THE SUFFERINGS OF THE FAMILY OF ORTENBERG. A NOVEL. TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN
OF AUGUSTUS VON KOTZEBUE, BY P. WILL, MINISTER OF THE REFORMED CONGREGATION IN
THE SAVOY.

TWO VOLUMES IN ONE.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY JOHN BIOREN, FOR HENRY and PATRICK RICE, NO 16, SOUTH
2ND ST. AND JAMES RICE, and CO. BALTIMORE. 1800.

SUFFERINGS OF THE FAMILY OF ORTENBERG.
Afflictions are by Heaven sent
To try our virtue, not for punishment.
Merit and persecution are
Companions here, and gloomy care
Clouds often the sunshine of this life
Which hails us after painful strife.
How often is visible success
The means to lose our happiness!
How often lays misery in wait
When strewn with roses smooth and strait
The path appears, and turns to night
The long missed rays of cheerful light!
Nor woe nor bliss are constant here.
Therefore let us with caution ste^r
The vessel through the ebbs and tides,
Rejoice when it securely rides,
And catch the present prosperous gale.
We are but voyagers, and sail
Through calms and tempests to the shore
Where virtue prospers evermore,
And smiles at what it grieved before.

THE lot of no mortal is more enviable than that of the man who, after having
by virtuous industry acquired a comfortable subsistence for himself and his
family, now is sitting down to a frugal supper between a beloved wife and a
hopeful boy, cheered by the sweet consciousness of having performed his duty,
while his darlings alternately kiss the sweat from his brow and animate him by
their smiles to innocent hilarity.

Do not smile contemptuously, you obedient slaves of female caprice; I am not
speaking to you, ye pitiful beings who have no fixed object in view, and have
neither a heart nor a soul. Do not scold, ye dusty pedants whom the sun of
learning has parched up so much as to resemble the dismal print that figures on
the title page of your worm-eaten books: I am speaking to thee, venerable man,
who art faithful to the golden medium; who neither hurriest from nothing to
nothing, nor constantly wast buried among rusty folios: for thee, citizen and
father, for thee am I going to delineate the subsequent picture.

Charles Frederick Ortenberg, head master of the grammar school at W**, was
sitting at nine o'clock in the evening at a table opposite to a plate of
potatoes. Caroline, a gentle and good-natured creature, sat on one side, and
William, a lovely boy, who was seven years old, whose eyes bespoke a sound
mind, and whose rosy cheeks were graced with the sweet smile of innocence, sat
at the other.

No spice of the Indies disgraced the homegrown potatoes. Fresh butter and
salt, and, by way of desert, a plate full of golden pippins, pealed by
Caroline's hands, and sweetened by Caroline's smiles -- these were the rural
dainties which left no wish for the temperate palate of the small amiable
family.

The cloth was removed. Ortenberg undressed himself, while mother and son
assisted him with cheerful alacrity. William fetched a lighted candle;
Ortenberg flung himself into an easy chair, and emptied his pipe against the
corner of the stove; Caroline fastened her needle work to a table covered with
green oil-cloth; William holding Gellert's fables under his arm, strove to get
upon a chair that stood by her side, and an old faithful maidservant, the only
domestic of this humble family, sat near the stove, behind the spinning-wheel
-- This was the sweet moment in which Ortenberg was wont to enjoy his domestic
happiness, while he conversed with his wife of the numberless trials through
which they had acquired their present contentment, and delineated a plan for
the education of their little family, which he hoped to see soon increase.
Heavens! how panted the heart of the happy parents, when they looked upon
William as the support of their old age; how many a sweet hour was dreamed away
in this manner! Deluded mortals! why did fate not realise your innocent dreams?
Why are the joys of this world like the rays of the moon in a wild, tempestuous
night, when her silver orb is eclipsed every moment by the fleeting clouds;
like the sleep of a sick person, who, after a few minutes of rest, awakes to be
tormented by new agonies; like the warm breath of the sun in April, which melts
the snow that shrouds the early flower, which is on the point of unfolding
itself with congenial warmth, and is buried in a few hours under the load of a
destructive shower of hail? The humblest happiness remains not unenvied; the
most secluded contentment is liable to be disturbed!

That evening was, as usual, designed for a sweet chat of an happy futurity and
peaceful old age; when honest Conrad suddenly rushed into the apartment, with a
visible and uncommon anxiety, and gave Ortenberg a sealed note.

"What is the matter with you, honest Conrad?" said Ortenberg, casting an
anxious look at his pregnant wife. Conrad would not speak, nor had he the
power: -- mute, and with wild looks; he pointed at the note and disappeared.

Caroline turned pale; her soul forebode misfortune; her trembling hand dropped
her work on the table: she started up, supporting herself by her son's chair,
and gazed with anxious and scrutinizing looks at her husband, who still held
the note unopened in his hand.

Ortenberg possessed a great share of firmness and presence of mind. The mute
distress of old Conrad; his strange and sudden disappearance; the manner in
which he had delivered the note -- a language of which Conrad, hitherto, never
had made use -- all this made him apprehensive that some portentious
thunder-cloud was hanging over his head. Caroline's nerves were weak, and she
was, besides, far advanced in her pregnancy. A most perplexing situation. A
sudden terror would have been mortal poison to her.

Ortenberg's resolution was taken. "Command your muscles," he said to himself:
"whatever be the contents of the note, let not your countenance betray its
purport."

"What is the matter, dear Caroline? said he to his wife, when he beheld the
paleness of her face, and saw her hand tremble.

"The note -- " replied Caroline, stammering, (with a forced smile).

Has then that note such a terrible appearance? (supplicating) Dear Caroline,
consider in what a situation you are. Is it fit you should tremble at the
rustling of a leaf?"

Caroline. But Conrad's anxious haste --


Ortenberg. Is nothing new to you. Conrad is old; old people are like children,
they mistake a dog for a lion. Do you recollect how much terror his countenance
expressed last autumn, when he came running into the apartment, to tell us that
the pear tree had been robbed?


Caroline. (somewhat vexed) Dear Ortenberg, you must think yourself, that the
note contains some bad news, else you would not so long have delayed opening it.


"If this be your opinion," replied Ortenberg, with seeming tranquillity, "I
will open it instantly." He recollected the resolution he had taken, and broke
the seal. Caroline's scrutinizing and portending eyes watched his countenance;
however, the brow of the resolute man displayed not even a single furrow. Yet
he did not act exactly, in that critical moment, as he, perhaps, ought to have
done. My readers shall know in proper time, what the misterious note contained.
The lamentable consequences of this note, or rather the manner in which
Ortenberg conducted himself on this occasion, will, perhaps, irritate many of
my readers against him. However, we ought never to judge of an action, which
was committed in a situation which we have never experienced. Ortenberg's life
depended in some degree on this note; Caroline's life was as dear to him as his
own; the instinct of self-preservation and fervent love came, in collision;
Ortenberg wanted to satisfy both, wanted to save himself, and to spare his
wife; two objects, which to attain jointly was very difficult, or, perhaps,
impossible.

"What o'clock is it?" he said, after he had read the note, looking at his
watch. "Half an hour past nine o'clock. I must go out." He pulled off his
nightgown, and wrapped himself in a gray roquelor.

"For God's sake!" exclaimed Caroline; "what means all this?"

Ortenberg was silent.

Caroline. (with a supplicating and moving voice.) Ortenberg, since when have
you secrets from me* am I your wife, only to share your pleasures? have I not
frequently participated in your sorrows and distress? have the misfortunes of
your younger years not enured me to sufferings? Ortenberg, your heart urges you
to speak, I see it by the working of your muscles, but fear to terrify me
prevents you.


Ortenberg. You are mistaken, my love! I conjure you by our mutual affection,
urge me no more.


Caroline. You want to spare me, and do not consider that our imagination
heightens the danger the more, the less we can guess the real object of our
misfortune. You torment me! the misfortune which you conceal from me, cannot be
half so dreadful as my apprehension represents it.


Ortenberg. How can you talk of misfortunes? You are very singular, dear
Caroline; be easy! the note concerns old Conrad. He conjures me to keep its
contents secret, and Caroline has hitherto, always been so discreet as to wring
no secrets from me.


Having said this, he went to his study, where he threw himself down upon his
knees, and implored God to give him courage and firmness, put some
Frederic-d'ors in his purse, and went down stairs again to fetch his hat and
cane. Caroline, who had been intimidated by his last reply, and seriously began
to believe that the whole affair concerned only old Conrad, surveyed him
silently. He still maintained the victory, but -- when he was going -- to quit,
perhpas for ever his pregnant wife and a helpless child -- to leave them
without assistance, and abandon them to the power of a voluptuous villain of
rank -- nature suddenly conqured. He took the brush from the harpsichord,
brushing his hat thrice, to gain time to try whether it would not be possible
for him to regain his fortitude. But alas! he tried in vain! breathed with
difficulty; a sigh escaped his breath, and Caroline's anxiety returned with
aditional force. He crossed the appartment several times; Caroline's perplexed
eyes followed his steps. He was silent; Caroline was silent -- a dreadful
stillness! He half opened the door; he felt as if he were going from his
apartment to the grave; his recollection forsook him. He rushed suddenly into
the arms of his wife; a torrent of tears, which he had in vain endeavored to
restrain, broke from his eyes. "Farewell, my Caroline!" was all he was able to
utter; but that was sufficient to deprive his wife of the use of her senses;
she sunk fainting upon a chair. "God!" exclaimed Ortenberg, with bitter
anguish, "God, against whom I never knowingly offended? be thou the protector
of that generous and innocent soul." He called for the servant, to assist
Caroline, imprinted a tearful kiss upon the lips of his son, who was just going
to read Gellert's affecting tale of Rhinsolt and Lucia, and rushed senseless
out of the house.

CHAP. II.
Virtue of sterling worth is like
The diamond in it is unpolished state:
It dazzels not the eye by outward show;
But those whose skilful eye can prize
The precious gem, discern its humble worth,
Though not announc'd by ostentatious show.

ORTENBERG's house stood desolated in the suburbs, at the bottom of a narrow
street; behind it was a large orchard and kitchen-garden, from which a gate
opened into the fields. The neighboring houses, which were half in ruins, were
scantily inhabited. The servant could not leave her mistress alone, to call the
physician. However, Caroline's dangerous situation naturally produced the wish
to be joined by human beings, no matter who they were. She recollected, that an
old captain, who was on half-pay, lived in the second floor and ran instantly
up stairs, to call him down. I shall attempt ^o draw the picture of this
venerable old man, who was on the verge of his seventieth year.

The captain was a man who had served from his twelfth year. His whole soul was
devoted entirely to his profession, and he risked his life cheerfully for God
and his King. A cannon-ball which shattered his left leg, ^ad made him an
invalid. He did not, however care much for it, and could have engaged to run
for a wager, by the assistance of his wooden leg, against any young gentleman
who wore narrow shoes. He reluctantly took leave of his grenadiers, who loved
him like a father; however, a certain petty prince wanted, just at that time,
to make a provision for one of his natural children, and the old brave captain
was compelled to consent to be declared unfit for further service, although he
should have received only a single grain of small-shot in the calf of his leg.
A scanty pension was the only reward of fifty years' hard and faithful
services. He was, however, never heard to complain. "Brown bread," he used
frequently to say, "satisfies the cravings of the stomach, and small beer
allays thirst. A man who has more than he wants, and gives not the rest to his
poor neighbors, does not deserve to have as much as he wants, however little
that may be. Has the King a better appetite than myself? Is he happier than I
am? Does he sleep better than I do?"

"Well then!" he sometimes exclaimed with a kind of enthusiasm: "well then,
thou wooden supporter, faithful companion of my sound limb, I am satisfied with
thee! my lips are maid to command and unaccustomed to complaints. A cripple
lives unenvied, and a man who is not exposed to envy, lives happy." These few
words comprised the whole philosophy of the brave veteran.

He was content to have only so much to spare as would enable him to purchase
the Life of Prince Eugene, or the Theater of State. He loved to talk of the
campaigns which he had made, and this was one of those weaknesses in which we
must indulge ourselves in old age. His fondness of familiar chat led him
frequently down stairs to Ortenberg, in long winter evenings, when he used to
delineate the positions of the two armies on the field of battle, with chalk
upon the table, and at last, with heartfelt joys, always made a stroke through
the hostile squadrons, to signify that they had been defeated. Ortenberg was
ever willing to listen patiently to the good old man. Caroline too applauded
him sometimes by a smile, and thus both had gained his love in such a high
degree, that he, in case of necessity, would cheerfully have sacrificed his
other leg for them. When no person was near to whom he could talk, he used to
converse with himself, and shape these discourses regularly, in the form of
question and answer. For instance:

"Captain Storm, (this was his name,) were you at the battle of Dettingen?"

Undoubtedly!

"Did you fight well?"

The duce take it! there was no opportunity to ^ight. Our regiment was exposed
five hours to the fire of the artillery, and that was all. They dropped (...)
like flies, before, behind, and near me. God preserved my life.

"Captain Storm," what do you think of the battle of Dettingen?"

I think it was a scandalous business: I am, indeed, not the the last, if the
enemy face me fairly. However, to stand five hours, and to suffer tamely to be
shot at amongst mangled bodies, groaning friends, bloody and shattered corpses,
to read the agony of death in the eyes of the dying, to see how one after the
other breathes his last -- no, by God, thus will I not be treated!

"Thus will I not be treated" was the favorite expression, which he applied on
all occasions. -- We hope, our readers now know him sufficiently.

He was just going to assist Duke Bernhard of Weymar, in besieging Brisach, and
bombarded the town with uncommon violence, when Caroline's maid entered his
apartment.

"Captain! for God's sake! exclaimed the servant out of breath, "I conjure you
to come instantly to her assistance; else she will be lost!"

Zounds! exclaimed the Captain, smiling, she shall be lost; Duke Bernhard has
made his disposition like a brave general.

The Servant. My mistress! my poor mistress has been seized with a fainting
fit, and there is no person to assiist her.


Having ejaculated these words, she rushed out of the apartment.

The Captain no sooner understood what she meant, than the siege of Baisach was
raised. He fastened his green nightgown with his belt, took his medicine-chest
under his arm, and hobbled down stairs as fast as his wooden leg would permit.
Captain Storm, whither art thou going?" said he to himself on the way.

I am going to assist Mrs. Ortenberg, for the wench says she has fainted away,
and no one is at hand to give her assistance. Yes, I am coming, to assist the
poor woman! repeated he on every step, dragging his left leg after him. Fresh
troops! forced marches! the succors are at the gate.

Caroline just opened her eyes, when he entered her apartment.

"What the deuce, madam, are you about!" (he surveyed the apartment) "you seem
to have been defeated; however, the field of battle is evacuated.

Oh! Ortenberg! exclaimed Caroline, and was on the point of swooning a second
time.

Dear Madam! for God's sake don't turu so pale!

He put his medicine-chest upon the table, took a glass of tincture of rhubarb
out, and held it under her nose; ran up and down the room with the most anxious
activity, poured spirit of hartshorn in a spoon, and fortunately, spilled it
before he reached Caroline's chair. He now mixed a powder with his little
finger, but recollecting that this was improper, threw it indignantly out of
the window. The servant had in the mean time, restored Caroline, and she raised
herself slowly.

"Thank God!" exclaimed the old Captain: throwing the spoon to the ground: " Te
Deum laudamus with trumpets and kettle-drums! The siege is raised, and the
fortress is saved. -- But, dear madam, in what war are you engaged! who is
friend, and who is foe?"

Caroline. My husband --


Captain. Is a brave fellow, an excellent man; he deserves to be a colonel, and
if he were -- I would instantly enlist in his regiment.


Caroline. However --


Captain. However, there are few husbands like him, are you going to say? True!
as true as if it were in print. An honest heart beats rarely under a black
coat. -- My chaplain -- God rest his soul! -- had the old and new Testament at
his finger's end, and swore like a trooper when he was at the gaming table.


Caroline. However --


Captain. However, when he was in the pulpit, he could scold, that it was a
pleasure to hear him. But I made him keep his distance. He appeared to me to be
like a gun charged with powder without ball, when he consigned the whole
regiment to hell. A bishop ought to be unspotted, says Luther, in his catechism.


Caroline. Oh God!


Captain. Madam! you must not attack me in that manner! I had rather hear a
battery of twenty guns roar than a woman sigh. Where is Mr. Ortenberg? I hope
he has met with no accident?


Caroline. I fear --


Captain. What fear? you must fear nothing! fear always renders bad worse. I
could tell you many instances to -- But be silent, old fool! every thing in
proper time -- however, fear properly ought never to be in time at all. What
then do you fear?


Caroline. Dear captain, my husband is gone out.


Captain. Well! well! if that be all; he will come back again. A young and
handsome wife is the most powerful magnet. I also was once i^ love, when I was
young. God forgive me! i^ you had said to me at that time: Captain Storm^ march
on! I will lead you to paradise! I should have deserted half ways. I always
felt as if I had a dozen of rockets in my inside, which wanted to mount with me
in the air.


Caroline. However, I fear --


Captain. Again? and what then do you fear?


Caroline. That he will not return again. He took leave.


Captain. As if he had not always done so. He has sufficient reason to do it.
Zounds, madam, a man who is married to an amiable wife, possesses a treasure
which he ought to respect. The number of good wives is but very small.


Caroline. However, the manner in which he did it. He wept. --


Captain. Wept? Fie! I never saw him weep. Besides, it is not becoming a man,
unless the ladies force us to tears, as you lately drew tears from my eyes.
But, I tell you, madam, I don't like that. You then say, he wept? hem! that
disconcerts my plan of operation a little. If a man, like Mr. Ortenberg, or
myself, weeps a single tear, it is of more importance, than if another had wept
a flood, which could not be crossed without pontoons. In short, madam, the
battle is lost.


Caroline. You alarm me, captain --


Captain. I don't wonder at it. I am not easy at it myself.


Caroline. Merciful God! but did you not chide me just now on account of my
apprehensions?


Captain. Very true! but do you think I am afraid? I have faced the enemies
batteries many a time, and my heart has not beat a bit quicke^ A man who has
shown his teeth to death as often as I have done, knows not what fear is. Be
easy, madam, I am your ally, body and soul; I will not desert you a moment till
Mr. Ortenberg returns, and any person who shall dare to offend you in the
least, shall pay for it, with his nose and ears.


Having finished this elaborate harangue, he took Ortenberg's pipe from the
table, whistling the march of his regiment, and filled it with the determined
look of a man who is ready to attack the very gates of hell, and to challenge
all its infernal inhabitants.

Caroline flung herself in speechless agony in an arm chair. The old soldier
mistook this for a mark of returning tranquillity, which he imputed to the
force of his consolatory arguments. He lighted his pipe with an air of
satisfaction, and marched up and down the apartment, wheeling always regularly
round. If he had known a little more of physiognomy, he would easily have been
able to read Caroline's agony in her countenance. But knowing of no other
danger, but that which the enemy's batteries threatened, and of no other means
of defense but swords, guns, and pistols, he had not the least idea, that a
person can quietly sit in an arm-chair, and yet be torn by the most agonizing
apprehensions. He had, besides, adopted the maxim, that the devil is not always
dreadful, if we have courage enough to look at him. He reflected therefore no
longer on what had happened, or might happen, and without entering into an
useless examination of the cause of Ortenberg's absence, sat quietly down,
chalked the plan of Breisach upon the table, and began to cannonade the
fortress, in the name of Duke Bernhard, in all directions.

William had laid both arms upon the table, and his head upon them, and was
fast asleep. This inactive stillness tended very little to restore peace to
Caroline's agitated mind. The melancholy silence lasted some time, and was
interrupted by nothing but Caroline's sighs; by the noise which the old captain
made in chalking upon the table: by William's snoaring, the chirruping of a
cricket in the chimney, and the howling of a dog in the street. -- The clock
struck twelve, and still no intelligence of Ortenberg. Caroline's agony
increased visibly; one tear after the other gushed over her cheeks. But they
were not those salutary tears, that kind gift of nature, by which the heart is
unburthened and animated with strength to bear new grief. There is a kind of
weeping, which is not attended with sobbing and wringing of hands; but, during
which, the tears start singly from our eyes, to let us taste the bitterness of
every solitary drop that steals down our cheeks. Thus, Caroline wept.

The captain perceived it at last; however he had exhausted his arguments of
consolation. He went to the window, and sung with cordial devotion the hymn
"Blessed is the man who trusts in God;" and, when he had finished, he
accidentally cast his eyes on the constellation Orion, and forgot his friend
Ortenberg, the suffering Caroline, and the whole world, in a moment. When he
formerly went out reconnoitering, that constellation always served him as a
guide, for which reason he could never behold it without sentiments of the most
heartfelt joy. When he once began to think of reconnoitering, he always thought
of the camp; and when his thoughts once were in the camp, no clap of thunder
could rouse him, unless he should have mistaken it for the report of a cannon.

"Captain Storm!" used he to say to himself, on these occasions, while he
contemplated the constellation with cheerful eyes: "Captain Storm! have you
frequently been out reconnoitering? undoubtedly! at night and in fogs, in storm
and rain, hungry and thirsty. All was alike to me. It is, indeed, not like a
party of pleasure. A skirmish every moment, and I hate skirmishing. Upon my
poor soul, I would rather have three battles in the open field, than one of
those pickerings, in which they mix pell-mell like ants -- A shot in front, a
cut behind, a thrust in the side. The bravest fellow is a lost man, if he have
no more than two eyes in his head, and be not protected by the angel of God.
God has sent his angel to guard me!"

He uncovered his head, looked up to Orion, and adored his heavenly preserver
in grateful silence. He covered his head again after a short pause.

"Captain Storm, had you not a brave corporal?

"Indeed, I had. His name was Reiter. He was as rough as his whiskers, and as
honest as a Pomeranian. He saved my life twice. Corporal Reiter! used I to say
to him, when I shall be old and you too shall be an old man, and neither you
nor I can fight any longer for our king, you shall live with Captain Storm. You
shall not want for bread while Captain Storm has a morsel to give. Corporal
Reiter has run over to the heavenly bands thirteen years since. The commanding
angel knows nothing of the service, if he has not made him a major." He
uncovered his head again and looked up to the constellation Orion. "Major
Reiter!" exclaimed he with great emotion: do you think sometimes of your old
brother soldier, Captain Storm?"

The servant who in the mean time, had left the apartment, to get the tea
ready, came suddenly in the room and reported in fearful accents, that she had
heard a noise at the garden gate, and confused murmurs, as if many people were
standing before it. Caroline turned pale; the old soldier stared a moment at
the servant, and recollected suddenly where he was and for what purpose he was
there.

"To arms! Captain!" exclaimed he: "we shall have an action at last!" With
these words he stumbled out of the door, asking himself, as usual, while he
limped up stairs: "Captain Storm, whither art thou going?"

"I am going to prepare myself for action, the alarm is given, the whole camp
is in motion; we are indifferently fortified, and the enemy is at the gate.
However I will let them know that I am an old veteran. Call to arms! give the
parole: God and the just cause!"

He returned after a few minutes with a brace of pistols under his right arm,
and an enormous sword in his left hand.

"Let them come on!" he exclaimed with a wild laugh.

"Make ready! Fire! is a command which I have not yet forgotten. These pistols,
madam, are excellent; I took them from a Swedish cuirassier; they cost me only
a sound cut across my face. -- The sabre is an inheritance of one of my
ancestors, who took it from a Turkish (...) at the siege of Belgrade. It cuts
as sharp as a razor! -- In short, madan, I shall find tight work for them! You
must stay with the baggage; for you are an invalid; but you, Hannah, (to the
servant,) must take a spit, and protect the rear. Wheel to the right! March!"

He had already opened the chamber door, when he suddenly called halt! and held
the following council of war:

"Am not I a fool to take the field with my army, without knowing whether an
enemy is near? -- I ought, at least, to dispatch some light troops, to
reconnoitre. Hannah, make your report once more: who knows what the timid fool
has heard? -- A noise? Why it may have been occasioned by rats. Murmurs? --
Dogs and cats make a noise which is very much like it -- However, let us see
what it is! March! we will fall upon the enemy's flank! No quarter! If they be
mice or rats, they will not laugh at me! No, upon my soul, they will not! That
spy there has alarmed the camp."

Caroline was not disposed to laugh; she trembled like an aspen leaf. Her eyes
rolled wildly, and her tongue seemed suspended to her palate.

The old captain had, in the mean time, taken his station in the passage:
Hannah was ordered to keep herself ready for action; and in this warlike array
he advanced toward the gate. He was only a few steps distant from it, when it
moved upon its hinges. It now was thrown wide open, and three muffled up
fellows with a dark lanthorn were standing before him.

"Stop, gentlemen! here is an out-post!" exclaimed the captain; "you will not
easily get away without a skirmish." He cocked his pistol with the ^reatest
calmness, being firmly determined to (...) them pay with their blood for every
inch of (...).

Fortunately the servant stood at his back with a lamp, which rendered it
useless for the intruders to shut up the light in their lanthorn. They were
irresolute what to do, and all three put their hands upon the hilt of their
swords.

"Either you or I!" continued the captain: "Rascals! what do you want?" So
saying he advanced two steps, and held his cocked pistol under the nose of the
foremost. "Who is there?" exclaimed he with a martial voice; "answer, or I Will
blow your brains out."

When a parallel line can be drawn between the mouth of a loaded pistol and our
nose, and we consider, that only a slight pull is wanted, to incorporate its
contents with our brains: when we see that the finger of a strange hand, is
already going to put the ball in motion, and reflect, that the fatal lead may
be lodged in a moment, in a place where it ought not to be: then all these
circumstances taken together, possess a magical charm, to open even the most
obstinate lips. The three strangers, who, hitherto, had not been inclined to
give any other but a palpable explanation of the motives of their nocturnal
visit, changed their resolution, suddenly: "Sir -- " stammered one of them.

"Take yourselves off, gentlemen!" replied the captain, hastily! "wheel to the
left, ye caitiffs, or, by our Lord, I Will make you caper like a cannonball.
Captain Storm is not used to neglect his post. You intend to surprise our camp;
however, your scouts informed us of the expedition. It is pity you should have
made your forced march to no purpose. Wheel to the left, I tell you; march! if
no sick were in the hospital, I would give every one of you a pill for your
pains, which should transport you soon enough to the devil's great army. Fie!
shame! to be put to flight by an old invalid."

Having said this, he seized the foremost by the cloak, in order to push him
and his companions out of the gate. However, the fellow thinking the captain
wanted to detain him, left his cloak behind, and took to his heels. His
comrades followed as fast as possible, and all three disappeared in a moment.

"Thunder and lightning!" exclaimed the captain, examining the cloak carefully
by the light of the lamp, "the fellow was a soldier; I saw plainly, that he was
dressed in an uniform. I shall report it to the governor. There are a number of
volunteers quartered in the town, who are nothing but a set of vagabonds. If
the colonels keep not a careful eye over them, they will plunder widows and
orphans."

CHAP. III.
Ah! were not friendship in this vale of tears,
How hard would be the lot of innocence,
How often would it be overborne by fears,
And left in storms of fate, without defense!

CAROLINE leaned on her knees, the picture of despair. Her eyes rolled wildly
in their sockets; her hair stood on end, and her hands seemed convulsive. "My
husband is dead!" This dreadful idea shook the inmost recesses of her soul,
like concealed fire, which makes the earth quake, and returned every minute
with additional force. "My husband is dead!" She now, in fancy, saw the dear
object of her conjugal love in the coffin. "My husband is dead!" She beheld her
William and the infant, which she carried under her heart, a prey to hunger and
despair.

"Rejoice, madam," exclaimed the old captain, while he opened the door:
"rejoice, the enemy has retreated, and left his baggage behind. (He meant the
cloak, which he had hung upon the servant's spit, and caused to be carried
before him in triumph). "But, dear madam," continued he, when he saw Caroline
struggling with despair: "this is not the manner in which I expected to be
received. I return with spoils from the field of battle, and intended to be
merry in my winter quarters, and you receive me like an unfledged ensign, who
has lost the colors, and make me sob, as if I had a musket-ball in my throat."

"I thank you from the bottom of my heart, dear captain -- "

"There is no occasion for it; I did no more than my duty!"

He laid the cloak, the pistols, and the sword peevishly upon the table,
lighted his pipe again, and stepped silently to the window, to contemplate the
constellation Orion, to recapitulate his campaigns, to devote a tear to
corporal Reiter, and to forget, in these pleasing reveries, the scene of misery
which was before him. The servant related in the mean time to Caroline, every
particular of the transaction. She protested, that she had been seized with the
most dreadful apprehensions, and could not conceive, how the dear old captain
could put three daring fellows to flight, without being leagued with old Nick.
She concluded with the assertion, that she was perfectly convinced, he was
proof against swords and bullets. Neither Caroline nor the captain paid the
least attention to what she said; Caroline, because her stupifying despair,
prevented her from perceiving any thing besides the agonies of her mind, and
the captain, because he was just occupied in the siege of Breisach.

"Merciful God! what can all this mean?" ejaculated Caroline, at last, after a
deep hollow groan: "and where may Ortenberg be?

"Not where he ought to be!" replied the captain hastily; "else he would have
been here before, and raised a dyke against these torrents of tears, and not
suffer that my poor pipe of tobacco should be thus imbittered."

Caroline made no reply, folding her handkerchief between her hands, and
casting her eyes to the ground. No tear started from her eyes! but the quick
heavings of her bosom, her anxious and short respiration, plainly indicated the
dreadful workings of her mind.

Thus another leaden hour crept away like a black thunder-cloud, which seems to
be fettered with heavy chains to the sky, while the trembling inhabitant of the
rural cottage, looks every moment out of the window, to see whether it has not
yet passed by: the cock crowed, the eastern horizon assumed a livelier hue, and
announced the approach of day.

"This is no joke!" said the captain; "I don't like it! I will go, madam, and
reconnoitre! I will make a forced march; and you shall see him in an hour's
time, either dead or alive."

He stumped up stairs, without waiting for an answer, dressed himself with the
greatest impetuosity, and whistled the march of his regiment. When he had armed
himself with his cane and sword, and, in case of necessity, with a brace of
pocket-pistols; he stumped again down* stairs, opened Caroline's door, leaning
in a martial manner upon his cane, and exclaimed;

"Well, madam, the detachment is ready! shall I march out?"

Caroline replied not.

"Madam," resumed the captain, "cannot muster up a single word, the
communication is cut off; the allies must see what they can do. Wheel to the
right!"

Having said this, he really made the evolution, stamped with his foot upon the
floor that the cups upon the table jingled, pressed the hat with his cane upon
his head, gave the word, March, and left the apartment.

When he came into the street, he asked himself as usual: "Captain Storm,
whither art thou going? -- I am commanded to go in search of a deserter, to
carry him to the camp, dead or alive. -- God has sent us a fine morning!" (He
took off his hat; which he always used to do when he pronounced the name of
God) "a clear, healthy air. Advance, wooden leg! I say! Comrade!" (he was just
near a sentinel) "have you not seen Mr. Ortenberg?"

Sentinel. No, sir, I have been only half an hour on my post.


The captain limped further. "The fellow has not seen friend Ortenberg,"
muttered he between his teeth; "heaven knows in which defile he is concealed."
He came to a bridge where another sentinel was on guard.

Captain. Comrade, have you seen Mr. Ortenberg?


Sentinel. No, Captain!


Captain. How do you know that I am a captain?


Sentinel. (an old bald-headed veteran). Don't you know me, captain? I have
served in your company. My name is John Miller.


The captain stared a moment at him, and then fell suddenly on his neck: John
"Miller!" exclaimed he: "and I, stupid dog, did not recollect honest John
Miller! How do you do, John?" He shook him cordially by the hand.

Sentinel. Indifferently, your honor. Five children, and no bread. I cut wood,
when I am off guard, or carry bales of goods to the warehouses, else I should
starve. I have served eight-and-twenty years; seventeen years in your company,
when I received not a single blow. But now they give me twenty blows with the
cane because I cannot tie the collar fast enough in my sixty-fifth year.


Captain. Fie, John Miller! (he spit out) Fie, shame! don't put me in a
passion. The devil take that brute of a Captain! God forgive me! comrade, come
to Captain Storm, when you are relieved; he lives No. 207, in the Suburbs, and
John Miller shall share with him the little he has.


He proceeded a few steps, but soon turned back again! apropos! comrade! did
you know corporal Reiter?

Sentinel. Surely, Captain; I knew him well enough. He was an honest and brave
fellow.


Captain. Upon my soul! he was honest and brave -- (he reclined upon his cane;
a tear sparkled in his eye, while he looked silently to heaven, and uncovered
his head) --


Sentinel. He fell by my side in the battle of Prague, and was stone-dead. I
took his wooden tobacco-pipe from his pocket, and preserved it as a precious
treasure.


Captain. Comrade. What do you ask for that pipe?


Sentinel. Captain, I am a very poor fellow; however, I would take no money for
it.


Captain. (searching in all his pockets). Comrade, there, take my purse; it
contains more than a dollar. Take it, take it, and give me the pipe.


Sentinel (soliciting). Dear, worthy Captain --


Captain. John Miller, I must have it! you ought to know subordination. Take
the dollar, and give me the pipe.


Sentinel. (taking the pipe with tearful eyes out of his pocket). Part with you
for money? no, never! there, take the pipe (averting his face), and keep your
dollar.


Captain. (deeply affected). Honest John Miller! no, God forbid! keep the pipe!
you deserve to have known corporal Reiter.


He averted his face, drying his tears with an handkerchief, not broader than
an hand, and now began to recapitulate with John Miller, the battle of Prague.

My readers will not be astonished to learn, that the battle of Prague made the
old veteran forget Ortenberg entirely, and that he stayed with John Miller,
until the latter was relieved.

But let us return to Caroline, and her helpless situation.

We are never entirely miserable, while some person is with us, by whose
actions and words we can perceive that he shares our sufferings, although the
mind be not in that disposition which is required, if we are to be sensible of
all the marks of sympathy which compassion displays, and able to shed a
grateful tear. This was Caroline's situation. While the captain was with her,
she shared her agony with him, without knowing it, and first grew sensible of
it, when he had left her. Till that moment, the flame of tormenting bodings,
burned only internally, but, no sooner was her venerable protector gone, than
she started wildly from her chair, crossing the appartment with staggering
steps, and went to the window, to look into the street. She mistook every
stranger, at some distance, for Ortenberg. There, he is coming! shouted her
wishful heart. He came nearer, and her heart always had imposed upon her eyes.
Dreadful were the sensations which convulsed her bosom. -- She went, urged by
restless anxiety, without knowing why, to her husband's study, casting her wild
looks all around, as if she there awaited the developement of some mysterious
event. Ortenberg's nightcap lay on the ground. Caroline was terrified. Her
eyes lighted on his picture; she started back, left the room, and shut the door
with as much violence, as if her husband's spirit had appeared to her. She was
obliged to support herself with both hands by the bannister, in order to be
able to return to her apartment.

William was still immersed in a sound and quiet sleep. Caroline, with folded
arms, stood sometimes opposite to him, fixing her eyes on his cheeks, which
were tinged with a crimson hue, by the invigorating balsam of sleep. "Poor
William!" groaned she: "this morning you played cheerfully with your father, he
rocked you on his knee -- alas! if he should be dead, you will soon be a
fatherless and motherless orphan."

She was long absorpt in melancholy contemplations, until she suddenly awoke,
as if from a profound dream, and was going to call for the servant, to undress
the boy and carry him to bed. However she was so totally deprived, by her
agony, of the use of all her senses, as to be unable to utter a single word.

Some person rung the house bell, at that moment with great violence.

CHAP. IV.
Behold the sap of tender plants is parched up by the cold north wind, and the
glowing rays of the sun: thus, the vital powers of our poor life are undermined
by too much joy and misery.
WHEN a solitary traveller, enshrouded by midnight darkness, wanders exhausted
through the intricate mazes of a forest, not knowing the road which leads to
his peaceful home; when every uncertain step entangles him more and more in
briars and thorns; when all around him is buried in profound silence, and only
the croaking owl flies before him from tree to tree, with melancholy shrieks,
and his mournful accents are re-echoed only by unknown mountains; when then the
forlorn wanderer suddenly is hailed by the cheerful sound of an human voice --
Oh! how does his heart then beat with hope! Here! says he, cheerfully to
himself; here are men, thy brethren! -- But, whispers his guardian angel,
perhaps, they are robbers: and circumspection adds, robbers, of the last
remaining ray of hope.

This picture conveys but a faint idea of Caroline's sensations, of the
confused emotions, which, in that moment, seized her perturbed senses. She
struggled, in vain, to exert the last strength of her exhausted muscles, to
receive the messenger, by whom she apprehended to hear her doom pronounced. Her
whole form was a picture of fear blended with despair, which was tinged only
with a faint ray of distant hope.

The servant, who was sitting by the fireside, and had fallen asleep at the
spinning-wheel, heard the ringing of the bell, started up, and staggered
half-sleeping out of the room to open the door. She had scarcely stepped into the
passage, when a draught of air from the garden extinguished her lamp. However,
as it already was broad day, she hesitated not to unfasten the door. When she
opened it, she was accosted by a man whom she knew not, because his hat covered
the upper part of his face. He gave her a letter, seemed to be inclined to
speak, but instantly checked himself, and disappeared. Caroline's eyes devoured
the letter; she tore it impatiently out of Hannah's hands, while all her limbs
trembled, every muscle quivered, her cheeks glowed, and her breath stopped.
However, she perceived suddenly, that it was the handwriting of her husband.
This, and the griefless direction, To my dear wife! restored her for a few
moments to the use of her speech. "God be praised!" exclaimed she: "he "lives!"
She dropped on her knees; a sparkling tear, worthy to be kissed away by angels,
swam in her eye, which was raised to heaven; her hands folded themselves, and
-- she was speechless. If my readers ever have been at Cassel, and seen
Cleopatra, Tishbein's masterpiece, they will be able to conceive an idea of
Caroline, during the pause of silence. Her grateful looks were the most
eloquent and affecting prayers. She collected herself at last, opened the
letter on her knees, and read as follows:

Dearest, best of wives!
I have acted imprudently! and stand in need of your forgiveness, and hope your
good and loving heart will readily grant it. I left you -- although, not quite
without reason, yet, too hastily and imprudently. Did I not know that my
Caroline has an undaunted spirit? that she is far superior to the generality of
her sex, who know not what to do, when a dark cloud overcast the horizon of
their life for a short time? Did I not know, that religion and love can perform
miracles? that Caroline's heart is the abode of both, and, that virtue,
conscious of its innate greatness, never wants resolution? Is not God above us,
whose assistance is nearest when we are least aware of it? -- And, particularly
now, when my dear Caroline is on the point of being a mother the second time,
she will, undoubtedly, call forth all her firmness, to bear a trifling
misfortune, which, perhaps, will separate me a few weeks from her. Yes, dearest
love, I am necessiated to make a short journey, in which you, in your present
situation, cannot join me. The governor -- need I to say more? You recollect
Breslau, and the scene at the review? -- In short, you can guess who is my
persecutor.

You will, probably, have sustained many terrors, and gloomy apprehensions last
night -- another consequence of my heedlessness. You would have been prepared
for the nocturnal intrusion of the soldiers, if I had informed you immediately
of the contents of old Conrad's letter. I know not what designs they had upon
me. Perhaps, they only wanted to frighten me, to make room for a base villain.
How could they be ignorant, that I am proud of possessing a wife, who wants no
male protector, who by one commanding look, can check the most unbridled
passions.

I begin, therefore, my journey with tranquillity, and confidence in the
protection of God. I am on the road to Berlin, to throw myself at the feet of
our king, to implore his justice, and you know our excellent monarch -- his
name ought to inspire you with the brightest hopes. I expect to close you again
in my arms after six or eight weeks. Till then farewell, my dearest love. Do
not disappoint my hopes that you will bear this trifling affliction with
firmness and piety. Consider what you owe to yourself! consider that another
life depends upon yours, the life of an innocent being, which will atone for
all your sorrows by its first infantine smile.

I am determined to see you no more before my departure; receive this letter as
my farewell exhortation. I would however not have you think that I am
apprehensive of any danger. Villainy only shrouds itself in midnight darkness
and shuns the rays of the sun. But why should I not spare you and myself tears
which the thought of our good king ought to dry up?

Adieu, my dear Caroline! kiss our William! thank honest Conrad for his
disinterested friendship. Farewell! as soon as I am arrived at Berlin, you
shall hear again from your loving husband,

Charles Frederick Ortenberg.


How happy are we when the smiling sun of hope shines on the bubble of our
wishes and expectations; when it charms the eye of our mind by a thousand
variegated colors! However, how much more miserable do we feel, when suddenly
a threatening cloud, tinged with the hue of darkest midnight, destroys the
sweet amusement of our imagination. The sun is overclouded, and the bubble
bursts.

The sudden transit from cordial and grateful joy to agonizing grief was too
rapid for Caroline.

Although Ortenberg had worded his letter with the greatest circumspection, and
treated the matter as lightly as possible, yet its contents were still too much
for a woman who was seven months gone in her pregnancy, and already had endured
one night replete with torments which were more excruciating than an infernal
demon would have inflicted. She sunk exhausted into her arm-chair, her eyes
were no longer capable of weeping, her breast attempted in vain to ease its
load by sighs, her head reclined against the back of her chair, her arms hung
down; her whole posture was that of a person utterly incapable of motion.

"Is nobody there?" exclaimed a voice in the street, while a knobbed stick, at
the same time, knocked pretty rough against the door.

"Who knocks?" asked the servant in a low voice.

"Good friend!" roared the bass of the old Captain.

"Guard, open the gate! let down the drawbridge, the detachment is returned. --
Cheer up, Madam!" exclaimed the old soldier as he stepped into the room, wiping
the sweat from his brow, "cheer up! it was only a false alarm. Mr. Ortenberg
will soon be here again."

When the condemned innocent is arrived at the place of execution, and the
dreadful sword of blind justice glitters already in the hand of the stern
executioner; when the guiltless victim has lost his recollection; does he then
not still think he beholds in every white handkerchief that is held up a signal
for his reprieve?

Caroline had the most unequivocal proof of her husband's misfortune, the fatal
letter, in her hand, yet a ray of hope darted across her soul when the blunt
soldier called to her in a firm tone of voice: "Cheer up, Madam!"

"My husband!" exclaimed she with anxious impatience.

Captain. Yes, Madam! It is as I told you. I hope he will again return to head
quarters in a few hours, and listen patiently to your curtain lecture. He has
deserved it, because it is not right to march out of the camp without orders.


Caroline. Have you seen him?


Captain. Seen? I have spoken to him and shaken hands with him. I conjure you,
Madam, be composed! good God how you look! God forgive me, like Lazarus rising
from the grave.


Caroline. But where did you see him?


Captain. (in the greatest confusion; for, although this question was extremely
natural, yet his good heart, which was an utter stranger to all kind of
falsehood, was not prepared for it). Where? -- Yonder -- at the corner of the
street -- no -- not at that corner -- at -- at -- at the Bruhler gate.


Caroline (in the tone of a person who hopes and wishes to be refuted).
Impossible!


Captain. But, I tell you, it is so! he is gone to see a sick friend.


Caroline. And just now I have received this letter in which he takes leave of
me.


The Captain was confounded, and stammered a long, "So! I see, I must confess
that I have told a lie; I am ashamed of it. But what could I do, dearest Madam?
Could I tell you that I had gone after him to no purpose? That would have been
very fine, indeed! I should have deserved to run the gauntlet. You would have
battered my poor old heart with your lamentations, and my little reason would
have been put totally in disorder. But this is the natural consequence of all
lies; curse all falsehoods! I will never again deviate from truth. May the
provost marshal order me to be put in irons and dieted with bread and water, if
ever I give truth another slap in the face. I never shall be such a fool again."

This was the last fatal blow. Caroline fell back in her chair. The rosy hue of
her cheeks turned to a dead white, her eyes broke, and her lips were tinged
blue.

"Holy Virgin, have mercy! wheel to the right! march!" called the Captain to
the servant: "could not the stupid beast have gone twenty times for the
physician? must you first wait for the word of command in such a case?"

The servant hurried away. The Captain rummaged his whole medicine-chest, took
out hartshorn, Hungary water, spirit of vinegar, and assafoetida, and held one
after the other to Caroline's nose. But all his pains were fruitless. He rubbed
her temples: but all without effect. He took her in his arms, and shook her
violently; alas! she awoke not. "God have mercy on us!" exclaimed he; "what an
unfortunate miserable fellow am I! by what have I deserved to be punished thus
in my old days! that angel of a woman will die in my arms! I cannot bear to see
it!

He replaced Caroline in her arm chair, and limped into the garden, where he
put his singers in his ears, running up and down, singing and whistling, as if
he wanted to stun his senses and memory.

Lettle William awoke at last from his quiet slumber, and seeing the helpless
situation of his mother, thought she was sleeping. He was, indeed, astonished
to perceive by his dress, that he had not been put to bed the preceding night;
being, however, not used to reflect upon what his parents thought proper to do;
he was rather rejoiced, because he expected he should not be combed, curled,
and washed that morning. He got cautiously from his chair, lest he should awake
his mother, rubbed his eyes, and looked at the wooden clock. It was past seven.
Papa, thought William, must already be at school, and it is high time that I
also should go. I cannot conceive why they suffered me to sleep so long. I now
must go to school, without having had my tea and roll. However, I rather will
go without my breakfast, than disturb mamma.

During this soliloquy, he got his books together, with as little noise as
possible, and was just going to steal away upon his toes with an empty stomach,
when the physician stepped into the apartment. The latter ordered Caroline to
be immediately put to bed, and a midwife to be sent for.

CHAP. V.
Soar aloft thou good and pious Soul,
Angels wait for thee at Heaven's gate,
Where no cares the unfettered mind control,
And where blessings crown thy hapless fate.

"WHAT do you think?" said the old captain to the physician while he, in his
anxiety, twisted a button from his coat: "will the fortress be able to hold out
a little longer?"

The physician shrugged his shoulders in silence. "Sir," continued the honest
soldier with tearful eyes, "you shall have half my pension! by God! I Will give
you half my pension if you save her."

"I shall see what I can do," replied the physician coldly; for these gentlemen
are as much used to misery and distress, as other people to eating and
drinking, and not much more concerned at the death of a worthy wife, which
renders a whole family miserable, than they are, when the cook has overdone a
haunch of venison.

Captain. Merciful God! why did thou not let me depart in peace to my grave?
by what crimes have I deserved this severe affliction? was I ever a
blood-thirsty warrior? was I a tyrant to my inferiors? have I not always spared
women and children? have I ever plundered? have I ever pierced the breast of
the wretch who supplicated for his life? and did I not always stand as
immovable as a wall, where it hailed bullets? Oh God! oh God! I always hated
crying! and now, oh God! now --


Violent groans prevented him from proceeding.

The physician opened a gold box, took a pinch of snuff, and said drily, is the
lady a relation of yours?

Captain. (with indignation) Sir, how can you ask such a foolish question? do
you think we ought to love only aunts, nieces, and cousins? do you suppose,
that love lays in the blood? don't you see, that this lady is an angel? but you
stand there like a frozen sentinel. By God! sir, I cannot endure this any
longer. This lady nursed (...) with maternal tenderness, when death levelled
his piece at me some years since. My old carcass lay stretched out upon a sorry
couch! I was deserted by all the world, destitute of friends, and not worth a
farthing. Corporal Reiter was dead. I should have died like a crippled horse,
on the field of battle, if that angel, in human shape, had not been my nurse,
my physician; and my all. You see, sir, she knew me not; I am neither a cousin,
nor a brother of hers. Is this too high for your conception, man of ice? (he
raised his eyes to heaven, uncovered his head, and folded his hands): merciful
father! if my death can save this angel of goodness from the grave, oh then, I
beseech thee, have pity, and let me die for her!"


The physician smiled and turned himself round upon his heel.

"I think we ought to send for a clergyman;" said the midwife, when she came
out of the bedchamber: "I have, indeed, succeeded in restoring her to her
recollection; however, I apprehend she will miscarry, which must prove mortal
to her, on account of her great weakness. I shall send for the Rev. Mr.
Wumpsnyvenius.

Captain. I desire you will spare yourself that trouble; she was as innocent as
an angel, and the Rev. Mr. Wumpsnyvenious will not be able to make a saint of
her. It is a folly to send for a priest, when death has opened all his
batteries. A fiddle-stick for your Rev. Mr. Wumpsnyvenius! I shall speak
comfort to her, if she wants it.


Midwife. Then you must go instantly to her; she has inquired several times
after you.


Captain. Why did you not immediately inform me of it? woman, I Will have you to
know, that Captain Storm is not used to be trifled with -- Dearest, best Mrs.
Ortenberg, in what can I serve you? (with these words, he flew to her bedside,
as fast as his wooden leg would permit.)


Caroline lay extended upon her couch; her face was pale as a lily, her eyes
languid as a drooping flower, her lips, formerly blooming like the full-blown
rose, now were of an ash color, and parched up. However, a calm and serene
countenance, resembling a fine autumnal evening at the setting of the sun,
proclaimed clearly, that she anticipated her impending union with sainted
spirits. She extended her hand, faintly smiling, and said, in a weak tone of
voice: "dear Captain, I do not think I shall recover. God's will be done! -- I
look upon you as my father -- "

Captain. (weeping aloud). Dearest daughter! Jesus Christ, what shall I do?


Caroline. I conjure you, not to embitter my last moments. An old soldier ought
to be familiar with death.


Captain. Yes, madam, I have seen many a brave fellow die. Death is on these
occasions dreadful, but it affects not. The sufferings of a gentle and beloved
woman, breaks the heart, and forces tears from the eye: I feel it today for
the first time.


Caroline. Tell my dear husband, when he returns -- that my last words implore
Heaven's best blessing for him. -- The Captain replied, only by repeated nods,
being deprived of the power of utterance, by violent sobs.


William now was called to her bedside. Caroline laid her hand upon his head,
and said: "God bless you, my son! -- grow an honest man, and all the fondest
wishes of your mother will be realized."

Her firmness had not hitherto forsaken her; she had not shed a single tear,
but now took her son in her arms, and wept aloud:

"God bless you, my son! be happy! I part reluctantly with you. -- The heart
under which you have lain, will soon be cold -- but never forget that you had a
mother who loved you -- who would have wished to have sown herself the seeds of
virtue in your heart, if Providence had permitted it. Once more, God bless you!
leave me now, William!"

The servant was going to take him away; but Caroline extended her arms after
him:

"No, do not leave me! -- William! William! grow an honest man, like your
father! -- "

The physician took the boy, smiling, by the hand, and conducted him coldly out
of the chamber, because he saw that his presence affected Caroline too much.
Caroline now turned to the Captain: "dear Captain, I have one more savor to
ask: burn this letter!"

She gave him Ortenberg's letter. The Captain put it mechanically in his
pocket. "Speak comfort to my poor husband when he returns. -- Take care of my
interment -- You will find some money in that cupboard yonder -- distribute
part of it to the poor."

The physician requested her to keep herself quiet, and desired every one to
quit the apartment. The Captain prostrated himself upon the threshold, and
repeated, while every word was interrupted by groans and sighs, all the prayers
he had learnt in his infancy. The exhausted Caroline was at length delivered of
a still-born boy, and died an hour after.

CHAP. VI.
Good old man, indignant fire
Animates thy breast in vain;
Useless is thy pious ire,
Vice triumphs with cold disdain,
Heroes fall by villains slain.

IF two fraternal friends were wrecked upon a desert island; if they for years
sweetened the bitterness of life to each other, and cheerfully assisted one
another to ease the burdens which fate laid upon their shoulders; if suddenly a
vessel did appear carrying one of them away to a better land, and leaving the
other alone in his dreary solitude -- what pen would be capable of portraying
the dreadful sensations of that hapless forsaken wretch?

Dreadfully mute -- dreadfully grinning and stamping the ground in frantic
agony, sat the old Captain upon his chair, gnawing the top of his cane. He sat
five dreadful hours on the same spot, without being able to shed a tear or even
to utter a groan. At last he suddenly recollected the letter which Caroline had
given him with the request to commit it to the fire. He put his hand hastily in
his pocket, opened it, and read. When he came to the passage in which the
Governor is mentioned, his mouth frothed, though it was a riddle to him; he
grinded his teeth audibly, clenched his fist mechanically, beating his
forehead, and the first word he was capable to utter was: "villain, you shall
not escape me! vengeance or death? God be my witness!"

He then relapsed again into his former reverie; death-like stillness prevailed
around him; no sound was heard in the whole apartment but the grinding of his
teeth.

The door was suddenly flung open, and the governor entered, decorated with the
order Pour le merit, which his soldiers had acquired and he received, as it
frequently happens.

He was about 40 years old, slim and well made, had a pair of large sheep's
eyes, an aquiline nose, a scoff^ing mouth, and a pair of firm and round calves,
which he frequently surveyed with secret satisfaction, and which had made him a
declared enemy to boots. His empty skull, overgrown with an abundance of black
hair, was covered with a hat adorned with a proud plume and gold. His stiff
tail whipped his thighs; his collar was buckled tight, which gave to his cheeks
a martial dark-red hue; the uniform seemed to be glued to his body; a cane,
four ^eet high, with a gold top which contained the miniature picture of some
venal beauty, was suspended between his fingers, which were adorned with
several sparkling rings, displaying likewise the pictures of different ladies,
and serving to set off the uncommon whiteness of his hands; he displayed every
moment with a triumphant mein, a gold snuff-bix, which also exhibited the
portrait of a conquered female, and even the case of his watch concealed at
least half a dozen of female profiles, whose originals he thought not to be
worth painting, because he had conquered them too easily.

The old Captain, keeping his seat and gnawing the top of his cane, stared in
his face.

Governor. (to a kind of French valet who had the honor to attend his
excellency). Parblue! all the inhabitants of the house seem to be dead, and
that old inventory there looks like an enchanted moor keeping guard before a
charmed castle.


The valet set up a horse-laugh, as his duty required, and the Captain changed
neither his features nor his position.

Governor. Sir, who are you?


The Captain still continued to stare at him, and replied not a syllable.

Governor. Is the lady of the house within?


No answer.

Governor. Who is that impertinent fellow? -- Do you know, Sir, who I am?


Still no answer.

Governor. I am governor of this town, and have it in my power to untie your
tongue, if you are disinclined to speak.


The Captain still remained as mute as a statue.

Governor. What shall I do with that old bear! Je m'en vais chercher ma bellc
Caroline.


He bent his steps toward the door of the chamber where Caroline's corpse lay.
The old Captain suddenly started up and roared like thunder:

"Stop, Sir! not a step farther!" The governor was amazed, and the Captain
continued:

"No villain shall dare to step over this sacred threshold while I have as much
breath left as a sister wants to blow the reveille. Dare not to stir from the
spot where you are now standing? advance not an hair's breadth, or, by God and
all his saints, I shall spit you like a rabbit." The governor, who never had
boen a hero, and met here with an old, rough veteran, instead of a gentle and
obliging woman, was so much confounded as to be entirely forsaken by his French
impertinence, and to stand motionless, as if rooted to the ground. The valet,
thinking his presence was entirely superfluous on this occasion, went in search
of some pretty chambermaid.

The Captain, who was sensible of the superiority which an honest man has over
a rogue, continued in his rough accent: "man! if you be an human being, and not
detached from Hell by the Devil; look there! and crave pardon of God, the
avenger of innocence."

With these words he flung the chamber door open. Caroline's corpse lay
extended upon a board, her right hand upon her breast, and her dead child in
the left arm. The governor was thunderstruck, trembling violently, and
averting his face, which was as white as a sheet.

Captain. Now, Sir, come with me, I have to whisper a few words in your ear.
But this is no proper place for it; we shall not disturb the peace of murdered
virtue.


He seized the stunned and speechless Governor by the arm, dragging him into
the garden behind a hedge, where none of the neighbors could see them. There
he took Ortenberg's letter from his pocket, contemplated it mournfully, and
said with bitterness: "go, poor fellow, go! the king cannot restore to you what
you have lost. Read, Sir, and if you wish to act as an honest fellow, go and
run the gauntlet voluntarily till you expire."

Governor. (recovering gradually from his first terror). Sir, I know not what
right you have --


Captain. No declamations! I will account to the omnicient God for what I am
going to do now, but not to a fellow like you. I know what I am going to risk
-- so much the better! I am willing to sacrifice my gray head for the just
cause of injured innocence. But first, sir, I am determined Caroline's death
must be avenged! my blade is not rusted yet; my leg is maimed, but not my arm
-- Read!


The Governor took the letter and began to read, but merely to gain delay, and
to have an opportunity of collecting his little courage; for he could see that
he should find hot work. The Captain took, in the mean time, a pair of thick
leather gloves out of his pocket, and stuck his cane into the ground. The
governor cast a side glance at him, and perceived the preparations which the
old soldier was making. Having however frequented the fencing academy more than
seven years, and broken many a rapier; he thought the old crippled Captain was
not worth the palpitation which he felt at the very place where the order Pour
le merit was suspended. "Well, and what more?" said he ridiculing, while he
returned the letter. "What more?" roared the Captain: "hell and furies! are not
you sensible that you are a villain?"

Governor. Softly, softly, my friend. You forget to whom you are speaking. Is
it a crime to admire an handsome woman? did nature create her charms only for
her husband? and is it my fault that her ridiculous virtue mistook pease for
globes?


The Captain, being seized with an unspeakable fury, which no pen can express,
tore foaming his order from his breast, trampled it with his feet to atoms,
drew his sword and stammered the words: "Oh! that my voice could r^ar like
twenty batteries, to proclaim to you and the whole world with the voice of
thunder, that you are the most infernal villain! -- Draw, and defend yourself!"

Governor. Sir, you are mad. You deserve to be hanged and broken on the wheel!
Do you know who gave me this cross?


Captain. It was unfortunately given you by our king; but he knew not to whom
he gave it. You are a proof that kings also are weak mortals. Defend yourself!


The governor drew, and they fought: the old, honest Captain, with the pious
resolution to avenge injured innocence, but with an impotent arm, and blinded
by rage. The governor, on the other hand, was in the full vigor of life, and
armed with strength, caution, and skill. The Captain was disarmed. The governor
flung his antagonist's sword over the garden wall. "Now, Sir!" said he in an
arrogant tone, "your life is in my power; however, I will not interfere with
the executioner. You have forfeited your head by having violated subordination,
the mandate against duelling, and trampling upon the king's order. You have
offended the king, not me. I shall leave it to him to avenge me."

He put his sword triumphantly into the scabbard, collected the fragments of
the broken order, and went away, rejoicing inwardly at his having been again a
villain with impunity.

Shame, fury, and secret murmuring against Providence for having denied
strength to the arm that defended the cause of injured innocence, rendered the
good old man for some time speechless, "Oh God!" exclaimed he at last, raising
his trembling hands to heav^^: "God, thou art incomprehensible. Why do thou
bestrew the path of vice with flowers? why does the villain display the badge
of rewarded merit, and trample with impunity upon the first and most sacred
laws? virtue conceals itself in vain in sequestered cottages: vice also
plunders in the land of purest innocence, which certainly is no enemy's
country. God! if thou have created the worm only to cringe and then to be
crushed -- (he put his hand to one of his pocket pistols) -- who then durst not
march without taking leave? but no, no, no! it cannot be! -- Thou have
certainly prepared good winter quarters for those who have fought bravely.
Forgive me, unaccountable being! forgive me, if I murmured a moment; if I
imagined a moment -- to be designed to be an instrument of thy vengeance. He is
perhaps, designed to be a scourge to other villains who are worse than him; and
thy arm will overtake him at last. What God does, is ever just and ever good.
-- Amen!"

A tear sealed this prayer, which ascended with fervent ardour to the throne of
the Omnipotent. He staggered slowly toward the house, to give orders for
Caroline's interment, and to discharge the last mournful duty. Pity the good
old man, sensible reader! The worthy veteran, though conquered, will
undoubtedly appear more deserving to you, than the vile conqueror.

Peace, peace attend thee to the shore
Where sighs and groans are heard no more,
Where virtue triumphs over vice,
And Reiter waits with wishful eyes,
To clasp thee to his honest breast,
And lull thy grief and cares to rest.

TO die is, in common life, like dying on the stage. The spectators weep, while
the actor calmly quits the scene when the curtain drops, and is satisfied to
have acted his part with applause. The same is applicable to the stage of the
world. The sensations of the dying, at most, can be compared with that of an
actor who performs a favorite character the last time, and with tears takes
leave of a Public that esteems him. However, this simile is rarely applicable
to those who are left behind. Parents, children, and friends who are groaning
at the deathbed of their darling, taste the bitterness of twofold death; for a
gloomy and cheerless futurity presents itself to their view, while the happy
conqueror anticipates the bliss of a better world. The son loses his father,
but the father meets his parents again. No! death is dreadful only to the
unfortunate wretch who loses his father, consort, sister, brother, or friend.
He stares wildly at the lifeless corpse, not knowing how to reconcile himself
to his loss, and still hopes that the mournful scene which he beholds, is only
a frightful dream, from which he expects soon to awake; and that singular
delusion lasts to the moment of interment. When the dear corpse has left the
house, and the funeral train has disappeared from his gazing eyes, he first
feels the whole extent of his loss. The day of interment is, undoubtedly, more
distressing to the unhappy mourner than the day of death. While he sees the
body of his departed friend extended before his eyes, can moisten his stiff
hand with his tears, and imprint kisses on his cold lips, his fate appears less
dreadful to him. But now the coffin is screwed up, the undertakers carry his
darling down stairs, and, alas! he shall never see him again. Oh! parting from
beloved friends, thou are dreadful! Every suffering admits of comfort, every
pain is relieved by tears: but parting is relieved neither by tears nor
consolation.

The day of interment appeared. Caroline was dressed in white satin, and her
brown hair adorned with cypress: the infant lay in her arms. The apartment was
lined with black crape, and eight torches burned on both sides of the coffin.
The afflicted old man sat at the head wiping with the knuckles of his hands the
tears from his eyes, groaning and exclaiming with a faint voice: "I loved her
like a daughter! she now is the daughter of God! but, alas! her death is more
than I can bear!"

William was dressed in black, his auburn unpowdered hair was tied with black
crape, and thus he stood between the legs of the old Captain, asking him
repeatedly whether his dear mamma would awake no more? Old Conrad sat in mute
sorrow at the feet of the corpse, his hands folded, his head bent against the
left shoulder, and staring at the ground. This old Conrad, who, probably, has
long interested the reader's curiosity, was steward in the Governor's house,
and the only honest being who entered the door of his master. The Governor
would, probably, have turned him into the street long since, if he had not
regarded him as a part of his paternal inheritance, and been obliged to confess
reluctantly that Conrad's fidelity and incorruptible honesty had saved his
finances several times from ruin. The villain ridiculed the honest fellow, but
did not wish to part with him. Conrad, whose soul was wounded by the excesses
of his master, had been repeatedly on the point of quitting his service.
Nothing could have retained him but the idea that the Governor's father had
been his benefactor. He staid therefore, submitted to what he could not alter,
and dragged the cart frequently out of the mud, when his master had involved
himself in serious difficulties. He was a native of Breslaw, and thence
originated his acquaintance with Ortenberg and his wife. He had been a
school-fellow of Ortenberg's father, and always retained a cordial regard for
his family. He had accidentally discovered the Governor's base design upon
Caroline* and the misfortune which threatened his old friend Ortenberg. He
informed him immediately of it by the above mentioned note, and returned
without delay to his master's house, lest his absence should expose him to
suspicion. Ortenberg fled. His flight produced, as we know, the most fatal
consequences, and Conrad was not the last who was informed of it.

"Barbara!" said he to his wife. "pack up our little property; I shall quit
this cursed house today." Barbara was one of those wives who by the vulgar are
called a blessing of the Devil: A little thin, and spiteful creature, decorated
with a Mulatto nose, a pair of green eyes, and a small remnant of half and
quarter teeth. The gout and asthma tormented her now and then in a most
lamentable manner; but her tongue enjoyed the most excellent health, for she
took all possible pains to prove that a perpetuum mobile was possible,
notwithstanding a practice of near sixty years, in which she had not taken the
least pains to spare that wonderful member. Her words rushed over the wrecks of
her teeth, like a rapid torrent which rolls over the ruins of decayed
buildings, and the stream of her eloquence continued to flow even when sleep
had touched her running eyes with his soporific wand; or to speak in plain
language, she talked in her sleep. By this means, Conrad had discovered the
Governor's design upon Caroline, which Monsieur Coquin, the French valet, had
communicated to his gentle helpmate, under the injunction of the most profound
secrecy. She disliked nothing more than going to church, because she durst not
contradict the preacher; however, she presided in all the meetings of the
gossips of the town. She was perfectly convinced that the words of the Gospel,
The man shall be the head of the wife, are not properly translated; and in
order to render herself capable of refuting that passage, took, in her younger
years, lessons in the Hebrew language of a stout Prebendary, who knew nothing
of it himself. But when the wicked world began to suspect her virtue, she
abandoned this resolution again, and married honest Conrad. She now took all
possible pains to refute, at least by her example, the truth of that passage.
Conrad loved peace and tranquillity. He submitted quietly to all the whims of
his wife, while it militated not against his conscience. But as soon as his
conscience told him that it would be wrong to indulge her any longer, he
commanded her peremptorily to be silent, and when that was of no use, applied
the eloquence of a good horsewhip so successfully, as to put a temporary stop
to the agility of her tongue, and to draw torrents of tears from her green
eyes. However, Barbara rarely carried matters to that extremity, and when
Conrad ordered her in his authoritative accent, the meaning of which she knew
perfectly well, to check the fluency of her eloquence, she obeyed his command
without grumbling.

Conrad having thus supported his authority, he exchanged his splendid livery
for a threadbare great coat, took his staff in his hand, and stepped into the
apartment of his Excellency, who, exhausted by yesterday's duel, recruited his
animal spirits with a dish of chocolate steeped in Burgundy, and amused himself
with reading the Pucelle d'Orleans.

Governor. (smiling graciously at Conrad.) Comment, Conrad, are you going to
officiate for the watchman? What is the meaning of that mummery? Par Dieu! you
look like a discarded schoolmaster.


Conrad. I don't care, if I only don't look like certain people, who have gold
upon their coat and smut in their heart.


Governor. Bravo! you begin to season you morals with satire; this is no bad
idea, old friend.


Conrad. I beg your Excellency's pardon! how ever, I must tell you that our
friendship is at an end. I am only a poor Devil. However, I am not used to
throw my friendship before the swine. In one word, I demand my discharge.


Governor. You, your discharge? How comes that whim into your head?


Conrad. I ought to have known long since, that it was impossible to wash a
moor white. Fine doings, my Lord! poor Ortenberg! my heart is ready to break,
when I think of it. I never have wished to be king; but I now wish to exercise
royal authority only a quarter of an hour, to send your Excellency in chains to
the fortress.


Governor. Monsieur Conrad, I advise you to be silent, or --


Conrad. No, my Lord, I shall not be silent; nor do I care what the
consequences may be. When your father was on his deathbed, he extended his
cold hand to me, and said: Conrad, you have served me faithfully! receive my
thanks for it! don't leave my son, and flatter him not, if you should see that
he is inclined to turn a rogue, but tell him always the truth. You know, he
said so. I promised it him, and he died. I have, hitherto, kept my word
honestly, and am now going to do it for the last time; for, I can be silent no
longer. Sainted man! if your spirit now looks down upon us, oh! then do not
accuse me of ingratitude! You covered my nakedness, and made an honest fellow
of me; I shall leave this house as naked as I entered it, and shall account to
you in a better world, how I have executed your last commands.


Governor. Fool! hold your tongue, and take this purse.


Conrad. No, my Lord, I shall not accept another farthing of you. I am poor,
but rather will beg my bread at the doors of charitable people. I demand my
discharge.


Governor. (in a passion.) Va t'en au Diable! -- Le Coquin, order that ass to
be kicked out of the house.


Le Coquin did as he was ordered, called the coachman and the cook to his
assistance, and kicked the honest old fellow out of doors.

Dame Barbara, instead of sharing grief and joy with her husband, ran scolding
after him, put her arms in her side and vociferated so, that the neighbors
crowded together: "Well, there we have it! the old dotard! there he goes, quits
his service, and knows not where to get a morsel of bread for tomorrow. Is it
not a sin and a shame? Such an old ass should have no more sense than a calf!
But, no; God forgive me! he acts like an ox, demanding his discharge like a
blockhead; and for what reason? -- because the dunce cares for unlaid eggs, and
meddles in affairs which are nothing to him. He now may go to market tomorrow,
and buy, and cook, and roast, if any one is foolish enough to give credit to
such a beggarly dog. Where will he get bread? Does he think that I have a mind
to starve in the bloom of life? It is an easy matter to marry; but to support a
wife decently and honestly, and to be no ass, no ox -- The soundest blow which
ever was dispensed by the sinewy hand of a man, and which shook the last
remains of her teeth, put an instantaneous stop to the stream of her eloquence.
Barbara resembled a dog, who, after having barked long enough with impunity,
suddenly receives a violent kick, and sneaks limping and howling into the
house. She did not think it proper to wait for a da capo of her husband's
caresses, and ran roaring back. Conrad proceeded to Ortenberg's house, and
there seated himself at the feet of the dead Caroline in the abovementioned
posture.

Lamenting cripples and weeping paupers besieged the door. Every one held the
last alms in his hand which he owed to Caroline's charitable donation; for the
Captain, to whom her last words were as sacred as holy writ, had not only made
large distributions of the money which he found in the place, pointed out to
him by his friend previous to her dissolution, but also added a few dollars
from his own scanty stock; which he had hoarded up to purchase The History of
the Thirty Years War. Groans and lamentations resounded at the streetdoor from
the lips of all these poor wretches. They related to each other in doleful
accents, how often Caroline's charity had preserved them from starving; how
good and strong the soup was, which she had sent to some of them in their late
illness.

It struck ten o'clock. The funeral train proceeded toward the church yard.
The venerable Captain staggered at the head of the poor, behind the coffin,
supported by Conrad and another of Ortenberg's friends. He had wrapped a crape
round his left arm, looking down upon this badge of mourning, and muttering
constantly, as he went along: "Alas! I loved her so much, she ought not to have
treated me thus."

The clergyman read at the church yard according to custom, a chapter from the
Bible, and concluded with the following words: it would be needless, were I to
descant to you upon the virtues of our sainted sister. Every one of you knew
her; she was a worthy excellent woman." -- (Indeed she was! groaned the
Captain) -- "Why should I praise while deeds speak more strongly than words can
express? She now has received the palm of peace in yon better regions, and her
reward is unspeakable. The Lord bless thee, and keep thee; the Lord make his
face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up his
countenance upon thee, and give thee peace. Amen!"

When the coffin was let down into the grave, and Caroline's terrestrial part
was to be covered with earth, the honest soldier was no longer able to check
the emotions of the most violent agony. He began to moan so loudly and
woefully, that the hearts of all the bye-standers were ready to break. The
clergyman attempted to comfort him, but he replied angrily;

"Alas! reverend Sir, you neither knew her, nor do you know me. I am now good
for nothing in this world, for nothing at all. There is a nation among the
savages who knock their decayed old parents on the head when they grow unfit to
enjoy the comforts of life any longer. Oh! that some person would commiserate
my distress, and knock me on the head! He returned to the house a prey to
heartbreaking grief. The first object which he beheld on entering his
apartment, was a cap lined with fur, which Caroline had given him on his last
birthday. He seized it with infantine eagerness, put it on his head, and went
to the looking glass, while tears trickled down the venerable furrows of his
cheeks. He walked groaning up and down the room more than two hours, before he
went to bed. The servant found him next morning dead on his couch. An
apoplectic fit had terminated his existence. The cap which he had received from
Caroline, lay in his folded hands. A tear, which was not yet dried up entirely,
stood on his cheek.

Peace, peace attend thee to the shore,
Where sighs and groans are heard no more;
Where virtue triumphs over vice,
And REITER waits with wishful eyes,
To clasp thee to his honest breast,
And lull thy grief and cares to rest.
An hour after a detachment of soldiers came to the house to arrest the Captain
by the Governor's command.

"Dear old Conrad," said the servant, "what will now become of poor William?"

Conrad. Leave that to old Conrad! he shall not starve while I have a morsel of
bread, and when I can work no more, I will go begging for him.


Barbara. (putting her arms akimbo). So! we have nothing to eat ourselves; nor
do we know where to get a morsel of bread for tomorrow, and the old fool wants
to take care of the children of other people.


Conrad. Hold your peace, Barbara! (he pointed at the whip).


Barbara was suddenly mute as a fish.

CHAP. VIII.
Dear deceiver, sportive fancy,
Through whose magic arts we see
What the hopeful heart requires
And the fondest wish desires,
Granted us by destiny.
Why is not the hoary wanderer
In the wintry storms of life,
In misfortune's tearful strife,
Blessed like youth by dear illusion;
Why do not, in sweet confusion,
Airy fantoms charm his eye;
Why forsake him? tell me why?

WE acquainted the reader in the antecedent chapters, with the leading scenes
of this history* for fear of tiring his patience by a long-winded introduction;
but it now will be high time we should draw the curtain, and elucidate the
events related in the preceding chapters. Charles Frederic Ortenberg, the
unhappy husband of Caroline, was a native of Breslaw. His father, an opulent
merchant, of that city, had only one son besides him, whose name was Nicolaus
Ortenberg. The latter was already in his boyish years extremely fond of the
lives of adventurers, especially of seafaring men. When he, at school,
reclined his two elbows against the table, devouring, as it were, the book
which lay before him with his eyes, and moistening the ends of his singers with
his tongue, in order to turn the leaves more quickly: his schoolmaster could be
certain that he should catch him in the act of reading Robinson Crusoe, Robert
Pierot, or some other book of that sort, instead of Julius Caesar or Cicero;
the general consequence was, the immediate confiscation of his favorite author.

However this could not deter him from applying every farthing he could save to
the prosecution of his favorite literature and the bookseller always got more
money from him than the fruiterer and pastry-cook. His father inferred from
this that Nicolaus must have a passionate desire to see the world. He was glad
that his eldest son displayed a liking for the mercantile line, because his
wife had made him promise, previous to the birth of the youngest, that, in case
she should be delivered of a boy, he should be brought up for the church. He
resolved therefore to send little Nicolaus, as soon as he should have attained
his fifteenth year, to Amsterdam, to article him as apprentice to a great
house, and afterward to let him make a voyage to the Dutch settlements in the
East Indies, to gratify his desire of knowledge. He therefore caused him to be
carefully instructed in accounts, writing, mathematics, Dutch, French and
English, and when he had entered his sixteenth year, sent him to Amsterdam to
the house of an old friend, to commence his apprenticeship. He had never been a
favorite of his mother, and this was the reason why his heart, which naturally
was excellent, was neglected, and his manners were unpolished. He took leave of
his parents without shedding a single tear. His head was too much occupied with
the desert islands which he intended to discover, and the gold and precious
stones which he expected to find there. He even had made a plan how he would
cure the skins of the unknown animals which he should discover, and to make
them fitter for being made up into garments than those which Robinson Crusoe
had employed for that purpose. He stepped, therefore, into the mail, entirely
occupied with airy castles, and no reflection on his parents, no jostling of
the vehicle, interrupted him in his sweet reveries. Five years of his
apprenticeship elapsed without giving his manner of thinking another turn; he
rather heated his imagination more and more every day. In the long winter
evenings, and on Sundays and holydays, when his comrades went to taverns and
coffee-houses, or killed their time and squandered their money away at the
gaming table, he used to sit down by the fire side, leaning his left arm upon a
round table, which was loaded with a smoking tea-urn, and always held in his
right hand one of those numberless imitations of Defoe's Robinson Crusoe,
which, at his time, inundated Europe.

Although the mind of the young man received a very romantic turn by his
readings, and his brains were left as destitute of solid knowledge as his
imaginary desert islands were of cultivation; yet he derived from them the
advantage of being rendered entirely indifferent to all the fashionable
dissipations of his age, which enabled him to attend with the most scrupulous
diligence to the occupations of his calling.

It was, however, at last, impossible for him to check his ardent desire of
going to sea any longer. He teazed his master every day to send him as factor
to the East Indies. I would, however, not have my readers to imagine that he
considered Batavia as the spot where he expected to make his fortune; for the
bustle of that great city, the regular constitution of the state, and the
extensive connexions which it maintained with all parts of the inhabited globe
-- all this did not agree with his plans. He desired that the shore where he
hoped to arrive on a plank or an empty cask, should be as wild and uncultivated
as the world was on the first day of creation, and he would have preferred a
garrison of wild goats to the first regiment in the service of the
States General. But why then was he so pressing in his request to be sent to
the East Indies? -- From no other reason but because he was perfectly certain
that he should be taken on his voyage by a pirate, and carried for a year or
two to Algiers, Tunis, or Tripoli, where he expected to effect his escape
without much difficulty.

However, our young adventurer found it more difficult than he had thought at
first, to persuade his patron to comply with his wishes. Experience teaches us
every day that merchants are particularly reluctant to part with servants who
are essentially useful to them; and as Nicolaus Ortenberg, after the expiration
of the time of his apprenticeship, was the most useful clerk in the
counting house, upon whose fidelity and diligence the Dutchman could implicitly
rely, he always contrived to start some pretext to deny the young man's request
for the present, although it was his father's wish he should see the world.

Nicolaus was, at length, tired of being fed any longer with empty promises,
and resolved to take the helm of his life in his own hand. I say, he resolved,
which is as much as if I had said, he conceived the idea; for thinking and
resolving is always one act with people of his disposition. It was therefore no
wonder that he disappeared a few days after his bad or good genius had put this
idea into his head, leaving the greatest part of his property behind. He had,
indeed, resolved, at first, to convey a chest with all sorts of tools secretly
on board the vessel, which he hoped would be wrecked on some desert island in
favor of his romantic plans; but recollecting that the wreck of the stranded
ship would supply him sufficiently with all implements of that sort, he
abandoned this idea again, and decamped in a beautiful vernal night,
indifferently provided with wearing apparel, and still poorer in cash.

Although the biographer of the Ortenberg family knows perfectly well what is
become of our adventurer, and where he spent the succeeding five and twenty
years; yet he thinks it would be improper to communicate his knowledge of his
fate to the reader in this place; but promises, at the same time, that he shall
make his appearance again at a period when his arrival will cause as much
pleasure as that of Admiral Rodney gave to the political world after the famous
battle of the twelfth of April.

His clandestine departure caused the most pungent affliction to his old
father. The mother, however, whose whole affection concentered in his younger
brother Frederic, whom she intended to bring up for the church, soon forgot the
rough sailor, as she used to call Nicolaus. Her husband, on the contrary, who
was on the verge of his eighty-fourth year, could not reconcile himself to this
severe blow.

Nicolaus was, for his open and guiltless heart and blunt honesty, his very
picture, and, on that account, his father's favorite. When all enquiries and
advertisements were fruitless, the old man consumed his last strength by
fretting after his darling, and died, at last, like an aged oak whose last
remaining sap has been dried up by a stroke of lightning.

CHAP. V.
How sweet is love, when through the eyes
Arrayed in innocence he speaks,
And from the dimpled cheek assails
The enraptured heart with conquering smile!
I feel his bliss in every nerve,
And bow submissive at his shrine.

ALTHOUGH the whole town had thought old Ortenberg was immensely rich, yet
after the payment of all his debts, scarcely as much was lest as was sufficient
for his widow to live decently, and to send her second son to an university.
This son, our Charles Frederic Ortenberg, now had attained his nineteenth year.
All his instructors gave him the most favorable testimony, and his mother
insisted he should quit Breslaw, and go to Frankfort on the order, to render
himself capable of supporting her in her old age.

She was enraptured a^ the thought that she should see her Frederic, in a few
years, in the pulpit of his native town and hear him preach the Gospel with all
the ^ervour with which she believed in it. Ortenberg himself wished to be able
to afford her that satisfaction before her death, and resolved to quit his
native town in spring.

However he consented reluctantly to his mother's plan; because his filial
affection was counteracted by love for another object which frequently got the
better of his tenderness for his parent. Reader, do not (...) our hero on that
account, for, alas! the power of nature is too imperious to be easily overcome
by reasoning and principles. We frequently love a faithless mistress more
firmly than a fond mother, who cheerfully would lay down her life to insure our
happiness.

Caroline Summer was the name of the sweet creature who had conquered
Ortenberg's heart, and, as my readers know, was goodness itself; and, alas! is
already buried. I shall not attempt the arduous task of portraying all the
charms of her beautiful person, and her still more beautiful mind. I only
observe that she had a pair of eyes which no one could behold without feeling
the flame of love creeping through every vein -- eyes, serene and blue like the
sky in a clear vernal morn; animated with youthful fire, and tempered only by
the shade of her long eye-lashes, which, when she cast them down, made her look
like a Madonna. Mild, forbearing kindness, was the principal feature of her
excellent character.

They had had frequent opportunities of seeing each other in company; always
hung their heads when they came to some place where they expected to meet, and
saw their hopes disappointed; were always animated with visible hilarity when
one of them unexpectedly entered the apartment. This lasted some time, and
neither Ortenberg nor Caroline conceived the smallest idea of reflecting upon
that singular phenomenon; for, novels, like those which nowadays assist the
novices in love to interpret the secret meaning of their sentiments, were at
those times as scarce as a white raven.

The first incident which opened Ortenberg's eyes, and actuated him to examine
the state of his heart, happened on the following occasion: Caroline's father
was an eminent merchant, and had been an intimate friend of old Ortenberg,
whose widow had deposited her little capital with him. This afforded young
Ortenberg frequent opportunities to come to the house of his mistress on his
mother's affairs. One day he happened to enter the apartment just when the
family were drinking their coffee. Old Summer desired him to sit down, and said
to his daughter, who stood with down cast eyes, at the tea-table, and could
have served a painter as a model of purest innocence: "Caroline, offer Mr.
Ortenberg a dish of coffee."

I know not whether it was owing to forgetfulness, or because Caroline was used
herself to drink her coffee without cream; in short, she brought him a dish of
coffee without it, and made a neat courtesy.

Any one that had an opportunity of asking Ortenberg's mother in the realms of
death, would have learnt that her son had assured her repeatedly, that he could
not bear coffee without cream. However, Caroline appeared to him a Hebe, the
dish seemed to him to be filled with nectar, and from that moment he always
drank his coffee without cream. The sunshine of metaphysic, as much as he had
learnt of it at school, was insufficient to enlighten all the folds of his
heart, and Amor had quartered his whole army (Captain Storm would have said) in
these very folds. He had concealed the real state of his mind but too long from
himself, and his heart always shrunk back like a (...) whenever his reason
intruded itself as a confidant. I would, however, not have you to believe that
he was happy during that state of incertitude; for, the old saying, what I
don't wot cannot make me hot, is not applicabe to love. Love frequently heats us
without our knowing any thing of its existence; and sometimes kindles a flame
in us that, at last, will flash from our eyes in spite of all our efforts to
conceal it, and betray the state of our mind to every connoisure.

Ortenberg covered his sentiments a long time with the cloak of friendship, and
was afraid to remove it in the smallest degree, lest Love, with its whole
retinue, should suddenly present itself to his view. However, Amor grew at last
tired of his long confinement, and broke unexpectedly his fetters on a fine
autumnal day.

Old Summer had company in his garden; Caroline retired after coffee, when the
company sat down to the card-table, to the remotest recess of a little park
which joined it, and seating herself upon a terrace, took out her knitting, and
began to work. I would lay an hundred ducats against a pin, that she secretly
wished Ortenberg would join her, but also that she had no clear perception of
this wish. Ortenberg scarcely missed her, when he perceived that some
mysterious charm urged him to quit the company, and his good genius conducted
him directly to the spot where Caroline was sitting.

He now sat by her side, beneath the shade of an ancient beech-tree, which
divided itself into two branches. A choir of chafinches caroled in the top, and
mingled their amorous notes with the rustling of its leaves, moved by Zephyr's
gentle breath.

Caroline plied her needle with the greatest assiduity, and pulled her straw
hat lower over her face, the real motives of which we cannot divine, as the
thick texture of the branches of the beech-tree sheltered her completely
against the rays of the sun.

"The weather is beautiful," said Ortenberg. "Yes," replied Caroline: "but it
is rather too warm." This assertion was an evident falsehood; for the autumnal
air blew very fresh; yet, for ought we know, she might really have been too
warm.

Ortenberg. We had a great many cherries this year.


Caroline. Yes, and apples too.


Ortenberg. The late thunder-storm has done a great deal of mischief.


Caroline. I believe it has.


In this tone the conversation was carried on some time, although both were
very sensible that they had to speak of more important subjects. A myrtle sprig
which adorned Caroline's bosom, rendered, at last, the conversation more
interesting. Ortenberg begged Caroline to give it him. She took it from her
bosom; he extended his hand to receive it; their fingers came in contact; an
electric fire streamed through all their veins, and Caroline exclaimed with
emotion; "my memory will die as fast in your bosom as this myrtle will fade."
She gave him the myrtle, looked upon her knitting, and a tear pearled in her
eye. She averted her face, and attempted to wipe it off unperceived. Both were
silent some time, Ortenberg remained several minutes in the fame posture in
which he had received the myrtle, He took at last his almanac out of his
pocket, and wrote the following impromptu on a blank leaf: Wither must the
fairest flower,
Though thy hand have gathered it;
Naught on earth can brave the power
Of decay; beuty, wit,
Wealth, and splendour, all must perish,
Naught but love will never fade,
Innocence and virtue cherish
Faithful love, and kindly shade
Against the heat of life its blossoms;
Shield it when with ruthless hands
Fate sows thorns in mortal bosoms,
Love alone and friendship stands.
Undismayed when tempests lower,
Threatening in the frowning sky;
Naught impairs their lasting power;
Love and friendship never die.


He offered it trembling to Caroline. She read it, while his anxious eyes
watched the emotions of hers. Her hand relapsed upon her lap after she had read
the lines, and she cast a glance at her lover, like that which the animated
statue cast at Pygmalion. But it was not this glance alone that informed him of
his happiness. Her eye was again directed at the paper, and she imprinted, at
last, a fervent kiss upon it. This was the signal for Ortenberg. He clasped her
in his arms, and inhaled unspeakable rapture from her lips.

However, he robbed her also, unfortunately, of a patch which was on her lip,
and now stuck to his. Neither of them perceived it, for reasons which are very
obvious. His soul was in the same state in which it had been at the time when
he, for the first time, drank coffee without cream; he would, therefore, not
have been able to perceive it, if he had been covered all over with patches. If
we, besides, consider, that he prudently took care not to wipe his mouth after
having kissed Caroline, we may easily conceive that the patch quietly could
occupy its post, without being disturbed by him. If, however, one or the other
of my readers should think it improbable that Caroline also took no notice of
that unmanly ornament, I can safely refer him to every fair-one, and to ask her
upon her conscience, whether she was able to lift up her eyes in the next
quarter of an hour after having clasped the dear object of her love the first
time to her bosom. Caroline at last cast her eyes coloring to the ground, and
could not have looked up for worlds. She was satisfied with making the remark,
after half an hour, in which little was said, and much felt, that the company
would miss them, and tripped silently on Ortenberg's arm toward the
garden-house.

The company had, unfortunately, been merry at Caroline's expense, on account
of the abovementioned patch, before Ortenberg had arrived with his mother. Some
young gentlemen had wittily observed that it covered half a dozen of graces,
while others had remarked that it was rather too large. One of the company, who
imagined himself a great wit, had, probably hatched out some mirth creating
idea, while Ortenberg and Caroline was acting the tender duodrama at the
terrace. Apprehending he should be choked by it, he directed therefore, as
soon as the young people entered the apartment, his eyes at the place where the
patch had been fixed when Caroline had left the company. It had disappeared.
However, his lynx-eye, unfortunately, discovered that the patch was lodged on
the same spot of the left side of Ortenberg's lip, where it had been fixed
before on the right of Caroline's. In order to revenge himself for being
deprived of an opportunity to sport his wit, he made the company observe the
fatal translocation. Some smiled, and others pretended not to have heard his
observation. Old Summer colored deeply with anger. He cast an indignant look
at Ortenberg, and betrayed his passion by his gestures to the whole company. A
general silence took place; Caroline could not conceal her confusion. Ortenberg
had so much presence of mind to tell the company with a calm smile, that Miss
Summer had lost the patch in the garden, where he had sound it, after a long
search, in the grass, and as she had refused to redeem it by a kiss, he had
made use of it, to punish her for her obstinacy. The company pretended to take
his assertion for sterling coin, admired the fine turn by which he extricated
himself, and every one believed as much of it as he thought proper. Old Summer
watched from that moment every glance and motion of his daughter, and contrived
to turn the pupils of his eyes so artfully that it would have been useless if
Argus had lent him half a dozen from his superfluous hundred. He failed,
therefore, not to observe the secret pressure with which Caroline rewarded
Ortenberg for his invention, when he, after supper, according to the custom of
his old fashioned times, kissed her hand.

As soon as the guests had taken their leave, a discourse commenced between the
father and his daughter, the thread of which Caroline in vain made repeated
efforts to break.

The father, sitting in an easy chair, dressed in a red damask nightgown, a
cap of purple velvet on his head, and in yellow slippers; a long tobaccopipe in
his mouth, and a bottle of ale before him upon a straw mat.

The daughter, in another corner of the apartment, sedulously engaged in
various little domestic occupations, and endeavoring to conceal the confusion
occasioned by the expressive glances of her father.

Father. My daughter has not behaved well today.


Caroline made no reply. She ought however, to have considered that we must not
run across the fields when large drops of rain begin to fall, but to endeavor
to find shelter in the nearest cottage. However, by being silent, she ran right
across the field; for I challenge all the seventy interpreters to declare
whether her silence was not in fact as much as if she had pleaded guilty! It
was natural that old Summer, who stood upon the vantage, did not give up his
point, and continued, "she has forgot the advice which her sainted mother
repeated so often to her."

The old man opened, with this reproach, a battery which he, as Caroline well
knew, used to bring to bear only on very extraordinary occasions. She foresaw
that she should not be able to avoid facing the enemy, and therefore replied
with as much resolution as she was mistress of, "how so, dear papa?"

Resolution and consideration are not always joined. This was, at least,
Caroline's case, otherwise she would not have made that reply; because old
Summer always was highly provoked when one of his family pretended to be
ignorant of a fault with which the conscience necessarily must reproach the
offender every moment. He knit, therefore, his brow, took the pipe out of his
mouth, and replied with a tone of voice which was at least three notes lower
than usual.

"Have you already forgot the patch?"

This was one of those critical moments in which guiltless souls rarely act
consistently. Caroline had no other alternative, than either to deny the charge
firmly, or to plead guilty. She had every reason to apprehend that all would be
lost, and that she would no more hear the carols of the chafinches in the
beech-tree, if she confessed the fact. But in the former case it was necessary
she should lay the napkin which she was folding immediately down, toss up her
nose, and turning toward her father, exclaimed with surprise, "the patch!"

She actually did all this just as we have described it; but committed herself
by doing it too late, and adding "dear papa!"

This addition made her father suspect that she could not deny the charge, but
wanted to palliate her guilt, by the endearing tone of her voice, and the
repeated assurance of her filial love, particularly as he had spoken in the d
sharp, whereas she had replied in the e flat. He replied therefore in the same
accent:

"If I really am your dear father, you will avoid in future all companies where
you might meet with young Ortenberg."

This injunction was like a clap of thunder to Caroline. A gentle shower was
just on the point of gushing from her eyes: she caught the first drops with her
mouth, tasting thus for the first time the bitterness of love, and collected
herself as well as she could.

"Your commands shall be obeyed," said she, in a crying accent, put her
nightcap on, kissed her father's hand, and went to bed.

However, she closed her long eye-lashes to no purpose, and could not get a
wink of sleep all the night.

Ortenberg was in no better situation. His mother questioned him about the
patch, before he went to bed, and he confessed, and denied not, protesting that
Caroline was the only woman in the world who ever had interested him, and
begged his mother not to refuse him her maternal benediction, if ever he should
be so happy as to obtain her hand. But we know of how little consequence such
benedictions are, no matter whether they be pronounced by a priest or an old
woman. The blessing of the old lady availed nothing, although she bestowed it
most liberally; for Caroline was obedient to her father's command, because she
could not help it, and her glances could but rarely tell her lover at church
that this restraint had blown up the spark of passion into a blazing flame,
instead of extinguishing it.

Ortenberg hit at last upon an expedient which any other young man, less
blinded by love than he was, would have found out much sooner. Caroline had a
married sister, a good-natured little woman, at whose house she spent every
week an afternoon, and staid till night. It was not advisable to appoint a
meeting with Ortenberg in her house, because it was to be apprehended her
brother-in-law would surprise them.

The young lover posted himself every evening when he knew that Caroline was
with her sister, against ten o'clock, in a little lane where she must pass on
going home. The servant who saw her home was entirely devoted to her, and thus
the lovers could see and embrace each other at least a few moments. Caroline
was always rather timid on these clandestine meetings. Her heart and knee
always trembled like that of Chloe in the 23d Ode of Horace, when the breath of
Zephyr rustled in the leaves of the vine which run up against the house, near
which they generally met. She never ventured to stop longer in the lane than
five minutes, and always fled like a criminal, trembling at her own shadow when
she looked round. Five minutes! how much, and how little time for a loving
heart! Thus winter elapsed, and the time drew near when Ortenberg was to quit
Breslaw. Caroline was informed of it. She was with her sister the evening
previous to his departure. Her agony increased visibly, when she perceived that
it was near ten o'clock; her knitting kneedles trembled, her bosom heaved
quicker, and her sister cast a compassionate look at her. She started hastily
up from her chair when the servant entered to tell her, her maid was below to
fetch her home. It rained violently; however, Ortenberg had nevertheless been
waiting for her a good while, wrapped in a great coat. She flew anxiously in his
arms, and her first question was: "When shall you set out?"

"Tomorrow."

Merciful God! -- They hung on each other's neck -- lips upon lips, mingling
their tears.

Ortenberg. Caroline, will you never forget me?


Caroline. Never!


Ortenberg. God sees us!


"Yes, God sees us!" repeated Caroline, sobbing, tearing herself from his
embraces, and fled.

But no! She was not capable of parting so soon with the darling of her heart.
She returned again, and again, to embrace him once more. Her timidity had
disappeared entirely. She would not have minded if all the tiles had had eyes
-- for, the eyes of a world are in the hour of parting a contemptible nothing,
which is swept away by the last farewell tears. Ortenberg was, at last, obliged
to conjure her to go home, to disengage her hands from his neck, and to entreat
her not to excite the curiosity of the people who were in the street, "Charles!
my dearest Charles!" exclaimed she, weeping, imprinted the last kiss on his
cheek, and went slowly home to give her tears time to dry, if possible. But,
alas! when she came to the corner where Ortenberg suddenly was withdrawn from
her eyes -- new bitter tears gushed from her eyes, moistening the flowing
tresses which covered her heaving bosom. She hesitated a considerable time to
enter her father's house, stopping behind one of the linden trees which lined
the banks of the canal, warming her handkerchief with her breath, and holding
it against her eyes, to dispel the redness. However, grief and confusion had
disordered her features so much, and imprinted their vestiges so deeply upon
her countenance, that it was impossible for her to conceal it from the Argus
eyes of her father; who asked her hastily, as soon as she entered the
apartment: "Good God, Caroline, what is the matter with you? what has happened?"

Caroline had already prepared a plausible excuse, for the confusion in which
she was; for lovers are never in want of excuses on such emergencies. She
replied with a tolerable presence of mind:

I have been frightened by a drunken man, on coming home. You know, papa, how
fearful I am?

The old man took this for sterling coin, and Caroline was as glad, as she
could be in her situation, to have reached her solitary apartment, where she
could give vent to her tears without being interrupted.

CHAP. X.
Farewell, ye objects of my fond desires,
My tearful eye bids you adieu;
All that my heart with love and joy inspires
Must I abandon now; how few,
Alas! how few are life's unchequered pleasures,
How quick by guiltless joys away!
Scarce have we touched life's long* sought, fairest treasures,
When farewell tears already stray
Adown the cheeks, and every fond desire
Is chequered, ah! and every charm
Which hope held forth, is chased away by dire
Necessity's relentless arm!

THE sensations with which Ortenberg entered his bedchamber, the last time,
were unspeakably bitter. He neither would nor could sleep. He (...) the
watchman cry the hours, and thought, alas! this is the last time I shall hear
him; he saw how the moon silvered the tops of the trees in the garden, and
thought, alas! I shall see this beautiful scenery no more. It is singular, that
objects which never interested us before, become extremely important to us when
we have reason to apprehend that we shall see them no more.

The clock struck one. The stage was to set off at three o'clock. Ortenberg
rang the bell for the servant, to make coffee, and in a few minutes, the whole
house was in a bustle. His mother also got up to assist in preparing her son's
breakfast. Tears started from her eyes, as often as she looked at her dear
Frederic. "God bless you, my dear child!" exclaimed she, when she embraced him
the last time; "God bless you, and prosper your studies; walk in the fear of
the Lord; have God before your eyes, and in your heart, all your life, and take
heed not to sin knowingly, nor to commit any thing contrary to the law of God.
God will grant my prayer, and restore you one time to my maternal arms, with a
pure and innocent heart. Venerate God, do right, fear no one, and my blessing
will follow you every where. But should you be tempted to stray from the path
of virtue, then think of your old affectionate mother, and consider that you
would load me with shame and disgrace. Let my gray hair be consigned in peace
to the grave. Oh! my son, my son! I am old and infirm; I am afraid I shall see
you no more. Farewell! God bless you!

Ortenberg could not utter one poor word. He moistened the trembling hand of
his mother with tears of filial love, and flung himself speechless into the
stage. He passed the house of his dear Caroline, saw her in the window, dressed
in a charming morning gown, extending her arms toward him, as beautiful as the
roseate cloud which just emerged from the Eastern horizon; her eyes were
overclouded with grief, like the rising sun when his orb is shrouded in a
thunder-cloud; he made a signal to her with his hand, which was moistened with
tears, and disappeared. He was scarcely in the open field, when all objects
which presented themselves to his eyes, contributed to render the sensations at
parting more painful. The garden in which he unknowingly robbed Caroline of her
patch; the terrace, and the tree under which he imprinted the first kiss on
Caroline's lips; the lonely walk at the waterside which he used to frequent in
his boyish years: the verdant hill where he frequently had played with his
juvenile companions; the little wood where he had laid snares for birds; the
lake on which he had skated. "God!" exclaimed he, while all these objects
gradually disappeared from his view. "All this I have, perhaps, seen the last
time!" In a short time he had only an imperfect view of his native town; the
stage drove down a hill, and his eyes sought the spot in vain where he had
dreamed away his boyish and juvenile years.

He arrived at the place of his destination with the firm resolution to be
faithful to the advice of his good mother. He kept his word. Nothing remarkable
occurred in the two first years of his studies. Caroline and his mother wrote
frequently; he neglected not to answer their letters; and the post went
regularly. We shall, therefore, skip over the two first years of his academic
life. We also shall not enlarge much upon the third, and only inform the reader
that he, at that time, made an acquaintance which had an important influence on
the subsequent occurrences of his life. Harman of Elhenhorst, an excellent
young nobleman, became his friend. -- Although I would advise every young man
of plebeian extraction to choose, at university, no nobleman for his friend,
because he would run the risk of being discarded and neglected, after the
conclusion of his academic life; yet Baron Elhenhorst made an exception. He was
a native of Cleves, and son of the Prime Minister, endowed with uncommon
abilities, possessing a heart warm for friendship, but cold for love. Many
young men intruded themselves upon him, and strove to gain his friendship;
because -- he was rich. Ortenberg entertained not the least thought of
ingratiating himself with him, and gained his friendship without having sought
it. This happened in the following manner.

Not far from the town where they studied was a pond, where Elhenhorst,
Ortenberg, and many more students used to skate. Ortenberg went one day, about
noon, to that place of diversion, and arrived at the very moment, when, at the
farthest end of the pond, the ice broke under Elhenhorst's feet, and he sank
into the mire up to his shoulders. There was, indeed, no danger because the
pond was not deep: yet every one of my readers will easily perceive that the
situation to which Elhenhorst was reduced, was far from being comfortable. A
person who has skates fastened to his feet, cannot easily help himself, and --
what is still worse -- the ice always broke when he attempted to work himself
out of the mud. Not a single soul was near the spot before Ortenberg arrived,
and for this reason the assistance which he endeavored to give to an utter
stranger, although he could not risk his life, was the more valuable. However,
Elhenhorst was obliged to be satisfied with his good intention, for when our
young hero hastened to the spot rather incautiously -- as all good natured
people are used to do when they have an opportunity of assisting their fellow
creatures -- the ice broke also under his feet, and he was reduced to the same
situation from which the Baron had struggled above a quarter of an hour to
extricate himself. Both were half dead with cold, and now began jointly to call
for assistance. This attracted some people, and they were, at last, fortunately
though covered with mud, half frozen, and slightly wounded in several parts by
the sharp edges of the ice, released from their unseasonable bath.

It always grieves me to see that the great and the little generally are less
grateful when our endeavors to be useful to them answer not our expectations
and intention, although our zeal and merit be the same as if we had succeeded.
Elhenhorst, differing in his principles with the majority of his noble
brethren, was as much obliged to Ortenberg as if he really had succeeded in his
attempt to release him from his uncomfortable situation. The most cordial
friendship was cemented, from that moment, between the two young men. Sympathy
had united their souls long before that misfortune happened, and accident
contracted the ties which nature had prepared. -- Propriety! what a troublesome
thing art thou! how often do we see a face at the sight of which our heart
whispers to us, that man could be thy friend, and thou would love him
fervently, if he were. However, stiff propriety, prevents us from shaking him
cordially by the hand and proclaiming the wishes of our heart. He has, perhaps,
in that very moment, the same idea: but if accident does not come to our
assistance, we part with the cold compliment, "I am happy to have had the
honor of making your acquaintance." If accident had not befriended Elhenhorst
and Ortenberg, perhaps they would never have been so intimate as they now were.
They spent every hour which was not dedicated to their occupations, in
confidential discourses, and many a long winter's evening appeared to them, at
the chess-board, as short as a serene hour in May. Oh friendship, thou sister
of love! how few are destined to be warmed by thy gentle fire! every one does,
indeed, offer an imaginary sacrifice at thy shrine, but, alas! the majority lay
prostrate at the idol of self-interest, which rules all over the world, while
they vainly think to sacrifice at thy altar.

Ortenberg now enjoyed a bliss which, hitherto, had been unknown to him. He
never had, as yet, tasted the happiness of communicating his most secret ideas
to a faithful friend, of speaking of his love, of pourtraying the idol of his
heart with those glowing colors with which Amor's eloquence furnished him,
and, in short, of enjoying his bliss in a twofold manner, as he was no longer
obliged to conceal it within himself.

Although Elhenhorst never had loved, nor was inclined to fall in love, yet he
listened kindly, and sometimes smiling, to his friend, when he vented the
tenderest feelings of his heart with enthusiastic warmth: and what a feast was
it for Ortenberg's love, when Elhenhorst praised Caroline's artless letters,
congratulated his friend upon being so happy to possess the heart of a woman
who was capable of such noble sentiments and of expressing them in such a
dignified manner. In short, congeniality of sentiments, principles, and
propensities tied in less than a year the most indissoluble bonds of friendship
between them. However, all our joys are like a gleam of sunshine in April. The
gloomy hour of separation already drew near: Elhenhorst was to leave Frankfort
on the Oder, and Ortenberg, who had to stay half a year longer was almost
frantic with grief when he thought of the torments of the impending moment of
parting.

They supped together in Ortenberg's apartment the night before Elhenhorst's
departure. They mutually pressed each other to eat, but their agony was so
great as almost to render it impossible for them to swallow. They rose from
table without scarcely having touched a morsel. Neither would begin to speak of
the impending separation, and the thought of it was, nevertheless, the only one
which occupied their souls entirely, rendering them incapable of thinking of
any thing else, and laming their tongue, as it were, for every other
conversation. Elhenhorst broke at last the painful silence:

I hope, Ortenberg, you will write very often to me!" said he, playing with his
watch-chain, casting his eyes to the ground, to conceal the tears which started
from them. -- "Undoubtedly!" replied Ortenberg with a half-stifled sigh; and
thus their conversation was again at an end. A game of chess now was proposed
and begun. But if it be true that this game is the game of kings, and that it
bears the most striking resemblance to a battle: I would not advise a king to
engage the enemy on a day when he is to be separated from a dear friend. But
how wildly am I talking? what king can say he has a real friend? -- Our two
heroes played like children, leaving their most valuable men undefended without
their being taken; staring sometimes half an hour idly at the board, and
forgetting whose turn it was to move. The clock at last struck ten, and
Elhenhorst prepared to depart. "Adieu, dear Elhenhorst!" said Ortenberg
hastily, pressing his hand with convulsive agony: "God bless and protect you."
"We shall see each other once more tomorrow morning," replied Elhenhorst
groaning, and left the apartment.

But no! they did not meet again. Ortenberg foresaw that the final parting
scene would be too much for his and his friend's heart, and tend only to make
them feel all the pangs of separation with additional bitterness. He had,
indeed, promised to be at Elhenhorst's apartment early next morning; however,
he took a walk to a neighboring village, and only left the following lines.

I am going to take a walk, to avoid taking leave. Farewell, dear Friend. God
bless you! We shall, probably, meet no more in this world. I thank you for the
numerous proofs of your friendship, which I have received! -- Be completely
happy, and forget not

Your ORTENBERG.


This note was stained with tears, and Elhenhorst's tears mingled themselves
with his. "Good God!" exclaimed he, trembling on stepping into the post-chaise,
while he scarcely was able to stand on his feet; "how dear can a worthy friend
render even the obscurest corner to us!"

Oh, how true, how true, is this remark! -- And parting is doubly dreadful, if
we know from experience that friendship, kept up by letters, frequently grows
cold by degrees, and at last dies entirely away. Should this world really be
the best? -- and if it were, should not all good men who meet in it, love each
other, and constantly united, live and act jointly for the good of their
brethren? or is this idea too sublime for this world? -- Yes, we shall meet
again in a better world, in the regions of purer bliss, to attain, hand in
hand, by active virtue, the highest degree of happiness.

The two friends corresponded frequently in the beginning. Elhenhorst informed
his friend that he had made a journey to Berlin with his father; that he had
been presented to the king, and been so happy to please the monarch; that he,
consequently, had the best prospects before him, and expected to be soon
promoted to a very honorable post. Ortenberg put the letter hastily in his
pocket, took his hat and cane, running into the street, and asking all his
acquaintances he met, whether they had known Elhenhorst? and when one replied
in the affirmative, he informed him with the greatest volubility and sparkling
eyes, of his friend's impending happiness. However, the correspondence of the
two friends was suddenly interrupted by a most melancholy incident.

CHAP. XI.
Fortune smiles with thousand graces
On her votaries today;
Ere tomorrow dawns, she chases
Every ray of joy away.

ORTENBERG received the following letter from his mother:

Dear Frederic,
I should have been happy to inform you, my dear son, that all is well, and
that I am cheerfully looking toward the joyful hour when I should receive you
again in my maternal arms; however, Providence has decreed it otherwise, and
visited me with a heavy affliction on the verge of the grave. Yet I kiss the
rod which chastises me, and pray every day to God to strengthen you, my son,
that you may be able to get through the trials which await you. Fate leads us
frequently over extremely narrow and rugged roads; however, it also heals again
the wounds which it inflicts. Old Summer, who had the management of our little
property, is a bankrupt, and has disappeared. I applied immediately to a
lawyer; however, I had the affliction to be informed by him, that I have not
the least hope to recover any thing. You know that we always placed great
confidence in old Summer, and entrusted him with all that we are worth, upon a
simple bond. The lawyer, declares, therefore, that we ought to think ourselves
happy, if we can recover twenty per cent. and even this, he thinks, will not be
paid so soon as we may want it. God knows what will become of us, and how we
shall be able to procure the necessaries of life. I will not judge. I am a
merchant's widow, and know very well that he may be innocent; however, I cannot
see how we shall be able to support life. I am too old to get my bread by the
labor of my hands, and wish sincerely God would take me to him. Yet I do not
despair to find an asylum in the house of some benevolent friend, and am only
anxious on account of my dear Charles. You cannot conceive how it grieves me to
think that you should not be as happy as you deserve to be. Miss Summer has
called upon me, and complained bitterly of her melancholy situation. You may
easily conceive that I pity her sincerely. Return as soon as possible to your
afflicted parent, to assist me with your advice in my extreme distress. You are
anxiously expected by

Your faithful Mother, ELIZABETH ORTENBERG.


Young Ortenberg's heart was deeply wounded by the contents of this melancholy
letter. He stood near half an hour motionless at the window, holding the fatal
letter in his hand. Several people who passed the house saluted him; however he
saw them not. Some acquaintances of his wished him a good morning as they
passed by; but he heard it not. His mother -- his Caroline -- his mother and
himself, rendered miserable by the father of his mistress -- his Caroline
reduced to poverty -- All these ideas crossed each other constantly, and every
one of them imprinted the dreadful picture which it contained, deeply upon his
mind. At last he roused himself from his stupor, and collected all his
firmness, to prepare without delay for his departure from Frankfort. He had
expected to receive a bill of exchange from his mother, and, consequently, had
contract* a debt with his landlord, which amounted to about twenty dollars. He
went down stairs, giving a faithful account of his misfortune, and requesting
him to take some pieces of wearing apparel, in lieu of payment. His landlord, a
creditable and honest tradesman, who loved Ortenberg as much as if he had been
his own son, listened with great emotion to his melancholy tale, and protested
solemnly that no power on earth should prevail upon him to commit such a mean
action, as he honestly called it.

"Dear man!" said Ortenberg, "this will do me no good; for I must sell part of
my clothes to raise, at least, as much money as I shall want for my journey."

"Dear sir!" replied, the landlord, "it grieves me to see that you place so
little confidence in me. Would it not have done more credit to you, if you had
come down stairs and said, landlord, I am in such and such a situation; I
should be glad if you could lend me a sew paltry dollars. Is it worth while to
make many words about such a trifle? No, no! Mr. Ortenberg, I shall not suffer
you to sell any of your clothes. You owe me twenty dollars; I will give you
thirty more, if you will give me a bond for fifty. I am sure you will pay me,
as soon as it is convenient to you."

Having said this, he put his hand in his pocket, took a key out of a leather
purse, and was going to open his bureau, to prove that he was serious in his
offer. But Ortenberg, deeply affected by the generosity of that worthy man,
stopped him.

"No, my worthy friend," said he, with tears in his eyes: "my clothes are of no
further use to me. Have I not told you, that I am poor? What occasion have I in
my present situation for coats laced with gold? I have studied theology, and,
consequently, must dress according to custom, as soon as I am returned to my
native town, and wear black or some other modest color. I have as little
occasion for my gold watch and my silverhilted sword. I entreat you to take my
scarlet coat, laced with gold, and the blue one, laced with silver, in lieu of
payment. If you will lend me thirty dollars, I shall take it as a great favor;
but insist upon pawning my watch with you for that sum."

They disputed a great while before they could agree, and Ortenberg was, at
last, prevailed upon, to give one of his laced coats, in lieu of payment, and
to take the thirty dollars upon the other till he should be able to redeem it.

I must observe, on this occasion, that pride is a fault which my readers
henceforth will frequently observe in Ortenberg, a fault which poverty alone
can excuse, and which ought to be found only among the poor.

"Farewell!" said the honest citizen, when Ortenberg got into the stage. "God
protect you, and prosper all your undertakings. Do not pass my house, if you
ever should come through Franksort, and forget not that I love you as a son."

Ortenberg could not utter a word. He rode through the town gate, immersed in
gloomy apathy. In the suburbs he passed through a street in which a new house
had been built, over the door of which were engraven the words, This house is
in the hand of the Lord. This was the first object that produced again an idea
in his soul. "God!" thought he: "if that lifeless structure be deserving of thy
protection, my fate must also be in thy hand. I will not complain, nor murmur;
your ways are often dark and thorny, however the goal -- although it should
present itself first beyond the grave -- will be worth the strife." Alas! poor
young man, the bitterest strife awaits thee yet.

It began to dawn when he beheld the walls of his native town again. He
alighted at the posthouse, and hastened immediately to his mother's abode. The
windows were open, which appeared unaccountable to him, as the cold still was
pretty severe. Merciful God! -- when he entered the house -- he beheld his
mother in her coffin. A scene like this cannot be described; and I shall leave
the melancholy task to the imagination and feelings of my readers. His mother
had left a letter for him. He opened it impatiently, and read:

Dear Frederic,
I perceived clearly that you will not be able to arrive so soon as my sanguine
wishes flattered me you would. I am sensible that God has heard my prayers, and
will take me from this world in a few days. Rejoice, my dear son, rejoice with
me at my impending dissolution. Nothing embitters my death but the idea that
the situation in which I leave you, is not as good as I should wish and you
deserve. However, you have learnt something; trust in God, and he will direct
all for the best. Confidence in God, my dear son, leads to happiness here and
hereafter. Miss Summer has been with me several days, and attended and nursed
me. The good child frets very much at the injury which her father has done to
me. However, it is not her fault, and I have not arraigned her for it. Neither,
I hope, will you, my dear son. She now is, indeed, reduced to poverty; however,
she is of a laborious turn, and fears God. I give you my maternal blessing, if
you ever should be able to marry her. God bless you, and make you happy here
and hereafter. Amen. If my eldest son, Nicolaus, ever should return again, you
may tell him that I blessed him on my deathbed, and that I quit this world
without entertaining the least resentment against him. I hope you will bury me
in the vault where the remains of my dear husband are entombed. God knows, I
always intended to leave a small legacy to the poor; but the Lord who gave it,
has taken it again; praised be his holy name. I should, indeed, have wished to
hear you preach once before my death; however, God has denied me that pleasure;
I submit to his paternal will. I now shall lay down the pen, after having bid
you once more adieu; for, I am so weak as not to be able to write another line.

Merciful God, receive me into thy paternal arms, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

ELIZABETH ORTENBERG.


The soul of the young man was rent with the most excruciating agony, while he
perused these mournful lines; one tear chased the other, and convulsive groans
deprived him of the power of utterance. He indulged his grief five mournful
days in his lonely habitation, without knowing what he was doing. Five
melancholy days elapsed without his having even inquired after his equally
unfortunate Caroline. No one came near him but an old maid servant, who had
known him when a child, and shared happiness and misfortune many years with his
family. She informed him, at last, of her own accord, that Caroline had entered
into the service of an old lady, as waiting woman, and had been in the house
the day before his arrival, to see his mother's corpse once more. She added she
had wept bitterly, but seemed to be pretty well reconciled to her new situation.

Ortenberg scarcely had heard this account, when his love for Caroline returned
again with redoubled force. He dispatched the servant instantly, to let her
know that he intended to pay her a visit. During the servant's absence he felt
for the first time that sweet anxiety, that anxious throbbing of heart, which
every young man will have felt while he looked impatiently and trembling at the
watch, counting every minute till the wished-for moment arrived. Ortenberg
observed, for the first time, that his servant was uncommonly slow, that she
crept like a snail, and was very unfit to be employed as a Postillon d' amor.
She returned at last, and delivered a sealed note, which contained the
following lines.

Dearest Ortenberg,
Why should I see you again? The sight of you would break my heart, and excite
in me reproaches against my father, produce ideas which I neither will nor dare
entertain. An union between you and me now can never take place. The daughter
of a man who has rendered you and your family miserable, will never be able to
resolve to give you her hand. Your love for me might abate, and, even if this
should not be the case, you might drop, in some gloomy, melancholy hour, a
reproach which would distress me more than words can express, and break my
heart. I therefore now inform you -- though with a trembling hand -- that I
renounce all ideas of ever being united to you, and that I wish and desire --
yes, sincerely desire, that my dear Ortenberg also would give up every claim to
my hand. Be my friend. My regard and love for you will terminate only with my
life. Keep my letters; I am not ashamed of having written them. You will oblige
me by avoiding all companies where you can expect to meet with me. I shall do
the same with regard to you. God bless you, my dear Mr. Ortenberg! Be happy! as
happy as it is the wish of

Your faithful friend, CAROLINE SUMMER.


"Is there no exception at all," exclaimed Ortenberg, wildly, after having read
the letter, "from the adage, no misfortune comes alone? God! God! give me
strength to submit patiently to thy decrees! -- What have I committed, to be
afflicted thus? -- No, Caroline, you know not what you are doing. You mean to
behave generously, and are very ungenerous. You must recant! by God, you must!"
-- He wrote the following answer:

Dear Caroline,
Do not expect to receive a letter from me which is interlarded with cold
civilities. I shall never cease speaking the language of the heart to you,
although you want to break the bonds which unite our souls. But you shall not!
by all that is sacred, you shall not: -- I will tell the whole world, that you
are mine -- I will complain of your infidelity, to the cold remains of my
mother. Is it possible Caroline could be able to renounce me? My sainted mother
called you a pious girl; but you are perjured. She will accuse you before the
tribunal of the eternal judge, of having rendered her son miserable. You force
me to utter reproaches. Would you complete what your father has done? How
little have I lost through him! -- But you -- you are not satisfied with seeing
me poor and naked, you also want to see me miserable. You know me. You know
that I can be as happy as a king, although I am poor, and therefore rob me of
your love, which made me richer than a king. Caroline, dear Caroline, recall
what you have written. Recollect our separation; recollect every sweet and
bitter hour which we have shared, and then pronounce my doom.

CHARLES ORTENBERG.


Caroline was no romantic heroine. She had a humane heart; but this and
weakness, are almost inseparable. It was with the greatest difficulty she had
wrote the aforementioned letter to Ortenberg. She had not expected to receive
such a wild, despairing answer, and therefore was not able to persist in her
resolution. Do not condemn her, ye fair ones, for not having been gifted with
enthusiastic punctilio; I would lay anything, that not one of you would have
acted otherwise in a similar situation. Caroline sent word to Ortenberg, that
she expected to see him at ten o'clock the next morning.

As soon as the first storm had abated, and the lovers were again able to cast
the anchor of reason, they began to look out for a safe port, to which they
could steer with united exertion. However, men think and meditate frequently
with unabating assiduity, and when they imagine they have found out something
entirely new, generally hit upon an object which would have presented itself to
their view, at first sight, if they but had had eyes to see it. Ortenberg and
Caroline had been closeted and consulting above two hours, when they agreed
that Ortenberg should apply to the consistory, to examine, and qualify him for
the possession of a living, and that Caroline should remain in the service of
her lady, till this wished for object was attained. The lady rung the bell, and
Caroline intimated to Ortenberg, that it was time for him to go, but made him
promise, before he went, to visit her only once every week, lest he should
expose her to the calumny of busy gossips. The condition was, indeed, very
painful; however, he was sufficiently indemnified for his self-denial, when the
long wished for Sunday came, and Ortenberg, could rove his native fields, by
the side of his dear Caroline. No routs nor splendid feasts can afford
pleasures like those which he felt on these occasions. Oh Heavens, what a scene
of bliss would it afford, if it were possible to establish a club consisting
entirely of lovers -- provided the number were even.

CHAP. XII.
Cursed be the wretch who treats with scorn
Meek virtue which is humbly born,
Who boasts of noble ancestry,
And rolls in voice. Nor pedigree,
Nor coronet, nor ducal crest,
Can honor him whose lustful breast
Is stained with crimes: he is a knave,
Though decked with gold. The virtuous slave
Is nobler than a titled knave.

HALF a year had now elapsed! Ortenberg was examined before the whole
consistory, received much well merited applause, and at last was dismissed,
with the strongest promises of being promoted to the first living that should
become vacant. However, these reverend gentlemen, know after the next quarter
of an hour, as little of their promises made to an honest fellow not to let him
starve, as the crutch knows that the lame leans upon it. Ortenberg knew this by
the experience of others. He therefore did not think it prudent to expend the
small sum which he had obtained by selling some useless furniture, and to rely
implicitly upon the faith of his reverend patrons. He made several attempts to
obtain the place of a tutor. But wearing his own hair, contrary to the custom
of all divines of his times; his endeavors were entirely fruitless, and he saw
himself necessiated to keep an obscure day school, in which he instructed the
children of trades people, for a small monthly stipend.

Ortenberg earned by that despised though honorable occupation, scarcely as
much as was necessary to support his life. The confusion in which the death of
his mother had involved him, the preparation for his examination, and the
establishment of his school, had hitherto taken up the greatest part of his
time, and caused him to leave two of Elhenhorst's letters unanswered.
Elhenhorst knew not what to think of his silence, and wrote a long epistle to
his silent friend -- in which he loudly complained of his supposed neglect, and
murmured at his own melancholy fate.

Grief and uneasiness really overclouded poor Elhenhorst's days. He had
obtained the post which the king had promised him. He acquired honor and
wealth, and had reason to hope to rise higher in a short time. However, his
superiors, seeing that he discharged his duty with unremitted zeal, had
burdened him with such a load of business, as left him little time for
recreation. If a young man who is buried the whole week among a heap of dusty
documents, and has even on a Sunday only a few hours to spare, which he is
doomed to kill at the card table, -- if such a young man is not to complain, he
really must be as unfeeling as a block, and destitute of all noble sentiments.

Ortenberg was deeply affected by the melancholy epistle of his friend. He
answered it immediately, imputing his long silence to the death of his mother,
and his public examination. He mentioned, indeed, that he had lost all his
property through old Summer's bankruptcy, but was too proud to complain, or to
drop only a single word about the utter want of the necessaries of life, to
which he frequently was reduced. He assured his friend, on the contrary, that
he wanted for nothing; that he was in hopes of attaining a comfortable living,
and should soon be happy in the arms of his Caroline. Thus their correspondence
had been taken up again, and was carried on regularly till Elhenhorst's
untimely death interrupted it.

Caroline had the misfortune to get acquainted with a wretch who poisoned all
the pleasures of her life, and rendered it an almost uninterrupted train of
misery. The lady in whose service she was, was a proud conceited fool, a puppet
without a soul, who had no other merit but that which she derived from her
pedigree, and entertained a very suspicious connection with a certain Colonel,
whom we already have introduced to our readers on a former occasion. As the
principal aim of the robust Colonel and the wanton lady tended entirely to
enjoy the world, and to give variety to their pleasures, he was always provided
with promising men servants, and she took care never to be without a pretty
waiting maid, which enabled them to assist each other in case of necessity. She
had not informed Caroline of this honorable destination, because she imagined
this was entirely superfluous, and, besides, took it for granted, that a young
woman in her humble situation would be proud of having a Colonel, who, besides,
was a nobleman, for an admirer.

Caroline was sitting in her apartment, on a hot summer's day, thinly attired,
on account of the intolerable heat. The Colonel, who had not found her lady at
home, entered her chamber, and seated himself opposite her, assailing the
blushing girl with jokes, to which no chaste ear can listen without
indignation. A look of Caroline's flashing eye, which could have confounded
impudence itself, lamed his tongue a few moments. However, heroes of the toilet
like him are not easily frightened. "The fortress is beautiful!" exclaimed he,
with a self-sufficient smile: "I must storm it!"

Having said this, he extended his hand, to remove Caroline's neck
handkerchief. Caroline started up, anger and contempt glowed in her countenance.

"Colonel! I shall complain to my lady of your rudeness!"

Colonel. Complain, my angel? What cause have you for complaining?


Caroline. (with dignity). I desire to be left alone.


Colonel. Indeed, I should deserve to be sent in chains to Spandau, if I could
let slip such a charming opportunity.


Caroline. (in a weeping accent). My, lord you are mistaken; I am a modest girl.


Colonel. A beautiful brunette told me the same two years since, and afterward
could not help laughing herself* at her simplicity. -- However, I will give you
credit for your modesty, my little angel; come, let me have a kiss!


Caroline. (pushes him back). Leave me, sir. Be gone instantly, or I shall call
for help.


Colonel. (mocking her), Fie, fie, sir! Let me alone! Indeed, I shall cry out.


Caroline. Merciful God! Could I ever have imagined that I should be humbled so
low? Cruel father! --


This was the first complaint she ever had uttered against her father.

The discourse and the attacks of the brave Colonel were fortunately terminated
here by the rolling of my lady's carriage, who was coming home. He cursed the
Baroness, and left Caroline weeping at her unhappy situation.

My lady, unfortunately, had disordered her head-dress, in alighting, and rung
the bell for her woman. -- (The Colonel had already sneaked away.) Caroline
appeared, her eyes red with crying. The Baroness perceived it in the
looking-glass, before which she was standing, examining the damage which her
coeffure had received; for, she was not used to condescend honoring her woman
with a look. "Why have you been crying?" asked she negligently. "The Colonel,"
replied Caroline, while a torrent of tears gushed from her eyes, "has treated
me like the most abandoned woman."

"How!" said the Baroness, with fashionable indifference.

Caroline repeated her complaint.

Baroness. An't you (...) stupid blocked? Is it worth while to make such a fuss
about a mere trifle?


Caroline (surprised). My Lady I am astonished!


Baroness. I command you to receive the Colonel with every mark of civility, if
he should condescend again to honor you with a visit in your chamber.


Caroline (amazed). My lady --


Baroness. It is, indeed, a great misfortune for a girl like you to be liked by
a Colonel, who, besides, is a handsome man, has conquered more hearts than
enemies, and ought by no means to be denied a favor by you.


So saying, she went to the harpsichord, and played a country-dance, without
taking any further notice of Caroline, who went in an agony of despair to her
apartment, and moistened her knitting with tears.

Ortenberg, unfortunately, came that very momoment, contrary to his usual
custom, to pay her a visit, informing her, with a cheerful countenance that he
was in hopes to obtain a comfortable living in a short time. The words died on
his lips when he perceived her woeful situation. We shall not inquire whether
Caroline did right or wrong in informing him of the insult which she had
suffered from the Colonel and her lady. Suffice it to say, that she represented
her forlorn situation faithfully to him; that she had no other friend besides
him, that he entreated her in the most affectionate manner to conceal nothing
from him; and that she thought her connection with him required the most
unreserved confidence. She ought, indeed to have forseen the fatal consequences
of her frankness. However, who can escape his destiny?

CHAP. XIII
All hail the generous man who boldly dares,
TO avenge the wrongs of virtuous minds,
Who in his fellow-creature's suffering shares,
And burns with indignation when he finds
A guiltless heart by bitter anguish torn.
All hail the man that draws with noble scorn
The avenging sword against the titled knave
Who insults virtue; he is valiant, brave,
Though strength should fail his arm, and he should fall
By more successful vice; the generous call
His weak attempt a noble, glorious deed,
And weep a mournful tear at his defeat.

ORTENBERG's heart was torn with the most excruciating agony during Caroline's
relation. It was impossible a proud and noble mind like his could have brooked
such a daring and shameful insult. He was seized, for the first time in his
life, with frantic fury. His eyes rolled wildly in their sockets, his veins
swelled, and his nerves were convulsed. He rushed out of the apartment, without
listening to Caroline's anxious screams, staggered, inebriated with fury,
through the street, and was almost senseless when he entered his apartment. He
wrapped himself in a long cloak, concealing a rusty sword under it, and flew to
the Colonel's house. The latter was not at home, and Ortenberg measured the
antichamber with hasty strides, firmly resolved not to quit the house, until
he should have avenged Caroline's injury. He waited a long time for the
Colonel, and consequently had time to recover from his blood-thirsty frenzy. A
thousand doubts began to cross each other in his mind. He began to reflect on
the fatal consequences which this action would unavoidably produce; he
shuddered at the idea of murdering a fellow creature, or depriving Caroline, by
his own death, of her only protector, and his resolution began to waver, his
blood grew cooler, and he was already on the point of quitting the house, when
the Colonel entered the antichamber. The sight of that unfeeling wretch
overturned at once all his good resolutions. His blood began again to ferment
violently, and he followed his rival to his closet. The Colonel started on
seeing a man in his closet, who was an utter stranger to him, and whose eyes
flashed with an unusual ferocity.

Colonel. Sir, what is your pleasure?


Ortenberg (with as much calmness as he was capable of). I beg you will be so
good to order your valet to leave us; I have to speak in private to you. (The
valet quitted the closet).


Colonel. Well! what is your business?


Ortenberg (grinding his teeth). We shall have a curious conversation.


Colonel (surveying him with suspicious and scrutinizing eyes). Sir, what do
you mean?


Ortenberg (with a contemptuous smile, and stifled rage). I suppose you have
never read the Bible, my valiant Colonel?


Colonel. Faith! the beginning is droll enough. (sneering) May I ask, why?


Ortenberg. For the sake of a very short tale: There was once a rich man who
possessed -- right or wrong, this makes no odds -- a numerous flock of sheep. A
poor man had only a single lamb, which he tenderly loved, fed with his own
hands, and would have parted with for no price. The rich knave attempted to rob
him of it. Colonel, what would you have done, if you had been in the room of
the poor man?


Colonel. Sir, do you want to jest with me?


Ortenberg (with deep contempt). Jest with you?


Colonel (passionately). Sir, who are you? what do you want?


Ortenberg. It matters not who I am. -- What I want? -- (looking firmly at
him). Do you know Caroline Summer?

The Colonel was terrified.


Ortenberg. Oh! old deceiver, your conscience seems to alarm you a little.


Colonel (putting his hand to the hilt of his sword). Sir!


Ortenberg (drawing his sword). You are welcome, Sir! I came for that very
purpose.


Colonel (in confusion). Stop one moment only. Are you perhaps related to the
young woman?


Ortenberg. Yes, related by the most sacred ties. She is my bride. We are
husband and wife in the eyes of God.


Colonel (smiling). I understand you. But why are you in such a passion? Do you
think I will dispute your bride with you? God forbid! your bride is your bride,
but nevertheless a charming girl. Or should I not do justice to her beauty
because she is your bride? This would be singular, indeed. I shall not hinder
you from inhaling the smell of a fragrant flower which blows in my garden
although it is my property. Why should we attempt to break each other's neck
for such a trifle. Take this purse, it contains, an hundred Louisd'ors --


Ortenberg could contain himself no longer. "Villain! defend yourself!"
exclaimed he, flying furiously at the Colonel. The latter scarcely had time to
draw his sword and to hold it against the furious young man. But more was not
wanting for his defense. Ortenberg being blinded by rage and unskilled in
fencing, ran into the Colonel's sword and received a deep wound in the abdomen,
which however was not mortal. "You see what it is to be too hasty!" said the
Colonel, sneering, and rung for his valet. A surgeon was sent for: Ortenberg's
wound was dressed, and the Colonel sent him home in his carriage.

This incident is the most evident proof that my tale is no fiction; for if it
were, Ortenberg would have pierced the Colonel like a second Grandison, and
kicked all his servants valiantly down stairs. But as all the events which we
relate of the Ortenberg family happened in a very natural manner, and as it is
consistent with the regular course of nature that a cool soldier should run a
furious divine through, the Colonel conquered, and the unfortunate young man
was carried wounded to bed.

The malicious conqueror stood before the looking-glass, repairing his locks,
and having wiped the heroic sweat from his martial brow, rode to the Baroness.

"I have had the most comical incident!" exclaimed he on entering the
apartment: " le Diable m'emporte, your ladyship is waited on by enchanted
princesses."

Baroness. Whose champion you wish to become?


Colonel. Par Dieu! no; that black knight of the bible breaks lances like pins
and compares ladies to a flock of sheep. Permit me, my lady, to congratulate
your woman upon the possession of such a valiant champion.


With these words he skipped out of the apartment, stroking his calves,
whistling an air, taking a looking glass out of his pocket to admire his pretty
face, and went into Caroline's chamber. The unfortunate girl was just upon her
knees in a corner of her chamber, imploring Providence to preserve her
innocence and to protect her lover.

It was dangerous for the Colonel to see a person at prayers, because he always
apprehended on such occasions to be choked. He raised a roaring horse-laugh.
Caroline turned round, casting a contemptuous look at the wild wretch, and was
going to quit the apartment. The Colonel stopped her.

"Stop a little, my angel! I shall soon have done (laughing violently). Let me
only recover a little (laughing still louder); 'pon my honor, this is too
bad!" continued he with tears in his eye and slabbering lips: "a girl eighteen
years old -- one should expect to find her before the looking glass -- or
reading les egaremens du coeur -- or writing a Billet-doux -- and, lo! she
prays!" (he almost was choked with laughing).

Caroline. (with unspeakable dignity). Vile sinner, leave me instantly! whoever
listens to you commits a sin; whoever condescends to cast a look at you, sins;
and it would be a blasphemy to treat you otherwise than with the most profound
contempt. (She endeavors to disengage herself.)


Colonel. Hell and furies! But come, my angel, I will make you commit a sin;
you shall, at least, let me see your charming anger.


He kept hold of her hands and informed her of Ortenberg's accident.

When he had told her he had run him through, Caroline ejaculated a loud
scream, and was ready to faint. However, her apprehension for her lover's life
soon animated her again with new strength. She hit the Colonel a violent blow
against the breast, which made him reel.

"Ortenberg wounded!" exclaimed she: "God curse you, vile villain!" She rushed
into the street undressed as she was. Not a thought of propriety came into her
mind; Ortenberg's wound was constantly before her eyes; she seemed to fly, and
before five minutes had elapsed, stood trembling at Ortenberg's bed side.

"Charles!"

"Caroline!"

She was dragged from the bed. The poor young man was sufficiently tormented by
agonising ideas; her compassionate and almost frantic love would have killed
him in that moment. Caroline was not admitted again before the seventh day,
when he began to mend. They moaned, wept and sighed together; however there was
no remedy against this misfortune.

Caroline had quitted the house of the Baroness immediately, and, in the
simplicity of her innocent heart, entered into the service of an old woman, who
was thought to be a lady of rank, and concealed the most contemptible soul
under the mask of artificial piety. Envy and avarice were the principal
ingredients of her character, and varnished with canting devotion -- She was
formerly a coquette, and now a procuress, when a young rake had sufficient
money to bribe her. She went frequently to church, sung the most sonorous
discant in the whole parish, and her eyes were red with crying in the driest
sermon. She boasted much of her exemplary piety, and pretended to converse with
superior spirits. She even sank never into the arms of a lover at the time when
she acted the part of a wanton coquette with applause, without assuring him
with tears in her eyes, that he was the first man upon whom she bestowed her
favors conquered by the omnipotence of love. She was a most garrulous talker,
and knew the art of distending and enlarging so much upon the most trifling
incident, as if it were a piece of elastic yarn and her auditors marble statues
of patience. She had read the bible above seventy times, and the revelation of
St. John 133 times. She kept a faithful journal of every thing that happened in
the town and in her house, subjoining always pious remarks to it. As she was
proud to show that journal to every one that wished to see it, I think giving a
few samples of it to the reader will not be deemed an act of indiscretion:

May 16. At four o'clock in the afternoon my next door neighbor's chimney was
on fire, which, however, unfortunately, was soon extinguished. Oh my merciful
Savior, extinguish the conflagration of his sins, lest he should be hurled
down into the eternal fire from whence there is no redemption.

May 20. Sewed pease. Oh, thou Holy Father in Heaven, extirpate the thistle out
of the sinful hearts of my fellow christians and sow the pease of thy grace
into them.

June 1. Finished the perusal of the Old Testament the seventy-fourth time. Oh,
thou Heavenly Father, be merciful unto thy unworthy servant Anna Maria of
Xantippendale, that she may be able to glorify thy name, and to edify thy
sinful neighbors by reading it as many times again.

July 13. Had my whole house white-washed. Oh, thou Holy Father in Heaven, wash
away the manyfold sins of my proud neighbor; lest Satan should put her one
time into his large wash tub.

July 23. Bought East Indian handkerchiefs. Oh, thou bloody Savior, save the
poor Indians from the clutches of Satan; for, they know nothing of the
incarnate Godhead.

Aug. 2. Heard a very edifying discourse on Christian self-denial, preached by
the Rev. Dr. Hornbelly, during which I had shed many thousands of tears. Mrs.
Wolman, that wicked woman, sat at my right hand without shedding one poor tear
of contrition. God judge that proud woman! she put a hard dollar into the plate
for the poor orphans, out of mere vanity.

Aug. 15. Took Miss Summer into the house. Oh, thou Supporter of widows and
orphans, move the compassion of men, that they may commiserate the situation of
that pretty child, and my charity bear fruits hundred and thousand fold.

Sept. 1. Had the misfortune to draw blood in beating a sick beggar girl, while
I chastised her with Christian meekness, to make her sensible that she should
not beg alms for her blind father and herself, of a poor woman like me. The
wicked justice sentenced me to pay a fine of 20 dollars, for which my merciful
father in heaven will damn him here and hereafter.

Sep. 9. Old Meyer, the merchant, broke a leg. A visible judgment of God;
because he is so rich, and a devoted slave to his mammon.

Oct. 6. The lightning struck into the church of St. Andrew, and damaged the
pew of Lady D. Oh, thou wonderful Jesus! the wicked woman had left it an hour
before.

Dec. 1. Killed a pig. Oh, thou lovely Jesus! convert the impious Jews, that
they may eat pork. Amen.

This will be sufficient for my readers to form an idea of a character, which
was a mixture of malice and absurdity; the former was concealed by the latter,
like an assassin, who is disguised by the mask of a faun. The gentle Caroline
imagined only that she was a singular woman, to whose oddities she must
accommodate herself; and although she did not relish her mode of life, which
was occupied with nothing else but praying, singing, scolding, railing against
the wicked world, cursing the impudence of beggars, complaining of the dearness
of provisions; rasping tobacco, and combing dogs; yet she thought herself
sufficiently happy to be free from all persecutions, and to wait for the
developement of her fate in retirement from the bustle of the world.

Ortenberg now had completely recovered from his wound. The Colonel had not
failed to proclaim his prowess in all companies, and to represent the
unfortunate young man in the most ridiculous light. The children pointed with
their fingers at Ortenberg when he went abroad the first time. "Be patient, my
poor heart," said he by himself: "The living which I am to have, will indemnify
me for all my sufferings. I shall not care for all the world, when I am housed
in my peaceful parsonage with my dear Caroline; I will perform my duties
faithfully, love my parishoners, cherish my wife, and live happy, quiet and
unenvied, enjoying the blessings of God with a grateful heart."

Poor, deluded man!

He resolved to apply the next day to all the reverend gentlemen who had to
dispose of his fate, and to remind them of their promises. However, before we
proceed farther, my duty as a biographer requires, I should make my readers
acquainted with the characters of the reverend patrons of our hero.

CHAP. XIV.
Are these the men whose sacred function
Calls them to sow the blessed seeds
Of happiness, and with compunction
To strike the sinner, root the weeds
Of baneful vice from mortal bosoms,
To soothe the mournful suff'rer's mind,
To nurse meek virtue's early blossoms,
And to be leaders to the blind?

HIS Excellency Baron Alexander, of Sturzenburzel, was president of the
Consistory. He was famous for speaking little and eating much. He never went to
the court of Consistory without having his pockets stored with cakes. He
generally fell asleep as soon as he had finished his last cake, and when he
awoke, said Yes. This is all that we can say of him.

Further: The Right Reverend Father in God, Joseph Lactantius Ignatius
Hogstyerius, Bishop of D**, and member of seven Academies of Sciences, and of
twenty-two Latin and German Societies. He was a man after God's own heart, who
was not for external pomp, but humbly, and with self denial, walked the thorny
path of life. He was six feet three inches high, and the diameter of his
venerable belly, was two feet five inches. A large wig as white as snow,
contrasted pleasantly and awfully with his black beard and eyebrows. His gait
was graced with Spanish grandezza. One of his hands reclined upon the
abovementioned venerable belly when he walked in the street, while the other
dispensed the benediction to the multitude. The writings which immortalized his
name, consisted in a Polemic of 37 quarto volumes, 134 Dissertations, and 572
Sermons against the pleasures of the Flesh.

Miss Flavia Rosamunda Shnurr was a fatherless and motherless orphan, 43 years
old. She had known the venerable prelate when he was a candidate, and always
received many spiritual and corporeal benefactions from him. She now had
superintended his house and kitchen more than seventeen years, and was assisted
in the discharge of her domestic duties, by five foundlings who had been sound
at different times at the door of the pious man, and owed their education to
his Christian charity. Further:

The Reverend Godfrey Godhart Godhelp Feargod Blockheadius, Archdeacon of St.
Bernard, whom his mother had qualified for a Saint from his baptism, by the
number of Godly names which he received. He was a little man; his face was
broad, and his eyes were always half closed. They flowed with tears at the sins
and wickedness of men, whenever he opened them. His whole life was devoted to
mourning at the depravity of the world. For this reason, he had also a
prevailing predilection for the black color. His wig was black, the face of
his wife was of a blackish hue, his arm chair was covered black, and his
domestic animals consisted of a black cat, a black dog, a black cock, black
cows and horses, and his favorite dish was black pudding.

The fourth arbiter of Ortenberg's fate was the Reverend Doctor Fipsnosius, two
feet eight inches high, very meagre, gifted with a squeaking voice, and graced
with a large protuberence (...) his left shoulder. He seemed to look at (...)
buckles when he raised his eyes to Heaven, and he appeared to be a dwarf when
he stood by the side of the Right Reverend Father in God Lectantius Ignatius
Hogstyerius. He was very proud of his preaching ex-tempore. He wore a well
powdered wig, and as the pulpit was rather high, his presence could be
perceived only by a cloud of powder which rose from his head, as often as he
shook it in the heat of eloquence. Through this cloud a reprimanding voice was
heard, proclaiming howling, and gnashing of teeth to his parishoners. He
imitated that howling so naturally, as to make his auditors imagine they heard
the damned moaning in full chorus. He was always willing to lend upon pledges,
"because," said he, "we are commanded by scripture not to bury our talents."
When Ortenberg came to him, he had just finished a Sermon upon the parable of
the rich publican.

The last person with whose character we have to acquaint the reader, is the
Reverend Doctor Theologiae et Philosophae, Olearius Mauritius Calfsheadius.
Famine and his person seemed to be twins. His chin was one of the longest in
the whole kingdom, and his body seemed to be a living skeleton. His bones
rattled when he lifted up his hand, and those that came near him could easily
count his ribs. His Sermons were generally lectures upon the Syriac and
Chaldean. These languages occupied his ideas so much that he, one time, in his
absence of mind, read the gospel of the paralytic, and held a sermon on the
golden calf. Another time he was sent for to the house of a sick person, but
being just occupied with finding out the root of a Syriac word, he went by
mistake into a house of bad fame, where he instantly was surrounded by three
ladies of pleasure. He awoke at last from his Syriac reverie, and fled with
horror from that abode of infamy. However, the neighbors who had seen him go
in, shook their heads with indignation, and exclaimed "Good God, what business
had our pastor in a brothel?" Dame Fame had spread this news all over the town
before a quarter of an hour had elapsed. "Have you heard of it?" said an old
toothless matron to a neighbor. "For goodness sake don't mention it; it
grieves me to think of that scandalous incident."

"Such an old man ought to be ashamed to go to a public stew."

"Merciful Heaven, what a scandal!" exclaimed the Right Reverend Father
Hogstyerius. "Make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof,"
said he to Miss Flavia Rosamunda Shnurr.

"I thought it would come to that!" groaned the Archdeacon Blockheadius; "the
world is verging toward dissolution!" "Indeed, it does!" squeaked Doctor
Fipsnosius, while he was occupied in filling some ducats. The poor, guiltless
Calfsheadius was summoned before the tribunal of his colleagues, and would have
been suspended from office, if he had not proved that it was impossible for him
to visit a house of pleasure for carnal purposes.

CHAP. XV.
A pampered blockhead, and a priest
Puffed up with pride, a woman swelled
With vanity -- enough, enough
For turning life to darkest hell.
Hapless the wretch who flies to them
For comfort; thrice unhappy he
Who Is doomed to dire necessity
To live on smiles which they bestow:
He dies of want, or turns a knave.

I HAVE given a faithful picture of the venerable supporters of the church, on
whose nods our hero's sat depended. Ortenberg, dressed in his best black
suit, from which the old faithful servant carefully had brushed every atom of
dust, his unpowdered hair curled into a round swelling lo^k, stepped, with
every mark of supplicating humility in his countenance, to the gilt portal of
his Excellency Baron of Sturzenburzel. Ortenberg's pride submitted this time
willingly to the bitter necessity of measuring an antichamber with humble
steps. Our hero who always trembled with indignation at the name of a parasite
of the great, imagined that now he was doing nothing but to what he was
entitled by the public proofs which he had given of his abilities. Poor,
deluded young man! Right depends upon power: power upon gold, and the gold is
in the possession of malicious fools.

"They have promised it to me," said Ortenberg by himself. Unexperienced youth!
go and build thy house upon sand; but rest not thy hopes upon the promises of
the great. The wind which a fly produces by the motion of her wing, is
sufficient to overturn all thy airy castles.

The hope of being blessed with Caroline's hand, finally conquered all
difficulties which Ortenberg's pride threw in his way.

A Swiss, dressed in a scarlet livery, decked with gold, stood at the portal.
His plump hands were negligently folded on his back. His thick head scorned to
return a kind nod to the stranger's salutation, and his greedy eyes stared at
Ortenberg's hands; but alas! they were as empty as his pockets. "My lord is not
at home!" grunted the hireling. Ortenberg perceived the president's head in
that very moment at one of the windows of the dining room, and informed the
surly Cerberus of this discovery.

"That may be," replied the brute, in the most indifferent accent: "I tell you,
nevertheless, my lord is not at home. So saying, he turned his back on the
confounded young man, pinching the rosy cheek of a milk woman, who was passing
by.

Ortenberg retired. The following discourse took place in his heart:

Pride. It would be meanness to make a second attempt to be admitted.


Love Refrained from all long winded declamations, and mentioned only the name
of Caroline.


Pride. Love must not tempt you to commit an act of meanness.


Noble self consciousness. You demand only the just reward of your merits, and
this cannot be called meanness.


Pride. But you would disgrace the dignity of man.


Good nature. How can the master help it, if his servants chose to be rude?
would you impute the rudeness of his servants to him?


Hope. You will be admitted to the president tomorrow.


Pride. But --


Love. Caroline!


Pride was silent, and Ortenberg succeeded the next morning in obtaining
admittance to the antichamber. There he found a gentleman decked with silk and
gold, who surveyed him from head to foot, and, at last, made half a bow, which
was returned by our hero with a whole one.

"What is your pleasure?" squeaked the powdered valet.

Ortenberg. I wish to be admitted to his lordship.


Valet. May I know what business you have with my lord?


Ortenberg. May I be so bold to ask who you are?


Valet. (affecting an air of protection). I am his Excellency's valet.


Ortenberg. So!


The valet's tongue made a short pause, to wait for the effect which he
expected to result from the discovery of his rank. But when he heard that
Ortenberg replied only by a dry So! he thought it would be necessary he should
add a few words more, to make the petitioner sensible of the importance of his
post. He hemmed, therefore, with an air of open dignity, spit in his silk
pocket handkerchief, played with his watch chain, and looked at a sparkling
ring of paste, which he wore on his finger. In this judicious posture he took
up again the thread of conversation, which had been cut off by Ortenberg's dry
So!

"I can say, without boasting, that I am in particular favor with his
Excellency. I lend him my ear, and sometimes my head too; and he, in return,
frequently lends me his hand."

O^rtenberg. So!


Valet. ^he Vicar of T** is my brother-in-law; (...) of M** is my son-in-law;
and the Minister of S** has married my niece lately.


O^rtenberg. So! So!


Valet. I now have to provide only for one relation more, an aunt, who, indeed,
is rather advanced in years, but wishes to be married, and may be sure of (...)
an handsome dowry of me. The gentleman who marries her, will obtain the best
living in the country. Here he cast a significant look at Ortenberg.


Ortenberg. So! So!


The frequent repetition of ortenberg's indifferent So! discountenanced the
president's favorite, at last, entirely. He had never met with a similar
reception. To see a proposal, which, in his opinion, ought to be accepted with
rapturous gratitude, rejected with the most insupportable indifference, was
more than the philosophy of a valet could bear. However, the wretch was too
much of a courtier, not to be able to conceal his vexation. He was, indeed,
extremely distressed about a provision for his old aunt, and resolved,
therefore, to try once more what could be done. Being apprehensive the
discourse would stagnate entirely, if he suffered the stranger to recover, from
the high opinion of his consequence with which he thought he had inspired him,
he resumed it so quickly, that he even did not know what he was going to say:

"I have also -- I could also -- I am a -- " A Knave! cried a parrot in a
distant corner of the room, whom Ortenberg had not yet noticed. A Knave!
repeated the parrot distinctly, and Ortenberg laughed. The face of the valet
was covered with a scarlet hue; he cast a furious look at the innocent bird,
and attempted in vain to make the honey of his eloquence flow again.

"Never mind, my good fellow!" said Ortenberg, rather contemptuously; "don't
let us kill time with useless talk. Tell your master that I wish to wait upon
him."

Heavens, how did the provoked dunce ^oss up his head! The familiar epithet. My
good fellow, from the lips of such a poor beggarly petitioner as Ortenberg
appeared to be, to a personage who was valet to the president of Sturzenburzel,
who had to dispose of the best livings in the country -- indeed, that was too
much. -- He gnashed his teeth, and replied with quivering lips, "My lord cannot
give audience to beggars to day. You must come again some other time."
Ortenberg smiled, and left the conceited upstart.

The conversation in his heart was renewed again.

Pride. Not a step more in this house.


Love. Caroline!


Pride. You would not deserve to obtain the hand of such an excellent woman, if
you could debase yourself so much on her account.


Love. (very soothing). Caroline!


Pride. Caroline herself would despise you for it.


Sophistry. (bribed by love). But what do you call degrading yourself? Your own
conscience only can degrade you. Conscience! I appeal to thee! Conscience
wanted to speak, but reason, also bribed by love interrupted it.


Reason. We must take the world as it is. Merit must run after reward.


Pride. Merit then ought rather to languish without reward.


Love. (in a captivating and soothing accent). Caroline!


Sophistry. But should merit starve, because it is not acknowledged by a
foolish valet?


Pride. Merit that labors to push through the anti-chambers of the great,
ceases to be merit.


Love. Only once more.


Pride. Not a single step more.


Hope. Tomorrow! tomorrow!


Pride. Hold your tongue! you are an impostor.


Love to Hope. Sister, do not deceive us this time; lest I also should be
obliged to be silent.


With these words love turned to pride, caressing him, and presenting two
pictures which she had hastily drawn. One represented the helpless Ortenberg,
and the unprotected Caroline; and the other Ortenberg in Caroline's arms.
Unfeeling pride glanced several times at them, and began to doze a little.

Ortenberg appeared the next morning again in the president's antichamber. His
Excellency was one of those people, who, having experienced no want themselves,
are not capable of forming an idea of the misery of their brethren, and
therefore sin, not out of malice, but from unpardonable weakness and
unfeelingness, which render their state so comfortable, that they carefully
avoid every opportunity by which it could be disturbed.

His antichamber was every day crowded with half-famished skeletons, who,
every morning with fasting stomachs, saw the fragrant breakfast of their patron
carrying through the apartment in which they were used to dance attendance.
They were indefatigable in paying their humble respects to the voluptuous
arbiter of their fate; but scarcely were honored with a kind nod of the head
during a life-long twelvemonth, spent in useless applications, and many of
them were urged by gnawing hunger to steal the parrot's almonds. If his
Excellency's belly was wanted to assist at some public breakfast, he sneaked
away through a back gate, flinging himself into his gilt chariot, and withdrew
from the hollow eyes of his wretched clients. His parrot soon learned to
pronounce the words Oh God! very distinctly. Whole mountains of dusty
petitions, whose authors had died of hunger long since, lay towered up in his
study, as he called the apartment in which he signed his name once in a month.
A sumptuous treat was, besides the powerful recommendation of his valet, the
only infallible means of obtaining his conset to a petition. The poor
endeavored to move his heart, and the rich tickled his palate; the poor missed
their aim, and the rich always carried their object.

Our hero certainly could not have obtained access to his sitting room, neither
on that nor any other day, if accident had not befriended him. The air was
extremely sultry, the rays of the sun had released millions of insects from
their temporary prisons, and an immense number of flies had taken post on a
cold venison pasty, upon which the Baron intended to breakfast. His Excellency
was, indeed, not remiss in endeavoring to repel the hostile army, but his
fleshy arm was soon tired, and the flies returned always in great numbers; he
rung, therefore, the bell, and ordered his people to be summoned to attack the
bold intruders with united forces. The following allies appeared without delay:
John, the huntsman, with a net, which originally was designed to catch larks;
William, his running footman, with a napkin tied to a pole; Robert, the cook,
with his kitchen apron fastened to a skimmer; and Samuel, the coachman, with a
broomstick, which was armed with a horse tail. The commanding general addressed
his faithful allies in the following pathetic manner: Those d***d flies invest
every morsel I am going to eat. Knock every one of them down, and let not one
escape, that could give me further disturbance!"

After this energetic address had been delivered, all windows and doors were
thrown open, and a general chase began; when the routed enemy suddenly
retreated through the windows. A large column took their flight through the
antichamber, and assailed Ortenberg, who instantly took out his pocket
handkerchief, and attacked them with so much ardour, that large drops of sweat
ran down his face.

His Excellency, who was sitting opposite the door, condescended graciously to
observe, that a hungry client assisted voluntarily in putting his enemies to
flight. The great man was seized with a sudden fit of laughter, which was so
uncommonly beneficial to his noble stomach, as to make his appetite return with
additional energy. The pleasure which this afforded to the worthy president,
prompted his Excellency to make a gracious sign to Ortenberg with his left hand
to draw nearer. Our hero obeyed the kind invitation instantly, after an humble
bow.

President. What do you want my friend?


Ortenberg. Bread your excellency.


President. You are welcome to my table. Sit down; here is bread enough. Eat as
long as you have appetite. I am always glad to have company at my meals. I find
that my appetite improves uncommonly, when some person is chewing with full
cheeks opposite me.


Ortenberg. But I want not only bread for today; I also want some for
tomorrow, and the day after tomorrow. Your Excellency will have the goodness
to recollect, that the Consistory promised me a few weeks ago the living of
Waltershausen.


President. (with full cheeks). -- Waltershausen? Is not that the village where
our large black cherries come from?


Ortenberg. It may be; however --


President. I now recollect that my table is also furnished with butter from
that place. Excellent butter.


Ortenberg. And --


President. It also produces crawfish and pikes as delicious as I ever have
tasted them.


Ortenberg. But --


President. I was there about twelve years ago, when the late incumbent gave a
feast to the members of the Consistory. I recollect with pleasure that we fared
most sumptuously. The fellow had rendered himself suspected of heresy, and was
to have been deposed; however --


Ortenberg. However --


President. However, the wine was good for nothing. There you are perfectly
right. It was very young and of an indifferent vintage. If I had not taken half
a dozen of excellent old Hock with me, and my cook -- do you know my cook?


Ortenberg. No, your Excellency, I do not.


President. (gaping). I assure you he is an excellent fellow. You will not find
his equal amongst thousands. His venison pasties are the best which I have ever
eat in my life. Only taste this here.


President. (gaping again). And that very cook has a son who will take
possession of the living of Waltershausen in a few weeks.


Ortenberg. However, the promise which --


President. (half asleep). I am very sorry; but you will easily perceive that I
could not give a denial to my cook. My cook's son is also a man of uncommon
merit besides his great eloquence. You would be astonished were I to enumerate
all his good qualifications. He knows, for instance, to preserve fruit -- (His
Excellency scarcely could keep his eyes open) -- and can drink -- drink --


Here the great man suddenly extended his arms and legs, while the thoughtful
head sank upon the left shoulder. He muttered a few more broken accents, and
soon signified by a loud snoring that the audience was at an end, and Ortenberg
had no hopes left.

Our hero now proceeded to the house of the Right Reverend Father in God
Hogstyerius, well knowing that he was the leading man in the consistory, and
frequently had silenced the president by his sonorious voice. He still knew not
whether he should laugh or grieve at the singular manner in which he had been
received by the president. But when he reflected upon the broomstick with the
horse tail, the venison pasty, and the chase of the flies, he was suddenly
seized with a loud fit of laughing in the open street. This happened,
unfortunately, just when he was within a few steps of the prelate's house, who
was smoking a pipe of canaster at the window, decently blowing the smoke into
the street. It was a shocking sight for his Saintship to see Ortenberg, that
great sinner, laugh in the street. He held the subsequent philosophical
soliloquy while Ortenberg ascended the stairs:

"That fellow has laughed."

"Either with or without cause."

"In the latter case, he is a downright fool."

"Should the former be the case, he either has laughed at me, or at some other
object."

"If he has laughed at me, he will be damned for ever and ever!"

"But should he have laughed at some other object, I cannot conceive how the
conscience of such an atrocious sinner can permit him to laugh."

The result of the whole soliloquy was, therefore, as my reader will easily
guess:

"Ortenberg is a sinner."

"He can laugh, and, consequently, is not even sensible of his being a sinner."

"A hardened sinner will be doomed to howl and to gnash his teeth."

"Ergo, Ortenberg must howl and gnash his teeth."

The charitable prelate rejoiced inwardly at his philosophical genius when he
had brought forth his excellent conclusion. He contracted his bristly eyebrows
when Ortenberg opened the door of his apartment, and called to him with a
thundering voice,

"Mr. Ortenberg, what do you want? If you are coming to me for comfort or
assistance, you will find neither. Return to the ^lowry path of vice. Broad is
the road which leads to Hell, and the salutary thorns of virtue are too pointed
for your feet."

The poor young man was struck with astonishment and confusion. "My lord,"
stammered he at last -- "the living --

Bishop. Don't speak a word about it. Do you think that I shall appoint a
rapacious wolf to feed a pious flock of sheep?


Ortenberg. (whose frame trembled with indignation.) But my abilities, of which
I have given proofs --


Bishop. Qui proficit in litteris, and deficit in moribus, plus deficit, quam
proficit.


Ortenberg (bitter. Should I really deserve, on account of a juvenile act of
levity, to be superseded by the son of a cook, because he can preserve fruit?


Bishop. (startled). What do you mean by that?


Ortenberg. Your lordship, probably, will not understand me. I have just been
at the president's house, where I have heard with astonishment that the son of
his cook is to have the living.


Bishop (passionately). How? What? -- He has made his reckoning without the
host... No, no! my Lord Sturzenburzel, I also have a word to say in that
business.


Ortenberg's hope began to revive. The Bishop continued with frothing lips:
"Think only, Miss Shnurr, what fine tricks the president is playing. He wants
to obtain the living of Waltershausen, which I have promised to your worthy
cousin, for the son of his cook, an illiterate blockhead."

Miss Shnurr (shaking her palsied head). He will find himself mistaken, as true
as my name is Shnurr. Does he think I have brought up my cousin for the church
to be superseded by the son of his cook? It should be a crying injustice, if
certain people should be preferred to my dear cousin, who preached such an
edifying sermon last Sunday. Certain people have a great opinion of themselves:
however, certain people have likewise not been born behind a hedge; and if
certain people were to tell what they know of certain people, certain matters
would be brought to light which certain people would find hard to be digested.


Ortenberg (raising his eyes to Heaven). Heavenly Father, will no man pity my
forlorn situation?


Bishop. Go, Mr. Ortenberg, go. If I have reason to hope after ten years that
you have sincerely repented of your sins, you shall have the first vacant
living; I pledge my word for it.


Ortenberg. Alas! my lord, who should have thought that you could ever treat me
so cruelly, when my father took you in his house, commiserated your helpless
situation, fed you, covered your nakedness, sent you to school at his expense,
and when his heart and purse were always open for you?


Reader, do not condemn our hero for this bitter reproach. He was a man;
humanity revolted, and his noble heart gave way to its feelings for a moment.

The Bishop inclined his head a little in lieu of an answer, and pointed at the
door. Ortenberg left him torn by anguish and indignation. While he went down
stairs he was pelted with rotten apples by the Bishop's foundlings.

CHAP. XVI.
True nobleness is not confined
To palaces alone; the hind
Who in the humble cottage dwells,
Is often more generous, noble, great
Than the proud Lord whose rank and state
Too frequently with scorn repels
The better feelings of the mind,
And makes him to true greatness blind.

OH my country, my country!" exclaimed Ortenberg with bitter anguish, when he
came into the street. "I renounce the happiness of closing my miserable days
where the bones of my ancestors rest. My ashes will not be mixed with theirs;
my name shall be mentioned no more in these abodes of injustice and cruelty!"

He went to Caroline.

We must part, dear Caroline! and, perhaps, shall meet no more in this world. I
return you your liberty. If you should meet with a worthy young man who offers
you his hand and heart, hesitate not to make him happy. My prayers -- my
blessing -- but you know what I feel for you. Adieu, my dearest love; God bless
you!

He clasped the weeping girl in his arms.

In such an embrace did you pledge your faith to me; in such an embrace I
return it to you. May your life be as bright and blissful as the few precious
days of our love were. Alas! they are gone for ever! --

He groaned, disengaged himself from her arms, clasped her again to his heart,
wept, tore himself once more from her, and fled to his solitary abode.

I scarcely need to observe to the sensible reader that I have written down
only the words of this affecting scene, and not the feelings which agitated the
minds of the unfortunate lovers. I mentioned nothing of what Caroline said;
because -- she could not speak, but only feel.

Ortenberg's agonies were no longer boisterous; he resembled a person who,
having struggled a long time against the overwhelming billows, at last drops
his arms, exhausted by the severity of the conflict, and commits himself to the
mercy of the waves. He did every thing which he undertook, with a kind of
unconscious stupor. The firm resolution to quit his native country as soon as
possible, was, however, constantly present to his mind. He sold all his
remaining property at half price, and paid his trifling debts. After having
satisfied all his creditors, his whole wealth was reduced to a coat, a few
shirts, and six shillings in money. "Be firm, my poor heart!" said the
unfortunate young man when he approached the frontiers of his native country,
supported by an oaken staff, and casting a last tearful look at the town of his
nativity: "Be firm, my poor heart! I shall not be left without bread. God will
let some grow for me too. I shall not always meet with hypocrisy and ignorance
disguised under the mask of religion. Contentment and temperance want but
little; and that little I can procure by the labor of my hands. God, God! if
it be true that individuals are protected by thee, oh! then be the supporter
and father of my Caroline!" --

After a journey of some days, when his six shillings were already spent, and
he knew not where to get a morsel of bread for tomorrow, he arrived in the
beginning of a serene day at the gates of H**, a small Prussian town. He just
was devoutly singing the follow verses, which he had composed himself after the
tune of a church hymn.

Kind, gentle Hope all-hailing cheers
The path of life with gladd'ning rays;
The eye, now moist with bitter tears,
Looks forth to brighter, better days.
The votary of virtue smiles,
When overborne by daring vice;
His trust in Providence beguiles
The pangs of woe and dries his eyes.
Learn the divine, the blissful art
To tolerate the offending foe;
For honor cannot rob the heart
Of innate worth, nor worth bestow.
Raise on the mazy path of life
The tearful eye to yon realms,
Where virtue crowns the noble strife,
And endless bliss thy suffering calms.
Ortenberg had seated himself on a large stone. He took his breakfast out of
his pocket, while he was singing, sharpened his knife, and took his frugal meal
on the verdant turf. A pure and salubrious air seasoned his bread, and a choir
of nightingales threw a thin veil over the pictures of his grief.

An honest citizen of K** who was weeding his field, had listened to
Ortenberg's song behind a hazel bush, and was deeply affected by his melancholy
notes. His emotion increased when he saw Ortenberg breakfast with cheerful
satisfaction upon a piece of black bread, and a few dried prunes. He also took
notice of the gloom which overclouded the traveller's countenance, although his
hilarity of mind, that sweet fruit of a good conscience, brightened it with
lucid rays. The poverty of his dress contributed to increase the interest which
his person and behavior created. The citizen could not resist his urgent
desire to accost the pious pilgrim. He took his hat off, and stepped forth from
his hiding place with confidence -- inspiring looks.

"Good morning, Sir!"

Ortenberg, (rather startled). I thank you, friend.


Citizen. May I take the liberty to ask from what place you are coming?


Ortenberg. From Breslaw.


Citizen. The air is very hot today. Do you intend to go farther?


Ortenberg. Perhaps.


Citizen. I have gathered some sallad. I shall be glad if you will take
pot-luck with me today.


The simple cordiality with which the honest fellow made his offer, touched
Ortenberg's heart. "With pleasure!" replied he with a cheerful countenance, and
took up his little bundle. The citizen had, in the mean time, tied his sallad
in a handkerchief.

"Will you give me leave to carry it for you? I am sure it must be too heavy
for a man of your age."

Citizen. Don't trouble yourself. I now am eighty-five years old; but God be
praised! I know nothing either of bodily or mental infirmities. I creep quietly
through life, and God has given his blessing to my undertakings, I have
cultivated that field which we have just left, in the sweat of my brow, as a
day labourer. It now belongs to me. When my master perceived that I was a
diligent and sober fellow who feared God, he gave me his daughter in marriage;
she was a sweet and excellent woman. The Lord took her from me two years since,
after we had lived forty-four years in a peaceful and pious state of matrimony.


Ortenberg. She is happy!


Citizen. Indeed, Sir, she is; however, her death was a severe affliction to
me. The wound which it struck to my heart is still green. [The visible
contortion of the muscles of his face, evinced clearly that he struggled hard
to check his tears].


Ortenberg [to himself]. So is it then true, that a good wife renders the world
paradise to us? Poor Ortenberg! (Caroline's picture forced itself upon his
mind).


Citizen. Whenever I knock at the door of my house, I imagine that it will be
opened by my Mary, and I fill a plate mechanically for her when the soup is
brought upon the table: when I undress myself at night, I always expect that
she will reach me my nightgown, but, alas! must fetch it myself; and when
secret grief preys on my heart, I know not what to do with it. Alas! I always
wish to be with her in the blissful abode of peace whenever I come from church
on a Sunday, and cast my eyes at the spot where she is buried, which now is
entirely overgrown with grass. However, I shall patiently wait till my heavenly
father calls me hence, as I still have many pleasant duties to fulfill.


Ortenberg. You probably have children?


Citizen. No; dear Sir! God has not granted me that happiness. Perhaps it is
better as it is. However, I have a mother who is an hundred years old. -- Who
would nurse and wait upon her in the last days of her great age? upon her who
nursed me when I was an helpless infant. Who would close her eyes, if the Lord
were to deprive her of her last support? It is principally on her account I
wish to live a little longer. I owe her a great deal, more than I shall ever be
able to repay.


Much less would have been sufficient to interest Ortenberg's good and feeling
heart in favor of that good old man. He seized his hand with great emotion.
"Venerable old man? I rejoice to have met with an honest and feeling heart;
alas! there are but very few in this world."

Citizen. I have heard you sing a very pretty hymn. We hope for better joys
than this world can afford. This is the only comfort of oppressed virtue. I do
not doubt but you are one of that class.


Ortenberg. Unfortunately!


Citizen. Don't say so. Who knows what good may finally arise from your
sufferings. I have reason to think that you are a worthy and pious man; who
knows whether you would have preserved your innocence in a state of affluence?
-- However -- excuse my liberty -- are you not in want of assistance? I am a
rich man, and willing to assist a fellow man, if he merits and wants it.


Ortenberg. No, my friend, I want nothing.


Citizen. Have confidence in me; you will not repent it; I am a well-meaning
man. Poverty is no disgrace; but it is unbecoming a man to be ashamed of being
poor.


Ortenberg. I am poor; I am not ashamed of it. However, while I can work, I
will rob no person who can work no more, of the charitable assistance of good
men.


Citizen. These are noble principles. Give me your hand! (He shakes it
cordially.) We must get better acquainted. But tell me frankly, can I do any
thing for you? Have you any business to settle at H**? My fellow-citizens love
me, and will be glad to do me a favor.


Just such a frank and cordial language was required to prevail upon Ortenberg
to confess that he wished to open a day-school at H**. The old man promised to
exert all his influence to recommend it among his numerous acquaintances, and
they arrived at last at his small peaceful abode. "Be cordially welcome under
my roof," said the Citizen; "and take up with the humble fare which my house
can afford."

The old mother met them at the door of the parlour, supported by a crutch, and
nodded kindly to the stranger. Her son tapped her gently on the shoulder:

"I have brought you a guest, dear mother. His name is -- Dear, sir, what is
your name? I really forgot to inquire after it."

Ortenberg mentioned his name.

Citizen. Well! well! the name is of no consequence. God regards the heart.
People who have the greatest names, are frequently the greatest knaves. --
Mother, let us have something to eat; my guest is hungry.


The cloth was instantly laid, and three good people dined cheerfully together!
Three good people at one table! you will not find them at the tables of the
great.

The plan concerning Ortenberg's school was discussed again after dinner. The
citizen pressed Ortenberg to accept of free board and lodging in his house; but
could not persuade him to consent. Ortenberg was determined to owe every frugal
morsel which he should eat to no one but himself. Labor for our support
creates and satisfies hunger. Those idle drones, who are fattened with the
marrow and sweat of the poor, cannot enjoy their wealth. Thus spoke and thought
that exiled young man, who was not worth a groat, and would not have thought
otherwise, though he would have spoken differently, if he had possessed
millions.

The old man exerted his good-natured eloquence in vain, and it was to no
purpose when he begged him to consider that neither himself nor his aged mother
would be able to spend the little with which God had blessed him.

"Be my son!" exclaimed he with paternal affection: "I have no children whom
you could rob."

Ortenberg never suffered his heart to get the better of his principles. He was
deeply affected, but persisted, nevertheless, firmly in his resolution.

"It will afford me pleasure," said he, "to honor you as a father; for alas! I
neither have a father nor a mother! but I should be undeserving your paternal
love, if I shamefully could abuse your good nature. It may be pride, which,
indeed, is a steril soil; however a noble exertion of all my abilities is the
fruit which it produces. In short, I never will accept a charitable gift of any
person whomsoever. I will never beg for any thing. I would exchange my heart
with no person whatever. Of whom could I beg without lessening the value of
this heart? I hate hypocrisy -- a hypocrite is a knave!"

Citizen. But many an honest man is reduced to the necessity of begging; and
there are instances --


Ortenberg. True my venerable friend, there are instances in which begging is
the sweetest triumph of humanity. If I cannot save my deserted friend from
misery, by my own exertions, I shall beg for him, and be proud of it.


Citizen. Mr. Ortenberg, I will press you no further; the will of man is his
heaven. All that you have said, is, indeed, very pretty, and I applaud you for
it; however, it appears to me, not to be quite consonant with truth. But I am a
simple man, and cannot presume to dispute with you.


Thus terminated the noble contest between benevolent generosity and the
consciousness of the dignity of man.

The following was the result of their consultation:

Ortenberg took possession of a garret in the house of the honest Citizen,
which was scantily furnished, and for which he agreed to pay a moderate rent.
He dined at the table of his fosterfather, and in lieu of payment, instructed
two orphan godsons of his host in religion, writing and reading. Supper, as
well as all superfluous beverage with which Mocca, China, and the two Indias
furnish us, were entirely banished from the table of our hero. "I will prove,"
said he by himself, "how little man wants, if he will want little."

The old man promised to speak in the evening with some of his friends, and to
persuade the oldest and most respectable Citizens to entrust him with the
education and instruction of their children. He was as good as his word.
Ortenberg saw himself in less than eight days, daily surrounded by five or six
boys, whose education procured him, indeed, only a scanty subsistence, but
enabled him, at the same time, to gratify his prevailing passion, pride, and to
owe every morsel which he ate entirely to his diligence; for the honest Citizen
applied in vain artifice and persuasion to render his situation more
comfortable.

CHAP. XVII.
Hope and love and friendship brighten
Cheerfully the gloom of fate;
Love can wonderfully heighten
Every bliss, and raise the head
Of the mourner. Love and pleasure
Always travel hand in hand;
But precarious is the treasure
Springing from her magic wand.
Love bestrews the way with flowers;
But, alas! kind love is blind
And beneath her roses lowers
Mischief often. She fills the mind
Now with too abounding pleasures,
And the heart is overcloy'd;
Now bestows too late her treasures,
Or too scanty, and annoyed
By the bleeding wounds of anguish,
Are the late and scanty gifts
After which the heart did languish
Often when she for moments lifts
To the skies the heart, dilated
By her blessings, pain and woes
Seize the hapless wretches, fated
Years to feel the dreadful throes
Springing up from disappointment.
Gladd'ning hope in light arrayed,
Is the only healing ointment
Granted by the hand of fate
To the prey of persecution.
But how soon alas! how soon,
Proves fond hope a mere delusion
And a curse her promised boon!
Friendship only, never ceases
To be faithful, true, and kind
To the suff'rer: she increases
With the anguish of his mind;
Ever fragrant are her roses,
Never die and never fade;
From their stem no poison oozes:
Friendship fears no change of fate.

READER, I shall attempt to give a faithful description of Ortenberg's external
and internal situation. He lived in a small low garret, with a kitchen
adjoining, which, however, was never blackened with smoke, while it was in
Ortenberg's possession. The condition of his apartment was the most speaking
proof of his poverty. Four straw chairs, two tables, and a wooden bench for his
scholars, a piece of a broken looking glass, and a sorry turn-up bed, was all
his furniture. A dark window with round panes set in lead, half covered with
paper, afforded a prospect of part of a ruined wall, the residence of shrieking
owls, whose melancholy* voices frightened sleep, his only remaining solace,
from his solitary couch. The wall which was the remnant of a powder magazine,
deprived him pretty much of the cheering light of day; and the gloom which
prevailed in his apartment was heightened in no small degree by the brownish
color of the walls. The decayed roof was frequently a sport of the winds; rain
and snow defied this crazy shield, and poured damps and unwholesome air into
his apartment. Narrow and dark stairs seemed to bear his foot steps with
indignation, groaning and bending under their weight. The whole room was
constantly filled with the unpleasant smell arising from the work of a tanner,
whose yard was under his window. Who of my readers is not sensible that a
cheeful abode is the most necessary requisite to render a dismal sat
tolerable, and that an unfortunate sufferer must be rendered entirely unhappy,
in such a gloomy prison! Ortenberg's mind shrouded itself timidly in a gloomy,
impenitrable mist.

He was surrounded from the dawn of morning till the dusk of the eve covered
nature with its sable mantle, by a small flock of children, whom he instructed
in subjects which afforded only a mechanical occupation to his mind. The only
poor reward which he enjoyed from the labors of the day was confined to a
solitary walk which tended more to nourish his melancholy mood, than to dispel
the gloom of his mind. The produce of his school was scarcely sufficient to
defray the small expenses of his frugal table, and his simple dress.

He had no acquaintance besides his landlord, to whom he never complained. His
wounds bled incessantly; however, he rejected the healing balsam which nature
distills from confidential communication. The town contained two men of
letters, as they were pleased to call themselves, a corpulent magistrate, and a
still more corpulent priest. The former was an abject slave to his belly, and
the latter was no acquaintance that suited Ortenberg; for he shunned all
priests like serpents since his departure from Breslaw. There was no food for
the mind to be procured at H**. Bibles and hymn books comprised all the
literature which the place afforded, some volumes of Sermons excepted, which
the corpulent pressed possessed, and by all the inhabitants were regarded as a
library. However, even if the barbarous town had been inundated with
booksellers shops and circulating libraries, yet Ortenberg's scanty revenues
would have prevented him totally from all access to these magazines of
learning. His mind languished therefore in the prison of inactivity, and he was
incapable of allaying his unhappiness by improvement in knowledge, labor, and
study, which alone can sometimes dispel the gloom of misery.

His reason had dictated to his heart the cruel law to beat no longer for
Caroline. He thought it would be criminal in him, were he to write to her, as
this might easily contribute to nourish her hope and passion. It was no easy
task for him to deny himself that pleasure: however, he collected all his
firmness to oppose the imperious dictates of his heart, and renounce with
heroic fortitude, the sweet pleasure of an intimate correspondence.

Then the poor, unfortunate sufferer had no enjoyment left? -- Yes! he still
had a few cheerful moments; namely, those which the kind letters of his
Elhenhorst procured him. The expenses of postage distressed him, indeed,
frequently very much; however, he rather would deny himself some necessaries of
life, than forego the enjoyment of the pleasing consciousness that he possessed
a faithful and sincere friend, whose heart defied time and distance. My readers
know that Elhenhorst could have no idea of Ortenberg's lamentable situation,
and imagined it was entirely different from what it really was; because
Ortenberg never complained.

As sufferers who are deserted by all men, must have some object of their
affection, Ortenberg had tamed two pigeons, with whom he shared his sorry fare,
and who afforded him many sweet moments by their innocent attachment to him. He
became every day fonder of his brute companions; they ate out of his hands and
mouth; their cooing was his lullaby; their caresses turned his gloomy anguish
frequently to soft melancholy, and he would not have exchanged the morsel of
bread which he shared with his pigeons, for the groaning table of the
magistrate.

He had now languished seven leaden months in this melancholy situation. It
grew more distressing every day; the gloom of his mind increased visibly, his
strength dwindled away, and he hoped his sufferings would soon be terminated by
the all healing hand of death. Not one desire, not a single expectation
remained in his bosom. Death! death alone was the object of his wishes.

He was sitting one evening, by the faint glimmering of a lamp, supporting his
head upon his hand, and contemplating a fly who had burned her wings in the
^lame. -- Conceive, reader, if you can, conceive the rapturous joy which like
electric fire thrilled his whole frame, when the door was suddenly flung open
and Elhenhorst stood before him. His traveling coat was ornamented with a
sparkling star; for his merits had soon raised him in a country where merit, at
that time, was the only recommendation. But this very star, made Ortenberg
start back, when he already had expanded his arms to press his long lost friend
to his suffering heart. However, the minister flew toward him with marks of
the most heartfelt joy.

"Ortenberg! Ortenberg! have I become a stranger to your heart? Have you ceased
to be my friend?

They flew into each other's arms -- their eyes were fixed on each other. Once
more embrace. Their looks were dimmed; for their eyes swam in sweet tears. A
third embrace. No words interrupted the meeting of their hearts -- nor shall I
attempt to describe by words the rapture of a scene which only can be felt.

Ortenberg. I wronged you, dear Elhenhorst! forgive me! I knew not, that a
heart which is covered with a sparkling star, can be susceptible of friendship.


Elhenhorst. In that case I would trample this star to atoms. Your sentiments
are still the same, noble and proud, even toward your friends. But come, let
us sit down and chat a little. I have traveled twenty four miles more today
than I am used to do, to surprise you this evening. How are you? How do you
live?


Ortenberg. Very well.


Elhenhorst. But you don't look well.


Ortenberg. The death of my mother -- the unhappy fate of my Caroline.


He never could pronounce Caroline's name, without being deeply affected. The
sight of Elhenhorst recalled to his mind all the happy evenings when his friend
had kindly assisted him in building airy castles; when the whole world yet lay
open before him, and he knew malice, envy, and chicanery, only from hearsay.
This sweetrecollection, which, added to the bitterness of his present
situation, mellowed him suddenly, and he began to unbosom himself to his
friend. However, my readers already know his lofty mind -- he seemed to have
entirely forgotten his own distress, and mentioned not a syllable of it to a
man who was his sincerest friend, and had it in his power to extricate him at
once, from all his difficulties. He related only the sufferings which the
misery of others caused him, and seemed to be perfectly satisfied with his own
situation.

However, although his lips uttered no complaints, yet his hollow eyes, his
meagre appearance, his half torn garment, and his sorry apartment, bespoke his
distress plainly enough. Elhenhorst surveyed his friend's apartment with
tearful eyes, and his bleeding heart vowed secretly to assist the unfortunate
man. Ortenberg was thrown into the greatest confusion, when he perceived that
Elhenhorst surveyed every corner of his room. He hastened to draw his friend
into a conversation, and to turn his attention to some other object.

Ortenberg. May a discreet friend ask what is the object of your journey.


Elhenhorst. It is no secret. You know what a heavy burden lay on my shoulders;
I mentioned it several times in my letters to you. I was scarcely able to
endure it any longer, and was seized with a melancholy gloom of mind, I almost
should say, with dark misanthropy. I was necessiated to spend the greatest part
of the day amongst tiresome dead, amongst whom Justinianus certainly was the
most tedious, which caused me mechanically to fly the living. My superiors took
notice of my gloomy existence when I least expected it; they seemed to be
convinced that the camel, which always must travel with the caravan to Mecca,
without being ever released, becomes lame at last. The king informed me
unexpectedly by a letter, in his own handwriting, that he had appointed me to
be minister plenipotentiary at **, and that I am to repair thither within three
months. I am now going to Berlin, to thank the king, and to obtain my
instructions.


Ortenberg. Need I to tell you that I take the liveliest interest in your
promotion.


Elhenhorst. This would, indeed, be superfluous, dear Ortenberg; I know you
sufficiently. (He took him affectionately by the hand.) Believe me, I wish that
you also would be happier than you seem to be in your present situation.


His eyes were compassionately fixed at the unfortunate Ortenberg, soliciting
confidence.

Ortenberg. (startled). Why do you suppose it? I am contented.


Elhenhorst. Dear friend, your countenance contradicts your words. I know you,
I know that a noble pride prevents you from complaining; however you carry it
frequently too far. I conjure you, by our friendship, let your Elhenhorst be an
exception.


Ortenberg. What do you want of me? Do you think that only a star on the
breast, or a cross in the button hole, can afford happiness?


Elhenhorst. Dear Ortenberg, do not grow bitter.


Ortenberg. Or do you think that I am not sensible of the dignity of my present
situation. I am every day surrounded by a circle of five or six boys, lively
and able geniuses, whom I teach to be virtuous and active members of human
society. Is this nothing?


Elhenhorst. A great deal, indeed. I despise the narrow minded selfish wretch,
who is not capable of feeling how honorable your occupation is. But, tell me,
friend, how will this terminate at last? I know you. I shall not dwell on the
contempt which, unfortunately, is attached to your present occupation. An
honest man is satisfied with the approbation of his own conscience, and frets
not when fools overlook his merits. But I know that Caroline is the sole object
of all your wishes. The worthy Ortenberg cannot desire that the darling of his
heart, who would willingly share a scanty income with him, should renounce, on
his account, all comforts of life, honor and many other advantages which a
crowd of adorers would offer her, if she were not connected with him.


Ortenberg. I am rejoiced to hear that you do me justice. I have renounced
Caroline; my heart bled, indeed, at the sacrifice; however, I did my duty. I
never shall renew my claims, unless I can do it without blushing.


Elhenhorst. Very fine words! -- But -- excuse my frankness -- is not the man
who makes no attempt at all to improve his circumstances, as guilty as the
wretch who has recourse to dishonorable means, to make his fortune?


Ortenberg. Would you have me to cringe and beg in the anti-chambers of the
great?


Elhenhorst. No, Ortenberg, I never shall advise you to mix with the
contemptible crew of servile parasites. However, you ought not to have been
reserved toward a faithful friend, but informed him of your distress, of your
visible want; not in a supplicating tone, but in a manner in which friends
ought to communicate with each other.


Ortenberg. Dear Elhenhorst, let us drop this subject.


Elhenhorst. Are you then really determined to accept of no assistance?


Ortenberg. I know that I am wrong; however, I rather would starve among
unfeeling wretches, than say that I want assistance.


Elhenhorst. This is enough! I will spare you that confession. Let us wave this
subject for the present. I am hungry. I will sup with you if it be not
inconvenient; I want nothing but homely fare and a cheerful countenance.


Ortenberg. (brightening suddenly up). It will give me the greatest pleasure.


My readers will be convinced that this, "It will give me the greatest
pleasure!" came from the bottom of his heart. However, you also know
Ortenberg's indifferent circumstances. Although he could not be expected to
give an alderman's feast; yet a supper required that something should be
brought upon table. Unfeeling metal! thou main-spring which moves the still
more unfeeling world! the unfortunate must starve if he cannot obtain thee
while his rich neighbor is choked by wanton superfluity. No gray headed miser
throws a dry crust of bread which he can chew no more himself to the famished
poor.

Those of my readers, who have formed a just idea of Ortenberg's noble and
generous character, will easily conceive that this came not in his mind, when
he rashly assured his friend that his company at supper would give him the
greatest pleasure. The sight of a dear friend, with a sparkling star on his
breast, had made him for a time forget his wants. However, even when he
recollected his poverty, he was not in the least distressed by it. His good
heart, overflowing with friendship, instantly pointed out the means of
gratifying Elhenhorst's request and his own wish. Ortenberg killed his two
pigeons.

It is impossible to conceive the anguish which he felt when he took a knife
from the dresser, and one of his darlings, apprehending no harm from her
benefactor, fearlessly stroked her bill against the fatal instrument. His heart
bled more than the dying pigeon, when he saw her blood flow, saw her convulsive
struggles, and imagined he read in her breaking eye -- What harm have I done
you? A stream of tears gushed from his eyes; he averted his face from the
bleeding companions of his solitary hours, went to the window and endeavored
to collect himself again, lest Elhenhorst, on his joining him again, should
have reason to suspect that he had sacrificed for him his last and only
pleasure.

His landlord's servant, a good natured creature, who was very much attached to
Ortenberg, ejaculated a loud scream, when he brought the two bleeding pigeons
into the kitchen, and desired her to dress them for supper.

"For God's sake, Mr. Ortenberg!" exclaimed the servant trembling: "what have
you done?"

Ortenberg. What is the matter? why do you cry?


Servant. Your pigeons! your good, faithful pigeons! (She sobbed, and mingled
her tears with the blood of the poor creatures.)


"Be not a fool!" said Ortenberg with stifled emotion: "there are plenty of
pigeons to be got."

He left the kitchen, ascending again to the garret. There he sat down,
cheerfully smiling, by the side of his friend, enjoying the happiness of
congenial communication, and forgot his pigeons. Elhenhorst related every
trifling incident which had happened to him during their separation. Ortenberg
returned his communication with equal sincerity, representing, however, the
heavy blows of his adverse fate in a humourous light, and striving anxiously to
pourtray his misfortunes in comical colors. He said, for instance, only a few
words about his fruitless application for the promised living, but dwelled the
longer on the chase of the flies and on the description of Miss Shnurr.

The servant now appeared with the roasted favorites. Her red eyes scarcely
could retain a new torrent of tears which was ready to break forth. Elhenhorst
perceived it not, and Ortenberg pr^tended not to see it. He was proud of being
able to treat his friend with a supper, and the few hours which Elhenhorst
could devote to him, ^^ed on wings of heart felt pleasure, a sensation to which
he had grown almost an utter stranger. They parted at last with cordial
embraces.

"Farewell, my dear friend," said Elhenhorst: "I hope we shall soon meet again!
I then will force you to confess that there are still some feeling souls in
this world, deserving of the love and confidence of a worthy man."

Elhenhorst scarcely had quitted the house, when he suddenly was accosted by a
weeping girl, (the servant of Ortenberg's landlord,) who stammered, sobbing,
"Dear Sir, you certainly are a great Lord. For God's sake have pity on that
worthy man. God will reward you for every assistance you give him."

Elhenhorst (surprised). What man?


Servant. The man whom you just have left. He is a dear, excellent man, who
would not offend a child, but so poor, so poor -- and now he has even killed
his pigeons.


Elhenhorst. What pigeons?


Servant. Those you had for supper. You would surely not have touched a morsel
if you had known it.


Elhenhorst [with anxious curiosity]. But what of the pigeons?


Servant. Alas! these two pigeons were his last, his only delight. They lived
in his room, and ate out of his hands. How often have I heard him say, "God, if
I had not these pigeons!" and now they are dead.


Elhenhorst's heart bled.

"but why did he kill them?" asked he in a trembling accent.

"Because the poor man had nothing else," replied the servant: "He absolutely
refuses to accept of any assistance from my master. Be so kind, my lord, to put
that worthy dear man in a way to become a great gentleman like yourself. I know
he deserves it. And since he loves you so much as to have treated you with his
poor pigeons --

Elhenhorst. Make yourself easy, my dear; he shall not be poor much longer.


His tears scarcely permitted him to utter these few words. He recollected his
sacred vow to relieve his suffering friend, and repeated it aloud in the face
of the starry heaven. His mind formed plans, his heart gave wings to them, and
after ajourney of a day and a half he arrived at Berlin.

CHAP. XVIII.
Naught but sufferings has this world
For the noble deeds of generous men.
Who can doubt that seeds of virtue
Scattered here will bear their fruit
In another world of better mould.

I NOW quit the hero of our tale a few moments I shall not attempt to describe
the bitter anguish with which, after Elhenhorst's departure, he missed his
pigeons, without however repenting of his having sacrificed them for his
friend; I shall drop the curtain lest the imagination of my readers should be
tired by pictures of too much sameness.

Elhenhorst was introduced, in the mean time, to all the circles of the Great
at Berlin, and forgot not his friend. He was presented to the King, who
received him as kindly as he always used to receive men of merit. Elhenhorst
thanked him for his promotion.

The King. I always was very much satisfied with your services, as my letter
will have told you, Continue to discharge your duty with equal fidelity, and I
shall have an opportunity of thanking you in return.


Elhenhorst. The discharge of our duty is not entitled to thanks.


King. Here you are mistaken. A man who performs what is incumbent on him does
a great deal.


Elhenhorst. And a man who performs it with pleasure is sufficiently rewarded.


King. Certainly. His reward is greater than that which I can bestow. Are you
single?


Elhenhorst. Yes, your Majesty.


King. Have you no intention to marry?


Elhenhorst. No, Sire, I have not.


King. You will then give no children to the state?


Elhenhorst. A flourishing state like your Majesty's kingdom will never be in
want of population.


King. (doubtfully.) Flourishing? it may be in time.


Elhenhorst. It is already. I met only with one unfortunate man on my whole
journey.

His heart beat violently. The decisive moment was near.


King. Where? Whom?


Elhenhorst. Oh, your Majesty! I tremble; and yet ought not to tremble; for, I
am speaking to a monarch who suffers none of his subjects to groan under
unmerited distress.


King. Speak! Speak!


Elhenhorst. I have a friend -- he deserves to be the friend of every honest
man: he is good, honest, learned and modest.


King. The latter qualities are rarely found in one person.


Elhenhorst. He is a divine, and has given the most unquestionable proofs of
his abilities to the consistory of Breslau. They promised him a living, and
afterward retracted their word. Humble in prosperity and proud in adversity,
he scorns to complain; however, he languishes in want and misery.


King. Why did they retract the promise which they had given him?


Elhenhorst. (shrugging up his shoulders). Your Majesty -- the tale is a long
one.


The King looked at his watch. "Let me see you again tomorrow."

Elhenhorst awaited the subsequent morning suspended between fear and hope.

"I now am ready to listen to your long tale!" said the King when Elhenhorst
entered his closet. The latter gave a faithful account of Ortenberg's fate;
mentioning, however, no names.

"Why do you suppress the names?" asked the King.

Elhenhorst. Because it affords me more pleasure to see your Majesty reward
than punish.


"He did wrong in fighting a duel!" said the King, sternly: "these are foolish
doings, and tend only to make bad worse." With these words he turned his back
upon the trembling petitioner, and left him filled with confusion.

"God! is there no help for my unfortunate friend?" exclaimed Elhenhorst, when
he had left the palace. A tear trembled in his eye and a melancholy gloom
overcast his countenance. His situation obliged him to go every day to court;
his countenance was a speaking picture of suffering friendship. The King
observed his dejection, but pretended not to see it, and spoke no more to him.
Elhenhorst had already formed the plan to resign his place and to live with
Ortenberg at one of his estates, when he, one morning, was suddenly summoned to
court. He found the King with a paper in his hand.

"I have caused inquires to be made at Breslau!" said the monarch when he saw
him. "The account which you have given me is true, word for word, and I am glad
of it for your sake. Tell your friend that it does not become a clergyman who
is to preach meekness, to suffer himself to be blindly ruled by his passions. I
have appointed him to be master of the grammar school at W**. Here is the
patent. However, I shall deprive him again of his place, if I should hear that
he shows as much passion to his pupils as he did to the Colonel, whose name I
do not want to know. I shall make inquiries about him."

Elhenhorst's rapturous joy straightened his breast and deprived him of the
power of speech. He dropped on his knee.

King. Rise, Sir, I cannot bear to see men kneeling before mortals. Men should
prostrate themselves only before God. Remember it.


Ye Gods of earth! woe unto you if your power be not crowned with justice and
benevolence! You are not destitute of noble examples.

I scarcely need to observe that Elhenhorst, after this happy catastrophe, was
impatient to leave Berlin. He scolded his people the first time in his life,
for being too slow. He was, at last, seated in his post-chaise; his heart flew,
and the fleetest horses appeared to him to be as slow as snails. At the close
of the second day, he came to a town which was only thirty-five miles distant
from H**. Night was setting in; however, Elhenhorst ordered immediately fresh
horses, and pursued his road with joyful impatience. "Tomorrow," said he to
himself; "tomorrow, when the day dawns, shall I clasp my unfortunate friend to
my bosom, happy through me. Oh God! how amply have thou rewarded me for all my
troubles and sorrows!"

When he had traveled some miles, and profound darkness already covered the
face of the globe, he perceived that the postillion drove over f^elds and
ditches. "D -- n my eyes!" exclaimed the latter, "that has never happened to me
in my whole life."

Elhenhorst. (putting his head out of the window). What is the matter?


Postillion. The matter? Why, the devil has made me miss the road. They have
burnt a witch her^ a hundred years since, and her cursed spirit haunts these
parts.


Elhenhorst was vexed.

"Must I lose my way just now!" exclaimed he; "now while I wish to fly on wings
of friendship to have the first ray of the dawning morn for a cheerful witness
of a blissful meeting?"

The postillion drove onwards as well as he could, the wheels contended with
the field-stones, the sparks flew from the gravel, the horses got into a
morass, and the chaise was overturned. Elhenhorst received no injury but a
bleeding nose, and having his great coat covered with mud. He ordered his
people to assist the postillion in disengaging the chaise from the mud, took
his pistols, wrapped himself in his cloak, and sat down upon a rising ground.

Here I should have the best opportunity of introducing a sentimental discourse
between Elhenhorst and the moon, which just emerged from a dark mass of clouds,
and silvered their margin. Elhenhorst thought this is the moon! but, as for the
rest, was so unfeeling as to blow the smoke of his tobacco pipe in her face.
The postillion was still more unfeeling; for he was so impudent as to exclaim:
"If that cursed moon had come sooner, I should not have lost my way."

The moon cared not a pin for their want of feeling, and disengaged herself
entirely from the clouds which enshrouded her orb, to be a witness of a scene
which at once gave a different turn to Elhenhorst's ideas.

He was sitting on the turf, contemplating the smoke of his pipe, which the
nocturnal breeze dispelled, and thought, this is a picture of glory; and thus
his ideas soon reverted again to his unfortunate friend. He was just going to
anticipate the heavenly scene, when he should surprise Ortenberg with the
pleasing intelligence which his letter-case contained, when suddenly piercing
screams from an adjacent thicket struck his ear. He mechanically laid hold of
his pistols on hearing the cry of distress. Elhenhorst was naturally brave, and
had a heart which could feel for the distress of others. The lamentations of an
unfortunate wretch never failed to touch him to the quick; his arm and purse
had felt it frequently. He started up: "William, draw your hanger, and follow
me!"

The postillion remonstrated, protesting that he should not be able to repair
the damage which the carriage had received in less than two hours, if William
did not assist him.

"William, follow me!" was the only answer which the Baron returned, and both
went toward the spot whence the screams proceeded. It now changed into hollow
groans, which scarcely were audible; however, the glimmer of a light in the
thicket, served Elhenhorst as a guide.

He arrived at the spot and beheld -- a young beautiful girl with a gag in her
mouth, struggling under the hands of three villains, who were going to violate
her. The last strength of the girl seemed to be exhausted. She had in vain torn
the cheeks of her enemies with her nails, and attempted, to no purpose, to
seize with impatient fury the sword of the officer who seemed to be the leader
of these wretches. A cord was tied to her round white arms, her recollection
left her, and the guardian angel of her innocence wept.

Virtue conquers but rarely; however, it is not always subdued.

"Stop!" exclaimed Elhenhorst, with a loud voice, cocking his pistol. "Wretch,
desist, or you are a dead man!"

The officer turned round, seized with confusion, and drew his sword. His
accomplices unsheathed their ^abres, and a bloody conflict seemed to be
unavoidable.

The officer was going to rush upon Elhenhorst, but suddenly stopped short, when
he beheld the cocked pistol in the stranger's hands.

Officer. Who are you, and why do you interfere in matters which do not concern
you?


Elhenhorst. This is no place for exchanging questions and answers. Every man
is bound to assist his suffering fellow creatures. I am a good marksman, and,
upon my honor, shall blow your brains out, if you don't deliver that lady up
this instant.


The officer retreated a few steps; for Elhenhorst had advanced toward him in
a threatening posture.

Officer. By what authority --


Elhenhorst. I told you that this is no fit place for disputing about what is
right or wrong. But you will find me tomorrow morning at H***; you need but to
inquire after Baron Elhenhorst. I am firmly resolved to deliver that lady from
your power. Retire, if you value your life. I have pledged my honor, and never
staked it in jest. Retire, sir! exclaimed he once more, advancing with cautious
steps toward him.


The officer retired, and Elhenhorst went up to the lady, who had fainted away.

Peace to the ashes of the monk who invented gunpowder! Thousands maintain he
has been a curse to mankind; but here is an instance of preserved innocence
which must be brought to his account. Elhenhorst's pistols alone were capable
of preventing a bloody contest, the success of which would have been very
doubtful, on account of the superiority of the enemy. However, the murderous
instrument in Elhenhorst's hand made him in that moment absolute master of the
trembling wretches who stood before him.

Every invention is, therefore, salutary in the hands of an honest man.

Elhenhorst (to the servants of the officer). Lay down your cutlass! take the
gag out of the mouth of this lady, and untie her hands!


They obeyed.

Elhenhorst. Carry her gently to my chaise; offer no insult to her, if you
value your lives. William, show them the way, and in case of ne^essity make use
of your cutlass.


His orders were punctually executed. The two wretches carried the lady away,
and William was close at their heels with his cutlass. The officer was
petrified, bit his nails, gnashed his teeth, but was sensible of his impotence.

Elhenhorst. Sir, I am your humble servant. You will find me by inquiring for
Baron Elhenhorst.


With these words he retired, and followed his prize. His trusty William had
already reached the carriage, which the coachman and his other servants, in the
mean time, had sufficiently repaired. The senseless girl was put into it: her
carriers received some lashes inflicted by the whip of the coachman, and
retreated as fast as possible to the thicket, where their disappointed master
was venting his impotent fury on the innocent grass.

Elhenhorst proceeded on his journey, rewarded by the heavenly consciousness of
having performed a good action, and left the recovery of his fair companion to
God and nature.

Morning dawned already, and Aurora's refreshing breath animated silent nature
with new life. The revigorating breezes of the morning air instilled new
strength into the exhausted frame of the fair sufferer, and she awoke from her
stupor. Her soft, blue eyes opened themselves, and sparkled in the dawn of the
coming day. Her cheeks put Aurora to the blush; the first ray of Phoebus kissed
timidly her blooming lips; young zephyrs sported with her auburn tresses.

"Where am I?" whispered she softly, like the breeze of the morning air in the
thin twigs of the beech-tree; like the trembling notes of a flute.

"In the hands of a gentleman," replied Elhenhorst: "be easy, dear lady, you
are safe."

This answer, Elhenhorst's noble countenance and benevolent looks, dispelled at
once the gloom that hung on her eyes; she seemed to be going to speak, her lips
opened themselves, and wanton cupids resumed their places in the dimples of her
cheeks. However, a new gloom spread itself suddenly over her charming face,
when her bloody fingers recalled the scene of last night to her mind. Her heart
was on the rack; her heaving bosom panted for air, and the blooming rose turned
to a pale lily.

"Am I still as I was?" asked she with pale and quivering lips, while she cast
down her eyes. The moment in which she expected to hear Elhenhorst's reply,
seemed to be the most agonizing of her whole life.

Elhenhorst. Yes, you still are what your eyes bespeak you, immaculate and
undefiled. Blessed be the hour in which the guardian angel of innocence made me
your deliverer!


Good God! exclaimed the girl, with folded hands, and raising her eyes to
heaven. Her lips moved softly; she seemed to pray. Elhenhorst contemplated her
in silence; that is to say, his lips were silent; however his heart spoke
louder than it had done hitherto; panted more violently than it ever had done
before. A swee^ strange sensation poured suddenly a gentle, but devouring fire
in his veins. The God of Love took, with a malicious smile, possession of a
cold heart, and forged iron fetters for his new slave.

The girl now turned to Elhenhorst; Elhenhorst trembled.

"My lord! to whom owes an unfortunate being the preservation of her innocence
and life?"

Elhenhorst trembled still more violently. What a singular change! He had been
used to smile with pity at the beauties of his native country, when they
attempted to ensnare his heart by a thousand female artifices; to face firmly
every eye that expected to conquer him by its fire or languishing and tender
looks. He took no notice of a white arm, or an elastic bosom: and when he
happened to cast a look at the charms of beauty, he contemplated them like a
man who admires a fine picture. But how different were his sensations now! His
bosom was straitened the first time, and his eyes were afraid to meet those of
the fair stranger. These novel sensations confounded him entirely. -- The
propinquity of the charming creature who produced this transmutation,
contributed to increase his perplexity still more. Eye against eye -- knee
against knee -- his hand so near to hers -- her warm breath touching his lips
-- he knew not where he was; nor what to think of his feelings.

"May I ask" -- stammered his trembling tongue in faint accents, "with whom --
who -- your name?" --

The Stranger. My name is Caroline Summer.


END OF VOL. I.
THE SUFFERINGS OF THE FAMILY OF ORTENBERG. A NOVEL. TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN
OF AUGUSTUS VON KOTZEBUE, BY P. WILL, MINISTER OF THE REFORMED CONGREGATION IN
THE SAVOY.

TWO VOLUMES IN ONE.

Philadelphia: PRINTED BY JOHN BIOREN, FOR HENRY and PATRICK RICE, NO 16, SOUTH
2ND ST. AND JAMES RICE, and CO. BALTIMORE. 1800.

THE SUFFERINGS OF THE FAMILY OF ORTENBERG.
CHAP. I.
Man is the sport of spiteful chance.
Did not a gladd'ning cheerful glance
From better worlds dart now and then,
Across the mazy path of life
And cheer misfortune's painful strife,
What then would be the fate of man?

THE stranger scarcely had pronounced the name Caroline Summer, when the color
fled from Elhenhorst's glowing cheeks. He started back and squeezed himself
into the opposite corner of the chaise, no less firmly and anxiously than if he
had committed a sacrilege. His pale face grew longer, his eyes stared, his
mouth remained open, his foot trembled to touch the hem of her gown, every look
of his, every word he had uttered, appeared criminal to him. Poor Elhenhorst!
by what crime had thou deserved that love should maliciously steal into thy
artless heart to struggle with the purest friendship.

He resembled a dreaming person in the first moments which succeeded that fatal
discovery; for, a rising passion is a sweet dream which deludes our mind with
pleasant and new sensations, and makes us anticipate the gratification of our
wishes in the very moment of which they were begotten. Imagine that such a
charming visionary dream were chased from your mind by a sudden alarm of fire,
and you will have an idea of Elhenhorst's feelings in the first moments when he
learned who the enchanting stranger was. The emotions by which they were
succeeded, were like the trembling of a wanderer, who, in the darkness of
night, suddenly perceives by a flash of lightning, that he slept at the brink
of a precipice. But he had scarcely conceived the idea, This girl is the
mistress of my friend! when he ordered the postilion to stop, and silently
quitted the carriage without being able to account for that involuntary action.

"What a singular man!" said Caroline by herself: shall I rejoice at my
preservation, or apprehend to have fallen from the talons of a vulture, into
the fangs of a tiger? But no, no, it cannot be; the Creator writes an illegible
hand, and nature is an impudent comedian, if this man be a villain!"

Who could blame Caroline for her apprehensions and doubts? Elhenhorst's
conduct was so singular, that confidence itself would have read the brooding
over a black deed in the disordered countenance of this unknown. Caroline
wished to enquire of the postilion or the valet, after the name of her
preserver; however Elhenhorst's presence closed her lips. The carriage drove
slowly, and he walked by its side; he struggled and was conquered; he struggled
again and obtained the victory.

Let us draw the curtain which conceals his internal emotions, and bring his
feelings themselves upon the stage.

Love. How charming -- how unspeakably charming is this girl!


Virtue. She is the property of another.


Friendship. And that man is your friend, your dearest friend.


Love. You have saved her honor.


Virtue. This was your duty.


Friendship. And has the performance of your duty ever been rewarded more
nobly? -- The blessings of your friend -- the grateful tears of that lovely
creature -- the heavenly and enrapturing spectacle which you will behold.


Virtue. And which is nobler? to be happy at the expense of your friend or to
render him happy at your own expense?


Love. But are you not already the instrument of his happiness? Did you not
procure the patent which you have in your pocket?


Virtue. Can Love speak thus? Would you not take more with the left, than you
bestow with the right hand? Love, I appeal to thy own feelings!


Friendship. The girl would besides, lose by the exchange. Your friend is
amiable in every respect.


Pride. You are a minister.


Virtue. And if you were a king! you have found a jewel, you know to whom it
belongs, and could you be such a knave as to withhold it from its owner? --
Fie! even if its owner were not your friend, -- fie! even if he were your
mortal enemy!


Conscience. You are a man! you have maintained hitherto the character of an
honest man; you have harbored no sentiment in your heart, at which you have
reason to blush; you could face every one frankly.


Love. What a charming, what a bewitching girl!


Virtue. It is not difficult to be an honest man, while no passion tempts you
to turn a villain. Show now what you are! and if you do not prove now, that you
are virtuous, you never have been!


This noble soliloquy rendered Elhenhorst generous; friendship and probity
fettered his rising love, and boasted not of their victory. The carriage stopped;
Elhenhorst joined Caroline with a serene countenance, and was smilingly
received by the lovely girl.

Elhenhorst. Your name is Caroline Summer?


Caroline. Yes, my Lord.


Elhenhorst. My name is Elhenhorst.


Caroline. (starting up). E -- El -- Elhenhorst.


Every syllable which she uttered, recalled to her mind one of those blissful
evenings, when Ortenberg had painted to her the features of his only friend,
with the most glowing colors.

"Elhenhorst, my Lord? -- you are -- I -- I know -- "

Elhenhorst. (smiling.) A man whose name is Ortenberg? and whose friendship for
me, sometimes may have mentioned my name to you?


Caroline. Good God! how wonderful! the man whom I frequently blessed in my
heart; the man whom I so ardently wished to know personally; whom I loved and
honored before I knew him; that very man was designed to save me!


Elhenhorst. And feels how enviable his lot is. -- Happy moment in which I
shall restore you to the arms of my friend! -- God, what bliss can thou
bestow on me in a better world, after I have tasted such an unspeakable
pleasure in this?


A long pause. The souls of both travelers feasted upon the raptures of
overflowing sensations of happiness, but were, nevertheless, not totally
unclouded. A sigh escaped Caroline's bosom -- that sigh whispered --
"Ortenberg." Elhenhorst's breast was strengthened, for he resembled a timid
youth who wrestles the first time with a vigorous man.

Caroline's curiosity urged her at last to speak: she said bashfully, "I have
not heard from him these eight months. -- No letter -- not a single line -- it
is, indeed cruel! -- I know not whether he is still alive?

She knew, indeed, well enough that he was alive; for Elhenhorst had intimated
it sufficiently; however, her question properly ought to have been, "I know not
where he lives." Bashful modesty transmuted the where into whether, and tacked
a still to it.

Elhenhorst's reply was very laconic: "Make yourself easy, he is alive!"

Caroline. And is well? happy? content?


Elhenhorst. (smiling ambiguously.) I dare say he is.


Caroline blushed reluctantly, and, without feeling the ambiguity of
Elhenhorst's reply, said with a gloomy look, folding her apron: "He then has
forgot his friend?"

Elhenhorst. He has not forgot, but wishes to exchange her.


Caroline (rather silly.) Exchange? You speak in riddles.


Elhenhorst. Yes, yes, exchange! Or do you think he is satisfied with your
friendship?


Caroline. But why not one poor line in eight months?


Elhenhorst. His silence does him honor.


Caroline. But it was certainly no effect of love.


Elhenhorst. Love and duty do not always agree.


Caroline. But your sex frequently affect to follow the dictates of imperious
duty, for no other purpose than to conceal the decrease of their love.


Elhenhorst (rather serious.) I hope you don't allude to my worthy friend?


Caroline (with warmth.) No, indeed; Ortenberg never would nor could do this. I
rather think that his motives are entitled to my admiration? -- Perhaps, he was
prevented from writing only by too much business -- (with an inquisitive look)
by the great distance of his place of residence?


Elhenhorst understood the secret meaning of her inquiries, but declined giving
the information which she was desirous to obtain. His imagination anticipated
the most delightful surprise. He interrupted her by the question, whether she
knew the wretch from whose hands he had delivered her! "I conjure you," added
he, "to honor me with your confidence, by explaining the incidents of last
night, and a frank communication of your sufferings.

Caroline. With pleasure.


She now began with a charming simplicity to relate her fate. My readers know
adready that the persecuted girl sought and sound an asylum in the house of
Lady Anna Maria of Xantippendale.

"I do not deny," continued Caroline, "that her house did not entirely answer
my wishes and expectations. I imagined to have met with a good and venerable
matron, whose only weakness consisted in an overstrained piety; a fault which I
am very willing to forgive, because it arises almost never from a bad heart,
rarely from hypocrisy, and almost generally from stupidity and ignorance. An
artless heart suspects no ^olds in those of others, and therefore is easily
imposed upon.

"When one of my cousins introduced me the first time to her, she was sitting
in the most picturesque attitude. She was ^itting in a leather arm-chair,
dressed in a brown worsted gown, and a nightcap. Both temples were covered
with black plasters, of the bigness of a crown-piece, against head ach,
rheumatism, etc. etc. A tooth from a scull, sewed in a piece of silk, depended
from her faded bosom, which was to serve as a talisman against the tooth ach.
The fragment of her nose was adorned with a pair of green spectacles, with the
assistance of which she was reading a chapter from Ezekiel. Her wrinkled hands
knitted at the same time a stocking of coarse yarn, and the nodding of her
head, the langour and blinking of her half-closed eyes, betrayed that she, at
the same time, enjoyed the sweetness of sleep, and, consequently, was employed
in three different ways.

"I made a courte^y at the door; her lap-dog barked, and tore a whole in my
apron, because he mistook me for a beggar; and the old lady took her spectacles
for a moment from her nose, to make a silent sign to me to take a seat upon a
straw stool, which stood behind the door. When I had seated myself she
continued to read aloud, (for my arrival had dispelled the god of sleep from
her running eyes,) beginning every verse an octave deeper than she finished it,
and concluding every verse with a sigh.

"Having finished the chapter, she marked the place where she had left off with
a piece of green silk, put her spectacles into a shagreen case, and waddling
toward me, to survey me from top to toe, with a most curious loquacity. Her
first address was not very encouraging for a timid girl of my age. You are,
probably, said she, a daughter of Mr. Summer, who broke six months ago? These
words lacerated my heart. However, I collected myself. Benevolent minds,
thought I, are not always endowed with delicate sentiments. You are poor and
deserted, continued she, but you have received a handsome figure from the mercy
of God, and must make a good use of it. I then did not understand the horrid
meaning of these words. You have met, in Lady Anna Maria of Xantippendale, with
a sinner who has found grace before God, and is of a charitable disposition,
concluded she; and if you are diligent, and walk in the paths of modesty and
piety, and always follow the advice of an experienced and pious woman, you will
never lack any thing that may be requisite for the wellbeing of your body and
soul.

"I thanked her with a sincerely affected heart, for my lamentable situation
caused me to read pure benevolence in every countenance, and I imagined that
every eye bespoke those sentiments which I would have felt myself for every
unfortunate being. I performed, therefore, cheerfully, my new duties, which
chiefly consisted in female work. The old woman seemed to be satisfied, and all
went off extremely well till after supper. But scarcely had the silver bell of
Lady Anna Maria of Xantippendale convoked all the domestics to assist at her
usual evening devotions, when a malicious demon sowed the first seeds of
discord between us.

"Here I have the best opportunity of pourtraying to you, in one groupe, the
inmates of our house, whom I saw the first time on that pious occasion.
Nicolaus, a square-bodied coachman, had been thirteen years in the service of
Lady Xantippendale, although she kept neither horses nor a carriage since the
death of her husband. Her avarice, which, on every other occasion, was
terrified at every useless expense, was obliged to give way, in this instance,
to Christian charity, because that very same coachman had drove her late lord
seven years to the townhouse, and at last assisted in conveying him to the
grave. She could not, therefore, resolve to leave him to the fortune of his
whip. He was a round, healthy-looking figure, sang a sonorous bass, and always
began the evening hymn, which was sung when the devotion was over, with great
dignity.

"The second figure which entered the apartment, was a dirty manservant, who
was just come from the field. His face was sunburned, and his hands were
covered with blisters. He was chewing when he took his seat, and his fatigue
and hunger seemed to curse the artificial devotion which he was forced to
display. He was followed by two females, one of whom was very old and fretful,
and the other young, gay, and apparently, more disposed to laugh than to pray.
The former was the cook, and the latter the house-maid.

"The devotion was opened with an edifying hymn, after the conclusion of which
Lady Xantippendale said a prayer which she had learnt by heart, exhorting me to
do the same. I confessed frankly that I never had learnt a prayer by heart, and
that I was convinced God paid little regard to the blabbering of our lips,
being satisfied with the pious emotions of our hearts. She protested with a
deep groan, that my youthful heart was already infected with the baneful poison
of libertinism: lending me immediately a prayer book which contained prayers
for every day in the year, the leap-year not excepted, and exhorted me to show
attention and devotion during the pious orisons of the rest of her domestics.

"The coachman roared his prayer, while his breath lasted, without paying any
attention to stops and half stops; the servant, whom the house-maid secretly
pinched and teazed, followed his example lustily. The cook alone groaned her
prayer with all the expressions of the sincerest contrition. The devotion
concluded with the hymn, Now all the woods are fast asleep, etc. and the
meeting was dissolved. She enjoined me once more before I went to bed, to study
her prayer book, under-lining with her own hand those passages which in her
opinion were most moving. I was obliged to learn every day two prayers by
heart, and durst not attempt to alter an obsolete or an ambiguous word
arbitrarily. "Thou shall not add unto the word, neither shall thou diminish
aught from it," said she, whenever I attempted the slightest alteration. She
possessed the singular gift to prove any thing from the Bible, citing some
passages out of its connection, and thus rendering it subservient to confirm
what she wanted to demonstrate. However, I begin to talk wildly; excuse the
joyful loquacity of the liberated dove who has escaped from her cage.

"Our mode of life was nearly as follows: We rose very early in the morning. I
was compelled to sew, my fingers sore while I assisted at the reading of the
Revelation of St. John, which she expounded to me, verse after verse,
protesting solemnly that she had discovered in it the downfall of the Pope ten
years ago, and also had written to him to warn him against the wicked French,
but never received an answer.

"About noon we went together into the kitchen, to assist the cook in preparing
a frugal dinner; or, to speak the truth, we watched Mary, to prevent her from
wasting too much butter, or poisoning the victuals by adding too great a
quantity of spice. After dinner Lady Xantippendale always took a nap, and I was
kept close at work. She made her appearance again at four o'clock, and combed
her lap-dog. She then went again into her closet to transact some private
business, examining her pledges, winding up the pawned watches, counting and
filing her ducats. Every half an hour which she could spare before supper, was
devoted to reading in the Bible. Our supper was as frugal as the dinner,
consisting in a few thin slices of bread. The above mentioned evening devotion
served in lieu of the desert; and when it was over, we were permitted to go to
bed. This is a faithful picture of our daily mode of life, which was never
altered in the slightest degree, except on a Sunday; when we went twice to
church, and in the afternoon criticized the dresses of our acquaintances
instead of reading in the Bible.

"Little as I relished this manner of living, yet I took cheerfully up with all
its inconveniences, flattering myself with the sweet hope that I should be
safe from persecution, and that my friend -- why should I not say my lover? --
would release me one time from it. I began already to reconcile myself to it,
and to court the favor of the old Lady by the most unremitted attention: in
which I apparently seemed to succeed pretty well. However, how great was my
astonishment and terror, when I, about a week since, entered the apartment of
my mistress, and beheld the Colonel, whom I had not seen since that unfortunate
day. A cold tremor ran through all my limbs; I was going to retire; but when he
made me a respectful bow, and continued to converse with my mistress on money
affairs, I tranquillized myself, fetched my work and seated myself in a corner.
The Colonel went with my lady into her closet, and they staid near an hour and
an half; I was seized with fearful apprehensions, and trembled violently. My
reason represented to me that the visit of an officer who always was in want of
money, was nothing extraordinary, considering the traffic which the old lady
carried on. My heart assented to the (...) of my reason; however, I trembled
nevertheless. He came back at last, walked with proud gravity through the
apartment, and having made a slight bow to me disappeared, I cast a
scrutinizing look at the old woman, but could not perceive the least change in
her features. I persuaded myself at last that the Colonel had given up all
designs upon me, and thought no more of that incident.

"The day before yesterday was the dreadful time when the enfernal plot was
executed. The old woman had told me already the preceding evening that a
relation of here is, who lived fifteen miles distant from the town, would send
her carriage for her to take her a few weeks into the country, and that I must
get myself ready to go with her. I had no suspicion, but rather was rejoiced at
having an opportunity to breathe the country air again, and cheerfully packed
up some linen and wearing apparel.

"A carriage and four appeared really the next day about noon at our door, the
old woman delayed our departure till toward evening. The first delay was
occasioned by her afternoon's nap; having finished it she went at least twenty
times all over the house to see whether all was sa^e; and when we, at last,
were going to set off, she recollected suddenly that she had forgot certain
papers which she had promised to her relation. Having rummaged all her drawers
and carefully locked them again. she went down in the kitchen to see whether
the fire was quite extinguished. She then read a long lecture to her domestics,
in which she enjoined them to preserve the strictest order and economy; and
when I hoped, at last that we were going to set off, after I had been ready
three or four hours, she called me back again once more, putting a hymn book
into my hand and croaking a hymn of a traveller who is going on a dangerous
journey, I laughed inwardly, as I had not the least apprehension that my
journey really would prove dangerous. I now can easily account for the slowness
with which she prepared herself for our final departure: she was anxious to put
it off till night should be setting in; but I entertained not the least
suspicion.

"We got at last into the carriage, and took a road which was entirely unknown
to me. The sun was setting, when we perceived a village at some distance. There
is a house at the other end of the village, said the old woman, where we shall
rest a little and take some refreshment. We then shall have only half an hour's
ride to the seat of my relation. I thought it singular that we were to rest
ourselves to eat and drink at a place which was so near the spot of our
destination; however I still entertained no suspicion, because I knew from
experience that Lady Xantippendale was fond of regaling herself at the expense
of other people, and was told that the house belonged to a rich niece of here is.
We really were received by a person, who pretended to be the steward of her
niece, and offered refreshments to us. We staid near an hour, and continued our
journey when the shades of night already had shrouded the fields in darkness. I
perceived, notwithstanding the darkness, to my utter astonishment, that four
white horses had been put to our carriage in the room of the black ones with
which we had set out. I communicated my astonishment to the steward, on getting
into the carriage, and was told that the black horses belonged to his mistress,
and that the lady whom we were going to visit had sent her own horses. I was
perfectly satisfied with this explanation, and suspected nothing.

"We had not proceeded half a mile when the old lady suddenly ordered the
coachman to stop, telling me that she must get out a moment, and that I should
remain quietly on my seat. My artless heart still apprehended no harm. But
suddenly two masked men jumped into the carriage, and the coachman drove on as
fast as his horses could run. I screamed and was gagged by one of my
conductors. I prayed and scratched; but my hands were tied; my recollection
forsook me and I fainted.

"As far as I can recollect, I remained some hours in that situation. The moon
had risen when I recovered the perfect use of my senses. One of my conductors
was snoring and the other betrayed his being awake, by coughing. I groaned and
prayed to God for assistance. The day began to dawn. My two conductors had
pulled off their masks. I concluded by their whiskers that they were soldiers.

"We arrived a few hours after daybreak, at a lonely house in a thick forest,
where we were received by a fellow with long red whiskers, and a pair of little
pig's eyes. His dress was that of a peasant. He welcomed me with a civil smile,
and begged me to alight, and refresh myself in his cottage. The soldiers
carried me out of the coach. I was very faint, and sank upon a turf seat, near
the house. One of my conductors, whose eyes displayed a faint ray of humanity
approached me. Make yourself easy, Miss! said he softly; you are in good hands.
Our master is generous and liberal; you will come to no harm. I now shall take
the gag from your mouth; but conjure you not to scream; for, it would be of no
service to you, as we are in a place where no person can hear us; and I should
besides be compelled to reduce you to a situation from which I should wish to
preserve you.

"He now took the gag from my mouth, and I began to scream aloud, as soon as I
was at liberty. The fellow with the red whiskers laughed, and his companion was
in a violent passion; but the other soldier who had spoken to me first, said,
in a tolerably civil accent:

"Miss, I shall suffer you to scream a few moments, to convince you that no
person can hear you. But if you do not leave off soon, I shall be compelled to
be again troublesome to you. You see my comrade begins already to be impatient.

"But when I continued to scream most violently instead of following his
advice, he realized his menace, gagged me again, and conveyed me to a dirty
room, which was blackened with smoke, and smelled of tobacco and the fumes of
beer. The furniture consisted of long deal tables, and benches on both sides.
The windows were hung with beer pots. Only a single chair stood in a corner,
and I was desired to seat myself upon it. I was some hours in a state of
insensibility. God be merciful unto me, and preserve my innocence! This was the
only idea which occupied my soul, and composed my prayers. My conductors in the
mean while, beguiled their time with taking their breakfast and smoking
tobacco, and were delighted to read the obscene rhimes which the guests had
written against the walls and windows.

"I remained in this melancholy situation till noon, when I was asked whether I
wanted to dine? I refused by shaking my head, and was urged no further. The
soldiers and the caroty fellow sat down to dinner and drank freely.

"After dinner, when the owner of the house was occupied in the kitchen and the
most ferocious of my two conductors was fast asleep, I was accosted again by
his companion, in whose eyes I perceived now and then a spark of humanity.

"Dear Miss, said he in a compassionate tone, I pity you sincerely, I cannot
save you, though I should wish to do it. But why do you yourself render your
situation more unpleasant? You see that your screams are of no service to you;
I will take the gag from your, mouth, if you will promise me to be silent.

"The mild accent in which he delivered these words kindled a faint spark of
hope in my soul. This man, thought I, can still take some interest in the
unmerited sufferings of others; I may, perhaps, be able to prevail upon him by
my prayers to assist me in making my escape. I nodded to him, and was instantly
disengaged from the troublesome gag, and the cords with which my hands were
tied.

"Oh! my friend! exclaimed I, wringing my hands: Oh! my friend! save my
innocence! God and your conscience will reward you for it!

Soldier. I have told you already that I wish to be able to save you, for I am
not so inhuman as you may think, and I pity you. Upon my soul I pity you
sincerely: however I can do nothing for you. My Colonel is a hard and cruel
man; he would make me run the gauntlet through the whole regiment; for, the
great can easily find a plausible pretext to vent their resentment against a
poor fellow.


"Caroline. I then am to be conveyed to Colonel**? Alas! I apprehended this was
the case!


"Soldier. Yes, Miss! he has long watched you in vain. If the devil had not
seduced that old procuress by ten louis d'ors --

"Caroline's heart revolted at these words. Every ray of hope disappeared, she
trembled for her innocence; despair raged in her agitated mind! she wept aloud;
and, behold! a compassionate tear started from the eye of the hardened sinner,
and moistened the brisly eye-lashes. Caroline threw herself down at his feet.

"I conjure you by the mercy of God, do not suppress these sentiments which
exalt you ^ar above your barbarous master. If you have been a villain, you now
have an opportunity of making your peace with God, by a generous and noble
deed! Save! oh! save my innocence!


Soldier (raising her from the ground with marks of great emotion.) Well, I
will venture it! -- I shall risk my life -- Old, honest father! -- your blood
rolls still in the veins of your son. -- (He cast his eyes fearfully round the
room) Follow me through this back door.

"Fear and joy," continued Caroline "agitated me alternately, I was on the
point of following him. But God ordained it otherwise; my preservation was
decreed by Providence to be accomplished by your lordship. When I was just on
the point of quitting the room, the owner of the house joined us, and left us
no more. I was seized with a stunning agony. The soldier shrugged up his
shoulder, seated himself on a bench opposite to me, and leaning his head upon
his hand, surveyed me silently, and with evident marks of emotion. His
compassionate looks attracted my notice. I told him that he seemed to have had
a better education than people in his station used to have. He replied with a
sigh, and to my great astonishment asked me in French, whether I understood
that language? When I affirmed it, he gave me the following account of himself:

"My father, said he, is an honest clergyman in the country, and now eighty
years old. He gave me an excellent education, and endeavored to animate my
juvenile heart with love for virtue and probity. When I was nineteen years old,
I was sent to University in company of a youth with whom I had been educated,
and who was the only son of an aged and poor widow in our parish. My father had
taken him into his house on account of his amiable qualities, and cultivated
his mind. The cruel phantom of honor caused us to fall out one day when we
were intoxicated. We were in a numerous and licentious company -- our
companions urged us to decide our difference by a duel -- they gave us swords
-- and I plunged mine into the heart of a young man, who was my only and
sincerest friend, and the last consolation of a poor, aged, and disconsolate
mother, who survived his untimely death only a few weeks. I was obliged to ^ly.
My father gave me his curse, and my mother died of grief. I turned soldier and
endeavored to silence my conscience by abandoning myself to the most horrid
excesses. -- I succeed now and then -- however, there are moments -- moments in
which I quarrel with God and his providence, and my heart is seized with the
most agonizing despair. Oh God! Oh God! -- A single step on the path of vice is
sufficient to ruin man for ever!

"He averted his face and was silent; however, I still imagine to hear his last
words. The tone with which he exclaimed: Oh God! was dreadful.

"The sun was already very high, and I think it was about three o'clock, when
the other soldier awoke, swearing dreadfully, because he had been suffered to
sleep so long, and scolding prepared for our departure.

"Do you whine again? asked he his comrade, when he perceived his melancholy
mood. Fie! be ashamed!"

"I requested the down-cast soldier to tell me whither I was to be conducted?
He assured me, he did not know it himself; adding, they had received orders to
conduct me over the heath of M** to a certain hill, where they were to meet the
Colonel in the evening. I saw no possibility of escaping (...) fate. I prayed
to God for assistance; and soon felt myself animated again with new courage. I
now thought it was impossible God could suffer a being to be dishonored, who
always had adored him with innocence and purity of heart. I trembled indeed,
when I got into the carriage; however, the first frenzy of despair had abated;
my soul conceived again some hopes; and I thought at last, if the worst should
come, I can only die. I am, perhaps called by God to die as a martyr for my
innocence.

"They had gagged me again, but left my hands free. The carriage drove over
unbeaten roads. We met not a single person, and not a sound of a living being,
except the rustling of a solitary lizard in the dry furze vibrated in our ear.
One of my companions sang very obscene songs, smoaked tobacco, and sneered at
his comrade who looked mournfully out of the window.

T"he sun had already concealed his radiant orb, and the darkness of the night
was setting in rapidly when we arrived at the hill, where we were to meet the
Colonel. We stopped; but saw no person. A saint ray of hope rose in my mind, and
I flattered myself with the cheerful illusion, that the villain perhaps had
already received the reward of his crimes, had been thrown off his horse or
attacked by robbers on his way. But alas! -- two men on horseback appeared at
some distance, a few hours after, when the moon had risen. My heart was
convulsed, my knees trembled, and I could scarcely support myself on my legs.

"Have I caught you at last, little rebel? exclaimed the Colonel, while he
hastily dismounted and went toward me. My mouth was gagged; I ejaculated an
inaudible scream, ran furiously toward him and seized his sword, drawing it
half out of the scabbard. However he threw himself in my arms -- I wrestled
with him -- I was dragged into the thicket -- despair gave me new strength -- I
bit -- scratched -- but to no purpose. My senses deserted me -- I sank fainting
to the ground; and when I came to myself again -- God had sent you, my Lord, to
be my guardian angel."

A burning tear fell upon Elhenhorst's arm.


CHAPTER II.
There are still noble, generous minds
Whose heart is warmed with sympathy,
Who fly to help, when virtue weeps,
There is still virtue in this world.
In every clime are feeling minds
Who joy in drying tears of woe,
Meek virtue is its own reward,
And therefore not rewarded here
She fills with Heaven's greatest bliss
The heart in which her scepter sways.

"How nobly," exclaimed Elhenhorst, "how nobly am I rewarded by this and the
coming moment! My rapture intoxicates me. -- Sweet Caroline, love is going to
reward your sufferings for innocence and virtue. -- My heart is too full -- it
must communicate itself -- I shall carry you to day to your lover!"

Caroline (starting with inquisitive looks, her bosom and face tinged with a
scarlet hue). Me? To Ortenberg? -- Where? --


Elhenhorst. Dismiss those dubious looks, that agitating incertitude! To
Ortenberg! -- To my friend Ortenberg! to H**.

Caroline's person was animated with new life and vigor, like a half-faded
flower when a gentle summer rain refreshes it with its re-invigorating
moisture. A soft rose-colour tinged her cheeks, her brow and bosom, and spread
even to the finger-ends; her eye sparkled like the morning star, when it
announces the rising sun. A thousand questions thronged from her soul, her rosy
lips quivered, doubtfully which of them they should render audible first; for,
every one of them appeared to her to be equally important.

"Ortenberg at H**!" stammered she with an enchanting confusion: "and we are on
the road to H**? and we shall be there to day? -- Perhaps, the -- steeple --
which I see yonder -- "

"No, lovely Caroline!" replied Elhenhorst smiling: "we are, indeed, on the
road to H**, and shall arrive there today; however, the steeple which you see
yonder, belongs to a village church."


Caroline (with a glowing face). Are we far from H**?


Elhenhorst. Only three miles.


Caroline. Can we not see it yet?


Elhenhorst. Not yet.


Caroline. Could the postillion not -- drive -- fa -- Her virgin bashfulness
snatched the word from her lips; she blushed at the fragment, and wished it
could be retracted.

The obliging Elhenhorst put his head out of the window: "Postillion, drive as
fast as you can; I Will give you half a crown more!" The postillion brandished
his whip, and put his four greys in a brisk trot.

A short pause.


Caroline. I dare say we now are not far off?


Elhenhorst (looking out of the window and holding his hand over his eyes). If
I am not mistaken -- I see yonder --


Caroline [hasty]. The steeples of H**?


Elhenhorst. Yes -- we are nearer than I thought.

Caroline's heart beat violently; she was seized with a sweet nameless
uneasiness; the color of her face changed every moment; she attempted in vain
to speak, and her impatient eyes roved inquisitively from one side to another.

The road serpentined between gardens. Her imagination whispered to her,
whenever she perceived a cool inviting spot: Ortenberg has, perhaps, been
sitting there; on that meadow he walks in the refreshing shade of evening,
rests here on the banks of this rivulet, thinks of his Caroline, and recalls to
his memory the many happy hours which we spent together. "Should we not meet
him?" whispered Hope to her sister Expectation. Expectation grew anxiously
attentive, gazed wishfully at every distant object, and mistook every child for
the long missed lover; fancied to see in every peasant's coat the light gray
frock in which he had taken leave of Caroline.

Elhenhorst sat with folded arms by her side, and read with rapture the
slightest emotions of her heart, in the open book of her physiognomy. He read
undisturbed, without being interrupted in his sweet observations by a single
look of the dear girl; for Caroline had too much to see and to gaze at; had now
to stretch her neck, now had occasion to murmur secretly against nature for
confining her looks by a hill; and now to be vexed at the slowness of the
postillion; and all these ideas and sensations crossed each other with so much
rapidity, as to make her forget her companion entirely. She had eyes only for
the steeples of the town which lay before her; ears only for every sound which
proceeded from that direction; sensation only for her love.

The carriage now rolled round a hill, and behold! they were suddenly before
the gates of the town. A loud, tremulous Ah! escaped Caroline when she beheld
the gate.

"Go on! exclaimed she to the postillion.

"I dare not proceed," replied the latter; the passengers are examined here."

"Good God!" said she with an enchanting impatience: "can they not see that I
am no spy?"

"But I might be one," replied Elhenhorst smiling; "we must submit.

The officer on guard stepped to the window. "Your name, sir?"


Elhenhorst. Baron Elhenhorst, Minister of his Majesty. I am coming from
Berlin, and am going to Cleves.


Officer. My Lord, Colonel *** has just passed the gate (Caroline turned pale)
and ordered me to inform you, that he lodges at the Wild Man.


Elhenhorst. Sir, I thank you. Go on, postillion!


"This lady?" -- muttered the officer smiling. "However, I shall put in my
report: Baron Elhenhorst and attendants. I have the honor to wish you a happy
journey."

The sneering tone and looks with which the officer said this, did not escape
Caroline. She was sensible of the ambiguity of her situation; her cheeks glowed.

Elhenhorst ordered the postillion not to put up at the Wild Man, because he
did not wish to embitter the approaching scene of rapture, by the sight of a
villain. We shall have time enough after dinner, thought he, to sight out our
difference.

The carriage stopped therefore at another hotel, and the travelers were shown
into an apartment which had a closet adjoining to it. Elhenhorst desired the
trembling Caroline to step into it, and sent for his friend.

Words cannot express the sensations with which he looked through the window,
and saw Ortenberg coming up the street. His feelings were a mixture of rapture
and anxiety -- a tear stole from time to time down his cheeks. He opened the
door of his apartment. Ortenberg ascended the stairs panting for breath, and --
both lay in each other's arms.

"Friend, you have kept your word faithfully!" said Ortenberg, shaking
Elhenhorst's hand while he stepped into the apartment. "I did not expect you so
soon."

Elhenhorst. Yes, dearest friend, I have kept my word. I deserve this
testimony. I promised you to compel you to confess, on my return, that I
deserve your confidence. You only have let me guess your distress; but no
matter of that: I guessed it. Take this, continued he, taking the King's patent
from his pocket: take this; the King has appointed you to be head master of the
grammar school at W**.

Ortenberg -- the indigent, starving Ortenberg -- who had not the smallest
glimpse of hope le^t -- raised suddenly to a state of moderate affluence, which
enabled him to satisfy all his wishes: Ortenberg was speechless, he seemed to
be rooted to the ground; he stood before his friend with expanded arms, holding
his cane in one and his hat in the other hand, while all his muscles trembled
and tears started from his eyes. He now gazed at the parchment and now at his
friend. His lips quivered, his whole frame shook, he could not find words, he
was not able even to stammer.

And behold: the folding door was suddenly flung open, but not wide enough for
Caroline's expanded arms. She flew toward her lover with a convulsive Ah!
which seemed to reproach her rapture for its overflowing ecstacy, and threw her
trembling hands round his neck.

Elhenhorst wept. His valet stood at the door and sobbed. Ortenberg knew not
whether he was awake or deluded by a sweet dream. He staggered, wanted to
speak, he stammered; Elhenhorst conducted him to a sofa. His joy was too
powerful for him. He resembled a blind person who beholds the radiant orb of
the sun the first time, and fainted. Caroline threw herself upon him and hung
upon his pale lips. Elhenhorst ordered him to be bled. He recovered the use of
his senses, and asked himself whether he had dreamed.

We shall leave the finishing of this picture to the imagination of the feeling
reader, and let him guess the thousands of questions which were put and
answered on either part. Elhenhorst invited, by Ortenberg's desire, his
landlord to dinner. The honest old man could not eat for joy. Elhenhorst had
the greatest difficulty to prevail upon his happy guests to eat and to speak;
for they feasted only with their eyes. He was obliged to ask more than ten
times before he could receive an answer; but was teazed to repeat the same
reply an hundred times.

"When do you intend to depart?" whispered he at last into Ortenberg's ear.


Ortenberg. Today if you have no objection.

"So much the better!" replied Elhenhorst. "I shall take care to make the
necessary preparations and attend you to W**, if you promise me that I shall
not live on the road, merely by looking at you.


CHAP. III.
You will catch an airy shadow,
If you look for roses without thorns;
For this sublunary world affords
Never happiness which is not bought
At the expense of a brother's bliss.

ELHENHORST, who apprehended that it would embitter the happiness of his friend
if he should discover that Caroline's preservation might cost him his life,
stole after dinner, secretly out of the room, and went to the Wild Man to
dispose the Colonel to fix a more distant time and another place for the duel
which was to be fought. The Colonel started passionately from his chair when
his antagonist opened the door of his apartment, and snatched up a loaded
pistol which lay on the table.

Elhenhorst (with cold dignity), Softly, Sir! Softly! put down your pistol.


Colonel. Baron, let us cut the matter short. If you have brought no arms with
you, you may take the other pistol there (he reached it to him).


Elhenhorst. You need not to trouble yourself? I don't intend to fight you
today.


Colonel. Not! -- and I am to treat you as a gentleman? --


Elhenhorst. Yes, I demand it of you; not because I am a nobleman, but because
I saved injured innocence from your grasp. That deed alone entitles (...) to
the privileges of a gentleman; and, by G --, you could not refuse treating my
valet as a gentleman, if he had performed it.


Elhenhorst. I shall (he took a chair, seating himself upon it). I gave you my
word that I would fight you; I was hurried away by my passion. However, I have
pledged it, and will meet you; but not today, nor tomorrow, nor within the
environs of this town.


Colonel. A charming declaration! But suppose I were to take up one of these
pistols?


Elhenhorst (drawing the table upon which the pistols lay, toward his chair).
I would not advise you, said he calmly; the king would miss me, and take it
very ill, were he to learn that you had assassinated one of his ministers who
came to you without arms.


Colonel (passionately). Baron, I shall call for my people!


Elhenhorst. What then?

The Colonel stamped with his foot, bit his nails, and walked irresolutely up
and down the apartment.


Elhenhorst. Let it suffice you that you know I will fight you; for, I assure
you, Colonel, it would cost me only a letter to the king, and you would be sent
to the fortress. I shall be at Dusseldorf on the thirteenth of next month; if
you then are inclined to meet me; you will find me; if not, I am your obedient
servant.

Elhenhorst rose and was going to quit the room.


Colonel (tamed by Elhenhorst's unshaken resolution). Baron, your word of
honor!


Elhenhorst. Upon my honor.


Colonel. I am satisfied, you shall see me at Dusseldorf on the thirteenth of
next month.

Ortenberg and Caroline were too much enraptured to miss Elhenhorst. He had
left them, and returned again without their perceiving it. They had not seen or
spoken a word to Ortenberg's landlord, who sat only a few steps distant from
them. Ortenberg had spilled half the contents of his coffee-cup on Caroline's
lap, and Caroline had torn his ruffles with a pin; but neither knew any thing
of it.

The carriages were ordered to be got ready. The old Citizen had crammed
Ortenberg's little property in a portmantua, and shed torrents of tears. All
was now ready, the postillion blew his horn, the horses stamped, Ortenberg took
Caroline by the hand, and assisted her to get into the carriage. He had already
put one foot into it, to follow her, when the old Citizen, who had been
standing behind him, holding his hat in his hand pulled him by the coat,
looking at him with tearful eyes, and seizing him by the hand without speaking
a word.

"My benefactor!" exclaimed Ortenberg, while the tears gushed from his eyes,
and threw himself into the trembling arms of the old man.

"My son!" stammered the old man. This was all they were able to utter. The old
man disengaged himself from Ortenberg's arms, laid his hands upon his head, as
if he were going to give him his benediction, and raised his eyes to heaven. He
seemed to pray. He then shook him violently by the hand, and suddenly turned
into another street.

The honest old man lost, by Ortenberg's departure, his only and last comfort,
and survived it but a few weeks.

The travelers reached the place of their destination in a short time, without
complaining once of the badness of the roads; for their hearts were as serene
as the sky. Ortenberg's arrival having been notified previously to the citizens
of W**, they had prepared a small but comfortable house in the suburbs for his
reception. His appointment, by an immediate order from the king, his winning
modesty, Caroline's charming liveliness, the friendship of a man of
Elhenhorst's consequence; all this contributed to procure him the most
flattering reception at W**.

As Elhenhorst, on account of the impending duel, pretended that the most
urgent business would not permit him to stay long, the young couple celebrated
their marriage a few weeks after his arrival. I shall not attempt to draw a
picture of that happy day; for Caroline's, Ortenberg's, and Elhenhorst's
feelings cannot be expressed by words; as for the other guests who were invited
on that occasion -- they ate, drank, played, laughed, sported their wit, and
conducted themselves perfectly as German guests are wont to do on a German
wedding. The young couple were teazed by the jocund company, till -- till Hymen
joined hands with his brother Amor.

The new-married couple were yet fast asleep in the morning, when the smacking
whip of the postillion roused Elhenhorst. "God bless you!" said he, as he stole
by the bridal chamber on tiptoe: "May all your days be like this smiling vernal
morning, and may you want for nothing but your departing friend."

The morning was beautiful. The pure picture of the rising sun trembled in
Elhenhorst's parting tears. He wished to have witnessed the first raptures of
his awaking friend -- and the enchanting blushes of the lovely bride; however,
he was bound by his word of honor, and flew through the gate, which just had
been opened.

The serene sky, the variegated verdure of the fields, and the beautiful banks
of the Rhine dispelled the gloom which overclouded his mind. Indeed nature can
make any thing of us; we laugh and weep, we exult and mourn with that all
powerful enchantress. Elhenhorst experienced that change of feelings, and the
confirmation of this truth.

Nature, that sublime painter, charmed him till he came to Duisburg, with the
most exhilarating pictures and groupes. The Rhine serpentined before him,
through fertile fields; floating streamers decked its proud surface, and the
rays of the sun reflected from its blue waves. The melancholy Ruhr sought her
majestic friend, creeping with soft murmurs through rich meadows and orchards,
and rushing exulting in his arms. The masts of light colliers appeared and
disappeared alternately between the clusters of trees which lined the banks.
The milk girl came singing from the pasture, carrying her clean ewer on her
head; the wild dove cooed in the top of the tree, and the lark carolled her
cheerful matins. The contented countryman earned with serene satisfaction the
reward of his labor, the pipe of the shepherd resounded through the plain, and
sporting flocks gamboled on the verdant hills.

But when Elhenhorst had left Duisburg, and was going to cross the proud forest
of oaks, which the ancient Romans already admired, clouds, big with thunder,
towered on the southern horizon, and darkened the gloomy forest. The storm
roared in the tops of the majestic oaks, they murmured indignantly, lightnings
whizzed through their branches, a heavy shower of rain washed their dark
leaves. The horses who were browsing in the forest, fled frightened in every
direction; the wild boar concealed himself in the thicket, and the squirrel
fled to find shelter in a hollow tree. Elhenhorst's mind was overspread with a
melancholy gloom, anxious presentiments straitened his bosom, and every flash
of lightning appeared to him to unfold a dark futurity.

But he had scarcely left the forest behind, when the storm ceased, the thunder
was silent, and the sun emerged from the womb of the dark clouds in majestic
splendour, forming a radiant rainbow in the moist atmosphere. Every pearly
flower perfumed the air with new fragrancy: the odoriferous exhalations which
emanated from the sparkling meadows, refreshed Elhenhorst's languid frame, and
the gloom of his mind fled as the clouds disappeared from the horizon.


"He arrived at Dusseldorf at seven o'clock in the evening. When he mentioned
his name at the gate, the officer who was on guard gave him a note, which had
been left for him. It contained the following words:

For Baron Elhenhorst, You will find me at the Black Eagle.

V** COLONEL.


Elhenhorst ordered the postillion to drive to the next hotel, where he wrote
an answer to the Colonel's note, in the same laconic manner:

I am just arrived, but being an utter stranger in this place, I desire you
will name time and place as soon as possible, because my business is urgent.

ELHENHORST.


Half an hour after he had sent these lines, he received the following note.

My Lord,
Your business cannot be as pressing as my desire is to release you for ever
from all business. Think, therefore no further of business, but pray God (if
there be one) not to let your poor soul (if there be such a thing) go to the
devil (if there be one.) I shall expect you to tomorrow morning at nine
o'clock, at the frontiers of Juliers, behind the little village of W***.

V** COLONEL.


At nine o'clock! said Elhenhorst, softly, and flung the letter on the table,
without being vexed at the brutal wit and the foolish boasting of his
antagonist. After dinner he wrote the following letter to Ortenberg:

Dearest Friend,
The world is ruled by prejudices, the fool and the wise obey them. The fool,
because he knows not what prejudice is; the wise, because he is not always
capable of despising them with the contempt which they deserve. Very small is
the number of those whose unshackled mind weighs every action in the balance of
cool reason; and I must confess that I am not one of them. I have received a
challenge, and must obey the fatal law of honor. If I should fall I beg you
will accept the enclosed draft, as the last proof of my friendship. Send it to
Cleves, to my old faithful steward, who will hasten to execute the last
commands of his master. I shall be no more if you really receive this letter;
for, I have ordered William to deliver it only in that case. Kiss your lovely
wife in my name. God bless you. We shall meet again without fail!


The enclosed note was a draft of eight thousand dollars. He also wrote a
letter to his sister, to whose children he left his whole property, in case he
should be killed, recommending his old steward to them. He then took a walk,
saw the excellent gallery of pictures, and a few more remarkable objects, and
went to bed at ten o'clock. He slept soundly till next morning, when William
came to tell him that his horse was saddled.

He was at the appointed place a little before nine o'clock. The Colonel did
not keep him waiting. They saluted each other coldly. Each of them had only one
servant with them. The sun was divided, and they agreed to fire at the distance
of eight steps. Elhenhorst did all this with silent caution, and a seriousness
and coolness which seemed to disconcert his antagonist a little. The Colonel
changed color several times, his hand trembled when he put the powder on the
pan, and he squinted with confused looks from under his hat, at his
cool-tempered antagonist, who stood opposite him in the calmest position,
holding his pistols under his left arm, and looking at him with unshaken
tranquillity.

"Will you soon be ready?" asked he at last rather impatiently.

The Colonel fired and missed.

Elhenhorst. It now is my turn.


Colonel. Fire away!

He pressed his hat in his face, and folded his arms. Elhenhorst fired his
pistol in the air.

Are you satisfied.


Colonel. No.


Elhenhorst. Then fire!

The Colonel fired, and Elhenhorst fell. He spoke no more. The ball had
penetrated the middle of his breast. He turned himself several times in the
sand, and died without a groan.

The Colonel fled to Holland. His rich relations hushed the affair up, and
imposed upon the king. The villain was promoted six years after this incident
to the rank of General, and appointed Governor of W**. His arrival at that
place drove peace and contentment from the abode of honest Ortenberg.
Caroline's death -- Ortenberg's flight -- all this is now no longer a mystery
to my readers.


CHAP. IV.
Seek not sympathetic fellow-feeling
In the splendid prisons of the great,
Where in drunken orgies vice is reeling,
And seduction's wily snares are laid.
Fly to rural huts where mild compassion,
Humble innocence and virtue thrive,
And the noxious bane of giddy fashion,
Poisons not the scanty joys of life.
Where malevolence and fiend-like slander
Sharpen not the edge of keen distress,
And the weary wanderer ever meets with tender,
Feeling minds, when with infuriate stress,
Stormy winds arise, and drenching showers,
Chill his trembling frame. Compassion dwells
Ever kind in lowly rural bowers,
Flies from palaces to humble cells.

THIS staff and this coat," said Conrad are my whole wealth: but, Barbara, I
cannot part with the poor boy."

Barbara. He may carry your bag when you are going to beg.


Conrad. I shall not beg. I will work; my profession (he was a tailor) will
procure us bread. The consciousness of having done a good deed, will season my
meagre fare.

Not far from W**, within the walls of which virtue sought in vain an asylum in
the lap of concealment, was a small village, inhabited by a race of excellent
people. A wood of birch-trees, a cultivated hill whose foot was washed by the
Ruhr, orchards and fertile fields surrounded the cheerful valley, to which none
of those vices had penetrated, which disgrace the gorgeous-palaces of the
great. Good natured, pious people spent there their guiltless life in happy
uniformity, which alone makes days glide away like hours. A clergyman -- peace
be with his ashes -- a clergyman who, as a pious teacher of virtue and a
feeling man, led his small flock the road of true happiness, and was a pattern
of meekness and modesty, had lived twenty-six years among his peasants like a
beloved father in the circle of his family. He was a simple, honest man, devoid
of intolerance and fanaticism, and no enemy to the innocent pleasures of life.
His heart was without guile, his wife a pattern of domestic virtue, and she
always had a morsel of bread for the hungry, a draught of home-brewed beer for
the thirsty, and fellow feeling and tender consolation for the afflicted.

Conrad resolved to retire to that village, and to try whether he could support
his wife and fo^terson by the labor of his hands, which had long been unused
to work.

Barbara (snarling) packed up the few rags, which the kindness of the Governor
had left to the honest old man as the only reward for his thirty years
services. Conrad caused an inventory to be made of Ortenberg's property, and
deposited it with a friend of the unfortunate fugitive.

"Let us now depart in the name of God!" exclaimed he, taking his staff in one
hand and the little William, who was eight years old, by the other: "let us
turn our backs on this town, yet without shaking the dust from our shoes. May
God mend those that are not incorrigible, and pardon those who are stung by a
repenting conscience. Come, boy, let us wander to the huts of peace!"

William, who neither knew nor cared to know what his foster-father meant by
the huts of peace, tied his small bundle of linen to a short stick, and as it
just struck seven o'clock, rejoiced inwardly that he was permitted to stroll
though the fields, instead of going to school, he was highly pleased with the
change of his situation; and are we not all like children on such occasions?
Even the intelligence of a melancholy accident, makes, in the first moment, an
agreeable impression upon us, because our soul is constantly panting after a
change of sensations.

The road to the neighboring village led by the church yard. Conrad thought it
would produce a salutary effect, if he were to agitate the young mind of the
artless boy by sensations which could not be expunged in the solitude that was
going to receive them, and, perhaps, might have an useful influence on his
future life. He conducted him to the grave of his mother, which distinguished
itself by the freshness of the clay.

"Kneel down!" said he to William, prostrating himself upon the grave: "here is
your good mother entombed; she hears us; her spirit soars round us. Do you
still recollect her?

"Yes, I do!" replied William, folding his little hands.


Conrad. Do you recollect how she called you the last time to her bed, and
folded you in her faint arms?


William. Oh! yes. (He began to weep bitterly.)


Conrad. Do you know what she said to you at that time?


William (sobbing.) She bid me to become a good man like my father.


Conrad (laying his hand upon him.) Well, my dear William, grow an honest man,
and you will be greater than the wretch who has the death of that saint upon
his conscience. Do, never forget your dear and good mother. Recollect her last
words: Grow an honest man like your father!

Conrad had gained his purpose; William's heart was deeply* affected. They
quitted the churchyard. Conrad cast a last melancholy look at the grave of the
good old Captain. No marble monument told the passing wanderer whose ashes were
resting here. Close to it was a splendid mausoleum of an usurer, founded upon
tears and groans of ruined widows and orphans.

They arrived at the village against noon. Old Conrad had made up his mind to
request a night's lodging of the first inhabitant he should meet, and in case
of failure, to apply to the clergyman, whose benevolence and humanity were
generally known.

The villagers being just employed in getting their harvest in, he went through
a great part of the place without meeting with a single person. All the houses
were open, but deserted and unguarded. The only living beings whom he saw, were
a ^ew little children who were bathing in the rivulet which ^^owed through the
village. Now and then he heard the hollow voice of a house dog.

Conrad perceived at last, before the door of a small but extremely neat house,
a man who seemed to be of a middle age, and whose whiskers made it appear that
he formerly had been a soldier. He was sitting upon a bench beneath the shade
of a lime-tree, and had a short pipe in his mouth. He rose when he saw the
strangers, taking his worsted cap off and bidding them a good day.

His looks were not repelling, and Conrad ventured to apply for a morsel of
bread and a night's lodging.

"Walk in!" said the hospitable countryman, in a good natured accent; "you are
welcome to share with me the little I can give."

He conducted them to a neat apartment, requesting his guests to sit down on a
bench, and regaling them with new milk, cheese, bread and a draught of beer.
While they were satisfying the calls of nature, the following conversation
ensued:


Conrad. What do you think, my friend? Should a tailor be able to get a
comfortable livelihood in your village?


Peasant. Why not? the village is large, and there are people enough in it. We
had a tailor when I came to live here, about eight years ago; however, he was a
lazy drunken dog, he died two years since.


Conrad. And has no one succeeded him in his profession?


Peasant. No: we have our clothes made in town.


Conrad. May I ask to whom I have the honor to speak?


Peasant (touching his cap.) my name is Unger.


Barbara. I am charged, Mr. Unger, with the pleasure of your acquaintance, and
beg your pardon for having taken the liberty of intruding upon you with my
husband and that strange boy there.


Unger. You are very welcome. You then are not the mother of that little fellow?


Barbara. No dear Mr. Unger; Heaven has not been pleased as yet to bless me
with children. He is only a beggar boy whom we have picked up.


Conrad. Wife, I advise you to speak with more propriety. He is the son of a
worthy man. Poverty is no disgrace.


Barbara. I might perhaps, be willing to be silent at your having burdened
yourself with the child of a stranger, if you had not been such a blockhead as
to quit your lucrative service in the house of his Excellency, like a fool.


Conrad. Hold your peace, Barbara! you know I am not to be trifled with in this
matter. I will tell you the naked truth at once, Mr. Unger. I am a poor man, a
tailor by profession, and my name is Conrad Spiller. I should wish to settle in
this village, if I could earn as much as would be sufficient to maintain myself
and this boy. His father is my friend, and his grandfather went with me to
school. In short, he shall not want for bread while I have a morsel to share
with him.


Unger. Here is my hand; I will assist you as well as I can. I have got a room
to spare; it is, indeed, not large, though clean and snug; you are welcome to
it, if you have none in view that is better.


Barbara. Indeed, Mr. Unger, you are too generous.


Unger. Dear Mrs. Spiller, I have a large account to settle with God, and am
glad whenever I find an opportunity of discharging a small part of my debt.


Barbara (to Conrad.) You clown, why don't you thank Mr. Unger?


Conrad. You will forgive me, dear sir; God knows, I cannot make many words on
such occasions.


Unger. Peace! peace! What I read in your eyes, gives me more pleasure than
useless words could -- (turning to William,) Well, my little ^ellow, what
profession do you intend to choose?


William. I wish to grow an honest man like my father.


Unger (with emotion.) God bless you my dear child; you will be happy if you
always keep on the road of virtue, and never have to atone for juvenile sins;
the hours of your old age will not be poisoned by stings of conscience, nor
will your sleep be broken by the tormenting dreams of a feverish fancy.

Night was setting in, and Unger said to his guest: Go to bed quietly: we will
go to church together tomorrow morning, and in the afternoon I shall introduce
you to the whole village."

Old Conrad went to his room, knelt down, and thanked Providence for the
unexpected asylum he had found. Barbara could not speak well enough of Mr.
Unger's civility. She had discovered that he was a handsome man, who looked
extremely well in his whiskers. She thought he must have saved a good penny
during the war, as he had such an excellent farm. "Yes," added she, "those who
save a penny in proper time, have something on a rainy day. However, there are
some people who have no thoughts of a futurity, and spend their money as fast
as they get it, as if we still were living in those Christian times in which
manna rained from Heaven."

She continued a good while to moralize with great volubility of tongu^^ but
when she, at last, perceived that Conrad and William were ^ast asleep, was
obliged to reserve the second part of her discourse for another time.

Conrad went the next morning with his host to church, and both (...)
themselves in the gallery, just opposite the preacher. The venerable old man
wore his own white hair, his eyes did not wander about among his congregation,
his fist did not beat the pulpit, his arms fought not with the air; his folded
hands lay quietly before him, and his artless discourse went to the heart. He
spoke of youthful sins, and observed that many a sinner continued to walk on
the road of vice, only because he thought that his amendment would come too
late. His exhortation was extremely affecting and paternal, when he addressed
those who had been deluded by the seducing phantoms of vice; when he called to
them in a heart-cutting tone, that it was never too late for a sinner to
repent, and that a pious age, which was marked with many good deeds, could
expiate a great number of transgressions.

Old Conrad perceived with astonishment, that the eye of his host grew gloomy,
and that he wiped the tears several times from his cheeks. "It is a fine
sermon," he thought: however, it could not make me weep. My host must have a
very susceptible heart."

When the clergyman concluded with the words, "Ye deluded sinners, return to
the path of virtue; come and throw yourselves into the arms of virtue and
piety; that the Lord may have mercy on your souls, when you are called hence!"
he heard him sob audibly. This appeared singular to him. "It is impossible,"
thought he, "that such a good and compassionate man could have been a villain.
What may be the cause that this sermon made such a deep impression upon him?"
He could not refrain from asking his host the reason when they went home.

"Alas!" replied Unger, pressing Conrad's hand violently, "I was a great
sinner! I killed my bosom friend in a fit of intoxication, brought the curse of
my father on myself, broke the heart of my venerable mother, was driven by
despair to turn soldier, served in the regiment of Colonel V**, assisted him in
the perpetration of many a nefareous deed, and God be praised -- was at last
restored to virtue by a young lady. I carried her violently off by order of my
Colonel. I still think to hear her say: If you once was a bad man, oh! then
make your peace with God by one good deed! This struck my hardened conscience.
Should it be possible, thought I, that God could be merciful unto me? -- I
tried to change my vicious course of life, quitted the military service eight
years ago, and, God knows, my conscience gives me the testimony that I have
succeeded."

Conrad stared with astonishment at him. "Is it possible, Mr. Unger? Did you
really serve in the regiment of Colonel V**, who now is Governor of W**.


Unger. This is the very man.


Conrad. Did you know the name of the young lady whom you carried off?


Unger. Caroline Summer, if I am not mistaken.


Conrad (raising his eyes to heaven). Providence! eternal Providence! -- Mr.
Unger, the boy who is with me, is the son of that very lady.

Unger was startled. He stopped and seemed to be anxious to read the confirmation
of this intelligence in Conrad's eyes. He threw himself at last on his neck,
and exclaimed, with tears in his eyes, God be praised that I can be grateful to
the son for what I owe to his mother. Is she alive?


Conrad. No; she died lately.


Unger. Peace be with her ashes. Come, honest Spiller; let us quicken our pace,
that I may press the boy to my heart.

My readers will probably recollect the soldier, who in the cottage in the
forest, showed more humanity than his companion, and who related his fate to
Caroline.

This unexpected discovery rendered the situation of poor William more
comfortable. Unger had, indeed, not much, but what little he possessed, he
shared willingly and honestly with him. His father had died two years since,
and enjoyed in his advanced age the pleasure of being six years an ocular
witness of the repentance and amendment of his only son. He did not trust to
external appearances in the beginning, and apprehended his son's conduct was
nothing but a farce which he acted in order to be appointed his heir. But when
four years had elapsed and every one gave his son the testimony that he was the
worthiest character in the whole parish, his paternal heart was at last
softened, he recalled his curse and exchanged it for his blessing. Unger never
rendered himself again unworthy of it. The recollection of his former
deviations from the path of virtue, rendered him more circumspect, and all his
actions were weighed in the balance of a rigorous conscience. A person who has
once lost his innocence and afterward repents sincerely, is less exposed to
the dangers of seduction than unsuspecting simplicity; and what is virtue which
never has been tried nor overcome dangers and difficulties? nothing else but
sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal.


CHAP. V.
My heart tells (...) and I believe the truth,
The hand that (...) us through the darksome maze
Of mortal life cannot abandon us
To misery; and although hope should lose
Her ground, yet let us firmly keep to this
All blessing truth. A single moment can
Often wonderfully change the fate of man.
WIELAND.
SIX years had already elapsed in uninterrupted uniformity. Conrad carried on
his profession, and as Unger let him live in his house rent free, and besides,
gave him all assistance his circumstances could afford, he supported himself
honestly. The good clergyman instructed William some hours every day with his
own children; the boy grew up, was healthy in body and mind, and would have
been completely satisfied with his fate, had not the spiteful Barbara
frequently imbittered his scanty fare and childish pleasures. She called him
every day a beggar boy, and his father a good for nothing vagabond, who never
would return again, and probably had long since died on a dunghill. This
afflicted the lad most painfully. He sat many a day in a solitary bush and
wept. Old Conrad applied indeed the horsewhip, sometimes, which always produced
a momentary calm; however he was of too peaceful a disposition to be able to
have every day recourse to that expedient, and Barbara grew daily more
fractious and spiteful, particularly after she had failed in a certain design
upon Unger's heart, probably because it was not sufficiently supported by her
charms. One day -- however we shall let the acting persons speak themselves.

(Old Conrad at his work. Barbara cutting, snarling, a piece of bread for
William.)

Conrad. Again no butter? the poor lad has been obliged to eat dry bread these
three days.

"It is not dry!" said William, dropping a tear upon it.


Barbara. Is it not good enough for him? Can he earn a morsel?


Conrad. Alas! Barbara, the world would soon be without inhabitants if all
those were to starve that cannot yet earn their bread. And who can tell whether
God has not designed him to support us, in return, when we can work no more?


Barbara. He? Indeed he looks like it! Such an idle, lazy dog --


William (caressing her). Dear mother!


Barbara. I should say nothing, if you, at least, did bring him up to your
profession, and teach him to earn his bread. However there is not the least
appearance that he will ever be able to earn a farthing. You have taken it in
your noddle to make a man of learning of him. It is soon said; but where are
the means? Very fine, indeed, to starve and to suffer want on account of the
children of other people.


Conrad. Hold your peace Barbara! I will have it so; and am certain that God
will reward me sooner or later for what I am doing for this poor orphan. The
boy shall not be a tailor, for he has an excellent genius, and he that clothes
the lilies of the fields, will take care of the means. -- He has besides no
inclination for my profession.


Barbara. So? It would be foolish, indeed, to ask such an orphan whether he has
inclination for it or no. So you little thief (clenching her fist), you have no
inclination to work, but wish to eat our bread in idleness.


Conrad. Wi^e, don't provoke me! you know me.


Barbara. Surely, do I know you, you are a foolish simpleton; the whole village
knows that you are. The boys point with fingers at you in the street. There,
say they, goes Spiller, the tailor, who educates the children of strangers, and
has nothing to eat himself, but depends on the kindness of others.


Conrad. And who ought to have cudgelled his wife to death long since, if he
were not such a good natured fool.


Barbara. What? what? cudgelled to death? you wicked good for nothing fellow!
(whining) your faithful wife, who followed you from a state of affluence to
misery, and assists by the labor of her hands to support you; her you want to
cudgel to death?


Conrad. Don't put yourself in such a passion, my dove; I did not say, that I
intend to do it, but only think there would not be much harm in it. Let us make
peace now, and give William some butter to his bread.


Barbara. I rather would grease my shoes with it, than cram every thing down
the throat of that dainty beggar-boy. (She took the key from the closet.)


Conrad. I entreat you to give him butter.


Barbara. I will not.


Conrad. Wife, I command you.


Barbara. I will not.

Conrad put his work calmly down, and was just going to arm himself with his
horse-whip, when some person knocked against the window, and a deep voice
exclaimed, "Halloo! is nobody within?"

"Come in!" said Conrad in his usual tone, and behold! a tall, thin man, whose
head almost touched the ceiling, entered the room. He was dressed in a dark
blue great coat, which was buttoned up to the chin; his sunburned face
displayed rough good nature.

"God give you a good day!" said the stranger: "what is your name?"


Conrad (surveying him with scrutinizing looks.) My name, sir?


Barbara. You need not to be ashamed of it.


Stranger. Women must be silent when men are speaking.


Barbara. Indeed! Be silent? Look only! Marry come up! Women have sometimes
more sense in their little finger than many men in their hollow skulls.


Stranger. Good old woman --


Barbara. What? old woman? You are very impertinent. If I am old, I am grown
old in an honorable way, and you are bald-headed yourself.


Stranger. I know it, I know it. Will you give me leave to say a few words to
that honest fellow there?


Barbara. Only think! I an old woman! how old do you think I am? Put your
spectacles on, man! I was a mere girl when I was married twenty years since to
that blockhead of a husband.


Conrad. Barbara, be silent, and leave us alone.


Barbara. I will not stir a step.


Stranger. Well, young woman, then, suffer me at least to speak.


Barbara. I am not used to have my tongue tied in my own house, and shall talk
as much as I choose.


Stranger (in a passion). Zounds! woman, I tell you, you shall not. With your
leave, my friend?


He opened the door and called two Negroes in. "My boys," said he, take this
woman between you, and spit in her face whenever she attempts to speak a word."

The negroes obeyed, and Barbara was silent.

Stranger. Now, friend, tell me, what is your name?


Conrad. Conrad Spiller.


Stranger. Well, Conrad Spiller, I am glad to see you again. You are grown old;
I should not have known you. Honest Conrad, I have heard a great deal of you;
indeed, I have!


Conrad (seized with astonishment.) May I ask --


Stranger. Who I am? Yes, my jewel! my name is Nicolaus Ortenberg.


Conrad (enraptured). Ortenberg!


Ortenberg. Yes, my friend, Ortenberg, Nicolaus Ortenberg. (He shakes him by
the hand.) I crave your friendship.


Conrad. Ah! Mr. Ortenberg, the friendship of such a poor man --


Ortenberg. Is always the most cordial; upon my soul it is. Dear Spiller, you
are an honest man; I recollect you perfectly well, you have rocked me
frequently on your knee. Do you recollect, at Breslaw?


Conrad. Why should I not? Dear Mr. Ortenberg, welcome, a thousand times
welcome!


Ortenberg. Have you had no intelligence of my brother?


Conrad. Alas! no. He was head master of the grammar school at W**, and
disappeared seven years ago; I have not heard a word of him since.


Ortenberg. Was my brother a schoolmaster? Fie! I don't like that? I dare say
he would not let the boys read Robinson Crusoe. But where the deuce may he be?
I hope he is not dead?


Barbara (muttering.) The vagabond!


Ortenberg looked round, and taking a needle from the table, said smiling.

"It would be less difficult to force a cable through the eye of this needle,
than to persuade a woman to check her tongue. Oh, Welli! Welli! there are also
such women among your sex. Well, Conrad, I have heard of it. There have been
sad doings here. Father and mother dead, the brother gone, God knows where? But
what is become of my brother's child? Where is he?

Conrad. Good God! my joy made me forget him entirely. William, come hither!
see, this is your uncle, of whom I have told you frequently.


William (flying toward Ortenberg). My dearest uncle!


Ortenberg (taking him affectionately in his arms.) A fine boy! tall and stout,
and an honest countenance. And you have brought him up, good Conrad? have
shared your poverty with him? you are an honest fellow! upon my soul you are! I
crave your friendship! you shall see that I am not ungrateful. No king on earth
can reward you for the love you have shown to the boy. I envy you for your
excellent heart; indeed, I do.


Conrad. I still think that I am dreaming; how wonderful are the ways of God!


Ortenberg. Yes, my jewel, there you are right, I could tell a tale -- but let
us drop this subject at present; all in good time. Come here, boy! what do you
say? you have now no father, will you be my son?


William. With all my heart.


Conrad. Did I not always say that God would not forsake the boy? Sir, it will
grieve me to part with him; I am a poor man, but he is as dear to me as if he
were my own child; I should have wished to keep him.


Barbara (almost choking with spite). It would be worth while to --


She had scarcely uttered this fragment, when the two Negroes executed their
order, and spit in her face.

Conrad. Barbara, it serves you right; why did you not hold your peace?


Barbara foamed, wiped her face, and kept her peace; for, she perceived that
the salivary ducts of the Negroes would not be exhausted so soon.

Ortenberg (smiling). Well done, my boys! What do you say, Spiller? I will
leave the tallest of them here; he is an excellent hand at spitting. -- I now
must proceed without delay to the town of Wernigerode in the Hartz. As for that
little fellow there, I shall take him with me on my return, after having
consulted with some deserving men about his education.


When William heard that his uncle was going to take him with him, and saw his
tormentor in the power of the two Negroes, he clung timidly to Ortenberg, took
him by the hand, and conjured him mournfully not to leave him an hour longer in
the house.

"Boy," said Ortenberg, "what is the matter with you? Conrad Spiller is my
friend; have you any thing to say against him?"

William. No.


Ortenberg. Come, come, let me hear what you have to say.

William looked irresolutely and fearfully, now at Conrad and then at Barbara.


Conrad. I will be plain with you. It reflects, indeed, no honor on my wife;
however, Barbara, I cannot help it, you have nobody to blame but yourself. You
must know, Mr. Ortenberg, that she teazes and torments the poor lad most
cruelly whenever I turn my back. I cannot blame him, if he is tired of it; he
will not complain of me.


Ortenberg. Woman, you are a very devil; indeed you are. Let me take her under
my care; I will send her to Java, to carry rubbish into the gold mines.


The negroes, who were the only persons in the room who knew what a terrible
punishment it is, in those hot countries, to be doomed to work in the mines,
smiled at each other, and nodded applause.

Ortenberg continued: if this be the case, I must, indeed, leave him here no
longer; for, I rather would have him to be among the Malays, than with a scold.
But what shall I do? Take him with me now? There is no room in my chaise.
Postpone my journey? that will not do; I must absolutely go to the town of
Wernigerode. (Musing a few moments). Is there no clergyman in the village?

Conrad. Yes, Sir, we have one, a dear old gentleman. He has instructed William
gratis these seven years.


Ortenberg. Did he? God will bless him for it. Come, honest Spiller, I must
press that man to my heart, upon my soul I must.


Old Conrad put his Sunday's coat on, and they went together to the parsonage.
The minister's wife received them at the door with a cheerful countenance.

"Will you take a walk in the garden? my husband is watering his flowers."

"Bravo!" said Ortenberg: "these are good aspects. I do not think, friend
Spiller, that my Negroes will have an opportunity here of making use of their
salivary talent." Welli! Welli! groaned he, when he slept into the garden, and
Conrad perceived a tear starting from his eye. The clergyman came to meet them,
and both were the most cordial friends before an hour had elapsed; for, when
two open-hearted and honest men meet, they feel in the first minute
benevolence, in the second confidence, and in the third love for each other;
and the fourth cements their hearts with indissoluble bonds. Ortenberg
attempted to force a ring of great value upon the honest clergyman, as a proof
of his gratitude for having instructed his poor nephew seven years, without
having had any prospect of being rewarded. The ring was firmly rejected. "My
heart," said the worthy man, "has rewarded me sufficiently for what I have
done; you would rob me of this reward, were you to force me to exchange it for
a jewel, which I even cannot value."

The honest seaman was sensible that the clergyman was perfectly right;
however, it grieved him to appear to be ungrateful, and no smile graced his
sunburned cheeks till he had obtained the promise from the disinterested old
man, to be entrusted with the fate of his two eldest sons. His looks brightened
instantly up, and he now scrupled not a moment to request the clergyman to take
his nephew a few weeks in his house, till he should return from Wernigerode,
which was cheerfully granted. This small number of good people seated
themselves round a table which was loaded with no other delicacies but fresh
butter and fruits; however, hilarity adorned their faces, from which no French
cook had dispelled the color of health.

Against the conclusion of the frugal meal, Ortenberg whispered a few words in
the ear of one of his negroes, who left the room, and soon returned again with
some bottles of cape-wine, a tobacco-pouch, made of buffalo skin, and a long
Indian pipe. "Heyday, children," exclaimed Ortenberg, when he saw him come;
"joy and mirth are not far off, when friends and wine are together. I can
easily perceive that you wish to know what has happened to me, during my long
absence from my native country? Alas! my friends, I have been guilty of many a
foolish action. However, I trust, God has pardoned my manifold follies. I am no
flatterer* neither to others nor to myself, and hate all flattering reptiles
more than I do a Macassar, who shoots with poisoned arrows. I will relate my
adventures to you, without palliating my errors and deviations -- I shall,
indeed, tear open many a painful wound; however, your pity will pour oil into
them!" He filled his pipe, and having replenished his glass, began as follows:

CHAP. VI.
Roving the world from pole to pole
Illumes with light the darkened soul,
Dispels the gloom of prejudice
And fills the mind with wondrous bliss.
The man who traversed sea and land,
And as to distant climes he went,
Enriched his mind with precious lore
Which to the observer every shore
And every clime affords, grows wise
And neither thinks a Paradise
This world, nor sees with darkened eyes
Naught on this globe but vanity
And splendid, dear bought misery,
He learns to love and tolerate
His brethern, sees how wisely fate
Directs the ways of man; his mind
Is stored with knowledge and refined
From foolish pride and arrogance.
He is not fettered by the trance
Of party zeal, and ever prone
To honor virtue on the throne
And in the cell of every zone.

"YOU know, children, that I left Holland clandestinely. The ship in which I
went, was designed to sail for Batavia; the captain was an honest fellow, and
had promised to procure me a place in the counting house of one of his friends
at Java. No stings of conscience tormented me; because all objects which I
beheld, were yet too new to me, and my romantic imagination was too much
occupied with visionary dreams.

The subsequent dreadful tale is literally true. If one or the other (...) my
readers should have read it already somewhere else. I hope he will read it a
second time without being angry with me for letting honest Ortenberg relate it
in his own way.
"The first four weeks of our voyage bore a very propitious aspect; the sea was
as smooth as a mirror, and the wind favorable, when suddenly, on a Tuesday, a
misfortune befell us, the bare idea of which makes my hair bristle. I was
standing on deck, conversing with the Captain, when suddenly the cry of, fire!
fire! spread terror and confusion among the crew. All our men were instantly
upon their legs, the Captain flew down into the hold, and I was close at his
heels, my heart beating violently in my breast.

"Where is the fire?"

"Here, Captain, here!" exclaimed the pale sailors, pointing at a cask. We put
our hands upon it, but could not perceive the least heat.

"Boys, you are mad!" exclaimed the Captain: "how can you make such a
confounded noise about nothing?" What is the matter?

"Every one wanted to speak first."

"Silence, my lads! let the Mate speak! The Mate related, that the cabin-boy
had gone down to fetch some brandy, and had suspended his lamp to the cask
which lay upon that from which he drew the liquor. A spark from the wick fell
unfortunately into the bung-hole, the brandy caught fire, the cask burst, and
the burning liquor got among the charcoals. Some pails of water were poured
upon the coals, and the fire seemed to be entirely extinguished.

"Water! more water! exclaimed the captain: "pour a deluge on the coals."

"The coals began to swim. "It is of no consequence!" said the Captain to me.
We went again upon deck, resuming our conversation and smoking our pipes.

"But what should happen? Half an hour after, we heard again violent cries of
fire. The Captain flew down, and I after him. It was a confounded ugly
business. The flames beat in our faces, the fire had spread among the coals,
and the danger was the more pressing as three rows of brandy casks were piled
upon one another, contiguous to the coals. An immense quantity of water was
poured upon them, when a new misfortune added to the danger of our situation.
The half extinguished coals caused such a thick, sulphurous, and benumbing
smoke, that we were in danger of being suffocated. However, we struggled
bravely against the impending danger. The Captain maintained his post like a
man, commanding his people with the greatest calmness, and the fellows relieved
each other by turns, to respire a few moments on deck. However, several of the
crew were suffocated before they could get out of the hold. I myself was
obliged to lean my head against a cask, and to turn my face toward the
opening, to draw a mouthful of pure air.

"Neither the Captain nor myself, could, at length, stand it any longer; we
were obliged to quit the hold, and I advised him to order his gunpowder to be
thrown over board. But he would not listen to my advice. "What the d -- I shall
we do, if an enemy were to attack us?" I thought being taken was not half so
bad as being blown up. However, he was of a different opinion, and the
gunpowder remained where it was.

"The fire crashed and crackled in a dreadful manner, the suffocating smoke
grew thicker and thicker, and no person could stay in the hold any longer. The
fellows took to their hatchets, and cut holes through the lower deck, pouring
floods of water down. Our long boat had been in sea three weeks, and the little
boat had also been launched, because it was in the way of our people. The
general terror was dreadful, no land or ship was near, and nothing could be
seen but fire and water. Our people slipped overboard, one after the other, and
swam to the boats, where they concealed themselves under the benches, intending
to leave us in the lurch, as soon as their number should be large enough.

"The steersman accidentally looked over board, and perceived the boats crowded
with people; those that were in the longboat, called and beckoned to him; fear
made him turn a traitor; he jumped over board and joined his companions. "But
let us at least take the Captain in!" D -- n the Captain!" replied the fellows,
"his command is at an end." They cut the cable and run away. I could not blame
them for it; for every one is his own nearest neighbor.

"I was still on the lower deck, assisting the Captain. We worked till the
sweat ran in streams from our bodies, apprehending no treachery, when our
people suddenly exclaimed, "Merciful God! we are lost; the boats have given us
the slip!" You may easily conceive how we stared when we got on the upper deck,
and saw the fugitives row briskly away. But what could we do? The Captain
ordered all the sail to be hoisted, and his people to endeavor to come up with
the traitors, being determined to run them down, if they should refuse to take
us in.

"We strained every nerve to overtake them; but Providence ordained it
otherwise. We were within a cable's length from them, when they gained the
wind, and we soon lost sight of them.

"Children," said the Captain, "make your peace with God, and redouble your
exertions, otherwise we shall be inevitably lost. Run and throw the gunpowder
overboard, before the fire reaches the barrels."

"Disorder and confusion prevailed in the vessel; some ran to the powder
barrels, others drew water, and the carpenters endeavored to bore holes into
the ship, in order to fill (...) 1 1-2 foot with water, but could not
penetrate, because the covering of her bottom was lined with strong iron
plates. When this last expedient to save the vessel miscarried also, the crew
set up the most terrible lamentations, which made my hair stand erect.

"Do not give way to despair," said the Captain, "God may yet preserve us, more
water my lads!"

"More water was poured down; despair gave us additional strength; we poured
torrents upon the flame, and the fury of the sire seemed to abate.

"However, our joy was of a short duration. The oil casks caught fire, a
circumstance which rendered our situation still more desperate. The more water
we poured upon the flame, the more furiously did it blaze, spreading farther
and farther. My senses almost denied me their service, and a cold tremor ran
through my frame. Yet we continued our labor with unabating assiduity,
carrying water into the hold, and throwing powder barrels over board. We had
already flung sixty barrels into the sea; however, there were still three
hundred left: they took fire, and the ship blew up, and was shivered into
millions of pieces in a twinkling of an eye.

"I was just standing on deck, by the mainmast, commanding sixty-three men,
who were drawing water, there being still an hundred and nineteen people on
board. We flew like lightning into the air. I expanded my arms, thought once
more of God -- which but too many do first when they are at the brink of
eternity -- and found myself suddenly in the water, among the wrecks of the
vessel.

"Love of life soon restored me to the use of my senses; I looked round me and
beheld the main. mast at my right and the foremast at my left hand I got upon
the former, and groaning, contemplated the dreadful scene of destruction which
exhibited itself to my eyes. Not one living soul besides myself was to be seen.
I was on the brink of despair, cursed the hour of my birth on account of my
impending destruction. I thought of my father without tears, of God without
murmuring, and bemoaned the juvenile rashness which had involved me in that
lamentable situation. I was already on the point of plunging into the water, to
shorten the agonies of death, when my dog raised his head above the waves and
swam toward me. Words cannot express the sensations which I felt on seeing
that faithful animal. The feelings which agitated my mind were so powerful as
to draw tears from my eyes for the first time since my infancy. "Poor fellow!"
exclaimed I, "come and die with your master!"

"The dog came nearer and crawled upon the mast; however it turned itself so
frequently under me, that I had the greatest difficulty to keep myself upon it,
and the dog was repeatedly thrown into the water. I endeavored therefore to
lay hold of a flat piece of the steerage, upon which I saved myself with the
dog.

"Fear of death had hitherto superceded every sensation of bodily pain, but I
now began to be sensible of the consequences of my fall. My backbone seemed to
be fractured, and my head was wounded in two different places. I was seized
with a kind of insensibility, and the dog licked my wounds.

"Toward evening I recovered the full use of my senses, and cast my eyes all
around in hopes of discovering the longboat. I actually saw it; but at a very
great distance. The sun was setting, and my last hopes declined with the light
of day. I began to prepare for death, Oh! my friends, the hour of dissolution
is an awful and trying one; especially when we have not acted as we ought to
have done. Conscience awakes in those moments and exercises its natural right.
That dreadful remembrancer then recalls to our recollection every folly which
we have committed, and makes us pay dear for every transgression of our duty.
We ought, indeed, always to ask ourselves, before we commit any action; would
you act thus if this were the last hour of your life? and, believe me, we then
would act differently in many instances.

"All my sins crowded on my recollection; I imagined I saw my poor father and
my mother before me. That night was the most agonizing period of my whole life.
However, I thank God for it: it recalled me to the path of virtue. I was a raw
and thoughtless young man, and nothing but such a severe trial could have made
me sensible of my errors. --

"I committed myself to the mercy of the waves all the night, and my dog whined
by my side. The darkness which surrounded me was at length dispelled by the
dawn of day, and -- imagine how great my joy was -- the longboat was not above
sixty yards distant from me. I called as loud as I could: "For God's sake, save
poor Ortenberg!

"Several sailors heard me. "Ortenberg is not dead!" exclaimed they, and rowed
toward me. However, as the piece of steerage upon which I was sitting was
entirely surrounded by the wrecks of the ship, they were afraid to come near
me, apprehending that they should run foul of the large pieces of timber which
floated on the water. They called my dog, but the faithful animal refused to
leave his unfortunate master. They desired me to swim to the boat; however, my
wounds had impaired my strength too much.

"The purser plunged at length into the water, and brought me a line which I
tied round my waist. Thus I got safely into the boat, where I met Van Hoorn,
the first mate. The crew surveyed me sometime with speechless astonishment, and
permitted me to retire to a kind of cabin in the hind part of the boat, where
two people could sit. There I recovered a little from my pains and terror.

"But what should we do now? I advised Van Hoorn to keep near the wreck till
day break, expecting we should be able to pick up some provisions, with which
our people were but scantily provided, and, perhaps, find a compass; but was
told "that the second mate, perceiving that the crew were preparing to quit the
ship, had taken it out of the cabin and gone to the bottom along with it.

"As for the provisions, Van Hoorn did not think proper to follow my advice,
although I assured him "that I had been surrounded with barrels of cheese and
salt meat the preceding evening when I had been sitting on the mast." We plied
our oars diligently, expecting we should see laud after sun rise. The sun rose,
we had lost sight of the wrecks of the vessel, but could see no land. Our
people grew quite faint-hearted. They agreed that I should be their Captain,
because they knew that I had some knowledge of navigation. I crept forth from
my little cabin to review my people who seemed to be quite exhausted with
rowing. I inquired what provisions they had, and they showed me eight pounds of
biscuit which was their whole stock.

"I forbade them instantly to row, because they had no means of refreshing
themselves. I ordered them to pull off their shirts and to make sails of them.
But where should we get thread? We were obliged to untwist the lines which were
in the boat and to shift as well as we could. We had soon patched all our
shirts together and made small sails of them. Our fellow-adventurers in the
other boat followed our example.

"Our whole number consisted of seventy-two people, namely, forty-six in the
longboat, and twenty-six in the other. They provided me, on account of my
mangled body, with a blue cloak and a blanket, the only cover which we had
saved. Our surgeon was one of those who had saved themselves in the longboat,
but had not a single medicine. He put a poultice of biscuit on my wounds, and
they mended rapidly, nature being assisted by my sound blood. I had offered my
shirt to be likewise applied for ^ails; however, my companions would not take
it.

"We sailed with a fresh breeze, and had no other guide but the stars. The day
on which I was saved by the crew of the longboat, was the twentieth of
November. -- The heat was intolerable in the daytime, the sun standing
directly over our heads, and my teeth chattered at night with cold, against
which my dog alone protected me in some degree. We were occupied on the
twenty-first of November and the two following days in composing a Jacob's
staff, to take the altitude. The ship's carpenter, who also knew something of
navigation, assisted me faithfully, and we succeeded, at last, after much
trouble, in finishing an instrument which answered our purpose tolerably well.
I drew a map upon a board, sketching Java and Sumatra, with the straight which
divides them, upon it.

"I had taken the altitude already on the first day of our misery, and found
that we were in the fifth or sixth degree of the Southern latitude, and
consequently, only about 100 miles from land. I repeated my observations every
day. We divided the seven or eight pounds of biscuits which were in our
possession, in equal shares and every one of us received his daily allowance as
long as it lasted. We also had nothing to drink, neither of the two boats being
provided with water. We spread our sails when it rained, and after they were
soaked through squeezed the water into two small casks, the only ones which we
had. This water served us in the day time to quench our thirst; an old shoe was
our goblet.

"My companions insisted notwithstanding our great want, upon my eating and
drinking my fill, alleging that they could not navigate the boats without my
advice, and that the diminution of provisions, which this occasioned would not
be much perceived. However, I took no more than the rest; and slipped now and
then a morsel into the mouth of my dog. The other boat was in as desperate a
situation as ours, and the crew apprehended, besides to be separated from us by
a storm, especially as not one of them had a sufficient knowledge of
navigation, and our boat sailed much better than theirs. They conjured us
therefore frequently to take them into our boat; however, our people would not
listen to their request, for fear of exposing ourselves to the greatest danger.

"We were at last reduced to the highest degree of misery; our biscuit was
consumed, and no land could be seen. Hunger raged in our entrails -- I was
obliged to see -- that my dog -- who had licked my wounds -- warmed my feet --."

Here Ortenberg faltered, an involuntary tear started from his eye; he
attempted several times to continue his narrative, however, his emotion denied
him the power of utterance, and his auditors could not help being affected by
the feelings of the venerable narrator, which spoke more powerfully to the
heart than words could have done. Every eye was moistened.

Ortenberg resumed at length: "Children I cannot speak of the dog; upon my
soul, I cannot!" A pause.

"However, what should happen? The crew began to murmur. I exerted my little
eloquence, to persuade them that it was impossible we could be far from land;
but I attempted in vain to pacify them.

"They told me to my face, that I imposed upon them and myself, and had steered
into the main ocean instead of sailing toward the coast.

"When we were reduced to the greatest distress, Providence sent us a great
number of mews, who hovered a considerable time over our long boat which
enabled every one of us to catch a few of them without difficulty. They were
instantly plucked and devoured raw. What a delicious meal! But what was one
meal to half-starved and emaciated people? Two leaden days more elapsed, and
the tortures of hunger returned again, with additional fury.

"Since we all must perish," exclaimed Van Hoorn: "let us die together and take
our companions into the long boat!"

"This proposal met with no opposition this time. We took the people, the oars
and sails out of their boat and left it to the mercy of the waves. We now had
fifteen pair of oars in the longboat which we divided among the rowers. We
also were provided with a foremast, a mizen-mast, a large sail and a bowsprit.
The boat was pretty roomy. I divided the crew in two parties, one of which was
sitting, while the other was working the vessel, and thus they relieved each
other by turns.

"Heaven interposed once more in our behalf sending us a great number of flying
fishes, which were as large as the largest whitings. We seized them with
avidity when they dropped into the boat, and devoured them raw. Again only a
temporary relief! We had, however, no sick among us, which surprised me the
more, as some of the crew had drank seawater, notwithstanding my pressing
remonstrances. Some gnawed their flints and balls, and others even drank their
own urine.

"Thus our distress increased every hour, and death seemed to gain gradually
upon us. Heaven sent neither rain nor mews, nor flying fishes to our
assistance, and our meagre countenances displayed the most dreadful despair.
Our people began to survey each other with a kind of savage ferocity; their
greedy looks seemed to devour the flesh of their companions. Some began already
to hint that no other expedient was left than to kill a couple of our young
people. I shuddered at that horrid idea, my heart misgave me -- I raised my
eyes to Heaven, and implored God, not to inflict severer trials on us than we
can bear. I conjured my companions in the most affecting manner to spare the
young people. I showed them my map and the observations which I had made every
day, and obtained at last, a respite of three days. However, they added, with
the most horrid oaths, that they were determined to execute their infernal
design, if we should not discover land within that time.

"Thus the leaden hours crept slowly on, and the most excruciating torments of
body and soul increased every moment. I myself was almost tempted by despair,
to agree to their savage proposal; however, we all were exhausted so much the
next morning, as to be scarcely able to stir. Few of my companions were able to
rise from their seats, and Van Hoorn could not move a limb. Although my wounds
had weakened me very much, yet I was one of the strongest, and still could
crawl from one end of the boat to the other.

The sky began to be overclouded on the 2d of December, which was the
thirteenth day after we had been shipwrecked. It began to rain violently, which
refreshed us a little. The air being calm, we could spread out our sails,
quench our burning thirst and fill our casks with water.

"I was just standing at the helm, examining my map, and concluded that it was
impossible we could be far distant from land. I even hoped that the sky would
clear up while I was on my post; and that I should descry the long sought
shore. However, the cutting wind, and the violence of the air drove me at
length away. The Quartermaster relieved me, and I crept into the midst of the
crowd, to warm myself a little.

"Not an hour had elapsed, when the sky cleared up, and the man at the helm
exclaimed unexpectedly: Land! Land! and we all were on our legs in an instant.

"The word land seemed to have animated us with new life. All were eager to see
the wishedfor shore, and thronged, pushed and pressed upon each other with so
much impatience, that I apprehended some would fall overboard. The fellow had
seen right: God be praised! we were really in sight of land. My companions wept
like children; one ran against the other, and all were frantic with joy. I had
great trouble to set them to work; however, they soon began to row as briskly
as if every one had had a leg of mutton for breakfast. We crowded all our
canvass to make the coast; however the violence of the surge prevented our
landing. We discovered at last, fortunately a small bay where we cast anchor,
leaping on shore as if the gates of Paradise had been thrown open before us.

"We dispersed instantly in the woods in search of nourishment. I threw myself
upon the ground, kissing it with weeping eyes. The first moment of safety after
we have escaped some imminent danger is unspeakably sweet. I was happier than
words can express, forgot all my losses; thought of futurity without trembling,
reflected with pleasure on the dangers which were past, and every incident
except the fate of my dog, which recurred to my recollection, afforded me
satisfaction.

"We found nothing upon the island but cocoa nuts; not even a drop of sweet
water. We regaled ourselves with the refreshing juice which the young nuts
contained, and with kernel of the riper ones.

"The juice was at that time a greater luxury to our palate than cape-wine, and
we should have been prudent had we not drank too much of it. However, people
who had fasted thirteen days, could not be expected to be moderate. We all lay
in the evening sprawling upon the ground, convolving ourselves like worms; and
our agonizing pains lasted all night.

"We dispersed ourselves in the morning over the island, but could not discover
a living soul.

"There were, indeed, in different places, vestiges of human footsteps;
however, we could find nothing but cocoa nuts.

"We filled our boat with young and ripe nuts, and weighed anchor against
evening, intending to look for the island of Sumatra, which we discovered the
next morning, the island where we had landed first, being only a few leagues
distant from it. We coasted the western shore of Sumatra while our provisions
lasted, till necessity forced us at last to land. However, this was no easy
task, the surge being extremely violent. Five of our best swimmers got safely
on shore, and ran down the coast, to see whether they could find a convenient
landing place, and coming at last to a river, made signs to us to (...) toward
it.

We did it, but were prevented from working our vessel into the river; because
a bank against which the waves broke in a furious manner, rendered its mouth
extremely dangerous. I was afraid to attempt working our boat through the
tremendous surge, without having previously obtained the general consent of my
companions. I placed them in two rows, and took the opinion of every
individual. The fellows agreed unanimously that we should brave the danger.
Well then, in the name of God, let us run the risk! I stationed two sailors
with oars at the stern to push the boat off in case of necessity, and Van Hoorn
took hold of the helm to steer the vessel through the roaring surge.

"The first wave almost filled the boat, and we were obliged to throw the water
out with our hats, shoes, and whatever implement we could find. A second wave
covered us entirely, and we were utterly incapable of making use of the helm or
the oars. (...) Boys!" exclaimed I, "preserve the equilibrium of the boat, and
throw the water out as fast as you can, le^t we shall all be lost." A third
wave came -- I recommended my soul to the mercy of God; however, the surge was
already so low, as not to be able to do us much injury, and we got safely out
of our perilous situation.

"We tasted the water, and were rejoiced to find that it was perfectly sweet.
This discovery made us forget all our past sufferings. We la^ded at the right
bank of the river, where the shore was covered with beautiful plants, amongst
which we found a kind of small figs which I had tasted when in Holland. We made
a most delicious meal. Savoury ripe figs, sweet and clear water, were a treat
which we had not expected to enjoy so soon.

Some of our people who had been roving over the island, found tobacco and
fire, which gave us reason to hope that we could not be far from an inhabited
spot. We fetched our two hatchets from the boat to cut down some trees, and
lighted large fires in different directions. My companions seated themselves
around them and enjoyed the tobacco which they had sound. We lighted an
additional number of fires against evening, and three sentinels were stationed
at the entrance of our little camp.

"The moon was in her wane; the first half of the night elapsed without any
sinister accident, except dreadful pains in our bowels, which was the effect of
our having eaten too great a quantity of figs. I had just began to feel myself
a little better, and was going to lay myself down to sleep when our sentinels
informed us that the natives were advancing in great numbers.

"The night was extremely dark; I concluded therefore that their design could
not be of the most amicable nature. Our whole store of arms consisted, besides
the abovementioned hatchets, in an old rusty sword, and we were, at the same
time, so ill, as to be scarcely able to stir.

"What should we do? We resolved at least not to die unrevenged. We assisted
each other to get upon our legs, armed ourselves with firebrands and rushed
furiously upon the enemy. The sparks flew far around, the sight was dreadful,
and the Indians took instantly to their heels. This was no more than natural;
for, how could they have known how large our numbers were? They also could not
guess that we had no other arms but a couple of hatchets and a rusty sword.

"They retreated to the woods, and we sat down again round our fires, where we
spent a very uncomfortable night; for, we started up when a lizard rustled in
the dry grass. Van Hoorn had retired to the boat, to cover our rear in case of
an attack.

"Three Indians came the next morning with the first dawn of day toward us
from the wood. I dispatched three of my people, who already had made a voyage
to India, and knew something of the language and the customs of the country, to
meet them.

"Of what nation are you?" was the first question.

"We are unfortunate merchants from Holland, whose vessel was burnt at sea, and
who are come to request some provisions of you."

"While they were treating together, the Indians proceeded toward the
longboat, to know whether we were provided with arms. However I had
anticipated their errand, and ordered the sails to be spread over the vessel."

"Undoubtedly," said our people, "we have got plenty of muskets and more powder
and ball than we shall want."

"Upon this intelligence they marched off again, and promised to bring us rice
and fowls. They kept their word, and we gave them about six shillings which we
had collected among ourselves. They seemed to be perfectly satisfied with their
bargain.

"Assume a commanding air," said I to our people, "and treat them as if you
were at home here!"

"We sat down upon the grass with apparent unconcern* and began to feast upon
our purchase.

"The three Indians staid with us while we dispatched our meal, and seemed to
admire our keen appetite.

"We enquired after the name of their island. They pronounced a great number of
unintelligible words; however, the word Sumatra was not amongst them.
Nevertheless, we were still in hopes that the island where we were could be no
other; because they mentioned Java, and pointed with their hands toward the
direction in which we supposed it must be situated.

"You cannot conceive how much we were rejoiced at the supposed confirmation of
our hopes; for, as it is not practicable to navigate the great ocean without a
compass, we apprehended constantly to rove at random on the extensive desert of
the sea from east to west, and from west to east, without ever gaining the
object of our wishes. And what was our final object? It was no other than to
reach a Dutch port, and to be again among Christians. Blockhead that I was! I
was never worse treated than among Christians, and spent the happiest time of
my life with an Heathen.

"All seemed to be well; our people were cheerful and in good health, and
impatient to quit the island; however, we were entirely destitute of
provisions. What should we do? We discovered a kind of hamlet at some distance,
and I resolved to venture going up the river in a canoe, with four of my
companions, and to buy, for the remainder of our money, as much provisions as
we could get.

"We arrived safely within a small distance of the hamlet. I sent immediately
rice and fowls to Van Hoorn, to divide them amongst our companions. As for
myself, I had a most delicious meal with my fellow-adventurers. The beverage of
the Indians, which they draw from a certain tree, was likewise not to be
rejected, and almost got into our heads.

"The islanders were standing around us, while we dined in public, and whenever
we moved our hand to the plate, followed us with greedy looks, and devoured
every morsel with their eyes, before we could carry it to our lips. When we had
finished our meal, I purchased a buffalo; however, the animal was so wild and
untractable, as to render it impossible for us to lay hold of him, or to drive
him before us.

"Time elapsed rapidly, and evening began to be setting in apace. I went
toward the boat, intending rather to return again in the morning than to
expose myself to the ferocity of the Indians. My attendants pressed me to give
them leave to stay in the hamlet all night, pretending that they should be able
to catch the buffalo in the dark. I attempted to dissuade them from their
dangerous design; however they refused to listen to my remonstrances, and I
consented at last to let them do as they pleased.

"When I had almost gained the bank of the river, I met* with a troop of
Indians, who, as far as I could guess by their gestures, were consulting
together whether they should let me pass unmolested or no. My situation was
extremely dangerous. However, I seized two of them by the arm, and pushed them
with the air of a commander who is not used to be contradicted, toward the
canoe. They looked ferociously at me but nevertheless got into the canoe, and
began to row briskly. Both were armed with a dagger, or a crid, as they call
it, and my life was consequently in their power.

"When we had proceeded a little way, the hindmost came to me in the middle of
the boat, where I was standing, and intimated to me by gestures, that he wanted
money. I took a small coin out of my pocket, and offered it to him. He
contemplated it at first with dubious looks, but at last wrapped it in a piece
of Calico, which he wore round his waist. It was but natural that his companion
also expected to receive something for his trouble. He came also toward me,
and made the same gestures. I gave him likewise a piece of money which he
turned round and round, and examined on both sides. He seemed more undetermined
than his companion, whether he should keep it or dispatch me, which he could
have done easily as I was quite destitute of arms.

"You may conceive that I was rather uneasy at my situation. I was sensible of
the greatness of the danger, and my heart beat violently. However, he kept it
at last, and we proceeded down the river with great celerity. When we had
finished nearly one half of our way, my two conductors began to talk with great
heat, and I concluded by their gestures, that they should attack me both at
once; I cannot deny that I trembled violently. I knew not what to do; and in
the agony of my heart began to sing with so loud and vociferous a voice, as
made the woods resound on both sides of the river. My conductors were seized
with a violent fit of laughter, and stared a few moments at me with
astonishment. I could conclude by their countenance, that they did not suspect
me in the least of fear or mistrust; and thus learned by my own experience,
what I frequently had heard asserted, but never would believe, that a high
degree of fear urges man to sing.

"When I perceived that this expedient succeeded, I continued to sing as loud
as I could, while the boat proceeded down the river with great rapidity. I soon
got sight of our boat, and made a sign to our people with my handkerchief
unperceived by my conductors. They saw it and fled to my assistance.

"I now endeavored to make the Indians understand that they both must stand in
the stern of the canoe, if I should be able to get on shore, because I
apprehended one of them would attack me from behind, while I quitted their
vessel. They obeyed without the least contradiction, and I joined at last my
companions without having received any injury.

"The two Indians enquired carefully previous to their return, where we
intended to spend the night? We pointed at some huts, which we had constructed
of braches and leaves. They then enquired where Van Hoorn and I intended to
sleep? We replied, "in the longboat under our sails;" upon which they got into
their canoe, and paddled away.

"I related to our people every thing that had happened to me, and gave them
hopes that we should see our companions again in the morning, with the buffalo
which we had bought. The night passed in death like stillness; the sun rose,
but we saw neither our companions nor the buffalo, and began to be very
apprehensive about the safety of the poor fellows. At length we saw two Indians
driving a buffalo; however I perceived instantly that it was not the same which
I bought the preceding day. One of our people, who had a smattering of their
language, inquired after the cause of that exchange and what was become of my
four companions. They pretended that the first buffalo had been too wild and
ungovernable, and that our people would soon follow them with a second. This
appeared suspicious to me; for the buffalo which they had brought us, was as
wild and untractable as that of the preceding day. I ordered the (...) to be
knocked on the head instantly, for fear we should lose our purchase a second
time.

"When the two blacks saw the buffalo drop down, they set up a most dreadful
howl, and from two to three hundred Indians rushed upon this signal from the
woods directly toward the longboat, probably with an intention to cut off our
retreat, and to massacre every one of us without mercy. Those of our people who
had been occupied in lighting a fire at some distance, perceived their
intention first, and apprised us of it by a signal. I raised my eyes, and saw
forty or fifty more Indians flying toward us from another side. Our situation
was desperate; however, I animated my people to be faint-hearted. "They are
naked wretches," said I; "let us fight them in the plain, and I will pledge my
word we will soon make them run away as fast as they came." However, I had
reckoned without my host. They grew more numerous every moment. Most of them
were armed with a shield, and had a short sword in the right hand.

"Let us retreat to the boat! exclaimed I, when I saw this; for it would have
been madness, if our small defenseless troop had attempted to engage immense
numbers, a grain of sand against a billow of the sea. We ran as fast as we
could toward the longboat, and those who could not run fast enough, plunged
into the river and swam on board. The enemy was close at our heels.

"We were, unfortunately, not prepared for a sudden departure, having spread
all our sails over the boat, in the form of a tent. What should we do? One part
of us made all possible haste to set the vessel afloat, whilst the rest
defended themselves with the two hatchets and the sword, as well as they could.
But what did our resistance avail? The hindmost were pierced by the zagavas (a
kind of lances with hooks) of the blacks.

"The ship's baker, a stout gigantic fellow, handled the sword with great
dexterity, and made a dreadful havoc among the blacks. I ordered the cable to
be cut, and we now rowed away as fast as our consternation would permit. The
savages pursued us into the water, but soon lost ground, and were obliged to
abandon their prey. We did all that lay in our power, to pick up our
unfortunate companions, who were swimming in the river. Those that were not
mortally wounded, came safely on board, a land breeze came to our assistance,
and wafted our vessel over the sand banks, through the rocks and the foaming
surge.

"Our enemies had expected that our vessel would be dashed to pieces against
the rocks, and had run to the outermost point of the cape; however, they were
disappointed in their expectation. We waved our hats, set up a loud shout, and
sailed away with a brisk breeze.

I examined the wound of the brave baker, as soon as we were out of danger and
perceived that it had been inflicted with a poisoned lance. It was above the
navel, and the surrounding parts had already turned black. I began to cut out
large pieces of flesh, to prevent the poison from spreading farther, but the
pains which the poor fellow suffered, were to no purpose; he dropped down dead at
my feet, and we committed his body to the waves.

"I counted my companions, and found that sixteen were missing, eleven having
been killed on shore. The fate of our four companions, whom I had left in the
hamlet, was unknown to us; however, we had the greatest reason to apprehend
that they had become the first victims of our ferocious enemies.

"We sailed along the coast. Our whole sto^k of provisions consisted only in
eight fowls and a little rice, upon which fifty people were to feed. We were
soon compelled by hunger to go on shore a second time. A troop of people took
to slight when we landed. We had no hopes of obtaining provision from them,
considering the unfavourable reception which their countrymen had given us.
However, we found sweet water, and the rocks with which the shore was lined,
afforded us oysters and muscles, which we ate with great relish, and seasoned
with black pepper, of which I had bought a whole hat full in the hamlet.

"After we had appeased the cravings of hunger, we filled our pockets with
oysters and muscles, replenished our casks with water, and went again on board.

"I proposed to my companions to steer farther into the middle of the sea, in
order to be able to make more way in a shorter time. They followed my advice;
but what was the consequence? A dreadful tempest overtook us at night and
tossed us about in a most unmerciful manner. We apprehended every moment to be
buried by the mountainous waves, but nevertheless rejoiced at having altered
our course. Had we continued to sail along the coast, the tempest would,
undoubtedly, have dashed us against a rock, or we should have been compelled to
land in the nearest bay, the inhabitants of which, as we afterward learned,
were sworn enemies to the Dutch, and persecuted them with fire and sword.

"The tempest abated at daybreak, and we perceived three islands which lay
close before us. We resolved to go on shore, because we expected to find some
nourishment, though they seemed to be uninhabited. We shaped our course to that
which was nearest, and found that it was entirely overgrown with bamboo as
thick as a man's leg. Necessity teaches us to turn almost any thing to
advantage. We excavated a great number of the thickest bamboos from top to
bottom, filled them with water and closed them carefully. Thus we had
multiplied our two water casks. We also found palm trees on the island, the
fruit of which served to appease our hunger. But this was the only sort of
provisions which we could find. We roved the whole island in every direction,
however could find nothing but palm trees and bamboos.

"The next morning, at sun rise, I climbed up to the top of a high mountain
which lay before us, having a secret presentiment that I should make an
important discovery. I stood there and gazed a good while to no purpose; my
looks wandered over the immense creation of God. Having gazed till my eyes
ached, I thought I perceived two high blue mountains at a very great distance.
I recollected that Hans van Shouten, my former master, God bless him, who had
been twice in the East Indies, had told me frequently that two high mountains
were on the island of Java, which seemed to be blue at a certain distance. I
concluded further: we came to this island when we had the coast of Sumatra to
our lest, these mountains are to the right, my eyes rove through the space
which is between them, without descrying land; there is a strait between
Sumatra and Java -- hurray! we are on the right tract!

"I skipt down the mountain as swift as a do to call Van Hoorn, and to
communicate my discovery to him; however, the clouds had concealed the blue
mountains before we could reach the spot from whence I had seen them. Yet I was
certain of their existence as I had clearly seen them. Van Hoorn agreed that my
conjecture was not improbable, and we went down again to inform our companions
of it.

"The joy of our people cannot be described, they sung and danced as they
carried dates and bamboos filled with water into the boat. The wind was
favorable; we weighed anchor and directed our course toward the blue
mountains.

"We saw a fire at midnight, and thought a long time that it proceeded from a
ship; however, it was on an island which lays in the entrance of the strait. We
had scarcely passed it, when we perceived again fire on the opposite side, and
found that it was burning in a fishing boat. We were becalmed toward
daybreak; however -- thank God! we were already near the coast of Java without
knowing it.

"A sailor who had climbed up the mast, exclaimed suddenly that he saw a fleet,
and counted three and twenty ships. Our joy was greater than words can express;
we danced, sung, and embraced each other with tears. We steered toward the
fleet as soon as a slight breeze got up. Heavenly Providence! (Ortenberg pulled
his hat off, and a tear glistened in his eyes) it was a Dutch fleet, and we
threw ourselves into the arms of our countrymen and friends.

"The Admiral, Van Ternaer, was just standing in the gallery with a
spying-glass, and being struck by the singularity of our sails and appearance,
sent his boat to meet us. Good God! the people who were in it were
acquaintances of our's; we had sailed together from the Texel, and afterward
were separated.

"They took me and Van Hoorn into the boat and brought us on board of the
Admiral's ship. All the sailors gazed at us with astonishment, and Van Ternaer
received us like brothers. It should seem that he perceived by our looks that
we were hungry; for he ordered the cloth to be laid instantly and sat down with
us to dinner. Good God! how was I affected when I saw bread again! my heart was
straitened, the tears started from my eyes, and I was not able to swallow a
morsel for some time. The rest of our people joined us soon after, and were
divided amongst the ships.

CHAP. VII.
Religion is an empty name
When virtue is not in her train.
The man whose deeds ^espeak his love
For what is noble, just and good,
Is truly pious, whether Zeus
Or Allah, whether Tien or God
Be called by him the source of bliss.

"ALL this was very well," continued the honest tar: but what was I now to do
to get a livelihood? My romantic ideas had been corrected pretty well, my
desire for adventures had abated, and, now I began to ask myself where I should
get bread?

"We arrived at Batavia; the people crowded around myself and my companions,
stared at us, listened to us with open mouths, and shuddered at our tale;
however that was all. Not one of them thought of covering our nakedness or
appeasing our hunger; and I confess I rather would have starved than solicited
alms.

"I had, fortunately, applied closely to drawing in my youth, and now could
easily delineate something upon a piece of parchment which looked like a human
figure. I drew a great number of such figures as my imagination suggested. Some
with hats and some with turbans, and sold them for Roman and Turkish emperors.
I roved in this miserable manner from one town to the other, visited Balambuan,
Panarucan, Tuban, and came, at last, to Bantam in the bay of Jacatra.

"You must know that Bantam is a considerable place where an extensive trade is
carried on. You can see there at nine o'clock in the morning, people of almost
all nations assembled in the market place; Portuguese, Arabs, Turks, Malayes,
Abyssinians, Chinese, Peguans, Bengales, Guzurates, and Malabares. One might
think it Heaven where people of all nations are to meet. You will see there no
useless disputes about belief or unbelief, for every one serves God in his own
way and makes no words, as it ought to be.

While I was standing there and gaping at the motley assemblage, and watching
for an opportunity to earn a morsel of bread, I heard suddenly some person
behind me speak German. I thought it music from another world. My head turned
mechanically toward the spot whence the grateful sounds proceeded, and I
perceived a man of a middle age, with an open countenance, which inspired
confidence, discoursing with another man, who, as I afterward learned, was a
Hambro' Captain.

When they had finished their conversation, and the Hamburger had left him, I
took courage, went up to the man with the good natured countenance, and said:
"Sir, I am a poor German, a countryman of yours. Your countenance tells me that
you are an honest man; I conjure you to do a charitable deed, and to assist a
shipwrecked wretch who has lost all his property. I wish to get my bread by the
labor of my hands, but have no opportunity of getting an honorable
livelihood; for no one has confidence in a naked fellow, but I neither should
like to beg, nor could do it.

"The man surveyed me from top to toe.

"Welcome! countryman!" said he at last: "I rejoice to do a work of charity. I
do not want your services, but will assist you as well as I can."

"He then took me to his house, gave me to eat and to drink, and abstained from
all troublesome questions, till I had appeased my hunger. But when I had
finished my meal, he began to examine me, and to enquire from what place I
came. I gave him a faithful account of my adventures, and informed him without
reserve of the follies I had committed. I thought it better to confess my
errors than to conceal them; for, we are all poor sinners, and lock up or
dissipate the talent which the great treasurer in Heaven has lent us, to pay
for our entrance into the next world. My frankness gained the heart of the
worthy German.

"Mr. Ortenberg," said he to me: "you are an honest man. The grief which you
have caused to your aged father, was early punished by Providence with trouble
and affliction. You now have had an opportunity of coming to a proper sense; I
dare say you have discarded your romantic notions, and beg you will ponder the
proposal which I am going to make to you. I am a native of Thuringia; my name
is Christian Shwarz I have lived twenty years on this island; God has prospered
my diligence, and I am a rich man. My domestics love me and I enjoy the esteem
of my fellow-citizens. However, what are love, regard, and wealth, if we cannot
enjoy them at the spot where we were born, if the companions of our juvenile
days with whom we grew up, do not see and share our prosperity? The voice of my
native country calls loudly in my bosom; I have sold all my plantations, and am
going to return in a few weeks on board of a Hambro' vessel to my dear Germany.
If you will keep me company, I will defray the expenses of your voyage, and
restore you to the arms of your father, who will receive you joyfully.

"This was, indeed, a good and sensible proposal, and came from a worthy and
honest man; but was it possible I could have accepted it? No, indeed, not! No,
said I, I cannot accept your generous offer; God knows, I cannot. I must first
endeavor to become a man of whom my father needs not to be ashamed. It would
kill me were I obliged to return to my parents as a beggar. Let the
consequences be what they may; I shall not return to my native country in this
state."

"The kind remonstrances of honest Christian Shwarz were thrown away upon me. I
could not bear to think that my townsmen should point at me in the streets, and
whisper: "There goes that fool who dreamed of finding golden mountains in the
Indies, and now is glad to be permitted to put his feet again under his fathers
table. What a scourge is that good for nothing fellow to his parents!" No, I
rather would be the slave of a Malay, rather moisten the sugar plantations with
my sweat, than become a laughing stock to my townsmen.

"When the honest Thuringian saw that he could not persuade me to return to my
native country, he counted down -- it sounds fabulous, but God knows he did --
he counted down a thousand ponnes in gold and silver fannons. About 625 pounds
sterling.
"Take this money," said he in a tone as if he had given me a glass of water;
"and do not thank me. I am a rich man, and returning to my country with
treasures which would enable me to buy a principality, if I were a lover of
principalities. I intended to make, previous to my departure, a present of a
gold calix, a rich covering for the altar, and the like to the Dutch chapel.
Man believes frequently that he can pay his debts to God by such nonsensical
gifts; however, I think it is much better to assist a worthy sufferer with the
sum which was designed for that purpose. This is more acceptable to God than a
gold calix. Take it my friend, and go with your money to the coast of
Coromandel, where you will find a thousand times more opportunities of making a
fortune than here. I wish you a happy journey. Forget not to pay a visit to old
Christian Shwarz, when you once come back again to Germany.

Oh, my friends, seventeen years are now elapsed since Christian Shwarz left
the Indies. I still think I see him in the harbor of Bantam, where he went on
board of the Hambro' vessel; I still imagine that I feel the last honest shake
of his hand, and to hear him call to me from deck:

"Farewell, Ortenberg! and when you return to Germany, forget not to spend a
few days in the town of Wernigerode!"

"The ship got under sail, and in a short time was borne from my view by a
rising gale. I stood on the pier, and wept till sunset, and slept very little
that night. But let us proceed!

"I now had a thousand ponnes in my pocket. My benefactor had enjoined me not
to stay at Java, and I had besides, no inclination to remain there. I hired a
place in a jonke which was to carry pine apples to the continent (for you must
know that Java produces the best ananas in the Indies). I passed Sumatra and
came into the bay of Siam, whence I proceeded, after a short stay, to Ceylon, I
went from the latter island to the coast of Coromandel, visited Negapatnam,
Karikal, Pondicherry, Madras, Masulipatnam, and thus approached gradually the
gulf of Bengal.

"I was still irresolute how I should lay out my thousand ponnes, whether I
should traffic with pepper, ging^ms, or printed callico.

"One day I happened to take a solitary walk into the woods near Bengal, musing
on my honest father, my old mother, and my native place. A sweet melancholy
stole by degrees upon my mind. The delightful notes of the chaffinch of Bengal,
the plaintive song of the Bulbul, the wild accents of the Buzzard, the chirping
of the little Quail of Gingi, and the harmonious song of the ^usted lark of
Malabar, produced strange and involuntary sensations in my heart. I wiped many
a melancholy tear from my cheeks. My imagination roved over the immense ocean
to my country and the place of my nativity, where I had inhaled my first
breath, and recalled to my mind those blissful days of childish innocence, when
the pond on the margin of which I was went to play, appeared to me larger than
the sea which now lay before me; when Breslau seemed to me to be a world, and
when I hung with gazing eyes on the lips of my father, while he related after
supper, accounts of the fabulous Indies and their astonishing treasures.

"Alas! I would have given all the gold of the Nabobs in that moment, if I
could have filled the tobacco pipe for my father, sat down by his side on the
straw stool which used to stand in a (...) behind the stove, and hear him
describe only what now was before my eyes. I still fancy to hear my honest old
father relate his artless tales, which he kindly adapted to my childish
capacity, till the clock which stood in the right corner of the parlour struck
t^n, when he emptied his pipe, pouring his last drop of beer on the embers,
offered me his hand to kiss it, took the key of the street door from the table,
and retired to his bed chamber."

Here honest Ortenberg was deeply affected -- and attempted several times in
vain to speak.

"I can dwell no longer on this subject," stammered he at length, while a big
tear glistened in his eyes: Friend Spiller you knew him!"

A solemn pause. All were powerfully affected. "Good old father!" exclaimed
Ortenberg, raising his eyes and hands to Heaven: "you have forgiven me my
follies; I am sure you have; and when we meet again, wherever it be, you will
receive me with that cordial shake of the hand with which you bade me farewell;
will call to me: "Welcome my son;" with the same kind and paternal voice with
which you said: "God bless you my son!" yes I am sure, you will! -- and now --
children, continued he, while he dried his eyes, don't mention a word more
about my father, if you wish that I should relish my glass of wine."

Another pause. Ortenberg had collected himself. "I was taking a walk, as I
told you, and unexpectedly found myself bewildered in the wood. I knew not
which way I should turn. While I consulted with myself which direction I should
take, I heard suddenly a murmuring of water, and perceived that I was near a
rill: I was dry and proceeded toward it, when I was dry and proceeded toward
it, when I was met by a girl of uncommon beauty, carrying a pitcher with water.
Her taper form was wrapped in a piece of chintz, an apron made of the wool of the
sheep of Tibet, floated from her waist, and twelve gold rings were fastened
round her arms and above her ancles. The palm of her hand was tinged with the
roseat juice of mindi leaves, and the ^ustre of her eyes was set off by a black
semicircle. Gold and silver chains adorned her beautiful neck; her diamond
earrings added little to the luster of her charms: her hair was anointed with
cocoa oil, and wreathed round a gold pin.

"She surveyed me with apparent satisfaction from head to toe, while she passed
me, skipping lightly over the grass, and uncovered her swelling bosom. The girl
thought I, must surely be an harlot; but I was mistaken; for I knew not that an
unmarried Indian who has had a good education, is obliged to uncover her bosom,
when she meets a person that belongs to one of the higher casts, or an European.

"This is a civility which the fair ones of the East perform with as much
unconcern as our ladies make a curtsey; and to be plain, I confess that this
custom appears to me to be more consistent with propriety, than the curtsies of
our ladies, which reduces a woman to a very awkward posture, that, indeed, does
not strike us, because we are used to it.

"The swelling bosom of the fair Indian, which was not squeezed up by a corset,
made me forget to quench my thirst, and deaf to the harmonious strains of the
tufted lark of Malabar. I stopped, and the Indian followed my example. We
looked at each other and seemed to be mutually inclined to enter into
conversation. My European notions of propriety and impropriety prevented me
from accosting her; but the beautiful child of nature, who was a stranger to
the burdensome prejudices of the Western hemisphere, obeyed the dictates of
her heart.

"Stranger, do you want to drink?" said she, with a bewitching sweetness.

"Yes, sweet girl, I want to drink! replied I with a kind of voluptuous tremor.

"She came to me, offering her pitcher, and I drank. The cape-wine here is,
indeed, not bad; however, I never relished a liquor so much as the water which
I received from the hands of smiling innocence.

"I thank you, my pretty girl; stammered I. "Who are you?

"I am Welli" replied she: "the daughter of the pious Bramin Akbar, who lives
not far from here in a Sholtre. Sholtre a building for the accommodation of
weary travelers.
Come with me; I will dress a dish of cange Cange, boiled rice water.
for you."

"Could I have done better than to accept the offer of the hospitable Welli? "I
like you," said she to me on the road: "do you like me too?"

"I squeezed her hand, a language which is understook in all countries. I had a
waistcoat with glass buttons on; Welli wished to have one; I gave it to her,
and she pressed me in return to accept of a diamond ear-ring.

"Why don't you take it?" said she.

"Because it is worth ten times more than my glass button!

"It is false," replied Welli; "your button is larger; I shall have it set in
gold, and wear it on my finger.

"I was obliged to put the ear-ring in my pocket; for she threatened to beat me.

"We at last arrived at the sholtre, which was not far distant from a pagoda,
dedicated to the service of Wishnu. Her father, Akbar, a venerable old man
whose head was shaved, met us at the door. His dress consisted of a piece of
Calico which was wrapped round his waist; his shoulders were covered with the
ashes of cow dung, and his forehead was marked with three strokes made with
sandal wood and saffron.

"Stranger, be welcome!" said he: walk in and sit down at the table of old
Akbar, eat of his rice and drink of his cange.

"I accepted his invitation with pleasure, because I was as hungry as an Indian
wild cat. The lovely Welli skipped busily to and fro, stroked my hair back
every now and then, and played with my glass buttons. Evening was setting in,
it was too late for me to return to my lodgings; Akbar ordered a couch to be
prepared for me, upon which a slept but very little, because the image of the
amiable Welli was constantly about me, near me, and within me; upon my soul it
was.

"The next morning I saw old Akbar go to the rill; he took some water in the
hollow of his hand, and sprinkled it before and behind him, and against the
rising sun. "Praised be Brama!" exclaimed he three times, and then bathed
himself. This ceremony, which is called Sandiwane, and is performed every
morning, is, in my opinion, by far more rational than the fumigations of
Europeans at the shrines of their saints.

"Welli now made her appearance; she was dressed with more care and splendour
than the preceding day; the semicircle over her eyes was blacker, the palm of
her hand tinged with a deeper hue, and I was vain enough to think she done it
on my account.

"Beautiful Welli," said I to her, "I love you."

"If you love me," replied she, "you may marry me."

"How can I, who am a stranger in this country marry you."

"Do the strangers never marry in your country?"

"Your father will not entrust the happiness of his daughter to a stranger."

"But I love you."

"I do not profess your religion."

"Are you an honest man?"

"Yes, I am."

"I love you, if you are; and my father will not refuse us his consent."

"If you think so, I will go and speak to old Akbar."

"Do so," replied the amiable Welli; I will go in the mean time, and wreath
flowers round the Lingham. The translator is sorry that the laws of decency
forbid him to explain this ceremony, although the custom be a very sacred one
among the ladies of the East, who perform it with sincere devotion, and without
conceiving an impure idea. If, however some of the fair readers of this tale
should not care to gratify their curiosity at the expense of a few blushes,
they will find it explained in the Universal History, Vol. vi. p. 634 -- 636.
And in Mr. Mac Intosh's Voyage.


"When a lover, in the Indies wants to apply for the hand of his mistress, he
takes thirty ponnes in his hand, goes to her father, and says: The gold is
yours and the girl is mine! The business is settled at once, if the father
replies: The gold is mine, and the girl is yours! I had heard of that custom at
Masulipatnam: and therefore counted thirty ponnes in my hand, went to the
Bramin and said:

"Venerable old man, (...) gold is yours and the girl is mine!

"The old man was startled, looked doubtfully at me, and pulled my hand gently
back.

"Softly, stranger," said he, "does my Welli love you!"

"She does."

"Will you love me also?"

"I shall."

"Will you live with me? nurse me in my old age? and serve my God?

I started. Serve your God!" stammered I. Akbar smiled. "Young man," said he
with dignity: there is but one God. Let us forget the distinctions which the
Vedam and the bible make. He, who created millions of worlds, preserves them,
and once will regenerate them, is the object of my adoration. Fear and praise
the Creator, abstain from doing wrong, do as much good as you can, search after
wisdom, condemn no person, honor the old, warn the young, raise the falling,
give to the poor, reflect upon what you was, and consider what you will be. Oh,
my son, you will die quietly if you have acted up to these principles. No
stings of conscience will torment you in your last hour, and you will be well
received by your judge. This is my creed; is it yours also?"

"The solemn tone in which the venerble old man spoke, affected my heart. I
clasped him in my arms, notwithstanding the cow dung on his shoulders.

"Be my guide on the path of wisdom," said I with emotion: "Be my father in a
twofold manner!"

"If I am to be your father," replied Akbar, you must comply with the manners
and customs of our country. There is but one religion in the world; the mortals
of the whole globe bend their knees only before one God. However, the ignorance
of men has infinitely multiplied the manner of worshipping the Supreme Being,
though it should be as simple as possible. Despise none of these different
modes of worship, on account of the weak; call none of your brethren an
heretic; ridicule none. If you wish to obtain the hand of my good Welli, you
must dress yourself like a Tamulian; I must instruct you two months in the
language and customs of my nation. At the expiration of that period, you may
come and say in the presence of my relations, the gold is yours, and the girl
is mine, and I shall reply, the gold is mine, and the girl is yours.

"I agreed willingly to every condition that could insure me the possession of
the charming Welli. The two months appeared indeed as long to me as if they had
been years; however a kind look of my bride made me a docile pupil. Akbar
frequently surveyed me with scrutinizing looks; however my frank and open
disposition gained me his confidence.

I learned in a short time, to wash the Lingam, and to perform the Sandiwane,
with as much dexterity as if I had been brought up to it. The probationary time
was elapsed, and -- Welli became my wife.

"Akbar took me aside the next day and said, "Young man, I have entrusted you
with the greatest treasure I possess; it is therefore just I should put you
also in possession of that which is of less value to me. Come and follow me!"

"We proceeded silently toward the neighboring forest; the old man led the
way and I followed him full of expectation. He conducted me by unbeaten paths
through wild and intricate bushes, and stopped at length at the mouth of a
cavern, which was covered with low shrubs.

"We stepped into a cavern, I perceived the glimmering of a small lamp at the
bottom; my conductor bade me stop, fetching the lamp, and lighting several more
which hung in different parts of the cavern.

"Heavens! what a spectacle for a greedy European. Large heaps of gold and
silver, diamonds and pearls lay before me. I was almost petrified. I had
imagined myself to be rich, because I had a thousand ponnes in my pocket, and
there lay a thousand times thousand pieces of gold, which bore the coinage of
all trading nations.

"You are astonished," said Akbar: "this treasure is indeed not the fruit of my
diligence, however, it also is, not the fruit of a crime. We Bramins are
obliged to live entirely upon alms, with which the superstition of the people
provides us, sometimes sparingly, and sometimes, richly, according to the
degree of their affection and regard. We are, strange to tell, prohibited to
work, the people pay us for our idleness, and I have been told this is also the
custom of your country.

"I have been a servant in the pagoda, from which we are coming during forty
circumvolutions of the sun. I had a father -- he went long since to the
blissful habitations of Wishnu, who taught me early to walk the paths of wisdom
and virtue. He instructed me to compute the course of the heavenly bodies, in
the art of making almanacks, and in the knowledge of medical herbs and roots.

"All this gained me a name in the adjacent country, the people flocked to my
pagoda, either to peep behind the curtain of Nature, or to be cured of
diseases; or only to gaze at me. None came with empty hands; the rich brought
me diamonds and gold, and from the poor I took only a nosegay.

"Here is all the wealth which I have treasured up these forty years for my
dear Welli, and now deliver to my dear son-in-law. You must, however, promise
me, neither to leave me, nor to touch this treasure till my eyes be closed.
Swear by your and my God!

"I complied with this request. Akbar clasped me to his heart, extinguished the
lamps, and returned to the pagoda* There I spent the happiest days of my life
in the arms of my dear Welli, and by the side of that excellent old man, and
learnt to estimate men by their intrinsic worth, and not by the forms of prayer
which they frequently utter mechanically, without meaning any thing by it. We
had no occasion for ^he treasure in the cavern; we wanted little, and had a
treasure within ourselves more precious than all the wealth of the Indies. Yes,
my friends, I have learnt that confidence in the goodness and wisdom of God,
cheerful submission to his paternal decrees, obedience to his holy laws,
moderation of our passions, purity and good will toward mankind, enable us to
be satisfied with little to insure happiness in this world, and to meet
futurity without trembling.

"I meditated frequently to send a part of our useless wealth to my old father,
but did not know how to accomplish my design. I could have applied to a Dutch
merchant of Masulipatnam, however Akbar opposed his whole paternal authority to
the execution of this plan, because he knew better than myself how much this
would have exposed me to the fanatic persecutions of the European missionaries,
to whom I might have been betrayed.

"I am old, and on the brink of the grave, (...) said he frequently to me: "I
shall certainly soon pass over (thus the Indians express the idea of dying,)
and then you may embark with Welli, for your native country, if she be inclined
to it."

"I was obliged to submit, and submitted without reluctance, for Welli loved
her father with an unspeakable ardour. The fatal hour in which the spirit of
honest Akbar was to return to the benevolent Being who had created it, at last
drew near. He died without a groan, a tranquil smile remained on his clay cold
countenance.

"This was a melancholy day. Welli tore her hair, smote her breast, and rolled
herself on the ground. All this is customary in the Indies; however, her agony
was something more than the mere effect of custom. A crowd of women flocked to
the pagoda, as soon as Akbar's death was known, and sung mournful dirges. I
cannot express how this affected me. The Bramins performed various rites, and
at last laid the corpse upon a palankin, adorned with flowers, and preceded by
two men, with a kind of wind instruments, which caused a most dismal sound, and
a great number of muffled drums. I supported my Welli; we followed the palankin
with tearful eyes. When we came to the pile, which had been erected of Sandal
wood, I was desired to set fire to it, because I was regarded as the head of
the family; a melancholy duty, which I performed with a bleeding heart.

"Welli dropped fainting on the ground when the flame blazed aloft. I took her
in my arms, and carried her home. We spent several gloomy months, shaved our
heads, and covered our faces, according to the custom of the East.

"The healing balsam of time restored at last, part of our lost tranquillity to
us; however, neither I nor Welli wished to stay any longer at that melancholy
spot. But -- oh, my friends! -- I am now coming to a period of my life which
has destroyed my peace for ever. Let me weep, and if you can, weep with me; it
will afford me some consolation. My Welli, my dear, good and gentle Welli, was
stung by a rattle-snake, and died in my arms a few hours after.

"God, thou have made me empty the bitterest cup of affliction! all other
sufferings which thou perhaps have reserved for me, will certainly be trifling
in comparison with that unspeakably painful blow! our most ardent wishes were
accomplished -- Welli was pregnant -- but, alas! oh weep with me, my friends,
and let me not weep alone! -- she was so good, so gentle, and so loving -- oh!
oh! let me not weep alone!

Ortenberg shed a torrent of bitter tears; all wept with him; these were
obsequies more valuable than any of those can be that are performed in honor
of the gods on earth. He recollected himself again at last, after a long and
painful struggle "My friends," resumed he, "you now know my story. I performed
the last melancholy duty which I owed to my Welli, and could not have staid a
day longer in a place where every object which I beheld recalled to my mind my
former happiness, which, alas! will never return again. I put my treasures on
board the first vessel that sailed, and returned to my native country.

"I am now here to weep a filial tear on the ashes of my parents, to make my
brother happy, and to visit my honest Christian Shwarz at Wernigerode. When I
have executed this, I shall willingly lay down my head, and depart to my
eternal home, where my Welli and honest Akbar are waiting for me."

CHAPTER VIII.
We toil through life and bear the toils
Of this vain world with cheerful hearts,
Upheld by hope, anticipate
An age of bliss, when all at once
The air-built castles are dissolved
Like a deceitful morning dream
That cheats the prisoner in his dark
And lonely cell. He dreams of feasts
And scenes of heart-expanding bliss,
And ah! awakes in fetters chained.

WHEN Ortenberg had finished his affecting tale, the rays of the lights
reflected thousand-fold from the tears which glistened in the eyes of his
auditors. He lighted his pipe again, cast his eyes on the ground, and puffed
the smoke of his pipe as rapidly and violently from his mouth, as if he were
determined not to let his grief g^in time to break out in tears.

"My friends!" exclaimed he at last; "to tear up a wound which scarcely is
healed, is painful in the extreme; however, your melancholy silence -- your
tearful eye -- does my heart good! But, no more of it. -- Well, young gentleman
(turning to William), which way are you inclined? what profession do you wish
to learn?

William. I wish to become an honest man, like my father.


Ortenberg. Bravo, my son, if you have not learnt that phrase by heart. Who has
taught you these words?


William. Ah! they were the last words of my dying mother.


Ortenberg. You are a good boy for remembering them; but no more of it, lest we
should be melancholy again. -- An honest man! this is the main point. However,
there are honest men in all ranks; their number is, indeed, small, but thank
God, honesty is not yet entirely out of fashion. What profession should you
prefer to learn?


William. I should wish to learn every thing, to be fit for any occupation.


Ortenberg. Well said, my lad! However, this is no easy task. But never mind!
strive to learn as much as you can, and you will learn at least something
useful. But let me tell you, my son, that nothing is more deceitful than the
picture which our glowing juvenile fancy draws of futurity; nothing is easier
overturned, than the castles of our imagination, adorned with love, honor and
wealth! Never say, I will steer no other course but this: a single step, a
look, the most trifling action of your life can turn the course of your fate.


Having said this, he rose, emptied his pipe, and begged to be shown to his
bed-room. The wife of his venerable host had prepared her bridal bed for him.
It was covered with a silk quilt, which was embroidered with a great variety of
flowers, and provided with chintz curtains, to keep off the rays of the morning
sun. Useless preparations! Ortenberg never slept in a bed. "I am always
terrified," said he, "when I sink all at once into a sea of feathers, and the
bed billows join over me; my bosom is straitened, and I cannot sleep." His
negroes spread a couple of blankets upon the floor* laid a pillow upon them,
and his couch was ready.

He awoke in the morning with the first dawn of day and got up. Impatience and
joyful expectation would not let him sleep, and whenever he closed his eyes, he
dreamed of Chistian Shwarz, and his imagination anticipated the raptures of
surprise which his sudden appearance would cause his benefactor, and the
pleasure which the communication of his adventures would give him.

He ordered the carriage to be got ready, and took leave of his venerable host.
"Farewell, my worthy friend," said he: "my heart urges me to be gone without
further delay. I shall return to you as soon as I shall have done chatting with
my dear Christian Shwarz. I then shall consider more maturely, what is to be
done concerning this boy; for I cannot do it now, because my imagination is too
much occupied by other objects, which absorb all my faculties of thinking!" He
got into the carriage and arrived two days after at the town of Wernigerode in
the Harz.

When he came to the turnpike, a drunken gate keeper asked him who he was, and
whence he came? Ortenberg informed him of both, under the condition that he
also should satisfy his curiosity, and tell him whether Christian Shwarz lived
in the town and was well?

"Christ -- shan -- Shwa -- Shwarz?" stammered the gate-keeper: "he has given
the slip to his physician and is well."

"I am glad of it, replied Ortenberg, and ordered the postillion to go on. When
he turned round the corner of a street, he met a funeral procession. "My friend
said he to one of his gaping spectators: "can you tell me where Christian
Shwarz resides?"

"There in that coffin!" replied the fellow coolly. Merciful God!" exclaimed
Ortenberg: "Good Christian Shwarz! -- must I see you in your coffin! shall I
not be able to thank you before we meet in a better world?

A torrent of tears gushed down his sun burnt cheeks; he jumped out of his
carriage and mixed with the mourners. No black crape bespoke his grief;
however, the copious streams of tears which started from his eyes, the silent
agony which his features expressed, displayed sufficiently the sorrows that
convulsed his bleeding heart. -- All gazed at the stranger -- "You are
astonished at the violence of my grief?" exclaimed Ortenberg in mournful
accents: "alas! he gave me a thousand ponnes when I was naked and starving."

The honest citizens of Wernigerode who knew not what a ponnes is, thought his
intellects were deranged. One of the attending clergymen went up to him asking
him; whether he had known the deceased?

"Yes, I knew him!" groaned Ortenberg: I knew him, indeed! he gave me a
thousand ponnes when I had not a kauri in my pocket."

The clergyman who contrary to the custom of his colleagues, knew something
more than to dispense the benediction and to rail against heretics and
infidels, recollected to have read that kauris are a kind of little shells
which serve instead of small cash on the coast of Coromandel and Malabar. "I
suppose" said he: "you knew our deceased friend in India?"

Ortenberg. Yes, dear Sir, I saw him the first and last time at Bantam. There
he gave me a thousand ponnes, when I earned my bread by painting Turkish and
Roman emperors. He made me promise to visit him on my return to Europe; and now
when I am come to keep my word I find him in his coffin.


"He is happy!" said the clergyman: he sees no more the tears of his wife, and
hears no more the cries of his children for bread."

"How! What! exclaimed Ortenberg: "excuse my frankness; this is false; indeed
it is. I am happy to hear that Christian Shwarz has left a wife and children --
but in distress! -- no, that cannot be. He possessed a princely fortune, and
always was an excellent economist."

Clergyman. He was, indeed; all his fellow-citizens can witness it. He returned
to his country with an immense fortune; however, repeated misfortunes can
exhaust the greatest wealth. He built a magnificent house, and it was destroyed
by fire; he bought an estate, and it was totally ruined by hail, inundations, a
constant failure of his crops, and epidemic diseases among the cattle; he
established a manufactory, and government threw numberless impediments in his
way; he engaged in trade, and his correspondents failed.

He had just as much left as would have enabled him to live comfortably with
his family, when he trusted too much to a false friend, becoming security for
him to a large amount, and was cheated. He was forced to turn all his property
into money, in order to escape a disgraceful confinement. This last severe blow
cost him, probably, his life.

"Oh God! oh God! exclaimed Ortenberg, wringing his hands: "is this the reward
of probity! who could blame the honest who murmurs against providence? Why must
virtue be persecuted every where by knaves?"


Clergyman. To be tried. There is another better world where virtue will be
rewarded.

Ortenberg gazed at him and shook him cordially by the hand. "If it were not
for that hope," -- said he.


Clergyman. What then would be the life of a man? -- The deceased is happy for
having taken this hope with him to the grave. He died with this consoling
persuasion, and only the distress of his wife and children imbittered his last
moments.


Ortenberg. He might have been easy about that point! Ortenberg is yet living,
and no knave like the rest.


They had arrived at the churchyard during this conversation. Ortenberg
requested the favor of having the coffin opened once more, as he ardently
wished to kiss the cold hand of his benefactor; however, the custom of the town
did not permit it. The common people imagined this would disturb the rest of
the dead, and would have stoned the person that should have attempted it, the
coffin was therefore committed to the ground, and Ortenberg moistened the earth
which was thrown upon it, with his tears.

After the officiating clergyman had pronounced the benediction, Ortenberg
distributed all the money he had with him among the poor.

"I don't give it to you" said he: "to pray for the peace of the deceased; he
does not want your prayers! but weep with me! I prefer your tears to your
thanks."

It was an affecting spectacle. Ortenberg had seated himself upon the fresh
grave, and taking up a handful of earth contemplating it with silent grief. The
honest Wernigeroders stood around him, gazing at him, and knowing not what to
think of him.

"Enough! enough! exclaimed he at last; "his children are yet alive, let us be
gone to the widow of honest Christian Shwarz."

He rose, took the clergyman by the hand, and requested him to go with him to
the widow of the deceased. They found the poor woman swimming in tears, and
surrounded by three boys half naked, the eldest of whom was about seven years
old.

"Excuse me, madam!" said Ortenberg when he stepped into the apartment: I do not
intend to console you, no, I wish to mingle my tears with yours."

He was as good as his word; for he had scarcely said this when a torrent of
tears gushed from his eyes, which he suffered to flow freely. The picture of
the deceased painted by Graf, an excellent likeness, hung opposite him; his
eyes caught it; "Yes, this is he!" exclaimed he sobbing: "thus he looked when
he embarked for Germany, and took leave of me! Alas! he has gone on a greater
journey without taking leave of me."

The clergyman told the astonished widow the gentleman was an old friend of her
husband and had known him in India.

"Friend! exclaimed Ortenberg: "he was more than a friend to me! he was a
benefactor, a father! I am his debtor! I owe him more than I shall be able to
repay in this world. Permit, me, Madam -- boys (calling for his blacks)! bring
my trunks hither!" The blacks obeyed. He unlocked it, and taking a leather
purse out, counted 1000 ducats upon the table.

"Here, madam, take it. These are the thousand ponnes which your husband
advanced me when I arrived half naked and half famished at Bantam. God will pay
him the interest! Sir (turning to the clergyman), I can spare no more at
present; however, I take you to witness that I engage to send to this good lady
the widow of my benefactor, within four weeks, ten times as much. I am not used
to give bonds; my word is my bond, and you can rely upon it. I should, besides,
wish to erect a monument upon the grave of my honest Christian Shwarz, and
shall send you 500 ducats for that purpose. Let it be done after your own
ideas; but let the inscription be as simple as possible. My name must not be
mentioned; for I want to erect a monument for him and not for myself."

The good people thought all was a dream; the widow was going to throw herself
with her children at Ortenberg's feet; however, he was almost provoked at it.
"I only have done my duty, and nothing else," said he: "I should not deserve to
live if I could suffer the widow and children of my benefactor to languish in
distress. No, no, while I have a morsel to eat, one half of it shall be yours."

The first violent sensation of grief yielded gradually to the milder feelings
of melancholy emotion. They began to converse more connectedly, discussed the
future domestic regulations of the widow, and consulted about the education of
her children.

"Would you give one of these boys into my charge?" said Ortenberg: "I will
treat him as if he were my own son."

Mother. With pleasure! Could I commit him to better hands?


Ortenberg. Well! would you let me have the youngest?


Mother (anxiously). The youngest! Dear Sir, not the youngest.


Ortenberg. Then let me have the eldest.


Mother (with increasing anxiety). To confess the truth -- I should not wish --
the eldest is so much like his father. --


Ortenberg. It makes no difference to me if you let me have the second.


Mother. (after a pause, during which she surveyed her three sons alternately,
with maternal tenderness). Excuse me, Mr. Ortenberg -- Indeed, I can part with
neither of them!


Ortenberg (affected). Excellent woman! keep your sons; I will be a father to
them nevertheless.


He kept his, word faithfully. The three sons of Christian Shwarz are still
living, have inherited the virtues of their father, do honor to the care of
their foster-father, and are useful citizens of the state.

When Ortenberg thus had satisfied the impulse of his heart, and fulfilled the
duties of gratitude, he took leave of his friend's widow and children, clasped
the mother to his heart, and her little ones saw him depart with tears in their
eyes.

CHAPTER IX.
See to sweeten thy repose,
The blossom buds, the fountain flows;
Lo! to crown thy healthful board,
All that milk and fruits afford.
Seek no more -- the rest is vain;
Pleasure ending soon in pain:
Anguish lightly gilded over:
Close thy wish, and seek no more.
SHENSTONE.
WHAT I have to tell you, kind reader in this chapter, is but very little, for
our honest Nicolaus Ortenberg does not wish that his good actions should be
talked of too loudly. He returned to his nephew, settled a large sum upon the
sons of the good clergyman, to enable them to prosecute their academic career
with ease; he caused a neat house to be built for old Conrad, which was
provided with all comforts of life, and added a small capital, to enable the
honest fellow to close his life in tranquillity and ease.

Barbara, who still thought she felt the spittle of the blacks on her wrinkled
cheeks, was not satisfied with the bounty of the generous Ortenberg, and
censured every thing he did for her and her husband's comfort. Ortenberg
proposed therefore to old Conrad, to send her to the house of correction, and
thus to put it out of her power to poison his domestic peace. However -- oh,
power of custom! -- the scolding Barbara had become necessary to old Conrad, he
cared very little for her scolding, nay, even thought he wanted something when
he heard not every day her shrill voice resounding in the house and kitchen.
"Then keep her in the name of God!" said Ortenberg, the will of man is his
heaven." They lived together till Barbara at last was involved in such a
violent quarrel with death, as to be choked with passion.

Ortenberg advertised in all the continental newspapers; That if Charles
Ortenberg, formerly head master of the grammar school of W**, should be still
alive, he was requested to inform his brother Nicolaus and his son of his
abode."

However, this attempt was fruitless, and Nicolaus used himself gradually to
the idea that he should not see his brother again on this side of the grave.

Nicolaus now formed a plan for his future life. He disliked the monar^hic
countries, because even the best monarchies are not entirely untainted with
despotism. He resolved therefore to spend the rest of his life in Switzerland.

Having settled every thing that concerned the future happiness of his nephew,
he retired to the Canton of Zurich, bought a large estate, sowed, planted,
occupied himself with the breeding of cattle, and perceived that satisfaction
with which Candide exclaimed, after having escaped the storms of life:
Cultinoons notre champ!

A well-chosen library shortened the long evenings, and a familiar intercourse
with a few good and social neighbors sweetened his solitude.

William grew up in the mean time, and made a good use of the instructions of
the worthy clergyman, and now had sufficiently improved to frequent an
university with advantage. Attended by the blessings of his uncle, the tears of
old Conrad, and the prayers of the venerable clergyman, he set out for
Gottingen, in his eighteenth year accompanied by the sons of his instructor.

He commenced his new career with ardour, and prosecuted it with unexampled
diligence. His head and heart did honor to his friends, and his sober and
steady conduct gained him general regard.

CHAP. X.
Innocence is a defense
For nothing else but patience;
'Twill not bear out the blows of Fate
Nor fence against the tricks of state;
Nor from the oppression of the laws
Protect the plain'st, justest cause;
Nor keep unspotted a good name
Against the obloquies of fame,
Feeble as patience, and as soon,
By being blown upon undone,
As beasts are hunted for their furs,
Men for their virtues are the worse.
BUTLER.
WILLIAM wa^ one day visited by two of his fellow-students, who, although
scarcely eighteen years old, yet knew already that they were Counts of the holy
Roman Empire, and almost knew nothing else but that. But as the German
universities are the abodes of liberty and equality, where the son of a peasant
enjoys the same privileges which are granted to the son of a prince; where
disinterestedness cements the bonds of friendship, and family pride is treated
with ridicule; these two gentlemen had been obliged to renounce all claims to
the difference which is generally attached to nobility of birth, and to learn
the conversation of plebeians, that distinction is not every where attached to
the superiority of rank which is founded merely upon the strength of a piece of
parchment. They betrayed their consciousness of their noble descent only at
times, and the words: His Excellency, my father, her Ladyship, my mother, our
subjects, etc. etc, were expressions with which they frequently interlarded
their discourses.

But enough of a couple of despicable beings whom accident has thrown into our
way, and in whose company I always stay with reluctance, whether I meet them in
the street or at the writing desk.

The conversation with which they condescended to entertain William, treated on
pretty girls, horses, hounds, and cits whom they had taken in. Poor William
felt the time very long while they were with him, gaped and frequently stepped to
the window to respire.

Their inane discourse was suddenly interrupted by an apparition. I may justly
call it an apparition; for the man who stepped into the apartment, having knocked
repeatedly at the door, looked more like a spectre than a human being. Imagine
to yourself an ash-grey countenance, hollow eyes shaded by thick gray eye
lashes, pale and parched lips, a gray beard and hair of the same color,
holding in his skinny hands a stick, which supported his bending frame, dressed
in a black thread bare coat which could not cover his nakedness entirely. He
staggered slowly and with tottering knees into the apartment; the burden of
heavy sorrows seemed to depress his frame more than the load of years. His
hollow eyes displayed however, still a faint spark of youthful vigor, and his
face bespoke a kind of noble pride.

"Gentlemen," said he, excuse my intruding upon you. I am a very poor man who
wishes to die in his native country, and cannot scrape together as many pence
as I have miles to walk."

What news from the moon, old gentleman?" began one of the counts: "you
probably, are just come thence, for I never saw on our globe such a libel upon
creation."

"I was mistaken! replied the old man, groaning and casting a look to Heaven
which bespoke unspeakable bitterness: "forgive me for having interrupted your
youthful mirth!"

Having uttered these words, he turned toward the door, and was going to quit
the apartment; but William called after him in a compassionate tone of voice.

"Venerable old man, stop a little you shall not leave me without receiving
some assistance."

"You are right, William!" said the count: "It would be pity were we to suffer
old Saturn to pass beyond our horizon."

William. Count, be ashamed! it is cruel to ridicule a poor old man, and I
shall not suffer it in my apartment.

The old man had in the mean time, turned round again and cast a grateful look
at the generous youth. The count returned no answer, and William took a crown
out of his purse.

The old man accidentally cast his eyes on a table which stood only a few steps
distant from him. It just happened to be post day. William had received a
letter from his uncle and left the cover which was directed to him upon the
table. The old man read:


A Monsieur.

Monsieur Guillaume Ortenberg. He read it and fainted away.

"There you have it?" exclaimed the count: "this is the consequence of meddling
with beggars."

William deigned not to return an answer. He slew to the assistance of the old
man, sprinkled cold water in his face, chafed his temples with Hungary water,
and at last saw his humane endeavors crowned with success. The old man opened
his eyes again.

"Good young gentleman," said he, after having looked round a mom^nt, and
recollecting the situation in which he had been: "God bless you for your
humanity -- God reward you for it -- " He seemed to wish to say more; however,
a look which he cast at the count who had just another witticism between his
teeth, rendered him mute. William pressed the crown in his hand, saw him to the
door, and patiently bore the railleries of the counts, who ridiculed him for
the tear of sensibility that (...) from his eyes, and which he neither would
nor could check.

William looked after the old man through the window, and saw that he slowly
staggered toward the town-gate, looking frequently back, stopping sometimes
irresolute, and seemed to talk to himself. He disappeared at last from his
sight, and he was soon after delivered from his troublesome visitors.

William was just going to raise his sunken spirits by a walk in the fields,
when a little ragged boy rushed into his apartment, panting for breath, and
gave him a note. William opened it and read:

If you wish to close the eyes of your dying father, come immediately to your

CHARLES ORTENBERG.


It would be fruitless were I to attempt to delineate to my readers William's
picture in that moment, and my imagination labors in vain to represent his
picture to you as it stands before my mental eyes. Your imagination must come
to my assistance, and picture to you the rapid changes of his countenance from
glowing crimson to death like paleness, the wild disorder of his looks, and the
trembling of his hands and feet. Methinks I hear his heart palpitate, agitated
by fear, joy, and uncertainty; methinks I see him fly down stairs without a
hat, and shoot down the street like an arrow, without even knowing where to
find his father?

"Where? where? stammered he at last to the boy, who followed him.

"In the suburbs, at the Golden Swan," replied the boy, and William shot along
as quick as lightning, rushing into the inn, overturning the landlord, and
stammering his: where? where?" with increasing agony.

When the people of the inn saw a man standing before them without a hat,
trembling like an aspen leaf, and with a wild and disordered look, they thought
he was mad. William could not speak; "where? where?" was all that he was able
to utter, and the innkeeper replied at every inquiry: "who? -- what?"

The boy had, fortunately, followed him as fast as possible, and entered the
house at the very moment when William, overpowered by the highest stretch of
all his feelings, was ready to swoon. The ^ight of the boy gave him new
strength, "where? where?" ejaculated he with a saint voice when he saw him.

"Follow me!" replied the boy, running up before him three pair of stairs, and
opening the door of a sorry garret.

There William beheld upon a truss of straw, the same old man who had quitted
his apartment a few hours before, and received a crown from him. His eyes were
dim, and his dissolution was near. His right hand grasped the crown, the
charity which his son had given him. A pitcher of water stood by his side, and
a prayer book lay at his feet.

William ^lung himself down by his wretched couch, grasped the neck of the
dying man with his arms, as if he were determined to wrest him out of the hands
of death; he still could not find words nor tears to ease the agony of his
heart, shook the fainting old man, wanted to go for assistance and yet could
not resolve to quit his hapless parent. He took his purse out of his pocket,
without knowing clearly what he was doing, flung it down at the feet of his
conductor, expecting that he would comprehend his meaning instantly. However,
the boy picked it up, casting a stupid sheepish look at him, and then at the
purse, and knew not what to do with it.

"Physician! surgeon!" thundered William.

The boy was terrified and flew down stairs.

And, behold! God said unto the Angel of death: Withdraw thy hand! take the
bitter cup from his lips, and mix it with tears of filial love, that the black
pinions of despair cover not his breaking eyes, and he fall smiling asleep in
thy arms." -- Ortenberg opened his eyes. "Is it you, my son? A ray of joy after
twelve years suffering!" William now recovered the power of utterance, a gentle
stream of tears removed the agony of his heart. He knelt at the old man's couch
with affecting devotion in his looks, thanked God for the bitter sweetness of
that hour, and prayed for his father's life.

"Not so, my son! said the dying sufferer in broken accents: "my hour is at
hand; I am happy to have found a son who will close my eyes, and commit my
bones to the grave. Say, William, is there any other tie, besides the bonds of
paternal love, that unites me with the world? is your mother still alive?

William (hesitating and anxiously). It is now twelve years --


Ortenberg. Enough! I guess the rest -- spare me! -- (He shed a torrent of
bitter tears).


William. However, my uncle Nicolaus is returned from India with immense
treasures, and has made all possible inquiries after you; I owe him my
education, and every comfort I enjoy.


Ortenberg. God bless him! I want nothing but a few hand-ful of earth. I am
sensible I shall soon have conquered. Assure him of my fraternal love, and tell
him that our mother gave him her blessing on her death bed.


He stopped and coughed his cheeks were tinged with an unnatural redness; his
tongue cleaved to his parched palate.

"Refresh your old father with a drop of wine," said he; "that I may inform you
before I die, of the sufferings which I have endured these twelve years."

William flew down stairs, demanding a bottle of the best old Hock, and knelt
in a moment again by the side of his sick parent. Ortenberg drank half a glass,
"How refreshing," exclaimed he, "is a glass of wine for a man who was compelled
twelve years to allay his thirst with putrified water!"

The corpulent innkeeper, whom William's purse had rendered uncommonly civil
and officious, waddled up and down stairs, brought balsam of life* Hossman's
drops, and feather beds, cramming the latter under the patient's head, covering
his feet, etc. and went himself to town, to call in a physician.

As soon as father and son were again by themselves, Ortenberg collected his
last strength, and solved the mystery of his sudden disappearance and his long
absence to the agonised William.

The reader will recollect that Ortenberg, in the first confusion which the
mysterious note of old Conrad produced, took the fatal resolution of going to
Berlin and demanding protection and justice of a Monarch who has proved
repeatedly that he dispensed justice as well to the peasant as to the first
peer of his realm. However the governor of W** no sooner was informed of
Ortenberg's departure than he guessed the real cause of it, and perceived that
his happiness and honor were at stake.

He dispatched immediately the obsequious and venal accomplices of his numerous
rogueries, ^o pursue Ortenberg in different directions, causing the hapless
fugitive to be carried to one of his estates, the steward of which if possible,
was as great a knave as his master, and frequently had enjoyed the frantic
satisfaction of having tormented to death an innocent victim that had been
entrusted to his care, without ever taking the trouble to inquire after the
motives of his confinement.

Poor Ortenberg languished in that place twelve years in a damp cellar. Bread
and putrid water were his daily nourishment, the damp ground was his couch and
the dark vault his cover.

Beelzebub recalled at last the Devil that inhabited the body of the fiend-like
steward, to advance him according to his merits. His successor possessed some
humanity, had compassion on his declining prisoner, gave him an opportunity to
escape, and Ortenberg fled. The unhappy man roved from village to village,
fearful of being pursued, sick and faint like an autumnal fly, and bordering on
a state of phrenzy, begging his bread from door to door, and supported by
nothing else but the hope of being enabled by providence to reach W** before
his death, and to conclude in the first embrace of his wife and son, an
existence which had become burdensome to him. He was obliged to pass through
Gottingen on his way to the dear objects of his love, and there finished his
sufferings.

But what enabled him to disguise his paternal ^eelings and to quit his son's
apartment without making himself known? what else but his pride, that baneful
passion that tyrannised him from his cradle to the grave. He perceived that the
young men who were with his son were counts; he believed he should disgrace his
son, or even, perhaps, hurt him, if he were to make himself known, after having
applied for alms. In short he was silent and went away, but scarcely had
arrived at his garret, when he was overpowered by the heavy load of his
feelings.

Reader, I perceive an angry look in your eye, composed of compassion and
indignation; ask yourself sincerely whether you never was guilty of a fault? I
wanted to pourtray an honest man, who always acted as an human being; for my
imagination is not fit for delineating the picture of an angel.

The most violent passions convulsed the heart of the young man while his
father related the melancholy tale of his sufferings. He now was tormented with
dreadful apprehension, and his staring eyes hung on the lips of the old man;
tears of grief now rolled down his cheeks, and fury now tinged them with a
crimson hue, and a wild fire flashed from his eyes.

"Vengeance! Vengeance!" exclaimed he, when his father had finished his
melancholy narrative: "I vow to you, my dear injured father! by God and our
blessed Redeemer, that I will take a bloody revenge on the villain!"

"Not so my son," said the old man: "you must promise me to forgive him, as I
do on the brink of eternity. He must, besides now be already far advanced in
years, and soon ripe for judgment. Promise it me! This is the only condition on
which I can give you my paternal blessing; and only this will enable me to die
in peace." William was obliged to obey, and to vow to his dying parent that he
would forgive the Governor and never take revenge. Having done this, the old
man blessed him, raised his heart to the throne of God, prayed, and took a
solemn leave of his son. William shed torrents of tears. Ortenberg had
exhausted his last strength, and relapsed exhausted upon his pillow. He soon
began to rattle in his throat -- the angel of death held the cup to his lips --
Nature struggled against the powerful arm of the last foe -- spasms announced
his approaching dissolution -- the eyes grew dark -- the cheeks turned pale --
the lips grew blue -- the body stiff -- only one gasp more -- a long pause --
and now he breathed the last time!

William's agony is no subject fit for description. The physician came too late
to save the father's life a few hours longer, but time enough to order the
distracted young man to be removed from the dear corpse. William was carried
home sick and delirious. Only the strength of youth saved him from the gates of
death, and the picture of his murdered father was for years constantly present
to his mind, and cast a gloomy melancholy over his person.

CHAP. XI.
Far greater numbers have been lost by hopes
Than all the magazines of daggers, rop^s*
And other ammunitions of despair
Were ever able to dispatch by fear.
BUTLER.
THE heart of old Nicolaus was severely wounded by the unexpected intelligence
of his brother's reappearance and death. He had already reconciled himself to
the idea that his brother Charles was no longer an inhabitant of this globe. He
was firmly convinced that he was a blessed citizen of a better world, dwelled
reluctantly with his imagination on the sufferings which he must have endured
(...) he was separated from his beloved Caroline and (...) dear boy: "At
least," added he, always when this idea forced itself upon his mind, "he is
happy, and enjoys the reward of his terrestrial sufferings!" And alas! this
pleasing persuasion now was so suddenly and dreadfully interrupted?

But let us drop the curtain, and say no more of the noble* proud, and
unfortunate Ortenberg. He now is an inhabitant of better regions, and wants our
compassion no more. If sympathetic pity interested you for his fate, bestow it
now upon his orphan son.

William had finished his studies and attained the age of manhood. I shall not
(...) able to describe the epoch of his life which now awaited him, better than
by inserting part of his correspondence with his old uncle.

Extracts from Letters written by William to his Uncle, and the answers of the
latter.
I.
-- I have made up my mind to quit Gottingen, and am waiting for your orders
and advice, my dear uncle, to determine finally upon the place of my residence,
and the career which I am to choose. I have gathered a tolerable store of
knowledge in various branches of science, and flatter myself to be able to do
pretty well in any situation; for a player, who once knows the cards, must be
equal to enter into the nature of any game which accident throws in his way,
and be able to conduct it well, though the trumps should be in his antagonist's
hands.

It is said that it would be easy to write the whole collection of human
knowledge which is sounded on mathematical certainty, upon a blank card; and we
rummage many a thick folio volume in vain to gather a few words which could be
added to that collection. I never quit our public library without a kind of
anxiety; so many books, so much to read; life is so short, the card so small,
and yet a man must be a Polyhistor to fill it only half. No, no, I will not
choose a learned profession! I will rove the boundless creation of God, will
enjoy the variegated pleasures of nature, not pry into its most occult
mysteries in order to form a system today, which tomorrow would be confuted
by the most simple phenomenon. However, while I am pursuing this idea, an
internal monitor whispers to me: "You are a link in the great social chain; it
would degrade you were you to spend your uncles wealth in idleness, and
occasionally to bestow a ^^illing upon a fellow creature in distress; your
faculties belong to the state, which protects you in the quiet possession of
your property." The regard which we have for our self is a singular sensation,
it is widely different from that which we have for the merits of others. The
latter is but too frequently influenced by the prejudices which we have imbibed
in our youth, by external and accidental attributes, wealth and pedigrees.
However, that which affords me satisfaction in solitude, and frequently renders
me superior to sufferings, and the erroneous opinions of the world; in short,
what every honest man seeks and finds more or less within himself, cannot be
purchased of the voice of the low or titled populace.

I will, therefore, devote myself to some profession, lest I should be an idle
drone in the great bee-hive of the world; I will fly out and in, gather and
work: your orders will assign me my station.

II. Nicolaus Ortenberg to William.
Give me leave to tell you, my dear nephew, that neither the beginning nor the
conclusion of your letter has met with my approbation. To speak the truth,
William, you have ceased being the simple child of nature which you was when
you left the house of your venerable Mentor. The periods and turnings of your
letter are stiff and affected; you presume to be in possession of the true
philosophy of life, although you are only a book philosopher. We must have seen
the world, and experienced some, if we are not to be astonished by every
uncommon appearance, and desire to bear the joys and sufferings of this world
with equanimity. Hark ye, my son, when you write again to your uncle, let your
letter be more cordial and familiar* I hate all formality and cold civility in
letters which one friend writes to another. Speak the simple and artless
language of the heart, and fear not to offend me by frank bluntness. As for the
station which you are to choose, it is nothing to me; this is entirely your
business. I don't care what you are, while you are an honest man, and this you
can be in any station. However, it would give me pleasure if you would rove the
world a few years longer, and then take a good and gentle wife like my Welli!
Alas! I have not yet learnt to pronounce or to write her name without shedding
tears.

The workmen have finished yesterday the little temple in the garden, and the
altar in the middle, upon which the urn is to stand that encloses the ashes of
my Welli. I took the urn out of the chest in which it was locked up ever since
I left the East Indies; for I had not the courage to tear my wounds open. As I
was saying, I took it out, and found a pair of bracelets and some rings of my
Welli's in the chest, and strolled with it into the garden. My tears fell upon
the urn, my hands trembled several times so violently, that I almost dropped it,
and my knees knocked together. I was obliged to rest myself upon a turf seat.
The urn now stands upon the altar, the temple is hedged in with rose-trees, and
bears the following inscription: TOMB OF THE GOOD WELLI, THE GENTLEST OF HER
SEX.

When my tears once shall be dried up, that is, when my eyes shall be shut
forever, it is to remind you, my dear nephew, that I loved my dear Welli better
than any thing in this world. I hope you then will visit our ashes every
morning and evening, and think of us.

I command you, nephew, and desire it of you as the only return for my paternal
love, not to let me be buried when I am dead. This is a foolish custom, and I
will have nothing to do with it. Some millions of dead bodies are annually
buried under ground, to infest the air with pestilential exhalations, to assist
death in his destructive operations, and to enrich the physicians. The church
yards ought to be divided amongst poor families to be turned into fertile
fields, for the benefit of the living. But the corpses -- Why they ought to be
burnt as they do in the East Indies, and in other countries, which would
prevent them from going through all those horrid degrees of corruption, and to
reduce them at once to dust, from which they were taken.

I once was in a museum, where I saw corruption imitated in wax, by a skilful
artist, and I assure you, William, it was horrid to see how the eyes are
covered first with a kind of moss, and the state of the dead body grows more
frightful every day. I prefer the burning of the dead to their being buried;
besides this, also on account of the living relations and friends. They drag
you out of the town, screwed up in a box, bury you six or seven feet under
ground, raise a tomb over you, and leave you to rot. Your friends and relations
forget you, have nothing that could remind them of you, and at most, cast on
Sunday, when they go to church, a look at your grave as they pass, to see
whether it be not yet overgrown with grass? If your relations remove from the
paternal soil, to some distant country, you remain behind, rot among strangers,
are forgotten, and your name occupies at most a small space in the church
register, or on the genealogy, and you are entirely expunged from the hearts of
those that were dear to you.

It is quite otherwise if the flame saves your body from corruption. The small
heap of ashes which remain, are carefully gathered by the hands of your widow,
your children, or your friend; their eyes moisten the dear relics with
affectionate tears, they are enclosed in an urn, and if your friends should not
be able or inclined to preserve that urn in a temple, like that which I erected
to the memory of my dear Welli, they may place it upon a table under the
looking glass, instead of your French clocks, conduct their children to it,
take off the cover, and show them the small remains of an human being, and I am
sure, this will make a deeper impression upon their hearts than their standing
with horror before a grave, from which corruption grins, and pestilential
vapors infest their smelling organs.

Do you imagine my son, that the Romans and Greeks, whose history I read with
admiration in my solitude, would have performed such heroic deeds, and devoted
themselves so cheerfully to death, if they had been obliged to suffer their
bodies to be committed to the nauseous and horrid operations of corruptions?
You may smile! I am no psychiologist; however, this supposition has a great
deal of probability in my opinion. And it is, besides such a sublime sight to
see the flame blaze aloft, and the smoke tower to the skies -- one should think
the spirit were rising like a phoenix from his ashes.

In short, my son, I desire to be burnt after my death! I have already bespoke
an urn which is to contain the remains of my old bones, and request you to
place it near that of my dear Welli. You then may sometimes take a walk to the
temple with your wife and children, in the dusk of eve, relate my history to
them, and think of me.

In case death should surprise me unexpectedly, and before I have declared my
last will as to this point, you are to consider this letter as my testament,
and produce it before the magistrates, to prevent all disputes with these
gentlemen. I should think that it must be entirely indifferent to them whether
the body of a deceased honest man be destroyed by the flames or by vermin. If
not, you may cause an empty coffin to be buried, and burn my corpse privately.
If that also should not be practicable on account of the pile which must be set
on fire, I desire you will cover my body with quick lime and moisten it with
water. It will answer the same purpose. Farewell. It is entirely indifferent to
me whether the reader thinks that the opinion of honest Nicolaus be an
offspring of innocent enthusiasm, or regard it as a proposal founded upon real
Psychology. However, I cannot help relating on this occasion an instance of
which I was an eyewitness and which I shall never be able to forget. I
traveled a few since through several parts of Germany, and met at R** with an
actor, a very worthy man, with whom I formerly had been connected at
Petersburgh. He had lost his wife, during the time I had not seen him, and his
family now consisted of a daughter a lively and amiable young lady, endowed
with a rich vein of wit and humor, in whose company I had spent many happy
hours during my residence at Petersburg. She was as lively as ever, abandoned
herself to her humourous gaiety, laughed and gave a free vent to her jovial
mirth. I cast accidentally a look at her toilette, and beh^ld -- a piece of
furniture which I never had expected to have seen on the dressing table of a
lady -- a skull. I asked with surprise: "how the duce happens that skull to
parade here?" She shed suddenly a torrent of tears, and replied sobbing: It is
the skull of my sainted mother! My father insists on my having it constantly
before my eyes, lest I should forget her maternal admonitions." -- I cannot but
confess that I was so much surprised at that singular idea, as to fix my eyes
sometime mute and immovable on the skull. I had known her mother, her form was
before my eyes, and now nothing was left but those old bones. Indeed, I was
more powerfully affected than I should have been upon her grave. And what do
you think, kind reader? Suppose the young lady had really been as giddy as she
was virtuous. Suppose her profession had exposed her daily to the snares of
seduction, and she had already been reduced to the brink of ruin: would not a
single look at that skull have been sufficient to recall her to the path of
virtue? -- Do not object that time weakens impressions of that nature, and at
last expunges them entirely. -- The mother was already two years dead, and the
tears of the daughter dropped warm upon my hand. Indeed, if her corpse had been
rotting at the churchyard, she would not have remembered her with so much
interest and emotion!

Note of the Narrator.




III. William to Nicolaus.
I am now at Hanover, dearest uncle, and wish to stay a few weeks longer here.
You will therefore be so kind as to send your letters and the money I am to
have to this place; I lodge at the London Tavern. Baron W**, an academic friend
of mine, was the original cause of my stopping here. I am very well pleased
with Hanover, the town has several pretty streets, and fine buildings; the
circumjacent country is beautiful, and I have been introduced to some very
enlightened and worthy men. Their number is, indeed but small; however, one
rose is worth more than an hundred odorless tulips, notwithstanding their gaudy
colors.

I have spent an evening with the excellent Mr. Zimmerman, whose book on
Solitude, as you informed me lately, contributes so much to sweeten your
solitary retirement. He appears in the first quarter of an hour to be cold and
repelling, the cause of which is, probably, to be imputed to the impertinent
intrusions of those mechanical travelers who come only to stare at him, and to
be able to say; I have seen the famous Zimmerman. But when he perceives that he
has a man before him whose heart is susceptible of congenial warmth and
unreserved communication, the chilling clouds which hang on his brow disappear
gradually, and his looks bespeak so much mildness and good nature as to
captivate the heart irresistibly, which has been my case. I should be proud, if
I could flatter myself that the love and regard which I have conceived for that
excellent man, and not entirely indifferent to him.

My friend has also introduced me to the families of several noblemen; however,
I do not like the tone which prevails there. I never met with more stiffness,
absurd formality, and foolish pride than I saw in these circles; the ladies
distinguish themselves particularly in this respect. They make a distinction
here between higher and inferior nobility, and the former think it would be a
disgrace to them, were they to spend only a few hours with the latter under one
roof, or even in the open air. As I am but a vile plebian, and my ancestors
were only permitted to look at theirs while they tilted and broke each other's
bones, you may easily imagine that they scarcely deign to look at me. My friend
W** is frequently very much distressed at the silly haughtiness with which they
treat me -- and I? -- I will laugh a few weeks more at their folly and then
proceed on my travels.

IV. Nicolaus to William.
You are a fool my dear Nephew; upon my soul you, are for lavishing your time
in the company of those noble coxcombs, and confirming them in their
presumption that they do you a great deal of honor by tossing up their noses
at you. Take care not to tempt me to suspect that you have no intrinsic worth
of which you can be proud, since you degrade yourself to be shone upon by the
borrowed rays of a lamp. I have a very indifferent opinion of a man who is (or
at least) ought to be sensible of his dignity, has a comfortable income, and
needs but to seek friendship, and rational conversation among his equals, if he
wishes to find them, and nevertheless intrudes himself shamefully upon a circle
where he is tolerated only on account of his mammon.

I do, however, by no means intend to infer by this remark that a nobleman, a
baron, or a count, cannot be a warm friend of a plebian; God forbid I should be
so unjust. There are, indeed, many worthy, noblemen who know very well that
nobility is an inheritance which imposes more duties upon them than we humble
plebians have to fulfill in our sphere. However, I would advise you, my son, not
to enter into the bonds of friendship with a nobleman, unless you have tried
him sufficiently whether he be deserving of possessing your heart. Watch him
with peculiar attention when you meet him in company of other noblemen. If he
should hesitate on these occasions to shake you cordially by the hand, to
withdraw with you to a confidential corner in presence of his equals, and to
enter with you into a familiar conversation, you ought to shun him, because he
is ashamed of his friend! upon my soul he is! It grieves me to tell you that I
have made this experience since my return to Germany, and that it has cost me
some very unpleasant hours.

I am not at all astonished to learn that you have found the women more foolish
and silly than the men; this is the case every where. The less a person has
deserved a superior dignity, the prouder he will be of it. A man who has no
other merit besides his title, will never forgive you if you neglect stiling
him my Lord; but a faithful servant of the state who is conscious of his
internal worth and smiles at empty words, will not even take notice of such an
omission.

Hark ye, my son! I wish to see your next letter dated from some other corner
of the world; although I am extremely happy to learn that you have made the
acquaintance of my dear Zimmerman. You may tell him that I esteem him not a bit
the better since the Empress of Russia has sent him an order, but that I have
more regard for that Princess on that account. Farewell!

V. William to Nicolaus.
You are perfectly right, my dear uncle. I was already going to prepare for my
departure and to make a trip to England; but I know not what to think of the
singular change which I have undergone within these few days; I am entirely
altered. I take a book in my hand and read not; I sit down to the harpsichord
and play not; I tread in all the puddles when I walk through the street, and I
neglect to return the compliment when an acquaintance salutes me in passing by.
I perceive it not when it rains, and am not sensible of it when the sun shines.
I am particularly fond of solitude, and imagine that I am by myself when I am
in large circles. The song of the nightingale makes me melancholy, and I look
at the setting sun with tearful eyes. My heart is uncommonly full, my head is
empty, my bosom is straitened, I seem to think and am thoughtless. Tell me,
dear uncle, what can all this mean?

VI. Nicolaus to William.
Fool! you are in love! upon my soul you are! I was exactly in your situation
after I had seen my Welli the first time. God grant your mistress may be like
her! I did not intend to marry you so soon; however, I find I shall be obliged
to give up my plan; for, I know that love cares not for plans. I only beg you
to consider that she is to be your partner in life till death. Above all things
endeavor to be certain ^hether she has a good heart? As for the rest, it is
all alike to me, whether she be noble or of an humble station, rich or poor,
handsome or ugly. I shall receive her as my daughter; you shall beget children,
and render my old days, days of joy; and now ba^ta!

VII. William to Nicolaus.
You have guessed right, dear uncle, I am in love, over head and ears enamoured
with a beautiful and good girl, it gives me pleasure to speak of her; be so
good, dear uncle, to listen to me.

It was five o'clock in the afternoon, last Monday se'nnight, when my friend
introduced me to the minister, Baron Wall. There was a kind of rout, A rout at
five o'clock in the afternoon? What unfashionable bears these Germans are?

Note of the Printer.


or whatever they call it; a dozen of card tables stood in a spacious
apartment, painted ladies and sweet-scented gentlemen sat round them* a tea
table stood before the sofa, on which sat a charming girl who poured out the
tea; I say, a girl -- for every one that beheld her lovely person forgot that
she was a Lady of rank.

Baron Wall received me with a cheerful and engaging countenance, yet without
denying the man of rank. He is far advanced in years; his face is the picture
of old German honesty, his gray hair grew white in the service of the state,
and no one can help loving the man at first sight. The case stands differently
with regard to the Baroness, whose eyes and nose bespeak the Hanoverian
family-pride; she can laugh in a most chilling and arrogant manner, is proud of
the station of her husband, and looks with pity down upon the inferior classes
of beings, like an angel, if I may use this simile, upon an ant-hill. She
returned my submissive bow with half a nod of her head, and did me the honor
not to speak a word to me. The whole company took notice of me, whispers went
from ear to ear, and when they had ascertained that I was not of noble
extraction, the games were continued without f^rther interruption.

The card tables which were before unoccupied, now were p^opled by degrees. I
was invited to engage in a party at ^'hombre with a plebian counselor and an
ensign, who were looked upon as the lowest in rank (for here they pay regard to
the difference of rank even at the card table); but as I am an enemy to cards
they turned their backs on me, as a person who knows nothing of the bon ton,
and left me at liberty to amuse myself as well as I could. I walked up and down
the apartment, looked at the prints, teazed the parrot, counted the
glass-panes, and did not know what to do with my humble self.

Lack of amusement led me at last into an adjoining apartment, where four or
five young ladies were sitting engaged in cheerful chat; for the unmarried
ladies are here rar^ly admitted to the card tables. Although I am no misogyn,
yet I always was to that moment timid in female circles, and as my gallantry is
but so so, I found it really difficult to introduce myself to them in a proper
manner. An honest man is never more in danger of acting like a blockhead than
when he is to converse with young ladies of rank to whom he is an utter
stranger. The dear creatures do not ask whether the man who is presented to
them be learned, a pattern of probity and a deserving member of the state,
whose exterior -- though it should be rather ridiculous -- ought not to come
into consideration; no, they review him at the first bow from top to toe, let
all his motions, all the different pieces of his dress run the gauntlet through
hundreds of curious looks, comment on every word he utters, laugh if his
waistcoat be too long or his bag too large, and frequently marry him after all,
and blush at their folly.

I do not recollect how I extricated myself from that dilemma. The young ladies
seemed to be rather frolicksome, but for the rest, were good and harmless
creatures, whose acquaintance I made in a trice. They asked me how I liked
Hanover? whether I intended to make a long stay, etc. etc. The conversation was
soon at an end, the replies and questions grew drier and drier, and I secretly
rejoiced at the fortunate idea of Lady Amelia (the Baron's daughter whom I had
first seen at the tea-table,) who laid her work down and went to a piano forte,
which stood at the other end of the apartment. "I don't care (thought I) how
indifferently she plays; it will at least save me the trouble of talking
nonsense; I need but pretend to be all ear, and may give vent to my thought as
I please." I placed a couple of chairs by the instrument, for her and myself,
and we sat down.

Amalia laid a sonata of Hosminster upon the desk, and pulled off her gloves.
Gracious heaven! what a hand did I perceive! So white, so round, so little and
so full -- whoever is led through life by such a hand must walk on roses. But
all this was nothing to what followed. She began to play, and her notes stole
upon my heart. The tip of every finger seemed to have a soul; every movement of
the sweet enchantress spoke forcibly to the heart. I thought it dangerous to
listen any longer to her enchanting strains, and was going to withdraw my eyes
from the beautiful hand, when they unfortunately were caught by her bosom,
which rendered my situation still more dangerous. I tell you, dear uncle, there
is not such another bosom in the world. If the fire of your imagination should
be extinguished, you need but recall to your memory that happy moment when you
met your sainted Welli the first time, and was hailed by the sight of her
swelling bosom. What you felt then was but trifling, it was Greenland cold, if
compared with the fire which ran through my veins while I sat by Amalia's side.
How the transparent gauze heaved and was swelled! Cato would have smiled, and
Plato, forgetting his dreams, blinked at her neckerchief with half-closed eyes.
I grew dizzy, forgot myself, dropped my head, and my lips imprinted a warm kiss
upon her hand. Amalia blushed; my perplexity was greater than I can express.
She continued to play, was out of time, touched the wrong keys; I knew not
where I was. In short, our hearts had understood each other; however, I shall
tell you in my next letter, how I betrayed her eyes, and at last her lips, into
the sweet confession that I am not indifferent to her, etc. etc.

VIII. Nicolaus to William.
Heaven protect us! my poor nephew has lost his understanding! upon my soul he
has! When you write again to your old uncle, you will do well not to introduce
Plato, the soul in the tip of the fingers, and similar nonsense. What is your
whole love affair to me? I will advise you not to tease me again in a further
letter with your amorous declamations, and desire you not to draw any further
comparisons between your dulcinea and my Welli. Marry the girl, in the name of
God, but don't pester me with your description of her hand and bosom; all this
is nonsense. The hand will not always be round and full, nor will the bosom
always heave; you may be sure of it. An union for life requires more important
considerations. Many a husband would rather lay upon a stone, than on the
swelling bosom of a scold.

However, all this is nothing to me. I do not care whether you marry a swelling
bosom and a white hand, or any thing else; that is your business; the happier
you are, the more pleasure it will give me. But it is a barefaced fal^hood
when you pretend that I am as cold as an inhabitant of Greenland, if compared
to you and that I was as frosty as snow in situations in which you think your
heart to be all on fire.

However, I shall be glad if you can contrive to make that enthusiastic fit
last all your life. But I am not pleased at all to learn that you are in love
with the daughter of a man of rank; she will be infected with so many strange
manners, whims, and formalities as to be very little pleased with the Indian
simplicity of your poor old uncle. I tell you, nephew, you will not be able to
prevail upon me to come to your wedding; for the tone of your societies, as you
describe it, is much too stiff for me.

But how come I to talk already of the wedding? as you do not yet know whether
the girl will take you, or, which is the same, whether her parents will receive
you as their son-in-law? Consider, nephew, a minister of state, a Baroness, an
honorable Miss, and plain Mr. Ortenberg -- I see a tempest rising in the sky;
the vessel is not yet in port. If, however, money should be able to contribute
something to pilot it safely into the harbor, you may tell them that you have
five thousand dollars a year, and will have as much again after the death of
your old uncle, Nicolaus.

IX. William to Nicolaus.
Kindest best of uncles, your paternal love has drawn tears of gratitude from
my eyes. I will not speak much about it; but if God conduct me once happily to
your arms, I will prove to you that the seeds of your generosity were not
scattered on a sterile foil.

Being sure of your approbation, I have ventured to make application to the
parents of my Amelia; they were startled and perplexed, and gave me an
ambiguous answer. I requested my friend W** to reconnoitre the ground for me; a
whole week was spent in consultations with the whole family. My plebian origin
was put in one scale, and my five thousand a year was put in the other; the
tongue was in the middle. Amelia loves me sincerely; I am proud of this sweet
conviction; however her heart was not asked.

They sent me at last word by a near relation, that I should have the girl if I
would purchase a patent for nobility. It is a mere whim my dear uncle, but what
can I do? Amalia is innocent of it, and my happiness is at stake. I have
already spoken to a genealogist, and shown him our family seal, which as you
know has a man with a whip upon the helmet. He assures me that our family must
be extremely old, and proves by our arms that it formerly was noble. He says
the Scythians had once made a long inroad into Asia; their slaves seized upon
their houses and wives during their absence, and took to arms, when their
masters returned. After they had sought a long time with alternate success, an
old Scythian proposed at last to his brethren in arms, to use only the whip
against the refractory slaves, instead of warlike weapons. His idea was
generally approved and carried into execution; every warrior seized a whip, the
sight of which recalled all the servile pusillanimity of the slaves, and behold
they threw down their arms, and took to flight. The Novogarodians, whose town
lies in Sarmatia, struck a medallion in memory of that event, upon which a
horseman brandishes a long whip; and the old Scythian who first started that
idea, was permitted to bear the man with the whip in his arms.

You see, dear uncle, that our family is pretty ancient. I expect your answer
with impatience, and hope you will have the kindness to send me a bill of
exchange; for you know that now adays a person must have money if he wants to
be made a noble man.

X. Nicolaus to William.
No, no, William, it cannot be! Your genealogist is a fool as well as yourself.
How can you talk of Scythians and Sarmatians? We are honest Germans and nothing
else. I will give you an explanation in my manner of the fellow with the whip.
I should think that our ancestor was an honest carter who led his wagon and
his four greys or blacks from one town to the other, and walked humbly by the
side of his cattle. He, probably, saved as much by his industry, as enabled him
to make himself comfortable in his old age, and to leave a good fortune to his
children. His children being desirous to preserve the memory of their
industrious father in the family, put a carter with a whip at the top of the
helmet, where it has remained to the present day. This sounds more natural and
probable than the story of your genealogist, and you need not be ashamed of
having had a carter for an ancestor, for his profession was ten times more
honorable than that of an highwayman, which was that of all the cavaliers of
those times.

There has been one before you of our family, who was as great a fool as
yourself. He did not like the carters whip, and pretended that it ought to be a
monk with a scourge, asserting boldly that the engraver had lengthened it out
of ignorance into a whip. I never shall forget the answer which my father gave
him. "Cousin," said he, "would you rather have a lazy big bellied monk for an
ancestor, than an industrious useful carter? The scourge has never been able to
drive any evil out of the world, but we owe, perhaps, to the whip, our present
prosperity." Hark ye, nephew, these were the sentiments of your grandfather, I
would therefore advise you not to speak disrespectfully of the whip.

As for your purchasing a title at Vienna, I will not hear another word of it.
A title bought for money is still less worth, than one that has been inherited,
and since I have read in Schloezer's Journal how much is to be paid for a
patent of a count, baron, and nobleman, I cannot help thinking with contempt of
these despicable practices.

The bestowing of titles was originally a most excellent institution; they were
obtained only by merit and courage, and the dignity of knight did not even
descend to the children. The same practice is still kept up in China and other
rational countries, where the father is a minister of state while the son is a
common sailor, if he be not deserving of a better station. Such a title is
worth while accepting, and we bow willingly to such a noble man. However, the
beardless boys who rove our country, and cause themselves to be styled my Lord,
are in my eyes less respectable than a laborious Paria The Parias compose the
lowest and most despised cast or tribe in India. Those that come near them are
considered as being impure. They must make themselves known already at a great
distance by loud cries, if they will not run the risk of being killed by the
first person that meets them.
of the coast of Coromandel. Our sovereigns ought to be ashamed of bestowing
for the sake of dirty lucre, their patent's nobility, to fellows who have no
other merit besides that which they derive from their pelf, and thereby destroy
the spur of honor which is the main spring of monarchies.

This is my creed with regard to this point, and you may easily conclude that
you neither will obtain my consent nor money to purchase a title. Deserve a
title by your superior merit, and I shall honor you for it, and be proud to
call you Baron Ortenberg.

Till then farewell! You may look out for another wife.

CHAP. XII.
Fell prejudice by darkness bred,
Stalks slaught'ring through the world to shed
The blood of innocence; destruction goes
Before the monster, nameless woes
Are in its rear; its noxious breath
Blasts humble merit, winged with death
And black despair are its decrees:
Virtue herself bends often her knees
And worships at the monster's shrine
And stains with disgrace her divine
And bliss dispensing deeds, imbrues
Her hands with brother-blood, subdues
Her noblest feelings, shuts her ears
Against Pity's voice, beholds the tears
Of weeping suff'rers with disdain;
And cleaves the breaking heart in twain.
Ye Gods of earth, unite to tear
The monster's mask, and break its spear
Which slaughters thousands and destroys
The social bond. Behold and shed
A mournful tear, a tree which spread
Its fruitful branches in the air,
Is worthy of your tender care,
And long the furious tempests stood,
Is disgraced by a poisoned shoot.

POOR William, you did not expect to receive such a letter of your good old
uncle. How beautiful did Hope, the arch-deceiver, paint your approaching
happiness to you? how joyfully did you anticipate in Amalia's arms the bliss of
future days! The confident tone in which he had announced his uncle's consent,
procured him free access to the Baron's house; he was permitted to take a seat
by Amalia's side at table, to attend her on her excursions, yea, even to see
her sometimes in her own apartment. The sweet girl, accustomed herself to
regard him as her intended husband, gave free vent to all her feelings, and
gradually buried the arrow of love so deep in her bosom, as neither to be able
nor inclined to pull it out again.

The old honest Baron who in the very beginning had approved of young
Ortenberg's courtship, but was entirely under petticoat government, was
rejoiced, on account of the smallness of his fortune, to have an opportunity of
marrying Amalia, his darling daughter, to a man like Ortenberg; he cared
nothing about his plebeian origin, and the foolish demand that he should
purchase a title at Vienna, originated entirely in the head of his dear
helpmate. The Baroness was, indeed, glad to have an opportunity of getting rid
of a girl whose blooming beauty eclipsed her sading charms.

She resolved, at the same time, to condescend to accept of her intended
son-in-law, a present of a pair of brilliant earrings, or any precious trifle
of that sort, and to do him the honor of giving splendid balls and sumptuous
suppers at his expense, which the declining state of her purse, and the
universal intrusion of her plebeian creditors, had prevented her to do for
years. How grateful soever these prospects were to her favorite propensities;
yet I would not have the reader to suppose that they were sufficient to procure
her consent to receive William without a title into her family. Her mo^^o was:
Pain bis et honneur! and if William, like the kings of Persia, could have
assigned the revenues of a whole province for every piece of her dress, all his
provinces would have been ranked among that class of things which, indeed, can
be borrowed without being paid for, but cannot be compared with a rotten piece
of parchment.

Poor William! the post is arrived, the postman is already in the street in
which you live, you stand at the window with a beating heart, he enters your
house, the servant brings you a letter, which, indeed, is sealed with the
family seal, upon which the Scythian brandishes his whip, but is so light and
thin, that it is impossible it could contain a few hundreds of yellow
comforters. But who knows? the useful invention of bills of exchange, which
alone ought to be sufficient to endear the Jews to us, affords some reason to
hope that it may be animated with a slip of paper which begins with the words:
Please to pay three weeks after date, etc. etc.

He opened the letter, read it impatiently, threw it indignantly upon the
table, took it up again, perused it once more, and folded it and at last put it
into his pocket with a deep sigh. "What shall I do? what will the Baroness say?
what Amalia? what her father?" These questions revolved in his head like the
vortices of Cartesius, till he resolved at last to write once more to his
uncle, to attack his heart with the eloquence of love, to paint his
disconsolation, his despair and to leave his mistress and her parents in the
error that he had not yet received an answer from his uncle, till he should
have ascertained what effect his epistle would have on his flinty heart.

He sat down and drew up a letter, but I must decline repeating to my readers
all the arguments and ideas which he introduced; for his disconsolate epistle
swelled to the size of a book, a treatise in which he labored to prove, that
it is absolutely necessary we should accommodate ourselves to the follies and
humors of the world, supporting his arguments by the opinions of ancient and
modern philosophers, and non-philosophers, and elucidating them by a powerful
host of examples. "Would you not, my dearest uncle," wrote he amongst others:
"have thought the old Bramin Akbar to be the most cruel and unjust of men, if
he had refused to unite his Welli to you, because you was no Tamulian, and did
not belong to his cast?"

"Very true!" replied Nicolaus: "and I give you leave to form any opinion of
Baron Wall, who will not let you have his daughter, because you are no Baron."

"Did you not yourself," continued William: "submit to the rites which he
prescribed to you? Did you not perform the Sandi wane, did you not adorn the
Lingam with flowers, not because you thought this was a more powerful ceremony,
than the sprinkling with holy water, but because the possession of Welli
depended upon the performance of that ceremony? Believe me, dearest uncle, we
should be compelled to fly to dreary deserts, to turn Anchorites, and to
renounce the conversation with men for ever, if we were to refuse every little
sacrifice to the rooted prejudices of our times. You are more to me than a
father, you gave me more than life, for I owe to your generous care every
accomplishment of my mind which renders me worthy of possessing my Amalia. You
destroy your own work, and rob me in one moment of every thing you gave me, by
depriving me of that sweet hope. Amalia alone is able to spur me to arrive at
greater perfection, and I shall turn a villain, if I cannot obtain her."

"You may turn any thing," replied Nicolaus, "except a nobleman for money. Did
I not tell you that you should endeavor to deserve a title by your merits?
Have you no courage to earn an order by devoting your abilities to the state?
Fie, shame! Love ought to raise your sentiments, and you whine like an
effeminate Corydon."

"Well, I then will turn soldier!" exclaimed William in a passion: "the
military line is the only one in which I may hope to purchase that miserable
distinction at the expense of my blood. I will fly to encounter dangers! I will
voluntarily fly into the midst of scenes of carnage and destruction, to which
the gray veteran creeps trembling and reluctant, will attract the general's
notice, and either wrest an order from the icy hand of death, or fall on the
field of battle."

Thus spoke William, glowing with youthful ardour, and animated by the fire of
the most ardent love, with enthusiastic fervor. His amorous frenzy made it
appear as easy to him to mount the summit of the Cordilleras, a^ it would be be
to step over an ant hill. However, he found it by far more difficult to (...)
the resolution to show to his mistress, and her proud mother, the mountains
which prejudice on one side, and well meant pertinacity on the other had thrown
up between them. Amalia soon read melancholy in his eyes, and drew the dreadful
secret from his heart.

After an awful pause, during which a pearly tear stole from her blue eye, she
offered him her hand with a mournful smile:

"Dear William! said she: I am scarcely seventeen years old, and you are only
in your twentyfifth. I will remain constant to you."

That William swam in an ocean of bliss, that he clasped Amalia in his arms,
and sealed the vow of eternal fidelity a thousand times upon her lips, is
matter of course which scarcely wants being mentioned. It is equally obvious
that a conversation must have (...) between the Baron and his lady, nearly of
the following tenor:

Baroness. He shall not come any more to our house.


Baron. But he is a polite and sensible man.


Baroness. He is no nobleman.


Baron. But our daughter loves him.


Baroness. She shall not love him; he is no nobleman.


Baron. However, he has a fine fortune.


Baroness. It would be better if he had a title.


Baron. But he would make Amalia happy.


Baroness. It is impossible; for he is no nobleman.


Baron. This is mere prejudice, my dear; he is an honest man; and who knows
what mean profession our ancestors may have carried on.


Baroness. I know nothing of your ancestors, my Lord; but as for mine, I must
request you to keep your remarks to yourself. My ancestor Hans of Wumpsenpumps
was knighted by Emperor Henry, the bird-catcher, and tilted at the first
tournament which was given in the year 936, after the creation of the world.


Baron. You mean after the birth of Christ?


Baroness. No, no, I tell you after the creation of the world. Christ was no
nobleman, and the cavaliers were not used to count the years from his nativity.
-- However, you have interrupted me. Eberhard of Wumpsenpumps tilted at the
tournament which Duke Lewis of Swabia gave at Constance on the Bodensee, and
gained the principal prize. Henry of Wumpsenpumps had the same honor at the
tournament which was held at Zurich, in the year 1165. Then --


Baron. Yes, yes, my dear, then comes Maximilian of Wumpsenpumps who tilted at
Nuremberg, under Emperor Henry VI. in the year 1197, and so forth. I know it
all by heart.


Baroness. Very well! if you then know it, how can you entertain the most
distant idea of marrying our daughter to Mr. Ortenberg?


Baron. Because I think that your ancestors have not tilted to ruin my
daughter's happiness.


Baroness. Stupid nonsense! I will make her happy. I have a count in view for
her.


Baron. I hope not Count Wimmer Wammer?


Baroness. The very same.


Baron. But you don't consider, my dear, that he is a downright blockhead.


Baroness. He is a count, and this is quite sufficient.


The Baron shrugged his shoulders and said not a word more, for my lady
threatened to faint, an argument which always convinced her good natured
helpmate. Ortenberg was therefore dismissed with a cold excuse, a proud toss of
the nose and a warm kiss. I leave my readers to guess who gave him the first
and second, and from whom he received the last farewell.

CHAPTER XIII.
It Is hard vice triumphs, and that virtue grieves;
Yet often affliction purifies the mind,
Kind benefits often flow from means unkind.
Were the whole known, that we uncouth suppose,
Doubtless, 'twould beauteous symmetry disclose.
The naked cliff, that singly rough remains,
In prospect dignifies the fertile plains;
Lead-colour'd clouds, in scattering fragment seen,
Show, though in broken views, the blue ^erene.
Severe distresses industry inspire;
Thus captives often excelling arts acquire,
And boldly struggle through a state of shame
To life, ease, plenty, liberty and fame.
We pass through want to wealth, through dismal strife.
To calm content, through death to endless life.
SAVAGE.
"DEAR uncle, I am going into the army!" exclaimed William to old Nicolaus,
when he met him at the foot of the Swiss mountains, in the lonely temple which
concealed Welli's ashes: "I am going into the army, and shall set off
tomorrow."

Nicolaus. I don't care, if you go today. Since when have you been seized with
that blood thirsty idea?


William. Since paternal love has fled from your heart.


Nicolaus. It Is false! upon my soul, it is false! Young man, young man! I have
placed you on a bed of roses, and now when you find a ruffled leaf in it, you
groan and whine, and think you are the most wretched of mortals, as if the
whole system of the world were to move after your commands. -- What a miserable
philosopher you are!


William. Be not angry, dear uncle! since I first saw Amalia, I know of no
other system but of the system of love, and view every object through a
colored glass.


Nicolaus. But love generally gives to her glasses a roseate color?


William. Successful love does! however, mine must be satisfied with a small
mixture of green, the livery of hope.


Nicolaus. Never mind! love always goes through all the colors of the rainbow,
till at last every cloud disappears from the horizon, and only the sky-blue of
friendship is seen, and then our days are serenest. -- Have you put an end to
the farce with Amalia?


William. (Hurt). Farce, dear uncle? -- what a word! Appears true and congenial
love so ludicrous to you? how ill does this accord with your vaunted passion
for the excellent woman whose ashes are enclosed in this urn!


Nicolaus. Peace, peace! don't be offended; I meant no harm. However, I shall
not ask your pardon before a year is elapsed, provided you then are still
serious in your passion for Amalia. You will see numerous pretty faces, hear
many harmonious warblers.


William. I shall see nothing but the hostile banners, hear nothing but the
thunder of cannons -- where is war? Every moment is precious to me, and
deprives me perhaps for ever of an opportunity of signalizing myself -- did you
not say, dear uncle, that I am to acquire a title by glorious deeds? -- I vow
in the most solemn manner, you shall not see me again until I have acquired an
order, or am in possession of some other badge of honor.


Nicolaus. How that blusters and boils. May I not know, my young hero, under
whose banners you intend to inlist?


William. It is all alike to me. I have no objection to enlist among the
Tartars if they have a mind to attack the Chinese.


Nicolaus. Fie! shame! your blood belongs to your country.


William. To my country? -- The world is my country! I am a cosmopolite.


Nicolaus. You are a fool, a downright fool! There, take it! (he gives him a
leather bag). There are a thousand ducates, go, and serve your king.


A dispute had arisen at that very time between two of the most powerful
monarchs of Europe, which, however, lasted only a short time, because the old
lion, as Raynal says, stepped once more forth from his den, and shook his mane
with noble indignation. William applied for a commission in the army of the
king of Prussia. Fortune was propitious to him. Count *** was just raising a
corpse of light cavalry, and as young Ortenberg distinguished himself by his
noble and polished figure, and wanted not for money, he obtained a commission
as first lieutenant. His captain was shot soon after in a skirmish, and our
hero who had received three wounds on the same occasion, succeeded him in his
command.

You see, kind reader, that our hero is in a fair way to make good his word.
Fortune, thou deceitful ignis fatuus, be kind to him, and light him on the path
of honor, without deserting him maliciously in the morass of danger.

One day -- he just had received a letter from Amalia, new sire rolled through
his veins, he felt himself bold enough to rush into the midst of the most
hazardous dangers -- on that day he rode with about twenty of his men round the
enemy's camp, teazing the out-posts, when he suddenly heard a firing of pistols
at some distance. He rode toward the place of action, and saw a small party of
Prussians fighting against a superior number of Austrian hussars. An old
Prussian General had ventured too far on a reconnoitring party, his retreat was
cut off, and he was so dangerously wounded as scarcely to be able to keep
himself in the saddle. William rushed furiously upon the enemy, paved himself a
way to the General, who was pressed on all sides, and came to his assistance,
at the very moment when an Austrian hussar was on the point of shooting him
through the head. William's sabre severed his arm, the pistol went off, but the
ball hit only the General's horse, who dropped down and rolled himself bleeding
upon his rider. William was also in danger of losing his life, a ball whizzed
by his head, and he received a cut of a sabre in his arm.

The enemy was at length dispersed, the old General was disengaged from under
the dead horse, and carried fainting to his tent. He was carried to bed, a
surgeon dressed his wounds, and he opened his eyes; "Where is the officer who
saved my life?"

William stood at the foot of the bed; the blood streamed from his wound.

"Yes, you are my preserver," said the General, with a faint voice, extending
his hand toward William: "I owe you a great deal; will you favor me with your
name."

William. Captain Ortenberg.


General. Ortenberg? Who was your father?


William. My father was master of the school at W**.


General. (with violent agitation.) Merciful God! -- Children, retire a few
moments.

His people quitted the tent.


General. Captain I perceive the finger of God. I struggle in vain to arm
myself in this hour, which perhaps is my last, with principles which I once
imbibed in the riots of dissipation. The powerful arm of God has seized me. I
cast my eyes beyond the grave, and horrid specter grin at me. Captain, summon
^p all your fortitude, I am the Governor of W**.


William. (ejaculating a scream of horror.) Merciful God! the murderer of my
poor parents!


General. Yes, I am, and confess that this hour is the first of my repentance.
I am at the brink of the grave; do not reject my prayer for forgiveness.


William, being dreadfully agitated, was not able to speak; his father's ghost
stood before him; he imagined he saw his pale, emaciated figure, his breaking
eyes, and that he heard his last groan; he p^t his hand to his sword -- when
his better genius whispered to him: "Recollect the promise which you gave to
your dying father! you have an opportunity to revenge yourself, show that you
are an hero of humanity -- forgive him!"

William struggled a moment, withdrew the hand from the hilt of his sword, and
extended it to the wounded General.

"General!" said he: "I forgive you; you owe this moderation to the shade of my
murdered parent. I vowed to him, when he was dying, that I would not avenge his
sufferings, otherwise I would have pursued you to the center of the globe,
plunged my sword into your heart, or died by your hand, to load your conscience
with the murder of a whole family. I knew that you was in the army, and shunned
the sight of you; however, fate had decreed it otherwise. Die in peace, and if
you should meet the spirit of my father beyond the grave, tell him that I have
kept my promise faithfully.

General. I will, generous young man! I wish it were in my power to retrieve
part of my crimes before I die, and to indemnify the son for the injuries and
sufferings I have caused to the father.


William. Indemnify: What do you call indemnification? Can you raise the dead?
o^ do you imagine yourself able to purchase peace of conscience with money! I
forgive you General, out of regard for the last command of my unfortunate
parent; and you mistake me very much if you impute this action to any other
motive.


General. And would you really deny me the satisfaction of assisting the son of
a man whom I have ruined?


William. I want no money, but serve for honor. If you can assist me to attain
this object, you will render it easier for me to forget what I have lost
through you.


A chaplain entered the tent.

"Before I recur to you for consolation," said the General, "I must first ease
my conscience by paying part of a debt which I owe to this young man."

His secretary was called in, and he indicted to him, in William's presence, a
report to the king, stating:

"That he had been surprised on a reconnoitring party, by a superior number of
enemies, that Captain Ortenberg had come to his assistance in the most critical
moment, and rescued him by his uncommon ^ravery from the Austrians,
notwithstanding their great superiority; that he not only had saved his life,
but also rendered the State the most important service, as he had plans and
papers in his letter-case, which, without Ortenberg's assistance would
unavoidably have fallen into the hands of the Austrians. He added, he could not
reflect without trembling on the dreadful consequences which this might have
produced, and requested the king to reward the brave Captain according to his
deserts."

He signed the report with a trembling hand, and dispatched it by a courier.
William quitted the tent, and the General was left in private with his chaplain.

It is no difficult task to convert, at the brink of the grave, a libertine,
who never took the trouble to sin after principles, and was a free-thinker, for
no other reason than that of having an opportunity to stun his conscience. The
Rev. Mr. Simson, a stout square-bodied man, who had courage enough to exchange
the bible for a sword, in case of necessity, and to march at the head of an
army, now raised his thundering voice, shaking the conscience of the wounded
sinner, which just seemed to awake from a long lethargy, painted the eternity
of damnation in horrid colors, and assured the officers on coming out of the
tent, after having exerted his pulmonary powers two hours, that he had saved a
soul from the clutches of the devil.

The General himself imagined that he was suddenly transformed into a pious
Christian; and this persuasion lasted -- till his wounds began to mend,
contrary to all expectation, and he grew tired of repenting. In short, he was
so much (...) in three weeks, as to be able to keep a faro-bank at his
bedside, and after the lapse of five weeks, threw himself again into the arms
of a strumpet.

It is but natural that he now was ashamed of having betrayed so much weakness,
as he called it, and shunned William's company as much as possible. He scarcely
spoke to him when he could not avoid him, spoke doubtfully of his courage, to
palliate his ingratitude to his preserver, and at last, when William's presence
became more and more intolerable to him, conceived the diabolical design of
making away with him in an unsuspected manner. He contrived for this purpose to
cause William to be commanded to all posts of danger. The artless young man,
who thirsted after honor, and suspected no treachery, went cheerfully wherever
he was ordered, and always returned to the camp with additional laurels.

The fame of his courage and zeal for the service, had already reached the ears
of the commander in chief. He enjoyed the respect and love of his brother
officers, and was esteemed by his superiors. Fortune smiled on him.

He was ordered one day to escort a wagon with money, and left the camp at the
first dawn of day. He had not been many hours absent when a courier arrived
from Berlin, and among other dispatches also brought intelligence that the king
had been pleased to grant the brevet of a major to Captain Ortenberg, and to
honor him with the order of Pour le Merit.

Ortenberg's promotion was made known in the army. No countenance bespoke envy,
sincere joy sparkled in every eye; every one wished to be the first harbinger
of that fortunate event; the return of William's regiment was impatiently
waited for; some of his more intimate friends rode out of the camp, to meet him.

The regiment returned at last in the evening. It had been obliged to skirmish
a great deal; the greater part of it had been cut to pieces, many officers
wounded, and some killed -- Captain Ortenberg was among the latter. A pistol
shot had wounded him in the neck; he still kept his seat, though with
difficulty, when another perforated his breast, and he dropped from his horse.
His lieutenant attempted to carry him away; but he was already dying.
Collecting his last remaining strength, he pulled his watch out of his pocket,
gave it to the lieutenant, and conjured him by their mutual friendship, to
deliver it himself to Amalia, and to request her to keep it in remembrance of a
man who had died for her. The lieutenant gave him his word of honor, and he
breathed his last.

Many a rough warrior, many a veteran grenadier wept a tear after him. His
corpse was conveyed to the camp and buried with all military honors.

The order of Pour le Merit adorned his coffin.

LAST CHAPTER.
To weep a tear of grief does not degrade
The wise; but it befits him not to loath
The thorny path: he mounts the sunny top
And leaves beneath his feet the scowling clouds
With mischief big. The wise may wish for death.
But not complain in accents of despair
Of his long journey through the vale of life:
For all experience gained in life bears fruit
Of happiness beyond the peaceful grave.
Joy and the thorns of sorrow are alike
Divided in this world. The Pilgrim who
On roses walks to his long home will tread
On thorns hereafter. My mortal self
No law of gravity will check thy flight
When Death, that messenger of peace and bliss
Dissolves the clay-form'd bonds. We meet again
In yon realms where peace for ever reigns.
These organs which enthral the eternal mind
Are formed by slow degrees for better worlds*
And Death sets free the nobler self from ties
Which bind the bliss-aspiring soul so hard
And wind depressing servitude aw hile.
Take hold, thou Man of woe, of this sweet hope,
When spiteful Fate bestrews thy path with thorns
And moists thy moldy bread with burning tears.
Look up to yon realms of endless bliss,
Where sufferers whose hearts are linked by woe
Will meet again and bless the hand that mixed
The cup of joy with heart-refining grief.

"HE was an excellent fellow! upon my soul he was!" groaned Nicolaus when he
heard that his nephew was dead. "Alas! I now sit here lik Robinson Crusoe on
his solitary island, have every thing in abundance and am nevertheless
destitute of all comforts. The architect has built a beautiful house for me;
but, alas! it is so large, so empty; when I blow my nose in my bed room the
servants hear it in the kitchen, and my apartment is as silent as the grave
when my Canarybirds and parrots don't choose to chatter; one could hear the
death-watch click. I have a fine garden laid out after Hirshfeld's theory;
however there is no other beaten path in it but that which leads to Welli's
mausoleum, and I have no person that calls me from that favorite spot. I have
a beautiful prospect into the mountains, but there is not a soul to whom I
could say: look, what a charming view is this! Of what use is my hoard of gold
to me? not even a beggar knocks at my door with whom I could share it. -- I
have lived long enough! a person may, sometimes live too long. -- Why did I not
reverse the mad law of the Indians? Why did I not share the blazing pile with
the corpse of my dear wife? Who will now execute my last will? Who will commit
my body to the flames? -- Unfeeling and heartless hirelings will surround me
when my breath is gone, incase my body in a dark box, and commit it to
corruption. -- Fie! I have, indeed, lived too long!"

"Thus moaned old honest Nicolaus in his solitude, and he grew week after week
more tired of the world. He rose from his couch, because the morning dawned,
and had not slept; he ate, because it was dinner time, and was not hungry; he
went to bed, because it was night, and was not sleepy.

He was soon tired of leading such a vegetative life. He wished impatiently for
the society of some sympathizing being on whose hand he could walk to the
peaceful grave. He considered some time, and at last sat down to his desk and
wrote to Hanover to Baron Wall.

Sir,
The charms of your daughter have cost my poor nephew his life; I demand an
indemnification for that loss, I consider your Amalia as the widow of my son,
and wish to be permitted to call her daughter. I am an old fellow, possess two
hundred thousand dollars in hard cash, a house and jewels which are worth as
much again. Let me share it with Amalia. I want nothing in return but her
company. She shall close my eyes and cause my body to be burnt. I have only a
few years more to live and then she will be my sole heiress. I shall, indeed
not purchase a title; however, my calling her daughter will not deprive her of
her nobility, and she may bestow her hand upon a count when I am dead.

We two old fellows shall, probably not meet in this life: however, I will give
you a faithful account of her in the next world; upon my soul I will.

I beg you will have the goodness to give the enclosed trifles to your spouse
in my name.

Nicolaus Ortenberg.


The enclosed trifles cosisted of a set of brlliants worth above eight thousand
dollars.

Poor Amalia had not enjoyed one hour of happiness since William's departure.
While Hope, that pleasing deceiver, lived in her bosom, she bore patiently
every harsh treatment of her proud mother, and when her worthy father one day
brought her a newspaper in which Ortenberg's name was mentioned with applause,
her virgin cheeks glowed with the crimson hue of desire; her loving heart beat
with fond expectation. She now looked with ardent desire toward every
post-day, came always down stairs when the letter-carrier knocked at the door,
to receive the newspaper, running with impatient steps up stairs to examine the
wished-for sheets, looked for the name of her beloved William, and found it at
last -- on the list of the killed. --

Poor, unfortunate girl! Alas, how mournfully did now her juvenile days creep
along! She was deprived even of the last consolation of a suffering mind; she
durst not give vent to her tears. She was not permitted to indulge her grief,
was always scolded when she cast her mournful eyes musing to the ground, was
frequently obliged to hear the most cruel insinuations, and suffer herself to
be chided for disgracing her noble birth by mean sentiments, and what was worse
than this, was tormented day after day by the loathsome addresses of the little
bigbellied count.

Thus desponding was her situation, when the letter of honest Nicolaus arrived.
The father was unwilling to part with his daughter; however, the mother who
hoped in vain to overcome Amalia's aversion from the little count, availed
herself joyfully of this opportunity of getting rid of her. She called, indeed
the artless Nicolaus a rude Bear, because he had mentioned her so bluntly by
the vulgar appellation of your Spouse, as he at least ought to have called her
her Ladyship; however, the brilliants appeased her ire a little; she dressed
herself with the precious gift, stepped to the looking glass, and the tongue of
the balance soon inclined to Ortenberg's side. She condescended to agree to his
request.

My readers will easily conceive that Amalia was extremely glad to leave a
house where the love of her father struggled in vain against his weakness, and
the pride of her mother poisoned all her innocent enjoyments, even the bitter
pleasure of melancholy.

The treaty was soon concluded. Amalia enfolded the knees of her father, his
tears trickled down upon her hand, his blessing consecrated the hour of
parting. The mother kissed her upon her cheek, and declared that she would give
her her curse if ever she should dare to disgrace the noble family of the
Wumpsenpumpses by throwing her heart away upon a plebeian. Amalia flung herself
into the carriage, attended by an old meager french duenna and proceeded
toward switzerland.

The old man received her with open arms, and sent the French antiquity
immediately back to Hanover. He felt in a few hours benevolence for Amalia;
loved her after a ^ew days, and not many weeks were passed when he doated on
her. She accommodated herself to all the whims and singularities of his old
age, wept with him at Welli's urn, was silent when he was disinclined to chat,
read to him when he was cheerfully disposed, sat down to the harpsicord and
lulled him asleep by her soothing play. She surprised him frequently by a rural
feast, summoned his tenants to partake of his bounty on the pleasure ground
which joined his house, and forced him sometimes to confess; that participating
in the pleasures of others is the highest and purest bliss.

His heart was gratefully sensible of what Amalia did for him, and he meditated
frequently in private how he could give her some unexpected pleasure, and the
day on which he had the satisfaction to succeed in it was to him a day of
festivity. Thus one month elapsed after the other, and the rays of the rising
sun emerging from behind the Alps, were hailed every morn by a content, if not
a happy couple.

One morning -- Amalia had just risen. -- a servant informed her a gentleman
wanted to speak to her. She referred him to Nicolaus; but he insisted upon
speaking to Lady Amalia Wall herself. She went down into the parlour and beheld
an officer, who presented himself to her with modest propriety as Baron
Waldburg. They sat down on the sofa, conversing on different subjects; the
Lieutenant seemed distressed how he should introduce the object of his visit.

"My Lady," began he at last, timidly, "I went in search of you to Hanover, to
comply with my word of honor which I gave to a dying friend. This watch --
belonged formerly to Major Ortenberg. He fell by my side and requested me
before he died to deliver this watch into your own hands, and to desire you to
keep it for his sake. -- Forgive me if I, perhaps, tear again a wound open
which scarcely is closed. -- I should have executed the last request of my
dying friend much sooner, if the service had not prevented me."

Amalia swam in tears; she pressed the watch to her heart. A small seal which
she had given William at Hanover was fixed to it. She wanted to thank the
friend of her lover, -- extended her hand toward him, but could not speak. The
idea that her name had been the last word which her dear William had uttered,
filled her heart with unspeakable sadness. Nicolaus now joined them, saw the
object of Amalia's tears, and could not retain his. I wish I had suffered him
to buy a title!" This was all he could say.

That day was devoted to sorrow. Lieutenant Waldburg staid dinner, during which
little was ate and less spoken. The full moon found them in the evening sitting
silently at Welli's urn.

I now shall lay down my pen. Nicolaus and Amalia are still living, whether in
Switzerland or at the foot of the Kaukasus will be indifferent to my readers.
Nicolaus moistens Welli's ashes with his tears, and Amalia looks frequently at
William's watch, and counts every hour which brings her nearer toward the
grave.

THE END.

