Reparation; OR, THE SCHOOL FOR LIBERTINES. A DRAMATIC PIECE IN THREE ACTS.

BY THOMAS PIKE LATHY.

As Performed at the Boston Theater, with great applause.

Published for the Benefit of the Author.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY JOHN RUSSELL, 1800.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Lord Stanton, Mr Whitlock. Old Latouche, Mr Kenny. Young Latouche, Mr S.
Powell. Polaco, Mr Simpson. Pastor, Mr Harper. Landlord. Mr Kedey. Blanco, Mr
Villiers. disguised as Spaniards.
Chapone, Mr Munto. First Ruffian, Mr Coals. 2d. do., Mr Moore.
Child, about 7 years old, Miss Graupner. Pastor's Servant.
WOMEN,
Julietta, Mrs Whitlock. Valence, Mrs Harper. Laborers, etc. etc.
SCENE -- Switzerland.

Time of Representation, from Daybreak till Night.

Reparation; OR THE SCHOOL FOR LIBERTINES.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Inside of a shabby Inn. -- Time, Daybreak. BLANCO discovered sleeping on a
bench. A stool with an extinguished Lamp, and Bottle by his side. Loud knocking
without. BLANCO endeavors to rouse himself. WHAT, hoa! house!


(Without) Blanco. ( Rubbing his eyes) What hoa! house! ( mimicking) If you
don't cease your knocking, you will soon knock the house about our ears. (
Knocking again) A plague of your manners, I say -- to disturb orderly, sober
people at this time of day! I have not slept time enough to recover my senses --
The fumes of my, lastnight's cup are hardly out of my head yet. I believe the
best way to drive them out, will be to pour a fresh cargo in. ( Sits up,
reaches the bottle and drinks)( Without) (Louder knocking) House! hoa!


Blan. ( Takes the bottle from his mouth and comes forward)) What with your
cursed noise, and the confounded whizzing in my head, I think I have enough to
do to keep my legs. ( Staggers) Now, if my master should awake (and the devil
himself could not sleep with such a clattering about his ears) the shower of
blows he will rain upon my shoulders w'on't steady me much; so, I Will even let
you in, whoever, you are, to keep your tongues still, and my bones whole.


(Exit with bottle) Re-enter immediately with LORD STANTON and Young LATOUCHE,
in great coats and fur caps. Blan. This way, your honors, this way; I beg your
honor's pardon for keeping you so long at the door, but --


Lord Stanton. No apology, my good fellow! we disturb you early; the darkness
made us mistake the road, or we should have arrived last night.


Young Latouche. Prithee, friend! is honest old Josefo, who kept this house
some ten years ago, still alive.


Blan. No! he is gone -- these shoulders helped to carry him to his grave.


Young Lat. How long has he been dead!


Blan. Just eight months after I came here to live; which was -- let me see,
five years last sheep shearing.


Young Lat. Heaven rest him! He was as worthy, humane, honest --


Blan. Sober man as -- myself. ( Hiccups.)


Lord Stan. Well, friend, take our great coats, and dry them; send your present
master to us; then unload our chaise, and carry the luggage to an apartment.


Blan. I Will go, send my master presently, your honors; he lies a bed pretty
late of mornings, because he crooks his elbow pretty much of nights ( makes
signs of drinking) you understand me?


Lord Stan. Yes, yes, your meaning's pretty plain.


Blan. Plain! why -- yes -- I am a plain man for certain; but a man might not
be a bit the less honest and sober, for all he be plain; my master, as I was
telling your honors -- Lord! what a blessing it is for masters to have honest,
industrious, sober servants. ( drinks) Why now, if it was not for Blanco -- but
I Will say nothing; I Will about your honor's commands straight.


(Exit reeling) Lord Stan. Ha! ha! ha! straight, indeed! -- ( turning to Young
Latouche who appears pensive) Why, Latouche, your native place does not seem to
cheer your spirits; why so thoughtful, man?


Young Lat. Excuse me, my Lord; whatever joy I might feel at my return to this
much loved spot, is damped by the reflection of what may have been occasioned
by my own imprudence. I left a revered father, a beloved sister, to fly from
the torments of a hopeless passion! Should any misfortune have happened to
either of them in my absence, I shall ever look on myself as the cause of it.


Lord Stan. But, why regard only the gloomy side of the picture? Figure to
yourself, a father enjoying a down till of life, unclouded by sorrow; cheered
by the attentions of a much loved virtuous daughter; and enlivened by the hopes
of once more clasping in his arms, a son ripened to manhood, humaniz'd by a
knowledge of the world, and returning to be the prop and comfort of his last
moments. And then --


Young Lat. And then, my Lord, to continue your Iandscape, let me behold all
this sunshine prospect, obscured at once by beholding my Valence (whom absence,
so far from erasing has impressed deeper in my heart) in the arms of another;
all her vows of neverceasing love and truth broken; myself the jest of all my
former comrades; and then --


Lord Stan. Latouche; but that I have had unequivocal proofs of your fortitude,
I should be almost tempted to doubt it. Is this the man, who so undauntedly
risk'd his life to defend mine.


Young Lat. My Lord; there is a wide difference between risking one's life in
the cause of humanity, and sitting down calmly, the sport of unmerited
misfortune. Was it my fault, that I was born of parents inferior, in point of
affluence, to my Valence's? Was it I who formed her father's heart of so flinty
materials that he would rather sacrifice his daughter to the embraces of a rich
man she detested, than see her happy in the arms of a poor man she loved?


Lord Stan. All granted; but you may still find your Valence constant; and if
riches are the only obstacle to your happiness; my possessions are far superior
to her father's; and those I need not tell you, you may command. Come! come!
cheer un wandering during the whole night has depressed your spirits you must
--


Enter LANDLORD in nightgown and cap. Landlord. Gentlemen, I am your honors
most obedient --


Lord Stan. The master of the house. I presume.


Land. At your honor's service


Lord Stan. You're just in time, I was going to prescribe to my friend here,
who is fatigued, and low spirited, a drop of your cordial --


Land. Truly, a most sovereign, prescription! For these fifty years that I have
kept an Inn, I never once knew my light-wines fail to cure heavy hearts.


Lord Stan. The Malaga, a bottle warmed with some spice -- we'll follow you
presently --

(Exit Landlord) Come Latouche, by the time you have got to the bottom of the
bottle, you will --


Young Lat. Excuse me, my Lord; duty is before every other consideration, I
must fly to my father.


Lord Stan. You wouldn't, surely, be rash enough, after so long an absence;
consider how dangerous the surprise may be.


Young Lat. ( Pauses) I believe you are right, my Lord; my impatience renders
me too precipitate.


Lord Stan. Take my advice; dispatch a messenger to bring him hither; I shall
go to rest for a while; but will be ready to receive him, and break your
arrival; and, as lovers don't stand in need of rest, when near the beloved
object, you go in search of yours.


Young Lat. Oh! my Lord --


Lord Stan. Love and Duty now are at even and odd. Do you go settle the one,
and leave the other to me -- But stay -- your change of dress has made an
agreeable amendment in your person -- this, perhaps, ( giving him a purse) will
be no disagreeable addition to your pocket, if not in your mistress's eyes, at
least in her father's.


Young Lat. My Lord, you overwhelm me with your bounty --


Lord Stan. No more of that! -- had not Providence sent you to my rescue, that
dross had been useless to me; can I do less than share it with him, who risk'd
his existence for me. I don't think of repaying your services -- Heaven alone
can do that. -- So go, see your mistress, and be blessed.


(Exit. Young Lat. ( solus) Blessed! -- yes, were I assured that my father and
sister were alive and well, and my Valence true hearted, I should be the
happiest dog in the creation! -- I don't know why, something damps my rising
joy --


Enter BLANCO. Blan. Your honor, the wine and a good fire are ready in the
inner room.


Young Lat. ( Aside) It may be without reason -- I Will try to shake off this
groundless fear. -- ( To Blanco) Hark'ye, honest fellow, do you know Old
Latouche, whose house is at the foot of the mountain about five miles hence?


Blan. Oh yes -- But he has never been in this house since old master's death.


Young Lat. But he lives --?


Blan. I Am very sure of that -- for if he would been dead, they couldn't have
buried him without my help -- nothing done in this village without Blanco!


Young Lat. Thank Heaven! I Am one doubt lighter, I have still a father! --
Well, my good Blanco, and his daughter --


Blan. I know nothing about her. The old man hasn't been our customer, as I
said before, since old Josefo's death -- I did hear he was melancholy about a
'scape grace son, that run away and turned soldier, and all for love of a woman.


Young Lat. Whew! there is a cut and thrust! -- well, Blanco, can you do me a
service?


Blan. You ought to know whether I can or not.


Young Lat. But will you?


Blan. If I can, I will; for look ye, your honor; though I love my bottle as well
as I love my life, dam'me, but I Would lay down either to serve my fellow creatures!


Young Lat. Would you? give me your hand. -- The service I require of you will
not be dangerous; it is only to go on an errand to Old Latouche's.


Blan. I ll do it, your honor -- you could not have found a fitter man in the
whole village to send of an errand, only somehow or other, I am main apt to
forget it before I Am got half way; but if your honor will put it down in black
and white --


Young Lat. I will -- follow me, and I Will write the letter instantly -- look'ye
-- here is something for your trouble in going; and, if your return be speedy, I
will give you another.


[Exit. Blan. ( solus) Hey! what! a Crown ( rubbing his eyes) Do I see clear?
or does my morning's draught make me see double? No, it is as I live; well! I
declare, what a fine thing it is to go of an errand for such a free hearted
gentleman! I do believe, now, that if he were to put such another piece of
money into my hand, with such a good natured look, and say "good Blanco, go to
the Devil" -- I should be tempted to go, if I could but find the way.

SONG.
BLANCO is my name,
And I Have got the fame
Of a devilish honest, clever, handy fellow;
For all work, d've see,
I Will fit you to a T.
But I always come off best, when I Am mellow.
I know not how it is,
With a watery quiz,
Without wine, I Am like fish that is out of water;
And I never knew,
My steps half so true,
As when I carried such a load, that I Would totter.
When I wake, all is buz!
I take the other guz, ( Drinks)
Then I trips it off, so neatly, and so steady;
At night if I reel,
Till head takes place of heel,
You can only say, my master's wine is heady.

[Exit SCENE II. -- Swiss view behind -- Sunrise -- Peasants discovered going
to labor.
Song and Chorus, by the peasants. Enter POLACO and VALENCE. Polaco. To work!
to work! ye sluggish knaves! was there any shame in ye, the blazing sun would
discover it; but no -- ye can eat, drink and sing; that is all ye are good for,
ye lazy, lubberly, idle, giggling, tittle tattling --


Valence. My dear sir, how can you be ever scolding the folks so -- they all
strive to do their best.


Pol. Hold your cursed clack! cannot you be content to be ever thwarting and
vexing me yourself, but you must encourage my laborers to do the same -- ( To
Laborers) go about your business! to work, I say!

[Exeunt Laborers. -- and now, Miss, a word with you -- you know after
infinite trouble, I have at length found a husband for you -- one of the
greatest, dignified Grandees in all Spain!


Val. Lord; Sir, what signifies all his dignity, and grandeur to me, so I cannot
love him.


Pol. But you shall love him; and, if you don't, I Will turn you adrift to perish
like a miserable wretch, as old Latouche did his daughter.


Val. How can you, Sir, delight to torture me so; you know she was the friend,
the companion of my youth.


Pol. Yes; and her hopeful, runaway, sixpence-aday soldier of a brother! he was
she friend and companion of your youth too. I know what makes you so attached
to that name. However, thank fortune! he has not been heard of these ten years;
so you may give him up for lost, and if you don't think fit to marry Don
Chicano, Estrapada; De Olla Podrida, Grandee of Spain, Knight of La Mancha, and
Viceroy of Barataria.


Enter CHAPONE disguised as a Spaniard, and strutting with a vast deal of
affected dignity. Chap. Right, Polaco, very right. After the pains I have
condescended to take, to instruct you in the names of my titles, honors, and
dignities, you have at length, got them pretty perfect; but to what purpose
were you reciting them now?


Pol. In order, your Highness, to impress on my daughter's mind the highest
sense of your dignity, and of the honor you intend her.


( Bowing very low) Chap. Honor, indeed! hem! ( aside) if you knew all. Well,
Polaco, you may go about your business now; I wish to have some private
conference with your daughter;


Pol. Well; your Highness, I obey, I go. ( aside) 'Egad these Grandees are
damned insolent fellows! more titles than manners!


(Going) Chap. What Is that you say?


Pol. That I hoped your Highness would excuse any want of manners.


Chap. Oh, very well: Retire! Exit POLACO, bowing very respectfully) Well,
Valence, have my rank and figure yet made any impression on your heart? (
strutting about)


Val. No. -- Chap. How so?


Val. Because my heart is not disposed to receive them.


Chap. Can you be so blind to your own interest as to refuse the offers of a
man of my condition?


Val. Yes; of any condition -- if --


Chap. If what?


Val. If I don't love him.


Chap. And don't you love me?


Val. No. -- Chap. Why so?


Val. Because, as I have several times before heartily told you, I love another.


Chap. What, that low bred vagabond, young Latouche!


Val. Sir, whatever your condition may be, you don't seem possessed of either
politeness or generosity, or you would scorn to insult an helpless woman, or
asperse an absent man.


Chap. Were he of my rank, I should not treat him so! but we, Grandees, think
it inconsistent with our dignity to treat such common plebeians like rational
creatures.


Val. Then, I am sure, I cannot wonder at your treatment of me; so, I shall take
my leave of your dignity.


(Curtesying, sneeringly, and going.) Chap. Hold! not so fast! ( stopping her)
Let me tell you that I have your father's consent, and I think but little of
yours. He has authorized me to take any steps, --


Val. But those of a gentleman, which, by your behavior, appears to be also
inconsistent with your dignity.


Chap. There is no bearing this insolence! know then, if you will not give your
consent, I will have you without. ( aside) Her father is gone; nobody near,
every thing convenient; it shall be so! -- (to VALENCE) Nay what should hinder
me from embracing the present opportunity.


Going to catch her in his arms, she pushes him off) Val. Is it becoming the
dignity of a Grandee of Spain, as you call yourself, to assault helpless,
unprotected innocence?


Chap. Our privilege is to do as we please with those of the lower order. So,
come! resistance is vain ( lays hold of her, she struggles.)


Val. Vallain! abandoned wretch! help! help!


Enter YOUNG LATOUCHE. Hands off, Ruffian! I shall find hotter work for you
than a female's soft hands can bestow.


Val. ( Turns to Young Lat, and falls in his arms) Heavens! Latouche!


Young Lat. Valence! my love! I came pretty seasonably here, I believe.


Chap. And who are you, rascal! who dare thus intrude?


Young Lat. No rascal; but a man who dares intrude any where, to defend female
innocence from the attacks of a rascal.


Chap. Insolent fellow! know you whom you talk to?


Young Lat. No; nor care! -- but you are talking to Latouche, who always thinks
a villain, even of the highest rank, beneath him; and never fears to tell him
so.


Chap. I will have satisfaction.


Young Lat. You shall this instant; and I wish every scoundrel, who dares to
lay hands of violence on a woman, may receive the satisfaction, I hope to give
you. Come, Sir, why don't you draw?


Chap. A gentleman never draws his sword in the presence of a female.


Young Lat. I understand you. Withdraw a little, Valence, while I revenge the
brutal insult offered you.


Val. Heaven protect you, my dear Latouche!


Exit. Young Lat. Now, Sir -- ( Chapone besitates and trembles) Why don't you
draw?


Chap. I never fight with one who is not a gentleman. When you can prove your
title to the honor of measuring swords with a Grandee of Spain, I am your man.


Young Lat. Man! none of that name ever offered violence to a woman -- Thing!
Reptile! Coward! -- What, do you still hesitate? Draw, or I shall kick your
Grandeeship.


Chap. Do with me what you please, I will not fight.


Young Lat. Not fight! How dare you then wear a sword, without courage to use
it even in defense of your villainy; give it me. ( Takes Chapone's sword from
him) Now, Sir, as you don't choose to use the blade, you shall have what every
poltroon deserves, the soabbard. ( beats? him with the scabbard)


Chap. Help! help! Mercy! Murder! ( Falling on his knees.)


Enter VALENCE and POLACO, (opposite sides) Val. Bravo! Don't spare him!


Pol. Hey! what! Dignity in a hobble! what is the meaning of all this! Pray
young man, who are you? and how dare you use his Highness thus?


Chap. ( Getting up, and going the other side of Polaco.) Oh, Polaco, I Am glad
you're returned: -- Scarcely were you gone, when, on my knees, I endeavored to
persuade your daughter to consent to our union; when that ruffian there, taking
advantage of my defenseless posture, rushed, on me suddenly from behind,
snatched away my sword, and I dare say was going to rob, and, perhaps, murder
me.


Val. Dear Sir, don't believe a word of it! No sooner had you turned your back
than he offered me violence; and had not my Latouche come to my aid --


Pol. Who! Hey -- What the devil! it is he sure (...)


Young Lat. Your daughter's screams drew me to protect her from the hands of
that villain.


Pol. And pray who made you her protector?


Young Lat. My duty as a man -- and he who wouldn't fly to assist an injured
woman is not only undeserving of that name, but deserves to be blotted from the
(...) life.


Pol. Dam'me; but he is a noble minded fellow! and if his purse was as large as
his heart he were worth a million of dignified boobies!( aside) Valence get you
home instantly.


Val. Good by'e, my dear Latouche! --


Pol. ( Sees Young Latouche kissing her hand) Hey -- what Miss Impudence don't
you hear what I say to you.


Val. Yes, Sir, but gratitude to my Protector will not suffer me to leave him
without some trifling acknowledgment.


Pol. Oh, the devil! I shall have her run away with before my face. Why does not
your Highness assist me. ( calling Valence from Young Latouche, Chapone is
advancing, when Young Latouche, quits Valence's hand and holds up the scabbard,
Chapone instantly flies back.)


Young Lat. Look'ye, Sir, ( to Polach) You, as my Valence's father I respect,
and resign her to you; but for that reptile ( pointing to Chapone) if ever he
comes in my way again, I Will crop his ears as an example for all dignified
scoundrels.


Pol. Your insult to his Highness will not pass unnoticed, so, Mr Soldier, you
had best set out on another campaign, before the law takes you in hand.


Young Lat. The Law, Sir, is made to protect, not to oppress; and an honest man
need never fear its rigor. Let such villians as those ( pointing to Chapone)
tremble. Your threats cannot intimidate me, while I am in possession of two of
the law's best advocates -- a good cause, and a full purse.


(Showing a Purse) Cha. The ruffian has, no doubt, stolen that purse and the
clothes on his back.


Pol. Like enough; and wants to steal my daughter.


Young Lat. Let me assure you, Sir, that it is not my intention to gain, your
daughter in a clandestine manner: If you will hear a few words, I hope to
convince you that my pretensions to her --


Pol. Your pretensions; ha! ha! ha! the savings of a soldier's pay --


Chap. Or the booty he has gained on the highway.


Young Lat. If you wish to avoid a repetition of this good, wholesome advice (
showing the scabbard) you will retire.


Chap. Come, Polaco, let us be going, the fellow may grow desperate.


Pol. Only one word more; I shall take pretty good care to keep my daughter out
of your way, so good by'e Mr. Six-pence-a-day.


(Exit with Valence.) Chap. Good by'e, Mr Ruffian!


Young Lat. Scoundrel! ( threatens him with the scabbard, he runs off after
POLACO; and YOUNG LATOUCHE, exit on the opposite side.)


SCENE, a room in the Inn.
LORD STANTON discovered sitting, in a thoughtful manner. Conscience,
conscience! what a perpetual goad art thou to the breast of an offender! Eight
years have elapsed since, in making the tour of Europe, I visited this spot;
and first beheld the lovely rustic Julietta, whom I most insidiously beguiled
of her innocence. Neither time, nor the dissipations of London have been able
to drive her from my memory; and the inward monitor has, with never ceasing
austerity, whispered me, that it was a villainous act, first to seduce and then
abandon to the world's scorn, a beauteous girl, whose only failing was an
unbounded confidence in my vows. Vows! false as hell.


Enter OLD LATOUCHE. Old Lat. Your servant, Sir.


Lord Stan. Sir, yours.


Old Lat. My name is Latouche; and you, I presume, are the gentlemen to whom I
am to apply for tidings of my son, according to the letter I received just now.


Lord Stan. You are right, Sir,


Old Lat. Heaven reward you! ( weeps) I thought the fountains of my eyes were
exhausted; but they flow afresh. Pardon me, Sir, these are the first tears of
the kind I have shed for many a year; for they are tears of joy-of joy for my
boy's safety!


Lord Stan. May you never have occasion to shed any other!


Old Lat. Bless you for that wish! Pray, Sir, hasten to indulge my anxious
curiosity to know where my son is -- when I may expect to see him.


Lord Stan. He will be here soon.


Old Lat. Soon! perhaps soon enough to close his poor old father's eyes.


Lord Stan. Soon enough, I hope, to revive his heart, and cheer him for many a
year to come. -- He is not far off.


Old Lat. How came he by the honor of your acquaintance, Sir?


Lord Stan. The honor is on my side. The acquaintance of a brave, worthy man is
a blessing seldom obtained -- never enough to be valued! Ours commenced by his
risking his life in defense of mine, against a band of assassins who attacked
me in a gloomy forest which I passed in my journey; a servant, whom I hired in
Paris, proved to be in league with them; and joined them at the beginning of
the attack. My efforts were exhausted, and I was nearly overpowered by numbers,
when your gallant son, returning to his native place, beheld the unequal
conflict, and flew to my aid; the villains were soon put to flight, therefore
to him am I indebted for existence.


Old Lat. My boy is not only alive then, but generous, and brave; merciful
Heaven! thou have heard my prayers. Now grant me to clasp him once more in
these worm out arms, and I shall die contented!


Lord Stan. Perhaps my good old friend! Heaven in compassion of your past
sorrows has restored your long loft son, and destined you yet many years of
happiness.


Old Lat. Happiness! oh! no; a small gleam of that can ever fall to my lot! the
presence of my son may, indeed, end'ven the gloom at intervals, but cannot
(...) the pressure I feel here. ( pointing to his breast and weeping) Excuse
me, Sir, I am old and weak. The iron rod of affliction has fallen heavy on me,
and bruised me forely; I feel the period approaching, when the cold, yet
friendly, hand of death, will close the woeful account.


Lord Stan. Nay, nay, banish every care; your son is arrived, he has acquainted
me with the cause of his leaving home, I will remove it; to a heart overflowing
with gratitude, heaven has added the ability to bestow on the brave youth that
qualification so essential in the eyes of the world -- Riches! He may now
boldly ask his mistress in marriage -- I will pay the marriage portion, and you
may still live blessed in your children.


Old Lat. My children! distraction! there sticks the barbed point which no
human skill can ever extract! there lies the wound which none but the grand
physician, Death, can ever heal! My children! oh! oh! -- I have but one! may
poor daughter!


Lord Stan. Your son has often mentioned his sister in the most affectionate
terms. -- Nothing, I hope, has befallen her! -- you do not grieve on her
account?


Old Lat. Alas, Sir, she is -- dead! and, perhaps, I, her unnatural father,
hastened the dreadful catastrophe.


Lord. Stan. Heaven forbid!


Old Lat. How shall I look my poor boy in the face after my unnatural behavior
to his darling sister?


Lord Stan. If the circumstances be not too painful to your feelings, pray
relate them to me; pour your griefs into mine, as into the bosom of a friend;
let me, condole with you, and strive to alleviate your distresses.


Old Lat. Your friendship I cannot accept, because I do not deserve it. None
but the worthy can be the friends of the worthy. An unnatural parent deserves
to be abandoned to the society of his fellow brutes. ( sobs violently.)


Lord Stan. Nay, nay, be not thus severe -- inflict not these deadly wounds --
have mercy on yourself.


Old Lat. 'Twas more than I had on my poor child, my poor lost, undone
Julietta! ( pause) Pardon me, sir, it is a hard task for a guilty mind to
unburthen itself, but I will endeavor to comply with your request. My boy left
me in the utmost despair, dreading the dangers which the phrenzy of hopeless
love might drive him into. My remaining child sat with me, wept with me,
reasoned with me, and lulled me with hopes into a kind of placid stupor. Near
two years elapsed in this manner, when she became pensive -- sighed -- seemed
to wish to avoid even my company -- and when her eyes met mine, I could observe
them bedewed with tears. Supposing grief for her brother's hopeless return to
be the cause, I, in my turn; endeavored to console her, but in vain!
Despairing at length of being able to conceal it from me much longer, she
related the dreadful story -- she had been seduced, and abandoned by a villain!


Lord Stan. God of nature! what do I hear? ( after a pause) did she mention who
her feducer was?


Old Lat. Inflamed almost to madness at the dishonorable tidings, I could
scarcely restrain myself whilst her poor broken heart sobb'd out the
circumstances. -- He was an Englishman, of distinguished birth, on his travels.


Lord Stan. An Englishman did she say?


Old Lat. She did. As an excuse for parting, he told my poor girl that his
father was at the point of death, and had commanded his instant appearance at
home; but that he would return as soon as his father's death or recovery would
permit him, and marry her. And worse, ten thousand times worse than devil, I!
to turn her out to the scorn of the world, to want and infamy!


Lord Stan. Wretched father! ( much affected.)


Old Lat. You are too much affected, Sir, Your spotless soul bleeds at the bare
recital of such consummate villainy.


Lord Stan. O torture! torture! the name, time, place, all agree; and I am the
cursed author of all this misery -- but I must, I will be satisfied, ( aside.)
Go on.


Old Lat. Rather let me bury the sequel in this dark breast, than wound your
sensibility any farther.


Lord Stan. No, proceed -- I entreat you to tell me what became of your unhappy
daughter.


Old Lat. Deaf to the cries of nature, her tears, entreaties and condition, I
spurned her from me, drove her from the house. Curses, curses on my unnatural
inflexibility!( pause) she at length gained admittance into the family of a
worthy Pastor in the neighborhood, where, as I heard, -- she diedin childbed,
unblessed! unforgiven!


Lord Stan. Horrid! ( sinks into a chair) the child! what became of her
helpless child?


Old Lat. Heaven, too merciful to entrust it to my savage care, took it with
her!


Lord Stan. The child too dead! -- Villain! villain! ( pause) Did she leave no
message for her base seducer in case of his return.


Old Lat. I know not.


Lord Stan. But I will know ( rising, visiently agitated) I will see the worthy
Pastor.


Enter YOUNG LATOUCHE. Young Lat. My father! my honored father! ( kneels to
him.)


Old Lat. My son! my son! ( embraces him.)


Curtain falls. END OF ACT 1st.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter CHAPONE, and two Ruffians. Cha. Well, my friends, now we are private,
adieu to distinction! I lay aside my dignity, you your servitude. You know our
various coups de main rendered it necessary for us to decamp to this distant
spot: if I succeed in marrying Polaco's daughter, you are to retire where you
please with five hundred crowns each. The father we have completely gulled --
the daughter still resists all my attacks, in consequence of her love for Young
Latouche, who, as ill luck will have it, is thrown in our way. He must be
removed!


1st Ruffian. But how?


Chap. That is what I want to consult you upon I know, by experience, you are
not chicken hearted, conscientious dogs, afraid of spilling a little blood.


2d Ruff. Not if can be done with safety.


Chap. Right! Polaco has forbidden any rival his house, and all intercourse
with his daughter; he will, therefore, naturally endeavor to gain a private
interview with her; that is what I wish -- we must way-lay, and overpower him.


1st Ruff. But he is courageous, you say.


2d Ruff. And desperate.


Chap. True; but policy and numbers will ever prove an over-match for bravery.
We must but hark! I hear footsteps I Let us retire, and look out.


(They Retire.) Enter BLANCO. Blanco! thou art a lucky dog! little did I think
when I crept to my straw-bed last night, that I should rise to such good luck
in the morning; well, I was always a man of business, but it never shower'd so
thick upon me before; I Have mounted from the post of cleaner of mules, and
drawer of four wine, to the important office of letter-carrier, a love letter
too! I clare swear, for its from a man to a woman, and a handsome price paid
for the postage. I don't know how I shall fill my last employment, for as I
never ogled, the girls much, I don't know one little, cunning, sly, gypsey in
the village to give me a lift, and I believe one in cursedly at a loss in these
affairs without the assistance of a petticoat. Hey! what is that ( a noise) By
heaven! here is one coming, I Have tried the bottle, till I Have drowned
bashfulness, that is one point gained; and now I Will try what sort of a hand I
can make of wheedling the girls.


(Retires up the Stage.) Enter VALENCE. Cruel father! can any thing be so
inflexibly obdurate as thy heart! Love, they say, is the strongest of passions;
but furely Avarice goes beyond it. Friendship, nay Generosity, have, in some
instances, triumphed over Love; but Avarice is unconquerable by either.
Parental affection, the strongest of human ties, is totally disregarded when in
competition with it: and we daily see unnatural father's sacrificing their
children's happiness in this world to the sordid and base consideration of
wealth! I have stolen out to meet Latouche; why does not the spirit who presides
over Love tell it him by instinct; or why does he not contrive some means of
sending me a letter?


(Musing) Blan. ( aside) Egad! here is one devilishly in want of a letter, and I
cursedly in want to dispose of one; what a pity but this now ( pulling out a
letter) could satisfy both our wants.


Val. If his love for me be disinterested enough to disregard Fortune, I Am
resolved to have him whether my father likes it or not.


Blan. ( aside) That Is a dutiful child!


Val. Now if I could but meet him --


Blan. ( advancing) Who, my pretty, sweet, dear?


Val. Heavens! who are you?


Blan. Just what you are in search of, a man! and a true man -- for he who
sticks to his bottle will never desert his lass.


Val. What brought you here?


Blan. Pretty much the same errand that brought you; you came to look for a
man; I, a woman.


Val. Who may she be?


Blan. If, as I overheard you say just now, you are in love, I may venture to
trust you with the secrets of lovers; and you may, perhaps have fellow-feeling
eno' to help their concerns -- Read that.


(Showing the letter.) Val. Heavens, it is, my dear Latouche's handwriting!


Blan. Faith, that is the gentleman's name.


Val. And directed to me!


Blan. To you?


Val. Yes; and your guardian angel has guided your footsteps right. ( Reads the
letter to herself.)


Blan. ( while she reads) Well then my guardian angel is devilish honest
fellow. I always carry him in my pocket, ( takes out a bottle) and whether my
footsteps are right or not, is just according to the homage I pay him.


(Drinks) Val. ( putting up the letter) My good fellow, go back to him straight
--


Blan. I will, that is if I can.


Val. And tell him I Have no opportunity here to write, but if he comes to the
little wood at the end of the garden gate about sunset, I will contrive to
meet him; here, take this for thy fidelity and pains.


(Gives him a purse, and exit kissing the letter) Blan. ( Examining the purse)
Bless your pretty face I say; who wouldn't be faithful and pains taking for
such a sweet, little good natured soul! If I had such a sweetheart, and didn't
do my duty by her, I wish my next drop might be my poison!

(Drinks) SONG
The Women, Lord bless 'em!
The man, who'd distress 'em
Deserver to be poisoned, I Am sure;
From the fair, now a smile
Will our sorrows beguile
Like a bottle of wine that is pure.
When in amorous prattle,
Their tongued tittle tattle,
And the soft notes of love they breathe out;
They cheer like old Sack,
Champaigne, Frontinac,
Or a bottle of beer called Brown Stout.
With women and wine,
Man's life how divine,
Such joys none but fools would neglect;
And may my next bottle,
Stick fast in my throttle.
When I don't pay'em proper respect.

[Exit. Re-enter CHAPONE and RUFFIANS. Chap. "If he comes to the little wood at
the end of the garden gate about sunset, I will contrive to meet him," -- So
we will, all, hey, boys?


1st and 2d Ruff. Ay, ay,


Chap. As he will expect to meet only his mistress, he will be sure to come
alone; what say you? could we wish a finer opportunity?


1st Ruff. There will not be much danger, it seems.


Chap. Not the least; he will come prepared for love, not war; and we may make
as easy a conquest of him, as ever mistress did of a lover. Let us now
separate; be it your care ( to 1 st Ruff.) to watch at the decoy; and, when the
game hovers round, do you ( to 2 d Ruff.) give me notice that I may hasten to
close the net.


(Exeunt different ways.) SCENE. -- The Inn.
LORD STANTON discovered, pensive. "She had been seduced and abandoned by a
villain. (...)! These were the old man's words; and who is the villain? I would
give the universe that the epithet did not attach here!( his breast) but even
hope, the wretch's last refuge, flies from me, and dreadful certainty supplies
its place. Every circumstance concurs; conscience decrees me villain; and
executes, itself, its dreadful punishment; whom have I injured* an old gray
headed man, already sinking beneath misfortune's rude billows; a brave young
man, who preserved my life with the hazard of his own; a young innocent female,
blessed with the utmost purity of soul, that is -- damnation! all the devils of
hell cannot invent a name black enough for that crime? ( stands, hearing some
one coming) who is there?


Enter YOUNG LATOUCHE. Young Lat. My Lord, pardon my boldness, but, hearing
your tone of voice unusually high, I was afraid something had created your
displeasure.


Lord Stan. Guilt! guilt! what a coward do thou make me! rather would I meet
the poignards of a thousand assassins, than the looks of the man I have
injured! ( aside.)


Young Lat. My dear Lord! -- ( advancing nearer)


Lord Stan. How would his affectionate style be changed, did he but know he
addressed himself to the murderer of his family's peace; oh!


(takes out his handkerchief) Young Lat. Pardon me, my Lord, if gratitude, and
affection --


Lord Stan. Why will he still cruelly persist to urge the fatal dart, which
already tortures to madness my quivering frame. ( aside)


Young Lat. My Lord, ( approaches, kneels and takes his hand) my heart bleeds
to see you thus disturbed, can I, or any one related to me, have --


Lord Stan. Madness! Madness! -- Latouche, ( raising him) would I could lay my
heart open; you would not then doubt the sincerity of its affection to you. But
at present, some past reflections derange me; tomorrow, perhaps, I Will explain
what passes in this tortured breast. Farewell! --


(Exit. Young Lat. ( solus) What can this sudden change mean? Instead of the
pleasure which used to sparkle in his eye when we met, he now studiously avoids
me. My own breast is conscious of no offense. Time and the will of Providence
may disclose its mazy paths.


Enter BLANCO. Blan. Here I am, your honor.


Young Lat. Well, Blanco, what news!


Blan. In the first place, I am so fatigued with my morning's work, that my
spirits (holding up his empty bottle) are quite exhausted. -- Young Lat. Psha!


Blan. In the next place, I have delivered your letter.


Young Lat. Have you? and you have brought another in answer? -- Blan. No.


Young Lat. No! stupid ass!


Blan. Hold, your honor.


Young Lat. To whom did you deliver mine?


Blan. To one, who kissed it so! that I believe you would fain have had your
lips in its place.


Young Lat. My dear fellow!


Blan. Hold again! How transitory are the affairs of this life! not a minute
ago you called me "stupid ass," now it is, "my dear fellow!"


Young Lat. Don't keep me in suspense, what did she say to you?


Blan. Why the only thing of consequence she said to me, was, that "I was a
faithful, pains-taking fellow" and gave me this purse as a reward.


Young Lat. The devil! But what did she tell you to say to me?


Blan. To you? nothing material, only; that "if you came to the little wood at
the end of the garden gate about sunset, she would contri^^ (...) ^eet you."


Young Lat. Did she; look ye, Blanco, continue to be as faithful as you have
begun; and, when I am married I Will take care you shall never be out of SPIRITS
all the rest of your life.


(Exit.) Blan. ( solus) Sha'n't I? Why then "fidelity's" the watchword! and,
dam'me, if I don't think one sip gained by that, is worth a whole gallon earned
by roguery.


(Exit) SCENE -- A room in POLACO's house.
Enter POLACO and CHAPONE. Pol. Can this be true? are you certain of your
information?


Chap. My servants saw her take the letter from Blanco, and heard her make the
appointment.


Pol. The devil they did! why then there is no time to be lost! what can we do?


Chap. Why, lookye Polaco; plot and counterplot! I have a scheme if you will
give into it --


Pol. I Will give into any thing rather than see the baggage run away with a
beggar.


Chap. Why then leave all to me -- Instead of your daughter, he shall meet
those who will keep him out of the way till our marriage takes place.


Pol. Will you? you have my free consent, and hearty wishes; we'll have the
wedding to night, and then the poor Soldier may set out for head quarters
tomorrow.


Chap. Spoke with spirit! But mind, Polaco! not a word of what has passed to
your daughter! her ingenuity may communicate our discovery to him, and
frustrate our plan, only keep watch; and if she goes out at the garden gate at
the time appointed, you will be assured of the truth of my information, there
will be no danger; I shall take care there will be no one there to meet her but
myself.


Pol. Excellent contrivance! your highness has only now to sign the mortgage of
your estates for the stipulated dowry; it is ready in my closet, and then this
night --


Chap. Makes you father in law to a Grandee of Spain; he! Polaco.


[Exeunt. SCENE. -- A Chamber in Pastor's house.
Julietta discovered reading on a Sofa; child asleep by her. It Is in vain!
nothing can relieve my perturb'd mind. Society! makes me miserable by
contrasting the light and airy joys of pure and unfullied minds, with the
gloomy sensations of my own contaminated breast. Retirement! gives me up to all
the horrors of reflection upon the fatal consequences of my past imprudence.
Books! teach me that virtue and prudence are the noblest ornaments of the
female sex; and that despair, infamy, and want are the deserved portion of
those who quit their paths. I Will read no more! ( throws away the book) Merciful
Heaven! instruct me where my sorrows can find vent -- my broken spirits
consolation! Thou, too, hapless innocent! must partake my guilt! cruel
inhumanity! to give misery to, whom we give birth! -- And thou! who, by
faithless vows of constancy and truth, melted my yielding fancy to love's
impression, and blurred the native purity of my soul with folly! dos't thou
escape remorse's deadly fangs! -- Perhaps, even now, thou art revelling in a
wanton female's smiles, whilst my despair's unthought of, or thy jest! -- O
death! lend me thine aid, open thy friendly habitation, and entomb a wretch,
who is weary of existence! ( reclines her head on her hand.)


Enter PASTOR. What! my fair penitent! still mournful! still dubious of the
all-working hand of Providence! Let me entreat you not to add to your failings,
a distrust of his merciful goodness.


Jul. Worthy Sir! to a soul that has never deviated from rectitude and virtue,
the cheering beams of hope may be admitted; but to that of a fallen wretch,
despondency is best suited. What can I hope for who have despised the virtuous
ends for which I was created, and brought shame on my own, and my hapless
offspring's head? -- Tell me, what have I to hope for?


Past. Pardon from him who can alone bestow it! But yielding to despair, is
doubting both his power and mercy. -- Look up! a life of constant virtue can
never be totally eclipsed by one speck of erring nature.


Enter SERVANT. A gentleman, who says he is a stranger, wishes the honor of a
private interview.


Past. A stranger! what business can he have with me? no matter -- show him up.
-- ( Exit Servant.) Dear Julietta, leave me for a while -- my wife awaits you
in my study, where as soon as this stranger is dispatched, I Will join you.


(She wakes the child, embraces it, and exit) Enter LORD STANTON. Excuse, Sir,
this intrusion from a stranger. -- Trusting to report of your humanity and
benevolence, I have called to consult you on a business which intimately
concerns the peace and happiness, not only of myself, but of others whom you
know --


Past. Your confidence does me honor, Sir -- pray be seated. -- We are in
private, and I am all attention to what you shall please to communicate.


Lord Stan. You know the Latouche family?


Past. I have reason, Sir.


Lord Stan. To his brave son I am indebted for no less than life! the
circumstances you will know hereafter. He accompanied me this morning.


Past. Indeed, Sir! after so long absence, without any tidings, the whole
village supposed him dead.


Lord Stan. He is returned adorned with every virtue that falls to human lot;
returned! eager to solace his aged, honored parent! but he finds him
overwhelmed with distress -- the reasons you are already too well acquainted
with.


Past. I am, indeed!


Lord Stan. The old man's story affected me beyond what you can guess. His
hapless daughter received, he told me, that asylum from your humanity, which
his obdurate heart denied her.


Past. I behaved toward her, as that master, whose religion I profess, taught
me it was my duty to do.


Lord Stan. He will reward you -- Permit me, Sir, (it is not from idle curiosity)
to ask the sequel of that unhappy fair one's story.


Past. Her father's pride remaining inflexible, and his door shut against her,
I offered her an asylum which she accepted. A long time she waited in anxious
hopes that her seducer (whom she too well loved) would hasten back to clear her
fame and honor -- but in vain. Perceiving despondency begin to take place, I
joined by my wife, endeavored to keep alive those hopes. For some time we
succeeded. At length despair, gaining the ascendency, took full possession --
herself and tender infant became the victims.


Lord Stan. Gracious heaven! support me. ( sobs aloud.)


Past. You seem much moved.


Lord Stan. I am, indeed! Did you observe whether she ever wore about her, or
had in her possession, any pledge, or mark of affection given her by her
seducer?


Past. ( Hesitatingly) I don't immediately recollect.


Lord Stan. Did she not say he was an Englishman of high birth?


Past. He told her so.


Lord Stan. Because such token might lead to a discovery -- I am, myself, an
Englishman of some little distinction, and might recognize him by it.


Past. ( after a pause of recollection) If I Am not mistaken, I think I Have seen
her wear a ring.


Lord Stan. A ring! Have you it? Can you show it me?


Past. I think I can; wait one moment; I Will try to find it.


(Exit) Lord Stan. ( solus, rising up) It Is so: That ring I gave her at
parting, and pledged with it my honor -- honor! that word from my lips! a
villain's lips! Oh! it was honorable to seduce an artless, innocent, lovely
girl, and then leave her till she fell a prey to despair and shame? that word
"Honor" pronounced by my lips was a hellish falsehood uttered to deceive and
ruin a credulous fair, who loved, alas! too well! -- Shame! shame! -- where can
I seek for excuse? Will the frequency of the crime serve! No -- Murder is
murder still how often soever perpetrated. Is it punishable? No. -- Men of the
highest rank commit, countenance, nay boast of it? Why then should I be thus
agitated? Something will not rest here, ( his heart) and though the world may not
call me villain, makes me know myself to be one.


Re-enter PASTOR. Past. Here is the ring!


Lord Stan. It is, it is, indeed, the ring! (Sinking, the Pastor catches him in
his arms and conveys him to a chair.)


Past. What means all this? What disturbs you thus? Do you know the ring?


Lord Stan. Oh, Sir! you are already, no doubt, much surprised! but you will be
more so, when I tell you that that ring was -- mine! that the villain who
seduced the lovely Julietta, is now -- before you!


Past. Before me!


Lord Stan. It Is too true. -- I Will endeavor to compose myself sufficiently to
be able to lay open my guilty conscience to your strictest scrutiny.


Past. ( aside) Gracious God! how wonderful are thy works!


Lord Stan. About eight years since, my father sent me to make the grand tour
of Europe. Having a taste for painting, I would not neglect to view the
picturesque mountains and valleys of Switzerland. I arrived at this spot --
going one fine morning to view the beauties of nature, heightened by the rising
sun I met the lovely Julietta in search of some stray lambs -- I admired and
accosted her; her answers, full of sweetness and simplicity, enchanted my
youthful mind, then of a romantic turn. At parting she told me, that she alone
attended an aged parent, who impatiently expected her return. Her filial piety
endeared her so much to me, that I could scarce check myself from offering to
share that amiable task with her -- with difficulty, I obtained her promise to
see me again at the same spot. She kept her word -- we grew interesting to each
other -- interview succeeded interview -- till firmly persuaded of my truth and
honor, she yielded!! -- How could her unsuspecting mind escape contagion! I
passed the time as in a dream of happiness; till I was roused by the arrival of
a courier from my father, with a letter announcing that his dangerous state of
health threatened a speedy dissolution, and commanding me to lose no time in
hastening home -- I had scarce courage to tell the tidings to Julietta, who
received them as I expected -- in an agony of grief -- I endeavored to soothe
her by a promise of returning so soon as my father should recover, or I should
have closed his eyes. Obliged to depart -- I gave her that ring as a pledge of
my honor! -- On my arrival in England, I found my father on the recovery, he
lingered out some years, while I, in vain, strove to deaden reflection by
joining the vortex of fashionable dissipation. After his death, I became Lord
Stanton; the settlement of his affairs required my longer stay; I finished with
all speed -- and sat out, hoping to find my Julietta still alive, and to make
her lawful reparation for her injured fame -- by marriage.


Past. By marriage, my Lord! -- ( after a long pause, with a very solemn
accent) as Heaven is your witness, was that your intention?


Lord Stan. Heaven is my witness, it was. -- On the journey my life was
preserved by her brother, who was then on his return home; hearing this was his
native place, I took him with me in my chaise. He told me why he left his home
-- I loved him for his courage, truth and constancy; and, as my fortune is
immense, I experienced the most heartfelt joy to think I could not only pay my
debt of gratitude to my preserver, by enabling him to marry the girl he adored,
but also surprise my Julietta with wealth and honor, Judge, then, my feelings,
when I found all these glorious prospects blighted at once (...) my Julietta's
death, and the knowledge that I was (...) murderer of the sister of the man to
whom I owed my own existence -- ( to the Pastor, who appears thoughtful
throughout this speech) nay, Sir, do not add to my distresses by doubting my
sincerity -- by Heaven! I Have spoken truth.


Past. ( after a pause) Have you, my Lord, ever mentioned this to Old Latouche,
or his son?


Lord Stan. No -- when I heard the old man's mournful story, its resemblance to
that of mine and Julietta's instantly struck me. I retired to reflect; and
endeavored to hope his sorrows were not caused by me -- now that hope is
banished. You have sealed the fatal certainty.


Past. I Am glad you did not tell them; as what is passed cannot be recalled,
the discovery would now only serve to open the seared wound, and make it bleed
afresh. For your offense to Julietta, penitence must make your peace with
Heaven. She has already forgiven you!


Lord Stan. Oh! oh!


Past. What recompense you ought to make to the living objects, you have
injured, I need not dictate to you. If, by your means, Young Latouche may
espouse Polaco's daughter, you will have done what lies in your power to
discharge your debt of gratitude to him; and the old man, having his son's
prosperity and happiness daily before his eyes, may be beguiled of part of his
sorrows. -- Perhaps, I speak too freely?


Lord Stan. Sir, I thank you for giving me, so freely, what I came to ask --
your advice. I had designed to have made a full confession of my guilt so soon
as I received its confirmation from you; to do it now, I agree with you, would
be imprudent. For myself -- withdrawn from the world, I Will penance out the
residue of my life in prayers to Heaven and Julietta for forgiveness. My
fortune, this paper ( gives a folded paper to the Pastor) leaves entirely to
your disposal. Give of it, what you may think necessary to the happiness of
Latouche's injured family. The rest bestow in such charitable uses as your
benevolence may dictate.


Past. I cannot now entertain a single doubt of your being a sincere penitent (
rising, embraces him) you have done all that now remains in your power to do.
As to this paper, your confidence in me will not be misplaced


Lord Stan. I am sure it will not. ( pause) I have yet another request to make;
if it be proper, I am confident, you will not, cannot deny it me.


Past. Certainly not.


Lord Stan. It Is, to be shown the spot where the remains of my much loved, much
injured Julietta, and child are deposited. There let me pay the tribute of my
tears, and then withdraw -- forever! --


Past. My Lord, as you have given me convincing proofs that your penitence is
sincere, you shall approach their tomb. But, since you have agreed to keep the
matter secret, you must not go by day; retire to my own apartment, there you will
find books, and no one interrupt you. At dark, I Will convey you to the Chapel,
which adjoins this house, there I shall leave you to your meditations.


Lord Stan. Heaven bless you!


Past. Now, my Lord, give me leave to show you to my chamber.


(Exeunt.) SCENE -- A Library.
JULIETTA and CHILD, discovered. Jul. Heavens! what can be the reason of my
beating heart sounding these strong alarms? Why this uneasiness! Who can this
stranger be? What is he to me? Yet, why did the Rev. Pastor ask me for my ring?
Sure, I must have been the subject of their conversation, or he never would
have asked me for that sacred pledge -- and with a look full of meaning? What
can ail me? --


Child. Mama, are you ill? Why do you talk to yourself so, and look! I don't
know how?


Jul. Nothing, dear! I only feel a little faint, go, fetch me a glass of water,
I shall soon be well.


Child. I don't like to leave you alone; what would become of you, if you
should be taken ill again and nobody near you?


Jul. My life! I am better already -- go, get me the water, I shall not be
alone, I think I hear the Pastor coming -- Go, my love! -- ( kisses the child
and leads him to the left side of the stage -- listens) it is -- I know his
step! surely this trembling forewarns me of something that I Am nearly concerned
in.


Enter PASTOR, (with complacent look) Well, Julietta, how are your spirits? Do
you feel more composed since our last conversation?


Jul. Not much, Sir, ( aside) He never before approached me with a smile, nor
would he now insult a broken heart with untim'd mirth; sure he must bring some
comfort.


Past. ( taking her hand) Julietta -- do not be alarmed; you must summon up
your utmost fortitude; I Have news to tell you which will require it, although it
will prove a consolation.


Jul. I am sure it cannot be for grief you thus bid me prepare, because your
looks are pleasant. After so many trials, methinks, Sir, you need not doubt my
fortitude -- I am ready.


Past. The stranger has brought news --


Jul. ( eagerly) Of whom?


Past. Of your brother! he is arrived!


Jul. ( withdrawing her hand, seemingly disappointed and chagrined) Was that --
what he had to communicate to you?


Past. It was; I hastened to tell you, what I though it joyful tidings; but they
don't seem to give you much satisfaction.


Jul. ( after a struggle, in which a sense of her own situation predominates
over joy for her brother's safe return) -- What is it to a wretch like me?
wherefore should I joy to hear of a brother's arrival? will he fly to embrace
me as a brother would a sister? No -- he will shrink from my touch as from a
pestilential vapor! on his first enquiry, his ears will be saluted with my ill
fame; his poor, lost, degraded sister will rise from the grave to shame him,
"with all her faults, by envy twice o'ertold." -- No -- let me still be
supposed dead.


Past. You love your brother?


Jul. I do, more than life.


Past. He loved you?


Jul. He did, once -- then I was pure and spotless. Should I now approach him?
-- oh! he would spurn me, dash me from him, trample me under his feet! whilst
I, humbly suppliant, in vain implored forgiveness of my crime! No, I can never
endure it. If I am supposed dead, my, father and brother may pity -- nay,
perhaps, forgive, bless and pray for me.


Past. It will, however, be some consolation to you to hear of your brother's
success. -- He has preserved the life of a man, whose gratitude is boundless as
his wealth. Polaco's only objection will be easily removed, and your brother
will very soon enjoy his beloved Valence and affluence.


Jul. It is, indeed, a consolation! happy brother! happy, happy Valence! you
will soon receive the reward of virtuous love! -- While I -- wretched,
despised, abandoned! -- oh, horror! I cannot bear -- my very soul shudders at
the contrast!


Past. Nay, pray be calm.


Jul. How would my soul spring out to meet a brother's embrace! but no -- it
cannot be --


Past. Consider, Julietta, your brother's absence made him long ago thought
lost. Providence has preserved him! Doubt you he can also cause the author of
your woes, struck by horrific conscience, to return and make you reparation?


Jul. ( in an agony of despair) He never will return! -- Men despise an easy
conquest. Their appetites, palled by enjoyment, must be roused by variety!
woeful's the experience I have bought. -- A simple Swiss rustic was not to be
the wife of an English man of fashion. No; he now flutters through the gay,
thoughtless circles of high life, or, perhaps, has long since given to some
rich lady that faithless hand which belonged of right to poor Julietta! --
Fool! artless fool, that I was! to stake my all -- my reputation, against a
man's promises!


Past. Here is your ring again, ( gives it her) did you not wonder why I asked
it of you?


Jul. I did, indeed.


Past. Attend! The stranger who came just now, was the person whose life your
brother saved! He is, by birth, an Englishman.


Jul. An Englishman!


Past. Yes, of noble family.


Jul. And he too, perhaps, like my undoer, satiated in his own country, comes
to these rude valleys in quest of variety -- another cormorant in search of
prey, to give a new edge to his sickly appetite! O! may my hapless fate prove a
warning! may the example of the undone Julietta serve as a beacon to other
females!


Past. The stranger anxiously enquired if you had any token of your seducer's
-- your ring struck me immediately; he knew it, he knew your seducer!


Jul. Knew him?


Past. Yes; was intimately acquainted with him; nay more -- was desired to
enquire you out!


Jul. By whom?


Past. By your husband! for such he acknowledges himself. -- He will soon, very
soon, be here, in person, to do you that public justice, your injured fame
demands.


Jul. You cannot mean to deceive me! it is not in your character of Pastor, nor
of a man! -- it is not in your nature!


Past. It Is not, be assured -- compose yourself; soon will the clouds, that
have obscured your reputation, blow away; and honor's sunshine brighten all the
prospect.


Jul. O Heavens!


Past. Soon will you receive again the endearing embraces of a tender father --
a loving brother -- and a -- repentant husband!


Jul. This is -- too much! ( sinking.)


Past. ( supporting her) Nay, let not your fortitude now forsake you; you have
borne up against adversity -- learn to support prosperity.


Jul. ( kneeling) Merciful Providence! why did I ever distrust thy wondrous
workings! why despair, knowing thy power to be over all! pardon! pardon!


Past. ( raising her) Now Julietta, how do you feel?


Jul. Quite resigned. If you have any thing more to communicate, fear not --
the greatest shock is past.


Past. Perhaps not: though what you have heard is wonderful; yet arm yourself for
what is -- more so!


Jul. What can it be?


Past. The stranger handed me this paper -- read --


(gives her the paper which Lord Stanton gave him) Juli. ( reads) "As some
reparation due to the family of the injured Julietta -- I hereby give into the
disposal of the Pastor of Soleure, all my estate, real and personal, in trust
for the Latouche family, and such other charitable uses as his humane heart may
dictate. -- LORD STANTON."

-- Who is Lord Stanton?


Past. That is your husband's name and title, since his father's decease.


Jul. Why does he send this paper?


Past. He knows not but you are dead; and this is meant as an atonement to your
injured family. -- Now, once for all, be prepared! the stranger, who just now
left me, is that Lord Stanton! your husband!


Jul. Oh! Heaven's! ( sinks into the Pastor's arms.)


Curtain falls, slowly. END OF 2d ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE. Garden back of Polaco's house.
Enter VALENCE. How heavily the time passes with a young girl between the
appointment and meeting with her lover! Every minute seems an hour! an age! O!
Latouche! why should two hearts so united as ours be obliged to seek communion
by stealth! or why wear any other shackles than their own? Hark! I hear
footsteps! that odious Grandee, perhaps -- ( looking out) no -- as I live, it is
my father! what business can he have at this time? sure he cannot suspect any
thing.


Enter POLACO. Pol. Ha! Valence, what brings you here?


Val. The fineness of the evening, Sir, A garden is a charming place for
meditation; and I was taking a walk to consider of what you were saying to me
today.


Pol. Well, and what do you think of it?


Val. Why, Sir, it is no very easy matter to determine; that I love Young
Latouche, you know very well; and that I love you, Sir, you know also. You must
make some allowance for the struggle between love and duty.


Pol. True, child; and to which side do you now seem to incline?


Val. To duty, certainly, ( coaxingly) I did, indeed, hesitate awhile, but when
I came to consider, and put wealth and grandeur into the balance, why -- love
kicked the beam.


Pol. ( aside) Deceitful baggage! Well, my dear child, I am glad you have made
so prudent a determination, and so kind a return to all my regard and
tenderness. But will not you endanger your health by walking so late in the
evening? Come, you had better go in with me.


Val. O no, dear Sir! I wish to be retired a little; and, as I have given up my
own happiness to consult yours, you wo'n't, I am sure, deny me such a trifle?


Pol. Certainly not, my child, I Will leave you to your meditations; good bye;
don't stay long, his Highness expects you, bye, my dear, ( aside) deceitful
hussy! I Would like to have been choused here, however I Have escaped, and it shall
not be many hours before I have satisfaction.


[Exit. Val. He Is gone, thank Heaven! why will Parents force their children
into deceit; but if the glaring examples of unhappiness which they daily bring
upon them be not sufficient warning, why they deserve to be deceived. The Sun
begins to decline, how strange that his cheering presence should be displeasing
to the eyes of lovers. -- I think by this time Latouche must be at the place;
and if no demon, envious of true lover's happiness, comes across us; this
might free me, my dear Papa, from every jurisdiction but that of a husband's!


[Exit. SCENE. Wood.
Enter CHAPONE and two RUFFIANS. Chap. Now, lads, the time is near at hand that
is to reward us for all our toils. The appointment was at sun set; it is very
nigh; he will soon be here, for lovers always anticipate. The thickness of the
wood is as favorable to our pursuits as to their's; once in view, we may steal
upon him unperceived; and when you see him in a pensive, defenseless position,
then is your time; rush on and secure him. I will be close at hand; and if he
makes any struggle, this settles the business.


(pointing to his sword.) 1st Ruff. Well, well, let us alone to seize him; but
if he resists, see you strike quick; we don't much like this job; he is damned
bad customer in our way; better settle a business of this kind with twenty
quiet, civil gentlemen, than with one such cursed resolute, fighting fellow.


Chap. But you know we are three to one, with an ambuscade in our favor.


2d Ruff. That Is true; so hang fear, I say!


Chap. Let us now disperse a little on the look out; and when either of us gets
a glimpse of him; we come together again.


[Exeunt different sides. Enter YOUNG LATOUCHE. It is just with an affair of
love, as with a point of honor, each party is anxious to be on the ground
first. I believe I have won the point this time; though I don't doubt but poor
Valence is as eager as myself; but, perhaps, she cannot elude the vigilance of
her old father! Now, Fortune! be constant to me this night, and veer to
whatever point of the compass thou please ever after! -- Hark! -- didn't I
hear some one -- No, all is hush -- 'twas only the wind, or my tip-toe fancy --
Perhaps I Am before my time --


Enter CHAPONE and RUFFIANS. Two RUFFIANS rush on and seize YOUNG LATOUCHE, one
on each side, CHAPONE follows. Chap. Not a minute; we have expected you some
time, though we knew you were too polite to disappoint us; you're heartily
welcome. ( to Ruffians) Conduct this gentleman to the place appointed for his
reception.


Young Lat. O Fortune! thou cursed jilt! thou have undone me; and that drunken
villain Blanco must have enticed me into this snare.


1st Ruff. Come, Sir, come along. We'll show you a neat snug habitation for the
night.


Young Lat. Perdition seize me e're I yield so tamely; villains! ruffians!


(struggles.) Enter BLANCO (behind) Blan. What three to one! dam'me, that is too
bad!


Chap. Nay, if you struggle, this settles the business.


(draws his sword) Blan. Not if I can hinder it, you damned villain! ( As soon
as Chapone's sword is out, Blanco rushes on him from behind, trips up his
heels, the sword flies out of his hand -- Blanco seizes it, and is going to
attack the Ruffians, who run off, Chapone gets up and does the same -- Young
Latouche turning, sees Blanco in a striking posture.)


Young Lat. What, villain! art thou alone left to finish the infernal deed?


Blan. Heavens! his honor! how happy am I that I came in the drawing of a cork
to save you!


Young Lat. To save me! why, are you not leagued with these Ruffians? was not
the message you brought me to day a falsehood to draw me into their power, and
do you not now brandish that weapon to complete your villainy?


Blan. This weapon fell from the hands of one of the assassins, who was going
to plunge it into your breast when I overpowered him -- ( kneel.) take it! and
if you doubt the honesty of my heart -- here ( opening is breast) 'twere
kindness to rip it out.


Young Lat. ( Throwing away the sword, and raising him) Confusion! that I
should suspect thee! but having fallen into this snare, I could not but suppose
thee false. -- How came you here?


Blan. Heaven, and our good Pastor sent me!


Young Lat. Then thank heaven, our good Pastor and thee, my brave fellow!


Blan. I have had a pretty hard days work on it -- and, as your honor, and the
sweet lady I gave your letter to, this morning, paid me so very liberally, I
sat down with a determination to recruit my spirits -- so as I was sitting with
my bottle before me, thinking that if your honor was so pleased, I would rather
run of errands for you and your sweet lady, than draw sour wine for our
landlord, (who, by the bye, is a damned old scoundrel, and not like old Josefo,
whom your honor knew) -- who should pop in but our Pastor. He asked for you --
I told him you were gone out on a little private business -- but I would'nt
blab; for I remembered your charge to be faithful -- then says the Pastor, "if
you know where he is, go to him; charge him by all his hopes of happiness -- by
filial duty, and every earthly tie, to hasten to my house -- If he neglects, he
may have cause to repent it forever."


Young Lat. What could he mean?


Blan. I know not; but he spoke so solemnly, that down goes glass, and away
goes I -- and as I knew from the message I delivered you to day, where to find
you, I scamper'd off as fast as I could; and though I lost sight of the Play,
came in time for the Entertainment.


Young Lat. In time, indeed! Blanco forgive my suspicions; give me your hand.
From this moment you are my friend.


Blan. Oh Lord! no -- not that -- but if you will make me your gentleman -- your
valet -- coachman, or -- butler, I should like best --


VALENCE (without) Latouche! Latouche!


Young Lat. Hark! I hear a noise.


Blan. Perhaps the villains have got a reinforcement, and are going to renew
the battle.


Val. ( without) Latouche!


Young Lat. It Is my Valence's voice -- yonder she comes -- now, Blanco, follow
us to the Pastor's and name your own reward --

Enter VALENCE. My life! my Valence! ( embraces her)


Val. Oh, my dear Latouche, I Am glad I Have found you -- just as I entered the
wood, I saw that villain, whom you chastis'd this morning, and two others
running toward our house with the utmost speed -- I feared they had contrived
some mischief against you --


Young Lat. Aye, and were very near executing it too -- but for this brave
fellow, we had been separated forever -- but come; we have no time to lose; he
will bring your father and his servants about us directly -- let us away this
instant!


Val. Whither?


Young Lat. To the Pastor's -- he has sent for me on business of the utmost
importance -- ( she hesitates) nay, my love, don't affect coyness now -- one
moment's delay may be fatal -- come -- the Pastor will soon settle our
differences -- Blanco will begin his new employment, and follow us.


[Exeunt Y. Lat. and Val. Blan. That I will to the world's end, ye pretty pair
of turtle doves! But first let me secure the spoils of war ( picks up the sword
which Latouche threw away) this is mine by right of conquest. Well, I have
often tried my hand at a bottle -- but, dam'me, if I ever knew before that it
was good at a tilting match. -- I see that a man may live many years before he
finds out all his own good qualities.


[Exit. SCENE. A Chamber in Pastor's house.
Enter PASTOR and JULIETTA. Past. Well, do you think you have collected
sufficient strength to go through with your undertaking?


Jul. It will be a most difficult task, though I know the end to be peace, joy,
and happiness. -- I feel that notwithstanding all the pangs he has caused me,
it is not in my nature to give him a moment's uneasiness. Let me entreat you
however to be at hand, for I feel my resolution will quickly vanish.


Past. I shall -- I have bespoke the presence of all the other guests, and only
wait arrival to instruct them how to play their parts in the last grand scene.
Do you go and tutor the child, while I get all else in readiness


Exit Julietta. Past. ( solus) Now, I wish that my visitors were all come. I
have much to go through to night; but as the peace of so many depend upon my
exertions, I hope I shall be able finish with a coup d'eclat.


Enter Young LATOUCHE, VALENCE and BLANCO. Eh! my young friend, I Am heartily
glad to see you. I called at the Inn, but was informed you were gone out. Did
you receive my message?


Young Lat. Yes, and a most fortunate one it was! This honest fellow who
brought it, came just in time to rescue me from the swords of three assassins,
who waylaid me.


Past. Fortunate indeed! Do you know who the villains are?


Young Lat. Yes, and I shall pay their bill of exchange at first sight; but at
present, I have more material business. This Sir, is my intended wife; please
Heaven and you to join us.


(Presenting VALENCE.) Past. Heaven bless you both.


Val. Thank you, Sir.


Young Lat. If you are at leisure, Sir, VALENCE and I would have no objection
to the ceremony's being performed out of hand, eh! VALENCE? nay, never look
down; as we are in for matrimony, we may as well put a good face on it.


Past. I have but one objection to your haste, and that is --


(Enter Servant, hastily.) POLACO, with a number of people are below, Sir; he
says he is in pursuit of his daughter, who is run away with by Young Latouche,
and that they have been seen to enter this house.


Past. Show him up, I wish to see him.


[Exit Ser. Val. O LATOUCHE, we are undone!


Past. Don't be alarmed, my child! I shall find means to assuage your father's
anger, and, perhaps, gain his consent to your happiness.


Enter POLACO and CHAPONE. Pol. So, here you are, Miss! this is your prudent
determination, after your struggle between love and duty, is it? but you see I
am pretty close at your heels. ( To Pastor) Sir, a man of your character and
function will not, I suppose, encourage the disobedience of children to their
parents?


Past. Never, Sir. Your daughter came here a few minutes ago -- but entirely
unexpected by me. There she is at your disposal.


Pol. Then they are not married?


Past. No, nor ever will be by me, without the consent of parents on both sides.


Pol. Thank heaven! Then, Mrs. Love and Duty! I shall make bold to exert that
authority which I still have over you. You shall have a husband to night; but
one of my choosing; and that will not be a soldier, I promise you -- so come
along, ( pulling her from Young Latouche.)


Past. Hold, a little. One word with you, if you please.


Pol. As many as you please, now I have secured my runaway. Words cannot get her
from me; though, egad, heels had like to have done it.


Past. Have you any other objection to this young man ( pointing to Young
Latouche) for a son in law, besides his want of fortune?


Pol. None. What other objection need I have? Want of fortune is want of --
dam'me, what is'n't it want of?


Past. If I understand you right, then -- provided he can bid as fair for her,
as any other person, you will consent he shall have her?


Pol. Why, look'ye, Sir, as I believe my daughter loves him, and he loves my
daughter, I Am not so unreasonable as to oppose their wishes, so their wishes do
not oppose my interest. I like the young fellow very well -- he is spirited! but
that alone will not do for Polaco! How the devil should he bid for my daughter?
I Am sure his father cannot furnish the wherewithal?


Past. What signifies, so he has it? what portion do you require?


Pol. Twenty Thousand Crowns, his Highness has engaged to give me a mortgage on
his estates for that sum, with interest till paid.


Past. The cash, Polaco, is better, is it not?


Pol. Put it down, and I shall not haggle for a bargain,


Past. Wait a moment.


[Exit Pastor. Chap. ( fiercely) How! dare you, Polaco, enter into treaty with
another, after your engagement with me? and before my face!


Pol. Before faces, your Highness, or behind backs, all is one to Polaco. I may
do as I please with my own child, I suppose. Your mortgage may be very good --
but the ready is a devilish deal better!


Chap. Insolent! ( walks up the stage in a passion.)


Re-enter PASTOR, showing in Lord STANTON. Past. This is the young lady's
father ( pointing to Polaco.)


Lord Stan. Twenty thousand Crowns, you say, will purchase your consent to this
couple's happiness?


Pol. I said it, and will stand to it -- besides I Will double it on the nail;
Polaco's no flincher!


Lord Stan. Go -- give them your blessing -- I Will give them the money.


Pol. Aye, but who the devil are you?


Chap. ( coming down) Aye, who the devil are you.?


[Starts Lord Stan. ( Looking at Chapone with surprise) Aye, sure it is -- the
very villain! ( to Chapone) And who the devil are you?


Chap. ( aside) Hell and furies! my master!


Lord Stan. Let that villain be instantly secured.


Chap. ( falling on his knees) Pardon me, my Lord, and I Will do whatever you
please.


Pol. ( aside) My Lord! hey! what the devil's here? ( to Chapone) what, your
Highness on his knees again! Faith, your Spanish Grandees seem a very devout
sort of folks.


Lord Stan. That impostor is the villain, who was my servant, and would have
robbed and assassinated me but for the interposition of this brave man -- let
him be taken into custody.


Blan. I Will execute that commission with pleasure, ( seizing Chapone roughly)
your Highness and I scraped acquaintance together in the little wood yonder, I
believe.


Pol. I humbly beg your Lordship's pardon -- I was unacquainted --


Lord Stan. No apologies, you agree to the match?


Pol. That I do, your Lordship -- let it be done instantly. There ( joins Young
Lat. and Valence's hands) Heaven bless you.

[Exit, Lord Stan. I Have now got a son in law of spirit! ( to Chapon: Your
Highness! ha! ha! ha! Oh, you damned sneaking rascal!


Young Lat. Blanco, do see that villain secured?


Pol. Yes, Blanco, do attend his Highness. What a damned old fool I have been.


Blan. Yes. I Will attend his Highness for old acquaintance sake -- come, get up
-- I believe your Highness' estate is already so deeply mortgaged, that its not
worth more than a halter.


[Exit Blanco, dragging off Chapone. Past. Now, my friends, I have to request
you to attend me on another business, which is, at present, secret; but the end
of which I wish you to witness. As you have seen villainy detected, you will
now behold virtue rewarded. Who waits?


Enter SERVANT. Serve. Your pleasure, Sir?


Past. Is every thing ready, as I directed?


Serve. All ready, Sir.


Past. Are all the guests, I mentioned to you, come?


Ser. All, Sir.


Past. Then conduct them to the different places I have assigned -- My friends,
be pleased to follow my servant; he will instruct you in all that is necessary
for you to know. I have not time to do it myself. However, let me assure you,
that what is passed will be trifling to the pleasure that is to come.


[Exeunt, all but Pastor.] Past. ( solus) Now, to conduct his Lordship to the
Chapel, and then for the catastrophe! -- which I have endeavored to make as
striking as possible -- and while the events of this day blazon the mercies of
the Supreme Being, may they prove that virtue, however it, may seem depressed
for a while, will rise more bright and unfullied than ever!


[Exit. SCENE. A Chapel.
A Tomb with folding doors -- and a Lamp over them -- on one side -- an altar
with candles on the other. Enter PASTOR, and Lord STANTON, in mourning Past.
This is the vault which contains your Julietta and child. My Lord, I shall now
leave you to your reflections.


[Exit Pastor. Lord Stan. ( Solemn pause. Looks at the tomb -- turns away, puts
his handkerchief to his eyes, and continues sometime in that posture.) Is it to
this dreary mansion, I must come to visit thee, Julietta! Is this the meeting
which I promised, when I took leave of thee almost broken hearted! -- Poor,
suffering saint! -- look down and behold the anguish of thy wretched murderer!
Soon do I hope to join thee; to join did I say? Oh, never! Thy guiltless soul
soars where mine, contaminated and o'erloaded with crimes can never mount! (
kneels) -- Father of mercies! compassionate a repentant, contrite heart! As
thou know the sincerity of my penitence, let not my sufferings on earth be
long! purify me, as thou have the saint-like Julietta; and let my soul, in
unison with hers, pay THEE humble adoration. ( rises) -- ( solemn music, as
from above) Whence spring those heavenly sounds? they give new life; already am
I lifted from the earth, and become an aerial being -- it is -- it must be so!
this must be a gracious promise that my prayers are heard -- Oh, Julietta,
spirit of bliss! when shall we meet again? -- ( Music again -- the folding
doors of the tomb are thrown open. -- Julietta and Child (in-white robes) come
forth -- they approach the altar, kneel, continue sometime as in adoration --
rise and come forward. She sees Lord Stanton -- starts! after a pause,
advances, and holds out her hand to him.)


Lord Stan. Lovely spirit! I thank thee for this token of thy forgiveness! Yes,
though I know thine aerial spirit cannot be polluted by my touch; -- yet will I
try to grasp the beauteous shade! ( kneels, and takes her hand) Gracious God!
is it possible! Speak! speak! and confirm the wonder!


Jul. My husband! ( falls on his neck.)


Lord Stan. Is not this a delusion? do not my senses, bewildered by grief, and
by approaching this hallowed spot, deceive me with imaginary visions? Speak? O,
speak again!


Jul. I am, indeed -- your -- living Julietta!


Lord Stan. My child, too! ( child kneels between them)


Jul. Lives to ask your blessing!


Lord Stan. O God! O God! how little have I deserved this?


Enter PASTOR, YOUNG LATOUCHE, VALENCE, OLD LATOUCHE and POLACO. Jul. My
brother! father too!


Old Lat. My daughter!


Young Lat. My sister!


CURTAIN FALLS.
