FALSE SHAME: A COMEDY, IN FOUR ACTS, TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF KOTZEBUE.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY M. L. and W. A. DAVIS. FOR THOMAS S. ARDEN, No. 186,
PEARL-STREET. 1800.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
FLAXLAND, a Counselor of State. MRS. FLAXLAND, his second Wife. MINNA, his
Daughter by the first Wife. EMMA, an Orphan. CAPTAIN ERLACH. HUG^L, a Country
Gentleman. VICOMPTE DE MAILLAC, an Emigrant. FRELON, his Valet. MADAME MOREAU.
JOHN, the COUNSELLOR'S old Gardener.
[ The Scene is Unchanged, in the Counsellor's Garden -- On one side of the
Stage runs a Palisadoe fencing a Lawn -- on the other side stand two lofty
Trees, with the branches intertwined, shading a bank of turf.]

FALSE SHAME.
ACT I.
SCENE I. JOHN, upon a short ladder, clipping the hedge, humming a ditty and
talking at intervals.
JOHN. LUXURIANT shoots: -- here and every where: but they cannot every where
be pruned: -- Ho! ho! could I but for once, with my sheers, go to work
pell-mell among the rabble who are feasting here upon the fat of the land,
snap! snap! -- every cut should tell. ( he sings, then pauses) -- My poor
master! -- happiness was once in this garden a perennial ever-green --
flourishing without labor in each nook: now have they hemmed my good master
within so close and thick a fence -- that not a sunbeam can penetrate a ^heval
de frize: and the effects upon him is but too apparent, for he wastes away like
a "viola ma^ronalis" devoured by insects.

( he sings and works.)
SCENE II. EMMA crosses the Stage slowly, knitting, and as she passes says --
Good morrow JOHN.
John. Good morrow, my heart's dear young lady; what so early risen; a thick
dew is on the ground, and you will wet your feet.


Emma. The sun shone through my window, that attracted me hither.

[Exit.
John. (looking after her) a pretty flowret! that (...) itself in the grass
like a ripe strawberry. Heaven preserve her from the ravenous jack-d^ws. Our
Minna, is also good; ay, very good: but she fashions herself rather too much
after her stepmother; and it may soon be said -- he was good. (he sings and
works.)


SCENE III. Enter FRELON.
Frelon. Bon jour, maitre Jean.


John. (Paases; eyes him; smiles contemptuously and works on.)


Frelon. (Approaches and cries) What ho!


John. What Is the matter?


Frelon. I say, bon jour, maitre Jean!


John. And I say -- go to the devil! I am an honest (...) fellow, and must be
spoken to in my mother tongue; do understand, Mounseer bon jour?


Frelon. Master John is for ever grumbling.


John. The Cuckoo is Maitre Jean -- my name is John; keep your distance, with
your French film-flams.


Frelon. The asses cry -- Jahn! Jahn!


John. So I hear.


Frelon. Maitre Jean, sounds better.


John. All passes current with you, if it does but sound: -- go your ways,
Mounseer cling-clang, and leave me unshorn.


Frelon. Sheep are shorn* but not bears.


John. Take heed of the bears paws.

(he sings and works)
Frelon. Maitre Jean, avec permission, leave off singing -- you have a cracked
voice.


John Who hinders thee from taking thyself off?


Frelon. My master ordered me to wait for him here.


John. Then post thyself yonder among the young peace, that for once in thy life
thou may be good for something.


Frelon. Your jests are truly German.


John. Methinks, for German bread, thou may well digest German truisms.


Frelon. (fanning himself) It will be hot to day.


John. There is mud in the pond, where thou may cool thyself.


Frelon. Apropos: the pond must be filled up.


John. (Surprised) What?


Frelon. I say the pond must ^anish.


John. (Smiles (...) -- (...) and (...).)


Frelon. Only let my master strike up a match with the daughter of the house,
and we shall soon turn things top^y turvy.


John. Your master -- with Miss Minna?


Frelon. Yes, yes, the ^iscount is in a fair way to forget what he owes to his
illustrious ancestors.


John. So -- but Miss Minna will scarcely forget what she owes to herself.


Frelon. Mon ami, my master is accustomed to turn the heads of young girls.


John. Verily, they must be turned to endure him.


Frelon. Respect -- Maitre Jear -- a word from me, and you fall under my
master's displeasure.


John. Hey! --


Frelon. At any rate -- I have my doubts, (...) her my master will continue
your service.


John. So! --


Frelon. As to the kitchen garden, you may there perhaps understand your
business: -- but, mon ami, you want taste.


John. Indeed!


Frelon. Your trees, hedges and tulips. -- might pass in Holland. -- but suit
not our taste: we require striking prospects -- improvistos -- hermitages --
mausolerms.


John. Now, have I enough of it?


Frelon. You are old, mon ami; have seen very little of the beautiful; il saut
lui passer son ignorance; you may be welcome to continue here as under-gardner;
but we shall engage a Frenchman -- a sane pareil, ah! maitre Jear -- you may
then become a pupil.


John. I! become a pulpil!

(descending from the steps.)
Frelon. What is now undermost -- he will make upermost; -- he will improve the
muddy pool in Dian's ^ath -- and the down-falling forcing-house -- into a
Chinese Kiosk.


John. Kiosk! Thou contemptible gasconader

(he seizes a water engine, and waters Frelon's legs.
Frel^n. (Jumping about) Maitre Jean, Maitre Jean, -- what means all this!


John. Dianna's bath -- Monscer bonjour!


Frelon. I say, let me alone.


John. If it does not please thee -- why, -- crawl into the Kiosk -- (he
follows Frelon about the stage.).


SCENE IV. The Privy Counselor FLAXLAND and the former.
Flax. John -- what art thou doing?


John. I am rooting up weeds!


Flax. Do not know, in whose service the fellow is?


John. (half aside) O! yes! like master, like man.


Frelon. (Wiping his legs with his handkerchief) Maitre Jean loves fun.


Flax. Where is your master?


Frelon. Most likely -- yet at the ball.


Flax. (forcing a smile) Bravo! -- That I call dancing.


Frelon. Toward daybreak, he sent me away, and ordered me to wait for him
here.


Flax. (With constrained indifference) the Viscount will doubtless attend my
wife home.


Frelon. My master knows good breeding.


Flax. Was the ball well kept up.


Frelon. O! yes! your lady dances -- comme un ange, and Mademoiselle Wilhelmine
-- comme un zephyr.


Flax. Was the company numerous?


Frelon. Your lady, was seated at midnight in a circle of the beau monde.


Flax. (Suppressing his uneasiness) I hope she will not take cold, in returning
home?


Frelon. She sent back the phaetor -- Chevalier Hugel offered his carriage.


Flax. Hugel! is he in town? -- I am glad of it.


Frelon. He arrived last night in full gallop -- dismounted -- and flew to the
ball -- ventre saint gris -- maitre Jean has so drenched me, that, by your
leave, I must change my chaussure.

[Exit.
SCENE V. Counselor FLAXLAND and JOHN.
Flax. Prithee tell me, John, why the trees, near the water, are festooned
together?


John. It is my lady's order -- I was to strip the garden of laylook and gilder
roses.


Flax. But wherefore all this preparation?


John. How should I know? -- she is to give a something -- the puppy just
hopp'd off -- named it in French -- Mounseer Rosat, the friseur, described it
to me -- it is called -- ha! ha! ha! -- a dancing breakfast; the cooks have
been at work all night -- and the maids beating chocolate.


Flax. (with constrained indifference) So!


John. Ay, ay, for a couple of years there has been such a bustle in the
garden, that the nightingales have quite deserted it.


Flax. No matter good old man, if contentment here still builds her nest.


John. Ay ay, contentment is a pretty bird, but, at times flies away like
swallows.


Flax. (Sighs and endeavors to conceal it.)


John. Be not offended, my dear master, I am an old gray headed servant, who
looked anxiously on, when you were baptized -- you grew up, but always loved to
be alone; -- when the neighbous' children played, you sometimes, through good
nature, mingled in their sports -- but then you looked just as you do now --
though never austere -- you understand me?


Flax. (Smiling) If neighbors children had claims on my good nature -- how
much more my dear wife! --


John. But often, what is easy to the lad, goes against the grain for the man
-- the twig bends -- the tree breaks -- After peaceably and quietly jogging on
in the same path for the fourth of a century, at the end of the way, we are not
inclined to practice any side steps.


Flax. My wife is young; I am turned of forty, and therefore should be doubly
obliging; (with warmth) and she is moreover entitled to my fullest confidence
-- she is, indeed, an incomparable woman.


John. Mighty well -- if madam would but leave me the garden in peace.


Flax. How so -- old one -- what difficulties, have you to encounter?


John. Ah! my dear master -- the garden is my paradise -- my father -- God
bless him -- planned the garden -- there was I born and bred -- and a couple of
years excepted -- which, through love of the art, I passed in Holland -- I have
scarce moved a step from the gate -- my hand prunes each fruit tree -- and what
my arms can now scarcely span -- I remember a tender sapling -- Behind yon
meadow is a grass plat -- it is hardly noticed -- by the garden wall stands a
few birch trees -- where in the evening I smoke my pipe.


Flax. Well!


John. Methought -- that a good word to your honor in my behalf -- would get
your leave to have me buried there.


Flax. That shall be done, my honest fellow.


John. Ah! but who knows how long these birch trees may remain -- Madam has it
under consideration to pull down the wall, and to make a plantation in the
meadow, with a labyrinth intermixed with a bit of a cornfield -- a Parnassus --
and I know not what -- and my poor birch trees will stand in the way.


Flax. No one shall molest thy birch-trees.


John. But who will care about such poor wood, when even these beautiful linden
trees are not spared.


Flax. What linden trees.


John. (pointing to the two trees twined together) Do you no longer know your
nurslings? -- you and Miss Philippina planted them on your good mother's
birthday.


Flax. O! I full well remember it.


John. You were then both children, scarcely taller than this rose-bush -- and
when you had put the cuttings in the ground -- you joined your hands over them,
and kissed one another -- your lady mother wept, and said to me, John, have a
care of these suckers -- this I have faithfully done -- they are become a pair
of stately trees; and must I now fell them? -- no* I cannot do it -- the hand
would grow nerveless that attempted to lay an axe to these roots.


Flax. But who wishes thee to cut 'em down?


John. Madam says -- when one sits in the summer house, these linden trees shut
out the prospect of the village.


Flax. No matter, these lindens shall not be touched -- I especially entrust
them to thee, John.


John. Mighty well.


Flax. It is the sole remembrance of my poor sister.


John. Alas! Yes!


Flax. My dear woman knew not of this.


John. Likely not: it was but yesterday she first mentioned it. I believe the
flighty Mounseer puts these fancies in her head -- He was with her, -- skipping
and pirouetting -- treading down here a cucumber, and there the ripe
strawberries. He seems to stand high in madam's good graces.


Flax. (With keen sensibility) Do think so?


John. He never leaves her side.


Flax. He is thought to be an agreeable companion.


John. To be sure, he can prattle -- and so can his va^let de chamber. -- he
already boasts of alliances.


Flax. (eager) what alliances?


John. I dare not even repeat them, for I do not believe a syllable of the
gasconnade.


Flax. (aside) So; already the servants prattle, (going to speak, but restrains
himself) Enough John: I disturb thee in thy work -- I could not sleep: and
thought to be the first in the garden.


John. The first! oh! no: Miss Emma was here half an hour ago.


Flax. Emma! where is she?


John. Yonder she sits knitting -- yonder, among the rose bushes.


Flax. (Calling to her) Good Morrow, Emma.


SCENE VI. EMMA, and the former.
JOHN removes further down, clipping his hedge, and gradually disappears in the
back ground.


Emma. Good Morrow, my dear father, I did not know you were so early risen.


Flax. Thy case was mine, and thy tiptoe tread was needless; -- what will thou
give me to be the messenger of good tidings?


Emma. Give! you joke! To give you, would be only to give back -- for have I
not received all from you?


Flax. From me! -- nothing my child: -- thou owe me only the roof, beneath
which thou dwell; every thing else, to the last penny, is repaid me, by my
astonishing friend, from his small stipend.


Emma. But can he also repay your fatherly affection?


Flax. That, thou amply refundest -- familiarizing to me the delightful idea of
having two daughters -- indeed, I could almost become jealous, by reflecting,
that I must to day divide my strongest claims upon your heart.


Emma. To day!


Flax. Erlach is expected.


Emma. Expected! and today! -- my deliverer! -- my noble benefactor! -- at
length, after eight years: but, my dear father, will he certainly come?


Flax. He writes so -- as usual, in three laconic lines -- the intelligence
surprised me: for at the beginning of a campaign, Erlach is not accustomed to
make visits.


Emma. Scarcely can I recall his figure -- O! would he were he! I will meet him
-- which road must he take?


Flax. No one knows -- my worthy Erlach seldom adds place or date to his
letters: -- do but read; "Thou will receive enclosed, Emma's pension -- and
next Tuesday, myself" -- that is all.


Emma. Sure enough! only a word or two -- but stamped with kindness -- his times
is too precious for writing -- it is devoted to action: -- is it not so dear
father? the hour is lost to him that does not dedicate some good deed to
eternity.


Flax. The gentle Emma has caught enthusiasm, and it pleases me.


Emma. O! when he raised the wretched Emma from the mass of ruins -- when he
shared with her his trifle of pay -- whenever I think of it, I cannot but weep.
My whole heart is his.


Flax. And deservedly; may thou succeed, dear girl, in curing him of his
woman hatred! and, indeed, the more I conteraplate thee -- the more rational
and the more probable, do I consider this hope -- what think thou Emma? --
thou know the disposition of the man -- his form alone is forgotten -- but
that is noble.


Emma. And were he as ugly as the slumbering poet -- whom a queen kissed in
passing -- he only uttered the beautiful -- Erlach does it.


Flax. Thy gratitude takes such a lofty flight, that her wings seem soaring to
the regions of love.


Emma. What is love -- if not attracted by the good and beautiful?


Flax. Thou art not then disinclined? thou permittest me to indulge an
association of ideas.


Emma. You joke, my dear father, and amuse yourself with my reveries -- but do
^ou know, that your playfulness may cherish a romantic day-dream, that has long
been sporting in my brain?


Flax. Well, my dear little American, let us hear?


Emma. When, on a summer's eve, I steal from your gay circle to wander in the
avenue of elms, then build I castles in the air -- how to recompense my
benefactor -- to enliven his old days -- but I am playing the fool with my
talkativeness -- and fortunately I just now perceive our ball visitors
returning home: dearest father, you have discovered my soul unveiled -- but
yonder gala beaux, shall not surprise me in deshabille.

[She runs off.
Flax. And do they come at last? -- but not to me! a dejeune dansant engages
them homeward.


SCENE VII. MINNA, HUGEL, FLAXLAND.
Minna. Good Morrow, to thee, my sweet pappa, or should I not rather say, good
night, and pillow my cheek to sleep?


Flax. Art Thou fatigued?


Minna. Oh dying!


Flax. Dear Hugel, I so much the more rejoice to see my good neighbor -- as,
at this season I dared not expect the pleasure.


Hugel. You are right, Sir -- the country in spring, furnishes so much
occupation -- so much gratification --


Minna. And what a grateful, a respectful curtesy, must I make you; that you
left all to a chance medley -- to be my partner.


Hugel. Could my company be of the least possible value* I might flatter myself
to have deserved it.


Minna. Extreme diffidence borders on vanity -- who could have thought, dear
pappa, that this young Squire -- who hitherto lurked in a corner, and looked on
when other folks were capering, last night, at my high behest at length boldly
resolved to stand with me the last couple in a contra dance, upon the express
condition, only to hand up -- and then to retire, if the figure seemed too
intricate. I Consequently expected nothing less -- than an awkward simpleton,
weighing like lead upon my arm, and bungling through right and left -- when lo!
he footed it along with me like a pupil of Vestris. In the name of wonder --
why have you hitherto seemed as if you were lame?


Hugel. I never danced in a public ball-room; the townsmen enjoy a laugh
against us rustics.


Flax. False shame was the only failing I could ever discover in my young
friend.


Minna. I have not yet finished pappa -- he sat next me at supper -- I filled
him bumpers, and was very attentive to him -- whether inspired by wine, or my
smiles -- the dumb Squire Hugel became eloquent, -- conversed so sensibly --
and sported such engaging bon mots, that I almost forgot I was in the temple of
folly. But in heaven's name thou wonderful man! why, hitherto, have thou been
so sparing of thy words?


Hugel. because I am apt to utter some absurdities in large circles.


Minna. For this very reason -- we have large circles, that every one may play
the fool with impunity -- what in a select company, is becoming diffidence --
would in the world be called false shame; there, your apparel must be splendid,
and your discourse dazzling: by ou^ fire side, we require comfort from clothing
-- and good sense from conversation.


Flax. (Who for some moments seemed restless and uneasy) Where did thou
leave thy mother?


Minna. She supposed you was still in bed -- and hastened to your chamber to
awaken you with a kiss.


Flax. Was she alone?


Minna. Alone! O dear! as if one could shake off the Viscountess de Maillac --
without telling him, to go to the devil.


Flax. He was then with her?


Minna. Not precisely with her -- but behind her -- when they perceive pappa is
not above, they will of course come down into the garden.


Flax. Quite right; for lo! yonder they are. (his countenance brightens, and he
hastens to meet his wife.)


SCENE VIII. MRS. FLAXLAND VISCOUNT DE MAILLAC, and the former.
Maillac. Nous voilla, Monsieur le Conseillere.


Flax. Good Morrow, my love -- have thou been well amused?


Mrs. Flax. Tolerably, my dear -- I met a couple of my youthful friends -- whom
I have not seen for an age; we laughed and prattled -- they greet thee kindly
-- and beg thou will not be offended at their having so long detained me.


Flax. Offended! what gives thee pleasure, makes me happy.


Maillac. Bravo, Monsieur, le Conseillere! vivent les maris raisonables.


Mrs. Flax. Have thou at all missed me, my dear?


Flax. My heart always misses thee.


Maillac. Very gallant, quite a french tournure.


Mrs. Flax. Therefore, I will remain with thee, the whole day -- I have invited
some twenty friends -- we will breakfast in the grove, and fancy ourselves in
Pyrmont.


Maillac. Ha! ha! ha! bravo! Madame la Conseillere has charming ideas.


Mrs. Flax. (curtsies) My ideas are highly obilged to you.


Maillac. Faith, Mesdames -- I entered Germany with very moderate expectations:
I had imbibed a frightful idea of German ladies -- it was said a girl of
fifteen blushed, through timidity, in taking off her glove -- and at table,
thrust her hands under the plate -- sitting by the side of a man of fashion,
with a dumb and vacant countenance -- or else, unmannerly laughing -- grimacing
-- and whispering to her play-fellows: -- a girl of eighteen has ever tearful
eyes -- is plunged into an ocean of sensibility; affects a partiality, and
construes rudeness to a stranger, into constancy to a lover: a woman of twenty,
imagines she displays her virtue, in hanging back like a child, whenever a
young man approaches her -- and pouts if he utters any thing gallant: a woman
of twenty-five --


Mrs. Flax. Enough, Viscount -- else we shall dispatch you to Hanover, to the
man who has written a satirical book against our sex.


Maillac. I will write an Encyclopedie against him, and should I ever return to
my country -- evil betide the prater who sports a bon mot upon the German
ladies.


Minna. And, as a reward, the German maidens should speedily convey you to the
grave, as the female's poet laure^t.


Maillac. It may, to be sure, be alleged -- that Germany was at first, in
part, truly delineated by the Emigrants -- and that afterward, the revolution,
which in the south caused so much calamity -- has extended through the north,
taste and cultivation.


Minna. You are right, Viscount: a vulgar German girl, would laugh in your face
-- but I, who already feel the benign influence of your society, am so well
bred as to make you a curtsey -- and walk away.

[Exit.
Maillac. Ha! ha! ha! bravo.


Mrs. Flax. (calling after her) Whither Minna?


Minna (turning to the stage) O! I am impatient to see Emma, and relate my
adventures -- the greatest delight which a girl can bring home from a ball, is
the prating about it for eight days after.

[Exit.
Maillac. (exclaims, and touches his shoulder) What was that? a drop of rain!


Mrs. Flax. O! no: the sky is clear, and will not interrupt our garden gala.


Maillach. But yet, do but see a wet spot upon my new frock.


Mrs. Flax. Perhaps a dew drop, from the trees?


Maillach. Madam -- you yesterday pronounced sentence of death upon these
cursed tall lindens.


Flax. My dear Emily, I implore mercy for these trees?


Mrs. Flax. Are they interesting to thee?


Flax. Inexpressibly so.


Mrs. Flax. I did not know it.


Flax. My poor sister and I planted them.


Mrs. Flax. (astonished) Thy sister! have thou yet a sister?


Flax. I had one; but whether she survives, God knows?


Mrs. Flax. And thou never said a word to me about it.


Flax. Your pardon; -- I dreaded the tearing open old wounds.


Mrs. Flax. Neither did I (...) it mentioned in thy family.


Flax. My Family, through false shame, avoids uttering my poor sister's name.
She loved, against her parents' approbation, a young merchant from Lions -- she
yielded -- and absconded -- For two and twenty years she has been dead to us --
most of my family have forgotten her -- I will never forget her!


Maillac. Lion! Lion! I was born in that neighborhood. Ay, ay, the Lyonese are
very seducing.


Mrs. Flax. (caressing her husband) My dear husband, I was on the point of
doing a very foolish thing -- but it was an omission on your part, not to have
entrusted me sooner with so many important family occurrences -- from this
moment, these linden trees are under my special protection; -- Viscount, I beg
your frock's pardon.


Maillac. But seriously -- I must change my dress.


Mrs. Flax. (smiling, and patting him on the shoulder) what could be more
ageeeable to us women, than such noble occupation; my toilet also awaits me.


Flax. May I offer thee my arm?


Maillac. Fie, Counselor Flaxland; That were two Germanic -- permit ^e,
(presenting his arm).


Mrs. Flax. Viscount I have not yet been long enough your pupil -- the German
wife every now and then twitches my gown. (She takes hold of her husband's
arm.) A revoir Messieurs. (going) I shall soon rejoin you.

(Exeunt.
SCENE IX. The VISCOUNT, and HUGEL.
Maillac. Bravo! an original German joke.


Hugel. I pity the French -- if such actions constitute their jokes.


Maillac. What else? -- matter for Florian's Nouvelles; or Arnaud's espreuves
du sentiment.


Hugel. (shrugs piteously his shoulders).


Maillac. You shrug your shoulders, Sir -- I must tell you -- your manners
displease me.


Hugel. I am sorry for it.


Maillac. We talk -- we relate -- we display our wit, but all in vain -- there
you sit -- looking like the deaf and dumb, going, for the first time, to Abbe
D'Epees seminary.


Hugel. I had rather resemble the unlearned scholar, than the uninvited tutor.


Maillac. But this must not be, Sir: at your age, with your figure, one may
dash at any thing -- you have beautiful teeth, you should laugh -- you have
large eyes, you should ogle -- you are well made, but you know not how to give
your body those bewitching careless contours which captivate the sex; the
undulating line is the line of beauty -- a young man should always display his
lineation -- with his arms -- his legs -- his whole body.


Hugel. (smiling) Unluckily I have been educated in the Cadet corpse.


Maillac. Yes, yes -- that is evident -- it will be an arduous task to unbend
you: en attendant, mon cher ami, -- if you will entrust yourself to my tuition.


Hugel. You honor me.


Maillac. But under one condition.


Hugel. What is it?


Maillac. I think I have observed you cast a presuming eye upon Miss Flaxland
--


Hugel. Presuming -- why yes -- it is, to be sure, presuming to love such an
enchanting girl.


Maillac. You love her then?


Hugel. I am not ashamed loudly to acknowledge the noblest feeling of my heart.


Maillac. And for her?


Hugel. I know not, Sir -- by what title --


Maillac. What title? -- parbleu -- I will marry the lady.


Hugel. Why, so will I.


Maillac. She is (...) -- handsome -- witty.


Hugel. She is good, sensible and amiable.


Maillac. I will make her a Viscountess.


Hugel. And I, Mrs. Hugel.


Maillac. She cannot be both.


Hugel. Probably, she may decline being either.


Maillac. Enter nous, mon cher ami, parlons raison.


Hugel. Willingly, if it does not incommode you.


Maillac. Minna must be my bride.


Hugel. I would enter the lists for such a lovely prize.


Maillac. What, when I tell you -- that I will not afterward lay the least
restraint upon her.


Hugel. What means that?


Maillac. Au contraire -- you will oblige me in becoming my wife's cecisbeo.


Hugel. I have not learnt this in the Cadet corpse.


Maillac. Love -- sigh -- languish -- as much as you please, I do not even
require your patience for the honey-moon -- l' ami de la maison will be ever
welcome.


Hugel. Your most obliged.


Maillac. But till after the wedding, I must entreat you to keep your distance.


Hugel. I am sorry -- that my refractory heart --


Maillac. But Sir -- I entreat! -- do you understand me? the tone in which I
entreat -- will fully explain to you, what impression a refusal must make upon
me.


Hugel. The path of love is open, like the career of honor -- we may march
abreast -- and he, who like you, Viscount, is conscious of his superior merit
-- what has he to fear? --


Maillac. (disdainfully) To fear! -- O! no -- but this happens to be now my
fancy -- I will not endure any rival.


Hugel. But for this time you will permit --


Maillac. No -- I permit nothing Sir -- nothing!


Hugel. That sounds somewhat dictatorial.


Maillac. You compel me to speak plainly.


Hugel. Miss Flaxland can best decide this contest.


Maillac. I accept no lady for arbitrator, whilst I wear a sword.


Hugel. I am not fond of knight-errantry.


Maillac. Tant pis pour vous -- for we must break a lance together.


Hugel. I have long ground down my sabre into the peaceful sickle.


Maillac. I would so much the more advise you to make your exit from a stage,
where your part cannot be the most shining.


Hugel. Competition does not always prove an unpleasant character.


Maillac. You then persist in your obstinacy.


Hugel. (shrugs his shoulders)


Maillac. When I peremptorily announce to you, that we must cut each other's
throat.


Hugel. I hope not.


Maillac. You must shut out hope.


Hugel. I consider all this exordium as a jest.


Maillac. There you are completely mistaken, Sir! Diable! I feel that your
damned sang froid fevers my veins.


Hugel. I entreat, Viscount!


Maillac. Superfluous -- you leave the field -- or draw the sword.


Hugel. I should be very reluctant.


Maillac. (disdainfully) So I perceive; you have not probably ever seen blood
shed in the Cadet corpse.


Hugel. If you then positively command it.


Maillac. You are still at liberty to decide.


Hugel. It is impossible for me to renounce Minna. (he coolly takes out his
gloves and puts 'em on.)


Maillac. I think it my duty as a nobleman, to caution you -- that I was taught
to fence by one of the most celebrated professors.


Hugel. I thank you for this generosity -- but it is too late. (he draws his
sword.)


Maillac. Enter nous, mon ami -- I emigrated -- through the misfortune of having
killed all the staff of my regiment in duels.


Hugel. Tant pis pour moi -- I acknowledge the peril, and trouble. (he stands
on his defense.)


Maillac. (draw^g back, confused) How Sir? -- what in earnest?


Hugel. How? -- were you only in jest? (advancing.)


Maillac. You do not recollect where we are.


Hugel. To be sure -- it is not the proper place.


Maillac. Even so: -- not for the world! -- I would never so far forget myself
-- to profane by a duel, a spot hallowed by hospitality! -- upon the frontiers,
Sir -- upon the frontiers, will I run you through the body -- and escape.

(Exit in baste.
SCENE X. HUGEL, Solus.
(He sheaths his Sword laughing.) And such a creature enjoys here free egress
and regress: -- thus, many a coxcomb is endured, because he dances well -- or
because his hands are at command, if a lady wishes to wind off her thread --
strange! that forward fools -- and absurd fashions -- should be thus indulged;
but women will wear the one, and tolerate the other -- and they commonly
ridicule both a month after -- The saying -- tell me thy company -- and I will
tell thee what thou art -- cannot apply to the sex, for one finds lap-dogs and
fools in favor, even with the most faultless female.

[Exit. ACT II.
Dancing and wind music heard at a distance. SCENE I. CAPTAIN ERLACH.
Ho! ho! -- It goes merrily here (looking toward the spot, whence the music is
heard) hats -- caps -- feathers -- dance and cards -- whirling together -- this
suits me not! and this they call a summer pastime, when they transplant the
card-table from the drawing room to the garden -- a swarm of ^nats breaks up
the party, and a drop of rain makes them scamper, as if it perforated through
their skulls; there are those who slumber over the whole summer, and do not
rouse themselves until the autumnal equinox -- and my old friend tolerates such
uproar in his garden? -- my honest sedate Flaxland, how can this be explained?
-- who knows -- may be his daughter's wedding? -- if some domestic would but
cross me -- to whisper in his ear -- Erlach is arrived. -- I will not step too
near this wild hurley-burley -- I would rather loiter in the alehouse -- and
muse over the hundred year calender -- ho! there good friend! -- why sure it is
old John.


SCENE II. CAPTAIN ERLACH and John.
John. Hey! hey! -- by the I ord -- his honor the lieutenant -- or rather,
already, his honor the captain.


Erlach. It Is all one -- if I am but welcome.


John. More welcome than an aloe in full bloom -- a rare guest! -- a dear guest!


Erlach. I should be sorry to become here only a guest.


John. How his honor will be rejoiced!


Erlach. Why, has one here leisure to enjoy an old friend?


John. We have talked daily about you; when the linden tree blossomed -- or the
melons ripened -- it was ever -- what a pity, my friend Erlach is not here?


Erlach. Who was meanwhile dancing at the great harvest feast -- where death
swung the scythe.


John. Sometimes he complained, that you wrote so seldom.


Erlach. Writing was never my passion.


John. And that one never could exactly know where you were?


Erlach. And what boots it? -- the soldier is every where -- and no where --
like the old man in Spiessen's tales of ghosts. I have existed of late, like
the wandering Jew: But above all, I cannot endure, when friends are for ever
scribbling each other their protestations of eternal friendship; -- it must be
self understood -- for a friend is not like a girl, adored to day -- neglected
tomorrow; -- apropos of girls -- how fares it with my Emma? is she bravely
grown?


John. Tall, good, and beautiful -- a rose -- a double rose!


Erlach. I am glad of it; -- here is company I perceive.


John. Yes, to my sorrow.


Erlach. Thou do not like it old one?


John. Am not accustomed to it.


Erlach. And thy master? neither was it his custom.


John. Ah me! here has been a great alteration.


Erlach. How so?


John. Our new lady.


Erlach. What? a new lady! it is not surely so? -- a second wedding?


John. Not know that! -- why it is going into the third year --


Erlach. Indeed! -- it is an unpleasant hearing -- and he is deceived -- it
serves him right.


John. A good lady -- but too gay -- too frolicksome -- it seems to me like two
kings in one hive -- such humming, buzzing, and swarming.


Erlach. Let the Counselor know I am here -- but secretly -- that it may not
be mouthed about.


John. I understand you.

[Exit.
SCENE III. ERLACH solus.
Fares it then with marrying as with drinking -- a debauch creates headache,
and scarcely sober, we again take the glass: -- No, Erlach, thou have done many
a crazy thing in thy lifetime -- but thou will not marry -- that is not thy
doom: -- He who stands on the beach, beholds the swimmers exhaust themselves --
yet plunges into the flood -- and deserves his fate.

SCENE IV. ERLACH and the COUNSELOR.
Flax. (springs to him with open arms) Erlach! my Erlach! (the two friends
press each other in silence to their hearts.)


Erlach. (with sensibility) Old youngster! it joys me to see thee again: (he
shakes him by the hand) I am truly glad! -- thou art become rather thinner --
but otherwise much the same: -- why, I believe thou weepest -- fie for shame:
(he turns away to conceal his own tears) hem! a fly makes my eye water.


Flax. I weep! -- yes: -- and thank thee for not joining the company, for there
I must have suppressed these sweet tears.


Erlach. So -- but why have thou such assemblies? -- it displeases me.


Flax. Of that hereafter; -- let them dance and play -- we have not met these
eight years -- dear Erlach, how fare you? --


Erlach. I retire as Captain.


Flax. Why so?


Erlach. Because it no longer pleased me -- and because an old aunt had the
sense to make me her heir.


Flax. I am glad of it -- now we (...) keep together.


Erlach. Truly -- that was my intention; -- but --


Flax. Wherefore a but?


Erlach. Thou have ventured upon a second (...) as I understand.


Flax. An excellent woman!


Erlach. May be: yet this style of living -- (...) know me -- it is not
after my way.


Flax. Do think it is agreeable to me?


Erlach. Why do thou suffer what thou could prevent?


Flax. I am twenty years older than my wife -- should I check her accustomed
youthful amusements?


Erlach. Thou should have taken that sooner into consideration.


Flax. I loved.


Erlach. If thou preachest of love, I have done.


Flax. Has Erlach never acknowledged a mistress?


Erlach. Friend, it is with love, as with the small pox -- who escapes it in
youth, is seldom or ever infected.


Flax. (smiling) But when caught it is the more dangerous: -- though to be
serious -- in thy present situation, what could thou do more sensibly than
to marry?


Erlach. What? why shoot myself -- that were more rational.


Flax. What, ever the inveterate woman hater?


Erlach. If the woman is worthless, it is bad -- and if good, it is still worse.


Flax. Thou art in jest?


Erlach. Not in the least -- I should love an amiabe woman.


Flax. So much the better.


Erlach. So much the worse: -- a man who loves his wife, becomes the slave of
his own heart -- her desires, which he may not be able to gratify, torment him
more than her.


Flax. An amiable woman cherishes no such desires.


Erlach. But desires are like dust, that insinuates itself through bolts and
locks.


Flax. And by the breath of love is blown away.


Erlach. Item -- who takes unto himself a wife, must wean himself from an
hundred little habits; which, since ten years, have become a second nature, and
to which mankind generally adhere more obstinately, than either to their
virtues or vices: -- every one has his favorite dish -- the chair he prefers
sitting upon -- his place at table, and so forth: -- suddenly appears a female,
as the household legislat^ix, and every thing must be moulde^ into another
shape -- the man wishes to dine on roast beef -- but to please madam it must be
fricasseed -- the carriage is ordered, when he would rather be on horseback --
and he abstains from tobacco, because she dislikes the smell.


Flax. (smiling) Trifles!


Erlach. Sapling have their roots -- which on all sides expand themselves in
the soil -- and at my years a man dislikes tearing up a flower, and even were
it a weed.


Flax. At thy years! why man -- thou stand as yet with at least one foot in
thy youthful luster.


Erlach. But let us finally bring the dear creature to her sick bed -- she has
headaches, I tremble -- no appetite, nor I neither -- a fever, I am beside
myself -- and at length, a lying in -- I am expiring through anxiety. No brother,
this is not my calling.


Flax. But have thou no conception of wedded bliss?


Erlach. O! yes: -- thou look the picture of connubial bliss! -- and do
thou not include yonder tumultuous revelry in thy catalogue of wedded joys?


Flax. (with a sigh) That might be otherwise, and peradventure may be otherwise!


Erlach. Prithee say, where does the shoe pinch thee?


Flax. Ah! dear Erlach, more than one worm is gnawing at my heart.


Erlach. Speak the truth, -- this manner of life: -- thou love quiet -- thou
would rather retire to thy farm?


Flax. Through love to my wife, I would roam from one carneval to the other; but
the expense is too great -- my purse cannot hold it out.


Erlach. Why do thou not tell her so?


Flax. I cannot; under her parental roof, she was accustomed to this life; when
a bride, she enquired with the most endearing confidence, the extent of my
income: -- I will most cheerfully accommodate myself -- answer me sincerely?


Erlach. And did thou not do it?


Flax. I! -- excuse me, my friend -- I was ashamed! -- live as heretofore, I
replied, the means shall never fail you.


Erlach. And so it rested?


Flax. She desired to know the conduct she should adopt! whether retirement was
my object? -- I shall conform entirely to your wishes, said she.


Erlach. But thou?


Flax. I could not bring myself to be, as it were, a kind of dictator, to
constrain her: I studied to make her avoid recollecting, that she married a man
turned of forty.


Erlach. That implies -- thou wast ashamed of thy age.


Flax. May be. --


Erlach. And would pass for a richer man, than thou art?


Flax. It is now too late to retract.


Erlach. Good sense, comes never too late -- though she knocks at midnight.


Flax. That yet might pass -- my heart disregards a diminished revenue -- but
--


Erlach. Yet, a but: --


Flax. To thee, and to thee alone, I confess my weakness -- I am tortured by
the demon of jealousy -- daily, must I behold a swarm of admirers fluttering
around her -- they are to be^ure, mere foplings -- but woe betide the man who
imagines a fop cannot distress him -- the necessity of amusement, ha^ often
made female virtue fall the victim of amusement.


Erlach. Why do thou not tell her so?


Flax. It is true, she has an hundred times enquired whether I also was jealous
-- one word, and I shall disperse all these (...).


Erlach. And an hundred times, thou have answered her --


Flax. Wh^^ I heretofore answered her, as bridegroom -- (...) my confidence in
her, was boundless.


Erlach. What is again, in other words, confessing, (...) of thy jealousy. --


Flax. Yes, (...) Erlach.


Erlach. (...) is not false shame a damnable weakness -- (...) would not be
half so many miserables, could we (...) had we but the resolution, to declare
(...) where the pain lies, -- Here now stands a (...) be happy -- whose wife
requires nothing more (...) confidence -- she wishes to be guided by him --
(...) whatever displeases him -- but he -- he is (...) holds his tongue.


Flax. I feel my error -- but want the resolution to an end.


Erlach. I must then occasionally lend thee some of my old bachelor frankness
-- be comforted! if thy wife resembles thy description of her, there may be
help for thee -- that is my affair: -- now tell me how fares my little
foundling? must I look for her in yonder circle?


Flax. Thou would seek her there in vain.


Erlach. I am glad of it -- between ourselves brother, I have at heart the
child's welfare -- would she were but grown.


Flax. O that she is already.


Erlach. And that she were marriageable?


Flax. O! that she is any day.


Erlach. You joke -- she was a mere child, not taller than my rattan, when I
was last here.


Flax. But in eight years it is easy to grow.


Erlach. Surely -- but the lass is yet blood young -- destiny threw the poor
orphan in my way, and I will faithfully provide for her -- I have neither child
nor family -- she shall call me pappa, as heretofore -- and when old Nick makes
me lead down death's dance, I shall leave my purse to her keeping.


Flax. Have thou discovered nothing of her origin?


Erlach. Not a syllable: -- but no matter -- I can be as good a father to her
as another.


Flex. Why not (...) husband.


Erlach. Art thou in thy (...)?


Flax. She so heartily rejoiced at thy arrival -- almost like a bride.


Erlach. Ay, ay, did she so? then be quick -- send her to me.


Flax. Instantly, (going) thou have sent thy baggage to my house?


Erlach. Not yet brother -- thou know me -- I must first find out, if all
goes here as I like it.


Flax. My old friend -- I cannot imagine --


Erlach. Go, go, all that will find its own way.

[Exit Flaxland.
SCENE V. ERLACH solus.
We must first develope the lady's disposition -- matrimony has many a time
administered an opiate to friendship -- and once fallen asleep, she awakes
never more: it is, as if love exhausted the spirit from the flask -- leaving
friendship only the vapor -- from which evil, the Lord deliver us: -- my poor
Flaxland -- and thou persuadest me to marry -- thou! a decoy bird -- sing as
thou listest, we shun the net and the lime twig.

SCENE VI. ERLACH and EMMA.
Emm. (breathless and with outstretched arms) my deliverer! my benefactor!


Erlach. (draws back and avoids her embrace, surprised) Who are you?


Emma. Have you forgotten your Emma?


Erlach. (astonished) You! my Emma?


Emma. And why not thou as formerly?


Erlach. Can you be the identical Emma, who eight years since was not taller
than my cane?


Emma. And who could only then lisp, what she n^w feels.


Erlach. Who sat upon my knee, and was afraid of my beard?


Emma. The same, whom you overwhelm with kindness -- and yet repel her grateful
exultation.


Erlach. (hesitating between doubt and affection) Well, well -- if it be so, I
am heartily glad -- thou -- you -- hang ceremony -- and run and kiss my dear
girl.


Emma. That, was the fatherly well-known voice. -- (she embraces him)


Erlach. (kisses her forehead, and contemplates her with admiration) Why, girl,
thou art become tall and beautiful -- thy eyes is tender -- and all thy ways
delight me -- do see? -- I cannot tell how folks feel who have children --
but at this moment, I would not give a doit for a living daughter (he touches
her cheek) my heart is so light and joyful -- do not laugh at me, for letting
the water trickle down my cheek -- this is not usual with me.


Emma. I laugh! -- I am so overcome, (weeping)


Erlach. Thou weepest! -- dear Emma, I cannot stand this -- I must go --


Emma. (dries up her tears and smiles.)


Erlach. So, so, my lovely girl, with such a smile thou could halt a
squadron on full charge -- but now for a rational word -- it cannot go on thus
-- thou and thee are no longer sitting.


Emma. Why not my father?


Erlach. But hang it, why your father? -- do I then look so old? I am eight
years younger than the Counselor. --


Emma. Your bounties --


Erlach. What, again? (quick) Do you hear, dear Emma? (gentle) my good Emma --
not a syllable more about it -- it is not my way -- and if it must be thee and
thou, it may as well be as thy brother -- at any rate a half brother, by a
first marriage.


Emma. My heart does not require any relationship to love you.


Erlach. So much the better -- little comes of relations who only love one
another for what little they can get.


Emma. You wrote us so seldom --


Erlach. My writing master raped my knuckles when I made crooked letters, and I
have since been always averse to writing.


Emma. Your goodness! --


Erlach. That is not the question -- I could but sparingly provide for thee --
for I had nothing beyond my Reutenant's pay -- but I shall go better in future:
-- we have inherited, my Emma, an old aunt, God bless her, has bequeathed us a
pretty snug estate -- I have therefore retired from the service, and purposed
taking my winter quarters (...) with you.


Emma. O! that is delightful --


Erlach. Yes -- but the style of living here, is not after my fashion -- if it
goes on at this rate every day -- It is true -- the Counselor has told me that
my Emma dislikes this bustle.


Emma. Custom has made solitude dear to me.


Erlach. Custom only! -- not then inclination -- not impulse?


Emma. Do not therefore think the wo^^e of a young girl -- whose heart has
sometimes throbb'd, when viewing at a distance the jocund crew.


Erlarch. Well? why did thou not make one amongst them?


Emma. Because it did not become me -- because I, a poor orphan -- must subsist
by others' liberality -- because --


Erlach. Because -- well -- fully out with it.


Emma. Before you -- I will not conceal my weakness -- because I could not
flatter myself in splendid circles to supply through innate worth, the
superiority of my companions in dazzling finery.


Erlach. In plain words -- that signifies -- thou wast ashamed of thy wardrobe.


Emma. Not here -- not in the society of superior beings -- but yonder -- you
know on what weak foundations -- the world grounds its siokle judgment.


Erlach. Another instance of false shame -- dear Emma -- a maiden is richly
dressed -- when adorned in the simple drapery of innocence -- but thou must not
want for any thing -- now I like such an apron with pockets, it looks so
domestic -- but the pockets must not be empty. (he endeavors unobserved to put
a purse in her pocket)


Emma. (much (...)) No, no -- in God's name, not so -- you have misunderstood
me -- you humble me -- I have more than I want -- If you love me take back the
^oney. --


Erlach. Be but quiet (he replaces the money) I have not managed this cleverly
-- pardon me -- I am too downright -- the art of giving is a fine art -- and
unfortunately, I do not understand it.


Emma. What I meant to confess as a (...) the appearance of effrontery -- I am
(...) rather as a daughter, or a sister -- ^ow (...) they (...) to force upon
(...) trinkets (...) -- I may still perhaps (...) -- whilst I am revelling
(...) a common peasant girl -- (...) my ears?


Erlach. A (...) -- no indeed, no!


Emma. ((...)) Know you perchance (...)


Erlach. (...) dear child -- only vague surmises.


Emma. Of relate to me these surmises -- the tale of my deliverance; when you
quitted us eight years since, I was a child, and could not understand it -- it
is true; that (...) the counselor has often related to me what he learnt from
you -- but the little local incidents -- which can only interest me -- escaped
his attention -- and how often a trifle is a clue to the most important
discovers! -- I will assist you with my faint infantine recollections -- I will
describe to you my mother's figure -- perhaps she yet survives! -- gracious God
-- she may still be alive! --


Erlach. Possibly! -- but not probably! -- we made good our landing in the
night -- surprzied Charleston -- our people were disguised by liquor -- they
became incendiaries -- the town flamed at every corner -- and those who spring
from the fire, fell by the bayone^! -- no commander -- no subordination -- I
think with horror on that infernal night -- I had shouted myself hoarse -- though
(...) thunder would have rolled unheard -- At length the day dawned -- and
enlightened the murderous scene -- covered with dust and blood -- blackened by
smoke and ashes -- our men laid snoaring around -- all was horror -- and in
that stillness of desolation, I scrambled sword in hand over the smoking ruins
-- when suddenly I heard a faint murmuring under my feet -- I listened -- I
removed away the glowing fragments -- when an infant countenance looked
piteously at me -- and cried mother! mother! it was thou, dearest Emma! -- thy
body laid half buried in soot -- a miracle had preserved thy existence -- I
loosened the soot -- one of thy little hands got free -- and thy first use of
it was to waft me a kiss -- this inexpressibly affected me -- Patience, poor
worm, said I -- thou may yet be ^el^eved -- my groom was near -- and
together we raised thee unhurt into the face of day -- I took thee in my arms
-- and thou clung around my neck -- To my mother! -- said thou in English --
to my mother! -- thou repeatedst in French -- and at last in German -- because
thou thoughtest I did not understand thee. -- Who is thy mother? I inquired --
here in the narrow street -- the good woman -- at the yellow house. -- But
there were no more -- neither narrow or broad streets, neither woman or house
-- I exerted every effort to make some discovery -- the few who had saved
themselves had crawled into the woods -- we re-embark'd -- What was to be done?
-- could I abandon thee among the burning ruins? -- My captain permitted my
taking thee with me -- he was moved when he beheld thee -- for thou wast so
little -- so little -- that I cannot even now comprehend -- how thou could
grow thus tall.


Emma. Alas! -- and do you not know more?


Erlach. (shruge his shoulders) We made a safe voyage to Europe -- and thou
foundest an asylum in my friend's house.


Emma. Could I not once lisp out to you my name?


Erlach. Thy christian name, Emma -- which makes me (...) British -- but thy
French and German were equally correct -- thou art therefore of no vulgar
origin -- thy (...) was marked A. M. and this is all I know.


Emma. O! would I were once there! -- could I but view my parents? -- I should
certainly recognize them -- my father was a dark thin man -- and my mother! --
her form I never can forget -- she looked so pale -- and wept so frequently --
and now, perhaps, she weeps oftener than ever -- and I dare not mingle my tears
with here is.


Erlach. Compose thyself dear Emma -- I see the holiday squadron prancing down
the alley -- such tears are too precious for creatures who have whirled away
their bit of feeling in the dance.


Emma. I cannot just now recover myself, but suffer me to go? (she retires)


Erlach. (alone) Excellent girl! -- only a pity, that she has grown so tall and
handsome: the heart cannot be so unreserved as formerly, and -- thou -- faints
on the tongue -- I will, however, remove my trunk hither.


SCENE VII. ERLACH, MRS. FLAXLAND, MINNA, HUGEL and EMMA.
Mrs. Flax. Welcome Captain; heartily welcome! I just now understand from my
husband --


Erlach. (with cool politeness) Have I the honor to be in Mrs. Flaxland's
presence?


Mrs. Flax. If it does not give you more satisfaction than honor -- I must
count another wish ungratified.


Maillac. Bravo! that is fine.


Erlach. Your wishes are very temperate.


Mrs. Flax. We have been expecting you for an eternity.


Erlach. So much the worse for me -- for the expected seldom answer the
expectation.


Mrs. Flax. I have an hundred times had your manner and appearance repeated to
me -- for when I hear of interesting persons -- I love to sketch an outline --
which at last seldom resembles the original: for example -- I have always
figured you to be a lively, jovial man -- with the nose of an eagle, and the
eye of a falcon. --


Erlach. Your most obedient.


Mrs. Flax. I would have wager'd Wieland's Musa^ion, your eyes were not of such
a dark hazel.


Maillac. Ha! ha! ha! -- bravo! --


Erlach. A cheerful spirit sometimes posts stern sentinels -- to check
merauders -- (fixing his eye on Maillac)


Mrs. Flax. But Captain -- if friendship undertakes to seize a heart by
surprise --


Erlach. Friendship only surprises fools.


Mrs. Flax. You are right -- I should have said by conquest -- she then eludes
mistrust, who guards the outpost -- in short, I am resolved to be your friend
-- that I may no longer continue your rival.


Erlach. Rival! --


Mrs. Flax. Yes Sir, yes: more than once have I been heartily jealous of you --
not a day passes but my husband expatiates upon you with enthusiam; -- It is a
passion -- a longing! -- were I suspicious -- I should have feared to behold in
^ou, a second Chevalier d'Eon.


Maillac. Ha! ha! ha! bravissimo.


Mrs. Flax. Viscount, I excuse you from the duty of applauding each of my words


Minna. Ha! ha! ha! bravo, bravissimo.


Maillac. (to Minna) Little censor, thou shall repay me this.


Minna. What, will you make more verses upon me?


Erlach. It nearly comes to my turn to cry bravo!


Minna. (to Erlach) Will you again restore the word to honor?


Erlach. (smiling) Indeed! my beautiful unknown!


Mrs. Flax. How! do you not know your friend's daughter?


Erlach. (surprised) What! can that be the Minchen? your pardon, Mademoisselle
Wilhelmina!


Minna. O! keep ever by Minna -- otherwise, for the first time, I shall grieve
at being grown tall.


Erlach. Yes, indeed, you are grown tall and handsome.


Minna. And can also blush brave captain.


Erlach. Flattery is not my way -- beauty is like nobility -- it does not make
the wise vain.


Maillach. Ah! Captain, she is as cruel as she is beautiful.


Erlach. (to Minna) An admirer I presume?


Minna. Yes, a bit of one --


Mrs. Flax. Monsieur le Vico^te de Maillace -- a French emigrant.


Erlach. So, so -- your humble servant.


Mrs. Flax. And here is Herr von Hugel, a worthy country gentleman.


Erlach. That is my object -- to this gentleman I am already nearly related --
for we Swiss are naturalized to a country life.


Mrs. Flax. Your arm Captain, to join the company, where you shall hear a
medley of names and titles announced.


Erlach. I had rather be introduced to a bed of hyacinths -- for when I
understood this to be a premier noble -- and that a Cardinal de Fleury -- I
should at least be rewarded by the smell.


Maillac. Monsieur le Captain, seems to be infected with the new philosophy?


Erlach. Infected! -- Bravo! the expression is select -- we shall soon begin to
build quarantine houses on the frontiers -- to stop travelers, posting in the
country, infected with the plague of reason.


Mrs. Flax. You bear yourself a name of renown.


Erlach. Unfortunately: it has often tormented me: if perchance presented at
court, it was buz'd through the circle -- are you descended from the famous
Rudolph Erlach? my God, yes -- but am I a hair the better, or the taller for
it? I Hans Erlach, serve God and my king to the best of my ability -- whoever
likes me on that score, let us shake hands as friends: but let no man touch his
bonnet to me on account of Rudolph Erlach, whose bones moulder under Strasburg
Cathedral.


Mrs. Flax. Well, my gallant Captain, I give you my hand, as the friend of Hans
Erlach -- but you must not forget, that when with wolves, we must join in the
howl.


Erlach. Your pardon: -- that is one of the senseless bye-words -- we should
never howl with wolves.


Mrs. Flax. But all this while my poor husband is confined among them: let us
hasten to release him! (she drags him away with her)


Erlach. (following her reluctantly) I am your prisoner -- and assuredly
prisoners may be made to serve as pioneers.

[Exit.
SCENE VIII. MINNA, the VISCOUNT, Herr von HUGEL.
Maillac. Le Captain -- is rather massif.


Hugel. No summer house -- such buildings shelter friendship in winter.


Minna. Shall we follow, to the company?


Maillac. You joke -- the comet never asks his tail, whether it will follow!


Minna. Ha! ha! ha! -- do you know that the tails of comets are said to be
composed from an exhalation of vapors?


Maillac. Composed as you please.


Minna. Are you of that opinion Herr von Hugel.


Hugel. I can find no comparison to Minna equal to herself.


Minna. (throws herself upon the bank) Well then gentlemen -- we will remain
here -- I am in no talking vein -- I must be amused, and care not how.


Maillac. Could I avail myself of this heure de Berger, and discourse of my
love.


Minna. No, no: -- do you not hear? I will be amused!


Maillac. Perhaps you may like reading? I have here a volume of Rousseau's
Nouvelle Heloise.


Minna. A book I dare not read -- papa does not permit me.


Hugel. I have Woldemar's Jacobis in my pocket.


Minna. Emma and I have read that twice through -- but tell me Viscount, why is
your book styled la Nouvelle Heloise?


Maillac. Probably the author's caprice -- for I cannot discover through the
whole work, one syllable about an Heloise.


Hugel. (smiles)


Minna. It must however bear some reference.


Maillac. Most assuredly.


Minna. Heloisa must have been extremely beautiful.


Maillac. (presenting Minna his snuff box) I can have the honor to show you her
portrait.


Minna. Does it resemble her?


Maillac. Like two dew drops.


Minna. (cunningly) Perhaps you were acquainted?


Maillac. Not with her -- she has been dead some years -- but I knew her uncle
Fulbert -- an honest old fellow -- there is a copper plate of him.


Minna. You smile, Herr von Hugel.


Hugel. I participate in your amusement.


Minna. We were conversing about the uncle, Viscount -- I suppose a person of
some consequence? --


Maillac. A financier -- one does not investigate these gentry so precisely --
they keep an excellent table.


Minna. And Abelard?


Maillac. Was at that time. avocat au parliament, and had acquired some
reputation.


Minna. Likewise I presume an elderly man?


Maillac. In the prime of life --


Hugel. (smiling) O, yes! -- he can scarcely be more than six or seven hundred
years old --


Maillac. How, Sir?


Hugel. At least, Bail asserts, he was born in the eleventh century.


Maillac. That is false -- I must know better than the obscure person you
mention.


Hugel. Bail! an obscure person!


Maillac. In short, Sir, he, who can to his face accuse a man of my condition
of an untruth. -- He, at least betrays -- that he is no Frenchman. -- This
Abelard is a man between forty and fifty, which I assert upon my honor! --
understand me, upon my honor; and there the affair is decided. -- Should you,
notwithstanding this opposition, remain in doubt, I am prepared to give you, in
the adjoining field, the most unequivocal proofs -- (He bows to Minna, casts a
haughty look at Hugel, and

(Exit.
SCENE IX. MINNA and HUGEL.
Minna. Why, this is a challenge in due form.


Hugel. So it appears.


Minna. And you do not go?


Hugel. Because I already know through experience -- that on foot there is no
overtaking him.


Minna. It would be comical for you to fight about Abelard.


Hugel. Men have often cut one another's throats, for objects equally
insignificant.


Minna. And have been chronicled as martyrs.


Hugel. Presumption is also a passion -- and our passions are frequently but a
stimulus, to be roused by opposition.


Minna. This should not be acknowledged to us girls.


Hugel. Why not?


Minna. Because it might make our sex mistrust the love of yours.


Hugel. Did I then mention love?


Minna. Is not love also a passion?


Hugel. Not true love -- which enables our existence, and becomes the innate
impulse to all that is good and great.


Minna. I doubt -- whether this definition would suit the taste of my sex? --
We are but too fond to excite passions -- and to make philosophy ridiculous,
reason, crowned with fool's cap, kneeling at the feet of beauty -- an engaging
picture.


Hugel. But only in water colors --


Minna. Girls are seldom judges.


Hugel. Nor will they be judges --


Minna. Detraction, my good Sir.


Hugel. I wish you were open to demonstration.


Minna. We have demonstration at heart, but men in our heads.


Hugel. Heart and head, should promote a friendly intercourse.


Minna. O! Such an intercourse were too tedious.


Hugel. Or marry! --


Minna. Wedlock would be yet more tedious.


Hugel. You are not serious -- but I am confident that at your golden wedding,
you will defend holy matrimony, with all the animation of youth.


Minna. At my golden wedding! heaven forbid! -- to survive that, I must at
latest marry tomorrow.


Hugel. Which must wholly depend upon yourself.


Minna. Upon me? -- comical enough! -- as if it depended on one's self to
resolve, to day I will give away my heart.


Hugel. Why not? -- as easy as to declare, today my ear shall not be shut
against the poor beggar -- today, I will comfort the unfortunate.


Minna. My sagacious Sir -- you over-rate the worth of a maiden's heart.


Hugel. I only alluded to your own.


Minna. Which I conjecture -- you cannot comprehend.


Hugel. I! not comprehend your heart? -- then must the sweet remembrance of my
childhood be obliterated! -- whither are flown those happy times -- when your
father resided on his estate -- and lived in friendly intercourse with mine --
when each fine summer evening, assembled us children in the village -- you
beckoned me kindly from afar -- and called me, thou, and Augustus! -- when
suddenly, the frolicksome Minna vanished from our sports -- to share her penny
with a beggar -- or to assist a fallen child -- When she industriously gathered
the strawberries for her father -- or selected flowers to celebrate her
mother's birthday. -- O! Minna! Minna -- I -- not know your heart?


Minna. (distrait) Those were happy hours!


Hugel. Blessed with innocence and peace of mind.


Minna. Nothing can be compared with the enchantment of our early youth.


Hugel. Except it be the charm of first love.


Minna. The one as transitory as the other.


Hugel. A random observation from the great world. -- in cities every thing is
painted -- landscapes upon canvas -- health upon the cheeks -- and love upon
the stage -- in cities, words are appreciated by fashion -- in the country,
they flow from feeling -- in cities they say, your obedient servant -- in the
country, good day: -- the first is politeness -- the second heartiness: -- I
love you, exclaims the townsman, with a (...) I love thee, says the countryman,
with a glist^ning (...) the first repeats the word an hundred times a day --
(...) other expresses it but once in his life -- To the one love is a mere
pastime -- to the other the enjoyment of life -- here a gaudy flower, the show
of a summer's day -- and there a sheltering foliage from rain, and the parching
sun -- an instrument never out of tune, through change of weather.


Minna. I now hear for the first time, that you are also a poet.


Hugel. (drooping) O! my throbbing heart! -- thy sensibility is misconstrued
into fiction.


Minna. I begin to fear thee -- romance is infectious.


Hugel. Romance -- I have been but too much inured to hear the genuine taste
for love and nature thus abused -- I therefore rivetted my heart -- and threw
not the key into the ocean of the world -- but treasured it, as unfolding the
ideas of my hopes and wishes -- I wished to discover the female, to whom the
unpresuming youth was more deserving than the pert coxcomb -- who, at a gala
ball -- would not pass with a contemptuous leer, the rustic noble -- because
unpractised in the dance -- and who, at the sumptuous board, did not mistake
silence for dullness: -- Ah! I thought to have found her --


Minna. (in a soft hesitating tone) And were mistaken! --


Hugel. (with enthusiasm) No, no -- I am not mistaken! -- This tender
inquietude manifests your beautiful soul -- yes, I often rejoiced to behold,
amidst the bustle of the world, your lovely countenance, clouded with
listlessness and ennui -- that where your heart was not interested, you could
display your judgment. -- O! fly these baneful circles, which oppose bulwarks
against reason -- card-houses against licentiousness -- where those style
themselves friends, who dissipate one another's time; where one is familiariz'd
to love -- by calculating that together the revenues suffice to fit up a house
-- where the possessor is reputed generous, if, on a Sunday afternoon, he
distributes twelve-pence among a dozen poor -- and he is esteemed pious, through
forbearance to talk of his religion, from the fear of being bewildered and
misled -- where the honest fellow inwardly despises the powerful scoundrel, to
whom he is compelled to pay obeisance -- where we compassionate the distressed
whilst shuffling the cards -- and by the third trick have utterly forgotten
them: -- in short, where egotism mingles with interest -- fear produces
meanness -- and the habitude of vice masks its deformity. Fly from this
pestiferous atmosphere to rural scenes, where every noble feeling is excited --
there is the heart unfolded to the good and beautiful -- there, love and
friendship are not visitors, but residents -- God is honored, when with
wondering transport we view the starry heaven -- We give to the poor to relieve
their wants -- vanity mingles not her ostentatious gifts, among the precious
contributions of benevolence -- there is mirth without cards, and conversation
without detraction -- one is not ashamed to esteem oppressed worth, and loudly
to proclaim, a scroundrel -- a scroundrel. O! I possess only a slender
patrimony -- but, if to all the blessings which industry, fortune, and my heart
bestow upon me, Minna designs to contribute love -- my little paradise will
only want a ridge of lofty rocks, to make it impenetrable to envy. -- You are
silent. -- The lively Minna casts down her eyes, and contemplates the flowers
in her bosom.


Minna. Methinks Herr von Hugel, it is a proof of my esteem for you -- that, at
this instant, my levity forsakes me.


Hugel. your esteem is my pride, but only love gives bliss.


Minna. Ere I answer you, confess to me sincerely. -- what proportion does my
figure hold in your love?


Hugel. Sincerely, my best Minna -- I have never examined myself, as to that
point.


Minna. Then do it now -- it materially interests me to know it: -- Should I,
think you, have engaged your affections, had I been ugly and deformed? -- I
appeal to your honor and honesty, for a faithful answer.


Hugel. Well then, why should I disavow an impression, which youth and beauty
produce in every well organized frame: -- I should love you, even were you
plain -- but whether I should have so clearly recognized your soul, concealed
in such unseemliness, I cannot venture to pronounce.


Minna. And supposing the smallpox should suddenly disfigure me, or if I be
not what I seem?


Hugel. What a supposition?


Minna. Girls are skilful in concealing their imperfections.


Hugel. My life upon the venture.


Minna. You shall venture nothing -- she, who will deceive an honest man,
cannot deserve his love -- (she takes his hand) I -- Herr von Hugel, highly
esteem you -- something more perhaps -- but --


Hugel. No but.


Minna. I must confess to you --


Hugel. (trembling) That your heart is engaged?


Minna. My heart is free.


Hugel. Well? --


Minna. I am -- I appear --


Hugel. O! you are what you appear --


Minna. No! no! I --

(The musicians at a distance play a Waltz.)
Minna. (uneasy and confused) Dancing is renewed -- shall we join the company?


Hugel. Without indulging me with an answer?


Minna. Yes, yes, I will answer you soon, though not now: -- this waltz -- it
delights me -- come, come along, and let us dance?


Hugel. It is out of my power at present to dance.


Minna. Indeed! -- the music is so inviting -- you will not then? -- excuse me
Herr von Hugel, I must look out for a partner.

(she hurries off)
Hugel. (looks after her amazed) Is it possible? -- God! is this possible? --
the acknowledgment of heart -- felt passion dissipated by a wretched waltz --
she discovered an honest man, but she sought a dancer. -- Now then farewell,
the holy belief in innocence and nature -- away Hugel, and hide thyself under
thy thatch -- water thy salads -- and scare the birds from thy domain, that
their notes may not remind thee of this cursed waltz.

[ (...)
ACT III.
SCENE I. CAPTAIN ERLACH
ABUNDANCE of eating and drinking -- a peal of laughter -- but no pure
enjoyment: -- he who laughs with all his might, is not of course always happy
-- one laughs at his own wit, and if he be rich, or powerful, the circle is
constrained to join in chorus -- another laughs at a double entendre, of his
own painful invention, and ogles the ladies around to enjoy their confusion --
here titters a gosling, to disguise an auk ward timidity -- and there leers an
ape, because his neighbor's tail is a hair too long: -- here is a good soul of
a mother relating her offspring's display of genius, and compelling her yawning
hearers to join in the admiration -- yonder, is a sketch discussing, from the
magazine of scandal, and a malignant smile blasts the opening bud -- when they
return home, says his Excellency to her Excellency, what a delicious party --
how heartily we have laughed: -- No; this is not after my way -- the most
rational among the groupe, seems to be the Counsellor's lady -- a canary bird
among bullfinches -- warbling to them, till they imitate a tune or two -- if
sometimes her wild notes escape her, they are lovely melodious tones; -- could
she but know how her husband is chagrined -- but patience -- she shall learn
it. Once domesticated together a couple of months under one roof -- (...)
couple of months! -- why Erlach, can thou swim so long in this strunge
element? -- why not? -- Flaxland is my friend -- and Emma! -- what choaks thee
old boy? -- daughter -- sisiter -- friend -- no matter how I call her, I dearly
love her, and having once for all saved her from perishing -- why -- ay -- so
-- a good girl -- only one thing in her displeases me -- the should not, mean
while, have grown eight years older.

SCENE II. EMMA and ERLACH.
Emma. (looking about for some one and perceives Erlach) Ah! you here?


Erlach. I am here, my dear child -- were you looking for me?


Emma. No: -- I was seeking -- I want to speak with some one, who has crept
into some bush, God knows where. (she gives him a friendly nod)

[Exit.
Erlach. (solus) Most obedient! -- that was not methinks so pretty in her! --
she might as well have remained a couple of minutes, and chatted a word or two
about the weather: hem! -- whom can she be seeking? -- who is this some one?
and what can she have so urgent to say to him? -- Some one! -- why that may be
a female -- though I will wager it is a man! -- O! ho, Miss Emma -- perhaps a
secret of the heart: -- well! what is that to me? -- am I not her -- her
father? -- she dared not amuse me about the blank nobody: I, however, surely
deserved a particle of confidence, just for a word at parting -- to have been
whispered this somebody is named so and so -- but so it is, when girls become
eight years older.


SCENE III. ERLACH and MRS. FLAXLAND.
Mrs. Flax. My dear captain, you court solitude!


Erlach. It is difficult to meet her in these quarters.


Mrs. Flax. Is that praise, or blame?


Erlach. I never dispute upon taste.


Mrs. Flax. I understand: -- but do not misconstrue into taste, what with me is
only custom -- and not seldom a tiresome custom.


Erlach. What hinders you from shaking off this tiresome custom?


Mrs. Flax. My husband likes this manner of life.


Erlach. He like this life? --


Mrs. Flax. If we are alone, he instantly becomes uneasy -- inquires twenty
times in an hour, if I am not vapour'd -- if I will not make such and such a
visit -- and is not easy till I order the carriage.


Erlach. And accompanies you?


Mrs. Flax. Seldom! only when I earnestly entreat him.


Erlach. What can he do at home alone?


Mrs. Flax. (playful) God knows: -- peradventure, he makes gold -- at least,
when I return, he always receives me as cordially, and as kindly, as if he had
discovered a treasure,


Erlach. Ha! this grieves me.


Mrs. Flax. How! -- what grieves you?


Erlach. To hear that my honest friend, since our separation, has learnt to
disguise himself.


Mrs. Flax. Disguise! how so?


Erlach. No such alteration occurs to a man at his years.


Mrs. Flax. Speak more intelligibly.


Erlach. I had rather be silent -- we do not as yet know enough of one another.


Mrs. Flax. Not know one another! when my husband gave me a right to his
affection, he gave me also a right to vour friendship.


Erlach. Friendship and old hock are good -- but mixed with a sharpness, not
perhaps to every one's taste.


Mrs. Flax: You excite my curiosity more and more: -- I be^eech you Captain,
don't count me among the formal beings who screw up their mouths at a truism,
because it is somewhat bitter; -- our acquaintance is yet young -- but were I
slumbering on a bed of roses, and a stranger preserved me from a viper's sting,
this stranger would become my friend.


Erlach. If you think thus --


Mrs. Flax. Indeed, I think thus: -- to please my husband is my most earnest
wish -- to be sure the difference in our ages is considerable, and I did not
fall into his arms through love, but was some how surpised into them through
esteem: -- we have not acted a romance together -- no lightning has inflamed,
but a chearing marriage sun has constantly animated us: be you then animated to
speak confidently -- but, notwithstanding this declaration, should my presence
any way confuse you -- I will place myself behind these trees -- forget my
being here, and you need not spare me in a soliloquy.


Erlach. Bravo! -- that is my way, those who think thus, I esteem highly -- and
to those I esteem highly, I speak the truth.


Mrs. Flax. Forward then --


Erlach. How can a woman with such an excellent head and heart, endure so many
fools about her:


Mrs. Flax. Alas! dear Captain -- should we banish fools -- our circles would
become very circumscribed.


Erlach. The smaller the better -- sense and sociability are guests who
disappear if they behold lights at every window.


Mrs. Flax. But folly lends good sense a foil.


Erlach. She does not want it -- and if your husband has pretended to like this
manner of life, he has deceived you.


Mr. Flax. That would grieve me. --


Erlach. He thought this indulgence was due to your youth.


Mrs. Flax. Then he little knew me.


Erlach. He feared you might imagine --


Mrs. Flax. What?


Erlach. That he was jealous.


Mrs. Flax. Jealous! -- you joke!


Erlach. Should I for example assure you, that last night he never closed an
eye -- that his imagination kept him on the rack till morning -- that he was
obliged to force himself away, when he heard your carriage draw up.


Mrs. Flax. I am all astonishment!


Erlach. It gnaws my heart strings, sighed he mournfully -- I endeavor in vain
to conquer this weakness.


Mrs. Flax. My God! -- why did he not say so to me?


Erlach. False shame -- the demon of confidence.


Mrs. Flax. Well, I have hitherto left our company to a chance medley -- in
future, he shall have the selection -- he shall be my constant companion --
this very day he shall make out a list, and name the persons whose acquaintance
he esteems.


Erlach. The list will be very short!


Mrs. Flax. Not so: -- there are here many worthy, sensible characters.


Erlach. O! yes -- but the more there are -- so much the more difficult for an
individual, who is no (...) to treat them.


Mrs. Flax. What do you mean? -- Flaxland is rich!


Erlach. He was!


Mrs. Flax. How?


Erlach. He may yet be called in good circumstances -- but if his property
continues to be melted, as it has been for these last three years --


Mrs. Flax. My good Sir, you alarm me.


Erlach. Where the outgoings so far exceeded the income --


Mrs. Flax. Can it be possible?


Erlach. He might, peradventure, 'ere long have been compelled to infringe upon
the maternal patrimony of his children.


Mrs. Flax. My God! -- why did he not tell me this?


Erlach. False shame! -- the less riches the less esteem.


Mrs. Flax. But not in my eyes. --


Erlach. He has long wished to retire to ^is farm.


Mrs. Flax. Willingly: -- heartily; -- this present evening.


Erlach. But he fears at your age, that country samenes^ --


Mrs. Flax. O! how it distresses me -- that my husband did not think it worth
while to appreciate my character -- that a stranger should repose more
confidence in me, than a man of whose affection I am proud -- that I should
injure his children, and destroy his peace of mind! -- that I should dissipate
the savings of paternal solicitude and maternal affection! -- why did he no put
me to the proof? why did he suppose that a swarm of coxcombs could entertain me
better than domestic quiet, and the converse of a well informed man! O! Captain
Erlach, men so often reproach us for our weakness -- it is no weakness -- it is
the soul's softness -- and it chiefly depends upon you to mould it into
goodness -- but you conceive that female love ill accords with truth -- you
require health and soundness of soul, and yet poison it with flattery: -- but I
am complaining and arguing, where I should be acting -- your hand, dear
Captain, you shall witness and acknowledge that I merit your confidence.

[Exit in great emotion.
Erlach. (alone) Why right! this is my way -- if she keeps her word -- I remain
here: -- but if I stay, the lass must alter her manner, and not run away from
me -- she must have confidence in me -- I should like, however, to learn if she
has found her plaguey somebody.


SCENE IV. ERLACH and HUGEL.
Hugel. (enters in a deep reverie)


Erlach. Here comes one who has disentangled himself from the Babel, and tries
to compose his ears: -- welcome Herr von Hugel -- I wish you joy.


Hugel. (starting) Of what?


Erlach. Of solitude. Some good folks imitate the nightingales -- when
surrounded by clamor they are silent -- you did not seem yonder to be in your
right place.


Hugel. I at least resemble the nightingales, by feeling myself in my proper
place only in the country.


Erlach. You are complimenting yourself.


Hugel. Were my attachment to a country life, a privilege, I should share this
privilege with every clown.


Erlach. Would he thereby lose ought of his worth?


Hugel. Yes; with many. --


Erlach. If you allude to the French locusts, who here infect the air -- you
may be right.


Hugel. No, no: -- better men -- perhaps the (...) -- yonder Frenchman for
example -- I dare not (...) to appreciate him -- but he pleases --


Erlach. Whom?


Hugel. He is prepossessing.


Erlach. To whom?


Hugel. (sighing) He is probably beloved. --


Erlach. (more uneasy than inquisitive) By whom?


Hugel. Ah! by a lady, who fails in nothing, but the faculty to discern the
heart which reflects her image.


Erlach. And this lady! for as to the heart, I know it! --


Hugel. You know it!


Erlach. Yes, without the faculty of looking into it -- but the lady? --


Hugel. That, methinks, you might easily have divined -- for I said expressly
-- that nothing failed her.


Erlach. Most obedient -- (aside) he certainly spoke of Emma. (loud) You
believe then, she is partial to the Frenchman.


Hugel. I must also fear it.


Erlach. (half to himself) Hem! -- should he be the some one, she so anxiously
sought!


Hugel. (eager) How! -- she sought?


Erlach. A somebody -- the devil take him -- with such haste, she was near
tumbling over me.


Hugel. Indeed?


Erlach. She was panting to speak with him.


Hugel. I lament the search was fruitless -- as an hour before, he walked away
with a couple of courtiers.


Erlach. (murmuring to himself) Accursed coxcomb -- such a girl, without a
failing -- only too old -- too old --


Hugel. How too old? -- she is only sixteen.


Erlach. So much the worse.


SCENE V. EMMA enters, and exclaims on perceiving HUGEL.
Ah! -- are you there?

Hugel. (surprised) I, madam?


Erlach. (amazed) Hem --


Emma. I have been looking for you above an hour.


Hugel. I was wandering in the meadow, not supposing that here, I could be
missed.


Erlach. So he was the some one whom you sought?


Emma. Yes, dear Captain -- I have something of importance, to communicate to
Herr von Hugel.


Erlach. Probably also a secret?


Emma. Emma has no secret for her benefactor -- but it concerns a friend.


Erlach. (feelingly) So, so -- I comprehend -- constrain, is not my way -- I
shall soon enough learn the secret from the bridegroom.

[Exit.
SCENE VI. EMMA and HUGEL.
Emma. Herr von Hugel, I have a msssage to you.


Hugel. If this message gives me pain, which I greatly apprehend, there has
been at least the consideration to choose an asswaging messenger.


Emma. I hope to be messenger of peace.


Hugel. Peace precludes discord -- and I knew not --


Emma. You have told my friend you loved her.


Hugel. Only told --


Emma. No sophistry, -- by your leave.


Hugel. Well then -- to my sorrow, I love Minna!


Emma. Why to your sorrow? --


Hugel. I am a plain countryman -- which for a moment, I ceased to recollect --
Minna has deeply humbled me -- it will never again be forgotten.


Emma. Humbled! -- that is a hard expression.


Hugel. The occasion was harder than the expression -- she, who treats a
serious proposal, as a jest -- she, whose levity hurries a man with the tears
of love in his eyes to a dance -- let me say, does not that imply contempt?


Emma. Dear Herr von Hugel -- beware of an intemperate judgment -- you may
repent at Minna's feet: -- Do you make no allowance for a poor girl's
embarrassment? -- I assure you, that most of the follies of which we are
accused toward your sex -- arise from embarassment -- how, if Minna was
heartily well disposed to you? -- but only shy of a certain confession, which
she feared, might in the eyes of the lover, diminish the worth of the beloved.


Hugel. (smiling sarcastically) You are supposing a case? --


Emma. I suppose nothing -- there are certain points, Herr von Hugel, which to
our sex are very important, but which, fortunately, do not always strike your
eyes: should a girl be not completely what she seems to be, she may, if she
can, deceive the public, but not the man whom she intends to marry.


Hugel. Minna is not what she seems? -- I do not understand you.


Emma. Minna is very beautiful.


Hugel. O! certainly.


Emma. A charming shape.


Hugel. Why, tell me that?


Emma. You find her faultless!


Hugel. You are in jest.


Emma. A man, and especially a lover, cannot be an accurate observer -- we
females examine more closely.


Hugel. I beseech you to speak plainer.


Emma. Know then, that Minna's apparent levity arose from being ashamed to
acknowledge to you, what she thought indispensable -- that she -- strange! -- I
am almost myself ashamed -- (in haste) that she is somewhat mis-shaped -- at
last -- it is out.


Hugel. Mis-shaped! --


Emma. On the left side -- she fell down stairs from her nurse's arms -- dress
can conceal the defect -- but to the eyes of her future husband, she wished not
to appear more engaging than she really is -- now you have a key to the enigma.
False shame deterred her from telling you herself -- for most females would
rather avoid a mental defect, than a corporeal failing: -- Minna does not
belong to this common class -- her tongue only denied its service. Now you know
all -- you know what she has lost in the attraction of her form -- and what she
acquired in the beauty of her soul: -- my friend murmured softly in my ear,
Emma, I love him! -- but that let him rather hope than know -- You see, I have
exceeded my powers -- the coming moment will evince, whether I must repent my
precipitancy.


Hugel. (transported) Is this a dream? -- Minna! -- noblest Minna! -- where is
she? -- where can I find her?


Emma. Dare I inquire with what intention?


Hugel. And can you inquire? -- my beloved! -- my bride!


Emma. It is as I expected -- go -- where she is I know not -- in^tinct guides
a lover.


Hugel. (hastens away) Minna! -- Minna!


SCENE VII. EMMA alone.
Emma. Go then -- but thou w^lt not soon find her -- probably she has crept,
through false shame, into some nook or other -- there she sits forlorn, and
listens -- and her heart often throbs high at the idea -- Emma is now speaking
to him -- (she sighs) How is this? -- I catch myself at a sigh! -- my bosom is
not surely nurturing envy at my friend's happiness! -- No, no -- but a maiden
may be allowed to confess, that to find a deserving, accomplished husband, is
truly enviable -- Erla^h seemed to go away murmuring and uneasy -- he did not
relish leaving me alone with Hugel -- why so? -- girl! girl! do not disclose to
any one, what thou now think. (she retires slowly in a reverie)


SCENE VIII. MADAME MOREAU appears, very meanly, though cleanly dressed; she
supports herself on a walking cane, sometimes stopping, and looking mournfully
around; at length she approaches EMMA, unobserved, and contemplates her from
head to foot, with mingled emotion and curiosity.
Madame Moreau. Your pardon, Mademoiselle.


Emma. (starting from her reverie) Who are you, Madam? -- whom may you want?


Moreau. Is this counselor Flaxland's house?


Emma. Yes.


Moreau. You are perhaps his daughter?


Emma. Would I could answer yes to that question -- do you wish to speak to the
counselor?


Moreau. Extremely -- if convenient.


Emma. Follow me -- I will conduct you to him.


Moreau. Is he alone?


Emma. I believe so.


Moreau. If he be quite disengaged, I wish he would condescend, through
compassion to an aged woman, who cannot well ascend the steps, to meet me in
the garden.


Emma. I will tell him so.


Moreau. Has he any family?


Emma. One son in the army, and a daughter.


Moreau. And you are not this daughter? -- that is a pity.


Emma. You are very kind, Madam -- whom shall I announce to the counselor?


Moreau. A poor old woman -- nothing else: -- I hope to be in a mansion, where
this title will neither shut door nor heart against me.


Emma. I find you well know the counselor -- he will be instantly here.

[Exit.
SCENE IX. MADAME MOREAU, alone.
Indeed! ah! good child! confidence in mankind is a tender plant, so seldom
cherished by the milk of human kindness, that at length it perishes; yes --
formerly he was benevolent and compassionate, but also young! youth is tender,
but age indurates all; and what dare I hope from a brother, when my only son --
hush, hush; speak it not aloud -- poor mother! rather think it was a dream, and
be silent -- will he not be ashamed of me? The rich have cousins and aunts in
every corner of the world; poverty is only related to misery: it were better to
conceal who I am, and first notice his manner and reception: Perhaps, I may be
more welcome as an object of benevolence, than if I demanded his assistance as
an act of duty! Methinks, -- yes, -- O God! how my heart beats! do not betray
thyself! For if thou must again abandon this house, where will thou find a grave


SCENE X. Counselor FLAXLAND and Madame MOREAU.
Flax. My foster daughter tells me, you wish to spea with me -- how can I serve
you?


Moreau. I am an Emigrant -- had house and home husband and children -- and am
now reduced to this staff but had rather starve, than stoop to beggary -- in my
youth, I learnt much for my amusement, but which now, perhaps, in my old age,
might procure me my bread -- I can sew and wash, cook and bake: -- most worthy
Sir, do you want an housekeeper?


Flax. I must, with regret, Madam, say no.


Moreau. You have probably some young children, whom I might instruct in
English and French?


Flax. I have only a daughter, who is grown up.


Moreau. Oh God! -- must I then also leave this mansion without consolation?


Flax. No, Madam -- that shall not be; I have friends to whom I will recommend
you -- and mean while you may occupy a spare room, and a vacant place at my
table.


Moreau. God reward you with an ever cheerful heart! -- My friend spoke truth,
when she promised me here a welcome.


Flax. Your friend! You have perhaps a recommendation to me?


Moreau I was born at Lions, and knew there, several years since, an
unfortunate German lady, Philipine Moreau.


Flax. God! my sister! does she yet live?


Moreau. She is dead!


Flax. Dead! (tears burst from his eyes; he turns, and leans against a tree,
weeping)


Moreau. (aside, with uplifted hands) He yet loves me -- there is yet some one
in the world who loves me!


Flax. (looking aghast) The first intelligence in twenty years! she is dead!


Moreau. She died in misery!


Flax. Oh! why was she so forgetful of her only brother?


Moreau. She did not forget him, but was silent through shame. Can I, said she,
intrude myself upon my brother in rags? will he not reproach me with my
weakness?


Flax. How could she thus misconstrue her William's heart?


Moreau. Shall I revisit my paternal roof, to learn that my good parents
bequeathed me their curse as an inheritance?


Flax. Both father and mother blessed her on their death bed.


Moreau. Blessed her! O! that I could convey this word of comfort into my
friend's grave!


Flax. Long, long, have I hoped that she would at length recollect the brother,
whom, when a lad, she so heartily loved.


Moreau. (animated) Yes, yes, that did she! (composes herself) she has often
assured me of it.


Flax. My hopes of seeing her again grew with these trees -- I planted the one,
and my sister the other -- time has interwoven their branches, but has torn my
sister's heart from mine.


Moreau. (greatly affected) No, no! --


Flax. Our dear mother planted yonder arbor, a year before her death -- I
shall not live, said she, to behold these tender shoots extend their shade, but
perhaps thou and thy sister may one day sit under them and remember me.


Moreau. (endeavoring in vain to repress her tears) I can no longer!


Flax. (embracing one of the linden trees) I envy our forefathers their
delightful superstition -- how fondly could I believe my sister's spirit in
this tree.


Moreau. (sinks down on her staff) My brother William!


Flax. (hastening to her) God! what is this!


Moreau. (kneeling, her arms cutspread) William! my brother?


Flax. (precipitating himself into her arms) Phillippine art thou her?


Moreau. I am: -- do not spurn me!


Flax. I spurn thee -- (a pause)


Moreau. My good William, lead me under the linden trees, which we planted on
our mother's birth day -- we then embraced each other, and our parent smiled
with fraternal love -- let me once more, under their shade press thee to my
heart, and the mother will again look down and smile.


Flax. (conducts his sister to the trees; awbraces her tenderly; looks up with
tearful eyes, and exclaims) Mother rejoice with us! -- the Almighty has granted
thee for us this hallowed moment!


Moreau. (leans her head on his breast) Here let me die!


Flax. Here shall thou by my side retrace our youthful endearments -- leaning
on my arm revisit every tree, whence we used to gather fruit, and yonder daisy
bank, where we often reposed -- then will I lead thee to the paternal roof, and
show the chamber which was called thine -- the nut-brown table yet remains
where we learnt to draw, and the closet where thou treasured me up bon bons (he
casts his eye on Madame Moreau, who is fainting on his breast) thou hear me
not! sister, how art thou? this deadly paleness! -- in God's name, help! help!


SCENE XI. EMMA and JOHN, enter hastily, from opposite sides.
John. What is the matter?


Emma. Alas! the poor old woman is taken ill.


Flax. She is my sister!


Emma. Your sister! (she assists Madame Moreau, who recovers slowly)


John. How Mademoiselle Philippine?


Flax. Yes, good old man, thou and I have often wept her loss: -- rejoice! we
have her again.


Moreau. (holds out her hand to John) My good John, art thou still living?


John. Ay! why should I not? and your god-child is also alive?


Emma. Dear Madam, shall I conduct you into the house? you will there be more
comfortable.


Moreau. No, dear child: -- the fresh air, and the sight that now enlivens me,
are the best restoratives.


Flax. If our affection thus revives thee -- O! why did thou not sooner
return to our arms?


Moreau. Forgive me brother: forgive me, my good parents: often when I gathered
resolution to surmount my shame, fate threw insurmountable difficulties in my
way -- I hastened with my husband from hence to his birthplace -- Lions -- his
parents were exasperated, they had other objects in view for him, and rejected
us -- we determined to await from the soothing hand of time some favorable
change in our destiny, and with the slender pittance of a friend, we embarked
for America.


Emma. To America! dare I inquire in what town you settled?


Moreau. In Charlestown.


Emma. Gracious God! (she stands by Madame Moreau, surveying her with the most
fixed attention and anxiety, but unperceived by Madame Moreau.)


Moreau. My husband's industry maintained us sparingly -- but we loved, and
were content -- heaven blessed our union with two dear babes, a son and a
daughter.


Emma. What! a daughter? --


Flax. Where is she? --


Moreau. Ah, William, do not ask: it pleased heaven to punish me for the
sorrow, I had occasioned my parents. -- the war in which America contended for
her independence, reduced us to poverty -- we returned to Europe eight years
since -- we found only my husband's mother living -- but she soon after died --
we enjoyed a momentary repose till the terrible revolution destroyed our
tranquillity -- my husband became a zealous patriot, and fell a sacrifice to
avarice and anarchy -- my son, misguided young man, emigrated with some young
dissipated noblesse -- Alas! they have but too well succeeded, in having
fashioned him into a vain self-conceited coxcomb, and eradicated every sense of
nature and filial duty -- I blush to own -- he was the first who met me near
the city gates.


Flax. This city? --


Moreau. Yes, he is here -- I recognized him -- not a glimmering of doubt
remains to comfort me -- with a groupe of riotous companions he rode past me:
-- my son! I exclaimed, and fell on my knees -- he knew my voice -- he threw a
hasty look at me -- I saw the blood rushing to his cheeks -- the bridle
trembled in his hand. -- I heard one of the set enquire, who is that? -- I
stretched out my arms and sighed, I am his mother! -- alas! he was ashamed of
his kneeling parent. -- The good woman, has lost her senses, said he, and gave
his horse the spur.


Flax. Poor sister! --


John. Good God! can thou suffer such a weed in thy beautiful garden? --


Moreau. I revere the avenging arm of providence -- when from a far I perceived
my paternal roof, the consciousness of my own undutifulness overcame me, and
lo! God sent my son in my way, to exemplify the thankless child: -- I do not
complain -- it is just: -- who forsakes father and mother comes to a childless
old age.


Flax. But thy daughter! --


Moreau. She died a miserable death!


Emma. (eagerly) She died! -- where? -- when? --


Moreau. Must I also relate that mournful event? -- The British and Hessians
stormed Charlestown --


Emma. (wild) The Hessians!


Flax. Proceed, dear sister?


Moreau. One dreadful night, the town was fired and plundered -- all fled -- I
clung to my husband, who carried our daughter in his arms -- the boy ran by our
side -- scarce had we reached the door -- when my husband fell by a musket
shot: -- in the same instant, a throng passed through the narrow street, and
threw me senseless to the ground -- after wandering alone for two days in the
woods, I found my husband, but my Emma was lost!


Emma. Emma -- in God's name --


Moreau. What means this? --


Flax. (with a faultering voice) Sister, this young lady is also named Emma,
and after the storming of Charlestown, was discovered among the smoking ruins!


Moreau. Brother! --


Flax. Have thou any mark to recognize thy daughter?


Moreau. None but my heart!


Flax. Her age at that period? --


Moreau. Eight years --


Flax. Her linen marked A. M. --


Moreau. (almost fainting) Amelia Moreau!


Flax. It is her!


Emma. (falling on her bosom) My mother!


Moreau. (faints in her brother's arms.)


John. (^obs and wipes his eyes -- The curtain drops.)


ACT IV.
SCENE I. ERLACH enters in hasts -- stops in the middle of the stage -- appears
to be considering -- after a minute's deep thought, he raps his cane on the
ground, as if he meant 'it shall be so,' and is going off -- the Counselor
meets and stops him.
Flax. Whither? whither? --


Erlach. Away!


Flax. What is amiss?


Erlach. Nothing --


Flax. Thou art a singular being.


Erlach. Accursed hour when I entered this house.


Flax. Do dream?


Erlach. No, I say no; -- it is not my way, nor ever shall be.


Flax. What is it then?


Erlach. Flaxland, have ever seen a fool? -- behold here stands one!


Flax. Singular being! what maggot has crept into thy head? -- we have been
seeking thee this hour?


Erlach. Me! nobody seek^ me: -- yes, well, if I were somebody --


Flax. At length we espied thee in the meadow -- marching with a quick step,
backwards and forwards, and skirmishing with your hands --


Erlach. That is nothing to any body.


Flax. I was hastening to tell thee --


Erlach. I already know all.


Flax. Impossible! -- the unhop'd discovery --


Erlach. Silence! -- I tell thee I already know all: -- the girl is a bride --
is she not? -- with Herr von Hugel -- is it not so?


Flax. Do already know that? -- it has but just now been told me!


Erlach. There we have it! -- it is then true? -- farewell! --


Flax. My God, whither will thou? --


Erlach. Do think I will be the laughing stock of the bridal feast? hey! --


Flax. My friend, I never saw thee thus.


Erlach. I am too, for the first time in my life, a fool -- but it has been of
old my motro, to be nothing by halves. I am an entire fool.


Flax. How can this connection concern thee?


Erlach. Man, ask me not -- ^orture me not -- art thou so dull of comprehension
that I must spell it to thee? why yes, I lately read to thee a chapter on false
shame, and thou may retort upon me, that I am laboring under the same
infirmity: Hear then, though the syllables be torn by pincers from my tongue; I
-- miserable wretch -- I -- the utterance will choke me! am in love! ( he stops
Flaxland's mouth) and now in God's name, hold thy tongue, hold thy tongue.


Flax. Thou in love? ha! ha! ha!


Erlach: There we have it; he laughs at me!


Flax. No, I am truly sorry; had I but known it sooner --


Erlach. Thou would have overpersuaded the girl: blessings on the wedding
feast; she shall never know it: and should a whisper escape thy tongue, thou
and I must pull a trigger.


Flax. Who could ever imagine any thing like this -- at thy age the infection
is seldom catching!


Erlach. Quite right!


Flax. One should beware of being enslaved by one's own heart.


Erlach. Proceed --


Flax. Better to pistol one self.


Erlach. May be --


Flax. Forgive this malicious raillery, and trust me, though I esteem Hugel as an
excellent young man, I had rather have seen thee in his place.


Erlach. Baby-pap!


Flax. But now let me tell thee --


Erlach. I will know nothing! do me the favor to send for posthorses.


Flax. How! thou will in good earnest --


Erlach. Away! -- and should thou peradventure know of some wilderness
unhaunted by women, tell it me: (he looks about) Ah! now we have it -- here she
comes, with the little head drooping, lovelorn, and sentimentally, and I dare
say, she will ask me my blessing.


Flax. Whom?


Erlach. ( Without turning, points his hand behind him)


Flax. I see nobody but Emma.


Erlach. Why there! -- Ah! brother -- that the lass could not avoid being eight
years older.


Flax. Did speak of her? --


Erlach. Of whom else? --


Flax. Herr von Hugel's bride!


Erlach. (peevishly) Why that I know too well already.


Flax. Ha! ha! ha! -- this is precious -- dear Erlach, I leave thee alone with
her.

[Exit.
Erlach. ( alone) The fellow is making game of me, so it goes, -- we do but
fall in love -- and, lo! a storm of misery bursts upon us. -- He leaves me
alone with her: but does it follow, I will speak to her? -- no! -- I go my
ways: farewell Ma^mselle -- and should you again be buried up to the chin in
soot -- may I be damned -- if -- Erlach! Erlach! -- one should not so the world
be guilty of swearing -- she comes nearer -- What is that to me? -- Should I go
-- she may conceive I am running away from her. -- No, no, Ma'mselle, it is not
so dangerous as that neither -- We will sit ourselves down in this arbor --
may be, she is again on the look out for her somebody. -- ( He seats himself,
and plays with his cane in the sand.)


SCENE II. EMMA and ERLACH.
Emma. ( enters, without perceiving Erlach, approaches slowly the linden trees
-- feelingly contemplates them -- throws both arms round one tree -- (...), and
exclaims, with emotion) Here, shed I the first tears of joy! God! -- I thank
thee!


Erlach. ( to himself with the chin resting on his cane) Ay, ay, it was here,
where she first found him.


Emma. My Warmest wishes are fulfilled.


Erlach. Warmest wishes -- does that become a maiden? --


Emma. Happy days to come --


Erlach. That is the question!


Emma. To (...) -- Is all I want.


Erlach. And Erlach before every one.


Emma. ( rising) I must find out the generous Erlach


Erlach. My turn is come at last.


Emma. How glad he will be.


Erlach. I doubt it.


Emma. ( turning round discovers Erlach) Ah! -- are you there?


Erlach. ( drily, without changing his place) Here am I.


Emma. ( playfully) You have been listening to me.


Erlach. It is not my way.


Emma. Do you already know? --


Erlach. O Yes!


Emma. Has the Counselor told you that --


Erlach. Yes the Counselor has told me.


Emma. But you do not partake in my happiness?


Erlach. O yes -- why not? -- I wish you joy.


Emma. So cold?


Erlach. I cannot dissemble, and to speak plainly, I naturally expected earlier
information.


Emma. Earlier! -- how was that possible?


Erlach. Why did you send me away! -- what passed between you, might be easily
conceived.


Emma. I cannot comprehend you.


Erlach. The way of the world -- Friendship imprints her pretensions on the
heart, as I do these letters on the sand: -- a breath of love! -- and all is
obliterated.


Emma. Can my benefactor condemn this love?


Erlach. O! no! -- What is it to me? -- I have no voice in your election.


Emma. My election!


Erlach. You love him -- he is a deserving man -- prudent -- in good
circumstances --


Emma. He! him! -- What can this mean? -- We misunderstand one another.


Erlach. Not at all -- the Counselor informs me the business is settled with
Herr von Hugel.


Emma. O, yes.


Erlach. Well then?


Emma. What is that to me?


Erlach. What is it to you? that is curious.


Emma. I have been brought up with Minna; we love one another as sisters; and
so far do I rejoice at her good fort^ne.


Erlach. Minna! what has she to do with it?


Emma. Why, she is the bride.


Erlach. Are you making a joke of me?


Emma. Heaven forbid!


Erlach. You conversed with Herr von Hugel --


Emma. In Minna's name.


Erlach. And gave consent --


Emma. For Minna.


Erlach. Indeed! in good earnest? and the fervent gratitude you expressed at
this tree -- could mere friendship produce such transport? Blessed then be he
who shares your love!


Emma. How come you -- to touch that string?


Erlach. Most naturally; by my soul! I feel myself so surprised! but so much
the better; the soldier, in the heat of the battle, forgets the danger.


Emma. Dear captain, you speak in riddles.


Erlach. May be; say but a half word, and I will solve the riddle.


Emma. Your coldness, your reserve, your transport! it is well we are
unobserved.


Erlach. Why?


Emma. (playful) A third person might have charged you with the shame -- of
being -- in love.


Erlach. Shame! -- yes, yes, -- it is a shame at my years!


Emma. Rather say on your principles.


Erlach. I forbid all ridicule.


Emma. How should I presume --?


Erlach. To be ashamed of abandoning absurd notions -- is false shame -- in one
word, have you not remarked --?


Emma. What?


Erlach. How; -- nothing?


Emma. No!


Erlach. A most unlucky affair has happened to me.


Emma. To you!


Erlach. Do but guess.


Emma. How can I?


Erlach. Try, for it will be harder for me to explain, than you to divine.


Emma. If I were vain --


Erlach. Well?


Emma. I should be apt to suspect --


Erlach. What?


Emma. You will laugh --


Erlach. By my soul! I am in no laughing mood. -- Well, what would you suspect,
were you vain?


Minna. That -- but pray forgive me


Erlach. Be quick -- I forgive all.


Emma. That you are in love with me.


Erlach. So! -- at last it is out.


Emma. I permit you to laugh at me.


Erlach. And I permit thee to be vain -- do understand me?


Emma. Vain only! -- my benefactor's love would make me more proud than vain.


Erlach. And Mr. benefactor will profit as little by pride as by vanity -- no
more of this -- I do not like it -- if thou have an idea of owing me any thing,
let us balance accounts.


Emma. I, poor girl!


Erlach. Ay, ay -- who will not pay, pleads poverty -- it is beautiful, good,
sensible -- but poor, poor --


Emma. For what I am and have, thanks to you.


Erlach. Baby-pap! -- that is not the question -- I see thou will not
understand me -- I am too old, plain for thee -- speak out.


Emma. Why this sounds almost --


Erlach. Like an offer of marriage -- why so, now we are at length come to time
and place.


Emma. (after a pause) You are marking this day, as the most memorable of my
life.


Erlach. So! how is that meant? -- yes or no?


Emma. I esteem you highly.


Erlach. Nothing further.


Emma. A female seldom acknowledges more -- had you permitted me to give the
word, you would 'ere now have known that within these few hours, a third person
has claimed a share of my heart.


Erlach. Share? -- that is not my way.


Emma. And you must n^w address yourself to my mother.


Erlach. To your mother?


Emma. Your friend's sister, who formerly emigrated with her husband to America
-- and there in one hapless night, lost house, home, and child.


Erlach. Lost! how?


Emma. The lamented child, whom a gallant soldier rescued from the smoking
ruins, is named Amelia Moreau -- it is her who delighted in your martial
apparel -- and since she could think and feel, has adored her nobleminded
deliverer. The man who raised me from the ashes, acted bravely, but
peradventure, many a one in the same predicament, would have saved the weeping
child from death, and abandoned it afterward to its fate; -- but the man, who
during eight years, has shared with me his slender appointment -- O! for him,
thanks are a poor return. -- Praise and fame may reward heroic deeds, but the
noblest actions are not always the most brilliant -- a great sacrifice is more
easily accomplished in one hour, than a thousand small sweet courtesies, during
the space of eight years.


Elach. (who, whilst she is speaking with animation, gives various signs of
impatience) Have you done?


Emma. Not yet, Captain Erlach -- with innate feeling) not yet friend --
benefactor -- brother!


Erlach. Brother! -- I understand --


Emma. No, you do not understand me! -- If my affections were entangled, I
would sighing confess -- generous man, pity me, I cannot love you: -- but
thanks to God, my heart is unfettered -- esteem and good will, friedship and
gratitude -- yes, these sensations are combined into one, and that one is love.


Erlach. My girl! -- Is that thy earnest?


Emma. With an Erlach, no preciptancy need be feared, neither was your proposal
utterly unexpected -- the nipping coldness with which you left me, when I
sought and found Herr von Hugel, intimated to me, what perhaps you scarcely
yourself imagined; -- my heart throbb'd high at the idea, to recompense my
benefactor, and the life which he preserved, to devote to the happiness of his
life; -- these flattering ideas excited hopes, wishes -- and now dear Captain
-- without affectation -- without false shame: -- if a heart, full of innocence
-- a grateful confidence -- and the endeavor to deserve you, can suffice, I
shall most willingly become your bride.


Erlach. (Seizes overjoyed her hand) Girl! girl! what do thou make of me? I
could fall on my knees before thee, had I not so often fondled thee on my knee
-- here then stand I -- would fain speak and cannot -- and falter before a
being, who, eight years ago, was no taller than this rose-bush; -- but one word
for all, thou art my wife, my dearest wife! -- Why, let them laugh -- ha, ha,
ha! I too will laugh -- see here, see here, and disguise your envy under
feigned smiles -- go your way -- she is mine! -- Erlach returns to his country,
and the alps shall reverberate his shouts -- for never was his heart so full of
ecstacy. -- (Eagerly and playfully he takes her hand under his arm) Yes, my
good girl, we will buy us a farm, an alpine cot, with the friendly sunbeams
sporting on our soil, where aromatic roots exhale health, and the wild roses
carelessly bloom like thy cheeks -- there will we mingle in the song, and dance
of a true hearted peasantry. -- Huzza! Erlach and his matchless wife. He lifts
her up, and swings her round)


Emma. Dear Erlach, my mother approaches --


Erlach. Whom? thy mother: -- I had nearly forgotten the romance -- and is it
then true? -- pardon me if I delay enquiring how all this hangs together? -- it
seems to me as if I were with Emma alone in the world, and had no concern with
the rest of mankind.


Emma. Let us beg her blessing!


Erlach. Ay, ay! (he throws away hat and cane -- takes Emma in his arms, and
carries her to meet her mother half way.


SCENE III. MADAME MOREAU, the former.
Erlach. Your blessing mother!


Emma. Dearest mother, this gentleman is my savior, my benefactor, and if you
consent -- my husband!


Moreau. Is this the noble-minded man, whom I have to thank for my life's last
comfort?


Erlach. Nothing! Nothing! -- all is amply repaid -- we have just finished our
account current, and a considerable balance appears in your favor.


Emma. He courts me for his wife!


Moreau. God! so much joy in one day' -- my blessing is with thee, follow the
impulse of your heart.


Erlach. (grasps Emma in his arms) Come hither! we have the mother's blessing,
and if we march hand in hand piously and honestly through the world, who will
dispute with us God's blessing?


Moreau. Does my brother know?


Erlach. Whence? -- a little quarter of an hour since I knew it not myself.
Bravo! Flaxland, my uncle! -- In that quality, he may laugh at me with
impunity, for the dutiful nephew must not murmur. Come, my dear Emma, let us
take courage, and boldly look the laughers out of countenance.


Emma. Why should we be ashamed?


Erlach. I that have been two-and thirty years a simpleton, and thou to have
deemed it worth while to convert such a simpleton.


SCENE IV. As he is going off arm in arm with her, they suddenly meet Minna and
Hugel, also arm in arm -- both couple, without separating, front one another.
Erlach. Who goes there?


Minna. A good friend!


Erlach. The parole.


Minna. Love and hymen.


Erlach. Bravo! -- all are in pairs -- that is just my way.


Minna. How Captain? -- that did not use to be thy way.


Erlach. Other times -- other manners.


Minna. Matrimony is an old fashioned custom, and truly you stand there with
Emma like a bridegroom.


Erlach. Ay, ay, Lavater forgot the bridegroom's physiognomy -- but a female
recognizes it at the first glance.


Minna. Emma, Emma, who could believe that the man whose arm so cordially
entwines thee, was only thy guardian?


Erlach. Away with the guardian -- she is my bride! -- and now laugh! shout! I
am armed against your raillery.


Minna. Indeed! -- why little cousin, thou do not open thy lips.


Erlach. Why should she? -- she has said yes, and that suffices.


Minna. Often a word too much. How, dear aunt -- have you consented?


Erlach. Why should she not consent? hey?


Minna. A woman hater!


Moreau. So much the more glory for my Emma.


Minna. A rough hewn soldier --


Erlach. Heart of oak is also rough, but the tree spreads its shadow far and
wide.


Minna. He is ever scolding and blustering --


Erlach. God beholds the heart.


Minna. Yes, because he can penetrate it --


Erlach. So can Emma; (with innate sensibility laying her hand on his breast)
is it not so Emma? thou see my heart.


Emma. Dear Erlach, it beats for me.


Minna. Ah me! my poor dear little friend is lost!


Erlach. Let her prate.


Minna. The gallant Captain is a second Caesar -- he comes -- sees -- and
conquers!


Emma. Have I then known him only since this morning?


Minna. But, he -- thee?


Erlach. Psha! -- when a spark falls into a powder barrel, it blows up in the
twinkling of an eye.


Minna. Psha! -- I did not know that men's hearts were powder barrels: -- but
to what cannot be undone, we must administer the utmost consolation* and as you
have proceeded together to such extremes, this solemn salutation (curtseying)
may intimate -- that -- no, no -- that is not to the purpose: -- Come hither
dearest Emma (kisses and embraces her) have thou understood me?


Hugel. (gives Erlach his hand) Captain Erlach, I am most heartily glad --


Erlach. (shakes his hand) Why right! an Anglo. German greeting -- this
language I have learnt from honesty. -- Well children, when shall be the
wedding day?


Hugel. Methinks tomorrow. --


Erlach. Why not today?


Emma. Within the month. --


Minna. In about a year. --


Hugel. Who shall decide?


Minna. Our good aunt. --


Moreau. Have a care child, I always take the part of the weakest.


Minna. That means us girls.


Erlach. By no means.


Hugel. At least not as brides.


Moreau. Ask my brother, and here he comes apropos.


SCENE VI. The COUNSELOR and the former.
Minna. (runs to meet him) Papa, the western wind has brought an influenza into
your garden -- every thing pairs itself -- every thing will marry.


Flax. So much the better.


Minna. Our platonic -- our growler -- our woman hater. --


Erlach. Pleasant distinctions! --


Minna. For thirty years and upwards he has made his head an ice-cellar, and
heaped frozen apothegma the one upon the other but you blue eyes have prerced
the gloom -- and lo! the ice is instantly melted.


Flax. So much the better. --


Erlach. Yes, my worthy uncle -- if you have no objection. --


Flax. My dear nephew, thou have better luck than thou deservest.


Erlach. The Spaniards embark for America, to find gold -- I have brought from
thence a precious treasure.


Flax. Why so silent, dear sister?


Moreau. I ought to rejoice in the scene before me, but alas! my son! my only
son!


Erlach. Your son? -- how Emma, have thou yet a brother?


Emma. Would to heaven, I could call him brother.


Erlach. Where is he? who is he?


Moreau. No more of this? my heart bleeds: -- tell it him, when you are alone.


Flax. Right sister -- let us not cloud the present cheerful hour -- I am glad
to perceive it undisturbed by the swarm of loungers.


Minna. Mamma feigned a headache, and the one vanished after the other.


Flax. Where is thy mother? -- nothing here is wanting but her presence.


Minna. She has retired into her closet.


Flax. Retired from us? -- what can this mean?


Erlach. My life upon it, nothing bad.


Moreau. She received me with the most heartfelt affection -- she appeared
overjoyed at my unlooked for appearance: -- providence, said she, rewards me
beforehand -- but dear sister go -- within an hour, I can most cordially
welcome you -- within an hour, I hope to show myself deserving of this blessing.


Flax. Incomprehensible! -- enigmatical!


Erlach. What will thou give me to put three on the scent?


SCENE VI. JOHN, the former.
John. (sobbing) Ah! your honor, my good master! --


Flax. What ails thee?


John. I have lived almost half a century in your service. --


Flax. Well? --


John. When a lad, I rooted up the weeds long ere they showed themselves -- to
be sure I was then so little, and stupid, that I often scraped up the primrose
and left the weed. --


Flax. My good old fellow, that happens frequently to children of larger growth
-- but why weepest thou?


John. Because I am in danger to be myself thrown upon the muck-heap, like
garbage: -- and, is it not so your honor though no peach tree, I am no nettle in
your garden.


Flax. Who molests thee?


John. Hitherto, to be sure, I am excepted -- but when one tree after the other
is felled, my turn must come at last -- Monsieur Rosa, the Friseur -- Master
Beefstick, the Maitre d'Hotell -- Signor Maccaroni, the cook -- and Here
Wantman, the porter, are all discharged.


Flax. What?


Erlach. Aha!


John. One after the other is called in, receives his half year's wages, and
must pack up his bundle -- the little conceited French mam'selle is now within,
and when she is dispatched, may hap my turn may come -- Remember Sir, I am an
aged tree, that will not bear transplanting: -- besides, I have young scyons
shooting up, and what is to become of them?


Flax. Be at ease: -- thou have carried me in thy arms -- helped me to plunder
many a bird's nest, and while I live, thy nest shall remain unruffled.


John. A thousand thanks! -- neither is it any sparrow's nest from which to
protect the cherries with netting. --


Flax. But I cannot comprehend --


Erlach. Thou will soon comprehend -- yonder comes thy incomparable wife --
away! away! let us leave a clear stage; for a matrimonial scene approaches,
which must not be performed before spectators: -- come, let us see if the
musicians have already had leave of absence? we must suspend the furlough, for
I will dance today, though I were myself to grumble the tune. (he offers Madame
Moreau his arm, the others follow.)


John. My old woman sits forlorn on the bleech and moistens the linen with her
tears -- I must home -- must tell her: do not cry old one, so long as we live,
we shall grow our vegetables in this garden.

[Exit. [The Counselor remains in a profound recerie and scarcely perceives he
is left alone.]
SCENE VIII.
Mrs. Flax. (in a neat plain morning dress -- she silently approaches the
Counselor, and lays her hand gently on his shoulder] So deep in the thought!


Flax. Ah! my love, I was thinking of thee.


Mrs. Flax. And yet look so gloomy. --


Flax. Thy countenance disperses every wrinkle -- except those which are
impressed by age.


Mrs. Flax. Domestic happiness, gives even to old age an unwrinkled forehead.


Flax. Then I should resemble a young man. --


Mrs. Flax. I appeal to thy heart -- thou deceivest me.


Flax. How? do thou discredit my love?


Mrs. Flax. No: -- but something more than love is required to constitute a
happy union.


Flax. More than love? --


Mrs. Flax. Love adorns the spring of life, and marriage it is summer: -- but
they who in dalliance neglect to sow the seeds of confidence, how can they
expect in autumn to gather the fruit of domestic bliss.


Flax. (smiling) Wherefore this poetic effusion? --


Mrs. Flax. Poetry! Well then -- poetry is the attendant of truth, and must
assist in decorating her mistress.


Flax. From thy mouth I prefer truth unadorned.


Mrs. Flax. Very gallant. -- As thou art in the vein to compliment me, allow me
to ask, how you like me now?


Flax. Thou art so simply, so neatly dressed, thou look most lovely.


Mrs. Flax. Handsomer than usual?


Flax. Much handsomer in my eyes.


Mrs. Flax. Why then art thou incessantly, lavishing upon me silks and taffeta?
-- Why do thou constrain me to follow every whim of fashion?


Flax. Thy round of visits is numerous.


Mrs. Flax. But why must I keep up this round of visits?


Flax. To add to thy amusements.


Mrs. Flax. Who makes thee believe, that I find elsewhere more amusement than
in thy company: -- this simple deshabille -- O! I well know it becomes me
better than a gala suit -- this is wholly for thee my dear -- modest,
unassuming, (smiling) the dust of jealousy will not cling to these folds.


Flax. Jealousy! -- I hope thou do not think me tainted.


Mrs. Flax. Why not? if thou love me.


Flax. But my confidence.


Mrs. Flax. Why even there it sticks: -- Oh! my good man, thou dissemblest
before me a confidence, and tormentest thyself in private with frightful
chimeras -- was I not then justified in asserting, that love alone did not
suffice to make the marriage state happy?


Flax. (confused) Thou wrongest me.


Mrs. Flax. No, no, I ^now all, and spare thee the confession -- a painful
wound must be healed, without too much use of the probe or the knife -- suffer
me only to add, it is thyself, who was ever engaging me in the great world --
it is thyself, who kept open house ^or coxcombs and parasites -- who feared thy
young wife would be vapoured in thy house -- That was false discretion --
Whilst complying with thy desire abroad, evil dreams haunted thee at home --
but thou wast ashamed of them, and that was false shame: -- Man and wife should
not even conceal their dreams from one another -- a look would have been enough
-- I might perhaps have indulged a little laugh against thee -- but should most
cheerfully have offered a worthless sacrifice to thy peace of mind. Oh! how
many a marriage union is destroyed, because the band of confidence was not tied
heart to heart. How often the torch of discord becomes unextinguishable, because
husband or wife smothered the first spark.


Flax. Angelic woman! -- forgive me!


Mrs. Flax. I forgive thee, but upon one condition -- that thou will be
pleased, henceforward, not to move a step without me; when thou writest, I will
set by thee with my work-bag -- and when thou have finished, we will continue
together.


Flax. Instead of punishing, thou art rewarding me, my love.


Mrs. Flax. O! -- I have now thought of a punishment: -- thou preferrest the
town, but I think the country most engaging -- only once within three years,
have we visited our farm -- that is unnatural -- and as a penance thou must
linger there with me the whole summer.


Flax. Caroline! -- this is too much.


Mrs. Flax. I cannot spare thee -- and thou must moreover be satisfied with
household fare, for I have discharged our privileged poison-mongers.


Flax. Thou have, I understand, made several oeconomical retrenchments.


Mrs. Flax. A complete revolution.


Flax. Thou will thereby diminish thy pleasures.


Mrs. Flax. And thereby acquire my heart's content: -- (...)! man! must I also
learn through a friend, that the luxuries thou wast daily recommending -- the
superfluity, in which thou made me indulge, were purchased at the expense of
thy peace of mind -- that I was wronging thy children, to reward by the robbery
every species of ennui.


Flax. Why surely Erlach --


Mrs. Flax. Thank God, for sending him to my salvation -- without him, I should
have been hurried to perdition, and awoke too late! -- Thou wicked man! -- that
again was thy fault, the want of confidence; -- in thy opinion, women were
incapable of estimating the value of a worthy man, unless his hands were ever
loaded with presents, like the subjects of an Eastern Potentate. Learn to know
us better -- a wife is prouder in an estimable husband, than in a pair of
diamond earrings -- and prefers going unnoticed on foot, possessing her
husband's affection, than without it, attracting the eyes of a gaoing crowd, in
a dazzling phaeton.


Flax. (falls at her feet) Caroline!


Mrs. Flax. (smiling) Dear Flaxland, I must for the first time remind thee,
that thou art turned of forty -- kneeling does not become thee.


Flax. I have indeed misjudged thee! -- pardon me.


Mrs. Flax. (raises him and embraces him) It is past -- ^e will retire into the
country, shall we not? and in a few years, my dissipation will be recovered.
Oh! -- how many an establashment falls to ruin, because the husband is ashamed
to disclose to his wife, the true state of his circumstances -- my experience
this day, has so innately convinced me of this melancholy truth, that were I
now standing before a numerous assembly, I should extend my arms, and glowing
with philanthropy, should address each father of family -- Trust thy wife --
thou totterest perchance on the brink of an abyss -- confidence may save thee
-- banish false shame, this monster of vanity and arrogance! -- trust thy wife,
thy truest friend! -- and thou will be rewarded with consolation for the past,
with advice and assistance for the future.


Flax. Wife! what a spirit gives utterance through thee!


Mrs. Flax. I should be a law-minded wife, if love and duty could not inspire
me.


Flax. I ought to be ashamed, that a woman of five-and-twenty, should instruct
a man of any mature years: -- but this were again false shame* which shall be
for ever banished from my bosom: -- from this moment, thou like God, shall
behold my heart's inmost thoughts -- even those, that shun the light of day,
will I whisper in thy ear -- and whenever a weakness would lurk concealed, the
remembrance of his hour, shall draw it forth, for thy good natured merriment
and forgiveness.


Mrs. Flax. O! God! I thank thee? -- it is accomplished -- my husband is once
more mine.


Flax. Thine for ever! -- but dearest Caroline, do not imagine, that through
deranged circumstances thou art compelled to bury thy youth in the country --
my property is yet ample.


Mrs. Flax. Bury! -- the enjoyment of nature and one's self, men call burying
-- well then, the nightingales shall chaunt our requiem.


Flax. My dear Caroline, thou art not familiariz'd with solitude.


Mrs. Flax. Through conjugal affection, the wife adopts another mode of life,
with the same facility she changes a fashion: -- I few years since, I fancied
only a large ^at could become me, and the hats were never large enough to my
mind -- I now think this fashion frightful, and am only pleased with myself in
the smallest hat -- Thus will it be in this case -- four weeks in the country,
and a city life will appear like a large hat -- and I never shall be able to
comprehend how I could endure myself in it.


Flax. So be it then, if this is thy desire.


Mrs. Flax. Here have thou my hand.


Flax. I embrace it with ecstasy!


Mrs. Flax. Domestic retirement shall be our delight.


Flax. And peace, in the bosom of my beloved!


Mrs. Flax. In the arms of affection --


Flax. Seasoned by friendship --


Mrs. Flax. Embellished by nature --


Flax. Nearly lost, through false shame --


Mrs. Flax. Through confidence restored --


Flax. (folds her in his arms) And never more to be abandoned --


Mrs. Flax. Never! never!


SCENE IX. ERLACH and the former.
Erlach. (indignant) Scoundrel? -- whoever breaks his neck, shall be amply
rewarded.


Flax. What aileth thee, brother?


Erlach. Scarce could I refrain from flourishing my rattan about his ears.


Flax. Of whom art thou speaking?


Erlach. Of the most accomplished Viscount de Maillac, my racally
brother-in-law.


Flax. (astonished.) Thy brother-in-law!


Erlach. The wretch has the honor to be Emma's brother, and is ashamed of his
poor mother: -- just now, with his usual impertinence, he skipp'd through the
garden gate, when Madame Moreau perceived him, she cried aloud -- my son! -- it
was a voice, that might have melted flint -- the puppy started, and seemed
alarmed -- but impudence would not leave him in the lurch -- he snuffled -- the
lady is mistaken -- we shudder'd, and explained to him, every one in his way,
how the matter stood -- Emma called him brother, and I a swindler -- meanwhile,
the agitated mother with uplifted hands, seemed anxiously expecting a filial
token, to fly into his arms; -- it was truly ever my wish, muttered the wretch,
to be allied to the Flaxland family, but if this be the only alternative -- And
so he shrugg'd his shoulders, folded himself like a snake, and darted out of
the gate: -- I called after him, fellow -- Among all the species of false
shame, the most attrocious is, to be ashamed of one's poor parents, because one
wants the resolution, to brave the miserable raillery of a few courtly
mendicants.


Flax. My poor sister! -- where is she?


Erlach. The girls are endeavoring to dry her tears -- here she comes --
behold, how quickly a mother's affliction bleaches the cheeks!


SCENE X. MADAME MOREAU, HUGEL, MINNA, EMMA, and the former.
Flax. (meeting her) My good sister!


Moreau. I beseech thee, brother, do not mention him -- let no one name him
more: -- you could not but condemn him -- and his mother could not attempt his
defense. It is far gone indeed, when maternal affection must be silent! Ah! had
he died in the cradle, I might have exclaimed, death has robbed me of a lovely
boy!


Emma. (caressing her) You have yet two children.


Moreau. The lost chil^ is always the most lamented.


Flax. We, must not expect cloudless days!


Moreau. Forgive me, I will not murmur; God has been today so indulgent to me!
Ah! what was I, but a few hours past? Come to my arms, my dearest children!
(she embraces Erlach and Emma, and drops her head on her daughter's bosom)


Erlach. I pledge you my hand, mother, I will re-instate you the boy!


Mrs. Flax. What is it I see? our woman-hater converted?


Minna. These sudden convertites are not always the most secure.


Erlach Miss Wisdom, learn from me, that from all proverbs and sayings, love is
ever excepted.


Minna. But after having so often vowed eternal hatred to the sex.


Hugel. To the sex, but not to angels.


Erlach. Well said, my good coz.


Minna. (to Hugel) Sweet Sir, it is written, you must have only eyes for me: --
if this applies to the green b^idal sapling, what must not one expect from the
mature seasoned wedding tree? -- Take my father as an example -- he is no
longer a youngster -- has been three years married, and behold how his eyes
dwell enamoured on my mother!


Flax. Emulate her example -- she has today made me the happiest of men! --
Rejoice, Erlach, we remove into the country.


Erlach. Amen.


Mrs. Flax. Thank him, my dear Flaxland.


Erlach. Hush! -- do not betray me.


Flax. A friend thanks not with words.


Erlach. Cheerly my hearts! -- here is a happy group -- an angel would not
blush to descend among us -- your ears have been regaled this morning with many
a ditty -- now, to please me, you must all join in the song -- strike up
musicians -- joy! -- planet of paradise! -- Elys^um's child!


The music behind the scenes, plays Schillers Ode to joy, Flaxland takes his
wife under the right, and his Sister under the left arm, joined on one side by
Erlach and Emma, and on the other, by Minna and Hugel -- Thus encircled, they
sing:

Ye, who in life's lottery blessed,
Where friendship, kindred, souls unites;
Ye, of endearing wives possessed,
Hymen, to this feast invites!
The Curtain drops, and the sounds die gradually away.
FINIS.

