Engraved by Gilbert Fox


Augustus ^on Kotzebue.

Published for the German Theater by Wm. Dunlap.



MR. HODGKINSON in the Character of BARON WELLINGHORST.

Published for the German Theater by Wm. Dunlap.

THE WILD-GOOSE CHASE: A PLAY, IN FOUR ACTS. WITH SONGS.

FROM THE GERMAN OF AUGUSTUS VON KOTZEBUE. WITH NOTES MARKING THE VARIATIONS
FROM THE ORIGINAL.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY G. F. HOPKINS, FOR WILLIAM DUNLAP. AND SOLD AT THE OFFICE
OF THE PRINTER, NO. 84 MAIDEN-LANE; T. AND J. SWORDS, NO. 99 PEARL-STREET;
CAINE AND TENEYCK, NO. 148 PEARL-STREET; JOHN BLACK, NO. 5 CEDAR-STREET; ALEX.
SOMERVILLE, NO. 114 MAIDEN-LANE; AND MOST OTHER BOOKSELLERS IN THE U. STATES.
1800.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT was the intention of the Subscriber, to have prefaced the first number of
the GERMAN THEATER, by some remarks relative to the undertaking; but, having
accidentally met with the Life of the Author, who, from his unparalleled
popularity, will probably occupy the largest portion of the work, he has
concluded, that such an introduction as the "Literary Life of A. Von Kotzebue,"
would be much more acceptable to the public than the matter originally
intended.

W. DUNLAP.
NEW YORK, March 7, 1800.
THE LIFE OF AUGUSTUS VON KOTZEBUE. WRITTEN BY HIMSELF. MY LITERARY LIFE.
AS an author, I have experienced both good and bad success, both in a high
degree, both frequently unmerited. I flatter myself that it may be useful to
young men desirous of entering upon the slippery career of literature, to read
the history of a man, who has not reached the goal indeed -- for how few ever
do reach it! -- but who has so far advanced before them in the progress toward
it; one who, without ceremony, joins their circle, and relates without disguise
when he fell, when he erred, and when he was deceived; where he enjoyed the
assistance of the Nine, and where he mistook the ravings of a Bacchante for the
inspiration of the Muse.

Come hither, then, ye inexperienced youths, who have, for the first time,
dipped the tip of your tongue in the honey of Parnassus, and think it desirable
because it is sweet; sit down and listen to me. You see I am in the vein; my
soul is unconstrained, and my lips are opened to confess with candor when I
have been deluded by vanity, and when my mind has been warmed with the feelings
of the true and the beautiful.

Rise then! rise before me, ye fairy phantoms of my happy childhood! In
remembrance you now scarce form a part of the being I now am! Rise and hover
round me, ye gentle shades! -- Gracious Providence! suffer once more those
delightful hours to rise out of the ocean of the past, like a dim mist before
my fancy!

Seize then the fleeting shades as they pass! -- See thou there that boy who
hangs with rapt attention on his mother's tongue, as she reads to him and his
sister some winter evening the interesting tale? -- That boy was yourself! --
See thou again how he makes the chair his table, and the footstool his chair?
See how he devours the romance, while ball and playthings lie neglected in the
corner! -- That boy was yourself!

My honored mother -- Heaven be praised she still lives, she hears my grateful
acknowledgments -- My good mother, when but a very young widow, denied herself
many of the pleasures and enjoyments of life, to devote herself entirely, to
the education of her children. She possessed taste, reading, sensibility, and a
rich portion of patient maternal affection. With these qualities, her efforts
could not be wholly unsuccessful. She provided preceptors of different kinds,
but to her own discernment and taste I owe more than to the tutors to whose
care my instruction was confided.

In the evening I used to read to her in the parlour. The first book that made
a lively impression on me was a Collection of Tales selected from all
languages, then in great repute; the next was Don Quixote; Robinson Crusoe then
engrossed my fancy, and I wished myself the possessor of some desert island.

Even in my sixth year I began to compose rude essays in verse; not long after
I made my first dramatic effort. I made a comedy, which was just the length of
an octavo page. I was sensible, indeed, that it ought to be much longer, in
order to resemble a comedy; but who was to teach me the art of spinning out the
thread, and expanding my materials?

I now come to that incident of my life, which, in its consequences, produced
the greatest influence on my character, and from my tenderest childhood
irrevocably destined me to be a dramatic writer. The late Abt, the player, came
with his strolling company to Weimar. Since I possessed any power of thought,
there had been no players in Weimar, and my curiosity was unbounded. Musaeus,
the amiable and excellent Musaeus, who was attached to me from a child, offered
to take me to the theater.

I went with a kind of reverential awe; my expectation was wound up to the
highest pitch. The piece was Klopstock's Death of Adam. Musaeus placed me
before him on a bench, that I might see over the heads of the spectators. The
curtain drew up. I was all ear, all eye. Not a word, not a movement escaped me.
Never had I before experienced such powerful impressions. I returned home
enchanted. Robinson Crusoe and the desert island disappeared. The theater now
engrossed my whole soul.

My joy, therefore, was unbounded, when the Duchess Amelia, that favorite of
the Muses, established a theater at Weimar. Several of the most celebrated
performers of the time came there, and, among others, the admirable Eckhof. I
never omitted any opportunity of going to the play, and I wondered that those
who could do what they pleased, could prefer any other species of
entertainment. As a proof of my attention, I could repeat the whole of
Lessing's Emilia Galotti without ever having had the book in my hand. To the
honor of the fashionable world at Weimar, I must confess indeed that Emilia
Galotti was very often performed, and always to full houses.

Meanwhile I was a pupil of Musaeus in the Gymnasium at Weimar. Among other
things, we had every Saturday an hour dedicated to the reading of little
poetical attempts. At this period the rage for ballets was at its height, and
the magazines swarmed with terrific stories of chivalry and ghosts. I composed
a ballet in the taste of the times. It contained abundance of murder and
ghosts; a Spirit read a lecture on vice, and the sinner was at length carried
away by the Devil.

I read this performance the first Saturday after it was ready; and judge my
raptures when, after it was finished, Musaeus pronounced those words which I
shall never forget: "Well, very well! From what magazine have you taken this?"
With what triumph did I reply, that it was my own composition! "Really!"
answered Musaeus: "Bravo! go on." Nothing could exceed my transports at this
panegyric, and my poetic propensity was confirmed.

At this time of life every thing is imitation, and I am convinced that there
is not a single original idea in a man's head till he is of an age to propagate
his species. Every thing I now made was only an imitation of the book I had
last read. I wrote a comedy called All Is Well that Ends Well, which I believe
had a strong resemblance to the Count of Olsbach. Goethe used to visit in our
house; he heard of my comedy, and was so condescending, or so polite, as to ask
a reading of it. By this wish he highly gratified my mother; and this probably
was his object, for I never heard more of the comedy. This able man, however,
in my boyish days always treated me with great kindness.

In my sixteenth year I went to Jena. At first my attention was principally
directed to the acquisition of the dead and living languages, and in both these
my knowledge was considerably increased. At Jena my partiality for the stage
still continued. Before my arrival, there was a private theater established
among the students, and it was one of my first objects to be admitted into the
association. As it is not customary for ladies to appear in such theaters, on
account of my youth, female characters of the younger sort were often assigned
to me. My propensity for rhyming likewise continued, and I produced a number of
poetic trifles.

In my eighteenth year I undertook to write a Romance, which I finished. It
consisted of eight or ten sheets, and, in my opinion at the time, was nothing
inferior to Goethe's Werther. The story indeed was much more terrific; for my
hero precipitated himself from the top of a high rock, and was dashed to
pieces. This performance I sent to Weygand, then publisher of most fashionable
romances at Leipzic. After waiting some time, however, I had the mortification
to receive an answer from him, in which he told me that the manuscript was at
my service, and desiring me to order payment of the postage of it! I never,
however, enquired after it.

In the year 1779 I returned to Jena from the visit I had paid to my sister
then lately married, and applied with considerable zeal to the study of
jurisprudence. I likewise attended the professors of history, logic, and
metaphysics, and continued to improve myself in modern languages.

I this year produced a tragedy called Charlotte Trank, which was performed at
our private theater, and I myself enacted one of the principal characters. The
reception of it, however, was rather cold. Soon after I wrote a comedy, which
was much better received, and, as far as I recollect, contained some tolerable
comic touches. I likewise instituted a poetic club, from which I derived
considerable improvement.

In my nineteenth year I returned to Weimar, and studied the Pandects with
great industry; was examined by the Government, and admitted Advocate. While I
waited for clients, I myself continued a zealous client of the Muses. The
summer after my return, I wrote several little things, which I am not now
ambitious to recall into notice. I likewise wrote some Tales, which were
published with my name by Dyk, at Leipzie, with an hundred and fifty pages by
some other hand. Several little dramatic pieces were likewise the produce of my
partiality for the theater.

In 1781 I went to Petersburgh. For some time I repressed my turn for poetic
pursuits, but I again began occasionally to indulge my ruling propensity. There
was a German theater at Petersburgh. It was then in a very indifferent state;
but soon after it was put in the number of the royal theaters, and the
direction of it given to my friend General Bawr, of the artillery, a German. I
now again found myself in my element.

I wrote a tragedy in five acts, called Demetrius Czar of Moscow. By a
whimsical circumstance the representation of this piece was nearly prohibited.
In the history Demetrius was by many called an impostor. In my play I found it
convenient to make him a hero. It turned out, however, that there was an old
proclamation of Peter the Great, in which this same Demetrius was declared to
be an impostor. With much difficulty, however, the piece was allowed to be
performed; after I had in a very formal manner been made to declare that I was
perfectly satisfied of the imposture of Demetrius, and the justice of the
proclamation, and that the freedom which I had used in my play was merely a
licentia poetica. I like wise wrote a comedy, called The Nun and the
Chambermaid, which was performed with great success. It was never published,
and the copy of it was accidentally lost.

In the year 1782, some of my friends who had influence at court, proposed to
procure me a place, and to facilitate their exertions I was requested to write
a small volume of Tales and Fables for young Princes, to be dedicated to the
young Grand Duke. Though I felt no great call for such a task, I complied; and
the volume was printed in a most superb manner by the direction of one of my
friends. Finding, however, that I was not qualified for this kind of writing, I
resolved, after the work had proceeded a considerable length, to repay the
publisher for his expense, and to bury the four sheets which were finished in
eternal oblivion.

Ye who so often and so loudly accuse me of vanity, to my Fables I appeal as
the proof of your falsehood! Their suppression cost me some hundred rubles, but
my vanity not a sigh.

I now come to the period when I went to reside at Revel. Soon after this I
wrote two plays, The Hermit of Formentera, and Adelaide of Wulfingen. The
former was performed at a private theater, and my propensity for the stage
revived. To this propensity the people of Revel are indebted for a theater,
which for the last ten years has had an excellent company, and can boast of
performers of no common merit. It was opened with a piece of mine, called Every
Fool has his Cap. The piece bore a striking resemblance to Moliere's Miser, and
I have buried it among my papers.

In autumn, 1787, I was seized with a severe illness, which for several years
reduced me to a state between life and death; or, what is worse than death, a
state of gloomy dejection of spirits. In the very height of this malady, I
wrote Misanthropy and Repentance The Stranger.
, and soon after The Indians in England. Both of them were finished within
about eight or nine weeks. Never in my life, either before or since, did I feel
such copiousness of ideas, such vigor of imagination, such fertility of
diction: and I believe it to be undeniable that there are some kinds of
maladies (among which may particularly be included those which increase the
irritability of the nerves) which elevate the powers of the mind to an unusual
height; just as, according to the story, a diseased muscle forms a pearl.

In the year 1790, I wrote The Virgin of the Sun, The Child of Love Lover's
Vows.
, and Brother Moritz the Humourist. I likewise proceeded in the collection of
my smaller works.

Upon Misanthropy and Repentance many foolish things were said and written at
the time. Among other things, it was objected that it was defective in poetic
justice, because, by an unconditional forgiveness, I had restored the criminal
to the enjoyment of all the pleasures of life. Whether any forgiveness could
completely remove the cruel punishment which her crime carried with it; whether
such a woman as Eulalia Called Adelaide, or Mrs. Huller, in the play as
performed hero.
, with a conscience so awakened, could ever again be happy, are questions which
nobody thought it worth while to ask, except Mr. Ziegler, who, however, took up
the whole affair erroneously, and, by the unjustifiable freedom of calling
Eulalia's seducer from the dead, completely changed the nature of the case. I
therefore wrote the Noble Lie Translated for the New York theater under the
title of The Stranger's Birth Day.
, in which, although certainly there appears a girl fallen from virtue, a
circumstance on which the impure imagination of Reviewers continues to dwell,
unquestionably prevails the purest moral that ever was inculcated from the
pulpit or the stage.

In 1790, I experienced one of the severest dispensations of Providence, in the
death of an amiable wife. Grief for this loss drove me to Paris, and the
account of this excursion I published under the title of The Flight to Paris.
This book was likewise severely attacked by some critics.

Full of indignation against the Parisians, of whose excesses I had been an
eyewitness, on my return to Mentz I wrote The Female Jacobin Club, a farce not
without some humor. My friend Huber, however, because he happened to be of a
different political creed from me, fell foul of it in the most violent manner.
Nevertheless, despotism is to me as hateful as it is to him; and this I
testified soon after in my Philosophical Sketch of Louis XIV. My publisher at
Strasburgh sent me the work in manuscript, and the correspondence which I had
with him on the subject, was broken open before it reached me. I complained to
our minister at Frankfort on the subject, who took my side; but it was alleged
at Mentz that the letters were open before they arrived there, and I never was
able to learn who it really was who did me the honor to mistake me for a spy,
or a red-capped Jacobin. It seems to be my fate, that while Mr. Huber and Co.
exclaim against me as an advocate of despotism, the despots around consider me
as a dangerous democrat, worthy of their most jealous attention. I could give
signal examples of this, if a man were at liberty to tell all he could.

Once in my life I had the weakness to write a book in complaisance to another.
It was the book on Nobility. I could say a great deal on this subject, but I am
not at liberty to do it. If the world knew -- and perhaps they may one day know
-- into what equivocal reputation of a certain kind I have been thrown by the
opinions, which both before and since I have expressed, and which have been so
egregiously misrepresented; if they knew how my most confidential private
correspondence was turned against me; if they knew what inducements I had, and
from whom they proceeded, they would decide upon that production upon quite
different grounds; they would take into view not only the author, but the
citizen and the father. I confess, however, that my inconsiderate complaisance
laid me open in several points to the attacks of criticism; but for attack from
those with whom I had lived in habits of friendship, I was not prepared.

All that I have written since has been received by the public with
approbation, and by the critics announced without approbation. These are, Count
Benyowsky, The Death of Rolla Pizarro in Peru.
, The Youngest Children of my Fancy, Poverty and Honor, The Man of Forty Years,
The Negro Slaves, The Chase Der Wildfang.
, The Count of Burgundy, The Defamers The Force of Calumny.
, False Shame, and La Peyrouse In addition to this catalogue we can add --
Sultan Wampum; The Reconciliation; Family Connexions; Self-Immolation; The
Children of Misory; and The Peevish Man, which have been published; and six
which were finished and sold to various European theaters as long ago as the
11th of June 1799: The names, as given in a letter of that date addressed to
William Dunlap, are as follows: The Epigram, in four acts: The Reward of Truth,
in five acts: Johanna von Montfaucon, in five acts: The Writing Desk, in four
acts: The Two Klingsbergs, in four acts: and The Wise Woman in the Woods, in
five acts.


Many of my plays have had the good fortune to be translated into French,
Dutch, Danish, Polish, Russian, Italian He had not, when this was written heard
of the great success of his dramas in this country.
; a new thorn in the side of the Reviewers! A few days ago I received the
following piece of intelligence in a letter from Moscow: "Your play, the Child
of Love, was as often represented, and with more applause here than The
Marriage of Figaro in Paris. It is very well translated into Russian."

Is it not matter of surprise, that at the same time, and in so many countries,
the Public should every where have judged wrong, and approved of things upon
which the Reviews had pronounced irrevocable sentence of condemnation? -- The
investigation of that phenomenon, however, I must reserve for the continuation
of this article on some other occasion. What may follow I must beg to be
considered as the defense of a man accused; for the critics have so often
charged me at the bar of their judges and mine, the Public, that it would seem
a contempt for that tribunal never to take the trouble to answer. In this view
I certainly may have some claim to indulgence. Yet shall it be my endeavor, as
far as it is in my power, to intersperse with flowers so dry a subject, and
never forget what Beaumarchais so well observes: "Faut-il, parce qu'on a
raison, donner des vapeurs a son lecteur? et fair secher d'ennui les
magistrates? Leur etat n'est que trop penible!" Because you are in the right,
are you to give your readers the spleen, or kill the judges with ennui? Their
situation is irksome enough already!


German Theater. No. I.

THE WILD-GOOSE CHASE.

THE WILD-GOOSE CHASE. AS FIRST PERFORMED AT THE NEW YORK THEATER, JANUARY 24,
1800.
CHARACTERS. -- PERFORMERS.
MEN.
BARON FREDERICK WELLINGHORST. Mr. Hodgkinson. FELIX. Tyler. SQUIRE PIFFLEBERG.
Hallam. JOHN MOLKUS. Jefferson. FRENCH HAIR-DRESSER. Fox.
WOMEN.
MADAME VON BRUMBACH. Mrs. Hogg. NANNETTE. Miss E. Westray. LISETTE. Mrs.
Hodgkinson.

MUSIC composed by MR. HEWITT. SCENERY by MR. CICERI.

THE WILD-GOOSE CHASE.
ACT FIRST.
SCENE FIRST.
The Hall of an Inn, with a front door, and several side doors, numbered.
FREDERICK is discovered, standing with folded arms, before a side door, looking
at the number. Fred. NUMBER three! A mysterious number! I shall not stir from
this spot until I know who lives here. A figure as lovely as if painted by the
pencil of Angelica Kauffman. Is she a wife or a maid? -- O! certainly a maid.
-- In church she never turns her face from the preacher; but if by chance my
eyes meet hers, her cheeks glow like apple blossoms. -- What is it to me who
she is? Ah! Fred, Fred, something whispers here (pointing to his breast) "that
is not true".

SONG. FREDERICK
Prithee Fred, what is it to thee,
Whether widow, maid or wife?
Ever roving, ever free,
Liberty be thine for life.
Ah Fred! Fred! Fred!
When next you meet her eye,
Her pouting lips and cherry cheeks
Will give your tongue the lie.
Cheek, and lip, and eye as fine,
Other girls possess: --
All -- yes, dam'me, all are mine --
Not a bonnet less.
Ah Fred! Fred! Fred!
The candor of her eye,
The innocence which marks her mien,
Will give your tongue the lie.

LISETTE opens the door before which he is standing, and calls. Lis. Molkus!


Molk. (Behind.) Here!


Lis. Bring coffee! (Goes in again, and shuts the door.)


Molk. Directly!


Fred. (Imitating her.) Molkus! -- Ha! ha! a pretty snip-snap dialogue. This I
suppose is the lady of the bedchamber, miscalled chamber- maid. We must buy
her voice in the cabinet.

Enter MOLKUS with coffee, etc.
Fred. Which way, good fellow?


Molk. Fellow! I don't remember drinking fellowship with you.


Fred. Don't take it amiss. We may know each other better.


Molk. Perhaps that may not be the better for one of us.


Fred. True. Whither do you carry coffee?


Molk. To No. 3.


Fred. Who lives in No. 3?


Molk. Sometimes one body, sometimes another; just as it happens.


Fred. I want to know.


Molk. Do you? I will tell you, sir.


Fred. Well!


Molk. It is a maxim, that when one man has knowledge and another wants it --
he must pay for it.


Fred. No more than right. Thus let the pupil pay the teacher. Thus let
ignorance pay tribute to knowledge. Here are three florins.


Molk. No. 3. One, two, three. So! He that asks reasonably shall be answered
truly. One, two, three. Ah! No. 3.


Fred. Well! Who lives in No. 3?


Molk. Three women.


Fred. Who are they? What are their names? Where do they come from? Whither are
they going? How long do they stay here?


Molk. I know not. I don't know. I cannot tell. I haven't asked. Nobody knows.


Fred. Nay, but my good fellow --


Molk. No better than my neighbors.


Fred. You, at least, know their names.


Molk. Their names. Yes. They have three names.


Fred. Probably.


Molk. Written in the clerk's book.


Fred. Well!


Molk. The old one is called Mrs. Von Brumbach.


Fred. Von Brumbach! That name promises nothing good.


Molk. The little rogueish wench is called Lisette, and is her chambermaid.


Fred. And the youngest of the graces with an angel's head?


Molk. What angel's head?


Fred. The Grecian girl with the swan's neck.


Molk. Angel's head and swan's neck! We have no such birds here.


Fred. Stupid dolt! Who is the third lady?


Molk. Dolt! -- (Weighs the money in his hand.) One, two, three. (Pockets it.)
Yes, the affront may be pocketted.


Fred. Well! The third, the third?


Molk. The third is -- the young lady.


Fred. But her name?


Molk. Her name is -- probably the same as her mother's.


Fred. Miss Brumbach! No, that must not be her name.


Molk. Give her another.


Fred. That I will, by Heaven! That I will! Do you know nothing more?


Molk. Nothing, but that -- the coffee grows cold.

[ Exit into No 3.
Fred. Miss Brumbach! -- The name sets my teeth a chattering -- makes a lump of
ice of me. How shall I cure this beautiful girl of her ugly name? And have I
not the power? Yes! I will be her physician! Before tomorrow night shall she
be Baroness Wellinghorst! -- That sounds better. But how shall I begin it? Not
a word have I spoke with her yet. (Peeps through the keyhole.) There I see a
green sofa -- but nobody sits on it. On the right hand hangs a looking-glass,
but no image is reflected from it. -- I must watch a little.

(As he puts his eye again to the keyhole, the door opens.)
Enter LISETTE from No. 3. Lis. Ah! (Screaming.) What does this mean?


Fred. A formal siege, my lovely girl: but you make a sally, and the enemy
retreats.


Lis. Have I done you any harm, sir?


Fred. Irreparable.


Lis. Oh, dear!


Fred. With those sparkling eyes, you rogue!


Lis. May I ask with whom you wish to speak, sir?


Fred. With you, dear girl.


Lis. Well, here I am.


Fred. Pray tell me, who do you serve?


Lis. Mrs. Von Brumbach.


Fred. And who is Mrs. Von Brumbach?


Lis. Now, indeed, you ask me too much. I have only been with her three weeks:
nor could my predecessor give me any information, for she had only served her
ten days.


Fred. And you three weeks! That does you honor.


Lis. My patience is already as thin as a cobweb, and if it was not for the
sake of the dear young lady --


Fred. Aye, the dear young lady! The lovely young lady!


Lis. Do you know her?


Fred. I know nothing but her! The whole of my existence is devoted to the
study of her; my soul can contain no other knowledge.


Lis. Where have you seen her?


Fred. Yesterday at church.


Lis. Never before?


Fred. No.


Lis. (Smiling.) The acquaintance is very young.


Fred. So am I young: and the young lady is young; and you are young; and -- in
short, I am damnably in love with her.


Lis. Indeed! We cannot read that.


Fred. But I know it by heart.


Lis. Have you often such attacks?


Fred. I Will tell thee what, Lisette. I have been in love ever since I was eight
years old, and I hope to continue so until I am eighty!


Lis. The last object of your love will be envied.


Fred. The last object is your young lady. I shall love her forever.


Lis. Forever!


Fred. Not an hour less.


Lis. Eternity is a pretty little thing in the mouth of a young man of twenty.


Fred. One and twenty, if you please; one and twenty.


Lis. One and twenty! I humbly beg pardon. But may one ask, how the knight is
called who bears my young lady's chains?


Fred. Baron Wellinghorst. I am rich. Have neither father or mother. Tomorrow
I am of age, and may do what I please.


Lis. So, so! Now if the young lady could do what she pleased.


Fred. Do you think she would be willing?


Lis. Why not? Here an old cross mother: there a pleasant young gentleman. Here
a glass of rhubarb: there a glass of almond-milk.


Fred. I am charmed! I must kiss thee!


Lis. (Resists.) Do you always kiss your beloved's chambermaids when you are
charmed?


Fred. Always, always -- its my way.


Lis. Young gentlemen kiss: old ones give money.


Fred. O! in that I Am as old as Methusalem. (Gives her a full purse.) There,
you rogue -- am I not gray?


Lis. (Feigning resistance.) No -- no. Indeed it was not meant -- but you are
irresistible.


Fred. O, that I could hear your young lady say so!


Lis. Who knows --


Fred. Tell her that I languish like Siegwart, rave like Werter --


Lis. And love like Tom Jones.


Fred. That I am modest and discreet --


Lis. That you sparkle like a rocket --


Fred. Which dissolves in brilliant globes of light --


Lis. And goes out in an instant.


Fred. You should never continue a comparison too far. Now let us speak of my
gratitude -- It shall be as lasting as my love.


Lis. Four weeks.


Fred. Jesting aside. It is in your power to put me into a perfect rage of
thankfulness. (Takes out a letter.) If, for example, you would deliver this
letter.


Lis. With all my heart. But where is the direction?


Fred. It is addressed from me, through you, to my future spouse.


Lis. Without a name. Then I can give it to whom I please.


Fred. Not to old Mrs. Von Brumbach: rather keep it yourself.


Lis. No; no, my pretty young gentleman of twenty one; a man in love must not
go post haste like a letter.


Fred. Cupid is drawn by doves; and doves fly. As soon as the little god shall
yoke snails to his chariot, I also will slacken my pace.


Lis. My young lady does not yet even know that you exist; and shall she begin
a correspondence with you?


Fred. Only let her read.


Lis. The letter is probably copied from her eyes.


Fred. Word by word.


Lis. Then I know it by heart.


Fred. But an ambassador without credentials --


Lis. Patience! Patience!


Fred. That word stands not in my dictionary.


Lis. Then write it in. Keep your letter, and I will tell her.


Fred. What?


Lis. Listen --


SONG. LISETTE and FREDERICK -- in dialogue.
Lisette.
That a handsome young man,
With eyes black and bright,
Will love her forever
And ever.
Frederick.
That Is right
Lisette.
That he is a baron
As bold as a knight,
And as rich as a prince:
What say you?
Frederick. All right.

Lisette. That he is almost
Twenty-one, but not quite --
And will wed her with pleasure
Tomorrow.

Frederick. Tonight!

Lis. If the old lady should not prove covetous of her blessing, and withhold
her consent.


Fred. Chance has made me a baron, and given me two rich manors; -- what
objection can she have to me?


Lis. She will say, children must not marry.


Fred. Two years hence she may say so to her grandchildren.


Lis. The mother is not willing to share the myrtle crown with the daughter.


Fred. What! Is the old one upon the lookout for a second marriage?


Lis. A third.


Fred. Bravo!


Lis. The first husband she vexed to death. The second ran away from her. She
will take better care of a third.


Fred. Indeed? And yet travels in company with her daughter! -- She would sell
cucumbers, and yet carries melons in the same basket.


Lis. We think the melons are not ripe. We call Nannette, the "little girl,"
the "child."


Fred. Nannette! Is her name Nannette?


Lis. Yes.


Fred. Nannette! O, what a heavenly name. I Am charmed again! I must kiss you!
Nannette! -- I must kiss you again!


Lis. What! charmed again already?


Fred. Yes, I Am made up of raptures, charms and enchantments! If your young
lady had a dozen such names, twelve times would I kiss you for each.


Lis. Lud a mercy! Softly, sir. If any one should surprise us they would think
you were in love with me.


Fred. To be sure. Why not? I am in love with you. I once was in love with
eight girls at the same time.


Lis. A pretty recommendation.


Fred. But if you should be of opinion, that a divided heart burns the weaker,
the fire of these kisses shall convert you. (Attempts to kiss her.)


Lis. (Resisting.) Baron! Why, baron!


Fell. (Opening his room door.) Frederick! Frederick!


Lis. Ah! (Shrieks, and runs off into No. 3.)

Enter FELIX in a morning gown, from No. 1.
Fred. What! my dear Mr. Felix, are you up already?


Fell. That is the question I would put to you: for you generally sleep some
hours longer than I do.


Fred. Alas! my dear tutor; love -- love robs me of sleep.


Fell. What, again? Three miles from hence I heard the same story.


Fred. Three! Was it just three? That was ominous.


Fell. How so?


Fred. Look at the figure of three on that door.


Fell. Well?


Fred. There dwells my beloved.


Fell. What, she who ran in there just now?


Fred. Oh dear! no. That was only her chambermaid; a star of the sixth quality
compared to the luminous sun of my affections.


Fell. I am used to hear of angels, stars, and suns.


Fred. And pray, Mr. Felix, if Mahomet could put the moon in his pocket, why
may not I marry the sun?


Fell. You will burn your wings.


Fred. You jest: but I am in earnest.


Fell. Heaven forbid.


Fred. Why?


Fell. Because we find among twenty marriages but one that is supportable: among
an hundred, but one that is happy.


Fred. You are a woman-hater.


Fell. A burnt child dreads the fire: but the youth rushes into the flames.


Fred. Flames! I Am a flame myself. A torch. A blazing tar-barrell. O! its so
delicious to be all on fire!


Fell. I have experience -- dearly-bought experience.


Fred. Only think, sir! Only think! Her name is Nannette.


Fell. Her name may be Angelica, and she no angel.


Fred. Only sixteen years old!


Fell. So much the longer will she torment you.


Fred. As beautiful as a rose-bud!


Fell. So much the more will the butterflies flutter around her.


Fred. As gentle as a dove!


Fell. Women are all gentle -- out of doors.


Fred. Out of doors! Then will we take the air all day.


Fell. My young friend, you jest upon the most serious affair of your life.


Fred. Serious? Just the reverse. To love a beautiful girl: be beloved by her:
marry her! -- What can be so charming?


Fell. It is well that I know you, and know how soon these sparks go out.


Fred. That was because they formerly were only sparks; but now -- now its a
Trojan conflagration!


Fell. Dear Frederick, no more romance. We have traveled together many a mile,
and have seen more than our posthorses. Don't let me have it to say, that you
know the world and not yourself.


Fred. If the seven sages of Greece had seen my Nannette, they all would be as
mad as I am!


Fell. And when you shall have been married to your Nannette one year --


Fred. I shall have been happy three hundred and sixty-five days.


Fell. And in the second year?


Fred. Three hundred and sixty-six -- if its a leap year.


Fell. Might my own terrible example be of service to you. I was once married --
perhaps still am so.


Fred. Perhaps! -- Odd enough. -- Don't you know?


Fell. I played the lover of romance with my wife, and stood gaping at the moon,
instead of examining her heart, until the sun of reason arose and showed me
that I was wretchedly deceived.

SONG. FELIX.
She hung on my arm, and with accents so sweet,
Cried, "the daylight cannot vanish too soon; --
I long thus to lean, while you lead me to greet
The mild beams of the silver-faced moon."
At eve all was hushed, and night's goddess shone bright,
I begged -- she consented too soon.
I thought that the spirit I thus made my own,
Was as mild as the beams of the moon.
The moon-beams soon vanished -- the bridegroom awoke --
Whilst the bright sun of reason arose,
Hymen's bands I found chains, and his garland a yoke:
And the moon but reminds me of woes.
Now at eve when I ramble over hill or through brake,
I deplore that I married so soon;
And in reason's despite my heart sometimes will ach,
While regret casts a cloud over the moon.

Fred. You opened your Xenophon, and read the life of Socrates.


Fell. My Xantippe presented to me daily the goblet of poison. Vanity,
obstinacy, and, above all, that accursed trick of pouting, at length drove me
from my home, to seek rest on the troubled billows of an unquiet world.


Fred. You left her, then?


Fell. It was wrong. I confess my weakness in the hope of preventing yours. -- I
left her all my property, which was far from inconsiderable, and an only child
-- a daughter. The little knowledge I had acquired was all I took with me.


Fred. Particularly your knowledge of women.


Fell. The assumed name of Felix protected me from enquiries; and I found an
asylum in your father's house when you were but a little boy.


Fred. My father died, and left to me the enchanting duty of continuing his
undiminish'd friendship to you.


Fell. You can if you will, dear Frederick.


Fred. We must always remain together. I could not be happy without you.


Fell. I love you as my son; and, as such, warn you of danger. Your father's
last words still sound in my ears.


Fred. "Obey this man," said he to me; "so shall my blessing remain upon thy
head."


Fell. Tomorrow you will be of age, and my authority ceases. The friend can
only warn and entreat.


Fred. The friend! You make me proud by the title. But, my dear Mr. Felix, why
must my marriage be unhappy because yours was so? If my Nannette should ever
ask me to gaze at the moon, I shall remember you, and think she means to blind
me.


Fell. But you do not know your newly beloved.


Fred. What! Have I not seen her? -- But not a word more; you yourself shall
see her, be enchanted, and become my rival! That soft blue eye, modest grace,
charming timidity, lovely innocence! -- Shaped like a Greek; blooming as a
Circassian; the bosom of a Turk; the teeth of a Moor -- (Sees a servant girl,
with a bunch of keys, cross the stage.) What a pretty creature! Stop -- hark,
my dear! Don't run. Ah! you little devil -- I Will be with you!

(Exit, running after her.)
Fell. There it is! Every white apron sets him on fire. Foolish boy! who takes
the heat of youth for love: and woe to the poor girl who shall throw her myrtle
garland into such straw flames.

[Exit into his apartment.
SCENE SECOND.
Mrs. BRUMBACH'S apartment. A door and window in front. Enter LISETTE. Lis.
(Counting the money given her by Frederick.) Eight dollars and a piece of gold!
I like this young man. He is as rash as an ensign, and as liberal as a prince.
Let me see. -- What is a chambermaid's duty in this affair? Here burns the
fire, and there lays the straw! Then she must put the straw a little nearer to
the fire; give a puff -- and the business is done.

Enter NANNETTE.
Nan. Lisette, is Mama up already?


Lis. Yes, miss, she is combing the lap-dog.


Nan. (Yawning.) What day is today, Lisette?


Lis. Monday.


Nan. I Am sorry for it.


Lis. Why?


Nan. It is so long before Sunday!


Lis. Did the last sermon please you so well?


Nan. The sermon! O, no! But at church one sees the people of the town. All the
rest of the week we dare not stir out of the house.


Lis. Yes, one sees and one is seen.


Nan. I wonder who would look at my plain hat and simple white clothes? Indeed
I am quite ashamed that mama gives me nothing better.


Lis. Perhaps she thinks mama nature has given you enough.


Nan. When I sit, in these clothes, among the fine dressed ladies, I feel that
mama is right when she calls me stupid ugly thing.


Lis. There are people who pretend the contrary.


Nan. Yes, Mr. Piffleberg once told me that I was pretty; but mama was angry,
and he retracted his words.


Lis. I know a young gentleman who will say as much, and not retract for all
the mamas in Germany.


Nan. Do you know him? Ah, dear! how happy you are, Lisette! You are acquainted
with so many people.


Lis. Within this half hour he talked more to me about you than I could repeat
in a year.


Nan. About me? O, gemini! Tell me, Lisette! Tell me!


Lis. He is young, well made, all in a blaze, and he says "damnably in love."


Nan. In love? with whom?


Lis. With you.


Nan. With me! Oh, gemini! Lisette how you have frightened me. We must go and
tell mama immediately.


Lis. O yes, and run and tell Molkus! Tell mama, indeed!


Nan. But does he love me, Lisette? Ah! now, you are joking.


Lis. Not I. He wishes to marry you.


Nan. Marry me! Marry me! Ha! ha! ha! That Is droll enough. But, Lisette, can I
marry already?


Lis. I see nothing wanting but a good husband.


Nan. You make me laugh.


Lis. He is rich, and moreover a baron.


Nan. Are barons better for husbands than other men?


Lis. Not all. But I will lay any wager, that this one pleases.


Nan. You will win, Lisette; I am sure you will win, if he loves me.


Lis. Love you! Why when I told him that your name was Nannette, he was in such
an extacy that he caught me in his arms, and kissed me like a madman.


Nan. Kissed you! Is that a proof of his love for me?


Lis. Certainly.


Nan. That Is droll. But I don't like such proofs.


Lis. He asked me to deliver a letter to you.


Nan. Where is it, Lisette? Quick, quick.


Lis. "I take a letter?" says I: "no, no indeed," and I scolded him soundly.


Nan. Now, how could you do so? Nobody ever wrote to me in my life. Poor young
gentleman! I dare say he will grow melancholy.


Lis. Never fear. Melancholy don't seem to be his business.


Nan. Oh, gemini! Lisette, what will be the end of it?


Lis. With time comes experience. You will know by and by. Your mama will not
hurry from hence, because her romance with Mr. Piffleberg begins to become
serious; so that you may, perhaps, have an opportunity of seeing and speaking
with one another.


Nan. See and speak! -- I am sure, Lisette, I shall neither be able to open my
mouth or my eyes.


Lis. That will be his business. Come, come, who knows what may happen. He has
fine estates, and when you are baroness Wellinghorst, I will marry the steward.


Nan. Yes. But then -- then, Lisette -- he need not prove his love for me by
kissing you.


Lis. No, no -- hush. You shall have all the proofs. Hush, here comes mama.

Enter MADAME VON BRUMBACH.
Nan. Good morning, mama.


M. B. Good morning, child. Good heaven! how vulgar you look today: as red and
healthy as a milk maid. I suppose you slept all night?


Nan. That I did, as sound as a top.

SONG. NANNETTE.
Did peaceful slumber ever decline,
Her poppies over the couch to shed,
Where guiltless innocence reclines her head,
And health and exercise to call her join?
The pillows of the great she flies,
Affrighted by their beds of state:
Ambition's sons in vain her savors wait,
And guilt in vain for peaceful slumber cries.

M. B. Ah, there it is! there it is! How can a child of a genteel family think
of sleeping half her life like a dormouse?


Nan. Indeed I cannot help it, mama. After supper I am so sleepy, that if I did
not go to bed, I should certainly nod in my chair.


M. B. That Is because you cat. A shocking vulgar custom. You may know a lady of
quality by her complaints. Thank heaven, I have not known an hour of health in
my life.


Lis. That accounts, madam, for the air of soft languor which diffuses itself
over your person, and renders your manners so interesting.


M. B. Dear Lisette, you know men are tyrants; and how should we weak creatures
dare to trample under foot the rights of the strong, if we could not render our
delicacy interesting? Nervous complaints, cramps and hysterics have
metamorphosed many a lordly master into a supple slave. But these are things
which little girls cannot understand: go, child, into my closet, read in the
prayerbook, and take care of the lap-dog.


Nan. Yes, mama.

(Exit Nannette.)
M. B. Has not Mr. Piffleberg been here?


Lis. He went a hunting very early this morning.


M. B. Poor man! Anxiety deprives him of rest. It is strange how hard some
people take the soft passion. What think you, Lisette, shall I marry him?


Lis. Consult your heart, madam.


M. B. Oh, horribly vulgar! No, no, those times are past, when the heart was
suffered to play the master and lead blindfolded reason in chains. Love is a
good servant, but a bad master. Marriage is a hateful custom; but, being
established, one must conform to it, as to the afternoon's nap in Spain. But
woe to the fool who bends her neck where she was born to govern.


Lis. But with Mr. Piffleberg?


M. B. True, there I run no risk of enslaving myself; and that is no small
recommendation. His estate, it is true, is mortgaged; but he is an honest
creature, and since one must have a male animal about one, as well him as
another. To be sure he is a little too rough and noisy, but he has a great deal
of nature about him, and I love nature! -- Lisette, where are my other teeth?


Lis. In your bedchamber, madam.


M. B. This man seems really attached to me: but I must make trial of his
talents for obedience.


Lis. And if he stands the trial --?


M. B. Why -- I am tired of rambling about thus alone: I want a husband to
settle my accounts, and take the trouble off my hands of quarrelling with
innkeepers and postillions. Then when I consider that I have a little child to
provide for --


Lis. Bless me, madam! have you a little child?


M. B. Do you forget Nannette?


Lis. Oh, the young lady --


M. B. What young lady? A child who hardly knows her right hand from her left.
I hope, Lisette, you don't put things in her head.


Lis. Oh dear, madam! Mercy forbid! Why she hardly knows that she has a head.


M. B. Ah! Lisette, a mother's duty is a heavy burden: then there is the
lap-dog and the canarybirds. -- My future spouse will have enough to do.


Lis. You might easily get rid of the young lady.


M. B. How so?


Lis. Give her a husband.


M. B. Art thou mad? Ha! ha! that child a husband! Don't mention such a thing.
Early marriage -- late repentance.


Lis. It would be a pity, to be sure, for poor Mopsy the lap-dog's sake, he is
so attached to her.


M. B. That alone would be sufficient. Come, Lisette, let me attend a little to
my dress. No, no, as long as the dear lap-dog lives, Nannette must not think of
marrying.

[Exit.
Lis. Oh dear! Oh dear! And she is called a mother! Well, they say charity
covers a multitude of sins. Then will I weave a plot to release poor Nannette
from this tyrant, the charity of which shall cover all my peccadillos like a
cloak.

SONG. LISETTE.
Come dear invention!
The chambermaid's first blessing;
Which makes her feel as Croesus rich,
Though nothing else possessing.
Hither! Fill my plotting brain!
Make the dragon's watching vain:
Until Hesperia's golden fruit be mine;
And love with beauty blessed pay homage at thy shrine.
[Exit.
END OF FIRST ACT.
ACT SECOND.
SCENE FIRST.
Scene, continues from last act. Enter PIFFLEBERG. Pif. Hoix! tally ho! tally
ho! The widow! What is the old puss still in her form? I Will rouse her with a
sportsman's serenade.

SONG. PIFFLEBERG.
The morning is bright, still the dew on the ground;
My pointers bound lightly and share In my joys; --
A brace of staunch dogs! -- Now, a covey is found --
See! -- they point! -- fixed as stone -- not a wink of their eyes!
Go on! -- They Are up! -- I single one.
He Is down! My aim is sure.
Mark! Mark! -- Again I Have marked them down.
My game is still secure.
While hills, dales, and woods the sharp echoes repeat,
My priming is laid and my charge is renewed.
Follow! Juno and Dashwood! In vain they retreat --
In triumph I bear home the choice of the brood.
Go on! -- They Are up! -- I single one!
He Is down! My aim is sure.
Mark! Mark! -- Again I mark them down.
My game is still secure.
Ye hoix! -- Tally ho! -- The widow! -- Here she comes! I Have brought her down!
-- I Am the shot, crack! (Always accompanying the last word 'crack' with a smart
clap of the hands.)

Enter MADAME VON BRUMBACH.
M. B. Bless me! what a vulgar noise! Have pity on my nerves, my good Mr.
Piffleberg?


Pif. Good morning, widow! A fresh morning. I have been bathing my feet in dew.


M. B. You speak as poetically as if you had been reading Kleist or studying
Thomson's Seasons.


Pif. Kleist? I have a cousin serves in that regiment. As to Thomson I don't
like him -- he is a damned brute of a poacher.


M. B. Thomson a poacher!


Pif. Yes, I have caught him at it. But he is a good miller, and so I keep him
on my estate.


M. B. Oh, lud! Oh, lud! -- Have you good hunting on your estate?


Pif. The best in the land. Marry me, widow, and I Will show you sport! -- Not
such a shot in all Germany; crack! Or for a fox-chace -- Devil take me widow --
you are no chicken; -- but you never saw such sport, old as you are.


M. B. Old! -- It seems, sir, you are as poor a judge of a lady's age as you
would be of a Chinese poem.


Pif. There you have me. I never was in the West Indies. I speak plain German.


M. B. German enough, heaven knows!


Pif. I can tell the age of a horse to a hair. There a body may look at the
teeth.


M. B. Will you walk into the stable?


Pif. What should I do there? To be sure the landlord has a pair of bays --


M. B. They will understand your language.


Pif. So ho! Dam'me the widow's up. I Have been at some of my old blunders I
suppose. I Am off the track -- must call in. Don't take any thing amiss, widow.
I am plain, but as honest as my spaniel; staunch as my pointer. A good
fowlingpiece should have a rusty coat; your polish startles the game -- but
clean within, widow; clean within! And what signifies a little rough casing, so
as the heart has but its proper loading, well wadded and ramm'd.


M. B. Why if a lady could understand --


Pif. Let us make an end of the matter. Tomorrow shall be the wedding; and the
next day the fox-chace.


M. B. Good heavens! you are so hasty! --


Pif. Why the truth is, widow, we have neither of us any time to lose. I have
been a long time out of my teens as well as yourself.


M. B. Why, pray sir, how old do you take me to be?


Pif. Why you told me yourself, that your second husband was killed in the
seven-years war.


M. B. Very pretty, sir! Why not in the Trojan war?


Pif. Trojan war! When was that? Was that one of old Fred's? But damn all wars,
they spoil sport. I love peace, and will marry you, even though you had gone to
school with Methusalem. Therefore, widow, make no difficulty. Come with me to
Piffleberg. My curate -- a damned good shot -- shall publish the banns, and
then in God's name -- be fruitful and multiply.


M. B. Not quite so fast, Mr. Sportsman. To win a lady or to shoot a partridge
are two very different things. There is nothing so disgusting as one of your
marriages which are concluded like a matter of bargain and sale; where there is
no elopement, no moonlight assignation, no duel, no suicide to enliven the
scene a little.


Pif. Suicide! A very lively affair to be sure, widow; but it may do as well
after the ceremony. As to the duel, why I Am a damned good shot, crack! but who
is there to sight with?


M. B. But setting aside those bagatelles, there are a thousand things to be
done.


Pif. In God's name, let us begin then, or the sporting season will be over. I
am ready to receive your instructions.


M. B. We must be undisturbed.


Pif. Well; who disturbs us?


M. B. This is a public hall: people constantly passing and repassing. -- But
observe, sir. Yonder door leads to the garden. Here is the key to it. When the
clock strikes twelve, the noon of night and hour of ghosts, I shall expect you
here.


Pif. At midnight! Why dam'me, widow, I am always a-bed by ten o'clock. "The
hour of ghosts!" yes, and the hour of thieves too.


M. B. Oh, sir! if you are afraid --


Pif. Afraid! -- No, I am only afraid of oversleeping the time. (He takes the
key.)


M. B. Very well, sir! If so, sir, you may seek a mistress in the dew tomorrow
morning.


Pif. But why must I come through the garden? The house is a public house, open
all night, nobody to stop me.


M. B. What, sir? would you expose my character? Besides, the garden is so much
more pleasant; the pure air and the nightingale's song -- and I shall myself be
there.


Pif. The nightingale don't sing at this season.


M. B. To be short, sir, the way to my heart lies through the garden.


Pif. What, widow, is your heart a hot-house? To tell you the truth, if I don't
get my usual rest at night, I am not worth a charge of powder the whole day
after.


M. B. Very well, sir: no sacrifice -- no merit.


Pif. Come, come, widow, let us leave these fooleries to younger people. I
believe our ages put together would amount to something more than a century.


M. B. What, sir, would you make me a Cybele?


Pif. You have the gout, and I am troubled at times with a rheumatism and a
cursed back-ach; and the night-air is as bad for that as for your asthmatic
cough.


M. B. Oh heavens! what indelicacy. I shall saint -- I am sick --


Pif. There it is, now! And yet you would be running about in the damp air at
midnight.


M. B. Nannette! -- Lisette! -- Help! -- I am dying.


Pif. Never fear -- I will mix you a tea-cup-full of brandy and gunpowder --
never knew it fail -- here is my pistol. (His pocket bottle.) Give me a tea-cup.
I am the best horse-doctor in --


M. B. Nannette! Lisette! Help! help! Hartshorne! Salts!

Enter NANNETTE and LISETTE.
Lis. Dear me! my lady, what is the matter?


Nan. What ails you, dear mama?


M. B. My salts -- give me my salts!


Lis. (Holding it under her nose.) The young gentleman has certainly been
taking liberties.


Pif. Young! (Half aside.) Not much younger than she is. And she is as gray as
a Russian hare in the winter.


M. B. Get out of my sight, sir! Get out of my sight, sir!


Pif. Her back's up now: we must smoothe it. (To her.) Why but, widow, what the
devil -- I meant no harm --


M. B. Out of my sight, sir!


Pif. Give me leave and I Will send you as fine a sow as ever you sat eyes on.


M. B. Keep your swine for companions.


Pif. Dam'me, she is in earnest. Even the sow will not soothe her.


M. B. I insist upon your quitting my apartments.


Pif. Well, well, be pacified -- I Am off -- but I shall return.


M. B. Never.


Pif. (Going.) I have thought of a plan for reconciliation. If that don't do --
Let the huntsman sound his horn and couple the dogs -- Hoix! Tally ho!
Ringwood! Echo! Dashwood!

[Exit.
M. B. What! Is he gone? and without throwing himself at my feet?


Lis. You must forgive him that, my lady, he is stiff in the knees.


M. B. Alas! how many things must we forgive the tyrannic sex.


Nan. Dear mama, do the Russian hares grow gray in winter?


M. B. You are a goose.


Nan. If my lover had said such a thing to me, I would have discharged him
without much ceremony.


M. B. Lover! Your lover! Is it possible? What do I hear? We shall soon have
babes in the cradle lisping to one another "I love." Each doll will be a Cupid,
and every sugar-cake a love-letter. -- Pray, my pert miss, do you know what
those things called lovers are?


Nan. Not very well, mama, but I am ready to learn. (Curtseying.)


M. B. Heaven forbid, child! A lover is worse than the sun in the spring; the
one spoils the complexion, the other the heart.


Lis. Yes indeed, miss, and if he don't spoil it, he takes it away.


M. B. A lover is a cunning animal, always lying in wait to take advantage of
your weakness.


Nan. Is one always weak when one has a lover?


Lis. It will happen so sometimes.


M. B. If he lies at your feet as a slave -- there let him lie.


Nan. Poor man!


M. B. Lift him up, and he becomes your tyrant. A lover is a second Proteus, he
insinuates himself in every possible form.

Enter FREDERICK as a hair-dresser.
Fred. Beg pardon, ladies; am I right? (Putting his head in at the door.)


Lis. (Smiling.) Yes, indeed, in every possible form.


M. B. Whom do you want, friend?


Fred. The celebrated and amiable Madame Von Brumbach.

(Entering.)
M. B. I am Madame Von Brumbach.


Lis. (Aside to Nannette.) It is the baron.


Nan. (Shricks.) Ah!


M. B. What ails the child?


Lis. You have made her so afraid of lovers, that even this powder-puff
frightens her.


Nan. Must I run away, mama, if I see one?


M. B. Not if I am present.


Fred. (Archly.) I think, madam, they say that children cut their eye-teeth
very soon in this country.


M. B. Children are very forward. But pray, my friend, what do you want here?


Fred. I wish to have the felicity of putting your silken hair in curls.


M. B. Your trouble is in vain. I have a hairdresser.


Fred. Certainly, madam, he is my master. He is sick, madam, and has sent me in
his place.


M. B. Ah! so, so! What ails him?


Fred. He is -- sick, madam, sick -- very sick.


M. B. But his disorder?


Fred. Yes, madam -- true -- he has the -- the -- broken-leg, madam -- the
broken-leg.


M. B. Poor man! How did it happen?


Fred. He happened to be -- Heaven knows why -- upon the top of St. Agathy's
steeple, and, in descending, his foot slipped and he fell down seventy-seven
steps. Seventy-seven -- I counted them myself.


M. B. Top of a steeple! Well, he that ascends high may fall low. But what
business had a hair-dresser at the top of a steeple?


Lis. They wish to be always busy about the head.


Fred. Ha! ha! ha! The lady is right -- even about the head of the church. I
should be happy to take the pope by the nose. (Imitating the action of
shaving.) But my master was in the line of his profession, madam, even at the
top of a steeple. Did your ladyship ever see St. Agathy's church?


M. B. Lisette bring my dressing-gown. (To him.) Never. (Lisette goes for the
gown.)


Fred. Nearly at the top of the steeple is a statue of the saint, with a
beautiful sox-coloured wig, which, being out of curl, my master was sent by
order of the vestry to put the holy hair in buckle.


Lis. (Having put the gown over her mistress and seated her in front of the
stage.) Good fellow, have you long exercised your profession?


Fred. (Beginning to dress.) I hope soon to be a master.


Lis. Then I suppose you will marry?


Fred. (Looking at Nannette.) If I can obtain the object of my love.


M. B. What countryman are you?


Fred. From Alsace, my lady -- an emigrant -- if I should be known, I am undone.


M. B. You must be on your guard.


Fred. I shall take care to deceive those who will suffer themselves to be
blinded.


M. B. There you are right. Have you many customers?


Fred. I forget them all when with your ladyship.


M. B. You are an odd fellow. Do you dress the Lady Hengsberg?


Fred. The Lady Hengsberg? O, yes.


M. B. How old do you think she is?


Fred. How old? Why -- a -- your ladyship might be her daughter.


M. B. (Smiling.) Oh, no! not so much as that. She is some years younger than I
am.


Fred. Is it possible? (He shows Nannette a letter. She appears anxious,
pleased, and timid. Lisette takes the letter, and reaches behind Frederick to
Nannette, who approaches and takes the letter from her.)


M. B. But it is very natural that she should look so old; the dissipated life
she leads --


Fred. Her husband ought to restrain her.


M. B. She has no longer a husband.


Fred. True -- true -- that is true enough -- she is a widow --


M. B. No -- she is divorced.


Fred. Ah! true; divorced. A widow or divorced, or divorced or a widow, it is
all one.


M. B. (To Nannette, who is going off with the letter.) Where are you going,
child?


Nan. To my room, mama.


M. B. Stay here. There is nothing for you to do there. Stay here. (To
Frederick.) So, the revolution drove you from home?


Fred. Yes, madam. They wanted to force liberty down my throat; but I (Looking
significatly at Nannette.) prefer slavery.


M. B. Why certainly hair-dressers are the servants of luxury --


Fred. I would willingly fly to England, but since Pit has laid a tax on
hair-powder, the English have all become crops; and, unless wigs can be brought
in, the profession must starve.


M. B. Lisette, pray give me -- (As she turns she sees Nannette reading the
letter.) Pray, miss, what have you got there?


Nan. (Frightened.) Nothing, mama -- nothing.


M. B. Nothing. Let me see immediately what nothing looks like. Bring it hither
instantly.


Nan. It is not nothing, mama. It is -- it is -- (Distressed.)


Lis. It is -- a paper -- (Confused.)


M. B. Will you not obey me? (Rises.)


Fred. O ho! What, miss, have you got the letter out of my powder-bag? that is a
good joke -- Ha! ha! ha! (Takes the letter.)


M. B. What letter?


Fred. I don't think the young lady would have done it, but that little thief
of a chambermaid of yours has taken it out --


Lis. (Taking the hint.) Little thief, indeed -- a pretty appellation: though I
did take the thing out of your nasty bag, I will not be called thief, so I will not.
(Pretending to weep.) You powder-puff: you wash-ball: razor-strop --
(Pretending rage, and following him as if to box his ears.) Bravo, baron, it
will do!


M. B. Am I to know the meaning of all this?


Fred. Sit down, serene lady, and compose yourself: you shall know all, though
I betray my indiscretion.


M. B. (Sits again.) Well, well!


Fred. I rely upon your generosity -- you shall know all.


Nan. (To Lisette, who now stands with her.) Sure he will not tell, Lisette?


Lis. I think we may trust him: he has taken his degrees, and is master of arts
tho only a bachelor.


Fred. Between ourselves, my lady -- but for heaven's sake do not betray me --
this letter is addressed to the Lady Hengsberg. I saw it this morning as I went
to dress her: it lay open on her toilette -- my eye caught a phrase --
curiosity was awakened -- and, in short, I whipped it into my powder-bag. If you
will permit, I will read it to your ladyship.


M. B. You may read it my friend -- you may read it. Nannette, go to your
chamber.


Fred. O dear! my lady -- a little girl like that would not understand it.


M. B. I am unwilling to let children hear such things. But, however, you may
stay and take a lesson against the wickedness of the world and the impudence of
lovers.


Fred. (Reads, and addresses the whole to Nannette.) "Beautiful and amiable
creature."


M. B. "Beautiful!" See, Nannette, what gross flattery.


Fred. "I have only seen you once, but my heart is yours forever. As you came
out of church yesterday -- "


M. B. That Is all she goes to church for.


Fred. Leaning on the arm of your ugly old mother -- "


M. B. That Is true enough, the mother is an ugly old woman, and as mischievous
as a cat.


Lis. And as vain as a peacock.


Fred. And as stupid as a goose.


M. B. Mischievous, stupid and vain. An excellent picture. Ha! ha! ha! Go on.


Fred. "You looked like Hebe led by the old Cybele. I am young, rich, and love
you unspeakably. Accept the hand of a youth who means honorably, and will
deliver you from the tyranny of a mother."


M. B. That I never heard of the mother -- she does but too much as the
daughter wishes.


Fred. "Let us endeavor to deceive her."


M. B. That will not be difficult.


Lis. I think not, my lady.


Fred. "And if she continues her odious tyranny and preposterous jealousy, fly
into the arms of him who adores you."


M. B. An elopement too! How I shall laugh at the old woman.


Lis. I think the young gentleman has explained himself clearly enough.


Nan. Very clearly.


M. B. (To Nannette.) It must be clear, indeed, if you could understand it.


Lis. What would you say, miss, if any one should write you such a letter?


Nan. I would not suffer any one to laugh at my mother.


Lis. Then you would dismiss the flaming youth?


Nan. Why -- no -- not so --


M. B. How can you embarrass the poor child by such questions?


Nan. Indeed, mama, I am very much embarrassed.


M. B. So, Lady Hengsberg is in a secret correspondence with a young unknown.
Ha! ha! ha!


Fred. I have found him out already.


M. B. Indeed! Who? who?


Fred. A certain Baron Wellinghorst.


M. B. Well, I must mention this to three or four of my most intimate friends.

Enter HAIR-DRESSER.
Hair. A ha! me lady, pardonnez moi, I hope you have not vait.


M. B. Bless me! monsieur, are you out of your bed?


Hair. "Me bed!" Ma foi, vy I av a been up -- up -- up --


M. B. Yes, I know it -- up to the top of the steeple.


Hair. Steeple!


M. B. To dress St. Agathy's wig.


Hair. Parblieu! me lady, vat vig?


Lis. Did you not put her holy hair in buckle?


Hair. Vat buckle?


Nan. And fall down seventy-seven steps?


Hair. Seventy-seven --?


Lis. And broke your leg?


Hair. Diable, vat you mean?


Fred. You might have broke your leg, ha? you might have broke it.


Hair. Me broke a me leg? Aha! (Capers.)


Fred. But you happily escaped with a sprain. A sprain; ha?


Hair. Sprain! Vat you call sprain?


M. B. Why then did you send your journeyman?


Hair. Me shoorneyman?


Fred. (Making signs to him.) Yes, sir, you know you sent me to dress this lady.


Hair. For vat I sent you, ven I have a good pair of legs myself; ha?


Fred. But you do not dress hair with your legs, sir.


Hair. Me lady, dis is some treek -- dis a fellow is imposteur.


Fred. (Getting before him, and offering him money with his hand behind.)
Understand me.


Hair. For vat I understand? Get out of de vay. I understand you for von dam
impudent fellow. Ma foi! Vere is your certificate?


Fred. Here, here. (Endeavoring to put money in his hand.)


Hair. No here, here; nor dear, dear -- I vont sell a de trade to vagabon -- I
vont sell a de bread out a me mout.


Nan. Oh, Lisette! I am in an agony.


M. B. This man then is not your journeyman?


Hair. No more dan is your lap-dog ma shoorneyman. He is imposteur -- vagabon
--


M. B. What has induced you to intrude yourself into my presence?


Fred. (Somewhat in caricature.) It is vain any longer to attempt to deceive a
lady whose penetration would baffle the art of the most experienced in the
wiles of Cupid, much more of me a simple youth. I will confess, my lady.


Nan. It is all over with us, Lisette.


Fred. I am a poor unfortunate lad. I saw you, my lady, in your yellow satin
gown -- I had a glimpse of you -- need I say more?


M. B. What do you mean?


Fred. I remembered the old saying "a cat may look at a king." I gazed and was
undone. If it is a crime to love, let nature bear the blame, who gave me such a
heart, you such a face.


M. B. Lisette, give me my fan.


Lis. To hide her blushes or her wrinkles? (Brings the fan, while Frederick
proceeds) --


Fred. My passion went hand in hand with discretion. I only wished to see you;
to be near you: and, as the means, fell upon this innocent stratagem.


Hair. Innocent! Ma foi! take a de bread out a me mout!


Fred. But never should my lips have uttered these words, but for this untoward
discovery. For now I must he banished forever from your presence. (Kneels.)
Punish me now! Complete the work your charms have begun!


M. B. You are a foolish young man. But rise. I pardon you.


Fred. Alas! -- I must then go! (Looking at Nannette.) But I leave my heart
behind.


M. B. Who told you you must go? You are a foolish youth, but you may be
improved. You see, monsieur, there is nothing to be done with this young fellow.


Hair. Nothing to be done? Ma foi! I go to de magistrate, and put him in de
ouse of correction.


M. B. If I pardon him, surely you may.


Hair. He take a nothing from you me lady, but he spoil a me trade. Pity me me
lady -- Listen and pity.

SONG. HAIR-DRESSER.
Tink, me lady, only tink,
Take avay me meat and drink;
How shall make de kittle boil?
Vat shall do for vife and shile?
Do I haven't break me leg,
I shall have me bread to beg.
Den he tell de lie so big; --
Say I dress de steeple vig.
Now, me lady, as I live;
As I hope me sin forgive;
De only vig I dress in town,
Gracious lady, is -- your own.

M. B. Vulgar fellow! In short, sir, here is your money. I have a right to be
dressed by whom I please, and I take this young man for my valet de chamber.


Fred. (Kisses her hand.) You give me life again!


Hair. He dress hair? Only see vat a fright he as made of your vig.


M. B. That Is nothing to you, fellow. Begone!


Hair. I will complain to de police --


Lis. Do you not hear, fellow? Begone!


Hair. I will ave you vipt out a town.


M. B. My valet de chamber whipped? You are an impudent fellow.


Lis. A fool!


Nan. A brute!


Fred. An envious fellow! (Pushing him.)


Hair. You take a de bread out a me mout --


Fred. A way!


Hair. As to de lady, you ver velcome to dress a her old stinking hairs --


Fred. Out of the house!

Enter PIFFLEBERG and his HUNTSMAN, with six hares. FREDERICK throws the
HAIR-DRESSER on PIFFLEBERG, who throws him to the HUNTSMAN, who throws him out.
Pif. Who says the hares are not fresh as a rose? Smell one, widow, (thrusting
a hare into her face). Just shot 'em, crack!


M. B. Good heaven, sir, how vulgar! -- And pray, sir, what has brought you
back?


Pif. How could I be easy under your displeasure? I bring half a dozen hares as
mediators between you and me.

(Throws down the hares. Exit Huntsman.
M. B. The price you set on the peace, shows the value you set on me.


Pif. Now I think six hares --


Fred. And a bear in the bargain --


Pif. There are no bears in this country.


M. B. If I thought that true repentance brought to my feet --


Pif. There they are, all at your feet.


Fred. The most repentant hares in christendom.


M. B. Young man, for a valet de chamber, you take too great liberties.


Pif. A valet de chamber! (after observing him) So, ho! Thunder and lightning!
Are not you the young baron who drank burgundy with me last evening at the
coffee-house?


M. B. A Baron?


Fred. I drink burgundy, your honor? I am glad when I get a drink of small beer.


Pif. Upon my soul, but it is you! Had we not three bottles?


Fred. Your honor mistakes.


Pif. Not I. Did not you say, that here in this tavern lodged a beautiful girl
with her ugly old mother? Did not you drink the young lady's health?


M. B. What does this mean? -- Have I been deceived -- abused --


Pif. Aye, that you have. He called you an old --


M. B. No repetition, sir.


Lis. So, we are fairly in the mire now.


Nan. Lisette, I shall die!


Fred. I tell you sir, you are mistaken -- you are blind --


Pif. I blind? The best shot in Germany, crack!


Fred. I tell you, you are blind -- blind, sir, blind! (puffing powder in his
eyes) blind! blind! blind!

[Exit.
Pif. Thunder and lightning! What do you mean? -- I am a gentleman -- a
sportsman -- powder and ball! -- Satisfaction!


M. B. I shall faint! -- I see the affront but too clearly -- I see it all.


Pif. I wish I could see any thing.


M. B. Such an affront! I shall die!


Pif. An infernal poacher!


M. B. Where is my faithful friend?


Pif. (Aside.) I thought she would come about. Here I am, widow.


M. B. The only one that never deceived me.


Pif. Here.


M. B. My faithful lap-dog! my Mopsy! my last consolation!

[Exit
Pif. Damn the old witch and her Mopsy!


Nan. It is very well, sir, I shall tell my mama that.


Pif. It is very well, my pretty miss, but your word will not go far now. Who
is the cause of all this? ha! A sly poacher has spied your tracks, and sneaks
after you through brier and bush --


Lis. And an old huntsman cries Halloo! ho! To spoil sport and frighten the
game. That Is all you are good for.


Pif. All I Am good for? Dam'me the best shot in all Germany, crack! Do you see
these hares?


Lis. Yes.


Pif. I killed them.


Lis. What a heroic deed! So the butcher may say, "do you see this beef? I
killed it."


Pif. Butcher? I am a sportsman.


Lis. Therefore without excuse for staining your hands with the blood of the
innocent. You rejoice at the sight of death, and destroy animal life for sport.
I Will sing you a sportsman's song.

SONG. LISETTE.
The sportsman armed, and filled with joy,
Forth issues to the plain:
To seek, to start, pursue, destroy,
And triumph over the slain.
With a "Ho! Halloo!
My dogs are true:
Tantivy! Tantivy! Hark forward apace!
She starts -- she falls -- she gasps for breath!"
What pleasure to view the convulsions of death!
For murder's the joy of the chase.
The partridge leads her callow young,
First forth in search of food;
With mother's joy she struts along,
And eyes the helpless brood.
With a "Ho! Halloo! etc."
The timid hare her covert flies,
And bounds with speed along;
Bends back her ears to catch the noise,
And hears of death the song.
With a "Ho! Halloo! etc."
Creation's pride, God's last, best work,
Thus time and strength employs,
Like wolf to prowl -- like fox to lurk;
Crowns reason's lord with joys.
With a "Ho! Halloo! etc."

Pif. So! very pretty! And here they leave me standing alone like a mile-stone;
covered with powder, and as white as a hare in a snow-storm. If the old woman
had not a heavy purse, she would not find me here as a rival to Mopsy. But what
can a man do? We shoot a raven that is carrying gold to her nest. Well, I must
humor her, and make use of her garden key to open her strong box.

[Exit.
END OF SECOND ACT.
ACT THIRD.
SCENE FIRST.
Scene continues from the last act. Enter LISETTE, who crosses the stage and
calls. Lis. Molkus!


Molk. (Behind.) Here!


Lis. (With a doleful tone.) Oh, Molkus!

Enter MOLKUS.
Molk. What Is the matter?


Lis. (Still more doleful.) Oh, dear Molkus!


Molk. Well?


Lis. (Changing suddenly.) How do you do, Molkus?


Molk. Pretty well.


Lis. Ha! ha! ha! Good day, Molkus.


Molk. Nothing else?


Lis. Is a good day nothing?


Molk. Nothing -- if it comes from you.


Lis. Why you thing; you piece of a man: -- bad day to you. The worst day that
ever the sun hid his face from!


Molk. Thank you.


Lis. As bad -- as that on which you lost your leg.


Molk. That day bad? That was my day of honor!


Lis. Ha! ha! ha! Of all the foolish animals in creation, surely that species
called man is the most so. A fellow hires himself to be shot at for sixpence a
day, which is three pence less than boys give in England to shoot at a cock on
Shrove-Tuesday -- one day a cannon-ball takes off his leg -- that is his day of
honor. A foolish girl, who sighs for she knows not what, on a day called a
wedding day, bends her neck to the matrimonial yoke, and becomes the slave of a
dunce -- that is her day of honor. Another, still more foolish, takes the veil
and becomes a nun; on a certain day she is decorated for the sacrifice,
renounces her reason, her senses, her friends, and the world -- and that is her
day of honor. The first gets a medal, the second a husband, and the third --
nothing at all. Thus do the few make fools of the many, and the fools are
dismissed, as fools ought to be -- with fools-caps.


Molk. What did you call me here for?


Lis. To make a fool of you.


Molk. And that being done -- (Turns solemnly to go.)


Lis. No, no! not half done yet. (Turns him about.) Every man is a fool, is he
not, Molkus?


Molk. No.


Lis. Each deriving food for his pride from the weakness of his neighbor. The
wooden-leg'd looks down on the straight-leg'd; the straight-leg'd on the
crooked-leg'd; and the crooked-led'g again on the wooden-leg'd. A rondo of
pride and folly. Am I not a philosopher, Molkus?


Molk. A chatter-box.

(Going.)
Lis. Where are you going?


Molk. Away.


Lis. Do you know, then, what I have to tell you?


Molk. No.


Lis. Do you wish to know?


Molk. No.


Lis. But you shall know. My lady orders you to wait here for her. She wants to
go out immediately.


Molk. Well.


Lis. But it is not well; and these answers are not well. "Away" -- "No" --
"Well." What answers are these?


Molk. Short ones.


Lis. Your answers are measured by your short leg.


Molk. Yes.


Lis. I Will tell you what -- if your head had been shot off as well as your leg,
you would have felt the loss as little.


Molk. You are right -- if I only spoke with women.

Enter MADAME VON BRUMBACH and NANNETTE.
M. B. Molkus!


Molk. Here!


M. B. I am going to my mantua-maker's.


Molk. Well.


M. B. You see here a couple of foolish girls?


Molk. Yes.


M. B. If a young man comes to see either of them, do not let him come in.


Molk. No.


M. B. Probably, he will wish to profit by my absence. If he comes, throw him
out.


Molk. Out of the door, or out of the window?


M. B. Where you will. I am not particular.


Molk. Well.


M. B. Child, do you read meanwhile in the works of Madam de Beaumont, or Madam
de Genlis, pour former le coeur et l'esprit. And Lisette!


Lis. Madam.


M. B. Do you take care of the lap-dog.

[Exit.
MOLKUS puts a stool before the door, sits down, takes a short pipe out of his
pocket, fills it, takes out steel, etc. strikes fire, and lights the pipe. Lis.
You do not even ask if we like the smell of tobacco.


Molk. No.


Lis. Miss, cannot you faint?


Nan. I do not understand that yet, Lisette. I must learn of mama.


Lis. What a charming opportunity this would be to speak to your lover. He is
certainly not far off.


Nan. I Am sure he is not -- feel how my heart beats.


Lis. How shall we get this blockhead out of the way?


Nan. Give him good words.


Lis. I would rather give them to the lap-dog, for he, at least, wags his tail
for them.


Nan. We will try. -- Dear Molkus!


Lis. Pretty Molkus!


Molk. What more?


Lis. You sit so uncomfortably there.


Molk. So, so.


Lis. A veteran, like you, who has deserved well of his country, ought to be
borne on the soft hands of the fair.


Molk. A wooden leg is worth more than a woman's hand.


Lis. In my lady's chamber stands a soft sofa.


Molk. There let it stand.


Lis. Let us lead you thither.


Molk. Thank you.


Lis. And give you a drop of my lady's choice cordial.


Molk. I am not dry.


Lis. You deserve to have your face engraved upon brass for your honesty.


Nan. And put under a glass and frame.


Lis. Then would we hang you under the looking-glass.


Nan. Oh, that you already hung there!


Lis. (Half aside.) Or on the gallows.


Nan. Dear Molkus, let me go out on the balcony?


Molk. Dare not.


Lis. To take a little fresh air. We are suffocating with tobacco smoke.


Molk. Very good tobacco.


Lis. Dear Molkus! pretty Molkus! charming Molkus! can you refuse me any thing?


Molk. Yes.


Lis. You block, stock, stick, stone! You mutilated lump of inanimate matter!
You stickbeaten drum-head -- weather-beaten knapsack --


Molk. So!


Nan. Don't mind her, Molkus --


Molk. I don't.


Nan. You are an honest fellow.


Molk. A'nt I?


Lis. I wish the ghosts of the poultry you have stolen could arise and cackle
at you. Do you relish your pipe?


Molk. Yes.


Lis. Take it to the watch-house. (Knocks it out of his mouth.)


Molk. (Takes it up coolly) If you do that again --


Lis. What then?


Molk. I will pick it up again.


Lis. Dear Molkus, if you will do nothing else for us, at least grow angry.


Molk. Anger is like fire -- it burns him that bears it.


Lis. Not if he bears it in a heart of stone, my pretty man of marble. In how
many battles have you run away?


Molk. Run away?


Lis Yes, for thou never had any motion but in thy lost leg, and then thou
wast a notable runner. I will give thee the history of thy creation, and that
will account for thy present immoveability.

SONG. LISETTE.
When art made thee man, that is, gave thee man's shape;
Or rather, a form between mastiff and ape;
For thy face she chose brass, and that thing thou call'st head,
She fashioned it out of a lump of crude lead.
For thy heart she took iron. For flesh, blood, and bone,
She gave thee a carcass of stick, stock, and stone.
Then to nature she went for some feeling to beg,
And obtained just sufficient to move one good leg.
That leg thou have lost; and the mass that is left,
Of feeling, thought, kindness, and motion bereft;
Remains a poor object, deformed in each part,
By nature rejected, a scandal to art.

Molk. Thank you. I like music when I smoke.


Lis. It is not worth while either to speak or sing to you.


Molk. I like silence, better than either.


Lis. Thou can neither hear, see, taste or feel. Thou art only fit to smoke
bad tobacco.


Molk. The tobacco is not bad.


Lis. Thou have not as many senses as an oyster. (Knocking is heard.)


Molk. Does an oyster hear?-Somebody knocks.


Lis. Get up and go out.


Molk. Getting up and going out are two different things. (He rises and puts
his head through the door) -- Who Is there?


Harsh voice without. A friend!


Molk. What friend?


Voice. An old invalid, who wants to speak to honest John Molkus.


Molk. Invalid! -- Wait a moment comrade. -- (Shuts the door.) Miss Nannette
and you miss Magpye, march to your chamber.


Lis. With all our hearts: we are tired of you and tobacco smoke.


Nan. We will go and see Mopsy.


Lis. Fate has destined us to see nothing better today.

[Exeunt Lisette and Nannette.
MOLKUS opens the door, and FREDERICK enters as an Invalid, with a wooden leg
and several scars on his face. Fred. Ah ha! Old comrade, how goes it? Don't you
remember me?


Molk. No.


Fred. What, have you forgot Georgy Frolic, of the regiment of Steinacker?
Don't you remember him?


Molk. Georgy Frolic? hum! -- Cannot say I do.


Fred. What! Don't you recollect our lying before Prague in the year '57?


Molk. Before Prague? Ah! I shall never forget that. Our regiment encamped on
the righ^of Ziskeberg.


Fred. The Austrians made a sally on the batteries of Strohof.


Molk. And Prince Ferdinand of Prussia drove them back!


Fred. How again they attacked us on the side of Wisherad.


Molk. Aye, and how our cartridges took them in flank!


Fred. How the Prince of Lorrain, with 4000 men, attempted to surprise us.


Molk. And how we sent them back with bloody noses!


Fred. O, what a pity that bad weather came on!


Molk. And the Moldau overflowed its banks.


Fred. And carried away our bridges.


Molk. Right, comrade. Yes, you were there!


Fred. I not there! My ears yet tingle with the noise. I could fancy myself
still there!

SONG. FREDERICK.
Still in my ears the cannons rattle,
And rouse my blood again to battle.
Hark! it is the roll of the hollow drum!
The shrill trumpet sounds!
To death, blood, and wounds!
From their trenches the enemy come!
Now every man at his post is found,
While swords and muskets glitter round.
See it is our standard beats the air!
Now the general comes,
The chorus of drums,
The salutes of the squadrons declare!
Now, now! the glorious game's begun!
They run! Too soon the cowards run!
See! where our horsemen charge their rear!
While shouts, cries and groans,
Music, thunder and moans,
With confusion over power the ear!

Molk. Bravo, comrade! Yes, you were there.


Fred. I there? Was it not our batallion that attacked the Austrians at the
windmill of Segeshuzen? Thus we stood, and thus we marched toward the
windmill. (Marches toward the door.) Ah ha! Holla within there! Where are the
enemy? Peep out of your holes!


Molk. Softly, softly, comrade! That is not a windmill. There are ladies
living in that room. (Pulls him back.)


Fred. Adso! Thank you, comrade. Then I shall wheel about. I would rather
attack the Croats.


Molk. Ah! there you think like me.


Fred. If I only hear of a woman, I run -- (aside) mad.


Molk. Just like me.


Fred. I would rather lose my other leg than attack a woman's chamber.


Molk. Where did you lose your leg?


Fred. At Kollin.


Molk. At Kollin! Just the spot where I lost mine! (Looking at his own wooden
leg.)


Fred. Is it possible? (Looking at his leg in imitation of Molkus.) Is it
possible? Who knows, but both our legs are buried in the same hole?


Molk. Ah! Who knows?


Fred. But come, never mind legs so as the heart is sound. Come, brother, what
say you to a drink together for old acquaintance sake. (Draws out a bottle from
his pocket.)


Molk. With all my heart. To the health of old Fred. (Drinks.)


Fred. Long live Fred! (Drinks and gives the bottle to Molkus.) Fred's a
knowing one.


Molk. At Kollin I was one that attacked the churchyard under General Hulsen.
(Drinks.)


Fred. I was in the brigade of Manstein.


Molk. You had hot work with the Pandours. (They continue drinking.)


Fred. Yes. Don't you see this cross scar on my cheek?


Molk. (Drinks.) Ah! curse the Pandours.


Fred. I was before Shweidnitz with them when they stormed the water fort.


Molk. I fought in the trenches before Olmutz. (Drinks.)


Fred. I was at Cuibau when we were attacked by Laudon as we convoyed the
forage.


Molk. But, brother, you look young for one that has seen the whole of the
seven-years' war.


Fred. I Am older than I look for, comrade. It Is wine gives me this youthful
appearance, in spite of time and scars. Drink, damn it, drink! He that would
remain young must drink!


Molk. Yes, drink. (Drinks.)


Fred. No women and much wine, that is my maxim.


Molk. Yes, much wine. (Drinks.)


Fred. I Will give you a song. Meanwhile don't spare the bottle.

SONG. FREDERICK.
Of old it was said, "wit, women, and wine,
Are the sources of man's purest joy."
But believe me the pleasure that is truly divine,
Flows from wine that has known no alloy.
Yes, Bacchus alone is the source of delight!
Let your Vulcan's and Venus's squabble. --
Let Mars blow the coals; -- while Apollo so bright,
Finds his wit the sure source of a hobble.
It Is women and wit are the source of all jars; --
Let us link them together for life;
Your would-be-wit woman all happiness mars,
And your wit is the pest of a wife.
But Bacchus is surely the source of delight!
Let your Vulcans and Venus's squabble. --
Let Mars blow the coals; -- while Apollo so bright,
Finds his wit the sure source of a hobble.

Molk. (Drinking.) Bravo brother! Bravo! Your songs grow better and better! But
where have you been since the seven-years' war?


Fred. I enlisted with the Hessians, and went to America.


Molk. What, with one leg?


Fred. Why the Prince of Hesse sold his regiment by the number of men, not by
the number of legs: and, as to myself, I was better fitted to face a
field-piece than ever, for I couldn't lose above half the number of legs I
might have lost at Kollin.


Molk. Ha! ha! ha! Good! (Drinks.) Right! good!


Fred. Ah! if I had had two legs I should never have seen my dear native
country again.


Molk. How so, comrade?


Fred. Why all our men who could walk away from the seacoast, took good care
not to return to their ships again.


Molk. Oh, the base villains desert their country! What could be their
inducement?


Fred. They had heard of a little saying very fashionable among the Americans,
handed down from father to son, ever since the first settlers of the country
took up their abode there to avoid persecution at home.


Molk. What is that, brother?


Fred. "Where liberty is, there is my country."


Molk. Here Is to that. (Drinks.) But how did you like the sea?


Fred. Oh! it is very wet.


Molk. Indeed!


Fred. Oh! very wet: and drunk, damned drunk.


Molk. What, the sea?


Fred. The sea. Drunk! I say drunk! You don't doubt me, I hope?


Molk. Heaven forbid.


Fred. Drunk. For example: -- (Staggering.) I want to steer this way -- the sea
-- the sea throws me that. Then I would tack about, but I miss stays and a wave
casts me upon a rock -- and then -- (Staggers against the door and bursts it
open.)


Molk. Ha! ha! ha! -- Halt, comrade! -- Ha! ha! ha! You are running on a
sand-bank.


Fred. I am on already! -- Help! help! -- Who inhabits the coast? -- Help! help!


Molk. Ha! ha! ha! -- Don't you remember, comrade, there are no inhabitants
there but women?


Fred. Let them come! Let them come! Dam'me, when I have had my bottle, I am
not afraid of the best of them! Come out! Who Is afraid?


Molk. Bravo! Let them come! I Am not afraid of them now!


Fred. I will give the signal of distress. Piff, paff, puff!


Molk. Ha! ha! ha I Paff, puff, piff!


Both. Piff, paff, puff!

Enter LISETTE.
Lis. What means this noise? Why you drunken wretches, do you think this is a
sutler's tent?


Fred. (Aside to her.) Lisette! Lisette! Don't you know me?


Lis. (Shrieks.) Ah! Hush, I know you.


Fred. These wenches are so squeamish.


Lis. Miss, miss, come out quickly.

Enter NANNETTE.
Nan. What Is the matter here?


Lis. Here is a drunken man whom you shall make sober.


Fred. Dearest Nannette, Proteus is in alliance with Cupid, and we play a
comedy in masks.


Lis. (Getting between them and Molkus.) Well, Molkus, how goes it?


Nan. Is it possible?


Molk. Always upon two legs, my pretty chickabiddy!


Fred. The moments are precious. I love you unspeakably.


Lis. Is that an old fellow-soldier of yours?


Molk. Aye, girl, we fought side by side at Prague.


Fred. May I interpret that sigh favorably?


Nan. Can I hinder you?


Molk. And our legs now lay side by side at Kollin!


Fred. Will you become my wife?


Nan. My mother will never consent.


Lis. Your legs?


Molk. Yes, buried in the same hole! O, curse the Pandours.


Lis. I never saw a Pandour in my life.


Fred. Trust to love and me, and fly to my arms.


Nan. Against the will of my mother? Never!


Molk. They are devils incarnate! But if a pretty girl comes in the way of one
of them -- like you for example, Lisette --


Lis. Well?


Molk. He becomes as tame as a lamb.


Lis. Aye, I warrant you!


Fred. Tomorrow we will implore your mother's forgiveness.


Nan. Those who ask forgiveness, must first have committed a crime.


Molk. Upon the honor of a soldier, you are a fine girl.


Lis. Indeed?


Fred. If you loved me --


Molk. If you loved me --


Nan. Has not my heart betrayed me?


Lis. (Patting Molkus's cheeks.) Do you think I hate you?


Fred. Fly with me this night, and tomorrow you are mine forever.


Molk. Don't you hate me, little rogue?


Nan. I am watched by a thousand eyes.


Lis. Who could behold the valiant Molkus with indifference?


Fred. Love blinds them all.


Molk. Is that true? Give me a kiss then.


Lis. Ah! but will you marry me?


Fred. Shall I attempt to carry you off tonight?


Molk. Marry -- Ha! ha! ha! -- I never was married in my life.


Nan. How will you penetrate through locks and bolts?


Fred. That is my care.


Lis. Only try. We shall live together like turtle doves.


Molk. Turtle-doves! Ha! ha! ha!


Fred. Have I your consent?


Nan. I entrust my innocence to your honor.


Molk. But the kiss -- the kiss --


Lis. There -- how do you like it?


Fred. (Embraces Nannette.) Divine girl! The deposit is sacred!


Molk. (Seeing them.) Hallo, comrade! -- What the devil! (Makes a step toward
them.)


Fred. What Is the matter, brother? (Meeting him.)


Molk. What! Do you take the town by storm?


Fred. The fort is ours!


Molk. Victoria! Let Us fire a feu-de-joy! Piff, paff, puff!


M. B. (Without.) Take out the horses.


Lis. Heavens! the old woman comes!


Nan. Alas! my mother!


Fred. Whither shall I fly?


Lis. She Is at the door!


Molk. Victoria! The old woman comes! Huzza!


Fred. Is the window high?


Lis. Only one story. It looks to the garden.


Fred. Adieu! dear Nannette! (Jumps on the stool, and from it through the
window.)


Nan. Alas! I am afraid he has hurt himself.


Molk. Huzza! huzza!

Enter MADAME VON BRUMBACH.
M. B. What noise is that? If the cat is not at home, the mice run over the
tables and chairs.


Lis. (Aside.) She has forgot the stool.


Molk. Victoria! The old cat has come home. (Staggers to the window.)


M. B. Molkus!


Molk. Huzza!


M. B. Art thou drunk?


Molk. (Looking out.) That fellow with one leg runs like a chamois.


M. B. Who has given him liquor?


Nan. Not I.


Lis. Nor I.


M. B. Molkus, go to bed.


Molk. (To Lisette.) Come, my little bride, the old woman says we must go to
bed.


M. B. Is the fellow mad?


Lis. Tomorrow, dear Molkus, tomorrow.


Molk. Yes, tomorrow the chaplain of the regiment shall come -- "John Molkus,
will thou marry this girl? -- " Yes," -- " Lisette, will thou marry John
Molkus?"


Lis. No.


Molk. "Yes." Now good night, old and young! Cat and kittens! (Staggers to the
window again.) Sleep well!


M. B. Where are you going, fellow?


Molk. To see if my comrade is off.


M. B. Comrade?


Molk. Hallo! Georgy Frolic, where are you?


Lis. Molkus, you are wrong; this is not the door -- this is the window.
(Pulling him away.)


Molk. Hallo! comrade.


M. B. What does this mean?


Nan. He is drunk, mama.


Molk. Drunk or not drunk, he stormed the water-fort before Sweidnitz, and
con-consequently --


Lis. Consequently you must go to bed. (Palling him.)


Molk. Stop. We must fire a feu-de-joy.


Lis. As much as you please out of doors. -- (Pushes him out.)


Molk. (Without.) Piff, paff, puff! Huzza! Piff, paff, puff!


M. B. Has any body been here?


Nan. Lisette, has any body been here?


Lis. Not a soul.


M. B. Why did you leave the chamber?


Lis. We heard the coach and ran to meet you, madam.


M. B. How does Mopsy do?


Lis. He slumbers sweetly.


M. B. Come, girls, it grows late. Go to bed.


Nan. Already, mama?


M. B. Yes, yes. Children had better sleep.


Lis. Shall I not undress you first, madam?


M. B. No.


Nan. Shall I not read the evening's prayers to you first, mama?


M. B. No. Go to bed. I shall sit up. It is a fine starlight night, and I
understand a little of astronomy. I know the Great bear and Jacob's staff.


Lis. Come, miss, your mama wants to see the Great bear.


Nan. Good night, mama.


M. B. Good night, child -- to bed.


Lis. Aye, to bed! to bed!

[Exeunt Nannette and Lisette.
M. B. The hour of trial has nearly arrived. Obedience, Mr. Piffleberg,
obedience is the test. If he does not make use of the garden-key, he shall find
my heart shut to him forever. Confess it, Salome, thou wishest him to prove
worthy of the reward; for, alas! she who has seen eight and forty summers --
hush -- let no one hear it -- age has betrayers enough; the tongue need not
prove traitor. What is that? Why do the trees rustle so violently under the
window? Don't I hear the window move? Yes, I feel by the blowing of the wind
that it opens. Should Piffleberg, in order to give me a proof of his
affectionate obedience, come through the window! -- Oh, delightful thought! --
What heart could resist such romantic love? I will listen, however.

Enter FREDERICK through the window, dressed as before, except the wooden leg.
Fred. (Putting his head in first.) Hist! hist! All quiet -- All dark -- In I
come. Where the devil are they all gone already? Here I am again. But what
farther? It Is so dark, I cannot see my hand. The right hand door is the place.
Hist! hist!


M. B. Hist! hist!


Fred. (Softly.) Is any body there?


M. B. (With disguised voice.) I am here.


Fred. My beloved?


M. B. Yes.


Fred. Oh, quickly fly to my arms!


M. B. Here, here!


Fred. Where, where? (He at length embraces her.) I hold thee in my arms, and
no power on earth shall sunder us.


M. B. (Screaming.) Ah! that is not Piffleberg!


Fred. Damnation! this is not Nannette! (Disengaging himself.)


M. B. Help! Thieves! Robbers!

Enter MOLKUS with ligts.
Fred. By all the devils, it is the old woman!


Molk. Why, comrade, how did you come by that leg?


M. B. Who are you, fellow? What do you want here?


Fred. (Embarrassed.) Long -- Madam -- I have long -- wished the honor of your
acquaintance --


M. B. And so you come in through the window?


Fred. If I dared -- if my tongue -- if I could speak -- to you a moment
without the presence of a third person.


Molk. As good a leg as ever it was.


M. B. Put down the candles, and leave us.


Molk. But, comrade, where did you get it? Could you not get mine too?


M. B. Go to bed, I command you.


Molk. He has never been to Kollin already. There Is witchcraft in it.

[Puts down the lights, and exit.
M. B. Now, sir, we are alone.


Fred. What shall I say to her?


M. B. Come, sir, no loss of time, for I expect to see a gentleman of honor
here this evening. I would not have Mr. Piffleberg find me with such a
companion.


Fred. Now, my lady, you have yourself named the cause of this my apparently
strange intrusion. Mr. Piffleberg is the cause of my coming hither.


M. B. Mr. Piffleberg?


Fred. Yes, madam. Knowing the power which your charms have over one so nearly
related to me --


M. B. Related to you?


Fred. Yes, my lady, Mr. Piffleberg is my father! My mother was his
housekeeper -- but, as her charms faded, the cruel man abandoned her, to seek
her bread in the wide world with me, pretty babe, at her back.


M. B. She deserved it. What else could she expect for such conduct?


Fred. As I grew up, I entered the service. I fought in Russia against the
Turks, and in Flanders against the French. My scars bear testimony to my valor.
Meanwhile, my father, notwithstanding my plaintive letters, afforded me neither
countenance or support. Accident brought me at length to this town. I heard
that my father, in common with all who see your ladyship, had become an adorer
of your charms; and encouraged by the celebrity of your benevolence, I resolved
to apply to you for your interference in my behalf.


M. B. But why make your application by starlight, and through the window?


Fred. Pardon me, gracious lady, but not daring to hope that I could approach
your august presence without introduction, I had made this assignation with
Lisette your chambermaid.


M. B. Then it was Lisette you expected to meet?


Fred. Whom else, my lady? She has given me so exalted an idea of your heavenly
virtues, that I could not but cherish the hope of your intercession in my favor.


M. B. Well, well, I promise to do something for you. I expect your father --
you shall stay and witness --


Fred. Oh, no! no, my lady! by no means. -- I will owe all to your power,
nothing to the emotions which my presence may excite in his paternal heart. I
will withdraw.


M. B. By no means, you shall stay --


Fred. Excuse me -- my father might -- if he sees me so suddenly --


M. B. Fear nothing -- Know you not that love leads lions with a chain of silk?

Enter PIFFLEBERG.
Pif. (Entering.) Now, where am I? Yhoix! Widow! Thunder and lightning! This is
as cold as a duck-hunt.


Fred. Now impudence assist me.


M. B. You are welcome, sir. You have come just in time to answer a few
questions concerning your son.


Pif. I? -- I a son?


M. B. Aye, indeed, and too clever a young fellow to be thrown without
protection upon the flinty world.


Pif. What the devil's all this? Have you set me upon this wild-goose chase
only to make a gander of me at last?


M. B. Look here, sir. Look at this youth and blush.


Pif. Blush! What should I blush for? Who is he?


M. B. Your son.


Fred. (Throwing himself at his feet.) Yes, my father! Do not stifle the voice
of nature. Acknowledge me for your son. Bless your unfortunate Frederick.


Pif. Are we playing a comedy here?


Fred. Hitherto it has been a tragedy with me. It is you that can make it a
comedy. Bless me, my father! Bless me!


Pif Are you mad?


Fred. (Starting up.) You will deprive me of my senses, cruel father!


M. B. Can you shut your heart against the feelings of nature?


Pif. Why, dam'me, you are both mad! -- May my piece miss fire but I smell a
fox. This fellow is some knave that wants to make a fool of me, or you -- I Will
have him seized --


Fred. Do you hear, my lady, he abandons me! Me! the son of his housekeeper,
who took care of his kitchen for kindness, and washed all his linen for love!
He wishes my misery! he desires my death! Well be it so. -- Cruel and unnatural
father! Tomorrow will they drag my mangled corse from the river! Tomorrow
will the cry of vengeance arise against thee! -- Ha! -- See! -- It opens! -- It
blazes! -- I see the devil, with his great iron claws! -- He seizes me! he
pulls! he tugs! -- (Aside as he goes out.) I Will soon be with ye again my
grey-headed goslins.

[Exit.
M. B. And so you persist in not acknowledging him? You let him go thus?


Pif. He may go to the devil. The fellow is out of his senses. I did not see it
at first, but it is plain enough -- The police ought to shut up such lunatics.


M. B. No, no, sir. He spoke very sensibly before you came. Your cruelty has
driven him mad.


Pif. Why, widow, you don't believe all that there stuff?


M. B. Why not, sir, why not?


Pif. Why, in the first place, I never had any housekeeper, but black Tom the
game-keeper; and, in the second place, every body knows I Am as virtuous, as to
all that there, as Jupiter de Mcdecine, or any other goddess of them all.


M. B. Oh! Goths and Vandals!


Pif. Aye, or any Goths or Vandals you are acquainted with.


M. B. You are as barbarous as you are deceitful. I do not doubt that he is
your son.


Pif. Because he is a stout handsome fellow, perhaps?


M. B. What reasons could he have for wishing to pass for your son?


Pif. Saint Hubert may know!


M. B. In the first place you are not rich.


Pif. Granted. But I Am an excellent shot, crack!


M. B. Secondly, you have a hard heart.


Pif. By all the elements, my lady, fish, flesh, fowl and red-herring! Would
you have a man build a foundling-hospital, to prove that his heart is soft?


M. B. But what advantages could he promise himself from such a plan of deceit?


Pif. I tell you once more, Saint Hubert must know it better than I; but as I Am
sure it is a lie, so I am certain there is no truth in it.


M. B. You will talk differently if he throws himself into the water.


Pif. No danger of that.


M. B. If he should be dead tomorrow!


Pif. Then will I be condemned, all my life, to shoot sparrows and dig moles.


M. B. You don't suspect that my chambermaid knows the young man?


Pif. That is not unnatural. Chambermaids will know young men.


M. B. She can unmask your hypocrisy.


Pif. My conscience is as clean as my gun.


M. B. We will try that. (Opens a door and calls.) Lisette, are you gone to bed
yet?


Lis. (Without.) No, my lady.


M. B. Come hither a moment.

Enter LISETTE.
Lis. My lady?


M. B. So, very pretty! you make assignations at night with men! You let young
fellows come in through the windows!


Lis. (Aside.) So! Now we are hobbled! Oh dear!


M. B. For this time I will pardon you, if immediately, without any subterfuge,
you make full confession.


Lis. (Aside.) Well, since she knows it, be it so.


M. B. Where did you become acquainted with the young man?


Lis. In this house, my lady -- he was so friendly --


M. B. And how do you know that he is Mr. Piffleberg's son?


Lis. (Surprised.) Ma'am?


Pif. Out with it! out with it! I will know what it is. I will not suffer that
any vagabond from the highway shall call himself my son.


Lis. Has he, then, himself confessed that this gentleman is his father?


M. B. Certainly, and referred me to you.


Lis. Since it is so, I must avow that to my certain knowledge, as far as one
can be certain in these things, he really and truly is the son of that
gentleman.


Pif. The son of the devil!


M. B. There, sir! there, sir! there it is! Perhaps you know his mother? Do you
know her, Lisette?


Lis. His mother? -- O yes, madam -- She is a distant relation of mine.


M. B. Now, sir! Now, Mr. Piffleberg!


Pif. May I be shot dead with peace if there is a word of truth in the whole
story.


M. B. Confession and repentance might perhaps have obtained my pardon. But now
-- what must I think? -- Who knows how many more such young fellows run about
the world, cursing their father? Who knows how many poor deluded damsels set
behind the spinning-wheel, and wet the flax with tears caused by your
infidelity?

Enter FREDERICK, as a woman, and veiled.
Fred. (To Piffleberg.) Have I found thee at last, perfidious man? Have I at
last found out your tricks, and detected you with your seraglio about you?


M. B. What is this?


Lis. Again, a new scene!


Fred. Is this the reward of my fidelity and constancy? Is this the fulfillment
of your oaths?


Pif. Thunder and lightning! Am I in a madhouse?


M. B. Who are you, madam?


Fred. Pardon, my lady, an unfortunate woman, who has been most cruelly
deceived. A thousand times has he sworn to me eternal love, a thousand times
promised to marry me. He gave me this ring as the pledge of his faith. (Weeps.)


Pif. Woman, are you possessed with the devil?


Fred. Oh! how different were your words when you sighed at my feet, and
persuaded me out of my innocence! Then I was an angel! --


Pif. An angel of darkness!


Fred. (Sobbing.) And now you abandon me! Now that your son, my pretty little
Billy, is crying at home for bread!


Pif. By all the elements, another child!


M. B. I am petrified.


Lis. So am I -- at his impudence.


Fred. I was warned of your intentions upon this lovely lady -- I watched you
-- I saw you sneak through the garden, like a thief -- I followed you --


Pif. Woman! I Will tear your infamous tongue out!


M. B. Softly, sir! I take her under my protection.


Pif. I Will have you sent to the house of correction!


Fred. Oh! gracious lady, save a poor unfortunate girl! What shall I do? If I
go from hence he will murder me!


Pif. Yes, you goshawk! That I will, you crow-face! you owl!


M. B. Do not be afraid, madam. Go to my daughter's chamber, there you will be
in safety.


Fred. Oh! my lady, you are as good as you are beautiful.


M. B. Conduct her in, Lisette. (Softly.) And let her out through the backdoor.


Lis. (Aside.) I shall leave my lips without blood from biting them. (To
Frederick.) Come, madam.


Fred. (To Piffleberg.) Farewell, thou tyrant! Thou beloved, too lovely traitor!

[Exeunt Frederick and Lisette.
Pif. Lovely devil!


M. B. Oh, thou hot-blooded monster!


Pif. This comes of being out of one's bed at midnight! This comes of going on
a wild-goose chase by starlight! Nothing but sorcery and witchcraft! The devil
has let loose all his legions to torment me.


M. B. You will never persuade me that the devil is the father of your
children. In short, sir, all is at an end between us.


Pif. Only make enquiries --


M. B. What enquiries? Haven't I seen children of all ages, mothers of all
conditions --


Pif. Where? Damn it, where?


M. B. Was not your son Frederick here? Was not the mother of little Billy
before me?


Pif. I wish the one was hanged and the other broke on the wheel.


M. B. Truly that would rid you of the expense of maintaining them.

Enter LISETTE.
Lis. Oh! Oh, my lady! My lady! My lady!


M. B. What Is the matter?


Lis. I cannot speak.


M. B. Has the woman fallen into a fit?


Lis. She has run away.


M. B. So much the better.


Lis. And carried off the young lady with her.


Pif. Yhoix! Tally ho! There you have it!


M. B. What? How? Speak?


Pif. She has carried her off to play with little Billy!


M. B. Speak? How?


Lis. I opened the backdoor, as your ladyship ordered, and then she threw off
gown, veil, and all -- and I saw that it was a man -- and I saw how he clasped
miss in his arms and flew away with her like wind.


M. B. Who was he? Who was he?


Lis. Indeed, my lady, whether it was Mr. Piffleberg's son, or the old soldier,
or the journeyman barber, I cannot say.


Pif. Or the young baron that dressed your hair while he courted your daughter.


M. B. Why did you not cry out?


Lis. I had just opened my mouth, intending to scream for the very blood of me
-- when he drew out a dagger, and swore he would kill me if I made the least
noise in the world.


M. B. Miserable woman that I am! Unhappy mother! Is this the reward of my kind
indulgence? What shall I do? My child! my child!


Pif. I told you it was all witchcraft, deceit and the devil!


M. B. Oh! my dear Mr. Piffleberg, if you love me -- fly -- run -- overtake the
seducer -- chase the robber --


Pif. I Am afraid, widow, that would be another wild-goose chase. Besides, I
thought it was all over with us.


M. B. I have done you wrong -- forgive an unhappy mother!


Pif. Will you marry me if I bring him back?


M. B. Yes, yes.


Pif. You will not insist on my running away with you?


M. B. No, no!


Lis. One elopement will serve for mother and daughter. (Aside.)


Pif. It Is a bargain! I Will soon be upon his track, and then, in spite of his
tricks, I Will drag him out from his form. Yhoix! Tally ho! Tally ho!

[Exit.
M. B. Away, Lisette! Call Molkus! Both go in pursuit. Take the watchmen to
help! Shut the doors! Run! Fly! -- Oh, dear! Oh, I could tear the hair from my
head for spite!


Lis. (Aside.) Yes, if she had any.

[Exeunt.
END OF THIRD ACT.
ACT FOURTH.
SCENE FIRST.
Scene, the Hall of the Inn as at first. Enter NANNETTE, running from
Frederick's chamber. FREDERICK follows her. Nan. No, I will not stay in your
chamber.


Fred. Why not?


Nan. I know not why, but my heart tells me, it becomes me not.


Fred. Does this place become you better?


Nan. In this public Hall, where every moment some one is passing, there is no
danger.


Fred. What danger is there in my chamber?


Nan. I know not. But if I am there alone with you, my heart beats so -- it
beats here too, but not so much.


DUET. FREDERICK and NANNETTE.
Frederick.
Sweet girl, fear no danger,
While safe by my side:
Tonight my hope's treasure;
Tomorrow my bride.
Nannette.
But my heart feels so strangely,
Perhaps it is not fear,
Yet it beats, throbs and flutters,
Whenever you're near.
Both together. Frederick.
Sweet girl, fear no danger,
While safe by my side;
Tonight my hope's treasure;
Tomorrow my bride.
Nannette.
My heart fears no danger
While safe by your side;
But still it would flutter,
Though I were a bride.

Fred. Is heart-beating a sin?


Nan. I know not. But I had a governess who used to say, "Abstain from every
thing which makes the heart beat or the blood rise in your cheeks."


Fred. I suppose her worn-out heart had not blood enough to spare a blush to
her wrinkled cheeks on any occasion.


Nan. I pray you bring a light hither.


Fred. Why?


Nan. You always ask me "why?" And I know not. But something within whispers,
"ask him to bring a light."


Fred. And what will that "something" say, if I refuse?


Nan. It will be unquiet and say, "Those who seek darkness will do evil."


Fred. Can one not do evil by the light?


Nan. No. Surely one would be ashamed of oneself.


Fred. But consider, dear Nannette, if there was a light here -- but a step
from us is your mother's chamber -- How easily might we be betrayed!


Nan. O me! -- I almost wish I were betrayed.


Fred. You do not love me, then?


Nan. O yes, I love you dearly: -- but to be alone together, certainly is not
right. I wish it were daybreak!


Fred. Your impatience will spoil all. We shall be surprised, you will be torn
from me, and then you will be lost to me forever.


Nan. I will be true to you, indeed and indeed!


Fred. Have compassion on my anxiety and come to my chamber.


Nan. Rather into the street, or the marketplace.


Fred. Strange -- lovely girl -- surely, after having run away with a man, you
may trust yourself in his chamber.


Nan. Have I run away with you? Oh, how foolish I have been!


Fred. Do you repent it?


Nan. Almost. Alas! what will you think of me? -- But, indeed, and indeed, it
is the first time I ever ran away with a man!


Fred. Sweet girl! I believe it fully.


Nan. You have so surprised me -- I know not how it was --


Fred. All uneasiness shall be forgotten tomorrow. I have thought of something
which will spare your delicacy. I will conduct you to the bedchamber of my
tutor.


Nan. The bedchamber of a man?


Fred. Of a man of fifty.


Nan. Whom I don't know.


Fred. I will stay with you.


Nan. But he will be asleep, and so we shall be alone after all.


Fred. Strange girl. There is a lamp burning by his bed.


Nan. And if he should awake?


Fred. Then will I present to him my spouse.


Nan. But it would be better if he would not sleep.


Fred. Well, then, I will wake him.


Nan. Go. Wake him.


Fred. Come with me.


Nan. No, you must wake him, and then he must come and conduct me to his
chamber.


Fred. Be it so. But I would not wish to leave you here alone. However it is
done in two minutes. Only stir not from this spot, and if any body goes through
the hall, hold your breath for fear of discovery. (Goes into Felix's room.)


Nan. Oh dear! Hold my breath? I do not know whether I have any breath. I
tremble like an aspin-leaf. Why then did my governess say "only the guilty
tremble?" My heart tells me that there is no guilt in love.

Enter MADAME VON BRUMBACH from No. 3.
M. B. I thought I heard a noise. (Listens.) No: all is still. How much anxiety
this wicked girl gives me. If I once get her again in my power, I will
immediately shut her up in a convent.

[ Exit into No. 3.
Nan. In a convent? No. I would rather go into the young baron's chamber than
into a convent.

Enter FREDERICK and FELIX, the latter with a lamp, and dressed in his morning
gown.
Fred. Mr. Felix, my best friend, here is the timid girl.


Fell. Frederick, Frederick! What have you done?


Fred. Rather ask what I will do. I will marry her.


Fell. After what is past, you must marry her.


Fred. I Am very glad to hear it; for, dam'me, if I wish any thing better. Turn
your lamp -- look on her lovely face.


Nan. Dear, unknown gentleman, pity my innocence! be my father!


Fell. A father, my child, is more easily deceived than a mother.


Nan. (To Frederick.) Do you hear? He reproaches me with deceiving my mother!
It pierces my heart! I will return to my mother. She will shut me up in a
convent -- there I shall weep forever! But here I can never be happy, if good
men and my heart reproach me.


Fred. My dear Mr. Felix! listen to the voice of the purest innocence! If ever
you loved me, now assist me.


Fell. I pity your weakness, and still more the inexperience of this good girl.
I will assist you on one condition.


Fred. I consent to any.


Fell. You must, as soon as the day breaks, throw yourself at her mother's feet,
and ask her blessing on your union.


Fred. Willingly.


Fell. Till then I take the young lady under my protection.


Nan. Now my heart feels light again.


Fell. Will you confide in me?


Nan. With joy, you appear so good! I can trust in you and love you.


Fell. Go, then, into this chamber. I will follow you.


Fred. Go, dear Nannette, and sleep a little meanwhile.


Nan. I sleep? Feel how my heart beats. I never was in such a situation but
once in my life before --


Fred. How -- once?


Nan. Yes -- when I had the smallpox; and I could not sleep a wink all night.

[Exit into Felix's chamber.
Fred. Do not leave the poor girl alone, sir.


Fell. Only one word more to you, young man. Maiden honor is like polished
steel, a single breath takes away its luster.


Fred. Not the breath of love.


Fell. That more than any other. If you were capable of sacrificing this
unspotted lamb --


Fred. Never!


Fell. I hope not. If you should, I would instantly leave you, and call down in
anguish the curse of your father!


Fred. Tomorrow she is my wife.


Fell. Rather say, when her mother consents.

Enter MADAME VON BRUMBACH. She comes to the door No. 3. as before, but seeing
the light, starts back.
M. B. I still think I hear -- Saints and angels! A ghost!

[Exit.
Fred. That was the old woman.


Fell. That voice is not unknown to me.


Fred. I dare say you have heard ravens croak.


Fell. I will go to the trembling girl. Do you remain where you are, and come
not in her presence until her mother's consent is obtained. But remember ever.

SONG. FELIX.
Bright is the honor of a maid, than polished steel more bright.
A single breath its luster dims;
The mirror then no longer beams
With smiles of innocence and bland delight.
A damp corroding rust succeeds,
Nor can a life of holy deeds,
Ever make again the tarnish'd surface bright.
[Exit Felix into his chamber.
Fred. Obtain her mother's consent! That will be no easy matter. However, I
have possession. -- I follow the fashion of crowned heads; seize upon the
territory they have resolved to make their own, and then proceed to
negotiation. But what am I to do with myself until morning? I must not go to my
bride, and I cannot go to sleep. O! what is so tiresome as the longing of a
lover? While old father Time, like all other grey-beards, having no
consideration for the impatience of youth, creeps on with snail's pace, and if
one attempts to give him a lift, it is in vain; alas! he is as heavy as a ton
of lead. Wishes are useless: impatience is vain: attended by prayers and curses
he creeps at length to the point -- the lover rushes to the arms of his
mistress -- and Time -- runs away as if the devil was in him! No stopping him!
No recalling him! No keeping up with him! On he goes! Whip and spur into
eternity! -- And sometimes takes love with him!

Enter LISETTE.
Fred. Something stirs. Hist! hist!


Lis. Hist! hist!


Fred. It Is a woman. I know the sex by instinct. From what charming lips comes
that "hist?"


Lis. Is it you, Baron?


Fred. It is I. But there are many Barons. Which seek you?


Lis. Baron Wellinghorst.


Fred. And who are you?


Lis. Lisette.


Fred. Ah, Lisette, is it you? Little rogue, come hither that I may kiss you.
You have come in the very moment for making time fly.


Lis. Where is my young lady?


Fred. Safe with my tutor. But where are you running at midnight?


Lis. My mistress has sent me to seek you, and Heaven knows what is to become
of me when she finds that I have aided you in your rogueries! I cannot think of
returning to her.


Fred. Make yourself quiet. At this solemn hour of midnight, when witches ride
upon broomsticks and devils dance upon hot grid-irons, do I, vested with a
husband's rights, name, appoint, create, nominate and install, you, as
chambervirgin, chambermaid, lady of the bedchamber or maid of honor, unto my
most honored and ever-to-be-loved spouse, from this time and forever, in
witness whereof I do hereby, press, kiss and embrace -- (Attempting to kiss
her.)


Lis. (Pushing him back.) I will alarm the old lady!


Fred. Take it, take it -- only as earnest money.


Lis. It is stolen money. And the receiver is as bad as the thief.


Fred. Take it, child. I coin this kind of cash every minute.


Lis. It is of no value, unless love sets his stamp on it. But without jesting,
Baron, I enter your service It is no more than just, for you have brought me
into these difficulties.


Fred. Well, be it so. I will bring you out again.


Lis. But where shall I stay tonight. On the left hand is Hell. (Pointing to
Mrs. Brumbach's room.) And on the right hand stands Satan. (Pointing to Fred.)


Fred. Suppose you steer a mid-course and go into Purgatory until morning?
There is the wardrobe, where I dress sometimes. Two old cloaks hang in it on
great wooden pegs. In one corner stands an umbrella and in the other a
lanthern. Will you pass the remainder of the night there?


Lis. Any where rather than with an old woman in a passion.


Fred. Go in, then. I will, put a stool in with you, and as soon as the day
breaks, Nannette shall redeem you.


Lis. A charming opportunity for repentance. (Looking in.) It is as dark as the
grave!


Fred. Your eyes will make it light.


Lis. I am no cat.


Fred. There -- take the stool and be as quiet as a mouse. Good night -- sleep
sound. (Shuts her in.) Now will I roam about the house, like a ghost that wants
his bones buried. Not a mouse that gnaws behind the wainscot, not a cricket
that chirps behind the oven, shall escape my notice.

[Exit.
Enter MOLKUS. Molk. I would rather pursue a flying Hussar than a lover that
has carried off his mistress. Oh, how my head aches! If I had had a comfortable
nap after my wine -- but to be running about all night through wind and rain --
Oh, how my back aches. My sound leg is tired, and my wooden leg is smeared with
mud. I will not run any more on the old woman's wild-goose chase. They may fly
to the Desert of Arabia for me, and eat locusts with Saint John. Well, shall I
return to the old dragon and report that I have found nothing? That would be to
run out of the rain under the water-spout. I would rather encamp here for the
night as well as I can. Ah, ha! A chair! (Sits in an armed chair.) Lightning
and grape-shot! this is as soft as if it was made for a gouty man. Now, thank
heaven! (Yawning.) I can only have the gout in one leg. Ah! how warm and
comfortable! (Yawns.) Ah, ha! -- And General Sleep has commenced his attack --
I shall yield at discretion. -- True it is no bed -- but after such hot
service. -- When I was in the seven-years' was -- stood sentinel on an out-post
-- there -- leaned on my gun -- and nodded -- nodded -- nod -- (Falls asleep
muttering.)

Enter PIFFLEBERG.
Pif. So! I give it up! Dam'me if all my hounds will catch this hare. He Is an
old fox -- up to all the tricks. Beating about through thick and thin, and what
have I got by it? Wet feet -- car-ache -- and rheumatism in my arm. I will not
go and have my head combed by the widow in the bargain. No, no, there is no
sport in that. I had rather stay here till daylight, and strive to nap it a
little upon the softest chair I can find. (Gropes about and finds the chair on
which Molkus sleeps.) So, so! Now we will try if an old sportsman can sleep
without rocking after a wild-goose chase. (Sits.)


Molk. Oh, the nightmare! The nightmare presses me!


Pif. Thunder and lightning! What Is the matter?


Molk. (Clasping him in his arms.) I have him, I have him!


Pif. Satan avaunt! Let me loose!


Molk. The robber is caught!


Pif. Saints and angels! -- Our father -- forgive our sins! --


Molk. Light! Light here!


Pif. Thou art the Prince of Darkness!


Molk. Where is the young lady?


Pif. Paws off, Satan!

Enter FREDERICK as a waiter, with a hump-back, a plaster over one of his
eyes, and a light in his hand.
Fred. What Is the m-m-matter here?


Pif. Ah! Molkus, is it you?


Molk. Ah! your honor, is it you? I thought it was the thief.


Pif. And I thought it was the devil.


Molk. Why did you sit on my lap?


Pif. I shall choose for the future rather to lay in Abraham's bosom, than to
sit in your lap. My limbs tremble yet. I shall always think of the devil when I
see you.


Fred. What Is the m-m-matter?


Molk. Ha! Who are you?


Fred. The master engaged me b-b-b-but last evening, and if such things go on
in the ho-ho-house, the d-d-devil may take it for me. What do you want s-s-s-so
late at night?


Molk. I ran after a young lady --


Fred. L-l-limp you m-m-mean.


Pif. Dam'me we might better chase a hare without dogs.


Fred. S-s-suppose I know where she is?


Pif. You!


Fred. B-b-but you must not b-b-betray me.


Pif. Honor, honor.


Molk. Let Us hear.


Fred. The young p-p-people are st-st-still in the house.


Pif. Where, where, my good fellow?


Fred. That room --


Molk. Well?


Fred. Is the dining room.


Pif. Ah ha! -- Well?


Fred. They are -- they -- they -- are not there.


Pif. Go on, go on. Where are they?


Fred. There is the wardrobe.


Molk. Aye!


Fred. They, they, they are n-n-not there either.


Pif. Gunpowder and flints! You booby! do you think we want to know where they
are not?


Fred. P-p-pep-patience, patience. Where they are not, they may come.


Molk. So, so!


Fred. I overheard a whispering, and the young ge-ge-gentleman proposed hiding
the lady in the wardrobe.


Molk. An excellent place for an ambuscade!


Fred. Bu-bu-but she said, "no, it is t-t-too dark."


Pif. Where did she choose?


Fred. The di-di-dining-room.


Pif. Oh ho! then I have her.


Fred. Bu-bu-but the young ge-ge-gentleman insisted on the wardrobe.


Molk. There then will I stand sentinel.


Fred. Bu-bu-but the young lady insisted on the di-di-dining-room. "N-n-n-no,"
said he. "Y-y-y-yes," said she. "N-n-no." "Y-yes." "No." "Yes." "No." "Yes." --


Pif. Thunder and lightning! How did it end?


Fred. Why thus. Now m-m-mark what I say. If you b-b-b-both go to the wardrobe
and she does n-n-not come there --


Molk. Why we shall have our trouble for our pains.


Fred. Pe-pe-perfectly right. Bu-bu-but if you b-b-both go into the dining
room, and the young lady should go into the wardrobe?


Pif. Then shall we both look like fools in the morning, for having been fools
all night.


Fred. Pe-pe-pe-perfectly right -- bu-bu-but if one hides here and t-t-t'other
there, she cannot escape you.


Pif. Bravo! bravo! Dam'me I have her already!


Fred. Ke-ke-keep her fast.


Pif. Never fear me!


Molk. I take possession of the dining room.


Pif. Do so; and if I hear that you have started the game, I Will come and join
in the pursuit, or be in at the death.


Molk. The plan of operation is complete. The allied army draws a cordon.
(Limps off into dining room.)


Pif. Now for the wardrobe. Give me the light.


Fred. B-b-by no means. Will she come in if she sees a light?


Pif. True. But its damned dark. I hope there are no more lame devils in the
house. (Goes into wardrobe.)


Fred. You may chance to meet with a little devil there, Mr. Marksman, who
would prove good game if you could bring her down. (Looks at his watch.) Three
o'clock. Glide, glide away! ye leaden footed hours! Until the blessed minute
comes when I shall seize my prize; and then go as ye will, or quick or dull, I
dance my time out with my lovely partner, to the tune of "Merrily through the
World."

Enter MADAME VON BRUMBACH from No. 3.
M. B. O dear! What a terrible night! Will it never be day? Blessed be the
Author of light, here is a candle! My good friend, what is the matter with this
house?


Fred. (Quits the stammering and assumes a gruff short manner.) House? Good
enough. Better than people


M. B. I have heard such a continual noise --


Fred. Cats.


M. B. No, no!


Fred. Rats.


M. B. Besides, I have seen a horrible apparition.


Fred. Been looking in the glass.


M. B. Have you heard any thing of my daughter?


Fred. Why -- yes.


M. B. What my good fellow?


Fred. That she has run away.


M. B. I know that already.


Fred. Who said you did not? I met her and her lover on the stairs.


M. B. And you did not stop them!


Fred. Am I to stop all I meet on the stairs?


M. B. But did you not see?


Fred. What did I see? A young lady with a young gentleman -- such things are
not strange at an inn.


M. B. But whither went they?


Fred. To tell you the truth, they are in the house yet.


M. B. My good fellow, I will reward you well if you will put me in the way of
finding them.


Fred. I will do it -- talk of reward afterward. First, step into the
dining room there.


M. B. Well?


Fred. There you will find, on the left hand, a door; which leads to a long
passage; where there is a lamp burning.


M. B. Go on.


Fred. No: it is you must go on, quite to the end of the passage; where you
will come to a narrow staircase.


M. B. Well? There I go up?


Fred. No. There you go down: -- and at the bottom you will find --


M. B. What?


Fred. Yourself in the stable-yard.


M. B. What under Heaven am I to do there?


Fred. What you please.


M. B. Booby! But where is my daughter?


Fred. Cross the yard, until the cow-stable is on your left hand.


M. B. Fellow! I am not seeking a calf.


Fred. And straight before you, you will see the wash-house.


M. B. Thank you, good lad! she is there!


Fred. Heaven forbid! -- but -- next to the wash-house --


M. B. Well? Next to the wash-house.


Fred. Is the calendering-room.


M. B. And there she has hid herself? -- Ha?


Fred. Perhaps so.


M. B. So, so! I will just throw my cloak over my shoulders, and then.

[ Exit into No. 3.
Fred. So, now let the old woman go on a wildgoose chase -- through mud and
mire. I have provided for all my friends, and let them play the rest of the
game as chance shall direct. (Puts the light on the table, and exit.)

Re-enter MADAME VON BRUMBACH.
M. B. So! -- What, is he gone? Never mind, I shall find her. Dining Room --
long passage -- stairs -- stable-yard -- cow-stable -- wash-house --
calendering-room. That Is right. Shall I take the light or leave it? It is dark
in the dining room, but there is a lamp burning in the passage. I had better
steal upon them in the dark and surprise them, as Peter the great did the
conspirators.

[Exit into the dining room.
Molk. (After a pause.) I have her! I have her!


M. B. Help! Murder! Help!


Molk. Your mama will help you! Come along! Come, miss!

Enter MOLKUS, from the dining room, with the old woman in his arms. He crying
out,
I have her! I have her!


M. B. Help! Murder! (Perceiving him) Molkus! -- What are you about? What are
you doing?


Molk. (Stares at her, and then let us her fall and stands amazed.) The devil!


M. B. Are you drunk again?


Molk. Don't know. Drunk, or asleep, or bewitched.


Pif. (In the wardrobe.) I have her! I have her!


Lis. Help! Help! Murder! Help!


M. B. What Is that?


Molk. Ah ha! He has her! If the devil don't change her into an old woman.

Enter PIFFLEBERG, from the wardrobe, with LISETTE in his arms. He crying out,
I have her! I have her! (Brings her forward.)


M. B. Mr. Piffleberg, what are you doing with my chambermaid?


Pif. (Stares at Lisette, drops her, and then stands amazed.) On a wrong scent,
dam'me!


M. B. Very pretty, indeed! What chase have you been on?


Pif. On a wild-goose chase, it seems.


M. B. I am petrified! Did not I send all three of you different ways in
pursuit of my daughter? and here I find you all together playing at
hide-and-go-seek in the dark. Pray, Mr. Piffleberg, what was you doing in the
wardrobe?


Pif. Watching the game, widow.


M. B. Fine game, truly! And you, Molkus, what were you doing in the
dining room?


Molk. In ambuscade.


M. B. And you, you impudent hussy?


Lis. I, I, I, your ladyship? -- I wanted to mend the blond lace in which your
ladyship tore a hole at the ball.


M. B. To mend blond laces in the dark -- very fine! And you, Mr. Piffleberg!
Are you not ashamed of yourself? Is this love? Is this friendship? Instead of
pursuing my daughter, here do I find you in a dark corner with my chambermaid!


Pif. Thunder and lightning! The devil may take you and your daughter too! I am
tired of being fooled. The moment I set a foot in your house, all hell is let
loose to torment me. One damned fellow blinds me with hair-powder -- Another
calls me his father -- Another impostor talks of my little Billy -- And now,
when I had the young lady fast, she is changed into this pest of a chambermaid!
Dam'me the place is worse than a mad-house. No, widow, I Am off. I Have changed my
mind. I am poor to be sure -- but rather freedom and a roasted potatoe, than to
be loaded with a foolish old woman on one side and a bag of gold on the other!
Yhoix! Tally ho! Yhoix! Dam'me, I Am off, crack!

[Exit.
M. B. Oh, miscrable woman! Every body abandons me!


Molk. Deceived by our spies.


M. B. However, I know where Nannette is hidden. I Will punish her, however. --
Molkus!


Molk. Here!


M. B. Take the light and follow me.


Molk. Where?


M. B. Through the dining room, into the dark passage, down the narrow stairs,
into the cow-yard, past the cow-stable and the wash-house into the
calendering-room.


Molk. Heaven preserve us! She Is mad.

Enter FREDERICK, in his proper dress.
Fred. (Kneeling.) Stay, my lady, and forgive the love which has caused all
this confusion.


M. B. Who are you, sir?


Fred. The man who has robbed you of your daughter.


M. B. And how dare you --


Fred. Permit me to make reparation. I am Baron Wellinghorst, the heir of an
illustrious house --


M. B. And if you were heir to the Emperor of Abyssinia --


Fred. I love your daughter and she loves me.


M. B. I will never forgive you, sir. I will never give my daughter to a man
who began with cheating an innocent girl out of her honor, and would bring my
-- black hairs with sorrow to the grave!


Fred. You do me injustice. Nannette is under the protection of an venerable
old man, my tutor. He shall be my witness, that your daughter has been
honorably treated. (Starts up and opens Felix's door.) Come my friend and
bride! help me to soften the heart of this obdurate mother!

Enter FELIX, leading NANNETTE.
M. B. Ah! my husband!


Fell. By all the devils, my wife!


M. B. Is it you, Charles?


Fell. Is it you, Salome?


M. B. Are you not dead yet?


Fell. Alas, no!


Lis. A tender scene of meeting.


M. B. Have I not advertised you in all the newspapers?


Fell. Have I not shunned you every where?


Lis. How edifying!


Fred. Is this lady your wife?


Fell. Alas, yes!


Lis. How touching!


Nan. Is this my father, dear mama?


M. B. Alas, yes!


Lis. How moving!


Nan. (Embraces.) Dear father! What unexpected joy!


Fell. Lovely girl! you help me to support the presence of your unhappy mother.


Fred. Now, then, our difficulties end! My friend, I expect my sentence from
you.


Fell. Yes, Frederick, the girl is your wife. I know your heart. The wine still
ferments, but the quality is good. But, Nannette, you will often be obliged to
have patience with him --


Nan. I will have patience, dear papa.


M. B. Well, Charles, you can do as you will with your daughter. As to me, I
have procured a divorce.


Fell. I have not one objection. Enjoy my property, and endeavor to be happy. I
shall be happy here without it. (Places himself between Frederick and Nannette.)


Lis. Molkus!


Molk. Here!


Lis. You wanted to marry me last evening.


Molk. I -- was drunk.


Lis. Your intoxication has soon gone off -- the baron's may last these four
weeks.


FINALE.
Felix.
Let us think that much happiness yet rests in store;
Hope points and we press to the place:
Joy runs with quick steps and is always before --
We follow -- Huzza! to the chase!
Lisette.
The wild-goose chase ended; again we must start!
Tallyho! then, huzza! and away!
The young hounds are coupled as never to part:
The old ones cast off -- and cry nay.
CHORUS.
Let us think that much happiness yet rests in store;
Hope points and we press to the place:
Joy runs with quick steps and is always before --
We follow -- Huzza! to the chase!
THE END.
NOTES ON THE WILD-GOOSE CHASE.
THE title of this play in the original is Der Wildsang, which is equivalent to
the English phrase of The Madcap. The English reviewers gave Wild Oats as their
translation of Wildsang; and I should have adopted it, had not Mr. O'Keefe
preoccupied that title.

Page 9. Song.] One acknowledgment will suffice for all the songs. They are
added by the translator, who must therefore be chargeable with their faults.

Page 10. We may know, etc.] Here eighteen words, including the reference, are
added by the translator.

Page 11. Thus let the pupil, etc.] Fourteen words are added.

Same page. Nay, but my good, etc.] Ten words are added.

Page 12. Angel's head and swan's, etc.] Eleven words are introduced in place
of the original -- "I do not understand you." These may serve as specimens of
the freedom with which I have translated this play. To mark every such
variation would be trifling and unnecessary.

Page 22. Between the words "Because yours was so" and "But you do not know,"
twenty-eight words are added, and the following lines are omitted.

"Fell. I do not say so. A man may win at dice or draw a prize in the lottery.
But I pray you make not your choice until the romantic fire of youth is
exhausted.


Fred. That may be a long time. I have lately see a Issland's "Old Bachelor"
represented, and poor Reinhold has made such an impression on me, that I am
resolved to marry over head and heels.


Fell. You are too young.


Fred. Youth is more easily pleased.


Fell. And more easily disgusted.


Fred. A man may be forty years choosing and not choose well.


Fell. You do not know the object of your love. You have seen a book in English
binding and do not know its contents.


Fred. Can God have given a bad book so lovely a binding?


Fell. Better an hour of reflection, than a year of repentance.


Fred. Right, dear Mr. Felix; I will prove Nannette with all the caution of a
lover.


Fell. That, indeed, is all a lover can promise.


Fred. In the first place, I have written her this letter, in which I tell her
that I adore her.


Fell. Oh! the best possible mode of gaining a true knowledge of her.


Fred. If I only knew how to convey the letter to her.


Fell. In time we pluck roses.


Fred. But when the rose is already expanded, there is no time to be lost.


Fell. You have called me your friend. Well, then, make use of my eyes. Love has
not varied my vision by putting spectacles on my nose.


Fred. Is love a dealer in spectacles? Or do you think it is better to borrow
the microscope from the hypocondriac? He that breaks a man's spectacles is
entitled to little thanks for the action."


Page 29. Lisette's soliloquy is added to introduce the song and close the act,
as I thought it necessary to divide the first act on account of its excessive
length.

Page 30. A few introductory words became necessary, for the above reason, in
beginning the second act.

Page 31. So ho! Dam'me the widow's up.] This speech is added, and it must be
acknowledged that more liberty is taken with Piffleberg than with any other of
the characters except the Hair-dresser: to represent a sportsman to an American
audience, I thought it necessary to make use of the language of an American (or
at least an English) sportsman.

Page 42. Ah ha! my lady, pardonnez, etc.] I took the liberty to make my
hair-dresser a Frenchman, and in the representation have seen no reason to
repent the change.

Page 48. That Is all you are, etc.] Twelve lines added to introduce the song.

Page 51. Fools' caps, etc.] Six lines added.

Page 52. If I only spoke with women, etc.] Here the following is omitted: --

"Lis. Blockhead, what do men want in the presence of women?


Molk. Every thing but the head.


Lis. And if there were no women, my God, who would put your heads to rights?"


Page 54. You block, stock, stick, etc.] Here ten lines are added, and the
following omitted: --

"Lis. Do but hear, how that most lovely young lady coaxes you?


Molk. And that most lovely old lady growls.


Lis. Is then all in vain?


Molk. All.


Lis. Perhaps you are hungry. Will you have some almond-cakes?


Molk. I eat ammunition-bread.


Lis. Come down into the kitchen, and have a piece of roast-beef to eat with it.


Molk. It is too soon.


Lis. It grows dark already.


Molk. Do you know why?


Lis. Well?


Molk. Because it grows late.


Lis. And do you know why you are a blockhead?


Molk. No.


Lis. Because you are all darkness: night in your head, and midnight in your
heart.


Molk. So.


Lis. What is to be done with the blockhead?


Molk. Nothing.


Nan. Thou art an honest fellow, dear Molkus.


Molk. Am I not?


Lis. We may converse without ceremony.


Molk. Without ceremony."


Page 55. Run away?] Here there is a small addition relative to the song, and a
trifling omission.

Page 60. Better and better, etc.] Here the following is omitted: --

"Fred. How came you in this house with women? I would rather be in barracks.


Molk. How came I with these women? -- I stand centry.


Fred. O fie! You that have guarded the general's tent -- and now watch women!


Molk. Why what is to be done, comrade? -- In the field we want two legs, in
winter quarters we can do with one.


Fred. (Feigning drunkenness.) Think you so? -- No, brother; he that meddles
with women must have two legs at least.


Molk. (Really drunk.) Two tongues you mean."


Same page. Right! Good!] Here sixteen lines are added.

Page 66. Good night, mama.] Here the following lines are omitted: --

"M. B. Go child, and endeavor not to sleep so much. Think on the affront you
have received today, and you will have sufficient cause for a sleepless night.


Nan. An affront? To me?


M. B. Have you already forgot that impudent fellow and his powder-bag?


Nan. I did not know that an offer of marriage was an affront?


M. B. He marry you? -- A boy that has just left school, and a girl that has
just left the doll.


Nan. Indeed, mama, he wishes to marry me.


M. B. So! -- How know you that?


Nan. I -- I -- suppose --


M. B. I suppose that you are a fool.


Lis. Marry? -- What are you thinking of, miss? -- He comes, sees, loves, burns
-- First a flame, then coals, then ashes. Woe to the girl that makes an ash-pit
of her heart.


M. B. Right, Lisette! explain this chapter to her as you go to bed."


Same page. The hour of trial, etc.] I have shortened this soliloquy.

Page 98. Your daughter.] The original play concludes thus: --

"M. B. But if you think that I will ever be your wife again, you are very much
mistaken. I have had you cited in all the newspapers, and you are divorced from
me, formally, as having been guilty of what the lawyers call a malicious
desertion. The high-consistory have written twelve sheets full about it, and
put a great seal under it.


Fell. I have not the least objection. Marry if you please three husbands more,
and be three times more divorced. What you possess of my property you may keep,
for the sake of the lovely daughter you have given me.


M. B. We can meet in company with politeness.


Fell. O yes.


M. B. And I shall never mention what I have suffered for your sake.


Fell. Nor I.


M. B. Then, mes chers enfans, I will no longer withhold my blessing.


Fell. God bless ye! And, with tears in my eyes, do I conjure you to take no
example from your parents.


Fred. Dearest Nannette, you are mine!


Nan. Dear father!


Fell. For the present, children, you must separate. You, Nannette, go with your
mother; and you, Frederick, come with me.


Nan. I am not at all sleepy.


Fred. Nor I.


Fell. Tomorrow, children, tomorrow shall your wishes be crowned. Good night,
madam.


M. B. Good night, sir.


Fred. Sleep well, dear Nannette.


Nan. Sleep well, dear Frederick.


Fell. and M. B. make reciprocal bows and curtsies.


Fred. and Nan. kiss their hands to each other.

[Exeunt.
Molk. A curious incident.


Lis. Well, Molkus, you wished yesterday evening to marry me.


Molk. I was drunk.

[Exit.
Lis. (Alone.) So! And is not the young gentleman also drunk? Aye, aye; I am
afraid that in four weeks he will awake quite sober."


FINIS.

