PIZARRO; OR THE SPANIARDS IN PERU. A TRAGEDY IN FIVE ACTS.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF KOTZEBUE.

NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR CHARLES SMITH, AND STEPHEN STEPHENS. 1800.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
ATALIBA, King of Quito.
Commanders of his arms ROLLA, ALONZO,

CORA, Alonzo's Wife. PIZARRO, Leader of the Spaniards. ELVIRA, Pizarro's
Mistress.
Pizarro's Associates. ALMAGRO, GONZALO, DAVILLA, GOMEZ,

VALVERDE, Pizarro's Secretary. LAS CASAS a Spanish Ecclesiastic. An old blind
Man. OROZEMBO, an old Cacique. A Boy. A Sentinel. Attendant. Peruvian Officer.
Soldiers.
PIZARRO.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A magnificent Pavilioa near PIZARRO'S Tent -- a View of the Spanish Camp in
the back Ground -- ELVIRA is discovered sleeping under a canopy on one side of
the Pavilion -- VALVERDE enters, gazes on ELVIRA, kneels and attempts to kiss
her hand; ELVIRA, awakened, rises and looks at him with indignation. Elvira.
AUDACIOUS! Whence is thy privilege to interrupt the few moments of repose my
harrassed mind can snatch amid the tumults of this noisy camp? Shall I inform
your master of this presumptuous treachery? Shall I disclose thee to Pizarro?
Hey!


Val. I am his servant, it is true -- trusted by him -- and I know him well;
and therefore it is I ask, by what magic could Pizarro gain your heart, by what
fatality still holds he your affection?


Elv. Hold! thou trusty SECRETARY!


Val. Ignobly born! In mind and manners rude, f^rocious and unpolished, though
cool and crafty if occasion need -- in youth audacious -- ill his first manhood
-- a licenced pirate -- treating men as brutes; the world as booty; yet now the
Spanish hero he is styled -- the first of Spanish conquerors! and for a warrior
so accomplished it is fit Elvira should leave her noble family, her fame, her
home, to share the dangers, humors and the crimes of such a lover as Pizarro!


Elv. What! Valverde moralizing* But grant I am in error, what is my incentive?
-- Passion, infatuation, call it as you will; but what attaches thee to this
despised, unworthy leader? -- Base lucre is thy object, mean fraud thy means.
Could you gain me, you only hope to win a higher interest in Pizarro -- I know
you.


Val. On my soul you wrong me; what else my faults, I have none toward you:
but indulge the scorn and levity of your nature; do it while yet the time
permits; the gloomy hour, I fear, too soon approaches.


Elv. Valverde a prophet too!


Val. Hear me Elvira -- Shame from his late defeat, and burning wishes for
revenge, again have brought Pizarro to Peru: But trust me, he overrates his
strength, nor measures well the foe. Encamped in a strange country, where
terror cannot force, nor corruption buy a single friend, what have we to hope?
The army murmuring at increasing hardships, while Pizarro decorates with gaudy
spoil the gay pavilion of his luxury! each day diminishes our force.


Elv. But you are not the heirs of those that fall?


Vol. Are gain and plunder then our only purpose? Is this Elvira's heroism?


Elv. No, so save me Heaven! I abhor the motive, means and end of your
pursuits; but I will trust none of you: -- in your whole army there is not one
of you that has a heart, or speaks ingeniously -- aged Las-Casas, and he alone
excepted.


Val. He! an enthusiast in the opposite and worst extreme!


Elv. Oh! had I earlier known that virtuous man, how different might my lot
leave been.


Val. I will grant, Pizarro could not then so easily have duped you; forgive
me, but at that event I still must wonder.


Elv. Hear me, Valverde. -- When first my virgin fancy waked to love, Pizarro
was my country's idol. Selftaught, self-raised, and self-supported, he became a
hero; and I was formed to be won by glory and renown. It Is known that when he
left Panama in a slight vessel, his force was not an hundred men. Arrived in
the island of Gallo with his sword he drew a line upon the sands, and said,
"Pass those who fear to die or conquer with their leader." Thirteen alone
remained, and at the head of these the warrior stood his ground. Even at the
moment when my ears first caught this tale, my heart exclaimed, "Pizarro is its
lord!" What since I have perceived, or thought, or felt! you must have more
worth to win the knowledge of.


Val. I press no further; still assured that while Alonzo de Molina, our
General's former friend and pupil, leads the enemy, Pizarro never more will be
a conqueror. ( Trumpets without.)


Elv. Silence I hear him coming; look not perplexed. -- How mystery and fraud
confound the countenance! Quick put on an honest face if thou can.


Pizarro. ( Speaking without.) Chain and secure him; I will examine him myself.


PIZARRO Enters. VALVERDE bows -- ELVIRA laughs. Piz. Why do thou smile,
Elvira.


Elv. To laugh or weep without a reason, is one of the ^ew privileges we women
have.


Piz. Elvira, I will know the cause, I am resolved.


Elv. I am glad of that, because I love resolution, and I am resolved not to
tell you. Now my resolution, I take it, is the better of the two, because it
depends upon myself, and yours does not.


Piz. Psha! trifler!


Val. Elvira was laughing at my apprehensions that --


Piz. Apprehensions!


Val. Yes, -- that Alonzo's skill and genius should so have disciplined and
informed the enemy, as to --


Piz. Alonzo! the traitor! How (...) once loved that man! His noble mother
entrusted him, boy, to my protection. At my table did he feast -- in my sent
did he repose. I had marked his early genius and the valorous spirit that grew
with it. Often I ^ad talked to him of our first adventures -- what storms we
struggled with -- what perils we surmounted. When landed with a slender host
upon an unknown land -- then, when I told him how (...) and fatigue, discord
and toil, day by day, did thin ou^ ranks; amid close-pressing enemies, how
still undaunted I endured and dared -- maintained my purpose and my power, in
despite of growing mutiny or bold revolt, till with my faithful few remaining I
became at last victorious! -- When I say of these thing I spoke, the youth,
Alonzo, with tears of wonder and delight, would throw him on my neck, and swear
his soul's ambition owned no other leader.


Val. What could subdue attachment so begun?


Piz. Las-Casas -- he it was, with fascinating craft and canting precep^s of
humanity, raised in Alonzo's mind a new enthusiasm, which forced him, as the
stripling termed it, to forego his country's claims for those of human nature.


Val. Yes, the traitor left you, joined the Peruvians, and became they enemy
and Spain's


Piz. But first with weariless remonstrance he sued to win me from my purpose,
and untwine the sword from my determined grasp. Much he spoke of right, of
justice, of humanity, calling the Peruvians our innocent and unoffending
brethren.


Val. They! -- Obdurate heathens! -- They our brethren!


Piz. But when he found that the soft folly of the pleading tears he dropped upon
my bosom fell on marble, he flew and joined the foe: then, profiting by the
lessons he had gained in wronged Pizarro's School, the youth so disciplined and
led his new allies, that soon he forced me -- Ha! I burn with shame and fury
while I own it! in base retreat and soul discumfiture to quit the shore.


Val. But the hour of revenge is come.


Piz. It is; I am returned -- my force is strengthened, and the audacious Boy
shall soon know that Pizarro lives, and has -- a grateful recollection of the
thanks he owes him.


Val. It Is doubted whether still Alonzo lives.


Piz. It Is certain he does; one of his armour-bearers is just made prisoner:
twelve thousand are his force, as he reports, led by Alonzo and Peruvian Rolla.
This day they make a solemn sacrifice on their ungodly altars. We must profit
by their security, and attack them unprepared -- the sacrificers shall become
the victims.


Elv. (Aside) Wretched innocents! And their own blood shall be dew their altars!


Piz. Right! ( Trumpets without.) Elvira, retire!


Elv. Why should I retire?


Piz. Because men are to meet here, and on manly business.


Elv. O, men! men! ungrateful and perverse! O, woman! still affectionate though
wronged! The beings to whose eyes you turn for animation, hope and rapture,
through the days of mirth and revelry; and on whose bosoms in the hour of sore
calamity you seek for rest and consolation; THEM, when pompous follies of your
mean ambition are the question, you treat as playthings or as slaves! -- I
shall not retire.


Piz. Remain then -- and, if thou can, be silent.


Elv. They only babble who practice not reflection. I shall think -- and
thought is silence.


Piz. Ha! there is somewhat in her manner lately -- (PIZARRO looks sternly and
suspiciously toward ELVIRA, who meets him with a commanding and unaltered eye.)


Enter LAS-CASAS, ALMAGRO, GONZALO, DAVILLA, Officers and Soldiers -- Trumpets
without. Las-C. Pizzaro we attend your summons.


Piz. Welcome, venerable father -- my friends, most welcome. Friends and
fellow soldiers, at length the hour is arrived, which to Pizarro's hopes
presents the full reward of our undaunted enterprise and long-enduring toils.
Confident in security, this day the foe devotes to solemn sacrifice if with
bold surprise we strike on their solemnity -- trust to your leader's word -- we
shall not fail.


Alm. Too long inactive have we been mouldering on the coast -- our stores
exhausted, and our soldiers murmuring -- Battle! Battle! -- then death to the
armed, and chains to the defenseless.


Dav. Death to the whole Peruvian race!


Las-C. Merciful Heaven!


Alm. Yes, General, the attack, and instantly! Then shall Alonzo, basking at
his ease, soon cease to scoff our suffering and scorn our force.


Las-C. Alonzo! -- scorn and presumption are not in his nature.


Alm. It Is fit Las-Casas should defend his pupil.


Piz. Speak not of the traitor -- or hear his name but as the bloody summons of
assault and vengeance. It appears we are agreed?


Alm. and Dav. We are.


Gone. All! -- Battle! Battle!


Las-C. Is then the dreadful measure of your cruelty not yetcompleat? --
Battle? -- gracious heaven! Against whom? -- Against a king in whose mild bosom
your attrocious injuries even yet have not excited hate! but who, insulted or
victorious, still sues for peace. Against a people who never wronged the living
being their creater formed; a people, who, children of innocence! received you
as cherished guests with eager hospitality and confiding kindness. Generously
and freely did they share with you their comforts, their treasures, and their
homes: you repaid them by fraud, oppression, and dishonor. These eyes have
witnessed all I speak -- as gods you were received; as fiends have you acted.


Piz. Las-Casas!


Las-C. Pizarro, hear me! -- Hear me, chieftains! -- And thou, all powerful!
whose thunder can shiver into sand the adamantine rock -- whose lightnings can
pierce to the core of the rived and quaking earth -- Oh! let thy power give
effect to thy servant's words, as thy spirit gives courage to his will! do not
I implore you, chieftains -- countrymen -- do not, I implore you, renew the
foul barbarities which your insatiate avarice has inflicted on this wretched,
unoffending race! -- But hush, my sighs -- fall not, drops of useless sorrw! --
heartbreaking anguish choke not my utterance -- All I entreat is, send me once
more to those you call your enemies -- Oh! let me be the messenger of penitence
from you, I shall return with blessings and with peace from them -- Elvira you
weep! -- Alas! and does this dreadful crisis move no heart but thine?


Alm. Because there are no women here but she and thou.


Piz. Close this idle war of words: time flies, and our opportunity will be
lost. Chieftains, are ye for instant battle?


All. We are.


Las-C. Oh, men of blood -- ( Kneels.) God! thou have anointed me thy servant
-- not to curse, but to (...) my countrymen: yet now my blessing on their force
were blasphemy against thy goodness. -- ( Rises.) No! I curse your purpose,
homicides! I curse the bond of blood by which you are united. May fell
division, infamy, and rout, defeat your projects and rebuke your hopes: on you
and on your children, be the peril of the innocent blood which shall be shed
this day! I leave you, and forever! No longer shall these aged eyes be seared
by the horrors they have witnessed. In caves, in forests, will I hide myself;
with tigers and with savage beasts will I commune: and when at length we meet
again before the blessed tribunal of that deity, whose mild doctrines and whose
mercies ye have this day renounced, then shall YOU feel the agony and grief of
soul which tear the bosom of your accusers now!

(Going.
Elv. Las-Casas! Oh! take me with thee, Las-Casas.


Las-C. Stay! lost, abused lady! I alone am useless here. Perhaps thy
loveliness may persuade to pity, where reason and religion plead in vain. Oh!
save thy innocent fellow creatures if thou can: then shall thy frailty be
redeemed, and thou will share the mercy thou bestowest.

(Exit.
Piz. How, Elvira! would thou leave me?


Elv. I am ^ewildered, grown terrified! -- Your inhumanity -- and that good
Las-Casas -- oh! he appeared to me just now something more than heavenly: and
you! ye all looked worse than earthly.


Piz. Compassion sometimes becomes a beauty.


Elv. Humanity always becomes a conqueror.


Alm. Well! heaven be praised, we are rid of the old moralist.


Gone. I hope he will join his preaching pupil. Alonzo.


Piz. Now to prepare our muster and our march^ At midday is the hour of the
sacrifice. Consulting with our guides, the rout of your divisions shall be
given to each commander. If we surprise, we conquer; and if we conquer, the
gates of Quito will be open to us.


Alm. And Pizarro then be monarch of Peru.


Piz. Not so fast -- ambition for a time must take counsel from discretion.
Ataliba still must hold the shadow of a scepter in his hand -- Pizarro still
appear dependant upon Spain: while the pledge of future peace, his daughter's
hand, secures the proud succession to the crown I seek.


Alm. This is best. In Pizarro's plans observe, the statesman's wisdom guides
the warrior's valor.


Val. ( Aside to Elvira.) You mark, Elvira?


Elv. O, yes, -- this is best -- this is excellent.


Piz. You seem offended. Elvira still retains my heart. Think -- a scepter
waves me on.


Elv. Offended? -- No! -- Thou know thy glory is my idol; and this will be
most glorious, most just and honorable.


Piz. What mean you?


Elv. Oh! nothing -- mere woman's prattle -- a jealous whim, perhaps: but let
it not impede the royal hero's course, -- ( Trumpels without.) The call of arms
invites you -- A way! away! you, his brave, his worthy fellowwarriors.


Piz. And go you with me?


Elv. Undoubtedly! I needs must be the first to hail the future monarch of Re^^.


Enter GOMEZ. Alm. How, Gomez! what bringst thou?


Gom. On yonder hill among the palm trees we have surprised an old cacique;
escape by flight he could not, and we seized him and his attendant unresisting;
yet his lips breath naught but bitterness and scorn.


Piz. Drag him before us. (GOMEZ leaves the tent, and returns conducting
OROZEMBO and Attendant, in chains, guarded.) What art thou stranger?


Oro. First tell me which among you is the captain of this band of robbers.


Piz. Ha!


Alm. Madman! -- Tear out his tongue, or else. --


Oro. Thou will hear some truth.


Dav. ( Showing his poniard.) Shall I not plunge this into his heart.


Oro. ( To Pizarro,) Does your army boast many such heroes as this?


Piz. Audacious! -- This insolence has sealed thy doom. Die thou shall,
gray headed ruffian. But first confess what thou know.


Oro. I know that which thou have just assured me of -- that I shall die


Piz. Less audacity might have preserved thy life.


Oro, My life is as a withered tree -- it is not worth preserving.


Piz. Hear me, old man. Even now me march against the Peruvian army. We know
there is a secret path that leads to your strong-hold among the rocks: guide us
to that, and name thy reward. If wealth be thy wish --


Oro. Ha! ha! ha, ha!


Piz. Do thou despise my offer?


Oro. Thee and thy offer! -- Wealth! -- I have the wealth of two dear gallant
sons -- I have stored in heaven the riches which repay good actions here -- and
still my chiefest treasure do I bear about me.


Piz. What is that? Inform me.


Oro. I will; for it never can be thine -- the treasure of a pure unsullied
conscience.


Piz. I believe there is no other Peruvian who dares speak as thou do.


Oro. Would I could believe there is no other Spaniard who dares act as thou
do!


Gone. ( aside.) Obdurate Pagan! -- How numerous is your army?


Oro. Count the leaves of yonder forest.


Alm. Which is the weakest part of your camp?


Oro. It has no weak part-on every side it is fortified by justice.


Piz. Where have you concealed your wives and your children?


Oro. In the hearts of their husbands and their fathers.


Piz. Know thou Alonzo?


Oro. Know him! -- Alonzo! -- Know him! -- Our nations benefactor! -- The
guardian angel of Peru!


Piz. By what has he meritted that title?


Oro. By not resembling thee.


Alm. Who is this Rolla, joined with Alonzo in command?


Oro. I will answer (...) for I love to hear and to repeat ^he ^ero's name.
Rolla, the kinsman of the king, is the idol of our army; in war a tiger, chased
by the hunter's spear; in peace as gentle as the unweaned lamb. CORA was once
betrothed to him; but finding she preferred Alonze, he resigned his claim, and,
I fear, his peace, to friendship and to COR^'s happiness; yet still he loves
her with a pure and holy ^^re.


Piz. Romantic savage! -- I shall meet this Rolla soon.


Oro. Thou had better not! The terrors of his noble eye would strike thee
dead.


Dav. Silence, or tremble!


Oro. Beardless robber! I never yet have trembled before God -- why should I
tremble before man? -- why before thee, thou less than man!


Dav. Another word, audacious heathen, and I strike!


Oro. Strike, Christian! Then boast among thy fellows -- I too have murdered a
Peruvian!


Dav. Hell and vengeance seize thee! ( Stabs him.)


Piz. Hold!


Dav. Could thou longer have endured his insults?


Piz. And therefore should he die untortured?


Oro. True! Observe, young man -- your unthinking rashness has saved me from
the rack; and you yourself have lost the opportunity of a useful lesson; you
might have seen with what cruelty vengeance would have inflicted torments, and
with what patience virtue would have borne them.


Elv. ( supporting Orozembo's head upon her bosom.) Oh! ye are monsters all.
Look up thou martyred innocent -- look up once more, and bless me ere thou
die. God! how I pity thee!


Oro. Pity me! -- Me! so near my happiness! Bless thee, lady! -- Spaniards --
Heaven turn your hearts, and pardon you as I do. ( Orozembo is borne off dying.)


Piz. Away! -- Davilla! If thus rash a second time --


Dav. Forgive the hasty indignation which --


Piz. No more -- unbind that trembling wretch -- let him depart; it is well he
should report the mercy which we show to insolent defiance -- Hark! -- our
troops are moving.


Attendant. ( on passing Elvira) If through your gentle means my master's poor
remains might be preserved from insult. --


Elv. I understand you.


At. His sons may yet thank your charity, if not revenge their father's fate.


( Exit. Piz. What says the slave?


Elv. A parting word to thank you for your mercy.


Piz. Our guard and guides approach. ( soldiers march through the tents) Follow
me, friends -- each shall have his post assigned, and ere Peruvia's God shall
sink beneath the main, the Spanish banner, bathed in blood, shall float above
the walls of vanquished Quito.


( Exit. Val. Is it now presumption that my hopes gain strength (...) the
increasing horrors which I see appal Elvira's (...)


Elv. I am mad with terror and remorse! Would I could fly these dreadful scenes!


Val. Might not Valverde's true attachment be thy refuge?


Elv. What would thou do to save or to revenge me?


Val. I dare do all thy injuries may demand -- a word -- and he lies bleeding
at your feet.


Elv. Perhaps we will speak again of this. Now leave me.


( Exit Valverde. Elv. ( alone.) No! not this revenge -- no! not this
instrument. Fie, Elvira! even for a moment to council with this unworthy
traitor! -- Can a wretch false to a considing master, be true to any pledge of
love or honor? -- Pizarro will abandon me -- yes; me -- who, for his sake, have
sacrificed -- Oh, God! -- What have I not sacrificed for him; yet curbing the
avenging pride that swells this bosom; I still will further try him. Oh, men!
ye who, wearied by the fond fidelity of virtuous love, seek in the wanton's
flattery a new delight, oh, ye may insult and leave the hearts to which your
faith was pledged, and stifling self-reproach, may fear no other peril; because
such hearts, however you injure and desert them, have yet the proud retreat of
an unspotted fame -- of unreproaching conscience. But beware the desperate
libertine who forsakes the creature whom his arts have first deprived of all
natural protection -- of all self-consolation! What has he left her? -- Despair
and vengeance!


( Exit. END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
SCENE. I.
A bank surrounded by a wild wood, and rocks. -- CORA, sitting at the foot of a
tree, is playing with her child. -- ALONZO looks over them with delight and
cheerfulness. Cora. Now confess, does he resemble thee or not?


Al. Indeed he is liker thee -- thy rosy softness, thy smiling gentleness.


Cora. But his auburn hair, the color of his eyes, Alonzo. -- O! my lord's
image, and my heart's adored! ( Pressing the child to her bosom)


Al. The little darling urchin robs me, I doubt, of some portion of thy love,
my Cora. At least he shares caresses, which till his birth were only mine.


Cora. Oh, no, Alonzo! a mother's love for her dear babe is not a stealth, or
taken from the father's store; it is a new delight that turns with quickened
gratitude to HIM, the author of her augmented bliss.


Al. Could Cora think me serious?


Cora. I am sure he will speak soon: then will be the last of the three
holydays allowed by Nature's sanction to the fond anxious mother's heart.


Al. What are those thee?


Cora. The ecstacy of his birth I pass; that in part is selfish: but when first
the white blossoms of his teeth appear, breaking the crimson buds that did
encase them; that is a day of joy: next when from his father's arms he runs
without support, and clings, laughing and delighted, to his mother's knee; that
is the mother's heart's next holyday: and sweeter still the third, whenever his
little stammering tongue shall utter the greatful sound of Father, Mother! --
O! that is the dearest joy of all.


Al. Beloved Cora!


Cora. Oh! my Alonzo! daily, hourly, do I pour thanks to Heaven for the dear
blessing I possess in him and thee,


Al. To Heaven and Rolla.


Cora. Yes, to Heaven and Rolla: and art thou not grateful to them too, Alonzo?
art thou not happy?


Al. Can Cora ask the question?


Cora. Why then of late so restless on thy couch? -- Why to my waking watching
ear so often does the stillness of the night betray thy struggling sighs?


Al. Must I not fight against my country, against my brethren?


Cora. Do they not seek our destruction, and are not all men brethren?


Al. Should they prove victorious?


Cora. I will fly, and meet thee in the mountains.


Al. Fly, with thy infant, Cora?


Cora. What! think you a mother, when she runs from danger, can feel the weight
of her child?


Al. Cora, my beloved, do you wish to set my heart at rest?


Cora. Oh, yes, yes, yes!


Al. Hasten then now to the concealment in the mountains; there dwells your
father, and there all our matrons and virgins, and our warriors' offspring, are
allotted to wait the issue of the war. Cora will not alone resist her
husbands's, her sister's, and her monarch's wish.


Cora. Alonzo, I cannot leave you: Oh! how in every moment's absence would my
fancy pai^tyou, wounded, alone, abandon'd' No, no, I cannot leave you.


Al. Rolla will be with me.


Cora, Yes, while the battle rages, and where it rages most, brave Rolla will
be found. He may revenge, but cannot save thee. To follow danger he will leave
even thee. But I have sworn never to forsake thee but with life. Dear, dear,
Alonzo! can you wish that I should break my vow.


Al. Then be it so. Oh! excellence in all that is great and lovely, in courage,
gentleness, and truth; my pride, my content, my all! Can there on earth be
fools who seek for happiness, and pass love in the pursuit?


Cora. Alonzo, I cannot thank you: silence is the gratude of true affection:
who seeks to follow it by sound will miss the track. ( shout without) Does the
king approach?


Al. No, it is the general placing the guard that will surround the temple
during the sacrifice. It Is Rolla comes, the first and best of heroes. (
Trumpets sound)


ROLLA. Roll. ( as entering) Then place them on the hill fronting the Spanish
camp.


( Enters.) Cora. Rolla my friend my brother!


Al. Rolla! my friend, my benefactor! how can our lives repay the obligations
we owe you?


Roll. Pass them in peace and bliss. -- Let Rolla witness it, and he is overpaid.


Cora. Look on this child -- He is the lifeblood of my heart; but if ever he
loves or reveres thee less than his own father his mother's hate fall on him!


Roll. Oh, no more! -- What sacrifice have I made to merit gratitude? The object
of my love was Cora's happiness. -- I see her happy. -- Is not my object gained
and am I not rewarded? Now, Cora listen to a friend's advice. You must away;
you must seek the sacred caverns, the unprophaned recess, whither, after this
day's sacrifice, our matrons, and even the virgins of the Sun, retire.


Cora. Not secure with Alonzo and with thee, Rolla?


Roll. We have heard Pizarro's plan is to surround us. Thy presence, Cora,
cannot aid, but may impede our efforts.


Cora. Impede!


Roll. Yes, yes. Thou know how tenderly we love thee; we, thy husband and thy
friend. Art thou near us? our thoughts, our valor -- vengeance will not be our
own. -- No advantage will be pursued that leads us from the spot where thou art
placed; no succor will be given but for thy protection. The faithful lover
dares not be all himself amid the war, until he knows that the beloved of his
soul is absent from the peril of the sight.


Al. Thanks to my friend! it is this I would have urged.


Cora. This timid excess of love, producing fear instead of valor, flatters,
but does not convince me: the wife is incredulous.


Roll. And is the mother unbelieving too?


Cora. No more -- Do with me as you please, My friend, my husband! place me
where you will.


Al. My adored! we thank you both. ( march without). Hark! the King approaches
to the sacrifice. You, Rolla, spoke of rumors of surprise. -- A servant of
mine, I hear, is missing; whether surprised or treacherous, I know not.


Roll. It matters not. We are every where prepared. Come, Cora, upon the altar
'mid the rocks, thou will implore a blessing on our cause. The pious
supplication of the trembling wife, and mother's heart, rises to the throne of
mercy, the most resistless prayer of human homage.


( Exeunt.) SCENE II.
The Temple of the Sun: it represents the magnificence of Peruvian idolatry: in
the center is the altar. -- A solemn march. -- The Warriors and King enter on
the side of the Temple. -- ROLLA, ALONZO, and CORA, on the other. Ata. Welcome
Alonzo! -- ( To Rolla.) Kinsman, thy hand. -- ( To Cora.) Blessed be the object
of the happy mother's love.


Cora. May the sun bless the father of his people!


Ata. In the welfare of his children lives the happiness of their king.
Friends, what is the temper of our soldiers?


Roll. Such as becomes the cause which they support; their cry is, victory or
death! our King! our Country and our God!


Ata. Thou, Rolla, in the hour of peril, have been wont to animate the spirit
of their leaders, ere we proceed to consecrate the banners which thy valor
knows so well to guard.


Roll. Yet never was the hour of peril near, when to inspire them words were so
little needed. My brave associates -- partners of my toil, my feelings and my
fame! -- can Rolla's words add vigor to the virtuous energies which inspire
your hearts? -- No -- YOU have judged as I have, the foulness of the crafty
plea by which these bold invaders would delude you -- Your generous spirit has
compared as mine has, the motives, which, in a war like this, can animate their
minds, and ours. -- THEY by a strange frenzy driven, fight for power, for
plunder, and extended rule -- WE, for our country, our altars, and our homes.
-- THEY follow an adventurer whom they fear -- and obey a power which they hate
-- WE serve a monarch whom we love -- a God whom we adore. -- Wherever they
move in anger, desolation tracks their progress! -- Wherever they pause in
amity, affliction mourns their friendship! -- They boast, they come but to
improve our state, enlarge our thoughts, and free us from the yoke of error! --
Yes -- THEY will give enlightened freedom to our minds, who are themselves the
slaves of passion, avarice and pride -- They offer us their protection -- Yes,
such protection as vultures give to lambs -- covering and devouring them! --
They call on us to barter all of good we have inherited and proved, for the
desperate chance of something better which they promise. -- Be our plain answer
this; The throne WE honor is the PEOPLE'S CHOICE -- the laws we reverence are
our brave father's legacy -- the faith we follow teaches us to live in bonds of
charity with all mankind, and die with hope of bliss beyond the grave. Tell
your invaders this, and tell them too, we seek no change; and, least of all,
such change as they would bring us. ( Trumpets sound.)


Ata. (embracing Rolla.) Now, holy friends, ever mindful of these sacred
truths, begin the sacrifice. A solemn procession commences from the recess of
the Temple above the altar. -- The priests and virgins of the Sun arrange
themselves on either side -- the High Priest approaches the altar, and the
solemnity begins -- The invocation of the High Priest is followed by the
Chorusses of the priests and virgins -- Fire from above lights upon the altar.
-- The whole assembly rise and join in the thanksgiving.) Our offering is
accepted. -- Now to arms, my friends prepare for battle.


Enter ORANO. Ora. The enemy!


Ata. How near?


Ora. From the hill's brow, even now as I over looked their force, suddenly I
perceived the whole in motion: with eager haste they march toward our deserted
camp, as if apprised of this most solemn sacrifice.


Roll. They must be met before they reach it.


Ata. And you, my daughters, with your dear children, away to the appointed
place of safety.


Cora. Oh, Alonzo! ( Embracing him.)


Al. We shall meet again.


Cora. Bless us once more, ere you leave us.


Al. Heaven protect and bless thee, my beloved, and thee my innocent!


Ata. Haste, Haste! -- each moment is precious!


Cora. Farewell, Alonzo! Remember thy life is mine.


Roll. Not one farewell to Rolla?


Cora. (Giving him her hand.) Farewell the God of war be with you: but, bring
me back Alonzo. ( Exit with the child.)


Ata. ( Draws his sword.) Now, my brethren, my sons, my friends, I know your
valor. -- Should ill success assail us, be despair the last feeling of your
hearts. -- If successful, let mercy be the first. Alonzo, to you I give to
defend the narrow passage of the mountains. On the right of the wood be Rolla's
station. For me, strait forwards will I march to meet them, and fight until I
see my people saved, or they behold their monarch fall. Be the word of battle
-- God and our native land.


( A march. Exeunt.) SCENE III.
The Wood between the Temple and the Camp. Enter ROLLA and ALONZO. Roll. Here,
my friend, we separate -- soon, I trust, (...) meet again in triumph.


Al. Or, perhaps, we part to meet no more. Rolla, a moment's pause; we are yet
before our army's strength; one earnest word at parting.


Roll. There is in language now no word but battle.


Al. Yes, one word more -- Cora!


Roll. Cora! Speak!


Al. The next hour brings us --


Roll. Death or victory!


Al. It may be victory to oen -- death to the other.


Roll. Or both may fall.


Al. If so, my wife and child I bequeath to the protection of heaven and my
king. But should I only fall, Rolla, be thou my heir.


Roll. How?


Al. Be Cora thy wife -- be thou a father to my child.


Roll. Rouse thee, Alonzo! Banish these timid fancies.


Al. Rolla! I have tried in vain, and cannot fly from she foreboding which
oppresses me: thou know it will not shake me in the fight: but give me your
promise.


Roll. If it be Cora's will -- Yes -- I promise -- ( Gives his hand.)


Al. Tell her it was my last wish! and bear to her and to my son, my last
blessing.


Roll. I will. -- Now then to our posts, and our swords speak for us. ( They
draw their swords.)


Al. For the king and Cora!


Roll. For Cora and the king!


(Exeunt different ways. Alarms without.) SCENE IV.
A view of the Peruvian Camp, with a distant View of a Peruvian Village. Trees
growing from a rocky Eminence on one side. Alarms continue. Enter an Old blind
Man and a Boy, O. Man. Have none returned to the camp?


Boy. One messenger alone. From the temple they all march to meet the foe.


O. Man. Hark! I hear the din of battle. O! had I still retained my sight. I
might now (...) grasped a sword, and died a soldier's death! Are we quiet alone?


Boy. Yes! -- I hope my father will be safe!


O. Man. He will do his duty. I am more anxious for thee my child.


Boy. I can stay with you, dear grandfather.


O. Man. But should the enemy come, they will drag thee from me, my boy.


Boy. Impossible, grandfather! for they will see at once that you are old and
blind, and cannot do without me.


O. Man. Poor child! you little know the hearts of these inhuman men. -- (
Discharge of cannon is heard.) Hark! the noise is near -- I hear the dreadful
roaring of the fiery engines of these cruel strangers. -- ( Shouts at a
distance.) At every shout with involuntary Haste I clench my hand, and fancy
still it grasps a sword! Alas! I ca^^ only serve my country by my prayers.
Heaven preserve the Inca and his gallant soldiers!


Boy. O father! there are soldiers running --


O. Man. Spaniards, Boy?


Boy. No, Peruvians!


O. Man. How! and flying from the field! -- It cannot be.


Enter two Peruvian Soldiers. speak to them, boy! -- Whence come you? how goes
the battle?

Sol. We cannot stop; we are sent for the reserve behind the hill. The day's
against us. -- ( Exeunt Soldiers.)


O. Man. Quick, then, quick!


Boy. I see the points of lances glittering in the light.


O. Man. Those are Peruvians. Do they bend this way.


Enter a Peruvian Soldier Boy. Soldier, speak to my blind Father.


Sol. I am sent to tell the helpless father to retreat among the rocks; all
will be lost, I fear. The king is wounded.


O. Man. Quick, boy! lead me to the hill, where thou may view the plain.
(Alarms).


Enter ATALIBA wounded, with ORANO, Officers, and Soldiers. Atal. My wound is
bound, believe me, the hurt is nothing: I may return to the fight.


Ora. Pardon your servant; but the allotted priest who attends the sacred
banner has pronounced that the Inca's blood once shed, no blessing can await
the day until he leaves the field.


Ata. Hard restraint! O! my poor brave soldiers! Hard that I may no longer be a
witness of their valor. But haste you; return to your comrades: I will not
keep one soldier from his post. Go, and avenge your fallen brethren -- ( Extent
Orano Officers and soldiers.) I will not repine; my own fate is the last
anxiety of my heart. It is for you my people, that I feel and fear.


Old man and Boy advance O. Man. Did I not hear the voice of an unfortunate? --
Who is it complains thus?


Ata. One almost by hope forsaken.


O. Man. Is the king alive?


Ata. The king still lives.


O. Man. Then thou art not forsaken! Ataliba protects the meanest of his
subjects.


Ata. And who shall protect Ataliba.


O. Man. The immortal powers, that protect the just. The virtues of our monarch
alike secure to him the affection of his people and the (...) regard of heaven.


Ata. How impious had I murmured! How wondrous, thou supreme disposer, are thy
acts! Even in this moment, which I had thought the bitterest trial of moral
suffering, thou have infused the sweatest sensation of my life -- it is the
assurance of my people's love.


Boy. ( Turning forward.) O father! -- Stranger, see those hideous men that
rush upon us yonder!


Ata. H^! Spaniards! -- And I -- Ataliba -- ill-fated fugitive, without a sword
even to try the ransom of a monarch's life.


Enter DAVILLA, ALMAGRO, and Spanish Soldiers. Dav. It Is he -- our hopes are
answered -- I know him well -- it is the king!


Alm. Away! Follow with your royal prize. Avoid those Peruvians, though in
flight. This way we may regain our line.


( Exeunt Davilla, Almagro, and Soldiers with Ataliba, prisoner. O. Man. The
king! wretched old man, that could not see his gracious form! -- Boy would
thou had led me to the reach of those ruffians' swords!


Boy. Father! all our countrymen are flying here for refuge.


O. Man. No -- to the rescue of their king -- they never will desert him. (
Alarms without.)


Enter Peruvian officers and soldiers, flying across the Stage; ORANO
following. Ora. Hold, I charge you! Rolla calls you.


Officer. We cannot combat with their dreadful engines.


Enter ROLLA. Roll. Hold, recreants! cowards! -- What fear ye death, and fear
not shame? By my soul's fury, I cleave to the earth the first of you that
stirs, or plunge your dastard swords into your leader's heart, that he no more
may witness your disgrace. Where is the king?


Ora. From this old man and boy I learn that the detachment of the enemy which
you observed so suddenly to quit the field, have succeeded in surprising him;
they are yet in sight.


Roll. And bear the Inca off a prisoner? -- Hear this ye base, disloyal rout!
Look there. The dust you see hangs on the bloody Spaniards' track, dragging
with russian taunts your king, your father! -- Ataliba in bondage, Now fly, and
seek your own safety, if you can.


O. Man. Bless the voice of Rolla -- and bless the stroke I once lamented, but
which now spares these extinguished eyes the shame of seeing the pale trembling
wretches who dare not follow Rolla though to save their king!


Roll. Shrink ye from the thunder of the foe -- and fall ye not at this rebuke?
Oh! had ye each but one drop of the loyal blood which gushes to waste through
the brave heart of this sightless veteran! Eternal shame pursue, if ye desert
me now! -- But do -- alone I go -- alone -- to die with glory by my monarch's
side!


Soldiers. Rolla! we'll follow thee. ( Trumpets sound: Rollo rushes out,
followed by Orano, officers and soldiers.)


O. Man. O godlike Rolla! -- And thou sun, send from thy clouds avenging
lightning to his aid! -- Haste, my boy; ascend some height, and tell to my
impatient terror what thou see.


Boy. I can climb this rock, and the tree above. ( Ascends the rock, and from
thence into the tree.) O -- now I see them -- now -- yes -- and the Spaniards
turning by the steep.


O. Man. Rolla follows them?


Boy. He does -- he does -- he moves like an arrow! -- now he waves his arm to
our soldiers -- ( report of cannon heard.) Now there is fire and smoke.


O. man. Yes fire is the weapon of those fiends.


Boy. The wind blows off the smoke: they are all mixed together.


O. Man. See thou the king?


Boy. Yes -- Rolla is near him! His sword sheds fire as he strikes!


O. Man. Bless thee, Rolla! Space not the monsters, Boy, Father, father! the
Spaniards fly! -- O -- now I see the king embracing Rolla. ( Waving his cap for
joy. Shouts of victory, flourish of trumpets, etc.


O. Man. (falls on his knees.) Fountain of life! how can my exhausted breath,
bear to thee thanks for this one moment of my life! My boy come down and let me
kiss thee -- My strength is gone! ( the boy having run to the old man).


Boy. Let me help you, father -- You tremble so --


O. Mad. It Is with transport, boy! ( Boy leads the old man off.


Shouts, Flourish, etc.

Enter ATALIBA, ROLLA, and Peruvian Officers, and Soldiers. Ata. In the name of
my people, the savior of whose sovereign you have this day been, accept this
emblem of his gratitude. ( giving Rolla his sun of diamonds.) The tear that
falls upon it may for a moment dim its luster, yet does it not impair the value
of the gift.


Roll. It was the hand of Heaven, not mine, that saved my king.


Enter ORANO, and Soldiers. Roll. Now, soldier, from Alonzo?


Ora. Alonzo's genius soon repaired (...) early broke our ranks; but I fear we
(...) loss; his eager spirit urged him too (...) suit!


Ata. How! Alonzo slain?


1st Sol. I saw him fall.


2d Sol. Trust me I beheld him up against and fight (...) he was then
surrounded and disarmed.


Ata. O! victory, dearly purchased!


Roll. O Cora! who shall tell thee this!


Ata. Rolla, our friend is lost -- our native country saved! Our private
sorrows must yield to the public claim for triumph. Now go we to fulfill the
first, the most sacred duty which belongs to victory -- to dry the widowed and
the orphaned tear of those whose brave protecte^^ have perished in their
country's cause.


(Triumphant march, and exeunt. END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
A wild retreat among stupendous Rocks. -- CORA and her child, which other
Wives and Children of the Peruvian Warriors, are scattered about the scene in
groups. -- They sing alternately, stanzas expressive of their situation, with a
CHORUS, in which all join. First Peruvian Woman. ZULUGA, see thou nothing yet?


Zul. Yes, two Peruvian soldiers, one on the hill; the other entering the
thicket in the vale


2d. Per. Woman. One more has passed -- He comes -- but pale and terrified.


Cora. My heart will start from my bosom.


Enter a Peruvian soldier, panting for breath. Wom. Well! joy or death?


Sold. The battle is against us. The king is wounded, and a prisoner.


(...). (...) and misery!


Cora. ( In a faint voice.) And Alonzo?


(...). I have not seen him.


1st Wom. O whither must we fly?


2d Wom. Deeper into the forest.


Cora. I shall not move.


Another Soldier, (without). Victory! victory!


He enters hastily

Rejoice! Rejoice! We are victorious!

Wom. ( Springing up.) Welcome! Welcome! thou messenger of joy; but the king!


Sold. He leads the brave warriors, who approach.


( The triumphant march of the army is heard at a distance. -- The Women and
Children join in a strain expressive of anxiety and exultation. -- The Warriors
enter singing the Song of Victory, in which all join -- The King and ROLLA
follow, and are met with rapturous and affectionate respect. CORA during this
scene, with her Child in her arms, runs through the ranks, searching and
enquiring for ALONZO.)

Ata. Thanks, thanks, my children! I am well: believe it; the blood once
stopped, my wound was nothing. (Cora at length approaches Rolla, who appears to
have been mournfully avoiding her.) Where is Alonzo?


(Rolla turns away in silence.) Cora. ( Falling at the king's feet.) Give me my
husband, give this child his father.


Ata. I grieve that Alonzo is not here.


Cora. Hoped you to fine him?


Ata. Most anxiously,


Cora. Ataliba! is he not dead?


Ata. No! the Gods will have heard our prayers.


Cora. Is he not dead, Ataliba?


Ata. He lives -- in my heart.


Cora. Oh kings! torture me not thus! Speak out, this child fatherless?


Ata. Dearest Cora! do not thus dash aside the little hope that still remains.


Cora. The little hope! yet still there is hope! Speak to me, Rolla, you are
the friend of truth.


Roll. Alonzo has not been found.


Cora. Not found! what mean you? will not you Rolla, tell the truth? Oh! let me
not hear the thunder rolling at a distance; let the bolt fall and crush my
brain at once. -- Say not that he is not found: say at once that he is dead.


Roll. Then should I say false.


Cora. False! Blessing on thee for that word! But snatch me, from this terrible
suspense. Lift up thy little hands, my child; perhaps thy ignorance may plead
better than thy mother's agony.


Roll. Alonzo is taken prisoner.


Cora. Prisoner! and by the Spaniards? Pizarro's prisoner? Then is he dead?


Ata. Hope better -- the richest ransom which our realm can yield, a herald
shall this instant bear.


Per. Women. Oh! For Alozo's ransom -- our gold, our gems! -- all! all! --
Here, dear Cora, -- here! here!


( The Peruvian Women eagerly tear off their ornaments, and run and take them
from their Children, to offer them to CORA.)

Ata. Yes, for Alonzo's ransom they would give all! -- I thank thee, father,
who have given me such hearts to rule over!


Cora. Now one boon more, beloved monarch. Let me go with the herald.


Atal. Remember, Cora, thou art not a wife only, but a mother too: hazard not
your own honor, and the safety of your infant. Among these barbarians the
sight of thy youth, thy loveliness, and innocence, would but rivet faster your
Alonzo's chains, and rack his heart with added fears for thee. -- Wait, Cora,
the return of the herald.


Cora. Teach me how to live till then.


Ata. Now we go to offer to the gods, thanks for our victory, and prayers for
our Alonzo's safety.


(March and procession. Exeunt omnes.) SCENE II.
The Wood. Enter CORA and Child. Cora. Mild innocence, what will become of thee?


EnterROLLA. Roll. Cora, I attend thy summons at the appointed spot.


Cora. Oh my child, my boy! -- have thou still a father?


Roll. Cora can thy child be fatherles; while Rolla lives.


Cora. Will he not soon want a mother too? -- For can thou think I will
survive Alonzo's loss?


Roll. Yes! for his child's sake! -- Yes, as thou did love Alonzo, Cora,
listen to Alonzo's friend.


Cora. You bid me listen to the world. -- Who was not Alonzo's friend?


Roll. His parting words --


Cora. His parting words! ( Wildly) Oh, speak!


Roll. Consigned to me too precious trusts -- his blessing to his son, and a
last request to thee.


Cora. His last request! his last! -- Oh, name it!


Roll. If I fall said he -- (and sad forebodings shook him while he spoke) --
promise to take my Cora for thy wife; be thou a father to my child. -- I
pledged my word to him, and we parted. -- Observe me, Cora, I repeat this only,
as my faith to do so was given to Alonzo -- for myself, I neither cherish claim
nor hope.


Cora. Ha! does my reason fail me, or what is this horrid light that presses on
my brain? Oh, Alonzo! It may be thou have fallen a victim to thy own guileless
heart -- had thou been silent, had thou not made a fatal legacy of these
wretched charms --


Roll. Cora! what hateful suspicion has possessed thy mind?


Cora. Yes, yes, it is clear -- his spirit was ensnared; he was led to the fatal
spot, where mortal valor could not front a host of murderers -- He fell -- in
vain did he exclaim for help to Rolla. At a distance you looked on and smiled
-- You could have saved him -- could -- but did not.


Roll. Oh, glorious sun! can I have deserved this? Cora, rather bid me strike
this sword into my heart.


Cora. No! live! live for love! for that love thou seek; whose blossoms are
to shoot from the bleeding grave of thy betrayed and slaughtered friend! But
thou have borne to me the last words of my Alonzo! Now hear mine -- Sooner
shall this boy draw poison from this tortured breast -- sooner would I link me
to the pallid corse of the meanest wretch that perished with Alonzo, than he
call Rolla father -- than I call Rolla husband!


Roll. Yet call me what I am -- thy friend, thy protector!


Cora. (Distractedly.) Away! I have no protector but my God! -- With this child
in my arms will I hasten to the field of slaughter -- There with these hands
will I turn up to the light every mangled body -- seeking, however by death
disfigured, the sweet smile of my Alonzo: -- with fearful cries I will shriek
out his name till my veins snap! If the smallest spark of life remains, he will
know the voice of his Cora, open for a moment his unshrouded eyes, and bless me
with a last look; But if we find him not -- Oh! then, my boy, we will to the
Spanish camp -- that look of thine will win me passage through a thousand
swords -- They too are men. -- Is there a heart that could drive back the wife
that seeks her bleeding husband; or the innocent babe that cries for his
imprisoned father? No, no, my child, every where we shall be safe. -- A
wretched mother bearing a poor orphan in her arms, has nature's passport
through the world. Yes, yes, my son, we'll go and seek thy father.


[Exit with the child. Roll. ( After a pause of agitation.) Could I have merited
one breath of thy reproaches, Cora, I should be the wretch -- I think I was not
formed to be. -- HER safety must be my present purpose -- then to convince her
she has wronged me!


[Exit. SCENE III.
Pizarro's Tent. PIZARRO, traversing the scene in gloomy and furious agitation.
Well, capricious idol, fortune, be my ruin thy work and boast. To myself I will
still be true. -- Yet ever I fall, grant me one smile to prosper in one act of
vengeance, and be that smile Alonzo's death.

Enter ELVIRA. Who Is there? who dares intrude? Why does my guard neglect their
duty?

Elv. Your guard did what they could -- but thy kn^w their duty better than to
enforce authority, when I refused obedience.


Piz. And what is it you desire?


Elv. To see how a hero bears misfortune. -- Thou, Pizarro, art not now
collected -- not thyself.


Piz. Would thou I should rejoice that the spears of the enemy, led by
accursed Alonzo, have pierced the bravest hearts of my followers?


Elv. No! -- I would have thee cold and dark as the night that follows the
departed storm; still and sullen as the awful pause that precedes nature's
convulsion: yet I would have thee feel assured that a new morning shall arise,
when the warrior's spirit shall stalk forth -- nor fear the future nor lament
the past.


Piz. Woman! Elvira! -- Why had not all my men hearts like thine?


Elv. Then would thy brows have this day worn the crown of Quito.


Piz. Oh! hope fails me while that scourge of my life and fame, Alonzo, leads
the enemy.


Elv. Pizarro, I am come to probe the hero further not now his courage but his
magnanimity -- Alonzo is your prisoner.


Piz. How!


Elv. It Is certain; Valverde saw him even now dragged in chains within your
camp. I chose to bring you the intelligence myself.


Piz. Bless thee, Elvita, for the news! -- Alonzo in my power! -- then I am the
conqueror -- the victory is MINE!


Elv. Pizarro this is savage and unmanly triumph. Believe me, you raise
impatience in my mind to see the man whose valor, and whose genius, awe
Pizarro; whose misfortunes are Pizarro's triumph; whose bondage is Pizarro's
safety.


Piz. Guard! -- ( Enter Guard.) -- Drag here the Spanish prisoner Alonzo! --
Quick bring the traitor here.


(Exit Guard. Elv. What shall be his fate?


Piz. Death! death! in lingering torments! protracted to the last stretch that
burning vengeance can devise, and fainting life sustain.


Elv. Shame on thee! Will thou have it said that the Peruvians found Pizarro
could not conquer till Alonzo felt that he could murder?


Piz. Be it said -- I care not. His fate is sealed.


Elv. Follow then thy will: but mark me; if basely thou do shed the blood of
this brave youth, Elvira's lost to thee for ever.


Piz. Why this interest for a stranger? What is Alonzo's fate to thee?


Elv. His fate! -- nothing! -- thy glory, every thing! -- Think thou I could
love thee script of fame, of honor, and a just renown? -- Know me better.


Piz. Thou should have known ME better. Thou should have known, that, once
provoked to hate, I am for ever fixed in vengeance. -- (Alonzo is brought in,
in chains guarded. Elvira observes him with attention and admiration.) --
Welcome, welcome, Don Alonzo de Molina; it is long since we have met: thy mended
looks should speak a life of rural indolence. How is it that amid the toils and
cares of war thou do preserve the healthful bloom of careless ease? Tell me
thy secret.


Al. Thou will not profit by it. Whatever the toils or cares of war, peace is
here. (Putting his hand to his heart.)


Piz. Sarcastic boy!


Elv. Thou art answered rightly. Why sport with the unfortunate?


Piz. And thou art wedded too, I hear; aye, and the father of a lovely boy --
the heir no doubt, of all his father's loyalty; and all his mother's faith.


Al. The heir I trust to all his father's scorn of fraud, oppression, and
hypocrisy -- the heir I hope to all his mother's virtue, gentleness, and truth
-- the heir, I am sure to all Pizarro's hate


Piz. Really! Now do I feel for this poor orphan; for fatherless tomorrow's
sun shall see that child. Alonzo, thy hours are numbered.


Elv. Pizarro -- no!


Piz. Hence -- or dread my anger.


Elv. I will not hence; nor do I dread thy anger.


Al. Generous loveliness! spare thy unavailing pity. Seek not to thwart the
tiger with his prey beneath his fangs.


Piz. Audacious rebel! Thou renegado from thy monarch and thy God!


Al. It Is false.


Piz. Art thou not, tell me, a deserter from thy country's legions -- and with
vile heathens leagued, have thou not warred against thy native land?


Al. No! Deserter I am none! I was not born among robbers! pirates! murderers!
-- When those legions, lured by the abhored lust of gold and by thy foul
ambition urged, forgot the honor of Castilians, and forsook the duties of
humanity, THEY deserted ME. I have not warred against my native land, but
against those who have usurped its power. The banners of my country, when first
I followed arms beneath them, were Justice, Faith and Mercy. If these are
beaten down and trampled under foot -- I have no country, nor exists the power
entitled to reproach me with revolt.


Piz. The power to judge and punish thee at least exists.


Al. Where are my judges.


Piz. Thou would appeal to the war council?


Al. If the good Las-Casas have yet a seat there, yes if not, I appeal to
Heaven!


Piz. And to impose upon the folly of Las-Casas, what would be the excuses of
thy reason?


Elv. The folly of Las-Casas! -- Such doubtless, his mild precepts seem to thy
hard-hearted wisdom! -- O! would I might have lived as I will die, a sharer in
the follies of Las-Casas!


Al. To him I should not need to urge the foul barbarities which drove me from
your side; but I would gently lead him by the hand through all the lovely
fields of Quito; there in many a spot where late was barrenness and (...), I
would show him how now the opening blossom, blade; or perfumed bud; sweet
bashful pledges of delicious harvest, washing their incense to the ripening sun
give cheerful promise to the hope of industry. This, I would say, is my work!
Next I should tell how hurtful custom^ and superstitions strange and sullen,
would often scatter and dismay the credulous minds of these deluded innocents;
and then would I point out to him where now, in clustered villages, they live
like brethren, social and confiding, through the burning day Content sits
basking on the cheek of Toil, till laughing Pastime leads them to the hour of
rest -- this too is mine! -- And prouder yet -- at that still pause betwixt
exertion and repose, belonging not to (...), labor, or to rest, but unto him
who sanctions and ordains them all; I would show him many an eye, and many a
hand, by gentleness from error won, raised in pure devotion to the true and
only God! -- this too I could tell him is Alonzo's work! -- Then would
Las-Casas (...) me in his aged arms; from his uplifted eyes a tear of gracious
thankfulness would fall upon my head, and that on (...) drop would be to me at
once this world's best proof, that I had acted rightly here, and surest hope of
my Creators mercy and reward hereafter.


Elv. Happy, virtuous Alonzo! And thou, Pizarro, (...) with fear of death a man
who thinks and nets us he does!


Piz. Daring, obstinate enthusiast! But know the pious blessing (...) thy
preceptor's tears does not await thee here: he has fled like thee -- like thee
no doubt, to join the foes of Spain. The perilous trial of the next reward you
hope, is nearer than perhaps you have thought; for, by my country's, wrongs and
by mine ^own, tomorrow's sun shall see thy death.


Elv. Hold! -- Pizarro -- hear me! -- If not always justly at least act always
greatly. Name not thy country's wrongs -- it is plain they have no share in thy
resentment. Thy fury 'ga^nst this youth is private hate, and deadly personal
revenge; if this be so -- and even now thy derected conscience in that look
avows it -- profane not the name of justice or thy country's cause, but let him
arm, and bid him to the field on equal terms.


Piz. Officious advocate for treason -- peace! -- Bear him hence -- he knows
his sentence.


Al. Thy revenge is eager, and I Am thankful for it -- t^^e thy haste to mercy.
For thee, sweet pleader in misfortune's cause, accept my parting thanks. The
camp is not thy proper sphere. Were thou among you savages as they are called,
thoud'st find companions (...) ^pngenial to thy heart.


Piz. Yes; she shall bear the tidings of thy death to Cora.


Al. Inhuman man! that pang at least might have been spared me; but thy malice
shall not shake my constancy. I go to death -- many shall bless, and none will
curse my memory. Thou still wilt live, and still wilt be -- Pizarro.


(Exit guarded. Elv. Now by the indignant scorn that burns upon my cheek, my
soul is shamed and sickened at the meanness of thy vengeance.


Piz. What has thy romantic folly aimed at? He is mine enemy, and in my power.


Elv. He is in your power, and therefore is no more an enemy. Pizarro, I demand
not of thee virtue -- I ask not from thee nobleness of mind -- I require only
just dealing to the fame thou have acquired; be not the (...) of thine own
renown. How often have you sworn, that the sacrifice which thy wondrous
valor's high report had won you from subdued Elvira, was the proudest triumph
of your fame? Thou know I bear a mind not east in the common would -- not
formed for tame sequestered love -- content ^mid household cares, to prattle to
an idle offspring, and wait the dull delight of an obscure lover's kindness --
no! my; heart was framed to look up with awe and homage to the object it
adored: my ears to own no music but the thrilling records of his praise; my
lips to scorn all babbling but the tales of his achievements; my brain to turn
giddy with delight, reading the applauding tributes of his monarch's and his
country's gratitude; my every faculty to throb with transport, while I heard
the shouts of acclamation which announced the ^oming of my Hero; my whole soul
to love him with devotion^ with enthusiasm! to see no other object -- to own no
other ti^ -- but to make HIM my WORLD! Thus to love is at least no common
weakness. -- Pizarro! -- was not such my love for thee?


Piz. It was, Elvira!


Elv. Then do not make me hateful to myself, by tearing off the mask at once --
bearing the hedious imposture that has undone me! Do not an act which, how'ver
thy present power may glos^ it to the world, will make thee hateful to all
future ages -- accursed and scorned by posterity.


Piz. And should posterity applaud my deeds, think thou my mouldering bones
would rattle then with transport, in my tomb? -- This is renown for visionary
boys to dream of -- I understand it not. The fame I value shall uplift my
living estimation -- overbear with popular support, the envy of my foes --
advance my purposes, and aid my power.


Elv. Each word thou speak -- each moment that I hear thee -- dispels the
fatal mist through which I Have judged thee. Thou man of mighty name but little
soul. I see thou were not born to feel what genuine fame and glory are -- yes,
prefer the flattery of thy own fleeting day to the bright circle of a deathless
name -- yes, prefer to stare upon the grain of sand on which you trample, to
musing on the starred canopy above thee. Fame, the sovereign deity of proud
ambition, is not to be worshipped so: who seeks alone for living homage, stands
a mean canvasser in her temple's porch, wooing promiscuously from the fickle
breath of every wretch that passes, the brittle tribute of his praise. He dares
not approach the sacred altar -- no noble sacrifice of his is placed there, nor
ever shall his worshipped image fixed above, claim for his memory a glorious
immortality.


Piz. Elvira, leave me.


Elv. Pizarro, you no longer love me.


Piz. It is not so, Elvira. But what might I not suspect -- this wondrous
interest for a stranger! -- Take back thy reproach.


Elv. No, Pizarro; as yet I am not lost to you -- one string still remains, and
binds me to your fate. Do not, I conjure you -- do not for thine own sake, tear
it as under, shed not Alonzo's blood!


Piz. My resolution's fixed.


Elv. Even though that moment lost you Elvira forever?


Piz. Even so.


Elv. Pizarro, if not to honor, if not to humanity, yet listen to affection;
bear some memory of the sacrifices I have made for thy sake. Have I not for
thee quitted my parents, my friends, my fame, my native land? When escaping,
did I not risk in rushing to thy arms to bury myself in the bosom of the deep?
have I not shared in all thy perils, heavy storms at sea, and frightful escapes
on shore? Even on this dreadful day, amid the rout of battle, who remained firm
and constant at Pizarro's side? Who presented her bosom as his shield to the
assailing foe?


Piz. It Is truly spoken all. In love thou art thy sex's miracle -- in war the
soldier's pattern -- and therefore my whole heart and half my acquisitions are
thy right.


Elv. Convince me I possess the first -- I exchange all title to the latter,
for -- mercy to Alonzo.


Piz. No more! -- Had I intended to prolong his doom, each word thou utterest
now would hasten on his fate.


Elv. Alonzo then at morn will die?


Piz. Think thou yon sun will set? -- As surely at his rising shall Alonzo
die.


Elv. Then be it done -- the string is cracked -- sundered forever. But mark me
-- thou have heretofore had cause, it is true, to doubt my resolution however
offended -- but mark me now -- the lips which cold and jeering, barbing revenge
with rancourous mockery, can insult a fallen enemy, shall never more receive
the pledge of love: the arm unshaken by its bloody purpose, which shall assign
to needless torture the victim who avows his heart, never more shall press the
hand of faith! -- Pizarro, scorn not my words -- beware you slight them not! --
I feel how noble are the motives which now animate my thoughts -- who could not
feel as I do, I condemn -- who, feeling so, yet would not act as I SHALL, I
despise!


Piz. (After a pause, looking at her with a smile of contempt.) I have heard
thee, Elvira, and know well the noble motives which inspire thee -- fit
advocate in Virtue's cause! -- Believe me, I pity thy tender feelings for the
youth Alonzo! -- He dies at sunrise!


(Exit. Elv. It Is well! it is just I should be humbled -- I had forgot myself,
and in the cause of innocence assumed the tone of virtue. 'Twas fit I should be
rebuked -- and by Pizarro. Fall, fall, ye few reluctant drops of weakness --
the last these eyes shall ever shed. How a woman can love Pizarro, thou have
known too well -- how she can hate thou have yet to learn. Yes, thou undaunted!
-- Thou, whom yet no mortal hazard has appalled! -- Thou wh^ on Panama's brow
did make alliance with the raving elements, that tore the silence of that
horrid night -- when thou did follow, as thy pioneer, the crashing thunder's
drift, and stalking over the trembling earth, did plant thy banner by the red
vulcano's mouth! Thou, who when ba^tling on the sea, and thy brave ship was
blown to splinters, wast seen -- as thou did bestride a fragment of the
smoking wreck -- to wave thy glittering sword above thy head -- as thou would
defy the world in that extremity! Come fearless man -- now meet the last and
fellest peril of thy life -- meet! and survive -- an injured woman's fury, if
thou can.


(Exit. END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE. I.
A Dungeon in the Rock, near the Spanish camp. -- ALONZO in Chains. -- A
Sentinel walking near the Entrance. Alonzo. For the last time, I have beheld
the shadowed ocean close upon the light. -- For the last time, through my cleft
dungeon's roof, I now behold the quivering luster of the stars. -- For the last
time, O Sun! (and soon the hour) I shall behold thy rising, and thy level beams
melting the pale mists of morn to glittering dew drops. -- Then comes my death,
and in the morning of my day, I fall, which -- No, Alonzo, date not the life
which thou have run, by the mean reckoning of hours and days, which thou have
breathed: a life spent worthily should be measured by a noble line -- by deeds
-- not years -- Then would thou murmur not -- but bless the Providence, which
in so short a span, made THEE the instrument of wide and spreading blessings,
to the helpless and oppressed! -- Though sinking in decrepid age -- HE
prematurely falls, whose memory records no benefit conferred by him on man:
they only have lived long, who have lived virtuously.


Enter a Soldier -- shows the Sentinel a Passport, who withdraws. Alonzo. What
bear you there?


Sol. These refreshments I was ordered to leave in your dungeon.


Al. By whom ordered?


Sol. By the Lady Elvira; she will be here herself before the dawn.


Al. Bear back to her my humblest thanks; and take thou the refreshments,
friend -- I need them not.


Sol. I have served under you, Don Alonzo -- Pardon my saying, that my heart
pities you.


(Exit. Al. In Pizarro's camp, to pity the unfortunate, no doubt requires
forgiveness -- ( Looking out) Surely even now, thin streaks of glimmering light
steal on the darkness of the East. -- If so, my life is but one hour more. -- I
will not watch the coming dawn; but in the darkness of my cell, my last prayer
to thee, Power Supreme! shall be for my wife and child! -- Grant them to dwell
in innocence and peace; grant health and purity of mind -- all else is
worthless.


(Enters the caveru. Cent. Who Is there? answer quickly! who is there?


Roll. A Friar, come to visit your prisoner.


ROLLA enters, disguised as a Monk. Roll. Inform me, friend -- Is not Alonzo,
the Spanish prisoner, confined in this dungeon?


Cent. He is.


Roll. I must speak with him.


Cent. You must not.


Roll. He is my friend.


Cent. Not if he were your brother.


Roll. What is to be his fate?


Cent. He dies at sunrise.


Roll. Ha! -- then I am come in time.


Cent. Just -- to witness his death.


Roll. Soldier -- I must speak with him.


Cent. Back, -- back. -- It is impossible! --


Roll. I do entreat you, but for one moment!


Cent. You entreat in vain -- my orders are most strict.


Roll. Even now, I saw a messenger go hence.


Cent. He brought a pass, which we are all accustomed to obey.


Roll. Look on this wedge of massive gold -- look on these precious gems. -- In
thy own hand they will be wealth for thee and thine, beyond thy hope or wish,
take them -- they are thine. -- Let me but pass one minute with Alonzo.


Cent. Away! -- would thou corrupt me? -- Me an old Castilian! -- I know my
duty better.


Roll. Soldier! -- have thou a wife


Cent. I have.


Roll. Have thou children?


Cent. Four -- honest, lively boys.


Roll. Where did thou leave them?


Cent. In my native village -- even in the cot there myself was born.


Roll. Do thou love thy children and thy wife?


Cent. I do love them! -- God knows my heart, -- I do.


Roll. Soldier! imagine thou were doomed to die a cruel death in this strange
land -- What would be thy last request?


Cent. That some of my comrades should carry my dying blessing to my wife and
children.


Roll. Oh! but if that comrade was at thy prison gate -- and should there be
told -- thy fellow soldier dies at sunrise, -- yet thou shall not for a moment
see him -- nor shall thou bear his dying blessing to his poor children, or his
wretched wife, -- what would thou think of him, who thus could drive thy
comrade from the door?


Cent. How!


Roll. Alonzo has a wife and child -- I am come but to receive for her, and for
her babe, the last blessing of my friend.


Cent. Go in. -- ( Retires.)


Roll. Oh! holy nature! thou do never plead in vain. -- There is not, of our
earth, a creature bearing form, and life, human or savage -- native of the
forest wild, or giddy air -- around whose parent bosom, thou have not a cord
entwined of power to tie them to their offspring's claims, and at thy will to
draw them back to thee. On iron pennons borne -- the blood-stained vulture
cleaves the storm -- yet, is the plumage closest to her heart, soft as the
cygnet's down, and over her unshell'd brood, the murmuring ring-dove sits not
more gently! -- Yes! -- now he is beyond the porch, barring the outer gate! --
Alonzo! -- Alonzo! -- my friend! Ha! -- in gentle sleep! -- Alonzo -- rise!


Al. How! Is my hour elapsed? -- Well, ( returning from the recess.) I am ready,


Roll. Alanzo, -- know me.


Al. What voice is that?


Roll. It Is Rolla's


Al. Rolla! -- my friend! -- ( Embracing him) Heavens! how could thou pass
the guard Did this habit --


Roll. There is not a moment to be lost in words: -- this disgused I (...) from
the dead body of a (...), as I passed our field of battle -- it has gained me
entrance to thy dungeon -- now take it thou, and fly.


Al. And Rolla --


Roll. Will remain here in thy place.


Al. And die for me! -- No! -- Rather eternal tortures rack me.


Roll. I shall not die Alonzo. -- It is thy life Pizarro seeks, not Rolla's --
and from my prison soon will thy arm deliver me; -- or, should it be otherwise
-- I am as a blighted plantain standing alone amid the sandy desert -- Nothing
seeks or lives beneath my shelter -- Thou art a husband, and a father -- The
being of a lovely wife and helpless infant hang upon thy life -- Go! -- Go! --
Alonzo! -- Go -- to save -- not thyself -- but Cora, and thy child! --


Al. Urge me not thus, my friend -- I am prepared to die in peace.


Roll. To die in peace! -- devoting her you have sworn to live for -- to madness,
misery, and death! -- For, be assured, -- the state I left her in forbids all
hope, but from thy quick return^.


Al. Oh! God!


Roll. If thou art yet irresolute, Alonzo -- now heed me well. -- I think thou
have not known that Rolla ever pledged his word, and shrunk from its
fulfillment. -- And, by the heart of truth I swear, if thou art proudly
obstinate to deny thy friend the transport of preserving Cora's life, in thee,
-- no power that sways the will of man shall stir me hence; -- and thou wilt but
have the desperate triumph, of seeing Rolla perish by thy side, -- with the
assured conviction, that Cora, and thy child, are lost for ever.


Al. Oh! Rolla! -- you distnact me!


Roll. A moment's further pause, and all is lost -- The dawn approaches -- Fear
not for me -- I will treat with Pizarro as for surrender and submission; -- I
shall gain time, doubt not -- while thou, with a chosen band, passing the
secret way, may st at night return -- release thy friend, and bear him back in
triumph. -- Yes hasten -- dear Alonzo! -- Even now I hear the frantic Cora call
thee! -- Haste! -- Haste! -- Haste!


Al. Rolla, I fear your friendship drives me from honor, and from right.


Roll. Did Rolla ever counsel dishonor to his friend?


Al. Oh my preserver! -- ( Embracing him.)


Roll. I feel thy warm tears dropping on my cheek -- Go! -- I am rewarded -- (
Throws the Friars garment over Alonzo.(...) -- There! -- conceal thy face; and
that they may not clank, hold fast thy chains -- Now -- God be with thee!


Al. At night we meet again. -- Then, -- so aid me Heaven! I return to save --
or -- perish with thee!


(Exit. Roll. ( Alone.) He has passed the outer porch -- He is safe! -- He will
soon embrace his wife and child! -- Now, Cora, did thou not wrong me? This
is the first time throughout my life, I ever deceived man -- Forgive me, God of
truth! if I am wrong -- Alonzo flatters himself that we shall meet again -- Yes
-- There!( lifting his hand to heaven) assuredly we shall meet again: -- there
possess in peace, the joys of everlasting love, and friendship -- on earth
imperfect, and embitter'd. -- I am an interested man; for do I not die, that,
when Cora ascends to her father, her first question may be, off where is
Rolla." I will reti^e, -- lest the guard return before Alonzo may have passed
their lines. -- ( Retires into the reces^.)


Enter ELVIRA. Elv. No -- not Pizarro's brutal taunts -- not the glowing
admiration which I feel for this noble youth, shall raise an interest in this
harassed bosom which honor would not sanction. If he reject the vengeance my
heart has sworn against the tyrant, whose death alone can save this land --
yet, shall the delight be mine to restore him to his Cora's arms, to his dear
child, and to the unoffending people, whom his virtues guide, and valor
guards. -- Alonzo, come forth!


Re-enter ROLLA. Elv. Ha! -- who art thou? -- Where is Alonzo?


Roll. Alonzo's fled.


Elv. Fled!


Roll. Yes -- and he must not be pursued -- Pardon this roughness, ( (...) her
hand) -- but a moment's precious to Alonzo's flight.


Elv. What if I call the guard?


Roll. Do so -- Alonzo still gains time.


Elv. What if I thus free myself?( Shows a dagger.)


Roll. Strike it to my heart -- Still, with the convu^sive grasp of death, I Will
hold thee fast.


Elv. Release me -- I give my faith, I neither will alarm the guard, nor cause
pursuit.


Roll. At once, I trust thy word -- A feeling boldness in those eyes assure me
that thy soul is noble.


Elv. What is thy name? Speak freely -- By my order the guard is removed beyond
the outer porch.


Roll. My name is Rolla.


Elv. The Peruvian leader?


Roll. I was so yesterday -- Today, the Spaniards captive.


Elv. And friendship to Alonzo moved thee to this act?


Roll. Alonzo is my friend -- I am prepared to die for him. Yet is the cause a
motive stronger far than friendship.


Elv. One only passion else could urge such generous rashness.


Roll. And that is --


Elv. Love?


Roll. True!


Elv. Gallant! -- ingenius Rolla! -- Know that my purpose here was thine; and
were I to save thy friend --


Roll. How! -- a woman blessed with gentleness and courage, and vet not Cora!


Elv. Does Rolla think so meanly of all female hearts?


Roll. Not so -- you are worse and better than we are! --


Elv. To save thee, Rolla, from the tyrant's vengeance -- restore thee to thy
native land -- and thy native land to peace -- would thou not rank Elvira
with the good?


Roll. To judge the action, I must know the means.


Elv. Take this dagger.


Roll. How to be used?


Elv. I will conduct thee to the tent where fell Pizarro sleeps -- That scourge
of innocence -- the terror of thy race -- the fiend, that desolates thy
afflicted country.


Roll. Have you not been injured by Pizarro?


Elv. Deeply as scorn and insult can infuse their deadly venom.


Roll. And you ask that I shall murder him in his sleep!


Elv. Would he not have murdered Alonzo in chains? he that sleeps and he that is
bound, are equally defenseless. Hear me, Rolla -- so may I prosper in this
perilous act as, searching my full heart, I have put by all rancorous motive of
private vengeance there, and feel that I advance to my dread purpose in the
cause of human nature, and at the call of sacred justice.


Roll. The God of justice sanctifies no evil as a step toward good. Great
actions cannot be achieved by wicked means.


Elv. Then. Peruvian! since thou do feel so coldly for thy country's wrongs,
this hand, though it revolt my soul, shall strike the blow.


Roll. Then is thy destruction certain, and for Peru thou peris^est! -- Give me
the dagger!


Elv. Now follow me: -- but first -- and dreadful to the heart (...) -- you must
strike down the guard.


Roll. The soldier who was on duty here?


Elv. Yes, him -- else, seeing thee, the alarm will be instant.


Roll. And I must stab that soldier as I pass? Take back thy dagger.


Eto. Rolla!


Roll. That soldier, mark me, is a man -- All are not men that bear the human
form. He refused my prayers -- refused my gold -- denying to admit -- till his
own feelings (...) him. For my nations safty, I would not harm that man!


Elv. Then he must be with us -- I will answer for his safety.


Roll. Be that plainly understood between us; -- for whatever betide our
enterprise, I will not risk a hair of that man's head, to save my heart strings
from consuming fire.


(Exeunt. SCENE II.
The inside of Pizarro's Tent. -- Pizarro on a Couch, in disturbed sleep. Piz.
(in his sleep) No mercy, traitor. -- Now at his heart! -- Stand off there, you
-- Let me see him bleed! -- Ha! ha! ha! -- Let me hear that groan again.


Enter ROLLA and ELVIRA. Elv. There! -- NOw, lose not a moment.


Roll. You must leave me now. This scene of blood fits not a woman's presence.


Elv. But a moment's pause may --


Roll. Go! -- Retire to your own tent -- and return not here -- I will come to
you -- Be thou not known in this business, I implore you!


Elv. I will withdraw the guard that waits.


(Exit Elvira. Roll. Now have I in my power the accursed destroyer of my
country's peace: yet tranquilly he rests. -- God! -- can this man sleep?


Piz. ( In his sleep.) Away! Away! -- Hideous fiends! -- Tear not my bosom thus!


Roll. No: -- I was in error -- the balm of sweet repose he never more can know.
Look here ambitious fools! -- Ye, by whose inhuman pride, the bleeding
sacrifice of nations is held as nothing -- behold the rest of the guilty! He is
at my mercy -- and one blow! -- No! -- my heart and hand refuse the act: Rolla
cannot be an assasin! -- You Elvira must be saved!( Approaches the Couch.)
Pizarro! awake! --


Piz. (Starts up) Who? -- Guard! --


Roll. Speak not -- another word is thy death -- Call not for aid! -- this arm
will be swifter than thy guard.


Piz. What art thou? and what is thy will?


Roll. I am thine enemy! Peruvian Rolla! Thy death is not my will, or I could
have slain thee sleeping.


Piz. Speak, what else?


Roll. Now thou art at my mercy -- answer me! -- Did a Peruvian ever yet wrong
or injure thee, or any of thy nation: did thou, or any of thy nation, ever
yet show mercy to a Peruvian in your power? Now shall thou feel -- and if thou
have a heart, thou ^t feel it keenly! -- a Peruvian's vengeance! ( Drops the
dagger at his feet) There!


Piz. Is it possible! ( Walks aside confounded.)


Roll. Can Pizarro be surprised at this? I thought forgiveness of injuries had
been the Christian's precept -- Thou see, at least it is the Peruvian's
practice.


Piz. Rolla -- thou have indeed surprised subdued me. ( Walks again aside as in
irresolute thought.)


Re-enter ELVIRA, (not seeing Pizarro.) Elv. Is it done? Is he dead? ( Sees
Pizarro) How! -- still living! Then I am lost! And for you, wretched Peruvians!
mercy is no more! -- Oh! Rolla! treacherous, or cowardly? --


Piz. How can it be, that --


Roll. Away! Elvira speaks she knows not what! Leave me ( to Elvira) I conjure
you, with Pizarro.


Elv. How! -- Rolla, do thou think I shall retract -- or that I meanly will
deny, that in thy hand I placed a poignard to be plunged into that tyrant's
heart? No: -- my sole regret is, that I trusted to thy weakness, and did not
strike the blow myself. -- Too soon thou wilt learn that mercy to that man is
direct cruelty to thy race!


Piz. Guard! Quick! a guard to seize this frantic woman.


Elv. Yes, a guard! I call them too! And soon I know they lead me to my death.
But think not, Pizarro, the fury of thy flashing eyes shall awe me for a moment
-- Nor think that woman's anger, or the feelings of (...) injured heart,
prompted me to this design -- No! Ha^^ I been only influenced so -- thus
failing, shame and remorse would weigh me down. But though defeated and destroyed
as now I am, such is the greatness of the cause that urged me, I shall perish
glorying in the attempt, and my last breath of life shall speak the proud
avowal of my purpose -- to have rescued millions of innocens from the
blood-thirsty tyranny of ONE -- by ridding the insulted world of THEE.


Roll. Had the act been noble as the motive -- Rolla would not have shrunk from
its performance.


Enter Guards Piz. Seize this discovered fiend, who sought to kill your leader.


Elv. Touch me not, at the peril of your souls; -- I am your prisoner, and will
follow you. -- But thou, their triumphant leader, shall hear me. Yet, first --
for thee Rolla, accept my forgiveness: even had I been the victim of thy
nobleness of heart, I should have admired thee for it -- But 'twas myself
provoked my doom -- thou would have shielded me. -- Let not thy contempt
follow me to the grave. Did thou but know the spell-like arts by which this
hypocrite first undermined the virtue of a guileless heart! how, even in the
pious sanctuary wherein I dwelt, by corruption and fraud, he practiced upon
those in whom I most confided -- till my distempered fancy led me, step by
step, into the (...) of guilt -- (...)


Piz. Why am I not obeyed? -- Tear her hence!


Elv. It Is past -- but did thou know my story, Rolla, thou would pity me.


Roll. From my soul I pity thee!


Piz. Villains! drag her to the dungeon! -- prepare the torture instantly.


Elv. Soldiers -- but a moment more -- It Is to applaud your general -- It is to
tell the astonished world, that, for once, Pizarro's sentence is an act of
justice: yes, rack me with the sharpest tortures that ever agoniz'd the human
frame; It will be justice. Yes -- bid the minions -- wr^neh forth the sinews of
those arms that have caressed and -- ever have defended thee! Bid them, pour
burning metal into the bleeding cases of those eyes, that so often, oh God! --
have hung with love and homage on thy looks -- then approach me bound on the
abhorted wheel -- there glut thy savage eyes with the convulsed spasms of that
dishonored bosom, which was once thy (...)! Yet, will I bear it all! And when
thou shall bid them tear me to death, hoping that thy unshrinking ears may at
last be feasted with the music of my cries, I will not utter one shriek or
groan -- but to the last gasp, my body's patience shall deride vengeance, as my
soul defies thy power.


Piz. ( Endeavoring to conceal his agitation.) Hear'st thou the wretch whose
hands were even now prepared for murder?


Roll. Yes! And if her accusation's false, thou will not shrink from hearing
her: if true, thy barbarity cannot make her suffer the pangs thy conscience
will inflict on thee


Elv. And now, farewell, world! -- Rolla farewell! -- Farewell thou condemned
of heaven! -- ( To Pizarro) -- for repentance and remorse, I know, will never
touch thy heart. -- We shall meet again. -- Ha! be it thy horror here, to know
that we shall meet hereafter! -- And when thy parting hour approaches -- hark
to the knell, whose dreadful beat will strike to thy despairing soul. Then,
will vibrate to thy ear the curses of the cloistered saint from whom you stole
me. Then the last shrieks which burst from my mother's breaking heart, as she
died, appealing to her God against the seducer of her child! Then the
blood-stifled groan of my murdered brother -- murdered by thee, fell monster!
-- seeking atonement for his sisters ruined honor. -- I hear them now To me,
the recollection's madness! -- At such an hour, -- what will it be to thee?


Piz. A moment's more delay, and at the peril of your lives --


Elv. I have spoken -- and the last mortal frailty of my heart is past. -- And
now, with an updaunted spirit, and unshaken firmness, I go to meet my destiny.
That I could not live nobly, has been PIZARRO'S ACT. That I will die nobly,
shall be my OWN.


(Exit guarded. Piz. Rolla, I would not thou, a warrior valiant and renowned,
should credit the vile tales of this frantic woman, The cause of all this fury
-- O! a wanton passion for the rebel youth Alonzo, now my prisoner.


Roll. Alonzo is not now thy prisoner.


Piz. How!


Roll. I came to rescue him -- to deceive his guard -- I have succeeded; I
remain thy prisoner.


Piz. Alonzo fled! -- Is then the vengeance dearest to my heart never to he
gratified?


Roll. Dismiss such passions from thy heart; then thou wilt consult its peace.


Piz. I can face all enemies that dare confront me -- I cannot war against my
nature.


Roll. Then Pizarro, ask not to be deemed a hero -- to triumph over ourselves is
the only conquest, where fortune makes no claim. In battle, chance may snatch
the laurel from thee, or chance may place it on thy brow -- but in a contest
with yourself, be resolute, and the virtuous impulse must be the victor.


Piz. Peruvian! thou shall not find me to thee ungrateful, or ungenerous --
return to your countrymen -- you are at liberty.


Roll. Thou do act in this as honor and duty bid thee.


Piz. I cannot but admire thee, Rolla; I would we might be friends.


Roll. Farewell. -- Pity Elvira! -- become the friend of virtue -- and thou will
be mine.


(Exit. Piz. Ambition! tell me what is the phantom I have followed? where is
the one delight which it has made my own? my fame is the mark of envy -- my
love the dupe of treachery -- my glory eclipsed by the boy I taught -- my
revenge defeated and rebuked by the rude honor of a savage foe -- before whose
native dignity of soul I have sunk confounded and subdued -- and I have
suffered him to escape! The enemy's strength was in my power. -- Guards! (
going) hold, Pizarro, have thou not pledged thy faith: damnation! -- yet he is
but a heathen, and our priests -- away, away! damned sophistry! -- the faith of
heroes ever was the same.

(Exit.
SCENE III.
An open place near the Peruvian camp. ATALIBA, Reposing under a Tree Ata,
Every thing around me is dreary and silent. -- The sensations which succeed a
victory resemble those which succeed a fever. We have scarcely strength enough
to rejoice. Our smiles swim in tears -- the triumph is expressed in sighs.
Conquest is always dearly bought. Historians tell us how many are slain, but
never let us know how many are made wretched. The arrow, which hits one heart,
sometimes inflicts a hundred wounds. Oh! I would give all my conquests for one
harvest festival.


Enter a Courtier Court. The herald has returned without consolation.


Ata. Is Alonza dead?


Court. No, but the Spaniards have refused the ransom. Your treasures, said the
haughty robbers, belong to us, and soon we shall be your masters. Justice
dwells in our strength.


Ata. What! not humbled yet. Do these address, then, which are hissing round my
throne, for ever grow again? where is Cora?


Court. She fled with her child but none knows whither. The army is alarmed,
for Rolla too has disappeared.


Ata. Rolla! Impossible! He forsake me, when surrounded my misfortune and
danger! oh, heavens! Is there no one who wishes to obtain my dignity! I will
exchange my situation for that of the meanest of my realm.


Enter ALONZO, in the Monk's habit. Al. Do I behold my king again?


Ata. Alonzo, is it you?


Al. Where is my wife?


Ata. How did you escape?


Al. By half a miracle.


Ata. Speak! -- tell me all.


Al. Who but Rolla could, by friendship urged, make so great a sacrifice? who
but Rolla could muffle himself in this mantle, and force his way even to my
prison? He it was, that broke my chains to h^ng them on himself.


Ata. Rolla in our enemy's power! alas! you wound me again.


Al. (Throwing off the monks habit.) Give me a sword, and five hundred of your
boldest warsiors, that I may hasten to release him.


Ata. Shall I risk in you my last support?


Alon. The enemy is dismayed; and the camp on the right side but ill defended.
Pizarro has made himself detested by his cruelties. His soldiers murmur; let
them not have time to reflect. Another victory, and we drive them into the
ocean.


Ata. Accompany me, I will myself examine where it will be most proper to
attack them.


Al. Do not expose yourself to danger, you are our king.


Ata. When the children are surrounded with danger, the father should exert
himself.


Al. Let me first embrace my dearest Cora.


Ata. (with confusion.) Cora!


Al. Her sufferings must have been great.


Ata. They have indeed.


Al. I will return to you in a few moments.


Ata. Where will you seek her?


Al. ( alarmed) Is she not here?


Ata. Her anxiety drove her from us.


Al. Whither?


Ata. I know not. To the mountains, perhaps where her father dwells.


Al. Heavens! what a chillness runs through my veins!


Court. She was seen running about the field of battle, calling for Alonzo till
it was dark.


Al. And --


Court. Then she disappeared in the woods.


Al. The woods! where Spanish soldiers are continually -- Cora! Cora! ( Going.)


Ata. Alonzo! whither are you going!


Al. Wherever error and despair may lead me. Good Inca, you are in safety. The
vanquished foe dare not attack you. Oh you who does protect the rights of all
your subjects, respect, the rights of nature, my wife, my child, my all is
(...), Release me from my duty as a leader, that I may fulfill the duties of a
husband, and go in search of Cora.


Ata. I deeply feel your agony, go, but forget not Rolla.


Al. Cora! -- Rolla! -- what guardian angel will direct my steps.


(Exit. Ata. ( to the Courtier.) Give me your sword, ( the Courtier presents
I^) (...) ( tries to raise it but his arm sinks) I cannot, poor monarch! what
avail reason and courage of the limbs refuse their office.


(Exit.) END OF THE FOURTH ACT.
ACT V.
SCENE. I.
A thick Forest -- in the back ground a Hut almost covered by Boughs of Trees
-- A dreadful storm, with Thunder and Lightning -- CORA has covered her Child
on a Bed of Leaves and Moss -- Her whole appearance is wild and distracted.
Cora. O NATURE! thou has (...) the strength of love. My anxious spirit is
untired in its march -- my wearied, shivering frame, sinks under it. And, (...)
thee, my boy -- when faint beneath thy lovely burden, could I refuse to give
thy slumbers that poor bed of rest! O my child! were I assured thy father
breathes no more, how quickly would I ^ay me down by thy dear side; but down --
down for ever. ( Thunder and lightning). I ask thee not, unpitying storm! to
abate thy rage, in mercy to poor Cora's misery; nor while thy thunders spare
his slumbers will I disturb my sleeping cherub. Though Heaven knows I wish to
hear the (...) of life, and feel that life is near me. But I will (...) all
while what I have of reason holds. ( Thunder and lightning.) Still, still,
implacable! unfeeling settlements! yet still do thou sleep, my smiling
innocent O, death! when will thou grant to this babe's mother such repose? Sure
I may shield thee better from the storm; my veil may --


While she is wrapping her mantle and her veil over him, ALONZO'S voice is
heard a great distance.

Al. Cora!


Cora. Hah!!! ( Rises.)


Al. (Again) Cora!


Cora. O, my heart! Sweet Heaven deceive me not! -- Is it not Alonzo's voice?


Al. ( Nearer) Cora!


Cora. It is -- it is Alonzo!


Al. (Nearer still) Cora my beloved! --


Cora. Alonzo! -- Here! -- Here! -- Alonzo!


(Runs out Enter two Spanish Soldiers. 1st Sol. I tell you we are near our
out-posts, and the word we heard just now was the countersign.


2d sol. Well, in^our escape from the enemy, to have discovered their secret
passage through the rocks, will prove a lucky chance to us -- Pizarro will reward
us.


1st Sol. This way -- The sun, though clouded, is on our left. ( Perceives the
Child.) What have we here? -- A child! -- as I am a soldier.


2d Sol. It Is a sweet (...) babe. Now would it be a great charity to take this
infant from its pagan mother's power.


1st Sol. It would so. -- I have one at home shall play with it. -- Come along.


(Takes the Child. Exeunt.) Re-enter CORA with ALONZO. Cora. ( Speaking
without) This way, dear Alonzo, Now I am (...) -- there -- there -- under that
tree. Was it possible the instinct of a mother's heart could mistake the
spirit. Now will you look at him as he sleeps, or shall I bring (...) waking
with his full blue laughing eyes to welcome (...) at once -- Yes -- yes --
stand thou there -- I Will snatch (...) from his rosy slumber, blushing like the
perfume (...).


She runs up to the spot, and, finding only the (...) and veil, which she tears
from the ground, (...) the child gone, (shrieks) and stands in speechless
(...).

Al. ( Running to her) Cora! -- my heart's beloved!


Cora. He is gone!


Al. Eternal God!


Cora. He is gone! -- my child! my child!


Al. Where did you leave him?


Cora. ( Dashing herself on the spat) Here!


Al. Be calm, beloved Cora -- he has waked, and accept to a little distance --
we shall find him -- are you assured this was the spot you left him in?


Cora. Did not these hands make that bed, and shelter for him? -- and is not
this the veil that covered him?


Al. Here is a hut yet unobserved.


Cora. Ha! Yes, yes! therelives the savage that has robbed me of my child -- (
Beats at the door exclaiming) Give me back my child -- restore to me my boy!


Enter LAS CASSAS from the Hut Las-C. Who calls me from my wretched solitude?


Cora. Give me back my child! ( Goes into the hut and calls) Fernando!


Al. Almighty powers! do my eyes deceive me! Las Casas!!!


Las-C. Alonzo, -- my beloved young friend!


Al. My revered instructor. ( Embracing.)


Cora. ( Returned.) Will you embrace (...) man before he restores my boy?


Al. Alas, my friend -- in what a moment of misery do we meet!


Cora. Yet his look is goodness and humanity. -- Good old man, have compassion
on a wretched mother -- and I will be your servant while I live. -- But do not,
for pity's sake -- do not say, you have him not -- do not say you have not seen
him.


(Runs into the Wood.) Las-C. What can this mean?


Al. She is my wife. -- Just rescued from the Spanish prison, I learned she had
fled to this wild forest -- hearing my voice, she left the child, and flew to
(...) me -- he was left sleeping under yonder tree.


Las-C. How! did you leave him? -- ( Cora returns.)


Cora, O, you are right! -- right! -- unnatural, mother, that I was -- I left
my child -- I forsook my (...) -- but I will fly to the earth's brink, but I
will find him. I have left my darling infant, and the vengeance of the gods
pursue me.


Las-C. Oh that I could console you!


Al. Help me to bear this load of (...).


Cora. ( Raving) Look at that speckled snake! -- look how it twines round the
child's body! -- now it hisses! -- now it stings his heart!


Al. Dearest Cora, compose yourself.


Cora. Do you see that cruel condor hovering in the air. Now it shoots down --
darts its talons into the defenseless infant. There a blood thirsty tiger lies
in ambush, waiting for its prey! -- now it springs from the thicket! -- see how
it tears him to pieces! ( Falls) Help! help!


Al. ( Kneeling by her side.) My wife! my son!


Las-C. Images of misery pursue me even to this solitude!


Al. Console us, Oh, Las-Casas, my instructor, my benefactor, do not forsake us
at this sorrowful hour.


Las-C. I will remain with you, but we are near the Spanish camp, fly to your
friends. I will accompany you.


Al. But how shall we convey this wretched being?


Las-C. Raise her.


Al. Come, dearest Cora -- let us go.


Cora. Go! whither?


Al. To our friends.


Cora. I quit this place -- this place where my Fernando died?


Al. We are so near the enemy's camp.


Cora. How cruel thou art! shall I even not collect my infant's bones?


Al. Your father and brother are arrived.


Cora. I have neither father nor brother. I only had a child.


Al. We will go in search of it.


Cora. ( Suddenly springing up) Go in search of it? where! where!


Al. This old man will assist us.


Cora. Yes, yes good old man! assist us to seek our child.


Las-C. Willingly, dear Cora, if you will collect yourself.


Cora. Have you any children?


Las-C. No.


Cora. Then I may forgive the expression. Give me back my child -- then you
will learn to know the composure of a mother.


(Runs out.) Al. Forgive me, Las-Casas, I must follow her: for at night, I
attempt brave Rolla's rescue.


Las-C. I will not leave you, Alonzo -- you must try to lead her to the right
-- that way lies your camp -- Wait not my infirm steps, -- I follow you, my
friend.


(Exeunt. SCENE II.
The Out Post of the Spanish Camp. -- The back ground wild and rocky, with a
Torrent falling down the Precipice, over which a Bridge is formed by a felled
Tree. Trumpets sound without. Almagro. ( Without.) Bear him along -- his story
must be false.( Entering.)


ROLLA (in Chains) brought in by Soldiers. Roll. False! -- Rolla, utter
falsehood! -- I would I had thee in a desert with thy troop around thee; -- and
I, but with my sword in this unshackled hand! -- ( Trumpets without.


Alm. Is it to be credited that Rolla, the renowned Peruvian hero -- should be
detected like a spy, skulking through our camp?


Roll. Skulking!


Alm. But answer to the general -- he is here.


Enter PIZARRO. Piz. What do I see! Rolla!


Roll. O! to your surprise, no doubt.


Piz. And bound too!


Roll. So fast, you need'st not fear approaching me.


Alm. The guards surprised him, passing our out-post.


Piz. Release him instantly. -- Believe me, I regret this insult.


Roll. You feel then as you ought.


Piz. Nor can I brook to see a warrior of Rolla's fame disarmed -- Accept this,
though it has been thy enemy's. ( Gives a sword.) The Spaniards know the courtesy
that is due to valor.


Roll. And the Peruvian, how to forget offense.


Piz. May not Rolla and Pizarro cease to be foes?


Roll. When the sea divides us! --


Piz. How if we were to be united by mutual interest? my claim to Quito's
throne I will renounce. Submit to the Spanish scepter, acknowledge the
christian faith, and I am satisfied.


Roll. Generous indeed!


Piz. The protection of a mighty monarch depends on Pizarro's friendship, and
this Pizarro makes thee an offer of his hand.


Roll. Rolla never was a traitor.


Piz. Thou will alone avert misfortune from thy native land.


Roll. I owe my life but not my honor, to my native land.


Piz. It is only removing a weak king from a station for which he was not
formed.


Roll. Ataliba weak! -- but were he weak, a king who makes his people happy, is,
through their affection, strong.


Piz. Follow thy own counsel.


Roll. My conscience has long since decided.


Piz. Rejected friendship rages as fiercely as rejected love.


Roll. Ha! that is the point at which I see you aim. Take off the mask.


Piz. ( Subduing his fury.) Rolla, thou mistak'st me.


Roll. May I now depart?


Piz. (After a struggle) Freely.


Roll. Will nothing intercept my way.


Piz. Nothing unless repentance bring thee back.


Roll. Thanks to the gods, I have never yet repented any thing.


Enter DAVILLA and Soldiers, with the Child Dav. Here are two soldiers,
captived yesterday, who have escaped from the Peruvian hold, -- and by the
secret way we have so long endeavored to discover.


Piz. Silence; -- imprudent! -- See thou not? -- ( Pointing to Rolla)


Dav. In their way they found a Peruvian child, who seems --


Piz. What is the imp to me? -- Bid them toss it into the sea.


Roll. Gracious heaven! it is Alonzo's child! -- give it to me.


Piz. Ha! Alonzo's child! -- Welcome, thou pretty hostage. -- Now Alonzo is
again my prisoner!


Roll. Thou will not keep the infant from its mother?


Piz. Will I not! -- What, when I shall meet Alonzo in the heat of the
victorious fight -- think thou I shall not have a check upon the valor of
his heart, when he is reminded that a word of mine is this child's death?


Roll. I do not understand you.


Piz. My vengeance has a long arrear of hate to settle with Alonzo! -- and this
pledge may help to settle the account,


Roll. Man! Man! -- Art thou a man? -- Could thou hurt that innocent! -- By
Heaven! it is smiling in thy face.


Piz. Figure to thyself this little head stuck on a lance's point -- then fancy
Alonzo, with uplifted sword, running against us, bearing all before him like a
rapid stream, which nothing can arrest but a -- child's head. Ha! I see him
there standing petrified. -- Down sinks his sword, and with horror in his
countenance, he surveys the bloody banner, from which the drops are still
trickling down the lance. Ha! ha! ha!


Roll. Do thou call thyself a human being?


Piz. And then at his arrival at home, when his anxious wife throws her white
arms around his neck, and with her silken hair wipes off the drops of blood --
"Stop," he will say "you think this to be the enemy's blood." -- Ha! ha! ha!
it is the blood of your infant."


Roll. Look at the boy's sweet smiles. Could thou murder this innocent?


Piz. Could thou kill a pigeon?


Roll. Be contented with a ransom, I will send this infant's weight in silver.


Piz. Convert it into a monument, to be erected on his grave.


Roll. Pizarro, I have spared your life. Grant me in return this infant's life.


Piz. Tell me, does it resemble Cora?


Roll. Pizarro! thou have set my heart on fire -- If thou do harm that child
-- think not his blood will sink into the barren sand -- No! -- faithful to the
eager hope that now trembles in his indignat heart -- 'twill rise to the common
God of nature and humanity, and cry aloud for vengeance on it is accursed
destroyer's head.


Piz. Be that peril mine.


Roll. ( Throwing himself at his feet) Behold me at thy feet -- Me, Rolla! --
Me, the preserver of thy life! -- Me, that have never yet bent or bowed before
created man! -- In humble agony I sue to you -- prostrate I implore you -- but
spare that child, and I will be your slave.


Piz. Rolla! still art thou free to go -- this boy remains with me.


Roll. Then was this sword Heaven's gift, not thine! ( Seizes the Child) -- Who
moves one step to follow me, dies upon the spot.


[Exit, with the Child. Piz. Pursue him instantly -- but spare his life (
Exeunt Almagro and soldiers.) With what fury he defends himself! -- Ha! -- he
fells them to the ground -- and now --


Enter ALMAGRO. Alm. Three of your brave soldiers are already victims to your
command to spare this madman's life; and if he once gains the thicket --


Piz. Spare him no longer ( Exit Almagro.) Their guns must reach him -- he will
yet escape -- holloa to those horse -- the Peruvian sees them -- and now he
turns among the rocks -- then is his retreat cut off.


(Rolla crosses the wooden bridge over the cataract, pursued by the soldiers --
they fire at him -- a shot strikes him -- Pizarro exclaims --

Piz. Now! quick! quick! seize the child! --


( Rolla tears from the rock the tree which supports the bridge, and retreats
by the back ground, bearing off the child.)

Re-enter ALMAGRO. Alm. By hell! he has escaped! -- and with the child unhurt.


Dav. No -- he bears his death with him -- Believe me, I saw him struck upon
the side.


Piz. Shot! -- Brave man -- worthy of a nobler Heath! -- I might have won thy
friendship -- yes, by heaven I admire him -- yet I am his murderer! away! --
give me a thousand men like him, and I will conquer the world!


SCENE III.
An open place near the Peruvian Camp. Enter ATALIBA in deep Meditation Ata.
The storm is over, the enemy quiet, and my troops are buried in profound sleep.
Not a breath of air is murmuring in the trees. All is silent around me -- but
not here -- ( pointing to his heart.) And why not here? -- Did I not draw the
sword for God and my country? why am I to be pursued by the specter of the
slain? Why am I to be tormented by the groans of the dying?


Enter CORA, raving. Cora. Whither am I going? where is my child's grave (
Seeing the king) ha! thou son of the sun, restore to me my child.


Ata. Cora, whence come you?


Cora. From my infants grave -- there under the earth -- there it is cold and
damp. ( shudders) I shiver!


Ata. Horrible!


Enter ALONZO and LAS-CASAS, in search of CORA. Al. Wretched Cora! whether does
thy phrenzy lead thee?


Cora. Peace Alonzo. There stands the sun of the gods. The sun is his father.
Let him but say a word, and the grave will open, and throw out its prey (
Embraces his knees) oh my king, speak this one powerful word! have pity on a
distracted mother's anguish.


Ata. Ye gods! what means this?


Al. She has lost her infant.


Ata. Poor mother, I cannot receive you. Alas! I am (...) king.


Corn. You cannot! who can help me then? To whom have the gods entrusted our
existence? It was thee who led the Peruvians to battle -- it was my Alonzo that
fought for thee -- do thou refuse me the only reward for all his courage --
the life of a child, who will hereafter fight for thee?


Ata. Annihilate me ye gods! I cannot bear this.


Cora. ( Hastily rising) Tyrant who cannot be moved either by my prayers or by
my anguish, has not yet blood enough been split to satisfy thy rank ambition?
Behold on each of thy diamonds hangs a drop of blood. Art thou (...) satisfied
-- must an infant be torn from a mother's breast to cast it to the beasts of
prey? -- What is thy diadem to me? what cares a mother for Quito's throne? Come
hither her all ye, whom victory has robbed of children! assist me to curse this
barbarian and let the cries of our misery rise with his shouts of joy to
heaven. Oh, if he does but feel for ever the distresses of one wretched mother,
his punishment will be great. ( Sinks breathless to the ground.


Al. ( Clasping her in his arms) -- To Ataliba.) Excuse the parenzy of a mother.


Ata. ( Wiping away a tear) Alas! my throne can bestow no compensation for this
tear.


Cora. (Smiling) Alonzo, my breast is painful. Reach me the child. ( Exhausted)
Oh, cruel Alonzo; you see me dying, and will not let me feel once more the
rapture of embracing my child.


Al. Alas! this is more horrid than her phrenzy. Continue raging, poor helpless
mother! thou no longer have a child.


Cora. ( Smiling) Thou no longer have a child.


Enter a Peruvian Peruvian Rolla comes.

Ata. and Alon. Rolla! Rolla!


Enter ROLLA Wounded, in his right hand the bloody sword, on his left arm
CORA'S Child. Ata. Heavens!


Roll. ( Sinks on his knees before Cora exclaiming) Cora, thy infant!


Cora. My child -- covered with blood!


Roll. It is my blood ( Giving her the child.)


Cora. ( Pressing it to her breast) My infant! Rolla!


Roll. I loved thee! thou have done me injustice! I can do no more -- (Sinking.)


Alon. ( Kneeling down by him) Rolla! thou die! --


Roll. For Cora -- and thee! -- (Dies.)


Cora. ( Throwing herself down by the body) O! has ever mortal loved like this
man? ( To the child) Boy, thou art dearly purchased!


Al. ( Starting up) Las-Casas! help me to believe in God.


Las-C. His ways are obscure. Pray and be humble.


THE END.

