THE COUNT OF BURGUNDY: A COMEDY OF KOTZEBUE. IN FOUR ACTS.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, BY CHARLES SMITH.

NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR CHARLES SMITH AND S. STEPHENS. 1800.

[ M. McFarlane, Printer, 29 Gold-Street.]

THE AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

ON this collection of my theatrical productions, I have little to say. As they
had the good fortune of meeting with the public's approbation, they will
undoubtedly displease the reviewers. I am so well accustomed to the asperity of
those censors against public approbation; to their illiberal hints against the
morality of my pieces; to their evident endeavors to attack the weaker parts,
and still more to discolor the good, that I shall not lose a single word on
that subject.

I know better than any reviewer that I do not produce master pieces, and that,
as a dramatic writer, I deserve but a subordinate rank. My productions are
chiefly calculated for stage effect; they obtain that end, and in this point of
view they ought to be judged. The public, which, for years back, has done me
justice, will, I trust, furnish me in future with oil against the bitings of
these musquetoes.

Some have objected to the Count of Burgundy, as appearing in the third act
suddenly too accomplished. But has not that rather been the fault of the actor,
who was unable to penetrate deep enough into the author's meaning? -- If the
young Count brings it forth as declamation what he has to say in the third act,
to the people, to his mother, etc. etc.; if he raises his sentiments into
sentences by ostentation in his expression; if he does not speak it carelessly,
just so as his feeling lays it upon his tongue; if he permits himself but one
moment, in accent and manners, to play the hero; then indeed the audience must
find a striking difference between him and the child of nature in the two first
acts. I am sorry to learn, that most of the young actors perform the Count's
part in that manner, but that is not my fault. It was my duty not to insert any
thing in the third act that might be contradictory to the words of the first
and second, and this duty, I trust, I have fulfilled. If they are spoken, as I
thought them to myself; the audience will recognize the hermit's son in the
reigning Count.

False Shame is a subject, which, I believe, has for the first time been
brought upon the stage; and this fault being the source of so many evils in
this world, I hope to have acquired some merit by inspiring many a good heart
with confidence to confidence.

The idea of La Peyrouse, suddenly rose within me, when, some time ago, I read
in the public prints that the wise of this unfortunate man, had embarked, in
search of him on uninhabited coasts. My imagination followed her to sea,
created interesting situations, and lost itself in the empire of possibilities.
But that in the plan of this piece -- in spite of the most careful evasion of
every thing improper -- an error against morality should have been found, is a
delicacy, to which I was not prepared.

As to the Wild Youth -- it is but a Christmas amusement, and is not to
represent any thing else.

THE AUTHOR.
FRIEDENTHAL, Jan. 1, 1797.
TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.
To lay before the public a faithful translation of all the dramatic
productions of the celebrated Kotzebue, who is justly styled the GERMAN
SHAKESPEARE, is the design of the present undertaking.

The difficulty of translating from the German into the English language is
very considerable, as has been sufficiently verified by the many unsuccessful
attempts which have been made for that purpose.

But if there is, in general, a difficulty in translating from so copious a
language as the German, it must obviously be considerably increased when we
attempt dramatic writings, in which in order to do justice to the original it
is essentially necessary, that we should be well acquainted with the very
genius and spirit of that language.

To represent the meaning of KOTZEBUE precisely as he intended it, shall be the
main aim throughout this publication; and if in accomplishing so important an
object the language should in some instances be found rather deficient in point
of (...), I doubt not of obtaining a ready excuse from a candid public.

To the intelligent reader, whether he be in the habit of seeing (...), it is
of no moment what (...) in the performance: but when (...) his down to peruse
the author, he will (...) every effusion of his heart in its real purity. He
wishes neither for curtailment nor alterations -- much less for any additions,
which being often the productions of men of inferior talents, greatly diminish
the splendour of the original author.

THE AMERICAN TRANSLATOR.
NEW YORK, February 10, 1800.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Brother PETER, an hermit at the foot of the Alps. HENRY, his son. Knight CUNO,
of Hallwyl. Count HUGO of Werdenberg, Governor of Arles. GUIDO, a boy. Knight
WALTER, of Blonay. BRUNO. BENEDICT, a cooper. NICHOLAS, a journeyman. Martin, a
grazier. BLOCK, a cabinet-maker. An OLD MAN. HALBERDEERS, pages, etc. PEOPLE.
WOMEN.
MATILDA, Countess of Burgundy, a nun. ELSBETH, Cuno's daughter. GERTRAUD,
Elsbeth's former nurse. A YOUNG WOMAN. A LITTLE GIRL.
THE COUNT OF BURGUNDY.
SCENE.
A woody country at the foot of the Swiss mountains In the back ground an
hermitage; opposite an open chapel; between both a garden fence. In the fore
ground a grass bench underneath an apple tree.

SCENE I.
PETER sitting upon the bench making a basket of willow branches. HENRY on the
opposite side splits wood, singing. BEHOLD in lofty air,
The waving banners fly;
And clashing steel is heard
And trumpets rend the sky.
Peter. This song pleases you?


Henry. Yes, father.


Peter. You like it better than the singing of the matins.


Henry. Much better.


Peter, (smiling). And are not afraid of such a sin.


Henry, Father? Cannot be a sin. This song seems to be as pleasing to you as to
me.


Peter. What do you mean by this?


Henry. When you sing Hora An hourly exercise of devotion is convents,
, you are cast down. But when you sing the battle song of Murgarten or the
Victory song of Sempach, then your cheeks glow and your eyes burn like the wax
candle before the holy virgin.


Peter. Have you discovered that?


Henry. Still more: You have a song of the sword of justice, and the shield of
faith; you love to sing that best, because it speaks of swords and shields.


Peter, (smiling). Boy?


Henry. A sword is a fine thing. As to the shield, one may do without.


Peter. Think you so my brave boy?


Heury. Had that valiant Knight Erlach a shield, when he fought at Donnerbuhel?
-- (swinging the hatchet over his head) ha! it is to me as if I heard the
trumpet's sound.


Peter. Who tells you that you are a Swiss?


Henry. My heart -- my thirst for actions!


Peter. Have patience, my son! your hour will arrive.


Henry. A creeping hour, slow like old mother Gertraud. I long to meet it.


Peter. Behold the apples on the tree; are they ripe*


Henry. Not yet, but soon.


Peter. Sweet fruits, for those who can wait.


Henry. Why have you kindled within me a flame, that finds no nourishment in
these forests and, consumes me? -- Why telling me so much of battles and fights
that man and horse day and night parade before my eyes? as often as our old
stallion neighs in the stable, I look for a lance and touch a rosary. As often
as the guard on the Castle's steeple sounds the horn, I run for a sword and lay
hold of an ax. Each great action makes the blood flow to my heart and brings
water in my eyes. Every valiant knight I would press to my heart, and split the
head of every scoundrel with the battle ax.


Peter. Such I wanted you to be.


Henry. For what? for whom? -- Have you taught me so many sciences, to sing
them before our shepherds at their festivals? Whoever brings up a falcon for
the chase must not confine him in a cage.


Peter. As long as he wears a cap he is too young.


Henry. Let us hear, how old?


Peter. Eighteen years and upwards.


Henry. See here father! (he splits a log with one stroke) how old was the boy
who made this stroke, do you think that an enemy's head is harder than this
trunk?


Peter. strength belongs to youth. Even in this willow branch is juice and
strength, but it is pliable. Obedience ornaments the boy.


Henry. Is the bow to become slack, wet it; give me herbs to cool my blood.


Peter. Go, try your courage with bears and wolves.


Henry. They are but trifling robbers as long as men exist. Let me go to the
castle. Knight Cuno long since wished me to become his armor bearer.


Peter. Will you leave your old father alone in this wilderness.


Henry. You are a pious man, the whole vicinity reveres the pious brother
Peter, -- who would hurt you?


Peter. Enough, Henry it is not becoming you to be Cuno's armor bearer.


Henry. Is not the race of Hallwyll noble and renowned? -- and who am I then,
that I should be ashamed to learn of Cuno to bear arms?


Peter. Dive not into matters, which time only unfolds. A youth may bear arms
but not keep a secret.


Henry. Father, why humble me? Is a noble name my inheritance, why will you
withhold the treasure from me?


Peter. To deliver it now into your hands, would be depriving you of it.


Henry. A problem -- always problems! why has the father so little confidence
in his son? -- have you fled from the field of honor into a desert; have you
converted your armor into a hermit's habit; and why -- has power forced you to
it?


Peter. And, suppose you have hit the point?


Henry. Then give me a sword, I will avenge you!


Peter. No, son, revenge slowly follows vice and has wings only to attain
virtue. The wished for hour is not yet come.


Henry. Allow me at least to travel into foreign countries, to prepare myself
by actions for your revenge.


Peter. Would soon forget in the tumult of the world your old father and his
wilderness.


Henry. You are not in earnest. I love you and the wilderness where I grew up;
I love the apple tree, which you have planted on my second birth day; and the
grave upon which you used to weep; I love the wood stream, our summer bath, and
the little garden, where the plants grow under my hands. Above all, I love Miss
Elsbeth, who was shooting at my side like a young cedar, and whose cheeks glow
like the castle windows when the evening sun gilds them. Also do I love old
Cuno, because Elsbeth calls him father. Not to forget mother Gertraud! often
have I plagued her in return for her nice cakes. Yes, I love all, all. -- The
road into the world is the road to honor; that into the mountains the small
path to tranquillity. Suffer only one twig of laurels to bloom round my head.
After that I am with you and lay myself to Elsbeths feet.


Peter. Water your plants, and if you grow too warm, cool yourself in the wood
stream, till the time-piece, calls you to higher actions -- who knows how soon?
-- a short while yet -- perhaps fortune favors you before the leaves fall off
these trees. My basket is finished. You forgot by your prattling your days
work. There in the garden is work enough. Split your wood and then come to
assist me.

Exit.
SCENE II.
HENRY alone. Looks after his father, shakes his head and goes to his work.
Very comprehensible. He has emptied the cup, how should he know what a thirsty
man feels -- tranquillity -- a refreshing draught to the old, to youth poison --
were but the wood in the forest harder, and required more strength to split it,
or were -- (he looks up) hallo! there climbs Elsbeth down the footpath -- God
knows how she contrives it, let me but see her and I am contented with every
thing -- She leaps like a roe -- old Gertraud behind her, laying hold of every
branch -- Shall I plague the girl? -- I owe her something for the large stone
she threw into the water the other day, which wetted me from head to foot --
where shall I hide myself -- hush? -- on the tree! (throwing away the ax he
climbs up the apple tree).


SCENE III.
Miss ELSBETH leaps upon the STAGE, looking anxiously around her. Mother
GERTRAUD appears a moment after. Her coughing is heard at a distance. Gertraud.
My God, Miss, do not run so fast, I am out of breath?


Elsbeth. Rest yourself, dear mother.


Gertr. I thought so! shall I again rest here? why just here?


Elsb. It is a friendly spot.


Gertr. Friendly? I don't know that. The sun can hardly penetrate the high
apple trees.


Elsb. Well; that makes it cool.


Gentr. Yes, as cool as our castle cellar. Think you the blood in my veins
flows as rapid as yours? -- you leap like a fish in the rivulet, walk on
thousand feet like a cellar worm. You would already have tumbled down the rock
a thousand times if you were not protected by the dear angels of heaven.
Scarcely day light appears, and you are out of your bed, forget ave Maria and
rosary, swallow your morning soup as if it was a bitter medicine: than she
calls and squalls: Mother Gertraud shall we take a walk? "ah Miss, this
troublesome cough" -- the free air will do you good -- "I have not said my
mourning prayers yet." -- under God's free heaven you can pray more fervent --
and so she lays hold of my clothes, tears me, draws me along --


Elsb. Be not angry mother.


Gertr. And whither does she carry me? -- always to this place. -- We are
scarcely got into the garden, where I stop to eat currents -- when, away she
runs, jumping from rock to rock, like a wild goat, leaping like a squirrel from
tree to tree, and all at once returns again to the same place, and old mother
Gertraud may call till she is hoarse --


Elsb. Have you done scolding, mother!


Gertr. Well, say, what secret treasure do you look for here. True you are a
Sunday's child. -- What are you looking for so anxiously: You turn your head
like a bird after red berries?


Elsb. Do you not conceive why I Am here? I seek herbs.


Gertr. They grow on the mountains better than here.


Elsb. see there, white root, it only grows in the shade, and -- wild clover
for father's soup.


Gertr. Indeed! and the poisonous marigold, will you put that into the soup
too? -- Miss! Miss! the marigold is an useless weed and the young fellow that
lives here is also an useless weed; but you are a wonder-flower that must bloom
in secret, to give pleasure to God and man.


Elsb. What do you mean by that?


Gertr. see the poor girl understands me not. I Will make it clearer to you. You
are running after that young boy here, Henry, do you understand it better now.


Elsb. Fie? Mother!


Gertr. Fie, I say too, the devil lays snares for the innocent. Your father
shall hear of it.


Elsb. Well, I do no evil.


Gertr. No evil? the unfortunate child! She can scarcely repeat a psalm or
scribble her name, and yet will know to distinguish good from evil. Think you
we find out the evil by the cloven foot or the dragon's tail? never -- the
honey which Jonathan sucked from the stump was sweet. Follow my advice, Miss, I
mean it honest with you; do not approach the hermitage too near.


Elsb. You are peevish, mother, why should I not visit the pious Peter?


Gertr. Aye, aye, that pious Peter has a son with whose (...) is not right. Has
not that fellow last Sunday desired me to spin, and even during the mass I
often catch him squinting at you from behind his hat.


Elsb. He does not squint, he has a fine large pair of eyes.


Gertr. so much the worse! I wish to God he was blind and lame! take care Miss!
if Walter of Blonay should hear of it. --


Elsb. What?


Gertr. Well, you understand me.


Elsb. Every one may judge my actions, and what has Chevalier of Blonay to do
with them.


Gertr. Your Bridegroom. --


Elsb. O! We are not yet come so far.


Gertr, But. with the help of God, we shall come so far. Blonay is a fine
knight, has three stately castles.


Elsb. Good! the sun shines also upon huts.


Gertr. Gold and silver --


Elsb. Can he do more than eat till he is satisfied.


Gertr. You talk like an ignorant girl; but when you see once the golden chains
and the precious bridal ornaments --


Elsb. Do we walk and jump easier in golden chains?


Gertr. Jumping is then altogether at an end. You will then walk in stately
array, a page bearing your train, and a noble youth leading your horse.


Elsb. (peevishly). Leave me undisturbed.


Gertr. Patience, Patience, the children's shoes are not worn out yet.


Elsb. I am no more a child.


Gertr. At the age of fifteen we still are with one leg in the cradle -- Go
young lady, if your father returns from hunting and finds you not at home, he
will growl.


Elsb. It is false, Mother; my father is good, he never growls.


Gertr. Yes, yes, he is but too good. Along! along! I already hear the horns.


Elsb. I will not.


Gertr. What will you do then?


Elsb. Stay here, to rest myself.


Gertr. (ironically) And look for herbs?


Elsb. I am fatigued. (She sits down upon the bench).


Gertr. Obstinate child what shall I do. -- (to herself) fortunately the boy is
not at hand, now there is no danger (loud) rest yourself then in the name of
God! I will go meanwhile into the chapel and repeat an ave Maria.


Elsb. Do that, Mother, and pray for me also.


Gertr. Yes, yes, it is necessary, it is easier to hold an eel, by the tail than
to guard a young girl.

(Exit.)
SCENE IV.
ELSBETH, and HENRY on the tree. Elsb. (looking around her) Where can he be? Is
the lazy boy asleep yet? Shall I throw a dry branch into the hut?


Henry. (lets an apple fall upen her). Elsb. What Is that? -- an apple, (she
takes it up and looks at it), is not ripe yet.


Henry, (hits her with another.) Elbs. Again? (jumps up) Does a hobgoblin make
jest of me -- (she perceives Henry) O! you rogue! down from the tree! I shall
pay you for that. (whilst Henry gets down, Elsbeth tears up some grass and
flowers, puts them into her apron, and as he approaches her she throws one
handful after another at his face.) This is for the first apple! -- this for
the sesond -- this for your listening, and this for your always plaguing me*


Henry, (shaking himself.) Elsbeth! Elsbeth! cease or I kiss you.


Elsb. Yes, you may kiss, mother Gertraud is in the chapel, and if she turns
her head she can see us.


Henry. She will not turn her head.

(he is going to kiss her.)
Elsb. You! I Will run into the chapel.


Henry, (holding her fast), run if you can.


Elsb. Henry. I shall be angry.


Henry. You must not get angry -- (he lets her go). Why will you not give me a
kiss?


Elsb. Have I not lately kissed you; when the rivulet was swelled up and you
carried the old man over the small bridge?


Henry. That is a long time since.


Elsb. And when you took that poor boy out of the water did I not kiss you then?


Henry. Oh! that is still longer ago.


Elsb. As often as you do a good action you shall have a kiss.


Henry. I wish to do always good. Is it my fault that not every day boys fall
into the water, or old men wish to get over a bridge? -- Kiss me.


Elsb. I Will Not.


Henry. I know why you will not.


Elsb. Well, why?


Henry. Walter of Blonay is a fine knight.


Elsb. Hold your tongue.


Henry. Those precious golden chains.


Elsb. (menacing) Henry, I go into the chapel.


Henry. Go, go; you will soon enough go there to be married to Walter.


Elsb. Old mother Gertraud has put that into your head.


Henry. Is it not true then?


Elsb. Well my father dropped a few words about it.


Henry. And they fell upon your heart!


Elsb. What Is that to you?


Henry. True -- it is nothing to me -- I am a poor youth -- I love you and
that is all -- When you come down from the castle with music and a stately
train, suddenly your horse will become shy and (...) -- what is that? you will
ask -- oh nothing! poor Henry lays on the road and has grieved himself to death.


Elsb. (in a softening voice) Fie! Henry! fie! that was naughty of you.


Henry* (sighing) And if it was true?


Elsb. I believe you weep -- Dear Henry kiss me.


Henry. No, I will not kiss you now, you only want to pay me for the grief I
shall have to endure.


Elsb. You are a fool* I shall not marry at all.


Henry. Will you promise that?


Elsb. I Will rather go into a convent than to Walter of Blonay.


Henry. My eyes have never beheld that man, but I hate him heartily.


Elsb. For shame! we must not hate any body.


Henry. If he should once fall into the water --


Elsb. Would you not help him out? Look at me!


Henry. (is going to say no, but a glance at Elsbeth, makes it impossible for
him) I would -- for your sake.


Elsb. No, for God's sake! To serve friends is no merit, but to save enemies is
a piece of entrance money with st. Peter.


Henry. She speaks like an Abbot.


Elsb. Be now again merry. Come let us look for herbs.


Henry. I must split wood.


Elsb. I Will help you.


Henry. You help me! ha! ha! ha! you can scarcely lift the ax.


Elsb. O ho! I can draw my father's massy sword out of the scabbard.


Henry. Well then try. (he gives her a hatchet, she makes a few awkward cuts,
whilst he with the utmost dexterity splits some large logs.)


Elsb. (fatigued) It will not do.


Henry. I thought so. You will cut your foot. But see how quick I do it. When
you are present, it is to me as if I could split rocks.


Elsb. Have you ever heard it, Henry, that when one loves and shares labor it
goes easier out of hand.


Henry. I have never heard that, but it may be very true.


Elsb. Come and help me to seek herbs.


Henry. What kind of herbs?


Elsb. Whiteroot and speedwell.


Henry. I don't know them.


Elsb. I will show them to you. See, this is whiteroot.


Henry. O, enough of them grow here.

(Both gather eagerly.)
Henry. There is a whole handful.


Elsb. Fool, these are not the right kind -- They are poisonous.


Henry. Throw them trifles away, and let us chat. If I should once be wounded
in battle, then you may seek roots, and prepare a salve.


Elsb. Aye, aye, what is it to me if you are wounded?


Henry. So! you would leave me helpless!


Elsb. There is brother Burkard in the convent, he understands medicine.


Henry. I cannot bear monks about me.


Elsb. Take a wife, then. It is becoming a faithful wife to nurse her master.


Henry. Right Elsbeth I Will make you my wife.


Elsb. You me? ha! ha! ha! -- how will you do that?


Henry. First I will go to Italy and Germany, to Burgundy and Wallis, there
I Will fight bravely, that people will talk of me; and a valiant prince make me a
knight; then I will present myself before your father and say: Valiant knight,
give me the graceful baroness Elsbeth to wife.


Elsb. And when the father says yes?


Henry. Well, then we send for the monk at the castle.


Elsb. And me you will not ask at all?


Henry. I hope you will not say no.


Elsb. Who knows it.


Henry. (tenderly) will you say no?


Elsb. Fie! don't look at me so.


Henry. ( more tenderly) Dear Elsbeth will you say no


Elsb. ( sinks into his arms.)


SCENE V.
Mother GERTRAUD, the FORMER. Gertr. Now, here we have it! holy Aguesia! and
all the eleven thousand virgins! assist me!


Elsb. What is the matter, mother Gertraud?


Henry. What is it?


Gertr. And you dare to ask? You wicked children! What have I seen?


Both. Where? where?


Gertr. Have you not been in each others arms.


Henry. Now? and what more?


Gertr. More still? heavens beware! Boy, would push the crime still farther.


Henry. Crime?


Gertr. Whilst I lay there piously upon my knees, and pray one rosery after
another, satan here carries on his game,


Elsb. Satan has not been here.


Henry. Let that be as it may, mother you know how much I love you.


Gertr. You? love me, as a wolf loves the dog that guards the sheep.


Henry. You found us arm in arm, is that not better than hatred and quarrel?


Gertr. No it is not better -- I would rather you had scratched out one
another eyes, there would be less danger.


Elsb. What danger?


Gertr. You do not understand that, young lady -- I must know that better: and
in short -- I shall this very day acquaint your father with it.


Henry. Be not so peevish, mother Gertraud, ( he picks up the apples which he
dropped upon Elsbeth) There take a pair of fine apples.


Gertr. Let me alone with your sour apples.


Henry. ( sneeringly) Well then, give to the apples some of your ripeness, and
you will both have enough.


Gertr. I believe the boy is mocking me.


Henry. God forbid! is it my fault that the apples are not ripe? -- Stop, I
recollect, ( he feels his pocket) see here a fine picture of the holy Maria,
finely colored, this I present you with.


Gertr. I will not have it. Away Miss.


H enry. Aye, aye, is this the mother Gertraud of whom every body speaks so
well.


Gertr. What have they told you of me?


Henry. That in your youthful days you were the finest damsel in the whole
valley.


Gertr. Paperlapapp.


Henry. Poets had exhausted their wit on your black eyes.


Gertr. Who told them to do so?


Henry. You was called the beautiful Gertraud.


Gertr. God had blessed me with a fine figure.


Henry. Old and young were staring at you, when at a dance, you turned yourself
in graceful windings.


Gertr. Yes, yes, that is true enough.


Henry. And you were, with all that, so chaste and pious, so modest and affable
--


Gertr. (to herself) The Rogue! one cannot be angry with him.


Elsb. (flattering her) are you reconciled again, mother.


Henry. Dear Mother! do not be angry with poor Henry.


Elsb. I love so much to see him.


Henry. I love her so much.


Elsb. Is it punishable, to be fond of one another company?


Henry. Is it sinful, to love each other?


Gertr. Children! children! you do not understand that. Satan often perverts
Love into boys tricks. You, Henry, may be a very good boy, but none knows
whence thou come or whither thou go. But Miss Elsbeth is a Knight's
daughter.


Henry. Aye, my father was formerly a Knight too.


Gertr. Your father is that pious Brother Peter; of whose knighthood I know
nothing. In short it is high time to separate you, before any misfortune
happens.


Elsb. What misfortune can happen then?


Gertr. Away, Young Lady! away! You are always so wonderful quick in coming
down and so slow in going up. --


Elsb. See there, mother, a Pilgrim passing through the wood.


Gertr. What is that Pilgrim to you?


Elsb. He comes perhaps from the Holy sepulcher. I love to hear news from
foreign countries.


Gertr. Curiosity fits not a young damsel. We often hear more in one hour than
we are able to forget all our life time.


Elsb. A few moments only, dear mother, are you afraid of that old Greybeard?


SCENE VI.
BRUNO, in Pligrim's habit. The FORMER. Bruno. Blessed be Jesus Christ!


Gertr. In all eternity amen!


Bruno. Can you inform me where dwells the pious Brother Peter?


Gertr. You are on the very spot.


Bruno. Thanks, mother, I come from the Convent Einsiedeln, A famous place in
switzerland where Pilgrims of all parts of Europe resort to.
in passing below through the village I heard much of his pious conduct; and
resolved to go out of my way, to confess to him. Where may I find him?


Gertr. Here is his Son, he can inform you.


Bruno. (joyfully and earnestly looking at Henry) his Son! this youth his Son?
(with emotion to Henry.) God bless you! my eyes become bright in beholding you.


Henry. I thank you, Venerable Man; but I am not so pious as my father.


Gertr. No, indeed! that he is not.


Bruno. (forgetting himself in beholding Henry) the tender sprig is become a
Stately tree.


Henry. Have you ever known me before?


Bruno. It may be.


Henry. Have you ever been here?


Bruno. (with signification) often have I been here -- constantly!


Henry. I forgot your features. Be that as it may! can I serve you in any thing?


Bruno. If you do it willingly?


Henry. I am always ready to serve.


Bruno. I may hereafter remind you of your word. For the present tell me where
is your father?


Henry. If you look over yonder fence you will see him in the garden.


Gertr. Let us he gone, Miss! me thinks I hear your father's hunting horns.


Elsb. I am going, Farewell Henry!


Henry. I shall conduct you part of the way.


Gertr. It Is unnecessary.


Henry. To the place only, where a piece of the broken rock barricades the
footpath. There I Will help you over.


Gertr. I have often got over without help.


Henry. The rain has made the ground slippery, and on the right hand the
precipice. No -- indeed, I shall not let you go alone.


Gertr. O heaven! It is surprising how much he is concerned that I should not
slip. But I guess -- you may accompany us this time but not farther than to the
large rock.


Elsb. Good bye, pious Pilgrim! if you come to see us at the Castle, I will
treat you with a glass of our best wine.


Bruno. I thank you, lovely Lady.


Henry. In the garden you will find my father.

(Exit with Elsbeth.)
Gertr. (To Bruno) God be with you! children children! don't run so fast.

(She goes slowly after them.)
SCENE VII.
BRUNO -- alone. Blessing on my Country! the lovely youth, uncorrupted in soul
and body. No sickly plant out of a princely garden; a fresh tree full of juice
and strength. It was fortunate, perhaps, for you Burgundy, that it so happened.
No monk has made his neck to bend, nor a prostitute deprived him of the
youthful red of his cheeks. But I forget that dear old Gentleman, so much was I
surprised at the appearance of the youth -- my intelligence is long looked for
yet unexpected. -- (he approaches the garden fence) Is that he -- who is so
busy digging the ground? -- It fits him well -- yet the sword fitted him
better. -- O how grief and age have altered him! gray hair, deep wrinkles on
his forehead -- but it is he! -- heart, my beating heart! Yes it is he! -- (he
calls) Chevalier, Hans of Bonstetten!


Peter. (behind the scene) Who calls?


Bruno. Hans of Bonstetten!


Peter. Great God! who calls?


SCENE VIII.
PETER comes in great agitation upon the stage. Peter. Pilgrim! who disclosed
to you my name?


Bruno. Have you forgot my voice?


Peter. Apparition! eighteen years ago I would have sworn it was my faithful
brother Bruno.


Bruno. (kneels down) It Is he.


Peter. (leaning upon him) Hah! welcome friend's voice. How sweet it sounds
into the unaccustomed ear! -- rise, let me press you to the heart -- that once
more beats youthful.


Bruno. ( in his arms) My good old master.


Peter. O what a variegated crowd of images -- the sound of your voice creates
before my eyes! -- how am I -- where am I? -- One single familiar tone has
converted eighteen years into a dream. I see myself again in the circle of my
family, see brothers and sisters about me, hold my dear wife in my arms.


Bruno. Where is she, that I may salute her.


Peter. Ah! I have buried her! yonder hill covers the dear remains. Eight long
years the noble Agnez assisted me in rearing plants in this wilderness.


Bruno. Oh that God had prolonged her days 'till the rising of a new sun.


Peter. Speak, what brings you here?


Bruno. The dear pledge, entrusted to you by fate he lives.


Peter. He lives.


Bruno. Then put on your armor! away! away! to Burgundy.


Peter. Is he dead, that robber of the throne?


Bruno. O'erwhelmed with curses he has descended to his forefathers.


Peter. Our time is come at last.


Bruno. So show ourselves -- still flow the tears of the people's love on the
grave of the murdered father.


Peter. Henry, your hour is arrived. Is, Matilda living?


Bruno. She lives in the solitude of a convent -- the maternal heart knows
nothing of the strong ties which link her to this world.


Peter. Messenger of heaven! after so many hopeless days, you have refreshed me
with a salutary dew -- I shall quit you, dear solitude -- quit you, grave of my
beloved wife! -- I thank you God, that for the welfare of my country you have
lengthened my days! -- Come, Bruno, come into that chapel, to bring to the
Eternal the offerings of our hearts! -- and then let us clean the armor that
has been rosting these eighteen years. ( He takes him by the hand and leads him
into the chapel.)


END OF THE FIRST ACT.
ACT II.
The Theater remains unaltered.

SCENE I.
PETER and BRUNO with spades; they dig a hole into the ground under a tree,
talking during their labor. Peter. AND so he is constantly: noble hearted,
good, full of sensibility, and thirst for action.


Bruno. Does he never desire to know your fate?


Peter. O yes, he is never tired of asking -- My answers are oracles. His being
my pupil only, never enters his mind. And indeed I love him as my child!


Bruno. Have you not given him a second life? Without you, his brother's
mournful fate would have befallen him.


Peter. I am not born for a pilgrim, and he found that out. I love better to
speak of battles than to read a legend. He is better acquainted with the
history of his country than that of the holy Antonius in the wilderness.


Bruno. Hush! methinks I hear something. If he was listening --


Peter. Listening? Good Bruno, you come from a princely court. Here in this
wilderness we listen to nightingales only. Henry is far enough. I have sent him
to the lake to catch a mess of fish -- I was fearful lest his questions would
disturb the sensation which, at this work, I wish to nourish -- Enough! Do you
see the trunk? Let us go and lift it up, it is not heavy. (They descend into
the hole and lift up the box) hah! how labor and frugality add to the
strength, which is absorbed by age. Indeed, Bruno, eighteen years ago I lifted
this trunk with less ease than to day. -- There it is -- I see it again, and
think of the last look I gave it on covering it with earth -- my wife was then
at my side -- at this tree she was leaning -- the tree is green yet -- Oh! -- (
he endeavors to collect himself) here is the key -- covered with rust -- we
shall open the lock easier with the hatchet. ( After some efforts the lid
opens. Peter drops his utensils, turns himself, puts both his hands before his
face, weeps aloud.)


Bruno. What ails you, good master, you weep?


Peter. Ah, Bruno! my wife's necklace first struck my view. Take it away and
put it in your pocket.


Bruno. ( is going to take it.) Peter. No! no! I cannot see it in strange
hands, (pressing it fervently to his bosom) In these ornaments I conducted her
to the marriage altar. In these ornaments she swore to me eternal fidelity, and
she has kept her vow -- till death -- My lovely faithful Agnez! the chain which
once adorned your neck -- (he puts it in his bosom) it shall never be wrested
from my heart.


Bruno. (Dries his eyes.) Peter. You are moved, good Bruno.


Bruno. I remember her benefactions. Twenty years ago, when illness stretched
me on my bed, her attention comforted me.


Peter. Twenty years have elapsed since, and you recollect it still with
grateful tears. But I, to whom she was every thing: I, whose hut she converted
into a palace -- Oh, what a precious jewel is a good housewife. Enough, Bruno,
our country calls -- be silent, my heart! -- See here the swathing clothes in
which Henry lay, when he in Agnez's arms escaped the bloody scene. -- This here
is the ring with the seal of the old Count -- This the cup with the arms of
Burgundy, which many a foreign prince took from my hands to take a welcome
draught -- Here underneath my armor, with helmet and sword -- Let us see
whether I can handle it yet -- (he draws the sword, swinging it over his head)
-- For God and my country! There is strength yet.


Bruno. Henry's name will conquer his people, not the sword.


Peter. True brother, a son finds his way easy to the throne, when it is marked
by the father's benefactions.


Bruno. (looking about him) Master, I see people coming down from the mountain.


Peter. Let us carry the trunk into the chapel. If they are the women from the
castle there will be no end to their questions.


Bruno. Methinks they lead an old man.


Peter. perhaps the old knight Cuno. A brave man. A little too talkative. What
pain it is to move the lips when the heart is affected. Come, assist.

( They carry the box into the hut.)
SCENE II.
Miss ELSBETH. Soon after CUNO and Mother GERTRAUD. Elsb. ( listening) Two men
went into the hut, carrying something that looked like a coffin: But Henry was
not with them.


Cuno. ( behind the scene) Elsbeth!


Elsb. Here, father!


Cuno. ( appears) You run about like a colt; that is not becoming; you are
fifteen years old, and should begin to walk modestly and softly.


Elsb. Why is a step more modest than a leap?


Gertr. A lively caper at a dance I should have no objection to.


Cuno. You carry your head so high and free; it shakes like a weather cock.


Gertr. And the eyes! the eyes! they turn about like a flame in a wirlwind.


Cuno. And the hands fly up and down, like the wings of a windmill.


Gertr. And the hairs hang wildly round the neck, like cedar-twigs.


Elsb. One finds fault with this, another with that! how shall I do to please
them?


Cuno. A modest young woman should trip it smooth and softly.


Gertr. Not look about, but blink.


Cuno. The hands must rest modestly in the lap.


Gertr. The hairs, neatly curled close to the neck.


Elsb. (peevishly) mother, get yourself a girl cut out of wood,


Gertr. Naughty child! am I then cut out of wood? In my youth how often have I
been at banquets sitting so stiff that they had to put a feather to my mouth,
to know whether I was alive.


Elsb. Banquets are no pleasure parties. Look at the Redbreast here in the
bush, how it leaps and sings; above a Mag-Pie chattering, but it seems to care
for nothing, father, -- you are fatigued.

(she wipes the sweat from his forehead.)
Cuno. How you made me cough, running after you down the mountain.


Gertr. That Is always her way; at every hedge she leaves a piece of cloth.


Cuno. And I don't know why you tore me out of my arm chair?


Elsb. (complaining) Mother Gertraud would not go with me, and alone I dare not.


Gertr. Aye, aye, alone! when the Be is out of the basket, there are ten
swallows behind to catch it up.


Elsb. (draws Cuno under the apple tree) sit down, father, on the grass bench.
So -- lean against the tree -- slumber -- I will link a few branches together
that the sun cannot discommode you -- (she is busy in placing the old man
comfortably) Now? Is it not better here than between the cold walls of the
Castle? in that cool leather arm chair? I Will go to gather herbs for your
Sallad, cresses, sorrel and spoon-wort.


SCENE III.
CUNO and GERTRAUD. Gertr. Miss Elsbeth, where are you going?


Cuno. Let her go.


Gernr. Quite alone?


Cuno, Children, Mrs. Gertraud; we have been young too.


Gertr. Aye, she is no more a child.


Cuno. The better for her if she thinks so.


Gertr. She runs to her destruction.


Cuno. For these few steps, where is the danger.


Gertr. One missstep is enough for a fall.


Cuno. Here in the valley --


Gertr. Even here in the valley, Knight, have you then observed nothing?


Cuno. What should I observe?


Gertr. That young boy, the pious Pilgrim's Son. --


Cuno. Well?


Gertr. She is fond of him.


Cuno. Aye, aye, mother, has she told you so?


Gertr. H'm! Such things young damsels never tell. She may scarcely know it
herself.


Cuno. And how do you know it then?


Gertr. Miss Elsbeth has forgot sitting still, she is for ever walking out.


Cuno. Well, but is that all.


Gertr. To the North is a beautiful wood, -- that is not her rout; to the South
is a pleasant declivity reaching to the very lake -- that does not attract her
-- westward a charming eminence, where the great poplar tree stands, there she
finds no pleasure either --


Cuno. Well, and whither walks she then?


Gertr. Constantly to the East, where the rock is roughest, and at every step
the neck is in danger; always to this valley where the shoes at every step
stick in the mud, and the sun at the meridian scarcely drys the dew.


Cuno. H'm! h'm!


Gertr. Henry is her first word at rising in the morning and her last at bed
time.


Cuno. (shaking his head) h'm! h'm!


Gertr. If I prepare a delicious soup or you have brought home some fine game,
she never forgets, that Henry should have a bit of it.


Cuno. H'm! h'm!


Gertr. Of the fine wine, your brother Abbot sent you lately from Italy, she
immediately hid a bottle behind her bed. -- For whom, Lady? -- she would not
tell -- but for whom else but Henry?


Cuno. Aye, aye, this, to be sure, looks strange.


Gertr. A Nosegay from him, common as the flowers may be, she never takes off
her bosom till it is entirely decayed. -- The roguish boy carves her name on
every tree -- yes, all must come out -- this morning the naughty children have
-- I am ashamed, to tell --


Cuno. What have they done then?


Gertr. They have -- I tremble thinking of it? --


Cuno. Quick, quick, out with it!


Gertr. (With a deep sigh, making the sign of a cross before her) they have
kissed each other.


Cuno. Kissed? aye, aye, that is too much.


Gertr. If Walter of Blonay were to hear of that.


Cuno. Yes, Mrs. Gertraud, he would quit the connection, and that of right.


Gertr. My advice would be to lock her up in her chamber.


Cuno. The needle in her hand.


Gertr. And the spinning-wheel.


Cuno. And a holy legend.


Gertr. And a prayer book.


Cuno. What is the boy about, he is not of noble birth. Not long since I wished
to take him as a page, for I liked his bold and fine appearance. I thought his
father to be a disguised knight, driven by ill fate into this wilderness. A
christian action it would have been, to give the boy, for God's sake, a noble
education. But when I sounded the father about his birth and rank, I soon
discovered him to be of low descent, with not a single helmet in his coat of
arms.


Gertr. Henry is however, a good boy, I cannot deny that.


Cuno. May be, Mrs. Gertraud, but he must let the girl alone. I Will speak to
brother Peter a few words; he is prudent and pious, he will find advice.


Gertr. Here comes the old man.


Cuno. Then leave us to ourselves, and see where Elsbeth is, loose her not out
of sight.


Gertr. Yes, yes, my eyes are well; but what of that, my bones will not carry
me.

(Exit.)
SCENE IV.
PETER and CUNO. Cuno. God bless you, pious man.


Peter. I thank you noble knight.


Cuno. I have a friendly word to speak to you.


Peter. Speak.


Cuno. You have a lively boy.


Peter. He is ripening to manhood.


Cuno. Yes, I well observe that.


Peter. He feels himself.


Cuno. A little too soon.


Peter. How so?


Cuno. He runs after my Elsbeth.


Peter. You jest, knight.


Cuno. Knighthood's honor and women's management, are things of which Cuno of
Hallwyl does not make a jest.


Peter. What gives you reason?


Cuno. H'm! Many things have happened -- they love to be together. --


Peter. Children.


Cuno. They trifle, they play.


Peter. Like children.


Cuno. But they kiss each other! -- Is that children's play?


Peter. No.


Cuno. And consequently --


Peter. Are you assured of that?


Cuno. Mother Gertraud has seen it with her own eyes.


Peter. No harm in it.


Cruno. No harm? no harm? pious brother! you have grown so old and know not yet
what a kiss means? If you have been chaste and modest all the days of your
life, the better for you! but do'nt take it amiss, methinks the boy is not
following your steps.


Peter. I thought, but --


Cruno. Be so good as to listen to what I mean. I think when straw and fire is
put together, it creates a flame -- Pray send the boy off to Italy, the sooner
the better, -- war is there, he may serve the Milanese as a foot soldier.


Peter. ( smiling) My Henry a foot soldier!


Cuno. And why not? he is not a nobleman? Better there to wound the enemy than
here a father, who, without his dauthter, has neither treasure nor joy.


Peter. Be composed, noble knight, my Henry shall never wound you; this very
day we quit this valley forever.


Cuno. No, no, it was not meant so.


Peter. ( shrugging his shoulders) We follow our destiny.


Cuno. Indeed! pious brother, you give unwelcome news -- Your presence has
brought blessing on my house -- Reluctantly I let you go -- What is it that
drives you so suddenly from this peaceful valley? Has any of my subjects given
you offense? Woe to him.


Peter. No, noble knight, the palm of peace has overshawdowed eighteen years my
quiet hut, thanks to you for it: my wants you helpfully supplied -- Never shall
I forget it. When dire disease laid my wife upon the sick bed, your kitchen and
cellar were open; you yourself were day and night at her bed side; your tears
dropped upon her sick bed -- and at last upon her grave -- that is engraven
upon my heart! --


Cuno. You move me, brother; you know I am not rich myself, and would have
willingly done more.


Peter. The more generous of you. A bit of bread and heartfelt joy, are
benefactions, which the rich seek in vain in their silver chests. It shall, by
God, not remain unrewarded to you.


Cuno. You have often rewarded me, by good advice and pious prayers.
(feelingly) Stay with me, brother Peter! we are both old, why will you leave
me? an old tree never takes root in foreign soil. Old men should not be
separated, they do not so easily attach themselves to what is new. If you are
not pleased any longer here in the valley? move up to the castle.


Peter. I cannot, I must be gone.


Cuno. Have you persecuting enemies? In the castle you are secure.


Peter. My Agnez's grave chains me more to this solitude than your prayers. But
I cannot stay; love and duty -- soon, noble knight, you shall learn what alone
was able to draw me back to the world's tumult.


Cuno. Then God be with you! you are a prudent experienced man, you best know
what is fit for you. When will you depart?


Peter. This very hour.


Cuno. So soon? I wish to furnish you first with victuals for the journey. I
have this morning killed a sine deer, we will get it roasted.


Peter. Thanks! we want but little.


SCENE V.
HENRY. The FORMER. Henry. (With some fish) Father, the sun shine so bright to
day, the fish will not touch the hook. Blessing to you, noble knight! Is Miss
Elsbeth with you?


Cuno. May be.


Henry. Where? where? -- There father take the fish and let me go.


Peter. Stay. I have to speak to you.


Henry. Are you in haste?


Peter. I am.


Henry. ((...)) Speak then.


Cuno. I will not interrupt you. Adieu, pious brother. You will, I hope not
leave this abode without a farewell draught?


Peter. Each moment of delay would be treason to my country.


Cuno. Then go, and may God be with you. I am sorry. In distant regions, forget
me not in your prayers. -- Farewell! -- No, we part not yet. I Will go for
Elsbeth, and then pass this way again.

(Exit.)
SCENE VI.
PETER and HENRY. Henry. What is he muttering about? Parting! A farewell
draught.


Peter. We must go.


Henry. What does that mean?


Peter. Your wishes are fulfiled.


Henry. Which?


Peter. You was desirous of going into the wide world.


Henry. And that shall be?


Peter. This very day.


Henry. You are jesting, father?


Peter. I speak in earnest. The strange pilgrim has brought me intelligence --


Henry. Inform me of its purport?


Peter. My country is distracted -- it wants my arm.


Henry, Your country? -- I am ashamed to ask; where is your country?


Peter. Where we are going.


Henry. ( whose uneasiness increases) Indeed? -- but who meanwhile will mind
our household?


Peter. Henceforth we want it not.


Henry. The hut will fall to pieces, the garden decay --


Peter. Even so?


Henry. Better for me to stay and keep every thing in order.


Peter. How? would you let me go alone?


Henry. I am so young your country would have no confidence in me.


Peter. But I -- I need a valiant youth, who, standing by my side, will learn
of me to fight, conquer -- and to die --


Henry. To die?


Peter. And why not? man is born to learn, and dies to learn. In death the
feeblest old man triumphs over the strongest youth.


Henry. You shall not fall, ( pointing to his breast) here is your shield.


Peter. Right, my son! you see I cannot do without you.


Henry. Well then! -- I must accompany you -- but when shall we return?


Peter. Never.


Henry. Never! What do you mean? The fight cannot last forever. We will combat
bravely till winter comes, then return and enjoy tranquillity under our straw
roof.


Peter. Henry, what is that? I understand you not -- Not farther back than this
morning each hour seemed to oppress you; even this morning you desired
impetuously to travel into the world; and now at my meeting you half way, you
deem your obedience a sacrifice?


Henry. Father, I know it not myself -- I am in a sad disposition -- I conceive
it not -- you are a prudent man, explain it me? why the world sometimes seems
to me to be too narrow, and then again I would not change yonder hut for the
emperor's throne of Trapezunt?


Peter. Habit --


Henry. Be it what it will, you must promise me a speedy return, or I shall
grieve to death!


Peter. I can promise you nothing.


Henry. You are my good father -- I would willingly obey you -- indeed with all
my heart -- but -- I must confess -- Miss Elsbeth is so dear to me!


Peter. What is Elsbeth to you?


Henry. A great deal. She has, I know not how, stolen into my heart -- wherever
I am, she is with me; wherever I go she hovers before me. In the wood she
stands behind every tree, and in the hut her rays appear from every corner. If
I lay down, she sits before me; when I awake she still sits there.


Peter. Separation will cure you.


Henry. Yes, if I was but gone! but -- be not angry, Father -- I cannot go!


Peter. Henry, if I tell you, that a person is yet alive, to whom nature has
given stronger pretensions to your heart, than to this damsel? -- If I tell you
that you still have a mother?


Henry. I a mother? does not yonder hill cover her grave?


Peter. My Agnez has saved your life, but not given it you. She was your
infancy's faithful nurse, yet she who brought you to this world lives still.


Henry. She lives? -- Who am I then? -- Have you ever been married to her? --
Disowned your wife, and took another? -- or are you not my father?


Peter. If love and care give a right to that title --


Henry Not otherwise?


Peter. No.


Henry. Alas! you rob me of a father whom I love, and give me a mother whom I
do not know.


Peter. Hasten to her arms!


Henry. I will not. I do not wish a strange mother! -- I entreat you for God's
sake! stay my father! -- I have so long since accustomed myself to love you as
a child, and I am now to deliver up my heart to strange hands.


Peter. To a mother's hands.


Henry. That sounds fine, but (pointing to his heart) this does not echo to it.
Never have I known my mother; by what benefaction has she attached me to her?
What pretension of hers can out balance yours?


Peter. The rights of nature.


Nature, nature -- I know not what that means. Have you then made an alliance
with nature to win my heart? Can I love my mother more than you? More than Miss
Elsbeth? -- In God's name, how came I to be an orphan all at once! -- For
pity's sake! stay father, or I throw myself into the stream! --

Peter. Be consoled, I shall remain your father, as long as you may acknowledge
me for it.


Henry. As long as I live! as long as a drop of blood --


Peter. Well then! a father may require obedience of his son. Prepare for your
departure. Before sunset we quit this valley.


Henry. Without taking leave of my Elsbeth?


Peter. You have invested me with a father's rights. We have not to loose a
moment. Soon you shall know why!

( He goes into the hut.)
SCENE VII.
HENRY -- alone. How am I? -- all used to be serene about me -- now all so dark
-- the rock seems to be higher -- the valley narrower -- the high trees make
too much shade -- I am peevish -- I must weep -- (pauses) a mother? -- what is
that? -- who can tell me what it is? -- I have no sense for it -- and what
shall I do at her abode? -- can she not come to me? -- will she tear me from
Miss Elsbeth? -- that is not the way to my heart -- no, no, no.

(He remains in deep meditation.)
SCENE VIII.
ELSBETH and HENRY. Elsb.( Entering slowly, with a garland in her hand, takes
suddenly the hat from Henry's head, placing the garland upon it.) Henry. Ah
Elsbeth! dear Elsbeth.


Elsb. (Putting on Henry that) Do I look like a boy


Henry. You jest and I am half dead.


Elsb. You? let us see, how one looks, when one is half dead? red cheeks --
clear eyes --


Henry. Full of tears.


Elsb. Tears? -- Indeed, I perceive one, Henry, are you unwell?


Henry. Would to God --


Elsb. Fie, what a wish!


Henry. Bad enough. Yes, would to God I were ill! then my father would be
obliged to leave me behind.


Elsb. What are you talking about? -- Quick! before my father and Gertraud
overtake me.


Henry. ( weeping) I -- ah, Elsbeth! (he takes the garland from his head) this
will become my funeral garland!


Elsb. For God's sake! torment me not.


Henry. I must go!


Elsb. Where to?


Henry. Into the wide world!


Elsb. Why?


Henry. (Mournfully) To fight -- to kill men --


Elsb. What have they done to you?


Henry. To me? -- nothing at all -- They might all live for me to the day of
judgment.


Elsb. Well then let them live and stay here.


Henry. I dare not.


Elsb. But you will soon return, I hope?


Henry. That Is the very thing -- I shall not return -- Eslbeth! I shall never
see you again! --


Elsb. Never see me again -- then I shall not see you again either?


Henry. Ah? that breaks my heart!


Elsb. Dear Henry! you alarm me -- weep not -- (she drys his tears with her
apron) Look at me -- speak reason -- who desires it then, that you never shall
see me again?


Henry. My father, and yet not my father --


Elsb. Are you raving?


Henry. He just now left me -- just now he discovered to me, that I am not his
son.


Elsb. God forbid! Henry, a father certainly you will have!


Henry. It Is all the same to me. If this is not my father, I will not have another.


Elsb. Why not? There are more good fathers in the world. For instance my
father -- if he would take you for my brother -- how funny it would be.


Henry. H'm! would not be very funny. A sister one dares not marry.


Elsb. Will you then really marry me?


Henry. Indeed! I love you above all -- more than you love me.


Elsb. That Is not true,


Henry. It Is true enough. See, my eyes are full of tears -- my heart is filled
with grief -- and you remain in good humor.


Elsb. I think, Henry, if you love me so much -- so very much; you would soon
return -- is it not so, Henry?


Henry. If I dare.


Elsb. Who will prevent you?


Henry. My mother.


Elsb. Who is your mother.


Henry. How do I know! it is a mother whom I never saw.


Elsb. But certainly a good women, if she is your mother. Be composed, Henry,
there is my hand, I will become your wife and no other's.


Henry. Do you promise that?


Elsb. I do.


Henry. Swear.


Elsb. How shall I swear?


Henry. By your Patroness.


Elsb. Well, I swear by the holy Agatha!


Henry. You will not marry Walter of Blonay?


Elsb. Never.


Henry. You will wait for news of poor Henry?


Elsb. Most certainly! -- Be now friendly again.


Henry. Ah! It Is all very fine and good; but how can I. be friendly? We are to
part --


Elsb. When?


Henry. This very day, before sunset, we leave this valley, so says my father.


Elsb. What is that: Parting? How shall we do that?


Henry. You give me your hand -- I shake it heartily -- you look at me
sorrowfully -- I weep -- you say farewell -- and I say farewell -- then one
goes this and the other that way.


Elsb. Ah, Henry! that is hard!


Henry. Very hard!


Elsb. ( Tenderly) Stay with me!


Henry. Aye! and you beg too --


Elsb. (Leaning on him) Stay with me!


Henry. Yes, if you move me so -- (hastily resolved) Elsbeth! I Will stay with
you!


SCENE IX.
Enter PETER -- The FORMER. Henry. (Meeting him) Father, I cannot go with you!
Elsbeth loves me -- she begs -- she weeps -- I am distracted -- and -- in short
-- I cannot go with you!


Peter. Then I shall tell your mother that she has borne an undutiful child.


Henry. Say what you please. Whoever bears this saint at his heart is not
without affection.


Peter. And your mother?


Henry. Why did she throw me from her.


Peter. But, if till now she thinks you dead?


Henry. Then leave her in that opinion. Long since she has done grieving for
that loss.


Peter. How? you would not give joy to her that gave you life? The bird in his
nest fondly flutters to its mother --


Henry. Because she has a worm in her bill for its nourishment. But what has my
mother done for me?


Peter. She has suffered for you.


Henry. Anxiety, love, hope, desire, is true life! All that is given to me by
Elsbeth, she alone is my mother! therefore I Will stay with her, exchange love
for love, will hope as a boy, desire as a youth, and combat for the possession
of her, like a man!


Peter. If your heart overcomes your reason, remember at least a father's
right, which you have voluntarily conferred on me. You must go with me.


Henry. You say, you must! -- Elsbeth says nothing -- she only looks at me --
and I can only obey her.


Peter. Miss, I claim my son from you.


Elsb. Will you bring him back again to me?


Peter. I can promise nothing.


Elsb. Go alone! Tell his mother to come here, and she will find a son and
daughter.


Henry. A precious thought! Yes father! go alone!


Elsb. Your Henry shall mean while want for nothing.


Henry. Remember me to my mother!


Elsb. And return soon.


Peter. I am troublesome to you, it seems. Well Miss! If your father has no
objection.


Elsb. My father is a good pious Man.


Peter. Here he comes. Ask him yourself.


SCENE X.
Enter CUNO, GERTRAUD -- the FORMER. Gertr. Did I not say so? on our left she
vanished behind a bush, and on our right hand we find her again.


Cuno. Aye! aye!


Elsb. ( running toward him) Father, the pious brother Peter will leave us.


Cuno. So I hear.


Elsb. But Henry must stay, say?


Cuno. He stay here? and why?


Elsb. Because I love him so much -- almost as much as I love you.


Gertr. And she says that with as little reserve as if she was repeating a
rosary. Naughty child!


Cuno, Elsbeth, have you renounced all female modesty?


Elsb. How so, father?


Cuno. You must love but your bridegroom, Walter of Blonay; and even to him you
must not discover it so bluntly.


Elsb. He certainly will not hear of it by me.


Cuno Henry goes with his father, and you stay at home in your chamber till you
are conducted to the marriage altar.


Henry. (dejected) Do you hear, Elsbeth?


Elsb. (privately) Grieve not; remember my promise.


Henry. Oh, noble knight! keep me at your castle as the meanest servant: I will
mind your horses and feed your dogs. Dear mother Gertraud, pray speak a good
word for me. I will catch birds for your old cat, and tap you on your back when
you are coughing.


Gertr. My old cat will have enough to eat without you.


Cuno. Go with your father, Henry, that is becoming a son. Here is no abode for
you.


Peter. Enough, children, my hours are counted: we must part.


Henry. Part? -- hear you, Elsbeth?


Elsb. (weeping) I will hear nothing -- I will not part. --


Cuno. You must -- Farewell, brother Peter! It goes to my heart to lose you,
but who knows to what it may lead. This thoughtless damsel gives me trouble. --
Travel under God's protection! and remember me in your prayers.


Peter. As often as I shall meet a noble hearted man, I shall remember you.
Farewell! (they shake hands) allow the children a last farewell.


Cuno. Now make haste! shake hands!


Henry. ( weeping) Then we must part indeed, Elsbeth! Farewell.


Elsb. (Also weeping) Forget me not!


Henry. Remember your oath!


Elsb. By the holy Agatha!


Henry. When you ramble here, speak to me as if I was here.


Elsb. Be always brave and love me.


Henry. There in the garden is a rose-bush, I have planted it for you, water it
sometimes.


Elsb. With my tears --


Henry. My pigeons I give you, feed them.


Elsb. Out of my mouth.


Gertr. The poor children move my heart.


Cuno. Away Elsbeth! it is enough!


Elsb. ( Goes slowly and looking often back) Farewell!


Henry. (Violently weeping) Farewell!


Cuno. God's blessing on the journey!


Gertr. May the saints attend you wherever you go?


Peter. Go, go, my heart breaks!


Elsb. (At a distance) Farewell, Henry!


Henry. ( Without looking back, with a faultering voice) Farewell, Elsbeth. (
Cuno, Gertraud and Elsbeth, are out of sight.)


Peter. Compose yourself, son, be a man!


Henry. If a man dare not weep, I will not be a man.


Elsh. (Comes hastily back with a floweret) Henry! dear Henry! Forget me not!
The name of that floweret in the German language, is Forget me not.
(she gives him the floweret and goes away.)


Henry. (Drying his tears and looking at the flower) H'm! -- What does this
flower avail? to-marrow it will be withered. (He puts it on his hat) Had she
given me a handkerchief or a ribbon, I would have revered it more than the
relics of the convent of Einsiedeln, I would have tied it round my arm, or
pinned it to my helmet, and then away into the throngest ranks of the enemy.
Hah, father! If we are not to remain among friends, I wish we were already
amidst the tumult of our foes.


Peter. Well then, my son, take your walking stick! the sun is lowering in the
west, the birds sing their evening songs, it is high time.


Henry. If we had but the Alps in our rear; if but the castle was not so high,
as to remain so long in view.


Peter. Look forwards. Patience Henry! When time and separation are united,
they extinguish flaming letters in the hearts of men.


Henry. Never, father! Lead me to the holy sepulcher; tell me: on this stone
sat the prophesying angel, and there my eyes will behold Elsbeth.


Peter. Great events await you


Henry. Great events shall meet with a man in me, if Elsbeth is the price.


Peter. The path from this wildesness leads perhaps to a throne.


Henry. You jest. And do we sit easier upon a throne than here under this
appletree? What think you father? If with your left hand you could take hold of
a scepter, and with your right draw the good Agnez from the grave, which would
you do?


Peter. Your youthful passion is like Aurora's feeble beam; but matrimonial
bliss is like the glowing brightness of the meridian sun.


Henry. Good! My meridian will also in its course arrive. Elsbeth or no other!


Peter. Deserve her.


Henry, Lead me to the battle! glory or death!


SCENE XI.
BRUNO, with a bundle on his back -- The FORMER. Bruno. We are ready to depart.


Henry. Messenger of woe!


Bruno. (smiling) I a messenger of woe,? hah, if you knew --


Henry. Rally not.


Bruno. In this bundle I carry for you a knightly armor.


Henry. For me? What means that? who am I? speak!


Peter. (interrupting) That leads us too far. Patience my son, 'till evening at
the first inn you shall know your fate.


Henry. One question more you will grant me, before we leave this valley: Does
my birth favor my union with Elsbeth?


Peter. ( after a pause) No.


Henry. How miserable am I! Why has not one of my ancestors met with a girl
like Elsbeth! Love would have made him a knight.


Peter. Honor's open arms await you, let us hasten!


Henry. Ah!

(They go a few steps. Peter stands still and stretches his arms out toward
the hut.)
Peter. How? -- Shall I then turn my back to you little hut, which for eighteen
years has given me a friendly shelter? -- Is not one wet eye of gratitude to be
cast on you? -- Fie on the man who suffers shipwreck, and can without feeling
burn the piece of board, upon which he safely reached the shore. How many
serene moments have love, hope, and piety created for me here! -- May
lightening and storm spare your rotten roof! and give shelter to many a weary
pilgrim! May the doves continue to coo on the tops of these cedar trees, and
fetch their food from this garden, where henceforth no one will distrub them. (
he turns round and looks at the distant hill) But ah! whose hand will nurse the
plants which ornament my Agnez's grave? -- Agnez! -- to separate myself from
your dust! -- (rashly) go, Bruno, follow him, Henry -- one moment more for my
heart! Then I belong to you and our country.


Bruno. Well, let us then in God's name begin our journey!


Henry. There it is! Lead in my feet. Give me a push in my back, to make me
tumble forwards.


Bruno. ( Takes out a sword from under his cloth) This sword is for you, Baron!


Henry. ( hastily catching at it) For me?


Bruno. Let me carry it, it might hinder you in walking.


Henry. ( tears it out of his hands) Old boy! if you are fatigued, I Will take
you yourself on my back. Hah! Elsbeth! I have a sword.

( He goes off rashly, Bruno follows him.) (Peter for so me time looks at the
hut feelingly, then at the apple tree, from which he takes a twig and puts it
on his hat; then he goes to the hole, and looks earnestly down; he then turns
toward the distant grave, toward which he at last stretches out his hands,
and sinks upon his knees. After a short and silent prayer, he rises. goes off
slowly; looks often back, and at last gets out of sight behind the trees.)
END OF THE SECOND ACT.
ACT. III.
An open place at ARLES surrounded with trees; in the back ground the palace of
the Count of Burgundy. In the foreground the house of a Cooper who with his
journeyman, is occupied at his door, in putting hoops to a barrel. They often
stop working, to talk.

SCENE I.
BENEDICT and NICHOLAS. Benedict. YOU have traveled through the world,
Nicholas, where did you like it best?


Nicholas. Arles is my native place, and at home a drink of water relishes
better, than on foreign soil, the best of wine.


Benedict. Thank God! we may now on Sunday drink again a glass of wine together.


Nich. You have been but badly off for some time back.


Benedict. Ah! Nicholas, God meant it well with you, that he did not bring you
sooner back to your home. All was upside down here.


Nich. I was but a boy, when the wicked Count Ulrich killed our pious Count
Albrecht.


Benedict. Brother-slaughter! oh!

(they work.)
Nich. And yet the murderer died quietly on his bed?


Bened. On his bed he died, it is true, but quiet? ( he shakes his head.) He
could not even dose quietly. A prince who goes to bed without a good action,
goes without consolation to his grave. At the first knock of my hammer in the
morning, suddenly there came a guard from the palace: Mr. Benedict, the Count
orders you to leave off hammering! it disturbs his morning slumber. H'm! I
murmured to myself: can he also defend the hammering of his conscience? --


Nich. It Is a wonder he did not drive you from your house.


Bruno. This almost happened once -- "Your hut," he said, disfigures the place
before the palace;" -- My lord, I answered: Integrity and industry are the
occupants of this hut; would to God! we could say that of many a palace" -- " I
will buy your hut," continued he -- " I will not sell it. My great, great,
grandfather has built it, my father repaired it, I was born and educated in it.
My old father is blind and can find his way in it without danger. But if I
bring him to a strange house he will knock out his brains." -- What answer do
you think my lord deigned to give me? -- "Well then", he said, stroking his
beard; and what of that?" --


Nich. The tyrant!


Bruno. In short, my house would have been gone, if Block the cabinet-maker had
not been on friendly terms with the court jester -- he brought things in order.

[They work.]
Nich. There was Count Albrecht, God grant him a happy resurrection! quite a
different man.


Benedict. Indeed he was! always friendly and good. Here he often would stop to
look at my work, and when the sun was burning, he would never suffer me to take
off my hat. Many a time he drank out of my silver cup. -- I still see him
passing by here, his little sons hopping round him. Oh! the dear little ones!
they would take off their caps before every mechanic -- nod to every fruit
woman -- and if they met a beggar, how quick they would put their little hands
in their pockets, and filled, with silver pieces, hold them to the poor. -- Oh!
It goes to my very heart, when I think, how unmercifully they all were sent to
the grave!


Nich. None escaped?


Bened. No, not one. I myself heard in that woeful night the groans of the dying
-- the lamentations of the Count's attendants -- the piercing cries of the
mother proceeding from the palace windows.


Nich. The old Countess lives still?


Benedict. It would be better for her, if she was dead. To spare her was worse
than murder. The good Lady buried herself in a Convent. She may have forgot
husband and children, but the splendour of high life, and the thirst for
revenge, she cannot forget, it is said. -- It Is natural, she was mother -- I am
only a burgher, but could I find one of the murderers, I would hammer him into
a hoop.

(He works earnestly).
Nich. Count Ulrich's son, they say, promises well?


Bruno. He is but a boy. A thorn-bush never bears plumbs. As long as Count Hugo
of Werdenberg, the governor, guides his youth -- that is a worthy knight.


Nich. ( Looking at a distance.) See there, master, what an uproar at the city
gates? --


Bruno. What Is that to us? a drunken man perhaps.


Nich. I see halberds fly.


Bruno. No matter. It is no more than it was in former times, when even the
most honest of us went out of the way of every page.


Nich. The tumult increases -- they approach.


Bruno. Now? what can that be?


SCENE II.
Some citizens run over the stage, calling: ring the alarm bell! the alarm
bell! another crowd of citizens, led by BLOCK, are pushing on. Block. Here,
citizens of Arles! here, to the palaceyard.


Bened. Neighbor Block, what is the matter?


Block. Friend Benedict, leave your work! shocking things! the day of revenge
is arrived!


The People. Revenge! Revenge!


Bened. Revenge? on whom? wherefore?


The Peop. Bring the murderers here! let them bleed under the palace windows!


Bened. What murderers?


Block. Pilgrims have been taken, the Count's sealing ring has been found upon
them. --


Another. And the cup with the Burgundian arms.


Bened. Hah! Just heaven! The avenging angel conducted them to Arles! Where are
they?


Block. They have been carried to prison --


The Peop. Bring them forward! ring the alarm-bell!


(The alarm-bell is heard ringing. The tumult is increasing. They ask, they
call, cry, relate, rave, all pell mell). Bened. Blessing on me, that I live to
see this day! Do you see, Nicholas, how these men are still attached to their
murdered lord? Thus benefactions shoot like flowers from the grave of the just,
rise Count Albrecht's spirit! from your vault, and behold your blood's revenge
glowing in the love of your people. (The gates of the palace open.) Some voices
cry: the Governor! the governor!


SCENE III.
Count HUGO of Werdenberg comes out of the palace, in the midst of the people.
Hugo. What is it, children? what has happened here? --

(The people are crowding round him, each eager to tell his story, nothing but
a confused noise is heard.)
Hugo. I understand you not. Speak singly.


The People. Speak, Mr. Martin! (All are silent.)


Martin, ( the grazier.) I was some days journey in the country about business.
On my return, in a village a league from here night overtook me, and after
having sent on my cattle, I laid down with other strangers upon the straw. It
was dark. But when day light appeared, I awoke, and cast a glance upon the
sleeping Strangers. An old man in Pilgrim's habit lay at my side. His cloth had
been disordered. I saw an armor under his habit, which excited my curiosity. I
looked at him attentively, and perceived on his finger a ring with a seal,
exactly resembling the ring of our murdered Count, which I often heard
described, when it was missing.


The People. Count Albrecht's murderer! he is found! revenge! blood!


Hugo. Silence! Silence! Let him continue speaking!


Martin. My blood chilled. Yet I was uncertain till I discovered at the old
man's feet, a large silver cup -- they may have been drinking the evening
before on their happy return -- when I took up the cup, the arms of Burgundy
stared me in the face.


The People. Enough! Enough! bring him here!


Hugo. Silence, brethren! Let your fellow citizen finish his account!


Martin. I was on the point of drawing my knife to send the villain to hell,
when he opened his eyes. Beside him lay a fine youth, and another man in
Pilgrim's habit. He roused them and they took their way toward the city. I
kept them company, not to loose sight of them. On the way the old man asked me
many questions; whether the people still loved the memory of their good old
Count Albrecht? whether they hated his murderers? and some such things. He also
spoke of you, Governor, and seemed to rejoice when he learnt that you were
still living and in good health. At our arrival at the gates, I called the
guards. We found in their traveling bag among other suspicious things,
Swathing clothes, marked with the Burgundian arms, and the letter H, under a
Lordly Crown. They certainly have once belonged to the poor little Count Henry,
whose innocent blood the villain has spilt.


The Peop. Revenge! Blood! Bring them here!


Hugo. Citizens of Arles! You have suffered under an oppressive yoke. You know,
what may be the evil consequence of a precipitate sentence. Be slow in
punishing! examine carefully! the prisoners cannot escape you. Hear them, and
judge coolly that the smoke of innocent blood may not again rise from this
ground.


The Peop. He is right! -- Let us hear them -- quick! quick!


A voice. Behold, the guards are already conducting the old man toward us!


The Peop. This way, guards! this way to the blood tribunal!


SCENE IV.
PETER, tied, and conducted by a GUARD, enters with a serene countenance, among
the PEOPLE. Hugo. Place him in our center.


A guard. He desired to be brought before the people.


A voice in the back ground. See whether he has an armor under his habit?


Some of the people (Who are nearest to Peter, lift up his habit and cry out)
Yes! yes!


One voice. Look for the ring at his finger.


Some (lift up his tied hands) Yes! yes!


The People. ( Cry tumultuously) Cut him down! tear him to pieces! stone him to
death!

(all push toward the prisoner.)
Hugo. ( preventing them with all his might) Guards protect him! away with you!
a few minutes only! -- hear him! citizens of Arles! if you love me! -- I
entreat you (...) the ashes of your murdered lord!

(The more reasonable citizens unite with Hugo and the guards.) Back! back! he
has desired to speak to the people. Let us hear what the criminal has to say.


Hugo. Silence! In the name of justice! let her balance the scales, and then
strike with the sword. (All are silence. To Peter) You have heard what heavy
crimes you are accused of.


Peter. An ignominious death threatens the innocent in vain! tears of joy roll
down my cheeks, and wet the chains which I carry with honor. After eighteen
years elapse, I behold with extacy the love of the citizens still fervent for
my good Count Albrecht. He was my friend, my benefactor! woe to his murderers!


The Peop. (murmuring) His friend? -- his benefactor? --


Peter. Citizens of Arles! formerly my dear fellow citizens! is there not one
among you, that recognizes me?

(All press forward to look at his face.)
Peter. ( turning to Hugo) Nor you my brother in arms?


Hugo. ( Looking at him attentively) Indeed! this voice does not sound strange
to me!


Peter. My God! have time and grief thus disfigured my features? Is there not
one who in his native place bids welcome to Hans of Bonstetten?


The Peop. Hans of Bonstetten? -- It Is he!


Hugo. (In his arms) Hans of Bonstetten my friend, and brother! has the grave
vomited you again? --


A voice. Yes, yes, I remember him.


Another. And I too.


A third. A brave and good man.


A fourth. The bosom friend of our Court!


The Peop. Take off his chains! Let us carry him on our hands to the grave of
our murdered lord.

( The guards take off his chains. He throws away the pilgrim's habit, and
appears in the dress of a warlike knight.)
Peter. (with emotion) Yes, to the grave of my good Albrecht! hasten, citizens
of Arles! behold his only son, crown him as your lawful sovereign!


The Peop. his son! his son!


Peter. Overcome your surprise! hear me! hear a friend's voice. In that
dreadful night, when the clashing of the swords of hired murderers, and the
groans of the dying surrounded me; when my good master already lay bleeding at
my feet, and his elder sons were drawing their last breath; I called my wife,
to whose care the youngest child was entrusted: Agnez, I cried, save your
precious nursling! the Count's ring I took from the finger of the corpse, the
silver cup I snatched from the table. By a secret door we escaped and reached
the open air. In the darkness of the night, through swamps and bushes, through
thorns and thistles, we walked on unused roads. The sun rose but to perplex us,
for he gave light to our pursuers. During day we hid ourselves in cornfields,
and silenced our hunger with unripe corn, God guarded your prince! we reached
the frontiers of Burgundy. Thence I sent my old companion, my faithful servant
Bruno, back. He was to wait in silence, till he could bring me news of better
times. At the foot of the Alps, in a poor hermit's hut, I took care of the dear
pledge, confided to me by God. The boy has ripened to youthful beauty. Citizens
of Arles! to day I brought him back to you! take him, and your future happiness
from my hands!


The Peop. ( rejoiced) Where -- where! --


Peter. He has been carried with me to prison. The hand that is to sway you, is
in fetters.


The Peop. Along! along! he lives! he lives! Albrech's son.

(The people run off huzzaing, the stage becomes suddenly empty.)
Hugo. Am I awake? -- or in a dream?


Peter. Give me your hand, Hugo! we often parted on this spot squeezing each
others hands, when we returned from the joyous feasts at the castle.


Hugo. Ah! what is become of those fine times!


Peter. They will return. My Henry is a beautiful sprig of the old Burgundian
stem. I educated him as a man, poor and low; blessing on the prince, who knows
poverty!


Hugo. Where is your good Agnez?


Peter. Do not obscure this hour to me?


Hugo. I understand you.


The Peop. ( at a distance) Long live Count Henry of Burgundy!


Peter. Hah! they return already -- Rejoice, Hugo, you will see a noble youth.


SCENE V.
The People carry HENRY upon their hands. The People. There he is! the young
Count -- an eye, like his father's! -- his father's smiling countenance -- Long
live Count Henry!


Some voices in the back ground. Let us see him too! we cannot behold him! lift
him up!


Benedict. Put him here upon my barrel. (Henry is put upon the barrel. A loud
huzza.) Long live Count Henry of Burgundy!

( Trumpets and kettle drums are heard from the castle.)
Henry.


Some of the People. He weeps! He weeps!


Henry, ( with a faultering voice.) Your first sight of me inspires you with
love; for this I have to thank my father -- May his blessing be upon me.


The Peop. ( Lifting up their arms toward heaven.) Count Albrecht's blessing
on his good son!


Henry. If I cannot be to you, what he was, -- I at least will love you as he
did -- ( Lifting his hands and raising his eyes to heaven.) Give with me,
thanks to God for my miraculous preservation.


All the People kneel down. We thank you, God!


A Woman's voice behind the scene. Where is he? where -- where?


Some of the People. Hah! his mother!


SCENE VI.
The Countess of BURGUNDY comes hastily upon the stage. The People, ( calling
out to her,) Your son! your son! ( pointing with their fingers to Henry.)


(She presses through the crowd, spies her Son, reaches out her arms toward
him and sinks down speechless.) Henry. My Mother!


(He is going to jump down. The people gather round him, take him from the
barrel and bring him to his mother's arms.) The People. Long live Matilda! Long
live Henry!


(Trumpets from the balcony of the Castle). Matilda. am I a mother yet? -- is
this my son? -- the only one who was saved! -- (she looks at him with
complacency) oh! In this world we can forget all, but maternal love.


Henry. Give me your blessing!


Matilda. The blessing of your dear father be with you! a prince must be
blessed by his people, not by his mother.


Henry. I will deserve the love of my people, and yours. By God! I will!


Matilda. Hah! my solitary cell will for the first time re-echo the maternal
joy! no more shall I pray for revenge before the Crucifix! -- thanks! --
thanks! -- Oh how much a mother loves to speak these words to the Father of us
all!


Peter. Gracious Countess, allow an old faithful servant to kiss the border of
your garment.


Mat. Knight Hans of Bonstetten! oh, will it ever be in my power to reward you.


Peter. Woe to my heart, if such a scene did not reward it!


Mat. When for the last time you bid me good night in yonder hall -- who could
have thought, that the dawn of morning would be eighteen years after! -- Where
is your good Agnez?


Peter. ( After a pause with emotion.) Her morning has not yet dawned.


Mat. I conceive, -- you and I have but one son now.


Peter. Count Henry of Burgundy, deign me to be the first who swears allegiance
to his new master.

( He kneels.)
Henry, ( throwing himself into his arms.) Do not make me blush. Do not deprive
me of the sweet name, which my heart cannot renounce! Call me your son! Be not
ashamed of me before the people's face.


Peter. ( pressing him to his heart.) My son!


Henry. ( With noble fire.) People of Burgundy! If I once fulfill your hopes, if
I succeed, in indemnifying you for the loss of my father, you will thank this
man for it! He took nothing with him into the wilderness but what no tyrant
could deprive him of -- his virtues! I loved him when a child, I admired him
when a youth, I shall imitate him when a man. He is not the first after me, he
is the first above me! Whatever good through me may flow to you, are but the
unfolded germs of his plantation. Could I ever forget, what he was to me --
what he is -- and will remain; then may God forget me forever!


Peter. It is but a trifling merit, to raise good fruits from noble germs.


Mat. Son! what I see and hear of you, makes me proud to be your mother.


SCENE VII.
A crowd of people come tumultuously from the Palace, carrying a boy, bound.
The people. Revenge! bloody revenge!


Henry. What Is that?


The Boy. Oh mercy! they have tied me.


Count Hugo, ( steps forward.) Who dares to tie this innocent boy? -- I hope,
Count, you will not tarnish the first hours of your reign with a cruelty? This
boy is Ulrich's son, your cousin!


Boy, ( anxiously.) Welcome, cousin!


Hugo. His father has murdered yours. But the son is not to expiate the
father's crimes.


Boy. Kill me not! I will love you.


Matilda. Is he of that race? -- hah! how the sight of him recalls all the
terrors of past times! how it opens the graves that are overgrown with grass,
how murdered corpses begin again to bleed! -- Away with him from my sight, lest
grief might tempt me to unnoble revenge.


Boy. [To Hugo.] What is she angry at?


Mat. [Looking wildly at the boy.] This pious hypocritical look you inherited
from your father; this deceitful smile you stole from your mother.


Boy. Father and mother are dead.


Henry. Who could hate this fine boy? untie him.


Boy. I thank you, it was so painful.


Mat. Be careful, son! do not nourish a serpent in your bosom.


Boy. I am a good boy.


Mat. Your brothers blood calls for revenge!


Henry. Revenge for the living! Tears for the dead. If blood could open their
graves, mine should flow. -- Come here to me, my boy! what is your name?


Boy. My name is Guido.


Henry. Will you be my brother?


Boy. Willingly. What Is your name, then?


Henry. Henry.


Boy. Then you are my brother Henry?


Henry. Yes, I promise it to you in the face of God and my people!


Peter. Right, my son!


Mat. May you never repent it!


Boy. [To Matilda.] Be no more angry. I am afraid of you.


Mat. Leave me! time only can reconcile me to your sight.


Boy. Tell me, brother Henry, what have I done to her?


Henry. Be always good, and you will win her heart.


Boy. Yes, I Will be always good. ( He draws him aside.) What do you think, shall
I give her this rosary?


Henry. My brave boy!

[He lifts him up and presses him to his heart.] [The People give signs of
their emotions.]
Peter. Henry, I am contented with you; you have learnt to govern yourself;
now, and not till now, you deserve to govern men.


Henry. Not yet, father; I have done but what my heart commanded.


Hugo. [Who during this was in conversation with some old citizens, goes to
Henry.] Noble Count, the citizens of Arles are desirous to welcome you
according to old custom. They are going to bring you present, as many centuries
ago the most respectable of the citizens brought to their first good prince.


Henry. Their approbation, their tears, were they not the most exquisite
presents?


Peter. [in a low voice.] Never deny your people, what may give them pleasure.


Henry. Go children, and do, what can give you pleasure.


The Peop. Away, to the townhouse! the presents! the old custom!

(The people all run out.)
Hugo.[ Conducts the boy to the palace.] Boy. [Turns his head.] Are you coming
with us, brother Henry?


Henry. I shall soon follow you, my dear boy.


SCENE VIII.
HENRY, PETER and MATILDA. Matilda.(Standing with folded hands in deep
meditation.) Henry. ( Approaching her.) What makes my good mother so thoughtful?


Mat. ( Recollecting herself.) I? -- Nothing! -- All my senses are chained by
the lovely dream. -- I could not pray even -- unless our Maker would accept
these tears as an offering of thanks! -- I am not ill, yet so faint -- so
fatigued --


Henry. Permit me to conduct you to your former residence.


Mat. Not there! my son! not yet! -- From those gates the murderers have drawn
your mother by her hair.


Henry. Do not draw the past from its obscurity.


Mat. Do you see that open window? -- Ah! there in yonder hall! --


Peter. There, Countess, you were betrothed to the noble Albrecht.


Mat. There have I seen my children's blood foaming against the walls!


Henry. I entreat you, mother -- a veil over those images.


Mat. No, not there! -- Leave me my son! -- Even pleasure wants respite. Allow
me to take breath! --

(She sinks upon a bench at the gates of the palace.)
Henry. (Is going to follow her.) Peter. Stay, my son. There are moments, in
which even love becomes oppressive. Let me ask you: how do you feel?


Henry. Well, my father.


Peter. To have the people's happiness at ones heart, is great and noble! Is it
not my son?


Henry. The heart of man is too narrow for such a sensation.


Peter. It is that narrowness of heart, that makes a man think himself of
superior quality to whom millions look up.


Henry. It is the gratitude of millions only that can justify such a thought.


Peter. I told you, you would forget your youthful whims. Have I been in the
right?


Henry. No, my father, you have been a bad prophet.


Peter. How? -- Still the same --


Henry. Now and ever! now more than ever! The youthful dream has been realized
by a miracle. My hopes were foolish; heaven has taken pity of my folly! I wear
to day another coat, my heart beats under it the same as before; you call me
Count of Burgundy, and I feel still that I am poor Henry.


Peter. ( Warning) Youth!


Henry. Is the sweet feeling, to render men happy, indivissible? Does it not
gain higher attraction, by sharing it? Dare a Prince not to be a father? Must
he not be a father; to learn in a small circle what he is to execute in a great
one?


Peter. He dares and must.


Henry. A prince, who is husband and father -- was not this your own remark of
yesterday? -- has a tender feeling for the welfare of his subjects; he will not
tear from a wife her husband, nor deprive a mother of her son, to carry him
into war, which is perhaps excited by whim or ambition. But a prince who
invites peace with forbearance, will be presented by his princess with a
garland, to ornament the welcome guest.


Peter. Right, my son! have I then desired of you, to remain unmarried?


Henry. Then let us send messengers to Hallwyl.


Peter. Why to Hallwyl!


Henry. I have given my word: Elsbeth or none!


Peter. What Henry promised --


Henry. Count of Burgundy will perform!


Peter. It becomes you not.


Henry. It becomes me not -- a wicked word! Bad actions are as unbecoming the
prince as the beggar. But to crown beauty and virtue, methinks is princely.


Peter. Youth! You have till now seen but few damsels, and love in Elsbeth, but
the sex.


Henry. Well, then invite to court all the daughters of the country; I will
look at them all as at a bed of flowers: here a beautiful tulip; there an
odoriferous violet: here an innocent lilly; there a scented pink -- Oh! they
are all nothing in comparison to the queen of flowers, the glowing rose.


Peter. ( Smiling.) Indeed, Henry, you have a turn for poetry. But learn first
your people's wish, your mother's council; follow the one, and obey the other.


Henry. (At Matilda's feet.) Do not deny my first request!


Mat. Rise, my son, what is your wish?


Henry. You bestowed your blessing on your son -- ah! you have a daughter too.


Mat. A daughter?


Henry. In the Swiss mountains there dwells a valiant knight, his family is
noble and renowned; but the most noble of her sex is Elsbeth of Hallwyl -- my
beloved -- let me add: my wife!


Mat. Do I hear right? you are married?


Henry. Not without your blessing. Speak a friendly word, and I fly to the arms
of my graceful bride.


Mat. Rise, my son. What answer can I give you? you are of age.


Peter. My Henry knows that a son in his mother's presence, never is of age.


Henry. I know it, and wait my judgment.


Mat. A Baroness Hallwyl you mentioned?


Henry. This name comprises all that is good and beautiful!


Mat. You know her, Bonstetten?


Peter. I know her. She wants nothing but equal birth.


Henry. A nobler creature was never born.


Mat. Count of Burgundy! the hearts of princes are subject to the people.


Henry. To choose another consort, were depriving my people of a mother.


Mat. You must support your throne by brilliant alliances.


Henry. Even without splendour, virtue is a powerful support.


Mat. The rich heiress of Savoy --


Henry. Do not finish the sentence, mother --


Mat. She would bring you a principality as a dowry.


Henry. Without Elsbeth, I will even renounce what I possess already.


Mat. She is handsome and good.


Henry. ( Pointing to his heart.) Here is no space left for any other beauty.


Mat. Examine first your heart.


Henry. A heart that remained firm in the intoxication of fortune, wants no
other proof.


Mat. Wait a year at least.


Henry. I dare not delay, another sues for her possession. Ah! if it already
was too late!


Mat. You destroy my dearest wishes, deprive me of high views.


Henry. A purple coat A dress wore by the European princes when sitting in
state.
is not the garment of domestic happiness; a heart without love remains cold
even under a furr coat.


Mat. Knight of Bonstetten, tell me in sincerity, what you think of it?


Peter. Shall I speak as a man or as a courtier?


Henry. (Rises hastily.) Speak as a father.


Peter. Well then! I have seen these young plants entwine their roots I am not
able to separate them.


Henry. Thanks! thanks! for this paternal word. -- Oh! my mother! what means
your serious silence?


Mat. (After a pause.) Indeed, eighteen years of solitude have taught me to
distinguish truth. I know the tears of anxiety and love. -- Ah! I know them! --
You have subdued my pride, go and obey the wishes of your heart!


Henry. ( In extacy, embraces alternately Peter and his mother.) Father! --
Mother! --


SCENE IX.
Enter, Count HUGO. Henry. (Going toward him.) It Is well you come, dear Count;
you have gained my confidence --


Hugo. Too soon, my noble young master! confidence is not a piece of coin, to
put upon the hazard of a die; we must not gain, but deserve it.


Henry. The opportunity is at hand. I employ you as my suitor.


Hugo. For your future spouse?


Henry. ( jokingly.) Count Hugo, you are a Courtier. If I am to confide in you,
I must travel with you myself. I myself! -- excellent! -- a numerous suite
accompanies the ambassador of Burgundy, myself amongst them as a page; hide
myself behind his attendants; to be witness of Elsbeth's charming bashfulness;
-- hear her refuse the Count of Burgundy for Henry's sake! hear how the prince
in vain endeavors to dispossess the poor hermit's son from her heart. -- All
this I shall see and hear, run to her arms and with a kiss -- snatch the
approaching terror from her lips! -- happy Henry! you will radiate above all
the sons of princes! for, which of them can say: The girl loved me, and not my
purple!


Hugo. Still I am at a loss --


Henry. You shall know all -- and when shall we set off? -- tomorrow early --
no, the days are hot -- in the cool of the evening -- or -- at this moment --
the sun is setting.


Peter. (smiling.) Henry, it is yet but noon. Devote this day at least to your
people.


Henry. The most solemn day for them is yet to come! that day when I with
Elsbeth at my side will enter the gates of Arles, when old and young stare at
us with admiration; when the children will smilingly stretch out their little
hands, while they fancy they behold an angel; and old men with emotion exclaim:
Now we may die contented -- O mother! mother!

(He throws himself into Matilda's arms.)
SCENE X.
A solemn march. Boys and girls dressed in white, lead in the midst of them, a
lamb, ornamented with ribbons. They are followed by youths and young girls with
garlands. Some old men close the procession, one of whom carries a golden cup
filed with pieces of gold. The procession ranges itself on both sides. The
music is silent. The old man with the cup advances, and addresses HENRY. Old
Man. My hands tremble; but of pleasure; my eyes are wet; but with tears of joy!
-- Accept, noble Count, according to immemorial custom, the trifling presents
of our city, It is an old custom. I beg you to consider: that love to our
princes is also an old custom.


Henry. (taking the cup.) Your love is my paternal inheritance. What I have not
to acquire, I shall at least know how to preserve.


A young Damsel, (approaches him and puts a myrtle garland on his head). Father
of our country, give us soon a mother.


Henry. I thank you, my child. Before these myrtles decay, your wishes shall be
fulfilled.


A little Girl, (leading the lamb to him). Noble Count, take this lamb, the
emblem of our innocence. It can yet but leap and play; but under your care it
will grow, and give milk and wool.


Henry, (gives the lamb to a page, embraces the little girl, and throws the
pieces of gold into her apron). Take this, and carry it to your parents.


Little Girl. I am an orphan.


Henry, (throwing her into Matilda's arms). Then I give you a mother! --
attendants give me some wine! the cup is empty! the presents of my people, are
flown back to them. Your love is the only present I preserve in my bosom; you
have exchanged your hearts for mine. ( A page has meanwhile filled the cup.)
Long live my people! (He drinks.)


The old man. (drying his eyes.) Blessing on our fine young lord!


All. Prosperity! and blessing!

(the curtain drops.)
END OF THE THIRD ACT.
ACT IV.
An Apartment in the Castle of Hallwyl.

SCENE I.
ELSBETH -- Alone. (She is spining. Beside her hangs a cage with a bird in it.)
ARE you tired at last with singing, little warbler? What makes you pick so much
at the wire? you want to get out? -- Will you desert me too, you only creature,
to whom I may complain of what oppresses me! -- Tarry only, till Henry returns
-- Oh! he will come for certain! -- (She spins, and tries to sing) God knows, why
I cannot sing; -- my throat is not sore, but strangled. -- Formerly when I was
leaping down the mountain, I sang louder than you, dear Linnet! that Henry
might know me at a distance. Now every thing is so silent about me, that I can
hear the moving of the time-piece at the wall. -- It perhaps points to my last
hour! -- Well then! -- If Henry not returns -- ( she spins and weeps.) Of this
flax they shall weave my shroud; it is wetted with my tears! --


SCENE II.
Mother GERTRAUD, with a large bunch of flowers. Gertr. Be joyful, Miss! all
troubles are at an end.


Elsb. ( Jumping up) Is Henry here?


Gertr. What! Henry! he may go on a pilgrimage to Palestine, and fetch a
splinter of the holy cross, a good remedy for the toothach. No, quite different
things are now in question! Behold this beautiful nosegay, variegated like a
wood-pecker, odorifarous like Indian spice. Whom do you think I got it of.


Elsb. Its indifferent to me.


Gertr. Do but see, and smell.


Elsb. My rose is finer and smells more delicious.


Gertr. The withered rose? hah! hah! hah! you have not taken it from your bosom
these ten days.


Elsb. But I plucked it from the bush which Henry planted.


Gertr. And what of that? you will soon sing another song. Hurrah! Miss, your
bridegroom is arrived.


Elsb. No, no, he does not come so soon.


Gertr. He is even now in the armory, in conversation with your father. He sent
me, meanwhile, with this nosegay. -- give my love, he said, to the noble young
lady, my charming bride. And then he slipped a piece of gold into my hand, the
dear gentleman! -- Your father sends you word to dress yourself in your best
clothes.


Elsb. My good mother, plague me not.


Gertr. Plague you, indeed! poor child, ha! ha! ha! she is ashamed.


Elsb. Is the knight here indeed?


Gertr. Indeed he is; why should I cause you useless joy?


Elsb. And is come, to take me for a wife?


Gertr. What else for then?


Elsb. No! never!

(She leans against an open window and looks sorrowfully through it.)
Gertr. I don't know what to think of you. I am afraid the old witch down in
the village has played her tricks with you. That wicked hag does great mischief
among men and cattle. The magistrates should be more vigilant. Is it not a
pity, how the poor child pines away. Her clothes become too wide. She used to
hop along upon one leg, but now she can scarcely crawl upon two. Formerly she
laughed at every thing; now she weeps for nothing. But patience, she will laugh
enough, when she sees this fine knight. He is grown thick and sat; a dark
complexion, black wiskers, a fine dress, and feathers in his hat. All is alive
below in the castle yard; there are pages and chamber maids, horses and mules,
chests and trunks without number. Ah! what fine things and bridal ornaments
must they contain. My mouth water at the thought of it! -- Heaven has at last
granted my prayers, I shall live to conduct my sweet young lady to her bridal
chamber, and put on her nightcap. -- But, you hear me not, what are you staring
at through this window?


Elsb. Do you see, dear Gertraud, Henry's hut below in the valley? -- Alas, it
is empty!


Gertr. What do you care about the old rotten hut, think rather of Walter's
stately castle.


Elsb. A hut with Henry! -- Ah! but a hut with Henry!


Gertr. Pshaw! dear child, better is better! Love's easiest death, ir the death
of hunger. -- But, what are you about? the bird will fly out.


Elsb. So he shall. (She opened the cage.) Go and seek thy mate.


Gertr. Strange girl! She has fed and nursed that little bird with the greatest
care -- and now the whim takes her -- hush! they are coming.


Elsb. In the name of God!

(Runs away.)
Gertr. Where, where are you going to? -- Yet, she is in the right! she has to
put on her Sunday clothes. Bertha shall curl her hair. A gown with a long
sweeping train -- a hoop petticoat -- a gold chain -- and then no meat for
Henry, though he were Emperor Henry, the bird catcher. (She waddles off.)


SCENE III.
CUNO and WALTER of BLONAY. (Conversing.) Walter. If I only do not appear too
old to the beautiful Elsbeth.


Cuno. Too old? how mean you that?


Walt. I am passed the years, in which men sing lovesongs to women, and dress
themselves in their colors.


Cuno. My Elsbeth has no colors. A blank shield without device.


Walt. I was but a youth, when by my bravery in battle, I acquired the crowned
Lion for my device. Many a fine damsel would then have rejoiced, if I had
exchanged the lion, crown and all, for a heart pierced by darts. But now --


Cuno. Well? now? Are you not still a manly, active knight.


Walt. I don't know. My journey to the holy Sepulcher has hurt my constitution,
the Egyptian sun has brought wrinkles to my face. The Saracenes have lamed my
arm, and the cut I received on my head has made me bald-headed.


Cuno. All evidences of your valor, the finest ornaments of knighthood!


Walt. May be to a father! but the daughter is no Amazon.


Cuno. Be unconcerned. Wait here a little, I Will send Elsbeth to you, and then
in God's name divulge to her the matter yourself.

(Exit.)
Walt. (Alone.) It must be true, what has been said by the old poets; that
valor becomes speechless before beauty. It is easier to attack a horde of Arabs
than to address a fine damsel. -- But here she comes -- what shall I say to
her? -- Before I sat out for the holy Sepulcher the little thing played with
the plume in my helmet -- and now -- she plays with my heart -- casts it away
perhaps, like broken toys. -- Good Cuno! a smooth chin is more agreeable to
women than a bald head. If an arm is too weak to throw it around a neck, they
care but little whether it has been lamed by the cut of a Saracene -- Walter!
Walter! be on your guard! you have escaped the fetters of the infidels; if you
fall into the snares of love, the absolution will avail you nothing, which you
have so dearly purchased.


SCENE IV.
Enter ELSBETH. Elsbeth. ( With embarrassment.) Good day to you, valiant
knight! My father sent me here.


Walter. And without your father's command you would not have come to meet me?


Elsb. Why not? you are an old friend of our house.


Waler. An old friend is often more welcome than a new lover?


Elsb, (at a loss what to say). You must know that better than I.


Walter. So, so, -- Do you know, my charming girl, that you are grown half a
head taller, since I saw you last?


Elsb. And you are grown older, Knight.


Walter. (aside). So, so, that sounds edifying, how shall I take up the thread
of conversation? -- (loud) Yes, yes, time will even make an armor moulder. It
is to me as if your charming cheerfulness had remained sticking in your
children's shoes?


Elsb. Ah! I was so happy in my childhood!


Walter. Will your future life be less so?


Elsb. An old gipsy has foretold me many fine things, but I am afraid she has
told me lies.


Walter, So, so -- Tell me what the old one has prophesied to you?


Elsb. She looked at my hand, love and pleasure, she said, every where, and the
long line signifies: to the highest age.


Walt. Now, the love is found already. --


Elsb. Yes, but the pleasure --


Walt. Is Love's slave, and serves him willingly. You know, charming miss, why
I am here?


Elsb. My father told it me.


Walt. I wish your heart had told it you.


Elsb. My father wishes that too.


Walt. I am, it is true, forty already; I cannot gain your heart by youthful
attraction; my love is not of glowing coals, but constant warmth; not of
tinsel, but of stuff, woven with integrity and faith. I rave no more, know
nothing of whim and humor, am tomorrow, like today, honest, without varnish.
I cannot say more. Now tell me, what you think.


Elsb. You are an honest man, I cannot deceive you.


Walt. Your pious eye speaks plain. You would not even deceive a rogue.


Elsb. If you value your happiness and mine, do not take me for your wife.


Walt. Take? fie! you shall give yourself to me.


Elsb. That I cannot.


Walt. ( Aside.) I thought so!


Elsb. My father will compel me.


Walt. He shall not.


Elsb. Pardon me!


Walt. What have I done to incur your hatred?


Elsb. I hate no one, and you least; I love all mankind, and you before many.


Walt. And yet --


Elsb. I will go into a convent.


Walt. Don't do that; for as little as I may be worth, in my castle is yet
better living than in a convent.


Elsb. A vow binds me.


Walt. To whom have you vowed.


Elsb. To the holy Agatha.


Walt. Look at me: Is that true?


Elsb. ( Unable to lie) No, it is not true.


Walt. A vow may bind you, but not to the holy Agatha. Am I right, Miss?


Elsb. I entreat your compassion.


Walt. I don't know which of us is most in want of compassion. I would rather
let you go to our Savior, than to a youth deserving of my envy. -- With me it
is all over! Farewell, my sweet dream! instead of a lovely wife, nobody will be
about me but the castle priest; instead of the merry noise of my boys and
girls, the hounds will howl in their kennel; good night, Walter? if you had not
been so foolish as to go in your youthful days on a pilgrimage to the holy
sepulcher, you might have found a damsel, who one time would have strewed your
grave with flowers. You have met with your desert! why did you go in quest of
happiness to Palestine? it dwells in every place where there is love!


Elsb. Good man! I wish to see you happy.


Walt. Yes, if it can be done without you, is it not so?


Elsb. I hear my father; ah! he will be angry.


Walt. Had I but a child! even though it gave me cause of anger.


SCENE V.
Enter CUNO. -- The FORMER. Cuno. ( In good spirits) Now? have you settled
matters?


Walt. Completely.


Cuno. Has the girl been bashful.


Walt. Not at all.


Cuno. That Is well, Elsbeth. How do you like him.


Elsb. Very well.


Cuno. Are you contented?


Elsb. If you are so.


Cuno. Yes, yes, dear girl! I am as much rejoiced as if I had to go to my own
wedding.


Walt. So you must.


Cuno. I?


Walt. If you want to celebrate a wedding in this house.


Cuno. How mean you that? -- I guess -- you intend at your own castle? -- I
shall not suffer that! I am not rich, but to my Elsbeth's day of honor I give
my last ounce of silver.


Walt. You are mistaken.


Cuno. Wherein?


Walt. She will not have me.


Cuno. What! do you make jest of me?


Walt. Far from it.


Cuno. Did you not say just now that all was settled?


Walt. That we shall not marry, is settled.


Cuno. That she without bashfulness --


Walt. Has told me, that she could not love me.


Cuno. And you -- you cast down your eyes?


Elsb. My father --


Cuno. Is it true?


Elsb. Do not be angry!


Cuno. Naughty child! will there be every day such suitors? you are a poor
girl, your smooth face is but a slender dowry. You also know that I cannot,
lead you, dressed in silk and velvet, from one carousal to another, there to be
stared and eyed at. You bloom here in obscurity; no one sees you, no one knows
you; the number of my friends is but small, for at my house there are no
festivals. You ought to thank your patron saint for having sent to you un
upright man, who does not despise our poverty.


Walt. No persuasion, knight. I love to see the hops voluntarily encircle the
elm; but I do not like to see them tied to it.


Cuno. Pooh! Pooh! a little constraint, and it soon becomes natural. --
Elsbeth! prepare yourself: On All Saint's Day your wedding with this worthy
man, will take place.


Elsb. Father, I cannot! Let me retire into a convent.


Cuno. Into a convent? Are you serious?


Elsb. Yes, father, the sooner! the better! there I Will pray for you.


Cuno. What will your prayers avail me? Those who do not act piously, pray. --
I am old and weak, have no other support, and no other pleasure, but you -- and
me you will desert? -- As I stood weeping at your mother's death bed; and with
groans exclaimed: Who will now nurse me in my old age! the angel once more
opened her eyes, smilingly pointed to you -- and expired.


Elsb. ( Falls weeping upon his neck.) Ah! my father!


Cuno. I trusted to the promise of a dying wife. With consolation, I saw you
grow up. Feeling my strength decline, I always said within myself, she will
nurse me, she and my grand children; when attacked by the gout or lamed by the
rheumatism, and unable to lift the spoon to my mouth, then she will feed me,
she and my grand children.


Elsb. ( Anxiously embracing him.) Father! dear father!


Cuno. When, on account of my fidelity to my liege Lord, the Count of Greyerz,
the Emperor proscribed me; when the finest of my castles became destroyed and
demolished, and I saw my property go to ruin; then I thought: If God pleases,
my Elsbeth will be spared to me! and if she finds a good and rich husband, I
will live with her, she will not let me suffer in my old age. -- Alas! poor old
man! she goes to a convent and prays, to the saints to help her father, whom
she does not like to assist herself. -- Go! go! mother Gertraud will close my
dying eyes.

( He weeps)
Elsb. (Agitated.) Father! you weep? ( Turning hastily to Walter.) Knight, I Will
be your wife!


Walt. I ought not to take advantage of this emotion; yet the sensibility, that
leads you to my arms, is so pious and noble, that I draw from it sweet hopes
for my future happiness. If such the daughter -- how precious must be the wife!


Cuno. ( Embracing her.) She is my daughter! -- A mother's blessing and a
father's thanks will accompany her to her new abode. When God intends to reward
good children, he makes them benefactors to their parents!


Elsb. May your tears and the last smile of my mother always be before my eyes.


Walt. ( Taking a ring from his finger.) May I offer this ring to my graceful
bride. --


Cuno. Give it me, my son. (He takes the ring, puts it on Elsbeth's trembling
finger, and joins their hands.) God bless you, and may your descendants
flourish to the latest posterity!


Elsb.( Trembling.) Cuno. What ails you? -- Gertraud! Gertraud!


Elsb. Don't call -- have patience with me -- it will soon be over --


Cuno. Recover yourself -- retire to your chamber --

(The sound of a trumpet behind the scene.)
Cuno. Hah! the watchman on the steeple sounds the horn. We shall have guests
at the wedding feast.


Elsb. Not today, my father -- only not today. -- I am not able to receive
your guests kindly.


Walt. Be tranquil, my lovely bride. You shall suffer no constraint.


Elsb. I am not well -- indeed I am not! -- but I shall soon be better. (She
reels away, raises her eyes and hands toward heaven, and mutters to herself:)
Ah, Henry!

( Exit.)
Walt. ( Looks thoughtfully after her, and shakes his head.) I cannot rejoice
in my good fortune.


Cuno. Content yourself, and give the bride time only, to drop the character of
the maiden.


SCENE VI.
Enter ATTENDANT. Attendant. An ambassador of the Count of Burgundy halts at
the bridge, and desires to speak to you.


Cuno. From the Count of Burgundy? what has he to do with me? -- he has lost
his way perhaps?


Attend. He enquired for Knight Cuno of Hallwyl.


Cuno. And the name of the ambassador.


Attend. Is Count Hugo of Werdenberg.


Cuno. Incomprehensible. Let down the drawbridge; assist him to dismount, and
conduct him here. (Exit attendant.) They do not speak well of the Count of
Burgundy. Is it not the same that killed his brother Albrecht?


Walt. It is said, that he is dead.


Cuno. It Is all the same. Also with his son I Will have no concern.


Walter. I am well acquainted with the Ambassador. In our youthful days we
broke many a lance together. An embassy in which Count Hugo of Werdenberg is
concerned can be for no unworthy purpose.


SCENE VII.
Enter Count HUGO, with a large retinue, among them HENRY as a page, hid among
the crowd. Hugo. Hail, noble Knight!


Cuno. You are welcome!


Hugo. I beg for a night's lodging.


Cuno. As good as I can give.


Hugo. Do I see right? Is not that Walter of Blonay?


Walter. It Is he.


Hugo. (Shaking hands with him.) It Is long since I saw you. How fare you?


Walt. The sun still shines into my garden.


Hugo. Good luck to you. ( Turning to Cuno.) Knight I have to deliver a message
to you.


Cuno. Speak in peace. --


Hugo. Henry, Count of Burgundy, Lord of Arles, greets you, and requests your
daughter, the noble Baroness Elsbeth of Hallwyl, as his spouse.

( After a pause, during which Cuno and Walter regard each other with
astonishment.)
Cuno. Knight not to mistrust your words, are you not mistaken?


Hugo. Not at all.


Cuno. Is your message indeed to Cuno of Hallwyl?


Hugo. To Cuno of Hallwyl.


Cuno. To the poor Cuno, whose property the Imperial proscription swallowed up?
and who holds the last remains of his castles in fief of a monk?


Hugo. To the same. Count Henry, my master, desires no other dowry than your
daughter's heart.


Cuno. Strange! by God! very strange! How can your Count have desire for a
damsel, he never saw?


Hugo. She is not strange to him, he often saw her.


Cuno. Then he has been fluttering round her window with the swallows, for her
foot never stepped beyond the limits of Hallwyl.


Hugo. No matter, he knows and loves her.


Cuno. I am sorry for it. Tell your master, that I think myself highly honored
by his offer, yet my consent to his request is no more in my power, for my
daughter is the bride of this worthy man.


Hugo. You perplex me. Knight Blonay, you often gained of me the price of arms,
yet I always remained your friend, but I envy you for the wreath of love.


Walt. I have only seen the buds, perhaps the blossoms will prosper with you
better.


Cuno. What do you mean by that? Do you doubt the honor of a knight? -- Cuno of
Hallwyl has never forfeited his word, and Elsbeth bears your ring upon her
finger.


Walt. I expected that of you, noble knight, and thank you for it. But here is
not the question, of what becomes you, or what pleases me? -- I give you back
your word; Elsbeth only can decide.


Cuno. God knows, how I dote on the damsel! yet were she capable of deviating
on this occasion, from the conduct which I demand and expect of her; I would
tear her from my heart! -- Go, page, and call my daughter. (A page goes off.)
(To Hugo.) Knight, do not take it amiss, you know the laws of honor. If I
cannot fulfill your wish, you are notwithstanding heartily welcome to my house.


Hugo. I have not lost all hopes yet.


Walt. With permission, knight, how old is your lord?


Hugo. Nineteen years,


Walt. Luck to them! Youth only plucks the roses of love.


Cuno. Be resolute, they will yet blossom among your laurels.


SCENE VIII.
Enter ELSBETH. Elsbeth. You have sent for me, father?


Cuno. Come nearer. Here is Count Hugo of Werdenberg.


Elsb.( Makes a courtesy.) Cuno. He solicits your hand, in the name of his
lord, the Count of Burgundy.


Elsb. You jest, father.


Hugo. It is earnest, Baroness. Permit me, to be the first, who pays his
respects to the new Countess of Burgundy, as my future sovereign.


Elsb. Knight, you think me to be a child. Who is this Count of Burgundy? Do I
know him? Have I ever heard of him?


Hugo. He loves you with warmth and honesty.


Elsb. How can he love me? has he seen me in a dream?


Hugo. If you do not trust my words, accept these jewels, as a token of their
truth. The Countess, Matilda, his mother, sends them to her beloved
daughter-in-law.


Elsb. Do you delight in my perplexity? Can my good father make jest of me?


Cuno. Not at all! The proposal is serious, for with Hallwyl's daughter no one
shall dare to sport. What I in duty had to say, I have said already; it is your
turn, speak, the language of your heart.


Elsb. Ah father! you know, my heart is attached to one alone! -- and that only
one is lost to me! -- Good Henry! If I am not to possess you, a throne has no
attraction for me! -- For your sake, father, I have given my word to this man,
and I will keep it. ( She offers Walter her hand, and then turns to Hugo.)
Knight, tell your master, that Elsbeth of Hallwyl is betrothed.


Henry. (calling out) Do not tell him so, knight! he would die with grief!


Elsb. (Looking around her, and falling into a swoon.) Henry.


Cuno and Walter. (Looking at the attendants.) What was that?


Hugo. My part is done. Count Henry, you must speak for yourself.


Henry. (Throwing himself down at Elsbeth's feet.) Away with the princely
crown! Here I lay it down at Elsbeth's feet. She loved the poor Henry, and the
poor Henry she shall again recognize, when she opens her lovely eyes.


Cuno. I feel strange? Is not this Henry? the old hermit's son.


Hugo. The son of Count Albrecht of Burgundy, whose uncle slayed his father,
and eighteen years withheld from him his parental inheritance.


Elsb. (recovering) Henry is it you?


Henry. Remember your vow, by the holy Agatha!


Elsb. My Henry!


Henry. You have refused my mother's jewels; behold the floweret lies within it
which you gave me at our parting.


Elsb. Have I been dead? and now awake in heaven?


Cuno. Miracles! Where is brother Peter?


Hugo. He has methamorphosed himself into the knight Hans of Bonstetten.


Elsb. (pointing to Walter) Father! For the love of God! -- I cannot become
this man's wife.


Walt. God forbid, that I should separate such a pair! remain my friend, noble
Miss, wear my ring as a remembrance of a faithful friend.


Henry. (rises and falls on Walter's neck) Take all my treasures! this one only
leave to me!


Walt. Its love that gives it you.


Cuno. It is the finger of God!


Henry and Elsb. (throwing themselves at Cuno's feet) Your blessing, father!


Cuno. ( Bending over them with emotion.) Take it with these tears of joy!


The Attendants. Long live the young Countess of Burgundy!!!

( The curtain drops.)
THE END.

