VOICE OF WARNING, TO CHRISTIANS, ON THE ENSUING ELECTION OF A PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES.

Blow the trumpet in Zion -- WHO IS ON THE LORD'S SIDE? NEW YORK: PRINTED AND
SOLD BY G. F. HOPKINS, AT WASHINGTON'S HEAD, NO. 136, PEARL-STREET.

1800.

TO CHRISTIANS,
Who prize a good conscience, a consistent character, and the honor of their
Redeemer, above all personal and political attachments; THE FOLLOWING PAMPHLET
IS DEDICATED: With the single request, that, laying aside passion, they will
give it such a calm, serious, and considerate perusal, as they owe to an
argument relative to the best interests of themselves, their families, their
country, and the Church of God.

N. YORK, September 30, 1800.
THE VOICE OF WARNING, etc.
IF a manly attempt to avert national ruin, by exposing a favorite error,
should excite no resentment, nor draw any obloquy upon its author, there would
certainly be a new thing under the sun. Men can seldom bear contradiction. They
bear it least when they are most demonstrably wrong; because, having
surrendered their judgment to prejudice, or their conscience to design, they
must take refuge in obstinacy from the attacks of reason. The bad, dreading
nothing so much as the prevalence of pure principle and virtuous habit, will
ever be industrious in counteracting it; and the more candid, rational and
convincing the means employed in its behalf, the louder will be their clamor,
and the fiercer their opposition. On the other hand, good men are often led
insensibly astray, and their very honesty becomes the guarantee of their
delusion. Unaware, at first, of their inconsistency, they afterward shrink
from the test of their own profession. Startled by remonstrance, but unprepared
to recede; checked by the misgivings of their own minds, yet urged on by their
previous purpose and connection, the conflict renders them irritable, and they
mark as their enemy whoever tells them the truth. From the coincidence of such
a bias with the views of the profligate and daring, results incalculable
mischief. The sympathy of a common cause unites the persons engaged in it; the
shades of exterior character gradually disappear; Virtue sinks from her glory;
Vice emerges from her infamy; the best and the basest appear nearly on a level;
while the most atrocious principles either lose their horror, or have a veil
thrown over them: and the man who endeavors to arrest their course, is singled
out as a victim to revenge and madness. Such, from the beginning, has been the
course of the world. None of its benefactors have escaped its calumnies and
persecutions: not prophets, not apostles, not the Son of God himself. To this
treatment, therefore, must every one be reconciled, who labors to promote the
best interests of his country. He must stake his popularity against his
integrity; he must encounter a policy which will be contented with nothing
short of his ruin; and if it may not spill his blood, will strive to overwhelm
him with public execration. That this is the spirit which has pursued a writer,
the purity of whose views is equalled only by their importance -- I mean the
author of " Serious Considerations on the Election of a President," I need not
inform any who inspect the gazettes. To lay before the people of the United
States, proofs that a candidate for the office of their first magistrate, is an
unbeliever in the scriptures; and that to confer such a distinction upon an
open enemy to their religion, their Redeemer, and their hope, would be mischief
to themselves and sin against God, is a crime never to be forgiven by a class
of men too numerous for our peace or prosperity. The infidels have risen en
mass, and it is not through their moderation that he retains any portion of
his respectability or his usefulness. But in their wrath there is nothing to
deprecate; nor does he deserve the name of a Christian, who, in order to avoid
it, would deviate an hair's breadth from his duty. For them I write not.
Impenetrable by serious principle, they are not objects of expostulation, but
of compassion; nor shall I stoop to any solicitude about their censure or
applause.

But do I represent as infidels all who befriend Mr. Jefferson's election? God
forbid that I should so "lie against the truth." If I thought so, I should
mourn in silence: my pen should slumber forever. That a majority of them
profess, and that multitudes of them really love, the religion of Jesus, while
it is my terror, is also my hope. Terror, because I believe them to be under a
fatal mistake; hope, because they, if any, are within the reach of conviction.
I address myself to them. The latter, especially, are my brothers, by dearer
ties and higher interests than can be created or destroyed by any political
connection. And if it be asked, Why mingle religion with questions of policy?
Why irritate by opposition? Why risk the excitement of passions which may
disserve, but cannot aid, the common Christianity? Why not maintain a prudent
reserve, and permit matters of State to take their own course? I answer,
Because Christians are deeply engaged already: Because the principles of the
gospel are to regulate their political, as well as their other, conduct:
Because their Christian character, profession and prosperity are involved in
the issue. This is no hour to temporize. I abhor that coward spirit which
vaunts when gliding down the tide of opinion, but shrinks from the returning
current, and calls the treason prudence. It is the voice of God's providence
not less than of his word, Cry aloud, spare not; lift up thy voice like a
trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their
sins. With Christians, therefore, I must expostulate; and may not refrain.
However they may be displeased, or threaten, I will say, with the Athenian
chief, " Strike, but hear me."

FELLOW CHRISTIANS,

A crisis of no common magnitude awaits our country. The approaching election
of a President is to decide a question not merely of preference to an eminent
individual, or particular views of policy, but, what is infinitely more, of
national regard or disregard to the religion of Jesus Christ. Had the choice
been between two infidels or two professed Christians, the point of politics
would be untouched by me. Nor, though opposed to Mr. Jefferson, am I to be
regarded as a partizan; since the principles which I am about to develope, will
be equally unacceptable to many on both sides of the question, I dread the
election of Mr. Jefferson, because I believe him to be a confirmed infidel: you
desire it, because, while he is politically acceptable, you either doubt this
fact, or do not consider it essential. Let us, like brethren, reason this
matter.

The general opinion rarely, if ever, mistakes a character which private
pursuits and public functions have placed in different attitudes; yet it is
frequently formed upon circumstances which elude the grasp of argument even
while they make a powerful and just impression. Notwithstanding, therefore, the
belief of Mr. Jefferson's infidelity, which has for years been uniform and
strong, wherever his character has been a subject of speculation -- although
that infidelity has been boasted by some, lamented by many, and undisputed by
all, yet as it is now denied by his friends, the charge, unsupported by other
proof, could hardly be pursued to conviction. Happily for truth and for us, Mr.
Jefferson has written; he has printed. While I shall not decline auxiliary
testimony, I appeal to what he never retracted, and will not deny, his Notes on
Virginia. The edition which I use is the second American edition, published at
Philadelphia, by Matthew Carey, 1794.


In their war upon revelation, infidels have levelled their batteries against
the miraculous facts of the scripture: well knowing that if its historical
truth can be overturned, there is an end of its claim to inspiration. But God
has protected his word. Particularly the UNIVERSAL DELUGE, the most stupendous
miracle of the old testament, is fortified with impregnable evidence. The globe
teems with demonstrations of it. Every mountain and hill and valley lifts up
its voice to confirm the narrative of Moses. The very researches and
discoveries of infidels themselves, contrary to their intentions, their wishes
and their hopes, are here compelled to range behind the banner of the bible. To
attack, therefore, the scriptural account of the deluge, belongs only to the
most desperate infidelity. Now, what will you think of Mr. Jefferson's
Christianity, if he has advanced positions which strike directly at the truth
of God's word concerning that wonderful event? Let him speak for himself: It
said that shells are found in the Andes, in South America, fifteen thousand
feet above the level of the ocean. This is considered by many, both of the
learned and unlearned, as a proof of an universal deluge. But to the many
considerations opposing this opinion, the following may be added: The
atmosphere and all its contents, whether of water, air, or other matters,
gravitate to the earth; that is to say, they have weight. Experience tells us,
that the weight of all these columns together, never exceeds that of a column
of mercury of 31 inches high. If the whole contents of the atmosphere then were
water, instead of what they are, it would cover the globe but 35 feet deep:
but, as these waters as they fell, would run into the seas, the superficial
measure of which is to that of the dry parts of the globe, as two to one, the
seas would be raised only 52 feet above their present level, and of course
would overflow the land to that height only. In Virginia this would be a very
small proportion even of the champaign country, the banks of our tide-waters
being frequently, if not generally, of a greater height. Deluges beyond this
extent then, as for instance, to the North mountain or to Kentucky, seem out of
the laws of Nature. But within it they may have taken place to a greater or
less degree, in proportion to the combination of natural causes which may be
supposed to have produced them. -- But such deluges as these, will not account
for the shells found in the higher lands. A second opinion has been
entertained, which is, that in times anterior to the records either of history
or tradition, the bed of the ocean, the principal residence of the shelled
tribe, has, by some great convulsion of nature, been heaved to the heights at
which we now find shells and other remains of marine animals. The favorers of
this opinion do well to suppose the great events on which it rests to have
taken place beyond all the aeras of history; for within these certainly none
such can be found; and we may venture to say further, that no fact has taken
place either in our own days, or in the thousands of years recorded in history,
which proves the existence of any natural agents within or without the bowels
of the earth, of force sufficient to heave to the height of 15,000 feet, such
masses as the Andes. Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, p. 39 -- 41.
After mentioning another opinion proposed by Voltaire, Mr. J. proceeds, There
is a wonder somewhere. Is it greatest on this branch of the dilemma; on that
which supposes the existence of a power of which we have no evidence in any
other case; or on the first which requires us to believe the creation of a body
of water and its subsequent annihilation? Rejecting the whim of Voltaire, he
concludes, that the three hypotheses are EQUALLY unsatisfactory, and we must be
contented to acknowledge, that this great phenomenon is, as yet, unsolved.
Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, p. 42.


On these extracts, I cannot suppress the following reflections.

1. Mr. Jefferson disbelieves the existence of an universal deluge. There are
MANY CONSIDERATIONS, says he, "OPPOSING this opinion." The bible says
expressly, The waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth, and ALL THE HIGH
HILLS THAT WERE UNDER THE WHOLE HEAVEN were covered. Genesis vii. 19.
Mr. Jefferson enters into a philosophical argument to prove the fact
impossible; that is, he argues in the very face of God's word, and, as far as
his reasoning goes, endeavors to convict it of falsehood.

2. Mr. Jefferson's concession of the probability of deluges within certain
limits, does not rank him with those great men who have supposed the deluge to
be partial, because his argument concludes directly against the scriptural
narrative, even upon that supposition. He will not admit his partial deluges to
rise above 52 feet above the level of the ocean. Whereas the scripture,
circumscribe its deluge as you will, asserts that the waters were fifteen
cubits (27 feet nearly) above the mountains. ib. v. 20.


3. Not satisfied with his argument, Mr. Jefferson sneers at the scripture
itself, and at the credulity of those who, relying upon its testimony, believe
that the bed of the ocean has by some great convulsion of nature, been heaved
to the heights at which we now find shells and other remains of marine animals.
" They do well," says he, to suppose the great events on which it rests to have
taken place beyond all the aeras of history; FOR WITHIN THESE NONE SUCH ARE TO
BE FOUND. Indeed! And so our faith in God's word is to dwindle, at the touch of
a profane philosopher, into an "opinion," unsupported by either "history or
tradition!" All the fountains of the great deep, says the scripture, were
BROKEN UP. Genesis vii. 11.
Was this no "great convulsion of nature?" Could not this heave the bed of the
ocean to the height at which we now fin^ ^hells? But the favorers of this
opinion suppose the great events on which it rests to have taken place beyond
all the aeras of history. And they do well, says Mr. Jefferson: the plain
meaning of which is, that their error would certainly be detected if they did
not retreat into the darkness of fable. Malignant sarcasm! And who are the
favorers of this opinion? At least all who embrace the holy scriptures. These
do declare most unequivocally, that there was such a "great convulsion of
nature" as produced a deluge infinitely more formidable than Mr. Jefferson's
philosophy can digest. But he will not so much as allow them to be history: he
degrades them even below tradition. We talk of times for our flood, he tells
us, anterior to the records either of history or tradition. Nor will it mend
the matter, to urge that he alludes only to profane history. The fact could not
be more dubious or less deserving a place in the systems of philosophy, from
the attestation of infallible truth. And is this truth to be spurned as no
history; as not even tradition? It is thus, Christians, that a man whom you are
expected to elevate to the chief magistracy, insults yourselves and your bible.
Nay, as it is only the scripture which authenticates the popular belief of an
universal deluge, Mr. Jefferson's insinuation can hardly have any meaning, if
it be not an oblique stroke at the bible itself. Nothing can be more silly than
the pretext that he shows the insufficiency of natural causes to effect the
deluge, with a view of supporting the credit of the miracle. His difficulty is
not to account for the deluge: he denies that; but for the shells on the top of
the Andes. If he believed in the deluge, natural or miraculous, the difficulty
would cease: he would say at once, The flood threw them there. But as he tells
us, " this great phenomenon is, as yet, unsolved," it is clear that he does not
believe in the deluge at all; for this "solves" his "phenomenon" most
effectually. And for whom does Mr. J. write? For Christians? None of them ever
dreamed that the deluge was caused by any thing else than a miracle. For
infidels? Why then does he not tell them that the scripture alone gives the
true solution of this "great phenomenon?" The plain matter of fact is, that he
writes like all other infidels, who admit nothing for which they cannot find
adequate "natural agents;" and when these fail them, instead of resorting to
the divine word, which would often satisfy a modest enquirer, by revealing the
"arm of JEHOVAH," they shrug up their shoulders, and cry, "Ignorance is
preferable to error." Notes on Virginia, p. 42.



4. Mr. Jefferson's argument against the flood is, in substance, the very
argument by which infidels have attacked the credibility of the Mosaic history.
They have always objected the insufficiency of water to effect such a deluge as
that describes. Mr. J. knew this. Yet he adopts and repeats it. He does not
deign so much as to mention Moses: while through the sides of one of his
hypotheses, he strikes at the scriptural history, he winds up with pronouncing
all the three to be equally unsatisfactory. Thus reducing the holy volume to a
level with the dreams of Voltaire! Let me now ask any Christian, Would you dare
to express yourself in a similar manner upon a subject which has received the
decision of the living God? Would you patiently hear one of your neighbors
speak so irreverently of his oracles? Could you venture to speculate on the
deluge without resorting to them? Would you not shudder at the thought of
using, in support of a philosophical opinion, the arguments which infidels
bring against that WORD which is the source of all your consolation; much more
to use them without a lisp of respect for it, or of caution against mistake?
Can he believe the bible who does all this? Can an infidel do more without
directly assailing it? What then must you think of Mr. Jefferson?

But it was not enough for this gentleman to discredit the story of the deluge.
He has advanced a step farther, and has indicated, too plainly, his disbelief
in the common origin of mankind. The scriptures teach that all nations are the
offspring of the first and single pair, Adam and Eve, whom God created and
placed in paradise. This fact, interwoven with all the relations and all the
doctrines of the bible, is alike essential to its historical and religious
truth. Now what says the candidate for the chair of your president? After an
ingenious, lengthy, and elaborate argument to prove that the blacks are
naturally and morally inferior both to white and red men; and that their
inferiority is not the effect merely of their condition of life, Notes on
Virginia, p. 205.
he observes, I advance it therefore as a suspicion only, that the blacks,
whether ORIGINALLY a distinct race, or MADE DISTINCT by time and circumstances,
are inferior to the whites in the endowments both of body and mind. ib. 209.
He had before asserted, that besides those of color, figure, and hair, there
are other physical distinctions, proving a DIFFERENCE of RACE. ib. 201.
He does, indeed, discover some compunction in reflecting on the consequences
of his philosophy. For to several reasons why his opinion must be hazarded with
great diffidence, he adds as a circumstance of great tenderness, that the
conclusion to which his observations lead, would degrade a whole race of men
from the rank in the scale of beings which their Creator may PERHAPS have given
them. ib. 203.
Much pains have been taken to persuade the public that Mr. Jefferson by
"distinct race" and "difference of race," means nothing more than that the
negroes are only a branch of the great family of man, without impeaching the
identity of their origin. This construction, though it may satisfy many, is
unfounded, absurd, and contradicted by Mr. Jefferson himself. Unfounded: For
when Philosophers treat of man as a "subject of natural history," they use the
term "race," to express the stock from which the particular families spring,
and not, as in the popular sense, the families themselves, without regard to
their original. A single example, embracing the opinions of two philosophers,
of whom the one, M. de Buffon, maintained, and the other, Lord Kames, denied
the common origin of mankind, will prove my assertion.

M. Buffon, from the rule, that animals which can procreate together, and whose
progeny can also procreate, are of one species, concludes, that all men are of
one race or species. Kames's Sketches, vol. i. p. 24.
Mr. Jefferson, writing on the same subject with these authors, and arguing on
the same side with one of them, undoubtedly uses the term "race" in the same
sense. And as the other construction is unfounded, it is also absurd. For it
represents him as laboring through nearly a dozen pages to prove what no man
ever thought of doubting, and what a glance of the eye sufficiently ascertains,
viz. that the blacks and whites are different branches of a common family. Mr.
Jefferson is not such a trifler; he fills his pages with more important matter,
and with deeper sense. And by expressions which cut off evasion, contradicts
the meaning which his friends have invented for him. He enumerates a variety of
distinctions which prove a difference of race. These distinctions he alleges
are not accidental, but physical, i. e. founded in nature. True, alarmed at the
boldness of his own doctrine, he retreats a little. His PROOFS evaporate into a
SUSPICION; but that suspicion is at a loss to suspect, whether the inferiority
of the blacks (Mark it well, reader!) is owing to their being ORIGINALLY a
distinct race, or made distinct by time and circumstances. Branches of the same
stock ORIGINALLY distinct, is a contradiction. Mr. Jefferson therefore means,
by different races, men descended from different stocks. His very " tenderness"
is tinctured with an infidel hue. A conclusion corresponding with his
speculations, affects him, because it would degrade a whole race of men from
the rank in the scale of beings which their Creator may perhaps have given
them. So then; the secret is out! What RANK in the scale of beings have we,
obeying the scripture, been accustomed to assign to the injured blacks? The
very same with ourselves, viz. that of children of one common father. But if
Mr. Jefferson's notions be just, he says they will be degraded from that rank;
i. e. will appear not to be children of the same father with us, but of another
and inferior stock. But though he will not speak peremptorily, he strongly
insinuates that he does not adopt, as an article of his philosophy, the descent
of the blacks as well as the whites from that pair which came immediately from
the hands of God. He is not sure. At best it is a doubt with him -- the rank
which their Creator may PERHAPS have given them! -- Now how will all this
accord with revealed truth? God, says the Apostle Paul, Has made of ONE BLOOD
ALL NATIONS of men, for to dwell on ALL the face of the earth. Acts xvii. 26.
Perhaps it may be so, replies Mr. Jefferson; but there are, notwithstanding,
physical distinctions PROVING a difference of race. I cannot repress my
indignation! That a miserable, sinful worm, like myself, should proudly set up
his "proofs" against the truth of my God and your God, and scout his veracity
with a skeptical PERHAPS! I entreat Christians to consider the sweeping extent
of this infidel doctrine of "different races." If it be true, the history of
the bible, which knows of but one, is a string of falsehoods from the book of
Genesis to that of the Revelation; and the whole system of redemption,
predicated on the unity of the human race, is a cruel fiction. I ask Christians
again, whether they would dare to speak and write on this subject in the style
of Mr. Jefferson? Whether any believer in the word of the Lord Jesus, who is
their hope, could entertain such doubts? Whether a writer, acute, cautious, and
profound, like Mr. Jefferson, could, as he had before done in the case of the
deluge, pursue a train of argument, which he knew infidels before him had used
to discredit revelation, and on which they still have great reliance --
Whether, instead of vindicating the honor of the scripture, he could, in such
circumstances, be as mute as death on this point; countenancing infidels by
enforcing their sentiments; and yet be a Christian? The thing is impossible And
were any other than Mr. Jefferson to be guilty of the same disrespect to God's
word, you would not hesitate one moment in pronouncing him an infidel.

It is not only with his philosophical disquisitions that Mr. Jefferson mingles
opinions irreconcilable with the scriptures. He even goes out of his way for
the sake of a fling at them. "Those," says he, who labor in the earth, are the
chosen people of God, IF EVER HE HAD A CHOSEN PEOPLE, whose breasts he has made
his peculiar deposit for substantial and genuine virtue. Notes on Virginia, p.
240.
--

How does a Christian ear relish this profane babbling? In the first place, Mr.
Jefferson doubts if ever God had a chosen people. In the second place, if he
had, he insists they are no other than those who labor in the earth. At any
rate, he denies this privilege to the seed of Abraham; and equally denies your
being his people, unless you follow the scythe and the plow. Now, whether this
be not the lie direct to the whole testimony of the bible from the beginning to
the end, judge ye. Some have been vain enough to suppose that they destroy this
proof of Mr. J's infidelity, by representing his expression "the chosen people
of God, if ever he had a chosen people," as synonimous with the following: "A.
B. is an honest man, if ever there was an honest man," which so far from
doubting the existence of honest men, that it founds, in the certainty of this
fact, the assertion of A. B's honesty. On this wretched sophism, unworthy of
good sense, and more unworthy of candor, I remark,

1. That the expressions are by no means similar. The whole world admits that
there are honest men, which makes the proposition, "A. B. is an honest man, if
ever there was an honest man," a strong assertion of A. B's honesty. But the
hundredth part of the world does not admit that God had a chosen people, and
therefore the proposition that "those who labor in the earth are the chosen
people of God, if ever he had a chosen people," is, upon this construction, no
assertion at all that the cultivators of the soil are his people, because there
are millions who do not believe the fact on which it must be founded: viz. that
he had a chosen people.

2. That if the expressions were parallel. Mr. J. would still be left in the
lurch, because the first asserts A. B. to be as much an honest man as any man
that ever lived; and so Mr. J. asserts "those who labor in the earth" to be as
much the "chosen people of God," as any people that ever lived. This is still
the lie direct to the whole bible, and the inventors of this lucky shift, must
set their wits at work to invent another.




After these affronts to the oracles of God, you have no right to be surprised
if Mr. Jefferson should preach the innocence of error, or even of Atheism. What
do I say! He does preach it. The legitimate powers of government, they are his
own words, extend to such acts only as are injurious to others. But it does me
no injury for my neighbors to say there are twenty Gods or no God. It neither
picks my pocket nor breaks my leg. Notes on Virginia, p. 231.


Ponder well this paragraph. Ten thousand impieties and mischiefs lurk in its
womb. Mr. Jefferson maintains not only the inviolability of opinion, but of
opinion propagated. And that no class or character of abomination might be
excluded from the sanctuary of such laws as he wishes to see established, he
pleads for the impunity of published error in its most dangerous and execrable
form. Polytheism or atheism, "twenty gods or no god," is perfectly indifferent
in Mr. Jefferson's good citizen. A wretch may trumpet atheism from
New Hampshire to Georgia; may laugh at all the realities of futurity; may scoff
and teach others to scoff at their accountability; it is no matter, says Mr.
Jefferson, "it neither picks my pocket, nor breaks my leg." This is nothing
less than representing civil society as founded in atheism. For there can be no
religion without God. And if it does me or my neighbor no injury, to subvert
the very foundation of religion by denying the being of God, then religion is
not one of the constituent principles of society, and consequently society is
perfect without it; that is, is perfect in atheism. Christians! what think you
of this doctrine? Have you so learned Christ or truth? Is Atheism indeed no
injury to society? Is it no injury to untie all the cords which bind you to the
God of Heaven, and your deeds to his throne of judgment; which form the
strength of personal virtue, give energy to the duties, and infuse sweetness
into the charities, of human life? Is it indeed no injury to you, or to those
around you, that your neighbor buries his conscience and all his sense of moral
obligation in the gulf of atheism? Is it no injury to you, that the oath
ceases to be sacred? That the eye of the Omniscient no more pervades the abode
of crime? That you have no hold on your dearest friend, farther than the law is
able to reach his person? Have you yet to learn that the peace and happiness of
society depend upon things which the laws of men can never embrace? And whence,
I pray you, are righteous laws to emanate, if rulers, by adopting atheism, be
freed from the coercion of future retribution? Would you not rather be scourged
with sword and famine and pestilence, than see your country converted into a
den of atheism? Yet, says Mr. Jefferson, it is a harmless thing. It does me no
injury; it neither picks my pocket, nor breaks my leg. This is perfectly of a
piece with his favorite wish to see a government administered without any
religious principle among either rulers or ruled. Pardon me, Christian: this is
the morality of devils, which would break in an instant every link in the chain
of human friendship, and transform the globe into one equal scene of desolation
and horror, where fiend would prowl with fiend for plunder and blood -- yet
atheism neither picks my pocket nor breaks my leg. I will not abuse you by
asking, whether the author of such an opinion can be a Christian? or whether he
has any regard for the scriptures which confines all wisdom and blessedness and
glory, both personal and social, to the fear and the favor of God?

The reader will observe, that in his sentiments on these four points, the
deluge; the origin of nations; the chosen people of God; and Atheism, Mr.
Jefferson has comprised the radical principles of infidelity in its utmost
latitude. Accede to his positions on these, and he will compel you to grant the
rest. There is hardly a single truth of revelation which would not fall before
one or other of them. If the deluge be abandoned, you can defend neither the
miracles, nor inspiration of the scripture. If men are not descendants of one
common stock, the doctrine of salvation is convicted of essential error. If God
never had any chosen people but the cultivators of the soil, the fabric of the
New Testament falls to the ground; for its foundation in the choice of Israel
to be his peculiar people, is swept away. And if the Atheism of one man be not
injurious to another, society could easily dispense not only with his word but
with his worship.

Conformable with the infidelity of his book, is an expression of Mr. Jefferson
contained in a paragraph which I transcribe from the pamphlet entitled "Serious
Considerations," etc.

When the late Rev. Dr. John B. Smith resided in Virginia, the famous MAZZEI
happened one night to be his guest. Dr. Smith having, as usual, assembled his
family for their evening devotions, the circumstance occasioned some discourse
on religion, in which the Italian made no secret of his infidel principles. In
the course of conversation, he remarked to Dr. Smith, Why your great
philosopher and statesman, Mr. Jefferson, is rather farther gone in infidelity
than I am; and related, in confirmation, the following anecdote: That as he was
once riding with Mr. Jefferson, he expressed his surprise that the people of
this country take no better care of their public buildings. "What buildings?"
exclaimed Mr. Jefferson. "Is not that a church?" replied he, pointing to a
decayed edifice. "Yes," answered Mr. Jefferson. "I am astonished," said the
other, "that they permit it to be in so ruinous a condition." " It is good
enough," rejoined Mr. Jefferson, for him that was born in a manger!! Such a
contemptuous fling at the blessed Jesus, could issue from the lips of no other
than a deadly foe to his name and his cause. Serious Considerations, p. 16, 17.


Some of Mr. Jefferson's friends have been desperate enough to challenge this
anecdote as a calumny fabricated for electioneering purposes. But whatever they
pretend, it is incontestibly true, that the story was told, as here repeated,
by Dr. Smith. I, as well as the author of "Serious Considerations," and several
others, heard it from the lips of Dr. Smith years ago, and more than once. The
calumny, if any, lies either with those who impeach the veracity of a number of
respectable witnesses, or with MAZZEI himself. And there are not wanting, among
the followers of Mr. Jefferson, advocates for this latter opinion. He must have
been a wretch indeed, to blacken his brother-philosopher, by trumping up a
deliberate lie in order to excuse his own impiety in the presence of a minister
of Christ! If such was MAZZEI, the philosopher, it is our wisdom to think, and
think again, before we heap our largest honors upon the head of his
bosom-friend.

Christian reader, The facts and reasonings which I have laid before you,
produce in my mind an irresistible conviction, that Mr. Jefferson is a
confirmed infidel; and I cannot see how they should have a less effect on
yours. But when to these you add his solicitude for wresting the bible from
the hands of your children -- his notoriously unchristian character -- his
disregard to all the ordinances of divine worship -- his utter and open
contempt of the Lord's day, insomuch as to receive on it a public
entertainment; At Fredericksburgh, in Virginia, in 1798.
every trace of doubt must vanish. What is a man who writes against the truths
of God's word? who makes not even a profession of Christianity? who is without
Sabbaths; without the sanctuary; without so much as a decent external respect
for the faith and the worship of Christians? What is he, what can he be, but a
decided, a hardened infidel?

Several feeble and fruitless attempts have been made to fritter down and
dissipate this mass of evidence. In vain are we told that Mr. Jefferson's
conduct is modest, moral, exemplary, I ask no odious questions. A man must be
an adopt in the higher orders of profligacy, if neither literary occupation,
nor the influence of the surrounding gospel, can form or control his habits.
Though infidelity and licentiousness are twin sisters, they are not compelled
to be always in company; that I am not a debauchee, will therefore be hardly
admitted as proof that I am not an infidel -- In vain are we reminded, that the
"Notes on Virginia" contain familiar mention, and respectful acknowledgment, of
the being and attributes of God. Though infidelity leads to Atheism, a man may
be an infidel without being an Atheist. Some have even pretended, that anxiety
for the honor of God, prompted them to fix the brand of imposture upon the
scripture! But where has Mr. Jefferson, when stating his private opinions,
betrayed the least regard for the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ? -- In vain
is it proclaimed, that he maintains a Christian minister at his own expense. I
shall not enquire whether that maintenance does or does not arise from the
product of glebe lands attached to many southern estates. Taking the fact to be
simply as related, I will enquire whether prudent and political men never
contribute to the support of Christianity from other motives than a belief of
its truth? Mr. Jefferson may do all this and yet be an infidel. VOLTAIRE, the
vile, the blasphemous Voltaire, was building churches, and assisting at the
mass, while he was writing to his philosophical confidants, concerning your
divine Savior, CRUSH THE WRETCH! In vain is the ACT for establishing religious
freedom, which slowed from the pen of Mr. Jefferson, and passed in the Assembly
of Virginia, in 1786, paraded as the triumph of his Christian creed. I protest
against the credibility of the witness! That act, I know, recognizes the Holy
Author of our religion, as Lord both of body and mind, and possessing "Almighty
power;" and by censuring "fallible and uninspired men," tacitly acknowledges
both the inspiration and infallibility of the sacred writers. But Mr. Jefferson
is not here declaring his private opinions: for these we must look to his
Notes, which were published a year after, and abound with ideas which
contradict the authority of the scriptures. He speaks, in that act, as the
organ of an Assembly PROFESSING CHRISTIANITY; and it would not only have been a
monstrous absurdity, but more than his credit and the Assembly's too, was
worth, to have been disrespectful, in an official deed, to that Redeemer whose
name they owned, and who was precious to many of their constituents. Such
Christianity is common with the bitterest enemies of Christ. Herbert, Hobbes,
Blount, Toland, Tindal, Bolingbroke, Hume, Voltaire, Gibbon, at the very moment
when they were laboring to argue or to laugh the gospel out of the world,
affected great regard for our holy religion and its divine author. There is an
edict of Frederic the II. of Prussia, on the subject of religious toleration,
couched in terms of the utmost reverence for the Christian religion, and yet
this same Frederic was one of the knot of conspirators, who, with Voltaire at
their head, plotted the extermination of Christianity: and whenever they spoke
of its "Holy Author," echoed to each other, Crush the wretch! This act,
therefore, proves nothing but that, at the time of its passing (we hope it is
so still) there was religion enough in Virginia, to curb the proud spirit of
infidelity.

CHRISTIANS! Lay these things together: compare them; examine them separately,
and collectively: ponder; pause; lay your hands upon your hearts; lift up your
hearts to heaven, and pronounce on Mr. Jefferson's Christianity. You cannot
stifle your emotions; nor forbear uttering your indignant sentence -- INFIDEL!!

This point being settled, one would think that you could have no difficulty
about the rest, and would instantly and firmly conclude, Such a man ought not,
and as far as depends on me, shall not, be President of the United States! But
I calculate too confidently. I have the humiliation to hear this inference
controverted even by those whose "good confession" was a pledge that they are
feelingly alive to the honor of their Redeemer. No, I am not deceived: they are
Christian lips which plead that Religion has nothing to do with politics --
that to refuse our suffrages on account of religious principles, would be an
interference with the rights of conscience -- that there is little hope of
procuring a real believer, and we had better choose an infidel than a hypocrite.

That religion has, in fact, nothing to do with the politics of many who
profess it, is a melancholy truth. But that it has, of right, no concern with
political transactions, is quite a new discovery. If such opinions, however,
prevail, there is no longer any mystery in the character of those whose
conduct, in political matters, violates every precept, and slanders every
principle, of the religion of Christ. But what is politics? Is it not the
science and the exercise of civil rights and civil duties? And what is
religion? Is it not an obligation to the service of God, founded on his
authority, and extending to all our relations personal and social? Yet religion
has nothing to do with politics! Where did you learn this maxim? The bible is
full of directions for your behavior as citizens. It is plain, pointed, awful
in its injunctions on rulers and ruled as such: yet religion has nothing to do
with politics. You are commanded " in ALL your ways to acknowledge him." Prove.
iii.^.
In EVERY THING, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, to let your
requests be made known unto "God, Phil. iv.6.
" And WHATSOEVER YE DO, IN WORD OR DEED, to do ALL IN THE NAME of the Lord
Jesus. Col. iii.17.
Yet religion has nothing to do with politics! Most astonishing! And is there
any part of your conduct in which you are, or wish to be, without law to God,
and not under the law of Christ? Can you persuade yourselves that political men
and measures are to undergo no review in the judgment to come? That all the
passion and violence, the fraud and falsehood, and corruption which pervade the
systems of party, and burst out like a flood at the public elections, are to be
blotted from the catalogue of unchristian deeds, because they are politics? Or
that a minister of the gospel may see his people, in their political career,
bid defiance to their God in breaking through every moral restraint, and keep a
guiltless silence because religion has nothing to do with politics? I forbear
to press the argument farther; observing only, that many of our difficulties
and sins may be traced to this pernicious notion. Yes, if our religion had had
more to do with our politics; if, in the pride of our citizenship, we had not
forgotten our Christianity: if we had prayed more and wrangled less about the
affairs of our country, it would have been infinitely better for us at this day.

But you are afraid that to refuse a man your suffrages because he is an
infidel, would interfere with the rights of conscience. This is a most singular
scruple, and proves how wild are the opinions of men on the subject of liberty.
Conscience is God's officer in the human breast, and its rights are defined by
his law. The right of conscience to trample on his authority is the right of a
rebel, which entitles him to nothing but condign punishment. You are afraid of
being unkind to the conscience of an infidel. Dismiss your fears. It is the
last grievance of which he will complain. How far do you suppose Mr. Jefferson
consulted his conscience when he was vilifying the divine word, and preaching
insurrection against God, by preaching the harmlessness of Atheism? But
supposing Mr. Jefferson to be conscientiously impious, this would only be a
stronger reason for our opposition. For the more conscientious a man is, the
more persevering will he be in his views, and the more anxious for their
propagation. If he be fixed, then, in dangerous error, faithfulness to God and
truth requires us to resist him and his conscience too; and to keep from him
the means of doing mischief. If a man thought himself bound in conscience,
whenever he should be able, to banish God's sabbath, burn his churches, and
hang his worshippers, would you entrust him with power out of respect to
conscience? I trow not. And why you should judge differently in the case of an
infidel who spurns at what is dearer to you than life, I cannot conceive. But
in your solicitude for the conscience of Mr. Jefferson, have you considered, in
the mean time, what becomes of your own conscience.? Has it no rights? no
voice? no influence? Are you not to keep it void of offense toward God? Can
you do this in elevating his open enemies to the highest dignity of your
country? Beware, therefore, lest an ill-directed care for the conscience of
another, bring your own under the lashes of remorse. Keep this clear, by the
word of God, and there is little hazard of injuring your neighbor's. But how
can you interfere with any man's conscience by refusing him a political office?
You do not invade the sanctuary of his bosom: you impose on him no creed: you
simply tell him you do not like him, or that you prefer another to him. Do you
injure him by this? Do you not merely exercise the right of a citizen and a
Christian? It belongs essentially to the freedom of election, to refuse my vote
to any candidate for reasons of conscience, of state, of predilection, or for
no reason at all but my own choice. The rights of conscience, on his part, are
out of the question. He proposes himself for my approbation. If I approve, I
give him my support. If not, I withhold it. His conscience has nothing to do
with my motives; but to my own conscience they are serious things. If he be an
infidel, I will not compel him to profess Christianity. Let him retain his
infidelity, enjoy all its comforts, and meet all its consequences. But I have
an unquestionable right to say, I cannot trust a man of such principles: on
what grounds he has adopted them is not my concern; nor will his personal
sincerity alter their tendency. While he is an infidel, he shall never have my
countenance. Let him stay where he is: and let his conscience be its own
reward. I could not blame another for such conduct to me; for he only makes an
independent use of his privilege, which does me no injury: nor am I to be
blamed for such conduct to another, for I only make the same use of my
privilege, which is no injury to him. Mr. Jefferson's conscience cannot,
therefore, be wronged if you exclude him from the presidency because he is an
infidel; and your own, by an act of such Christian magnanimity, may escape
hereafter many a bitter pang. For if you elect Mr. Jefferson, though an
infidel, from a regard to what you consider the rights of conscience, you must,
in order to be consistent, carry your principle through. If infidelity is not a
valid objection to a candidate for the presidency, it cannot be so to a
candidate for any other office. You must never again say, We will not vote for
such a man because he is an infidel. The evil brotherhood will turn upon you
with your own doctrine of the "rights of conscience." You must then either
retract, or be content to see every office filled with infidels. How horrible,
in such an event, would be the situation of your country! How deep your agony
under the torments of self-reproach!

But there is no prospect, you say, of obtaining a real Christian, and we had
better choose an infidel than a hypocrite. By no means. Supposing that a man
professes Christianity, and evinces in his general deportment a regard for its
doctrines, its worship, and its laws; though he be rotten at heart, he is
infinitely preferable to a known infidel. His hypocrisy is before God. It may
ruin his own soul; but, while it is without detection, can do no hurt to men.
We have a hold of him which it is impossible to get of an infidel. His
reputation, his habits, his interests, depending upon the belief of his
Christianity, are sureties for his behavior to which we vainly look for a
counterbalance in an infidel; and they are, next to religion itself, the
strongest sureties of man to man. His very hypocrisy is an homage to the
gospel. The whole weight of his example is on the side of Christianity, while
that of an open infidel lies wholly against it. It is well known that the
attendance of your Washington, and of President Adams upon public worship, gave
the ordinances of the gospel a respectability in the eyes of many which
otherwise they would not have had: brought a train of thoughtless people within
the reach of the means of salvation: and thus strengthened the opposition of
Christians to the progress of infidelity. You can never forget the honorable
testimony which Mr. Adams bore, in one of his proclamations, to a number of the
most precious truths of Revelation; nor how he was abused and ridiculed for it,
by not a few of those very persons who now strive to persuade you that Mr.
Jefferson is a Christian. In short, your President, if an open infidel, will be
a center of contagion to the whole continent: If a professed Christian, he will
honor the institutions of God; and though his hypocrisy, should he prove a
hypocrite, may be a fire to consume his own vitals, it cannot become a
wide-spreading conflagration.

Can you still hesitate? Perhaps you may. I therefore bespeak your attention to
a few plain and cogent reasons, why you cannot, without violating your plighted
faith, and trampling on your most sacred duties, place an infidel at the head
of your government.

1. The civil magistrate is God's officer. He is the minister of God, says
Paul, to thee for good. Romans xiii.4.
Consequently his first and highest obligation, is to cherish in his mind, and
express in his conduct, his sense of obedience to the Governor of the Universe.
He that rules over men must be just, ruling in THE FEAR OF GOD. Ps. xv.4.
The scriptures have left you this and similar declarations, to direct you in
the choice of your magistrates. And you are bound, upon your allegiance to the
God of the scriptures, to look out for such men as answer the description; and
if, unhappily, they are not to be had, for such as come nearest to it. The good
man, he who shall "dwell in God's holy hill," is one in whose eyes a vile
person is contemned; but he HONORETH them that fear the Lord. 2 Samuel xxiii.3.
But can you pretend to regard this principle, when you desire to raise an
infidel to the most important post in your country? Do you call this honoring
them that fear God? Nay, it is honoring them who do not fear God: that is,
according to the scriptural contrast, honoring a vile person, whom, as
Christians, you ought to contemn. And have you the smallest expectation that
one who despises the word and worship of God; who has openly taught the
harmlessness of rebellion against his government and being, by teaching that
Atheism is no injury to society, will, nevertheless, rule in his fear? Will it
show any reverence or love to your Father in Heaven, to put a distinguishing
mark of your confidence upon his sworn foe? Or will it be an affront to his
majesty?

2. The civil magistrate is, by divine appointment, the guardian of the
sabbath. In it thou shall not do any work; thou, nor thy son, etc. nor THE
STRANGER THAT IS WITHIN THY GATFS. Ex. xx.10.
"Gates," is a scriptural term for public authority; and that it is so to be
understood in this commandment, is evident from its connection with "
stranger." God says that even the stranger shall not be allowed to profane his
sabbath. But the stranger can be controlled only by the civil magistrate who
"sits in the gate." Dan. ii.49.
I therefore belongs to his office, to enforce, by lawful means, the
sanctification of the sabbath, as the fundamental institute of religion and
morals, and the social expression of homage to that God under whom he acts. The
least which can be accepted from him, is to recommend it by personal
observance. How do you suppose Mr. Jefferson will perform this part of his
duty? or how can you depo^it in his hands a trust, which you cannot but think
he will betray; and in betraying which, he will not only sacrifice some of your
most invaluable interests, but as your organ and in your name, lift up his heel
against the God of Heaven? In different states, you have made, not long since,
spirited exertions to hinder the profanation of your Lord's day. For this
purpose many of you endeavored to procure religious magistrates for this City,
and religious representatives in the councils of the State. You well remember
how you were mocked, traduced, execrated, especially by the infidel tribe. But
what is now become of your zeal and your consi^tency? I can read in the list of
delegates to the Legislature, the names of men who have been an ornament to the
gospel, and acquitted themselves like Christians in that noble struggle, and
yet are expected to ballot for electors, whose votes shall be given to an
infidel President. Who has bewitched you, Christians? or, what do you mean by
siding with the infidels to lift into the chair of State, a man more eminent
for nothing than for his scorn of the day, the ordinances, and the worship of
your Redeemer; and who did not blush to make it, in the face of the sun, a
season of frolic and revel? The Fredericksb. feast, given on the Sabbath, to
Mr. J. 1798.
Is this your kindness to your friend?

3. The church of God has ever accounted it a great mercy to have civil rulers
professing his name. Rather than yield it, thousands of your fathers have
poured out their blood. This privilege is now in your hands: and it is the
chief circumstance which makes the freedom of election worth a Christian's
care. Will you, dare you, abuse it by prostituting it to the aggrandizement of
an enemy to your Lord and to his Christ? If you do, will it not be a righteous
thing with God to take the privilege from you altogether; and, in his wrath, to
subject you, and your children, and your children's children, to such rulers as
you have, by your own deed, preferred?

4. You are commanded to pray for your rulers: it is your custom to pray, that
they may be men fearing God and hating covetousness. You entreat him to fulfill
his promise, that kings shall be to his church nursing-fathers, and queens her
nursing-mothers. Is. xlix.23.
With what conscience can you lift up your hands in such a supplication, when
you are exerting yourselves to procure a President, who you know does not fear
God; i. e. one exactly the reverse of the man whom you ask him to bestow? And
when, by this act, you do all in your power to defeat the promise of which you
affect to wish the fulfillment? Do you think that the church of Christ is to be
nurtured by the dragon's milk of infidelity? Or that the contradiction between
your prayers and your practice does not mock the holy God?

5. There are circumstances in the state of your country which impart to these
reflections, applicable in their spirit to all Christians, a double emphasis in
their application to you.

The Federal Constitution makes no acknowledgement of that God who gave us our
national existence, and saved us from anarchy and internal war. This neglect
has excited in many of its best friends, more alarm than all other
difficulties. The only way to wipe off the reproach of irreligion, and to avert
the descending vengeance, is to prove, by our national acts, that the
Constitution has not, in this instance, done justice to the public sentiment.
But if you appoint an infidel for your President, and such an infidel as Mr.
Jefferson, you will sanction that neglect, you will declare, by a solemn
national act, that there is no more religion in your collective character, than
in your written constitution: you will put a national indignity upon the God of
your mercies; and provoke him, it may be, to send over your land that deluge of
judgments which his forbearance has hitherto suspended.

Add to this the consideration, that infidelity has awfully increased. The time
was, and that within your own recollection, when the term infidelity was almost
a stranger to our ears, and an open infidel an object of abhorrence. But now
the term has become familiar, and infidels hardly disgust. Our youth, our hope
and our pride, are poisoned with the accursed leaven. The vain title of
"philosopher," has turned their giddy heads, and, what is worse, corrupted
their untutored hearts. It is now a mark of sense, the proof of an enlarged and
liberal mind, to scoff at all the truths of inspiration, and to cover with
ridicule the hope of a Christian; those truths and that hope which are the
richest boon of divine benignity; which calm the perturbed conscience, and heal
the wounded spirit; which sweeten every comfort, and soothe every sorrow; which
give strong consolation in the arrest of death, and shed the light of
immortality on the gloom of the grave. All, all are become the sneer of the
buffoon, and the song of the drunkard. These things, Christians, you deplore.
You feel indignant, as well as discouraged, at the inroads of infidel principle
and profligate manners. You declaim against them. You caution your children
against their infection. And yet, with such facts before your eyes, and such
lessons in your mouths, you are on the point of undoing whatever you have done;
and annihilating, at one blow, the effect of all your profession, instruction,
and example. By giving your support to Mr. Jefferson, you are about to strip
infidelity of its ignominy; array it in honors; and hold it up with eclat to
the view of the rising generation. By this act, you will proclaim to the whole
world that it is not so detestable a thing as you pretended; that you do not
believe it subversive of moral obligation and social purity: that a man may
revile your religion and blaspheme your Savior; and yet command your highest
confidence. This amounts to nothing less than a deliberate surrender of the
cause of Jesus Christ into the hands of his enemies. By this single act -- my
flesh trembles, my blood chills at the thought! by this single act you will do
more to destroy a regard for the gospel of Jesus, than the whole fraternity of
infidels with all their arts, their industry and their intrigues. You will
stamp credit upon principles, the native tendency of which is to ruin your
children in this world, and damn them in the world to come. O God! the ox
knows his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but thy people does not know,
and Israel does not consider. Is. i.3.


With these serious reflections, let me connect a fact equally serious: The
whole strength of open and active infidelity is on the side of Mr. Jefferson.
You may well start! But the observation and experience of the Continent is one
long and loud attestation to the truth of my assertion. I say OPEN and ACTIVE
infidelity. You can scarcely find one exception among all who preach infidel
tenets among the people. Did it never occur to you, that such men would not be
so zealous for Mr. Jefferson if they were not well assured of his being one of
themselves -- that they would cordially hate him if they supposed him to be a
Christian -- or that they have the most sanguine hope that his election to the
Presidency will promote their cause? I know, that to serve the purpose of the
moment, those very presses which teemed with abuse of your Redeemer, are now
affecting to offer incense to his religion; and that Deists themselves are
laboring to convince you that Mr. Jefferson is a Christian; and yet have the
effrontery to talk of other men's hypocrisy! Can you be the dupes of such an
artifice? Do you not see in it a proof that there is no reliance to be placed
on an infidel conscience? Do you need to be reminded that these infidels who
now court you, are the very men who, four years ago, insulted your faith and
your Lord with every expression of ridicule and contempt? That these very men
circulated, with unremitting assiduity, that execrable book of Boulanger,
entitled Christianity Unveiled; and that equally execrable abortion of Thomas
Pain, The Age of Reason? That, in order to get them (especially the latter)
into the hands of the common people, they sold them at a very low rate; gave
them away where they could not sell them; and slipped them into the pockets of
numbers who refused to accept them? Do you know that some of these infidels
were at the trouble of translating from the French, and printing, for the
benefit of Americans, a work of downright, undisguised Atheism, with the
imposing title of Common Sense? That it was openly advertised, and extracts, or
an extract, published to help the sale? The title is a trick, designed to
entrap the unwary, by palming it on them through the popularity of Paine's
tracts under the same name. The title in the original, is Le bon Sens, GOOD
SENSE. It was printed, I believe, in Philadelphia; but the Printer was ashamed
or afraid to own it.
Do you know that some of the same brotherhood are secretly handing about, I
need not say where, a book, written by Charles Pigott, an Englishman, entitled
A Political Dictionary? Take the following sample of its impiety: (my hair
stiffens while I transcribe it) Religion -- a superstition invented by the
archbishop of hell, and propagated by his faithful diocesans the clergy, to
keep the people in ignorance and darkness, that they may not see the work of
iniquity that is going on, etc. Pigott's Political Dictionary, p. 132. This
work was originally printed in England; but having been suppressed there, the
whole or, nearly the whole, impression was sent over to America, and
distributed among the people. But in what manner, and by what means, there are
some who can tell better than the writer of this pamphlet. It was thought,
however, to be so useful, as to merit the American press. -- For the copy which
I possess, is one of an edition printed at New York, for THOMAS GREENLEAF, late
editor of the Argus: 1796.


Such are the men with whom professors of the name of our Lord Jesus Christ are
concerting the election of an infidel to the Presidency of the United States of
America. Hear the word of the Lord. What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? And what communion has light with darkness? And what concord
has Christ with Belial? And what part has he that believes with an infidel?
2. Cor. v.14, 15.
Yet Christians are uniting with infidels in exalting an infidel to the chief
magistracy! If he succeed, Christians must bear the blame. Numerous as the
infidels are, they are not yet able, adored be God, to seize upno our "high
places." Christians must help them, or they set not their feet on the threshold
of power. If, therefore, an infidel preside over our country, it will be YOUR
fault, Christians; and YOUR act; and YOU shall answer it? And for aiding and
abetting such a design, I charge upon your consciences the sin of striking
hands in a covenant of friendship with the enemies of your master's glory. Ah,
what will be your compunction, when these same infidels, victorious through
your assistance, will "tread you down as the mire in the streets," and exult in
their triumph over bigots and bigotry.

Sit down, now, and interrogate your own hearts, whether you can, with a "pure
conscience," befriend Mr. Jefferson's election? Whether you can do it in the
name of the Lord Jesus? Whether you can lift up your heads and tell him that
the choice of this infidel is for his honor, and that you promote it in the
faith of his approbation? Whether, in the event of success, you have a right to
look for his blessing in the enjoyment of your President? Whether, having
preferred the talents of a man before the religion of Jesus, you ought not to
fear that God will blast these talents; abandon your President to infatuated
counsels; and yourselves to the plague of your own folly? Whether it would not
be just to remove the restraints of his good providence, and scourge you with
that very infidelity which you did not scruple to countenance? Whether you can,
without some guilty misgivings, pray for the spirit of Christ upon a President
whom you choose in spite of every demonstration of his hatred to Christ? Those
who, to keep their consciences clean, oppose Mr. Jefferson, may pray for him,
in this manner, with a full and fervent heart. But to you, God may administer
this dread rebuke: You chose an infidel: keep him as ye chose him: walk in the
sparks that ye have kindled. Whether the threatenings of God are not pointed
against such a magistrate and such a people? Be wise, Oye kings," is his
commandment; be instructed ye judges of the earth: serve the Lord with fear and
rejoice with trembling: KISS THE SON, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the
way when his anger is kindled but a little. Ps. ii.10 -- 12.
What then is in store for a magistrate who is so far from "kissing the son,"
that he hates and opposes him? The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all
the NATIONS that FORGET God. Ps. ix.17.
And who forget him, if not a nation which, though called by his name,
nevertheless caresses, honors, rewards his enemies? The Lord has sworn to
strike through Kings in the day of his wrath. Ps. cx.5.
Woe, then, to those governments which are wielded by infidels, when he arises
to judgment; and woe to those who have contributed to establish them! To
whatever influence they owe their determinations and their measures, it is not
to the Spirit of understanding and of the fear of the Lord. Do I speak these
things as a man; or says not the scripture the same also? Woe to the
rebellious children, says the Lord, that take counsel, but not of me, and that
cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin. That
walk to go down into Egypt (and have not asked at my mouth) to strengthen
themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt.
Therefore the strength of Egypt shall be your shame, and the trust in the
shadow of Egypt your CONFUSION. Is. xxx.1 -- 3.
This is the light in which God considers your confidence in his enemies. And
the issue for which you ought to be prepared.

I have done; and do not flatter myself that I shall escape the censure of many
professed, and of some real, Christians. The style of this pamphlet is
calculated to conciliate nothing but conscience. I desire to conciliate nothing
else. If I pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. I do not expect,
nor wish, to fare better than the apostle of the Gentiles, who became the enemy
of not a few professors, because he told them the truth. Gal. iv.16.
But the bible speaks of children that will not hear the law of the Lord --
which say to the seers, See not: and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us
right things: speak unto us smooth things: prophesy deceits. Here is the truth,
Whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear. If you are resolved to
persevere in elevating an infidel to the chair of your President, I pray God
not to choose your delusions -- but cannot dissemble that my flesh trembles
for fear of his judgments. It is my consolation that my feeble voice has been
lifted up for his name. I have addressed you as one who believes, and I beseech
you to act as those who believe, That we must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ. Whatever be the result, you shall not plead that you were not
warned. If, notwithstanding, you call to govern you an enemy to my Lord and
your Lord; in the face of earth and heaven, and in the audience of your own
consciences, I record my protest, and wash my hands of your guilt.

ARISE, O LORD, AND LET NOT MAN PREVAIL!

Is. xxx.9, 10.

