THE BEAU METAMORPHIZED, OR THE GENEROUS MAID: AN AFTER-PIECE, IN TWO ACTS.

[Rejected by the Managers of the New Theater, when offered to them for
performance.]

BY AN AMERICAN CITIZEN OF PHILADELPHIA.

FIRST EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH C. CHARLESS, FOR THE AUTHOR. 1800.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of this and former essays may be charged by some with presumption;
from the harsh critic and illiberal classic, he expects but little mercy: on
the other hand, he looks for every indulgence from the liberal critic and
generous classic. The author does not presume to rank himself among the
learned; he is sensible of the disadvantages he labors under in point of
education and situation in life; he, however, will not give up the right of
defending himself against the assertions of two partial and narrow-minded men.
That he has been most shamefully treated by the managers of the new theater, he
will make appear to the Reader, by the following circumstances:......

The Triumphs of Love was brought before the bar of the Public, on friday
evening, May 22d, 1795, and acquitted with as much honor, as the Author could
wish (considering the curtailed manner in which it was performed.) At the
instance of a number of gentlemen the piece was printed. On the opening of the
theater the ensuing season, the Author requested the managers to give it a
second representation,.....they refused,.....the Author appealed to the
Public,.....they replied,.....he replied in turn, but the doors of the press
were shut against him (he believed) through the influence of the managers.

The following are the pieces alluded to: For the Philadelphia Gazette ( Feb.
24, 1796) MR. BROWN,
Knowing that a great number of the citizens are daily expecting to hear the
Triumphs of Love, or the Happy Reconconciliation, announced for performance, it
is requisite that they should be informed how that piece is situated, by A FAIR
RECITAL OF FACTS.

Occasionally visiting the theater, I was, at times, much disgusted, to see and
hear pieces performed, so foreign to the circumstances of a republican people;
which prompted me, at my leisure moments, to throw my ideas into a proper train
to produce a drama, which would be more consonanant to the ears of Americans.
Upon accomplishing a piece, and aware of the foible common to human nature, of
being too partial to what originates with ourselves, I put it, for perusal,
into the hands of several persons, whom I know to be judges of that peculiar
species of writing: it was returned by them with high encomiums. I was
requested by them to submit it to the managers of the new theater: pursuing
their advice, I did. Some weeks it lay with them; they finally rejected it. I
informed the gentlemen of their dicision, they were not a little surprised, and
expressed themselves in terms of indignation; there matters rested. The piece
was thrown aside to sleep, as I supposed the sleep of death. The flower was
born, and as I expected, to blush unseen forever from the public eye: but upon
the opening of the new theater on the ensuing season, I was again requested by
the alluded to friends of the piece to present it once more to the managers. I
replied, it was in vain; comparatively speaking, it would be like opposing a
feather to a strong north-wester. I told them I thought I discovered a
confirmed temper in the managers to trample on native productions. They wished
me to give it up to them, and leave it to their management. I accordingly did.
They waited upon the managers with it, were promised by them to pay it due
attention. There it remained a length of time, without receiving a direct
answer, though they were frequently importuned to give one, or return the play.
At last, beyond the eleventh hour, it was shoved into the world, unmercifully
dissected by, (what was called by the managers) necessary expungings.
Notwithstanding its mutilated state, it was received with the strongest marks
of approbation, by one of the most respectable audiences the house ever
contained. That, and the flattering compliments I had paid me the next day,
joined with the desire of many, induced me to have it published: by so doing, I
am out of pocket. Sometime ago, I sent the managers a second composition, an
after-piece in two acts; informed them how I was circumstanced with respect to
the first; observed that if the two were played in concert, there was no doubt
but in all human probability they would have an overflowing house, and it would
give a start to the sale of my first piece. But they were not disposed to
perform either; the reasons given, were not of the most forcible kind......I
shall conclude, by asserting to the managers, in the full face of the Public,
that the Triumphs of Love, or Happy Reconciliation, with all the imperfections
which they or those who influenced them, may charge it with, as it was well
received in the first instance, has an undoubted right of taking its place or
chance with other pieces in the early part of the season.

THE AUTHOR.




The following answer appeared in the same gazette, the next evening: The essay
by the Author of the Triumphs of Love, or Happy Reconciliation, in the gazette
of yesterday, cannot (a correspondent remarks) carry with it, to a judicious
Public, any reflections on the managers of the new theater. That Author
certainly misplaced his abilities when they were employed in the production of
a dramatic performance.....of this, the citizens had an opportunity of judging
last season, at the theater. The Happy Reconciliation has been published, and
few who have read it would wish to spend an evening to see it represented. It
is absurd to suppose the managers have an inclination to trample on native
productions, when they possess merit. The managers have embarked in a business
which is attended with a very heavy expense, and it is their duty to bring
forward the most celebrated pieces which are to be found in the English
language, whether American or English productions.




The proceeding answer was handed to Mr. Brown: MR. BROWN,
Want of time prevented me from replying to a correspondent in your paper of
the 25th instant, who has undertaken to espouse the cause of the managers of
the new theater.... The correspondent takes a stride over a greater part of
what he calls, the Author's essay, without answering his complaints against
them, but throws them upon the mercy of the Public. The correspondent observes,
"The Author certainly misplaced his abilities when employed in the dramatic
line, of that, the citizens had an opportunity of judging last season, at the
theater."..... What would the correspondent be at; what is his inference?
Surely he will not be so bold as to insinuate that the comedy was not well
received; or does he suppose that a piece performed amid the plaudits of a
numerous and a respectable assembly was not some evidence of its merit? Is this
handsome of the managers, is it fair in their agent, the correspondent? With
respect to the Author's misplacing his talent, as the correspondent remarks, he
has no reason to believe he has; it is one of Nature's choicest gifts, which he
will cultivate at convenient seasons: perhaps the time will come when we shall
have managers of more enlarged minds. The correspondent takes notice that "The
Happy Reconciliation has been published, and few who have read it, would wish
to spend an evening to see it performed." What a limping assertion is
that.....how has the correspondent obtained his information? Has he heard the
general opinion of those who have read the piece, or does he according to the
countryman's phrase, measure other people's corn by his bushel. The
correspondent concludes by observing, "It is the duty of the managers to bring
forward pieces of merit whether of American or European production." To cherish
native productions is evidently their duty, but it is doubted by some, whether
they conceive it to be their interest. It is believed by many, that while ever
they can play off their old threadbare pieces, or new ones which they have
nothing but the trouble of bringing up, the poor native dramatist may throw his
mantle over his head, and mourn in silence. No premiums, no benefits to be
given for imported dramas The fear of a benefit is the rub which startles the
managers and makes their souls shrink within them. The Author again concludes
with the correspondent as he did with the managers; as the Triuphs of Love, or
the Happy Reconcilition was cordially received on its first appearance,
according to European usages it has a positive right to a second representation.




This answer, Mr. Brown refused to insert: the Author then carried it to Mr.
Bache (who had extracted the managers' reply from Mr. Brown's paper) he also
refused to insert it.

The Author will make further remarks on the last part of the managers' reply.
They say, "They conceive it their duty to bring forward the most celebrated
pieces which are to be found in the English language." This they have not done;
they have imposed a number of plays on the American Public, which were with
much difficulty dragged over the English stage. I could instance many, but will
confine myself to two, viz. Cheap Living; and Knave or not.

CHEAP LIVING, a Comedy, by Mr. Reynolds. Character of that Piece, from the
European Magazine for November, 1797, viz.
The principal novelty in this piece is the character of Sir Edward Bloomsly, a
boy of the age of sixteen, who is not only completely versed in all the scenes
of dissipation; but is endowed also with a greater portion of wisdom than
generally falls to the lot of men of double his age: we cannot approve of this
delineation, which we consider as improbable and unnatural, and liable to do
mischief to the rising generation: we think the present mode of education is
too liable already, to tempt inexperienced youth to tread the path of folly,
where their virtue and property are too often lost: we therefore consider the
performance as having an immoral tendency.


KNAVE OR NOT. Character of this Piece, from the European Magazine for
November, 1798, viz.
This comedy has both merits and defects. The drift of the piece is favorable
to virtue; but the satire is rather that of Juvenal than Horace, and hardly
that of the comic muse: in the grave scenes, the language is vigorous and
animated; but the comic ones want sprightfulness and elegance. As a performance
which has a tendency to make mankind dissatisfied with each other, by the
gloomy view it gives of human nature, we are not surprised at the cold
reception it met with.


KNAVE OR NOT. Remarks on the above Piece, from Brown's Gazette of February
13th, 1799.
This piece, which was performed to a very respectable audience, on monday
evening, is certainly one of the most servile and insipid productions that ever
disgraced the boards of a well regulated theater: respecting it, any exertion
of impartial criticism would be needless; it is composed of materials so
repugnant to genius, and so diffusive of dullness that submitting to the
obscurity it must soon be inevitably doomed to, we shall add no other eulogiums
on its sublimity, than to acknowledge it must be seen to be admired, heard to
be understood.

During the representation which was attended with much yawning, nodding and
hissing, the performers labored under a weight they could not sustain without
expressing evidently a sense of their burden; they must of course rejoice in
getting rid of (...).


Such are the choice comedies which the managers bring forward to an American
audience, as the most celebrated pieces which are to be found in the English
language, so much for that assertion.....Again.... It is absurd (say these
self-important gentlemen) to suppose the managers have an inclination to
trample on native productions, when they possess merit. What is called refusing
to perform a second time, a native piece, which was well received on the first
representation; does not this appear like trampling on native productions. The
managers may say they have lately given a proof to the contrary, by giving
several representations to a new comedy, entitled the Wedding in Wales, said to
be written by a citizen of Philadelphia, which has been called a native
production: true, the piece may have been written in Philadelphia, but the
author might as well have wrote it in Wales, or any other part of England, and
presented it to the managers in London, for representation, where it might have
met the same fate as the abovementioned pieces, and afterward ushered upon
our stage, as one of the most celebrated pieces to be found in the English
language. The Author takes the liberty of extracting (from Brown's gazette of
March the 11th last) some thoughts on the piece before it was acted.

MR. BROWN,
The friends of taste and the drama, will learn with pleasure, that an original
performance is announced for representation. The genius of America has too long
been reproached with the poverty and sterility of its productions. Few persons
have been sufficiently bold to appear before the Public as candidates for
literary fame; and it is to be regretted, that among those, some, whose
productions have merited a better fate, have been treated with indifference or
neglect.

The dignity of the American theater, has too long been impaired by the almost
exclusive representation of foreign plays, which, however well adapted they may
be to the state of European manners, lose much of that interes there which they
excited in the places of their nativity; nothing perhaps, has more repressed
the reputation of dramatic amusements in this country, than total reliance on
foreign productions: and it may not be incorrect to assert that no theater
merits extensive patronage, which does not excite and cherish the cultivation
and exercise of domestic talents.


This writer no doubt had an intention to serve the Author of the Wedding in
Wales: but unfortunately, his observation are against him, and operate most
forcibly against the managers. He observes, "the dignity of the American
theater has too long been impaired by the, almost exclusive representation of
foreign plays, which however well adapted they may be to the state of European
manners, lose much of that interest here, which they excited in the places of
their nativity." It may be enquired, whether the Wedding in Wales, is not as
foreign in its nature, as any play that ever appeared on our stage?

The Author takes the liberty of introducing an abridgment of strictures on the
Wedding in Wales (as they appeared in Mr Brown's gazette of the 15th of March
last, signed Neander) from Porcupine's gazette of March 16th the whole being
too lengthy.

THE WEDDING IN WALES.
The interest of the piece commences with the introduction of Maria, and is
from thence strongly kept up to the conclusion: but this interest is excited
and supported more by the peculiar situation of the parties, than by any
powerful poetic skill, or those feeling touches and irresistible applications
to the human heart, in which Shakespeare so abounds. Human misery ever excites
human sympathy, without the assistance of poetry; and it is no difficult thing
to bring people into trouble: a distracted, injured woman, with dishevelled
hair; an old, worthy and unfortunate man, exposed to a pitiless storm; and an
innocent, helpless and friendless infant, are easily imagined, and cannot fail
to excite interest. If we think of Lear in the same situation, Llowellen claims
but little of our attention.

The story of Maria is interesting and affecting, but I find very little
novelty in it. The principal incidents, and even some of the more minute ones,
such as the real priest and license having been used instead of a false one,
through the agency of the servant of a perfidious master, is an old
contrivance. Sometime since, I accidentally picked up on my kitchen table, a
little book, entitled "The History of the Farmer's Daughter," in which the
history of Maria is, among other things, very strongly pourtrayed; we there
find this same deception practiced by a servant on his master, respecting the
priest and the license; and the circumstance of the apprehension of Maria, as a
vagrant may also be found in it. As I have never seen this book any where else,
and as it is very coarsely written, I suppose its circulation is principally
among chambermaids.

It will not I think, be contested, that the play has any originality of
character or much skill in the conduct and contrivance of the plot: of wit and
humor it is almost entirely destitute.

It is confidently asserted, that the piece has been written for the
performers, and the several characters drawn and cast for their supposed
particular merits: I know not if the fact be so, but nothing can be more
contemptible, nothing more certainly ensures a speedy death to a play: it has
incorporated with it the seeds of its own dissolution. A play should be written
after nature, and not after players...... to see a poet descending to take
measure of an actor, and cast out his performance accordingly, instead of the
actor adapting himself to the poet, is a ridiculous, unpardonable inversion of
every thing honorable or dignified in authorship.

Strictures on the Triumphs of Love, from Messrs. Fenno, and Bache's papers, of
monday, May 25th, 1795.
[From Mr. Fenno's.]
On friday evening was performed a comedy (said to be written by a citizen of
Philadelphia) called the Triumphs of Love, or the Happy Reconciliation. The
piece, though wanting in incident to make it interesting, has some degree of
merit. Sambo and Patrick, are characters calculated to irritate the risible
muscles; they were happily conceived, and supported with tolerable point and
humor. We were sorry to see two such admirable actresses as Mrs. Whitlock and
Mrs Marshall, appearing in characters so very insignificant as Mrs. Peevish and
Rachel Friendly. Mrs. Whitlock was deprived of the most interesting part of her
character.
The performers in general, exerted themselves to give all possible support to
the piece.

[From Mr. Bache's.]
On friday evening, a first representation was given of the new comedy of the
Triumphs of Love, written by an American citizen. The writer has endeavored to
expose the folly of too much restraint in the education of youth, and the
impropriety of a practice among the religious society called Friends, to
discourage alliances between their children and those without the pale of their
church. In this comedy are interwoven sentiments that do honor to the writer's
heart, both as a man and as a citizen, on several interesting topics, such as
negro slavery, and our glorious revolution. The language throughout the piece,
is pure and appropriate, but the plot wants interest and incident, The most
interesting and incidental parts of the piece were expunged by the managers,
unknown to the Author.
the sentiments are also rather trite. It shows the writer a man of feeling,
and some observation, but who wants that knowledge of the stage, necessary to
succeed in dramatic composition. The Triumphs of Love has much of nature in it,
but it is plain, sober nature, without that point required to command the
attention and interest the feelings, and that relief necessary for stage
effect. The audience received it with their wonted indulgence, and applauded it
much throughout.

Thus matters stand between these two pieces; one the production of a native
and a citizen of Philadelphia, the scene in Philadelphia, the characters common
to our country, received with applause upon its first representation, and
afterward rejected when offered for a second representation.

The other wrote by a foreigner, and on a foreign subject; the author and the
piece cherished by the managers, and had three representations.

The Author submits (with defference) to the Reader, if such a decided
partiality in favor of the production of a stranger is not trampling on native
productions.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
REALWORTH, guardian to Miss Sophia Prankish. CHARLES REALWORTH. VAINLY, a
young foreigner on his travels, carried away by national prejudices, but
naturally of a good heart. BOASTLY, a superficial character. BOB STUBLE^, a
young countryman, and servant to Boastly. FINIKIN, a servant to Vainly.
THIMBLE, a tailor. PUFF, a hair-dresser.
WOMEN.
MISS PRANKISH, an heiress, secretly engaged to Charles Realworth. MISS
SPRIGHTLY, niece to Realworth. POLLY, maid to Miss Prankish.
THE BEAU METAMORPHIZED, OR THE GENEROUS MAID.
ACT. I.
-- SCENE I.
[Enter Miss Prankish and Miss Sprightly veiled.] Miss Prankish. HANG me if I
like this new fashion of hiding ones face.


Miss Sprightly. Nor I, it looks as if one was under sentence of death, or
ashamed to show ones face.


Miss Prankish. Suppose we were to take off these sable curtains and put on our
hats.


Miss Sprightly. Agreed.


[Miss Prankish rings the bell. -- Enter Polly.] Miss Prankish. Polly, bring
our hats.


Polly. Yes ma'm. (Exit.)


[Re-enter Polly, with hats, puts on Miss Prankish's, who looks at the glass.]
Miss Prankish. A little more on this side, Polly, -- [Polly places it] --
that is the dandy, that shows a significant, intelligent eye.


Miss Sprightly. I don't like that mode of wearing the hat, -- [goes to the
glass, puts on her hat] -- that is the way I like to wear mine, then I can look
at those confident male creatures with a full front.


Miss Prankish. We are in a land of liberty, every one can follow their own
taste: Polly, where is my dear little Bunny?

[Polly pulls a squirrel out of her pocket] Here it is Miss.


Miss Prankish. My Bunny, my honey,
My dear little Bunny -- (kisses and puts it on the floor)
Say, will you go,
Oh, no, no, no,
You must not, shall not, must not go,
Oh, no, no, no,
You must not go, shall not, must not go, shall --
Say, little simple, foolish Bun,
Whether, oh, whether would you run, whether, oh-h
Say, little simple, foolish Bun,
Whether, oh, whether would you run, whether, oh-h
Oh, no, no, no,
You must not go, -- (takes him up)
You must not, shall not, must not go --
Stay here at your ease,
Your mistress to please,
Stay here at your ease,
Your mistress to please, -- your mistress to please. --
Methinks I hear him say,
Pray, mistress, pray,
Let me go free.
Methinks I hear him say,
Pray, mistress, pray,
Let me go free,
Once more to bound from tree to tree,
Once more enjoy sweet liberty.
Oh, no, no, no,
You must not go.
Stay here at your ease,
Your mistress to please,
Stay here at your ease,
Your mistress to please, -- your mistress to please -- (kisses it.)

Miss Sprightly. How can you caress that mischievous, nut-cracking thing?


Miss Prankish. O, my dear, he was a present, I love the little animal for the
donor's sake.


Miss Sprightly. Ha, ha, ha, and when the donor takes his place, poor Bun will
be in a bad plight, as it happens to most pets; recently, Miss Fondly had a
favorite lap-dog, which she was so fond of, she would not let it poke its nose
out of doors, least the dear creature might be indisposed; every night,
forsooth, must have it to sleep with her: but when she got a husband, poor
Flora was discarded, and now is a poor, neglected, forlorn little devil as can
be -- (sings)

Instead of a lap-dog,
She has got something else in her arms, tol-lol-de-rol.

Miss Prankish. Ha, ha, ha, that is rather bordering on levity, Clara.


Miss Sprightly. Mum, Soph, a reproof from any one but you -- (looks at her
watch) -- are we not for the circus this evening, have you secured a a beau for
the purpose.


Miss Prankish. Yes, yours, Vainly.


Miss Sprightly. O lord! that surfeiting coxcomb?


Miss Prankish. Be not so censoreous, it is a comely youth.


Miss Sprightly. He is well enough as to personal accomplishments; but the
creature is so full of prejudices in favor of his own nation, he wont admit
that the Americans have any genius or any taste; he is constantly ridiculing
the American character, -- faith, if I had my will of those foreigners, who
affect to despise our country, I Would make them all march out of it, to the tune
of yankee doodle.


Miss Prankish. We will try if we cannot reduce him down to our republican
standard.


Miss Sprightly. That will not be so easy; why his man is an hour and a half
every day dressing his hair, and to be sure, when he is about ushering into the
street, to observe his motions is truly diverting; I have had a full view of
him, first he views himself in the glass -- (goes to the glass, mimicking) --
as so, burying his chin in a great bolster of a neck-cloth -- (struts, still
mimicking) -- goes to the front door, looks ar his legs, and starts off just so
-- (walks, mimicking) -- ha, ha, ha.


Miss Prankish. O, here comes his counterpart, his man Finikin.


[Enter Finikin with a note.] Finikin. Madam, my master's compliments to you.

(Miss Prankish goes toward him, he discovers the squirril, and retires back,
she speaks) -- Surely the fellow is afraid of my Bun, now for some fun, --
(aside....she follows, he retires) -- is that note for me.


Finikin. Yes mem. -- (offers the note at arm's lengh, still retiring.)


Miss Prankish. Why do you not give it me? -- (goes closer to him, he runs, see
after him.)


Finikin. O lard, O lard, O lard, pray mem, eh, eh, eh, my mother, when she
was, eh, eh, eh, she was frightened.


Miss Prankish Your mother frightened! the man is out of his senses. -- (puts
the squirrel on his back.)


Finikin. O murder, murder, I am killed, oh, oh, oh! -- (falls down, tumbles
over and over, gets up and runs off.)


Miss Sprightly. Ha, ha, ha, how could you teaze the poor devil so.


Miss Prankish. Remember the old saying, there is almost as much pleasure in
teazing as in pleasing, here is the note all rumpled, -- (takes it up) -- ha,
it is a letter and the seal broken, it is no crime to read it, -- (reads) -- My
dear Vainly, I am to acknowledge yours of the present day, you say you are
engaged to go to the circus with Miss P. and Miss S. that you are in an
unfortunate predicament with them two ladies, that you have reason to believe
they are both in love with you, that you have a partiality for Miss S. but the
great fortune of Miss P. is an object, and that you want my advice: I Will give
it you. Prefer Miss S. it is true she is a mad-cap, but a few years of
matrimony will cool her, but as for the other, with all her fortune, she will
be a bad bargain, she will lead you a hell of a life, she is the damndest vixen
that ever was born, but by the by, I shall venture upon her, I have her at my
option, as you observe, the great fortune is a great object, I shall have a
devil of a job to tame the shrew, but I Will make her say, before I have done
done with her, that the moon is a pancake.

Yours, J. BOASTLY.


I will tear it into a thousand pieces. -- (walking in a passion) -- no I Will
preserve it; it shall snare the lying villain some of these days in the face --
(walks in a pet) -- abominable, lying wretch; Vainly too, one can scarcely be
civil to those animals, but their presumption leads them to suppose one is in
love with them.


Miss Sprightly. Ha, ha, ha, they are not worth anxious thoughts, we will lay
our heads together to be revenged upon them in some merry way.


[Enter Vainly, making bows as he approaches.] Vainly. Ladies I am yours, I
hope I shall have the exquisite pleasure of being told you are well: Miss
Prankish, your face resembles the great representative of nature behind a
cloud, and like that glorious luminary, you have the power of dispelling
vapors.


Miss Sprightly. Then we shall be deprived of Mr. Vainly's company.


Miss Prankish. Well said Clara. -- (aside)


Vainly. Ha, ha, ha, 'pon my soul miss, ha, ha, ha, your wit, ha, ha, ha, is so
blunt, ha, ha, ha, it almost knocked me down.


Miss Sprightly. Conceited coxcomb. -- (aside)


Vainly. But you must all be wits or authors in this country; I have just
finished reading a performance, when some people have designated by the name of
-- (sneeringly) -- a play, and it almost suffocated me


Miss Prankish^ How so?


Vainly It smelled so much of -- (affectedly) -- de (...) et de pomade. The
piece alluded to, is said to be wrote by a hair-dresser.



Miss Prankish. Will you allow it to have no merit, Mr. Vainly?


Vainly. No, no, no, no, no, -- no sentiment, no satire, no humor, -- a
burlesque, a jargon, a jumble of nonsense, -- without plot, without incident,
-- an imposition upon the public.


Miss Sprightly. O, how I could lug him by the ears, -- ( aside) -- it no doubt
has its defects, as most dramatic pieces have, yet the audience were highly
entertained with it, it went off with great eclat -- but it was written by an
American, and not one of the first grade; had it been the composition of a
classic, as one of those who call themselves the first order of beings, perhaps
it might have passed in your estimation.


Vainly. ( contemptuously) -- To be sure, it was a damned piece of presumption
in the fellow -- ( sneeringly) -- but it is a mere farce for your first
classics to attempt a dramatic; your country affords no matter, no subject, no,
nothing to lay the groundwork of a play upon.


[Enter Realworth, sen.] Realworth. Your servant, Mr. Vainly, I hope you are
well.


Vainly. I thank you, sir, pretty good health, only a little fever in the head.


Realworth. No wonder, with such a quantity of hair upon it -- ( aside) -- you
would feel a great relief if you were to have the fore part of your hair
reduced.


Vainly. O lard, O lard, then I should become a prey to the flies -- no, no,
no, no, sir, I would not have my top reduced upon any consideration, no, no,
sir, not on any account, -- any news, any news, Mr. Realworth?


Realworth. A ship from London, just arrived.


[Enter a servant with a packet, gives it to Mr. Realworth, who opens it.]
Realworth. Letters from my son, one for you Miss Prankish, you my niece, and
one for you Mr. Vainly, and for several of his friends. -- ( they all apen
their letters eagerly, and read, apparently pleased with the contents.)


Realworth. Heaven be thanked, Charles informs me there is a prospect of a
general peace in Europe; O that mankind would enforce it upon their hearts,
that they are but one great family, and instead of destroying each other, would
unite in promoting their general happiness in their transcient and at most,
short-lived residence on this earth, -- ( addressing himself to the company) --
well, what writes Charles to ye?


Vainly. He mentions peace too, with other occurrences, which are between him
and me, not necessary for you to know, sir. -- Since he has been in England, he
is highly improved; -- Rest assured, sir, your son conducts himself in such a
way, as gives a general bill of credit to his countrymen; I have been with him
in the first society in England, where he was the admiration of the company,
the whisper went round -- what an accomplished American!


Realworth. The account you give of my son, Mr. Vainly, is truly flattering,
and extremely grateful to a parent's ear.


[Enter servant who speaks to Realworth.] Servant. A gentleman wishes see you
without.


Realworth. I will attend.


(Exeunt.) Miss Sprightly. O how I am rejoiced at the idea of seeing my dear
cousin Charles, we may look for him every day.


Miss Prankish. Not more than I do, -- (turns aside and kisses the letter) --
if the vessel has but a tolerable passage, we may look for him every day.


Vainly. I shall be happy to shake him by the hand, he is a prince of a fellow,
he has been much improved by being in England. -- (looks at his watch) --
Allons, allons, ladies, we shall be too late for the riding man.


Miss Prankish and Miss Sprightly. We are ready. ( Exeunt.)


Scene changes to another apartment.
[ Enter Bob Stubble^.] Stub. I have pounded at this door, until I almost beat
my knuckles bare, and not a soul would come to open it; I believe this is the
house master sent me to; as they would not open the door, I think I had a right
to open it myself.


[Enter Polly, who starts back.] Polly. As I breathe, there is my old flame Bob
Stubble^ -- (aside.)


Stub. ( stands and looks at her, and speaks) -- May I be soused up to the chin
in a ditch if that is not my sweetheart Poll D^iry -- ( aside -- runs and
catches her up in his arms) -- O, Polly, do I grasp thee once more in my arms!
-- ( runs about the stage with her.)


Polly. O lord, you will suffocate me, and your plagued beard scrubs so.


Stub. ( kisses her) -- I could eat you up, I am so glad to see you -- ( puts
her down, looks at her) -- why I hardly knew you at first, you are so
metaphorsosist.


Polly. Ah, we are obliged to dress in a different manner in town. -- In the
name of wonder what brought you to the city?


Stub. You.


Polly. Me?


Stub. Aye, you -- I have had no rest, day nor night, since you went away.


Polly. An honest hearted soul as ever lived -- ( aside) -- no more of that
Bob; I told you before it would not do, we are too poor to come together;
remember the old saying, when poverty comes in at the door, love flies out of
the windows.


Stub. Cannot we fasten them down?


Polly. Say no more, I am determined, -- where do you live?


Stub. With Mr. Beastly.


Polly. Mr. Boastly you mean.


Stub. Beastly his name ought to be, he does not behave like a human parson, he
is got a great big house and mighty fine goods, but he grinds guts most
damndably.


Polly. Why, does he not give you enough to eat?


Stub. No -- why don't you see how I have fell away? there is nothing but slops
for breakfast, picking of bones for dinner, and nothing at all for supper; that
is not at all like our country are, where we could swim in a pan of milk, and
have a stroke at an apple pie as big as a tea-table, with other cuts and come
again.


Polly. You must try to dispose of your greedy country appetite, and purchase a
city one. -- Have you been to see any of the public amusements?


Stub That word is rather too high learned for me, shows you mean.


Polly, Yes.


Stub. I have been to two shows; at the first one I saw the devil a riding on
horseback.


Polly. Ha, ha, ha, you were at the circus I suppose, where you saw Mr.
Ricketts performing feats of horsemanship.


Stub. You may call him by what name you please, but I am sure he was the
devil, for none but the devil could have done what he did.


Polly. Where was the other show?


Stub. That was at a monstrous great house right over the road, called a
playhouse.


Polly. Over the road! you will be making use of your country phrases, -- the
street you should say. -- What play did you see acted?


Stub. Let me think -- there was two plays, one made me cry desperately, and
the other made me laugh terribly, -- ( pauses, scratches his head) -- now I
have got it, the first was, was, was Romo, Romo and, and Julo, it was all about
love; it infected me cruelly: a poor lady died and came to life, and died
again; and a poor young man killed himself too -- it made us all cry horribly.


Polly. What was the other play?


Stub. I remember that very well, it was called the Rump; O lord! how we all
did laugh; there was a girl that boxed for all the world like a man, she dug
a young man, called Watty, in the sides confoundedly.


Polly. Ha, ha, ha, your description of the performance is truly entertaining.
-- How did you like the appearance of the house, did not the ladies look
beautiful?


Stub. O gramery, yes. -- What do you think I wished, Poll?


Polly. How the deuce can I tell?


Stub. Why, I wished I was the President, that I might have all them ladies,
faith, I Would keep a grand sargulo.


Polly. O, you would make a charming faithful husband........He sings most
charmingly, the family being out of the way* I Will get him to sing, -- ( aside)
-- well Robert, have you learned any new songs? you used to be famous for
singing new songs, I dare say you have got some.


Stub. Ah, that I have, and I have sung them over and over again, because they
were wrote by a man belonging to our town.


Polly. Who is he?


Stub. Tim Scribble, you know Tim Scribble, don't you?


Polly. Bless me, Tim Scribble the cobbler, has he turned poet?


Stub. I don't know what you call poet, but he has turned song-maker.


Polly. Who could have thought it!


Stub. Aye, so says other folks besides you, and it has caused him some
enemies, there is Swagger the lawyer, Dr. Sneer, and Parson Guttle run him down
all they can, they say, "the cobbler had better stick to his last," they think,
because he was not brought up in a high place of learning, he cannot have any
sense.


Polly. Pray Bob, let me hear Tim's songs, I am all in a gig till I hear them.


Stub. Well, I Will begin one upon our Saint's day.


Polly. Who was he?


Stub. Why, did you never hear of our Saint, old Tammany, the engine who loved
grog so well?


Polly. O yes, I have heard of St. Tammany, -- please to begin.


Stub. -- (sings) --

SONG ON ST. TAMMANY'S DAY.
Once more do we hail the first of sweet May,
Which gave birth to our Saint, the good Tammany;
By some, it is said, he was apt to get mellow,
Though they cannot but acknowledge he was an honest old fellow.
Derry down, down, derry down.
Independent he lived, independent he died,
Whatever were his faults, that will not be denied;
With a stout rousing fire in his hut he expired, It is said he was burned in
his wigwam, in a state of intoxication.

Neither priest nor physician nor lawyer required.
Derry down, etc.
He took leave of the world without any parade,
But in his last moments to his children he said,
Be mindful of Freedom, it is your natural right,
When'er it is aggressed on, be ready to fight.
Derry down, etc.
Never let us forget the last words of our Sire,
But prove to all ages, the Frank is a liar,
When he asserts to the word that we are divided,
And have not the spirit to see ourselves righted.
Derry down, etc.
We'll gird on our swords in our country's cause,
By the virtuous mankind we shall meet with applause,
In defending our rights against an arrogant nation,
Whose design is to place us in an abjected station.
Derry down, etc.
United we stand, divided we fall,
A prey to fell faction or imperious Gaul,
Let us join hand and heart and let the world see*
The sons of St Tammany will die or live free.
Derry down, etc.
Like Americans true we'll rally round our good chief,
In the sons of St. Tammany he will find that relief
Which is due to the man that has long been our friend,
By which we shall triumph most sure in the end.
Derry down, etc.

[Enter Finikin, who runs and takes Polly by the hand.] Finikin. Permit me,
loveliest, and sweetest of creatures to kiss this fair hand. -- ( kisses her
hand.)


Stub. (to Polly, sneeringly) -- And you would make a charming faithful wife --
(pushes Finikin) -- I courted her before you did.


Finikin. (with contempt) -- What a Mohawk! Pray sir, who is your hair-dresser?


Stub. Ask about.


Polly. I shall have some fun with my rustic Bob and this English petit maitre.
-- (aside.)


Finikin. Elegant language!


Stub. Pray who made your breeches?


Finikin. (starts back) -- Did ever any one hear such vulgarism! -- you should
have said inexpressibles, such indelicacies are enough to make one faint.


Stub. You are damned squamish, suppose I was to make you swallow half a dozen
of your teeth, how would you like it? You need not think to be running your
rigs upon one neither. [bell rings.]


Finikin. Adieu, my charmer. -- I shall see you again Mr. Clod. -- (exit.)


Stub. And damn me if you shall not feel me too.


(exit.) Scene changes to another room.
[Enter Miss Prankish and Miss Sprightly.] Miss Sprightly. We lost the best of
the performance in consequence of going so late, but what we saw was very
entertaining, ha, ha, ha, I was as much diverted with a country fellow who
laughed so immoderately, he opened his pondrous jaws that you might almost have
shoved a wheel-barrow down his throat, ha, ha, ha.


Miss Prankish. Our beau went home sick, the fellow is one half of his time
hipped; I Will tell you what popped into my head, Clara, as we were coming home,
if we can succeed in it, it will afford us sufficient satisfaction, ha, ha, ha,
which is to contrive to get Vainly's top cut off, and to create a quarrel
between him and Boastly.


Miss Sprightly. May be they may kill each other, and the world be deprived of
a great loss.


Miss Prankish. I have no apprehension of that, beaus and bragadoes are not
fond of fighting, they may possibly meet, but I Will engage their wounds will not be
very mortal.


Miss Sprightly. I think I should like to see them at it, methinks I see
Boastly standing thus -- (mimicking) -- with hand shaking, and Vainly, thus,
setting his cravat, now sir, are you ready? then at it, bouze, bouze, one fires
to the right, and the other to the left.


[Enter Polly.] Polly. Ladies, tea is ready.


Miss Sprightly. I am glad of it, I have got an excellent appetite. (Exeunt.)


Scene changes to Boastly's house.
[ Enter Boastly and Stubble^.] Boast. Who did you see at Mr. Realworth's?


Stub. Why, I saw Poll Dairy, and a frigasee'd frizzled fellow, I have seen
with Mr. Vainly.


Boast. Who did you give the note to?


Stub. The note? -- (scratches his head, gapes) -- may I be blistered if I did
not forget it -- (aside.)


Boast. Who did you give it to?


Stub. (scratching his head) -- Why, sir, I-I-I-I forgot to give it, sir.


Boast. Forgot to give it, stupid bumkin, did I not send you for that express
purpose, where is it?


(Stub. searches his pockets, turns them inside out, takes out his pocket book,
looks into it, scratches his head) Boast. You have lost it -- ( takes him by
the collar) I will shake your soul out, you scoundrel.


Stub. There is two of us can play at that kind of work. -- ( takes Boastly by
the collar.)


Boast. Do you dare, villain, to take me by the collar! in my own house too?


Stub. Damn ye, sir, if I Will let you, or the President of the United States, as
much as I like him, take me by tne collar, without taking my own part, if you
let go hold of me, I will let go hold of yon, you make such a work about a
piece of white paper with a red patch upon it.


Boast. Was there ever such impudence! I will shake you to pieces.


Stub. And I will shake too.


[ They shake each other, Boastly falls....Bob goes off.] [Boastly gets up and
runs after him in a violent passion.] [END OF THE FIRST ACT.]
ACT. II.
SCENE I.
[Vainly and Thimble, Thimble fitting the knees of Vainly's breeches.] Thim.
There, they fit, fit to a notch, sir.


Vainly. They do not fit me, they are a monstrous deal too big, horrid clumsy;
what is the reason you American tradesmen have no taste, I see I shall be
compelled to send my old clothes back to England to have new one made by them
-- pettishly -- come try the coat on (Thimble puts on the coat, he views
himself in the glass) worse and worse, see how it bulges out.


Thim. If you were to wear it for a day, sir, it would settle to your person.


Vainly. Settle the devil -- ( walks up and down views himself) -- as Paddy
says, it fits me as well as if I had not been by when my measure was taken.
I Will tell you what, Thimble, you should turn cobbler, you are no more fit for a
tailor than my horse, why, they are not fit for a mechanic to wear.


Thim. (with scorn) Mechanic to wear! who has a better right to wear good and
well fitted clothes, than mechanics? are they not the most useful and
industrious part ot the people? I must tell you, sir, you are the most
arrogant, insulting young coxcomb I ever worked for, and you and your clothes
may go to England or to the devil, for what I care, I will never work a stitch
more for you again.


(exit in a passion.) Vainly. Sol, fa, la, equality with a devil to it, he is a
general I suppose, or a member of congress -- (ironically.)


[Enter Puff.] Vainly. Well, sir, what is your business?


Puff. I am come, sir, at the instance of Miss Prankish, to cut your hair.


Vainly. Did you serve your time in London?


Puff. No sir.


Vainly. Then you do not know how to cut hair.


Puff. I hope, sir, you don't think that genius and taste are entirely confined
to London.


Vainly. A pert fellow -- (aside) -- well, I Will try you; Miss Prankish has
placed you at the head of your profession -- (rings the bell, enter Finikin) --
bring my dressing gown, tol, lol, de-rol -- ( exit Finikin) -- you understand
your business, you say?


Puff. I am not to speak in my own praise, sir.


[Re-enter Finikin, who puts on his master's gown.] Vainly. Hand me that glass,
Finikin, come on Monsieur Frisseur, you are certain you can cut hair well, if
you don't please me, I Will put you to death: I want it cut so as to admit of an
easy comb, to fall gently over my forehead not quite so low, you understand
weeding or thinning the hair.


Puff. Yes sir, -- (sniggering) -- I have got my instructions from Miss
Prankish -- (aside.)


Vainly. Ah, you handle the hair tolerably well, now take care you don't go too
close, -- (Puff begins to cut his hair, Vainly starts up) -- damme you have
spoiled my hair by that one slash -- (walks about in a passion, looks at
himself in the glass) -- close to the skull by all that is damnable, why damn
you, sir, what did you mean by cutting it so.


Puff. Sir, it is impossible for you to judge until it is finished; if you will
let me go on, I Will be bound I Will please you; your top was so large you think I
cut more off than I did.


Vainly. (sits down) -- Give me your comb. -- (combs his hair) -- Ruined!
ruined! impossible you can mend it, come go on -- (Puff cuts....Vainly starts
up) -- that is closer still -- (walks about in great rage) I shall be obliged to
stay in the house until my hair grows out again.


Puff. If you will have patience and let me finish it, sir, I am sure you will
be satisfied, I Will cut it in the present American fashion.


Vainly. Damn your American fashion -- ( sits down again, Puff cuts) -- have
you done sir?


Puff. Yes sir.


Vainly. ( gets up and looks in the glass) -- You have made a pretty devil of
me to be sure -- ( gives him money) -- there, my servant can do the rest.


Puff. Thank you, sir. He, he, he, I have capershered him, he, he, he --
[aside....exit.]


Vainly. See what a figure the fellow has made of me.


Finikin. Horrible, sir, he has sheered you as close as a Nottingham sheep.


[Re-enter Puff.] Puff. Don't you want your tail shorter, sir?


Vainly. Turn the fellow out of doors, damn him. [Exit.]


Finikin. ( goes up to Puff in a seeming passion) -- Will you be so good as to
walk home. -- ( Puff takes out his puff and dashes in Finikin's eyes.)


Puff. Oui Monsieur Bagatelle. [Exit.]


Finikin. Oh, oh, murder, murder, the damned yankee barber has blinded me. -- (
groupes after him, exit.]


Scene in a room in Realworth's house.
[Enter Polly] Polly. Ha, ha, ha, I believe there is not such a cracked brain
in this city, as my mistress, yet she is a generous, good soul, she thinks no
more of money than snuff: The other day she received a letter from a poor woman
who was in the utmost distress, what did she do? why, not like most people,
give money and think no more of it; no, she answered the letter, and with her
own dear hands put in a bank note, and sent it immediately to her: next day she
and I went to see the object, where we were witnesses to one of the most
distressing scenes that ever was beheld, it would have melted the heart of a
stone....a poor woman with several small children, destitute of the common
necessaries of life, with nothing hardly to cover their little bodies; she
proved to be a poor creature who had the misfortune of having a bad husband who
did nothing for her but get her into trouble once a year, and abused her into
the bargain; curse such scoundrel husbands, I say, they should all be put in
jail, and made to pound plaster of Paris: as I was saying, when she saw their
distress, we went to a shop where she bought clothing for them all, and the
next day sent them every thing that was necessary to make them comfortable and
happy, heaven bless her, though she is wild, she is as good as she is rich.


[ Enter Bob Stubble^ in soldier's dress.] Stub. Well Poll, I am come to bid
you good by.


Polly. Lord help me, are you enlisted?


Stub. Yes.


Polly. What made you enlist?


Stub. To fight.


Polly. What could possess you?


Stub. Because I could not possess you.


Polly. Ah, why have you made a slave of yourself?


Stub. As for that, I have learned so much since I have been in this place, as
to know, they are the greatest slaves, who depend on faithless women or damned
cross masters.


Polly. ( crying) -- O, I cannot bear the thoughts of your going to the wars,
you will be scalped or tomahawked by the cruel savages, and I shall never,
never see you more.


Stub. Now I am sorry I enlisted.


Polly. I will try to get you off.


Stub. No, no, Polly, that would make me look calfish.


Polly. It is often done.


Stub. No, I must go, I will not be a servant man again, I have had a heart's
scolding of it, if I am to be a servant, it shall be to serve my country.


Polly. You will go then?


Stub. Within this half hour -- ( goes to salute her, she retires.)


Polly. I will not take leave of you, you must not go.


Stub. I never had my heart so tried -- ( aside) -- once more farewell: if you
will not let me take a parting kiss, I will say God preserve you -- ( going.)


Polly. ( crying) -- Cannot you run away?


Stub. Never, never, I Will never desert my colors....I Will sing you a parting
song, it was made by Tim Scribble, for my cousin Bob, when he enlisted, it will
answer very well for me and you -- ( sings) --

Had you but told Bob Stubble,
Your heart was all his own,
You Would saved a world of trouble,
And he would have staid at home.
But now I am enlisted,
And received my captain's pay,
Your tears must be resisted,
I cannot run away.
It Is honor now that calls me,
To meet my country's foe,
Whatever fate befalls me
Dear Polly I must go.

[Enter Finikin.] Finikin. He, he, he, I can tell you news, Miss Polly, Bob
Stubble^'s master has given him a devil of a flogging, and turned him off.


Stub. You lie, but I Will give you one; I promised you the next time I saw you
you should feel me -- ( beats him.)


Finikin. Murder, murder, Miss Polly will not you help me! -- ( Stub. beats him
off, Polly following crying.)


Scene changes to another apartment.
[Miss Sprightly and Miss Prankish.] Miss Prankish. Ha, ha, ha, here he comes,
mind, this is the chair, I will attack him on the right, and you on the left.


[ Enter Vainly, bowing.] Vainly. Ladies I hope I have the pleasure of seeing
you compos mentis.


Miss Sprightly. Compos mentis -- ( aside) -- please to sit down, Mr. Vainly.


Vainly. ( sits down, jumps up suddenly.) -- What the devil is in that chair!


Miss Prankish. ( examines the chair) -- Bless my heart, there is a pin stuck
up in the chair, an unlucky accident, I hope you are not hurt, sir, -- he, he,
he. -- ( aside.)


Vainly. Curse the pin.


Miss Sprightly. ( goes toward him, starts back) -- Lord help us! what ails
you Mr. Vainly? you are strangely altered since I saw you last.


Vainly. Do you think so -- ( goes to the glass) -- it is owing to my hair
being cut: damn the scoundrel -- ( aside.)


Miss Prankish. I see the cause of the change, Mr. Vainly has had his hair cut,
ha, ha, ha, why you ha, ha, ha, look like Crop the conjurer.


Miss Sprightly. Ha, ha, ha, mercy on us, ha ha, ha, it is owing to that, ha,
ha, ha, you looked like a singed cat, what made you get shaved so close?


Vainly. (walks up and down in a pet, views himself in the glass) -- Damn the
fellow, I told him so -- ( walks in a passion.)


Miss Prankish. You must get a wig made, to imitate your former hair, you cannot
appear at the assembly or any party in that trim.


Vainly. (walking in a passion) -- Villain, the damned barbering villain, if I
but lay my hands upon him, I will beat him to mummy.


Miss Sprightly. Get a scalp made.


Vainly. Get a scalp made! I have been scalped pretty well, I think; it seems
as if heaven and earth was combined against me,....the vile yankee
hair-dresser, has shorn me as close as a sheep, and my friend Boastly is a
going to blow out my brains.


Miss Sprightly. That would be a difficult matter -- (aside.)


Miss Prankish. What, a challenge!


Vainly. Yes, faith, here it is, -- (pulls a note out of his pocket and reads)
-- Sir, I expect you will meet me this evening, a little before twilight,
before the grove to answer for an insult offered to one of my female friends,

Yours, J. BOASTLY.
N. B. It is not necessary to bring a second.







Miss Prankish. (seemingly serious) -- You will not meet him, I hope.


Miss Sprightly. (affectedly) -- You will not expose your life, I hope, sir, don't
meet him -- (they both lay hold of him) -- Both. Pray don't go.


Vainly. Ladies, upon my soul, you almost disarm me, but I will meet him, for
the honor of old England, I will meet him -- (looks at his watch) -- the time
is near at hand, excuse me ladies, my honor is at stake, I must be gone.
[exit.]


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha -- ha, ha, ha. [exeunt.]


[Enter Realworth, sen.] Real. Tomorrow, heaven permit, I shall see my boy,
after an absence of three years.


[Enter Polly, who goes to Realworth and kneels.] Polly O, sir, let me entreat
you to do me an act of friendship; I know you have a heart always ready to do
good, it will not be the least of the many good deeds you have done.


Real. What is (...) request, Polly?


Polly. It is, sir, to get a poor young countryman, a cousin of mine, his
discharge; he last night, in a foolish frolic enlisted, I have tried to get him
off but could not succeed, O, sir, it would be an act of the greatest charity,
he is the only son of a poor old woman, and is her only support; O, do sir be
so good.


Real. My good girl, I Will try what I can do, but I am afraid it will be a
difficult matter to accomplish. What is his captain's name?


Polly. O dear me, I don't know, if you please sir, I will go with you to his
quarters.


Realworth. O no, enquire for his name.


Polly. I beseech you, sir, to let me go with you immediately, or it will be
too late, they are are to march in a short time.


Realworth. I Will go with you. [exeunt.]


Scene, the skirt of a Wood.
[Enter Vainly and Boastly conversing.] Vainly. Upon my soul, I know of no lady
I have offended, it is damned hard you will not inform me who is my accuser.


Boast. The lady enjoined me to secrecy.


Vainly. Damn me Jack if I will fight you.


Boast. Then damn me, sir, if I don't post you. I know he will not fight --
(aside.)


Vainly. Post me!


Boast. Yes sir, post you for a coward, all over the city.


Vainly. Ha, ha, ha, post me for a coward, no, no, you shall not,.'''.have at
you sir, take your distance.


Boast. He looks as if he was in earnest -- ( aside) -- Will you beg the lady's
pardon, sir?


Vainly. That is curious logic; I am to beg the lady's pardon, and you wont let
me know who she is!


Boast. Have you not lately affronted a lady?


Vainly. (speaking loud) -- No.


Boast. Upon your honor?


Vainly. I shall make you no farther answer on that head, but must insist upon
immediate satisfaction from you, so sir, prepare yourself.


Boast. Are you serious, sir?


Vainly (speaking loud) -- Yes.


Boast. I am satisfied, I don't wish to fight you.


Vainly. He is afraid -- (aside) -- Then I Will post you.


Boast. Post me!


Vainly. Yes sir, I Will post you at the coffee house and at the corner of every
street in the city; take your distance.


Boast. I will, and it shall be a pretty respectable distance too -- (aside --
they turn, Vainly takes his distance with a slow step -- Boastly runs off.)


Scene an apartment in Realworth's house.
[Enter Realworth, sen. and Polly.] Polly. I humbly thank you, sir.


Real. I am much displeased with you Polly, why was you not candid with me, you
put me in a most embarrassed situation, when you discovered the real cause of
your interesting yourself in the young man's behalf.


Polly. I was ashamed sir, to tell you.


Real. Never be ashamed to tell the truth, a departure from it is a certain
road to disgrace; lying is a key that unlocks the first door that leads to vice.


Polly. Sir, I hope you will pardon me for it, love perhaps may be my excuse.
[exeunt.]


Scene changes to Vainly's lodgings.
[Enter Finikin.] Fin. O lord, I have just heard my master is gone to fight a
duel, if he is killed I shall be left at the mercy of these mohawks; oh, that I
was once in my own dear country again, where I could purchase a bottle of
porter for -- and say what I please; they call this the land of liberty, yet
one dare not speak his own mind, I was in a beer house the other night, and
happened to say the American government was something like our English one, but
not so good; a great big fisted fellow swore, that if I made that comparison
again, he would beat my English head as flat as a flounder: I was obliged to be
mum, I was as a lamb along side of a wolf: O gemmini! here is my master. [Enter
Vainly in haste] O sir, I am so glad to see you come back alive.


Vainly. Follow me.


Fin. Yes sir. [exeunt.]


Scene at Realworth's, sen.
[Enter Miss Sprightly and Miss Prankish.] Miss S. Ha, ha, ha, I Will vow,
Sophia, I would not have missed of this frolic upon any account.


[Enter Vainly and Boastly.] Vainly. (bowing reservedly to Miss Prankish) --
Miss Prankish, did I ever insult you?


Miss P. Insult me! Now for turning the tables upon them -- (aside.)


Boast. Miss Prankish, did you not tell me that Vainly had affronted you, and
requested me to resent it?


Miss P. I did.


Vainly. (walking affectedly) -- I should be glad to know at what time or
place, that I deviated from the rectitude of gentlemanhood.


Miss P. You have both insulted me; you Mr. Boastly particularly.


Boast. In what instance, Miss, have I offended you? -- (assuming a
consequential air.)


Miss P. I Will produce both your accusers -- ( takes the letter out of her
pocket, and reads) -- My dear Vainly, I am to acknowledge yours of the present
day, you say you are engaged to go to the circus with Miss P. and Miss S. that
you are in an unfortunate predicament with those two ladies, that you have
reason to believe they are both in love with you, that you have a partiality
for Miss S. but the great fortune of Miss P. is an object, and that you want my
advice: I Will give it you. Prefer Miss S. it is true she is a mad-cap, but a few
years of matrimony will cool her, but as for the other, with all her fortune,
she will be a bad bargain, she will lead you a hell of a life, she is the
damndest vixen that ever was born, but by the by, I shall venture upon her, I
have her at my option, as you observe, the great fortune is a great object, I
shall have a devil of a job to tame the shrew, but I Will make her say, before I
have done with her, that the moon is a pancake.

Yours, J. BOASTLY.


There sir, will you deny your own hand writing. -- (both look confused.)


Boast. How the devil did she come by that letter! -- ( aside.)


Vainly. Blast it, how did she get that damned letter! -- (aside.)


Miss P. There is the proof, and how dare either of you to take such liberties
with me? Was there ever ought in my behavior, Mr. Boastly, to authoize you to
dictate such sentiments of me?


Miss S. (to Vainly) -- And pray sir, how did the vast magnitude of your
profound wisdom and penetration discover that I was enamoured with your
Adonised person?


Vainly. (looking foolish) -- O damme, I wish I was out of her clutches -- (
aside) -- Miss, I had reason to suppose I was not disagreeable to you.


Miss S. Well, I now sir, tell you in plain terms, you are very disagreeable to
me, and so please to take your china limbs away.


Miss P. (to Boastly) -- And you, sir, march --


Miss S. March is the word -- (sings) --

Yankee Doodle's come to town,
Is not he the dandy?
For in one hand he carries a can,
In the other a bottle of brandy.
Yankee Doodle Dandy, etc.
( they push them, they resist.)
Miss P. If you don't go quietly, I Will call my maid Polly to turn you out -- (
they push them off, Miss Sprightly singing the tune of yankee doodle -- they
both laugh) -- Ha, ha, ha, -- ha, ha, ha, -- ha, ha, ha,


Miss P. Well, Clara, taking every thing into view, we have had ample
satisfaction; I wish every coxcomb who presumes to sport with a woman's
reputation, could be made to run a similar gauntlet.


[Re-enter Vainly.] Vainly. Pray miss, may I not hope for pardon?


Miss S. Come hither gentle Adonis, will you comply with my request if I do?


Vainly. Faith I Will do any thing but hang myself -- I Would lay my fortune at her
feet, I so love the hussy -- [aside.]


Miss S. The very thing I want you to do.


Vainly. Prithee, dear girl, be not so ironic, I am ready to make an atonement
for any offense I have given you; my fortune and my person, if you please are
at your disposal.


Miss S. [makes a bow courtsey affectedly] -- Sir, is it possible you can make
such a sacrifice, as to lay your great fortune and pretty person, at the feet
of a poor, unaccomplished American girl; you have lost sight of the grand
object, Mr. Vainly, the fortune! the fortun! Miss Prankish has the fortune.


Vainly. Curse on that letter, it was that fool, Boastly, drew me into this
scrape, let me atone.


Miss S. A thought has struck me, I Will try it I cannot produce some good out of
it -- [aside] -- Well, sir, the first request I have to make is, that you will
subscribe a something for the relief of those poor families, that have lately
been burnt out of their houses; here is the subscription paper -- [gives him a
paper.]


Vainly. I will most cheerfully, for, however I may be biassed by national
prejudices, my purse ever has and ever shall be open to the unfortunate of
every country -- [subscribes and returns the paper.]


Miss S. [reads] -- Two hundred dollars, it almost makes me love the creature,
generosity covers a multitude of foibles -- [aside] -- You are very liberal Mr
Vainly.


Vainly. I am pleased you think so: Any other demand, Miss?


Miss S. He begins to be rational, if I could get that great bolster about his
neck reduced I think I should begin to like him -- ( aside) -- I have one other
request to make.


Vainly. Mention it.


Miss S. It is to stretch your neck a little.


Vainly. That is, you are determined I must hang myself.


Miss S. No, hang me if I do, I want you to look somewhat genteeler about the
neck....where is the occasion of that great wad under your chin?


Vainly. Fashion me as you please.


Miss S. That Is a darling -- ( takes off his neckcloth, takes out the pad and
ties it on again; she pulls tight.]


Vainly. Not so tight, not so tight, by the lord, you will choke me, let go,
miss, let go.


Miss S. No I will not till you make me certain promises.


Vainly. What the devil does she want now, it is the devil to be in the clutches
of a woman -- ( aside) -- Yes, I Will promise any thing.


Miss S. That you never will wear so large a cushion again.


Vainly. I cannot give that up.


Miss S. Will Not you? -- ( pulls tighter.)


Vainly. O lord, O lord, damn it, yes I will.


Miss S. Another promise yet.


Vainly. Out with it.


Miss S. You never will ridicule the American character again.


Vainly Never, never.


Miss S. What a dear conformable creature thou art!


Vainly. Now I expect that thou will be a dear conformable creature, and take a
reformed young man into thy lovely arms -- ( kisses her.)


[ Enter Mr. Realworth, sen.] Real. Ah, Mr. Vainly, in the act of making love!


Vainly. You see, Mr. Realworth, what love has brought me to....completely
metamorphized to your republican system.


Real. I hope you will not be less happy on that account; remember the old
addage, "when you are in Rome, you must do as Rome does." I have the pleasure
to inform you that your friend Charles is arrived, I expect him every moment.


Vainly. From my soul I give you joy; Sir, I hope we shall soon have the
pleasure of seeing him.


[Enter Charles Realworth and Miss Prankish.] Charles. ( runs to his father and
embraces him) -- Honored sir, my dear Father!


Real. My son, my dear Charles! -- ( weeps) -- thank God!


Charles. My dear coz, and my friend Vainly! I am happy to see you again, I
hope you have enjoyed good health during my absence, how are all our friends? I
could ask a thousand questions in a breath.


Real. Your friends are all well our city is vastly improved since you went
away, and our country is generally prosperous and happy, thanked be heaven.


[Charles Realworth and Miss Prankish retire to one end of the stage, and then
come forward] Charles My Sophia and me have concluded to make confidants of our
friends present.


[Vainly bows, Miss Prankish courtseys.] Miss S. ( aside) -- To ask dady's
consent I suppose.


Charles. Beloved father, my adorable Sophia and me request your approbation
for an union in the bands of wedlock.


Real. ( agitated -- pauses) -- No, Charles, honor forbids it....you have
deceived me -- ( walks agitated) -- you have practiced upon her innocence --
you have stolen into the affections of her inexperienced age: Remember I have
protected her from her tender infancy, I have been her guardian, and will still
be so.


Charles. Sir, you wrong me.


Miss P. Yes Sir, you do wrong him....if it was a crime to open the tender
scene of love, I am the criminal, it was I who made the first advances, nor do
I feel any indelicacy in avowing it; your son is a youth of real merit, and
worthy of the hand and heart of any woman. In the preamble of my dear father's
will, I see he held you nearest his heart.... though not rich in what the world
is apt to pay court to, yet he knew you to be rich in honor and probity, he
placed me (then an infant) with my patrimony, then under your care, and, by
your judicious management, I have been put in possession of an independent
fortune....I cannot apply it to a better purpose, than to share it with the
amiable son of my worthy guardian.


Real. My dear girl, this declaration, coming from you, sufficiently satisfies
me, -- ( joins their hands) -- may heaven cement your hearts and afford you all
that blissful happiness which the marriage state is capable of.


Charles. ( kisses Miss Prankish's hand) -- I feel a just sense of the
preference you have gave to me, and when I prove unworthy of your affection,
may I be cast on the world with shame and disgrace:... Gratitude, the noblest
quality of the human mind, shall inspire me to love you with unremitting
tenderness, thou generous maid.


THE END.

