AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT BYFIELD, FEBRUARY 22d, 1800, THE DAY OF NATIONAL
MOURNING FOR THE DEATH OF General George Washington.

BY THE REV. ELIJAH PARISH, A. M.

FROM THE PRESS OF ANGIER MARCH. SOLD AT HIS BOOKSTORE, NORTH SIDE OF
MARKET-SQUARE, NEWBURYPORT.

AN ORATION.
ALTHOUGH the occasion of our assembling this day is uncommon, it is not the
less important.

As families and villages publicly mourn the loss of individual members; so the
nation mourns the fall of her Friend, her Hero, her Founder. He being the
Benefactor and Father of all, which town or hamlet, from Maine to Georgia,
would be willingly excluded from this general Lamentation?

Though the annals of OUR country afford no example of the kind; though we are
in danger of adopting tokens of extreme sorrow; yet this is not the first
instance of national mourning. For forty days, Jacob, the Hebrew patriarch was
mourned in the nation where he died.

Pelopidas, Plutarch.
the Theban, slain in a foreign war, when borne to his native State, was met on
the way, as he past through the cities, by magistrates, by young men, by
children, by the ministers of religion with all the pomp, which could give him
honor, or express their grief. The Thessalians, in whose cause he had fallen,
importuned the privilege of directing his funeral solemnities.

But the first ORATION, pronounced in honor of the dead, mentioned in history,
was delivered by Poplicola at the death of Brutus; that Brutus, so renowned for
his disinterested zeal in giving sentence of death against his own sons guilty
of treason. For him the Roman women mourned a whole year; two months longer
than for their nearest relations.

The Commonwealth interred Poplicola at the public expense, and to express
their affectionate veneration for the man, the women by common consent lamented
his death a year, "as if he had been a son, a brother, or father."

Bingham's Antiquities of the Christian Church.
The first Christians adopted the custom of funeral eulogies; they were
pronounced at the grave of the saint; to render the scene more solemn, the
emblems of their crucified Savior were administered. But neither Christians for
the loss of a brother, nor Greeks, nor Romans, for the fall of their Consuls
and Generals, had such cause for mourning as the States of America, at the
present time.

Probably NO MAN ever united so many great talents, and reigned so entirely in
the hearts of millions, as he whose departure the nation mourns. The Poets and
Orators of the world will blazon his virtues, and the last age of time admire
the wondrous man.

Were the Speaker to take a part in the eulogies of the day his words might be
lost as a drop of dew on the bosom of ocean: still it may be DUTY to remark,
that we are unspeakably indebted to God for raising up such a character, at
such a time; a character whose moderation, whose gentleness, whose purity was
so adapted to the moral habits, and religious opinions of his country. While
clad in panoply dreadful; terrible to his enemies, as the fiery bolt of heaven;
he was gentle as the Shepherd of a flock, compassionate as the Parent of a
family. Mercy softened his justice; humanity tempered his vengeance, and the
crimson of his sword, was the blood of necessity.

The idea of conquest and triumph, of invasion and slaughter, never darted its
contagion amid the reflections of his mind. Had this humane spirit been
wanting; had he been merely the rough soldier, or daring Commander, Americans
would have been disgusted; their confidence lost; the prospects of the
revolution wrapped in darkness. He never wounded the breast of sensibility, never
extorted a tear from morality, nor a sigh from religion: He never gave his
country "pain, but when he died."

His INVENTIVE genius was necessary. What in other circumstances might have
been convenient was here essential. A vast extent of defenseless territory,
towns and cities, raised the supplicating eye, and implored protection from
him. A race of harmless farmers, from their birth living in habits of equality,
independent lords of the soil, revolting at the thought of military
subordination, were the unpromising materials to form a defense against the
disciplined valor of European Veterans. Much of his artillery slumbered in the
hills of ore; much of his ammunition slept in the dust, or bade him defiance in
the magazines of his foe.

All the stratagems of creative genius encouraged his friends, awed the enemy,
and saved the cause Under his eye the husbandman soon became the Champion of
Freedom, the field of harvests the citadel of war, on the hill of flocks was
the blaze of battle, and the flag of INDEPENDENCE waved over the deep. The
metamorphoses of poetic fiction seemed visible in real life. His measures often
disappointed the calculations of prudence, overleaped the rules of system,
while the cloud of adversity guided his banner to the hill of victory. When he
seemed to rest quietly in his camp, like the slumbering volcano, he has
unexpectedly burst on his foe in a deluge of fire.

His FORTITUDE in seasons, which tried the most intrepid minds, was a golden
pillar in the temple of his merit. When his wants were multiplied; when revolt
raised her standard; when necessity besieged his camp; when resources failed;
when the seas said, "They are not in us," and the fields, "They are not in us,"
like the rock of the billows, or the hill of storms, he bore all with
invincible fortitude.

Undismayed he left the isles of Newyork; undismayed he abandoned the
fortresses of the Hudson, while the crimson of their steps betrayed the course
of his desponding troops. The American contest, the Liberties of mankind,
appeared to tremble in the scale of events; the voice of popular zeal had sunk
almost to the whisper of submission. The Commander in Chief remains unmoved.
Though he knew when to retire; yet like the blast of the tempest, it was to
return with increasing fury.

The astonished Delaware bore him back to victory; the triumph at Trenton
roused the country to a sense of their own force; gave the mortal stab to
oppression, broke the scepter of despotism. Like the sun obscured by clouds,
but not extinguished, he continued the same in every exigence.

His unaffected MODESTY after all the services he had done, all the distresses
he had borne, all the honor he had won, was a diadem of glory, was a prodigy of
human virtue. Ascribing to the aid of other Agents, or immediately referring to
the PROVIDENCE OF GOD the great events in which he was the principal Actor,
What did he ever arrogate to himself? His replies accepting the great
appointments of his country; his addresses resigning those appointments, are
the uniform language of his life; they show the great man rising above himself.

Travelers Brissot's travels in the United States.
have been surprised at the modest manner in which he described those events of
the revolution, which covered him with glory, and made a bloody page in the
history of war. The manner was the same, as if he had not been present, or only
an observing spectator.

But the unrivalled splendour of his character beamed from his DISINTERESTED
spirit.

Without that ambition for fame or wealth, which frequently fires the heart,
and directs the actions of men, he was reclining under the groves of Vernon, or
ploughing his own field, when the voice of millions called him to lead their
armies. His favorite indulgences allured him to refuse; his benevolence
required him to comply; he did not hesitate; he became our Captain.

How constantly was the same self denial necessary during the uncertain, the
dismal contest. A narration of these trials would be the history of the
revolution.

When he had given sovereign INDEPENDENCE to his country; when he had raised
her to empire and glory; when he had repelled the foe, and hushed the thunders
of invasion; when he had fixed the confidence of his country, and the
admiration of the world, he then resigned his sword; that sword, which courted
his hand; with tears he bade adieu to that army, who would have given him their
blood; who would have made him perpetual Dictator: He became a private citizen
with that people, who could not have refused him a THRONE.

Here gaze, ye Caesar's, ye Cromwells, ye Buonapartes, of the world, and shrink
into your merited nonexistence! But here was no struggle of passions, no trial
for the pure benevolence of WASHINGTON. The blessings of his country attend
him, as he retires to the banks of Potowmac; their prayers ascend for his peace
and final happiness.

But a more painful question demands his decision. Can he, will he again
sacrifice his wishes? Look, ye children of men, look ye angels of light, see a
spirit of benevolence like thine own. He feared not the loss of those honors,
which he never sought; he grudged not any service for that people, who were
dearer to him than the blood which rolled through his heart; but fatigued with
the toils of the crimson field; tired of public life, he sighed for repose. Yet
he consents to preside over the nation, which his sword had established.

Here the frozen calculations of worldly wisdom, the mechanical balancing of
arguments yield to the fervent impulse of disinterested zeal for the public
good. Justly to estimate his virtues, or to recommend them to others, requires
a spirit pure and benevolent like his own. The beams of morn extinguish the
stars; the meridian blaze dazzles the eye; we need not, therefore, mention his
resigning the first office of his country, or his acceptance of a subordinate
station. So great were his other sacrifices that we forget to tell, that the
bread which he eat, and the happiness of doing good, were all his reward for
years and years of toil in the best part of his life.

But to omit his VALOR would be to rob the Hero. How many hills and plains have
shuddered to see his cool, undaunted valor! His courage was not the rage of
Brutus, Plutarch.
hurrying to death in single combat; it was not the fury of Mahomet, Echard.
riding into the sea to support his distant fleet; it was not the madness of
Pelopidas, rushing from life before his army; but that dispassionate presence
of mind, which ensures victory, or prevents the common disasters of defeat. He
never wantonly exposed a hair of his head; he never turned his bosom from the
hottest battle when duty called.

His ardor in the field was not a thirst for fame; but the indignant spirit of
self defense; it was not a frenzy of raving passion; but the calm dictates of
conscience: it was not delight in slaughter; but the zeal of saving his country.

His enemies will relate the deeds of his bravery to other times. The batteries
of York-Town, the plains of Monmouth, numerous hills of blood, eulogize the
sword of his battles. In strains enchanting the Monongahela strikes the song,
the Hudson, the Delaware, the Schuylkill, and Brandywine, swell the chorus of
his valor.

His SUCCESS completes the glory of his name. Here he rose on the breath of
heaven above the sphere of his own great actions. No virtue is so spotless, no
courage so undaunted, no discretion so watchful, as to ensure such a series of
success, such a tide of glory. The uniform confidence of his country was a
phenomenon great, like the virtues of his mind, the remarkable deeds of his
life, the almost miraculous interpositions of Providence in his behalf.
Republics are not in the habit of such uniformity or gratitude. It will
probably stand as a political wonder in the history of man, during the present
state of society, that he so long enjoyed the unwavering confidence of these
States. That they should have sagacity to discover him among millions, and
wisdom to give him their constant support merits them vast applause. He was as
evidently a favorite of Providence, as of his country: He as conspicuously
enjoyed the protection of his God, as the cordial veneration of his
fellowcitizens. The time of his birth, the peculiar state of his country, many
things in which He had no influence, as well as the energetic powers, the
unsullied virtues of his own mind, all conspired to render him what he was, the
Founder of our Republic, the pride of his country, the admiration of mankind.

Nor ought it to be forgotten that he enjoyed powerful aid. The swords of Green
and Putnam General PUTNAM commanded in the celebrated action of Bunker or
Breed's hill. It is a singular circumstance that this should not be more
generally known. -- Putnam was the commanding officer of the party, who went
upon the hill the evening before the action: he commanded in the action: he
harangued his men as the British first advanced, charged them to reserve their
fire, till they were near, 'till they could see the white of their eyes,' were
his words. -- At the second assault he commended their former calmness, assured
them "they would now do much better," and directed them "to aim at the
officers." They obeyed. The fire was tremendous. 'My God,' said Putnam, in
telling the story, 'I never saw such a carnage of the human race.'

These things he related to the Reverend Mr. Whitney, his Minister, by whose
permission they are now published. -- In a note of his sermon occasioned by the
death of the General, he says, "The detachment at first was put under the
command of General Putnam, with it he took possession of the hill, and ordered
the battle from beginning to the end. General Warren arrived alone on the hill
and as a Volunteer joined the Americans just as the action commenced. -- These
facts General Putnam himself gave me soon after the battle and repeated them
after his life was printed. The General, who encouraged and animated his
soldiers, by his words and example, to prodigies of bravery, is highly to be
honored, and the praise not given to another, however meritorious in other
respects. Other evidence, to confirm what I have here said, I am able to
produce, if any should call for it."

Mr. Whitney has a letter written him by an officer, who was in the action,
asserting that Putnam was Commander. While writing this note an officer of
rank, who was wounded in the battle, who saw Warren fall, tells me I may "be
assured, General Putnam was the officer who led the party to the hill, who
marked the ground to be fortified, and commanded in the action."


spread terror through hostile legions: The fame of ADAMS and Jay will flourish
when the foundations of the world shall crumble to dust.

Yet never was the address of the Theban to Diagoras, when he was crowned in
the olympic games more applicable, than to our Timoleon, "Die, die, thou can
not be a God."

Others have equalled him in some particulars; but in whom have so many social,
political and military talents united? Romulus was the founder of a State; but
rapine and blood stained his soul. Mahomet rises like a mountain of the desert;
but blackest crimes blast his name. Where shall we find a character like the
illustrious FARMER of Mount Vernon?

Equal in stratagem to Hannibal, as modest as Cincinnatus, as disinterested as
Regulus, as daring as Leonidas, as cautious as Fabius, as valiant as Caesar, as
successful -- why should I proceed? He displayed a constellation of virtues.

Like Moses on Sinai's fiery summit, he stood alone. His life was a great
volume, every page and sentence gives instruction. In peace and war, like the
all-pervading power of attraction, he combined, he directed, and fixed his
country on the basis of safety and glory.

Columbus discovered a new world, a chaotic mass, dark were the dwellings of
the forest. Like the eldest morn of time, feeble was the beam of light, till
Washington kindled her sun, balanced her stars, established her hills, raised
her barriers, diffused order, and beauty. But he is gone. His Master has
recalled him from his labor. The breach is great like the sea; Who can heal it?

The pencil of description might show the nation mourning before God; the mount
on which he lived the hill of darkness, the fields sad, the groves weeping, the
mansion desolate, the bowers trembling, awful silence round his tomb, while
angels guard the sacred dust. But we forbear -- The mighty man is fallen; his
sword sleeps in his hall. The almighty GOVERNOR often takes his most useful
Agents from this world: While darkness pavilions his throne are there not
REASONS VISIBLE for such events? May not such Actors be taken away to be raised
to a more exalted state?

Man is evidently formed for endless improvements in knowledge, usefulness, and
enjoyment. In this life they are progressive and sometimes great. In the world
of purity where passions, and prejudices, wants and wos, do not obstruct or
embarrass, more rapidly must the soul rise in excellence. The heart of
goodness, advancing in virtue, prepares for higher spheres; he is 'worthy' a
more exalted state; he is mature for heaven. In this crisis the pale Messenger
conveys the soul to mansions of rest. There the good spirit of feeblest powers
will become equal in wisdom to what Prophets and Patriarchs now are, who have
been for thousands of years receiving light at the fountain of excellence; he
will pass on, and arrive at the present glory of angels: He will pass on and
rise to the present glory of the high archangel* He will pass on and rise, as
far above the present glory of the archangel, as that surpasses a spark of love
in the humble soul. Then his light is only dawning, an ETERNITY to ascend in
bliss and glory is still before him. But for this he must drop his clay: To
rise, to reign, to live, he must sleep in the narrow house, return to the dust
of the ground. It is the stormy hour in the voyage of our existence: It is the
moment of agonizing contest, as the victory is won, as the crown is received.
But what coward would fly when the triumph is certain; when a kingdom is the
reward, when the livery of death is exchanged for robes of immortality? We die,
we soar, the powers expand, the worm of dust unites with elder sons of light;
their work, their joys the same. "Were death denied even fools would wish to
die." Is it not kind in God to remove his most useful agents from the evils of
time to more exalted scenes in glory?

When God determines to PUNISH, he may wisely remove useful persons, who were
barriers against his judgments. Lot must be hastened from the devoted city;
omnipotent anger "cannot do any thing," cannot kindle a spark till he is gone.
The Judgments of God flow from the common course of events; no violence
deranges the natural order of things; effects spontaneously flow from their
causes: Therefore when the hour of divine Judgments arrives, those persons must
be removed whose influence would prevent the evils designed. Being the
confidence of his country, the Champion of Gath must bow to the angel of death,
the sword of the Shepherd must drink his blood, that terrors might seize the
camp, the falling troops burden the fields as they fled.

As a haughty spirit precedes a fall; as pride swells the heart destined to
ruin; as the means of safety are removed before destruction comes; so those
persons whose prowess, whose wisdom, or piety, defend their connexions, will be
removed before the divine judgments arrest their victims. The Righteous are
taken not only from the evil; but that it may come; that it may flow
uncontroled. This is natural; it is agreeable to common sense; therefore the
Hero of Troy crimsons the dust before the city falls. When punishment hastens,
useful persons are removed from their stations.

To show he needs not the noblest instruments; to show his INDEPENDENCE, GOD
removes them from the world. Nothing can impoverish him, who creates: A Tyrant
he raises up in the land of Ham to show his mighty power: That Tyrant he
destroys to show he was not necessary. Kings and Conquerors are as easily
formed, as drops of dew, or floating atoms. While the smallest evils may ruin
the great men of this world, the greatest, actually promote the designs of
Providence. On mount Gilboa the royal Warriors fall, "who were the beauty of
Israel, who were swifter than eagles, who were stronger than lions; on whose
face was seen the rage of battles, the step of death was behind their swords,
the blood of armies on their spears."

Cities have ascended in burning vapor, as leaves of the forest; a world has
been drowned, as a ship in the storm. The majesty of his kingdom, the riches of
his empire, the awful magnificence of his government, confounds our
calculations, when dreadful scenes strike the view, when God hides in darkness
the first Agents of the world. This INDEPENDENCE of means commands our
admiration.

God, also calls away the principal Actors from the world to make room for the
forming of OTHERS. Such is the present state of things, that but few can be
eminently great at the same time. If all were Generals, who would compose the
phalanx? If all were rulers, who would be the subjects? Had Nimrod and the
officers of his government continued till this time, how may great men must
have remained in their original obscurity.

Seldom does the exigence of the time fail of producing the characters
required. The moment he was needed, the Hero of Columbia rose. Had he been
immortal, no other like him would have appeared, no other would have been
necessary. By the removal of such there may be a succession of great men, as
long continued as the duration of the world, more numerous than the generations
of time: Therefore there may be a period when every hill shall have been a
VERNON, and every family have furnished a WASHINGTON.

Though the beloved man is fallen, there is no shadow of doubt, but the hour
which demands, will also exhibit another formed for the occasion. It is the
folly of error for us to tremble, or for our enemies to exult, as if he, who
raised up one, cannot send a host of Washingtons. An ADAMS lives, and when God
designs to bless a people, there will always be found the necessary Agents; a
Moses where the chains of a Despot are to be broken; a Cyrus where a captive
nation find deliverance; a Washington where the banner of independence is
unfurled, or a new Empire established. As the mortality of great men multiplies
great men, it renders the world a nursery of Genius, a school of virtue and
glory. Easy it is, therefore to justify Providence in calling useful Agents
from earthly scenes.

We may here remark that the Almighty Governor removes men from life, when the
WORK is ACCOMPLISHED for which they were DESIGNED. The God of knowledge
perfectly knows what is the work of every person, as he enters on the stage of
life. When his work is done, the agent lives to no purpose, therefore reason
approves, righteousness demands his removal. Every actor good and bad retires
when his part in the drama is finished. God perfectly knew the work of Egypt's
king; therefore when he displayed his last judgment, when his work was done, he
was whelmed in the deep, he left the world.

Redemption was the work of Jesus Christ; therefore when that work was
'finished,' he was the prisoner of Death: Why should not the agent be removed
when his task is accomplished?

To teach men their DEPENDENCE upon God for great characters, He often removes
them in the midst of their usefulness. The view of a long, a constant series of
events, without derangement or change, is apt to efface our convictions of the
divine agency, which gives existence and energy to all. Men long accustomed to
enjoy law and protection from the wise and valiant, too frequently forget the
hand, who raised them up; they regard the servants of God, as the authors of
the blessings, while they are only the means of producing them. That God may
not be robbed of his glory, he removes those useful persons, who prevented us
from seeing his goodness. Was not the Prophet's school deeply awed with a
present God, and a sense of their own dependence when they saw the man of God
ascending in a chariot of fire?

Finally, God removes great agents to teach great men, THEY MUST DIE. All men,
but especially those prosperous, are too little solicitous respecting their
dissolution, and the unknown events beyond the grave. The cares of business,
the pride of wealth, the flatteries of greatness, the enchantments of pleasure,
seize their hearts, and direct their actions.

Were none to die, but those worn out with years, none but those no longer
useful; were none but the dregs of mankind swept into the grave, Who, among the
active and great, would think of death, or prepare for heaven? But when the
mighty man falls, his companions in honor see, that while they are respected as
Gods, they must die like men. They see that no degree of importance repels the
shaft of death; the tyrant delights to spread his terrors, to make the great
tremble, the world mourn.

In a critical day, when the Hebrew camp seemed to need his wisdom, with
Canaan's hills in view, their Leader, their Legislator, their Washington
expires; he passes from the top of Nebo to his seat in glory. While the wonders
of his benevolence were enlightening the world; while the spirits of the good
were ravished by his divine eloquence, the Prophet of Nazareth was nailed to
the tree. While a great part of mankind are in arms, and his country trembles,
as a barque in the storm, the Defender of America descends into his tomb. From
his importance to society, Who can presume on life?

Thus reasons visible plead for the afflictive wonders of divine sovereignty,
which summon from earth the great and good. Most important considerations
demand such dispensations. Pleasant is the office to speak for God, to justify
his conduct toward the great, the good, the wise men of the earth: Yet what is
more dreadful in the divine government, than the mortality of such persons?
Therefore though we "know not now," we may 'hereafter' know why other
remarkable circumstances exist; why wickedness, famine, and pestilence,
depopulate the world; why moral darkness reigns; why the beams of rational
religion illume so small a part of mankind; why we inherit danger and distress;
why infants expire, and guilt wakens a fire that never dies.

As God has reasons wise for the terrible acts of his authority, SUBMISSION
becomes the heart of man. Still the event we contemplate is serious; a great
man, whom God delighted to honor, is fallen. He loved our nation, his name was
a formidable host. The star is set, which guided us through a dark night of
imminent dangers; gone is the cloud, which gave terror to our foes, light and
safety to his country. He was happy, not in his own splendour, but in our
prosperity; he lived not for himself, but for us. How many years of distressing
days, and dismal nights in the blaze of summer, and the frost of winter, did he
hazard his life in the bloody field! He made every sacrifice, welcomed every
burden, dared every danger, which the public good required. When did he refuse
to die for his country? From what scene of carnage did he ever fly? What was
his REWARD for all his services? Like the mountains of the new world, he rose
with unrivalled sublimity.

What are the kings and conquerors of the old world? Do not most of them
resemble him, as the painted canvass or frozen marble does the Hero of valor;
or the lightning's flash, the cheering beams of the morning sun? They are
Generals and Kings because they happened to be twigs of such a branch, or to
vegetate in such a spot. Edward first, sent his Queen into Wales to be
delivered, that the Welsh having a prince born in their own realm might submit
to his government. Hence the title of Prince of Wales.
He was a Commander, because he was first in the art of war. He ruled, because
he had no competitor. Can a man, who loves his country, who loves himself, be
unaffected by such a Death? Have we not some reason to fear the sword is
broken, which prevented public calamity; that the FATHER of his people is taken
from evils coming?

Mourn for him then, my country, mourn; let not this day be a cold formality.
Weep for him, ye who cultivate the soil; he repelled the hosts of invasion from
your shore. He preserved your farms from tribute, yourselves from the chains of
tyranny. Lament for him, ye friends of religion; be robed in mourning, ye
altars of GOD, he saved you from persecution and sacrilege.

Atheism illuminized had formed her mines, stored her magazines, placed her
ambush, to demolish the strong holds of Zion. She had planted her banners,
raised her bulwarks, levelled her artillery, against the institutions of civil
society. These were viewed as the outworks of christianity. An assault had been
made, the blast of victory had startled the world. Raptured with their success
in the first scene of the tragedy in a fair part of Europe, the Leaders had
determined to hurl their thunders, and disgorge their volcanos upon the whole
empire of JESUS. In their imaginations the work was done; nothing remained of
the city of God; but trembling walls, smouldering temples, and mangled Priests.
To accomplish this business in America, an Emissary Genet.
from that Land which is a CURSE to all nations, aided by democratic Societies,
shook our government to its center. For a time he threatened to be great, like
the ENVOY of HELL overturning the constitution of Paradise. Our beloved Chief
put forth his hand, caught the falling ark, placed it more safely on the basis
of public opinion. He looked, the federal banner rose, faction expired, and we
were happy.

This for a time has saved your Churches from profanation, your Ministers from
slaughter, your sabbaths and sacraments from destruction, yourselves from a sea
of blood. Therefore, while other nations mourn the death of their Tyrants, let
us weep the loss of our DELIVERER; while they display the pomp of pretended
sorrow for the Robbers and Murderers of the age, let us with bleeding hearts
cry, "My FATHER, my FATHER, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof."

THIS serious air, this silent gloom around,
The mourning tokens, and the sigh profound,
Proclaim the ruin Terror's king has made --
In Death's cold vault is Vernon's Hero laid.
To spread the honors of our mortal race,
In worlds, which roll through distant fields of space,
To raise the MAN above the tides of woe,
To show creation whence their blessings flow,
To snatch from hostile scenes where sorrow lowers,
To find employment for his matchless powers,
Where angels labor, embryo systems rise,
And God himself illumes celestial skies.
The Almighty spoke -- The king of Terrors heard,
And quick before the sovereign God appeared.
To him attending was this mandate given,
And thus addressed the order sealed in heaven.
"Descend unseen to Vernon's towering height,
"And veil Columbia in the shades of night,
"Unseen descend, if thy design be known,
"Ten thousand, thousand prayers assault my throne,
"Unnumbered saints will raise united cries,
"By Faith 'command' the Ruler of the skies,
"Arrest my hand, revoke my fixed decree,
"Thine arrow shiver, set thy prisoner free."
Trembling the phantom heard, and hied away,
Bid stormy clouds obscure fair Vernon's day,
Bid deadly vapors rise from marshy ground,
With poison armed the breathing gales around;
Disease alarming seized the mighty man,
The febrile flame through every member ran,
Contagion fatal burned along each vein --
Serene he bore the agonizing pain;
With heart humane forbid the slaves to go,
They dare not fly to tell their master's woe.
The Fiend prepared his most invenomed dart,
The wound was mortal -- transient was the smart.
At his own deed appalled the Monster fled,
'The world in tears' lament their favorite dead.
A band celestial soothed the bed of grief,
With rapturous visions gave his mind relief,
Unveiled the splendors round the throne of God,
Illumed the dreary path his Savior trod,
With winning smiles received the godlike man,
To realms of light their brilliant course began.
See hosts descending meet them on the way,
To swell the honors of his brightest day,
Heroes and Statesmen throng to see him come,
To wear the diadem his virtue won.
Weep, weep Thou fond COMPANION of his cares,
No more for him you press your warmest prayers,
To God submit, nor let one sigh complain,
He sorrow feels, to see his children's pain,
He frowns in tender love to make them wise,
Affliction's hour bids fairest virtues rise.
Ye Veterans bold, ye men of deathless names,
On rising hills empaled in bursting flames,
Or wide extended over the tented field,
Or in the wild the sword of battle wield,
Mourn, mourn -- the valorous man, who led your host,
Your Guide to triumph and your country's boast,
No longer kens the hostile storms from far,
No longer wheels Columbia's flaming car,
Nor like the sun amid the starry train,
Gives dazzling splendour to the embattled plain.
Behold great ADAMS seeking sad relief,
Like Israel's king indulging cheerless grief:
He scorns the marble heart, the flinty eye,
His sorrows flow to see a Brother die.
Elisha erst the prophet's mantle caught,
With power of miracles divinely fraught;
So he the course pursues, the Hero trod,
Repelling danger as a guardian god,
While tempests shake the world, the heavens deform,
HE safely guides COLUMBIA through the storm.
He calls our Tribes to form the mourning train,
And leads the throng, who crowd the hallowed FANE.
The Bells from Maine to Georgia's fertile clime,
The dirges sad, which aid the solemn chime,
The cannon's roar, the nation prostrate, tell,
The country trembled when the WARRIOR fell.
The general mourning speaks the public woe,
In swelling streams the tears of millions flow,
While youth and beauty swell the plaintive song,
Seraphic Choirs the dismal strains prolong.
The fields his valor saved are robed in grief,
With tears the flowers bedew each trembling leaf,
Along her shores Monongahela sighs,
Her waters saw his dawning glory rise;
Ye isles of York with waves of sorrow flow,
Monmouth and Trenton strike the chords of woe;
Ye verdant banks of broad Potowmac's tide,
In sable vapor cloud your lightning pride,
Your waving surges lull in fixed gloom,
In silence pass the HERO's AWFUL TOMB.
The lonely Dome of Vernon asks a tear,
No more her walls the voice of pleasure hear;
Her columns languish bound in sad array,
Her fairest suns illume a mournful day.
Ye shady Arbors formed for cheerful talk,
Repeat the sighs, which break from every walk,
Ye murmuring brooks, who seek the dales below,
With tears enlarge, and drown the fields in woe,
Ye musing forests, groves of aged trees,
Your anguish tell in every sighing breeze.
When lofty hills shall sparkling volumes raise,
With all his streams the Sire of rivers blaze,
The Andes vanish, as a cloud of dust,
And stars and suns their glorious orbits burst,
The fame of Vernon's honored CHIEF shall rise,
Survive the wreck of worlds, and triumph in the skies.
FINIS.

