

THE SAILOR's MEDLEY: A COLLECTION OF THE MOST ADMIRED SEA AND OTHER SONGS.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed for MATTHEW CAREY, No. 118 High Street. -- 1800.

THE SAILOR's MEDLEY.
SONG.
OH, think on my fate! once I freedom enjoyed,
Was as happy as happy could be,
But pleasure is fled! even hope is destroyed,
A captive alas! on the sea.
I was taken by the foe, 'twas the fiat of fate,
To tear me from her I adore,
When thought brings to mind my once happy estare,
I sigh! while I tug at the oar.
Hard, hard, is my fate! Oh how galling my chain!
My life's steered by misery's chart;
And though against my tyrants I scorn to complain,
Tears gush forth to ease my full heart.
I disdain even to shrink, though I feel the sharp lash;
Yet my heart bleeds for her I adore,
While around me the unfeeling billows will dash,
I sigh! and still tug at the oar.
How fortune deceives; I had pleasure in tow,
The port where she dwelt we'd in view;
But the wished nuptial morn was o'er-clouded with woe,
And dear Anna! I hurried from you.
Our shallop was boarded and I borne away,
To behold my dear Anna no more,
But despair wastes my spirits, my form feels decay;
He sighed and expired at the oar.
SONG.
TIGHT lads have I sailed with, but none ever so sightly
As honest Bill Bobstay, so kind and so true:
He Would sing like a mermaid, and foot ^r' so lightly,
The forecastle's pride, the delight of the crew:
But poor as a beggar, and often in tatters
He went, though his fortune was kind without end.
For money, cried Bill, and them there sort of matters,
For money, cried Bill, and them there sort of matters,
What Is the good on it, do you see, but to succor a friend?
There Is Nipelseefe, the purser, by grinding and squeezing.
First plundering, then leaving the ship like a rat;
The eddy of fortune stands on a stiff br^eze in,
And moun^s, fierce as fire, a dog-vane in his hat.
My bark, though hard storms on life's ocean should rock her,
Though she roll in misfortune, and pitch end for end
No, never shall Bill keep a shot in the locker,
When by handing it out he can succor a friend.
For money, etc.

Let them throw out their wipes, and cry, spite of the crosses,
And forgetful of toil that so hardly they bore;
That "Sailors at sea earn their money like horses,
"To squander it idly like asses ashore."
Such lubbers their jaw would coil up, could they measure,
By their feeling, the generous delight without end,
That gives birth in us tars to that truest of pleasure,
The handing our rhino to succor a friend.
For money, etc.

SONG.
'TWAS ^^turday night, the twinkling stars,
Shone on the rippling sea;
No duty called the jovial tars,
The helm was lashed a-lee.
The ample cann adorned the board,
Prepared to see it out,
Each gave the lass that he adored,
And pushed the grog about.
And, (...), etc.

Cried honest Tom, my Peg I Will toast,
A frigate neat and trim,
All jolly Portsmouth's favorite boast:
I Would venture life and limb,
Sail seven long years, and never see land,
With dauntless heart and stout,
So tight a vessel to command;
Then push the grog about.
I Will give, cried little Jack, my Poll,
Sailing in comely state,
Top ga'nt-sails set she is so tall,
She looks like a first rate.
Ah! would she take her Jack in tow,
A voyage for life throughout,
No better birth I Would wish to know;
Then push the grog about.
I Will give, cried I, my charming Nan,
Trim, handsome, neat, and tight,
What joy, so neat a ship to man,
Oh! she is my heart's delight,
So well she bears the storms o^^ life,
I Would sail the world throughout,
Brave every toil for such a wise:
Then push the grog about.
Thus to describ^^ (...) o^ Nan,
Each his be^^ m^^^er tried,
Till summoned by the empty cann,
They to their hammocks ^ied:
Yet still did they their vigils keep,
Though the huge cann was out;
For in soft visions gentle sleep
Still pushed the grog about.
SONG.
ESCAPED, with life, in tatters,
Behold me safe ashore,
Such trifles little ^^^tters,
I Will soon get togs galore,
For Poll swore when we parted,
No chance her faith should jar,
And Poll's too tender hearted
To slight a shipwrecked tar.
To Poll his course strait steering,
He hastens on apace,
Poor Jack cannot get a hearing --
She never saw his face;
From Meg, and Dol, and Kitty,
Relief is just as far,
Not one has the least pity,
For a poor shipwrecked tar.
This, whom he thought love's needle,
Now his sad misery mocks,
That wants to call the beadle,
To set him in the stocks:
Cried Jack, this is hard dealing --
The elements at war,
Than his, had kinder feeling,
They spared the shipwrecked tar.
But all their taunts and fetches,
A judgment are on me,
I for these hardened wretches,
Dear Nancy, slighted th^e;
But see, poor Tray assils me,
His mistress is not far,
He wags his tail and hails me,
Though a poor shipwrecked tar.
'Twas faithful love that brought him,
Oh! lesson for mankind,
It Is one, cried she, I taught him,
For on my constant mind
Thy image dear was graven,
And now remev'd each bar,
My arms shall be the haven
For my poor shipwrecked tar.
Heaven and my love reward thee,
I Am shipwrecked, but I Am rich,
All shall with pride regard thee,
Thy love shall so bewitch:
With wonder each fond fancy,
That children near and far,
Shall lisp the name of Nancy,
That saved the shipwrecked tar,
SONG.
IT IS said we venurous die hard, when we leave the shore,
Our friends shall mourn,
Lest we return,
To bless their sight no more:
But this is all a notion,
Bold Jack cannot understand,
Some die upon the ocean,
And some upon the land:
Then since it is clear,
However we steer,
No man's life's under his command;
Let tempests howl,
And billows roll,
And dangerspress;
Of those in spite there are some joys
Us jolly tars to bless,
For Saturday night still comes my boys,
To drink to Poll and Bess.
One seaman hands the sail, another heaves the log,
The purser swops
Our pay for slops,
The landlord sells us grog:
Then each man to his station,
To keep life's ship in trim,
What argufies naration?
The rest is F^^^une's whim:
Cheerly, my hearts,
Then play your parts,
Boldly resolved to sink or swim;
The mighty surge
May ruin urge,
And dangers pres^;
Of those in spite, etc.
For all the world's just like the ropes aboard ship
Each man's rigged out,
A vessel stout,
To take for life a trip:
The shrouds, the stays, and braces,
Are joys, and hopes, and fears
The ^^lyards, sheets, and traces,
Just (...) ^uch passion veers;
And whim prevails,
Direct the falls.
As on the sea of life he steers:
^^^n let the storm,
Heavens face deform,
And dangers press:
Of those in spite, etc.
SONG.
LIFE'S like a ship in constant motion,
Sometimes high and sometimes low;
Where every one must brave the ocean,
Whatsoever winds may blow:
If, unassail'd by squall or shower,
Wasted by gentle gales;
Let Us not lose the favoring hour,
While success attends our sails.
Or, if the wayward winds should bluster,
Let us not give way to fear;
But let us all our pat^^nce muster,
And learn, by reason, how to steer:
Let judgment keep you ever steady,
It Is a ballast never fails;
Should dangers rise, be ever ready,
To manage well the swelling sails.
Trust not too much your own opinion,
While your vessel's under way;
Let good example bear dominion,
That Is a compass will not Pray:
When thundering tempests make you shudder,
Or Boreas on the surface rails;
Let good Discretion guide the rudder,
And Providence attend the sails.
Then, when you're safe from danger, riding
In some welcome port or bay;
Hope be the anchor you confide in,
And Care, awhile, encumbered lay:
Or, when each cann, with liquor flowing,
And good fellowship prevails;
Let each true heart, with rapture glowing,
Drink "success unto our sails."
SONG.
WHILE high the foaming surges rise,
And pointed rocks appear,
Loud thunders rattle in the skies,
Yet sailors must not fear.
In storms, in wind,
Their duty mind;
Aloft, below,
They cheerful go,
To reef, or steer, as it is designed;
No fears or dangers fill the mind.
The signal for the line is made,
The haughty foe's in sight,
The bloody flag aloft displayed,
And fierce the dreadful fight.
Each minds his gun,
No dangers shun;
Aloft, below,
They cheerful go;
Though thunders roar, yet still we find
No fears alarm the sailor's mind.
The storm is hushed, the battle's over,
The sky is clear again;
We toss the cann to those on shore,
While we are on the main.
To Poll and Sue,
Sincere and true,
The grog goes round,
With pleasure crowned
In war or peace alike you will find,
That honor fills the sailor's mind.
SONG.
WOULD you hear a sad story of woe,
That tears from a stone might provoke --
It Is concerning a tar, you must know,
As honest as ever biscuit broke:
His name was Ben Block -- of all men,
The most true, the most kind, the most brave;
But harsh treated by fortune -- for Ben,
In his prime, found a watery grave.
His place no one ever knew more;
His heart was all kindness and love;
Though on duty an eagle he would soar,
His nature had most of the dove.
He loved a fair maiden, named Kate;
His father, to interest a slave,
Sent him far from his love, where hard fate
Plunged him deep in a watery grave.
A curse on all slanderous tongues!
A false friend his mild nature abused;
And sweet Kate of the vilest of wrongs,
To poison Ben's pleasure accused
That she never had truly been kind;
That she scorned him, and wished be might find,
In the ocean, a watery grave.
Too sure from this cankerous elf,
The venom accomplished its end;
Ben, all truth and honor himself,
Suspected no fraud in his friend:
On the yard, while suspended in air,
A loose to his sorrows he gave;
"Take thy wish," he cried, "false, cruel fair;
And plunged in a watery grave.
SONG.
FRESH blows the gale, soon under weigh,
Our bark was borne with many a sigh,
I often reviewed the lessening bay,
And lost it with a tearful eye;
But soon our crew began to blame
My love born grief, and called it folly,
But often I Would troil a catch for shame,
Yet secret sighed for pretty Polly.
Our little bark, by valor fraught,
Soon met the foe, and laurels won, sin;
Inspired by love alone I fought,
And gained fresh counage at my gun, sir.
Our captain's praise unmoy'di^ heard,
Thought all the victor's boast but folly!
Then flew to shore to claim reward.
And heart for heart from pretty Polly.
SONG.
A PLAGUE of those musty old lubbers,
Who tell us to fast, and to think;
And patient, fall in with (...) rubbers,
With nothing but water to drink:
A cann of good stuff, had they twigg'd it,
'Twould have set them for pleasure agog,
And, spic^ of the rules
Of the schools,
The old fools,
Would all of 'em swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
My father, when last I from Guinea
Returned with abundance of wealth,
Cried Jack, never be such a ninny
To drink -- said I, daddy your health:
So I showed him the stuff and he twigg'd it,
And it set the old codger agog,
And he swigg'd, and mother,
And sister and brother,
And I swigg'd, and all of us twigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
The Other day as the chaplain was preaching,
Behind him I curiously slunk,
And while he our duty was teaching,
As how we should never get drunk,
I showed him the stuff, and he swigg'd it,
And it soon set his reverence agog,
And he swigg'd, and Nick swigg'd,
And Ben swigg'd, and Dick swigg'd,
And I swigg'd, and all of us swigg'd it,
And swore there was nothing like grog.
Then trust me, there is nothing like drinking,
So pleasant on this side the grave;
It keeps the unhappy from thinking,
And makes even more valiant the brave;
As for me, from the moment I swigg'd it,
The good stuff has so set me agog,
Sick or well, late and early,
Wind foully or fairly,
Helm a-lee or a-weather,
For hours together,
I Have constantly swigg'd it,
And, dam'me, there is nothing like grog.
SONG.
A SAILOR's life's a life of woe,
He works now late now early;
Now up and down, now to and fro,
What then? he takes it cheerly.
Blessed with a smiling cann of grog,
If duty call,
Stand, rise, or sall
To fates last verge he will jog.
The cadge to weigh,
The sheets belay,
He does it with a wish,
To heave the lead,
Or to cat head.
The ponderous anchor fish;
For while the grog goes round,
All sense of danger's drowned
We despise it to a man.
We sing a little,
And laugh a little,
And work a little,
And swear a little,
And fiddle a little,
And foot it a little,
And swig the flowing cann;
And fiddle a little,
And foot it a little,
And swig the flowing cann,
And swig the flowing cann,
And swig the flowing cann.
If howling winds and roaring seas
Give proof of coming danger,
We view the storm, our hearts at ease,
For Jack's to sear a stranger.
Blessed with the smiling grog, we fly
Where now below
We headlong go,
Now rise on mountain's high;
Spite of the gale,
We hand the sail,
Or take the needful reef;
Or man the deck,
To clear some wreck,
To give the ship relief,
Though perils threat around,
And sense of danger's drowned,
We despise it to a man.
We sing a little, etc.

But yet think not our case is hard,
Though storms at sea thus treat us,
For coming home -- a sweet reward.
With smiles our sweethearts greet us.
Now to the friendly grog we quaff,
Our amorous toast,
Her we love most,
And gayly sing and laugh.
The sails we furl,
Then for each girl,
The petticoat display.
The deck we clear,
Then three times cheer,
As we their charms survey.
And then the grog goes round,
All sense of danger's drowned,
We despise it to a man.
We sing a little, etc.

SONG.
DICK DOCK, a tar, at Greenwich moored,
One day had got his beer on board,
When he a poor maimed pensioner from Chelsea, saw,
And for to have his jeer and flout,
For the grog once in the wit's soon out,
Cries, how good master lobster did you lose your claw?
Was It one night in a drunken sray,
Or the other when you ran away?
But hold ye Dick, the poor sot has one foot in the grave;
For slander's wind too fast you fly,
Do you think it fun, you swab, you lie,
Misfortunes ever claim the pity of the brave,
Misfortunes ever claim. etc

Old Hannib^, in words as gross,
For he like Dick had got his dose,
So to have his bout at grumbling took a spell --
If I Am a lobster, master crab,
By the information on your nab,
In some skirmish or other they have cracked your shell;
And then how you hobbling go
On that jury mast your timber toe,
A nice one to find fault with one foot in the g^ave.
But halt! old Hannibal, halt! halt! halt!
Distress was never yet a fault,
Misfortunes ever claim the pity of the brave,
Misfortunes ever claim, etc.

If Hannibal's your name, do you see,
As sure as they Dick Dock call me,
once it did fall out I owed my life to you,
Spilt from my hawse, once when it was dark,
And nearly swallowed by a shark,
Who boldly plunged in, saved me, and pleased all the crew.
If that is the case then cease our jeers,
When boarded by the same Monsieurs,
You a true English lion snatched me from the grave;
Crying, cowards, do the man no harm,
Damn me, don't you see he has lost his arm,
Misfortunes ever claim the pity of the brave.
Misfortunes ever claim, etc.

Let Us broach a cann before we part,
A friendly one with all my heart,
And as we push the grog about we'll chearly sing
On land and sea may Briton's fight,
The world's example and delight,
And conquer every enemy of George our King.
It Is he who proves the hero's friend,
His bounty waits us to our end,
Though crippled and laid up with one foot in the grave.
Then tars and soldiers never fear,
You shall not want compassion's tear,
Misfortunes ever claim the pity of the brave,
Misfortunes ever claim, etc.

SONG.
WHEN it is night, and the mid-watch is come.
And chilling mists hang over the darkened main,
Then sailors think of their far distant home,
And of those friends they never may see again:
But when the fight's begun,
Each serving at his gun,
Should any thoughts of them come over our mind,
We think, but should the day be won,
How 'twill cheer
Their hearts to hear,
That their old companion he was one.
Or, my lad, if you a mistress kind
Have left on shore, some pretty girl, and true,
Who many a night does listen to the wind,
And sighs to think how it may fare with you;
Oh! when the fight's begun,
Each serving at his gun,
Should any thought of her come over your mind;
Think only, should the day be won,
How 'twill cheer
Her heart to hear
That her own true sailor he was one.
SONG.
To the brook and the willow, that heard him complain,
Poor Collen went a weeping, and told them his pain,
Sweet stream, he cried sadly, I Will teach thee to flow,
And the waters shall rise to the brink with my woe.
Willow, willow, etc.

Believe me, thou sair one, thou dear one, believe,
Few sighs for thy loss and sew tears will I give.
One fate to thy Collen and thee shall betide,
And soon lay thy shepherd down by thy cold side.
Willow, willow, etc.

SONG.
WHAT Cato advises, most certainly wise is,
Not always to labor, but sometimes to play,
To mingle sweet pleasure with search after treasure,
Indulging at night for the toils of the day.
And while the dull miser esteems himself wiser,
His bags will decrease while his health does decay:
Our souls we enlighten, our fancies we brighte^,
And pass the long evening in pleasures away.
All cheerful and hearty, we set aside party;
With some tender fair each bright bumper is crowned;
Thus Bacchus invites us, and Venus delight's us,
While care in an ocean of claret is drowned.
See here is our physician, we know no ambition,
But where there is good wine and good company found;
Thus happy together, in spite of all weather,
It Is sunshine and summer with us the year round.
SONG.
BEGONE, dull Care, I prithee begone from me,
Begone, dull Care, you and I shall never agree,
Long time thou have been tarrying here,
And sain thou would me kill,
But faith dull Care,
Thou never shall have thy will.
Too much care will turn a young man gray,
Too much care will turn an old man to clay,
My wife shall dance and I will sing,
So merrily pass the day,
For I hold it one of the wisest things
(...) drive dull Care away.
Care now begone, I prithee fly away,
The rose and the lily you will blight, sull soon they will decay;
Bring the flask and the cask,
Mir^h and joy for me,
Care shall turn out of the room,
With me he can never agree.
SONG.
WHY droops my Nan, and why those tears?
Cheerful, my girl, dispel those fears;
Cast grief aside, while from you far
Tumult'ous billows rock your tar:
While howling winds arround him blow,
Let none your bosom ache with woe;
A power benignant from above,
Will guard me for my dearest love.
I go, my Nan, my country's friend,
We Are dared by foes, we must contend;
Glory and honor both invite,
The youth to six his native right:
One cheerful smile before we part,
Wipe off those drops that sink my heart:
Wherever I go I Will think of you,
One kiss, sweet girl, and then adieu.
SONG.
WHY, fair maid, in every feature
Are such signs of sear expressed?
Can ^ wandering, wretched creature
With such terror fill thy breast?
Do my phrenzied looks alarm thee,
Trust me, sweet, thy fears are vain:
Not for kingdoms would I harm thee,
Shun not then poor Crazy Jane.
Do thou weep to see my anguish?
Mark me, and avoid my woe!
When men flatter, sigh, and languish,
Think them false; I found them so.
For I loved, oh so sincerely!
None could ever love again;
But the youth I loved so dearly,
Stole the wits of Crazy Jane.
Fondly my young heart received him,
Which was doomed to love but one.
He sighed, he vowed, and I believed him,
He was false, and I undone.
From that hour has reason never
Held her empir^ over my brain.
Henry fled -- with him for ever
Fled the wits of Crazy Jane.
Now forlorn, and broken hearted,
And with phrenzied thoughts beset,
On that spot where last we parted,
On that spot where first we met,
Still I sing my love-lorn ditty,
Still I slowly pace the plain,
Whilst each passer by, in pity,
Cries, God help thee! Crazy Jane.
SONG.
WIDE over the tremulous sea
The moon spread her mantle of light,
And the gale gently dying away,
Ba^ath'd soft on the bosom of night:
On the forecastle Maraton stood,
And poured forth his sorrowful tale;
His tears fell unseen in the flood,
His sighs passed unheard in the gale.
Ah, wretch! in his anguish he cried,
From country and liberty torn;
Ah! Maraton, would thou had died,
Ere over the salt waves thou were borne:
Flow, ye tears, down my cheeks ever flow,
Soft sleep from mine eyelids depart,
And still let the arrow of woe
Drink deep of the stream of my heart.
But hark! -- on the silence of night,
My Adela's accents I hear!
And, mournful, beneath the wan light,
I see her loved image appear;
Oh Maraton! -- haste thee, she cries,
Here the reign of oppression is over;
The tyrant is robbed of his prize,
And Adela sorrows no more.
SONG.
EXCHANGING vows of love and truth,
Beside a purling stream,
Sat Joe and Jane, in prime of youth,
And love was all their theme:
Gin ye can loo me, lass, he cried,
And loo but only me,
Ye soon shall be a bonny bride,
And I Will be true to thee, lassie.
A we house over the bourn ye see,
Wi' thatch well covered over;
'Twill shelter gi'e to thee and me,
And what should we want more.
Gin ye can loo me, etc,

Let others follow fame and wealth,
For greater joys I sigh;
I ask of Heaven sweet ease and health,
With thee to live and die.
Gin ye can loo me, etc.

SONG.
IT was far retired from noise and smoke,
O hark! I hear the woodman's stroke,
Who dreams not as he fells the oak,
What mischief dire he brews;
Or what may shape the falling trees,
He knows no luxury nor ease,
Nor weighs not matters such as these,
But sings, and hacks, and hews.
The tree now felled by this good man,
Perhaps may form the spruce sedan,
Or wheelbarrow, where Oyster Nan
So vulgar runs her rigs;
The stage, where boxers crowd in flocks,
Or else the quacks, perhaps the stocks,
Or poles for signs of barber's blocks,
Where smiles the parson's wig.
This bold peasant, O what grief,
The gibbet, or where hangs the thief,
The seat where sits the great Lord chief,
The throne, the cobler's stall;
It Is pompous life in every stage,
Makes folly's whim prize equipage,
And children's toys and crutche for age,
And coffins for us all.
Yet justice let us still afford,
Those chairs and this convivial board,
The binn that holds Bacchus's hoard,
Confess the woodman's stroke;
He made the press that bled the vine,
The butt that holds the generous wine,
The hall it self where tipplers join,
To crack their mirthful joke.
SONG.
YOU ask me sweet maid if my vows are sincere
And call for some proof of my love;
Still doubting my passion, I see but too clear --
But pr'ythee, such fancies remove:
Or if, as you say, lovers' vows are but breath,
O set me some task to perform?
And I Will brave it, though circled by peril or death,
And smile as I buffet the storm:
But this, this, believe me, can poorly express
How truly, how dearly I love thee.
Nay, bid me some action or enterprise dare,
That men, though the boldest, would shun;
And whether by water, earth, fire, or air,
I Will do it, if it is to be done.
And if still a doubt in thy fancy remains,
Injurious to love and to me,
O fetter me more, if you can, with your chains!
Nor ever -- oh, no! -- set me free.
But this, this, believe me, can poorly express
How truly, how dearly I love thee.
O let my fond vows some favor obtain,
And pleasure succeed to my toil!
Accept them, dear girl, and, to banish my pain,
O crown the kind words with a smile!
Ah, yes! for there is surely a pleasure divine
In the smile of the girl we adore --
A promise so fost, that no words can define:
It says that your doubts are no more;
That now you believe -- what no words can express,
How truly, how dearly I love thee.
SONG.
WHEN Sandy told his tale of love,
I knew na' what to do,
For mither did not him approve,
But I did much him loo,
I told her, but it ga'e me pain,
I wad hae him or none,
And soon at Kirk, across the plain,
The parson made us one.
Ever jocund a' the day,
Now a bonny bride sae gay,
Sandy pipes, I dance and sing,
While the merry bells do ring,
Ting ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding.
My mither did wi'anger burn,
To hear that I was wed,
She vowed (and did me from her spurn)
She near would give me bread:
For much she doubted Sandy's truth,
But when his worth she knew,
She cried, I will embrace the youth,
For now I ken he is true.
Ever jocund, etc.

Wi' Saddy, in a pleasant co^,
Sae happy now I live,
I would na' change my rural spot,
For a' that man could give;
The empty show of pride and wealth,
We dinna' wish to have,
For we are blessed with peace and health,
And nothing more we crave.
Ever jocund, etc.

SONG.
BEHOLD the man that is unlucky,
Not through neglect, by fate worn poor;
Though generous, kind, when he was wealthy,
His friends to him are friends no more!
He finds in each the same like fellow,
By trying those he had relieved:
Though men shake hands, drink healths, get mellow,
Yet men by men are thus deceived.
Where can he find a fellow creature,
To comfort him in his distress?
His old acquaintance proves a stranger,
That used his friendship to profess.
Although a tear drop from his feeling,
His selfish heart cannot be moved:
Then what avails his goodly preaching,
Since generous deeds cannot be proved.
But so it is in life among us,
And give mankind their justly due,
It Is hard to find one truly generous,
We all, at times, find this too true:
But if your friend he feels your sorrow,
His tender heart's glad to relieve;
And when he thinks on you tomorrow,
He Is happy he had that to give.
SONG.
TOM Tackle was noble, was true to his word;
If merit brought titles, Tom might be a lord:
How gaily his bark through life's ocean would sail:
Truth sinish'd the rigging --
When I took my departure for Dublin's sweet city,
And for England's ownself through the seas did plough:
For three long days I was tossed up and down.
Peaceful slumbering on the ocean,
Seamen fear no dangers nigh:
The winds and waves in gentle motion
Sooths them with --
Oh, the bonny, bonny bells,
How I love to hear them sound;
Far and near --
The lads of the village, so merry ah!
Sound the tabor, I Will hand thee along;
And I say unto thee --
Curtis was old Hodge's wife,
For virtue, none was such:
She led so pure, so chaste a life,
Hodge said --
Here, a sheer hulk, lies poor Tom Bowling,
The darling of our crew,
No more he will hear the tempest howling,
For death --
To Batchelors'-Hall we good fellows invite,
To partake of the chase that makes up our delight,
We have spirits like --
I Am Jolly Dick, the lamplighter,
They say the sun's my dad:
And truly I believe --
That all men are beggars, you plainly may see,
For beggars there are of every degree;
Though none are so blessed or so happy as we,
Which nobody can deny, which nobody can deny.
SONG.
FROM place to place I traversed along,
Devoid of care or sorrow:
With lightsome heart, a merry song.
I thought not of tomorrow;
But when Priscilla caught my eye,
With every charm arrayed in,
I sighed and sung, I knew not why,
Dear little Cottage Maiden.
And would the charmer be but mine,
Sweet nymph I so revere thee,
I Would gladly share my fate with thine,
And ever more be near thee;
Though gold may please the proud and great,
My heart with love is laden;
Then let us join in wedlock state,
Dear little Cottage Maiden.
Over me and mine, come mistress prove,
And then what ill can harm us?
Kind Hymen will each fear remove,
And spread each sweet to charm us:
Together we will live content,
And naught but love we'll trade in;
So sweetly shall our lives be spent,
Dear little Cottage Maiden.
SONG.
JOHN BULL for pastime took a prauce,
Some time ago to peep at France,
To talk of sciences and arts,
And knowledge gained in foreign parts;
Monsieur obsequious, heard his speak,
And answered him in Heathen Greek,
To all he asked, 'bout all he saw,
'Twas Monsieur je vous nen tends pas.
John to the Palace Royal come,
Its splendour almost struck him dumb,
I say, whose house is that there here?
Hesse! je vous nen tends ^as, monsieur.
What! Nong tongue paw, again, cries John,
This fellow is some mighty Don,
No doubt has plenty for the m^w,
I Will breakfast with this Nong tongue paw.
John saw Versailles from Marks's height,
And cried, astonished at the sight,
Whose fine estate is that there here?
Stat je vous nen tends pas, monsieur.
His! what the land and houses too?
This fellow's richer than a Jew,
On every thing he lays his claw,
I should like to dine with Nong tongue paw.
Next tripping came a courtly fair,
John cried enchanted with her air,
What lovely wench is that there here!
Ventch! je vous nen tends pas, monsieur.
What, he again! upon my life,
A palace, lands, and then a wife,
Sir Joshua might delight to draw,
I should like to sup with Nong tongue paw.
But hold, who is funeral's that? cried John,
Je vous nen tends pas; what, is he gone!
Wealth, fame, and beauty should not save
Poor Nong tongue paw, then, from the grave;
His race is run, his game is up,
I Would with him breakfast, dine, and sup,
But since he chooses to withdraw,
Good night to ye, Monsieur Nong tongue paw.
SONG.
ANACREON, they say, was a jolly old blade,
A Grecian choice spirit, and poet by trade.
Anacreon, they say, was a jolly old blade,
A Grecian choice spirit, and poet by trade.
To Venus and Bacchus he ^on'd up his lays;
For love and a bumper he sung all his days:
For love and a bumper he sung all his days.
He laughed as he quaff'd still the juice of the vine,
And though he was human, was looked on divine,
At the feast of good humor he always was there,
And his fancy and sonnets still banished dull care.
Good wine, boys, says he, is the liquor of Jove,
It Is our comfort below and their nectar above:
Then while round the table the bumper we pass,
Let the toast be to Venus and each smiling lass.
Apollo may torment his catgut or wire,
Yet Bacchus and Beauty the theme must inspire,
Or else all his humming and strumming is vain,
The true joys of heaven he would never obtain.
To love and be loved how transporting the ^liss
While the heart-cheering glass gives a zest to each kiss:
With Bacchus and Venus we'll ever combine,
For drinking and kissing are pleasures divine.
As sons of Anacreon then let us be gay,
With drinking and love pass moments away;
With wine and with beauty let us fill up the span,
For that is the best method, deny it who can.
SONG.
VATSH te matter, goot folks,
Dat you pass your jokes,
On dish new fashion goots what I cry?
Dant you know very well,
Dat a Jew ought to sell
Vatever a Christian will buy:
If itsh a long tail'd pig,
Or a short tail'd pig --
Or a pig without never a tail,
A Jew pig,
Or a true pig --
Or a pig wid a curling tail.
Though I cry no more,
Vat I sold you before,
Yet, by Cot, is co^nisal too;
Yo may come for a cake,
Widout any mistake,
For dere's always a cake mid a Jew.
Buy my long tail'd pig, etc.

Our peoples may stare,
When dey hear dish affair,
Lack a daisey, it is noding at all;
De mistaks vat you meet
Every day in the street,
If far vorse den for smouches to call,
A long tail'd pig, etc.

You may see a young man,
As tin as my hand,
Wid his head in a counsellor's wig,
And a clumsy old chap,
In a light horseman's cap;
A citizen, fat as a pig.
A long tail'd pig, etc.

Old hunky for life,
Pig in vid a wife,
And noding but words prevail;
Den the bisnesh you know,
To de proctor dey go,
And dear by hangs a tale;
Of a long tail'd pig, etc.

Here ladies of rank,
At a faro bank,
Dere's (...) barber's boy in a gig,
Dere's my Lord and his grace,
Vaiting in Duke's place,
And here is a Jew selling pig,
A long tail'd pig, etc.

SONG.
MY temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine,
And barter all joys for a goblet of wine,
And ba^ter all joys for a goblet of wine.
In search of a Venus no longer I Will run,
But stop and forget her at Bacchus's tun,
No longer I Will run,
But stop and forget her at Bacchus's tun.
Yet why this resolve to relinquish the fair?
It Is a folly with spirits like mine to despair;
For what mighty charms can be found in a glass,
If not filled to the health of some favorite lass?
It Is woman, whose charms every rapture impart,
And lend a new spring to the pulse of the heart;
The miser himself, so supreme is her sway,
Grows a convert to love, and resigns her his key.
At the sound of her voice, Sorrow lifts up her head,
And Poverty listens well pleased from her shed;
While age, in an ecstasy, hobb'ling along,
Beats time, with his crutch, to the tune of her song.
Then bring me a goblet from Bacchus's hoard,
The largest and deepest that stands on his board;
I Will fill up a brimmer, and drink to the fair!
It Is the thirst of a lover -- and pledge me who dare!
SONG.
SEE, the course thronged with gazers, the sports are begun,
What confusion! -- But hear! -- I Will bet you, -- done, done;
A thousand strange rumors resound far and near,
Lords, hawkers, and jockies, assail the tired air;
While with neck like a rainbow erecting his crest,
Pampered, prancing, his head almost touching his breast;
Scarcely snuffing the air, he is so proud and elate,
The high-mettled racer first starts for the plate.
Next Reynard's turned out, and over hedge and ditch rush,
Men, horses, and dogs, are hard at his brush;
Over heath, hill, and moor, led by the sly prey,
By scent or by view, cheats a long tedious day;
Alike bred for joy in the field or the course,
Always sure to come through by some staunch and fleet horse;
And when fairly run down, the fox yields up his breath,
The high-mettled racer is in at the death.
Grown aged, used up, and turned out of the stud,
Lame, spavin'd, and wind galled, but yet with some blood;
While knowing postillions his pedigree trace,
Tell his dam won that sweep-stakes, his sire won that race:
And what matches he would won, to the ostlers count over,
As they loiter'd their time by some hedged alehouse door,
Whilst the harness sore galls, and the spurs his sides goad,
The high-melted racer's a hack on the road.
At length old and feeble, trudging early and late,
Worn down by disease, he bends to his fate;
From morning to evening, he tugs round a mill,
Or draws sand till the sand of his hour glass stands still:
And now cold and lifeless, exposed to view
In the very same cart which he yesterday drew;
Whilst a pitying crowd his sad relics surrounds,
The high-mettled racer is sold for the hounds.
SONG.
WHEN I drain the rosy bowl,
Joy ex^ilerates my soul;
To the Nine I raise my song,
Ever fair and ever young.
When full cups my cares expel,
Sober counsel then farewell
Let the winds that murmer, sweep
All my sorrows to the deep.
Let the winds, etc.
When I drink dull time away,
Jolly Bacchus, ever gay,
Leads me to delightful bowers,
Full of fragrance, full of flowers.
When I quaff the sparkling wine,
And my locks with roses twine,
Then I praise life's rural scene,
Sweet, sequestered, and serene.
When I drink the bowl profound,
(Richest fragrance flowing round),
And some lovely nymph detain,
Venus then inspires the strain.
When, from goblets deep and wide,
I exhaust the generous tide,
All my soul unbends -- I play
Gamesome with the young and gay.
SONG.
BY the gaily-circling glass,
We can see how minutes pass;
By the hollow cask are told
How the waning night grows old.
Soon, too soon, the busy day
Drives us from our sport away.
What have we with day to do?
Sons of care, 'twas made for you!
By the silence of the owl,
By the chirping on the thorn,
By the butts that empty roll,
We foretell the approach of morn.
Fill then, the vacant glass.
Let no precious moment slip: --
Flout the moralizing ass;
Joys find entrance at the lip.
SONG.
YOU ask how it comes that I sing about Nancy
For ever, yet finding something new;
As well may you ask why delight fills the fancy
When land first appears to the crew.
When sat from the toils of the perilous ocean,
In each heart thanks of gratitude spring,
Feel this, and you will have of my joy a faint notion,
When with rapture of Nancy I sing.
You and I nature's beauties have seen the world over.
Yet never knew which to prefer;
Then why should you wonder that I am no rover,
Since I see all those beauties in her?
Why, you will find about ships all you have known and been hearing,
On their different bearings to bring.
Though they all make their ports, they all vary in steering;
So do I when of Nancy I sing.
Could a ship round the world, wind and weather permitting,
A thousand times go and come back,
The ocean's so spacious 'twould never be bitting,
For leagues upon leagues, the same track.
So her charms are so numerous, so various, so clever,
They produce in my mind such a string.
That, my tongue once let loose, I could sing on for ever,
And vary the oft'ner I sing.
Shall I tell you the secret? You Have but to love truly,
Own a heart in the right place that is hung,
And, j^st as the prow to the helm answers duly,
That heart will lend words to the tongue.
No art do I boast of, no, skill I inherit;
Then do not of my praises ring;
But to love and to nature allow all the merit,
That taught me of Nancy to sing.
SONG.
THE women all tell me I Am false to my lass;
That I quit my poor Chloe, and stick to my glass;
But to you, men of reason, my reasons I Will own;
And if you don't like them, why let them alone.
Although I have lest her, the truth I Will declare;
I believe she was good, and I Am sure she was fair;
But goodness and charms in a bumper I see,
That m^ke it as good and as charming as she.
My Chloe had dimples and smiles, I must own;
But though she could smile, yet in truth she could frown:
But tell me, ye lovers of liquor divine,
Did you ever see a frown in a bumper of wine?
Her lilies and roses were just in their prime,
Yet lilies and roses are conquered by time;
But, in wine from its age, such benefit flows,
That we like it the better, the older it grows.
They tell me my love would in time have been cloyed,
And that beauty's insipid when once it is enjoyed;
But in wine I both time and enjoyment defy,
For the longer I drink, the more thirsty am I.
Let murders, and battles, and history prove,
The mischiefs that wait upon rivals in love:
But in drinking, thank heaven, no rival contends;
For the more we love liquor, the more we are friends.
She too might have poisoned the joys of my life,
With norses, and babies, and squalling, and strife;
But my wine neither nurses nor babies can bring,
And a big-belly'd bottle's a mighty good thing.
We shorten our days when with love we engage;
It brings on diseases, and hastens old age:
But wine from grim death can its vo^aries save,
And keep out 'tother leg when there is one in the grave.
Perhaps, like her sex, ever false to their word,
She had left me -- to get an estate or a lord;
But my bumper, regarding nor titles nor pelf,
Will stand by me when I cannot stand by myself.
Then let my dear Chloe no longer complain:
She Is rid o! her lover, and I of my pain;
For in wine, mighty wine, many comforts I spy. --
Should you doubt what I say, take a bumper and try.
SONG.
FILL your glasses, banish grief,
Laugh, and worldly care despise;
Sorrow never will bring relief;
Joy from drinking will arise.
Why should we, with wrinkled care,
Change what nature made so fair?
Drink and set the heart at rest;
Of a bad market make the best.
Busy brains we know alas!
With imaginations run;
Like the sand in the hourglass,
Turned and turned, and still run on,
Never knowing where to stay,
But uneasy every way.
Drink, and set the heart at rest;
Peace of mind is always best.
Some pursue the winged wealth,
Some to honors high aspire:
Give me freedom, give me health;
There Is the sum of my desire.
What the world can more present,
Will not add to my content.
Drink, and set your hearts at rest;
Of a bad market make the best.
SONG.
ATTEND all, I pray, to the words I Have to say,
In tablet of memory insert 'em.
Rich wine do us raise to the honor of bays:
Quam non fecere disertum?
Tol de roll de roll lol lol lol lol.
Of all the brisk juice the gods can produce,
Good claret preferred is before 'em;
It Is claret shall strait happy mortals create,
Mars, Bacchus, Apollo, virorum.
We abandon all ale, and beer that is stale,
Rosa solis, and damnable hum;
But sparkling bright red shall raise up its head,
Above omne quod exit in um.
This, this is the wine, which, in former time,
Each wise-one of men they called Magi,
Was wont to carouse in a chaplet of boughs,
Recubans sub tegmine fagi.
Let the hope be their bane, let the rope be their shame,
Let the gout and the cholic still pine 'em,
That offer to shrink, in taking their drink,
Sen Groecum sive Latinum.
Let the glass fly about till the botile is out,
Let each do to each as he is done to;
Avaunt those that hug the abominable jug!
Amongst us heteroclita sunto.
There Is no such disease as he that does please
His palate with beer, for to shame us:
It Is claret that brings Madam Fancy her wings
And says -- Musa, majora canamus.
He Is either a mure, or does poorly dispute,
That drinks not wine as we men do:
The more wine a man drinks, the more like subtle sphinx,
Tantum valet isto loquendo.
Art thou weak, art thou lame, do thou sigh after fame?
Call for wine, and thou quickly shall have it:
It will make the lame rise, it will make the sool wise,
Cui vim Natura negavit.
The more wine in my brain, the more merry my vein;
And this to me wisdom and bliss is:
For him that is too wise I can Justly despise;
Mecum confertur Ulysses.
SONG.
HAIL, Burgundy, thou juice divine!
Inspirer of my song!
The praises given to other wine,
To thee alone belong,
Of poignant wit and rosy charms,
Thou can the power improve;
Care of its sting thy balm disarms,
Thou noblest gift of Jove!
Bright Phoehus, on the parent-tines,
From whence thy current streams,
Sweet-smiling through the tendril shines,
And lavish darts his beams.
The pregnant grape receives his fires,
And all his force retains;
With that same warmth our brain inspires,
And animates our strains.
With that, etc

From thee, my Chloe's radiant eye,
New sparkling beams receives;
Her cheeks imbibe a rosier dye;
Her beauteous bosom heaves.
Summoned to love by thy alarms,
Oh! with what nervous heat!
Worthy the fair, we fill their arms,
And often our bliss repeat.
Worthy the fair, etc.

The Stoic, prone to thought intense,
Thy softness can unbend;
A cheerful gaiety dispense,
And make him taste a friend.
His brow grows clear, he feels content,
Forgets his pensive strife;
And then concludes his time well spent,
In honest, social life.
And then, etc.

Even beaux, those soft amphibious things,
Wrapped up in self and dress,
Quite lost to the delight that springs,
From sense, thy power confess.
The fop, with chitty maudlin sace,
That dares but deeply drink,
Forgets his cue and stiff grimace,
Grows free, and seems to think.
Forgets his cue, etc.

SONG.
ON Etricks banks, in a summer's night,
At gloming, when the sheep drove hame,
I met my lassie, bra and tight,
Came wading barefoot a her lane,
My heart grew light, I ran, I flang
My arms about her lily neck,
And kissed, and calspt her there fu' lang;
My words they were nae muny, feck.
I said my lassie, will you go,
To the highland hills, the Erse to learn;
I Will heath gie thee a cow and yew,
When you come to the brig of Earn.
At Leith, auld meal comes in, never fash,
And herring at the Broomy law;
Cheer up year heart, my bonny lass,
There Is gear to win we never saw.
All day, when we ha wrought enough,
When winter's frost and snaw begin,
And when the sun goes west the Loch,
At night, when you fa fast to spin,
I Will screw my drones and play a spring;
And thus the weary night we'll end,
Till the tender kids and lumb-time bring,
Our pleasant summer back again.
SONG.
Now Is the time for mirth and glee,
Laugh and love, and sing with me;
Cupid is my theme of story,
It Is his godship's fame and glory.
It Is his godship's fame and glory:
Ever bending to his law,
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha;
Ever bending, etc.
Over the grave, and over the gay,
Cupid takes his share of play,
He makes heroes quit their glory,
He Is the god most famed in story,
Bending then unto his law,
Ha, ha -- ha.
Sly the urchin deals in darts,
Without pity piercing hearts.
Cupid triumphs over passions,
Not regarding modes nor fashions,
Firmly fixed is Cupid's law,
Ha, ha -- ha.
You may doubt these things are true;
But they are facts 'twix me and you;
Then young men and maids be wary,
How ye meet before ye marry,
Cupid's will is solely law,
Ha, ha -- ha.
SONG.
YE lads of true spirit, pay courtship to claret,
Released from the trouble of thinking:
A fool long ago said we could nothing know;
The fellow knew nothing of drinking.
To pore over Plato, or practice with Cato,
Dispassionate dunces might make us:
But men, now more wise, self-denial despise,
And live by the lessons of Bacchus.
Big-wig'd, in fine coach, see the doctor approach;
He solemnly up the stairs paces,
Looks grave -- smells his cane -- applies finger to vein.
And counts the repeats with grimaces.
As he holds pen in hand, life and death are at stand --
A toss-up which party shall take us.
Away with such cant -- no prescriptions we want,
But the nourishing nostrum of Bacchus.
We jollily join in the practice of wine,
While misers 'midst plenty are pining;
While ladies are scorning, and lovers are mourning,
We laugh at wealth, wenching, and whining.
Drink, drink, now it is prime; toss a bottle to time,
He Will not make such haste to overtake us;
His threats we prevent, and his cracks we cement,
By the styptical balsam of Bacchus.
What works is there made by the newspaper trade,
Of this man's and the other man's station!
The Ins are all bad, and the outs are all mad,
In and out is the cry of the nation.
The politic patter which both parties chatter,
From bumpering freely shall not shake us:
With half pints in hand, independent we'll stand,
To defend Magna Charta of Bacchus.
Be your motions well timed; be all charged and all prim'd:
Have a care -- right and left -- and make ready.
Right hand to glass join -- at your lips rest your wine --
Be all in your exercise steady.
Our levels we boast, when our women we toast;
May graciously they undertake us!
No more we desire -- so drink and give fire,
A volley to Beauty and Bacchus.
SONG.
DE^L take the war, that hurried Willy from me,
Who to love me just had sworn;
They made him captain surely to undo me;
Woe is me! he will never return.
A thousand loons abroad will fight him;
He from thousands never will run;
Day and night I did invite him,
To stay safe from sword or gun.
I used alluring graces,
With muckle kind embraces:
Now sighing, then crying, tears dropping fall.
And, had he my soft arms
Preferred to wars alarms,
By love grown mad,
Without the man of Gad,
I fear in my fit I had granted all.
I washed and patched to make me look provoking,
Snares that they told me would catch the men;
And on my head a huge commode sat poking,
Which made me show as tall again.
For a new gown too I paid muckle money,
Which with golden flowers did shine:
Well might my lover think me gay and bonny,
No Scotch lass was ever so fine.
My petticoat I spotted,
Fringe, too, with thread I knotted;
Laced shoes, and silken hose, too, garter'd over knee:
But, oh, the fatal thought!
To Willy these were naught,
Who rode to towns,
And rifled with dragoons,
When he, silly loon! might have plundered me.
SONG.
TO ease his heart, and own his flame,
Young Jockey to my cottage came:
But though I liked him passing well,
I careless turned my spinning wheel.
My milk-white hand he did extol,
And praised my fingers long and small,
Unusual joy my heart did feel,
But still I turned my spinning wheel.
Then round about my slender waist,
He clasped his arms, und me embraced,
To kiss my hand he down did kneel,
But yet I turned my spinning wheel.
With gentle voice I bid him rise;
He blessed my neck, my lips and eyes;
My fondness I could scarce conceal,
Yet still I turned my spinning wheel.
Till bolder grown, so close he pressed,
His wanton thoughts I quickly guessed,
Then pushed him from my rock and reel,
And angry turned my spinning wheel.
At last when I began to chide,
He swore he meant me for his bride:
'Twas then my love I did reveal
And slung away my spinning wheel.
SONG.
WHEN Orpheus went down to the regions below,
Which men are forbidden to see;
He tuned up his lyre, as old histories show,
To set his Eurydice free.
To set his Eurydice free.
All hell was astonished a person so wise
Should rashly endanger his life,
And venture so far; but how vast their surprise!
When they heard that he came for his wife!
How vast their surprise!
When they heard that he came for his wife!
To find out a punishment due to his fault,
Old Pluto long puzzled his brain
But hell had not torments sufficient, he thought;
So he gave him his wife back again.
But pity succeeding found place in his heart;
And, pleased with his playing so well,
He took her again in reward of his art;
Such merit had music in hell!
SONG.
WHEN war's alarms enticed my Willy from me,
My poor heart with grief did sigh;
Each fond remembrance brought fresh sorrow on me,
I woke ere yet the morn was nigh,
No other could delight him:
Ah! why did I ever slight him,
Coldly answering his fond tale?
Which drove him far,
Amidst the rage of war,
And left silly me, thus to bewail.
But I no longer, though a maid forsaken,
Thus will mourn, like yonder dove;
For, ere the lark tomorrow shall awaken,
I will seek my absent love.
The hostile country over,
I Will fly, to seek my lover,
Scorning every threatening fear:
Nor distant shore,
Nor cannon's roar,
Shall longer keep me (...) my dear.
SONG.
I AM a lad well known in town,
For friendship mirth and fun,
Among the fair, the black, the brown,
My daily course I run;
I chat with Bet? I toy with Sall,
I dance with Kate and Sue;
My part I play with every girl,
So fond of something new.
To kiss and keep it up's my aim.
For I Am a roving blade;
Tom Bowling is my saucy name,
A rover I by trade;
Shall drowsy watchmen me perplex,
That ramble through the town,
I love my bottle and the sex,
They all my sorrow drown.
Then bring me bowls of generous wine
And pledge me with the same;
Since life's a jest I Will never r^pine,
Despair's an emp^y name;
The favorite catch, the sprightly glee,
That pleafing scenes impart:
In flowing numbers weleome me,
And cheer the merry heart.
SONG.
'TWAS within a mile of Edinburgh town,
In the rosy time of the year,
Sweet flowers bloomed, and the grass was down,
And each Shepherd wooed his dear:
Bonny Jockey, blythe and gay,
Kissed sweet Jenny making hay:
The lassie blushed, and frowning cried, no, no, it will not do;
I cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot, mannot buckle too.
Jockey was a wag that never would wed,
Though long he had followed the lass,
Contented she earned and eat her brown bread,
And merrily turned up the grass:
Bonny Jockey, blythe and free,
Won her heart right merrily,
Yet still she blushed, and frowning cried, no, no, it will not do,
I cannot cannot, wonnot wonnot, mannot buckle too.
But when he vowed he would make her his bride,
Though his flocks and herds were not few,
She gave him her hand, and a kiss beside,
And vowed she would for ever be true;
Bonny Jockey, blythe and free,
Won her heart right merrily,
At church she no more frowning cried, no, no, it will not do,
I cannot cannot, wonnot wonnot, mannot buckle too.
SONG.
THOUGH fostered in the humble cot,
My friends of low degree;
A higher state I envied not,
While blessed with liberty.
Then sweetly danced the hours away;
What sorrow could I prove?
With all to make the bosom gay,
Sweet liberty and love.
But now my heart is full of woe;
Ah! well-a-day poor me!
The worst of misery to know
The loss of liberty!
Yet still be calm, my anxious breast,
Hope comfort from above;
Kind heaven again can make me blessed
With liberty and love.
SONG.
AT Symond's-Inn I sip my tea,
Then file a judgment or a plea;
Inrol a deed in special tail,
Tax the costs or put in bail.
Speaks] O, it is a clear case, Sir! the dafendant's a married woman, pleads her
coverture; you would better not go on; your client will have all the costs to pay.
Will he? dem^me i^ mine don't, yours shall! that is all.

Sings.] With sham plea and misnomer;

Nil debet, nulla bona;
Declaration, Replication;
Fieri facias, Special capias;
Affidavit, devastavit;
Clausum fregit, Non elegit;
Non est factum, Nudum pactum;
Demoratur, Allocatur;
Ad satisfaciendum, Et respondendum.
Should a client ask advice,
There Is six and eight pence in a trice;
Or treat me to a dinner.
I make him pay
For all I say,
So I Am sure to be the winner.
Speaks.] Sir, you have certainly merits; I Will speak to Mr. Shark, the
plaintiff's attorney: pray, Sir, did you knock my client's eye out? No, Sir; we
plead a justification to the aslault; then, Sir, we must go to trial.

Sings. With sham plea, etc.

For plaintiff or defendant,
If but the fees we snack,
We never make an end on it,
Till the coat is off his back.
Speaks] Lord, Sir, only a few extra costs, such as the master will not allow:
poor devils of clients pay the piper. Rattling down in post-chaise' to the
assizes; hackney-coaches to West minsterhall; my gigg on a Sunday; counsel's
fees, taveru b^lls, and traveling expenses.

Sings.] With sham plea, etc.

SONG.
WHERE the rising forest spreads,
Shelter for the lordly dome,
To their high built airy beds,
See the rooks returning home:
As the larks with varied tune,
Carol in the evening loud;
Mark the mild resplendant morn
Breaking through a pleasant cloud.
Tripping through the silken glass,
Over the path-divided dale,
Mark the rose complexion'd lass,
With her well-pois'd milking pail:
Linnets, with uncumber'd notes,
And the cuckoo bird with two:
Toning sweet their mellow throats,
Bid the setting sun adien.
SONG.
WHEN first Miss Kitty came to town,
With round eared cap and ru^ffet gow
Mittens nice and straw hat new,
Pattens high and stockings blue;
She tried the rake, she tried --
Spanking Jack was so clever,
So hearty and Jolly;
Though winds blew great guns,
Still he would whistle and sing --
Oh! the broom, the bonny bonny broom,
The broom -- Though I sweep to end fro,
Yet I Would have ye to know, there are sweepers --
To Anacreon in Heaven where he sat in full glee,
A few sons of Harmony sent -- A
Tinker and a tailor,
A soldier and a sailor -- To
Ease his heart and own his flame.
Young Jockey to my ^^^age came,
And though she liked him passing well,
She careless turned -- A
Beggar I am, and of low dogree,
And I came of a begging family,
I Am lame, but when -- In
My club room so great, I Am seated in state,
At the head of the table -- I was do you
See a waterman, as tight and spruce as any,
From horsly-down to -- Five
And twenty sidlers all of a row,
Five and twenty sidlers all of a row,
There was sidle fadel, treble bass and double,
Stop, short, flats, and sharps.
It is Bet Jenks's birth day,
Therefore we'll keep holliday,
We come for to be merry.
SONG -- COMPLAINING OF ABSENCE.
Tune, -- My Apron Deary.
AH, Chloe! thou treasure, thou joy of my breast,
Since I parted from thee, I Am a stranger to rest,
I fly to the grave, there to languish and mourn,
There sigh for my charmer, and long to return,
The fields all around me are smiling and gay,
But they smile all in vain -- my Chloe's away:
The field and the grove can afford me no ease, --
But bring me my Chloe, a desert will please.
No virgin I see that my bosom alarms,
I Am cold to the fairest, though glowing with charms,
In vain they attack me, and sparkle the eye;
These are not the looks of my Chloe, I cry.
These looks where bright love, like the sun, sits enthroned,
And smiling diffuses his influence round,
'Twas thus I first viewed thee, my charmer, amazed,
Thus gazed thee with wonder, and loved while I gazed:
Then, then the dear sair one was still in my sight,
It was pleasure all day, it was rapture all night;
But now by hard fortune removed from my fair,
In secret I languish, a prey to despair;
But absence and torment abate not my flame,
My Chloe's still charming, my passion the same;
O! would she preserve me a place in her breast,
Then absence would please me, For I would be blessed.
SONG.
Let Us (...)
Madness it is for us to think,
How the world is ral'd by a^^es,
And the wise are swayed by chink.
Fa, la, ra, etc.

Then never let vain care oppress us,
Riches are to them a snare.
We Are every one as rich as Croesus,
While our bottle drowns our care.
Fa, la, ra, etc.

Wine will make us as ^ed roses,
And our sorrows quite forget:
Come let us fuddle all our noses,
Drink ourselves quite out of debt.
Fa, la, ra, etc.

When grim death is looking for us,
We are toping at our bowls,
Bacchus joining in the chorus;
Death, be gone! here is none but souls.
Fa, la, ra, etc.

God-like Bacchus thus commanding,
Trembling death away shall fly,
Ever after understanding,
Drinking souls can never die.
Fa, la, ra, etc.

THE BROOM OF COWDENKNOWS.
HOW blyth ilk morn was I to see
The swain come over the hill!
He skips the burn, and flew to me:
I met him with good will.
O the broom, the bonny bonny broom,
The broom of Cowden knows;
I (...)
I neither wanted ewe nor lamb
While his flock near me lay:
He gathered in my sheep at night,
And cheered me a' the day.
O the broom, etc.
He tuned his pipe and reed sae sweet,
The birds stood listening by:
Even the dull cattle stood and gazed,
Charmed with his melody.
O the broom, etc.
While thus we spent our time by turns,
Betwixt our flocks and play;
I envied not the fairest dame,
Though never sae rich and gay.
O the broom, etc.
Hard fate that I should banished be,
Gang heavily and mourn,
Because I loved the kindest swain
That ever yet was born.
O the broom, etc.
He did oblige me every hour,
Could I but faithfu' be?
He staw (...) heart, Could I refos^
Whatever he asked of me?
O the broom, etc.
My doggie, and my little kit,
That held my we soup whey,
My plaidy, broach, and crooked st^^^,
May now ly useless by.
O the broom, etc.
Adieu, ye Cowdenknows, adien,
Farewell a' pleasures there;
Ye gods, restore me to my swain,
Is a'l crave or care.
O the broom, the bonny bonny broom,
The broom of Cowdenknows:
I wish I were with my dear swain,
With his pipe and my ewes.
SONG.
Tune, -- I loo'd a bonny Lady.
TELL me, tell me, charming creature,
Will you never ease my pain?
Must I die for every feature?
Must I always love in vain?
The desire of admiration
Is the pleasure you pursue;
Pray thee, try a lasting passion,
Such a love as mine for you.
Tears and fighing could not mo^^ you;
For a lover ought to dare:
When I plainly told I loved you.
Then you said I went too far.
Are such giddy ways beseeming?
Will my dear be fickle still?
Conquest is the joy of women,
Let their slaves be what they will.
Your neglect with torment fills me,
And my desperate thoughts increase:
Pray, consider, if you kill me,
You will have a lover less.
If your wandering heart is beating
For new lovers, let it be:
But when you have done coquetting,
Name a day, and fix on me.
SONG. THE REPLY.
IN vain, fond youth; thy tears give over,
What more, alas! can Flavia do?
Thy truth I own, thy fate deplore:
All are not happy that are true.
Suppress those sighs, and weep no more;
Should heaven and earth with thee combine,
'Twere all in vain, since any power,
To crown thy love, must alter mine.
But if revenge can ease thy pain,
I Will sooth the ills I cannot cure,
Tell that I drag a hopeless chain,
And all that I inflict endure.
SONG. THE YELLOW-HAIR'D LADDIE.
IN April when primroses paint the sweet plain,
And summer approaching rejoiceth the swain;
The Yellow-hair'd Laddie would often times go
To wilds and deep gleus where the hawthorn trees grow.
There, under the shade of an old sacred thorn,
With freedom he sung his loves evening and morn:
He sang with so saft and enchanting a sound,
That Sylvans and Fairies unseen danced around.
The shepherd thus sung, though young Maya be fair,
Her beauty is dashed with a scornfu' proud air;
But Susie was handsome, and sweetly could sing,
Her breath ^^e the roses perfumed in the spring.
That Madie, in all the gay bloom of her youth,
Like the moon was inconstant, and never spoke truth;
But Susie was faithful, good-humored and free,
And fair as the goddess who sprung from the sea.
That mama's fine daughter with all her great dower,
Was aukwardly airy, and frequently sour;
Then, sighing, he wished, would parents agree,
The witty sweet Susie his mistress might be.
SONG. THE LAST TIME I GAME OVER THE MOOR.
THE last time I came over the moor,
I left my love behind me,
Ye Powers! what pain do I endure,
When soft ideas mind me?
Soon as the ruddy morn displayed
The beaming day ensuing,
I met betimes my lovely maid,
In sit retreats for wooing.
Beneath the cooling shade we lay,
Gazing and chastely sporting:
We kissed and promised time away,
Till night spread her black curtain.
I pitled all beneath the skies,
Even kings when she was nigh me;
In raptures I beheld her eyes,
Which, could but ill deny me
Should I be called where cannons roar,
Where mortal steel may wound me;
Or cast upon some foreign shore.
Where dangers may surroun^ me:
Yet ho^es again to see my love,
To feast on glowing kisses,
Shall make my cares at distance move,
In prospect of such blisses.
In all my soul there is not one place
To let a rival enter:
Since she excels in every grace,
In her my love shall conter.
Sooner the seas shall cease to flow,
Their waves the Alps shall cover,
On Greenland ice shall roses grow,
Before I cease to love her.
The next time I go over the moor
She shall a lover find me:
And that my says is firm and pure,
Though I left her behind me;
Then Hymen's sacred bonds shall chain
My heart to her fair bosom,
There, while my being does remain,
My love more fresh shall blossom.
SONG.
THE goddess of war threw her spear on the ground,
And peace waved her olive branch gracefully round;
A stillness now reigned over the wide spreading main,
The Sirens began a melodious strain;
The shipwrecked sea boy his troubles forgot,
The yawn of the waves and the whistling shot;
His dear native home pressed strong on his mind;
His parents so loving, his sisters so kind.
Then hurried on, with his heart all elate,
To embrace them all round, and his story relate;
His hard-earned wages he longed to divide,
Amongst those that he loved, by his own fire side.
But, when he arrived say, what pen can express,
The genial delight, the joy in excess!
So welcome at home was this brave little guest,
You Would have thought that their welcomes would never have ceased.
He hailed every one, and he smiled with such glee: --
Cried hold out your hands, take this present from me,
A fine silken 'kerchief each neck to enfold:
But gave to his parents a purse full of gold.
The sidler was sent for that lived on the green;
Such dancing and romping sure never was seen.
Then ri^^^g'd till Phoebus peeped over the shed,
SONG.
Tune -- When she came ben she bobhed.
COME, sill me a bumper, my jolly brave boys,
Let Us have no more female impert'nance and noise;
For I Have tried the endearments and pleasures of love,
And I find they are but nonsense and whimfies, by Jove.
When first of all Betty and I were acquaint,
I whin'd like a fool, and she sighed like a saint:
But I found her religion, her face, and her love,
Were hypocrisy, paint, and self interest, by Jove.
Sweet Cecil came next with her languishing air,
Her outside was orderly, modest and fair;
But her soul was sophisticate, so was her love,
For I found she was only a strumpet, by Jove.
Little double gilt Jenny's gold charmed me at last:
(You know marriage and money together does best:)
But the baggage for getting her vows and her love,
Gave her gold to a shiv'ling dull coxcomb, by Jove.
Come fill me a bumper then, jolly brave boys;
Here Is a farewell to female impert'nence and noise:
I know few of the sex that are worthy my love;
And for strumpets and jilts, I abhor them, by Jove.
SONG. PEGGY, I MUST LOVE THEE.
AS from (...) com'lpying
His native soil, overcome with grief,
Half sunk in waves, and dying:
With the next morning sun he spies
A ship, which gave unhon'd surprise:
New life springs up, he lists his eyes
With joy, end waits her motion.
So when by her whom long I loved,
I scorned was, and deserted,
Low with despair my spirits moved,
To be for ever parted:
Thus droopt I, till diviner grace
I found in Peggy's mind and face;
Ingratitude appeared then base,
But virtue more engaging
Then now since happily I Have hit,
I Will have no more delaying;
Let beauty yield to manly wit,
We lose ourselves in staying:
I Will haste dull courtship to a close;
Since marriage can my fears oppose;
Why should we the happy minutes lose,
Since, Peggy, I must love thee.
Men may be foolish if they please,
And deem't a lover's duty,
To sigh, and sacrifice their ease,
Doting on a proud beauty:
Such was my case for many a year,
Still hope succeeding to my fear,
False Betty's charms now disappear,
Since Peggy's far outshine them.
SONG.
Tune -- Rothes's Lament; or, Pinkev-House.
AS Sylvia in a forest lay,
To vent her woe alone;
Her swain Lysander came that way,
And heard her dying moan.
Ah! is my love (said she) to you
So worthless and so vain;
Why is your wonted fondness now
Converted to disdain?
You vowed the light should darkness turn
Ever you would exchange your love;
In shades now may creation mourn,
Since you unfaithful prove.
Was it for this I credit gave
To every oath you swore?
But ah! it seems they most deceive
Who most our charms adore.
It Is plain your drift was all deceit,
The practice of mankind:
Alas! I see it but too late,
My love had made me blind.
For you, delighted I could die;
But Oh! with grief I Am filled,
To think that credulous, constant I
Should by youself be killed.
This said -- all breathless, sick and pale,
Her head upon her hand,
She sound her vital spirits fail,
And senses at a stand.
Sylvander then began to melt:
But ever the word was given,
The heavy hand of death she felt,
And sighed her foul to heaven.
SONG. MARY SCOT.
HAPPY's the love which meets return,
When in soft flames souls equal burn;
But words are wanting to discover
The torments of a hopeless lover.
Ye registers of heaven, relate,
^f looking over the rolls of fate,
I Did you there see me marked to marrow
Mary Scot the flower of Yarrow?
Ah no! her form's too heavenly fair,
Her love the Gods above must share;
While mortals with despair explore her,
And at a distance due adore her.
O lovely maid! my doubts beguile,
Revive and bless me with a smile;
Al^^! if not, you will soon debar a
Sighing swain the banks of Yarrow.
Be hush, ye fears, I Will not despair,
My Mary's tender as she is fair;
Then I Will go tell her all my anguish,
She is too good to let me languish:
With success crowned, I Will not envy,
The folks who dwell above the sky;
When Mary Scot's become my marrow,
We'll make a paradise in Yarrow.
SONG CORN RIGS ARE BONNY.
MY Patie is a lover gay,
His mind is never muddy,
His breath is sweeter than new hay,
His face is fair and ruddy.
His shape is handsome, middle size;
He Is stately in his wawking;
The shining of his even surprise;
It Is heaven to hear him tawking.
Last night I met him on a bawk,
Where yellow corn was growing,
There money a kindly word he spoke,
That set my heart a glowing.
He kissed and vowed he would be mine,
And loo'd me best of any;
That gars me like to sing sinsyne,
O corn rigs are bonny.
Let maidens of a silly mind,
Refuse what may they are wanting,
Since we for yielding were designed,
We chastely should be granting;
Then I Will comply and marry Pate,
And syne my cockernony,
He Is free to touzle air or late,
Where corn rigs are bonny.
SONG -- TO CLARINDA.
Tune -- I wish my love were in a Mire.
BLESSED as the immortal gods is he,
The youth who fondly sits by thee,
And hears and sees thee all the while
^oftly speak, and sweetly smile, etc.
So spoke and smiled the Eastern maid;
Like thine, seraphic were her charms,
That in Circassia's vineyards strayed,
And blessed the wiseit monarch's arms.
A thousand fair of high desert,
Strave to enchant the amorous king;
But the Circassian gained his heart,
And taught the royal bird to sing.
Clarinda thus our sang inspires,
And claims the smooth and highest lays,
But while each charm our bosom ^^res,
Words seem too few to sound her praise.
Her mind in every grace complete,
To point surpasses human skill:
Her majesty, mixed with the sweet,
Let seraphs sing her if they will.
Whilst wondering with a ravished eye.
We all that is perfect in her view,
Viewing a sister of the sky,
To whom an adoration's due.
SONG.
SWEET are the charms of her I love,
More fragrant than the damask rose
Soft as the down of turtle-dove,
Gentle as winds when Zephyr blows,
Refreshing, as descending rains
To sunburned climes and thirsty plains.
True as the needle to the pole,
Or as the dial to the sun,
Constant as gliding waters roll,
Whose swelling tides obey the moon:
From every other charu^er free,
My life and love shall follow thee.
The lamb the flowery thyme devours,
The dam the tender kid pursues,
Sweet Philomel, in shady bowers
Of verdant spring, her note renews;
All follow what they most admire,
As I pursue my soul's desire.
Nature must change her beauteous face,
And vary as the seasons rise;
As winter to the spring gives place,
Summer the approach of Autumn flies
No change on love the seasons bring,
Love only knows perpetual spring.
Devouring time, with stealing pace.
Makes losty oaks and cedars bow;
And marble towers and walls of brass
In his rude march he levels low:
But time, destroying far and wide,
Love from the soul can never divide.
Death only, with his cruel dart
The gentle Godhead can remove,
And drive him from the bleeding heart
To mingle with the blessed above,
Where known to all his kindred train,
He finds a lasting rest from pain.
Love and his sister fair the soul,
Twin-born from heaven came:
Love will the Universe control,
When dying seasons lose their name;
Divine abodes shall own his power,
When time and death shall be no more.
SONG.
BLESSED as the immortal gods is he,
The youth who fondly sits by thee,
And hears and sees thee all the while,
Softly speak and sweetly smile.
'Twas this bereaved my soul of rest
And raised such tumults in my breast:
For while I gazed in transport tossed,
My breath was gone, my voice was lost.
My bosom glowed; the subtle flame
Ran quick through all my vital frame;
Over my dim eyes a darkness hung,
My ears with hollow murmurs rung.
In dewy damps my limbs were chilled,
My blood with gentle horrors thrilled,
My feeble pulse forgot to play,
I fainted, sunk, and died away.
SONG. OWEN.
THOUGH far beyond the mountains that look so distant here,
To fight his country's battles last May day went my dear!
Ah! well shall I remember with bitter sighs the day:
Why Owen did thou leave me? at home why did I stay?
Ah! well shall I remember, etc.

O cruel were my parents who did my flight restrain,
And I was cruel hearted who did at home remain;
With him I love contented I Would journey far away,
Why Owen did thou leave me? at home why did I stay?
With him I love contented, etc.

To market at Llangevillen, each morning do I go,
But how to strike a bargain no longer do I know;
My Father chides at evening my Mother all the day:
Why Owen did thou leave me? at home why did I stay?
My Father chides at evening, etc.

When thinking of my Owen my eyes with tears they fill,
And then my mother chides me because my wheel stands still;
How can I think of spinning while Owen's far away?
Why Owen did thou leave me? at home why did I stay?
How can I think of spinning, etc.

O should it please kind Heaven to shield my love from harm,
To clasp him to my bosom would every care disarm;
But ah! I fear far distant will be that happy day.
Why Owen did thou leave me? at home why did I stay?
But ah! I fear far distant, etc.

SONG. THE CAN OF FLIP.
TO distant shores the breezy wind,
The jolly far from home conveys;
No anxious thoughts annoy his mind,
Whilst whistling he the sheet belays:
Though storms around him londly roar,
And from his jacket brine shall drip,
Unmoved he hears the tempest roar,
And takes his cann of generous flip.
No silly cares can him oppress,
If tight his ship and sea-room clear;
Nor on his heart can aught impress,
The distant thought of coward fear.
Though storms around, etc.

Yet when he views his native land,
His swelling heart with ardour glows;
And as he leaps upon the strand,
It Is thus his tongue with rapture flows:
Nor storms nor tempests her assail,
Nor brine shall from my jackets drip,
Here love alone shall blow the gale,
And we drink canns of generous flip.
SONG. THE CAPTURED CREW.
NIGHT scarce her mantle had withdrew,
And slowly ushered in the morn,
When bearing down, we 'spied in view,
The savage foe not far astern:
The stoutest trembled -- small our crew.
The victims of superior power;
Yet courage bade the drooping few
Wait calmly for the fatal hour.
'Bold they approached -- a council's held,
Our men, with voce united, cry,
Rather than basely deign to yield,
'They'd meet their fate and boldly die:
The ^ight now raged -- from side to side
The thundering cannons dreadful sound,
With purple stain the deck was died,
Which issued from each gaping wound.
Such havoc now stern death has made,
Fain our re^^stance -- naught could shield;
Wounds and fatigue on valor preyed,
And with reluctance did ^e yield:
But scarce our battered hull we quit,
Scarce from the sturdy wreck retire,
Ere up she blew, 'sham'd to be beat,
Shrouding her form in sheets of fire.
SONG.
WHAT virgin of shepherd in valley or grove,
Will envy my innocent lays,
The song of the heart, and the offspring of love,
When sung in my Corrydon's praise,
Over brook and over break, as he hies to the bower
How blithsome my shepherd can trip,
And sure when of love he describes the soft power
The honey-dew drops from his lip.
How sweet is the primrose, the voilet how sweet,
And sweet is the eglantine breeze,
But Corrydon's kiss, when by moonlight we meet
To me is far sweeter than these.
I blush at his raptures, I hear all his vows,
I sigh when I offer to speak,
And oh! what delight my fond bosom overflows,
When I feel the soft touch of his cheek.
Responsive and shrill be the notes from the spray,
Let the pipe through the village resound,
Be smiles in each face, oh! ye shepherds to day,
And ring the bells merrily round:
Your favors prepare my companions with speed,
Assist me my blushes to hide,
A twelve month ago, o^ this day I agreed,
To be my loved Corrydon's bride.
SONG. GIVE ME THE GIRL THAT IS KIND AND FREE.
WHILE happy in my fair-one's arms,
What rapturous joys possessing;
To gaze on woman's blooming charms,
Extatic is the blessing:
A virtuous girl is all my pride,
Possessing wit and beauty;
Blessed with her love I never derid
But pay respect and duty;
Each freeborn Lover's wish should be,
Give me the girl that is kind and free.
Let fops and fools still court the glass,
A prey to self-opinion;
My joys are centered in my lass,
I how to love's dominion:
For Nancy is the girl I love,
My hearts own love's impression,
Each tender moment I improve,
They yielding soft confession:
Each freeborn Lover's wish should be,
Give me the girl that is kind and free.
SONG. LUBIN'S RURAL COT.
RETURNING home, across the plain,
From market, the other day,
A sudden storm of wind and rain
O'ertook me by the way:
With speed I tript it over the ground,
To find some kinder spot,
And from the storm a shelter found,
In Lubin's rural cot.
This swain had long possessed a flame,
But modestly concealed;
Nor 'till those favoring moments came,
His passion ever revealed:
Will you consent, sweet maid, cried he,
To share my humble lot;
Return, my love, and mistress be,
Of Lubin's rural cot.
He spoke so fair it pleased my mind,
I, blushing, answered yes;
He swore he would be true and kind
And sealed i^ ^^th a kiss;
Next day the wedding ring was bought,
I all my sears forgot;
And blessed the day I shelter sought,
In Lubin's rural cot.
SONG. THE SWEET LITTLE GIRL THAT I LOVE.
MY friends all declare that my time is misspent
While in rural retirement I rove;
I ask no more wealth than dame fortune has sent,
But the sweet little girl that I love,
The rose on her cheek's my delight
She Is soft as the down, on the dove,
No lily was ever so white
As the sweet little girl that I love.
Though humble my cot, calm content gilds the scene,
For my fair-one delights in my grove;
And a palace I Would quit for a dance on the green
With the sweet little girl that I love.
No ambition I know but to call her my own,
No fame but her praise wish to prove;
My happiness centers in Fanny alone,
She Is the sweet little girl that I love.
SONG.
MY goddess Lydia, heavenly fair,
As lily sweet, as soft as air,
Let loose thy tresses, spread thy charms,
And to my love give fresh alarms.
O! let me gaze on these bright (...)
Though sacred lightning from them (...)
Show me that soft, that modest grace,
Which paints with charming red thy face.
Give me Ambrosia in a kiss.
That I may rival Jove in bliss,
That I may mix my soul with thine,
And make the pleasure all divine.
O! bide thy bosom's killing white,
(The milky way is not so bright)
Lest you my ravished soul oppress,
With beauty's pomp, and sweet excess.
Why draw'st thou from the purple flood
Of my kind heart the vital blood?
Thou art all over endless charms;
O! take me dying to thy arms.
SONG.
HOW poor is the man, though he wealth should possess
Who the impulse of pity never knew!
But unfeeling could hear the sad tale of distress,
And withold from misfortune its due.
The elements rigor much sooner I Would brave,
Which my vessel on foul ground should strand;
Or in Biscay's rough bay meet a watery grave,
Than I Would take such a wretch by the hand.
INDEX.
Beginning with the first Line of every Song.

AT Symonds ^nn I sip my tea Page 48 A Sailor's life's a life of woe Page 13 A
plague of those musty old lubbers Page 12 Anacreon they say was a jolly old
blade Page 28 Attend all I pray, to the words I Have to say Page 37 Ah Chloe!
thou treasure, the joy of my life Page 50 As from a rock past all relief Page
58 As Sylvia in a forest lay, Page 59 Behold the man that is unlucky Page 25 By
the gaily circling glass Page 33 Begone dull care I prithee be gone Page 18
Blessed as the immortal gods is he Page 61 Blessed as the immortal gods is he Page
63 Come fill me a bamper my jolly brave boys Page 57 Dick Dock a ta^ at
Greenwich moored Page 15 De'il take the wars that hurried willy from me Page 42
Exchanging vows of love and truth Page 21 Escaped with life in tatters Page 6
Fresh blows the gale, soon under weight Page 11 Fill your glasses banish grief
Page 39 Hail burgundy thou juice di^ine Page 38 Happy's the love that meets
return Page 60 How blyth ilk morn was I to see Page 52 How poor is the man,
though he wealth should possess Page 70 ^ohn Bull for pastime took a prance Page
27 ^am a lad well known in town Page 46 I was far from noise and smoke Page 22
In vain fond youth; thy tears give over Page 54 In April when primroses paint
the sweet plain Page 54 Life's like a ship in constant motion Page 9 Let Us be
jovial fill our glasses Page 51 My temple's with clusters of grape's I Will
entwine Page 30 My friend^ all declare that my time is misspent Page 69 My Patie
is a lover gay Page 61 My goddess Lydia heavenly fair Page 69 Now Is the time
for mirth and glee Page 40 Night sc^^ce her mantle had wighdrew Page 66 Oh
think on my fate! I once freedom enjoyed Page 3 On Etrick's ^^nks on a Summers
night Page 40 Returning home across the plain Page 68 See the course througed
with ga^^^s Page 31 Sweet are the charms of her I love Page 62 To the brook and
the willows that heard Page 17 'Twas Saturday night the twinkling stars Page 5
It Is said we ven'trous die hard when we leave the shore Page 7 Though fostered
in the humble cot Page 47 Tom Tackle was noble, was true to his word Page 25
The women all tell me I am false to my lass Page 35 'Twas within a mile of
Edinburgh town Page 46 The goddess of war threw her spear on she, ground Page
56 The last time I came over the moor Page 55 Tell me, tell me, charming
creature Page 53 Though far beyond the mountains that looks so distant here Page
64 To distant shores the breezy wind Page 65 Vash te matter goot folks Page 29
Would you hear a sad story of woe Page 13 When I drain the rosy bowl Page 32
When Orphensweat down to the regions below Page 44 When wars alarms Page 45
When it is night and the mid-watch is come Page 17 What Cato advised most
certainly wise is Page 18 Why droops my Nan, and why those tears? Page 1^ Why
fair maid in every feature Page ^^ Wide over the tremulous sea Page 20 When
Sandy told his tale of love Page 24 While high the foaming surges rise Page 10
Where the rising forests spread Page 49 When first Kitty came to town Page 49
While happy in my fair one's arms Page 67 What Virgin or Shepherd in valley
^^^rove Page 67 You ask me sweet maid if my vows are sincere Page 23
FINIS.

