Luther Richardson's Oration.

AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED July 4, 1800, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
Town of Roxbury, IN COMMEMORATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY Luther Richardson.

Quis est enim cui non possessio libertatis, lux haec ipsa, and hoc commune
patriae solum, cum sit carum, tum vero dulce atque jucundum. Cic. BOSTON
PRINTED BY JOHN RUSSELL.

ROXBURY, JULY, 4, 1800.
AT a meeting of the citizens of Roxbury, Voted, That NEHEMIAH MUNROE, Dr. JOHN
BARTLETT, and WILLIAM H. SUMNER be a Committee to wait on Mr. LUTHER
RICHARDSON, return him thanks for the eloquent and judicious Oration delivered
this day, and request a copy for the press

ROXBURY, JULY 4, 1800. GENTLEMEN,
SOLICITING the same candor on the perusal, which was shown at the delivery of
the Oration, this day, I with diffidence submit it to your disposal.

LUTHER RICHARDSON.
Messrs MUNROE, BARTLETT, and SUMNER.



AN ORATION.
CITIZENS AND FELLOW COUNTRYMEN!
A NEW era in the annals of time has commenced; tyranny has yielded the scepter
to patriotism; liberty, guided by reason, has began her bright career. Science
has erected her temple on the grave of superstition; humanity has extracted the
rancour from the bosom of war, and wrenched the sword of destruction from the
arm of victory; commerce has subjected the ocean to the empire of man; and a
new world beyond the limits of the old has arisen into view.

WE are assembled, not to pay the servile homage of adulation for the birth of
kings and despots; not to pour forth the shouts of fanaticism for the triumphs
of anarchy; nor to swell the guilty acclamations of a phrentic usurper -- No, a
more exalted theme inspires our minds. We celebrate that day, which freed a
nation from tyranny, which gave a new empire to the world. A day, which
declared the dignity of human nature, and the eternal rights of man; a day,
terrible to tyrants, but dear to freemen.

WHAT day can better unite all hearts; what sentiments are more worthy to
employ all minds? Rise then, Soldiers, Citizens, Statesmen! approach the altar
of your independence, and recount the blessings of your arduous toils. Lead
forth your tender offspring, and teach their youthful minds, to expand with
sacred love of country. Let pleasure blow the trump of joy; let shouts of
patriotism burst from every tongue; and paeans of exultation rise from every
breast.

THE American revolution will forever stand, a grand epoch, in the political
world. The faculties of human nature, and the rights of man were never till
then thoroughly investigated. The art of legislation was brought back to
reason, government was stripped of its mystery, and exposed to the eye of
public scrutiny; and "it was found that for a nation to become free, it is
sufficient that she wills it."

HERE was no demon of anarchy, to spread the pestilence of civil war, to rule
in solitude over the graves of his countrymen; no phrenzied parricide, to bear
in triumph the head of his father, streaming with blood from a guillotine, to
testify his patriotism. Ambition never soared on the crimson wings of victory,
to waft herself to empire. We boast no cities laid in ruins, to commemorate the
downfall of government and religion; no provinces desolated, to mark the
flaming path of Equality; no rivers choked with the putrid carcases of
murdered citizens. No, far different triumphs are ours. Calm reflection here
performed the miracles of inspiration, and deliberate valor acquired the
achievements of Gods. An empire happy, a mighty nation freed from tyranny.
These are the glorious monuments of our revolution; these are the immortal
trophies of which we boast.

OUR fathers, persecuted and hunted from their native land, committed
themselves to the bosom of the deep, choosing to associate with the monsters of
the ocean, and to wander at large amid storms and tempests; rather than
sacrifice their religion and liberties to the inquisition of an inexorable
tyrant. Guided by heaven to these solitary shores, nature received them with
open arms, and joyfully pressed them to her rugged breast. By their toils and
perseverance, by that virtue derived from pure religion, and that industry
inspired by liberty, they rapidly increased to a degree of population and
opulence, which commanded national respectability. With minds superior to
revenge the ingratitude of the mother country, they still fondly hailed her by
the endearing name of parent. Every tongue was loud in her praise, and every
heart rejoiced to obey the commands of her patriot kings.

BY the sovereign aid of her colonies Great Britain was exalted to a height of
power, which threatened the liberties of mankind. Victory every where crowned
her arms by land, and her navy rode triumphant over the seas. Europe trembled
at the omnipotence of her sway; Africa groaned under her mercenary iniquity;
Asia wore the chains of her monopolizing avarice; and the whole world was too
narrow for the boundaries of her ambition.

BUT the wealth of nations was insufficient to support the pomp and pageantry
of a profligate court, and the cravings of ministerial rapacity. Jealous of a
rising power, which he foreboded would soon set him at defiance, and adopting
the narrow policy of his traitorous counselors, the king of Britain attempted
to gratify the avarice of his favorites by oppressive extortions from his
colonies. The perfidious design was concealed with all the art of hypocrisy and
imposture. The powers of flattery and promises, of bribery JOSEPH REED, a
member of Congress was offered a bribe of L,10,000, and any office in the
colonies he might choose, by Gov. JOHNSTONE, to which he replied, "I am not
worth purchasing: but such as I am the King of Great Britain is not rich enough
to do it." To the glory of our revolution, there was but one solitary instance
of defection -- but one Arnold to disgrace our country.
and seduction, were in vain exhausted, to ensure its success. Our rulers were
too virtuous to barter their rights for gold; too wise to be duped by the
insidious professions of a treacherous cabinet; and too resolute to be
plundered by royal robbers. They reasoned, petitioned, remonstrated. It was not
the value of the demand, it was the right, which they contested. The commands
of ministers became at length open and peremptory. Unconditional submission, or
chastisement, was their insulting language. But America roused with just
indignation; her flinty brow sparkled at the strokes of oppression, and kindled
a holy flame of patriotism, which the engines of kings, and the slaves of
tyrants, could never extinguish.

EUROPE beheld with astonishment an infant nation, unskilled in the detestable
art of human slaughter, without the means of war or foreign aid, rise in
defiance to the power of Britain. The forces of a mighty empire were called
forth, to crush, and chain us. The fiery meteors of royal vengeance streamed
through our atmosphere; the clouds of war gathered blackness, the tempest of
battle burst over our heads -- But America stood firm and undaunted, like the
mighty Andes, whose towering tops rise in calm sublimity, mocking the fury of
the angry elements.

SAY, ye hoary freemen, who are yet alive, what enrapturing love of posterity,
what mighty fortitude, what divine enthusiasm, inspired your patriot souls, to
appeal to heaven for the justice of your cause; to challenge the world in arms;
and to swear with one voice, to die freemen rather than to live slaves.

WHERE shall I begin to relate a series of events, which to admiring nations
appeared like miracles! Shall I bring back to view "the times, which tried
mens' souls?" Shall I present you our neighboring capital, crowded with
hostile foes; her temples plundered, her altars polluted, and the peaceful
ceremonies of religion driven from this holy sanctuary? Shall I lead you to the
heights of Bunker, amid torrents of conflagration, the thunders of battle, and
the groans of the dying? Shall I set before you our devoted country, trembling
on the brink of annihilation? On the East, a victorious army and an all
powerful navy ravaged our sea coast. On the West, the savage cannibal forsook
his native haunts, to spread devastation and carnage. Terror and despair
assailed us in the South; famine and pestilence broke in from the North --
Inexorable Deity at length listened to the cries of expiring freedom. The God
of liberty proclaimed aloud what men can do, has been already done; I have
found a patriot worthy to rule a nation of freemen. A flood of glory burst from
heaven, and encircled WASHINGTON. At the boldness of his achievements the
ministers of Britain stood appalled, their monarch trembled on his throne, and
despotism himself, blinded by the blaze of his fame, threw down his chains.

THE crimson morn of liberty was often obscured with clouds of misfortune. The
object of our revolution was but half completed by the acquisition of
independence. Our bands of unity relaxed with our dangers. Mutual jealousy,
party discord, and an alarming spirit of licentiousness, those inseparable
evils of an excess of liberty* threatened to undermine the fair fabric of our
freedom. The old confederation was found inadequate to the ends of government,
and to regulate the new interests of commerce and foreign intercourse. Industry
was paralized under an intolerable load of taxes, trade was shackled with
exorbitant duties; our finances disordered, and public credit ruined. The
people felt the evils, and ignorant of the cause, became outrageous against
their rulers. Anarchy reared her hydra head; the high priests of faction blew
the trumpet of rebellion; and the vultures of civil war screamed for joy at the
prospect of carnage.

BUT the weeping genius of liberty fled for refuge to the groves of Vernon. The
father of his country, transported with parental love, flew to comfort, and
save his despairing children. His presence, like order moving over the face of
chaos, brought harmony out of confusion, confidence from despair. A new
constitution was formed from the collected wisdom of American sages. A
constitution, which unites the advantages of all former governments, without
their evils; a government as perfect, as the mind of its chief author, and
which, if maintained in its pure spirit, will be eternal as his glory.

EUROPE is doomed to perpetual discord and commotion. Diplomatic policy has
spread its crafty net over all her cabinets, and bound them in eternal enmity.
Impulse given to one, causes them all to vibrate. Reason, policy and humanity,
protested against our taking any part in the present unnatural war. A neutral
position was the dictate of prudence and wisdom. This enviable situation, by
the firmness of our government, and the discretion of our chief magistrates, we
have honorably maintained in defiance of foreign threats and domestic intrigue,
in spite of royal plunderers and republican robbers.

THE present is an alarming crisis. We have triumphed over foreign enemies, but
we have now, to contend with ourselves. We have to combat the powers of
intrigue, that pestilence, which walks in darkness; a spirit of
disorganization, begotten by envy, and propagated by calumny, hypocrisy and
atheism; which has applied the most captivating names to the worst of crimes. A
doctrine, in which all subordination is denominated oppression; all government
and law, despotism and tyranny. A new political philosophy, which renders its
disciples all equal -- equal in infamy, the scourges of mankind, the
antichrists of rational liberty.

DOES any one doubt the pernicious effects of this wonderful philosophy? Let
him turn his eyes to Europe, and behold her in all her terrors. There, she has
raised herself a power, which like Aaron's serpent devours all others. There,
by her influence deeds of horror have been committed, the bare relation of
which would blister the tongue of savage cruelty; which would curdle the blood
of cannibals! Thanks to the hero, who has arrested the monster in the midst of
her triumphs, and chained her down to military despotism. But the marks of her
ravages, like those of the deluge, will remain to latest posterity.

NEARLY all the evils, which convulse the world at the present day, have arisen
from mistaken ideas of the rights of man. Too feeble to defend himself against
surrounding dangers, and to gain subsistence alone, man enters the social
compact for convenienee and security. Yielding up his original independence, he
voluntarily lays himself under the restraints of order, in return for
protection and safety. Thus the embryo of society is begotten by government,
and nourished on the bosom of subordination and law. Thus the popular doctrine
of equality in a civilized state, founded on error, and propagated by
ignorance, is a solecism in politics. Civil liberty does not consist in
wandering at large over a barren wilderness; but in enjoying a cultivated
garden, secure from the invasion of all others. It is not marked by the
unbounded limits of passion and will; but confined by the gentle restraints of
doing whatever does not injure another. Hence, no society can exist without
government, no liberty without obedience to laws; and experience demonstrates
that "even the worst of governments is preferable to none at all."

CAN any true lover of his country reflect on the present situation of the
world, the unnatural war, which has spread havoc and destruction in every
quarter of the globe, the millions, which have fallen victims to its fury, the
nations which have been swept away in its progress, without gratitude for the
signal preservation of America? What nation on earth enjoys so high a degree of
freedom and happiness? What government secures to its subjects their rights and
liberties, like our own? Have we not a constitution of our own free choice;
administered by men of our own election? Are not our rulers bound by the most
solemn obligations of duty and conscience for the faithful discharge of their
trusts? Are they not under the highest responsibility? Can they pursue any
oppressive measure, which will not equally effect themselves? Will they not all
return at the expiration of their offices, and mingle with the mass of
citizens? Ought not our unexampled national prosperity, enjoyed under our
present administration, to inspire public confidence? Is it not the highest
demonstration of the uprightness of our present political system? Have we not
for our chief magistrate, a statesman, whose wisdom and fidelity command the
veneration of mankind; whose patriotism is testified by a life devoted to your
service; whose firm soul, to secure popular applause, never feared to execute
the stern commands of justice; but whose mercy repentant guilt never implored
in vain? -- Reflect (...) these truths, ye foreign exiles, ye fugitive
imp^^^^res, who criminate every public measure from a pretense of republican
jealousy; who view government and rulers through the distorting medium of your
own prejudices; reflect, and tremble for your presumption. Contemptible
miscreants! Suspicion and calumny are the deadly weapons, which you wield with
nerves of malice. Do rulers faithfully discharge their trust, they expect your
abuse. But the rays of your vengeance, darted upon them, serve only to
brighten, but cannot consume their merit.

AMERICANS,

WHEN we contemplate the vast extent of our country, the local advantages for
commerce and agriculture, our national enterprise, the rapid increase of
population and opulence, and the mighty empire to which we may possibly arrive,
the mind, expanded with the vast idea, ought to feel a generosity of sentiment,
superior to private prejudice, or party rancour, and to act worthy of the
important occasion. Our national existence is inseparably interwoven with our
constitution When this falls, it will bury our country in its ruins. The eyes
of mankind are upon us. We are destined to demonstrate by experiment the grand
political problem, whether pure Republicanism is a blessing, made for man.
Europe has rejected her; the eastern continent is unworthy of her; America is
her last, her only asylum. Should we cast her off, she would bid adieu to an
ungrateful world, and return again to heaven. Our laws, our government, our
religion, all demand our utmost exertion. The voice of posterity, the cries of
unborn millions call upon us, to unite for the public good. Our country is
threatened not from foreign invasion, but by domestic dissension. By inflaming
party discord we precipitate her downfall. In vain we supported an age of
toils; in vain we fought, and bled in the defense of freedom, if it is unworthy
of preservation. Oh liberty -- heavenly fugitive! dear to thy votaries only
during the toils, the pangs, the agonies of thy birth. But when secured in
peace, forsaken, persecuted, destroyed. Fatal inconsistency! Infatuated
Americans! Once the glory and admiration of the world; but soon to become the
sport of anarchy, a prey to civil dissension. Once the scourge and terror of
despots, but soon to fall the victims of yourselves. -- Ye grass-grown
monuments of our revolution! Ye dear heights, who inherse within your bosoms
the precious dust of WARREN and his brave warriors, shall forever witness our
disgrace! The indignant heroes, who fell in the cause of liberty, shall spring
from their tombs, to brand their degenerated posterity with curses of infamy.
From the high realms of bliss the fainted spirit of our departed father frowns
with anger on his deluded children. The echo of each foot-step is the voice of
his admonition; he sighs with every breeze, with every dew-drop he sheds an
immortal tear.

BUT let us not too deeply shade the picture of future evils, nor overcharge
the gloomy prospect of our dangers. Repentance of our political errors may
delay them; reformation will prevent them. A cheerful support of our present
administration will preserve the tottering fabric of our liberty; national
unanimity will render it immortal.

COLUMBIAN fair! generous disposers of our happiness, and amiable protectors of
our felicity. To you it belongs to rule the milder empire of virtue. Long
continue, as at present, the watchful guardians of our morals; and by the
persuasive mildness of your conversation, and the sovereign influence of your
example, soothe party discord to friendship and unity. Remember, no heart can
resist the voice of patriotism, when urged by the lips of beauty and innocence.

AMERICANS, the close of the eighteenth century will be commemorative of the
most distressful events. Our orphan state had not unveiled her mournful face
for the loss of her patriot SUMNER, before she was summoned with all America to
that agonizing event, which made "a nation fatherless, a world in tears." Ah!
how different is this from our former anniversaries. The shouts, which always
spoke a nation's joy, are now drowned by a nation's sighs. Afflicted
countrymen! check not your tears. To weep for WASHINGTON is filial gratitude;
to grieve is manly virtue. Wonderful man! heroic warrior, immortal legislator,
father of America, parent of the patriots of all nations, benefactor of
mankind! the praises of the whole congregated world would be too small for thy
virtues. Thy memory shall be cherished by all ages, thy same shall expand with
creation, thy veneration shall increase with time, thy glory shall be
commensurate with eternity.

YE sainted patriots, who bore the toils of freedom; ye who gloriously fell in
the field of battle, and ye, who expired in the arms of a weeping country,
while ye celebrate this anniversary with new transports in the blissful courts
of heaven for the presence of your illustrious chief, oh bow your immortal
heads, to accept the blessings of your graceful country. Assembled before the
altar of our independence, we all swear to defend those rights purchased by
your toils; to obey the last precepts of our great political father; and to
unite with zeal in the cause of God and our country.

IMAGINATION withdraws the curtain from futurity, and unfolds to our
enrapturing view that joyful era, when the rising sun of glory shall arrive to
its meridian splendour in this western hemisphere; when the empire of America
shall be unbounded, as her happiness; when the deep rooted thrones of despotism
shall crumble into ruin; when thy temple, O Liberty, shall be the whole concave
of heaven; thy altar the hearts of all mankind; when a new world shall emerge
from the chaos of the old, and a new WASHINGTON, to render it happy.


