New Work. GEORGE BARNWELL. A NEW NOVEL. BY T. S. SURR, Author of Consequences,
a Novel; and Christ's Hospital, a Poem.

But is amusement all? -- Studious of song,
And yet ambitious not to sing in vain,
I would not trifle merely, though the world
Be loudest in their praise, who do no more.
COWPER. TWO VOLUMES IN ONE.

BOSTON: PRINTED FOR JOSEPH BUMSTEAD. SOLD BY HIM AT No. 20, UNION-STREET; BY
THOMAS AND ANDREWS, NEWBURY-STREET; BY E. LARKIN, WM. P and L BLAKE, CORNHILL;
AND J. NANCREDE, MARLBRO' STREET. 1800.

ADVERTISEMENT.
CUSTOM has long established the right of dramatists to a property in the plots
and characters of novelists; and recent instances might be adduced of novels
and romances* which were scarcely suffered to be read, ere they were converted
into dramas.

The equal right of the novelist to similar^ trespasses upon dramatic ground
cannot be contested: whether the exercise of that right, in the present
instance, will be as favorably received by the public, their voice can alone
determine.

As there may be those, however, who acceding the question of right, yet marvel
at the author's taste in the selection or so hacknied a subject, he begs leave
to state the motive of his choice.

Having been so fortunate, as to be present at Mrs. Siddons's performance of
Milwood, he was so agreeably surprised by the novel, yet just coloring, which
that lady's incomparable talents gave to a character, till then deemed
insignificant, that he determined, perhaps rashly, upon the present
undertaking.

Such readers, as have seen Milwood personated in the usual manner only, will
conclude, that the copy attempted in the following sheets, differs too much
from the vulgar openness of character they have been accustomed to associate
with the original. Such as have seen Mrs. Siddons's performance, will, he
humbly conceives, form a contrary opinion: and he rests perfectly at ease as to
the decision of the best judges respecting the preference he has yielded to her
delineation of Milwood, whose most extraordinary powers are only equalled by
the just discrimination, which directs their display.

The author has deviated in several instances from the story he has adopted;
has introduced some new characters, and changed the features of others; yet as
the chief incidents are preserved, he thought it more candid to retain the
original title, than to invent a new one.

Of his own production, he would only observe, that he believes the design is
novel, and respectfully submits it to the world, merely as the exercise of a
mind somewhat contemplative, in those evening hours of leisure, which the
duties of a humble destination in life occasionally afford him; and by no means
as the effort of a competitor for literary fame.

LONDON, September, 1798.
PREFATORY DIALOGUE.
FRIEND. STOP, stop the press, my friend: with themes like these,
So stale, so dull, how vain the hope to please!

AUTHOR. So stale, Erasmus! -- Need you then be told,
That it is the ton to dote on what is old?
Do you not hear each fashionable fair
Warbling old ditties to some modern air,
By Doctor Arnold, and Composer Hook,
Gleaned from that ancient store, the nurs'ry book;
Which tells of that renowned grenadier,
Who comes to say -- "he wants a pot of beer;"
Of that old man, "who could not say his prayers,
"By left leg taken, and thrown down the stairs?
Have we not op'ras, too, of Robin Hood,
Of Blue Beard, and the Children in the Wood?
When favorite dramatists such paths explore,
And deign to delve in legendary lore;
Say, why pronounce my humble effort vain,
From the same source the same success to gain?

FRIEND. O, monstrous vanity! For shame, for shame!
Stainer of paper, with thy humble name,
Dare thou comparison with bards presume,
Whose brows are decked by fashion's glittering plume?
Learn the distinction which the world has placed
'Twixt you, and bards with public favor graced.
Once seated on Celebrity's high throne,
An Author views the subject town his own;
All fashion's vot'ries own his sovereign sway,
His voice all follow, all his nod obey.
But when a luckless wight, like you, my friend,
Whose name no paragraphic puffs defend,
By some new art to please the town essays,
With cold neglect the town his toil repays.
Thus had some Novelist, whose happy fate
Has made his name familiarly great,
Whose heroes and whose heroines must be known
By such as sport the manners of the town;
Had such a Novelist pursued your thought,
And from an old play some new novel wrought,
'Twere well: -- but unfledged Authorlings like you,
Must lowly aims through beaten paths pursue.

AUTHOR. Too late, Erasmus, are thy croaking strains
To save the maiden sheets from printer's stains:
It Is done: -- nor shall the terrors, you descry,
Affright my bantling from the public eye.
What! after all I felt when I conceived,
What! when with anxious throes my brain's relieved,
Strangle my offspring at it is very birth! --
Not for a Fielding's fame, or Pult'ney's worth.

FRIEND. Ah! then prepare for all those ills that wait
On Folly's children, who are wife too late!
Prepare, at Hookham's to endure the sneers
Each Beauty lisps, when "Barnwell" strikes her ears.
" Barnwell!" cries Emma, "pshaw, the name's enough
" To fright all fashion from such hum drum stuff!
" Stolen, I imagine, from that vulgar play,
" That forms the pastime of my Lord Mayer^ Day.
" How monstrous low-bred must the creature be,
" Who writes such trash -- don't offer it to me!
" Give me some novel of a different ki^d,
" Where castles, ghosts, and demons are combined,
" To rouse one from the stupor of the spleen,
" With sights that never have, nor can be seen."
Prepare thy back for the indignant strokes
Of snarling critics, or their serious jokes.
Whilst vexed librarians curse the silly head
Which breeds such books as must remain unread;
And wail their folly, poor defrauded rogues,
That placed "George Barnwell" in their catalogues:
A work so well adapted to themselves,
It never will circulate beyond their shelves.
Nor this the whole -- soon as that month draws near,
Famous for settling bills, and Christm^s cheer --
When careful tradesmen sum up their accounts,
Eager to learn to what their gain amounts,
And stationers and printers make their bow
To the Grandees of Paternoster Row.
Then tremble for thy BARNWELL'S shameful doom!
See Symonds spurn him from his lumber room!
Blushes, nor tears, nor promises avail! --
Behold him -- lot the last -- at some trade sale;
Where booksellers, by smell of ven'son drawn,
Booze over a catalogue of books in pawn;
By thrifty publishers, self-saving sent
To fetch the price of their advertisement!
But here, even here, unlucky stars pursue,
The wags sit sober, and -- "that price will not do."
Now, mark the end of all thy hopes and fears!
Behold, "George Barnwell" now the paste brush smears!
Behold, "George Barnwell" line some musty trunk;
And book and author in oblivion sunk!

AUTHOR. Thus to condemn, when it is too late to mend,
Reminds me of the d -- d good natured friend
Of Sheridan, and leads me to conclude,
That Truth, poor honest Truth, is sometimes rude.
Yet be it so -- not mine the daring aim,
To climb the step and slippery paths of fame;
The ardour of that bold pursuit be theirs,
Whom fortune frees from many meaner cares,
The Rogerses and Walpoles of the day,
Whose works, correctly elegant, display
The ease of affluence, so rarely joined
To learning's treasures, or a musing mind.
If, in the scenes I draw, it should be said,
No towering flights of fancy are displayed,
No magic power of genius there appears,
Now moving mirth, and now enforcing tears,
One secret voice, at least, shall sooth my heart;
(Nor will I tremble at the Critic's dart;)
Conscience shall sweetly whisper this applause --
"Thou have not injured Virtue's sacred cause."

BARNWELL.
CHAP. I.
As into air the purer spirits ^low,
And separate from their kindred dregs below;
So flew the soul to it is congenial place.
POPE
THE eye that has witnessed the peaceful departure of a just man's spirit in
the presence of affectionate relatives, and revering friends, has beheld a
spectacle solemnly delightful, and awfully interesting, beyond all power of
description. -- On such occasions the heart trusts not to the tongue's feeble
utterance, but rushing to the countenance, there delineates its emotion in a
language without words. Such was the scene at the rectory of Hanworth: its
worthy incumbent had heard with resignation, the opinion of his physician, that
no human means could save him. Mortification had advanced almost to it is last
stage. Yet, though he felt no pangs of guilt, no dread of future worlds, though
perfectly resigned to die, there were attractions, whose resistless* force
still held his wishes for a longer life -- Around that couch, from which he
never was to rise, knelt objects that had awakened in his breast, the finest
feelings of an husband, father, friend.

The amiable woman, who at an early age had given him her hand, and with it the
worthiest of hearts, too deeply afflicted to weep, gazed alternately on her
expiring husband, and on those, who were so soon to be the orphan pledges of
his love, with the soul-piercing wildness of despair.

Their son, a youth of sixteen, held his father's hand clasped firmly betwixt
both his own, and bent his face over it to conceal his tears.

A daughter, somewhat younger, with tears and swelling sighs mingled
ejaculations to the Deity to spare a life so dear.

Leaning his head against the feet-posts of the bed stood Dr. Hill, the
benevolent friend and skilful physician of the rector, whose serene countenance
he appeared contemplating with pleasure.

"I could have wished he had arrived -- I should have retired from the scenes
of this life with less regret, had I committed these my only cares to his kind
keeping" faintly uttered Mr. Barnwell. "But his own good heart," continued he,
"will suggest to him all I could have said."

It was his brother to whom he alluded, who entered the room as he was
speaking. His appearance changed the scene. -- Mrs. Barnwell, Eliza, and
George, clung round his knees, and seemed to hail him as the messenger of joy:
but it was a momentary joy. Sir James had been anxiously expected, and his
arrival as it ended that anxiety, occasioned a momentary impulse of pleasure.
But no sooner did the melancholy cause of his visit recur, than silence and
sorrow ensued.

Sir James, after a pause, approached his dying brother, and an affecting
farewell took place. Tears rolled down the pallid cheek of the worthy rector,
as he pressed his brother's hand, and cast a meaning look upon his family. He
sunk exhausted on his pillow.

"Think of this world no more, my brother," said Sir James: "from this moment
this is my wife -- these are my children -- and all I have is their's!"

"My God! I thank thee," exclaimed the Rector and expired.

CHAP. II.
These thoughts, my father, every spot endear,
And whilst I think, with self-accusing pain*
A stranger shall possess the loved domain.
In each low wind I seem thy voice to hear!
Yet, oh! poor cottage -- and thou sylvan shade --
Remember, ere (...) left your coverts green,
Where in my youth I mused -- in childhood played,
I ga^'d I paused, I dropped a tear unseen,
(That bitter from the fount of memory fell)
Thinking on him who reared you -- now farewell!
BOWLS.
WHEN the first effusion of ^orrow for the loss of friends is exhausted, and
grief begins to listen to the voice of reason, there are certain arguments
which custom, almost invariably* applies on such occasions; such (...) that --
"we must all die," -- that "our loss is the gain" -- that "sorrow is useless,
and tears cannot restore them to us."

Sometimes it happens that Prudence steps kindly in with some such counsel as
this -- "that though a husband, or a father, is gone, it is a comfortable
consideration that his widow or his children enjoy the fruits of his industry
and economy; and that, instead of grieving for a calamity that is past, it
were better to rejoice in the blessings that remain."

Such are the reflections that sooth the breasts of many an heir, and many a
widow, beneath the sable show of sorrow; who often times by their cheerful
countenance, wisely endeavor to dissipate the gloom occasioned by the
escutcheon that darkens the window of their ball room, and the black equipage
that conveys them to the opera -- Thus bear about the mockery of woe
To midnight dances and the public show.


The family of the Barnwells, inheriting from the rector little else than his
good name, were in no danger of insulting his memory by a joyful display of his
wealth; nor would their grief have been lessened by the possession of
thousands. Every branch of this bereaved family was sensible of the loss it had
sustained, and felt, when the violence of grief was abated, a regret more calm
indeed, but not less sorrowful.

Sir James was, perhaps, the individual among them who, possessing the least
sensibility, was the least affected: not that the knight was deficient in those
feelings which are the honorable appendages of humanity, but he was older than
Mrs. Barnwell by at least ten years, and had spent the greater part of his life
in a counting house, and on the Royal Exchange; which, though certainly the
schools where industry may learn an honorable way to its rewards, cannot be
deemed the most favorable soil for the growth of those sensibilities which,
though not virtues themselves, are at least Virtue's faithful allies.

Sir James was the first, therefore, to call the attention of his sister-in-law
from the tomb which held her affections, to those duties which she owed to
society, to her children, to herself.

"I am a lone man," said the knight, "and, by the blessing of heaven upon
honest endeavors, have accumulated more than I shall ever spend. My brother, I
know, accumulated in another way -- his stock was the treasure of the mind -- a
proper possession, doubtless, for a clergyman, but for which his heirs are
little or nothing the better.

"After the loss you have sustained, my sister," continued the night, "I am
sure your inclination is to quit this place as soon as possible. I insist on a
visit to my old mansion, where we may leisurely discuss the plan I have in
contemplation to make us all happy."

A proposal so perfectly congenial to her wishes was readily accepted by Mrs.
Barnwell, and a day was named for their departure; but whilst herself and Eliza
impatiently desired that day's arrival, George deprecated its approach. To quit
for ever his native home -- cost his young heart -- which was the shrine of
sensibility -- some struggles. Among the various objects that called reflection
to its pleasing painful task, there stood in the center of the garden a small
temple, built in the Gothic style, and dedicated to retirement. This was
constructed under the direction of George himself, and was the favorite
retreat of the rector. To this place young Barnwell would frequently retire,
where memory would rehearse to him those lessons, to which he had often
listened with reverent attention -- and, aided by fancy, would place his
father's countenance and form before him. -- As he strolled round the grounds,
in one place a plant, in another some little monument with classical quotation,
would remind him of the pleasing-employment of his past hours.

"Days of happiness! -- hours of hope! -- farewell!" exclaimed the youth: "and
you, sweet home, where first the light of heaven beamed upon these eyes --
farewell! Oh, you have cheated me, false Hope! How often has my sainted father,
too, added false prophecies to my delusive tales! How often has he said, 'When
I am gone, my George, this plant shall speak to you of me -- this tablet shall
remind my son -- that he must also die!' and now, alas! some stranger's eye
shall gaze indifferent upon these plants -- some fool, perhaps, shall scoff at
Wisdom's lesson -- whilst those for whom they were designed, like the wanderers
from Paradise, are even to explore an unknown world!"

Such really were the reflections of a youth of sixteen, incredible as they may
appear to those who judge of human nature, and it is faculties, by the same
calculations as a surveyor values timber, its size and growth. Such persons
would deny the existence of Chatterton.

CHAP. III.
"Witness the sprightly joy, when aught unknown
"Strikes the weak sense, and wakes each active power
"To brisker measures: witness the neglect
"Of all familiar prospects, though behe^d
"With transport once -- he fond, attentive ga^e
"Of young astonishment -- (...)
"Of age -- commenting on prodigious things!"
AKENSIDE.
ADJOINING the seat of Sir James stood the remains of one of those cemeteries
for the living, called monasteries. -- These mouldering and moss-covered relics
afforded a more grand ^coup a'ce^l, from his park, than can be imagined by
those whose contemplations have been confined to the modern ruins, with which
it is fashionable to decorate the grounds of modern villas.

One of the aisles of the chapel still remained in its original state, and
afforded conversation matter for all the lovers of romance in the country,
Specter of all sizes and shapes, of either sex, had been seen, by moonlight or
torchlight, at different times, playing most singular antics in the old abbey
chapel. At one time it was a nun, at another a monk; and now assumed the
terrific appearance of the fallen angel; and now danced along the aisle, in
form most beauteous, to notes of most musical air.

Among other subjects which-engrossed the attention of the company at the
knight's table, a few days after his return from the rectory, the haunted aisle
became a topic of conversation.

"Well, I don't know," said Sir James; "such things may be -- spirits may walk.
For my own part, I would neither obstinately deny all belief in stories of this
kind, nor would I implicitly believe all I hear. What thinks my nephew George;
he smiles as if he would convey a sort of contempt for things of this nature."

George blushed deeply. He had not been accustomed to speak in so large, and
respectable a company as the knight's hospitality had assembled, and felt
considerable embarrassment in so new a situation. He recovered himself, and,
with some hesitation, said, "I confess, Sir, I have been taught to consider
stories of this description as ridiculous."

"Ridiculous!" exclaimed Mr. Sandall the chaplain -- "ridiculous! young
gentleman; and wherefore, let me ask, ridiculous?"

"Because, being irreconcilable to truth and nature, they are beneath the
dignity of serious argument."

"It must be confessed, Mr. Sandall," said the knight, "that these appearances
are supernatural."

"Allow me, to remark, Sir James," obsequiously said Mr. Sandall, "that is no
proof of their nonexistence; besides, with all deference, I would ask how we,
whose ideas are so finite, can pretend to limit the operations of the Author of
nature."

And then raising his voice triumphantly, and fixing his small sharp eyes on
Barnwell -- "I believe, young gentleman," interrupted he, "if you had seen the
appearances these eyes have witnessed, at the abbey, your courage would have
fled with your incredulity."

George only bowed.

A Miss Lucas, a neighboring maiden lady of fortune, could not suffer so
charming a subject as ghosts to be dropped so easily.

"Surely, Sir," said this lady to Barnwell, "you cannot presume to put your
opinion in competition with such high authorities as Drelincourt on Death, and
Dr. Johnson. You will allow, I hope, there are ghosts, though it may not have
been your privilege to have seen them."

"Without incurring the charge of vanity, I apprehend," said Barnwell, "that I
may hold an opinion even against the greatest authorities: for you will allow,
that judgment should yield to argument, not names. I have never beheld a
spectre myself, and I am inclined to attribute the narratives of those, who say
they have, to the influence of a weak or a warm imagination acted upon by
accidental circumstances."

"It Is rather singular, then," said Mr. Sandall, "that the greater part of
mankind should have remained so long in error: for I conceive a majority
believe in apparitions."

"There cannot be a doubt of that, Mr. Sandall," said Miss Lucas. "This is
termed an enlightened age; and pray, does not the popular opinion sanction,
almost exclusively, a novel, a romance, or a drama, where the prominent
character is a ghost, or a demon?"

"And yet," replied Barnwell, "I cannot bring myself to consider even this
universal patronage as the consequence of a general belief in specter; unless
it could be first proved, that the mass of mankind are most delighted with
known truths: whereas I consider the chief source of the pleasure in reading or
seeing such unnatural productions, is, their remote distance from probability;
which, creating a monstrous novelty, excites the attention of those, whose sole
aim is amusement."

"Pray, Sir," said Miss Lucas, "have you among other things been taught a
knowledge of the holy ^criptures?"

"My father, Madam, was a clergyman," said George, with a degree of warmth;
"and I was intended for the same holy office;" added he, with an emphatic sigh.

"Then, pray," said Miss Lucas, without feeling the rebuke, "do you believe the
story of the Witch of Endor?"

"Pardon me," interrupted Sir James; "but it is a custom I have established at
my own table, these thirty years, never to permit the discussion of religious
or political subjects over the bottle. I beg leave, therefore, to propose a
walk."

CHAP. IV.
The passions affect the mind with greater strength when we are asleep than
when we are awake -- Joy and sorrow give us more vigorous sensations of pain or
pleasure at this time than any other. ADDISON.
WHY is curiosity most easily raised, or why most unquietly does it rest, in
the female breast?

Eliza, whose modesty did not permit her to trouble the company with her
observations, yet treasured in her memory all that had been said concerning the
abbey.

When she retired to her chamber, the windows of which commanded a view of the
ruins, she questioned the servant who attended her concerning the story of the
haunted aisle. The incongruous narrative of Hannah served only to increase her
curiosity, and she determined to pay a visit to the abbey the following morning
before breakfast.

Sleep did not conquer the senses of Eliza, that evening, with its usual ease.
She had extinguished her candle, had whispered a prayer from the heart, and
sought repose. A slight slumber brought with it the following dream --

"She had reached the abbey ruins, and was just entering the haunted aisle,
when a tomb which stood at the entrance seemed to rock at her approach. Whilst
hesitating whether to retire or advance, the tomb became enveloped in an
ascending vapor. In a moment the abbey ruins echoed the groans of one in the
agonies of death; and as the vapor dispersed, there appeared kneeling on the
tomb a most beautiful female, naked to the waist. Her eyes were swollen with
weeping, her hair was dishevelled, and from her wounded breast blood trickled,
whilst her hands in vain attempted to remove a dagger, whose fatal point was
buried in her bosom. Eliza's attention to the spectre was so intense, that she
did not notice the form of a man who stood contemplating with smiles the
agonies of the female, until the sound of a harp, which he touched in a rapid
manner, aroused her. His figure was handsome, his complexion a dark brown, and
jet-black hair curled in ringlets on his forehead: his voice, which accompanied
the harp, was melodious. Listening to his lively strain, Eliza was smote with
horror and astonishment at the following rhapsody. --

Flow softly -- gently -- vital stream;
Ye crimson life-drops stay;
Indulge me with this pleasing dream
Through an eternal day.
See -- see -- my soul, her agony!
See how her eye balls glare!
Those shrieks, delightful harmony,
Proclaim her deep despair!
Rise -- rise -- infernal spirits rise,
Swift dart across her brain:
Thou, Horror, with blood-chilling cries,
Lead on thy hideous train.
O, feast my soul -- revenge is sweet:
Louisa, take my scorn; --
Cursed was the hour that saw us meet,
The hour when we were born!
Scarcely was the last stanza sung, when the trembling Eliza awoke from her
dream; doubting for a considerable time, whether what she had seen or heard was
not reality. Just as she had overcome the impressions arising from so horrible
a vision, the night wind wafted by the casement of her chamber the tone of an
instrument so similar to those she had heard in fancy, that, starting up in her
bed, she drew aside the curtain, under an apprehension of beholding, awake, the
vision of her sleep.

The chamber was in total darkness; but the same sounds were repeated; and
hearing them now more distinctly, her heart sunk with terror at the certainty.
She determined to quit her bed, and feeling her way to the window, opened it.
The same sounds were heard again, yet more distinctly, and she was convinced
they came from the abbey ruins. She bent her eyes toward the spot whence they
issued: in a few moments all was silence, and she beheld a lighted torch borne
along the ruins, but the night was too dark to (...) the person that carried it.

Returning to her bed, terrified and astonished, she began to reason with her
fears. That the music was not imaginary she was convinced; and that its
influence, added to the impression of Hannah's incoherent narrative, which bore
a resemblance to her dream, had occasioned the vision, she no longer doubted:
yet not less strange appeared the reality than the vision. For what purpose any
one could ramble among the mouldering tombs of the abbey, she had yet to learn.
Fear, at length, gradually retired from her breast; but its most constant
companion Curiosity remained.

CHAP. V.
Nature well known, no prodigies remain:
Comets are regular, and Wharton plain.
POPE
"THERE is a very singular coincidence of your dream with the music you really
heard," said George to his sister, who had unburdened her mind to him,
according to her usual practice. "Do you remember enough of the place you
supposed was the abbey, to compare what you saw in your dream with the ruins
themselves?"

"Beyond a doubt," said Eliza.

"We will take a ramble there in the evening," replied George; "and should
there be a tomb in the old aisle resembling that in your dream, I think we
should relate the whole to Sir James. Murder," added he, "is a crime, above all
others, offensive to the Deity; and if ever the omnipotent, displays a miracle,
I can conceive nothing more likely to occasion his supernatural interference
than detection of so foul a crime."

They separated. At dinner they joined a numerous circle of the neighboring
gentry. It was the custom of Sir James, once a year, to invite them all without
exception. At other times he indulged his pleasure in a selection. On this
occasion he relinquished his prejudices, and though himself a whig of the old
school, and a high churchman, there were at his table individuals of as
various a cast, as a circuit of ten miles round contained.

Among these visitors, there was one most opposite to the worthy knight in his
principles and his manners, and whose residence was contiguous to Sir James's.

By the opposite to a whig, used to be formerly understood a tory; and by the
opposite to high-church, low-church was suggested. Now Mr. Mental was neither
whig nor tory, nor a high, nor low churchman; yet were his principles more at
variance with Sir James than a Jacobite presbyter's: the latter only diffe^ed
with the knight as to the person of a king and the modes of religion. Mr.
Mental was supposed to be equally averse to all kings, and to all religion.

As his figure and dress were the most singular imaginable, they rendered him
conspicuous in all companies. He was of a large make, but thin; his face pale;
his hair, a coal black, cropped short in the neck; his dress, always the same,
a suit of plain brown cloth. He would eat nothing that had ever enjoyed life;
nothing in which sugar was an ingredient; and his drink was water. He never
smiled; and the only pleasure he ever appeared to ^njoy, was the triumph of
argument. To obtain this this pleasure, he ^ould constantly controvert the most
allowed truths; delighted in attacking revelation, and was indefatigable in
discovering the scruples of his hearers on religious points

The irremediable evils of society were his dearest topics, and the climax of
his felicity was, by the abuse of the eloquence he possessed, to render
discontent triumphant.

He had resided in the neighborhood many years, but saw no company at his own
house, and very rarely accepted an invitation to any other: whenever he did, it
was his invariable custom to single out one from the younger part of a company,
with whom he would abruptly begin a conversation.

George and a young baronet, of one and twenty, were engaged in some trifling
discourse, when Mr. Mental tapped the latter on the shoulder, and asked him if
he had read a celebrated novel, much talked of.

"I never read novels" said the baronet.

"Why not?" asked Mr. Mental.

"It is throwing away one's time, to say the best," replied the baronet. "I
make a point never to read any thing of that sort. I never read a novel in my
life, and I never will: they are well enough for girls."

"Prejudice -- Prejudice -- Prejudice -- how art thou worshipped in this isle!"
exclaimed Mr. Mental. "I suppose, then, you (...) a pretty good depth in
literature of a more (...) or erudite nature," continued he. "Have you looked
into the Political Justice?"

"I make a point never to read works of that description; I understand its
object is to turn every thing topsy-turvy; and I feel no sort of inclination to
be made giddy. I leave this sort of thing to your revolutionists."

"Prejudice again," cried Mental. -- "Perhaps then, you dive into the mines of
science. You read -- "

"Oh, no, believe me, not I. I was obliged to do something in that way at
Pembroke. But I Have done with lectures completely; and, to own the truth, the
only science I care about now, is, to make an estate of ten thousand a year
bring me happiness in the way I like it."

"I crave your pardon then," said Mr. Mental. "Had I known you were in the
possession of ten thousand a year, I should by no means have suspected you
guilty of possessing a mind."

"Is there no prejudice in that observation, Sir?" said Barnwell, with a smile
of modest diffidence.

Mr. Mental, instead of answering, fixed a pair of large black eyes on George;
and, folding his arms upon his breast, examined every feature of his
countenance. After a considerable pause --

"You, I believe, do not possess ten thousand a year," cried he; "but if I am
not much, indeed, deceived, you have materials of which a skilful artist might
form a great mind. Allow me to ask you -- have you a father?"

George gave an expressive look.

"He has left you -- Did I know him -- was he of these parts?"

George satisfied his curiosity.

"Unfortunate! -- unfortunate, indeed! continued Mental, "that such materials
should have fallen into such hands. You of course endeavor to compel your
reason to adopt all those doctrines which priestcraf^ ^^aches."

"Sir," replied Barnwell, with the glow of indignation on his cheeks, "the
honored person to whom, without knowing him, you apply a commonplace epithet,
never strove to inspire a sentiment in the breast of his children, to which the
most enlightened reason could object."

"You rejoice me," cried Mental -- "You have not then imbibed the jargon of
superstition, called religion." Some readers may deem it an impertinent
interruption, if not an impeachment of their understandings, to be reminded
"that the sentiments which are put into the mouths of various personages in a
novel, are for the illustration of their various characters, and ought never to
be viewed in any other light." But the author would rather incur the blame of
an unnecessary interruption, than suffer the possibility of a supposition that
it was his wish to disseminate principles, which it is his aim to destroy.


"Superstition and religion in your dictionary then, are synonymous terms,"
cried Barnwell.

"In the dictionary of truth they are so," replied Mental. "What is religion --
but ceremony, or a set of ceremonies: -- what are ceremonies, but superstition!
For instance; how absurd, how degrading to a human being, with faculties so
comprehensive that all nature bows before him, to which she unfolds her secrets
and submits her laws -- I say then it must be beneath the dignity of such a
creature to bend his knees, to bow his head, and mumble syllables of
absurdities strung together centuries ago, when, by the exercise of his own
powers, he might be introduced into the arcana of great Nature herself."

George replied -- "The dignity of human nature, Sir, is no new subject to me.
My father taught it me truly, and exemplified his doctrines by his conduct. He
taught me, Sir, that the dignity of our nature cannot be degraded by a public
acknowledgement of our obligations to the Author of nature, according to the
customs and manners of our country; and that it is better to sanction, by
example, even prejudices, which cannot be momentarily and safely removed, than
by ridiculing those institutions, which the mass of our fellow citizens hold
sacred, to give the reins to uncultivated nature."

"There is a vein of independence in your reasoning I admire extremely, however
much we may deviate in our conclusions," said Mental.

This introduction led to a long conversation, in which each seemed to take an
interest. Mental appeared less and less disgusting in the eyes of George, and
George delighted old Mental, who expressed a wish that this would not be the
last of their conversations. --

"You are an inmate of Sir James's, I presume," said he.

"For the present," said Barnwell; -- "but in a week or two I shall quit this
place for London."

"For London!" cried Mental. "What takes you to that focus of corruption and
folly?"

"My uncle has most generously entered into a treaty with a merchant there,
(...) share of whose concern is to become mine, after the usual initiation."

"A merchant!" exclaimed Mental. -- "Can you confine your capacities then to
the boundaries of a counting house ledger -- and condemn your noble faculties
to calculations of courses of exchange? Have you thought what you are about?"

"I believe I have thought too much about it," replied George. "To speak
heartily, I have been at no small pains to make a match betwixt duty and
inclination; but the latter receives the addresses of the former, even yet, but
coolly."

Mr. "Barnwell," said Mental earnestly, "as you value your happiness for life,
reflect -- now is that important moment, in the period of your existence, that
will gild with pleasure, or darken with discontent, every scene as yet behind
the veil of time. I feel a lively interest in your welfare; and if you can
trust yourself with me for an hour, tomorrow, I will venture to say you will
not regret it."

CHAP. VI.
And when they talk of him, they shake their heads,
And whisper one another in the ear.
SHAKESPEARE.
A SUMMER day drew toward its close -- carriage after carriage had rolled away
the well-pleased guests of the worthy knight; and silence once more reigned in
the temple of hospitality.

While Eliza, with a palpitating heart, accompanied her brother to the haunted
aisle, the impressions of terror revived in her breast as* they entered the
avenue from the park, which led directly to the ruins. -- They were at the
entrance of the aisle -- Eliza trembled --

"Stay," said George; "it is dark, and we are far from the house. A thought
strikes me -- I have little dread of ghosts -- but it is not impossible that
this retreat may be the rendezvous of beings less merciful, and more powerful,
than mere specter. Were we to be attacked, our loudest cries would reach no
friendly ear. -- Do you wait a moment behind this old column, and listen
attentively. I will go on. Should there be danger, you will hear my cries (they
shall be loud enough) and immediately run as fast as possible toward the house
-- it is a straight road, and you cannot miss it."

When George had resolved on any purpose, he always adhered to it. Remonstrance
on the score of his personal danger was in vain, and the anxious Eliza clung
round the pillar in trembling expectation. A few minutes elasped -- Eliza grew
impatient. A few minutes more passed away -- no noise was heard -- no brother
returned. The whole space of time was less than ten minutes -- but how much
long it appeared in the reckoning of suspense, is easily conceived.

At length she heard a distant sound of footsteps; -- it approached nearer --
she left her retreat, thinking to meet her brother; when a form, muffled in a
long black cloak, and masked, met her at the entrance of the aisle. She
screamed -- In an instant George was at her elbow; but the cause of her alarm
was vanished.

"Surely I cannot be deceived?" said George. "'It Was certainly a man -- I saw
him most distinctly. A black cloak and a mask were lying on the very tomb you
have described. As I approached it, a man, who was kneeling near it, started
up, hurried on the cloak and mask, and, presented a pistol, spoke these
remarkable words -- 'I am discovered!' Ere I had recovered from my surprise he
vanished."

"For heaven's sake, my dear brother, let us quit this situation: it may be the
abode of murderers," said Eliza.

They walked swiftly toward the house -- "There are so many singular
circumstances combined in this adventure," said George, "that I am determined
to relate the whole affair to Sir James."

It was late when they reached home; the family were assembled at supper, and
the looks of Eliza answered the purpose of a preface to George's narrative.

"Now, young gentleman," said Mr. Sandall, triumphantly, "I suppose you concede
a little of your skepticism against apparitions.

"Not a scruple," said George.

"What! will you allow nothing supernatural in the dream of Miss Barnwell --
nothing supernatural in the description she gives of the tomb she never beheld?"

"True" said George, "she never beheld this tomb; but Hannah has seen it, and
in describing it to my sister, so impressed the image on her mind, that it
(...) impossible to doubt the origin of her dream."

"Did Hannah, too, impress her mind with the poem she so well remembered?"

"Hannah told me a confused story, something similar in its circumstances to
those in my dream," said Eliza.

"I have heard," said Sir James, "stories of this nature frequently repeated;
but, till now, I own, I never paid a serious attention to them. What has
happened, however, determines me to take some active measures toward
unravelling the apparent mystery. In the morning I will myself see the place,
and examine its appearances."

In the morning the knight, with a numerous train of attendants, sallied forth
to survey the haunted aisle. He was supported on his right hand by the
superstitious Mr. Sandall; on his left by Barnwell. A few armed domestics
preceded them -- Arrived at the entrance of the aisle, Mr. Sandall paused.

"If I might advise," said he, "the servants, I conceive should first search
the place, for they are armed."

"But what are arms against incorporeal substances, Mr. Sandall?" said George.
"Besides, we can take the arms which the servants carry, who may wait here, and
be within call, if their assistance is wanted."

"Foolish scheme enough!" said Sandall, terrified in no small degree.

"Suppose," continued George, "some demon really tenants the old tomb, what do
the servants know of exorcising? Come, Sir, let us enter. I Will take this
musket, and if the inhabitants are formed of tangible stuff, a bullet may be
useful, in case of attack; on the other hand, should they be spiritual
residentiaries, I shall turn them over to the discipline of the church."

"Not so much levity," said Sir James. "I apprehend no danger; but there is no
telling -- so go on, Joseph we'll proceed -- as we set out."

Some minutes passed in the most profound silence. Nothing was heard, nothing
was seen, that could justify the most distant conjecture. George could hardly
refrain smiling, and in his heart exclaimed -- "I would this solemn mockery
were ended;" but his uncle's reproof was yet recent. At length --

"Are you sure you saw upon this tomb -- this very tomb, a mask and a cloak?"
said Sir James: "that you also saw a man kneel near this tomb -- saw him rise
-- put on the mask and cloak -- Are you perfectly convinced no part of this was
imagination?"

"I am sure I saw all that you have stated."

"'It Is very strange!" said Sir James.

"Very strange!" said every one. --

"Could not this tomb be moved?" said George. "Where we in the forests of
Germany, I should be induced to think, from circumstances, that it covers the
trap door of some subterraneous cavern."

"Aye, Sir," said Joseph, an old domestic of the knight's, "you have hit the
right nail on its head now. To be sure its no business of mine; but if I were a
magistrate -- "

"Hold your tongue, Joseph -- What would you do, if you were a magistrate?"
said the knight in a breath.

"Why, might I be bold to speak the truth, I do think murder lies hid under
this here moniment; and if I was a magistrate, it should be all pulled down,
and dug under; and my life on it, but murder lies at the bottom."

"That cannot be done without the consent of the owner," said Sir James, "or
some better grounds of suspicion than we have at present."

"Do you not own the ruins, Sir?" said George.

"Not this part of them," said the knight. "All the land on this side the row
of alder trees belongs to the next estate."

"And who owns that?" asked George.

"Mr. Mental, the cynic you saw yesterday. What do you start at?"

"Nothing, Sir," replied George, hesitating; -- "but -- Mr. Mental -- is -- a
strange man."

"Ah, God forgive him, if all they say be true," cried old Joseph, with an
expressive shake of the head.

"God cannot forgive him," cried Sandall: "he is an atheist."

"He is a singular man, undoubtedly," said Sir James;" "and people will talk.
Nobody, it seems knows who or what he is, or where he came from* But I have
heard old men, who remember his first coming here, whisper strange stories."

George was ruminating -- After another fruitless search they returned home.

A variety of conjectures presented themselves to the fertile imagination of
George, all pointed to Mr. Mental. He now conceived, that the man he had seen
the preceding evening was Mr. Mental. He imagined the voice he had heard
resembled Mr. Mental's, and built upon these impressions a suspicion to the
disadvantage of his character. Quickly again his heart rebuked him for so
illiberal a conclusion from a train of mere accidents. He recollected his
invitation, and resolved immediately to visit him. Unwilling to awake those
suspicions in the breast of another, which he was himself ashamed of
cherishing, he determined to keep his visit a secret from the family; and
merely observed, that as he wished to take a long stroll, it was doubtful if he
should return before evening.

CHAP. VI.
Oh, for a lodge in some vast wilderness,
Some boundless contiguity of shade,
Where rumor of oppression and deceit
Might never reach me more!
COWPER.
THE residence of Mr. Mental was a short distance from Sir James's. It was a
large old-fashioned house, containing many rooms: of these only three were in
use; one served as a kitchen, and chamber for an old woman, his only domestic;
a second was a sitting, eating, and sleeping room of her master; and the third
was a study.

George rung a bell at the iron gate, which opened on a plot of ground before
the house, that was formerly a lawn. In its present neglected state it would be
difficult to call it by any name that would convey an idea of its appearance.

The above named old dame appeared at a window, and demanded the business of
Barnwell. Having informed her master, George was admitted. Wading through
'weeds most rank and wile,' he had at length found himself in the aforesaid
sitting room, where Sarah told him her master would come to him.

After some time most patiently occupied in contemplating the motly furniture
of the apartment, and a few ejaculations of surprise at so strange a mode of
life, George ventured to call old Sarah, and ask if her master was particularly
engaged; if so, he would take another opportunity of seeing him.

"As to that, come when you will, he is always at his studies," said Sarah.

"Shall I go to him?" said George.

"God forbid!" exclaimed Sarah -- "Go into the study! -- I have been here these
twenty years, and no living soul but master has been in that study."

Every moment the curiosity of George was increased, and he felt a great
inclination to chat with Sarah concerning her master, when the original himself
appeared. George gazed earnestly at him as he entered, but could observe
nothing in his countenance that in the least sanctioned his suspicions: there
was no embarrassment, but an air of solemn ^ase, a kind of look that indicated
a familiarity with grief.

"And you are really come," exclaimed he. "Is it the spur of curiosity that has
urged you to this compliance? Come, be honest, Sir. You wondered, doubtless,
how an old fellow, like myself, could at first sight be smitten with an
attachment to your countenance. Sir, I have read the wondrous volume of this
world -- I have been amongst men -- I have bustled in the crowd. I have also
been secluded from the herd; and in silent musings of full many a year I have
contemplated the strange variety of human nature -- Perhaps there is no
passion, no impulse of the mind, that I have not experienced -- Man is familiar
to me -- I know the whole machine -- its movements -- and the nature of the
materials of which it is composed. Often by the countenance men are deceived. I
may be so. If I am not, you have an honest mind; by which I mean, that you are
sincere; that your tongue utters what your heart prompts, and your reason
dictates. Now tell me, Sir, what kind of man you think me."

"Forming my judgment solely on appearances, I should suppose you a
disappointed man; one whom misfortunes have induced to quarrel with the world."

"The very notions I should have entertained, had I seen my present resemblance
at your age: for then I viewed mankind through the same fairy telescope that
you do now. Then my delighted fancy saw such guests on earth, as Sympathy,
Friendship, and Love; my heart hailed them for its own; it panted for inmates
so necessary to its health and peace, and like you, I should have thought that
man unfortunate who missed the bliss around him. But, "'it is delusion all!"
Apathy is the icy ruler of the hearts of men -- interest destroys all social
union, and sinks the master passion of the human soul below the appetites of
brutes. Oh, young man, distrust -- distrust thy fellows; suspect the tear of
sympathy, refuse the hand of friendship; and should some siren voice tell thee
of love, fly from the serpent, that only charms to kill. There is no sympathy;
no friendship, no love amongst the apostate race of man. Do I not know it --
have I not felt it! -- "

The gesture that accompanied this apostrophe was that of the extremest
anguish. George was affected, and Mental saw the emotion he had excited.

"Nay, nay," said he, "I mean not to insinuate, that I am peculiarly wretched
-- It Is the common lot -- the destiny of man -- to be deceived, to hope and be
deceived again. Just as an infant who sees the rising bubble, that his breath
has formed, burst as it ascends, will still pursue another. But this is a
sombre discourse to a young man just stepping into life, and by no means the
subject on which I wished to speak to you. You have received, I think, a
liberal education."

George here expatiated on the benefits he had received from the tuition of his
father in most lively colors.

"Your father must have been a man of erudition; and not only so, but a man of
taste and feeling. Do you imagine he would have approved of your entering into
commercial concerns?"

"His intentions were very opposite."

"And I believe your inclinations are the same."

"I cannot conceal the truth; they certainly are."

"Are you aware of the consequences of entering upon a plan of life, where your
duties and interests will excite a perpetual rebellion of intellect, and in
which it is impossible to unite the cultivation of those mental powers you
possess, with a respectable progress in business?"

"I have thought on this; -- again and again have thought on it -- but what can
I do? The will of my benefactor, of my mother, o'erpoises all other
considerations. To refuse the bounty of the former, would offend him, and
render miserable a most excellent mother. I must therefore entreat your
forbearance on this subject, however much I am obliged by your generous
intentions."

"Nay, I will not forbear. Would you see a passenger approach a lion's den,
from which you had escaped, and think it unpolite to interrupt him? Nor will I,
who have experienced the miseries I see you running after, suffer any motive to
stifle Caution's voice. When you shall feel shackle's weight upon your prisoned
mind, when the aspiring soul shall lift its wing to soar, in vain; then, youth,
you will know the importance of this moment*

"If the detail would not be tiresome, there are particulars in my own
experience, that might, perhaps, teach you a lesson. I have not, for many
years, talked of myself to others; but if you would not hold your time ill
spent in listening to my tale -- "

"I should ill deserve so great a favor, Sir," interrupted Barnwell, "if I
could estimate its worth no better."

"I did not expect your compliment, nor do I admire it," said Mental; "I merely
obey an impulse, which would be painful to resist, in this mark of my regard
for you. You have a heart of sensibility -- you have a mind superior to your
years -- Don't think I compliment now, for it is matter, in my imagination,
rather of condolence, than congratulation. But to my story.

CHAP. VII.
"It is rather singular, that none but Princes and Monsters have the privilege
o^ exciting curiosity at their birth. A man of genius is dropped among the
people, and had first to encounter the difficulties of ordinary men, without
that confined talent which is adapted to a mean destination. D'ISRAELI on the
Literary Character.
"THE father of the man you see before you," said Mental, was a tradesman. He
was unfortunate in the concerns he undertook, somewhat negligent in consequence
of misfortunes, and, at last, brokenhearted with disappointment, sunk poor to
the grave.

"My mother had gone there long before, when I was little more than five years
old. My parents had brought up several of their children to the period of
youth; but at the demise of my father I was their only offspring living.

"It may be well to remark to you a few traits of my earliest years, as
peradventure you may somewhere trace a resemblance. I remember perfectly well,
that, when only four years old, it was frequently my amusement to mount upon a
chair, arrayed in my mother's white apron, and assembling round me my younger
brothers, an old woman their nurse, and my mother, to preach with considerable
vehemence.

"The prediction concerning me at that period, elevated my future fate to a
mitre. After my mother's decease, I went three or four times with a relation to
the theaters, and I still recollect the wonderful impulse I felt to leap upon
the stage, and join the performers.

"A similar sensation often seized me at church, where I always wished myself
in the pulpit. I know now that this was ambition in embryo; and had my parents'
situation in life placed an army within my early views, I doubt not I should
have felt the same impulse to have seized the truncheon from a General, as I
did to displace the clergyman from his pulpit, or thrust the performer from the
stage.

"At seven years old I possessed all the gravity of a sage. The pastimes of
other boys were my aversion. Books of all descriptions that came within my
reach I read, but not with that delight that animated me in scribbling over
every piece of paper I could procure, with what I called my studies. The
effusions were generally of a similar nature with the book I had last read; and
of course I was a theologian, a dramatist, a poet, and a novelist, in turn.
Nothing, however, at this period was a greater treat to me, than to be
permitted to remain at table after dinner, when the other children were sent to
play, that I might listen to the discourse of my elders.

"My bodily frame was such as may be expected from an indulgent mode of
bringing up in a city, and my own sedentary inclination -- weak and delicate.
This consideration induced my father, for some time, to object to placing me in
a public seminary, where a relation offered to provide for me. Poverty,
however, advancing rapidly toward his humble dwelling, and quickening its
pace, after domestic economy had quitted it with my mother, made him soon
accept the offer of his cousin.

"I left my native roof ere I was eight years old, and became a member of the
celebrated public school at Eton. This I esteem the first grand era in my
life. A public seminary is a little republic, where the honors and advantages
of the community lie open to all; and in no other soil can the seeds of
ambition be so well cultivated. Soon was the spark of emulation felt within my
bosom, infusing energy and vigor into every action. The middling classes
beheld me, with envy, pass their ranks; and the highest wondered at my* swift
approach. Success urged fresh endeavors, and ere I had attained my thirteenth
year, I was qualified for the university; where I already was, in fancy,
struggling for academical distinctions.

"Just before my fourteenth birth day, was the second grand era in my life. My
father died insolvent. A letter from his cousin, my benefactor, acquainted me,
that, in consequence of some considerable failures in his speculations, his
fortune was much lessened; and that he could not fulfill his intentions of
supporting me at the university; adding, that as I was now of an age to go into
the world, he wished me to think of some trade I should like.

"You, Mr. Barnwell, can conceive my feelings; I cannot describe them. In the
first moments of my disappointment, rage conquered reason, and I considered my
benefactor worse than an assassin. 'My God!' exclaimed I, 'is he not a
murderer? Has he not made me the parent of the fondest hopes, the brightest,
dearest expectations? Did he not, himself beget these dreams of bliss which I
have cherished? and now, with a word, he murders every hope!' -- Trade! -- my
soul sickened at the sound. Apprentice! -- horror was in the word, and every
hope of happiness vanished from my sight. In another moment different feelings
agitated me. My warm, romantic fancy, could not at once relinquish the views it
had fostered. Pride aided fancy; and I persuaded myself, that were my genius
but known, it would most certainly be patronized. I resolved to write to a
celebrated nobleman, at that time a patron of literature. The same evening on
which I received my cousin's letter, I wrote one for this nobleman, intending
to send it the following morning; but in the morning my mind was in a different
frame.

"I resolved to see my benefactor. He was an opulent tradesman, and resided in
the metropolis. 'You have received my letter, Henry,' said he. 'I am sorry you
should be disappointed in your views, though I have not a doubt but you will do
much better in trade, than by drudging all your life time over books. Have you
any choice?'

"None that I can follow now, Sir. I have indulged a hope that my industry at
college might possibly have recommended me -- 'To be some great man's
toad-eater,' interrupted he: 'Is that what you mean? -- It could do nothing
else for you. The church is absolutely beset with hungry suppliants. There Is no
arriving at the bar without a fortune; and as to physic, a man's talents will
never recommend him to a patient, if he keeps no carriage. I wish to be your
friend, Henry; and I think I know how: -- it must be by placing you in such a
situation, as, however disagreeable it may appear on entering, will lead you to
independence.'

"I began now seriously to reflect upon the truth of these observations. I
recollected I was speaking to the only friend I had on earth; and though my
pride suffered a severe wound, my judgment was improved in my own estimation.

"After a pause, I yielded my assent to the truth of his observations, and
expressed a wish that I could write a fine hand, as it might possibly be in ^is
power to procure me a genteel situation in some merchant's compting-house.

"He smiled at my wish -- 'You are in the same error there,' said he. 'I
believe no set of men labor more, in general, than persons of that
description; -- and what is their reward? -- a clean shirt, and a shining pair
of shoes; which is pleasant enough for a young man in his teens. But think of
the situation of such men, if they marry -- if they live to old age! A
mechanic, who earns fifteen shillings a week, is a prince to them. I by no
means control you: if you think genteel misery desirable, you will be a
merchant's clerk.

"I was humbled in my own sight; my heart no longer throbbed in the
expectations that had delighted it; I felt it sinking, and a passive
acquiescence in his sentiments was the consequence.

"We parted, with a promise from him to send me the address of a grocer the
next day, on whom I was to wait as my future master.

"My colleagues at school saw an alteration in my countenance, and soon
discovered my future destiny; which attracted the scorn of some, the pity of
many.

"Instead of sleeping that night, my mind was busily employed in contrasting
the real with the fancied situation that was to succeed my school days. My
thirst for literature was never more to be indulged, but conquered. Ah! fatal
delusion! I thought it might be conquered -- But, hear me, Mr. Barnwell -- and
would to God all men might hear me -- the thirst of knowledge is occasioned,
Sir, by an unquenchable spark, and must be gratified, or will consume. Imagine
not I mean to sanction idleness, which often assumes the mark of genius, but is
not, cannot be allied to it. Imagine not that I would sanction restlessness of
mind, which scowls, dissatisfied, at its own lot, and covets every other.
Imagine not that I approve that morbid sensibility, so often mistook by its
possessors for heaven-born genius -- by no means! But if the soul perceives
with itself that active principle, which ease nor gain can satisfy; which,
almost overlooking common things and common duties, soars into the regions of
sublime inquiry; and creative fancy gazing with eagle eye even on the source of
light -- Oh! then let him who feels the heavenly guest obey its sacred voice;
-- for I, who have contended with its power, know that Genius is not to be
subdued!

"Let such a man resist the natural impulse he will feel to yield his
inclinations to the well meant, but fatal, advice even of parents. Let no
commands, no tears, no supplications, even of mother, bias him. Let sincerity
be his guide, and firmness of mind his staff, and his pilgrimage will gro^
pleasanter in his progress: but if, to dry a momentary tear, or escape a
momentary pang, he submits to smother genius, he seals his own misery, and
deceives, besides himself, his friends. I did so; and mark my history.

"I waited on Mr. Nutting, the grocer. He received me in a little room at the
back of his shop, where Mrs. Nutting was sitting. They appeared plain, plodding
sort of folks, remarkably neat in their dress, and precise in their discourse.
After a variety of questions, Mr. Nutting inquired if I was sensible of the
importance of an interest in the merits and sufferings of our Blessed Savior.
I cannot describe the astonishment this question occasioned me. Mr. Nutting saw
my surprise --

'Well, well,' said he, 'I see you have not been brought up with a proper sense
of your eternal welfare. It is however, a great mercy that you have been
directed to this roof where you will have the benefit of instruction and
example in the right road. You may tell Mr. Darwall (the name of my benefactor)
that I like you very well, and shall be ready to receive you tomorrow; and
after a month's trial you may be bound.'

"Every necessary was provided for me at Mr. Darwall's expense, and I bade
farewell, with a sigh, to my school and my school companions.

"I passed my month of approbation. -- Night after night, as I laid my head
upon the pillow, I meditated upon my situation; and strong was the struggle
betwixt what I esteemed my duty and my inclination.

"Often would the swell of independence elevate my mind to the contemplation of
the most impracticable scheme! -- As often would a sense of gratitude to Mr.
Darwall, as well as an implicit faith in his assurances that my present (almost
intolerable) situation would lead to future ease and comfort, baffle the
suggestions of my romantic fancy.

"Thus, Sir, were the embers of genius damped, and the powerful energies of a
thinking mind depressed, by the duties of a mean destination. The progress of
my tale will show, that totally to extinguish the former, or destroy the
latter, is beyond the power of circumstances, while the senses remain
unimpaired."

CHAP. VIII.
-- The highborn soul
Disdains to rest her heav'n-aspiring wing
Beneath its native quarry*
AKENSIDE.
"THE menial offices which my situation compelled me to perform, at first were
grating to my pride; but I soon discovered that to be a false pride, and, by
degrees, became its master. I could stand behind the counter and chop sugar
without feeling the shame of a mean action; but I was often roused from a
reverie by my master, when I have been weighing out teas, and at the same time
busily employed in the regions of fancy.

"When the business of the day was ended, my apartment was the kitchen, my
companions a methodist old woman, who was the servant, and her friend a black
cat. Here I might have regaled myself after the fatigue of the day with
reading; but unfortunately, the old lady's library, consisting of the Pilgrim's
Progress, the Holy War, and a volume or two of sermons, was at that time little
suited to my taste. The pious discourse of the old dame was still less
pleasing; thus (too fatigued for bodily employment) sleep, or a meditation,
were my only alternatives; and from these I was frequently roused by the
tabernacle hymns, to the tune of which the old woman mended her stockings.

"On Sundays I constantly attended the meeting to which my master belonged,
where I was compelled to hear doctrines, at which my blood chilled, and my
heart grew faint.

"The gloom of Calvinism, the disappointment of my first hopes, the conquest of
my pride, the dull and cheerless life I lead, in a short space of time so
cooled the former ardor of my mind, that, if it is too much to say, I was
heart-broken; I was reduced to that state of mind, which sees no brightening
prospects in futurity, and which, ceasing to hope, studies and struggles to
endure.

"Such was the state of mind in which, with a trembling hand, I signed the
indentures that consigned me for seven years to the gloom of a cloister,
without its consolations or tranquillity.

"Mr. Nutting, previous to my being bound, had often hinted to me, that I was
slow in business; and thinking of one thing, whilst I was doing another; and
having once caught me in the attitude of study, leaning upon a broom, with
which I was sweeping the shop, he exclaimed -- "Henry, this will not do; you seem
more fit for a philosopher than a tradesman."

"With this opinion, which was certainly a just one, Mr. Nutting ought not to
have taken me as his apprentice. But Mr. Nutting was not a rich man; and Mr.
Darwall had promised him a premium of sixty guineas.

"From what I have related, you will readily conceive that I made but poor
progress in the art and mystery of the Grocer's Company; and though cheerfully
and willingly obeying my master in all his commands, I yet failed to please
him: the natural consequence of a want of that energy in my business, of which
inclination must be the parent.

"I was more fortunate with my mistress. She was of a mild temper, and humane
disposition, and was a strict Calvinist from sincere conviction. Superior to
her husband in intellect, she would frequently, when opportunity offered, enter
on a conversation with me, and discovered an amiable heart. She was mistress of
all the controversies upon theological topics* and felt great delight in
confuting the arguments of the opponents of Calvin.

"When you recollect, Sir, that Mrs. Nutting's was the only conversation I
enjoyed, which embraced in any degree mental topics, you will not be surprised,
that, notwithstanding it was religious. I esteemed it highly. In short, I
became delighted with these occasional recreations from the jargon of congou,
bohea, souchong, and hyson.

"Sill more delighted was I to listen to her, while she qualified the doctrines
of Calvinism, and labored to reconcile the benevolence of the Creator with the
doom of the created, and the unborn. Her language was warm: -- her colorings
exhibited the strongest lights, and deepest shades. She staggered my reason,
opened new scenes to my view, and so far conquered my objections, as to make me
wish and pray that I could believe her creed.

"She perceived the crisis, and gave me permission to take what books I pleased
from her bookcase, which contained the whole body of Calvinistic divinity. Thus
two or three years passed away, at the expiration of which I had become a
zealous Calvinist.

"Power of the universe! -- how I shudder, when I think upon the thousands, who
at this hour, cherish in their breast those horrible ideas of Thee, which at
that time formed my creed!

"I was about seventeen years old, when Mr. Nutting, one evening, was sent for
in great haste to visit a stranger who had lately taken a lodging at the next
door, and who was then at the point of death.

"This stranger was a man, who, having obtained early in life the possession of
a considerable estate, had given the reins to his passions, and had indulged in
every pleasure that a vitiated taste and corrupt principles suggested. On the
bed of sickness his heart smote him.

"Chance led him to the house he was in, and the landlord of that house was a
strict dissenter, of the same persuasion as Mr. Nutting, whose sanctity and
upright conduct had been frequently proclaimed in the hearing of the dying man.
He requested to see him; derived a pleasing consolation from his discourses and
prayers, and placed in his breast an ample confession of his crimes.

"There was only one object living, for whom, in his present situation, he felt
any concern; and that was a daughter, the fruit of an illicit amor in the
West Indies.

"This daughter he had brought up with the true affection of a father, having
bestowed a very libe^al expense upon her education at a very eminent school in
the vicinity of the metropolis, where she then resided as a boarder.

"For this daughter Captain Ellison felt an increasing concern as his own end
drew nearer. Himself grasping eagerly at the hopes and promises of eternal
happiness offered to him by Mr. Nutting, on the simple condition of believing,
he became anxious that his Elinor should share the same blessings, but which he
now fully persuaded himself she would never taste, unless converted to the
(...) faith with that which he himself had embraced.

"Such, at length, was the confidence he reposed in Mr. Nutting, that he made a
will, by which he bequeathed an estate in Hertfordshire, and some considerable
property in the funds, to his daughter, upon the express condition of her
residing with Mr. Nutting till her twenty-fifth year, or till her marriage with
his consent.

"So strictly was his will drawn up, that Mr. Nutting, who was his sole
executor, obtained by it an unlimited control over his ward during her
minority, and an arbitrary disposal of her in marriage, besides the interest of
her property while she resided in his house.

"The Captain died. Miss Ellison had visited him two or three times at his
lodgings, and was apprized of his intentions respecting her. A day was
appointed for her removal, and I was ordered by my master to take a coach from
Hyde Park-Corner to Kensington, to bring Miss Ellison and her appurtenances to
the strand.

"Well do I remember the scene at Kensington. Affection truly maternal glowed
in the charming countenance of the governess, who threw her arms round the neck
of her departing charge, and buried tears of sensibility in her bosom. -- The
young ladies her companions, saluted her with a warm and sincere affection,
whilst even the youngest of the scholars clung round her, kissing her hands and
twitching her robe, while a buz ran round the room, of -- 'Remember me, Miss
Ellison -- Pray, remember me!'

"My native tenderness was rising; -- but the gloomy principles I then
nourished checked every generous feeling of the heart, as allurements from the
love of heaven!

"Miss Ellison at length burst from their embraces, and hurried into the coach.
I took my seat opposite to her, and imprinted on my memory a face and form
never -- no, never -- to be erased!"

"As Mr. Mental uttered the last sentence, he sighed deeply, and covered his
face with his hand. Recovering himself --

"Sir," continued he, "she was not, perhaps, the most beautiful woman in the
world: -- her complexion, when she left Jamaica as an infant, was rather tinged
with an olive hue; but her features were the notices of those inmates of the
female breast, which charm the soul of man -- sweetness of temper, and
conquering submission; whilst the soft expressions of her eyes indicated the
superior cultivation of an exquisite mind.

"She first broke a silence of some duration by asking me, if I was the sun of
Mr. Nutting, which led to several other questions; the result of which was a
short description of the family she was about to enter, for which she expressed
her thanks, though I saw the pain which the intelligence occasioned her.

"I pass over her introduction to her guardian and Mrs. Nutting, but must not
omit to mention a conversation which took place in the evening, while I was
assisting in unpacking some boxes in the apartment allotted for her chamber.
There were some shelves in the closet -- 'I am glad to see these shelves,' said
Miss Ellison, 'for I have books enough to fill them.' 'Books -- books!' said
Mr. Nutting; 'what books, child? Let me see -- its proper I should see what
books you have.' 'Certainly, Sir;' was the reply; 'though I flatter myself you
will approve the selection, for they have received the approbation of my dear
Mrs. Herris.' -- 'I dare say Mrs. Herris is a good sort of moral woman; but
what are her religious sentiments? There is the important point.'

"By this time I had untied the cord, and began placing the books upon the
floor. Mr. Nutting took up a volume, and opened it -- 'What a'-prize is this,
child? Eh! -- outlandish jargon, I take it. What is it?"

'It is a system of geography in French, Sir,' replied Elinor.

'French! -- ah, well; it may be Dutch, or Greek, or Algebra, or any thing
else, for what I know; but I must take this here book, and all them there, that
I don't understand myself -- Pack of nonsense, I dare say -- but they will cut up
for the shop.'

'Oh, dear Sir,' said Elinor, 'you would not, surely destroy my library! If you
do not approve of my reading French, I pledge my word I will not. But, pray, do
not destroy the books: several of them are valuable.'

'Pledge your word -- Yes -- yes -- pretty pledge enough. No, no -- the safest
way is to put it out of your power. I stand in a most awful situation, child. I
shall have to answer for the great charge of your soul, that has been so
providentially committed to my care; and nothing shall you read that I do not
understand.'

"Elinor looked ashonished, but Mr. Nutting did not notice her. Having laid his
hand upon another book --

'Mercy on us! -- here is a play book!' exclaimed he. 'Did your Mrs. Herris know
of this too?'

'O dear, yes, Sir; there are eight volumes of them: they are the immortal
Shakespeare's.'

'God forgive you, child! Immortal! -- Yes; he is, doubtless, in immortal
torments. Here, Henry, take the immortal Shakespears away.'

"Poor Elinor trembled -- Mrs. Nutting saw her distress. --

'You should consider, my dear,' said she, 'Elinor has been brought up by
worldly people; and though it is an infinite mercy that brought her to our
roof, there must be an inward change wrought in her heart before she can be
brought to see the folly of her worldly wisdom.' --

"How I blessed my mistress. She spoke my thoughts. Mr. Nutting made no reply,
put proceeded with the true zeal of an inquisitor.

'Milton's Paradise Lost! Aye, put that on the shelf if you will,' said he.
'Hervey's Meditations! that you may take. But, here, put all the rest up in the
box, Harry, and carry them, for the present, up to the loft; take a hammar and
nail the box down; I cannot stand looking now; I Have got somewhat else to do. So,
child, if you want books to read ax Mrs. Nutting, and she will put what is proper
into your hands; though I think the needle suits best of week days; and on the
sabbath you may read your bible.'

"Surprise, regret, and something like anger, mingled their influence in the
mind of Miss Ellison, and a tear stood quivering in her eye. I obeyed so much
of my master's orders as to carry the box into the loft, and intended to finish
my commission when I went to my chamber, which was one story lower than the
loft. But, O, sovereign genius -- invincible power -- inextinguishable spark!
-- then, again, thy smothered embers blazed!

"Taking my candle and my hammar, I ascended the loft, I placed my candle on
the floor, and was about to drive the nail, when a sudden impulse of curiosity
arrested my arm. --

"Suppose, thought I, I just look over these books. They are profane, said
Calvin; they are the productions of men destitute of the enlightening spirits
of God, and may tend to draw your affections from holy things. --

"Only one peep, cried curiosity; perhaps I may meet some old acquaintance that
I have almost forgotten; for it was full three years since I had looked into
any book save the theological labors of Calvinists.

"Down I dropped upon my knees. 'If it be a sin, God forgive it; if it is
temptation, Lord deliver me.' I opened the box, trembling; I took up a volume
and opened it. It was a volume of Shakespeare, and the passage that caught my
eye was the speech of Portia on mercy. As I read, my heart grew warm; as I
proceeded, it grew warmer; and when I came to the line -- 'It is an attribute
of God himself,' it literally glowed within me.

"This speech had been my favorite at school, and I had spouted it an hundred
times. It brought to my recollection another, for which I eagerly searched and
found in the same author: 'O gentle sleep, etc.' My spirits seemed to have
gained a deliverance from fetters; my heart beat quicker than for a long time
past; and I went on devouring the contents of the box with as much appetite as
a hungry man would a dinner. I tasted every dish that presented itself, and
found each dish a dainty. Nearly at the bottom of the box was a volume of Sir
Charles Grandison, which I opened at the interesting conversation of Sir
Charles and Lady Clementina upon the topic of religion. Conceive the interest I
felt; and judge my regret when I heard the clock strike three, and saw the
approaching departure of my light, which glimmered in the socket of the
candlestick. I found my way to bed in the dark; but sleep was far off.

"The spring of reason, that had been stretched to impotence by bigotry, seemed
by this accident to have recovered its elasticity, and once more resumed its
operations -- O Superstition, how greatly to thy prejudice!

"I recollected the scene in Miss Ellison's chamber. I placed before my fancy
the ignorant piety of my master, and the profane intelligence of his ward. I
dared even to trace the origin of their principles. I did more; I inquired, if
it was a consistent idea, to suppose a beneficent Creator would grant a special
light to a few of his creatures, by which they only should be guided to eternal
bliss; while the multitude are doomed to wander through a dark passage to the
precipice of everlasting woe? And when I had inquired -- I blushed!"

CHAP. IX.
As yet it is midnight deep* The weary clouds,
Slow meeting, mingle into solid gloom.
Now, while the drowsy wo^ld lies lost in sleep,
Let me associate with the serious Night.
THOMPSON.
WHEN George arrived at the baronet's, a council was sitting to consider of
proper measures to be adopted relative to the nightly appearances at the abbey.

George had been meditating all the way from old Mental's upon the same
subject, and had determined to watch this night among the ruins. Overruling
every objection that was started, he abided by his resolution; and when the
rest of the family retired to their chambers, he muffled himself up in a box
coat, armed himself with a brace of pistols, and sallied forth toward the
ruins.

Darkness and silence reigned; with difficulty he discovered his way, and ere
he reached the aisle, the echoes of the midnight chimes rolled amongst the
ruins. At the same moment he observed a lighted torch glide slowly toward the
avenue that led to the aisle: at the entrance the person who carried it turned
round -- George stepped behind a column, and saw the same masked figure he had
beheld on the preceding evening.

After gazing earnestly round him for a few seconds, the figure moved slowly
toward the aisle. With a gentle tread George followed him, but stopped at the
entrance of the aisle, and reclined his head against the remains of a stone
arched gateway, in the attitude of listening.

Presently the tones of a harp struck his ear: they were solemn, slow, and
melancholy. After a few interesting movements, a voice accompanied the
instrument. George could no longer resist the impulse of curiosity; but,
creeping softly, entered the aisle. The Unknown sat with his back to the
entrance upon a little stool, near the tomb, upon which lay his mask. A lamp
burnt upon the ground, and the torch was extinguished. The anxiety of his mind
prevented George from hearing distinctly the words of a ballad, but of which
his memory retained the following fragment. --

BALLAD.
Spirit of the lost Louisa,
Hear a wretch lament thy doom;
Drops of warm blood from his bosom
Sanctify thy early doom!
Spirit of the lo^t Louisa,
Whither do thou ^oam tonight?
Art thou present -- do thou hear me?
Take some form, and bless my sight*
Slave of guilt, how rash thy prayer!
Lo! the horrid vision speeds:
Lo! a female form approaches --
See! her wounded bosom bleed!
From her cheeks are fled the roses,
Round her eyes no luster plays;
Death has clasped his arms around her --
All her form his touch betrays*
Pale, and wan, and cold her face is,
And her heart has ceased to beat:
Worms now revel in her ringlets*
Worms now play around her feet.
Monster! ask the loathsome spectre
Why it quits the peaceful grave?
Is it to revenge soul murder?
Is it innocence to save?
Hark -- above loud thunders rattle!
From below blue flames arise!
Hark! -- a voice, sepulchral, murmurs
"I Will not rest till Henry dies!
"Wretch, prepare thy soul for tortures --
'Tortures are prepared for thee!
"Murderer of youthful beauty,
"Endless pain thy portion be!"
During the time this ballad was singing, George stood motionless, with his
eyes fixed on the singer. When it was concluded, he withdrew a few paces back,
to a spot where he might see, unobserved, what should pass.

As soon as he had finished this ballad, which appeared to agitate him
extremely, the Unknown started from his seat, and, clasping his hands together
violently, exclaimed -- "O! what torments -- what tortures could cruelty invent
equal to thy stings -- thy scorpion stings -- O, inward hell of guilt! -- O,
conscience! Am I for everlasting to endure these pangs? And will this worm for
ever live within me? -- O! that a blow could strangle it; -- that leaping into
burning liquid could annihilate all thought! Why -- why -- fool that I am --
why do I hesitate to try?"

As he uttered the last words he drew a pistol from his bosom -- "This, in a
moment, brings me to my -- Would I could say, my end! But, no -- no -- no! --
She did not cease to be, when this accursed arm plunged this bloody steel into
her beauteous breast! (holding up a dagger, bloody at the point) -- "Somewhere
she still exists; for still her spirit haunts her ruthless murderer! -- steals
from his pillow peace; and makes the light of day more hedious than dark and
gloomy night! -- meets me in every walk -- crosses me in every path; and here
-- even here -- where like an outcast wretch I mourn away my nights -- here,
too, it follows me, and makes a hell. O, wretch! -- wretch!"

As he spoke, he threw his arms upon the tomb, and buried his face in his
hands. The suspicions of George were just: his voice, his face, declared this
confessor of murder to be Mental. Horror and astonishment struck him to the
soul; he trembled, and shuddered at the discovery, while a varying train of
ideas floated in his brain.

In a few minutes his attention was again arrested. Mental exclaimed --

"Away this dream of horror! Was she not faithless?" And then, in a softer tone
-- "Yes, faithless as fair!"

He flew to his harp, and moving his fingers briskly, seemed endeavoring to
recollect some air. "Aye -- that was a favorite," cried he: "how charmingly
did she look when her snow-white arms were extended to touch these strings --
her flaxen hair flowing in ringlets about her lovely neck -- her expressive
eyes beaming glances of love upon me -- while her coral lips moved to the
melody of an angel's voice! -- And yet I could destroy her! -- could change
that breathing beauty into putrefaction! I was that monster; and now, like an
infant that has broke his toy, I could sit down and weep a life a way! O! if
repentance were availing -- what do I not suffer! Foolish mankind! -- among thy
race how many a holy penitent have I viewed whose lengthened visage, and briny
eye, has soothed away remorse! Why, then, in what a mould was I formed, that my
wounds should resist all healing applications? Is there no balsam that may cure
my soul? -- 'Physician, Omnipotent Physician! -- "

Here he sunk upon his knees; but in a moment starting up --

"Mental! ar't turning Monk," exclaimed he, "as if an intercession could more
avail with the All-powerful than his own benevolence? Call back time past --
undo past deeds -- bid the dead live -- and then expect the peace that thou
have parted with for ever!"

Not a syllable that sell from the lips of this miserable man was lost by
George. Three hours passed away, during which Mental occasionally broke out
into similar ejaculations, or played upon the harp. Soon as a distant bell
tolled three, he lit his torch; and removing a large and heavy stone, which lay
at some distance from the tomb, a kind of grave appeared, in which he deposited
the harp, the lamp, and the stool, and replaced the stone; then masking
himself, he left the aisle, and George, at a cautious distance, followed him.

CHAP. X.
He has made his fortune himself, and says that England may be richer than
other kingdoms, by as plain methods as he himself i^ richer than other men: --
though at the same time I can say this of him -- that there is not a point in
the compass but blows home a ship in which he is an owner. SPECTATOR.
UNDETERMINED in his mind, whether to reveal or conceal the discovery of the
preceding night, George joined the family at breakfast. To avoid their
questions, however, he informed them generally, that he had been partly
successful in his research; and that in another evening he expected to be able
to unravel the whole mystery.

Fortunately a letter arrived from the knight, which turned the conversation
from a subject that George would have encountered some difficulty in
disguising, and which he did not wish to reveal till he had heard the sequel of
old Mental's story.

This letter came from Mr. Freeman, a merchant of the old school, to whom Sir
James had written concerning his nephew. Its contents ran thus --

My good old friend,
Yours of the 17th ult. came duly to hand. Your generous proposal on behalf of
your nephew is such as becomes Sir James Barnwell. You know that, of late
years, I have left the laboring oar in the hands of my god-son and partner,
Mr. Francis Emery, who also married my ward, Georgiana Ruby. He is a man who
will, (...) day or other, hold up his head as high as any merchant on 'Change.
He is the confidante of the Minister; knows every thing before other people's
eyes are open, and lets nothing go by. To be sure, I am told his establishment
is shewy, and expensive; but you know, my good friend, that in our own time
there was no fishing without a bait. Emery knows what he is about; and though I
have not been in town these six years, he sends me such accounts that make me
as easy and as comfortable as if I looked over the ledger every night. Besides,
is not my interest his interest? -- tell me that, say I, when people would be*
putting me on doubting, and mistrusting -- Sometimes I think of withdrawing
from the concern altogether: but then I think of my dear Maria, who grows the
very image of her poor mother, and is the delight and comfort of my old age,
and deserves every shilling a father can bestow; so that for her sake I keep on
-- But I fly from the subject. When yours came to hand, I wrote him thereon;
strongly recommended the youth, and enclosed your overtures. Now, as an old
friend, I remit to you this answer, which will be sufficient directions for
your proceeding -- Wishing every success to the young man, and every happiness
to yourself, brings me to a close. So I remain your well-wisher,

FRANCIS FREEMAN.


Mr. Emery's letter was as follows --

Dear Sir,
I hope it is unnecessary to repeat, that your wishes will ever be considered
by me in the nature of commands, which it is my duty to obey; besides, I
perfectly agree with you that Sir James's proposal is extremely liberal: three
thousand pounds down, and seven when the young man is admitted to an eighth of
the profits, considering he is to take an active part, is an offer, in my
opinion, not to be refused. As the nephew of Sir James Barnwell, I think he
should domesticate with me; and as your friend, Sir, I shall certainly treat
him with every respect: -- we shall therefore be happy to see him in Portman
Place, as early as agreeable to himself. There are favorable reports from
India; but, as I intend writing upon business tomorrow, shall make my present
letter a domestic one. Will you never accede to the petitions of Mrs. Emery and
myself, and trust your Maria with us for a winter? You should, indeed, Sir,
consider her age -- nineteen, you know -- and allow her some of those pleasures
so naturally looked for at her time of life, and which the metropolis alone
furnishes. Charlotte adds her entreaties to our requests, and we all unite in
every good wish to you both.

I am, dear Sir, gratefully and truly yours, Francis Emery.

Francis Freeman, Esquire. Oak Hall, Yorksh.

The discourse that followed the perusal of these letters was interesting; in
which the benevolence of the worthy knight, and the gratitude of the Barnwells,
were warmly delineated. That day week was fixed for the departure of George.

CHAP. IX.
They loved -- but such their guiltless passion was
As in the d^wn of time informed the heart
of innocence, and undissemb^ing truth.
THOMSON.
VARIOUS were the emotions which agitated the mind of young Barnwell, as he
strolled toward the house of Mr. Mental. When he was introduced into his
presence, he trembled.

"Ere we parted, Sir," said Mental, abruptly, "I think I had introduced Miss
Ellison to your acquaintance, and bestowed some praise upon her person. It is
absolutely impossible to pourtray her mind, at once simple and noble,
condescending and dignified. I will not attempt even to sketch its outlines,
but shall confine myself to a single narrative of facts, in which her actions
will more faithfully unfold her mind, than can the most laboring description.

"However dissimilar the manners of the Nuttings were to those which a polished
state had made her own; however abhorrent their gloomy notions of religion to a
mind of exquisite sensibility, and an understanding of uncommon strength and
cultivation; having once brought herself to believe it her duty to obey the
injunctions of her father's will, she submitted, without sullenness, to their
mode of life, and paid a decent respect to those duties which their religion
enjoined them to observe.

"But do not imagine she played the hypocrite. She never avowed her dissent
from their doctrines. and scrupled not to confess her dislike at their recluse
way of living. Honored -- shall I not say blessed -- with the confidence of
this charming woman, my situation seemed changed from the most cheerless to the
most blissful. We read, we conversed together; we wrote, and submitted our
performances to the criticisms of each other. In short, we seemed mutually to
confess, that in that house, at least, there was no pleasure but in each
other's society. What the library in the loft had left unfinished, Miss
Ellison's conversation completed; and my soul once again glowed with hope.

"I looked forward with impatience to the termination of my servitude, when I
imagined, I should burst forth upon the world as a prodigy of genius. The hours
of pleasure which were heretofore gloomily spent in reading the horrors of
Calvinism, were now employed in perusing various authors, or in the composition
of verses. The subject of my verses of course, was my Elinor.

"Having, one day, stolen a volume of Shenstone from the box in the loft, the
melody of his meter chimed in my ears, and I strung together some lines, which
I Will repeat to you, that you may form some judgment of my romantic notions. You
will remember, I was little more than eighteen.

I.
Ah! whither is happiness fled?
Ah! where is contentment concealed?
I Will seek them in yo^ lonely shed,
Through woodbines and briars revealed.
There health and contentment reside,
There happiness often i^ a guest;
Mirth sings by the wood-fire side,
And peace rocks the cradle of rest.
II.
Affrighted, from cities they fly,
Where Pleasure's enamouring bowl
Gives birth to the tear and the sigh; --
Seduces and poisons the soul:
Where Treachery calls itself Trade,
And Honor dissolves into Gain;
Where the isicie heart is displayed --
An emblem of Apathy's reign.
III.
Sweet Peace, and Contentment, and Health*
To you shall my orisons rise;
Above all the tinsel of wealth
Your heart-thrilling blessings I prian;
If constant my Elinor prove,
And add, O Content! to thy store
Her innocence, beauty, and love,
I Am happy, and sigh for no more.
"Having copied this effusion for Miss Ellison, unfortunately I left it upon my
master's desk. He sound it. Not with more voraciousness does the hungry tiger
seize upon its prey, than did Mr. Nutting upon my poor morcean. Foaming with
anger, he flew toward me, and tearing into ten thousand atoms the cause of his
indignation, he threw them in my face; 'Here's going on,' exclaimed he: --
Here Is attention to business. Why its an abominable heathenish hymn, or love
elegy, or some such stuff; trumped up to seduce the affections of my ward. But
I Will put a stop to it. If ever I see you speak to her, or look at her, I Will --
'Here, choked with anger, he stamped his foot, and threw down three pots of
honey; an accident that by no means helped to restore him to reason.

"The consequence of this discovery was an abridgment of the opportunities of
conversing with my Elinor, and a more rigid line of conduct toward Miss
Ellison herself.

"Shortly after this event, another occurred of most decisive consequences
toward us both. A relation of Mrs. Nutting was taken ill, and requested her
attendance. She went to reside with her a few weeks at Hampstead. On the
Saturdays Mr. Nutting went to sleep there, and returned usually on the Monday
morning. Miss Ellison was left in the Strand, as a guardian to the house. On
one of these Saturdays Elinor and myself had planned to bribe the old woman, I
have mentioned as the servant, to secrecy, and to embrace the opportunity of
going to a play. The old dame, would never have consented to our visiting the
'Devil's House,' as she termed the theater; and therefore it became necessary
to deceive her with the tale of a visit we were going to pay Mrs. Herris, the
former governess of Miss Ellison. To this she yielded, after a few weighty
arguments.

"I can now see a great inconsistency in Miss Ellison's conduct, as well as a
great impropriety in my own, in thus abusing the confidence placed in us both.
But, Sir, at the moment I am speaking of, temptation was irresistible; you
cannot conceive its strength.

"Elinor was as passionately fond of theatrical performances as myself. I had
not seen one in the space of four years, nor had she since her entrance into
our family; nor was there the remotest probability that any other opportunity
would occur during our stay with the Nuttings.

"The play to be performed that evening was Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet; and
the Romeo was Garrick.

"There were several scruples to conquer; but, in the end, temptation triumphed.

"Taking some precautions to disguise our persons, we went and mingled with the
crowd that had assembled at the pit door of Drury Lane theater. Unaccustomed to
the place, and surrounded completely by a concourse of people, Elinor began to
tremble with terror.

"The attraction of Garrick had drawn an unusual throng: the heat and pressure
became almost insupportable to Miss Ellison, and, added to her fright, at
length overpowered to endure it. She told me that she felt herself fainting. I
attempted to make a retreat through the crowd. It was impossible. She fainted
in my arms. At the ^ame instant the doors opened, and, being deprived of the
use of my arms, we both sunk together, and I became senseless.

"When my senses returned, I found myself in a strange bed, with several
persons standing round me. Astonishment seized me for a moment; but when the
memory of the scene that had passed recurred, it was like an arrow shot through
my brain -- 'The lady! -- the lady! -- Elinor! -- Miss Ellison! -- is she
alive! -- where is she!' exclaimed I in the agony of the most torturing
suspense. In lifting my hands to my head, I found I had been bled.

"The people around me stared in my face, and at one another, but made no reply
to my questions. 'My God! will you not tell me?' They shook their heads in sign
of pity. 'She is dead! -- she is murdered then!' exclaimed I. 'Poor youth!'
cried a man who stood nearest to me; 'poor youth! -- his brain is quite
disordered. I believe we must take a little more blood.' 'You'd better look,
whose to pay you, first,' cried a fat man in a red worsted cap; 'I think
instead of bleeding, we'd better see and get a chair, and take him to the
workhouse. He cannot stay here all night. I don't know what business some folks
have to bring all casulties to my house.' 'Why, as to that, Mr. Brown,' cried a
decent-looking man, 'where could we take him so proper: -- who would have
thought, to look at him, but that he was dead; and in that case, the coroner
would have sat upon the body at your house, and you would have had no objection.

"Where am I, then? exclaimed I -- 'Where are you!' cried the fat man: -- 'why,
you're at the Dolphin, in Drury Lane: and as you seem in your senses now, young
man, pray, where do you live -- who are your friends?'

"My God! what a thunderbolt was this question. Instead of answering this man,
I repeated my questions concerning Elinor, but could procure no intelligence.
My anxiety made me strong. I determined to arise; nor could the whole College
of physicians have prevailed upon me to relinquish my purpose. I dressed myself
with assistance. I was severely bruised in several places, but had received no
material injury.

It was nine o'clock when I left the Dolphin. My inquiries after Elinor were
for along time fruitless. All the intelligence that I could gather in the
neighborhood of the theater was, that a young lady had been trampled to death,
and conveyed away in a hackney coach, but whither, nobody knew.

"I went home, with a faint hope that she might have been conveyed thither. I
rung the bell; the old woman appeared, and her first inquiry was -- 'What have
you done with Miss?'

"Without answering her question, I ran away I returned back to the door --
Again I left it, and, from the anxiety of mind, played the antics of a madman.

"The whole of the night (...) wandered up and down the streets, stopping every
hackney coach, inquiring of every passenger after the object of my search --
Imagination tormented me with a thousand horrible ideas -- I saw her dead! --
worse than dead! -- I saw her person violated! -- I heard her shrieks! -- I saw
her agonies! -- and my reason absolutely reeled. Morning appeared; I had walked
the whole night; I had taken no refreshment; and I found myself sinking with
fatigue.

"As I passed the Chapter Coffee-House in St. Paul's church yard, the servants
were taking down the shutters. I went in; and, leaning my head upon a table,
indulged a sile^^ grief. I remained in this posture some time, till several
persons came into the room. After them was a short, neat looking man, who
seated himself near me -- 'How is your patient this morning, Mr. Brooks?' said
a gentleman to him. 'She still remains insensible,' replied he; 'but her fever
is lower.' 'Poor thing!' said the other, 'and was there nothing about her that
could give you any idea who she is? There are some aching hearts on her account
by this time.'

"Merciful Providence! -- have I then found her? exclaimed I* in a tone that
alarmed the whole company.

"If you have any heart! -- if you would relieve the most wretched being on
earth! -- continued I; pray take me to my Elinor.

"The people gathered round me with astonishment. An ecclaircissement took
place. It was my Elinor. The humanity of Mr. Brooks, who was a respectable
bookseller, had saved her life; and she was then at his house in Paternoster
Row.

"I saw her, but she knew me not; though, in the (...) morning sentences she
uttered, my name was often mentioned. A physician attended her, who pronounced
her out of danger.

"Relieved from the heaviest part of my anxiety, I had now leisure to think of
my own situation; but could not resolve how to act. Mr. Nutting I dared not to
see; Mr. Darwall I shuddered to meet.

"I made Mr. Brooks my confidante, who humanely offered me an asylum in his
own house, till he could reconcile me to Mr. Nutting, or at least to Mr.
Darwall, whom he determined to see the following morning.

"His endeavors were unavailing with both. The former firmly protested against
ever receiving me again into his house; and so represented me to the latter,
that his heart was completely steeled against me. Thus did one trivial event
deprive me of the only friend I had on earth. Thus were nearly five years of my
life fooled away, without affording the least advantage to myself, or
satisfaction to my benefactor.

"I had now, indeed, my liberty; but independence came too late, and in too
melancholy a way.

"I perceive, Mr. Barnwell, I must be less prolix. One incident leads on
insensibly to another. I must content myself, therefore, with a more general
account.

"Passing over, then, many tender and affecting interviews I had with Miss
Ellison, on her recovery, at the house of Mr. Brooks, ere she was well enough
to be removed to her guardian's, I will confine myself to the one in which a
mutual confession of love, (for we really loved) took place.

"She had that morning received a letter from Mr. Nutting, urging her return.

"And when do you mean to go, Miss Ellison? said I.

'Never! replied she with firmness. 'I will not sacrifice independence and
happiness to wealth!'

"Miss Ellison, are you serious?

'I am resolved. I went there in obedience to my father's will. I found the
situation barely tolerable.

After this unfortunate accident it will no longer be so. I shall, therefore,
relinquish all claim to my fortune, and retain the rights of a human being!'

"My God, Elinor! -- Madam, what are you pursuing -- what means of living, what
prospects even of a subsistence have you in view? --

"Let me retort your questions, Sir -- You have on my account, lost your late
prospects. What is your determination?'

'I -- I -- Madam -- I -- I am a man --

'And is the privilege of procuring a subsistence confined to men exclusively?
Have women, then, no hands to labor, no judgment to plan, or resolution to
pursue a project? I am ready to concede to your sex superior prowess in bodily
exercises; but I am yet to be convinced, that nature made the female that
passive animal, which custom exhibits in our cities. My resolution is fixed --
my plan is arranged -- Mr. Brooks approves it -- at least acquiesces in it.

May I ask the nature of it?

'I have no desire to keep it a secret, particularly from you. I am going to
commence author by profession. For the present I shall remain in his house, as
a boarder. It Is no hastily formed project, but the result of serious
consideration.'

I was struck dumb with surprise and regret.

'What ails you, Mental?' said he; 'are you unwell?'

Why did you not acquaint me with this plan yesterday? said I. It perhaps would
have been possible to have procured some similar employ myself.

'Certainly nothing is more easy. Mr. Brooks himself means to offer you a
proposal this very day.'

Why did he not propose it yesterday?

'What happened yesterday, then, Sir? Is it too late? Tell me, what of
yesterday?'

"O, Madam! -- O, Elinor! -- yesterday was a fatal day. Depressed with gloomy
ideas, I wandered through the busy streets of this metropolis, ruminating on
the past, and on the future. I looked back, without much regret, at what I have
left, but with sorrow at what I have done. I had sacrificed the most important
part of life to an implicit submission to another's judgment. I had lost that
"tide in the affairs of men, which leads to fortune," and nothing but miseries
and shallows presented themselves in the rest of my voyage.' In all the
boundless ocean of futurity I could behold no single spot on which to cast
Hope's anchor.

"As I walked on, musing in this strain, the carriage of a celebrated Pleader
passed me, in which he lolled at ^ase; and opposite to him sat his son, a youth
seemingly about my own age. I sighed; perhaps (I ought to own the truth) I
envied him. Yes, Elinor, envied him; for that which is emulation where
competition is open, is envy where it is shut.

"Would I were that happy youth, sighed I. What admirable exercise for the mind
does such a profession open! -- what opportunities for displaying its powers!
And it is mere prejudice to imagine a man cannot possess a liberal mind, who is
a lawyer.

"The carriage stopped -- Instinctively I followed them into the Guild Hall.
The courts were sitting. A cause was arguing -- I listened -- I became
interested in the arguments -- I wondered at the omission of many, which would
have made for or against the question. The judge rose to give his opinion. I
had anticipated much that he said. My proud heart fluttered; I was a pleader in
imagination, I applauded myself -- was happy in my fancies. The verdict was
given; the crowd dispersed; and then -- I felt what I really was!

"As the concourse of people separated at the door, one cried, shaking
another's hand -- 'I must go -- so and so -- such business calls me.' Another
replied -- 'I should have been at such a place.' Every one appeared to be
running after some object that occupied his mind, and brought emolument to
himself. 'And where shall I go!' sighed I.

"In King Street I met a mob, dragging a poor ragged wretch to justice, who had
been detected in picking a pocket. I mingled with the crowd to hear the
examination -- 'What means have you of getting a livelihood?' said the
magistrate. The culprit was silent -- 'Why then, to save you from the gallows,
I shall send you for a soldier.'

"What means have you of getting a livelihood! rung in my ears. I traversed
street after street. Often would I check myself with the question -- What means
have I of getting a livelihood? Where am I going? Not to my father, mother,
sister, or brother -- these are unmeaning sounds to me! Not to my home -- even
that cheering sound, which delights the poorest, was but a mockery to me --
Then darted across my mind -- yes, let me own it -- your image, Elinor. I saw,
at that moment, the utter impossibility of your ever being mine -- nay, bear
with me a moment! -- I saw you given to some rich idiot, whose bigotry might
please old Nutting; and I almost cursed existence!

"Just then the martial sound of fife and drum struck my ears. A recruiting
party appeared -- I paused! -- What means have you of getting a livelihood!
still rung in ears. Phrenzy seized me -- I ran to the lieutenant, and offered
him my hand -- 'I'll serve the King!' cried I. The men pulled off their hats,
and gave three cheers. The lieutenant shook me by the hand; and, after looking
in my (...) exclaimed with an oath -- 'Harry Mental! He had been my chum at
Eton.'

'Merciful heaven! and I have been the cause of this,' cried Elinor. 'O, then,
it is time, my Henry -- my love -- it is time to throw off every little
affectation of our sex, and let you see my heart -- a heart, my Henry, that,
whether you accept or reject it, is only yours. I love you Henry; and, go
where you will, no earthly power, that leaves me life* shall separate me from
you.'

Excuse these few drops of weakness!' said Mental, as he wiped his eyes --
"They are sacred to the memory of a martyr! -- Yes, Sir, she made this frank
avowal of her love, whilst her beauteous face concealed its virgin blushes in
my bosom -- O! memory -- memory! -- too faithful memory!" --

And again the tears would flow.

"A declaration so frank, so noble, so worthy of her uncommon character, was
met, on my part, by one at least as sincere, as ardent, as disinterested, as
her own.

"The lieutenant being my friend, by his interest I obtained a discharge from
my rash engagement; and Elinor and myself were shortly after married.

"Mr. Brooks continued the friendly rock on which we built our little bower of
bliss. His counsel directed, his benevolence aided, his generosity munificently
remunerated our labors. He was engaged in a very extensive concern, and found
us abundant employ. Elinor wrote a Novel, which succeeded well. We published
jointly a volume of Poetry; and we mutually labored at translations.'
Competence was the sweet reward of our labors, supplying us with all the
necessaries, and many of the decent luxuries of life. We resided in a small but
neat cottage at Walworth; only visiting the metropolis occasionally.

"The life I now lead was the very reality of that picture which imagination
had taught my youthful heart to dote upon; and yet, possessing this reality, I
was not content. When literary compositions became the means of my subsistence,
I found it irksome; I fancied it a mean employ of talent to let out for hire. I
grew dissatisfied, I formed a variety of new schemes, which alternately
delighted and disgusted me.

"A period however approached, which compelled me to submit to the irksomeness,
and even meanness (as I deemed it,) of my employment. My Elinor bore me a
daughter. I wept tears of joy; my heart beat with rapture; for at that moment,
Sir, I did not dream how many curses, in disguise, I hailed as blessings -- I
sometimes laugh to think how my silly heart was cheated."

[Here Mental laughed, but in a manner that conveyed the misery and horror of
his recollections!]

He continued --

"A year or two marched onwards in the track of time unmarked by any record of
the memory; but about the time my little girl was three years old, and began to
prattle, there happened an event which is so firmly printed on my mind's
register, that not even the flaming fingers of the fiends of hell can burn the
page, nor all the pitying dews that drop from angels' eyes blot out the bloody
character!

"But spare me now a task I feel beyond my powers -- Retire -- retire, my young
friend -- See me tomorrow; and come prepared to hear a tale of horror --!"

The anguish of his heart was visible in the struggling features of his face,
and he breathed painfully convulsive sighs. George pressed his hand and retired
in silence.

CHAP. XII.
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all!
SHAKESPEARE.
"THIS tale of horrors, to which he alluded," said George, musing on his way
home, "must be the murder of the Louisa of his ballad, and the Elinor of his
tale. Why does he change the name then?"

A chain of conjectures on poor Mental's tale occupied his mind till he reached
home, when a fresh occurrence demanded his attention.

Upon entering the drawing room, he started back with surprise, at the sight of
the harp, the lamp, and the stool, which he had the preceding night seen
deposited by Mental, under the stone in the haunted aisle. There was nobody in
the room -- he had found the hall door open, and had entered without seeing any
of the servants. Descending the staircase he met old Joseph. --

"O, Sir!" said Joseph, "such discoveries!"

"Such discoveries!" cried George -- "Where?"

"At the haunted aisle, Sir. Have you not seen the music, and the lamp?"

"Yes: -- but how were they discovered?"

"I discovered them -- " with an air of impatience. "This morning, Sir, I was
going to the doctor's for some conserve of roses, for Mrs. Meredith, the
housekeeper, who has got a terrible blight in her eyes, as I take it, by
sitting in the garden when the night air -- "

"Well -- well, Joseph -- you were going to the doctor's -- never mind what
about."

"True, Sir, as you say, that is no matter; that is neither here nor there as to
the discovery. Well, Sir, the nearest way to Doctor Saffron lies through the
park, and the ruins; and though I have many times gone round by the road way
for fear, I was determined this morning to go boldly on through the haunted
aisle: and so I did; for, since our search there, I began to think less of the
matter than I used to do. I did tremble a little, to be sure, when I got there;
but some how or other, as if Providence had ordered it so, I grew bold when I
had been there a while; and finding myself a little fatigued with my walk, I
sits me down boldly upon the very tomb where they say the naked lady sits every
night. Now only mind, Sir, what great discoveries sometimes happen from
trifling things. I had a hat on that was bran new last Sunday; the day was hot,
so I pulls off my hat, and lies it down upon the tomb. -- Well when I had
rested me, I takes my hat up, and, behold, all the top of the crown was soaked
in lamp oil. I was struck very strange, to think how this could happen: --
when, lo, and behold ye, I find a quantity of oil, as if it had been spilt upon
the tomb stone; and I find it had dripped, dripped, dripped, all the way along
the moniment to a large stone covered over with moss, and beyond that stone not
a drop of oil was there to be seen or smelt. Then all of a sudden, it came into
my head about the light that has been so often seen of a night. And -- "

"Enough -- enough -- " cried George with his usual impetuosity of temper -- "I
know the rest, good Joseph, and will spare you the trouble of reciting it --
You moved the stone -- and there the harp and the lamp was sound -- But here
comes Sir James."

"The strangest discoveries!" said the baronet.

"Joseph has been relating it, Sir," replied George.

"Well," continued the knight -- "and what conjectures do you draw from it?"

Mr. Sandall, Mrs. and Miss Barnwell joined them.

"The music that has been heard, and the rights that have been seen, are
rationally accounted for, at least, by this discovery," said Gearge; but the
performer of these nocturnal orgies we have yet to discover. I should think,
Mr. Sandall, a ghost would not be at the trouble of hiding those things?"

Mr. Sandall was silent.

"It seems a strange propensity," said Sir James, "in any man to amuse himself
in such midnight recreations. I know nobody I could suspect of such exploits;
unless, indeed, the strange old fellow, who is the proprietor of the ruins."

"And who else would you suspect, Sir James," said Sandall, "Is not the man
known to be every thing that is bad? Who knows for what infernal purposes he
might hold his nightly sittings there? These are strange times, Sir James. I
was reading to you the History of the Illuminati, a book which proves the
existence of conspirators against all the world; and I believe that this
country is not free from them. The place is retired; Mental's house is large;
and no one is seen to enter his door by day light. Now, who knows but he may
entertain in that house, or have concealed about the ruins a gang of these
horrible villains, who would go any lengths to overturn all religion and order.
I should not presume to dictate to you, Sir James; but you are a Magistrate,
Sir James; and a hint to a man of your penetration is sufficient. -- "

George would certainly have incurred the displeasure of the knight by a hearty
laugh at his chaplain, had he not been prevented by a noise in the hall below,
and alarmed at the voice of Mental himself.

The rumor of the discovery had spread widely in a short time, and had
gathered numberless additions in its progress: till at length the story of a
murder, committed by Mental, had actually gathered an assembly of peasantry
about his gate, who were pointing to his house, and significantly lifting up
their hands and eyes to heaven. The old man had noticed them; and by piecemeal
had obtained information of the discovery.

Rudely rushing into the drawing room, to the extreme terror of Mr. Sandall and
the ladies; his head covered, his hands clenched, his eyes darted anger and
revenge -- "By what authority, what law -- by the show of what prerogative, is
my property removed from my own state, and placed here? exclaimed he -- "Yet do
not answer me! I know the tale that hangs upon your lips. But I demand to know
the author of those vile calumnies, which the deluded peasantry are blowing
round my dwelling. I think, I trace the infamous suggestion in the coward
countenance of yonder priest," pointing to Mr. Sandall.

"Me! -- me!" exclaimed Sandall, skulking behind Sir James' chair. "Mr. Mental,
I assure you, Sir, I have had no hand whatever in the business."

"What! can you lie?" said Mental -- "O, how ill does it become the man whose
lips spout forth the purest and sublimest doctrines ever taught mankind, to
retail calumnies: How ill does it become a man, of any faith, to wound the
reputation of his absent fellow; then shrink at his approach, conscious of the
injury bestowed, and yet most dastardly disown the blow!"

Mr. Sandall was of a pale complexion; but at this moment his lips were paler
than his cheeks, and he could not stand upright.

"Does your reverence know this man?" asked Mental. [It was farmer Cornall.]
Sandall trembled. "The tale you have instilled in this man's ear, was wanton,
or malicious. Be it as it may, Sir, it shall be refuted. You have spread
stories of enchantment, necromancy, nay, of murder! to my prejudice; that I
conceal banditti of Illuminati in my house. Now, Sir James," -- to the knight
-- "you are a magistrate -- I surrender myself on the charge of this zealous
Protector of the christian faith, and am your prisoner till acquitted. Go to my
servant, take the keys, search* every room -- nay I insist on it -- search
every drawer, examine every paper. I fear no discoveries."

After many objections, Sir James consented to visit the residence of Mr.
Mental, as the only means of averting the threats of the laborers, assembled
from the neighboring villages, to pull down the house.

Accompanied by Mr. Sandall, and George, he walked toward the house; and at
the particular request of Sir James, Mental went with them, smiling as he
passed the insulting throng assembled round them, which all the eloquence and
authority of the knight could scarcely keep in order.

As they were entering the house, Mental took an opportunity of whispering to
George, unnoticed -- "You have not tattled, boy?"

"I am no babbler," said George.

"Then whatever you may now observe, be secret still. However strange or
mysterious may appear my future conduct, at present disclose nothing that you
know concerning me." Then squeezing his hand -- "Let this memorandum sometimes
claim a place for me in your thoughts!" -- and he sighed heavily, as he slipped
a miniature into his hands -- George put it in his bosom.

By this time they had reached the sitting and sleeping room -- "Here, Sir
James," said Mental, "I eat and sleep; it is my whim; there is no statute to the
contrary, I believe, Mr. Chaplain! That closet will open, by turning the handle
of the lock. It contains my wardrobe, a few changes of linen, and a roquelaire.
The bayonet and belt, that hang upon that peg, I once wore, nay, I once used! I
drew human blood with that weapon -- Christian blood, Mr. Sandall; -- English
blood, Sir James. 'Twas an unhappy cause: but I was then a soldier in the
ranks, and endeavored to annihilate the powers of mind that I possessed, for
they were useless; and my arm sent death where the discretion of my officers
directed. It makes me cold to think on it. I see the belt is moldy, and the
bayonet rusty. I wish they were buried in the plains of Quebec. There is
nothing else worth notice in this room."

They entered the apartment of poor old Sarah, who was in tears.

"Why -- why -- Sarah -- Come, come, dry these tears -- I can bear any calamity
better than to see a faithful creature, like you, miserable through my means,"
said Mental.

"It han't for myself, its for you I cry. I always thought it would come out.

"Come out!" said Sandall. "What do you mean, good woman?"

"O, the study -- the study!"

"Poor wretch!" cried Mental.

"What about the study, good woman?" said Sandall: and then taking Sir James'
arm -- "Come, lead us to the study."

" I lead you to the study! -- God forbid! no, no -- let them that will, go for
me," cried Sarah.

George recollected her former dread of the study.

"This faithful creature has resided with me twenty years," said Mental. "In
all that time she has not seen the inside of my study. I spend many hours there
alone; and often the whole night if it rains, and I am prevented from walking
in the abbey, which I prefer in fine weather. The circumstance has created a
mysterious fear in poor Sarah's brain, and she would not enter the study, I
believe, to save her life. But you shall yourselves judge how little cause of
terror exists there."

As they were leaving the room, Sarah took an opportunity, unperceived by
Mental, to pull Sandall by the coat, and make earnest signs to him not to go.
George himself was staggered for a moment by this circumstance -- But Sandall
seemed petrified with terror.

"Come, Sir James," said Mental, "I Will show you this study."

"They moved on. At the door of the kitchen Sandall turned round, and perceived
that Sarah had dropped upon her knees, and was in the attitude of praying. His
knees tottered as he ascended two slights of stairs, which led to a gallery, at
the end of which was a door, which Mental informed them was the study. He
opened the door, and the first object that struck their sight was, the lid of a
coffin covered with black cloth: there was a plate fixed on it, with this
inscription --

Mrs. Elinor Mental, Died July 12th, 1772; Aged 22.

George cast his eyes curiously about the study, and appeared entering in his
memory an inventory of its contents.

The coffin lid was placed upright in one corner of the room; on a corner shelf
over it was a human skull, in excellent preservation; near it was a writing
table, on which burnt a lamp, the shutters of the windows being continually
closed; the floor was strewed with books, pamphlets, and newspapers. A chest
under the desk contained a large quantity of ma^^script. In another corner
stood an electrical machine, covered with dust, the cylinder broken. In
another, a furnace had been raised for chemical experiments, but had evidently
been long in disuse, and was half concealed by broken crucibles and charcoal
dust. The general appearance of the place conveyed the most gloomy ideas, and
its furniture constituted melancholy memorandums of energies of mind decayed
and faded; as tattered banners and broken helmets tell of some valiant arm laid
low!

As Mental stood with his arms folded, leaning against the wainscot, Sir James
and Mr Sandall alternately fixed an eye of wonder on the apartment and its
mysterious owner. After a considerable silence --

"Well, Mr. Sandall," said Mental, "you are now in the very council chamber of
your supposed secret committee! -- You have my willing permission to inspect
any paper, book, or drawer; and if the appearance of this place, or any thing
in it, suggests any question, even of curiosity, I will as truly answer it as
if I were on oath.

"That piece of elm, covered with black cloth, was intended to be buried with
the person whose name is inscribed on the plate. I had some regard for her
memory, and chose to have it preserved. -- 'Twas a strange fancy, you may say
-- Be it so.

"That structure of bone, on the shelf over it, I also kept as a memorandum --
It was once the repository of much intelligence; and in those sockets once
beamed eyes, which glistened with the dews of sensibility, and won the gazer's
admiration ere their owner spoke. Yet, Sir, there was a something contained
within that skull, which plotted and executed the most mischievous damnation
that ever blasted the tender blossoms of human hope! -- I now gaze upon it by
the hour, and wonder where the animating spirit of the deserted cavity has
fled? -- We can gather no intelligence of this nature, Mr. Sandall. Science is
ignorance, and genius madness, as to such information.

"That machine, whose electrical powers have amused me many a year, attracted
for a while the powers of my reason; till, having gained a thorough knowledge
of its principles, my mind sought novelty. The labors of chemistry kept me
still longer in play; till at length research was satisfied. But nothing I can
read, nothing I can study, resolves me what I am! -- whence I came! -- or
whither I shall go! This perplexity, may, and I know does, trouble me more than
many men. I own, too, its inutility -- Yet, be the torture of doubt its
punishment; and let me not incur suspicions that I do not merit. I know no
Illuminati, Mr. Sandall."

"Why, Sir, I -- I -- am surprised at -- your odd ways. I -- I -- have no
reason to doubt your good intentions -- But it appears strange, that a person
of your sense -- that is, it is -- as I may say -- it is surprising" --
stammered out Mr. Sandall --

"Spare yourself, Sir," said Mental -- and I will spare you also; for I
perceive you are not such a being as a man of any strength of mind ought to be
offended with. Therefore, though you are the means of again unsettling me --
the busy meddler that once more drives me from a spot I chose to die on -- yet
I, atheist as you deem me, can be so much a christian as to forgive you.

"To you, Sir James, I owe a fuller explanation. In a few words then, Sir -- I
am a miserable man! -- whose views of happiness have been almost constantly
obscured by unexpected blights and storms, just as I thought them mine: and
being of a frame and constitution, perhaps, ill suited to these buffetings of
fortune, I find they have inflicted wounds upon my heart which have engendered
a disease, whose baneful influence has made me seem the thing you see me --
What I really am, is my own concern -- But I am sorry that, if by word or act,
I have offended you; and I know I have.

"You, Sir James, are happily not troubled with the mania of inquiry, and are
content to take this world as you find it. I have too frequently indulged a
pettishness of mind at your expense, when I have aimed to decompose that order
of things, and system of society, with which I am dissatisfied. Let me, then,
make you the only recompense I can, by a solemn and sincere assurance, that
what I have frequently uttered in your presence, has been the offspring of a
distorted fancy -- a sickly heart -- a feverish, giddy brain. -- Let me assure
you, Sir, I am no wiser man, because I can detect an error in another's creed
-- I am no happier man, because I laugh at others' hopes of future life and
bliss. No, no Sir; I know now less than when I was a boy: the learning and the
sciences of men have but confused the simple thoughts of nature; and as to
happiness -- Ha! -- ha! -- ha! -- (grinning horribly) -- this world affords me
no prospect of peace; and as to futurity, my doubts obscure all hope.

"Thus much I owed to you, Sir James; but the suspicions of this reverend
gentleman are as groundless as they are mean, and unbecoming that faith which
teaches charity!"

Sir James apologized. Mr. Sandall bowed, and stammered; and, after examining a
few empty apartments, they retired.

On their return home, the knight published Mr. Mental's innocence, and sent a
servant to his house with the articles found in the haunted aisle.

CHAP. XIII.
Ah, me! the prospect saddened as she sung;
Loud on my startled ear the death-bell rung:
Chill darkness wrapped the pleasurable bowers,
While Horror, pointed to yon breathless clay,
"No peace be thine!" exclaimed -- "away, away."
BOWLS.
TOWARD evening, on the following day, as George was sauntering near home, a
postchaise passed him, in which were Mental and his old servant*

At the lodge gate the porter delivered him a packet. Concluding it came from
Mental, he hastened with it to his apartment, and broke the seal. On a slip of
paper was written the following note --

"The events of yesterday drive me from a retreat, in which I had hoped to die.
I shall see you no more till we meet in London -- In that polluted place I
shall awhile reside -- I shall discover your abode, and will not fail to see
you.

"In the meantime, I have hastily composed, for your perusal, the sequel of my
melancholy story. You will perceive what a blank there is in my affections --
how cold and empty a space my bosom has become. Sometimes I think, that if the
glow of social feeling is ever more to warm my frozen breast, it must be
kindled by yourself. But if my story fail to gain the tear of sympathy, I trust
it may at least, be beneficial to you as a warning.

"Farewell. May the present tranquillity of your breast never be exchanged for
the torture that racks the bosom of

"MENTAL."


The narrative ran thus --

"There resided near our cottage, at Walworth, a youth of fortune, who visited
us, and became our intimate acquaintance. I soon discovered in him uncommon
genius, and ardent feelings.

"This youth, with about ten or eleven others, of similar dispositions and
talents, had formed themselves into a club, for the purpose of candid and free
inquiry -- I had the honor of being invited a member.

"My friend possessing, from his fortune, a considerable influence with the
club, his patronage procured me a respect I otherwise was not entitled to; and
I was elected their secretary. I say nothing of our labors, which were
published at a joint expense, and circulated with a zeal beyond description.

"Experience however, has taught me one truth, that every structure of morality
or philosophy we raised upon the ruins of those we overthrew, is unable to
stand the test of practical experiment, and, are, many of them at least,
greater nuisances in society than those we attempted to destroy.

"As secretary of this society, my house became a sort of rendezvous for its
members. My Elinor and I were delighted at our good fortune in this respect, as
it afforded us many hours of rational amusement in the conversation of men of
taste and letters.

"Among others was a celebrated painter of that day. He had a person of manly
beauty; a countenance expressive of the most tender sympathies; his manners
were engaging; his converse truly captivating. We delighted in the company of
Mr. Linmore, and he seemed to receive an equal satisfaction in our's -- His
gratitude for the humble entertainment our roof afforded him was beyond all
bounds. His paintings were the ornaments of our ^^oms, and the testimonies of
his favor.

"We passed the greater part of a year in a state the nearest to bliss I ever
saw on earth. Fortune seemed determined to heap her favors on us all at once;
for in the course of this period Mr. Nutting, the grocer, died; and smitten
with the injustice of possessing the fortune which Elinor's conduct bestowed
upon him, on his death bed made a will, by which she regained her right to a
property, that made us completely independent.

Now, mark the fickleness of fortune. Just as the sun of prosperity was
ascending the meridian, and his beams had gilded a wide and beauteous landscape
of enchanting hopes, a little sable cloud sprung up, and floated in a corner of
the hemisphere. It sailed toward my dwelling. It swelled as it drew near; it
increased till the sun was hidden from my sight; and then descending, burst
upon my head, o'erwhelmed all prospects of the hopes I had beheld, and left me
nothing to contemplate, save the frightful desolations of despair!

"To dwell as little as possible upon a subject that snakes every nerve with
horror at its remembrance, know, then young man, that this specious moralist,
this zealous friend, this smooth speeched Linmore, proved himself a most
consummate villain.

"He came to our dwelling, and ^ound Peace, Innocence and Love, its inmates; he
saw as fond a (...) as Nature ever designed for each other's bosom. What, then,
was that principle that could excite within his breast the horrid purpose, the
execrable, vile design, to mar such bliss? "With the dissembled visage of
benevolence, he must have borne a heart that languished for the murder of his
species, or how could he deliberately have planned the destruction of one of
Nature's noblest works!

"You have not yet felt the influence of love; you cannot, therefore, feel like
those who have. But, if you shall ever love, if all the mental energies, and
all the glow of passion that constitute the essence of existence in your
nature, ever center in one point, ^ix on one object -- you may then conceive
what I experienced, when, all at once, I found that object vanished. O! what a
chilling void I felt in my breast! Such it became, soon as suspicion pointed to
her dishonor; -- but, when I tell you -- Alas! my poor brain cannot bear the
recollection! --

"With trembling hand I take my pen once more. -- Circumstances awakened in my
breast a jealousy of Linmore, and determined me to watch his every emotion.

"Start not: -- my jealousy was well founded -- The damned darts of the arch
fiend succeeded -- Virtue was subdued, and treacherous lust triumphant -- O!
that the lightnings of heaven had blasted him or me, ere I had seen the smiling
murderer!

"One fatal day, when having pretended a day's absence, I concealed myself at
home, I saw her enter her chamber, and in a few minutes Linmore followed. This
was conviction; and all the powers of my reason fell beneath the impulse of
revenge -- My hand indistinctively grasped a dagger that was near me -- I
rushed into the room, and, aiming a just reward at the seducer's heart, the
cursed villain shrunk from my vengeance, and it fell on the poor, lost Elinor!

"The coward fled, and I was discovered kneeling by my bleeding wife, the fatal
weapon still buried in her breast.

"In that moment of agony, I knew not what occurred. I was dragged by force
from the body, and confined, in my own house, under the care of some medical
gentlemen.

"In a few days my senses returned, and I was able to give some account of the
horrible transaction; which being corroborated by the circumstance of Linmore's
slight, the coroner's jury returned a verdict, accidental death, and the
remains of my ^oor Elinor were interred.

"Though I was not then deemed a madman, my reason had sustained a shock it
never has perfectly recovered.

"When I looked back upon the happiness I had enjoyed, and gazed upon the
dreadful wreck around me, my blood now chilled to ice -- Now slowed like
burning lava through my veins -- and my affrighted reason fled at the horrid
view! My adoration of the object would scarcely allow me to believe her false,
and my love seemed unaccountably increased!

"She was then in her coffin -- I flew to it -- I threw myself in agony upon
it; nor would I quit it, till my strange wish was gratified, in preserving the
coffin lid, as a memento, to be ever in my sight. Another was accordingly made.

"After her interment, I secluded myself some months from the world. Human
nature suffered a degradation indeed in my estimation. I grew disgusted with
mankind, and with the system of the moral government of the universe. Yet I had
not then experienced more than half the misery I have since endured.

"My cottage at Walworth now became frightful, every room reminded me of some
happy scene! and brought to mind my Elinor! They brought to me my child -- O,
how it chilled my blood to look at her! I thought her little eyes seemed to
dart reproach and vengeance on her mother's murderer -- I could not bear her
presence!

"After some time I determined to quit not only Walworth, but England; and went
to reside in America.

"I placed my daughter under the care of a respectable person in the
neighborhood; made an ample provision for her education; and, in case of my
death, had left her the whole of her mother's fortune.

"Now, Sir, let your imagination, and your pity, follow a heart broken man to
another quarter of the globe; and even there you will find, that misery pursued
him.

"Scarcely was I settled in any degree of intimacy with any one of my fellow
creatures, and had begun to feel something like humanity reviving in my heart,
when those troubles, of which the world knows so well, broke out.

"My friend was an American by birth, and sided with Congress. My opinions,
though they did not coincide with the rulers of England, yet compelled me to
resist the entreaties of my friend to take up arms against my mother country. I
would have remained neuter, but that could not be; and thus, soon as my heart
began to cherish a love for my friend, my arm was lifted to destroy him. 'Twas
then I was compelled to wear and use the arms you saw at my residence. But let
me bury in oblivion my country's shame!

"One instance of retributive justice I met with in America, which in some
degree, reconciled me to the notion of a Providence. The villain, Linmore who
had made that country his refuge, was in prison when I arrived there,
implicated in a charge of murder. He was one of a party where murder ensued, in
consequence of an unlawful project. He was executed, and dissected. I offered
any price for his skeleton, and did actually obtain the skull, which you saw in
my closet.

"Disgusted with the scenes which passed before me, I embraced the first
opportunity of returning to England, and bought the estate of the abbey, near
your uncle's.

"This retreat suited me well. Its distance from any other dwelling, the
romantic scenery around it, and the gloomy walks among the abbey ruins,
accorded well with 'my soul's sadness.'

"The old woman I retained as my servant, had lived some time in the house
before I bought it. When I received the little furniture I wanted, I deposited
the coffin lid, and the human skull, in my study; and from that moment the poor
woman resolved never to enter it. Here I had proposed to end my days of
disappointment and remorse.

"Time will not now permit me to describe the state of my troubled mind. --
Shook to its foundation was my faith in all revealed religion. I employed whole
nights in the painful study of metaphysics, with no other reward than a
confirmation or increase of doubts. Resolving to give over every other pursuit
o^ that nature, I flew for amusement to chemistry, electricity, anatomy; and
grew tired of each.

"Hating the sight of human beings, I generally kept close at home all day, and
walked among the ruins when others slept.

"Among a few other memorandums of my former happiness, I reserved the harp
discovered in the old aisle: -- it was my Elinor's delight!

"Annexed to these memoirs are several pieces of poetry, which I composed in
the calm silence of midnight at the abbey -- they all relate to my poor Elinor,
(...) I have there called Louisa!

"Thus rolled away year after year. I only saw the active world through the
medium of report. Newspapers, pamphlets, reviews, and various publications
showed me the bustling scenes of men, on which I gazed an unconcerned
spectator. -- Yet there was still one object in the world, for whom my heart
felt a glowing interest -- my daughter! My young Elinor often started to the
vision of my memory, and painted me with the dreadful anticipation of her fate
in such a world of treachery and woe.

"I heard frequently from her governess, but I could never bring myself to see
her. The accounts I received were, with little variation, satisfactory, until
her eighteenth year; when, all at once, a letter came with tidings that,
without any known cause, she had eloped!

"Any attempt to describe my feelings at this intelligence were vain. I
reproached myself as the author of her guilty fate, in having abandoned her
education to strangers.

"A severe illness followed this intelligence, which threatened my dissolution.
-- Every effort to discover her proved unavai^ing. Where she is, or whether she
exists at all, I know not. Thus misery weighs down my declining years; and yet
I live -- live in torturing suspense as to my child -- in dreadful doubt as to
her fate. Will you, then not pity a miserable old man, almost distracted, and
commiserate his fate! -- Talk of him as little as possible; but when his name
is mentioned, do that justice to his story which these memoirs enable you.

"In London I shall see yo^; till then, farewell, youth. Thy breast is pure --
thy slumbers are sweet! -- May they ever be so. Farewell.

"MENTAL."


CHAP. XIV.
Rank abundance breeds,
In gross and pamper^d cities* sloth and lust,
And wantonness, and gluttonous excess:
Such London is, by taste and wealth proclaimed
The fairest capital in all the world;
By riot and incontinence the worst.
COWPER.
THE departure of Mental from the abbey was soon buzzed around the country, and
various stories were circulated concerning him.

Whilst curiosity, or the love of scandal, actuated the many, George felt his
heart warmly interested in the fate of so unhappy a fellow creature, and sighed
earnestly for the power of alleviating his sorrows.

The tender hearted Eliza and the benevolent Mrs. Barnwell, to whom he had
communicated the outlines of the melancholy tale, united in commiserations for
the sufferings of a man, whose life, almost from infancy, had been marked by
disappointment and sorrow.

"How much is he to be pitied!" said Mrs. Barnwell: -- "his heart torn with the
keenest sorrows, and his mind prevented by skepticism from reposing in the
consolations of religion. Let his story, my dear George, teach you the value of
those truths a departed saint early instilled into your mind, and never suffer
the subtilty of eloquence to destroy those impressions which christianity has
formed in your heart."

"How unfortunate for him," said George, "that doctrines, so admirably adapted
to the human heart, should have been presented to his view in so distorted a
shape as they were by the Nuttings. It surely is no^ assuming too much, to
attribute his rejection of all revelation to that circumstance. Such a mind as
Mental's would doubtless have received the uncorrupted principles of
christianity as congenial to its wants, and its expectations, and would not
have remained, as at present, an unorganized mass of useless energies, which
are attracted to one center; but, flying off at all points, rouse the
imagination of the most painful doubts, and leave the heart unbenefited by
their operations.

"Your remarks are certainly just," replied Mrs. Barnwell; "and it affords me
the greatest pleasure to hear such observations fall from a son I am so soon to
part with. In the long absence we are to suffer, it will be no inconsiderable
source of pleasing reflection, that you leave us with such sentiments.

"The scenes, in which you are about to perform a part, my George, are of a
complexion that dazzle and intoxicate the mind; and you will have occasion
frequently to recur to those principles for direction; let me hope you will
ever make them your guide, and then, I am persuaded, I shall never blush at the
mention of my son."

Conversations of a similar nature frequently took place till the day of
departure arrived, when George, with abundant proofs of the liberality of his
uncle, quitted his hospitable roof, which still remained the asylum of his
mother and Eliza.

For the first time George entered the metropolis -- for the first time,
breathed the fashionable air of Portland Place, where, Mr. Emery resided.

From the account George had received from Mental of the meanness and avarice
of traders, he was not a little surprised to observe the elegant appearance of
Mr. Emery's residence. His astonishment increased, when, upon admission into
the hall, he was surrounded by four or five stout, tall fellows in blue and
silver, large bunches of flowers in their bosoms, and white cambric
handkerchiefs in their hands. The youth was absolutely confused, and felt some
difficulty in persuading those gentlemen of the ceremonies to procure him an
audience of Mr. Emery, who was entertaining the cabinet ministers that evening
at dinner, at his own table.

They condescended, however, at length, to show him to a parlour, where, in
about an hour afterward, Mr. Emery came to him; George having sent in his name.

Instead of the merchant of the old school George expected to meet, Mr. Emery
was a man of the most elegant deportment, dressed in the extreme of fashion.

He entered the room in ^stile so commanding, yet easy, that his presence
bespoke the most accomplished manners.

"I am extremely concerned, Sir," said he "that very particular people are with
me to day, and prevent my receiving you more agreeably with my wishes, and the
respect due to a nephew of Sir James Barnwell. Allow me, however, to
congratulate you upon your safe arrival, and to introduce you to Mrs. Emery and
her daughters."

George apologized for his appearance, and would have avoided the introduction.

O, by no means, said Mr. Emery, ringing -- In what part of the house is your
mistress, said he to the servant who appeared.

The ladies have drove down to the pavilion this morning, Sir; and do not
return till tomorrow.

That Is unfortunate, indeed: but you will excuse me, I Am sure; we shall be
better acquainted soon, and apologies will become unnecessary. -- William,
serve dinner in this room to my friend Mr. Barnwell, and tell the butler to
bring what wine he orders.

With a cordial shake of the hand, Mr. Emery left his young friend to a
soliloquy, full of wonder, at the scenes before him. The manner in which he was
received astonished him: -- Cabinet ministers dining with a merchant -- was a
novelty to him; but more strange than every thing else, appeared to him the
idea of a man's not knowing whether his wife and daughters were at home, or in
the country.

A profuse dinner was served up, consisting of every delicacy that the season
afforded, and in a style of legance beyond all George had ever seen.

It was near ten o'clock when he had finished his sumptuous dinner; and about
eleven, he was thinking of retiring to rest, when Mr. Emery entered,
introducing a young man, apparently about twenty, of an (...) countenance and
delicate frame.

"Mr. Barnwell," said he, "this is a pupil of mine. Mr. Rigby, let me recommend
Mr. Barnwell to your friendship: I have mentioned him to you before."

"I shall be very proud of rendering you any service, Sir," said Mr. Rigby.

Mr. Emery retired, calling to the servants in the hall -- "The chariot in a
quarter of an hour."

The pupils were left together. What a contrast did they form! George's cheeks
glowed with health -- Rigby's were sunk, and pale; George's form and and limbs
proclaimed the temperance and exercise he used -- Rigby's slender legs and
shrivelled arms as plainly declared a life of sloth and intemperance. The dress
of the former was simple and manly -- that of the latter, disgustingly
effeminate: his whole appearance prejudiced George against him, whilst he in
return considered George as a boor.

-- "The chariot in a quarter of an hour" was echoed three or four times in the
hall.

George could not refrain from asking whether any thing particular drew Mr.
Emery abroad so late.

"So late! -- Eh, demme! -- that is neat -- Excusez moi -- Upon my soul I cannot
help laughing!" -- which laughing was merely a hectic barking. Why, my dear
fellow, you must be very raw -- very green, indeed! -- excusez -- moi -- its
not eleven!" -- whirling a gold watch round by the chain -- "The Principal's
only going his usual round."

"May I be so free as to inquire, what you mean by that phrase, Mr. Rigby? -- I
believe you know I am a stranger in London."

"O yes -- excusez moi -- that is plain enough! However, one should not be too
severe -- I remember when I -- I -- I -- was as great a quiz -- excusez moi --
as you, Sir -- By going his round -- I mean, looking in at the opera --
squeezing a few figurante -- lounging in the way of the scene-shifters, and
getting hissed off the stage. Then whirl to Lady Srongbox -- Splash away the
Spanish -- make an assignation for the morning -- and off again to the House --
take a lounge there for an hour -- get a bow from the Treasury Bench -- gape at
Doctor Sceptic's doubts -- and then to Brookes's -- lose a trifle -- get the
headache -- and dash home with two flambeaux by day light!"

"You are very happy at a description, Mr. Rigby," said George: -- "a little ad
libitum in the colors though, I presume."

"No, demme, not I -- I Am a plain matter of fact, absolutely. But what are you
going to do with yourself till bedtime?"

"That time is come with me, Sir, for I am fatigued."

"To bed at eleven o'clock -- O, horrible! For heaven's sake sham sick, my good
fellow -- sham sick -- or the servants will die with (...) convulsion of
laughter!"

George smiled; Mr. Rigby supposed, at his wit: it was, in fact, at his folly.

How wide a field for reflection did the incidents of the last few hours open
to a mind like George's, ever active and discerning, and -- "never less alone,
than when alone."

CHAP. XV.
Sound, unbroken youth,
Health ever blooming -- unambitious toil --
Calm contemplation -- and poetic ease.
THOMSON
FROM the specimens he had seen on the day of his arrival, George was prepared
to expect a very different style of living, from that which he had anticipated
in the country, and such was the reality.

He was established in Mr. Emery's house in the capacity rather of a private
secretary than a clerk. Instead of being confined from an early hour in the
morning till late at night, in posting ledgers, and copying invoices, as Sir
James had taught him to expect, and as was the case with all merchants' clerks
when Sir James was in trade, George found that the sons, or nephews, or cousins
of merchants, who threw a capital into the firm, under-went no such drudgery,
which is consigned to boys who had learnt to write fine hands at charity
schools.

About eleven o'clock George usually went from Portland Place to the
'compting-house, Broad Street Buildings, where Mr. Drudge, the fagging partner,
resided. Any communications of consequence, betwixt Mr. Emery and Mr. Drudge,
were conveyed by George; as well as papers that required the signature of the
former, who seldom visited the counting house himself.

From Broad Street Buildings to Batson's coffeehouse was a regular one o'clock
walk for George, where he met the rich Jew brokers, and made Mr. Emery's
proposals for the barter of bullion, consols, omnium, or lottery, according to
previous instructions; which, from his intimacy with ministers, gave generally
the tone to the market.

At three he paraded the Royal Exchange, and invited the foreign merchants to
dine in Portland Place, which completed the labors of the day; except upon
particular occasions, when letters of confidence were to be copied, or
memorials for contracts sent to the Treasury.

Such a slender portion of employ, left void a large space of time for his own
inclination to fill up.

It being but the commencement of the season, Mrs. Emery and her daughters were
seldom in town; and Mr. Emery was scarcely visible in his own house, except at
a few dinners, surrounded by company.

Mr. Rigby, in addition to an extreme opposition of taste and pursuits, had the
motives of jealousy and envy to render George disgustful to him; and therefore,
beyond the ceremonials of occasional meetings, they never spoke to each other.

Thus leisure, for a considerable time, was also solitude to George, who had
refused several invitations to visits, for the vulgar reason of not liking the
party.

A well stored library was his usual lounge after dinner, and in the evening he
amused himself with music, or drawing; in a familiar correspondence with his
sister; and occasionally in attempts at poetry, of which he was fond to excess.

The library of Mr. Emery comprised an assemblage of literature in all its
branches, and the privilege of access to such a store was, perhaps, the
greatest happiness George had ever experienced.

Having, one afternoon, finished reading Dr. Gregory's life of the unfortunate
Chatterton, he was detected in tears by the servant who brought him his tea and
the evening papers.

George hastily snatched up the newspaper, to conceal his emotion, and cast his
eyes rapidly over its contents.

Whilst his heart beat indignant at the fate of Chatterton, a paragraph
presented itself, in which the enormous sums paid in one season to Didelot and
his wife for dancing at the opera were enumerated.

"Good God!" exclaimed he, when left to himself, "how small a portion of this
wealth might have saved to England, and to the world, another Milton!"

His ardent mind pursued the melancholy thought, and he penned the following
sonnet:

SONNET.
Blush -- Blush ye great! to hear the frequent sigh
Despair extorts from many a Briton's breast,
Inspired by Genius, and by Want deprest,
Whose life is misery -- who^e hope -- to die!
Whilst in your gorgeous theaters, behold,
From foreign shores a pantomimic ^and
Sublimely daring -- on one leg to stand,
Delights your folly, and receives your gold.
O sons of Levity, with hearts of air,
Awake! arise from Fashion's flowery bed;
Go search where Genius lies, unhous'd, unsed;
And rescue suffering Merit from despair!
Unbend stern Suicide's determined brow,
And give his palsied heart with gratitude to glow!
Such were his pursuits, such his propensities; a conduct so different from
other young men of his age, was the source of ridicule all over the house. The
footmen, as they picked their teeth after dinner, "wondered where the devil the
Hottentot was bred?" The maids "never saw such an insipid creature in their
lives -- supposed he had left his heart behind him, if, indeed, he ever had
any;" whilst Mrs. Jennings, the housekeeper, vowed "that she verily believed,
for her part, that he was sent into the house as a spy upon their conduct."

This latter suspicion aroused the jealous resentment of the butler, and the
whole corpse domestique resolved upon a war of indolence against him, which,
however, the engaging suavity of his manners soon converted into the homage of
grateful respect.

Such was the situation of George, when orders arrived from the Pavilion to
prepare the house for the reception of its mistress during winter.

Though, to the rusticated mind of George, every apartment seemed an assemblage
of splendid unnecessaries, yet every apartment was thrown into confusion by the
addition or exchange of sofas, cabriolets, tripods, chandeliers, and chimney
ornaments, as if the house, for the first time, was to be furnished.

CHAP. XVI.
Time was, a sober Englishman would knock
His servants up, and rise by five o'clock;
Instruct his family in every rule,
And send his wife to church, his son to school;
Now times are changed --
POPE.
NEW scenes now opened. The reign of dissipation commenced for the season by
the arrival of Mrs. Emery and her daughters. George was introduced by Mr.
Emery. "Lord, child," said Mrs. Emery, "you cannot think how excessively I Have
been longing to see you, ever since I knew of your arrival. Well, how do you
like London? Is not it delightfully charming! Don't you think yourself
transported to Paradise? What do you think of the theaters? Which do you like
best, Drury Lane, or Covent Garden? Have you seen Parisot? Have you heard the
Banti?"

George was never so confused in his life, as at the abrupt volubility of this
lady. He was thinking how to reply to her string of questions, when all of a
sudden, she exclaimed -- "O, pray do me the favor to write a note to the
Countess of Codrington, to say we are come to town, and mean to be at the opera
to night; and do me the favor to write to the Duchess of -- O, no -- now I
think of it, it will be quite delightful to take them all by surprise -- and
I Will positively frighten them all out of their senses. Come, Emma -- Come,
Charlotte, looking at her watch, "we have just time enough to drive round the
squares before we dress;" and away they flew, leaving George in a state of
perfect astonishment.

At dinner he saw them again, and more particularly surveyed the Miss Emerys.
They were mere fashionables; their countenances rather pretty than handsome,
without any traces of intelligence or sensibility. The youngest possessed most
vivacity, and the eldest more sense; the former loved laughter, but the delight
of the latter was scandal.

As they were reputed fortunes, they were not without admirers, whom they both
kept in that doubting state of vassalage, so pleasing to the vanity of the
giddy part of the fair sex, but at which a woman of virtue and understanding
revolts.

By the attention of Lord Morley to Miss Emery, and the Rev. Mr. Eastwood to
Miss Charlotte, George easily discovered the favorites of the day.

The hour for the opera arrived; the carriages were ordered; each of the
favored lovers handed his idol to his own chariot, whilst Mr. Emery's was
reserved for Mrs. Emery and her new friend, George, of whom she affected to be
extravagantly fond! and kindly undertook to lead him through all the mazes of
the high world.

When they entered the magnificent structure of the opera house, which was
extremely crowded, George was absolutely overcome by the strength of the new
impressions which so sudden a blaze of splendour ^reated.

The opera was over, and the overtures of the ballet was performing. Upon a
mind tasteful by nature, and uncommonly susceptible, charms of music were not
lost. While every one else had seated themselves in the box, and were busily
employed in nodding round the brilliant circle, exchanging looks of smiling
affability, and at the same moment whispering mutual calumnies, George stood
absorbed in exquisite sensations. A tittering sort of laugh aroused him, and he
found he had been the laughing stock of the party.

"In the name of wonder," cried Lord Morley, "what have you found so
petrifying?"

"Why, child," said Mrs. Emery, "you have used an attitude in the wrong place.
Nobody ever listens to the overtures; and as to being astonished, you must
remember its the vulgarest thing in the world to be surprised at any thing one
sees!"

"Possibly," said Mr. Eastwood, "this is Mr. Barnwell's first appearance in
this character."

George assented.

"O, monstrous!" screamed Mrs. Emery. "Thou brute! -- A month in London and not
one night at the opera! How can you have possibly amused yourself?" said Lord
Morley. "Have tragedy and comedy entirely engrossed you?"

He had not seen either.

"Mercy on me," exclaimed Mrs. Emery, "what a task have I undertaken! -- Mon
petit enfant, come, tell your mama what you really have seen, and what you
really do know."

Such was the trifling that prevented George from paying any attention to the
music or dancers.

For what purpose do so many persons assemble here? thought he. The
entertainments of the orchestra or stage might certainly as well be altogether
omitted, as so slightly attended to. All that he had been permitted to see or
hear, only served to excite his curiosity, and determined him to take an early
opportunity of visiting the theater alone.

As they were leaving their box -- "I must relinquish going to the Duchess's
delightful party to night," said Mrs. Emery, "or dismiss my noviciate; for
positively, George, you would disgrace me. Besides nobody knows you. I should
have imagined Mr. Emery might, at least, have introduced you to a few
fashionables. But he is so necessary to the ministers. Do you think they will
give him a coronet, my Lord?" turning to Lord Morley.

"I know they can refuse him nothing," said Lord Morley.

"Well," said Mrs. Emery, after a pause, "I shall certainly dismiss you,
George. And merely for your sake, I Will positively give a route on Thursday,
(though its abominable early in the season) ask all the world, and introduce
you myself to every body. So, go -- go your ways." -- George parried these
blows very well; for, though unlearnt in the fashionable jargon of the beau
monde, he was wanting neither in genteel deportment, or even an elegant and
agreeable manner of expressing his ideas, which were superior, beyond all
comparison, to the united efforts of his party.

As he was making his bow to Mrs. Emery, at the chariot door, three gentlemen,
walking abreast, pushed the soldiers on one side, and were passing on, when
Mrs. Emery's carriage attracted their notice, and they stopped to pay their
respects: -- "O Middleton," said the lady, "are you here?"

"We Have just looked in," said a florid face man, with an amazing large cocked
hat, and an insolent air: -- "but, who the devil's that Quiz?" in a whisper.

"A very particular friend of Mr. Emery's just escaped from rural fetters. Have
a little compassion on him, for our sakes. George," continued she, "this is
Captain Middleton; he wishes the pleasure of your acquaintance?" and the
carriage whirled off.

George now found himself in a new society. Captain Middleton took his arm in
as familiar a style as if they were old acquaintances, and began a sort of
catechism, and soon discovered his own most libertine principles, and proved to
him the unsullied mind of his new acquaintance.

It was a dark night, and began to rain; a hackney coach was called, and orders
given to drive to St. James's Street. They alighted at a coffee house; and
George, having acknowledged that he had no engagement, felt compelled to sit
down with them to supper. Wine was quaffed in goblets, laughter expelled
thought, and was kept up by a continued series of obscene merriment.

Unaccustomed to such scenes, George performed his part but indifferently. It
was the first time in his life he had ever listened to an unbridled ridicule of
religion and morality. Religion was absolutely scouted; and as to what was, or
was not morality, it was so indefinable to the comprehension of those wits,
that according to their system, a man of liberal ideas had no other guide for
his conduct than his own convenience.

As the wine circulated through their veins, their stories gained a richer
coloring, and their principles became more naked.

In this situation was placed a youth of seventeen, whose heart had hitherto
ever beat in unison with reason. It had known no irregular desires; had never
felt the fire of lust, or cherished any inclination unsanctioned by his head.
Yet was his heart not stoic; it was open, generous; glowing with good will to
all around him. Thence sprung that general wish, so fatal in its effects, to
accommodate his conduct to his company -- to do as others do. To refuse a
glass, is frequently to refuse a toast; and to refuse some toasts, would so
impeach a man's principles, that he would be for ever after pointed at as a
monster of virtue!

George was too good natured to refuse his wine, and too unaccustomed to its
effects to keep pace with his companions. The consequences were, insensibility
for the night, and a most inveterate headache in the morning, with reflections
more painful to his mind than any he had hitherto experienced.

CHAP. XVII.
As all the persons who compose this lawful assembly are masked, we dare not
attack any of them in our way, lest we should send a woman of quality to
Bridewell, or a Peer of Great Britain to the Counter. SPECTATOR.
EVERY succeeding day now brought with it some novelty. The route at Mrs.
Emery's was as splendid as any in London, and as crowded as her ambition could
desire.

At this route George was introduced to a numerous host of personages, male and
female; and their various titles, names, and descriptions, danced in his brain
the whole night: yet amongst them all there was but one for whose further
acquaintance he felt the least inclination.

A very genteel young man, in mourning, who with his two sisters were
introduced under the names of Mr. and the Miss Lambtons* had left a very
favorable impression upon his mind.

His manners would have passed, with many, as proudly forbidding; but George,
with more discernment, saw in them the effects of a dignified reserve.

His conversation was elegant, and rational. He appeared to possess a
considerable knowledge of the world, and to be familiar with the etiquette of
the higher circles.

The Miss Lambtons were pleasing and intelligent young women.

Having passed an hour in delightful converse with Mr. Lambton, George felt
extremely concerned at his departure; and the more so, as not the most distant
hint of a second meeting fell from his lips.

Upon inquiring, he learned from Mrs. Emery, that this gentleman was the son of
a deceased Welsh squire, who had left his children the fame of a liberal
hospitality, in return for having frittered away, almost to nothing, his estate.

Mr. Lambton was studying the law; and his sisters, who had just arrived from
Wales, at present resided with him in town, and were entirely dependent upon
his generosity.

George sighed to think, that the only individual he had met with in London,
whose friendship he should wish to cultivate, he might in all probability never
behold again.

He was agreeably disappointed. A few days after the route there was a
masquerade at the opera house. Mrs. Emery had engaged George to accompany her,
and a party was accordingly formed.

They had scarcely entered the room, when a black domino, with two females
under his care, advanced Mrs. Emery, with her usual volubility, was trying the
patience of George just as this party passed.

"I have heard that voice before," said the black domino, to his companions.

George instantly recollected Mr. Lambton's voice, which was confirmed by the
reply of his sisters. Noticing carefully his dress, he determined, if fate
relieved him of his patroness, to make himself known.

Lord Morley and Miss Emery came running out of breath, to acquaint them that
there was a most singular character at the other end of the room.

Mr. Eastwood and Miss Charlotte Emery arrived with a confirmation of the same
intelligence. At the same instant Captain Middleton appeared, and Mrs. Emery
taking hold of his arm, relinquishing George's, he made his escape, and went in
pursuit of Mr. Lambton. In a few minutes he discovered him; and walking a small
distance behind him, listened to his voice again, that he might be confirmed in
his opinion.

"Well, then, my girls," said Lambton, for 'twas he, "masquerades will not be
among the number of those indulgencies you may sigh to think a parent's
indiscretions have deprived you of. What but inanity of mind can find pleasure
in a scene like this? Are you not already tired with it?"

George was now convinced; and walking up to him, respectfully said -- "Am I
mistaken -- or have I the pleasure of addressing Mr. Lambton?"

"My name is Lambton, Sir; but I have to learn that of the person who honors me
with his notice."

"Barnwell," replied George, unmasking.

Lambton bowed, and presented his sisters.

"I must absolutely offer a sacrifice to chance for this unexpected good
fortune," said Barnwell. "I think it so long since I had the pleasure of your
conversation, that I began to despair of its renewal."

"Do you expect me to ^reply sincerely, or fashionably, to so handsome a
compliment?" said Lambton.

"That will depend, I apprehend upon your own opinion, of which I am most
likely to be pleased with; though, if my own assertion will pass for any thing,
I prefer sincerity, and yet desire to receive no greater than I bestow."

"Am I to understand then, that residing with the most fashionable Commoners,
in the metropolis, with the most easy access to every amusement it affords, you
can find leisure and inclination for so dull an employment as conversation?"

"I am happy to find you do not judge of me personally, but relatively."

A pause ensued.

"I am surprised to see so few characters," said George.

I am rather surprised at the contrast for the real and assumed character of
the metamorphoses we have. What, for instance, should you suppose was the real
character of that prim Quaker! -- The dress of purity conceals one of the most
celebrated votaries of impure pleasure in this city. With the imbecility of
accelerated old age is combined the folly and dissipation of youth.

He has the disposal of immense wealth, which he lavishes upon the lowest
objects of pollution; yet, to discharge a just debt is painful to him.

He disgraces the patrician order, by having been born to a dukedom; nay, he
lessens the dignity of human nature, by showing that the spirit of a Satyr may
animate the resemblance of a man.

"Miserable old man!" cried George.

And yet, observe how his company is sought after. His riches procure him the
attention of a train of parasites, whose praise is infamy, but which he, poor
man, gratefully receives, as the only substitute for those pleasing sensations,
which play about the heart where virtue is respected.

That fine form in the vest of a Nun, who seems so desirous of attracting the
Quaker's attention, is one of the wildest daughters of fashionable levity, Her
parents are respectable and opulent citizens; but Matilda unfortunately has an
aunt, who is a widow of quality, with whom she resides at a distance from
parental observation. If she has not yet absolutely bartered virtue for
pleasure, she cannot justly be surprised that the world has already attached
that infamy to her character, which she so sedulou^ly courts.

You will observe, that if she fails in obtaining the notice of the Cyprian
Quaker, which would be the climax of notoriety, that she will attack at least
half the young men in the room, be familiar with each, and tells them all, that
she perfectly despises the last she flirted with.

"How much to be pitied!" said George.

How much more to be blamed! replied Lambton: for, though we make every
allowance for an improper education, what can palliate such a contemptible
thirst for admiration. Her errors are not the offspring of nature, but a mean
and disgusting self-vanity, which impeaches her heart as well as her
understanding. I can admit the volatility of youthful blood as an excuse for
vivacity; but where that is natural, it never permits a disguise.

Matilda is a mistress of cunning, and to obtain notoriety, would sacrifice the
feelings of half mankind.

It would be a task for the night to enumerate the uneasiness she has
occasioned in various families the discord she has fomented betwixt friends and
lovers. But see, she has relinquished the Quaker in despair, and is crossing
herself in the attitude of supplication before a Monk.

"And does your information extend to a knowledge of his reality?"

"He is the son of a courtier; a young man whose acquaintance is covetted by
such as prefer a warm and luxurious description of obscene incidents to
rational conversation. He has traveled, and will recount to you the intrigues
of convents in such glowing language, as delights the depraved taste of such of
his company as would be fatigued to death with any thing intellectual. I
believe, in general, his stories are credited; but for my own part I cannot
help a little skepticism, that makes me revolt at narrations so full of the
mavelous. In fact, I have heard well informed people say, that in the company
of men of sense, he will himself laugh at the credulity and false taste of his
dupes."

"Do you observe a very well sustained resemblance of the Tragic Muse?" said
George.

"It is an exception to my former remark," replied Lambton; -- "and is
supported by an amiable woman, as melancholy at all seasons as she now appears.
Her fate excites the sympathy of all who are susceptible of pity. With an
admirable mind, and beauteous form, Fortune had also bestowed upon her riches
and independence.

"Her ambition was a title. The Earl of -- wanted materials to repair an
impoverished estate, and possessed art sufficient to entangle her judgment. She
became the Countess of -- and, too late, discovered that, for the inanity of a
title she had exchanged independence and all prospects of happiness: she
discovered that she had married a libertine, and a gamester.

"Her friends interposed; and have saved just so much from the wreck of her
fortune as maintains her in oeconomical gentility.

"She is separated from her husband; and with the title of a Countess, is
compelled to live in lodgings, and seldom appears in public.

"The frivolous part of her former acquaintance shun her with silly scorn; and
the more sensible and sincere few, who still visit her, can afford her little
else than their pity; the consolations of which, a dignified mind like here is
would much rather dispense with.

"Without a husband, without progeny, she is still a wife; and her present
misfortunes are in no small degree heightened by the painful reflection, that
they are attributed to her own fatal error."

"How much I am obliged by your communications," said George, "and how much
would my dislike to London, and its Harlequinades be softened, could I have
recourse to the intelligence of such a mind. Why are the terms friend, and
friendship, become so ridiculously unmeaning," continued George, "that, whilst
one's heart is prompted to confess its attachment, the force of ridicule repels
the generous instinct?"

"But for this, Mr. Lambton, I would not hesitate to ask a probation of my
professions; and am not without hope that I should obtain your regard."

"Its well the party you have left do not overhear you," said Lambton. "Had
Captain Middleton heard such a sentimental speech, you would never have been
admitted into any of his parties; and the rejection would have marked you for a
milk-sop all the rest of your life."

"Would to God he had been here, then," cried George.

"Softly, young man," said Lambton; "you are not sufficiently aware of the evil
you so bravely spurn. Could you be content to be sneered at by the men, and
laughed at by the women of your acquaintance?"

"Would all my acquaintance," said George, archly, "act so absurdly?"

"I perceive your allusion," said Lambton, smiling, "but you are too young for
a philosopher -- What comes here?" continued he.

A mask now approached, followed by a crowd, which his strange dress, and still
more strange behavior attracted. -- He appeared as a Hermit.

"Does any one know him? -- Does any one know him! was buzzed about the room.

Captain Middleton, Mrs. Emery and her daughters, with Lord Morley and Mr.
Eastwood, were among the followers of the Hermit.

"The man should certainly be confined," said Captain Middleton: he must
absolutely be mad."

"Somebody had better take care of him," cried Mrs. Emery; "he may commit some
mischief."

"Its excessively unpleasant to be so bored with his sermons," said Lord Morley.

"Insects, away!" cried the Hermit, in a voice which George immediately
recollected to be Mental's. "Insects, away! -- Ye flies of fashion! -- Ye
fluttering nothings! -- Devoid of thought -- caprice impels, or folly leads
your steps. Leave me -- leave me to my own reflections -- Aye -- Can you laugh!
-- Grin on -- it is Levity's meridian now, and this the paradise of Folly! Oh,
how delightful to flutter in the blaze of such a sun! -- sipping the dews of
pleasure, and breathing the soft (...) of (...) respiration! -- 'Twere well
were this your everlasting region. But, O! ye silly ones -- how will ye bear
the nipping frost, when chill adversity obscures a distant sun! -- how will you
palate the bitter cup of misery! -- How will you meet the herald of your
dissolutions, who have never fostered the unfortunate, or sympathised with the
miserable, or the dying!"

"Lord!" cried Charlotte Emery, "let us leave him: -- one had as well be obliged
to listen to the man that preaches to the Jews."

"True, my sweet girl," said the Rev. Mr. Eastwood. "Morality is certainly very
necessary in the world; but there are times for all things: besides, one may
contrive means to acquaint people with their duty, without a breach of good
manners."

George had stood silently observing what passed; but when Mental and the crowd
had passed him, he could not help exclaiming --

"Good heavens! the last man in the world I should have expected to meet at a
masquerade!"

"Do you know him, then?" said Lambton.

George briefly related the outlines of his story, which, with the remarks of
Lambton on the tale, occupied the remainder of the time till they separated;
when, to the great pleasure of George, Mr. Lambton gave him his address, and
requested the favor of an early visit.

CHAP. XVIII.
I must have liberty
Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
To blow on whom I please -- for so fools have,
And (...) that are most galled with my folly,
They most must laugh --
SHAKESPEARE.
SEVERAL weeks passed away unmarked by any event of consequence.

Mental never appeared, though, since the night of the masquerade, George
constantly expected him.

New (...) of business (...) amusement, succeeded each other so rapidly, as to
leave little room for reflection, or little leisure for the conversations of
Lambton, which were the source of considerable improvement, and real delight.

Imperceptibly his mind became molded into a compliance with fashionable life,
and his manners assimilated to its modes; yet still the native purity of his
principles remained unshaken: honor still glowed in his breast, and sincerity
dwelt on his tongue.

He had now passed his seventeenth year, though the expression of his features,
and his manly person, made him appear considerably older.

About this time Mr. Freeman wrote Mr. Emery intelligence of his intention to
comply with his request, and permit his daughter to visit the metropolis; and
added, that he meant himself to accompany her to town.

The agitation of Mr. Emery at this intelligence surprised George extremely.
Uneasiness of mind became evident in every transaction. He would order the
chariot, and forget his orders ^he would employ George to copy statements of
accounts, which he would alter as frequently as if it depended upon his fancy
to arrange the figures.

Mr. Drudge, the acting partner, was closeted with him for hours together.
Letters after letters were dispatched to the Treasury; and anxiety was
expressed in his looks, words, and actions.

At length Mr. Freeman and his daughter arrived. The latter was a beautiful
girl, about the age of seventeen.

George, who happened to be with Mr. Emery when their chaise st^pt at his door,
was struck with his exclamation, as he went to receive^ them -- "He Is here, by
G --! Then there is nothing for it but deception!"

In a moment the chagrin of his countenance was half concealed by an
hypocritical smile of welcome.

"Well," cried Mr. Freeman, as he stumped through the hall, leaning on a gold
headed cane "Well, Master Emery, here am I, once more, in London. Upon my
conscience, but you have an elegant house here. Aye, and here are my old
acquaintances, Emma and Charlotte. Why, they are grown out of mind; and so fine
too -- why, Maria," to his daughter "our country clothes will make our
fashionable friends here blush for us. Where is my ward, Georgina? and where is
young Barnwell?"

Congratulations and embraces now took place; and about six o'clock the servant
announced dinner.

"Dinner!" exclaimed Mr. Freeman: "by my credit, but I Am shocked! What have you
not dined! Well, well -- I suppose its the fashion."

By design, Mr. Emery had no party that day. As they were at dinner -- "And,
pray, how go things now in London. Have sugars advanced as much as was
expected?"

"Sir, -- Eh -- sugars -- " cried Emery, and looked significantly at George.

George answered the question.

Mr. Emery, fearful of more questions, began talking himself.

"Have you heard how many millions Mr. Pit wants?"

"No," replied Mr. Freeman; "nor I don't care."

"I beg your pardon," said Emery; "but it will make some material difference to
us, that I happened ^o know to a certainty. The turn of the market hangs on
that point."

"What market?" said Mr. Freeman.

Mr. Emery appeared confused.

"I mean," said he, "the funds. You are aware, that during the war, part of our
capital would lie dead, were it not for the opportunities offered by loans.

"Why, truly," said Mr. Freeman, "loans, or those things, I don't know much
about. Merchandise in my younger days, consisted in imports and exports; a good
cargo outward, or homewards (...) and I cannot say I much like the new sort of
merchandise, where the freight is invisible, and the bills of exchange are
abundant. Not but, in my time, if the state stood in need of assistance, the
merchants of London could advance their cash at fair interest; but they never
made the distress of their country the means of their profit, or degraded the
character of an English merchant into that of a money lender!"

"But you must con^ider the difference of the times, Sir," said Emery. "Things
are much altered since then."

"I Am afraid they are," said Mr. Freeman emphatically.

After dinner Mr. Freeman, Mr. Emery, and George, were left to themselves. Mr.
Emery drank glass after glass till he seemed to have conquered his feelings,
and George thought proper to leave them together.

They soon, however, joined the ladies in the drawing room, and were scarcely
seated, when Lord Morley was announced.

"Lord who?" cried Mr. Freeman. "Why, you did not say you expected any Lords."

"O dear, Sir," said Mrs. Emery, "they tire us to death with their freedom."

"Either, then, the dignity of a nobleman is diminished, or the consequence of
Master Emery considerably advanced," said Mr. Freeman.

A hectic cough introduced his lordship. My dear creatures," cried he,
entering, "am I the first to give you joy -- have you heard it -- Eh -- But I
beg pardon, I did not observe -- "

Mr. Freeman was introduced.

"What Is the news, you tiresome creature?" said Miss Emery. "How can you keep
us in such suspense!"

"Any thing of importance, my Lord?" said Mr. Freeman.

"News of the first consequence, Sir," replied the Lord.

"From the continent, I suppose^*" said Mr. Freeman.

"You are right, Sir -- from the continent. We totally despaired of such good
fortune; for though we would absolutely not have scrupled sending over a whole
corpse in exchange for him, the Great Nation would have still persisted in
detaining him, had he not escaped sans ceremony."

"He is safe arrived, then?" said Mr. Freeman.

"I have seen him," said his lordship.

"Bravo! -- Bravo!" cried Mr. Freeman, rubbing his hands. "He is a brave and
gallant fellow, and I am glad of it with all my heart; and hope it will not be
long before they send him upon another blazing expedition against their navy."

Lord Morley stared -- "Blazing expedition! -- Navy! -- You Will pardon me, Sir;
but, upon my honor, I don't comprehend the allusion."

"Why, I Am alluding to Sir Sidney Smith, who you say has escaped from the
French."

"Sir Sidney! -- the devil!" exclaimed his lordship. "No, Sir, I do not concern
myself about any such gunpowder gentry. I -- Sir -- am alluding to that dear
delightful creature -- Monsieur Caperonis -- the first dancer in Europe."

"Psha!" said Mr. Freeman; "is that your important intelligence?"

"Delightful! -- Charming! -- charming!" -- cried Mrs. and the Miss Emerys.

The Reverend Mr. Eastwood now entered the room: his pretty features screwed
into a simper -- twirling an eye glass in his hand, which was suspended
gracefully round his neck by a purple ribband; a white Cambrick handkerchief
hung half out of his pocket; his left toe just touched the ground, and he stood
the complete image of the most disgusting character in the world -- "a clerical
fop!"

"Have they imposed upon me, my dear Lord Morley, or is it really true -- The
Caperonis -- is he really arrived?"

The conversation flowed now solely in this channel, and Mr. Freeman, evidently
disgusted, strolled out of the room, and Mr. Emery followed him.

The ladies engrossed Maria to themselves; and George could only now and then
make a remark. When, however, he had that opportunity, the sense or feeling of
his observations was eagerly noticed by Maria, who failed not to contrast them,
to their advantage, with the insipidity and impertinence of the rest of the
party.

The appearance of Lambton was a relief to Barnwell, who called by appointment,
to introduce him that evening to one of Mr. Heaviside's converzazioni.

"What a comfortable escape," said George to his friend; "and yet these are the
beings so emphatically styled, by Shakespeare, the 'makers of manners!' -- Well
may our manners be vapid Here, however," continued he, as they entered Mr.
Heaviside's theater, "we shall meet minds of a different mould."

Mr. Lambton found pleasure in answering the questions of George concerning
what he saw, for he was perfectly well read in the theory of anatomy, and was
in the habit of intimacy with several professional men. Among a group that were
assembled round the fire, he pointed out to him a young man, as a poet of
uncommon genius.

"He has the fire of Milton," said he; "but wants judgment. His writings
resemble a wild, uncultivated spot of ground, where the most beautiful
productions of nature occasionally surprise and delight the eye, but wanting
the uniformity of design, and arrangement of taste, fail in making any lasting
impression on the fancy. It is exactly so with the works of that young
enthusiast, who has published already enough to raise the highest ideas of what
he might have been, and at the same time to show the world, that he will never
reach that eminence.

"I perceive," continued he, "he is now debating most vehemently. We will join
the party; but let me first guard you against the warmth of his language and
sentiments. He is a democrat from feeling. The French revolution burst upon his
opening mind like a new created sun, and the rays of the new philosophy have so
dazzled his discernment, that his mind, enlightened only on one side, can
discover neither beauty or truth out of the new system."

They joined the group, which consisted of several celebrated characters --
George, all ear, listened with avidity to the conversation, and felt a real
delight when it was proposed to adjourn to a tavern, to supper.

During supper the conversation was general, and not very interesting, but when
the waiters withdrew, and the glasses were placed on the table, George's heart
beat high with expectation. When he saw such celebrated characters seated with
himself at the same board, he almost debated with himself, which he desired to
hear most drawn out: and justly imagining, that, most probably, he should never
behold such another meeting, he hoped they would all enter into the
conversation.

How unstable are human hopes! The young poet, whose ardent fancy had formed
some hundred lines, which he presented to the managers of the theater, as a
tragedy, now appealed to the company for their opinion of his production. Then
pulling out a bundle from his pocket, he began reading his tragedy, nor once
attempted to desist, till the exeunt omnes of the last scene of the last act.

The production, which at any other time might have entertained him, appeared
to George now perfectly disgusting; as, by its obtrusion, the mouths of the
whole company were closed, till the salutation of "Good night" broke up the
party.

CHAP. XIX.
-- Ah! turn thine eyes
Where the poor, houseless, shivering female lies:
She once perhaps, in village plenty blessed,
Has wept at tales of innocence distressed.
GOLDSMITH.
AFTER a week spent in London, during which time he had inspected the accounts
which his partners laid before him, Mr. Freeman returned to his seat in
Yorkshire, leaving his daughter Maria in Portland Place.

The remainder of the winter was passed by the fashionable family of the Emerys
in a round of amusements, of which the repetition would be tedious. The
theaters, the opera, concerts, balls, routes and faro banks at length, however,
yielded their influence over the bea^ monde to the various attractions of
summer.

Away flew the Emery's to the Pavilion; which was a most beautiful Villa built
by Mr. Emery, from a design of Wyat's, on the bank of the Thames, near Richmond.

To this delightful spot George frequently rode on an evening, and returned to
town in the mornning; or sometimes would remain there two or three days. The
whole family delighted in his company; and though the Pavilion was never
without a party of six or seven besides themselves, yet the additional society
of Mr. Barnwell was always matter of pleasure. But to none was his converse so
sweet, his manners so pleasing, as to the gentle Maria.

Nor was her well cultivated mind, her well grounded principles, her grace, her
elegance of manners, and winning softness of disposition unnoticed by Barnwell.
A mutual esteem was the result. It may be properly called esteem, for it was
the homage of the judgment and the heart, unblended with passion: it was the
delightful dawning of love; a serene, pleasing sensation of the mind, unruffled
by desire.

In their walks, they would ofttimes hear of each other's benevolence from the
neighboring cottagers.

In their mixed companies, a smile of approbation from one, rewarded the
expressions or sentiments from the other. In the library their choice of
authors was frequently the same; whilst their private conferences still more
fully discovered their conformity of sentiments and taste.

Dividing his time betwixt the Pavilion and Portland Place, alternately
enjoying the society of his friend Lambton and the amiable Maria, with just
enough of business to make his leisure more agreeable, George passed the months
of this summer more pleasantly than any former period of his life.

The letters he received from his mother and Eliza, every week brought him the
happiest accounts of their health, and comfortable situation. The world
appeared to his glad view a pleasant garden; and blossoms of delight decorated
his tranquil path.

Such was Barnwell; when, toward the close of day, about the middle of
September, a person muffled up in a long black cloak, inquired for him in
Portland Place; and upon being shown into a parlour, discovered himself to be
Mental. He was grown paler, and much thinner, than when George saw him last.

"Are you alone?" cried he.

"Yes," replied George.

"And are you at leisure? -- Does no banquet wait for you?"

"None, I assure you," replied Barnwell, "Mr. Emery is at Buxton, and the rest
of the family at the Pavilion."

"Is the door fast? -- Bolt it -- I have a secret to impart."

George began to survey him more closely. His manners seemed even more wild,
and his words more like madness, than when he parted with him. He obeyed him
however, and repeated his assurances that they were alone.

"When I last saw you, I gave you a miniature," said Mental. "Have you it about
you?"

George drew it from his bosom.

"Yet do not show it me! -- Confirmation is unnecessary. Put it up -- put it
up! -- O, horrible!" -- and he shuddered as if seized with an ague.

Barnwell was affected -- "Whatnew sorrow, Sir," said he, "afflicts you thus?
-- May I be entrusted --?"

"Sorrow!" cried Mental; give it not so soft a name! Fools, women, children,
can be sorry. If it rains, if the dews of heaven wet their silks, they are
sorry. If a dance is postponed, or a play deferred, or a dinner spoiled, folks
are sorry. What, then, but horror is it that a man must feel, who having
murdered his wife, drives his child to perdition! -- My Elinor! -- my daughter!"

"Have you heard any tidings of your daughter, Sir?" said Barnwell.

"Look at that miniature," said Mental. "It is the counterpart of that which
you possess."

Walking three or four times up and down the room, which happened to be a
dining parlour, and drinking a tumbler of water which stood on the sideboard,
he appeared, after awhile, more composed, and threw himself into a chair.

"It was my intention when you you came to reside here, of which I was
apprised, to have visited you, but a strange discovery prevented me.
Sauntering, one day, through the streets of the metropolis, my eye was
attracted by a brilliant show of jewelry and trinckets in the window of a
pawnbroker. Among a crowd of other articles, in one corner of the window, were
three miniatures, one of which (imagine my surprise) struck me as greatly
resembling what I had once seen. Upon a closer examination, not a doubt
remained of its being the counterpart of that which I presented you at the
abbey. The villain Linmore, in our happy days, painted the two likenesses. One
was my poor Elinor's, which I gave you; the other was given to the governess of
my daughter, to be presented to her, and I know was presented to her, on her
twelfth birthday.

"To see this miniature, then, was to see my daughter, and brought to my mind
the painful recollection of her uncertain fate. I purchased it; and then, with
an earnestness that surprised the pawnbroker, requested him to relate to me all
he knew concerning it.

"Barren was his intelligence, amounting merely to the recollection, that it
was pledged there about two years ago, by a woman who lived as a servant to
some ladies, at that time lodging nearly opposite, at a house that had since
been pulled down.

'The woman,' he continued, 'still very often comes here; and you may, perhaps,
learn something further from her.'

"Day after day, forgetful of every thing else, I waited on the pawnbroker,
and, in about a week, was informed the woman had been there, and had left her
direction. I sought her residence -- a miserable one it was -- the abode of
infamy and lewdness! O, how my heart sickened at the picture of misery and
vice, wretchedness and debauchery! -- and how fearfully I gazed at each
countenance* dreading to behold among the hirelings of prostitution, my poor,
abandoned child!

"The woman who had pledged the miniature told a plain tale frankly, that made
the blood freeze in my veins! The ladies with whom she resided, she owned, were
of that description I feared -- that the miniature, she believed, belonged to
the one who went by the name of Ellen, who had been well brought up, and had
eloped very young, from a boarding school, with an Irish officer.

"I doubted no longer. Ellen, I persuaded myself, was an abridgment of her own
name; and I determined not to rest till I discovered her retreat, if living --
her grave, if dead.

"The clue I gathered was, that, soon after the miniature was parted with,
these unfortunate women quarrelled and separated. Ellen went with a young
nobleman to Bath, and the other Unfortunate went ^broad.

"To Bath, the next day, I traveled post; and, by inquiries, found that the
poor wretch resided there about six months, and then quitted that place for
Bristol, where she opened a little shop with the wages of her infamy, the
nobleman having quitted her. Here she resided nearly twelve months, when having
met with impositions and losses, she became involved in debt, and was compelled
once one to seek refuge from her creditors in the crowd of this metropolis, and
returned to a miserable trassick of shame! O, what a year of misery have I
since endured!

"Every place of amusement, every haunt of pleasure, every mart of sham^, I
have visited, I have strolled whole nights through the streets of London,
viewing each female with a dreadful curiosity; but all was in vain: 'till,
about a fortnight ago, at the corner of Exeter Street, in the Strand, I met the
woman to whom I first applied. She knew me, and accosted me --

'Ah! Sir,' cried she, 'poor Ellen!' --

"I seized her by the arm -- What of Ellen? -- Where is she? -- answer me! --
show me where she is! -- exclaimed I.

'Haven't you seen her, then, Sir? -- Poor thing, she would not know you now,
then -- She Is quite delirous!'

"Take me to her this moment! said I. I followed her silently through several
lanes and allies at the back of the Strand; till at length she stopped at a
dirty old house, kept by a woman who sold green grocery. Feeling my way up two
pair of dark stairs, I entered a miserable apartment. The walls had once been
white-washed, but were now covered with smoke and dirt. A dull light was
admitted through a small casement darkened by pieces of old rags stuffed in
several places where the glass was broken. Not a chair, nor ^able, was in the
room; no grate, nor stove, was in the fireplace; but a few bits of wood were
burning in one corner, over which an old woman, covered with rags and filth,
was warming something in a pipkin.

"On the floor -- On the floor! Mr. Barnwell," repeated Mental, "was a sight to
agonise a heart of stone! A thin mattress only was betwixt the bare boards and
a poor emaciated wretch, breathing out the last sigh of anguish and despair!

'There's poor Ellen, Sir,' said the woman who conducted me. And then
addressing herself to the old woman -- 'Here, Mother Andrews,' said she, 'is a
good gentleman come to see poor Ellen!' 'God bless him for it,' said the old
woman: 'but I Am afear'd its all over. I Have been warming her a little tea -- its
all I Have got to give her.'

"All this passed during my profound silence, for I could not speak. I knelt by
the poor dying object; I took her senseless hand, but in vain searched for the
resemblance of my Elinor. The agonies of death had already deformed the
countenance; and in a few moments, with a groan, she expired! I dropped a ^ear
upon the lifeless hand -- the first I had (...) shed -- and it greatly relieved
me.

'God receive her poor soul!' said the old woman.

"This aroused me. 'Ill fated child! of an ill fated mother!' cried I, and
embraced the senseless corpse. 'O, what a change from the blooming cherub of
innocence, that I abandoned!' I sunk in agony upon the body. At length the
voice of the old woman again aroused me -- 'Is there a Deity! -- is there a
Deity!' exclaimed I; 'and is this his world -- and are we his creatures? -- O,
no, no, or these things would not be!' It was an ejaculation extorted by the
keenest anguish, that ever pierced the human breast. The poor wretch gazed at
me with a sort of horror --

'Ah! Sir,' cried she; 'don't talk so! -- There is a God who knows what is best
for us all; and if we suffer in this world, he can reward us in another! -- and
I am sure, poor soul, she went through enough to atone for her folly. Poor
creature! -- nobody knows, but them that sees, what they go through!'

"And who art thou, that have seen so much?" said I. 'Come -- sit you down; --
[there was a washing tub and an old box, which served for chair and table] --
and, if you can, relate me the story of this poor wretch!'

'I only know'd her lately. In their best days they keep higher company. I have
lived ten years in this room; and, though Ellen is the first that died here, I
have 'tended many a one in sickness on that bed. But then, if they get worse,
they mostly got into some hospital, or went to their parish.'

"And were there no hospital, or parish, for her?

'Why, you shall hear. Its about two-months ago, since, one very rainy night,
this poor creature was brought here by one, that had formerly had half of my
bed. She was that day thrust out of doors by a hard-hearted creature, who
thought herself an angel, truly, because she did not send the poor soul to
jail, for about two and forty shillings, that she owed her.

'She was as thin as a lath! and had a cough; it made one's heart ache to hear
it. The clothes upon her back, and two shillings and a pocket-piece were all
she had in the world. The girl that brought her was a tender hearted thing, and
promised that, if I would let her have half of my bed, she would see me paid my
groat a week regularly; and for a while sure enough she did, and brought her
poor friend, now and then a raspberry tart, and a little wine. But all of a
sudden she left it off, and I have never seen her since. God knows but she may
now be in want herself.'

"This is Society! cried I, shaking as with an ague. 'Anan?' said the old
woman, not understanding me. She went on.

'So, then, I was obliged to break into her two shillings; one went all at once
for a bottle of stuff for her cough; and soon the other was spent also. Then
the poor clothes went; one thing after another. And at last she grew quite
delirous.

'I had saved up about a crown, but that I know'd would not last long; and as I
could do no washing for the other girls, while I tended her, there was nothing
coming in; and so I was obliged to apply for an order for her to be moved to
the workhouse, where she was to have gone this morning; but last night she
changed so for the worse, I thought it cruel to move her; and as she wanted
nothing but a little moisture in her mouth, I said I Would 'tend her till she was
released, and then they might send for a ^offin --.'

"No -- No -- cried I -- I will provide what is wanting n^w. Perhaps an earlier
meeting might have saved her life."

She was decently interred. The good Mrs. Andrews was rewarded. Good, I call
her, for whatever in her youth she may have been, she now possesses a heart
that wills all good imaginable to her fellow creatures.

"Thus far I had acted upon the presumption of her being my child. There was
little doubt upon the point, indeed; but still it was not certain: when a
circumstance took place that confirmed me in doubting rather than believing. I
applied to the woman who so inhumanly thrust her from her house, for
information; but she could afford me none. There was a trunk of here is, she
said, in her possession, which, upon paying what was owing, I might receive.
She believed it was full of letters.

"I eagerly consented; and, upon opening the trunk, found it, as she said, full
of letters. Among them was a bundle written in a neat female hand. I untied
this bundle, and found the letters signed "Elinor." They are compositions of
uncommon merit, as to style and manner; but the matter, though ingenious, is
highly exceptionable.

"This circumstance staggered me extremely. That the letters were wrote by my
daughter, is beyond a doubt. They had been sent under cover, and began "Dear
Friend;" but no address was upon them.

"The only conjecture, then, that can reconcile the deceased's having these
letters, written by herself in her possession, is, that they have been returned
from the person to whom they were written."

"It may be so," said George; "but surely it is not too much to hope, that the
deceased, after all, was the friend who resided with your daughter; and that
she herself may yet be living."

"Not for the wealth of worlds would I change the certainty of her death for
such a torturing suspense. No -- no -- no -- I will cherish the thought of
having laid her in the silent grave, though it be delusion.

"Come with me -- Come with me -- I Will show you the spot where she lies. I Will
repeat to you the story of her sufferings; for, O, young man, in such a house
as this, these lessons are not common. The riot, the mirth, the glitter of
guilt alone, you behold here. Come -- come to the abodes of the dying, and the
graves of the dead, and learn its certain consequences!" They walked out
together.

CHAP. XX.
Yet know the time arrives, the dangerous time,
When all these virtues opening now so fair,
Transplanted to the world's tem^estuous clime,
Must learn each passion's boisterous breath to bear.
MASON.
A FEW days after Mental's visit, and while the Emerys were yet at the
Pavilion, Barnwell received the following letter:

SIR,
"It is with extreme reluctance that an unhappy stranger obtrudes herself upon
your notice. The forms of society do not so strongly condemn me as the emotions
of my own proud heart, but adversity weakens, even where it does not conquer
pride -- and I have known adversity! -- Have known, do I say! --

"Though perfectly unknown to his son, the Rev. Mr. Barnwell once honored me
with his friendship, and if a countenance, so resembling his father's may be
trusted as indicative of a similar generosity of heart, that son will not spurn
the suit of the unfortunate. It is, indeed, almost too much to solicit the
favor of a visit, though the tale I am compelled to relate I should be
unwilling to trust on paper. I will venture, then, to beg one hour of your
time, whenever it can be best spared from more cheerful occupations, to listen
to the distresses of,

Berners Street, Wednesday. Sir, Your most Obedient servant, E. MILWOOD.
"P. S. I shall take the liberty of ordering my servant to call for an answer
in the evening."




Curiosity and compassion were awakened by this letter in the breast of
Barnwell. Repeatedly, and distinctly, he read its contents. There was distress,
yet delicacy -- there was an appeal to his heart through the most fine-wrought
^lattery. -- Above all, there was praise to the memory of a father, whose shade
he adored -- In the warmth of his first impressions, he was going immediately
to Berners Street; but the impropriety of such a step soon occurred. This
incident occupied his entire thoughts: he formed a variety of conjectures,
planned his conduct according to the supposed cases, and as speedily renounced
his imaginations as absurd.

That the purport of this visit was to afford him an opportunity of displaying
his generosity, seemed certain; and he began a calculation of his finances. His
uncle had remitted him large sums. His expenses, though great, were well
managed. He was a strict economist; and therefore, though his hand had been
liber^^ his purse was not empty.

If, therefore, thought ^he, a temporary assistance will avail, I shall have
the satisfaction of affording it; and if, on the contrary, a more deep
calamity, than my ability can disperse, claims the just notice of
discriminating benevolence, there is my uncle, or even old Mental, who, I am
sure, will thank me for the information: and surely the writer of this letter
cannot be unworthy of their favor.

Such were the reflections of inexperience, and such the feelings of a
benevolent and uncorrupted heart.

He wrote an answer, appointing the next morning, at twelve o'clock, for the
interview; and felt no inconsiderable anxiety till its arrival.

At the appointed hour he repaired to Berners Street, and was ushered into a
very neat and elegant drawing room. In a few minutes a lady entered, in deep
mourning, with a work basket in her hand. She seemed almost sinking with
dissidence; and the struggles of her wounded pride appeared depicted in her
countenance. George rose, and bowed respectfully.

"This condescension, Sir," said she, hesitating; -- "the condescension of this
visit, is, at the same time, the source of so much satisfaction and pain! --
that I must request your pardon: -- but -- I really -- I! --." And she sunk
into her chair, and applied her handkerchief to her face.

Barnwell stood mute with surprise. Instead of the female of his imagination,
worn with woe, and wasted with despair -- a form and ^ace had burst upon his
view, the most beautiful he had ever seen. Her figure, considerably above the
middle size, was majestic, dignified, and elegant: her countenance admirably
corresponded with her person. Dark hair, flowing in luxuriant ringlets on her
forehead, and hanging loose on her neck, greatly heightened the effect of a
most delicate complexion, still further assisted by well formed eye brows, and
lips of coral hue.

Her dress was simply elegant, and displayed the beauteous symmetry of her
person to advantage. After a pause of some duration --

"Pray, be seated, Sir," said she, recovering herself; -- for Barnwell,
unconscious that he did so, had stood silently gazing on the form before him --
"How weak are our strongest resolves!" continued she. "I had, I imagined,
prepared myself for this interview; and thought myself strongly armed against
all the attacks of pride: but the remembrance of what they have been, is among
the last things with which the unfortunate are compelled to part."

George, extremely afflicted at her distress, attempted once or twice to speak
himself, but failed in the attempt. The lady continued --

"Many and powerful, were the struggles I have encountered, ere I resolved upon
soliciting this interview; but the character of Mr. Barnwell, so opposite to
the volatile and unthinking youths of fashion (to whom a story of distress is
the source either of spleen or scorn) added to the very encouraging traits of
benevolent sympathy so strongly portrayed in his countenance, at length
emboldened me to take a step, I have since, more than once, repented. I have
therefore, Sir, to entreat your pardon for so great a liberty; and hope you
will completely erase from your memory the indiscreet request I have made."

"Madam -- I -- If I can -- if it is in my power -- I shall be happy, Madam --
I hope -- if there is any thing that --."

Such were the incoherent words of Barnwell, in whose breast pity, which was
its constant guest, now mingled its influence with a new and strange sensation;
-- so strange, so new, as to create a wild alarm not only in his countenance,
but in his words and manners.

"I perceive your generous intentions; but I cannot -- I ought not -- to take
advantage of so much goodness! -- How strongly you resemble your worthy father!"

"You know my father?"

"Yes, Sir, I knew him once -- They were happy days when I knew Mr. Barnwell!
-- I little dreamt how severe a destiny was to succeed those joyful days. But,
alas, how feeble is our hold on earthly bliss -- how fleeting our joy -- how
unstable our hopes of happiness! -- O, painful to contemplate the picture of
what I have been -- and view the gloomy scenes before me^* Wealth, and friends,
and hope, were then all mine. Now poverty, and enemies, and fell despair,
surround me; and the worst that Fate can ordain to mortals, is my gloomy
expectation!"

Barnwell had struggled to overcome his embarrassment; and collecting himself
as much as possible, he said --

"If the calamity, which has wrought so unhappy a change, may be communicated
without pain, believe me, Madam, the confidence with which you honor me shall
be respected, by one who has ever felt for the unhappy, but who never felt so
deeply as at the present moment."

"Ah, Sir!" said Milwood -- and sighed -- "The soothing voice of friendship,"
continued she, "has been so long unheard; my ear has been so used of late to
the sounds of anger and defiance, that the tenderness of your expressions has
the influence of music on my mind. But when you are acquainted with my story, I
much fear that your language will be altered; and that, ceasing to pity my
misfortunes, you will only censure my misconduct."

"Pardon me, Madam," said Barnwell. "The emotions of pity are arbitrary
sensations, for the justice of which we cannot be presumed responsible; but the
voice of censure ought at least to have the sanction of experience, and the
motives of prevention. To add poignancy of reproof to the stings of conviction,
betrays an unfeeling heart at all times; but most unpardonable, indeed, would
it be to pour reproach into the breast that seeks, by confidence, the balm of
consolation!"

"Cease, Sir! I beseech you, cease to speak thus! You are not aware how much
you increase the wound you seek to heal!"

Then rising from her chair, and walking with considerable emotion about the
room --

"I have borne oppression!" continued she; "I have suffered, with some degree
of dignity, the 'stings and arrows of outrageous fortune;' but your pity, your
sympathy, Mr. Barnwell, disarms me of my purpose, and increases the weakness I
had almost subdued. I will hasten to relate to you my errors, that your scorn
and contempt may subdue the baneful effects of your too cruel tenderness!"

"Mysterious!" exclaimed Barnwell, in a low tone of voice.

"Hear me, Sir. -- My name is Milwood: my family is one of the most ancient and
respectable in the county where they reside. My parents both died ere I had
attained an age to be sensible of their loss. I was the youngest of six
orphans. My eldest brother who succeeded to the title and estates of his
father, was at the period of his decease, a student at Cambridge university;
another brother was an ensign in the militia of the county; and a third served
as a midshipman in the navy.

"I had two sisters, who, with myself, were taken under the guardianship of my
mother's brother, the Dean of --. With this gentleman we resided, enjoyed every
advantage which his fortune or abilities could bestow. As my father died
intestate, and the whole of his property was in landed estates, every branch of
the family was left dependent on the discretion and generosity of my elder
brother.

"Poor Edward! Thy memory shall never be insulted by me, however severely the
consequences of the errors fall on thy unhappy sister: Suffice it, then, to
observe, that the indiscretions of the youth at college were made the means of
enriching a few worthless characters, who preyed upon the openness of his soul,
and consigned to poverty and dependence those, who were born with far better
expectations.

"The remorse he felt, that a fate so unworthy of his house should be brought
upon it by himself, drove the ill-fated Edward to those wretched expedients,
which, lulling for a moment the pangs of recollection, increase the dread of
thought, and hurry those who seek them to a grave of shame.

"So 'twas with my poor Edward! Peace to his spirit! My other brothers are each
rising to wealth and eminence in their professions. The eldest of my sisters
married to the satisfaction of the Dean, and is now the happy mother of several
children. My other sister died.

"Now, Sir, I am to speak of myself. From a long residence in his family, from
his parental fondness, I had imbibed for the Dean, my uncle, all the tender
feelings of a daughter. The Deanery was as my native home; and every desire
that the young heart knows, was gratified as soon as known. 'Twas here I once
was honored with the society of your father. He was an excellent man." [George
bowed.] "I have no particular event to detail," continued Milwood, "till, about
two years ago, when a distant relation of the Dean's who had been some time
upon a visit at the Deanery, did me the honor to offer me proposals of
marriage. It was not the first offer I had received; but it was the first that
had received the pressing recommendation of the Dean.

"I answered, however, to this proposal, as I had uniformly done to others; and
heartily intimated, that I did not feel that affection, on which alone I built
my hopes of happiness in the married state; and without which, it was my firm
determination never to approach the altar!

"Why, then did he still pursue me? Why did he commence a persecution, that can
only terminate with my existence! Or why O, my beloved uncle* why did the cold
calculations of interest outweigh, in thy breast, the pleadings of nature!

"I must check myself. -- The wealth and honors of the gentleman who was my
suitor were among his inferior recommendations. Elegant in his person and
manners; happy and uniform in his temper; mild and benevolent in his
disposition; learned without pedantry; witty, without satire; he possessed
almost every qualification that could render him amiable and estimable. Yet,
Sir, I felt for Lord Naresby nothing like love. I admired his accomplishments;
I respected his virtues; but, alas! this state of mind is far short of love.
You, perhaps, Mr. Barnwell, as well as myself, are, I presume, sensible how
different the operations of our hearts are from the cool exercises of our
understandings!"

The abruptness of this appeal, and the penetrating look that accompanied it,
overwhelmed with confusion the youth to whom it was addressed. Barnwell blushed
deeply; he stammered; but his words were incoherent sounds.

Of love, as a passion, he had hitherto known nothing but the name. There was,
perhaps, something extremely like the beginnings of love now struggling for
existence in his bosom; but it was a new, a strange sensation, of whose origin
he was ignorant; of whose influence he had no conception.

Milwood, whose penetration and art equalled her beauties, observed with
satisfaction, with delight, the disorder of which she well knew herself the
creator. Dissembling, however the joy she felt under the well feigned semblance
of sorrow, she continued her tale.

"My uncle," said she, "so warmly espoused the cause of Lord Naresby, as to
descend to threats of his displeasure, if I persisted in refusing his
proposals. He is naturally a humane man; but, in this instance, his anger
overcame him, and his expressions were harsh and cruel. Still, Sir, I persisted
in my refusal.

My brothers, were appealed to. My married sister, and her lord, were also made
my judges; and with one voice they all condemned me to the cruel alternative of
marrying a man, for whom I felt no preference; or of forfeiting, for ever,
their protection and esteem!

"The most insulting and unfeeling motives were attributed to me in rejecting
so splendid and honorable a proposal. I was shunned by the whole family. My
walks were at first watched; at last, prohibited. I was detained a prisoner in
my uncle's castle, nor ever permitted to walk beyond the boundaries of his Park.

"As my relations increased their cruelty toward me, Lord Naresby redoubled
his tenderness and attention; obtaining by his interest occasional liberties,
and some few marks of concern from my tyrants; but, instead of gaining, by this
conduct, any advance in my esteem, it sunk him beneath the former level of
indifference, and I became disgusted with a man, who would consent to receive
such mean advantages.

"My situation grew daily more and more intolerable. A faithful servant, who
had attended me for many years, was discharged, upon the pretended suspicion of
aiding me in an ideal correspondence, which they said I carried on with some
low born wretch, whom I had the meanness to prefer to the man of their choice.

"Alas! how much were they mistaken, if, indeed, they imagined my heart at that
time had a preference among mankind. No, Sir, not even a friend, beyond poor
Mary, whom they discharged, had I in the whole world. When she was gone, they
placed over me a cruel, insolent old woman, in the capacity of a servant, but
with the powers of a mistress.

"Debarred the comforts of society, of reading, drawing, or any other
amusement, my mind, unshaken in its resolution, became desperate; and after
duly weighing all the obstacles that opposed themselves to such a step, I
determined to quit, for ever, the house that had hitherto been my asylum.

"My faithful Mary found means to acquaint me, in my captivity, that, after her
dismissal, she had traveled, at her own expense, twenty eight miles from the
castle to an old lady who was my father's distant relation, but an inveterate
foe to my uncle, and all my mother's relations.

"This lady, a widow, and childless, was extremely rich; and though she had
never seen me, such was the success of Mary's tale of my sufferings, that she
commissioned her to tell me, she would receive me as her daughter, if I could
escape from the castle.

I did escape; and Mary and I were received by my relation with every mark of
kindness and respect.

"I have particular reasons for concealing, for the present, the name of this
lady and her residence.

My uncle soon discovered my retreat, and wrote a letter filled with
indignation at my conduct, and a formal renunciation; in which he was joined by
my brothers and sisters.

"In my new situation I was, for some time, as happy as I could wish; till an
event -- But let me stop in time -- If I proceed with sincerity to relate the
cause of my unhappiness, I am afraid -- indeed, Mr. Barnwell -- I am much
afraid, the loss of your esteem would be the painful consequence; and heaven
only knows how highly I esteem your good opinion.

"Madam!" -- exclaimed Barnwell.

"Aye, Sir, you may well be surprised! -- My face, my voice, are new to you;
but not so yours to me."

"Indeed!" said Barnwell. "Where, pray, have you then seen it?"

"No matter, Sir -- since I now see it for the last time!"

"I hope not!" said Barnwell, with warmth. "Stranger as you are to me, Madam, I
feel so deeply interested, so much concerned, for your welfare, that, excepting
my sister and my mother, I know no person in the world I more ardently desire
to serve."

"You are kind -- you are very kind!" said Milwood.

"Can I serve you, Madam?"

"You alone, can serve me; but you will not, nay, you shall not serve me."

"You speak mysteriously, and look wild. Fear not, I beseech you, to confide to
me your sorrows! -- my bosom shall be their sacred repository."

"Generous -- generous youth!" said Milwood; and, with a seeming
unconsciousness, threw her arm upon his shoulder: then, appearing to recollect
herself, hastily withdrew it.

Every moment now increased the desire of George to be made acquainted with her
distress. He gazed earnestly upon her face, endeavoring to read her sorrows in
her countenance. He ventured to take her hand --

"Dear lady, let me entreat you no longer to delay the recital of your woes. Of
whatever nature they may prove, God only grant me the power to remove them, and
I shall be the happiest of all men."

"Your generosity of mind, your tenderness of heart, are indeed the objects of
my admiration! But, alas; my calamity is of so peculiar a nature, that the most
generous mind, the most susceptible heart, cannot conceive any thing that can
alleviate it. Mine is a silent sorrow, that broods within my own breast. A sigh
is its only expression -- a tear is its only relief: -- no tongue has
proclaimed it: no ear has received its complaint. To you it desires to speak --
to you alone it will ever speak; but -- spare me -- pardon me -- leave me!" --
And she wept.

How strange is her behavior, thought Barnwell: -- how wild, yet how mournful
her countenance! After a pause, Milwood, recovered her former serenity, and
continued --

"I am to blame, Sir, thus to trifle with your time. I will endeavor to
conclude my dull narrative, and at all hazards venture to explain the motive of
my request to see you.

"My benefactress, whose bounty was my only resource, continued to treat me
with the affectionate regard of a parent; my days rolled on in comfort; and my
heart knew no distress, till that event to which I before alluded. O, God! how
shall I relate it! -- But it must be told.

"There resided near our dwelling a family of respectability, but not wealthy;
they therefore did not visit our house, but we once or twice met in the
neighborhood. Of the father -- of the mother -- of the daughter, I shall say
nothing; but of the son! -- Pardon me -- Indeed, I cannot proceed!"

"Wave this reluctance," cried Barnwell. "Confide in me, as your brother: --
you shall find me as tender of your feelings, as zealous in your service, as if
one womb had borne us."

"What do I hear!" cried Milwood, with quickness. "Is it possible! Did you say,
you loved me as a brother! -- Happy, happy moment!" She took his hand, and
kissing it with warmth, exclaimed -- "My brother -- my brother!"

Barnwell starting from his chair, and snatching away his hand, seemed thrown
into a delirium; whilst Milwood, appearing to recollect herself, hung down her
head, and blushed.

"In the name of heaven, Madam, tell me, who and what you are? Finish, I
beseech you, this mysterious tale, and quickly, that I may, if possible, serve
you; or if not, may instantly escape a presence that creates emotions of pain
and pleasure, too powerful to be long endured!"

"I entreat your forgiveness," cried Milwood. "But go, Sir -- go -- ere you
know the misery you have occasioned -- the storm of ruin that you have raised
-- Go ignorant of my wretchedness, which to know, would perhaps excite a
painful pity in your breast, but no relief to me! -- Since to behold me is so
painful -- "

"I did not say so!" cried Barnwell "or if I did -- "

"I see," said Milwood, "we are both too much agitated. Your surprise, and
perhaps your pity, have overpowered you; whilst I -- I am the prey of feelings
which rack my bosom with torture inexpressible!"

"'It Is suspense alone that tortures me," cried Barnwell. "Your manner -- your
mysterious words -- and the wildness of your eyes, make me dread a something,
which I fear -- yet ask -- to know! -- You speak of a youth who resided near
you -- You talk of ruin, of misery, of which I am the author -- You request to
see me -- You desire me to leave you, as ignorant as I came! -- Whence spring
such inconsistencies?"

"From a source you have never dreamt of," said Milwood, with firmness; --
"from Love!" --

Her countenance was now altered from the picture of contending influence, to a
portrait of determination! Her eyes were fixed firmly on Barnwell: -- she
remained silently gazing on his face a considerable time. Barnwell himself was
dumb.

"'It Is over!" at length cried Milwood: "I have conquered! -- The youth to whom
I alluded, is -- George Barnwell! -- Yes! -- he it is, whom Fate has ordained
my destruction! For him, I quit my friends, my country -- For him, I forfeit
affluence, and embrace the horrors of poverty, in a foreign and distant clime!
-- Was it, then, too much to ask the favor of one hour's interview, merely to
declare how ardently I love, and how largely I sacrifice to an hopeless passion!

"O Nature! -- can I thank thee for the liberal share of personal attractions
thy hand has given me, since they have but served to heap upon my head the
persecutions of a train that I cannot help despising, while on that heart
alone, which I esteem, their influence is too weak to impress even a cold
regard!"

Barnwell was lost in wonder! after various attempts -- "I do not remember ever
to have seen you before!" said he.

"I can too easily believe you, Sir."

"And yet, I think, if ever I had beheld such a countenance as yours, surely,
Madam, I could not have forgotten its interesting traits!"

"Nay, Sir," cried Milwood, I must not hear you, if your voice assumes that
strain. Do not imagine Sir, my declaration meant to claim your pity! No, -- my
resolution is fixed as firmly as the decrees of Fate. One moment longer let me
detain your ear and then, farewell for ever! -- Briefly, then -- the same
persecutions, though from different quarters, rendered the abode of my
benefactress as miserable as my uncle's, with this addition of wretchedness --
that in the latter, my heart was wholly disengaged; in the former, your image,
your worth, barred all avenues to affection for another.

"The object so dear to me was unknown to my benefactress -- to all the world
-- but myself. My refusals were therefore deemed obstinacy; my perseverance
became rebellion; and I was at length driven to the dreadful alternative of
quitting, for ever, the refuge I had obtained, or to approach the solemn altar,
and vow fidelity with my lips, whilst my heart would be adulterous for ever.

"Such was the choice held out for my adoption: and could I hesitate? No, not
for a moment! I waited not to be driven from a home -- Voluntarily I departed.
-- I have remained some time in the metropolis -- I determined to see you; --
and now will for ever quit the country that gave birth to my existence and my
woes! -- I will seek in some corner of a distant land, that grave, which can
alone restore peace to my heart, by an oblivion of you!"

She ceased. Barnwell, who had risen from his chair, and was walking about the
room, was deeply involved in thought, combatting one suggestion of his fancy
after another, till his head became giddy. -- He threw himself on a sofa, and
leaned his head on his arm. Milwood with the tenderest expressions of concern,
took his hand, and pressed it warmly.

"If I have given you pain -- if I have relieved my own breast, at the expense
of a moment's uneasiness, to you -- what a source of eternal regret! Or, if I
have rendered myself odious, by a declaration which custom condemns, and have
erected a monument of scorn in that remembrance, where I sought to deposite the
pearl of pity -- O, how miserable has my folly made me! Say then, only, that
you do not despise me -- that you do not abhor me -- and I will never -- never
-- trouble your quiet more!"

"His heart must be differently molded from mine," said George, "that can
despise, or abhor you, Madam. Your confession has so much influence on mine, I
would say more -- but, at present, let me, at least, entreat you not to quit
this place, till I have been favored with another interview. I have a mother
-- I have -- "

"Hear me on my knees, Mr. Barnwell," interrupted Milwood; "if you do not wish
to drive me to the most awful crime our nature can commit, grant me my request:
-- silence, silence, eternal silence to my story. There is not a calamity in
life I should so hardly bear, as the discovery of my imprudence! Then swear to
me -- nay, I will not quit this posture till you do swear to me, that you will
not, to your dearest friend, utter a breath, that may betray me!"

"Good God, what do you ask!" cried Barnwell, "In the most trying situation of
my life, would you deprive my inexperience of their superior council, who love
me, and have wisdom to direct me?"

"What council can you want -- what is there to determine?" cried Milwood. "By
tomorrow's setting sun, I shall be the ocean's charge. All that you have heard
will then be only as a vision, that may occasionally ask a sigh; whilst it
reminds you, that there is one in the universe, on whom the night will never
steal, or the dawn break, without a prayer to nature's Author for your heart's
peace! Why, then, should you wish to make her errors tales of common tattle, or
give her conduct to the examination of beings, who have not her feelings? Will
you deny me this oath then?"

"Rise! I beseech you, rise!"

"Not till I have received your solemn promise!"

George hesitated some min^tes; during which time, she held his hand betwixt
both her own, and leant her warm cheek upon it.

"Will you, then, promise me," said Barnwell, to remain here till tomorrow?"

"By no means!"

"Will you permit me an interview this evening?"

"For what purpose, Mr. Barnwell?"

"Nay, I know not!" cried Barnwell; "but my heart tells me -- that I am to
blame. I would prevent the necessity of your leaving England."

"Necessity!" interrupted Milwood. "'It Is my choice!"

"But if -- if -- " cried Barnwell; and his breath grew short. "Why -- why do
you wish to restrain me from consulting my friends? I have an important, very
important, point to decide; and I dare not trust my feelings with the decision."

"I understand the insult now!" cried Milwood, rising, scornfully. "You would
insinuate, that, if your relations can find no just objection to my character,
and fortune, you might condescend to pity me, and perhaps, if, and supposing so
and so, you would then offer me a love, not the offspring of my creation, but a
condescending acceptance of overtures, you may imagine I have made to you! I
had conceived your heart a different composition, Mr. Barnwell; or mine would
never have been known to you."

"You judge wrong, Madam, I assure you! Your candor, your noble mindedness,
have impressed me with reverence, not contempt; and if this new sensation in my
bosom be not -- But, spare me only for a few hours -- Permit me to see you in
the evening -- and if, then, you require the oath, I will most solemnly take
it; and till then not a whisper shall escape my lips concerning you."

After a pause -- "I cannot see the necessity for this, Mr. Barnwell. Why
should we meet again? Why not immediately separate for ever! But -- " pausing
again -- "since your request is otherwise -- be it so, Sir. I shall expect you
in the evening; till then, farewell!"

"Adieu, Madam," cried George, and with trembling feet retired.

CHAP. XXI.
The other dame seemed even of fairer hue;
But ^old her mien: unguarded roved her eye;
And her flushed cheeks confessed, at nearer view,
The borrowed blushes of an artful dye.
SPENCER
IN the most profound reverie Barnwell passed the distance betwixt Berners
Street and Mr. Emerys'. The crowd that surrounded him, the bustle of carriages,
were insufficient to arouse him from a sort of stupor into which he had fallen.

When he arrived at home, he rushed through the hall, and hurrying to his own
room, threw himself into a chair -- "Milwood! -- Milwood!" muttered he; 'I
never heard the name; I have no recollection of the face before today. -- O,
what an important day! Those looks! -- that form! -- never will my memory lose
the impression!"

He sighed deeply, and painfully. -- "Love me! -- Yes, she loves me! She owns
it: nay, her behavior declares it more powerfully than her words! What a
wondrous effect has she wrought upon me! What means this swelling of the heart
this quickness of the pulse -- this difficulty of respiration? Can I imbibe a
partiality so instantaneously? Are our natures, indeed, so susceptible? --
Surely, it cannot be! It Is pity for Milwood -- for her sufferings -- that pains
me thus. Then let me soften them as much as possible -- let me send her in
writing the oath she requires, and spare her the pain of another interview! and
yet -- never to see her again! -- Why do I feel a dread at that thought?
Suppose she should be already gone? Forbid it heaven! Once more -- once more,
let me behold a form so lovely! What brilliant expression in her eyes! -- what
sense! what animation in her countenance! -- How happily might I pass my life
with such a woman! But then her situation -- my own too! Madness alone can
suggest such a thought. She is proud -- I dare not offer her pecuniary aid.
Where can she go? What part of the globe does she seek? Unhappy Milwood! Would
I had never seen you! -- Would to God I had never seen you!"

Such were the meditations of Barnwell -- Milwood absorbed all his thoughts,
while her beauteous ^orm floated in air before his imagination! Never, till
this day, had his imagination been heated by the charms of woman!

I^ Maria Freeman he beheld an amiable companion, whose modesty and beauty
mingled won the esteem of his heart, and the approbation of his understanding;
but in Milwood he saw a far different female.

This woman was beautiful in the extreme. Nature had, indeed been liberal of
her gifts, and education had increased the value of her bounty. Milwood had
once possessed every thing desirable in the female character; for she once
possessed virtue and innocence. But she parted with innocence, and in its stead
had admitted, as the guest of her heart, the most accomplished cunning.

At an early period of her life she had surrendered all claim to chastity, and
had since then submitted to that miserable traffic, which is the most severe
libel on civilized society.

Too aspiring to herd with the unhappy class to which she had reduced herself,
her strong and towering mind was perpetually busied upon schemes more valuable
to herself, and far loftier in the scale of wickedness than the generality of
those unfortunate beings, whose daily infamy is their daily bread!

In her own fall, she was the dupe of a professed rake; and her own schemes
upon the tranquillity of others were all infused with a large portion of
revenge. Man at large she deemed her enemy; and the talents, and the charms she
possessed, she considered as the weapons of revenge.

Unlike many a sighing wretch, whom severe distress urges to compunctive acts
of shame, Milwood was systematically vicious. The present world bounded her
views of futurity, and the struggles of the present scene ended, in her
imagination, the drama of existence!

Thus, no principles of a religious nature swayed her thoughts, no checks of
conscience ever intervened betwixt the inclination and the deed: Pity, and all
the tender sensibilities which many natures feel, were her inward derision; but
their semblance was perfectly at her command.

Such was Milwood! Such was she, for whom Barnwell, at first sight, had
unconsciously imbibed the most powerful love!

She had never once seen his father, or any of his relations; nor had ever
beheld Barnwell himself, till his arrival at Mr. Emery's. Having learnt the
very great confidence reposed in him, the large sums entrusted to his care, she
was not long in arranging a method to ensnare him within her power. For this
purpose, she had spared no pains to obtain the intelligence she had gained
concerning his family, and had feigned the story she had related to him, and
which containad not one syllable of truth.

Her sentiments, her tone of voice, her gestures, were studied for the
occasion; and she was guided, from moment to moment in the plan she would
pursue, by the effect which her penetration discovered she had wrought on her
victim. -- Thus artfully had she prepared the groundwork of her plot; and had
thus far succeeded to the extent of her wishes.

The interim, betwixt his departure and the hour at which she expected his
return, was anxiously spent by Milwood; and she repented, more than once, that
she had suffered him to leave her: a step to which she had consented, chiefly
to carry on appearances, and from a persuasion, in which she was not mistaken,
of her power over him.

Meanwhile he, for whom her machinations were devised, was planning the means
of rendering her happy. Many and various were the resolutions he formed, but
all unstable. His heart had admitted a spark, which his reason was too impotent
to extinguish, and which was rising rapidly into a flame, of whose influence he
was ignorant, but whose warmth he began to discover.

If the imagination of Barnwell was already wro't to a dangerous warmth, the
next reception he met with in Berners Street was well calculated to increase it.

On a crimson damask sofa, placed under a brilliant mirror, illuminated by wax
lights, reclined the Siren Milwood. -- A most elegant white dress had
superseded the sable weeds of the morning; with a Turkish turban, ornamented
with gold cords and tassels. The solemn air of dignified sorrow was exchanged
for the most fascinating smiles; and instead of the reserved and bashful
demeanor, Barnwell had prepared himself to meet, he was thrown off his guard
by the most alluring glances.

She did not rise when he entered the room, but holding out a most beautiful
arm, encircled at the wrist with a brilliant bracelet --

"Mr. Barnwell!" said she, with an enchanting softness.

George approached in the most profound astonishment, and received her offered
hand.

"Am I not a strange creature!" continued she. "My trappings of woe, you see,
are soon thrown off. But, in truth, I did not think it consistent with the
pleasure I expected, in your society, to wear the semblance of sorrow!"

George was petrified with amazement, and doubted, for a moment, whether the
woman of sentiment he had seen in the morning, and the wanton form now before
him, were the same. As she still held his hand in here is, she fixed her
sparkling eyes full on his face --

"You have an uncommon countenance!" said she. "You are very severe -- and yet
have great sensibility. You are a compound of the stern and the tender: I
scarcely know which preponderates in your nature. You do not lack courage, or
fortitude; at the same time you will weep at a tale of misery, and the
unfortunate are sure of your sympathy. Is it not so? I have studied Lavater.
Now, let me try if I am mistaken. Place that harp nearer me, and I Will sing you
a ditty about a poor simple maid -- 'who never told her love, but let
concealment,' as the poet says -- and so on -- Now be silent!"

It is difficult to convey an idea of Barnwell's situation at the present
moment. The feelings with which he had entered the room were changed so
suddenly, it seemed the work of enchantment. Pity for the sorrows of Milwood
was absolutely forgotten in the bewildered admiration of her charms; and the
determination of his reason, as to the steps he should pursue, was lost in the
delightful and intoxicating dream of the existing moment.

He placed the harp -- and Milwood, changing her features from the wanton to
the languishing, gave him the manuscript to hold, while she sung and
accompanied a simply pleasing ballad with exquisite taste and melody. The
expression of her eyes was perfectly in unison with the words; and her voice
uttered the sweetest sounds! -- It was a pathetic story, and affected Barnwell
extremely.

"There," cried she, "I knew you would weep -- at a fiction too! And will not
real sufferings," continued she, in a tender voice, "at least as much affect
you! -- Ah! Mr Barnwell -- to me only you are insensible! My abrupt sincerity
has made me the object of your scorn! -- Yes, cruel and insensible, you return
the most glowing affection with the coldest disdain!"

"Disdain! -- O, no!" said Barnwell: -- "say, rather, admiration and esteem!
Where is the being, who could gaze on such charms, and disdain their possessor?
How must the heart be formed, that can remain insensible to so much beauty!"

"There are hearts, I fear," said Milwood, "round which the ^cy hand of worldly
prudence forms a circle, that freezes every passion of the soul. There are
beings, who can love according to a scale of reason, and model their affections
by a standard! But I do not -- cannot -- think so young a heart as yours -- "

"Our Reason," interrupted Barnwell, "should regulate, not destroy our
passions!"

"Charming philosophy!" cried Milwood, with a satirical smile. "And where did
you learn that maxim? I should suppose some ponderous folio so says. But have
books hearts? No, no, Mr. Barnwell. Ask those who wrote the senseless lies,
what is this Reason, that is so omnipotent? Where is it to be seen -- or who
possesses it?"

"Astonishing!" said Barnwell. "Do you, then deny the existence of Reason?"

"Yes, such Reason as the black letter gentlemen depict. Can Reason quench the
thirst, or satiate the appetite of hunger? -- Ah! no -- no! And is the
strongest impulse of our natures to be so easily swayed by Reason then? Why
have we passions -- merely to torment us! O, infamous libel on the Author of
our existence, who has given his creatures all things to enjoy. -- Well sings
the poet -- To enjoy is ^o obey!"

The air, the doctrine of Milwood now roused, for the first moment, a suspicion
in his mind of her intentions, which startled Barnwell. He sunk into a profound
reverie, his eyes cast on the floor. -- Milwood observed it, and saw the
struggle that was rising in his breast. Perfect mistress of her art, she was
aware how imperceptibly her bold advances had stolen into his heart, and with a
cunning caution restrained her efforts, and changed her operations.

Instead of attempting to continue an argument, at which she well knew he
revolted, she touched the strings of the harp, and raised an enchantment of
melody: from the slowest and the softest, to the most brisk and lively
measures, her fingers swept the trembling chords. The effect on Barnwell was
instantaneous. In vain did the enamoured youth aim to repress the rising flame
-- in vain attempted to resist the maddening impulse of desire! -- On the
precipice of danger, he was ignorant of his situation. His cheeks flushed, his
eyes looked wild, and he fell back on the sofa, overcome with the force of such
new and powerful emotions.

The siren saw her time. She struck the harp again, and -- " Softly sweet in
Lydian measures,
" Soon she soothed his soul to pleasures."


She sighed -- she gazed with looks of warmest love -- she seemed to yield her
soul to her desires -- sunk by the side of Barnwell -- reclined her head upon
his cheek -- pressed the warm lips to his, and conquered.

CHAP. XXII.
I this night
(Such night till this I never passed) have dreamed,
If dreamed, not, as I often am wont, of thee,
Works of day past, or morrow's next design,
But of offense and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksome night.
MILTON.
"NOT at home all night!" exclaimed Mental, in the hall at Mr. Emery's -- "not
at home all night!" repeated he.

Whilst he was speaking, Barnwell knocked at the door. At the sight of Mental
he started back, and hung down his head. His hair was undressed, his eyes were
read and swelled, and his whole appearance proclaimed the revelry in which the
night had passed.

Mental surveyed him leisurely from head to foot; during which time Barnwell
recovered from his surprise, and invited him into a parlour.

"Having a few hours of leisure this morning," said Mental, throwing himself
into a chair, and leaning on an oaken staff, "I came to have some conversation
with you. I am sorry that my visit is so ill rimed. I really had no intention
of breaking in upon your hours of rest; but my vulgar ideas had not associated
going to bed with the sun in the meridian."

"You are satirical," said George, endeavoring ^o force a smile.

"You are hypocritical," replied Mental. --

"Sir!" exclaimed Barnwell.

"He who attempts to put a simper on his countenance whilst his heart aches
with remorse, is a hypocrite!" said Mental.

Barnwell's cheek glowed with the blush of shame.

"Young man," continued Mental, "accident has brought us acquainted with each
other. I love you, sincerely love you. I have wealth -- I have no one to
inherit it. The grave has covered those, who were mine: You know my history --
you know my heart -- I ask, in return, yours -- Give it me -- Let me know its
emotions -- its trials! Tear from it with noble indignation, the veil that
would conceal it. I know it is human -- I know it cannot be perfect. O, let me
at least receive from a life of painful experience, the rewarding pleasure of
being useful to you. I know, by your countenance, that you have committed some
act, which reflection condemns as indiscreet -- perhaps vicious. Tell me,
sincerely, where have you spent the night -- in whose society -- in what
pursuit?"

"Spare me -- spare!" cried Barnwell. -- "I have fallen sufficiently in my own
esteem -- Let me not forfeit yours!"

"You, Mr. Barnwell, who possess faculties of no common magnitude, cannot have
^o far descended from the dignity of a human creature, as to have surrendered
the distinguishing powers of intellect to the grovelling pleasures of the
bottle? -- You have not, I am sure, devoted a whole night to inebriety!"

"No -- no, indeed, I have not."

"Nor can I, for a moment suppose you have yet sunk into the despicable
character of a gamester!"

"Never -- never," cried Barnwell, with warmth, "shall you have to upbraid me
with so mean a vice!"

"There is but one conjecture more, then," said Mental, with peculiarly
satirical expression: -- "but that would scarcely make you sad! Besides, at
your age -- in this hot-bed of the passions, London -- I presume chastity has
long been relinquished, as a virtue unsuited to the times in which you live; --
an encumbrance, indeed, which young men of fashion must not be suspected of
retaining. -- Long ere last night, therefore -- "

"Forbear, I beseech you, Sir!" said Barnwell; "you strike a painful chord! --
'Till last night I had not to upbraid myself with a crime, beyond all others
base -- seduction!" --

"Hold -- hold -- hold! -- if you would not have me curse you!" cried Mental.
-- "Do you not remember," continued he, clasping his hands together, "that I
once possessed an angel, till Seduction tore her from my arms! -- that I had
once a daughter! -- that I abandoned her; and that she, too, was seduced! --
driven to infamy! -- to death! And can you confess yourself a Seducer! O, how
often have I invoked eternal vengeance on the deliberate betrayer of confiding
innocence! -- Recall the odious charge, or you will become more loathsome to my
sight than leprosy. But it is impossible! You a Seducer! It cannot be. The
deliberate Seducer must be a being -- allied to natures differing from human.
His heart must be a salamander's bed; his head the cool repository of design
and artifice. The passions that rob other men of prudence, increase his
cunning, and render him the agent of the deepest villainy! Such you cannot be!
-- But you are agitated -- I speak too warmly -- My feelings must excuse for
me."

Changing his voice and manner into the softest and most gentle, he ceased not
his importunities till he had obtained from Barnwell a relation of all that had
passed betwixt himself and Milwood.

When he had heard the whole narrative -- "'It Is a strange tale!" cried he: "a
very strange story! But as you relate it, you charge yourself with too large a
share of blame. I have strong doubts of this Milwood."

"O, Sir, you have not seen her -- or her countenance would prevent such
undeserved suspicion."

"You have promised to see her again, of course," said Mental.

"See her again!" echoed Barnwell: -- "what tortures would be severe enou^^ for
the wretch who could abandon her!"

"Do you mean to marry her, then?" said Mental.

Barnwell started at the question.

"Your uncle Sir James, your mother, your sister, perhaps will scruple to
receive into their family a relation of so mysterious a character!"

"You have taken me by surprise, Sir," said Barnwell: "I have as yet determined
upon nothing. My mind has not yet recovered from the emotions that have so
powerfully agitated it. I thank you sincerely for your generous concern; but I
want reflection -- I want to be alone!"

"I will leave you, then, to yourself awhile; but I will not relinquish my
claim to your confidence. Thus far you have acted openly, and worthy of
yourself: -- but, if I am not deceived, it is but the commencement of a
struggle, in which you are at present victor. Adieu, youth, adieu!" and
abruptly he departed.

Barnwell immediately retired to his chamber, and threw himself upon the bed.
Overcome with want of sleep and anxiety of mind, he fell into a slumber; but
even in his sleep Milwood haunted his imagination. He dreamt -- 'that he was
sitting in the little temple dedicated to Retirement, in his father's garden,
and that, from a window, he beheld a wide expanse of ground. His mother and
Eliza were sitting near him, and he was reading to them Spence's Judgment of
Hercules. After he had recited the poem, as he reclined his head on his arm,
and mused upon the view before him, two female forms appeared, at a distance,
resembling in every respect those described by the poet -- "Both far exceeding
human beauty fair;
"Graceful -- ^et each with different grace they move,
"This striking sacred awe -- that softer, winning love."


'As they drew nearer, a voice which seemed to descend from above, proclaimed,
that the trial was at hand which was to determine his future doom; and that his
happiness or misery depended upon the choice of the present moment. The females
continued to advance, and he now beheld their countenances distinctly, and
immediately recognized two well known faces -- those of Maria Freeman, and the
siren Milwood. The former supported on one arm a bee-hive, on the top of which,
linked by a golden chain, perched two turtle doves: her other arm reclined upon
a pedestal of white marble, on which was inscribed -- "LOVE born of ESTEEM, and
cherished by CONSTANCY: -- PLEASURES the produce of INDUSTRY!"

'He was on the point of kneeling before the lovely vision, when the other
female stepped gaily on, and placed herself before the pedestal. Arrayed in a
robe, "that betrayed
"Through the clear texture every tender limb,
"Height'ning the charms it only seemed to shade;
"And as it flowed adown so loose and thin,
"Her statue showed more tall -- more snowy white her skin!"


'Her right hand held a chalice, into which dropped, unpressed from a cluster
of grapes suspended by her left, the intoxicating juice. Light as the motion of
the air she danced awhile, and then, with graceful agility, sprung on a
pedestal of ruby, on which, inscribed in golden letters, were the words --
"LOVE, free as air! -- PLEASURES stolen from other's TOILS!"

'He quitted his mother and sister, and descended into the plain. As he stood
wavering before these forms, his soul, now swelled to virtuous achievements,
by the majestic look and inspiring language of the one; -- now sinking into
wanton ease, beneath the alluring glances and the siren songs of the other. A
chorus, in sound like that which fills the vaults of heaven, from golden harps
and angels voices, struck his enamoured ear -- Shun, O, youth, the syren's arms,
Ruin lurks beneath her charms!
From her offered cup refr^in,
As you dread severest pain:
It Is the treacherous cup of Vice --
Peace of mind its only price!


'As this chorus was singing, the female, who resembled Milwood, scoffed by her
smiles and gestures the warning voice, and in derision flourished her cluster
of grapes in the air; whilst the form that bore the countenance of Maria,
raised her fine blue eyes in calm and tranquil contemplation. He turned his
attention now wholly on the latter; and the more he gazed, the more lovely she
seemed. -- He was approaching respectfully to take her hand, when the Wanton
descended from the pedestal, and again intercepted* him. She danced before him,
and threw herself into the most captivating attitudes -- at intervals kneeling
before him, and earnestly entreating him to accept the chalice, which she held
in her hand.

'As his mind wavered, and his eyes roved from one form to the other, he
reflected on the chorus, and was spurning the importunate Wanton, when another
chorus arrested his attention. It ascended as from a vault beneath his feet,
and was preceded by loud peals of laughter. It was accompanied by music, but of
a different nature from the former: the notes were brisker, and louder, but
wanted harmony and sweetness. He listened, however, and this was the strain --
Can thou, then, reject the fair?
Mark her mien! Her jetty hair
Flows luxuriant on her breast,
Where young Cupids nestling rest!
Listen, youth, it is Pleasure's voice
Bids thy generous heart rejoice.
Taste the cup that Beauty gives,
He alone, who drinks it, lives.
Ask thy youthful, growing fires
What it is thy soul desires:
Love shall whisper in thine ear --
"Taste the cup, and banish fear!
"Quickly through thy veins shall flow
"Raptures none, but lovers, know!"


'Whilst he listened to this song, the siren had wove her arms around his neck,
and placed the chalice to his lips. He tasted the intoxicating draught! -- At
that moment the shrouded shade of his father approached solemnly from the
temple, with his mother and Eliza in either hand. -- As they passed him, they
looked on him with a countenance of deep felt pity, and walked on toward the
pedestal where the semblance of Maria still remained; but her appearance was
changed: the emblems she had held were vanished, and she looked pale as a
spectre. As soon as the group reached her, the pedestal became changed into a
sepulcher, which enclosed within its womb his father, his mother, and Maria,
whilst Eliza stood weeping over the tomb as it sunk.

'He trembled, and exclaimed in agony -- "O, Beauty, what a sacrifice have I
made to thy charms! -- Too powerful Beauty, what have thou done!" As he spoke
these words, he turned round to Milwood, whom he thought he addressed, and
found he was clasping a skeleton, which grinned horribly at his surprise; --
and striking him with a lifted dart, occasioned him so severe a pain at his
heart, that he awoke in inexpressible horror.'

"Merciful Heaven, what a dream!" exclaimed he. -- "My mother! -- My sister! --
my sainted father, too! -- O, God! how sadly did they gaze upon me! -- What can
such a vision portend? Surely, I am upon the brink of some dreadful precipice!
Milwood! -- Milwood! -- shall I ever have cause to curse the day we met! --
Already have the guilty pleasures I have -- yet, why guilty? Can a form of
words be of so much import? No, surely! Our hearts are united, and our vows are
registered in heaven! Why then do I feel as if I had committed a crime? Why
does my heart deny me its wonted approbation? Why am I tormented with such
fantasies? If our passions have been strong, still they are not impure! --
nor, on my part, shall they be ever so. To one only object have they yielded --
and the same pure affection shall control them ever! Yes, Milwood, enveloped
as thou now art in mystery, I will soon rend the veil from thy character, and
present thee, deserving as thou must be, to those that will love thee for the
sake of thy, Barnwell. Haste, then away, ye intervening hours! and let the
moment come, that shall for ever ease my breast of anxious doubt!"

Such was the state of mind in which Barnwell passed the remainder of the day.
He anxiously looked forward to the hour they had appointed to meet, and,
pleading indisposition, remained in his chamber, musing on the prospect before
him, and endeavoring to mark out a suitable course to pursue.

CHAP. XXIII.
A truly good man is, upon many occasions, extremely susceptible of tender
sentiments; and his heart expands with joy, or sinks with sorrow, as good or
ill fortune accompanies his friend. CICERO.
ABOUT an hour before the time appointed for Barnwell to be in Berners Street,
the following letter was delivered to him: --

"AUTHOR of my future destiny! -- my conqueror! -- my husband! -- [will you
allow the title?] -- still dearer name, my Barnwell! -- your trembling Milwood
throws herself upon your generosity -- she trusts implicitly on a heart that
has so effectually mastered her own!

"My uncle is in pursuit of me -- For worlds, I would not at present behold
him. He has inquired for me in Berners Street. I was of course denied. He is to
be there again this evening.

"O! How I wanted your advice: -- Why had you left me? As it was, I was
compelled to a decisive conduct. I discharged the lodgings immediately --
ordered a postchaise, and drove to Barnet; from thence took another chaise,
and, appearing to have changed my mind, ordered the driver to set me down in
Piccadilly.

"I write from the house of a tradesman, whom I have formerly employed; and
leave your feelings to express to you, how impatiently I wait your arrival! --
What shall I subscribe myself? -- O! Barnwell, for both our sakes, let me
entreat your presence! And let fate play what part it will, I shall ever be

"Your own!
"The bearer will direct you."




Thunderstruck at such an unexpected proceeding, Barnwell was for some time
incapable of deciding what steps to take. While he hesitated, Mental entered
the room -- He still held the letter in his hand --

"You are engaged?" said Mental.

"No, Sir -- Yes, Sir -- that is -- I -- "

"Well, Sir," cried Mental, "I Will not intrude. I may, perhaps, bring stale news
too. I have inquired twice, today, in Berners Street. At first the lady was
not visible; the second time, I learned that she had taken post horses, and
left town. You may possibly know the route."

"No, Sir -- Yes, Sir -- " cried Barnwell, again hesitating

"Ah!" said Mental -- "how difficult does nature find the winding paths of mean
dissimulation! If you would retain your peace of mind -- O, youth, retain
sincerity! -- And remember, that shame or danger will prove as unwelcome at the
end of a maze, as if boldly met at their first appearance!"

Ere Barnwell could reply, Mental took his hand affectionately -- "One caution
let me impress upon your memory, and I am gone -- Make no promises of secresy!
-- Farewell."

Barnwell, had not the power, nor indeed, just then, the inclination, to detain
him; and he retired.

"He has called twice in Berners Street!" said Barnwell, after his departure.
"Perhaps, then, Milwood may have imagined his inquiries to be her uncle's. But
why that caution as to promises of secresy? Surely Milwood -- But whilst I am
arguing, she spends the moments in anxious expectation!"

He rushed toward the door, and desired the man who waited, to conduct him to
Milwood. -- Immediately they met, she ran to him apparently in the greatest
distress of mind, and hiding her face in his bosom -- "O, hide me -- hide me,
my dear Barnwell, from my pursuers!"

"Dispel these fears, Madam!" said Barnwell. -- "Your alarms may be groundless
-- It Is possible you may have mistaken the description of another person for
your uncle."

"O, no!" cried Milwood -- "I have ^een him. He pursues me, and will tear me
for ever from these loved arms! -- O, how cruel -- how peculiarly cruel is my
destiny! Perhaps already he has traced my chaise to this very door, and will
soon be here. Let us quit the house!"

Barnwell, alarmed and greatly concerned for her distress, thought of nothing
at the moment but relieving it. "Where will you be safe?" exclaimed he.

"Alas! I know not! -- But let us this moment quit this place -- My trunks may
be left here for the present -- Come, come!"

She hurried on her cloak, and leaning on his arm, walked toward the door. --
They had walked a considerable distance from the house ere Barnwell had
sufficiently recovered from the surprise her conduct had occasioned.

"I am faint!" cried Milwood. This aroused him; and being near the coach stand
at Hyde Park Gate, he called a hackney coach. When they were seated -- "Where
am I to drive, your honor?" said the man.

Milwood leaning her head against the side of the coach, remained silent --
Barnwell knew not how to answer. After a considerable pause -- "The case is
this," said Barnwell; "this lady is just arrived in town, and we want lodgings
-- Drive slowly along the Brompton road, and if you observe an advertisement at
any door, stop there."

The coachman obeyed -- They stopped at a house kept by a widow, and Barnwell
hired the lodging at the rate of two guineas a week. Milwood, thus placed in a
safe retreat, as she pretended, from her uncle, gradually reassumed her
serenity of countenance, and expressed her gratitude to Barnwell in the warmest
language, and by the most seducing endearments.

CHAP. XXIV.
It is hard to personate and act a part long, where truth is not at the bottom;
nature (...) always be endeavoring to return, and will p^ep ^ut, and betray
herself one time or other. TILLOTSON.
THE pretended fears of Milwood, so admirably played, completely answered the
purpose for which she had assumed them. Her penetration had easily discovered
that Barnwell's mind, if time was allowed him for reflection, would too
scrupulously examine the question of propriety. She therefore artfully resolved
to take him by surprise.

The apartments in Berners Street she had taken for the express purpose of
their first interview, where she had resided but a few days, and had actually
discharged them in the manner she had related. The story of her uncle's pursuit
was entirely a fiction. Her present aim was to obtain an habitation at the
expense of Barnwell; and this, it is seen, she accomplished.

Having thus far succeeded, a pause in her operations was necessary. She now,
therefore, dallied with the unfortunate youth, who was the victim of her arts,
and evaded all his inquiries as to her future designs. When an air of sadness
marked his features, she would sing -- when he hinted his wish that they were
married, she sighed deeply, turned her head away from him, and talked on some
different subject; when he spoke of his friends, she affected the extremest
agitation; wept (for she could weep at will,) and implored him, as he valued
her life, to retain their connection an inviolable secret, for at least some
time to come.

Barnwell started, as the caution of Mental, 'never to promise secresy,' rushed
across his memory. -- "Why, why should there be secresy?" he exclaimed.

"Our fates have rendered it most necessary," she answered. -- "Ah! Barnwell,
you know not yet all the perplexities that rack this heart. Pardon the
mysterious veil that for a moment conceals it, and confide in the assurance,
that it is wholly and forever yours. 'Twere to be wished, that we -- yes, we
(for I will not affect to throw the guilt wholly on you) had not yielded to the
too powerful impulse of our passions! -- But, who can recall the past? How
useless, then, it is to repine! Let us, my dear Barnwell, rather conquer, then
submit to our fate, and employ ourselves in a prudent anticipation of the
future, in preference to a gloomy retrospect of the past!"

Such were the blandishments with which the siren soothed the regrets of
Barnwell, and such the arts by which she bound him in unfelt setters.

At his return home, the following morning, he sound a packet of dispatches
from his uncle's. Soon as he saw the well known writing, his heart smote him.

For some days previous to the unfortunate meeting with Milwood, accident had
prevented his writing to his sister, with whom he had hitherto regularly
corresponded, since his arrival in London; and the events which had occurred
since then were such as he felt no inclination to relate. With the just
apprehensions of reproof, therefore, he broke the seals, and read the following
letters.

LETTER I.
My dear Son,
I am uneasy at a silence, of which I know not the cause. If you are as happy
as usual, why not let us be equally so, in knowing that you are? If otherwise,
why so selfish as to retain, in your own breast, cares in which others have a
right to participate? It is impossible you can forget that you have a sincere
friend in

Your most affectionate mother, E. BARNWELL.

LETTER II.
It is with pain, my dear brother, I am compelled to complain of you, even to
yourself! You were by no means acting politically, to be so good and attentive
a brother, and so punctual and pleasing a correspondent, if you foresaw the
present neglect, which is extremely increased in its effects by the contrast.
-- Ignorant too, as I am, of the cause of your silence, ten thousand tormenting
supposes are rapidly succeeding each other. You paint the amiable Maria in such
pleasing tints, that I sometimes suppose you devote my little portion of your
time to the study of your favorite picture. Yet, if so, say I to myself, surely
he would delight in recounting the charms he discovers. Suppose some face, or
some mind, more engaging than Maria's, has supplanted her in his approbation,
would he not have been eager to have displayed to his Eliza those superior
attractions? -- Suppose he should be reclining on the uneasy pillow of a sick
bed! -- Thus, my dear brother, do I torture imagination to find excuses for
your conduct; but as imagination has yet offered nothing in your savor, to the
satisfaction of your judge, you are now called upon for your defense. Speak
then, Sir -- You have a powerful pleader in the breast of your Eliza; and if
you can make but a tolerable excuse, you may assure yourself of a ready
acquittal. It is necessary to conclude, by way of memento, in the old fashioned
style, that

I am, dear brother, Your affectionate sister, ELIZA BARNWELL.

LETTER III.
Dear Nephew,
I take this opportunity of expressing to you my approbation of your conduct,
the report of which, as well from Mr. Freeman as Mr. Emery, gives me great
pleasure. I am sure it is needless in me to give advice to one who so well
knows what is right; at the same time my wishes for your welfare make me remind
you how important the effects of your present actions are in forming your
future comfort, or otherwise. I hope you pay particular attention to your
expenses, and never suffer yourself, for the sake of momentary pleasures or
false pride, to go beyond the mark, which would compel you to descend to real
meannesses, or bring on lasting eneasiness. You will take this as caution, not
reproof. I have every reason to rely upon your prudence, and shall fall with
quiet into my grave, if only I am permitted to see my brother's son settled
respectably in life, and become the guardian and protector of his widowed
mother, and his sister, which, if you please, you will be enabled to be. I have
remitted you a draft for fifty pounds. Should any emergency, at any time,
occasion you a pecuniary want, let me be your friend; and I charge you, ^by no
means to lie under obligations of this sort to any, but to your

Most affectionate uncle, JAMES BARNWELL.

These letters, the simple genuine effusions of affectionate hearts, were
perused by Barnwell with mingled sensations of pleasure and pain. When he
compared the last of them with his situation with respect to Milwood, he
shuddered. --

"What steps shall I pursue?" said the distracted youth. "They charge me with
silence -- How shall I ever write again! -- I have pledged myself to Milwood --
I have sworn to be secret. If I write, therefore, I must conceal from them my
perplexities -- I must disguise my feelings -- I must invent occurrences to
account for my time. -- Dreadful situation! And who can foresee its duration?
How long may the too lovely Milwood envelope herself in this impenetrable veil
of mystery!

"I have incurred a certain expense in a provision for her -- perhaps too far
-- Oh, God! what a precipice am I descending! There is no possible way of
sustaining my ground, but by a timely disclosure of my errors -- and from that
I am prevented by a rash oath! Long this secrecy cannot last. Liberal as my
uncle is, his generosity cannot equal wants of which he never dreams. Why did I
make so rash a promise! Why should she exact it! -- So contrary to my nature,
to my practice too! -- I hate, I abhor secresy! It Is but another name for
deception! I will fly instantly, and retract my engagement. I will convince her
how necessary it is that our marriage should immediately take place, and be
declared; -- then, even if the anger of my benefactor should overpower his
tenderness and affection, I have the world before me -- Industry shall supply
the necessities of nature; and the sweet reward of sincerity, my heart's
approbation, shall make ample amends for the luxuries I lose. But to continue
the mean paths of dissimulation -- to start at every noise -- to tremble at
every glance -- existing under the uplifted rod of Fear, is worse, much worse,
than any evil which can result from an opposite conduct. This is the voice of
prudence, of interest -- and is in unison with the lessons of morality, and the
precepts of religion. -- I will obey it instantly."

Such were the inward musings of Barnwell; such was the noble resolution of his
heart. As he was completely master of his own time in Mr. Emery's absence, he
answered some letters received that morning from Buxton, and went immediately
to Brompton.

END OF VOLUME FIRST.
BARNWELL.
VOL. II.
CHAP. I.
Sincerity,
Thou first of virtues, (...) no mortal leave
Thy onward path, (...) should (...),
And from (...) Destruction cry,
To take (...) way.
TRAGEDY OF DOUGLAS.
"THIS is an unexpected pleasure, indeed, my Barnwell," said (...), as she
received him with a well-feign (...) of satisfaction, though she would gladly
(...) with his presence; "how much I owe you for this endearing attention!"

"Hold!" cried Barnwell, seriously; -- "be first certain that my visit is
volunteered!"

"By so grave an address, you terrify me!" cried she, pretending excessive
alarm. "Tell me, my dear Barnwell, why are you so serious? Where are those
smiles that have gained such a triumph?"

"They are (...), I hope, only for a time," said Barnwell. "It is in your power
to recall them."

"O, say by what means?"

"Give me back my oath of secresy, for I cannot be secret -- it is contrary to
my nature, and my heart will be never at ease till my countenance is at
liberty."

"Absurd!" said Milwood, with a smile half satire* half scorn. "Are mankind,
then, to walk the paths of society with transparent breasts? Are we to give the
world the clue of all our actions? Secrecy, my Barnwell, is a virtue of the
first class in the present system of things; and the being is as mad, who
throws it aside, as he who rushes with a naked breast upon an hostile spear!
You are too unacquainted with a tricking world, my Barnwell. When you shall
know its wiles, how will you laugh at your present childish notions!"

"Then may I never know them! I cannot, and I will not be a hypocrite!"

Barnwell spoke this with so much earnestness, that Milwood trembled for its
consequences. Turning her powers, therefore, against this rising strength of
resolution, which alarmed her, she burst into tears, and throwing herself into
a chair --

"Go, then, proud youth; proclaim, through the wide circle of your friends, the
triumph you have gained; display the spoil your conquering charms have won;
exhibit my disgraoe; summon to my ears the songs of Scorn; and give to
foul-mouthed Calumny the prey that you despise!"

"How wildly you talk, Madam!" cried Barnwell, still struggling to resist the
tender influence he felt.

"Madam!" echoed Milwood -- "Madam!"

"Pardon me -- my -- what name -- what title shall I give you? Why will you not
this moment give me a right to call you wife?"

"Merciful Heaven!" cried Milwood; "are you delirious? What can add to the
right which I have granted you? -- What mean you, then? Do you allude to the
mummery invented for the use of those who have not faculties of their own to
define the laws of nature? Am I the less yours -- are you the less your
Milwood's because a ceremony is omitted?"

"No, Milwood, no. -- In my own estimation, you are mine as sacredly as
possible. Have we not sworn a mutual faith in His presence, who is every where!
Our vows are registered by Him -- -- "Whose temple is all space,
Whose altar, earth -- sea -- skies."


"The solemnity of an earthly temple, or the sanctity of temporal altars,
therefore, cannot increase the force of obligation with a mind, that thinks as
mine does! But O, Milwood! I am not a solitary being -- I have a mother, a
sister, whose happiness is wove with my own. -- I have a benefactor, too, whose
generous kindness deserves the warmest gratitude! Can I tell them, that I --
Could I introduce --."

"'It Is because you can not do this, that I required your secrecy."

"But, you will permit me to add, that if we had the sanction of Custom (not to
say the obligation of Law) to our connection, there would exist no cause of
secrecy! Those who love me will receive you as my wife; and -- "

"Surely, surely you will not imagine my dear Barnwell, that from choice I
throw an obstacle in the way of your proposal; -- it is impossible you should
think so! -- but at present, for some time at least, we cannot marry!"

"What mystery veils you, Milwood! O, cast it off. There cannot be a thought
that, either of us should engross to ourselves: let me beseech you to confide
in me."

"Only for a little space of time, my Barnwell, spare me. Soon shall the veil,
that now conceals my heart, for ever be removed: -- then shall our breasts be
the common repositories of our mutual thoughts -- there shall not be a hope or
a fear of one unknown to the other; but so blended shall become our very
thoughts, we shall together form but me existence!"

"And why is that moment postponed?"

"You know not, my dear Barnwell, how you wound me by this useless importunity.
I do not form my resolutions on caprice, but on the (...) right or wrong I see
before me; and therefore, I never change my purpose, but with the revolution of
existing causes. I act from motives, not from impulse; else I might, by your
persuasions, be moved to reveal a secret, that my reason now denies you.
However much, therefore, your importunities may afflict my heart, they shall
not, they cannot, subdue the sovereign power of intellectual decision!"

"Extraordinary woman!" cried Barnwell. "How, then, am I to act? Say, Milwood,
had you a mother and a sister whom you loved, and to whom you had been
accustomed to reveal your inmost thoughts, could you refrain from recounting
such (...) train of interesting events as have occurred to us within these few
important days?"

"What can be more easily decided than your question? Ask yourself, what
benefit you can expect from revealing these events? -- You would merely create
an host of painful apprehensions in those breasts, which you wish should be the
mansions of peace; and the only possible result of their knowing what has
passed, would be a painful anxiety to know more than it is at present in your
power to reveal."

"And yet, to conceal the true state of my mind, I must feign a satisfaction I
do not feel; I must assume an indifference to which my heart is a stranger. How
can I answer such letters as these?"

Barnwell then gave her the three letters he had received in the morning. --
When she had perused them --

"Your sister is an amiable girl; and your mother is, doubtless, a good woman,"
said she; "but I scarcely know how to pronounce on your uncle. His letters of
prudence seem more the acquisitions of habit, than the suggestions of his own
reason. He is very rich, I presume?"

"I understand so."

"And as no children?"

"None."

"Your mother and sister reside with him: -- of course to acquaint them with
our connection, would be the same as informing your uncle."

"Does that follow?"

"Yes; unless they can feign a satisfaction they do not feel, and assu^^e an
indifference to which their hearts are strangers, you know!

Barnwell smiled.

"I perceive, my Barnwell," continued she, "the state of your mind. It has
hitherto been too much swayed by prejudice early imbibed, and still unexamined.
But as you advance in life, you will discover, that the wisest and the best of
mankind find it impossible to model their actions by given rules. The incidents
of life hinge so entirely on chance, that our situations, relatively and
individually, assume many complex shapes; and are perpetually at variance with
defined notions of duty. It Is, therefore, impossible to exhibit a standard of
virtue or vice.

"Let us apply this observation to your present situation: -- You say you
cannot be a hypocrite! I grant you, hypocrisy is classed amongst what are
called vices; but will any one say, that to distress the feelings of a mother
and sister, to wound their hearts with the arrows of perplexing doubts and
apprehensions, is more virtuous, than simply to conceal the events which have
passed, and which were not the effects of our own designs? Such a doctrine
scarcely merits a moment's thought!"

By these and similar arguments, did this mistress of dissimulation at length
defeat the noble purposes of that sincerity which hitherto had dwelt in
Barnwell's breast, and he fatally resolved to keep his friends in ignorance of
his situation.

In the honesty of his nature, he had confessed to Milwood, that he had
mentioned the affair to one friend, but that he was ignorant of any thing that
had occurred since their second interview; and overcome by her tears, her
arguments, and her persuasions, he promised he would never allow himself to
mention her again even to this one friend, nor would ever suffer him to name
her to himself.

This was the precise point which the arts of Milwood aimed to accomplish; for
she well knew that, among the many and various errors to which youth and
inexperience are exposed, there is none more fatal in its consequences, than
the concealment of having committed them. The first deviating steps from the
paths of rectitude, may often be retraced by the aid of friendly council; but
he who denies himself that timely aid, will in vain implore its efficacy when
entangled in the maze of deception; and when every avenue on the return to
happiness is obstructed by some unexpected obstacle.

CHAP. II.
With wary caution you must bear yourself
In public, left your tenderness break forth,
And* in observe^s stir conjectures strange.
TRAGEDY OF DOUGLAS.
THOUGH Barnwell's inclination led him to devote the whole of his leisure to
the company of Milwood, respect to Mr. Emery pointed out the propriety of a
visit to the Pavilion, where he had lately become a stranger.

'Twas a delightful evening in September, when, for the first time since his
acquaintance with Milwood, he arrived there. A period of ten or twelve days had
elapsed since his last visit, and he was framing his apology as he walked his
horse slowly round the paling of the Park, and was near the Porter's Lodge,
when he was aroused by the sweet notes of a guitar, issuing from the Park. When
he alighted, as he gave his horse to the porter, he inquired who was the
performer.

"'It Is one of the young ladies that be here on a visit," said the man. "I
thinks they do call her Miss Freeman; but our young ladies do call her Maria --
a sweet young lady she is too! she do a world of good wherever she goes; -- old
and young do pray for blessings on her: and yet I be hugely out in my reckoning
and she be'nt very unhappy!"

"Why do you think so, Wilmot?" said Barnwell, who was interested at his
account.

"Why your honor, she be so mopish, and lonesome, and do never seem to make
merry with the gentlefolks; but walks, and walks, alone, all day; and then she
do sigh mightily -- and be grown so pale! -- It is a main pity, your honor,
that she, who do take such pains to make every body happy, should not be happy
herself!"

"Pity, indeed!" replied Barnwell, who encouraged his loquacity, that he might
discover if any thing had occurred in his absence -- for old Wilmot had the
talent of extracting from one or other of the domestics the whole news, of the
Pavilion. One of the grooms having taken his horse, he followed Wilmot into the
Lodge, under pretense of admiring his grandchildren -- "What a fine fellow
this!" said he, patting a chubby-faced little boy on the head; -- "and those
are charming little girls!"

"I do thank heaven," cried the old man, "they be brave and hearty."

-- "And only look, an' please your honor," said the mother, "what beautiful
fine dimity coats, and what lovely fine frocks the dear Miss Freeman has made
for them, with her own hands!"

"Ah!" resumed the old man, "she is to be pitied, sweet lady!"

"Yes," cried his daughter; "if what Mrs. Watson, my lady's maid, says, be
true, it is a hard case for such a beautiful and lovely charming good angel to
be crossed in love! -- for every body says it is love. Lord, I declare it makes
one's heart ache to see her moping about, when all the rest of the grand
gentlefolks are riding out, or fishing, or dancing, or archering, or -- "

Just as she was speaking, Maria, ignorant of Barnwell's arrival, strolled into
the Lodge. Her eyes were thrown pensively upon the ground, her guitar hung on
her arm. She appeared much changed in her countenance, and sighed deeply still.
Barnwell could not behold her without a recollection of his dream. He sat in a
corner of the little room, and Maria, lifting up her eyes, saw him --

"Mr. Barnwell here!" exclaimed she, with a momentary blush that suffused her
pale cheek. The surprise appeared to have overcome her, and she trembled.

"I am admiring Wilmot's grandchildren," said Barnwell, with some hesitation.
-- "I have been -- that is, I have been -- I mean, it is a considerable (...)
since I have been here."

"How is the poor woman at farmer Jasper's," said Maria to old Wilmot,
appearing not to notice the too evident embarrassment of Barnwell.

"O, my sweet lady, she be quite another guess thing; and she do talk of
nothing but her good angel. Tomorrow she do mean to pay you her respects, and
return thanks for -- "

"Nay, nay," interrupted she, "I must (...) hear you talk thus, good Wilmot: --
but if the poor woman should come tomorrow, detain her here, and send in for
me. I charge you not to let her come into the house; -- her too grateful heart
would pour ^^rth effusions I should be pained to hear in the presence of
others. -- Good evening" -- and she walked out of the Lodge. Barnwell followed
her.

"Permit me to carry that instrument," said he.

"No, Sir," replied Maria, coolly.

"You seem fatigued -- will you honor me by accepting my arm?"

"No, Sir," replied she again.

(...) I so unfortunate,' said Barnwell, "as to have (...) Miss Freeman's
displeasure, that she denies (...) the pleasure of rendering her assistance?"

She walked on in silence. Barnwell was really concerned. He esteemed Maria ere
he felt the fervor of love, and valued her good opinion too highly to part with
it with indifference. They reached the house without exchanging another word.

As they entered the saloon, Miss Emery was playing a serious air of Banti's on
the piano, which she immediately changed for -- " See the conquering hero
come!" which she accompanied with her voice. -- Mrs. Emery, Miss Charlotte,
Lord Morley, and Mr. (...) were present, and laughed so heartily, that (...)
could not return the salutations of Barnwell, or listen to one word of his
apology. As soon as silence returned, Charlotte opened the battery of raillery.
--

"Most puissant, and renowned Conqueror of hearts, Colonel Commandant of the
Corpse of Cupids! whose headquarters are your brilliant eyes, whose ^rtillery
is your smiles, condescend to accept the congratulations of the meanest of your
captives, upon your safe arrival, after so long and painful an absence!"

Barnwell was astonished!

"Sterling! -- sterling! -- upon my honor," cried Mr. Eastwood; and the whole
party, except Maria, joined in a most hearty laugh.

"The annals of Love are but the records of your conquests," continued
Charlotte, "and wherever we turn our wondering eyes, we view the victims of
your charms!"

As she said this, she fixed her eyes significantly upon Maria, who seemed hurt
by the allusion. Barnwell was no better pleased. Regardless, however, o^ the
pain she created, so long as Mr. Eastwood admired, and the others laughed, she
continued --

"But cease, mighty conqueror, cease this havoc among beauties; deign to
consider the misery you extend, and the woes you increase. Let the languid
eyes, the pallid cheeks, the painful sighs, the palpitating hearts of those,
who have already fallen, suffice for sacrifices; check the cruel career of
conquest, and distribute the consolation of your presence more equitably among
your slaves! Forget not, that while the cheering beams of your countenance
dispensing life and vigor at Brompton, their absence is fatal in other
quarters! Only conceive the effects to the earth of twelve days' absence of the
sun, and emulate in justice, as you do in splendour, the equal revolutions of
that glorious orb!"

Barnwell was petrified with astonishment at this rhapsody. He could not fail
to understand her meaning, but was lost in wonder how his visits to Brompton
could have reached the Pavilion.

"Come, come," cried Lord Morley, "be merciful, Charlotte, as you are powerful.
You see how you make the poor youth blush!'

Barnwell was really embarrassed -- "Upon my word," cried he, after several
attempts, "you are very entertaining!"

"Do you think so?" cried Charlotte archly. "Well, then, now I Will be serious --
quite in right arnest;" and drawing herself stiffly upright in her chair, with
her thumbs twirling round each other -- "If you please, Mr. Barnwell, how do
you like the air at Brompton? I hope it agrees with your health."

"I beg your pardon -- I -- really don't understand you."

"Shall I explain myself then, Sir, before (...) whole assembly; or will you
have the house cleared, and strangers excluded, before I rise to explain? -- Be
quick, Sir, in your choice; for I perceive I have already caught the Speaker's
eye."

Maria was looking earnestly at her whilst she spoke. Barnwell beginning to
apprehend she really knew more than she had yet hinted, found no way left but
to return her raillery, however severely he felt her observations --

"I think I have a right to call for an adjournment," said he, "as your
proceedings are as irregular as unjust. You should certainly have given notice
of the measure you intended to bring before the house."

"Guilty -- Guilty, upon my honor," cried Lord Morley; or he would never have
evaded a trial upon a point of form." --

"Well," cried Barnwell, "I suppose you understand one another; but it is all
cross purposes to me."

"O, I dare say you think them cross enough," cried Charlotte; "but if people
will set themselves up for Joseph's, and one should by accident discover them to
be no Joseph's, why the consequence is -- What ails you child!" breaking off,
and addressing herself to Maria, who complained of a giddiness in her head, and
fainted.

A bustle ensued, during which, Barnwell, finding his services useless, retired
to his own room.

His own reflections were no more pleasing than the railleries of Charlotte
Emery. His connection with Milwood was evidently known at the Pavilion. It
might also have reached the ears of his mother, and his uncle. Milwood herself
was grown, if possible, more mysterious. Her expenses increased rapidly, and
his own finances became straitened, notwithstanding his excellent management
previous to his acquaintance with her. The disdain of Maria, too, sat not easy
on his heart: he knew her to be as amiable in mind as lovely in person; and no
longer doubting but the report of a clandestine connection had lost him her
esteem, if not a more tender regard; he most bitterly lamented the fate, that
prohibited his offering any explanation in justification of his conduct.

The long intervals betwixt the broken slumbers of the night were, therefore,
occupied in a train of thoughts, neither satisfactory in a survey of the past,
nor in a contemplation of the future. Regret followed, and Fear preceded him.

Nor was the breast of Maria tranquil. Her mind, endowed by nature with a quick
susceptibility of tender sentiments, had imbibed for Barnwell an affection
fatal to her peace. His person was handsome, his countenance interesting; but
those exteriors had little influenced the thinking Maria. 'Twas the native
elegance of his manners, the integrity and generosity of his sentiments, and
the noble tenor of his conduct, that had gained him so honorable a distinction
in her bosom. This distinction had increased continually by a comparison with
the young men who visited Mr. Emery.

Among the swarm of fashionable flies that buzzed perpetually about her, she
sought in vain for his originality of mind, his purity of thought. One was
conspicuous for his disgusting rudeness, practiced by mistake for affability;
others, for an equally disgusting obsequiousness, that set all appreciation of
their minds at complete defiance: this entertained her with the history of the
theaters, and retailed the scandal of venomous tongues to the prejudice of the
performers; whilst others, could she have listened to them, would have taught
her the whole art of farriery, and stored her mind with the true principles of
nicking, docking, cropping, and training horses.

But when opportunity favored her with the society of Barnwell, her mind
expanded in the pursuit of his ideas her heart glowed at the congenial
effusions of his; and she felt at once delighted and improved. Such a
distinguishing esteem naturally, though imperceptibly softened into Love; and
Maria was surprised at her own situation when she first discovered how
necessary was the presence of Barnwell to the satisfaction of her heart.

This discovery she made, when, day after day, he absented himself for above a
week from the Pavilion; which, all gaiety as it was, appeared in the estimation
of Maria the very temple of Dullness, without the society of Barnwell. But if a
doubt was left on her mind respecting the state of her heart, it vanished at
the pain, the most exquisite pain, she endured, when through the tattle of
servants, (which Barnwell never suspected) his nightly visits to Brompton were
made known at the Pavilion.

Then did the bosom of Maria swell with anguish, unfelt before. She doubted,
she scrupled to believe, that Barnwell would be guilty of intrigue; and yet
there was no way of acquitting him, but by supposing he had entered into more
solemn, and lasting engagements. Either supposition wounded her heart. She grew
melancholy and thoughtful; and the struggle of her reason and her love sapped
the foundations of her health.

Such was the situation of Maria, when the behavior of Barnwell in the saloon
confirmed her in the opinion that, if ever he had been worthy of her esteem, he
had now relinquished that claim. The anguish such conviction occasioned her,
was too powerful for her delicate mind, and was the cause of her fainting.

With Maria therefore, as well as with Barnwell, the night passed heavily on;
and when the glorious orb of day chased darkness from the earth, neither
Barnwell nor Maria could hail, with a tranquil breast, those gladdening beams,
that heretofore had kindled in their hearts the glow of grateful joy.

CHAP. III.
Virtuous and vicious ev^^y man must be,
Fe^ in the extreme, but all in (...)
The (...), is fair and wise,
And ev^n the best, by (...), what they despise.
POPE.
A POSTCHAISE and four was at the door when Barnwell arrived, the following
morning, at Portland Place. Mr. Emery had just returned from Buxton. He
immediately paid his respects to him in the library. --

"So Barnwell!" said Mr. Emery, as he walked hastily about the room: -- his
eyes were red and swelled -- his aspect lowering -- his brows knitted -- not
one trace was left in his countenance of his former ease and gaiety.

Barnwell was hesitating whether to retire or remain; when Mr. Emery, putting
his hand to his head, exclaimed --

"What an infernal crew! -- What devils upon earth! -- Blood-suckers that feed
upon the vitals of their fellows! -- Curse them! -- curse them!" Then turning
suddenly round -- "What are you staring at?" cried he to Barnwell. -- "Did I
send for you? Go -- Stay -- Where Is my wife?"

"At the Pavilion, Sir."

" Pavilion! Ha -- ha -- ha! -- "'It Was mine, it is his, and has been slave to
thousands!"

There was a wildness, approaching to madness, in the manner and words of Mr.
Emery, that struck Barnwell with surprise and horror; yet, ignorant of the
cause, he was unable to offer consolation to his despair, had his situation
allowed him the privilege. After two or three paces round the room -- "Write me
a note," cried Mr. Emery, with a quickness that startled him. Barnwell listened
to his indicting --

"Mr. Emery will esteem himself highly obliged, if Mr. Negotiate will call in
Portland Place, as early this morning as possible."

"Take this no^e yourself: -- see Negotiate, and know the exact minute he will
be here."

Barnwell obeyed his orders with promptness, and returned with intelligence,
that Mr. Negotiate was just stepping into his chariot, to fulfill an appointment
at the Treasury, and would wait on Mr. Emery as he returned.

Mr. Negotiate was a money-broker; a man supposed to be immensely rich; who,
from the facility with which he could convert remote securities into ready
cash, was a necessary confidante of the needy, both at Court and 'Change. He
was a little thin man, and always seemed ready to sink (...) the weight of
Exchequer bills, Scrip receipts, and money bonds, with which his pockets were
continually loaded. He was pompous and proud to those who wanted his
assistance; obsequious and meanly submissive where he wanted assistance.

About one he arrived. Barnwell was withdrawing when he entered the library --
"Stay;" said Mr. Emery, "we must have a witness; and you who already half know
my embarrassments, may as well know the whole."

"There, now," cried Negotiate, who was a Jew, "I vas thought as much. --
Embarrashment, embarrashment! -- Every body (...) out that tone, Embarrashment.
Public affairs -- Private affairs -- Great men's affairs -- Marchant's affairs
-- Banker's affairs -- Tradesfoks' affairs -- all vas embarrashment! Vell, vell
-- vat vas I to do with it. I vonder vat peoples takes me for! There is the
Minishtry -- and there is the Upholsterer -- all come to Mishter Negotiate.
Marcy on me! -- they vorry me to death! And pray, now, Mishter Emery, vat vill
relieve your embarashment?"

"Why, for the present," said Mr. Emery, "six thousand will do."

"Got Almighty! Vere vas you think I can scrape so much money? 'Tish
impossible! Good morning, Mishter Emery -- Good morning -- You must inquire
further. But I will tell you one thing -- your friend, the Ea^^, is as embarrash
as you. Here! see, Exchequer bills -- Exchequer bills -- and the market!"

"D -- the market! cried Emery, furiously. "I must -- I will have the money!"

"Marcy on us, (...) ^varm you grow! Be quiet! be easy! be calm!"

Negotiate always made it a point to refuse in the first instance, that, by the
effects of disappointment upon his victim, he might judge of their emergency,
and offer terms accordingly. After a variety of difficulties were, at length,
dispatched, he advanced the sum required, upon the security of the estate at
the Pavilion, at an enormous premium, and on a bond to reimburse stock to the
amount sold out, be the price at its expiration ever so disproportionate.

This transaction opened a new scene to Barnwell, and filled his mind with the
most serious reflections, in which the peril of his own situation was not
forgotten. Every hour it grew more dangerous. A clandestine connection with a
person, of whose family or friends he could procure no sort of intelligence,
whose story was mysterious, and in several points contradictory, sat not easy
at his heart. The following letter, from his sister Eliza, by no means lessened
his regrets.

LETTER.
There is something wrong, my dear Brother: you are unhappy, and you have
rendered us so too! What a letter was your last -- ' Engagements of various
kinds! -- Particular circumstances! -- Want of tim! -- What excuses are these
from one, who had used to delight in recounting every little incident that
might entertain; every thought that might improve his sister! Did I fancy it,
or was your hand, indeed, unsteady while you wrote? O, George, you are a sorry
actor! In vain you aim to fit a mask upon your soul: it spurns it, and will
burst the fetters of deception. It must not be concealed, that we concluded
from the incoherencies, the contradictions of your letters, that something is
wrong; and the anxiety as to the nature of the evil, is greater, beyond all
comparison, than a certain knowledge of it, be i^ what it may. Leave us no
longer, then, in the purgatory of conjecture. 'Engagements,' you speak of. It
was your custom to describe to us the events of every day. What then is the
nature of those engagements you keep back from our knowledge? Your situation
must be changed, indeed, if press of business has so quickly succeeded a
leisure, of which you formerly complained! Ah, George, that leisure, in such a
place as London, ever occasioned our dear parent some concern for you. But when
we found it devoted to the improvement of mind, to the elegant pursuits of
literature, and particularly when spontaneously you devoted so large a portion
of it to a correspondence, that brought us, as it were, daily into each other's
presence, her heart glowed with gratitude to the memory of him, who is now no
more, as she hailed with joy the sweet blossoms of his early cultivation.

Shall we then be deceived at last! Say, my brother, were those blossoms so
tender, that Temptation's tempest can have blighted them? Forgive the thought!
It cannot -- can (...) be! It may have checked them; it cannot have destroyed
them. Some indiscretion has, for a while, shed its sombre influence over a
mind, that cannot be at once in error, and at ease. Is it so, my dear brother?
I have a right to presume it is, from your conduct; for on no other ground can
I define it. And if it should be so, what have we ever done, that our hearts
are denied their just right to a knowledge of your imperfections? How often
have the imperfections of human nature been our theme! How often have we pitied
the poor disciples of modern philosophy, who boast the reverse. We have heard
persons declare, that they have never repented of one act of their lives, and
we have smiled. It must be false shame, or false fear, then, that has betrayed
my dear brother into the concealment of his errors.

Perhaps you may imagine, that to acquaint us with them, would occasion us
pain; and that what we do not know, we cannot regret. Fatal delusion! How many
wrecks of promised happiness has that rock occasioned! Most, who opproach it,
perish. Examine this specious suggestion of Pride -- It is no more. We are
unwilling to descend in the esteem of those we love, and we conceal from their
knowledge indiscretions, which we imagine would have that effect; forgetting
that, by the very concealment, we practice a crime, instead of committing an
error; and are guilty of the meanest hypocrisy, in passing ourselves upon our
friends for such miracles of perfection, as make a comparison with their own
experience, painful. Besides the meanness of this deception, it will be found
impolitic. It is the unvarying law of nature, that all causes produce effects.
Indiscretion, then, must have its consequences. And how frequently is it seen,
that the consequences declare the indiscretion to those, from whom we have
sought to conceal it! and then how contemptible do we appear, from the very
act, which we vainly imagined the prop of our characters!

Pardon me, dear George, in thus reminding you of truths gathered from
yourself; and believe me, that my heart would not have rested satisfied, had I
said less. Anxious will pass the moments till we hear from you; and if you are
not indeed angry and offended at an officiousness, of which the tenderest love,
and dearest interest, are the parents, you will not hesitate to repose in a
mother and sister's breasts the distresses or perplexities of your own.

It is scarcely necessary to observe, that our benevolent uncle has remarked
your silence. But be assured, our correspondence at present is confined to
those, who only probe a wound, they persuade themselves you have received, that
they may with more effect administer to its cure. I am commanded to remit you
the blessing of your mother, and with that unite the warm and sincerest
affection of your sister.

E. B.


The heart of Barnwell suffered the severest conflicts from the perusal of this
letter. The fallacious arguments of Milwood, respecting the propriety of
concealment were answered, as completely as if he had expressed them to his
sister. His mind was clearly convinced of the folly, as well as guilt, of any
further secrecy; and he once more determined to acquaint Milwood, that he could
no longer submit to a clandestine connection.

CHAP. IV.
O* beware, my Lord, of jealousy:
It is (...) green-eyed monster, which does mock
The meat it feeds on --.
But, O, what damned minutes tells he over,
Who doats, yet doubts -- suspects, yet strongly loves!
SHAKESPEARE.
THUS determined to rend the veil, which screened the situation of his heart
from those to whom its most secret thoughts had been ever open, Barnwell again
bent his footsteps toward Brompton.

As he entered the house, Mrs. Griffiths, the landlady, accosted him, and
requested he would walk into her parlour, as she had something of consequence
to say to him. Barnwell was by no means in a humor patiently to listen to the
harrangue with which the widow had prepared to amuse him, yet his politeness
prevented a refusal.

Mrs. Griffiths had, about five months since decently interred the poor dear
soul, her second husband, who had been pastor of a dissenting congregation. The
relics of her two husbands' effects, and an annuity of twenty pounds a year,
allowed her by the church to which Mr. Griffiths had administered, afforded her
the means of living decently, with the help of letting lodgings. Having seated
herself in her elbow chair, smoothed her apron, and taken a comfortable pinch
of snuff --

"It does not become me, Mr. Barnwell, to pry into other folks' matters, no more
than what I Have a right, and that my duty calls upon me to do. I am left, as I
may say, to my own look out, and to do for myself; for as to depending upon
others, I sees the foolishness of that every day. My last poor saint was too
good for this world a deal: he spent his breath and his spirits for other
people's good, and did it, as he said, from a sense of duty, and was always for
relying upon their gratitude for my future support. You must know, Mr.
Barnwell, that my first husband drove the Lord Mayor of London in his state
coach, in the year seventy-six, and saved something pretty, I assure you,
besides getting his freedom. I might have done better, to be sure; -- but what
is to be will be. -- We were married, Sir, and did very well for some years, in
a house, though I say it, that drawed as good a butt of beer a week as ever
came ou^ of Whitbread's store, besides compounds and cordials in proportion.
But he, poor man, could net resist the temptation of one and another; and at
last, by drinking too freely, I must own, brought on a dropsy, and went off
(...) the snuff of a candle, though as fine a man at one time as ever you
clapped your eyes on. Well, Sir, there was I left a widow, and had every thing
to manage, and to do. But, as I said before, what is to be will be; and,"
lifting up her hands, "so it will!"

"It will, indeed!" said Barnwell, scarcely able to refrain a smile.

"Ah! Sir," continued the widow, "who would have thought, when Mr. Griffiths
came to measure my poor first husband for his coffin, that he was to conduct me
a second time to the Halter of Im^^d! But so it was. He was then 'prentice to
an undertaker, and not more than nineteen; but he had such a tongue! -- It was
as good as a cordial to hear him talk. I am sure I may say it was not his person
that gained my heart, for he was very tall, and very thin; his face was as pale
as a tallow candle; his eyes large, but sunk, and his cheeks hollow. But I soon
larnt that he was dissatisfied with his sittyashon, and had a turn for larning.
To make short, Sir, I pitied the poor young fellow; and he used to come now and
then, of a Sunday, and dine; and then he would read books, and make out such
meanings from the Scriptures, as nobody else, but a great genus, would think
of. At last he prevailed upon me to believe, that keeping the sign of the Goat
was a sinful way of life; and turning what I had into money, I entered the holy
state once more, and we lived at a little place a few miles from London. Here
he got acquainted with some people that belonged to the Meeting, and they made
him their parson. I saw then how it would turn out. -- 'What does it signify,
Mr. Griffiths,' says I, 'your tearing your lungs to pieces, four times a day,
in this manner, to people who will not give a bit of bread to your poor Dolly,
when you have got your death by them?' and so, sure enough, it was. He preached
himself into a galloping consumption; the other dri^ked himself into a dropsy;
and now they are gone -- and (...) am I le^t to my own look out!" --

The patience of Barnwell, was, by this time, completely exhausted; and he was
rising to depart, when Mrs. Griffiths prevented him.

"But now, Sir, I comes to what I was agoing to remark to you. You see how I am
sittyated; and that I am not able to afford to loose by my lodgers. To be sure,
the church does allow me a paltry twenty pounds a year; but that is no
dependence, as I don't go to their place, and, indeed, don't much like their
prayers without books, where one don't know what they are agoing to say.
Besides, if I should alter my condition again, which there is no telling, I dare
say they would take it off: and so, what I say is -- its my own look-out I must
depend on; and I cannot afford to lose." --

"I don't understand, Madam, what all this leads to," cried Barnwell,
interrupting her. "You are very regularly paid, and well paid."

"As to that, two guineas a week for what this Mrs. God-knows-who has, its
little enough."

"More respect, if you please, when you mention that lady!" --

"I does not mean to affront you, Sir; but I must look after my own. To be sure,
you have paid regular enough as yet; and so did the gentleman, at first, that I
lost -- "

"Mrs. Griffiths," said Barnwell, extremely vexed, and taking his hat in his
hand -- "if you have any thing to say that concerns me, pray say it at once;
but if you are going to begin any more stories, you must excuse me."

"Why then, Sir, if you are for being so blunt -- pray, who are you, and what
are you? When you took my lodgings, it was all in a hurry, as I may say, and I
went upon your appearance; but it is my wish now to have a proper reference for
your character. I have particular reasons for it!"

"Barnwell started involuntarily, and blushed -- "What reasons?" exclaimed he.

"Nay, for what I know, you may have your enemies!"

"Explain, Madam -- I insist upon it. I am naturally warm and hasty in my
disposition; and I hate all this preface"

"Why then, Sir, I Will tell you the whole business."

"As briefly as you can," cried Barnwell.

She then related that -- "this morning, as she was sitting at the window, she
noticed an old gentleman, plainly dressed, who walked three or four times past
the house with particular observation. At length he bowed to her, and knocked
at the door. Upon being shown into the parlour, he bluntly asked her, if she
let lodgings; and then as abruptly desired to know the name of her present
tenants. When she informed him, Barnwell -- he exclaimed -- 'Then I am right.
Is the lady within who accompanied Mr. Barnwell here?' "Upon finding he knew
the circumstance," continued Mrs. Griffiths, "I answered, yes. He then desired
to see her. I went up stairs, and told the lady; but she refused to see him
unless he came with any message from yourself. The old gentleman was too
scrupulous to tell a story; but sent up word -- He did not come with your
knowledge, but that he came as your friend; and only wished to intrude upon her
time five minutes. But she positively refused him. 'This looks ill!' said the
old gentleman; and he sat talking to himself a good while. -- 'I should like
too see this lady,' said he, 'even if I did not speak to her. Could you manage
this for me?' I told him, that she generally walked in the garden in the course
of the morning; and that, if he pleased, he might stop and see her pass the
windows of the back parlour. He did so; and we talked of you, Sir. He
acquainted me, that this lady was one of those despicable hussies, that ought,
in my opinion, to be burnt alive; and that you was going to ruin headlong; and
that it was ten to one if you was able to pay me, for that you was only a
marchant's clerk."

" He told you this? -- He say this of me? -- Impossible!" cried Barnwell; for
he instantly concluded it could be no other than Mental.

"Yes, but he did; and much more he would have said, had not the lady just then
passed the window. She turned round to pluck a flower, and so he had a full
view of her face. Starting up like a madman, as soon as he saw it, he clasped
his hands together, and, striking his forehead, rushed out of the house before
I was aware."

"This is all very extraordinary," cried Barnwell -- "very extraordinary,
indeed! -- Pray, have you acquainted the lady with this circumstance?"

"No, not I, Sir. The lady, as you call her, must find more suitable
companions; and you, if you please, a m^re pr^p^rer place to keep her in."

"Barnwell, at once disgusted, vexed, and surprised, left her without a word,
and sought Milwood. She met him as he entered the room --

"Why, my dear Barnwell, is your brow thus constantly clouded?"

He answered not, but throwing himself on the sofa --

"I shall never be happy again," murmured he "O! Milwood, what a wretch have
you made me! I was basking in bliss -- I knew not a painful reflection -- and
now, I can neither consult my friends, nor my own heart -- I have grown
despicable in the estimation of both! -- You have destroyed my tranquillity for
ever!"

"From you this language, Barnwell! -- From you, for whom I have sacrificed not
only friends, but fortune -- nay, for whom I have sacrificed the delicacy of my
sex -- and have incurred a shame never to be effaced! -- Who is most the
sufferer, Barnwell -- you, who have shared equally in all the pleasures of our
connection, and, in the world's opinion, have obtained a triumph -- or I, who,
for my portion of rapturous moments have to encounter the evils of years,
unborn? -- Yet will I never repine -- I, who am a woman, will yet be
philosopher enough, not to lament the price of my pleasure! -- No, my
Barnwell," throwing her arms round his neck -- "no! -- though existence was
that price! -- What, then, can you repine at?"

"At the mystery which encircles her I love!" said Barnwell; -- "at the
necessity of secresy, which I abhor! Milwood, I feel about my heart the weight
of a crime! -- Never shall I feel one happy moment till I can introduce you to
my friends -- solicit their forgiveness -- and regain their esteem. Let me,
then, hasten the return of happiness to us both, by the only means that are
left us."

"I understand you, Barnwell -- I perfectly understand you; and would to God
that obstacles, insurmountable obstacles, did not prevent our adoption of those
means. But, once for all -- know, that the step, to which you allude, is --
quite impossible."

"Impossible! -- Milwood, do I hear you rightly -- Impossible?"

Milwood wept, and sighed.

"Tell me, most mysterious woman, and, by one word, for ever seal my doom --
Are you already married?"

Milwood remained silent.

"Nay, answer me, I beseech you," continued Barnwell. "The certainty that it is
so cannot be more tormenting than this suspense. Tell me, then, at once, how
guilty and how miserable a wretch I am."

"O, Barnwell! -- thy cruel penetration has wounded my soul! -- I am -- nay,
start not, fly not from me -- I am -- already -- married! -- "

Barnwell, in an agony, burst from her arms, and rushed toward the door. He
had seized the handle of the lock, when, with a shriek, Milwood fainted on the
safa. His tenderness returned in an instant, as he saw her beauteous person
extended lifeless on the sofa. He rang the bell violently; Mrs. Griffiths and
her servant came up, and he assisted them in their services. Half opening her
eyes, the artful Milwood observed his attentions --

"He has left me -- he is gone -- he is gone for ever!" exclaimed she. Then
appearing to recover, and starting at the sight of him, she caught his hand,
and kissing it rapturously -- "O, this is god-like, indeed!" said she.

Barnwell, finding she recovered, dismissed the landlady and her servant, and
tenderly supported her in his own arms. He could not, however, so far disguise
his feelings, as to appear otherwise than offended.

"Ah! why was this cruelty exerted!" said she -- "why have you saved me from
death, if thus you gaze on me! -- Never! never can I bear those reproving eyes!
-- Never can I support your anger, Barnwell. This scornful silence too! The
bitter reproaches were kinder than this cold silence, Barnwell!"

"What can I say to thee, thou dangerous woman? -- You, Milwood, may deem
adultery no crime; but I --."

" You, Barnwell, are no adulterer -- you are innocent -- I, indeed, am guilty!
-- But the love I cherish for you is all my heart approves. -- Compelled to
marry another, I have vowed at the altar to be his; but never have those vows
been sanctioned by my heart -- they were tortured from my lips -- but never has
my person yielded to such legalized pollution. From that memorable day I became
a fugitive, and only approached the altar with that view. A prisoner, in the
strictest sense, I had no other alternative, than to yield my hand to a loathed
bridegroom, whom, from that hour to this, I never have beheld."

Barnwell sat silently musing on the sofa; his hands were folded in each other,
and his eyes fixed on the floor.

"Still you are silent, Barnwell. I see the rising scorn, that sits upon your
lips; I know the innate delicacy of your pure mind revolts at the desperate
actions of a phrensy stricken woman, whom cruel tyranny and unbounded love
unite to plunge into despair. I will not aim to lessen your disgust; it is the
only remedy for my ill-fated passion. Go then, too lovely youth; go, and forget
for ever, the lost -- lost Milwood! -- Go, and in some other's arms, be blessed!
-- while I, in a lone corner of the earth, mourn ^'er thy memory, and bless thy
name."

"Yes, Madam," cried Barnwell; starting from his reverie -- "I perceive no
other mode of action: -- there appears one only outlet from this sea of guilty
pleasures; -- where, longer to remain, must be destruction!"

"I know your dreadful meaning, Sir: -- It Is cruel, but it is necessary. We must
part; and, since I have become so loathsome to your sight, the rudest deserts
will be preferable to your presence. No -- I could never stay to be despised by
you!" --

Here the siren shed a flood of artificial tears, that tortured Barnwell to the
very soul. The extreme sensibility of his nature subjected him to extremes in
sentiment: now, most tenderly he pitied the miseries of Milwood; then, the
memory of his family rushed across his mind -- he saw their indignant frowns,
he heard their rebukes, for a conduct so unworthy of them, and of himself.
Again, when he reflected on the dreadful fate of her, who had abandoned so much
for his sake, he was ready to extend his hand, and vow eternal truth. Again,
the taunts of the world, the revenge of an injured husband, and the ignominy to
himself and friends, of a public accusation, checked the softness quivering on
his lips, which only escaped by a painful sigh. --

In this conflict of his mind, memory placed before him the vision he had seen
in his sleep: he felt the allusion of the scene most strongly; the very
countenance of his father was present, and summoned a resolution in his breast,
that conquered every opposition. Approaching the sofa with tremulous voice --

"Painful to me, Milwood, are those tears; but, after the knowledge I have
obtained of your situation, to continue a connection -- "

"I know it must not be," interrupted she: -- "I know the jaundiced eye of
prejudice views in it all the hideous colorings of vice! I ask it not, my
Barnwell -- heartbreaking is the sacrifice; but to your peace of mind, I will
surrender, even yourself! Yet, do not add to the horrors of such a separation,
by inflicting the misery of thinking that I am despised by you. Say that you do
not hate me; and -- "

"Hate you! -- O, Milwood -- have I not preferred you, even to virtue? And now,
if you knew the struggle of my heart, you would see it is impossible to hate
you!"

"Generous -- generous Barnwell! -- why should the cold and rigid arbitration
of an ill-judging world sever such hearts as ours!"

As she spoke, she twined her arms around his neck; her palpitating heart beat
against his bosom, and her warm kisses brought on a delirium of ecstasy.

At this moment the door opened, and three men, in masks, rushed into the room.
Milwood shrieked and fainted. Two of these intruders held Barnwell on the sofa,
and prevented his cries; whilst the other conveyed Milwood away in his arms.

Barnwell in vain exerted himself against superior strength, as no person came
to his assistance. In about ten minutes the third man returned, and beckoned
the other to follow him. They left Barnwell gagged and bound. A considerable
time elapsed before Mrs. Griffiths and her servant made their appearance,
crying and lamenting most bitterly, having undergone the same treatment as
Barnwell.

When they had released him, he raved with the fury of a maniac; impeached the
integrity of the poor women, who stood trembling at his anger; and gave the
reins to the passions of jealousy and despair.

The strength of his unhappy attachment, was at no period so visible as now.
The uncertainty of her fate, the tormenting apprehensions he felt for her
safety, engrossed his whole soul.

The house being situated at a distance from any other, he could obtain no
intelligence by inquiries.

Having, after a considerable time, somewhat exhausted the first and violent
bursts of passion, he began to listen to the reasonings of Mrs. Griffiths; and
the only probable conclusion that he could draw, was, that the old gentleman,
who had been there in the morning, and was so desirous of seeing Milwood, and
who, he had supposed, was Mental, must have been her uncle, who had taken this
method of carrying her off to her husband.

As his present state of mind prevented his returning immediately to Mr.
Emery's, he remained some hours at Brompton, contemplating what steps to
pursue. The suggestion that best pleased him, of the many that presented
themselves, was, to seek out Mental, relate to him all that had happened, and
be guided by his opinion.

Just as he was preparing to put this resolution in practice, a boy delivered a
letter at the door, addressed to Barnwell, and which he said had been given him
by a man, who directed him to the house, and then ran away.

THE LETTER.
"It will be a very useless waste of your time to pursue the unfortunate woman
who has been snatched from your arms; she is in the custody of her uncle at
present, and in a few days will quit this kingdom for ever. The steps which an
injured husband will adopt toward the spoiler of his honor, and the destroyer
of his peace, you will shortly learn from those, whose profession it is to seek
from the justice of the laws the only reparation in your power."


There was neither name nor address affixed to this letter; but its contents
stung Barnwell to the soul. It confirmed his opinion as to her ^ate, and his
own. He now hesitated, whether he ought to apply to Mental, under his present
circumstances; and yet to whom else could he apply. He shuddered at the very
idea of acquainting his mother or his uncle -- The thought was like lightning
through his brain --

"Never, never," exclaimed he, as he paced the room with the letter in his hand
-- "never could my hand be firm enough to write them such intelligence. What!
tell my benevolent benefactor, that, in return for his generosity to me, I have
branded his name and family with the crime of adultery! -- tell my affectionate
sister, my honored and widowed mother, that, instead of the consolations I owe
her, she must expect to read the crimes of her son exhibited in the public
prints, and listen to sneering tattlers, while they point to her venerable
form, and cry, ' that is the Adulterer's mother!' -- O God, can any man do this?
-- No, no -- let me hide my guilty head in some dark cavern, far from the
haunts of men, ere such tidings reach their ears! O, that the oblivion of death
were shed over me ere that day come!"

When the powers of his mind had been stretched to the extent of pain, by
reflecting on his mother and Eliza, and some little relaxation of grief ensued,
another source of misery sprung from the image of Milwood. He felt all her
sufferings; he listened, in imagination, to her groans; and his heart sickened
at the thought that he should never see her more. Thus tortured by remorse, and
jealousy, the unhappy Barnwell, with trembling steps, once more gained his
master's house; and without resolving on any measure to adopt, he passed a
sleepless night, in anxious dread of what tomorrow would produce.

CHAP. V.
There is a species of (...) wit, which is much used, and much more abused; I
mean Raillery. It is much safer to let it quite alone, than to play with it;
and yet almost every body does play with it, though they see, daily, the
quarrels and heart-burnings that it occasions. CHESTERFIELD.
THE first intelligence that Barnwell received when he arose, was the arrival
of the family from the Pavilion the preceding day, which he gathered from the
servants, who were packing and cording trunks for a journey. Mr. Emery himself
had risen early, and encountered Barnwell in the Hall. There were no traces of
uneasiness now to be observed in his countenance, and Barnwell was not a little
surprised at so sudden a return of his former gaiety.

"We Are going to Ramsgate," said Mr. Emery, "and Mrs. Emery insists upon your
accompanying us. Indeed I wish it myself."

Barnwell was thunderstruck -- "Ramsgate, Sir! -- I really am not prepared. If
I might be excused -- "

O, by no means; any thing you may have occasion for can be sent after you. The
plan is arranged; -- you are to drive Miss Freeman in the curricle; and there
will be three or four other carriages. We breakfast early. The carriages are
ordered at eleven. You Will be ready.

Before Barnwell could reply, Mr. Emery was gone; "Ramsgate!" said he to
himself. "Curricle! -- Miss Freeman! This is sudden indeed! Just at this crisis
to be obliged to leave the metropolis! -- What can be done? -- Even should I
acquaint Mental, what could he do toward concealing a transaction, that must
come before a public court of justice? -- His advice, at least, may aid me!"

It was yet but eight o'clock; he determined, therefore, to wait upon Mental
immediately. When he arrived at his lodgings, to his infinite concern, he
learnt that he had discharged them the day before, at a moment's notice; but
had left the following note, which was to have been delivered to him that
morning.

"Accident has just discovered to me the wretched woman, who aided the cursed
designs of the betrayer of my daughter's honor. She resides at Ramsgate -- I am
flying thither in the hope, that she will direct me to the villain, who, if he
lives, shall feel the vengeance of an injured father; and the death of my
Elinor shall yet be avenged. Farewell.

"MENTAL."


The hope of meeting Mental at Ramsgate, tended to make the journey thither no
longer a matter of regret; and as he flattered himself, that his prosecutors
would at least acquaint him with their proceedings, he left particular
directions to have all letters immediately forwarded to him; and, assuming as
serene a countenance as possible, he joined the party in the breakfast room,
which consisted of Mr. and Mrs. Emery, the Miss Emerys, Miss Freeman, Lord
Morley, Mr. Eastwood, and Capt. Middleton.

In spite of his efforts to prevent it, the countenance of Barnwell spoke a
language different to his tongue, and but ill accorded with the vivacity he
assumed.

"Knight of the woeful countenance," cried Charlotte Emery, "whence springs thy
sorrow? -- " D^st grieve for friendship unreturn'd,
Or unregarded love?


"Really, young man," cried Mrs. Emery, "you assume a kind of gravity by no
means becoming at your age -- you positively vapor one!"

"What Is the matter, Barnwell?" said Mr. Emery.

"I believe, 'pon my honor," cried Lord Morley, "that we are too severe upon so
susceptible a youth."

"Dear me!" cried Charlotte -- "only look, Miss Freeman, how prettily he
blushes! -- Nay, child, I did not tell you to blush; but, really, there is a
very lively sympathy betwixt you."

"Suppose I were to publish the banns of marriage; at once," said Mr. Eastwood,
"betwixt George Barnwell, of the parish of -- "

"I forbid the banns, in the name of one Milwood of Brompton!" interrupted
Charlotte.

Barnwell turned pale, and the tea-cup clattered as he held it in his hand.

"I have been a silent auditor, Sir, of this kind of raillery some time," said
Maria, addressing herself to Mr. Emery; "but I now demand your interference to
check such levity; since, it my friend feels no concern for the pain she
inflicts on the feelings of others, I can no longer endure the insults she
bestows upon mine!"

Charlotte looked grave.

"O dear! Miss Freeman," cried two or three at once -- "O dear! -- really you
view the matter too seriously by half -- Consider it as a joke."

"You will excuse me," replied Maria; "but I cannot so far forget the respect
due to my character, as to yield it to the amusement of jesters! I am sure my
dear Charlotte will acquit me of unnecessary severity in my present appeal; and
I hope, from this moment, to feel its success."

"Very well, Madam -- very well" -- cried Charlotte; -- "you may talk us down
with your notions of propriety, and all that sort of thing; but you cannot
prevent grooms and stable boys from telling what they see and hear to the
footmen; and if the footmen should whisper the chambermaid, and she should
confide in the valet, and the valet should drop a word or two as he combs my
Lord's hair, and then his Lordship reveals it to me -- why have not a right to
tell my story again?"

"What does all this allude to?" said Mr. Emery.

"You must understand," said Lord Morley, "that my valet --."

"Give me leave to tell my own story," interrupted Charlotte.

"Only remember, I do not vouch for your embellishments, Charlotte," replied
his Lordship.

"You know, Sir," returned she, "that when we first saw Mr. Barnwell, we all
concluded that the young man had been bred in a monastery -- he had all that
cold sort of gravity, that monks are said to possess; and was for ever
preaching about virtue, and propriety, and such things. Who would have ever
expected then, to hear that such a being had actually under his patronage one
of the finest women in England; of whom he is so extremely jealous, that he
keeps her locked up in a sort of citadel at Brompton. -- They say he employs
two eunuchs and an old woman to attend her; and never permits her to approach
the window, or walk in the garden, except by moonlight. We were all excessively
astonished at this intelligence; but as for Miss Freeman, she has been
melancholy ever since!"

"You see, Maria, what an incorrigible she is!" said Mr. Emery.

"It Is perfectly amazing to me," said Mr. Eastwood, in a tone of fulsome
adulation, "how any one can be otherwise than enamoured of such an enchanting
vivacity!"

"For my part," said Lord Morley, "I think it a most enviable talent which
Charlotte possesses, of relieving a dull story, by throwing in a few dashes of
light and shade. How intolerably petrifying it is, to be obliged to listen to
the dull matter of fact style, which some people narrate in!"

"Splendid fiction obtains a preference with your Lordship, then, over plain
truth," said Maria.

"Out of all doubt! said his lordship.

Barnwell, glad to put an end to the conversation, ran to the window, and
announced the arrival of the carriages. A delay now commenced, by the positive
refusal of Maria to ascend the curricle, and ended not till a considerable time
was spent in forming a new arrangement, which gave the curricle to Lord Morley
and Emma Emery, placed Maria in his lordship's coach, and delivered Barnwell
over to Captain* Middleton's post chariot.

CHAP. VI.
Yet what can Satire, whether grave or gay? --
It may correct a foible -- may chastise
The freaks of fashion --
COWPER
AFTER a journey interrupted by no incident worthy of relation, the travelers
arrived at a house, prepared for their reception, at Ramsgate.

Mrs. Emery and her daughters were delighted with its situation, commanding
fine views of the sea in the front, and an extensive sweep of country behind;
and having no single care upon their spirits, they were negatively happy in
participating, with others of the first order of people, the amusements of the
season.

Lord Morley and the polite Divine also killed their time tolerably to their
satisfaction, with the aid of bathing rooms, libraries, theaters, raffles,
danci^g, sailing, riding, driving, eating, drinking, and sleeping.

Captain Middleton and Mr. Emery had other occupations; they were gamesters in
the confidence of each other, the former had been many years of the profession,
the other was of later practice. -- Mr. Freeman, his godfather and master, had
married him to his ward, an heiress, and had given him a share of his concerns.

Mr. Emery entered life with the fairest prospects, and the best intentions;
but unfortunately connecting himself with courtiers, and by their interests
with the government itself, his vanity defeated his interest, and he had
injured, most deeply, not only his own fortune, but that of his early
benefactor. By the artificial aid which his court friends afforded him, he was
enabled to extend a credit, which imperceptibly, but inevitably, undermined his
fortunes; since, in return for that credit, a reciprocal accommodation was
expected, which could only be yielded by narrowing their capital, whilst
additional credit called for its enlargement.

It is matter of peculiar regret, that the only methods which persons in Mr.
Emery's situation can adopt, to retrieve their errors, are precisely those
which are equally likely to render them fatal. Thus, had Mr. Emery possessed
the resolution to have narrowed his concerns, confined his trade, and lessened
his expenses, his consequence in the eyes of the world would have sunk, his
Court friends would have vanished, and those whom he could no longer serve,
would at once have withheld their countenance from him; and the consequence is
obvious.

In addition to this consideration, Mr. Emery was naturally vain, and shrunk
from the idea of a temporary degradation. Hope pointed from one speculation to
another, till, in the pursuit of reparation, he found destruction; yet, though
in sight, he struggled to conceal it from himself: he trembled with horror at
the recollection of the wide ruin he had wrought, and, by various methods,
strove to murder his own thoughts.

Middleton was a man, whose very heart was bad, and within whose breast the
voice of Conscience had long been stifled. The necessities of Emery made him
the dupe of this wretch, who, by pretending to initiate him in the mean arts of
gaming, only secured him the more easily his prey.

The amiable Maria carried with her to Ramsgate a silent sorrow, and concealed
affection which preyed upon her health and spirits; and cast a gloom over those
scenes that enchanted others.

Barnwell, the unhappy Barnwell, was the prey of the most afflicting remorse,
and tormenting uncertainty.

Such were the party, who by the splendour of their establishment, attracted the
admiration of the rich, and the envy of the poor; that poor, who would often
exchange their envy for pity, if, through the dazzling exterior of grandeur,
they could view such hearts as Emery's.

Two or three days elapsed, and brought no success to Barnwell's search after
Mental. He inquired minutely, and sought diligently, but to no purpose. Nor had
he received any intelligence from London. The fourth day, as he was returning
from a walk, his attention was drawn to the sea shore, by the arrival of the
hoy; and he stood some time contemplating the motley crew as they disembarked.

Among a variety of strange figures, he particularly noticed a tall, thin man,
dressed in a slovenly manner, in a shabby suit of black, who, the moment he
landed, seated himself on a firkin of butter; and, pulling out his pocketbook
and pencil, began scribbling, and exclaimed aloud --

"Dam'me, that'll do -- fresh water sailing -- the Sprightly Kitty -- Battersea
Bridge -- Chelsea Water Works -- Splash -- Spanish -- Keep moving -- Push on --
What Is to pay? -- that is your sort -- It'll do, dam'me!"

Every body stared with astonishment.

"Who is that gentleman, pray?" said Barnwell to another passenger, who stood
near him.

"Hum!" cried the stranger -- "Only notice him!"

In a minute the other started from the butter-tub, and set off a scamper,
exclaiming, as he ran by Barnwell -- "Dam'me, I Have every thing but a plot!"

"Sir," said the stranger to Barnwell, "that is one of the first dramati^
geniuses we have. He came down in the hoy, merely to study characters; and, I
warrant you, we shall have a play next season something about failing."

"Next season!" replied Barnwell: "he must be a quick hand, then, at these
matters."

"O, Sir, he will turn you out two in a winter; and one shall be equally as good
as the other. But, pray, Sir, may I ask if you can direct me to a Mr. Emery's
residence here?"

The smile which hovered on the lips of Barnwell, at the eccentricity of the
dramatist, fled in an instant; he trembled as he answered the inquiry, and was
unable to ask the man his business there, much as he wished to learn it.

"Perhaps you may know the person I want to see,' cried the man: -- "its a Mr.
Barnwell."

"Fortunate enough," said Barnwell, with a look ill according with the
sentence: -- "My name is Barnwell. I reside with Mr. Emery."

"You, Sir! -- Is it possible? -- If you are the person I want, you know a lady
of the name of --."

"Milwood," interrupted Barnwell -- Is it not so?"

"The same, indeed," replied the man.

"Tell me, then, instantly, your business -- have you any letters from her --
any message -- any -- "

The man retired some paces from Barnwell, and looking him full in the face --
"Any message from her! -- Pray, Sir, what do you take me for? -- No, Sir; you
mistake the person you have to deal with, I assure you. I come, Sir, from the
injured husband, from the enraged uncle, of that unfortunate woman -- and I
come, Sir, upon most serious business -- but this is not a proper place for
such conversation as we must enter into."

They retired to -- 's Hotel. -- When they were seated, and alone, the
stranger, pulling off his hat and stroaking his chin with an air of vast
importance, began, in a pompous tone of voice -- "My name, Sir, is Blackmore --
Nehemiah Blackmore, of Hatton-Garden; a name not altogether new, I flatter
myself, to the ears of the world. Few people, of my standing, have had half the
practice in certain causes, vulgarly termed crim. con.; which causes, as you
doubtless must have noticed, tend, more than any thing else within the pale of
the courts, to fix every one concerned therein upon a perspicuous eminence of
notoriety; as they form, Sir, a species of news, which the public (...)
greedily devour, than the description of a sea sight, military operations,
theatrical intelligence, parliamentary debates, court dresses, and voluntary
contributions! -- You must, doubtless, Sir, have observed the eagerness with
which every body skips over those columns of a news paper which contain the
aforesaid articles, as well as the dull advertisements of officers' widows in
distress; lieutenancies to be disposed of; mendicant clergymen, with fifteen
children, and thirty pounds a year; presentations to livings in a sporting
country to be sold by auction; the Temple of Flora, and Dr. Nostrum; bankrupt
lists, and curricles to be sold cheap: -- but, Sir, when, at the top of a
column, the eye catches -- Court of King's Bench -- Crim. Con. -- I his was an
action brought by the plaintiff A, to recover of the defendant B, satisfaction
in damages -- -- Then, Sir, the attention is fixed through five columns of Mr.
Erskine's pathetic opening -- Mr. Garrow's tart examination -- Mr. Law's reply,
and Lord Kenyon's severe remarks on the crime; nor is the eye ever once moved,
till the conclusion of "the Jury returned a verdict for the plaintiff with
heavy damages of 10,000l." -- I dare say, Sir, you must have observed this?"

Barnwell too deeply felt the truth of these ill-timed observations --
"Certainly -- Yes -- true -- " replied he; but to your business, Sir."

"Why, Sir, you are young, I perceive, and new to the world, or it would not be
necessary to mention, that you are extremely fortunate in having fallen into
such hands as Nehemiah Blackmore, of Harton Garden; whose character is that of
a peacemaker. -- Upwards of a thousand law suits have been prevented by your
humble servant; though I would not, for the world, have it known, as I should
certainly be kicked out of the profession."

"Still, Sir," said Barnwell, "you wander from the subject -- I desire to know
your instructions."

"As to my instructions, they were to proceed immediately against you, to
recover damages (...) --."

"Less prolixity, if it be possible."

"In short, then, Sir -- being ordered to prosecute, I reflected upon the
certain consequences of such a measure, which always exposes both parties, and
frequently sixes three or four heads in a sixpenny magazine --."

"For heaven's sake, man speak to the purpose," cried Barnwell, starting from
his chair, and walking about the room -- "spare yourself this needless preface
to your demands -- Say honestly, at once, that the wretch who married this
lady, is willing to heal his wounded honor with gold; and that, if I will give
it him without the mandate of the law, he will accept it -- Is it not so?"

"Something like it, I must confess."

"Well, Sir -- and the sum --?"

"One thousand guineas."

"Tell the mean wretch, then -- that it is impossible to comply with his
terms," said Barnwell, and walked toward the door.

"Stay, Sir -- stop -- you are very rash -- very rash, indeed -- Do you
consider the consequences?"

"Yes, Sir -- and shall provide against them?"

"You look wildly, Sir -- for God's sake, think upon what you are about to do.
I understand your expectations from your friends are great -- Surely you could
not hesitate betwixt a measure that will conceal this transaction from them for
ever, and one that must speedily expose you to their displeasure, and them to
the ridicule of the world?"

"I cannot be said to hesitate, where there is no choice -- my fate appears to
be determined -- and I must meet it. Shall you, Mr. Blackmore, ever see -- "

"I understand you, Sir -- It is quite uncertain -- She was to have le^t Dover
yesterday, but her uncle has been prevented from accompanying her; and I know
not if they have yet sailed."

"Dover -- you say? -- Farewell, Sir -- and he rushed out of the room, leaving
Mr Nehemiah Blackmore, of Hatton Garden, in no small consternation at his
behavior.

CHAP. VII.
O, whither would ye drive me! -- ^ must grant,
Yes, I must grant, but with a swelling soul!
DRYDEN.
TWO days more elapsed without affording Barnwell any intelligence of Mental;
and he concluded, that, having accomplished the purpose of his journey, he had
returned to town. The mind of Barnwell, in the mean time, was suffering the
severest pains of which its nature was susceptible. In addition to the
acuteness of his own feelings, the letters of his mother and Eliza inflicted
agonizing wounds upon his heart. The state of his mind became more and more
evident to observers; and from an object of ridicule, he had become the subject
of pity, even with the volatile Charlotte herself.

But the utmost powers of language are inadequate to describe the conflict of
contending influences in the bosom of the amiable Maria. Pity was a nursling
which she had fostered there from the first moment she was capable of receiving
impressions. Benevolence was the instinct of Maria -- and to dispense around
her comfort and peace, was the business of her hands, and the object of her
thoughts. -- When the merits of Barnwell had kindled in her heart a new and
strong emotion, she had cherished it without the remotest apprehension of
danger. When she discovered that virtuous sympathies, and congenial tastes,
imperceptibly had wrought a passion in her breast, she started not with shame
-- she examined the object of her admiration in every point of view, and found
him worthy; while the similarity of their dispositions and pursuits, drew from
Barnwell an attention, which Hope had painted to her mind in the colors most
agreeable to her wishes. It was not, therefore, till the quick echo of scandal
had vibrated to her ^ar stories to the prejudice of his moral character, that
the breast of Maria ever felt a pang. But when his subsequent behavior
sanctioned the surmises formed upon report; when she beheld his former openness
of countenance changed into a contracted brow, and a timid eye; when she saw
his former polite attentions converted into the most illtimed absences of mind
-- his occasional starts -- his abrupt sighs -- and various other symptoms,
that too plainly say -- "My heart is not at ease! -- " then was Maria miserable
indeed! She felt his sorrows, and would have healed them by the sacrifice of
all that was dearest to her in existence.

As she pursued this train of thought, however, and traced the supposed cause
of his inquietudes to Milwood, pity for his sufferings became diminished, by a
jealous apprehension, which she found it impossible to conquer. In vain she
reproved the selfishness of her feelings: she found, that the heart will act as
a free agent; and often, very often, against the cool, dissuading admonitions
of the judgment.

That heart still cherished for Barnwell the glow of love; and, in spite of her
efforts to dissemble, the effects of that love were conspicuous in many of her
actions.

The whole of the party, except Barnwell, being engaged on a sailing trip, to
visit the fleet, then anchored in the Roads, he had spent great part of the day
in writing letters for Mr. Emery; when, toward evening, a person inquired for
him, who would impart his errand to himself only. He had the appearance of a
fisherman, and, upon being introduced to Barnwell, delivered the following
letter --

"If it be possible, let me entreat you will accompany the bearer immediately,
who will conduct you in five minutes to

"Yours only, and for ever, MILWOOD.


Without a moment's deliberation Barnwell followed his guide. At a small
detached hut, near the sea side, the fisherman halted. A clean, neat, elderly
woman sat at the door, mending nets, and four or five children were playing
before her --

"This is my bit of place, please your honor; and there is a grand lady within,
who gave me that letter for your honor."

Barnwell entered, and discovered Milwood, elegantly attired in a traveling
dress. The fisherman retired to the outside of the hut, and they were left
alone.

"How came you hither?" cried Barnwell. "Where is your uncle?" --

There was a wild horror in her looks -- she fixed her eyes on him, grasped him
by the hand, and made no reply to his questions. She conducted him in this
manner, through the fisherman's garden, to an avenue that led direct to the
cliffs. -- Barnwell began to tremble for her intellects, so well she feigned
the character of confirmed Despair. When they had ascended a stupendous height,
she approached the extremity of the cliff that overhung an inlet of the sea,
whose billows tumbled at its base with an awful roaring.

"Here, Barnwell, we must pause," said she, in a tone of voice expressive of
the firmest resolution -- "we are alone -- unheard -- unseen by mortal!" --
then fixing her eyes on the setting sun -- "Witness for me, thou glorious orb,
descending now beneath the expanse of waters -- If these eyes for the last time
are fixed on thee, O, bear me witness, in the chancery of Heaven -- here stands
my murderer!"

Barnwell started! --

"The agitation of the mind," continued she, "consequent on an adventure like
that which severed us, so rudely, from each other, is now over, Sir. There
exists no more within this bosom, doubts and desires, contending for empire: --
the conflict is decided. I am free from the control both of my uncle, and the
being, who imagined that the mummery of a ceremony could consign my heart to
his possession. They have both sworn never to see me more."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Barnwell.

"Yes," replied she; "but you, Sir, they mean to pursue with all the vengeance
with which the law invests them. -- It seems you have thought fit to reject
their overtures to compromise, and have determined rather to suffer a
ridiculous exhibition of yourself and me, than part, a little sooner than you
must, with a few filthy counters!"

Barnwell was amazed!

"It would be absurd, through a false delicacy, to speak less to the purpose,
Sir. -- We are not now mingled with the subjects of prejudice and forms, in
what is termed society. You and I are, upon this spot, ourselves alone; and the
expression of our feelings to each other need suffer no restraint. All that we
view around us, at present, is the work of nature, save these artificial
habiliments that deck our persons. -- Be ours, then, the language of nature.
For myself, I am determined to speak no other. Thus, then, says my heart --
that it will exist upon no other terms, than the possession of your love. Say,
then, Barnwell -- Do you bid me still enjoy the cheerful rays of life -- or
shall I quickly seek the shades of everlasting night?"

"How wildly you converse!" said Barnwell: -- "surely your reason, Milwood -- "

-- "Has thrown off the fetters that controuled it," interrupted she. "The true
end of reason is to lead us to happiness. Two paths are opened to me, and one
of them is -- Death! -- Surely that trembling is feigned, Sir -- or you would
not hesitate to prevent a catastrophe which so seriously affected you."

"How prevent it, Milwood?"

"By acceding to the propositions offered you."

"It is impossible!"

"Nothing more easy: -- your bond for the greater part would be accepted; and,
surely, three or four hundred might be raised immediately. I have some baubles,
which I should deem well disposed of in procuring your peace of mind. But,
Barnwell, there is a deliberate coolness, too evident to be overlooked, that
tells me, it is your wish, that the affair should burst upon the public ear. I
must have been mistaken in you, Sir, when I thought otherwise. But, mark me,
while I swear, in the hallowed presence of Omniscience!" (and she knelt) "not
beyond the limits of another day will Milwood live, if you persist in a refusal
of the terms!"

"Hold, hold -- for heaven's sake, retract!" cried Barnwell.

"'It Was not rashly sworn, and shall be sacredly observed," said she, rising
with a firm, majestic air.

The soul of Barnwell was tortured with severest conflicts. He could not gaze
upon her form without a love, that equalled adoration. His own heart, ^void of
guile, suspected not deceit in her. He conceived he saw before him, misery and
despair of his own creation; and his countenance proclaimed to Milwood, that
the moment proper for the attack was come.

Somewhat softening her voice and her manner, she pressed his hand -- "Could I
have ever thought (...) would have doomed me to destruction, Barnwell! -- me,
did I say? Is it not possible, that with me may perish one, whose future smiles
might have blessed us, Barnwell?"

"O, hold! -- My wife -- my guide -- my fate -- lead, direct, control me, as
thou will! -- Live, Milwood; live, on any terms you please."

*With matchless art she guarded against this overflow of his affection; and
cautiously reflecting upon her situation -- "Nay, Barnwell," cried she, "add
not this cruel pity to my sufferings! If it is resolved, that I must die, in
mercy do not shake my resolution, by the thought that you would feel a pang,
when I am dead!"

"Talk not of death," said Barnwell. "Do I not say, that I will sign the bond?
-- Ay," continued he, wildly, "though sure destruction were the penalty. Come,
then, let us seek this Blackmore."

"O, Barnwell, how has this tenderness altered all my thoughts. No; you shall
not sign this bond; at least not at present. Here are some jewels of my
mother's; take them; they have been valued at six hundred pounds. You can
dispatch some confidential person to London, who may dispose of them. But, in
the mean time, it is absolutely necessary, so well I know the wretch's
mercenary spirit, to procure three hundred pounds this night. I^ you could
borrow so much till the jewels are disposed of -- "

"O, with ease," cried the poor victim. "I have always more than that of Mr.
Emery's in my possession, and I am sure he will oblige me."

"And yet," said Milwood, "would it not lead to a variety of questions, and
conjectures, if you were to ask him? As it will be but, at farthest, for a few
days, could you not without his knowledge -- "

Barnwell started -- "What! steal it, do you mean?"

"If you must put so harsh a construction on my meaning, why, call it stealing.
I conceive, merely to borrow from an idle fund, for so short a time, and with
such security for the repayment, differs essentially from stealing; -- but use
your own discretion. I merely hinted the objection, from the motive of desiring
to save you pain; since you must either confess our connection too abruptly,
(which would be conveyed to your Eliza, and your mother) or evade it by a
falsehood -- a meaner vice, in my estimation, than even stealing!"

This sophistry was a stumbling block to Barnwell. He sighed -- he inwardly
lamented the alternative to which he was reduced, but was silent. They now
walked toward the fisherman's hut. -- Milwood deposited the jewels in his
hands, which Barnwell said he would not sell, but pledge for the sum
immediately required, and would soon redeem them. He engaged to return to the
hut in half an hour, and departed.

He entered the residence of Mr. Emery -- he opened his bureau -- his hands
trembled -- he counted out three hundred pounds in bank notes. In writing his
name on one of them, a tear fell, and blotted it; -- it surprised him: -- "Why
do I weep?" said he -- "Childish weakness!"

As he returned through the town he kept his eyes fixed on the ground; he
imagined every passenger looked suspiciously upon him. When he entered the
room, Milwood received him with open arms. He breathed hard -- his countenance
was pale, and his knees tottered.

"You are unwell, my Barnwell," said ^e.

"A little sick -- It will be over soon."

"If this is the consequence of your effort to preserve me, Barnwell, rather
let me perish than exist upon your misery. -- Go -- replace these notes -- and
be happy!"

"Milwood -- it is not easy to vanquish those outposts of virtue, which have
long repelled within my bosom the approach of a mean thought. A reverence of
honor is the strong guard of virtue. I have broken down the trenches of
self-approbation, by the commission of a mean, if not a vicious act! -- But it
is done -- and -- I shall -- I hope -- soon forget it!"

"Indeed -- indeed, my Barnwell you think too seriously. Had you even committed
a robbery, you could not have discovered more remorse. Surely, there is
something like weakness in yielding to these vapourish impressions."

"It may be weakness -- but -- "

"Come, come, no more of this -- I have another subject now for your attention.
Do you observe a little cottage at the foot of yon ascent that winds up to the
cliffs? I have engaged a small but neat apartment there, for a few days. Shall
I have your approbation? -- Come, it is but a few minutes walk.

There was a magic surrounded this woman, which Barnwell had long found
omnipotent. He was surprised upon entering the cottage to find it most
elegantly, though simply, furnished. The evening was warm -- Milwood conducted
him to an alcove in the garden, that commanded a near view of the sea. A gentle
breeze floated melodiously on the surface of the ocean; the moon's image was
reflected in the deep, and her silver beams shed an undazzling splendour on the
surrounding scenery. The soothing silence of the hour was uninterrupted; save,
now and then, the nightingale sent forth her soft and sweetest notes; or the
dashing of distant oars murmured melancholy on their ears.

A repast of fruit and home-made wine furnished the table; whilst Milwood, by
every artifice in her power, essayed ^o sooth his melancholy, and turn the
current of his reflections.

The sensibility of Barnwell's soul was exquisite, and in some fatal moments
gave passion a superiority over principle. 'Twas thus that, in the enchanting
caresses of this beautiful woman, he forget all other existence. Rapture
succeeded to bliss, and his whole soul yielded to the ecstacies of love!

An hour or two had passed away in these endearments, which Milwood artfully
mingled with short accounts of her release from her uncle and husband, and her
vows of future fidelity to him. Still she hinted the necessity of a little
longer concealment of their connection from his friends; well aware that the
whole force of her enchantment rested on that point -- one breath of suspicion
would have ruined all her deep-laid schemes, and one effort of his friends
would have released her victim from the sacrifice, to which her most infamous
arts had doomed him.

There cannot be a more dangerous situation for youth, than that which, from
any motive, induces them to withdraw a confidence in those, who by experience,
interest, and affection, are always best, and often solely, qualified to advise
them.

It was nearly midnight, and of course too late to return to Mr. Emery's; but
this occasioned him no uneasiness, as from the irregular mode of living at
watering places, the individuals of the family seldom saw each other, except at
dinner.

As they were about to retire, a little sail, which had hovered in sight for
some time, made the shore immediately under the alcove. Two persons landed, one
of whom, muffled up in a black cloak, said to his companion, in a voice which
Barnwell instantly recognized as Mental's -- "We must, if possible, obtain a
lodging at the hotel tonight; or if not, a ramble among the cliffs and rocks
will occupy the time till morning."

"Ay, master," said the other; "but I Would rather be comfortably tumbling about on
a soft feather bed, than be climbing hard rocks by moonlight."

" You might," said Mental; "but think you now, that the villain who seduced,
and then abandoned, my poor child, and who with justice may be deemed her
murderer, sleeps undisturbed upon his bed of down? Alas! there is a difference
in the moulding of the human heart, if it be so. I, who am innocent by
comparison, sleep not without such dreams of horror, as chill the blood to
think upon."

They then wandered out of hearing.

"Poor Mental*" said Barnwell.

"Mental!" exclaimed Milwood, trembling. -- "Do you know that person then --
and is his name Mental?"

"Yes," replied Barnwell, "'It Is an uncommon name. Do you know any of the same?"

"I did, once!" said she, with a sigh, more sorrowful than even she could have
^eigned. It came from the heart. Masking her feelings, however, she continued
-- "But this person cannot possibly (...) the Mental I knew! -- Come, my love,
the morning air grows cool -- let us retire."

CHAP. VIII.
But who, for thee, O Charity! will bear
Hardships, and cope with perils, and with care?
Who, for thy sake, will social sweets forego*
For scenes of sickness, and the sights of woe?
Who, for thy sake, will seek the prison's gloom? --
BOWLS.
THE certainty of Mental's being at Ramsgate, was some slender relief to the
agitated mind of Barnwell. The next morning, therefore, he busied himself in
inquiries, and at length discovered his residence. The whole of that day,
however, Mental was from home, and Barnwell merely left his address.

The house and family of Mr. Emery grew hateful to his sight; his own
reflections were intolerable; and the only resource left him, was the society
of Milwood. This consummate mistress of hypocrisy now amused him with the
relation of a new tale, of the manner in which she had disposed of the three
hundred pounds. Mr. Nehemiah Blackmore, of Hatton Garden, was once more brought
to figure in the scene. He produced a fictitious release from the pretended
husband of Milwood, and a bond for five hundred pounds, payable to himself,
with interest, at the expiration of three months. -- The artifices of this man
(who was, perhaps, one of the (...) base among that class of attorneys, which
calls down unmerited censure and infamy upon the profession at large) added to
the arts of Milwood, overpowered the scruples and hesitations of a young man
half distracted with the perplexity of his situation, and he signed the bond.

He now considered Milwood as his wife, and was only restrained by her
entreaties, for yet a little more delay, from acquainting this parent and his
sister with his situation. He was determined to confide immediately in Mental,
and went early the next morning to his lodgings.

Soon as that extraordinary man observed Barnwell, he ran to him, and shaking
him by the hand -- "I have discovered him!" said he: -- "the monster shall not
escape the vengeance due to his enormous crimes. I will be revenged -- a
daughter's shame -- a daughter's death, must be avenged -- Middleton, or
Mental, dies.

"Middleton!" exclaimed Barnwell*

"Ay!" cried Mental, "Middleton -- Captain Middleton -- the friend, the
intimate, the familiar, of your Emery -- He it was who destroyed the innocence
a father had abandoned!"

"Astonishing!" exclaimed Barnwell. -- "Have you ever seen the Captain?"

"Never," said Mental: "but I have learnt his character -- which is a blot upon
the name of man! Mark how accidentally I discovered the betrayer. The
distressing scene of my poor daughters death so fastened its reflection on my
mind, that my waking thoughts, and my midnight dreams, seemed with images of
similar distress and misery. Thus haunted by the wretchedness of my fellow
creatures, I began to contemplate how far my own abilities might lessen or
alleviate their sufferings, I shuddered to reflect, how large a portion of time
I had devoted to unavailing sorrows and remorse; and how useless, had remained
the property I possessed. I determined immediately to change my course of
action; and, for the purpose of discovering those whose lot I might ameliorate,
I chose the path of that superior man among mankind, whose life was spent in
doing good -- the GREAT HOWARD!

"O, youth, had you beheld with me the spectacles of misery within the prisons
of the proud city, how would your youthful heart have sickened! Tears would
have stained your cheeks; and as yo^ listened to their doleful stories, you
would have lifted up your eyes to heaven, and have said -- O Love omnisic, why
must these things be? The hours fly too fast, or I could crowd thy memory with
many a melancholy proof of man's ingratitude! -- of man's revenge! -- of man's
injustice to his fellow man! I could recount such tales of tyranny of Office,
the Law's most torturing delay, and Justice trampled under the insulting foot
of iron-hearted Wealth, as should make 'each hair to stand an end!' But I must
confine myself to one narration -- one display of villainy; -- I will exhibit
one black group of fiends infernal, masked with the semblance of man's nature,
in which this Middleton stands infamously conspicuous!

"In the prison, which is called the Fleet, there are ranges of little rooms on
the ground floor, resembling cells. I had visited several of them, and
conversed with their sad inhabitants; I say sad, because there is a merry class
of prisoners, who tenant the upper rooms, and are generally young men of
family, who take the method of confinement, merely to extort the price of their
release from their friends; or they are villains, who riot there, in complete
safety, upon the spoils of ruined families. Thus the upper apartments
frequently resemble the galleries of an hotel, where waiters are groaning
beneath the weight of wines and tavern dainties; whilst the lower range more
generally assumes the appearance of an ill-provided lazar-house. It Is to one of
these rooms that I am now going to introduce you.

"Figure to yourself a stone arched roof recess, about ten feet square, which
contained a bed, a table, two or three chairs, some boxes, and five
inhabitants. One was an aged man, bald and blind: -- he sat in an armed chair
by the fire; one of his arms was wrapped in flannel, being paralytic; whilst
with the other hand he kept constantly feeling his granddaughter, a girl of
about nineteen, with an intelligent countenance, but pale and sickly from
confinement, who was reading to him. His son appeared rather more than forty,
and was employed at a press, in one corner of the room, in cutting smooth the
edges of some pamphlets, which his wife was stitching. A little boy of six
years old, who was in bed, sick with the smallpox, made up the group.

"When my conductor introduced me, as a gentleman who had been relieving
several of the prisoners, and who was desirous of knowing the particulars of
their debts, the old blind grandfather grasped tightly his grand-daughter's
arm, and drew her nearer to him. The woman rose, and curtsied; but the man kept
on working, without bestowing the least notice upon his intruder. "Who is the
gentleman?" said the old man. One, said I, whose name is doubtless strange to
you, but who, possessing the power to soften sorrow, has taken the liberty to
intrude on yours.

"The old man sighed. The poor woman looked as if she wished to welcome me; but
her husband, still with his back toward me, called to her, in a rough tone, to
sit down, and go on with her work -- "Haven't you been duped enough with
flummery already?" cried he. "Co on -- go on, do -- Get these home -- let my
father have a dinner to day, for God's sake!" "Nay, nay, Ned," cried the old
man, "don't be cross now -- but give a civil answer to the gentleman. Is it a
young gentleman, Patty?" [to his granddaughter.] "No, grandfather," said
Patty. "Speak to him, Ned," said the old man. "I Have nothing to say," said his
son, "that it concerns him to hear."

"Have you no wants, my friend?" said I. "Would you not be happy to be able to
render your father and your family more comfortable than they are?" "That Is no
concern of yours," replied he: "I labor from morning to night, and they exist
by the fruits of it -- But, come, Kate -- " [to his wife] -- "What do you
snivel at? -- The brat will be waking soon, and you will not get these finished.
What business has that fellow to bring people here to stare at me? -- Come --
quick -- quick -- I stand still."

"Struck with the uncommon behavior of this man, I became more curious to
learn his history, in proportion as he discovered less inclination to reveal
it. I therefore addressed myself to the old man: -- Your son, Sir, said I,
appears to me to have suffered so much from false professions of benevolence,
as to have made him spurn with indignation, all pretensions of that nature.
"Alack-a-day! good Sir, whoever you be, I am sure you deserve better treatment:
-- but my poor Ned! -- " "Hold your tongue, father," cried the son.

"I could no longer refrain -- I approached him, and laying my hand upon his
shoulder -- Friend, said I, you mistake my character: I come not to wound your
honest and praiseworthy pride -- I honor independence of spirit -- I am
myself, also, a sufferer by the false colors with which men paint themselves.
My heart is not whole, but my purse is heavy -- too heavy for an individual. I
have no prospect of happiness before me, but in rendering service where merit
demands it. Then, taking his hand -- Let me, my friend, serve you. I see your
heart -- I feel your feelings -- Come -- come -- trust me -- I am no deceiver.

"The man looked steadfastly in my face -- I never beheld so harsh a set of
features -- His countenance was almost savage. After he had stared at me a few
minutes -- "You may mean very well," said he: -- "'it is possible your intentions
may be good -- But go, Sir, go -- we are a miserable family, and too far sunk
in wretchedness for any rescue but death! -- Don't hinder us, then -- but go."
Just then a man tapped at the door, and entered. "Who Is that?" exclaimed the
grandfather, again drawing his lovely charge nearer to him. "Its lawyer
Blackmore, father," said the woman.

At the name of Blackmore, Barnwell started. -- "Blackmore! did you say, Sir?"
cried he.

"Yes," replied Mental, "Do you know such a person?"

"I -- I -- have heard of him," said Barnwell, glowing with confusion.

"Well," continued Mental, "this Blackmore entered, and with a supercilious air
approached toward the old man -- "Once more, Mr. Norris," said he, "I am come
with offers of clemency to your son. My client by no means wishes to detain him
here; it is far from his intention; it is by no means his wish; he don't desire
it; it is far from pleasant to him; and I hope, therefore, you have prevailed
upon him to --." "Wicked, wicked man!" cried the grandfather; -- "you share in
the guilt of this transaction, by becoming the bearer of such proposals!"

"Less calm was his son. Quitting his work* he seized the lawyer by the
shoulders, and thrusting (...) out of the apartment -- "If ever you enter this
place again, on this errand, rascal!" cried he, "you will not quit it living."
He followed the lawyer through the passage to the gate, exclaiming violently
against him.

"Whilst he was out of the room, his wife came to me -- "O, God bless you for
your goodness! I hope you will excuse my poor husband; but his brain is almost
turned, Sir, by bad usage. I wish I could tell you our story; but he is grown
so wild, we dare not contradict him. O, he is so altered! -- There was not a
kinder creature living, a more tender and affectionate husband or father, till
that bad man, Captain Middleton --."

"Here the husband returned, and the poor woman, with evident symptoms of fear,
went to her work.

"Son, son," said the old man, "I charge thee, let this kind gentleman know our
story. Come, now, I pray, do. I am sure he is a good-hearted gentleman, and
will serve thee."

"Poor old man!" said his son; "and you my dear girl [to his daughter;] my
little boy too; and you Kate [to his wife,] I feel for you all! But, psha, what
but pain results from feeling! I will not yield to tenderness -- Come, come, to
work, to work, I pray you, Sir, to leave us."

"Here there was a violent burst of laughter in the court yard, just within
hearing. Not far from the window, a party of young fellows were playing with
some of their mistresses, and their mirth was as loud as obscene.

"Daughter," cried the younger Norris, "stop your ears -- Leave the room."

"O, no! no!" cried the old man, still holding her.

"O, God!" exclaimed the son -- "where is the equity of our laws -- where is
the justice of our land? -- To be caged, thus, amidst the most abandoned of
society! -- and for what crime? -- Refusing to prostitute my own child!"

"How!" exclaimed I."

"Even as I have said," replied he. "Come, sit you down, and for very madness
will I tell you our tale. But mark me, I court not your pity -- I spread no
(...) for your compassion! -- That venerable old man, my father, about sixty
years ago, entered into business in the city of Canterbury. I was his only
child; I learnt his art, that of bookbinder and stationer. My mother died -- I
married; and as my father declined in years, I conducted our concerns. Nineteen
years of time had passed since my marriage, when there came to be quartered in
our city, a regiment of militia. We kept a library, and of course our shop
became a sort of lounge for the ladies of Canterbury. The officers of the
regiment soon discovered this, and pestered us with their company. My girl,
there, though now pale and sickly-looking, was then as fair a wench as any in
all Canterbury. Her beauty obtained her many fulsome flatteries, of which we
endeavored to show her the insignificant value; and I believe the girl had
sense enough to treat them for the most part, with just that civil indifference
they deserved: -- but there was one scoundrel -- a handsome fellow, too -- a
captain in the regiment, who made a a more than ordinary impression upon my
poor girl's heart. His attachment was evident; his attentions too conspicuous
to be overlooked; but his purposes, his infernal purposes, he well concealed.
Under the mask of kindness for me, and my family, he held out a bait, which my
active and industrious spirit too eagerly grasped at. About that time a
librarian at Margate failed; the shop and business were to be disposed of; and
having obtained, by his frequent visits, a most familiar footing in our family,
Captain Middleton, after a proper introduction, offered to lend me a sum
sufficient to purchase them, upon the joint bond of my father and myself; with
the simple condition, that an elderly lady, his friend, should board and lodge
there. Unfortunately we accepted his treacherous offer; we completed the
purchase; and my father, being indisposed, and having gradully lost his sight,
removed to Margate, accompanied by my daughter.

"'It Was not long ere the real purpose of this seeming generosity was exposed,
by the following accident: -- Captain Middleton frequently rode from Canterbury
to Margate, and never failed paying his respects to the old lady, whom he
settled in our house. I myself, having to superintend the business both at
Canterbury and Margate, also had frequent occasions to be there. It happened,
that, one evening as I walked round the garden at the back of the house, I
heard the voice of Captain Middleton, loudly disputing in a summer house with
Mrs. Masters, the old lady; and as I passed the door, which was shut, I heard
him distinctly utter -- 'My God, Madam, I am trifled with: -- do you imagine I
have been paying three hundred pounds for mere gape seed! I tell you, the stay
of the regiment at Canterbury is uncertain; and I am determined to possess this
jewel before I quit Kent.' 'I say, Sir,' replied the old Beldame, 'that your
impatience will ruin every thing. The girl loves you, I am certain; but she has
been strictly educated, and her notions of virtue are not to be overcome so
easily as we conquered Elinor Mental's.'

"Judge," said Mental to Barnwell at this part of his narrative, "how I felt at
that name, and at the subsequent remarks! -- I struggled hard; and, in part,
concealed my emotion, as I longed to hear the conclusion of the tale.

"Presuming," said Norris, upon what I heard, how much I was interested in
their discourse, I continued to listen. 'Ay,' cried Middleton, 'that affair was
well managed: -- to the last hour of my life, Mother Masters, I shall be
indebted to you for that business; but here you boggle cursedly; and yet this
chit has not half the cunning of the jilt Mental.' 'True' replied the other;
'but there is so much more virtue and fuss in the way than there was with
Mental. Besides, here are a father and mother; Mental was the castaway charge
of a neglectful boarding school governess. -- I repeat, Sir, you must have
patience, or you will spoil all.' Here their conversation broke off; but I had
heard enough to kindle a fire in my veins. I am by nature warm, and impatient
of insult; -- bursting open the door, I seized the villain, and exhausted my
rage in curses on his head. Guilt made him coward -- He submitted tamely to my
anger. -- The woman left the arbor, and in a few hours the house. In vain he
attempted to palliate his intentions. I was deaf to every thing he said. I
continued roughly to handle him, and never relinquished my hold, till I had
kicked him completely out of doors.

"Every hour since that, the mean and cowardly villain has been planning the
ruin of my family. His first step was, to put the bond he held, immediately in
execution against me; and, as a fit engine for his infernal purpose, he chose
the man you have just now seen as a lawyer. If you know any thing of law, you
need not be told, Sir, that, in the hands of wicked men, it may be easily made
the destruction of poor debtors.

"My business was neglected, in the attendance necessary to carry on a
fruitless defense against his extortions; my little capital was exhausted; my
father's houses were sold; my customers forsook me; my real creditors flocked
about me; my effects were seized, and sold. But the aim of this villain was
revenge; he therefore preferred seizing my person; and having hunted me from
one part of the kingdom to another, for some months, he has at length succeeded
to the utmost of his malicious wish. My poor, infirm parent will not quit me,
but prefers this dungeon to a workhouse. My daughter he will not trust a minute
from him, being tormented with the notion that Middleton will will yet obtain
her.

"I have had friends, false summer friends, whom now I never see. Judge then,
Sir, if there is not some excuse for my ferocious disposition. I am like a
hunted beast taken in the toils; and have lost all hope in heaven, all
confidence in man. I labor hard to gain a slender sustenance for my (...); and
here, even here, my pursuer worries me with his damned proposals, to release me
from my cage, upon yielding my poor child a prey to his lewd desires. But
rather would I dig her grave with my own hands -- ay, rather would I dig one
general gulf, and plunge wife, father, children, self, all living, to its
bottom, than prostitute the child I have given birth to!"

"Is there such a villain in existence, said I, as this Middleton? Where is his
residence?

"Six months," replied Norris, "I have been immured in this prison; of course
he is living but where I know not. He has never been here himself, but all his
proposals are made through the (...) of the lawyer Blackmore.

"I have heard that the wicked wretch, who has been his assistant in many a
scene of infamy, the Mrs. Masters, is now dangerously ill at Ramsgate, and
lingers under all the horrors of remorse, in expectation of her dissolution.'

"At Ramsgate! -- Can you address me to her, my friend, said I. I have
inducements to see this woman, of which you have no conception. You have
mentioned, in your narrative, the name of one, whom I ought to have cherished
in my own bosom, but whom I abandoned to the loose guardianship of an hireling.
The Miss Mental, alluded to by the base Mrs. Masters, must have been my poor,
deserted daughter.

"Gracious Goodness!" exclaimed Mrs. Norris lifting up her eyes; "and what has
become of the' poor creature!"

"Dead! -- to my comfort -- dead! -- exclaimed I. But if her seducer lives; and
if, by the instructions of this Masters, I can discover him, vengeance shall
yet o^ertake him. -- This very night I will set off for Ramsgate; and a part of
the vengeance I will hurl on this wretch, shall be the deliverance of your
persecuted family."

"Alas! good gentleman, you know not how deeply our distresses have involved
us," said the elder Norris. "A thousand pounds would hardly clear us; and then
my poor Ned would be ashamed to see Canterbury again."

"No!" exclaimed I, "he shall not be ashamed. -- (...) had resolved upon my
conduct; and contriving to slip my purse into Mrs. Norris's hand, unobserved by
her husband, I took my leave of these victims of iniquitous power. The
necessary directions for their liberation were given; and I arrived at Ramsgate
in time to hear from the lips of the dying wretch, Masters, the horrible tale
of my Elinor's destruction. I obtained the address of Middleton, which was in
London. I returned thither the next day, and traced him to Emery's, in Portland
Place, where I learnt, that he had accompanied the family hither.

"After spending some time in a necessary attention to Norris's family, which
will soon be at liberty, I returned to Margate, and from hence in a little
fishing boat to this place."

"What an extraordinary discovery!' said Barnwell, when Mental concluded.

"Yes," replied Mental; "and I am determined to act decisively upon it. --
Where is Emery's house? -- I Will see this Middleton today."

"I will conduct you, if you please," said Barnwell. "But, before we go, if you
could bestow an hour's attention upon a circumstance, that involves in its
consequences my future destiny --."

"That Milwood, you allude to. -- I have not forgotten, amidst my own concerns,
your danger, youth! Nor, believe me, am I indifferent to your welfare. If you
will unburden your breast of its anxieties, you shall experience from me all
that a fond parent is desirous of bestowing on his son."

Barnwell related every occurrence that had taken place since his connection
with Milwood.

CHAP. IX.
O! I shall never, never hear her voice!
The spring time shall return, the isles rejoice;
But faint and weary I shall meet the morn,
And 'mid the cheering sunshine weep forlorn!
BOWLS.
WHEN Barnwell had concluded his story, having concealed nothing from Mental,
but the means by which he obtained the three hundred pounds, the latter fixed
his eyes upon the former, and in an affectionate tone of voice -- "Beware,
youth, beware!" said he. "I shall think on your story: in the meantime, lead me
to Middleton."

"Upon their arrival at Mr. Emery's, they were surprised to find the whole
house in confusion. Maria Freeman, whose health had been some time declining,
was that morning so extremely indisposed, as to be confined to her bed with
symptoms of a delirious fever. Upon their entering the parlour, Miss Emery, and
her mama, immediately began a most lamentable duet upon the monstrous
disagreeableness of people's being ill --

"It makes one," said Miss Emery, "so vapourish, to see the old doctors, and
the apothecaries, and nurses! -- "

"O! absolutely," cried her mama, "its the most excessive dull thing in the
world! -- May be she may die, too! -- Really, Emma, I Will return to the Pavilion
-- I do hate any thing that reminds one of one's latter end. Where Is Charlotte?
-- I hope she is not so mad as to be in Miss Freeman's chamber!"

At that instant Charlotte entered -- "So, Mr. Barnwell," said she -- here is
havoc you have made! Why, Sir, if Miss Freeman dies, you will be indicted for
murder! She is screaming after Mr. Barnwell, do you know, in such a violent
manner that all the old Quizzes are frightened out of their wits."

"What Is all this trifling?" cried Mental, starting from his chair, and
thumping his oaken stick on the floor. "Show me to Captain Middleton, Sir -- I
did not come here to do penance, in listening to the vapid effusions of empty
heads, and iron hearts -- Show me to Middleton!"

The ladies were quite terrified -- "Lord bless me, Mr. Barnwell," cried Mrs.
Emery, "who have you brought here?"

"This gentleman, Madam, has very particular business with Captain Middleton."

"Do, pray, then, have the goodness to show him into the library. Mr. Emery and
the Captain are both there."

At the door of the library Barnwell announced, that a gentleman desired to see
Captain Middleton; and Mr. Emery was politely retiring --

"Let me request your presence, Sir," said Mental: "the business I am about to
enter on requires evidence."

Mr. Emery returned. Captain Middleton bowed to Mental, and entreated him to
sit. -- Barnwell, by desire of the latter, also was seated. After a pause --

"Gentlemen," said Mental, "I am commissioned with the execution of a most
unpleasant business. A person, whom I sincerely regard, has sustained a most
serious injury. He was unfortunately deprived, by death, of a most amiable
wife, at a period when her maternal attentions began to be loudly called for by
their daughter, a beautiful girl of three years old. His affairs, about the
same time, compelled this person to leave England for some years: being
unwilling to take his daughter with him abroad; and, having no female relative
or friend with whom he could deposit his heart's sole treasure, he was
compelled to place his child with the governess of a respectable
boarding-school. Here she remained, and increased in beauty and accomplishments
as she grew in years.

Well, gentlemen, her father returned, after a long absence, to his native
home, and settled in affluent circumstances, in a retired part of the country.
Remaining still a widower, for that, and possibly for other reasons, he did not
immediately after his return send for his daughter from the seminary, where, he
was convinced, she was improving herself in the seize adapted to her sex
and fortune.

"Thus she continued at school till she was about seventeen years of age.
You Will say, perhaps, her father was to blame to continue the care of her, at
that thoughtless season of her life, in the hands of a mere school mistress.
Events have proved that it was wrong; but he, a sort of a Recluse, little
imagined that there were beings base enough, among mankind, to plan the slow
destruction of innocence and beauty. We, who are men of the world, know things
better, Captain Middleton. We know, that girls at the age of seventeen, under
no other control than that of a negligent governess or a depraved teacher, are
very comeatible articles -- (...)?"

There was an expressive sneer that accompanied this last sentence, which made
Middleton tremble.

"Sir! Eh!" cried the latter; "I don't clearly understand your drift."

"You will soon," said Mental. "I meant merely to remark on the extreme
ignorance of the old fool, who could trust such a charming temptation in the
way of us red coats! (for I Have served, myself in the army) and then be
surprised at its consequences.

"But, to proceed with my tale. In the neighborhood of this young lady's
residence there was quartered a regiment of militia, which was graced by a
Captain of most elegant exterior, and perfectly accomplished; that is, he had
run one man through the body, and wounded several; had figured in a crim. con.
action, knew the use of loaded dice, and would see you a three-bottle man under
the table.

"For the accommodation of these dashing gentlemen, there are certain beings,
who assume to themselves the name of women; and, under the character and
appearance of gentlewomen, contrive an introduction to the young and
inexperienced part of their sex, with the infernal design of debauching their
morals, and rendering them an easy prey to seduction. Unfortunately for my poor
friend, a wretch of this description found means to gain the confidence of his
daughter, whose volatile disposition, and full flow of careless spirits,
exposed a heart, unguarded by principles, to the easy conquest of this harridan.

"The Captain was introduced to the poor victim, as a friend of this
creature's; and, to be brief, ^he consequences were, the ruin of the daughter,
and the consummation of many miseries to the heart-broken father!"

"Unhappy man!" said Mr. Emery: "is he still living?"

"You shall hear," cried Mental. -- "The arts of those experienced
practitioners in iniquity were so refined, that the deluded girl eloped from
the house of her governess, and not one probable clue to a discovery was left.
-- You are a father, Sir; Captain Middleton, I believe, is not: but any man,
who has the common feelings of his nature, may picture to himself the agony of
her parent, when he heard the dread tidings of her fall, and was doomed to
remain ignorant of her fate!"

Captain Middleton, upon whom Mental all along kept his stern eyes fixed, began
now to half-rise from his chair, wiped his face with his handkerchief, twirled
the chain of his watch round his fingers, and betrayed various other symptoms
of uneasiness. -- Mental continued --

"But, gentlemen, there was an hour approaching replete with yet more piercing
anguish for his soul. The unhappy parent lived to see that daughter -- but, O,
God! what a sight -- He beheld her, suffering the last agonies of death, on the
bare floor of a mean hovel, surrounded by misery and want! and whilst the
poison of prostitution consumed her frame, the horrors of reflection on a
guilty course agonised her mind! He saw her die!! -- If, then, the wretched
parent, at that moment, had seen and known the author of this misery, should
you, gentlemen, have been surprised to hear, that in the phrenzy of his
despair, he had imbrued his hands in the villain's blood? But 'twas not so. Ere
he became acquainted with the story I have related to you, his agonies had
mellowed into grief, his phenzy into settled melancholy.

"Meanwhile the perpetrator of this deed was busily employed in fresh pursuits
of the same nature, aided by the same infernal spirit, in the form of woman.
Undaunted by any of the vulgar prejudices of humanity, or feelings; unchecked
by the incommodious principles of honor, or virtue, he plunged boldly on, to
prosecute the ruin of more beauty; and further to extend the desolations of
domestic peace -- a family, raised by his perfidious promises to the pinnacle
of prosperous hopes, was hurled from thence to the abyss of wretchedness,
poverty, and the views of endless thraldom: this was the pastime of the
all-daring villain!"

Captain Middleton's behavior now expressed those feelings he could no longer
smother. -- Starting from his chair -- "You have fixed your eyes on me, Sir, in
a manner I am unaccustomed to, and accompany your dismal stories with such
significant glances upon me -- I cannot mistake their meaning: but, Sir, whoever
this friend of yours may be, he is deceived, if he has insinuated the most
distant charge of this sort upon a man of my respectability!"

"Your respectability!" ha, ha! cried Mental, with a sneer.

"D -- n me, Sir," cried Middleton, "I will not brook this conduct. Let me see
this injured father, and I will confront him to his face!"

"You will -- then do" said Mental. "Behold him, thou reptile! behold him
here!!"

As he spoke, he rose with a majestic air, and folding his arms, stood opposite
to Middleton, with a look expressive of the deepest indignation; whilst the
astonished Captain staggered back a full pace, and trembled; Mr. Emery,
remaining in complete amazement. -- A silence of some minutes ensued.

"The names of Masters, and Norris, ^ill convince you, Sir," said Mental, "your
iniquities are no longer secrets. The steps that have led to this discovery I
shall not retrace. I know you are the seducer and betrayer of my child, the
oppressor of innocence, and, this instant, I demand the paltry satisfaction of
your life.

Middleton remained dumb. Mr. Emery, extremely terrified, attempted to
interpose.

"Silence, man," cried Mental: "You don't know me. I am not one, who frames,
destroys, and frames anew his resolutions! I come not in the moment of passion,
to wreak revenge, but calmly to inflict upon a villain the punishment of death!"

"You come to murder, then?" cried Emery.

"Sir!" said Middleton, after a long struggle of cowardice -- "Sir -- I -- see
-- that -- you are -- determined, not to listen to any thing I offer in my
defense; and, therefore, name your place, and time, and take what satisfaction
you please."

"Tomorrow, at break of day, which will be four o'clock -- behind the mill,
two fields from the adjoining lane," said Mental, in a firm tone.

"I Will meet you there -- " said Middleton, who, on this occasion, was indeed a
coward; though, till this moment, he had always retained the credit of great
courage. But there was an inexpressible something in the countenance of the
father, which the seducer of the daughter trembled to gaze upon, in spite of
his insensibility to all virtuous emotions.

"Shall we meet alone, or shall those who are now present attend us there?"
asked Mental.

"Is it impossible to prevent this meeting?" said Emery. "Can no concessions --
no recompense --."

"Are you a father," interrupted Mental, "and you talk of recompense? -- If,
indeed, he has power to raise the dead, and make that pure and spotless, which
his lust has sullied, there might be meaning in your speech: -- I know no other
recompense that he can offer, or I can receive."

At length the meeting was arranged. It was agreed, that Mr. Emery and Barnwell
should attend; and Mental retired.

CHAP. X.
-- Innocence, when once thy tender flower
The ^ickly taint has touched, where is that power
That shall bring back its fragrance, or restore
The (...) of loveliness -- that shine no more?
BOWLS.
NO sooner had Mental left the house, than Mrs. Emery and her daughters,
attended by their shadows, Morley and Eastwood, rushed into the library, to
learn the errand of so strange a Quiz, as he was termed by Lord Morley.

It was in vain to attempt concealment, and therefore, partly by Emery, partly
by Middleton, and partly by Barnwell, the whole history was related of
Barnwell's first acquaintance with him -- of the loss of his wife -- the fate
of his daughter -- and the result of that morning's visit.

"A duel!" Screamed Mrs. Emery. "Captain Middleton it shall not take place --
Run, my Lord -- Run, Mr. Eastwood, to that fat, ugly fellow of a justice we saw
yesterday; and, for heaven's sake, entreat him to get all the constables in the
place ready to keep the peace."

"I insist upon it, my Lord, you do not obey such orders -- as you will answer
to my honor. I must confess that I, as well as many others, have been guilty of
improprieties in my younger days, of which I readily acknowledge this one of
the worst. As to the death of the girl, God knows, I was perfectly ignorant,
and of her want, for I have not seen her for years ^in fact, I had almost
forgotten her. The encountering the old man in this way is awkward, certainly,
very awkward; but it is unavoidable."

"O, you cruel wretch, you," cried Mrs. Emery -- "when you know the value of
your life to Mr. Emery, to myself, to thousands -- thus to sport with it! A
figure like yours, Captain Middleton, to be shot at by such an old, ugly,
wizard-looking being as that -- (...) shall not be -- I will go myself, (...)
moment, to --."

"Lor, Ma'!" said Miss Emery -- "Do you think Captain Middleton cannot level a
pistol better than old Mental? I have not the least fear, but he will kill the
old brute."

"And then, will he not be obliged to fly the kingdom?"

"O, only for a little time, till its blown over?"

"Only look at Mr. Barnwell!" cried Charlotte, who had been watching his
countenance some time: "really, now, by the excessive length of his visage, one
would imagine he were going to fight a duel."

In fact, Barnwell's mind was absorbed in very different meditations. He was
anxiously calculating the time that had elapsed since he had dispatched the
jewels to London; and reflecting on the horrible consequences, should the man
prove dishonest. Aroused, by this remark of Charlotte, from his reverie, he
unfortunately betrayed his absence by a sham laugh, and exclaiming -- "A duel!
What duel?"

"There Is a hard-hearted wretch, now!" said Charlotte, "to laugh at such a
serious thing as a duel!"

"Whatever the event of tomorrow may be,' said Middleton, "this trifling upon
the subject is unbecoming. I have made up my mind, Madam:" [to Mrs. Emery] "I
am bound in honor to give the meeting; and whoever attempts to prevent it,
will throw a stain upon my character, that nothing but suicide will efface."

Mrs. Emery shrieked and fainted; her daughters flew to her assistance, and the
party separated. Mr. Emery gave directions to Barnwell to discharge some debts
of Captain Middleton's, and retiring with the Captain, to arrange some mutual
concerns, he desired Barnwell to let him have his accounts to examine in the
evening.

Upon the arrival of the post, Barnwell was surprised to receive a letter, in a
strange hand writing; but his surprise was soon lost in stupefaction when he
read the contents, as follow --

SIR,
You have been most grossly abused by the person, whoever it may be, that
consigned the jewels to you. Their value is nothing more than the gold and
silver in which they are set, about seven or eight pounds -- The stones are all
sham -- Having business that will keep me here a day or two longer, I thought
it my duty to apprise you of this affair.

I am, Sir, yours, TIM. BROWN.


Some minutes had elapsed before Barnwell removed his eyes from the paper; and
when he did, they were covered by a thick film, that obscured every object
around him. Cold sweats succeeded; and he had nearly, very nearly, fainted.

"O, Milwood!" exclaimed he -- "Milwood, thou have destroyed me!"

He rushed out of the house, and immediately ran to the little cottage.
Breathless and pale, he approached the siren, with the letter open in his hand,
and gave it her to peruse. With the most complete hypocrisy imaginable, she
shrieked -- she raved -- and imprecated curses on the man, though the sham
jewels had been made to her own orders. She protested most solemnly and
impiously called on heaven to witness her oaths, that they were her mother's
jewels; and either the man, she said, must have exchanged them, or some secret
thief in her former residences --

"Can my Barnwell," said she, "for a moment harbor a thought so much beneath
his liberal nature to indulge, as to suppose me privy to a fraud? What is
there, Barnwell, in my nature like such mean dishonesty? Reflect, and answer,
Sir, whether a person of my spirit, even were she vicious, would stoop to the
paltry pilfering tricks of a Ring-dropper? Barnwell, it would have hurt me
less, had you accused me of a murder!"

"Nay, Milwood," said the youth, "I have not accused you; but I am distracted
by the event! What can be done? Mr. Emery has ordered me this evening, this
very evening, to make up my accounts. -- I am lost for ever! Never more can I
return to him -- And whither, O, whither can I go!"

In the utmost agony, he threw himself into a chair, and leaned his head upon
the table. Milwood, affecting the profoundest thought, walked about the room.
-- "The deficiency must not be known," cried she. "We must prevent this
discovery by any means."

"I see no possible way," said Barnwell.

"I see but one," said she; "and that you will scruple to adopt. It Is indeed,
one that, upon a small necessity, ought not to be resorted to; but when, if
adopted, it will, to a certainty, prevent disgrace to yourself and family, the
utter ruin of all your future prospects, the horrors of a prison, and the
character of a thief -- I think, self-preservation calls on us to adopt it."

"Name it," said Barnwell.

"FORGERY."

Starting from the chair, with all the wildness of despair expressed in his
countenance -- "Wretch! -- Sorceress! -- Away -- Away! There is a dreadful ruin
waits on thy accursed beauty, and I now see it in all its horrors!"

He would have left the room; but Milwood, seizing his arm, detained him.

"Barnwell, were I that demon your despair now exhibits to your mind, I should
at once relinquish you. What more could such a spirit wish, than that, in this
disordered state, you should seek your master. Detection and disgrace, chains
and imprisonment, would follow; but, no, Barnwell! -- too closely woven is my
own destiny with thine to suffer this: too deeply impressed upon my heart, O,
youth, are thy endearments, thus to be relinquished. And, by the power that
sees that heart, I swear, no fate shall separate us. No, though thine obstinate
resistance should doom thee to the unwholesome damps of a dark dungeon --
should load these manly limbs with fetters -- I would follow thee, and share in
all thy wretchedness. I -- innocently though it be -- yet, I have been the
cause of your calamities; and never, never will I yield my title to a share of
the bitter draught."

With all the softest, tenderest expressions, she hung upon him; she embraced
him, and bedewed his cheeks with her tears. The soul of Barnwell was in an
agony -- He sighed -- he sobbed aloud -- He called upon his mother, his Eliza,
and invoked the departed spirit of his father to direct him!

"O, think upon the agonies of thy dear friends!" cried she. "Can you reflect a
moment on the phrensy that will seize your venerable mother -- the pangs that
will rend your sister's heart, when they hear a son, a brother --."

"Hold, hold!" cried Barnwell. "They must not, shall not! -- Tell me the means
that can prevent discovery -- Quick, quick, unfold them, that, without the
possibility of a retraction, I may pledge my soul's eternal welfare to their
adoption!"

"Suppose a bill of Exchange was drawn upon Mr. Emery; say for five hundred
pounds at two months, could you not imitate his acceptance? -- If so, I would
myself undertake to negociate it; and long ere it became due we could provide
means to prevent its being presented for payment; and thus the whole
transaction would remain a secret within our own breasts -- You hesitate! -- "

"O, Milwood, what a proposal! Miserable wretch, that I am, how am I fallen,
that I can with patience listen to it!"

"Is this a time for abstract reasonings? Is this a moment to moralize,
Barnwell? If you are not determined to surrender every hope -- if you are
determined to expose yourself, and all that are dear to you to infamy -- you
must act -- "

"I do not hesitate at the crime -- for I am sunk beneath those scruples; but I
tremble at the dreadful consequences of its discovery."

"Absurd argument!" said Milwood. "A present, an almost instant discovery must
take place, if we do not resort to this, or some similar preventive. Against
the chance of future detection there are ten thousand odds. Time, at least,
will be gained; in which we may guard ourselves against the worst consequences.
Ruin is at the door; and you are weakly arguing, if it be wise to fly from it,
because there is a possibility we may again encounter it."

"But," said Barnwell; "even if I were to adopt this dreadful alternative, how
are you sure that you could procure money for this bill?"

"I will engage for three hundred of the five in less than six hours time."

"But -- But -- I -- cannot -- it is impossible!"

"Barnwell, this weakness is unworthy of your nature. -- Determine -- Are you
prepared to tell Mr. Emery, that you have robbed him of three hundred pounds?
-- Are you prepared to meet the anger of your benefactor, the curses of a
parent, the madness of your sister? -- "

"Hold -- Hold -- for heaven's sake -- or you will drive me to commit that, in
desperation, which, on reflection to have done, will (...) to the grave of
suicide!"

"And rather, Barnwell, much rather, would I see you dead at my feet by your
own hands, than behold you among felons at the bar of justice, a spectacle to a
gaping multitude!"

"O, God! that must not be! -- He would not, he could not, surely, proceed to
such extremity!"

"Will you, then, trust to the hazard of his clemency a matter of such import?
-- Puerile folly! -- Barnwell, I will myself save you from the effects of your
own cowardice."

She produced a stamp from her pocketbook, and drew a bill of Exchange upon
Mr. Emery, payable in two months, for five hundred pounds.

"In vain Barnwell asked her a string of questions -- How she came by the stamp
-- for what purpose she could have it -- if she had ever indulged such a
thought before -- and many others.

"When you receive the money to replace what you have taken, I will answer all
these jealous questions; till then, I am dumb. -- There," [having finished it]
"I have drawn it in the fictitious name of Emily D'Alembert, and dated it from
Southampton: I shall pass it as the signature of an emigrant friend. Now, in a
word, will you put Mr. Emery's acceptance to it, or not?"

"Oh, Milwood! -- over what a dreadful precipice do we hover!"

"And yet, insensible to the danger, you loiter upon its very brink. --
Barnwell, if you have the courage of a man; nay, if you merely possess the
policy of a coward, hesitate no longer. If you persist in these obstinate
scruples -- by every thing most sacred, I swear, these eyes shall never view
the misery that awaits you! -- If you leave this room with a refusal, I will
not quit it living! I have endured wretchedness enough already in this accursed
world of woe, and will endure no more. This steel is my sovereign antidote
against all future misery. I will henceforth live happy -- or will cease to
live!"

She drew the dagger from her bosom, and, in the act, threw back that part of
her dress that concealed the most lovely neck and breasts -- that ever kindled
anarchy of desires in the heart of man! -- Fixing the dagger's point to her
left breast --

"Barnwell -- my fate is in your hands -- Approach me not -- You know me
resolute -- If you stir one pace from the table, that moment the dagger shall
be sheathed here; nor will I remove its point till you accept the bill, or quit
the room: -- Now, choose." --

"Where are the boasted powers of Reason now! I know you resolute, indeed! --
and am thus reduced to Murder -- or Forgery! -- If there is a Power, who sees
the struggles, the desperate conflicts of this hour, O, let me hope, that, in
my account hereafter -- Why do I reason? -- All clue of right or wrong is lost
-- my brain is fire -- my heart is ice -- I have no more the agency of my own
will! -- Woman -- or demon -- whichsoe'er thou art -- I am your slave, for
ever! -- Lead me, then, onward in your own paths, be their termination Heaven
or Hell!"

He forged Mr. Emery's acceptance! -- Milwood sprung toward the table, hurried
the bill into her bosom, and covered her dovoted victim with caresses.

CHAP. XI.
Every man, whose knowledge, or whose virtue, can give value to his opinion,
looks with scorn or pity on him, whom the panders of luxury have drawn within
their influence, and about to be torn to pieces by tailors and jockies,
vintners and atto^nies. RAMBLER.
AFTER an absence of two hours, Milwood returned to the cottage, where Barnwell
waited in a state of mind beyond the powers of language to describe -- Guilt,
terror, and remorse, haunted his breast, and created there a hell torments!

She tendered him a Bank note of three hundred pounds. Hastily snatching it
from her hands, he cast on her a look of mingled love and horror, and rushed
out of the room.

As he was turning quickly round the corner of a street, he almost stumbled
over his first London acquaintance, Mr. Rigby, who had left Mr. Emery's the
first winter of his arrival. --

"Barnwell! In the name of Oddity, what makes you from London? Positively, I
should as soon have expected to see the statue at Charing Cross trotting ten
miles an hour, as to meet you at a Wateringplace: -- but excusez moi -- yo^
look upon the queer -- What Is the business? You were running; Excuse moi, but I
met Nick Snatch the bailiff here -- I beg you will make no ceremony, but trip."

"Bailiff! -- Nick Snatch! -- I really don't comprehend you, Sir!"

"No matter; change the subject. All the world talks of a smash in a certain
quarter -- Perhaps that is the business that queers you. Expensive style --
speculative man -- loan at a discount, and no bonus -- Poor Emery!"

"Really, Mr. Rigby," cried Barnwell, vexed to be detained at such a moment,
and by such a trifler -- "Really, Mr. Rigby, when you and I converse, we should
call in an interpreter."

"O, excusez moi -- Change the subject -- Do you want a horse; my Fireball,
sorry to part with him, perfectly sound, good wind, full of flesh, fine figure,
fast trotter -- must go -- want Spanish!"

"Spare yourself, Sir; I am in no want of a horse; but rather in haste."

"O, change the subject. What do you think? bought a curricle, two chestnuts,
plated harness -- knocked down at -- what think you?"

"No matter what, Sir," said Barnwell. "Good morning."

"Why, where the devil are you running? Change the subject. Who Is in Ramsgate?"

"The whole family."

"O -- excusez moi -- Promenade -- nous allons -- and seizing hold of
Barnwell's arm, he was constrained to submit to his company. "Change the
subject -- What do you think? Such a mess! quarrelled with dad -- wouldn't
bleed -- cut him completely -- never speak -- drain mama -- coax sisters --
come over the Israelites -- all will not do -- hardly enough to buy Jew bail --
afraid of the Morrow of All Souls -- curse their Terms -- wish old dad would
trip -- snug coffin -- neat monument -- rummage the parchments -- annuity mama
-- pair off the girls -- marry Kitty -- get a seat in a certain House -- and
laugh at Nick Snatch!"

Slender was the attention of Barnwell to the ^illy effusions of this
profligate young man, who was become completely the dupe of a set of
unprincipled beings, who made him at once their prey, and the object of their
ridicule.

Such was the extreme volubility of his companion, that Barnwell's silence was
unnoticed. They arrived at Mr. Emery's. Mr. Rigby could by no means obtain an
audience of any of the family. The ladies were quite a^ aesespoir for the event
of tomorrow; Mr. Emery and the Captain were close closetted; and therefore,
after tormenting Barnwell an hour longer, he retired, and left him to the most
excruciating reflections.

CHAP. XII.
-- No law divine condemn the virtuous
For differing from the (...) your school^ devise^
Look ^ound how Providence bestows, alike,
Sun shine and rain, hat bless the fruitful year,
On different nations -- all of different faiths.
ROW.
BY a letter, the preceding evening, Mental had requested Barnwell to be with
him by three o'clock on the morning of the duel. He was punctual to the hour.
He found that extraordinary man clam and more collected in his manner and
speech than he had ever beheld him. There were two packets lying on a table,
which he pointed out to Barnwell.

"Uncertain of the events of the next hour," said he, "I have prepared either
for death or flight. If I should fall, let this packet be opened immediately
after my remains are brought hither (...) it contains directions for the
disposal of my property. If Middleton should fall, and I survive, let this be
opened the day following my flight: It contains some few requests, which I
persuade myself you will not hesitate to comply with. Now I am ready; and be
the issue what it may, I am content."

The state of Barnwell's mind was ill adapted to remonstrate at that time, even
could he have imagined remonstrance of the least avail with such a man as
Mental. Much, indeed, he wished to relate to him how far he had himself
deviated from the paths of rectitude; much he wished to declare the horrors of
remorse, and fears of disgrace, that tortured his afflicted soul; but the
solemnity of the hour forbid him. He could not disturb the tranquillity of
Mental's bosom at a time, when, of all others, it became him, if possible, to
increase it.

As they were walking toward the field, Mental, gazing round upon the opening
beauties of the morning scene, said --

"In a little time, probably, this vast and wondrous Theater of Nature will be
for ever shut to me! and what shall succeed it? -- Vain inquiry! That something
will succeed, I feel -- for nature shudders at the idea of total annihilation.
Nor is this longing, anxious hope of "living-on," the mere effect of education,
as I myself once thought. The various prospects of that Future may, and
doubtless do, receive their several colorings from education; but the
expectation of some hereafter, seems to me, upon mature consideration of all
opinions, and a scrupulous investigation of my own thoughts, to be the only
innate idea of Man, a universal principle implanted by the common Parent, and
influencing, under various forms, the tenants of each quarter of the globe. But
beyond this conviction, the powers of my mind do not go one step. In England,
this ^uturity is represented in one form to our senses; in Turkey, it assumes
another; in Hindostan, another; and among the Africans, another still; and he
who, dwelling under either dispensation, is ignorant of any other, feels no
difficulty in blending his belief of what he hears with the conviction of what
he feels. Not so the man of more enlightened mind; who, unblinded by prejudice,
surveys the numerous creeds of various nations. He hesitates, ere he can affix
to any little spot on earth, the Divine Revelation of Futurity; and rising
superior to the littleness of self, inquires how he may reconcile the Justice
of Omnipotence with so confined a notion. -- Hence, he no longer broods over
forms and ceremonies; he ceases to let down the energies of thought to silly
scrutinies of trivial exteriors; but, unfettering his soul from chains of human
workmanship, gives it bold flight, even to the stretch of Reason. In
consequence, he acts, he speaks, he thinks -- deeds, words, and thoughts, truly
his own.

"One error generally accompanies this originality of mind, from which I have
been far from free -- "forgetfulness of the general state of mankind" -- which
calls for the slow and gradual removal of the veil of prejudices, and on which
too sudden a glare of light must necessarily produce effects, the very opposite
to those intended by the benevolence of true philosophers.

"A deep consideration of this fact has made me lament having published some
strong truths, which have unsettled many minds from that foundation on which
they had rested, ere any new and more solid base was formed for their support;
and has confirmed me strongly in the opinion, that REFORMATION is much better
adapted to the purposes of philanthropy than the best planned REVOLUTION. I
feel a relief to my mind, in making this free apology for my own conduct, and
sincere confession of my sentiments, at this time, most probably so near my
exit from these scenes. And permit me, my young friend, earnestly to recommend
to your remembrance, that, at the closing hour of his life, there was nothing
so anxiously employed the thoughts of Mental, as the future effects of those
doctrines, which he had promulgated among mankind. May it impress upon your
mind a caution, which will most carefully regulate the propagation of your
sentiments, and even the effusions of your fancy."

This sermon (for such the solemnity of Mental's manner made it appear)
finished, as they were within sight of the mill. -- They had not arrived three
minutes before they were joined by Captain Middleton and Mr. Emery. The paces
were measured, the pistols loaded, and the antagonists took the ground. The
surprise which had made a coward of Middleton, had worn away, and he now
resumed that courage for which he was celebrated. They were to fire together,
at a signal from Mr. Emery. The word was given -- Mental's ball grazed the
shoulder of Captain Middleton, who fired in the air.

"How is this?" exclaimed Mental -- "why did you fire in the air?"

"Having received your fire, Sir," said the Captain. "I presume I may now,
without the imputation of cowardice, solicit your attention for a few minutes
to some observations I would offer. When you have heard me, it shall remain for
your decision, whether this affair shall proceed. If it is your wish to fire
again, I shall think myself justified in returning it, after the explanation I
may offer, and the satisfaction I have already afforded by receiving your ball."

"I cannot refuse to hear you, Sir; but our situation requires you should be
brief."

"If I could prove, from the most certain evidences," said the Captain, "that
your daughter lives --."

"My daughter lives!" exclaimed Mental, starting. -- Psha, psha, psha! -- I saw
her die -- I saw the earth receive her poor remains into its bosom! Why, then,
this paltry evasion?"

"I am patient," said the Captain, "I bear with the effusions of your sorrow --
but, believe me, Sir, -- if the unfortunate girl, whom the madness of desire
urged me to seduce, and whose name was Mental, residing at Mrs. Orme's -- if,
Sir, this was your daughter -- she still lives -- I saw her last night."

"Saw her last night!" echoed Mental, clasping his hands together -- "I hope
not -- No, no -- it cannot be -- I saw her die."

"You must have been deceived, Sir, by some strong resemblance of person, or
some striking coincidence of circumstances -- for, by Heaven, I repeat, Miss
Mental lives!"

"Wonderful, wonderful!" said Mental, in a voice barely audible, with his
folded hands placed to his eyes.

"After the strong impression of her death, which you have received," said the
Captain, "nothing will, perhaps, convince you of her existence, unless you were
to see her."

"See her! see her!" exclaimed Mental, fearfully looking around him! -- "Is she
near me? -- I would rather embrace the severest tortures Cruelty ere framed! --
See her! -- horrible! -- horrible!"

As he ceased, the teeth chattered in his head, and his whole frame was
convulsed.

"Your arm, my friend," continued he, to Barnwell. "I am faint."

He reclined his head on Barnwell's shoulder. Mr. Emery then advanced, and
proposed retiring to his house, that Captain Middleton might relate the
discovery of the preceding evening, from which Mr. Mental might draw his own
conclusions. He submitted; and by a slow walk they arrived there. Mental asked
for a glass of water, and, after taking it, requested Captain Middleton to
proceed.

"It is a very considerable time, Sir," said the Captain, "(...) Miss Mental
and myself separated -- I would, if possible, avoid shocking your mind; but I
am compelled to say, that Elinor's infidelity was the cause."

"Facts, facts, Sir, if you please, and spare your comments," said Mental.

"Since our separation, I understand, she visited Rome, Florence, and several
of the Italian States, in company with a young nobleman, whom, at length, she
left, and sunk into that way of living."

"I understand, Sir -- " interrupted Mental -- "Pray, go on."

"From that period, till last night, I have remained ignorant of her entirely.
In consequence of the intended meeting of this morning, I had occasion for my
attorney. Fortunately, I learnt he was in Ramsgate, and he waited on me. The
cause of our meeting, of course, was mentioned; when to my astonishment, he
declared, your daughter was at that moment alive, and in Ramsgate! He cannot be
deceived, for he knew her as early as myself, and has corresponded with her
ever since."

"In Ramsgate!" muttered Mental; "so near me, too!"

"Yes," replied the Captain. "She resides in a small cottage near the sea, and
assumes the name of Milwood."

Barnwell turned pale as the dead; his knees shook, and his head sunk upon his
breast. Mental, almost as much affected, had yet more presence of mind; and
said, with particular emphasis; We must inquire into this* and endeavor to
conceal our emotions for the present."

Barnwell took the hint; and continuing to hold down his head, made every
exertion in his power to screen his astonishment from observation.

"Where is this attorney, Sir," said Mental.

"In this house," replied the Captain. "Hoping to gain your attention, I
requested he would be ready to corroborate, by his testimony, what I have
asserted. I will step for him."

"Nay, Sir," said Mental; " I will examine him in private. Lead me to him."

This maneuver of Mental's, to prevent the meeting of Blackmore and Barnwell,
was truly acceptable to the latter, who would, most probably, have been
betrayed by the presence of Blackmore, into a premature confession of his
connection.

The time that Mental was out of the room, was occupied by the observations of
Mr. Emery and Middleton on this discovery; whilst Barnwell's mind was absorbed
in contemplating the consequences it would produce.

At length Mental returned, and, addressing himself to Captain Middleton --

"I am convinced," said he, "from the narrative of this man, that she, over
whose grave I have wept, was not my daughter. I doubt not but she lives. --
This discovery gives birth to many difficulties, which I must overcome; my
life, therefore, is necessary; and I am thus obliged to relinquish, at least
for the present, any further claim which the laws of honor may allow me." He
then beckoned Barnwell, and they left the room together.

CHAP. XIII.
It is of the very essence of affection, to seek to perpetuate itself. He does
not love, who can resign this cherished sentiment, without suffering some of
the sharpest struggles that our nature is capable of enduring.

One of the last impressions a worthy mind can submit to receive, is, that of
the worthlessness of the person on whom it has fixed all its esteem.

Godwin's Memoirs of M. W. Godwin.
MENTAL and Barnwel passed the distance from Mr. Emery's house to the lodgings
of the former, in the profoundest silence. When they entered the room, the
sight of the two packets affected Mental extremely.

"I did not expect to see these papers again," said he; "but who could have
imagined the events of this hour! Who could have doubted such appearances? The
miserable being whom I deposited in the grave, Barnwell, was the friend and
companion of Elinor when she resided in Holborn; her name really Ellen. Thus
whilst I have imagined she had withdrawn from our world, the guilty wretch has
been saying snares to entangle you. O, my poor brain!"

Overpowered by the strength of his feelings, he sunk into a chair, and
reclined his head on the table. He wept.

"Tears!" exclaimed he. "Well -- well! -- a few struggles more, and nature must
yield. But you, O, ill-fated youth, what must be your feelings! The dupe of
such consummate artifice -- how must your bosom burn with indignation against
the -- against my daughter!"

"O, Sir!" exclaimed Barnwell, with a heart too full for further utterance.

"Fly to her," cried Mental: "upbraid her! heap on her the curses of a father!"

"Hold -- hold!" said Barnwell. "It cannot be -- it is impossible -- that a
countenance, which bespeaks the calm, serene felicity of angels, can disguise
so depraved a heart! There must be more Milwood's than one. She, whom I know,
cannot be your Elinor* and yet such mysterious secresy -- such contradictory
narrations -- such evidence, too! -- O, God! if it should be so!"

"Poor youth!" cried Mental. "Fain would I comfort you; but when the
recollection of the source whence flows your misery darts through my brain --
can I reflect upon a prostituted child -- can I contemplate the ruin of
innocence I ought to have preserved, and be calm?"

In agony the wretched father stamped his feet, and clasped his hands together,
with a groan that pierced the heart of Barnwell. Then, with an effort,
recovering himself --

"But this is woman's weakness; this is disgraceful impotence of mind, thus to
be startled at a phantom! for what more is it? I will still suppose her dead --
she shall be as dead to me -- ay, and to you, too, youth!" continued he, taking
Barnwell by the hand, ho had shaken his head significantly: "Yes, we must each
console the other, as though each had followed to the grave the object of his
hopes and love. Let us upbraid each other's weakness, if a tear glisten in the
eye, or a sigh escape its prison of the heart! there, close captives, let our
sorrows lie; and, though they struggle with a giant's strength to escape their
bonds, not till the bursting of the heart, in death, be they our conquerors!
How say you, boy, can you do this? Or will you crouch before the rod of Fate,
smart under the discipline of foolish griefs, and whimper like an infant for a
broken toy? -- Come -- let us swear, never to behold her more!"

"O! -- Impossible -- impossible!" cried Barnwell. "The love I cherish has
become the source of my existence; it is woven with life itself; -- and their
duration is coeval, Nor can I -- pardon me, Sir -- approve your conduct. What
if she be fallen as low in infamy as we are told -- what if her former life has
been a scene of vice! -- Might not a father's hand, extended, preserve her from
still lower depths of sin? Is it not possible your Elinor might yet become the
solace of your latter days?"

"What madness!" said Mental. -- "Wild infatuation! Do you not know that the
lost being has become a professor of iniquity? It Is not a lapse of human nature
should make me thus resolve. -- Had she sought these arms, when the accursed
seducer first abandoned her; had she brought to me the heart that he spurned
from him; think you a man, so much above the prejudices of the vulgar, would
have disclaimed her for the weakness of her nature? No! I would have nursed her
penitence in my pitying bosom -- I would have healed her wounded heart with a
father's best affections! But, now -- when the impulse of her nature is
exchanged for the sordid purposes of interest; when the affections of her heart
are all evaporated, and in their channel flows a stream of putrid passions --
pride, envy, l^st, revenge against mankind -- what can you imagine would result
from overtures of reconciliation on my part, but insolent denials? The delight
that swells the bosoms of the parent and the child, is virtuous joy! The smiles
of a father, is bliss unspeakable to a virtuous breast; but, to a corrupted
heart, is as the sight of heaven to the fallen angels!"

Barnwell listened most attentively.

"If, indeed, you are pursuaded," said he, "that she is so far abandoned, which
I, who have so lately seen her, cannot allow, yet, even then, admitting she
spurned all overtures of a father's aid in a return to virtue, would not the
thought, that you had offered it, afford some consolation?"

Mental started, and paused a considerable time.

"No, no -- it must not be," cried he. "Your suggestion struck me for the
moment; but, upon consideration. I am convinced it would prove a fruitless
offer, and only add to her despair."

"Still you argue," said Barnwell, "on the ground, that she is irreparably
lost. If you could see her -- if you but heard her sentiments --."

"Deception is her trade," cried Mental. "But, yet, I am half inclined to see
her."

"O, do!" cried Barnwell, with quickness.

"If I were sure she would not know me -- And so little resemblance to the
portrait do I now bear, that, I think, it is impossible she could -- I would
see her."

"Obey this impulse, Sir -- it is the voice of nature, and I will hope the
happiest effects. She must, she shall, prove virtuous yet; for it is in vain to
talk of tearing from your heart her lovely image!"

"Softly youth," cried Mental. "Let not passion bear away remembrance. Grant
that we succeeded to our utmost hopes; what would follow -- but that she should
forsake the throngs of society, and in the solitude of retirement calm the
tumultuous sea of passions that rages in her bosom. You do not, surely, for a
moment, Barnwell, think of renewing a connection with a common prostitute!"

"Do I hear you, Sir!" cried Barnwell, his cheeks tinged with a rosy glow, his
breast heaving with the impetuosity of youthful passion -- "Was it Mr. Mental
that I heard? Impossible! 'Twas the croaking voice of Prejudice, that blended
the supposition of returning virtue and a hiding place together. A MONK could
not preach otherwise, indeed! But I disdain the notion. O, were Milwood
virtuous now, not all the screams and howlings of a wondering world should
fright me from her arms!"

"Youth," cried Mental, with an expressive gaze -- "Youth, I admire and tremble
-- Hear my determination: -- The attorney Blackmore is completely in my power
-- some practices, of which he was guilty in the affairs of Norris, would
transport him. On his lips, therefore, I have a seal. My daughter is ignorant
of the duel, and its causes; she will remain so. Could it, then, be contrived
to admit me, for a day or two, as a friend of yours, into her company -- by
which means I might judge of her for myself, and act accordingly?"

"Nothing more easy," said Barnwell. "You might, for a few days, occupy a room
in the cottage. It Is an excellent thought; and I cherish the strongest hope of
its success."

After several obstacles were removed, this plan was resolved on, and Barnwell
went to prepare for its execution.

Milwood had scarcely risen, when Barnwell entered the cottage. Surprised at so
early a visit, the first thought that occurred to her was, that the forgery had
been already detected, though Blackmore, in whose hands she placed the note,
had declared he would not negociate it for at least a month; in which period
she proposed the conclusion of her schemes on Barnwell. She was agreeably
disappointed, therefore, when he acquainted her with the nature of his errand;
describing Mental as an old gentleman from whom he had considerable
expectations, who wished to reside some time at Ramsgate incog. It was settled,
that a bed should be prepared for him by the evening. Influenced, as it was, by
contending emotions, Barnwell's behavior did not escape the penetration of
Milwood. --

"Are you unwell, Barnwell?" said she.

"No," replied he.

"Your mind is uneasy, then?"

"What should make it so? -- Do I not possess your love -- your whole heart? --
Milwood, you never loved another as you love me!"

"Never. But why that question?"

"There are others of the name of Milwood in the world, I should suppose; or
else calumny has been busy with yours!"

"Who dare calumniate my character?" and she blushed deeply.

"Nay, I did not say 'twas yours. But my friend, whom you will see tonight,
soon as I mentioned the name of Milwood, and expressed to him (for he is my
second self) the nature of our connection, started, and then detailed some
tales that he had heard of one Milwood. But they could not relate to you." --

"'It Was not kind, Sir, to refuse my poor request of secresy for a few more
days; but to convince you how superior I feel to any tale of calumny, I am glad
your friend is coming. He will not scruple to repeat it, I should hope."

"I never knew him shrink from his own act."

Enough had passed to convince Milwood she was suspected. When, therefore,
Barnwell prepared to take leave, she made no attempt to detain him; but
immediately after his departure went in search of Blackmore, and challenged him
with treachery: he, from a dread of Mental, persisted to the contrary; and
declared, that he had not uttered a syllable concerning her. Destitute of any
other good of suspicion, she now turned her thoughts again toward this
stranger, and prepared herself for a detection. Summoning to her aid all the
powers she possessed, she waited with considerable anxiety his arrival.

CHAP. XIV.
So farewell, Hope -- and with Hope, farewell fear;
Farewell Remorse; all Good to me is lost; --
Evil, be thou my Good! --
MILTON.
THE mind of Barnwell began now to assume a ^ast, which justly to delineate is
beyond the best efforts of the most brilliant powers of description. The rapid
progress of interesting events, in which he had been chief actor, seemed now to
have attained their climax. Left to his own reflections for a time, the
consequences of that morning's discovery passed in a dreadful succession before
his imagination.

"Milwood!" -- would he murmer -- "Milwood! -- Mysterious being! I am lost in
unravelling her actions! what but love can have impelled her to such a series
of impostures? -- A prostitute! is not the end of such lost women -- Gain --
Subsistence? Has such been Milwood's! -- Have I not offered her my hand? --
Might she not have been my wife, with half the efforts that it has cost her to
procure five hundred pounds? Besides, has she not shared the crime, and
consequent hazard of detection and death? Had she, when she obtained that sum,
fled from the reach of justice, I could at once decide upon her motives, But,
no. -- Jewels, which she imagined worth more than that sum, were in her
possession -- these she parted with: -- for what? -- To purchase a release from
her husband! -- Has she, then, a husband? If not, why pretend so? Then, her
uncle! If she is, indeed, Mental's daughter, she, can have no uncle. Blackmore,
too! -- the creature of Middleton! -- He, it seems, is the discoverer of this
lost daughter; and he finds her -- in Milwood -- whose husband, he pretended,
was his client! -- By heavens, it is a conspiracy -- a juggle! -- But how to
detect it? Tonight's interview will probably throw some light on this
mysterious business; but to me, it seems impossible she can be Mental's
daughter!"

To these reflections succeeded others, respecting that dreadful act to which
the siren had urged him. --

"Forgery!" exclaimed he to himself. "Who, I -- I commit a forgery! -- Spirit
of my father, did you see the deed? -- Where is the fatal paper? -- Perhaps,
ere this, detected, traced! -- And who, cries an inquiring world, who was the
villain? -- Horrible, horrible! -- Three hundred pounds may yet redeem it. I Will
instantly ask it of Mr. Emery. Why do I hesitate? -- My embarrassment will
betray me. -- Shall I, then, acknowledge to him, in time, what I have done?
Coward, that I am, my heart sinks at the idea! The distresses of Mental, at
this moment, render it cruelty to obtrude another's miseries upon him. -- My
uncle! -- my mother! -- Gracious God! it would be parricide to let them know
that I am such a villain!"

In the most distracted state of mind he passed the remainder of the day;
seeking every opportunity of solitude, dreading the glance of every eye,
starting at every footstep; retracing, with an aching heart, the past, and
contemplating the future, almost with despair!

Evening arrived. He repaired to Mental, who awaited his call to accompany him
to Milwood's cottage, having disguised himself in the habit of an Hanoverian,
in which he had formerly traveled.

"Now for an effort, young friend," said he. "But, methinks, you do not brave
this warfare of the passions with the fortitude that becomes you: -- your brow
is marked with grief; your eye lowers, and you sigh! Come, come -- be more
yourself! One interview, most probably, will announce the future destinies of
us both. I tremble for myself; and yet I (...) act the hero for your example.
Should she resemble her mother! -- But, come -- the evening is advanced.

Barnwell bowed in silence, and they set forward for the cottage.

In the mean time, Milwood had not been idle. Every channel of inquiry had been
drained. Blackmore had been entreated, and threatened, in vain; he had
disclosed nothing, and the result of all her industry was vague uncertainty, as
to the expected stranger. She did not fail, however, to make such preparations
as might evince to Barnwell her desire to please. The entertainment that she
provided for his friend was deficient in nothing that her situation permitted
her to procure.

Mental and Barnwell arrived. She saw them open a wicket gate, at the entrance
of a gravel walk that led to the cottage door. She placed herself to receive
them. Mental started at the threshold, and retired a pace or two -- It was his
daughter that he beheld; and in her he saw her unfortunate mother! To screen
his confusion, Barnwell attracted the attention of Milwood, by saying -- "This
is Mr. Townley, whom I mentioned this morning. Circumstances rendering a
temporary concealment necessary, he has chosen this disguise to insure it."
Milwood, having surveyed the stranger circumspectly, said -- "As the friend of
my Barnwell, Sir, you are welcome: acquaintance, I doubt not, will teach me to
respect you on your own account."

Mental bowed, and, in a faltering voice, replied -- "I am a plain man, Madam,
and too much out of humor with my own destiny to accommodate my muscles to a
smile of gallantry; but, I thank you, and, rough as my manners may appear to
you, I shall not be an insensible observer of your actions. My young friend
has, I presume, acquainted you with my customs, which to you may wear the
semblance of capricious whims; but, 'twas upon the assurance of your compliance
with them that I trouble you with my company for a day or two.

"In the first place, I must entreat you to forbear all those obtrusive
attentions, called civility, or politeness. I cannot bear teazing; my nerves are
irritable. Thus if I choose to spend my day in my chamber, you will not be
rapping at my door, with silly importunities to see your garden, or to walk, or
ride, thinking that I am too much alone; and such frivolity. I hate it. Again,
if sometimes a strange ejaculation pass my lips, don't lift your hands and eyes
to heaven with stupid admiration; nor cry -- 'Sir! -- what did you say?' In
short, however I may demean myself, be this your rule -- that as I have
capacity and will, so let that will be free. Now, by your leave, I Will to my bed
at once."

"We must, in all respects comply with my friend's wishes; and cannot better
show our willingness to please, than by forbearance to express as much," said
Barnwell.

"'It Is an early hour to retire," said Milwood; "but, knowing your inclination,
I willingly comply."

Barnwell conducted him to a small chamber. Mental grasped his hand -- "We must
not talk," said he, in a whisper. "My pen shall do the office of my tongue.
Stay not here to night. Suffice it, for the present That I have seen my
daughter! -- Go, or we shall awake suspicion. In the morning be here, and I
will contrive to slip into your hand, unnoticed, my written observations.
Farewell -- Be resolute." Upon his return to Milwood, she overwhelmed him with
questions respecting the stranger: and Barnwell was compelled to presevere in
falsehoods. Among other questions which she put to him -- "Is he rich?" said
she.

"Very rich." said Barnwell.

"And who are his heirs?"

"He has none; nor, at present, any friend but me."

"Then you would, most probably, inherit all his wealth, were he to die."

"Distant, far distant, be the day of his death!" cried Barnwell; "though ten
times his wealth should be mine at that period."

Milwood pondered a moment; and her expressive eyes proclaimed some mighty
purpose was just then generated in her brain. Barnwell observed it not. She
made no effort to detain him, when he tool his leave, but suffered him to
depart, with the promise of an early visit in the morning* The instant he was
gone, she dismissed her maid for the evening; and, shutting herself in her
chamber, committed the offspring of her mind to paper, in the form of a letter
to the Chevalier Zelotti, an Italian, whom she met at Bologna. It is necessary
to observe, that this Italian was the wretch who had put the finishing touches
to the character of Milwood, whose real history this is the proper period for
disclosing.

It is unnecessary to retrace the subject father back than her elopement, from
Mrs. Orme's academy, with Captain Middleton. At that epoch she possessed all
the levity of youth, uncontrouled by principles of any solidity. Estranged from
her parents, she felt for them, or their memory, no regard. Her heart wanted an
attachment, and Captain Middleton, aided by the infamous Masters, accomplished
her ruin with ease.

Her residence, whilst she continued with Middleton, was principally at
Tunbridge Wells; where, growing satiated with his object, Middleton deserted
her. She flew to Mrs. Masters, and, having made her election for her future
course of life, that woman instructed her in many of the arts necessary for the
profession she had chosen.

'Twas at this period she formed an acquaintance with the son of the Earl of
--, and accompanied him, through the connivance of his tutor, in a tour to
several of the courts of Europe. During the period of this connection, she had
ample opportunities of observing the amazing disparity of doctrines and
practice among the clergy of the church of Rome; a circumstance that unhappily
rivetted that disgust she had cherished for religion in general.

At Bologna, the young nobleman, her patron, continued a considerable time, in
consequence of numerous recommendations to the nobility there, several of whom
were allied to the maternal branches of his family. Here it was that the
Chevalier Zelotti first presented himself to Milwood. She conceived a violent
attachment to his person, almost at first sight, and a short acquaintance gave
birth to a reciprocation of passion.

Intrigue, in Italy, is one of the businesses of life; and the similarity of
unshackled sentiment soon removed every obstacle to the gratification of their
desires. The same contempt for the laws which govern society, the same ridicule
of scruples under the name of prejudices, the same unlimited gratification of
their own wills, actuated Zelotti and Milwood. The mind of Milwood was strong
and masculine; but Zelotti, in addition to natural strength of intellect,
possessed the advantage of experience; having received a Monkish education;
having passed some years in the army; and having been employed as private
secretary to a nobleman, who was some time ambassador at Venice.

When Milwood was obliged either to accompany the young dupe of her charms to
England, or discover her infidelity, and remain with Zelotti, it was agreed in
consultation to prefer the former, under an engagement from Zelotti to visit
her in England, as soon as his finances enabled him. They separated, but their
correspondence had ever since remained unbroken.

The Earl of -- died soon after the return of his son from the Continent, who,
succeeding to the title and estate, dismissed his former connections, and
shortly after married.

At this period Milwood became distressed, and was compelled, for a time, to
accept the friendly offers of the unhappy Ellen, whose acquaintance she had
accidentally acquired; and being seized with a lingering illness, was almost
reduced to want. Then it was that the portrait of her father was disposed of by
her friend, which circumstance led Mental to the conclusion of her death.

In the mean time, Zelotti had so well played his game in Italy, that he
married the dowager of a Florentine merchant, of immense property, with whom he
resided a short period; and then, by the aid of poison, disencumbered the
possessions she brought him from their unwelcome clogg. He had, however,
exchanged his passion for Milwood for a new face, which presented itself in the
person of a native of Florence, of mean extraction, who willingly accompanied a
man of his wealth to England.

Their letters mutually acquainted them with each other's situation, and the
utmost freedom was used by both. Milwood did not disdain to accept the
pecuniary assistance she wanted, and the liberality of Zelotti raised her from
distress. Her indisposition was of the most lingering nature; and she passed
many months without the hope of recovery.

During the whole of this period she resided at Southampton, with Zelotti and
his mistress; and, if the word is not dishonored by the use, they lived in
habits of unbounded friendship, without the return of passion. As the health of
Milwood returned, however, her charms once more appeared, and those desires
revived strongly in her bosom, which she had never aimed to control.

In this crisis of her history she learnt from Zelotti the character of Mr.
Emery, who was then at Southampton, and had actually resolved upon a conquest
there; when, from the same source, she gathered the intelligence of Barnwell's
innocence and inexperience, and without a moment's hesitation changed her
intention. The success of her attempts are thus far known. The letter to
Zelotti runs thus:

He is this instant gone. -- The stranger, I mentioned in my last letter,
sleeps at this moment in the room above that in which I now write. He appears
an original. If his history is to be obtained, you know me too well to doubt my
industry. He is rich, Zelotti -- very rich; and Barnwell, to a certainty, his
inheritor.

What idea associates itself with this information in your brain? When we first
sketched the outlines of our plan, at Southampton, Sir James Barnwell's death,
you recollect, was decided. Would not old Townley's wealth buy the same
pleasures as old Barnwell's? The one is in our power: a simple infusion in his
drink would send him quietly away, and yield us all we wish.

To accomplish our original design I begin to think it a work of greater labor
than we imagined. The expense and plans we have already encountered have not
been trifling. Blackmore's charges for the business at Brompton are enormous;
and hitherto we have received in return, nothing. The forged acceptance for
five hundred has cost us three, and can only be used as an incentive to that
act, from which the fruits of all our labors are to result. -- Should the
young sinner disappoint us there, a very fruitful enterprise it will prove!

Zelotti, I have ever held thee a master in thine art; but, really, the
arrangements in this affair add nothing to thy fame! -- the jewel scheme
excepted (for which I thank you:) -- the other branches of your plan I have
been so frequently compelled to alter, that, intoxicated with passion as
Barnwell is, I wonder at the blindness, which has not, more than once, detected
contradictions absolutely glaring. -- Here is an opportunity of retrieving your
eminence, in my opinion. Exert it, man.

There is a sort of lethargy, I have observed of late, from your epistles, has
seized thee, my Zelotti. Arouse those drowsy faculties the hand of nature so
profusely has bestowed. Look round thee, man, and mark the eagar zeal with
which the plodding dupes of laws and systems run in their limited pursuits;
their course hedged in on either hand by rules and customs, and bounded by a
cowardice of conscience. Yet how many of this description are there, who amass
wealth, gain honor, and are borne upon the shoulders of the crowd! What, then,
should be their lofty daring, who own no law but prudence, and laugh at the
Nonentity, called Conscience, which scares the multitude?

Think on this, Zelotti; and say, if this old Townley must must not be
dismissed from the scenes of men? -- Devise some safe and certain means of
doing this, and of ensuring to ourselves the advantage of his death.

Good night -- I seek my pillow; -- and in my dreams I shall doubtless view
bones, that are 'marrowless,' stalk round my chamber; eyes glare at me, in
which there is 'no luster;' and bloody hands, that draw the curtain of my bed!
-- But, I shall wake, and know ''tis but a dream.' -- Good night, once more,
Zelotti, says your

ELINOR.


CHAP. XV.
Swift is the f^ight of wealth -- unnumber'd wants,
Brood of voluptuousness, cry out aloud
Necessity, --
DYER.
AT the residence of Mr. Emery a general joy displayed itself for the safety of
the Captain; and Barnwell was tormented with questions concerning the old Quiz,
as Mental was denominated by the young ladies. Mrs. Emery herself summoned him
to her dressing room, and tortured him with an hour's conversation on that
subject; and on another which occasioned him much pain.

"And so," said she, "the brute will not see his creature of a daughter, though he
made such a fuss about her, and absolutely frightened one to death with his
challenge! -- Well -- let us hear no more of the wretch! -- But, my dear
Barnwell," continued she, "I have another and much more important affair to
mention to you -- an affair of the heart! I shall be as candid as possibly one
can on a subject of such excessive delicacy; and I am amazingly much deceived,
if I do not meet in a mind like yours, susceptible of tender impressions, and
alive to those delicate sensations, as I may say -- that is -- I mean
sensibility! -- softness of soul! -- and all that! -- You understand me."

"Madam!" said Barnwell, blushing deeply.

The lady reclining her head, and playing with her fan, continued, "I say --
that is -- it is unnecessary to say -- but in the present state of society,
when marriages are entered into without a consultation of that congeniality of
sentiments; and people are thrown together, as it were, like blanks and prizes
in a lottery: Why, it cannot be wondered at, that affection should not always
follow, where parents or guardians -- Heigho! Its excessively warm," (fanning
herself) -- "Do, pray, throw that door open."

It was her chamber door. Barnwell obeyed, and was retiring.

"Stay, Sir -- I -- I -- Pray, Mr. Barnwell, can you conceive what can possibly
engage Mr. Emery so perpetually from home?"

"No, Madam. I -- "

"Not that I deem it a misfortune; he is so morose in his manners of late --
that, though I never did, to be sure, love the man, yet one would contrive to
keep up appearances. But really, of late, he has become so indifferent, that
one's lot is deplorable; -- and --."

This lady of fashion now began to develope her intentions so openly, that
Barnwell, whose soul revolted with disgust at the discovery, would certainly
have betrayed that disgust, but for a melancholy interruption, which disclosed
a passion of a purer nature. The lovesick Maria had been permitted to sit up
that afternoon, as the violence of her fever was abated, though succeeded by a
melancholy of the most painfully interesting nature.

She had expressed a wish to see Mrs. Emery, and her attendant accompanied her
to the dressing room. Her eyes were fixed on the floor, as she entered, leaning
on the arm of her attendant. She did not perceive Barnwell --

"If you know he is very wicked, my dear Mrs. Emery," said she, "you ought to
tell me; for how should I have guessed at such a thing -- when his countenance
was so full of goodness? -- What a deceiver he must be! But don't you think he
will grow tired of such bad ways? -- Poor young man! -- well, well -- all is
for the best!"

Mrs. Emery, bursting with anger and vexation at the interruption, was yet
compelled to dissemble.

Barnwell, hesitating whether to go or stay, was pierced to the heart at the
sight of the lovely mourner. At the intimation of her nurse, he concealed
himself behind the door, as she must have seen him had he retired.

"My good girl," said Mrs. Emery, "why do you leave your room?"

"C," replied she, "was so uneasy, you cannot think; for I cannot help loving
him: -- and then, you know, these wicked women have such arts to ensnare poor
youth! And if any harm were to happen to him -- why, then -- Mrs. Emery, my
poor head aches so very much, it makes me forget all that I was going to say.
But, suppose I was to talk to him -- only for his own good! -- He would listen
to me. -- I am very faint -- and very ill -- But he is well -- that is a great
happiness to know he is well! I had something to ask you, but my poor head
grows quite forgetful -- So let us go, Nurse -- and we will pray for him --
come, we will pray for him!"

"Unfortunate girl!" exclaimed Mrs. Emery, when Maria had retired.

"I am lost in amazement!" interrupted Barnwell. "To what can the dear sufferer
allude?"

At that moment the trampling of horses in the court yard announced the arrival
of Mr. Freeman, who was expected, in consequence of the ill state of Miss
Freeman's health.

Disgusted at the conduct of Mrs. Emery, and at the same moment filled with
compassion for the amiable Maria, Barnwell met the respectable and worthy Mr.
Freeman.

"This, then is the end of my parting with her! Why did I trust the staff of my
old age from my ^ight? Show me to my child!"

In vain Mrs. Emery and her daughters urged the impropriety, and even danger,
of the interview. The fond, afflicted father was deaf to reason, and would
suffer no arguments to prevent him from embracing the object of all his love.
Maria shrieked at the sight of him -- ran to his arms, and buried her face in
his bosom. A fainting fit succeeded, in which, except for short intervals, she
remained the whole night. The venerable old man would not quit the bedside,
but personally administered her medicines, and watched her countenance with
unwearied attention.

Another event, of the same evening, occasioned Barnwell fresh food for
conjecture, and some uneasiness. He had retired at the usual our, and upon
entering the breakfast room, the next morning, was surprised to find it empty.
In a few minutes his surprise was increased, by the entrance of Mr. Rigby, in a
pair of red slippers, his hair undressed, and his whole appearance indicating
that he had slept in the house --

-- "There, my boy, as good as a prophet!" cried he, before Barnwell had
recovered himself -- "Knew it was upon the totter! -- Saw it going -- going --
and now its gone!"

"Sir!" said Barnwell.

"Tell you all about it. I was at Margate -- charming assembly -- fine girls --
six belles to a beau -- gives one consequence -- didn't choose to dance -- an
hundred ogling me -- kept up my dignity -- strutted about the rooms -- lounged
among the card folks -- flattered the old dowagers, and made them throw away
their aces."

"But what is all this?" said Barnwell.

"Coming to the point. -- As I stood leaning, in a pick tooth attitude, upon
old Lady Snow-drop's chair, very attentive to a trick in diamonds, we were all
frightened out of our wits by a sudden exclamation of "D -- n!! -- as loud as
the echo of Ashley's double drums! I knew the voice -- 'Twas Emery's; every
body was up, the cards were mixed, candles thrown down, and the whole room in
complete consternation! -- The tremendous word, that occasioned; such an
effect, was but the overture to the piece that succeeded; in which Emery,
Middleton, a Captain of the Guards, and the dear darling of an eminent
distiller, were performers, both vocal and instrumental, their vociferations of
abuse being accompanied by the jarring of pokers, candlesticks, and chairs!"

"Proceed, Sir," cried Barnwell: "if under all this embellishment there is any
matter of fact --."

"O, excusez moi, my dear fellow -- truth, to a word, on my honor, the
antagonists were at last parted; the cause of dispute was blown -- foul play --
The distiller's son had detected Middleton, at a time when some thousands were
against the former. Emery was charged as an accomplice. Swords and pistols
followed of course, and an immediate meeting was agreed on. Emery saw me, and
entreated me to break the affair at home; and thus ends the first part of the
chapter of accidents.

"Are you in earnest, Mr. Rigby?" said Barnwell: "really in earnest; serious I
don't expect you to be."

" Real right earnest, upon my honor."

"And where is Mr. Emery? Is he safe?"

" Excusez moi -- cannot say -- Drove to town like furies -- Justices had took
the alarm, and would suffer no meeting at Margate -- 'Twas quite a blaze -- the
whole town in an uproar."

"The event is uncertain, then?" cried Barnwell.

"Quite so. A bit or a miss, that is the hazard."

"And Mrs. Emery and the ladies -- "

"Have cried and fainted, and gone to sleep."

"Good God! what indifference about the life of a fellow creature!" said
Barnwell; and, bursting in anger from Rigby, learned from the servants that the
most material part of his narrative was too true. -- The ladies, in anxious
expectation of tidings, remained in their room -- whilst Lord Morley and Mr.
Eastwood had gone post to London.

The most scrupulous care was taken to prevent a breath of this intelligence
reaching the ears of Mr. Freeman, who still kept watch by the bedside of his
daughter. All Ramsgate, however, rung with the story, colored and improved by
every retailer. Reports ^lew thick and fast* The house was beset with
inquirers; and Barnwell, fully occupied with attending Mrs. Emery and her
daughters, and answering the politely curious inquisitors, found it would be
impossible to see Mental or Milwood that day, and therefore dispatched a note,
announcing the event.

From the answer of Mental, he learned, that he had entered into a conversation
with his daughter that morning, in which, as Mental expressed it, "he had
discovered she possessed a vigorous mind, a quick fancy, and some acquired
knowledge; but when I gazed on her countenance," continued he, "my memory rose
in war against me; the image of her murdered mother stood before me, and I was
compelled to fly the vision. I have shut myself up in my chamber; I have
reasoned with the inward chidings of my soul; I have struggled to obtain
acquittal of myself, and found that struggle hard. When late I stood upon the
grave's brink, I was less shaken. I felt no pangs for an irretrievable act of
homicide; -- but the resemblance grew upon me, fastened on my mind, and
conjured up the thousand vain regrets I thought for ever buried. Those gloomy
thoughts, which I often indulged at the still midnight hour in the old Abbey's
aisle, now beset me, and attract the mind from more useful occupations.
Something we must determine soon respecting this lost woman! -- * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * * -- Whispers passed my chamber door -- They are
continued. -- In detecting artifice, art must sometimes be used. Much as I
abhor listening, from m^re curiosity, the stake of happiness we hold in all
that concerns this Unfortunate, compels me -- I will listen. This is what I
heard her say --

"Give him this letter; and tell him, his Elinor never wanted the aid of her
Zelotti so much as at this moment. He could not have arrived at a more
interesting period. Say, I expect him most impatiently. Adieu.

"From the window of my chamber, I see her attend a person, in a traveling
dress, along the gravel walk to the wicket. Who is the Zelotti? -- Come to me
as soon as possible -- Our situation becomes interesting. MENTAL."

Such was the conclusion of the letter Barnwell received from the Cottage.

Many hours of anxiety were endured by Barnwell ere any certain intelligence
was received concerning Mr. Emery. About ten at night Lord Morley and Mr.
Eastwood returned.

Mr. Emery had received a very severe wound in the head, and the ball was not
extracted, at their departure from Portland Place. Captain Middleton had
dangerously wounded his antagonist, and had set off immediately for Hamburgh.

To conceal the danger of Mr. Emery's situation from his family, it was settled
that they should continue for the present at Ramsgate, and be merely informed
that a meeting had taken place, and Mr. Emery slightly wounded, but forbid to
travel for a day or two, when he would return to then.

About noon the following day a post-chaise and sour drove into the courtyard,
and Mr. Drudge, the acting partner in the concern of Freeman, Emery, and Co.
was in a few seconds in the hall. Barnwell received him. --

-- "Mr. Freeman! -- Mr. Freeman! -- Where Is Mr. Freeman? -- Let me see Mr.
Freeman," exclaimed Mr. Drudge.

The rattling of the chaise, the loud talking of Mr. Drudge, and the bustle of
the servants, alarmed the whole family, who, with Mr. Freeman himself, were
immediately assembled, to inquire the occasion of such a noise. Soon as Mr.
Drudge saw Mr. Freeman, he ran to him, and grasping his hand --

"O, Sir! -- prepare yourself -- prepare yourself. -- such tidings! -- such
discoveries! -- Good God!"

Mr. Freeman trembled -- Mrs. Emery and the ladies almost fainted -- whilst
Lord Morley and Mr. Eastwood stood motionless, with a stupid stare of vacancy.

"Is Mr. Emery dead?" exclaimed Barnwell.

"O, worse, worse than death -- He is a -- ruined man! -- and much I fear his
ruin will extend to more than him. O, my dear Sir, when I think what you must
feel!" -- still grasping Mr. Freeman's hand --.

"Ruin! -- ruin!" exclaimed the worthy Mr. Freeman; and, placing his hand to
his forehead, cried -- "Strengthen me, good heaven!"

Lord Morley and Mr. Eastwood gaped at each other, and the rest of the company;
and the latter, at length, proposed taking the ladies into another room, whilst
Mr. Drudge explained to Mr. Freeman. Barnwell remained.

"Where is Mr. Emery?" cried Mr. Freeman.

It now became necessary to acquaint him with the affair at Margate; and Mr.
Drudge added --

-- "The report of such conduct soon buzzed about London, and no less than ten
arrests were that morning issued against him; and notwithstanding the poor man
is absolutely delirious, from his wound, he has been removed to a
spunging-house. In the house at Portland Place there are already four
executions; as many in Broad Street, and at the Pavilion. Demands upon demands,
to such amounts that astonish me, flock so fast one after another, that to
procure bail is impossible; and reparation seems beyond the reach of human
hands."

Such was Mr. Drudge's unvarnished tale; and its effect upon the mind of Mr.
Freeman may be conceived, but cannot be expressed.

"For this have I nourished thee -- thou Ingrate!" exclaimed Mr. Freeman, --
"Villain! -- hypocrite! -- smiling, systematic villain!! -- What must be done?
You, too honest man, the sweat of whose brows have furnished this monster with
luxuries -- you, too, must be involved in his ruin!"

"To be sure I must suffer -- my wife and children must suffer!" said Mr.
Drudge. "But, O, Sir, I am a young man yet; but you, you Sir -- who have grown
old in the respect of the world, and have acquired a right to the comforts of
age -- you, Sir, must be a sufferer, indeed! -- Your amiable daughter too --."

"Hold, hold, hold!" cried Freeman: "there you touch my soul! But how can he so
long have deceived us both?"

"Alas! Sir, I have long suspected when balance after balance has been against
us; but he was so ready with specious excuses. At one time he pretended money
was locked up in the hands of government; at another, speculations of the
boldest nature in the funds; and as they had all your sanction --."

"My sanction! -- I never dreamt of such proceedings. Month after month he
remitted to me statements of the concerns, that showed an increasing, very
increasing balance in our favor."

"Good God, what villainy! -- Sir, he has repeatedly, again and again, assured
me you knew the facts, and approved them; while, at the same moment, he must
have been remitting for your inspection, statements of his own fabrication."

"Can human nature be so base!" said Mr. Freeman. "But what can be done? How
are we to learn the amount of debts against us?"

"A meeting must be instantly called," said Mr. Drudge.

"O, just Heaven, help me to support it! -- At my time of life, must I, after
having so many years enjoyed the good opinion of my brother merchants, must I
now be reduced to stand down-cast before my creditors, and own myself connected
with a swindler? How shall I bear it? -- [Tears actually rolled down his
cheeks."] -- "Had he buried a dagger in my heart, it had been mercy, to a deed
like this!"

Barnwell, who trembled for the effects of this stoppage upon his own crime,
was scarcely able to speak; yet the tears of such a man as Mr. Freeman roused
him to attempt something like consolation.

"Not on you, Sir," said he, "not on you will disgrace fall, whose actions -- "

"The world, in these cases, seldom discriminates, young man. What will my
tenants, my neighbors say, when my house, my lands, my very furniture, is
lotted out for sale, to pay my creditors, perhaps a fourth, an eighth, of their
just debts? -- And you, too my Maria -- poor dear girl!" -- [He dropped on his
knees] "Take her -- take her, gracious God, to thine own kingdom! Let her not
rise from the bed of sickness to a beggar's lot!"

A considerable time passed before this injured merchant could, with any
composure, discuss what steps should be adopted. At length it was agreed to
summon a meeting of their creditors. When this was arranged --

"There is one circumstance more, which I think I had better mention, le^t you
hear it by some other channel: -- The connections of Mr. Emery have, lately,
been of the worst kind imaginable. To some gamblers he was in the habit of
giving bills for large (...) payable by the firm. Among others, I was shown
one, for five hundred pounds, which a Jew br^ker had discounted, as he termed
it, and which I am certain is a (...). It wants some time of being due. Now, in
all probability, this is not the only one."

Like lightning, the word FORCERY struck the brain of Barnwell. -- "I am ill"
cried he, and rushed out of the room. In the hall he stood for a few moments;
then, with the swiftness of desperation, left the house, uncovered, and ran in
a straight direction, for a very considerable distance, without any
determination as to where he would fly.

CHAP. XVI.
The fortunate have many parasites: Hope is the only one that vouchsafes
attendance upon the wretched and the beggar. SHENSTONE.
A SCENE of confusion followed the abrupt departure of Barnwell. Nothing but
madness could be devised as the cause of such a proceeding. Servants were
dispatched in every direction in pursuit of him, and even amidst the general
ruin that threatened them, each individual of the family felt a sincere regret
for the fate of one so universally esteemed and beloved.

Miss Freeman continuing too ill to be removed, and Mr. Emery being in an unfit
situation to receive his wife and* daughters, it was settled that the ladies
should remain, for the present, at Ramsgate; whilst absolute necessity
compelled the distracted father of Maria to accompany Mr. Drudge immediately to
London.

It was at this most critical moment, that Sir James Barnwell, accompanied by
the Sage Sandall, arrived at Ramsgate; and, from -- 's hotel, addressed the
following note to Mr. Emery.

"Sir James Barnwell presents compliments to Mr. Emery, and begs leave to
advise him of his arrival at Ramsgate, where he is to remain some time pr.
order of his physician. -- Understanding that his nephew is at present with Mr.
Emery at Ramsgate, Sir J. B. would be happy if the young man might be permitted
to wait on him, having a communication from his mother to deliver to him.

" -- ' s Hotel, Thursday."

This note was delivered to Mrs. Emery, who was wholly incapable of answering
it, and handed it over to Lord Morley, who, in turn, conveyed it to Mr.
Eastwood, when the following private dialogue ensued:

" Lord Morley. What the devil's to be done, Eastwood. Positively, all this
kind of uproariness, as one may call it, so absolutely deranges one's ideas, I
am scarcely compos me^tis."


" Eastwood. Precisely my feelings, I assure you, my dear lord. I never was
more completely (...) since I have existed. Really, my lord, its a species of
suicide to remain amidst such scenes. For my own part, I -- I -- had it in
contemplation to have raised the siege, even had not the man's character been
disclosed in such most shocking colors; for I don't know, my lord, how you may
have been treated but the insolence of Charlotte has lately been intolerable."


" Lord M. How exactly similar are our sensations. Really, one is apt to be
blinded by affection; but of late my eyes have been much undeceived respecting
Miss Emery -- such vanity in both the girls!"


" E. Such coquetry!"


" Lord M. Such lovers of scandal!"


" E. Such inanity of mind!"


" Lord M. Such paucity of ideas!"


" E. Such poverty of language!"


" Lord M. And then, how far from beauties!"


" E. They both paint!"


" Lord M. And paint ungracefully!"


" E. They dress ridiculously!"


" Lord M. And yet extravagantly!"


" E. And as to fortune --!"


" Lord M. There Is the rub --!"


" E. Positively, my lord, one's character is at stake, in remaining here any
longer!'


" Lord M. Will you oblige me with your company a few days at Morley Park?"


" E. My dear lord, you overwhelm me! How can I possibly be so well, or so
happily employed, as in Lord Morley's charming society!"


" Lord M. We'll start directly. -- You Have a ready pen; answer this old
gentleman's note; and leave one in our joint names, for Mrs. Emery. I Will order
the carriages."


His lordship retired, and Mr. Eastwood wrote the following:

Sir,
From the tenor of your note to Mr. Emery, it is evident you are unacquainted
with late events that have taken place in that person's family. Mr. Emery has
been proved a most unprincipled gamester; and, in consequence of some unfair
transaction, has been called out, and severely wounded. The rumor of this
affair brought a swift^ succession of demands upon the house, which appears to
be in a most wretched and beggarly state of insolvency. Mr. Freeman, and the
other person concerned, are also ruined, in the full sense of the word. Your
nephew, overcome by these events, or some other cause, has become deranged. He
left the house in a fit of insanity this morning, and has not since been heard
of. It is truly afflicting to a delicate mind to relate such events; but as
Mrs. Emery is unfit for such a task, it has devolved upon,

Sir, Your most obedient, H. EASTWOOD.

Sir J. Barnwell, -- 's Hotel.

"Lord Morley, and the Rev. Mr. Eastwood, most cruelly tortured at the events
which have taken place in Mr. Emery's family, would merit the severest censure,
if, by their presence, they continued to remind the unfortunate of their former
situation in life. They are sensible, therefore, that they are consulting Mrs.
and the Miss Emery's tenderness of feeling, when they resolve to save them the
pain of a farewell, under their present circumstances. Lord M. and Mr. E. (...)
never cease to remember, most gratefully, the (...) civilities they have
received from every branch of the family; and will feel infinite satisfaction,
if, at any time, the exigencies of that family can be relieved either by their
advice, or their fortunes."

"Mrs. Emery."

Thus fled these summer friends, at the first blast of wintery adversity. How
different the conduct of the worthy Sir James Barnwell! Soon as he had perused
Mr. Eastwood's note, he repaired to the house of mourning; nor did the
heartfelt sorrow which seized him on his nephew's account, prevent him from
tendering every consolation in his power to the unfortunate Emery's.

These ladies felt the change of circumstances severely indeed. Mother and
daughters so resembled each other in their feelings, that one description
serves each and all. Uneducated in any true principles of religion or morality,
they had borne prosperity too ill to sustain adversity with fortitude. When
they were surrounded by the luxuries and dainties of life, and seemed placed on
an eminence above the reach of want, or woe, they had never been taught to
reflect upon the means, by which they were thus exalted, whilst millions of
their fellow creatures struggled to endure existence: they never reflected, it
was that chance "in the affairs of men" which gave them wealth, and others
want; but vainly arrogating to themselves a visionary superiority in the scale
of human beings, called not the poor their brethren. Instead, therefore, of
alleviating the consequences of that inequality in society (which experience
seems to pronounce inevitable) the occupation of their lives was to increase
that splendour, which dazzled -- but never cheered the poor! The feelings of
benevolence, the impulse of charity, the glow of sensibility, are words they
may have heard, but emotions they had never felt. How pitiable, then, their
present situation. In an instant that pinnacle, on which they were exalted,
sinks; and from affluence to poverty is but the journey of an hour. The
sentiments they had imbibed continue; and, judging from their own feelings,
they consider themselves, of course, objects of contempt to the rich; whilst,
at the same time, fallen pride is naturally the ridicule of the poor.

The benevolent Knight in vain offered consolation to minds the victims of
childish fretfulness: -- sobs, tears, and fits succeeding fits, prevented the
voice of reason from approaching their ears. Turning, therefore, from so vain
an effort, he rendered them, unknown to themselves, a most essential service.

The proprietor of the ready furnished house they occupied, had expressed, in
his hearing, his wish they should quit his premises, as he saw no chance of
ever being paid. Sir James became responsible, and the landlord became quiet.
-- Meanwhile, he had not neglected any steps immediately necessary for the
discovery of his nephew. Hand-bills were printed, and brought home, describing
his person and dress, and were about to be circulated, when a fisherman brought
a letter, 'which,' he said, 'a strange young gentleman wrote, at a public house
in Sandwich, where he was, and gave him a crown to bring it to this house.' It
bore this direction -- 'Let any person, except the servants, open it. -- G. B.'

Sir James broke the seal, and read as follows: --

"George Barnwell entreats most earnestly, that his abrupt departure, and his
absence, may be most scrupulously concealed from the knowledge^ of his mother,
his sister, and his uncle. Whoever is officious enough to hint it to either,
must answer for the most dreadful consequences. -- A day -- only a day, of two
at most, he begs, upon his knees, for the concealment of this act. -- If he
returns not by tomorrow night -- discovery must take place -- for he will
return ere then -- or never! -- Any attempts to discover him, now, will be
fatal. Again he implores, in pity to his mother, to his sister, to his uncle,
and in mercy to himself, secresy for a day!"


Whilst Sir James held this note in his hand, and just as he wiped a tear from
his eyes, entered Mr. Sandall. He had heard the state of Mr. Emery's affairs,
and accordingly followed his patron to enjoy the whole, true, and full account,
as a most ample meal of scandal, upon which poisonous food he loved to
gormandize.

Obsequiously cringing, as he held the door in his hand -- "I fear, Sir James,
I intrude -- I --."

"O, Mr. Sandall," cried the knight, "my poor nephew -- Read -- read!"

"Alas, alas!" said Sandall, when he had perused it. "Ay, this is always the
end of such fiery, uncontrollable youths. I was afraid what would be his
conduct, ever since he so obstinately resisted our arguments upon apparitions;
-- there was too much enquiring, doubting, heresy, about that youth; and then,
his connecting himself with that impious, atheistical Illuminati, Mental; for I
have proofs that he is one; or else what could be the meaning of his mystic
coffin lid, and his skull, and his nightly orgies in the abbey?"

"Silence -- silence," cried Sir James. "You judge too quickly to judge
impartially. May it not prove that some youthful indiscretions have brought on
embarrassments, of which he is ashamed? -- But what can he mean by a day or
two's concealment? So suddenly to leave the house, too -- It is all
extraordinary!"

"It is extraordinary," said Sandall, who never differed many moments from his
patron's opinion.

"To acquaint his mother with the affair at present, would be cruel."

"It would be cruel, cried Sandall.

"And would answer no end," said Sir James.

"No end at all," rejoined Sandall.

The result of their deliberations was, to continue their search and inquiries
after the poor fugitive, and at least, for a day or two, to keep his mother and
sister ignorant of the event.

CHAP. XVII.
But grant that those can conquer, these can cheat,
It Is phrase absurd to call a Villain, Great:
Who wickedly is wise, or madly brave,
Is but the more a fool, the more a knave.
POPE.
WHILE such was the state of affairs at Emery's, the following letter, from
Milwood to Zelotti, will unfold the scenes passing at the cottage. It was
written the evening of the day on which Barnwell fled.

Zelotti,
Hasten, hasten on the wings of mighty Mischief! -- Events are rapidly
succeeding each other, of high and interesting import. There are materials now
ready to our hands, Zelotti, of which thy matchless talents might frame fabrics
of felicity for thy Milwood, that will exist with her existence. In plain
terms, there is wealth ready to be gathered, that shall furnish all the goods
of existence, all the pleasures, enjoyments, and voluptuousness of living, as
long as I shall live.

This will meet you, I hope, near my present humble cottage. I intend it merely
as a plan of the camp you are entering. The stranger is rich, I am convinced
beyond all doubt. There lie in a chair, by his bedside, two packets, sealed;
only part of their contents were, therefore, visible to the prying eye. I could
discover enough, however, to know that Barnwell is the sole possessor of his
wealth after his decease; and the words "estates in Hertfordshire, jewels,
cash, etc." I could catch half glimpses of. On the same chair is a casket,
doubtless the repository of these jewels. My hand is eager for the blow,
Zelotti!

From old Townly, let me lead you to another character. -- Emery has thrown his
die, and lost! -- We ever, you know, concluded that would be the case. Half
villains and half wits never thrive in this planet of the system. -- Perhaps
they may do better, should they hereafter tenant the moon! Middleton too,
rejoice with me, my friend, Middleton, is compelled to fly the kingdom, whilst
Emery, whom he has long made his staff of life, is reduced to beggary. This is
all well -- this is a most delicious draught for the thirst of proud revenge!
But it shall not intoxicate the sober Milwood. No, Zelotti; -- 'twere but a
puny gratification for a mind like mine, did it end here; but mark the
consequences: -- The forged acceptance of five hundred pounds, on which our
tool Blackmore advanced me three, you recollect he was to reserve in his own
possession till nearly due; but the needy rogue broke his promise, and
discounted it to some Jew, or, in other words, sold it for three hundred and
eighty. -- This bill naturally enough, was suspected, and Blackmore was
acquainted of the circumstance. This discovery, and the dread of some others,
gave wings to the man of law, and by this time he is on his voyage to America.
The boy Barnwell, terrified beyond all measure at this discovery, fled from his
friends, like a lunatic, the moment he heard it; and having rambled the whole
of this day without food, by secret paths, and under cover of the night,
arrived here about an hour ago. Of all the compositions of human nature, that I
have hitherto studied, he is by far the nearest to that standard, which is
called good in society: of course the best adapted to our purpose; for, do we
not know, Zelotti, that the wicked are wary? Had Barnwell brought with him, to
Berners Street, polluted passions, would he so easily have fallen our victim?
-- Had Barnwell been in the habit of dissembling, would he have scrupled to
have told some varnished tale to Emery, as an excuse for borrowing three
hundred pounds? Or, had his heart been cased in adamant, as Middleton's, as
our's, as half mankind's are, would he have committed himself to the risk of
death to have preserved another's life? O, never! -- But, no matter by what
means we have ensnared him; he is now as completely in my power as my heart can
wish. I am not altogether sorry you are not here, till I have disposed of him.
He is concealed in the chamber which must be yours. -- Most fortunately for
us, he refuses to see old Townley, and begs earnestly that he may not be
acquainted with his arrival.

Nor is this all: -- as if chance itself had espoused our cause, it has
directed, just at this momentous crisis, Barnwell's uncle to Ramsgate, who has
taken up his residence at the house where Emery resided. This event has filled
me with ambitious, bold desires!

What think you, Zelotti; is it not possible to combine our schemes, and by a
double blow accomplish the dismissal of Townley and old Barnwell both? 'Twould
be a glorious achievement, and its result would be a consonant reward. --
Hush! * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 'Twas Barnwell stealing from his chamber;
he tapped at my door, and I had just sufficient time to conceal my letter, when
he entered, more like a spectre than a man -- his hair dishevelled, his eyes
red with weeping, his cheeks and lips pale as Consumption. Speechless, he
tottered toward my chair, and seated himself on the floor at my feet,
reclining his head on my lap.

As old Townley sleeps in the room above, I dared not suffer him to speak -- I
forced him to swallow a cordial, and have prevailed on him to throw himself
upon the bed. He slumbers; but his mind, even in sleep, is haunted. At
intervals he pronounces "Milwood' so loudly, that if old Townley 'wakes, he
must surely hear it. At other times he calls upon his mother, his Eliza, and
has this moment uttered, in a voice of agony, "Father, father! -- save me, save
me!" --

If these powerful effects follow the dread of a detection of forgery, a common
reasoner would say, there is but poor hope that we shall compel him to murder.
That very dread, however, is the basis of my hope -- I Will keep him the whole of
tomorrow in my own room, so that the chamber is ready for your reception. --
The light of tomorrow's sun will show me my Zelotti. Remember your part, and I
will devote the whole of this night to the study of mine.

Yours, ELINOR.


Whilst, with a fiend-like industry, Milwood thus spread new toils for the
unsuspecting victim of her infernal machinations, he, in broken slumbers, folt
all the horrors of his situation; and when the light of morning dispelled his
dreams, the reality of his fate was to his exquisitely feeling heart,
intolerable.

In the meanwhile Mental passed his hours most unpleasantly. His situation
became torture. He was placed under the same roof with his own, his only child;
but every opportunity of converse which he snatched, all the observations he
could form, tended to confirm him more and more in the opinion, that this child
was lost to virtue for ever! Despairing, therefore, for the success of any
attempts toward her reformation, he that morning resolved to remove from the
cottage, without making himself known.

Ignorant of those important events which had taken place at Mr. Emery's, he
began to murmur at the absence of Barnwell, and hinted his intention of
inquiring for him at Mr. Emery's, if he did not call in the course of that
morning. This step Milwood determined to prevent. -- About noon Zelotti
arrived. Mental was in the parlour when he entered, and Milwood introduced them
to each other.

The person and manners of this Italian were extremely prepossessing, and in a
very few minutes he found means to entangle Mental in a conversation, in spite
of the general taciturnity of the latter. Mental was, perhaps, in some degree,
induced to this conversation by the curiosity he felt concerning Zelotti; but
the Italian was too wary to allow the least possible clue to his real character
to escape him. Mental perceived, however, that Zelotti was no common man.

The first employment of Zelotti, after a consultation with Milwood, was to
assume the disguise of a fisherman, and reconnoitre Mr. Emery's late residence.
He was admitted to the presence of the almost distracted uncle of Barnwell. His
olive complexion helped his disguise, and he spoke English very well.

"I believe I am right," said the impostor; "you are the master, as I take it,
of one George Barnwell.'

"No, no," cried Sir James, "I am his uncle: Where is he? -- Where is my
nephew?'

"That is more than I must tell."

"But you shall be compelled to tell."

"No, Sir; I am poor, and roughly finished; but I have never yet, nor I never
will, betray my trust."

"But it is for his interest, it is for his happiness alone, I wish to know. Take
me, then, to the poor distracted youth, and he himself will bless you for it to
the latest hour of his life."

"It must not be -- I have sworn an oath, your honor, a sacred, solemn oath,
that I would not utter a word that might lead to his discovery."

"What is the purpose of your errand, then?"

"This, your honor -- to say, that he will either come home to night, or else
that he will write a letter; but being much afraid his absence might be blazed
abroad, he wanted much to be assured that his mother nor his uncle were
apprized of it."

"His mother and sister are yet ignorant of it; and if he would return
immediately, they might never know it. I have letters to deliver from them; but
being ignorant of their contents, I know not how they might affect him."

"I Will answer for it, they will be the means of hastening his return; besides,
your honor, if you were to send them, and some kind message from yourself, I Would
back it to the best of my power. Whilst he is at my hut no harm shall come to
him; and either I, or Margery, my dame, have always our eyes upon him. When he
leaves us I Will see, too, that he goes no where but to this house."

"Will you promise to do this -- will you, on your oath, promise to do this?"
said the knight. -- "And do you really think he will come tonight?"

"I do, I do," cried Zelotti.

"Then, here, honest fellow, take him th^se two letters from his mother and
sister, and tell him, that if all I possess can render him happy, it is his
own. Tell him, that if he will return to me this night, all that has past shall
be kept secret for ever -- tell him, in short, good man, whatever you think can
induce his return; and, depend on it, your reward shall not be small" [Sir
James was untying his purse.]

"Put up your purse, your honor," cried Zelotti; "the pleasure of carrying
such a kind message to heal his poor broken heart, is reward enough to Ned
Martin."

He retired. -- Sir James's heart was lightened considerably by the hope which
this impostor occasioned, and he wrote to his sister-in-law, and his niece, to
apprise them of the change in his old friend Mr. Freeman's affairs, and
slightly mentioned that his nephew was well; but much employed in consequence
of the unfortunate alteration in the circumstances of his friends.

CHAP. XVIII.
I was contriving how to make you happy.
Think you to merit by your idle sighs,
And not attest your love by one brave action.
THE DISTRESSED MOTHER.
UPON the return of Zelotti, conference was held betwixt that subtle Italian
and Milwood, the result of which was the following conduct: --

Barnwell had made her chamber his prison. It was nearly dark when Milwood,
confusion and dismay pictured in her countenance, rushed into the apartment,
and locked the door.

"Barnwell!" exclaimed she, "Barnwell! arouse yourself, or we are lost for
ever!"

The unhappy Barnwell, almost stupefied with sorrow, sat on a chair, his legs
placed on a window-seat, reclining his head on his hand, like one inanimate. --
He noticed nothing that she said. She approached him, took his hand in here is,
and gazed full in his face. --

"O, Milwood! that face -- those eyes -- were they designed by nature to
accomplish such wide ruin? Poor Eliza! poor mother!"

There was such a settled wildness in his eyes, that Milwood doubted, for a
moment, whether he was sensible. After some time, a deep sigh was followed by a
flood of tears, which seemed greatly to relieve him.

"Come, come; for shame," said she," conquer these unmanly vapors; summon the
energy of your mind; it is now, Barnwell, you need it. This weak, puerile
dejection, is ruinous and disgraceful. Arouse, Barnwell, arouse! -- think what
you owe to the law of nature -- your own defense -- think what you owe the
dignity of your nature, and scorn to crawl thus, on captive knees, beneath the
iron scepter of imperious fate. Such base yielding ill becomes the man of mind,
of sovereignty of soul -- it ill becomes my Barnwell. Arm yourself, then, with
the intrepidity of manhood, and struggle to the last gasp with fate, till death
or triumph end the strife."

"Alas! what is there more to be achieved? Do not the swift feet of Justice
hunt me? Does not her outstretched arm hold over my devoted head the sword of
death? What have I, then, to do, but to submit?"

"Cowardly, grovelling notion! Why, a poor reptile outcast of society, a being
rising scarcely any thing in intellect above the worm we tread on, a petty
common thief, trembling beneath the shadow of his gibbet, could not concede a
meaner, more humiliating confession. And shall Barnwell sneak thus like a
reptile to his hole, and die? O, whither are thy feelings fled? Where are the
powers of thy memory? What, tamely yield yourself to a felon's fate -- chains,
public infamy, and public death? Look at the effects of such conduct on others
-- Behold the pale, deathlike form that gave you life -- gaze on her agonies --
see how she rends her gray hairs -- how she mangles those breasts that have
nurtured thee! See, too, a beauteous sister falling, in the bloom of life, a
victim to thy disgraceful fate! -- while I -- "

"Hold, Milwood, as you value my existence! -- If thus you paint the horrors
that await me, no strength of reason, no suggestions of moral duty, will
prevent me from instant suicide. Surely I was born for the accursed purpose of
inflicting tortures on those I love! -- But spare me the painful picture. In my
heart, in my brain, the impression of all these horrors is fixed with
unutterable anguish!" --

"You feel all these horrors, you say; yet who can believe it? You make no
single effort to avert them -- Insensible to the dangers that threaten us,
tamely you indulge a fruitless sorrow."

"Is it not impossible to escape those dangers?"

"It is possible not to endure them."

"What possible means of avoiding detection can you devise, Milwood? Is not the
forgery^^ discovered? -- Is it not traced even to Blackmore?"

"Ay, even to Milwood -- but what then? Think you that Milwood will surrender
up herself to galling fetters, to a public trial, to an ignomini^us death,
while this friendly steel is here?" [At these words she exposed the handle of
the dagger which she constantly wore in her bosom.]

"Milwood, you dare not meditate such mischief!" said Barnwell, seizing her
hand. "O, here, in this breast, rather plunge the weapon! Why should you bleed
for my crimes -- why -- O, my brain burns -- I am giddy with madness of
thought!"

"Of what does Barnwell think (...) nature of his Milwood is compounded? Surely
he must think fear of death is an ingredient in her composition, if he supposes
she can undergo, with coward patience, the solemn mockeries of funereal
preparations, ascend a scaffold, face a multitude, and bear the tortures of
superstitious rites and ceremonies, merely for a little longer life. No, since
we must die, let us, like Romans, meet the blow, rather than wait the lingering
stroke of systematic murder."

"You speak as if we were already apprehended, and even sentenced."

"And is it not so? Do you imagine that, in our present condition, there is a
possibility of our escape? Have I -- have you -- ten pounds in our possession?
Will the billows of the ocean bear us on their naked waves to shores of safety?
Will the owner of any vessel shelter poor and pennyless fugitives? Folly's own
sons would spurn so poor a hope. Tomorrow, in all human probability, if we
resolve to live, a prison will be our dwelling. Then, the very means of freeing
our spirits from their bondage will be (...) from our hands, and we shall curse
the torpor of sou^, that let this precious moment pass. Come, man, be bold, and
let a woman's courage give you strength -- This draught" (presenting a phial)
"will give your troubled soul, my Barnwell, an everlasting calm."

Barnwell shuddered with horror; his whole mass of blood seemed, in a moment,
congealed; the coldness of death seized his limbs, and the features of his face
were worked up to phrensy.

"Thou a woman?" exclaimed he, "a woman! No -- no -- no -- thou art some spirit
of the grand enemy of mankind, permitted to assume this lovely form, to blast
the peace of families, to sever the hearts of mother, sister, son and brother,
from each other; to drain the human heart of its own natural affections, and in
their place implant a poisonous lust, that generates a chilling apathy to all
but thine accursed self: that wars with all that is good and amiable in
society, that stirs rebellion against God himself, prompts the despairing soul
to the last damning act of sin, and bears it, with a horrid yell of triumph, to
scenes of endless torture and despair!"

In the extreme of agony, the lost youth tore his hair, threw himself upon the
floor, and abandoned himself to the violence of his despair!

Milwood, with the malice and art of a demon, silently contemplated the
progress of her operations. She suffered him to exhaust the violence of his
feelings, and sat covering her face with her handkerchief. After some time,
Barnwell, raising his eyes from the floor, beheld her in tears.

What is that potent, most mysterious influence, to which is given the name of
Love? Say, ye, who aim at defining all the influences and operations of our
nature, who presume to have discovered causes for all the actions of men -- how
is it, that a being, endowed with more than the common powers of reason, whose
heart has been fenced with the lessons of virtue, should, by the influence of
this most powerful passion, be impelled to the commission of deeds, at which,
when that influence ceases to operate, his heart recoils with horror, and his
reason surveys with astonishment?

Barnwell saw her tears; they were like burning drops upon his own heart -- he
arose -- he flew to the dissembler.

"Milwood, Milwood! you weep -- you are wretched -- and I have made you so!"

"You have, indeed," said she. O, unkind -- O, cruel! But I deserve it -- yes,
I deserve it, Barnwell; but could I have imagined you, of all men, would thus
heap reproaches upon the poor heart over which you have triumphed! O, no -- the
taunts of society, the scorn of my own sex, the derision of yours -- these I
expected, Barnwell; but that you should revile me -- that you should -- O! it is
this overcomes me!"

She wept, and her whole soul seemed melted into woe. Barnwell, irresolute and
wavering in his mind, was at a loss in what language to address her. She
continued --

"If our fates have proved calamitous; if evil, following on the heels of evil,
pursues us, how am I to blame? Did I request that second fatal interview, the
source of all our woes? Was I not prepared to leave forever the isle which you
inhabited? Have I received an interest or a pleasure separate from yours, since
that ill-fated hour? And yet I am arraigned as guilty of intentional crimes. O,
youth! lovely, yet unfortunate, be just, even amid your sufferings. Why have I
offered the antidote of death to the miseries that threaten? -- because I knew
you timid, scrupulously hesitating; when the only means of escaping them are
bold, enterprising, and uncommon; such as, indeed, are above the use of beings
educated in the prejudices and errors of systems; such as I know you could
never be brought to use; and, therefore, we must die!"

"Die!" exclaimed Barnwell; "you -- you must die? O, God, forbid! -- Let us fly
-- let us fly this instant, Milwood! I begin to see your horrible condition"
(putting his hand to his forehead.) "Merciful Heaven! -- Milwood, why did you
concern yourself in the accursed forgery? -- O, forgive my madness, when I
accused you. Where is -- where is my friend -- where is Townley? I must see
him, or it will be too late -- perhaps it is already too late to escape our
pursuers. -- He will give me any sum of money we may want -- Let me go to him."

"Alas! my Barnwell," cried Milwood, prepared for this proposal, "hope nothing
there. He left the cottage this morning early, as he said, on urgent business,
and will not return till tomorrow: by that period our fate will be decided."

" Our fate, Milwood! No, no, you must not suffer. On me -- on me, just Heaven,
pour thy vengeance! But has not my friend left his casket? -- I know its value
-- I know your right to it."

"You talk wildly, my Barnwell! But even had we the right you speak of, we have
not the power; the casket is not here.'

"Did he not say whither he was gone?"

"No."

"Did he ever converse with you on any subjects besides common ones? Did he
ever make any discovery, or throw out any hints?"

"No -- no -- none -- but let us not waste time now inwords, when every moment
that escapes us brings the crisis of our sat still nearer."

"You are calm, Milwood! -- Ah! then, I know your resolution -- Give me that
dagger."

"No, Barnwell; it is the last wreck of hope that is left to cling to."

The distracted youth now raved again -- all the endearments of the siren, all
the high-wrought picturings of memory, burst at once on his imagination. She
was every thing to him, in this moment of transportation from himself. All
other existence was to him as though it existed not; and to contemplate the
destruction of this idol of his soul, or rather the extinction of this essence
of his own existence, was beyond the efforts of his reason. He sunk senseless
on her bosom. --

"O, were there any means, however desperate, however dangerous, by which I
might save you, Milwood!" said he, after some time.

"There is a way, Barnwell; but it is a track unmarked by vulgar footsteps: the
great of soul alone walk in this path -- the votaries of ambition, of revenge,
and all the higher, nobler propensities of our nature. Men of low and
grovelling impulses tremble at its entrance, and turn aside, seeking each
little potty avenue of cowardly escape, while those of higher daring, boldly
tread the paths of blood!"

"Go on," cried Barnwell: "I understand you."

"If he -- who holds the fatal paper, which is to witness against us to our
death -- if he and you, Barnwell, were in some retired spot, far from the
prying y^ie of mortals -- how would you act?"

"Milwood, there is a desperate meaning in your words -- Know you who holds the
bill?"

"I do."

"Is he some villain -- some usurious shark, that has long preyed upon the
distresses of his fellow creatures? -- Say, is he a father, or a husband? Would
his death -- O, whither am I wandering?"

In the road to safety -- to future years of peace and joy -- had you but the
courage of a man. You have discovered, Barnwell, the only avenue of escape from
death. Think on it, man: Does not the law of nature loudly call on you to act?
If, in the highway, another meet you with some deadly weapon, and threaten your
destruction, what is the impulse nature gives? Here is but trifling difference
-- An instrument of death -- no matter what -- is in the hands of one who
threatens you, and in you, all who love you, with destruction! If, then, by a
blow that nature prompts, you can disarm your foe -- Barnwell, do you
understand me?"

He had fixed his eyes, which had a death-like glassy appearance, firmly on
Milwood -- his hands were clenched tightly together, and rested on his knees.

"Milwood," said he, continuing in the same posture, "Milwood, I have taken a
desperate resolve! -- Who had dared have told me, a few months ago, that I
should prove a murderer! But I shall -- ay, you shall live, Milwood, in mirth
and jollity: After these hands have done the bloody deed, will we not be merry?
Nay, you look grave, my love!"

This was not the precise disposition to which she had aimed to bring him.
There was a wildness in his manner, bordering so nearly on insanity, that she
trembled with the apprehension, that he might betray their purpose.

"This is the rant of madness," cried she; "not the decision of courage."

"By Heaven, I Will do it! I have dismissed that troublesome guest that has
hitherto daunted my courage -- it is fled -- fled for ever. I have now no
conscience, but thy voice, my love. Come, let us to action -- Where does the
old villain dwell?"

"Be more yourself, Barnwell -- you rave."

"No, by my soul, I am calm! Come, give me my victim -- see the moon rises, and
the hour of foul deeds draws nigh."

Milwood paused -- she meditated -- she saw his soul wound up to desperation,
and ripe for the deed she wished concluded; but, ever wary in her designs, she
looked beyond the deed, and saw his state of mind ill calculated for its
concealment, when performed. She paused again -- she recollected, that there is
a crisis in mental operations, and knew, that if she suffered this crisis of
desperation to arrive, without accomplishing her end, it never would return.
She well knew the state of languor that would succeed it, and, with a boldness
of determination, resolved upon the risk. When she had resolved, she took his
hands, she kissed them, bathed them with tears, and called him by the dearest
title of Savior.

"Every hour of my future existence will be a gift of thine,' said she; "to
thee, my savior, shall I owe all the years of life I may enjoy. But, are you
firm, my hero?"

"I am resolved."

"But when you shall hear who is the victim, the necessary victim, for whom
Fate calls -- O, then, all my hopes of life will vanish! You will prefer his
life to mine, to a mother's, a sister's, to your own!"

"No -- no -- no," cried he; "were my father living, and in the way 'twixt life
and you, I think -- yes, I think, I should, Milwood --!"

"But you have a near relation, who yet lives, Barnwell -- you have an -- "(she
held his hand grasped tightly in her own) "an -- an -- Uncle!"

"Is it my poor uncle, then? -- O!"

He struck his head violently. -- She suffered him to remain silent a few
minutes, and then, in a most tender voice --

"Barnwell, speak to me -- tell me -- am I to die?"

He threw himself into her arms.

"Live, Milwood, live! -- though perdition, everlasting perdition, be the price
of your existence!"

From this moment he was lost. The situation of his uncle at Mr. Emery's was
made known to him; she pursuaded him that the forged bill had passed into his
possession; that, ignorant who had forged it, he still held it; and, if he
lived, must, in spite of every wish to the contrary, be compelled to appear
against them.

CHAP. XIX.
Hear me, you wicked one --
You have put hills of ^ire within this breast;
Not to be quenched with tears; for which my guilt
S^^s on your bosom!
TRAGEDY OF PHILASTER.
SIR James Barnwell had just finished a solitary supper, when Barnwell,
attended by Zelotti, rung the bell at the gate of the court yard. The pride of
Mrs. Emery and her daughter, confined them to their chambers; the poor Maria
was entrusted to the care of a nurse; and Mr. Sandall was gone to visit a
friend at Margate.

The pretended fisherman introduced Barnwell to his rejoicing uncle, who fell
on his neck, and embraced him. Barnwell, pale and trembling, seated himself
silently on a chair, and supported his head by leaning his elbow on the table.
Zelotti, in a whisper to Sir James, observed, that the less notice was taken of
him, and the earlier they retired, the better, and then departed. The anguish
of the old man, as he looked upon his nephew, was keen indeed.

"You look ill, my nephew; you are fatigued. We will not enter on the cause of
your uneasiness tonight; but if your happiness can be restored by any means in
my power, assure yourself of my best endeavors."

"You are very good -- yes, you are truly good -- and that is one comfortable
reflection," said Barnwell.

Sir James little suspected the drift of his discourse.

"Have you supped, George?"

"I have not eat, a long while, Sir; my appetite is gone, quite gone -- but I
can drink -- what have you there, wine?"

The wine was on the table; he drank a bumper greedily.

"You don't inquire after your mother, or your sister, George."

"O, true! you're right -- my mother -- ah, my mother -- and Eliza -- poor
girl! -- Come, Sir, will not you take some wine?"

Sir James was alarmed at his wild manner. Barnwell poured out another bumper,
and swallowed it.

"How much does it want to one o'clock?" said he.

"'It Is not twelve," said Sir James.

At that instant Mr. Sandall entered the room. Sir James intimated silence to
him. Barnwell looked at him, but did not notice him.

"What an altered house is this!" said Barnwell. "No more merriment! -- Well, I
must to bed -- and you, Mr. Sandall, being a divine, will pray for us all --
Uncle, do you pray every night?"

Sir James, who conceived his brain injured, humoured him, and answered him --
"Always, George."

"I am glad of that," said he; "you are a righteous man, and your prayers are
heard."

He rung for the servant. At the door he turned round and stood with his eyes
fixed some time on his uncle, then retired, saying, as he left the room, "God
bless you, Sir -- good night."

When the man had attended him to his chamber door, which was one, among
several, in a long gallery -- "There poor Miss Freeman sleeps -- does she not,
Sam?"

"Yes, Sir."

"And in that room, I suppose, my uncle sleeps."

"No, Sir, the other gentleman has that room -- Sir James lies in this here,
next to yours."

"Does that clock, that stands at the end of the gallery, strike the hours,
Sam?"

"Yes, Sir."

"Do the lamps at ^ach end of the gallery burn all night?"

"Yes, Sir, till near day light."

"Good night, Sam."

He retired to his chamber. The clock struck twelve. -- "One hour more!"
exclaimed he. He paced about the chamber in agony of thought. -- "Hush!"
murmured he to himself, "I hear his aged footsteps -- he passes my door -- he
enters his chamber. Will he lock the door? -- no -- he dreads the danger of
fire, and rather trusts to man's mercy than a senseless element! Hark! he prays
-- Good God! he prays for me -- even me! Listen! -- 'Restore his peace of
mind.' -- O, poor martyr! that is a vain petition -- Alas, Milwood! what have I
sworn to do? -- But you cannot both live? Why, O, why was I permitted to see
this hour! -- Hark! the bed creaks -- he lays his aged limbs to rest -- never,
never more to rise!"

All was now perfect silence in the house, so that the dashing of the ocean's
waves were heard distinctly, the windows of that range of chambers overlooking
the sea. When he parted from Milwood she had furnished him with a dagger, and
gave him* small packet, with an injunction not to open* it till the bell tolled
one. This dagger he now drew from his bosom, and placed it, with the packet on
the table.

His reflections now grew more and more tormenting; his resolution was an
hundred times shaken, and raised again by the memory of Milwood. When the idea
of her public death rushed across his brain, madness nerved his arm, and he
often grasped the dagger in a state of phrensy.

In this horrible conflict the hour passed away; the clock in the gallery
struck one. A chilly sweat dewed his whole frame -- his blood shot like a bolt
of ice to his heart. With a trembling hand he opened the packet; it contained a
most animating likeness of Milwood, in miniature, and fully answered the
purpose she intended. A small scroll of paper contained, in her own hand
writing, these words: -- "If another hour elapses, and the deed is not
performed, you may gaze on the resemblance of Milwood, but will never behold
the original alive." He gazed on the portrait; he read the scroll again; again
he contemplated the miniature -- he kissed it with fervor -- his brain grew
inflamed -- imagination riotted -- He kissed the miniature again -- he placed
it in his bosom, grasped the dagger, and, throwing off his slippers, opened his
chamber door. Not a breath moved along the gallery -- he stood trembling for a
few moments, fearfully gazing around him -- his shadow on the floor startled
him -- he shuddered. Once more he drew the portrait from his bosom, and looked
on it by the light reflected from the lamp. Summoning a desperate effort, he
made two or three strides, and found himself in his uncle's chamber. He closed
the door after him, and approached the bedside. A chamber lamp burned in the
fire place: by this light, as he leaned against the feet of the bed, he
perceived his uncle slept. At that moment he fancied, that he heard a footstep
in the gallery -- he listened, and was confirmed it was so. He fixed his eyes
upon the door in horrid dread of a detectio^, and half concealed the dagger in
his bosom, still holding the candle. No one entered -- all was again silent.
Once more he slowly drew the dagger forth, and once more turned his eyes upon
his sleeping uncle. The dim, faint light, emitted from the lamp, just served to
discover his tranquil features. His lips were closed in a smile, that indicated
peaceful slumbers. As he contemplated this scene, a deep groan pierced the ears
of Barnwell: frozen with horror he dared not to turn his head toward the
gallery, whence it seemed to issue, but remained fixed as a statue. In another
moment a voice, softly, but distinctly, uttered -- "I Will sit all night on his
cold, cold grave!" He fancied it was the voice of his sister. The dagger fell
from his senseless hand, and he clung to the pillars of the bedstead for
support. Waked by the noise and motion, his uncle started up. Barnwell,
instigated by a sudden impulse, in which fear was an ingredient, snatched up
the dagger, sprung upon the breast of the venerable old man, and plunged its
fatal point deep in his heart! One groan only preceded his dissolution!

The moment the fatal blow was struck, remorse was kindled, with all its
horrors, in the breast of Barnwell; a remorse too powerful for words or action;
it was a consuming fire kindled in the center of his heart. In a few moments
the same voice he had heard before, exclaimed -- "In heaven he will be mine,
for Milwood cannot come to heaven." Roused to madness, he rushed like lightning
to the door, opened it without regard to the noise he made, and beheld, sitting
in her night gown at his own room door, Maria Freeman. This amiable and
afflicted girl, still the victim of concealed affection, grew hourly worse. Her
mind constantly fixed on the object of her love, was now impressed with the
notion of his death, and her attendant having fallen asleep, the lovely maniac
had left her bed under the impression of visiting his tomb. The noise and his
appearance caused her to utter the (...) violent shrieks, which brought Mr.
Sandall and the servants to be witnesses to a scene of the utmost horror!
Barnwell, taking the advantage of their confusion, burst through them all, and
fled, with incredible speed toward the cottage.

Urged on by an instinctive sense of danger, scarcely knowing the route he
took, and, without bestowing a thought on the certain consequences of his
sudden flight, he pursued his way. Each step he took, he trembled; even the
falling leaf that floated in the air, alarmed him. As he approached the sea,
the roaring of the water appalled his guilty soul with terror. If, for a
minute, he raised his eyes from the ground, the most horrid images floated
before them. His uncle's mangled, bleeding corpse, his father's angry ghost,
the very torments of the damned racked his imagination! The gloomy aspect of
the heavens aided the force of these guilt-born terrors, and rendered his
situation horrible beyond expression!

With difficulty he at length found the wicket gate of the cottage -- it was
locked, nor could all the noise he was capable of making gain him admission.
Dreading to remain unhoused, he endeavored to explore an entrance at the back
of the garden, by climbing up to the arbor from the sands. The tide was
flowing rapidly in, and he found he had no time to lose. By perseverance,
spurred on by the desperation of his mind, he gained, at length a footing on a
part of the cliff, that overhung the sea, and was within a few paces of the
arbor.

Exhausted with fatigue, and overpowered by the conflicting exercises of his
mind, he threw himself down on the rock, with a groan of agony. The fever of
the soul bacame exchanged for a most awful languor -- he dared not to think.
The roaring of the waters underneath, at length, aroused him, and the horrors
of his situation flashed once more across his imagination.

At that moment, rising from the ground, he felt strongly impelled to plunge
from the precipice on which he stood into the gulf of waters; but almost at
the same instant, the murmuring of approaching whispers startled him, and
arrested his attention. It was too dark to discern their faces; but he could
distinguish a man and woman plainly, as the former carried a lantern in his
hand. They approached the edge of the cliff, and appeared to make toward the
spot where he stood. A little to the right there was a spot, where the chalk
had fallen away some feet in depth, and left a hollow space. Here he crept and
concealed himself. In a few moments they were close to the place of his
concealment -- A voice, which he too well knew, now struck his car -- 'twas
Milwood's.

"Well," said she, "how is the tide?"

"Coming in," said the man, who was Zelotti; "but it will not do this tide; it
will be break of day ere there be sufficient depth of water."

"Cursed delay!" cried Milwood; "what must be done with the body, then?"

"Let it remain in the sack, under the seat in the arbor, till another night."

"That might do, if we were certain of remaining here; but I dread the morning,
Zelotti. Fool that I was, to trust a work of such a nature to his hands. If
Barnwell should be detected in the act, or by his weakness discover it when
done, we must fly instantly, and then old Townley's corpse would be discovered,
and his murder clearly traced to me." -- [How poor Barnwell shuddered!]

"That Is true," replied Zelotti. "Let me consider, as there are no marks of
violence upon his person, suppose we strip him; the effects of the poison, in
swelling the body, may pass well enough for the same effects produced by
drowning; so that if it floats, and is discovered in the morning, there would
be no ground of suspicion."

"Quick then, about it!" cried Milwood; there has been too much delay. -- O,
Zelotti! if Barnwell's heart were but molded like our own, what a glorious
harvest should we reap! -- But, my soul misgives me -- I fear his tenderness,
his foolish remorse. -- Would this night were well over!"

They had now retired out of the hearing of Barnwell. He had, however, heard
enough to petrify his soul with horror! -- It was plain that Milwood had
poisoned her father! -- Language is not equal to the task of describing what
now passed in his agonized bosom! Dreading to meet them, he was compelled to
keep his situation. Sooner than he imagined, they returned, and in a few
moments the awful sound smote his ear of the fall of poor Mental's corpse into
it is grave of billows! -- He could not check a deep groan at that instant.

"Did you hear any thing?" said Zelotti.

"No," said Milwood; " you are not surely turning superstitious?"

"I am sure I heard a groan," said Zelotti.

"Fancy -- fancy -- man," cried she: -- "Come, we have work to do -- Peace to
old Townley -- now for his treasures."

They bent their way toward the arbor. Barnwell followed them with his eye.
In their hurry they forgot the ladder by which they descended from the window
of the arbor. He noticed this neglect, and, waiting a considerable time, his
first impulse was to ascend the ladder; but he checked it, and continued
wandering near the spot till break of day.

The tortures inflicted by his conscience became almost insupportable, and he
once again resolved to die.

At the very moment, however, of acting upon this dreadful resolution, an
indescribable terror seized him, and turned him from his purpose. The
conviction of a future state was so deeply impressed upon his mind, that,
though surrounded by misery, he dared not to plunge, uncalled, into eternity.
Again, when the horrible consequences of his crime rushed in force upon his
imagination, he felt almost irrisistibly impelled to escape them by the only
means left -- the guilt of suicide!

Thus wretchedly passed the hours of darkness: now the torments of his
situation drove him almost to self murder; and now the dread of what another
world might prove, deterred him from the crime. Nor was the recent scene he had
witnessed the least part of his present wretchedness -- Sorrow for the fate of
Mental, at any common period, would have powerfully afflicted him; put when the
incontrovertible evidence of his own sight and hearing proved to him the real
character of Milwood, surprise, agony, and despair took possession of his soul!

Such was the state of mind in which, early in the morning, Milwood and Zelotti
discovered the poor lost Barnwell. Anxiety respecting the body of the murdered
Mental brought them to observe if the tide had thrown it on the shore. When
Milwood first saw Barnwell, he was kneeling, his hands clasped, and his eyes
were fixed on the rising sun.

"Amazement!" exclaimed she. "Barnwell! Barnwell! -- Tell me, do my senses
deceive me?"

Barnwell surveyed me with a wild inquiring gaze, but spoke not.

"Answer me," said she; "does he live?"

"In heaven!" said Barnwell, shaking his head, and showing some blood upon his
hands.

"Why then, are you here?" said she; "you should have remained in your chamber,
as I directed you, to avoid suspicion. -- Where is the dagger -- where is the
miniature?"

"By his bleeding corpse!" said Barnwell, solemnly.

"Fool! -- madman! -- Did you intend detection? -- My portrait left in the
room! -- perhaps my letter too. -- Zelotti, we must fly -- this instant we must
fly! -- Away -- away! -- and leave this whimpering boy to the fate his folly
merits."

She cast a look of contemptuous rage on him, and walked swiftly toward the
arbor, followed by Zelotti.

Barnwell, roused from his stupor of misery, by this conduct, pursued them,
exclaiming, as he went -- "Milwood -- Milwood -- hear me!" At the foot of the
ladder he seized her hand eagerly -- "Lost -- lost woman! -- Why am I still
anxious concerning you? -- Why, even after you have driven me to perdition, do
I still love you? -- Why is it, that, though I know you a murderer, I cannot --
cannot detest you? -- O, then, listen to me, Milwood; and, instead of
attempting, to escape the just punishment of our crimes, let us surrender
ourselves to death, as the only atonement in our power, and devote the few
hours we may live in preparing for eternity!"

"Canting babe -- preaching infant!" cried Milwood, scornfully. "Know, fool,
that she, to whom you preach, is of a nature above indulging such dreams, as
haunt children of prejudice, and dupes of priestcraft, like yourself. She
scoffs your counsel, and despises you for offering it. To you, and such as you,
she leaves it to bend the neck supmissively to laws and ordinances. Her life is
her all; she dreams of no future worlds, nor dreads accounts hereafter. On
such, the puny fears of others, she builds her towering projects, and would not
scruple, if she had the power, to hurl yon blazing orb of light from its fixed
center to destroy whole systems, that opposed her purpose."

"Can human nature fall so low?" cried Barnwell, "can that, which we are taught
to believe emanates from Deity itself, become infernal?"

"Who is this Deity you speak of? -- Where is his power? -- If he exists, why
did he suffer you, a villain, maddened by lust, to murder sleeping innocence?
-- Fool! -- fool! -- fool! -- Away, Zelotti."

"Yet, one moment, hold," cried Barnwell. "Where is my friend -- where is
Townley? O, what must be your agony, Milwood, when you hear, that Townley, he
whose murdered corpse, last night, you yielded to the deep, was -- your father!"

"Already is the mighty secret known!" said she. "I know he was my father -- I
own, too, that these hands mixed and administered the dose that poisoned him!
-- Where was the Deity you talk of, then? -- Why did not his power, if he
possesses it, prevent so foul a deed? I knew not, at the moment, that he was my
father: the contents of his casket, and his papers told me, that he had played
a character that he was not in reality, and he has fallen in consequence. --
It Is possible he might have lived, but for his deception."

Barnwell was petrified with horror and astonishment!

"In a few hours," continued Milwood, as she ascended the ladder, "some dungeon
may immerse us, if we remain, Zelotti. -- Come, then, nor let us waste the
present opportunity."

As she uttered the last words, she entered the arbor by the window. In the
same instant she shrieked violently, and three men rushed down the ladder, from
the window, and secured Barnwell and Zelotti. The ravings of Milwood were too
horrible to describe. During their absence from the cottage, Mr. Sandall,
attended by several of the domestics, and conducted by the information found in
Barnwell's papers, had arrived there, and forced the outer gates. As the garden
door was open, they had just entered the arbor, when the voice of Barnwell
arrested their attention; and concluding, from the replies of Milwood, that she
was returning, they stationed themselves in such a manner as to secure her when
she entered. The criminals were immediately conveyed before a magistrate, and
committed to prison. Milwood continued to rave. Zelotti loaded her with
reproaches; but Barnwell silently hung down his head, and endeavored to
conceal the tears, that bedewed his pallid cheeks.

CHAP. XX.
Think, timely think, on the last dreadful day,
How you will tremble there, to stand exposed
The foremost in the rank of guilty ghosts,
That must be d^om'd for murder!
DRYDEN.
NIGHT approached -- Milwood, who, during the whole day, had sought, in vain,
an opportunity of self-destruction; at length, overcome by the violent
exertions of despair, sunk on her pillow, and slept. Two women, who were
appointed to watch in her apartment, soon after midnight, were aroused by the
violent shrieks which she uttered in her sleep. Pierced to the heart by her
exclamations, which seemed to indicate the most excruciating tortures of her
mind, they were yet too superstitious to awake her. Several inhabitants of the
prison, alarmed by her dreadful cries, entered the apartment, and stood
trembling round the bed of the despairing Milwood. Big drops of sweat rolled
down her cheeks, her eyes were half open, her teeth gnashed horribly, and her
whole frame was strongly convulsed.

At length starting up in the bed, she seized the hand of a by-stander,
exclaiming, in a voice of horror -- "Am I in hell? -- O, torment me not, my
father! -- do not you inflict the tortures! -- Barnwell -- Barnwell -- end my
miseries! -- O, they have torn my flesh with burning pincers! -- Now they are
shooting sparks of fire in my eyes -- scorpions fasten on my breasts -- and
see, my murdered father fixes his ghastly eyes on me! -- Barnwell I own the
deed: -- thy uncle's bleeding ghost approaches! -- Save me -- save me! -- See,
they bring more brands of ^ire -- showers of fire descend! -- O, my heart burns
-- it burns -- and yet I do not die!"

A shivering fit now seized her, and she awoke. Casting her eyes wildly round
her, by degrees she recollected her situation. Among the prisoners, who stood
near her, was a clergyman confined for debt. Viewing the horrors of her mind,
he was prompted to offer her some consolation.

"Unhappy woman!" said he, "see the sad consequences of guilt! -- As yet thy
terrors are only imaginary; may they prove salutary, and lead you to seek, by
heartfelt penitence, that christian hope of mercy, which alone can calm your
mind! -- Are you willing I should pray with you?"

She fixed her eyes upon him -- "Mercy!" cried she. "Penitence! -- Pray for me!
-- To whom?"

"To your Almighty Judge!"

"There is not an Almighty Judge -- It Is false, old man. There is not -- cannot
-- no -- no -- there cannot be another world -- or if there is, why am I
tortured with the thought of it -- when, if there is -- I -- I -- O! no -- no
-- do not say there is another world!"

"Surely, most surely, there is," said the good old man, with a vehemence that
made her tremble.

She struck her hand violently against her head. -- "If, indeed, there should,"
exclaimed she, "horrible thought! -- I dare not think! -- O, if you have any
pity for my wretched lot, give me some potent draught, some cordial, that will
drown all sense of what is past -- all dread of what may come!"

The worthy minister, who truly merited the title of a christian priest,
exerted every effort to sooth the workings of despair. He dismissed the idle
gazers from the room, and was in the act of kneeling to offer up a prayer, when
the poor object of his solicitude shrieked violently, and implored him to
desist.

"'It Is torture -- torture -- torture!" cried she; "I am accursed, and I hate
all good!"

Finding his attentions increased her despair in her present frame of mind, he
desisted, in the hope of a more tranquil moment. By his advice, they permitted
her to take some wine, and she, once more, seemed to sleep. But a few minutes,
however, had elapsed, ere she awoke again, under the same impressions of horror!

Mr. Elderton, the clergyman, had not left the room, but had employed himself
in silent prayer. Her despair now rose to fury; her expressions were horribly
blasphemous, and assistance was necessary to keep her in her bed. Her exertions
were fatal. In the paroxysm of her despair she burst a blood vessel; the blood
gushed rapidly from her mouth, and notwithstanding every possible assistance
was instantly procured, before the sun arose, despairing she expired!

At break of day, upon visiting Zelotti's apartment, the keeper of the prison
discovered he had taken poison the preceding night. He had not undressed
himself, and his corpse lay a dreadful spectacle, stretched upon the floor. A
scrap of paper lay near him, on which were scrawled with a pencil these words,
barely legible, supposed to have been written after he had drunk the poison: --
"Milwood -- there is a God! defy him not! -- Zelotti."

CHAP. XXI.
that if this cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? --
SHAKESPEARE.
THE worthy clergyman, who had witnessed the dreadful death of Milwood,
^nfluenced by the pure motives of christian charity, determined to visit the
fallen victim of her wiles. Sad change had marked the face of Barnwell. The
horror of guilt had marred one of the (...) countenances nature ever formed. No
more the rosy glow of health adorned his cheek; no more the smile of innocence
and peace hung on his lips; no longer the tranquillity that once dwelt in his
bosom beamed from his eyes! Bitter misery had traced its (...) characters over
all his wasted form. At the entrance of Mr. Elderton he started; but still kept
his eyes on the floor.

"I have intruded," said Mr. Elderton, "upon hours which, I hope, are devoted
to penitence, to announce to you the melancholy end of --."

"O, God!" cried Barnwell, clasping his hands together, "my mother -- I have
slain my mother!"

"No -- no -- no," said Mr. Elderton, eager to undeceive him, "I speak of the
unhappy partners of your guilt, who are now no more. The wretched woman died by
the bursting of a blood vessel in a paroxysm of despair, and the man has
poisoned himself!"

"God forgive them!" cried Barnwell, "God forgive them! -- Poor Milwood!"

Even in his present awful situation, a pang shot through his heart, when he
heard she was gone for ever!

"You mentioned a mother, Sir," said Mr. Elderton; "have you a mother?

"O, spare me, I beseech you, whoever you are, spare my poor bursting heart the
anguish of that thought!"

At that moment the door was thrown open, and Mrs. Barnwell, Eliza, and Mr.
Sandall, were in the room. The rumor of Barnwell's absconding, by some means
had reached them, and they immediately followed Sir James to Ramsgate. Soon as
the wretched mother saw the object, which guilt had rendered her son; when
attempting to meet her, his fetters grated on her ears, overcome by the horrid
vision, she sunk senseless on the floor. Eliza fainted on the bosom of her
brother, and the prison rung with the imprecations of Barnwell on his own
guilty head!

By the direction of Mr. Sandall, whose folly had permitted the interview, they
were torn asunder, and conveyed home to the house that had been Mr. Emery's.
The shock which Mrs. Barnwell had received was severe, and its effects, even
when her senses returned, confined her to her bed, and rendered the attendance
of a physician necessary. Eliza, who loved her brother almost to adoration,
suffered an inconceivable pain of heart; but her youth enabled her to sustain
the blow with less injury to her health, than their unhappy parent: an alarming
attack of the asthma, to which she was subject, occasioned serious
apprehensions of her life. Though the dutiful and affectionate Eliza would not
quit her bed side, she yet divided her painfully anxious thoughts between the
sick couch of her parent, and the sad destiny of her brother.

In the mean time, Barnwell struggled to meet his fate with resignation; and
if, at times, the horrors that surrounded him opened an avenue for thoughts of
suicide, the truly pious. Elderton was constantly, at hand to administer the
consolations of hope to his despair.

Some days passed, during which the remains of Sir James Barnwell were conveyed
to his late seat, and interred. Mrs. Barnwell remained confined to the bed of
sickness, and very slender hope was entertained of her recovery.

The unfortunate victim of unlimited confidence, Mr. Freeman, had received from
the numerous and injured creditors of his house, that discriminating
generosity, for which the merchants of London are celebrated in every part of
the globe. He received an immediate and full discharge, upon assigning over all
his estates, from which an annuity of six hundred pounds, for his own life and
that of his daughter, were liberally settled upon them-by the unanimous voice
of the creditors, in opposition only to his own sincere wishes to the contrary.
Mr. Drudge likewise experienced their liberality; but the exasperation of the
majority of the creditors was fully displayed in their conduct to Emery, who,
abandoned by his titled friends, was left literally destitute, and being unable
to procure his certificate, the vengeance of several pursued him so far as to
terminate the future prospects of his existence with the gloomy evils of
confinement.

Such was the situation of his affairs when Mr. Freeman returned to Ramsgate,
after the funeral of his old friend Sir James, who had left him his executor.
The greatest part of his estates were bequeathed to his wretched nephew, and,
in failure of issue, to his sister and her descendants. Very handsome provision
was made for Mrs. Barnwell and Eliza, and, excepting a few complimentary
legacies, no part of his property was bequeathed out of the family of his
brother. The horrid deed of Barnwell received a still deeper tint of horror, by
the benevolent intentions thus displayed.

Not the combined wealth of worlds, is able to eradicate the cankering speck of
guilt, or prevent that course of consequences which nature has decreed. Never,
perhaps, was the insufficiency of wealth to make the heart happy, more
powerfully proved than in the miserable Barnwell's.

As the awful day of public trial drew near, the channels of grief flowed in
more painful violence through the hearts of this most wretched family. The good
and tenderhearted Freeman sympathised deeply with the mourners, and stole
occasionally a thought from the melancholy image of his beloved daughter,
bereft of reason, to mingle sorrows with them.

Barnwell had particularly requested to be alone, and peremptorily refused the
visits of all but the pious Elderton. By these means he gradually prepared his
mind for those awful scenes which he was shortly to encounter. Eliza, whose
mind was considerably above the common level, calling the energies of reason
and the hopes of religion to her aid, thus tempered the sensibility of her
heart to sustain the miseries that pressed heavily upon her. The following
letter will exhibit the state of her mind.

LETTER.
O, my poor brother! -- O, George! -- how shall I endure this greatest of
calamities that could have befallen me? -- But I do not upbraid you, my dear,
dear brother! -- no, no, it is not necessary that a sister's voice should add
cruel reproofs to those which conscience, I am sure, inflicts! -- O, could that
sister's blood assuage the wounds she sees, she feels, are in your heart! -- O,
no! -- her tears, her prayers are vain! -- The storm of passion, in which that
heart has floated, leaves it a wreck beyond all reparation! That noble,
generous, manly heart -- that heart which was our boast, our --, but let me
turn from the painful retrospect -- to what? -- O, mighty God, support me! --
to what? -- To the sad solitary cell that holds thee, that dear loved brother,
who has often clasped me, in pure transport, to his fondest breast! to those
chains, whose weight is nothing to thy limbs, but a load of infamy to thy once
great soul! -- Is this the spectacle on which imagination now must gaze! Would
the dreary picture finished here? -- But, ah! sad, trembling culprit -- how
will thou face the members of that community whose laws thou have violated? How
will thou meet a fellow-man's offended countenance, whose very nature is
debased by a crime like thine!

"These are torturing thoughts; but these are not thy keenest sufferings! I
know how often the reflection of a mother's, of a sister's agonies kindle in
thy breast, thy brain -- flames fiercer than the fires of AEtna! But ah! poor
sufferer! even this is not the climax of thy miseries! -- Imagination tortures
thee with all the dreadful apparatus of a public ignominious death; but th^^e
behold the (...)! -- In the shame, in the pain of that hour, my loved, though
fallen brother, view the consequences of thy crimes, and Heaven strengthen thee
to meet them!

"Now, drooping spirit, rise! Beyond that gulf a sweetly soothing strain lures
thy approach. -- Hope beckons thee to brighter realms! No more, then, let the
agonised sight be limited to the bounds of time! Endure yet a little longer the
chequered scenes of life, where passion wars with reason, and the benevolent
mind trembles to contemplate the origin of vice and woe! Behold a glorious
vision, which the wondering soul wakes to admire, a DEITY DISPLAYED! Nor fear
to raise thine eye! Away with terrors of imaginary wrath -- away with impious
expectations of retaliating fury! -- Doubt not that God is Love, and when
necessity demands no more evil, then from the source of love shall flow
UNMINGLED GOOD!

May peace spread her wings over thy mind, prays

Your affectionate sister, E. B.


The solemn moment now arrived, that placed Barnwell at the bar of temporal
justice. The court was crowded with spectators, and as his fatal story was
generally known, there was scarcely an individual present, whose eye did not
testify the compassion of his heart. The pale and trembling culprit pleaded
guilty, in a voice barely audible! The judge pronounced the awful sentence of
death in the usual words, at the conclusion of which Barnwell exclaimed -- "O,
God!" placed his hands before his eyes, and was removed from the bar.

Conveyed to the cell appropriated to the wretched victims of death, he was
left to his own reflections, and having solicited pen, ink, and paper, he
committed several of his thoughts to writing: --

Saturday Evening, 9 o'Clock.
I am condemned to die -- I know the very hour of my dissolution -- on Monday
morning at eight o'clock I shall -- Why do I still feel this weight of shame?
Why is the ignominy of death, even yet more painful to me than any
apprehensions of its tortures? A spectacle! a public punishment! -- a warning
exhibition to the wicked of society! -- O, my poor, expiring mother, was it for
this you suffered the anguish of my birth! -- was it for this, with anxious,
f^nd attention you hung over my cradle, and watched the very moment of my
infant wants! Was it for this most shameful end, O, spirit of my fainted
father, for this, that you, with the same tender vigilance, gazed on the
opening intellect, nurtured each growing virtue, and rooted out the early weeds
of vice!

O, hear me, on my knees, thou sacred shade, and fend some ministering angel to
calm the soul of thy afflicted, lost, and guilty ^on! -- O, no! -- I see thee
frown -- I see thee point a bloody dagger to thy brother's grave, and hear the
host of heaven shriek abhorrence at so foul a crime! -- Father, I own it --
'twas this parricidal hand -- but recollection sickens at the thought -- my
brain is giddy, and my heart's blood chills with horror at the bare idea! Tell
me, then, some holy sage, O, tell me, how shall ever peace again be wooed
within this bosom?

How could I do it! -- can it be possible! -- was it this very heart, this same
mind that now shudders at the memory of the act, that could devise a mischief,
which, were it to do again, I think no power on earth, nor fiend of hell,
could, by all its tortures, force me to commit! -- Murder! -- O, God! have I
not pitied the sacrifice of a lamb to man's necessities? Have I not often saved
a captive fly from the torturing pastimes of my school-fellows? And yet I have
committed murder! -- and on whom -- a fellow creature? -- worse -- a
benefactor! -- 'Twas a devil's blow!

O, Milwood! dare I, in such a solemn moment, so near, so very near the
dreadful entrance of eternity -- dare I call back the spirit that has flitted
over the gulf before me, bid it appear in that form of beauty that kindled the
flame of lust in my bosom? Dare I inquire how, or from whence, those tumults
sprung, that hurried on the soul to its destruction! -- O, vast research! chaos
of inquiry! -- 'Till thy form attracted me, 'till thy touch intoxicated me --
O, fatal beauty! I could not have allowed even a thought of injury to a
fellow creature, admission to my heart! What, then, were thou, O, wondrous
power, what was the nature of that potent influence, which thy charms shed over
my soul, that it could change the soft and gentle influences of compassion,
that ever played around my heart, into the maddened impulse of a parricide? --
Say, was it passion?

As Barnwell wrote the last sentence, the pious Mr. Elderton entered the cell,
and casting his eye over his paper, caught the question. -- "Yes, my young
friend," said he, "'it was passion; but ask thyself, if, in the composition of
our natures, passion has no antidote? Where was the voice of reason, when first
the subtle tempter wooed thee to thy ruin?"

"Stifled,' said Barnwell, "by the stronger cries of passion."

"Granted," said Mr. Elderton; "but passion's boisterous breath became at
length, exhausted, and conscience then was heard! -- Ah, poor friend!"
continued he, taking him affectionately by the hand, "had you but listened
then, though you had sinned, yet how far short would you have stopped of your
present depth of guilt! But I wonder not, when I contemplate the uncommon
talents of the seducer, the frailties of nature, and the inexperience of your
heart. Had you but revealed your situation, the strong foundation of all
Milwood's plans must have vanished, and you would have been saved. Fatal
reverse! -- O, may the dread example operate with every hesitating youth, who,
bending beneath the weight of secret shame, longs, yet dreads, to confide his
sorrows and his errors in some pitying breast. -- And may each individual,
honored with the name of parent, or of guardian, who hears thy woeful story,
aim, with increasing zeal, to WIN THE CONFIDENCE OF YOUTHFUL HEARTS! May they
reflect of what warring compounds human hearts are framed, reflect how much at
variance with the institutions of society are many of our passions! -- And God
forgive the man, who, by a COLD ^ROWN at venial errors, shall DRIVE HIS SON TO
HIDE THE WEAKNESS OF HIS NATURE IN AN ALIEN'S BREAST! But let us turn from a
painful retrospect to scenes where Christian hope points our attention.

Fortunately for Barnwell, Mr. Elderton was no bigot: he labored not to bend
his penitent to the feigned belief of controverted doctrines; he labored not to
exchange the principles of reason for Christian faith, but aimed to strengthen
the hopes of the former, by the assurances of the latter. He succeeded, and the
last thoughts of Barnwell were thus expressed, with a tranquillity that
consoles the heart, which pities his sad end, and bows the spirit that would
question the JUSTICE of that OMNIPOTENCE, that permitted his fall.

Sunday Midnight.
"A few more sleeting hours! -- How awful rolls the echo of the midnight bell
along these dark and dismal vaults! -- Solemn, silent hour! -- How many sons of
care now sleep, lightened of their anxious loads! -- I, too, shall shortly
sleep -- but they shall wake again to care -- again become the sport of hopes
and fears! -- Shall I, too, wake? -- Say, can the narrow limits of an earthly
life bound the existence of the aspiring soul? O, trembling inmate of this
frail form, prepare! thy present tenement in a few hours falls, for ever falls!
-- Prepare to wing thy flight, see brighter realms appear, and kindred spirits
wait to waft thee to their blessed abode! I Will think no more of earth then!
Mother -- sister -- friends -- and if I have a foe -- all, all farewell! Seek
not to know why Heaven permitted murder, or how my arm has done a deed, at
which my heart recoils! Evil is in the world; and man's best employ is to avoid
its certain consequences, as much as possible himself, and, if he have
benevolence of heart, study to ameliorate its sad effects on others. There is,
there must be, a recompense for virtue, often denied here, since even guilty
wretches, like myself, can feel a hope, that sustains the soul at the approach
of ignominious death! -- A hope not to be defined -- a hope beyond their
comprehension, who do not feel its influence. Yet is it not less real, less
worth research; for, in the agonies of dissolution, what sounds so soothing to
the soul, as the sweet voice that whispers -- "There is another, and a better
world."

These were the last words he wrote. The hour of suffering, of shame, of death
arrived, and Barnwell having penitently yielded to the consequences of his
crimes, his liberated spirit winged its trembling flight to the bright throne
of mercy!

The pangs a mother felt at this sad catastophe, who can describe? Happily they
were short -- soon the welcome herald, Death, arrived, and changed those
temporal scenes, a son's crimes had rendered painful, for views of bliss no
clouds can ever darken! Maria, too, fell, like a blighted blossom, to the
earth, and with her last sigh mingled the name of Barnwell.

The worthy Mr. Freeman met the event with calm, yet heartfelt sorrow. The
painful vicissitudes of fortune, reserved for this, the evening of his life,
had bowed his mind; and having stripped him of this his last hold on earthly
bliss, he endured, with resignation, an existence of tranquillity, almost
without a hope, or an anxiety!

Eliza, the sister of Barnwell, became his charge, and if ever a temporal
concern floated in his mind, it was on her account. By the recent sad events
she acquired the very large property of her late uncle, and retired with her
guardian to his residence. Sorrow often visited her in this retirement, when
memory mused on melancholy scenes gone by. Yet Eliza struggled with regret: she
had imbibed some early lessons of sound and pure philosophy, the advantages of
which now shone conspicuous. She contemplated, with earnestness, her situation,
and the strongest feeling of her heart was a dread, that ^he should misapply
the loan of wealth, which Heaven had entrusted to her care.

Her next concern was, to render Mr. Freeman as happy as her soci^ty and means
could make him, and she aimed with zealous diligence to amuse his reflection
from the past. The sit^ation of the Miss Emery's and their mother, attracted
her attention, and indulged her with an opportunity of exercising that
benevolence, which was the chief trait in her character. With the consent of
Mr. Freeman, she afforded them an asylum in her house, and studied to make
their dependence as little felt as possible. She frequently enabled the
daughters, by her generosity, to remit those comforts to their father, which
ameliorated the horrors of confinement; and she looked forward to the
termination of her minority for the pleasing ability of placing them beyond the
fear of dependence, by the settlement of an annuity, that would ensure them,
with frugality, the decencies, though not the luxuries, of life.

In such delightful employ, we leave Eliza, whose discriminating generosity
afforded her many heartfelt pleasures, and the exercise of which was her
constant resource, whenever memory pointed to the consequences of CONCEALED
ERRORS in the melancholy fate of her brother.

FINIS.

