A SERMON, on the DEATH of General George Washington, delivered At Cape May, on
the 22d of February 1800.

By JOHN STANCLIFF.

PRINTED BY S. C. USTICK, MOUNT-HOLLY. 1800.

SERMON.
I SAMUEL, XXV.I. And Samuel died; and all the Israelites were gathered
together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. --


WE have here but a short account of Samuel's death and burial. Though he was a
great man, and one that was admirably well qualified for public service, yet he
spent the latter end of his days in retirement and obscurity: not because he
was superannuated, for he knew how to preside in a college of the prophets; but
because Israel had rejected him, for which God chastised them, and because his
desire was to be quiet, and to enjoy himself and his God in acts of devotion in
his advanced years.

Secondly, All Israel lamented him: and they had reason; for they all found
their loss in losing him. His personal merit commanded this honor to be done
unto him at his death -- his former services to the public, while he presided
over Israel, made a respect to his name and memory a just debt: it had been
very ungrateful to have withheld it. Samuel was a constant intercessor for
Israel, he prayed daily for them: if he is gone they have lost the best friend
they have. The loss is the more grievous, at this juncture, because Saul was so
outrageous: never was Samuel more wanted than now; yet now he is removed. We
will hope the Israelites lamented Samuel's death the more bitterly, because
they remembered against themselves their own sin and folly in rejecting him.
Those have hard hearts, who can bury their own ministers, and GOD's faithful
servants, with dry eyes; that are not sensible of the loss of those who, under
GOD, have been their deliverers.

They buried him: -- not in the school of the prophets; but in his own house,
perhaps in his garden pertaining to it at Ramah, where he was born. Thus ended
the life of that great man; but his GOD would not left his servant's name he
buried with his mortal part: as says the Psalmist -- The sweet remembrance of
the just,
Shall flourish when he sleeps in dust.


Brethren, I have chosen the words of our Text, on the present mournful
occasion, because there is such a similarity between the beloved Samuel, and
the beloved Washington; both the servants of God -- both the gifts of God to
his beloved, though sinful, people -- both, under God, the saviors of their
country -- both the envy of kings, and scourge of tyrants -- both beloved of
the people in general in their lives, and both universally lamented in their
deaths. And O! with what propriety did Israel lament the death of their beloved
Samuel: he was the father of their Country, their friend, and the kind gift of
their covenant God. And how much reason have the people of America to lament
the death of their beloved Washington, who was equally the gift of God to them,
as Samuel to the Israelites. But as I have said there was a similarity, between
these two great characters, it shall be my business, on this mournful occasion,
to set forth that similarity.

And First, Samuel, in his early age, was found active in the cause of God,
which no doubt, was the salvation of Israel. In like manner, General
Washington, early in life, in the western country, applied himself to the
military profession in the defense of his country, which no doubt was the cause
of GOD, and terminated in the salvation of GOD's American Israel.

Secondly, It is remarkable that we have no more of Samuel from the time the
Lord called him, while he dwelt in the house of Eli, until his country was
besieged by the Philistines, which was a space of 20 years -- then, in the time
of danger, this great man steps forth, and gathered together all Israel to
Mizpeh: there he prayed for them, and with them -- there he counseled and
advised them, and by his prudent advise, the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh,
and pursued the enemy, and smote them, (says the text) until they came unto
Bethcar, 1 Samuel vii.11. So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more
into the coasts of Israel; and the hand of the LORD, was against the
Philistines all the days of Samuel, verse 13.

Simile. In like manner, nothing material was heard of the great and good
Washington after the Western Expedition, until his American Israel was in the
utmost danger of being deprived of their precious Liberty. Then our illustrious
Hero steps forth, in the day of danger, in defense of our liberties and our
lives, of our wives and of our children, and all that was dear to us. And after
the example of his adorable Lord and master, the LORD JESUS CHRIST, he counted
not his life dear unto himself; but ventured both life and fortune for the sake
of his country. It was not filthy lucre that moved the great, the memorable
Washington; for he received no pay. No, sirs, it was Dei Gratia, or the grace
of GOD, in his noble heart, that moved him in all his heroic actions; and the
power of Almighty GOD, that gave his servant Washington success against the
most powerful and well disciplined army upon earth.

How blind must that man be, that sees not the hand of Almighty GOD with the
Sword of Washington. It might be said with propriety, as of old it was of
Gideon, "The sword of the Lord and of Gideon;" so we may say, The sword of the
Lord and of Washington, has made us the most free and happy people on earth:
and though we lament this day the death of our dear Washington; yet we have
reason, great reason, to rejoice, that the GOD of General Washington lives --
ever lives, and is our GOD -- and who, I trust, will protect us and bless us
forever. Let us not, therefore, my brother officers and fellow citizens,
"sorrow as men without hope" for them that sleep in him. For them that sleep in
CHRIST will GOD bring with him. It is right our beloved Washington should "rest
from his labors, and his works follow him." Our eternal Father has called home
the Father of our country -- not to rest at Mount Vernon, where his rest has
been frequently interrupted by the enemies of his beloved country; but far
above the everlasting hills -- even, we trust and believe, to the eternal
heavens, where JESUS, the Almighty JESUS, smiles upon his servant Washington,
and fully rewards him for his faithful services while an inhabitant of this
lower world. But to return:

Samuel like, he had the happiness to see the American Israel, masters of the
field -- under his auspices, a happy and honorable peace -- and our
Independence acknowledged by his Britannic majesty. And, as in the
administration of Samuel, to wit, through his whole life, the Philistines no
more troubled Israel; so, in like manner, through the whole administration of
the illustrious Washington, no enemy in an hostile manner, durst invade our
borders.

After the whole work was finished, our dear General retired to his seat at
Mount-Vernon, to enjoy the pleasures of domestic life: but this rest was short.
Behold the great Washington was born for nobler ends -- to rule GOD's American
Israel: and as Samuel became the chief magistrate in all Israel, so our beloved
Washington, by the appointment of Heaven, and the voice of all the People,
became the chief magistrate, or governor, of the United States* he was twice
unanimously chosen to be the chief magistrate of a free people. In this high
office, his conduct and prudence was such as commanded the respect of all the
people, from the highest to the lowest. Even all the powers of Europe admired
and revered our amiable Leader. Yet, nevertheless, though his character was so
spotless, in every point of view, as a Man -- as a Christian -- as a Statesman
-- as a brave Soldier -- as a wise and valiant General -- as a tender Parent to
his people, and a faithful and disinterested friend to his country; yet, as it
was with the infatuated Israelites, in rejecting and finding fault with the
administration of Samuel; so some of the people in the United States found
fault with our deceased General, and with our happy federal and most glorious
constitution, in the framing of which the deceased was a principal agent, and
of which I may say, it is the most free and happy constitution in the world;
for which we ought ever to adore the disposer of all events. But, brethren, let
us reflect, that when we sin against our rulers, we sin against God himself.
See Samuel viii.7. thus says the Lord to Samuel, They have not rejected thee,
but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. But why brethren,
should we wonder, that there are men found among us that slight General
Washington, when it is too great a truth, that there are many among us who
slight and treat with the greatest disrespect the adorable and ever blessed
JESUS, and the mild government of our gracious and sin-pardoning GOD. O!
foolish people and unwise, thus to treat the Lord of glory. Foolish indeed must
that mortal be, who dare attempt to rush upon the fierce bosses of GOD
Almighty's buckler. Can any of us bear everlasting burnings, or dwell with
devouring fire? Oh! no! no! Then, for your soul's sake lay down the arms of
your rebellion, while there is yet a possibility of obtaining mercy.

Thirdly, Samuel died, and all Israel lamented him; and they buried him on his
own place -- and says the True American, "O painful reflection! on Saturday, the
14 Instant December 1799.
, died suddenly, at his seat in Virginia, General GEORGE WASHINGTON, Commander
in Chief of the Armies of the United States of America -- mature in years --
covered with glory, and rich in the affections of the American people. But our
loss, we have no doubt, is our illustrious Leader's gain: -- and while we, with
Elisha, lament and cry, 'my Father, my Father, the chariots of Israel and the
horsemen thereof,' our dear Washington has dismissed his fiery chariot, being
safely arrived far above the everlasting hills -- where sin and sorrow never
come."

Indeed, my brethren, the exit of this great man, the wonder of the age, may
truly be said to be a fiery trial, as his quivering lips pronounced in his last
agonies. As his respiration became difficult, he said calmly, "I die hard
Doctor" -- but notwithstanding the excruciating agonies of his violent disease,
he tranquilly asked several questions during the evening. About 15 minutes
before he died, he said, "Doctor what is the Clock? How long am I to continue
in this situation?" The Doctor answered, "Not long sir" -- he rejoined, with
the firmest countenance imaginable, "I have no fear, Doctor, to die." O! happy
Washington! O! man greatly beloved -- Israel's King has well described thy
case, Psalm xxxvii.37. "Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the
end of that man is peace."

Such was the peaceful departure of the great and good Washington. As he lived,
so he died: tranquil in the field of battle; and beyond all human conception
tranquil on a dying bed: we may truly say the end of such a man was peace, as
Mr. Harvey has beautifully described. "The sufferer, all patient and adoring,
submits to the divine will; and, by submission, becomes superior to his
afflictions. He is sensibly touched with the disconsolate state of his
attendants; and pierced with an anxious concern for his wife, the dear partner
of his bosom, who will soon become a disconsolate widow. Yet, though cast down,
not in despair. He is greatly refreshed by his trust in the everlasting
Covenant, and his hope of approaching glory. Religion gives a dignity to
distress. -- The soul just going to abandon the tottering clay, collects all
her force, and exerts her last efforts." The good, the great Washington raises
his dying hand -- closes his own eyes and mouth -- and, with the greatest
composure, resigns his departing spirit into the hands of its divine Former,
the ever adorable IMMANUEL, who is GOD over all, and blessed forever, Amen.

Thus died the memorable Washington, in a very particular crisis. As it was
with Samuel, as we said before, at a time when Saul was so outrageous; so it
was a peculiar time of danger to the United States, when our General died: a
time, when some of the European powers threatened us with war and devastation.
Never was there a time, when General Washington was more wanted than now -- yet
now he is removed -- even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.

My brethren, when men of common character are swept from the theater of life,
they die without the tribute of public notice, as they had lived without a
claim to public esteem. But when, in compliance with Heaven's high mandate, the
Hero of the age lies numbered with the dead -- when the reverend sage -- the
august statesman -- the father of his country has resigned his breath: when the
beloved of an empire -- the envy and admiration of distant nations, and the
brightest ornament of human nature, in this late age of the world -- when
Washington, the servant of divine IMMANUEL, is no more -- let a sense of the
general loss be testified, by the badges of a general mourning; For as the
stars that guild the vault of night,
Unnumber'd, pour effulgence on the sight;
So Chiefs, and Senators in crowds abound:
But rare as comets Washingtons are found.


Fourthly, they buried Samuel in his own house. So the mortal part of this
great man was buried on his own place at Mount-Vernon, his once beloved
retreat; where now remains the dear body of our beloved Chief, waiting till the
last trump shall sound to the general judgment, when the ever adorable and
ineffable Redeemer shall come to be glorified in his saints, and admired by all
that believe. It Is then we may expect to see the now emaciated body of the dear
deceased reunited to its sister spirit, his noble and redeemed soul; and both
soul and body fitted, by the Creator of all worlds, for the full enjoyment of
Israel's God, forever and ever. Until that happy day, let us take comfort in
contemplating the happy flight of our General's immortal part through the
etherial blue to realms of bliss: as says the poet -- "From Vernon's Mount
behold the Hero rise!
Resplendent forms attend him through the skies;
The shades of war worn veteran's round him throng,
And lead enwrapt their honored Chief along.
A laurel wreath the immortal Warren bears --
An arch triumphant Mercer's hand prepares --
Montgomery's god-like form directs the way,
And Green unfolds the gates of endless day.
While angels, trumpet tongued, proclaim through air,
Due honors for the first of men prepare."


Thus ended the life of this great man: and as it is recorded of Samuel, that
all the Israelites lamented him -- so let it be recorded of General Washington,
that every true American -- that every son of Liberty -- that every friend to
the best and mildest government in the world lamented him. And how similar is
the lamentation for the great Washington to the lamentation made for the great
Samuel. "And all the Israelites gathered together, and lamented him." And is it
not so through the United States for the dear deceased? Do not the rulers and
people every where gather together to make lamentation, and show due honors to
the deceased parent of their country? See the illustrious and excellent Adams,
with the honorable Congress of the United States, deeply mourning and
lamenting America's faithful friend, and showing every mark of respect and pure
affection to his memory. Take a view of his excellency Richard Howell, our
worthy Governor and Commander in Chief of the Armies of New Jersey, with his
aids, with mournful steps following the funeral process in Philadelphia. See
the patriots in every department, wearing the badge of mourning; showing by
this outward sign, the inward and sincere sorrow of their souls, for so great a
loss as they feel in being deprived of their Commander in Chief. Take a view of
the ministers of JESUS CHRIST, of all denominations, paying due respect to the
memory of their patron, the excellent Washington, the gift of their covenant
GOD, who was as a nursing father to the church of IMMANUEL while he continued
among them. See the churches dedicated to the sacred worship of Jehovah, all
hung in deep mourning, all bespeaking unfeigned sorrow for the much loved
Washington, the servant of the living GOD, of his church, and of his people.

Such honor has our heavenly Father conferred upon his faithful servant's last
remains: for surely, brethren, it is the searcher of hearts alone, that is able
to melt the hearts of an whole empire. O! Blessed GOD! thou art divinely good,
beyond all we poor mortals can conceive of thee, to them that serve thee in
this lower world. Did any of the sons of men ever serve our God, and did not in
this present world receive ten thousand fold, and in the world to come, life
everlasting? As says the poet: "Far from these narrow scenes of night,
Unbounded glories rise,
And realms of infinite delight,
Unknown to mortal eyes.
There death nor sickness never come,
And grief no more complains:
Health triumphs in immortal bloom,
And endless pleasure reigns.
No cloud these blissful regions know,
For-ever bright and fair;
For sin, the source of mortal woe,
Can never enter there.
There no alternate night is known,
Nor sun's faint sickly ray;
But glory, from the sacred throne,
Spreads everlasting day.
O! may the heavenly prospect fire
Our hearts with ardent love;
Till wings of faith and strong desire
Bear every thought above.
Prepare us, Lord, by grace divine,
For thy bright courts on high;
Then bid our spirits rise and join
Our General in the sky."


Those happy mansions, my brethren, we believe, are the happy residence of our
dear departed Chief; whose liberated spirit, we trust, at this moment, enjoys
all that blessedness that comes to man through the merits of a Savior's
invaluable blood.

PRAYER.
O BLESSED, adorable, Redeemer! thou gave to us thy body -- thy immaculate
soul -- thy most precious blood -- to make an all-sufficient atonement for us;
and to add to the innumerable blessings of our lives, thou gave unto us our
Washington, to be, under thee, the protector of our civil and religious rights
-- And it has pleased thee, in thine infinite wisdom, now to take thy servant
home -- blessed be thy name, O Lord, our GOD. It is meet and right that we
submit to thy unerring wisdom, who do all things well. Hear us, O! Lord,
while we beseech the continuance of thy glorious presence and guardian care. O!
blessed LORD, will thou be with thy servant Adams, as thou wast with thy
servant Washington: preserve his useful life, O! Lord, and make him a lasting
blessing to thine American Israel, Amen.

ADDRESS TO THE OFFICERS.
AND now my brother officers, and fellow soldiers, an Address to you must close
the mournful scene.

First, I lament with you the loss, the great loss of the virtuous Washington,
our beloved General: but, brethren, the Lord has done it. Let us not murmur at
the awful stroke; but rather let the removal of our beloved and affectionate
Parent, our valiant and illustrious Leader, stimulate us to seek the favor and
friendship of our eternal Father, who is ALONE able to save our country -- our
persons -- our wives -- our children, and our immortal souls with an
everlasting salvation; and to place us where, we trust, our dear General lives,
in immortal glory. Let us strive to imitate the example of that great man, and
follow him as he followed CHRIST. Let us use all our power to promote the
interest of our present most excellent government. Let us be found in due
subordination to our superior officers, as the ministers of GOD, and let us
always remember that awful sentence, "He that resists the power, resists
the ordinance of GOD." But the rather, brethren, let us give diligence to be
found obedient to those whom GOD Almighty has placed in authority over us.
And, above all, my brethren, let us use fervent prayer, through the merits of
divine Emanuel, for the revival of decayed religion among us -- that our land
may prosper, and our Independence maintain under the auspices of the King
eternal, immortal, and only wise GOD, JESUS CHRIST; to whom be glory, honor
and power, forever and ever, Amen.

HYMN I.
1.
How vain are all things here below,
How false, and yet how fair;
Each pleasure has its poison too,
And every sweet a snare.
2.
The brightest things below the skies,
Give but a flattering light!
We should suspect some danger nigh,
Where we possess delight.
3.
Our dearest joys our nearest friends,
The partners of our blood,
How they divide our wavering minds,
And leave but half for God.
4.
The fondness of a creatures love,
How strong it strikes the sense?
Thither the warm affections move,
Nor can we call them thence.
5.
Dear Savior, let thy beauties be
My soul's ternal food;
And grace command my heart away,
From all created good.
HYMN II.
1.
Why do we mourn departing friends,
Or shake at Death's alarms?
It Is but the voice that Jesus sends,
To call them to his arms.
2.
Why should we tremble to convey,
Their bodies to the tomb?
There the dear flesh of Jesus lay,
And left a long perfume.
3.
The graves of all the saints he blessed,
And softened every bed:
Where should the dying members rest,
But with the dying head?
4.
Thence he arose and burst the chain,
To show our feet the way;
From shades where death and darkness reign,
To realms of endless day.
5.
Then let the last loud trumpet sound,
And bid his kindred rise;
Awake ye nations under ground,
Ye saints ascend the skies.
THE END.

