A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT READING FEBRUARY 22, 1800; THE DAY RECOMMENDED BY
CONGRESS TO THE Observance of the People of the United States, BY THEIR
ASSEMBLING, IN SUCH MANNER AS MIGHT BE CONVENIENT, AND Publicly testifying
their GRIEF for the DEATH, AND THEIR RESPECT FOR THE MEMORY OF GENERAL George
Washington.

BY ELIAB STONE, A. M. Minister of the Second Church in READING.

BOSTON: MANNING and LORING, Printers, near the Old South Meeting House.

G. W. Born Feb. 22, 1732. Died, at MOUNT VERNON, Dec. 14, 1799. Aged 68.

The just shall be had in everlasting remembrance.



" Glory with all her lamps shall burn,
To watch the WARRIOR'S sleeping clay,
Till the last trump shall rouse his urn,
To share the triumphs of the day."
AT a Town-Meeting regularly called, in READING, April 7th, 1800, Voted, That
the Selectmen be a Committee, to request of the Rev. Mr. STONE a copy of his
Sermon, delivered Feb. 22d, occasioned by the death of Genesis GEORGE WASHINGTON,
to be printed; and when printed, to furnish each family in the town with one
copy.

Attest. TIMOTHY WAKEFIELD,
Town Clerk,
Discourse.
PSALM CXII. 6. -- THE RIGHTEOUS SHALL BE IN EVERLASTING REMEMBRANCE.
TO be remembered with affection, and descend to posterity with applause, is a
peculiar honor allotted to the righteous. Those who have been actuated only by
selfish and base passions; who have never sought, and never promoted, the
happiness of mankind, die without regret, and are soon forgotten. But those, of
benevolent hearts, who make it their constant aim to do good to their
fellow-men, and in their general conduct are governed by the rules of virtue,
acquire a name better than precious ointment. While they live, they are the
objects of universal veneration and love; and when they die, their memory is
blessed.

WHEN, therefore, such useful and worthy citizens are cut down by the stroke of
death, survivors, who have been blessed with their labors of love, must be
shamefully insensible not to be deeply affected by the loss. A good man, even
in the humblest walks of life, will be followed to the grave by his friends,
with weeping eyes and sorrowful hearts. But when those are laid in the dust,
who have filled various public stations, with great dignity and usefulness,
millions mourn: all are afflicted: the inhabitants of the whole earth sustain a
loss, and testify their grief. For such men are blessings not to one nation
only, but to all. The benign influence of their benevolence, wisdom, and virtue
extend to all people. They are, in some respects, that to the whole human race,
which the sun is to the solar system. They preserve order and regularity, and
diffuse light and comfort to all around them, except those, who love darkness
rather than light, lest their deeds should reprove them.

To these general observations we have been led, by the universal sadness and
mourning, which have been spreading through the earth, ever since the fatal
fourteenth of December last. Genesis WASHINGTON died Dec. 14th, 1799, between 10
and 11 o'clock in the evening, after a short illness of about twenty-four
hours. His disorder was an inflammatory fore throat, which proceeded from a
cold.
On that ever-memorable day, our beloved WASHINGTON rested from his labors. He
finished his career of terrestrial glory, and took possession, as we trust, of
that eternal weight of glory, which GOD of his grace has prepared for the
faithful.

BUT, although his body is mouldering in the dust, the memory of him shall
never perish. He still lives, and he will always live, in the affections of his
grateful countrymen. His unexampled achievements will stand recorded upon the
faithful page of history, till time shall end; and he will be handed down to
posterity, as one of the greatest and best of men. Yea, more, as we believe,
his name is written in the LAMB'S book of life, which is beyond the reach of
devouring time, and he will literally be in everlasting remembrance.

Is then our beloved WASHINGTON removed from us for ever? Will he no more lead
our armies to victory; aid us by his sage advice; or bless us with his future
counsels? We are unwilling to believe either. But, alas! these painful truths
are not to be denied. He who triumphed over the enemies of America, who subdued
the enmity of all hearts, has himself fallen a victim to the last enemy, Death.
By his demise, the sensibility of every American is sorely wounded. The sadness
of every countenance is expressive of the grief of every heart.

AT such a time of universal sorrow, it is with great propriety, that our civil
rulers have invited us to the house of GOD. Here we may unitedly contemplate
our afflictions and our consolations. By suitably considering both these; by
reflecting upon the wonderful dispensations of Divine Providence; and by our
humiliations and fervent prayers to GOD, we may hope, that our hearts will be
properly affected: -- that such a balance of our passions will be produced,
that we shall not be extravagantly depressed or elated "at aught this scene can
threaten or indulge." May the whole nation be deeply humbled under the mighty
hand of GOD. May our united humiliations and supplications come up before GOD,
as sweet incense. With devout hearts, may we adopt the prayer of the Psalmist:
"Help, LORD, for the godly man cease; for the faithful fail from among the
children of men."

IN AMERICA, the 22d of February has been celebrated, with festivity and
rejoicing, because, in the year 1732, it gave birth to WASHINGTON. But, alas!
how are the accustomed scenes of this day reversed! Our festivity ceases. Our
songs of joy are changed for tears of grief. We are clad in mourning attire.

" To civic triumphs, funeral rites succeed;
To flowery garlands, this encircling weed;
And to loud paeans sounding through the skies,
Low solemn dirges and heart rending sighs."
INDEED, if the citizens of America were not deeply affected with the loss of
their political FATHER, they would evince base ingratitude, and even stoical
apathy. To drop a tear over his tomb, is as agreeable to our holy religion, as
it is congenial with our afflicted hearts. In this our heavenly FATHER, who
knows the weakness of our frame and the greatness of our loss, will readily
indulge us. In doing this, we shall copy his example, whom to imitate is our
greatest glory. For we are told that our Divine MASTER wept at the grave of his
friend Lazarus.

BUT, my friends, for whom do we weep? Is it for our Father, or for ourselves
and our country? Surely not for him. For, if, as Christ has told us, we may
know men by their fruits, we must believe, that he has made a happy change.

LOOK, then, on the various parts of Genesis WASHINGTON'S life, and you will find
that he uniformly maintained an excellent character. He was eminent for those
virtues, which adorn human nature, and endear a man to society. Through his
whole life, he seems to have been actuated by a generous, humane, and patriotic
spirit, and to have discharged his public and private duties with singular
fidelity. Notwithstanding he had filled the most exalted stations in society,
and was loaded with all the honors, which his grateful country could bestow,
yet he uniformly exhibited a shining pattern of humility and dignified
condescension. He was a PUBLIC PROFESSOR General WASHINGTON was educated an
Episcopalian, and usually attended divine service in that church; but he
exercised great liberality of sentiment toward all other denominations of
Christians. Says he in his farewell address to the people; "With slight shades
of difference, you have the same religion."
of the Christian religion, and in his life and conversation adorned its
doctrines. His observance of the Sabbath was very exemplary, At his entrance
upon his civil employments, Genesis WASHINGTON announced to the public that he
would attend to no secular business upon the Lord's day, and he uniformly
adhered to his resolution.
and in his attendance upon the public worship of GOD, which was regular and
constant, he always appeared serious and engaged. Nor did he think this the
only homage he was bound to pay his Maker. He maintained a daily intercourse
with Heaven by prayer. By one of the General's domestics while at Cambridge, we
are informed, that he regularly maintained family prayer. Through the whole of
the war, he is known to have observed stated seasons of retirement for secret
devotion. And it was his positive order for none to intrude upon him, but in
case of an alarm.
Frequently in his conversation and in his communications to the public, he
expressed his deep sense of a superintending Providence, and of his own
dependence upon the divine care and direction. He never said, like the proud
conquerors of the earth, My own arm has gotten me the victory. But he
uniformly ascribed his success to the blessing of GOD upon the united exertions
of the whole nation. Read his "Political Legacies," and you will need nothing
further to convince you of his high sense of the importance of religion. A
striking specimen of this, you may see in the following extract from his
"Circular Letter to the Governors of the several States, in 1783." "I now make
it my earnest prayer, that God would have you, and the State over which you
preside, in his holy protection; that he would incline the hearts of the
citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination and obedience to government; to
entertain a brotherly affection and love for one another, for their
fellow-citizens of the United States at large; and particularly, for their
brethren who have served in the field; and finally, that he would most
graciously be pleased to dispose us all to do justice, to love mercy, and to
demean ourselves with that charity, humility, and pacific temper of mind, which
were the characteristics of the DIVINE AUTHOR of our BLESSED RELICION* without
an humble imitation of whose example, in these things, we can never hope to be
a happy nation."
In the closing scene of life, he discovered nothing of the weakness of human
nature; -- no distrust of the foundation of his hope. He declared, that he was
not afraid to die. And he met his fate, as he had lived, like a CHRISTIAN HERO.
Although exercised with acute pain, not a murmur or a groan escaped from him.
With great composure, he closed his eyes, with his own hand, and resigned his
spirit to GOD who gave it. "Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for
the end of that man is peace." Psalm xxxvii. 37.


CAN we desire better evidence respecting our departed friend, on which to
found a judgment of charity? Is not such profession and such a practice the
best proof we can have, that he was one of those righteous persons, who shall
be in everlasting remembrance? A celebrated poet has justly said,

"For modes of faith let graceless zealots fight,
His cannot be wrong, whose life is in the right."
WE may, therefore, mingle tears of joy with tears of grief, on the present
occasion. While we mourn our loss, we should rejoice at his gain. And truly it
is no small consolation to have such substantial evidence, that our deceased
friend is gone to the FATHER, to be forever happy with the LORD.

BY the death of General WASHINGTON the world sustains a loss. His writings,
his character, and example had a most extensive and salutary influence. The
friends of order have lost in him one of the main pillars by which regular
governments of every denomination are upheld. For he firmly opposed the
restless disorganizers of civil society, and those haughty despots, who would
give laws to all the world. He was willing that every nation should choose its
own form of government and be ruled by its own laws. That right he readily
yielded to others, which, at every risk, he had claimed and defended for his
own nation. By his death the friends of social happiness have lost, I will not
say, the founder of freedom, but the CHIEF CORNERSTONE, on which rational
liberty has been erected. Mourn, ye Inhabitants of the earth! Weep, ye Sons of
Freedom! For you have lost one of your best friends and greatest benefactors.

BUT, alas! Who can calculate the loss of this GREAT MAN to America? We are
deprived of our first man: First in war; first in peace; first in the
affections of his countrymen. And justly was he dear to them. For, through a
long course of years, he rendered the most essential services to his country.

IN early life, he gave striking proofs of his talents, and commenced his
career of usefulness. Before he was twenty years of age, he was appointed to a
military command. In the year 1753, when the French and Indians from Canada,
made encroachments on the frontiers of Virginia, he was commissioned, on the
difficult and dangerous enterprise of treating with the Indians, and of warning
the French, to desist from their aggressions. This commission he executed with
honor to himself and satisfaction to his constituents.

IN 1755, he sustained the rank of extra Aid de Camp to General Braddock, and
gave a striking specimen of his military skill. That ill-fated commander,
contemptuously rejecting the prudent advice of WASHINGTON, fell into an ambush
of the Savages, on the banks of the Monongahela, near the Ohio, by which
himself with a large part of the army were slain. Colonel WASHINGTON, by his
presence of mind and gallant behavior, saved the remainder from the rage of the
victorious foe. This he did in such a masterly manner, as gained him the
applause both of Great Britain and America. This brilliant action in a young
officer, was the occasion of his being then spoken of in terms which now seem
in a manner prophetic of his future greatness. President DAVIES, in a sermon
published at that time, calls him a worthy young man, whom Providence seems
raising up to be the SAVIOR of his country.

IN the year 1759, on account of bodily indisposition, he resigned his
commission in the British army. His health being gradually re-established, he
married the present amiable Mrs. WASHINGTON, and settled as planter and farmer
on his estate at Mount Vernon. From 1759 to 1774, he was a member of Assembly,
a magistrate of the county in which he resided, and a judge of the court. In
each of these capacities, he acted with the same assiduity and fidelity, as in
his more exalted offices. He was elected a delegate to the first Congress in
1774, and to that which associated in the following year.

How wonderful are the ways of God! By a special Providence does WASHINGTON
seem to be raised up and endowed with extraordinary talents particularly suited
to the eventful era of his life. And this appears to be the time, destined by
Heaven, for calling them conspicuously into exercise. Great Britain claimed,
and by force of arms was attempting to exercise, "the right of making laws
binding us in all cases whatsoever." This roused the martial genius of the
country, and, on the 19th of April, 1775, the flames of war burst forth in
America. When, therefore, a General was necessary to conduct our armies, the
eyes of Congress were immediately turned upon WASHINGTON. He was then in the
vigor of manhood, and well acquainted with the science of war. He sustained a
high reputation, as a soldier, and possessed a most engaging address. And by
the unanimous voice of Congress, to the universal satisfaction of the people,
he was appointed to that most important office. This trust he accepted with a
modesty and diffidence peculiar to himself. The united voice of the people, he
considered, as the voice of GOD. He therefore dared not to disobey. So ardent
was his love of liberty; he looked down on slavery with such noble indignity;
and he felt such resentment at the injuries done his country, that he was not
awed by the terrors of a proscription. Without any pecuniary reward, he
determined to enter on the perilous enterprise, having no alternative before
him, but victory or death. But satisfied of the justice of his cause, he
trusted GOD for the event.

DURING an eight-years war, he encountered innumerable difficulties, fatigues,
and dangers. He conducted the whole with singular wisdom. At all times, his
great military skill was conspicuous; but he shone with the brightest luster in
the darkest and most perplexing seasons. Difficulties and dangers were so far
from disheartening him, that they gave a spring to his spirits; -- an energy to
his exertions, that removed every obstruction. An instance of this, you may
recollect, took place in the close of the year 1776: that most gloomy period of
our affairs, -- that crisis of American danger. GENERAL WASHINGTON with a
handful of men, naked and destitute of almost every convenience, was then
flying through the Jersies, before a numerous, veteran, and well-supplied army.
How did his great soul, at this trying time, shine out in all its splendour.
Combating the most formidable difficulties, braving the rigors of winter, and
the inclemencies of the weather, he with his little band performed prodigies of
valor at Trenton and Princeton. They checked the force of the whole British
army, and closed with honor a disastrous campaign. How successfully he
afterward opposed our enemies, you need not be told. The battles he fought,
the victories he won, and the armies he captivated, are fresh in your memories.
His prudence, his caution, his wisdom, and fortitude; his incorruptible
fidelity and invincible perseverance; his policy in cluding and circumventing
the foe; his amazing fertility of invention, in finding out expedients to guard
against future difficulties; his great sagacity in penetrating the designs of
the enemy and judging of their future movements; and his masterly address in
composing differences, in silencing the voice of discontent and mutiny, and
harmonizing the discordant parts of his army, are so well known as to fill us
with admiration, and will be told to the astonishment of future generations. A
particular detail of his achievements in the Revolutionary War, will not be
expected on the present occasion. It is sufficient to observe, that he obtained
the grand object for which he contended. He with the PATRIOT ARMY drove the
enemy from our shores, and settled our country in peace, liberty and
independence.

THIS arduous conflict being ended, our victorious General, on the 23d of
December, 1783, resigned his commission to Congress, and, like Cincinnatus of
Rome, retired to the rank of a private citizen, amid the most flattering
plaudits of his countrymen.

BUT great talents, designed for public use, could not long be solely occupied
in private concerns. The exigencies of our country soon called him to the
public council. The old Confederation, formed in haste, being found essentially
deficient, a new form of Government must be instituted. In the august body,
delegated from every part of the Union to perform this mighty work, we behold
our venerable WASHINGTON, by their unanimous suffrage, placed at their head.
Their united wisdom produced our present happy Constitution.

AFTER the Constitution was adopted by the several States, a mighty task still
remained to be performed. The government must be organized. This complicated
machine must be set in motion. A person was to be chosen, who should see that
the laws were faithfully executed. Happy for America, there was one citizen,
whose pre-eminent endowments and distinguished services, precluded all
controversy respecting the man to whom this important trust should be
committed. By the free suffrages of the electors in every State, the General of
our armies was twice chosen PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES. On the 30th of
April, 1789, he was introduced to office.

THROUGH eight tempestuous years, he sat at the helm of our political ship.
Here again he displayed great talents and sublime virtues. Encompassed by
dangers on either side; -- having Scylla on the one hand and Charybdis on the
other, he skilfully steered a middle course, and avoided them both.

AT length, worn down with cares and fatigues, and thinking, that duty no
longer called him to the arduous task of the Presidency, he declined being
considered a candidate for that office.

AGAIN he retires to his beloved shades. But not long does he enjoy his wished
repose. The enemies of our country insult our government and abuse our
citizens. Force is found necessary to maintain our rights. While WASHINGTON
lived, no other could be thought of to command our armies. At the request of
our worthy CHIEF MAGISTRATE, and to the joy of every American, he accepted the
appointment to that important office. The indignities and abuses offered to his
country, aroused the resentment and martial genius of us our war-worn General.
He again girded on his conquering sword. He took the command of our armies, and
directed their operations, till HE, who is higher than the highest, summoned
him from all his earthly employments to join the armies above. "Behold, the
Lord, the LORD of hosts does take away the mighty man, the man of war, the
honorable man and the counselor."

DID ever before, so many great and good qualities unite in one man! It is
difficult to determine whether he excelled most in the cabinet, or in the
field. He had the singular felicity of uniting all hearts in favor of the
measures he recommended for the common good. Such was the purity of his
motives, and the disinterestedness of his conduct; so long had his
fellow-citizens experienced his wisdom, and fidelity to their interests, that
he possessed their entire confidence. This however was not a blind credulity.
He recommended his plans of operation with such force of reason, and in such an
engaging manner, that all, who were open to conviction, were convinced of their
sound policy and stimulated to carry them into effect. We may safely challenge
civil history to produce his equal. Where shall we find another, who, for so
long a period, has filled such various, important, and very difficult stations,
with universal applause, and ended his career with equally well-earned honors?
When compared with Alexander, Caesar, and the mighty conquerors of the east, he
rises far above them. They fought for dominion, to increase the number of their
miserable slaves. But WASHINGTON fought for PEACE, for the LIBERTY and
INDEPENDENCE of his country, and to promote the happiness of mankind. They were
the plunderers and butchers of the human race; he their benefactor and friend.
They were the enslavers of their country, he was the SAVIOR of his. Considered
in every point of view, we do not hesitate to pronounce him one of the greatest
and best men the world ever saw.

BUT, Oh, the frailty of human greatness! This first of men, the pride of
America, the admiration of the world, the glory of human nature, must die like
the rest of mortals! Let us console ourselves under this loss, with the
consideration, that he has finished his course with joy; -- that he has changed
Mount Vernon, for Mount Zion. Farewell, illustrious Shade! Patron of liberty!
We pay these funeral rites, these last, but just respects, to thy dear remains.
Securely may thy precious dust rest in the silent tomb, till the trump of GOD
shall rouse the dead to judgment. Then may we meet thee again, and with thee be
vindicated into the glorious liberties of the sons of GOD.

BUT, my mourning friends, shall we bury all our comforts in one grave? Have we
nothing left to solace our grief and wipe away our tears? Blessed be GOD we
have many consolations. We think too well of our present Rulers and of our
fellow-citizens at large, to indulge the thought that when General WASHINGTON
died, wisdom, valor, and patriotism perished with him. He was indeed our first
man, but not our whole dependence. Not a few of the PATRIOT ARMY, whose valor
and military skill were equalled by few and exceeded by none, still live, ready
to rise in the defense of their country. Many others, who were signally
instrumental in bringing about our REVOLUTION, still remain disposed to
contribute their exertions to the common good. And although our worthy CHIEF is
removed into darkness, yet he still lives in his bright example and most
excellent writings. By these, although dead he yet speaks, and tells us what
we must do to save and build up our rising republic. By these, we doubt not,
many of the present and future generations will be made wiser and better, and
inspired with patriotism and valor. Especially, should we console ourselves
with the reflection, that the LORD GOD OMNIPOTENT reigns. He has signally
protected us in times past, and we have abundant reason to repose our trust in
him. Consider, my friends, what great things GOD has done for us. When,
heretofore, worthy public characters have been taken from us by death; have not
others been raised up to sill their important stations? When a HANCOCK was
removed, did not a SUMNER succeed? And now WASHINGTON is gone, does not ADAMS
remain? His wisdom, patriotism, and fidelity, in various public stations, for
more than twenty years together, have raised his character above the reach of
slander, and justly endeared him to every enlightened American.

WITH such instances of God's goodness before our eyes, to distrust his future
care would be base ingratitude. Let us thank GOD and take courage. He that
raised up a WASHINGTON for us at such a critical juncture of our affairs, can
do any thing for us; and he will do every thing we need, if our ways as a
nation please him.

LET us, therefore, study to improve in that righteousness, which exalts a
nation. Let us cultivate love and unanimity, among ourselves, remembering that
united we stand; divided we fall. Let us encourage the hearts and strengthen
the hands of our Rulers. Our united confidence in their integrity and wisdom
will afford them the highest satisfaction, and they will be excited thereby to
continue their exertions for the public good. And let us manifest our love for
our country, and our respect for him, whose loss we this day deplore, by
imitating his virtues, and by laying up his counsels in our hearts. In his
admirable LEGACY, we have the fruit of his long experience and most mature
reflections. It clearly points out to us the way to national safety and
happiness. And it richly deserves to be treasured up in the memory of every
American.

ABOVE all, let us cordially embrace and obey the gospel of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST. He has set us a pattern of all holy living, and he has taught us the
words of eternal life. By living agreeably to the maxims of his religion, we
shall find joy and consolation; we shall have peace, in our death; we shall be
good citizens, in this world; and, finally, we shall be made citizens of the
New Jerusalem, where sorrow and mourning shall never enter, and where, with the
assembly of just men made perfect, we shall dwell forever at God's right hand.

FINIS.


TWO FUNERAL DIRGES AND THE FOLLOWING HYMN WERE PERFORMED ON THE OCCASION, WHTH
VOCAL AND INSTRUMENTAL MUSIC.
UNVEIL thy bosom, faithful tomb,
Take this new treasure to thy trust!
And give these sacred relics room
To slumber in thy silent dust.
2 No pain, no grief, no anxious fear
Invade thy bounds; no mortal woes
Can reach the peaceful sleeper here,
Whilst angels watch its soft repose.
3 So Jesus slept; God's dying Son
Past through the grave and blessed the bed;
Then rest, dear saint, till from his throne
The morning break, and pierce the shade.
4 Break from his throne, illustrious morn!
Attend, O grave, his sovereign word!
Restore thy trust; the glorious form
Will then arise to meet the Lord.

