THE Christian's POCKET LIBRARY,

BY JOHN STANFORD. M. A.



VOL. II.

NEW YORK, Printed for the Editor by (...)

1800.

THE CHRISTIAN'S POCKET LIBRARY.
NO. I. -- VOL. II.
AN ESSAY ON TIME.
-- We take no note of time
But by its loss. To give it then a tongue
Is wise in man. --
YOUNG.
TIME, though a reality with which in our present existence we are deeply
conversant, is the most difficult to explain; and some have thought its nature
so extremely intricate that it is incapable of admitting any clear and explicit
definition. It is, therefore, with diffidence we enter upon this subject, and
offer our observations upon it, not as usurping over the reason or the religion
of our readers, but with a devout wish for their instruction, by that Almighty
Being who is the first cause, the great and last end of all things.

Time is the limited or given period for the production and duration of things
in natural life, according to the wise counsel and sovereign pleasure of God.
The diurnal and annual revolutions of the sun, as having been, from the
beginning of nature, constant, regular, and universally observable by mankind,
and supposed equal to one another, have been, with reason, made use of for the
measure of such natural and animal existence: consequently, we find that time
has been divided into centuries, years, months, weeks, days, hours, minutes,
seconds, etc. and by these the larger and less intervals of time are estimated
and measured. Whatever is without time has no succession; and whatever is in
time, is subject to changes. Time, therefore, consists of three parts -- the
present, which enjoys existence; the past, which has lost it; the future, which
is to obtain it. The light of nature, I presume, may teach us, that time is a
creature; or, in other words, is given out and designed by the Supreme Majesty;
because it is in a perpetual flux, produces the will of him who reigns above
all, and is itself perishing in its own ruins, dragging with it the fate of
kingdoms in spite of human opposition. Some, therefore, have called time a drop
taken out of the vast ocean of eternity, and which shall return into its own
bosom; that it is an intermediate space, a prelude to an infinite expansion,
boundless and never ending. Mr. Lock says, "the general idea we have of time,
is by considering any part of infinite duration, as set out by periodical
measures." The being or existence of time is obvious to all; and although a
philosophical search after its origin, nature, and periods, be commendable in
the penetrating genius, yet its improvement for our moral happiness must
certainly meet the highest commendation, and be more interesting to all; and,
from this conviction, numberless volumes have been written upon the subject.

However uncertain the sentiments of philosophy upon the subject of time, let
us now take up our BIBLE and see if we cannot tread upon more solid ground, and
derive more pleasure in our inquiries.

I. This inestimable volume, the bible, directs our inquiries to Jehovah, as
the ANCIENT OF DAYS, Daniel vii. that is, the author of time, and the parent of
eternity; who was before all things, by whom and for whom all things were made;
and which, in the new testament, is applied to Jesus Christ in his divinity,
who is God over all, blessed forever, the first and the last. Rev. i. 8.

Time, though now grown old, bears not its own date; neither informs us of its
designed period; but the scriptures instruct us of the formation of the
universe, when time, with human beings, commenced; the divisions of time by day
and night, and what we call its weekly round; likewise of the period when the
angel shall stand upon the earth and upon the sea, lift up his hand to heaven,
and swear by him that lives forever and ever, that there should be time no
longer. Rev. x. 5, 6. Therefore, in point of antiquity, the bible claims our
devout esteem. This volume also gives us the completest history of the
succession of time, as to the being and the vicissitudes of a vast number of
the inhabitants of the earth, as formed into families, cities, and empires; the
greater part of which were the subject of previous prophecy; and which, in
their time, were fulfilled, not one failed; an investigation of which gives us
a solid evidence of the authenticity of the scripture. Those who have been most
conversant with the bible, have observed that the duration of time is marked
with seven periods, or thousand years; two from the creation to the flood, two
to the birth of Christ, two for the gospel era, now in being, making six
thousand years; to which is added, one thousand for the personal reign of
Christ, called the Millennium: in the whole, seven thousand years;
corresponding with the six first days of creation, and the sabbath, or seventh,
the day of rest; for a thousand years are with the Lord as one day.

II. Let us now contemplate time as the limited space of man's natural
existence. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under
heaven; a time to be born, and a time to die. Eccl. iii. 1, 2. Man comes not
into being by accidental circumstances, or by what some call chance, but
according to the foreknowledge and infinite pleasure of God, who declares the
end from the beginning, and who works all things after the counsel of his own
will. David, in language most sublime, acknowledges God the author of his
existence: -- Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect: and in thy
book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as
yet there was none of them. Psm. cxxxix. 16. And in contemplation on the human
structure, we may unite with Dr. Lowth -- With awful joy I view this frame of
mine,
Stupendous monument of power divine!


Our clime, parents, birth, parts, passions, time, place, and circumstances of
our introduction to natural life, infancy, youth, manhood, old age, death, with
all their variety of appendages and events, in their successive periods, are
ordered by that God in whom we live, move, and have our being. Acts xvii. 28.
Or, as Cowper admirably describes it -- -- God gives to every man
The virtue, temper, understanding, taste,
That lifts him into life, and lets him fall
Just in the niche he was ordained to fill.


We are not long introduced to life before we learn that time, like a vast
confluence of waters, takes its rise from eternity; rapidly returns to the
unbounded source from whence it came, bearing on its bosom the myriads of the
human race. We learn too, that none can stem the current, nor for a moment
divide its stream; it is, indeed, visible to all as we pass along, we date its
rise with us, but none knows what a day may bring forth, nor ascertain when
the solemn period of our time shall be turned by the hand of death. In youth we
are prone to view our future time as a vast expanse; in manhood, by more
confirmed worldly habits, we call our moments our own; though frequently they
elude our touch, and either cut short the thread of life, or imperceptibly
bring us to old age. May we not say with David, Lord remember how short my time
is! Psm. lxxxix. 47. Our days on earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding; 1 Chronicles. xxix. 15. a vapor, that in an instant is no more seen! James
iv. 14. The longest life, in the review, is but as yesterday; and its various
occurrences are as a tale that is told: Yet, every fleeting moment and
revolving year are graduated by the hand of Almighty God, upon the scale of
human being, and each shall answer his intended end.

III. The transactions of human beings survive the wreck of time, and pass into
eternity; a thought, this, which should fall with solemn weight upon every
breast. God's universal government, the unequal distribution of rewards and
punishments in this life, the soul's consciousness of virtue and of vice, the
egress of the mind toward a future state, man's departure out of time by death
against his own will; these, with many other incontestable truths, form the
foundation of our confidence, that the transactions of mankind, in time, are
amenable to a future state of retribution; and, in which, the honors of God,
in his law and justice, shall be revealed in presence of men and angels. On
these most solemn and interesting subjects the scriptures give us the highest
instruction; they make a considerable part of their ample page. Verily there is
a God that judges the earth. Psm. lviii. 11. We must all appear before the
judgment s^at of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body
according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. 2 Cor. v. 10. The
Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any
that did understand and seek God. They are all gone aside, they are altogether
become filthy; there is none that does good, no, not one. Psm. xiv. Every idle
word that man shall speak, he shall give account thereof in the day of
judgment. Matt. xxxvi. The dead, small and great, shall stand before God; the
sea, death and hell, shall deliver up their dead to be judged, every man
according to his works. Rev. xx This description of the state of man, and of
future retribution, is consonant to sound reason; a conviction of which must
exist in every conscious breast. How dreary then the prospect of human nature!
On the rapid stream of time, esteeming the precious moments of existence as the
most trifling commodity though more valuable than choicest treasures, --
employed in gratifying the carnal, earthly, and sensual appetites of the soul;
-- trampling upon the authority of God, trangressing his law, and bidding
defiance to his almighty judgment! Every moment brings the sinner nearer to his
final end; the strong current of time hastening him to death, who shall whirl
the soul down the awful precipice from whence he can only rise to stand before
the judge of all, and receive his final doom. Lord what is man! passing on the
impetuous torrent of time to a future state, from whence he shall not return!

Die man, or justice must; unless for him
Some other able, and as willing, pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
MILTON. IV. It is therefore with the highest pleasure we reflect on time as
the space in which the purposes of God are unfolded in Jesus Christ, as willing
and mighty to redeem lost sinners as they were low sunk in wretchedness and
ruin. This most blessed Savior was promised immediately after the
transgression of our first parents in Paradise, and revealed as the seed of the
woman who was to bruise the serpent's head. Genesis iii. 15. He was afterward
recognized by successive prophets, in successive ages; and Daniel ushered in
the precise time in which the Messiah was to appear. Chap. ix. Paul, well
conversant with the Hebrew prophecies, informs, that when the fullness of time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to
redeem them that were under the law; that we might receive the adoption of
sons. Gal, iv. 4, 5. Jesus, Messiah, the Son of God, appeared, spent thirty
years in private life, according to the Hebrew law, and began his public
ministry: this being accomplished, he goes up to Jerusalem voluntarily, to
suffer and to die. In view of the cross he cries, " Father, the hour is come,
glorify thy Son that thy Son may also glorify thee." John xvii. 1. The
memorable point of time is arrived, in which all the series of prophecy and
sacrifice are accomplished. He finishes the transgression, makes an end of
sins, makes reconciliation for iniquity, brings in everlasting righteousness,
and seals up the vision and prophecy. Daniel ix. 24. The paschal Lamb is now
slain; the law is magnified and made honorable both in precept and in penalty;
the powers of darkness are overcome and bound in more than adamantine chains;
death is disarmed of his dreadful sting, and the gates of immortal life wide
unfolded to every pious mind! Then, my soul, admire this blessed gospel day --
-- Survey the wondrous cure,
And at each step let higher wonder rise*
Pardon for infinite offenses! A pardon
Through means that speak its value infinite!
A pardon bought with blood! With blood divine!
With blood divine of him I made my foe!
Persisted to provoke! Though wooed and awed,
Blessed and chastis'd, a flagrant rebel still!
Nor I alone! A rebel universe!
My species up in arms! Not one exempt!
Yet for the foulest of the foul he dies.
YOUNG.

V. As there is a time for a man's natural birth, so there is also a period for
his spiritual birth; except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God; and by which, in time, the soul is habitually prepared for an
eternal state. By their fruits ye shall know them. Man possessed of carnal
appetites and desires, never can be happy in the enjoyment of spiritual, holy,
and heavenly realities; there is, therefore, a moral necessity for his being
born again in time; and, by which, his soul is brought to taste, feel, and
enjoy those sacred blessings unknown, if not despised by him before. Time, the
precious gift of God, he views with new eyes; redeems what is lost, and
improves the present to the noble purposes of glorifying God, and promoting the
benefits of his fellow mortals. What time he is afraid, he trusts in the
Lord. Psm. lvi. 3. In the time of trouble, God hides him in his pavilion,
covers him in his secret tabernacle, and sets him upon a rock. Psm. xxvii.
5. His highest privilege is to walk in the light of God's countenance, and in
his name to rejoice all the day. Psm. lxxxix. 15, etc. One peculiarity is
worthy our remark: every man, by natural birth, is born to die; but he that is
born of the Spirit, and believes in Christ, shall never die eternally; and
with this most comfortable persuasion, he passes the time of his sojourning
here, in prospect of an eternal state of blessedness with God beyond the vale
of death. John xi. 25, 26.

God of all worlds! Source and supreme of things!
From whom all life, from whom duration springs!
Intense, O! let me for thy glory burn,
Nor fruitless view my days and months return.
Give me with wonder at thy works to glow,
To grasp thy vision, and thy truths to know:
Over time's tempestuous sea to reach thy shore,
And live, and sing, where TIME shall be no more.
THE MISER.
MR. OSTERVALD, a well known banker, died in France, 1790. This man, originally
of Neuschatel, felt the violence of the disease of avarice so strongly, that
within a few days of his death, no importunities could induce him to buy a few
pounds of meat for the purpose of making him a little soup. "'It Is true," said
he, "I should not dislike the soup, but I have no appetite for the meat, what
then is to become of that?" At the time he refused this nourishment, for fear
of being obliged to give away two or three pounds of meat, there was tied round
his neck a silken bag, which contained eight hundred affignats of one thousand
livres each. At his outset in life, he drank a pint of beer, which served him
for supper, at a house much frequented, from which he carried home all the
bottle-corks he could come at. Of these, in the course of eight years, he had
collected as many as sold for twelve louis-d'ors, a sum that laid the
foundation of his future fortune, the superstructure of which was rapidly
raised by his uncommon success of stock-jobbing. He died possessed of three
millions of livres; that is, one hundred and twenty-five thousand pounds
sterling!

How pernicious is avarice! while it denies a friendly hand to wipe away the
tear of grief that falls from a fellow mortal's eye: it is as a vulture upon
the miser's own breast; and however such may plead the christian name, he
proves himself a stranger to its benevolent nature. A spirit of avarice is so
inhuman, so contrary to the well-being of society, and so despicable in itself,
that no christian virtue can dwell in that breast in which it reigns. It
expresses the highest ingratitude to God for the vouchsafement of his favors,
and withdraws from that love of our neighbor which should characterize our
species; so that the miser may be said to disdain all obligation both to God
and man; and I may add, he is unworthy of both. That benevolence yields its own
most pleasurable reward, no man will dispute; that avarice, too, is frequently
the miser's executioner, abundant testimonies occur; among which, I shall, for
the further entertainment of our readers, recite the following authenticated
narrative.

Monsieur Foscue, one of the farmers general of the province of Languedoc, in
France, who had amassed considerable wealth by grinding the faces of the poor
within his province, and every other mean, however low, base, or cruel, by
which he rendered himself universally hated, was one day ordered by the
government to raise a considerable sum, upon which, as an excuse for not
complying with the demand, he pleaded extreme poverty; but fearing least some
of the inhabitants of Languedoc should give information to the contrary, and
his house should be searched, he resolved on hiding his treasure in such a
manner as to escape the most strict examination. He dug a cave in his
wine-cellar, which he made so large and deep that he used to go down to it with
a ladder: at the entrance was a door with a spring-lock upon it, which, on
shutting, would fasten of itself. Very lately Monsieur Foscue was missing;
diligent search was made after him in every place; the ponds were drawn, and
every method which human imagination could suggest, was taken for finding him,
but in vain. In a short time after, his house was sold, and the purchaser
beginning either to rebuild it or to make some alteration in it, the workmen
discovered a door in the cellar, with a key in the lock, which being opened,
and on going down, they found Monsieur Foscue lying dead upon the ground, with
a candlestick near him, but no candle in it, which he had eaten; and on
searching farther, they found the vast wealth which he had amassed. It it
supposed that when Monsieur Foscue went into his cave, the door by some
accident shut after him; and being out of the call of any person, he perished
for want of food. He had gnawed the flesh of both his arms. Thus awfully did
this miser die amidst his treasures, denying his wealth for the benefit of
society; he was constrained to make his last meal upon his own body! -- Few
misers but what, some how or other, trap themselves.

NATURAL HISTORY. depiction of a dog THE DOG.
THIS class of animals may be principally distinguished by their claws, which
have no sheath, like those of the cat kind; by their having six cutting-teeth,
and two canine in each jaw: also by their having five toes before, and four
behind. But, though this is invariable in the wild species, such as the wolf,
etc. the common dogs have frequently five toes on each foot. The tail of those
of the dog kind bends toward the left, a character common to the whole
species, and first discovered by Linnaeus.

Of all animals the dog is the most susceptible of change in its form, its
varieties being almost numberless: each will mix with the other, and produce
varieties still more unlike the original stock. The climate, the food, and the
education, make strong impressions upon this animal, and produce alterations in
its shape, color, hair, and size; and in every thing but its nature. All dogs
are evidently of one kind; but which of them is the original, from whence such
a variety of descendants have sprung, is not easily to be determined. Mr.
Buffon makes the chien de berger, the shepherd's dog, to be the original, it
being naturally the most sensible; and becomes, without discipline, almost
instantly the guardian of the flocks, and keeps them within bounds.

The dog is the most intelligent of all known quadrupeds, and the acknowledged
friend of mankind. At night the guard of the house is committed to his care,
and he seems proud of the charge; he continues a watchful sentinel, goes his
rounds, scents strangers at a distance, and warns them of his being upon duty.
His voice is more readily obeyed by the flock and the herd, than even that of
the shepherd or the husbandman. The dog is formed for the chase, and affords
equal assistance to the sportsman: his scent is more exquisite than that of
other animals in the pursuit of game, and can distinguish his master from among
a thousand.

Some of the varieties of the dog, are, the shepherd's dog, the hound, the
spaniel, the greyhound, the mastiff, the bull-dog, the terrier, the
blood-hound, the tumbler, the lap-dog, lion-dog, etc. etc.

The heathen consecrated the dog to Mercury, as the most vigilant and crafty of
the gods; because watchfulness and sagacity are the properties of that animal.
The Japanese give the following names to the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and
the twelve hours of the day. The first they call the rat, second the cow, third
the tiger, fourth the hare, fifth the dragon, sixth the serpent, seventh the
horse, eighth the sheep, ninth the ape, tenth the cock, eleventh the dog, and
twelfth the boar. The emperor who was upon the throne when Kaempfer was in
Japan, was born under the eleventh sign, or the dog; consequently he had a
great fondness for that animal. According to an edict published by that prince,
all the dogs that died within his dominions were to be carried to the top of a
mountain, there to be buried with great pomp. A poor man, who was carrying his
dog to the appointed spot, finding the dead carcass heavy, and the way long,
began to murmur against the orders of his sovereign, upon which a neighbor,
who accompanied him, observed with much propriety, that instead of complaining,
he ought, on the contrary, to thank the gods, who, in their wisdom, had decreed
that the emperor should not be born under the sign of the horse; "for," said
he, "a horse would have been a much more disagreeable burden than a dog."

I will here take leave to introduce to our readers the practice of the Guebres
of Persia, to those who are in the act of expiring in death; the attendants
raise the poor man, and a near relation presents a dog to his mouth, on a
supposition that the breath, or soul, will be communicated to that animal, and
be happy. No less extraordinary is the practice of this people toward the body
after death. This is laid decently upon the ground, under the walls of the
intended sepulcher, while one of the relations goes round the village to try if
he can allure a dog to follow him. He does all he can to bring the animal as
near as possible to the corpse, for they imagine that the nearer the dog comes,
the nearer the departed soul is to everlasting happiness. But if the dog cannot
be tempted to approach it, then it is considered as a bad omen, and they almost
despair of his felicity. When the dog has performed the task assigned him, two
priests, standing about ten yards distant from the body, repeat a form of
prayer half an hour in length. During the whole of this ceremony, the corpse
has a piece of paper fixed to each ear, and hangs over the face about three
inches below the chin. As soon as the prayers are over, the corpse is carried
to the place allotted for its reception, and all the company follow it, two and
two, with their hands devoutly closed. They are enjoined not to speak a word,
because they believe their sepulcher is a place of silence and repose.

While we lament the general ignorance of the Guebres, we perceive that they
had a strong conviction that the soul survived the death of the body; and that,
in its separate state, it was capable of happiness or misery. How inexcusable,
therefore, are those of our clime who pretend to greater degrees of rationality
and refinement, and yet presume, at least to profess, that the soul either
sleeps with the body in the grave, or is entirely annihilated? Thankful ought
we to be for the volume of revelation which describes the nature, qualities,
and immortality of the soul, and opens to us, in the most rational, sublime,
and God-honouring scenes, what awaits us beyond the vale of death; and points
us, at the same time, to an all-sufficient Savior, who is the way, the truth,
and the life.

The scripture, for the purpose of conveying instruction to our minds, and of
designating some particular characters, has named the dog, the animal now under
consideration.

A dog, a dead dog, a dog's head, were frequently named to express an
insignificant and vile person. Elisha, the prophet, being inspired by God to
foresee the future evil conduct of Hazael, thus addressed him -- I know the
evil that thou will do unto the children of Israel: their strong holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the sword, and wilt
dash their children, and rip up their women with child. Hazael replied -- What,
is thy fervent a DOG, that he should do this great thing? 2 Kings viii. 12, 13.
But however this wicked man professed an abhorrence to such atrocious actions,
yet it is certain that the wretched dog did cut Israel short, and smote them in
all their coast. x. 32.

As in the days of Isaiah, so in every age, there are false teachers, wicked
persons, not called of God, that intrude themselves upon the people, who are
justly said to be blind, ignorant, dumb dogs, that cannot bark; therefore, not
fit to give an alarm in time of danger, nor give faithful instruction to
others; -- they are sleeping dogs, lying down, loving to slumber; and so quite
unfit to watch the gates of Zion; -- greedy dogs; that can never have enough,
they love the fleece better than the flock, constantly preying upon rich and
poor without filling their own belly. Isa. lvi. 10, 11. Such persons, let them
be found among whatever religious denominations they may, must prove a curse
instead of a blessing.

Satan, the devil, is called a dog; a fierce blood-hound, seeking the
destruction of the souls of men; and who combatted Christ in the wilderness,
and upon the cross, but foiled and made prisoner in chains. Psm. xxii, 20. I
may now call Satan the shepherd's dog: Christ, the chief shepherd of Israel,
making use of him as a shepherd does his dog, to keep his flock together, and
making all his howlings and barkings, his vile efforts, subservient to his
pleasure, and the highest interest of his chosen flock.

To gratify our young readers, in particular, I shall close this piece of
natural history, by reciting some well authenticated anecdotes of the sagacity
and faithfulness of the dog.

Of the following incident Plutarch affirms that he, himself, was an
eyewitness. Being once on shipboard, he observed a jar which was about half
filled with oil. A dog was very desirous of paying his addresses to the
contents, but the oil was too low in the containing vessel for him to get at
it. The seamen were all engaged different ways; and the dog, willing to make
the most of the favorable opportunity, took up, successively, a number of
stones which were stowed in that part of the ship, and dropping them, one by
one, into the jar, the oil at last rose within his reach, and he lapped as much
of it as he pleased. " I was astonished," says Plutarch, " by what means the
dog could sagaciously know, that the immission of heavier substances would
cause the lighter substance to ascend."

A servant of Sir Henry Lee had formed a design of assassinating his master,
and robbing the house. That very night, a mastiff dog, which had never been
much noticed by Sir Henry, for the first time followed him up stairs, got under
the bed, and could not be got from thence, by either master or man. In the dead
of night the same servant entered the room to execute his horrid design, but
was instantly seized by the dog; and being secured, confessed his intention. In
memory of this preservation, Sir Henry Lee engaged Johnston, the celebrated
painter, who drew a portrait of Sir Henry, with the mastiff by his side; and in
one corner of the picture, are ten laconic lines, concluding thus -- But in my
dog, whereof I made no store,
I find more love than those I trusted more.


The dead body of a Roman soldier, who had been killed in a domestic tumult,
was carefully watched and guarded by his dog; who would not permit any person
to touch the remains of his departed master. PYRRHUS, the king, passing by that
way, took notice of so striking a spectacle, and inquired into the
circumstances of the case. On being informed that the man had been slain three
days before, and that the dog, in all that time, had neither stirred from the
body, nor taken any food, the king ordered the body to be buried, and the dog
to be brought to him. The creature soon grew fond of Pyrrhus, who, shortly
after, ordering his forces to muster, the soldiers passed before him in review.
During this ceremony, the dog, for some time, lay quiet at his feet; till
seeing those soldiers march by who had murdered his late master, he sprung at
them with such rage and fierceness, and turned himself to Pyrrhus with such
meaning in his looks and gestures, that the men were sent to prison, on
suspicion of having committed the crime with which the dog seemed to charge
them. Being strictly examined, they confessed themselves guilty, and were
accordingly executed.

SNOW.
He gives the winter's snow her airy birth,
And bids her virgin fleeces clothe the earth.
SANDYS.
AMONG the phenomenon of winter, no one is more worthy of discussion than that
of SNOW, which is confessedly one of the most curious productions of nature;
and, from the remotest ages of antiquity, has excited the admiration of
philosophers and poets. We shall, therefore, offer our readers a few
philosophical remarks upon the subject, and then advert to the scriptures,
which not only corroborate the dictate of sound philosophy, but, under the
emblem of snow, afford us lessons of spiritual instruction.

Snow is formed by the freezing of the vapors in the atmosphere. It differs
from hail and hoarfrost in being, as it were, crystallized, which they are not.
This appears, on examination of a flake of snow by a magnifying glass; when the
whole of it will appear to be composed of fine shining spicula, diverging like
rays from a center. As the flakes fall down through the atmosphere, they are
continually joined by more of these radiated spicula, and thus increase in
bulk, like the drops of rain or hailstones. Dr. Grew observes, that many parts
of snow are of a regular figure, for the most part so many little rowels, or
stars of six points, and are as perfect and transparent ice as any we see on a
pond. Upon each of these points are other collateral points, set at the same
angles as the main points themselves; among which there are diverse other
irregular, which are chiefly broken points, and fragments of the regular ones.
Others also, by various winds, seem to have been thawed, and froze again into
irregular clusters, so that it seems as if the whole body of snow were an
infinite mass of icicles irregularly figured; that is, a cloud of vapors being
gathered into drops, the said drops forthwith descend; upon which descent,
meeting with a freezing air as they pass through a colder region, each drop is
immediately frozen into an icicle, shooting itself forth into several points;
but these still continuing their descent, and meeting with some intermitting
gales of warmer air, or in their continual wastage to and fro touching upon
each other; some of them are a little thawed, blunted, and again froze into
clusters, or entangled so as to fall down in what we call flakes. The lightness
of snow, although it is firm ice, is owing to the excess of its surface in
comparison of the matter contained in it; as gold itself may be extended in
surface till it will ride upon the least breath of air. From some late
experiments on the quantity of water yielded by snow, it appears that the
latter gives only about one tenth of its bulk. The peculiar agency of snow as a
fertilizer in preference to rain, may, without recurring to nitrous salts
supposed to be contained in it, be rationally ascribed to its furnishing a
covering for the roots of vegetables, by which they are guarded from the
influence of the atmospherical cold, and the internal heat of the earth is
prevented from escaping. Whatever difference may arise upon this subject, every
true philosopher will pronounce the phenomenon of snow to be the production of
the ALMIGHTY, under whose supreme control every element is subservient to his
infinite pleasure, and produces infinite benefits to mankind.

He from aerial treasures downward pours
Sheets of unsullied snow in lucid showers;
Flake after flake, through air, thick-wav'ring flies,
'Till one vast shining waste, all nature lies.
Then the proud hills a virgin whiteness shed,
A dazzling brightness glitters from the mead;
The hoary trees reflect a silver show,
And groves beneath the lovely burden bow.
BROOM. This subject is charmingly illucidated in the scriptures, and to which
we will now repair. Contemplating the works of God, the writer of the book of
Job declares -- God thundereth marvelously with his voice: great things does
he, which we cannot comprehend: for he says to the snow, be thou on the earth.
Job xxxvii. 6. Jehovah, in his expostulation with Job, inquires, Have thou
entered into the treasures of the snow; or have thou seen the treasures of the
hail? xxxviii. 22. He gives, says David, snow like wool: he scatters the
hoar-frost like ashes. He casts forth his ice like morsels: who can stand
before his cold? Psm. cxlvii. 16, 17. "At his command, he makes the snow to
fall apace. As birds flying he scatters the snow, and the falling down
thereof is as the lighting of grass-hoppers. The eye marveleth at the beauty of
the whiteness thereof, and the heart is astonished at the raining of it."

It is obvious that the productions of nature are employed by the Almighty,
through the medium of the scripture, to instruct us in the unsearchable riches
of Jesus Christ, which are for the benefit of the subjects of his grace; who, I
may say, constitute a spiritual world in animal life. It is worthy of remark,
that all natural productions named in the scriptures, are such with which men
are generally conversant, and of which the most feeble mind can form some
agreeable ideas. The blessings of grace, however rich and abundant, are
incomprehensible by the eye of depraved reason: -- The natural man receives
not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him; neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. ii. 14.
Therefore, that mind which is illuminated by the rays of the SUN OF
RIGHTEOUSNESS, not only sees God in every animal, vegetable, and fossile
production of nature, but grasps the whole as wonderfully designed by a wise
and condescending God, to instruct us in the more sublime, satiating riches of
his grace. Here, then, we may find a solution of the query which Broom, in
terms so delicate, has proposed -- Why hover snows and wanton in the air,
Fall by degrees, and clothe the hoary year?
To teach us the infinite understanding, and the immaculate holiness of Christ
Jesus as the supreme judge, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. Col. ii. 3. How sublime the description of our Lord, and of the
attending circumstances of final judgment, drawn by the spirit of inspiration,
with the hand of the prophet Daniel, vii. 9, 10. I beheld till the thrones were
cast down, and the ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as SNOW,
and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery
flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued, and came forth
before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened. The
same grand images were continued and multiplied by St. John, who was honored
with a sight of the Son of God, whose head and hairs were white like wool, as
white as SNOW, and whose eyes were as a flame of fire. Rev. i. While the
splendid magnificence of this description fills our imagination with the
highest transports, may our hearts be equally impressed with solemn awe; that
we, that writer, and the reader, each in their own persons, shall stand before
the judge of the whole earth, when time, with them, shall be no more! May the
judge, therefore, become our friend! for, O! wonderful goodness and unparallel
mercy! -- the judge himself has died for criminals, and suffered upon the
cross, the punishment of human crimes, to transmit them to a crown of bliss!

What production of nature is whiter than snow? And what a delightful idea do
its phenomenon convey of the efficacy of Christ's precious blood upon a
sinner's heart! Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord: though
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red
like crimson, they shall be as wool. Isaiah i. 18. As the new fallen snow
covers a polluted carcass, or a filthy dunghill, so, infinitely more so, the
blood of the Lamb covers the foulest crimes, and cleanses from fins of the
deepest dye: so pure and perfect in the eye of discerning justice, that neither
spot, blemish, wrinkle, nor any such thing shall be found upon them. Ephesians. v.
27. David, the King of Israel, conscious that he was black with original
corruption, and actual transgression, like the leper and the unclean, under the
Mosaic law, plead, with earnestness, the sprinkling of atoning blood: Purge me
with hyssop, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Psm. li. 7. And what heart but needs the same cleansing? Yet, alas! how few
esteem a Savior's blood!

The fleecy snow descends to aid our reflections on God's beneficent address to
the prophet Isaiah, assuring him, under the beautiful emblem of snow; the
salutary efficacy of the word of his grace upon the human soul. As the rain
comes down, and the SNOW from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters
the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the
sower, and bread to the eater; so shall my word be that goes forth out of my
mouth. Isa. lv. 10, 11. Does the snow fertilize the earth and promote the
vegetation of plants? Infinitely more efficacious is the word of Christ upon
the heart of man, which falls with gentle influence, producing the fruits of
righteousness which are through Jesus Christ to the glory of God, and the
infinite advantage of mankind.

We cannot close this paper without reminding the thoughtless sinner, that, as
drought and heat consume the snow-waters, so does the grave those which have
sinned. Job xxiv. 19. While in the bloom of youth, the abundance of wealth, or
in the career of honor, suddenly, as the heat dissolveth the snow, and its
waters penetrate the earth without leaving a trace behind, so death removes the
sinner to the grave; he mingles with the dust, and all his false hopes, riches,
honors, name, are covered together from mortal sight, and await the judgment
of the great God. Let us, therefore, be wise, reflect on the baneful
consequences of sin, consider our latter end, and seek salvation and immortal
glory in that most blessed Savior, who shall preserve our souls when snow and
hail shall cease to fall, and ruined nature sinks in years!

A VERY SOLEMN OCCURRENCE!
Transcribed from The STAR, printed in London.
THE Rev. Caleb Evans, D. D. president of the seminary at Bristol for the
education of young ministers, was called to visit a family that belonged to his
congregation, and saw a young lady setting in an easy chair, who came to the
hot wells for the benefit of her health, and boarded with them. Observing her
unusually pensive, the Doctor took the liberty to inquire the reason. She
answered -- "Sir, I will think no more of it, it is only a dream; and I will
not be so childish as to be alarmed at a dream: but Sir," said she, "I will
tell you my dream, and then I will think no more of it." She then repeated as
follows: --

"Last night I dreamed I was at the ball where I intend to go to night: soon
after I was in the room, I was taken very ill, and they gave me a smelling
bottle; and then I was brought home into this room, and I was put into that
chair, (pointing to an elbow chair) fainted, and died. I then thought I was
carried to a place where were angels and holy people singing hymns and praises
to God; that I found myself very unhappy, and desired to go from them. My
conductor said, if I did, I should never come there again: with that, he
violently whirled me out, and I fell down! down! down! through darkness, and
thunderings, and sulphur, into flames; and when the flames began to scorch me,
I was alarmed with hideous cries, and awaked."

Dr. Evans made some serious remarks on the dream, and desired the young lady
not to go to the ball that night. She said she would, for she was more of a
woman than to mind dreams. She went to the ball -- was taken ill -- a
smelling-bottle was given her, according to her dream -- she was brought home,
put into the chair abovementioned -- fainted -- died!

The well known respectability of Dr. Evans, and his disposition in not
receiving the sallies of fancy for realities, much less giving credit to the
many imaginary stories which float about the world under the denomination of
religious: these were sufficient inducements to the EDITOR to give the above
narrative a place in this publication as truly authentic. He makes no comment;
he leaves it with his readers, and adds his affectionate wish, that the perusal
of it may be attended with solemn reflection by the young and the gay; by which
they may learn, that a character formed in this life, virtuous or vicious, will
not fail to terminate the career of mortals, and introduce them to pleasures or
to pains.

A TROPHY OF GRACE, OR THE THIEF SAVED UPON THE CROSS.
IT is generally observed that the greatest usefulness of men is confined to
the meridian of their life; but this will by no means apply to the Son of God
while on our earth: for, although his whole life was spent in teaching the
ignorant, and in performing the most astonishing miracles for the benefit of
mankind, yet, his greatest acts of mercy, and his most valuable miracles, were
reserved for the last. Among these is the conversion of the thief who was
crucified with him upon Calvary. As this is the subject for our present
reflections, we will examine the state of this poor man while in the pursuit of
sin; the marks of Christ's interposing grace while the thief was upon the cross
in the very agonies of death; then draw some useful lessons from the affecting
scene.

I. Examine the case of this poor man. St. Matthew and Mark inform us that he
and his companions were thieves; for which, they were condemned by the law of
their country, to die upon the cross. What they had stolen, from whom, or how
frequently they had transgressed, we are not informed; but of this we are
certain, that they had not only injured their fellow creatures by depriving
them of their property, exposing themselves to a shameful death, but that, by
sin, they had robbed God of his honor and themselves of happiness, and exposed
themselves to his displeasure. Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed
me, says the Lord. Mal. iii. 8, 9. The man who is the particular subject of
our attention, could not be insensible of the horrid disgrace to which his
crimes had exposed him; his soul must have been filled with horror, for a
wicked man is loathsome and comes to shame. Prove. xiii. 5. But, whatever may
have been this man's consciousness at his trial, in the dungeon, or on his way
to Calvary, we now behold him in the very grasp of death, with his unpardoned
sins upon his head, and without the shadow of hope for reprieve. Every beating
pulse, every groan, every drop of blood flowing(...)

POETRY.
FOR New Year's DAY.
BY THE REVEREND JOSEPH SWAIN.
HARK! in the ear of reason, what deep sound
So solemnly to recollection calls?
It is the voice of Time, whose rushing wings
Call to attention, as he passes by,
And wake the sluggard, as he lies supine
On his soft pillow: nor do even the wise
And diligent escape reproof from him,
Who never varies in his steady course.
Is Time gone by? Yes, twelve succeeding months,
Improved or unimprov'd, are all revolved
Since the last year closed its account in shades.
Fellow mortals, up! and overtake
The universal warner, lest he turn --
Whet his broad scythe, and, by divine command,
Mow down your hopes, unripe; and, unprepared,
Summon you sudden to the awful bar
Where Justice sits, who will not take a bribe;
But, with impartial hand and heart unmoved,
To holy saints or hardened infidels
Deals life eternal, or eternal death!
We live but moments; and a moment soon
Will cut the strings that by appointment hold
The imprisoned soul in its corporeal cage.
Then should experience be a living clock,
And every breath a moving dial's hand,
To point us to the hour when we must die;
While every blessing we through time receive
Should, as a nimble finger, lead the mind
Up to its author God -- of good the source.
But whence is Time? and what his errand here,
That his incessant voice attention claims?
From God he comes, the sovereign Lord of all,
To measure man's existence here on earth,
And waft him from the cradle to the grave.
Swift, on his wings, he bears us through the maze
Of life's short race, its pleasures and its pains;
Till our appointed moment to depart;
Then drops us deep into eternity!
And what is eternity? it is all the past
And all the future, seeming to unite
And reader now a point unseen by man.
And yet this now is the hour in which we dress,
That we may stand before the awful Judge
Of quick and dead in robes of heavenly dye;
Fit to attend the marriage of the Lamb;
Or, in polluted rags, for heaven unfit,
To sink into the dismal shades of hell!
Where Is then the spotless robe in which, arrayed,
The happy soul may from the righteous Judge
Meet an eternal smile, and sit approved
In that august assembly, where the man
In all the Godhead clothed presides supreme?
Not that self-wrought, by Pharisees of old
Held in such high esteem -- the piercing eye
Of him who sits on his eternal throne
Through the appearance searches to the heart,
And, short of what springs thence in genuine streams
Of pure affection, and obedience pure,
No works can in his sight acceptance find:
But human nature and perfection now
Meet not on earth -- heaven is their meeting place,
And Christ their center -- from his fullness flows
All that can render human nature fair
In God's all-searching eye. On earth he wrought
A robe of righteousness, which covers all
The sins of his elect; and now in heaven
He sits an advocate to plead their cause!
His merit and his sufferings of their hope
Are all the ground, the firm foundation, where
The heav'n-taught-wise build for eternity.
This is the robe in which the saints shall stand
Before the great tribunal, from the law,
With all its threat'nings, freely justified,
When rolling years, and months, and weeks, and days,
And cold, and heat, and changing light and shade,
With all the marks and measurement of time,
Give place to one eternal blaze of day!
ON THE CITY's RESTORATION FROM SICKNESS.
BY JOHN COBBY.
UPON the willows long unstrung
Your harps ye mourning saints have hung;
Now tune each string in grateful lays,
To sound your great PRESERVER'S praise!
Vicegerents Magistrates.
of the heavenly King,
Preserved by him, his praises sing:
Pastors and Flocks adore his grace,
Who grants you yet a longer space.
Let age and youth his power confess,
Let churches own, adore, and bless
His potent arm, his mighty hand,
By which upheld in life they stand.
Grim Death his desolations spread,
Waved his pale banner over our head;
Greedy of conquest, aimed his dart,
With pois'ned venom, to the heart.
From relatives, how many torn!
With deepest grief survivors mourn:
With hearts oppressed, their face appears
Disconsolate in flowing tears.
Forbear! Almighty goodness cried,
Here let thy ravages subside:
In terror clad no longer reign,
Thy conquest stay, thy hand refrain.
Voracious Death the fiat heard,
And blooming Health once more appeared;
Our city healed, our joys restored,
Our great PHYSICIAN is the LORD.
We sing our great DELIV'RER'S praise,
And thus our Eben-Ezer raise:
May we record the blessing past,
While life, and breath, and being last!
THE SPIDER AND TOAD.
SOME author (no great matter who,
Provided what he says be true)
Relates he saw, with hostile rage,
A spider and a toad engage:
For though with poison both are stored,
Each by the other is abhorred,
It seems as if their common venom
Provoked an enmity between 'em.
Implacable, malicious, cruel,
Like modern hero in a duel,
The spider darted on his foe,
Infixing death at every blow.
The toad, by ready instinct taught.
An antidote when wounded sought
From the herb Plantane growing near,
Well known to toads its virtues rare,
The spider's poison to repel;
It cropp'd the leaf and soon was well.
This remedy it often tried,
And all the spider's rage defied.
The person who the contest viewed,
While yet the battle doubtful stood,
Removed the healing plant away --
And thus the spider gain^d the day.
For when the toad returned once more
Wounded, as it had done before,
To seek relief, and found it not
It swelled and died upon the spot.
In every circumstance but one
(Could that hold true, I were undone)
No glass can represent my face
More justly than this tale my case.
The ^oad's an emblem of my heart,
And satan acts the spider's part.
Envenomed by his poison I
Am often at the point to die:
But he who hung upon the tree
From guilt and woe to set me free,
Is like a Plantane leaf to me.
To him my wounded soul repairs,
He knows my pain, and hears my prayers.
From him I virtue draw by faith,
Which saves me from the jaws of death:
From him fresh life and strength I gain,
And satan spends his rage in vain.
No secret arts or open force
Can rob me of this sure resource,
Though banished to some distant land
My medicine would be still at hand;
Though foolish men its worth deny,
Experience gives them all the lie;
Though Deists and Socinians join,
Jesus still lives, and still is mine.
It Is here the happy difference lies,
My Savior reigns above the skies,
Yet to my soul is always near,
For he is God, and every where.
His blood a sovereign balm is found
For every grief and every wound;
And sooner all the hills shall flee
And hide themselves beneath the sea,
Or ocean, starting from its bed,
Rush over the cloud-topt mountain's head,
The sun, exhausted of its light,
Become the source of endless night,
And ruin spread from pole to pole,
Than Jesus fail the tempted soul.
An obvious CONCLUSION from the CIRCUMSTANCE of ST. PETER'S IMPRISONMENT and
RELEASE. Acts xii.
DEEP in the dungeon's hateful gloom,
The victim of tyrannic hate,
Lo! Peter bows to cruel fate,
And, galled with fetters, meets his doom:
Remorseless Herod gave the word,
And soldiers grasp the vengeful sword
To keep their captive there;
And hardened keepers vigils keep,
While Peter, sunk in peaceful sleep,
Knows respite from his care.
For Peter's sake the ransomed few
With melting hearts and earnest cries,
And prayers, that sweet as incense rise,
Their supplicating vows renew;
The God of saints inclined his ear,
And listened to their urgent prayer,
And ordered quick relief;
For in the troubles of his saints,
He hears with pity their complaints,
And feels for all their grief.
Sent on an errand of his grace,
An angel wings for Peter's cell
(Such embassies please angels well)
Commissioned Peter to release:
So all who feel a chain within,
That binds them fast the slaves of sin,
Like liberty would share,
If they could but by faith aspire
Upon the wings of pure desire,
And try -- the force of prayer.
T. P.

AN HYMN OF PRAISE TO JESUS.
EXALTED on a throne of grace,
With smiles eternal on his face,
Jesus, a Prince and Savior, reigns;
Blessed Angels, full of holy flame,
His uncreated power proclaim,
In lofty everlasting strains.
Triumphant saints around the throne,
Sing what the Prince of life has done,
His peerless love, and precious blood;
They swell the music of the sky,
Possessed of pure eternal joy,
In presence of their loving God.
Hark! how the Empyrean rings!
While each wrapped seraph sweetly sings,
O could I catch their sacred flame!
Then rocks, and caves, and woodlands round,
Should echo with the charming sound
Of Jesus, precious Jesu's name.
Come, touch my lips with hallowed fire,
My heart with melody inspire,
To sing my Savior's bleeding love;
To save me from the pains of hell,
In which damned souls and devils dwell,
He left the splendid throne above.
Hosanna to the mighty God,
Who lived for me, and shed his blood,
That grace and glory might be mine;
Ten thousand thousand thanks be given
To HIM who made my peace with heaven,
And fills my soul with love divine.
JOSEPHUS.

OBITUARY.
ON the 26th of September, 1795, died, in the 32d year of his age, of the
malignant fever which then prevailed in New York, the Rev. JACOB BRUSH, one of
the Elders of the Methodist Episcopal Church. Mr. Brush attended Mr. Courtney,
at whose house he boarded, and who died of the fever; and on the next
Lord's Day he preached a sermon on the occasion, from Matt. xxv. 23. in the new
church. Mr. Brush, immediately on his return home, was taken ill, languished
five days and died, and on the Sabbath following the Rev. Mr. Kingston preached
a sermon, from Rev. xiv. 13. in the same pulpit, on the death of Mr. Brush.
Shall not this event make a solemn impression upon surviving Ministers, that
they may so faithfully discharge their office as to be ready to go from the
pulpit to the tribunal of Jehovah? What is yet remarkable, Mr. Brush, in a few
days, was to have been married to Miss E. M. -- How soon may our most pleasing
prospects be over-cast, and we torn from the embraces of our friends, and
lodged in the chambers of corruption!

Mr. Brush, at an early period of life, became seriously affected with divine
things. After deep distress for sin, he obtained faith in Christ as his
Savior. He then thought it his duty to preach the Gospel of that Christ who
had done so much for his soul, and in 1785 he was admitted as probationer into
the Conferrence of Methodist Ministers. In 1788 he was ordained a Deacon, and
in 1790 he entered the Eldership. As a minister, he was zealous, wise, bold and
successful; as a christian, devout and circumspect; and as a friend,
sympathetic, kind and constant. In his last sickness he appeared solemnly
happy; and, a few hours before his death, he was asked "Whether he felt happy
in God, and had an assurance of the divine favor?" To which (by signs) he
answered in the affirmative. The last Lord's Day that he preached he appeared
to be so resigned to the will of God, that some of the hearers observed, "they
never heard him preach with so much power before, and that he seemed to preach
as though it were his last."

Thus was cut off, in the prime of life, a promising and useful Minister of
Christ, and as highly beloved among the people of his connection.

In thee, my Brush, the Lord did sweetly join
The Friend, the Christian, and Divine;
Thy message was, "go preach the sacred word,"
Nor did thou fear to draw the preacher's sword.
Supported thus thy race through life is run,
Thy battle fought, and crown of glory won:
Thy Master smiles and bids thee to retire,
With "Well done servant, now receive thy hire!"
Escaped from earth, thou'st gained the happy plain,
Where tempting is no more, nor racking pain;
There Jesus views his flock with sweet delight;
He looks benign, and says they are his right.
My Brush, my friend, and brother, ever dear!
Thy memory from my eye extorts a tear,
Of friendship, while thy worth I view,
By few excelled among the pious few.
O God of love! our hearts do thou inspire
To live, to preach, like Brush, and never tire;
So shall we meet in realms of bliss above,
With Christ, to celebrate a feast of love.
A BROTHER.

THE Christian's POCKET LIBRARY,

BY JOHN STANFORD. M. A.



VOL. II.

NEW YORK, Printed for the Editor, by (...).

1800.

THE CHRISTIAN'S POCKET LIBRARY.
NO. II. -- VOL. II.
An ESSAY on the POWER of CHRIST.
By the Rev. GEORGE STREBECK.
WHO would conclude, that the babe of Bethlehem, the tender plant which shot
forth from the stem of Jesse, should ever be the great and mighty Potentate of
the universe! That HE, who suffered death on the cross, should ever travail in
the greatness of his strength! Yet so it was. JESUS burst the bands of death,
triumphed over the grave, and declared that " all power in heaven and in earth
was given unto him."

I will not detain you to inquire in what respects his power is, that of
authority or ability, but rather take notice of its extent, and inquire how it
was a gift unto him.

1. He exercises his power in heaven. O! how different the view of Jesus in the
state of his humiliation, and that glorious state of exaltation which he enjoys
at the right hand of the Father! Those temples which once were crowned with
thorns, wear now the crown of glory and majesty! Those hands which once were
nailed to the cross, now hold the scepter of his kingdom! It is a striking
evidence of the power which Christ exercises in heaven, that angels, with the
superior authorities of the celestial abode, are subject to his authority and
control. It was said of Jacob, that like a prince he had power with GOD and
prevailed; but in how much more conspicuous light does the powerful
intercession of JESUS appear in heaven? His blood is a powerful advocate for
penitent sinners before the throne above! It speaks better things than the
blood of the most dear and costly sacrifices! It Is that which opens a new and
living way to the throne and affections of our heavenly Father, and procures
that for us which the riches a Croesus could never obtain.

It is a further evidence of the power which Christ has given him in heaven,
that heaven itself is at his disposal. This is currently acknowledged in the
sacred pages. PAUL declares his expectation of receiving a crown of
righteousness, as the gift of his righteous judge. And JESUS himself promises a
crown of life, and a participation of his glory, to those who overcome, by his
blood, and remain faithful unto death.

2. On earth also Christ has all power given unto him. The natural and moral
world are subject to him. At his command the wheels of nature roll; -- the sun
goes forth from his chamber, and as a giant rejoiceth to run his race; -- the
silver queen gilds the night, and the twinkling flames shine in their several
orbits. But let us more particularly contemplate the power which he exercises
with regard to the rational creation. He has power given him over the heart of
man, to change and make it new; to enlighten the dark understanding; to incline
the stubborn and refractory disposition of the will; to bestow repentance unto
life; and to raise the sinner, who is dead in trespasses and sins, to a new
life of righteousness! In the days of his humiliation, he possessed the power
of forgiving sin. On the cross this power was evinced in the pardon of the
penitent thief; and now he is exalted at the right hand of the Majesty on high:
the apostle instructs us, that through him is preached unto us the forgiveness
of sins. His power on earth is further evidenced in the support and protection
of his church. How often would she have perished in the waters of affliction, or
been consumed in the flames of persecution, had she not been protected by his
powerful arm! Although she is represented as fleeing into the wilderness from
the face of the dragon, we behold her coming up again leaning on her beloved.
Most gladly, therefore, may she endure and rejoice in her various afflictions,
that the power of Christ may rest upon her: and, although many of the human
race acknowledge not the authority of Christ, nor bow to the scepter of his
grace, yet these also are subject to his power. The power of Satan itself is
limited by the power of Jesus: nor can any of the powers of this world, in all
their combinations, elude the control of HIM who does all his sovereign will
among the kingdoms of men; who, sitting in the heavens, holds all their
malicious machinations in derision, will break them as with a rod of iron, and
dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel.

3. This power Christ himself declares to be given to him. But let not the sons
of infidelity be premature in their triumphs on that account. As GOD, it is not
given to him. The fullness of the GODHEAD dwelt bodily in him. He consequently,
as such, possessed every divine perfection in the amplest and most independent
manner. But as Mediator between GOD and man, we can easily conceive how Jesus
possessed this power as the gift of the Father. In this character he very
frequently acknowledges the superiority of the Father: "My Father is greater
than I." In this character, he confesses the instructions and commandments
which he had received from his father relative to his office, and in this
character also he expressly asserts the power he possessed. To his disciples
who had continued with him in his temptation, he declared thus: "I appoint unto
you a kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me." This is an instance of the
power which Christ exercises in heaven. Now, the Father appointed his reward
unto him as Mediator, by covenant agreement, consequently his appointing a
kingdom to his followers, as the Father appointed unto him must signify, that
he made that appointment in the exercise of his mediatorial office. Another
example of his exercising his power on earth as Mediator is recorded in the
second Psalm. Solemnly inaugurated and proclaimed king of Zion, his reward for
the discharge of his office, for which he is authorized to ask, is the heathen
for an inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for a possession. And,
at the same time, is vested with power to destroy those who submit not to his
authority! v. 8. The power, therefore, which he exercises in heaven and earth
was given him, not as he was GOD, but as he was Mediator between GOD and man.

And, 4. In that character it was given him as the reward of his obedience and
sufferings. Thus we are clearly instructed in several passages of the holy
scriptures. ISAIAH declares, chap. liii. that although his soul should be made
an offering for sin, his days should be prolonged, and that he should be
satisfied in seeing the travail of his soul. And PAUL more expressly declares,
that on account of his voluntary humiliation, GOD has highly exalted him, and
given him a name above every name that is named, at which every knee should
bow, in token of submission to his mediatorial authority.

5. A few reflections shall close this short essay. And how consolatory is the
idea of the Mediator's power in heaven and earth to the believing mind? Hence
they defy, and rest safe and secure in the presence of the sharpest spite and
rage of Satan and all his legions. God is for, who, therefore, can be against
them? The power of Christ is their defense from all danger; and will be their
security and their safeguard amidst all the surrounding afflictions and storms
of life. But how alarming is the power of Christ to the impenitent! To them he
appears in all the strength of his majesty; not as the Lamb of God, but as the
lion of the tribe of Judah. Let us therefore seek, by a timely reconciliation
with him, to elude the fearfulness of his powerful displeasure. Let us "kiss
the Son, lest he be angry, and we perish from the day when his wrath is kindled
but a little."

ANECDOTE OF THE KING OF HUNGARY.
THIS king was extremely distressed on account of the sinful state of his soul,
and appeared before his brother exceedingly dejected. His brother, the duke,
insisted on knowing the reason; to whom the king replied, "O brother, I have
been a great sinner against God, and I know not how to appear before his
judgment seat." The duke, a man of brisk gallantry, not unlike our modern
freethinkers, replied, "These are but melancholy thoughts," and made light of
them.

The king answered nothing at that time; but the custom of that country was,
(the king being absolute) if the executioner sounded his trumpet at a man's
door, he must instantly prepare for execution. The king sent the executioner at
midnight, and caused him to sound a trumpet before the duke's door; who,
hearing and seeing the messenger of death, ran, trembling, and fell upon his
knees before the king, beseeching him to declare wherein he had offended him?
"O, brother," said the king, "you never offended me, but loved me; but is the
sight of an earthly executioner so terrible to thee, and shall not I, who am so
great a sinner, fear much more to be brought before the judgment seat of an
angry God?"

A TROPHY OF GRACE, OR THE THIEF SAVED UPON THE CROSS.
[Continued from page 44, and concluded.]
HAVING treated on the saved thief upon the cross, No. 1. vol. ii. p. 44, we
now proceed to offer such instruction as may be deduced from the subject.

I. Mark, the Evangelist, by this very remarkable scene on Calvary, leads us to
see the literal fulfillment of prophecy. Isaiah says, in chap. liii. 12. He was
numbered with the transgressors. Mark xv. 28. In this instance, how great was
the condescension of Immanuel! and, how significant was it of his office as a
sin-bearer, Isa. liii. placed on the cross, between two, who, for their crimes,
were hanging between the heavens and the earth, as outcasts from both? A lively
representation of all mankind, who, by their sins, had robbed God of his honor
in his law, and their own souls of immortal bliss, in themselves suspended, by
the brittle thread of life, between heaven and hell! And if Jesus saves his
people from their sins, he must be numbered with them, and bear the awful curse
in their stead. He did so. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on a tree, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ. Gal. iii. 13, 14.

II. In the conversion of the crucified thief we have a noble instance of
Christ's free grace and power to save the chief of sinners, in the greatest
sorrows, and at the latest period of their lives.

No man can attentively review this scene, but must believe the sovereignty of
Christ's grace, however prepossessed in favor of human merit. Here are two
men, both thieves; both condemned; both revilers of Christ; both suffering
death upon the cross; both deserving God's wrath, and hastening to receive the
just rewards of their deeds in awful eternity; yet, the one is taken, the other
left. One soul is plucked as a brand from the burning, the other left to
consume! Rich the mercy that reached the one: just the judgment that left the
other. Will a professed Christian call this conduct of Christ in question?
Surely he took one soul as a proof, that he came to save some; he left the
other as a testimony that he should not save all. Therefore, let sinners in
their sins tremble; and let those who have hope in their Savior be clothed
with humility. One man dies wretched in his sins, in the very sight of Christ's
bloodshedding; the other dies in peace, by virtue of the same blood, and looks
for an endless Paradise! From this, as well as many other instances recorded in
the scripture, we must be convinced, that man's supposed merit weighs nothing
in the scale of salvation, though proud, fallen nature, would lift her head,
and demand an everlasting crown as her own reward.

As a farther proof of the total depravity of human nature, and its disdain of
a complete salvation, in a crucified Christ, as exemplified in the impenitent
thief, I shall add, that, if he had possessed the least degree of natural or
moral ability to have saved himself, there were circumstances every way
calculated to have drawn them forth. His state was equal with his fellow
sufferers; he was nailed to the cross at the same time; his condemnation, by
the law, the same; he equally felt the powers of approaching death; he saw the
Savior in his sufferings, and heard his addresses; he hung the same time as
did the other, upon the cross; they both outlived Christ, and both witnessed
his last words; both saw the supernatural eclipse, and both felt the earth
quake and tremble. All these things, which may amount to what some name calls
opportunities, incitements to repentance, etc. etc. made no sort of impression
upon the heart of the hardened thief, and left him the very same man that they
found him.

It is evident, that the pardoned thief possessed external advantages superior
to the other man; he was pointedly reproved by his fellow; he saw and heard the
amazing moral change in his companion; he heard his pathetic prayer to the
Savior, for a remembrance in his kingdom; and he heard the Savior's promise
of acceptance for future bliss; -- all these passed under his eye, and
penetrated his ear; yet the poor man, with all these advantages, remained
hardened in his crimes; he addressed not the Redeemer unless to revile him; he
wished not to be honored with his remembrance; no, nor go into a Paradise, if
he must be indebted to a crucified Christ for the favor. He lived, he
suffered, he died in his sins! Let us not boast of human excellence, but be
clothed with humility. May we learn lessons of the deceit, the power, the
stupefaction of sin, and look to Christ for a free salvation! In the poor,
hardened, wretched thief, see human nature in the perfection of its depravity:
in the other, behold the free triumphant grace of Christ in its meridian glory!

I think I may venture to say, that this scene of Christ's grace on Calvary has
its frequent likeness among mankind, in every age, and in every place where the
gospel is preached. How many thousands are there, who, for many years, set
under the sound of the history and the truth of the gospel, before whose eyes
Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth, as crucified among them. Gal. iii.
1. Yet, like the impenitent thief, they disdain and perish in their sins; while
others, equally guilty and depraved, who feel the virtues of the cross, are
brought nigh to God, live an honor to his name, and die triumphant, with
heaven beaming upon their souls. Thus, the ministry of the gospel is a favor
of life to some, and of death to others. 2 Cor. ii. 15 -- 17. The difference of
success is resolved into the grace of Christ whom we serve: -- By the grace of
God, I am what I am!

III. Let me ask my READERS if they feel the importance of these reflections,
and are convinced of their need of Christ to save them? Remember, you need the
same grace, mercy, power, and love, to save you as did the thief upon the
cross. Proud nature will not submit to this. To be saved, wholly by the blood,
the unmerited grace of Jesus, which reached the vile malefactor's heart that
died upon Calvary, is not what you will submit to, until you have a just sight
and an humbling sense of your depravity and guilt before an holy God! Then will
you bow before the cross, while, with a believing eye, you behold the fountain
of blood flowing from the Savior's heart, to cleanse from foulest stains; yes,
with Cowper you will say -- "The dying thief rejoiced to see
That fountain in his day;
O may I there, though vile as he,
Wash all my sins away!"


IV. To review this scene upon Calvary, as constituting a part of the TRIUMPHS
of CHRIST, shall conclude our reflections. Our Lord entered upon the field of
time, met sin, death, and hell, as the foes of men, and, in order to conquer,
he must die the death of the cross; there on, blotting out the hand writing of
ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, took it out of the
way, nailing it to his cross: and having spoiled principalities, and powers, he
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. Col. ii. 14, 15. He
ascended up on high, led captivity captive, sat down on the Father's
right hand, and gave gifts unto men, that the Lord God might dwell among them.
While on the cross, though reeking in his gore, behold! he plucks the thief
from the jaws of destruction, embraces him in his bosom, and bears him to
Paradise, as a trophy of his grace, and to show all heaven the virtue of his
blood! Safe beyond the vale of death, united with the saints in glory, we
congratulate the saved thief; who, in incessant strains, unites with
patriarchs, prophets, apostles, and the numberless redeemed -- Blessing, and
honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sets upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb, for ever and ever!

REPLY to Y. Z. in our last Number -- " When will Faith and Hope cease?" 1 Cor.
xiii. 13.
PAUL concludes his beautiful description of Charity in these words, Now
abides faith, hope, charity, these three: but the greatest of these is
charity. 1 Cor. xiii. 13. There is manifestly a preference given to charity
above faith and hope, chiefly because faith and hope shall have an end, but
charity abides for ever. Charity, or love, is the essence of religion and
moral virtue. This, in a very considerable degree, forms the happiness of the
christian in this, and in a future state of existence. It, therefore, stands
foremost in the list of christian virtues. Faith and hope, though essential to
the christian character, must, I conceive, have an end: To illustrate this, let
me take St. Paul's description of faith, in Heb. xi. 1. Now, faith is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. When,
therefore, those things not seen become visible, and those things hoped for
arrive, there can then be no further room for faith to exercise itself; it
must, therefore, cease. The happiness of heaven appears to me to be what the
apostle alludes to as hoped for. By the eye of faith, the christian sees a
glorious salvation wrought out, and secured for him in Christ Jesus; -- he
believes, that after he shall have done serving his master in this lower world,
in which he sees through a glass darkly, and where he knows but in part, he
shall be admitted to the bright regions above, where dwells that which is
perfect, and that which is in part shall be done away; where he will see face
to face, and know, even as also he is known. When this period arrives, faith,
agreeably to the above definition, must cease.

Another definition of faith, differing in words, though amounting to the same
thing, is a firm reliance on the atonement and righteousness of the Redeemer
for salvation and eternal glory. Considering faith in this sense, when does it
cease? In my opinion it is when the soul is put in the actual possession of
that state of felicity beyond the grave. But when shall hope be done away?
Certainly when those things arrive to our enjoyment for which we are induced to
hope; for what a man sees, why does he yet hope for. Romans viii. 8. My opinion,
in brief, therefore is, that faith shall cease in vision; and hope, which is
our expectation of things future, shall be swallowed up in fruition. In the
heavenly world there can be no room for the exercise of faith and hope; but
charity alone abides for ever.

A. F.

ANSWER BY ANOTHER HAND.
When shall Faith and Hope cease?
NOT on the immediate departure of the soul from the body, though transmitted
to the bosom of the Lord. Many things will remain as the subject of faith and
the object of hope. Faith shall yet exercise her powers in the highest degree
of perfection, without the shadow of a doubt, upon the purposes and reign of
Christ the King of Zion, who will spread his kingdom from pole to pole --
gather his elect unto himself -- reign before his ancients gloriously -- burn
the universe by the breath of his mouth -- dissolve the heavens -- sit in final
judgment -- and receive his people, amidst the universal blaze, to the mansions
of his glory. The pure Spirit, resting in the enjoyment of Christ above, shall
yet exercise hope of the general resurrection, await the joyful period, and
exclaim with David* My flesh shall rest in hope! Then, when the body shall be
raised, made like unto the glorious body of the Lord Jesus, and reunited to
the soul, both, in eternal union, shall be received to inconceivable glory. Now
sublunary objects are buried in oblivion -- the world has vanished as the smoke
-- the kingdom of Messiah is complete -- the purposes of Jehovah toward his
Church are accomplished -- the kingdom is delivered unto the Father, and God
himself is all in all: therefore, the objects of faith, and the subjects of
hope, now issue in perfect enjoyment, and the virtues themselves are no longer
useful, and for ever cease. But charity! the love of God, and of his saints!
this abides, and shall for ever abide; form the felicitating, innate principle
of the glorified soul, and expand its powers in eternal admiration, joy and
praise!

ANECDOTE.
A Person admiring the beauty of some ornamental china on a chimney-piece, was
informed that the elegance of its figures, and the perpetuity of its colors,
were owing to its having been consolidated by passing through the fire. Equally
so, replied he, many excellent christians are both ornamental and useful in the
world, by their having passed through the fire of sanctified affliction.

NATURAL HISTORY. depiction of a horse THE HORSE.
THE horse is a genus of quadrupeds, belonging to the order of belluae, in the
class mammalia. The genus comprehends the horse, the ass, and tho zebra; they
have six erect and parallel fore-teeth in the upper jaw, and six, somewhat
prominent ones, in the under jaw; the dog teeth are solitary, and at a
considerable distance from the rest; and the feet consist of an undivided hoof.
The horse has not only a grandeur in his general appearance, but there is the
greatest symmetry and proportion in the different parts of his body. The
regularity and proportion of the different parts of the head, give him an air
of lightness, which is well supported by the strength and beauty of his chest.
He erects his head as if willing to exalt himself above the condition of other
quadrupeds: his eyes are open and lively; his ears are handsome and of a proper
height; his mane adorns his neck, and gives him the appearance of strength and
boldness.

To view this majestic animal we must look for him as nature has formed him,
and placed him as an inhabitant of the extensive deserts of Africa, in Arabia;
and in those vast countries that separate Tartary from the more southern
nations. Large assemblies of these animals are seen among the Tartars. Arabia
produces a breed of horses, the most beautiful, generous, swift, and
persevering. Their color is brown, their mane and tail very short, their hair
black and tufted: their swiftness is incredible. The method of taking them is
by traps concealed in the sand, which entangling their feet, the hunter
approaches them, and either kills or takes them alive.

The horse, with us, is a domestic animal, and is trained up for the purpose of
husbandry, the pleasure of the chase, and the service of the warrior; and, in
each department, he proves himself a useful and magnanimous creature:
admitting, at the same time, such a variety of stages, qualities, and
circumstances, that the lower, as well as the higher orders of mankind, may
avail themselves of the benefit and the pleasures he is calculated to afford.
To these observations let me add, that the beneficent Creator has so ordered,
that the animal now under reflection should not only be capable of rendering
the highest services to man while living, but that, after death, he should
contribute to our advantage. His skin is used for traces, collars, and other
parts of harness. Thus, even after death, he preserves some analogy to his
state of servitude when alive.

The eastern heathens, the Persians, who worshipped the sun, imagine that he
rode along the sky in a chariot drawn with fleet horses, to communicate his
light and warmth to mankind; they consecrated to him the finest steeds, with
which, in chariots, they rode to the eastern gates of their cities, as the sun
rose, to pay their adoration, and to offer their sacrifices. Other heathens
offered the horse to Mars, as the god of battles. Tacitus is said to have
supported white horses in the sacred woods, at the public charge, from which
they drew omens: no one was even permitted to touch them; the prince and priest
alone fasten them to a consecrated chariot accompanied them, and observed their
neighings and tremblings.

Leaving the superstitions and idolatry of the heathen, let us glance at the
sublime description of this noble animal, contained in the sacred writings.
God, to humble the haughtiness of Job, and to bring him to a more solemn
consciousness of the divine wisdom and power in creation, thus addresseth him:
Have thou given the horse strength? Have thou clothed his neck with thunder?
Can thou make him afraid as a grass-hopper? The glory of his nostrils is
terrible. He paweth in the valley, and rejoiceth in his strength: he goes on
to meet the armed men. He mocketh at fear, and is affrighted; neither turns
he back from the sword. The quiver rattleth against him, the glittering (...)
and the shield. He swalloweth the ground with fierceness and rage; neither
believes he that it is the sound of the trumpet. He says among the trumpets,
ha, ha, and he smells the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and
the shoutings. Job xxxix. 19 -- 25.

The callous, impenitent heart of the Jews, regardless of the evil and the
consequences of sin, are said to be as the horse that rusheth into the battle.
Jer. viii. 6. Equally as thoughtless are those who precipitately rush before
God in prayer, without realizing the infinite majesty of Jehovah; feeling the
wretchedness of their depraved ^^ture, and confiding in a Mediator for
acceptance. And, although the real christian may sentimentally accord in the
justness of these observations, in too many instances, as it relates to his
walk with God, his secular concerns in the world, and in his public profession
of the gospel, he may too often find himself guilty, and lament his
precipitance.

It is not improper, in this place, to introduce the translation of Elijah to
heaven in a chariot of fire, and by horses of fire. 2 Kings ii. 11. This
celestial vehicle might be a conflux of exhalations or clouds, formed in this
likeness by a supernatural power; and, by the solar rays striking on them,
might appear fiery and red; much in the same manner as our Lord himself was
taken up in a cloud. Acts i. 9. This idea on the chariot and horses of fire is
considerably supported by the latter clause of the verse: and Elijah went up by
a whirlwind into heaven. -- The mode of Elijah's conveyance to heaven has,
however, been more generally considered to have been by the ministry of Angels,
whom God makes a flame of fire. Psm. civ. 4. The chariots of God are twenty
thousand, even thousands of Angels. Psm. lxviii. 17. Mr. Henry's remarks upon
the subject are so pleasing I cannot forbear transcribing them. "Elijah must
remove to the world of Angels; and, therefore, to show how desirous they were
of his company, they would come and fetch him. The chariot and horses appeared
like fire, not for burning, but brightness; not to torture and consume, but to
render his ascension conspicuous and illustrious in the eyes of those who stood
afar off to view it. Elijah had burned with holy zeal for God and his honor;
and now, with a heavenly fire, he was refined and translated."

The spouse, the church of Christ, are compared to a company of horses in
Pharoah's chariot; Sol. Song i. 9. not as ranging in the woods, nor prancing in
battle, but paired, harnassed, drawing with uniformity, steadfastness and
allegiance, displaying the wisdom and magnificence of their Lord. It is to be
confessed, that the credit and the comfort of religion depend very much upon a
steady profession; if ye love me, keep my commandments. The present age of
christianity is attended with too great an indifference to the positive
precepts of the gospel, and the ordinance which Christ has graciously
appointed in his church; and I cannot but consider that, among the many baneful
consequences of such unsteadfastness, is the triumph of infidelity. Let us,
therefore, hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; for God is
faithful, who has promised, and he will never leave nor forsake us.

We shall conclude our reflections on this part of natural history, by
adverting to the book of Revelations, in which the HORSE is repeatedly
mentioned. The white horse, says Dr. Gill, on which the crowned conqueror rode,
expressed the pure and uncorrupted gospel, which, with speed, was to be carried
unto all nations, for the important purposes of converting sinners, increasing
the visible empire of Christ, and diffusing the most sublime happiness. The red
horse denoted the persecutions, wars, and bloodshed, which the publication of
the gospel of peace, which is contrary to the depraved appetite of mortals, and
to worldly empire, would undoubtedly procure against the saints and servants of
the Lord. The black horse, the errors which should make rapid progress against
the truth of Christ. The pale horse, on which sat Death, denoted the gradual
destruction of sin, superstition, and every enemy that should war against the
Lord and his church; especially describing the present sickly state of the
Romish church, and its secular powers.

How blessed will that period be, when, according to the prediction of
Zachariah, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD shall be written upon the bells of the
horses. xiv. 20. The war-horse shall no more tread the field of blood to
gratify the rider's lust for revenge or power. The animal created in Paradise,
for the innocent use of man, shall no more bear burden to maintain an infamous
traffic, but be employed for the noblest purpose of showing forth his Maker's
praise.

THE SLEEPY WORSHIPPER.
THE habit of sleeping during the public worship of Almighty God, must be
pronounced worthy of censure; and could sober reasoning operate on such a
person, he would soon be reclaimed. How inattentive is such to his health?
Would any but a stupid, inconsiderate man, choose a public church to sleep in?
His character! what can be said for him, who, in his sleep, makes mouths and
wry faces, exhibits strange postures, and sometimes snorts, starts, and talks
in his sleep, rendering himself ridiculous to the very children in the place?
His prudence! when he gives occasion to malicious persons to suspect him of
gluttony, drunkenness, laziness, and other usual causes of sleeping in the day
time? His manners! he ought certainly to respect the company present: what an
offensive rudeness, carelessly to sit down and sleep in their presence! His
gratitude to the minister for his attempts to instruct him in the things that
make for his peace! His self-consciousness of his need of edification, to fold
his arms, and deliberately compose himself to sleep, instead of seeking
spiritual improvement! Above all, where is his piety to God! to sleep on the
very spot appointed for solemn worship, when all in the place, except himself,
may be devoutly engaged in prayer and in praise?

Ministers have tried a number of methods to rid our churches of this odious
practice. Some have reasoned -- others have elevated their voice to the highest
pitch: some I have known to call upon the children in the gallery to keep
perfect silence lest they awake their sleeping parents below, while other
preachers have threatened to name the sleeper, and has actually done so. Some
have been so exasperated at their sleeping hearers as to cry aloud, Fire! fire!
-- others have been so deeply affected as to close their lips, and sit down.
Dr. Young, on beholding these sleepy disturbers of worship, sat down and wept!
Bishop Abbot took out his Testament and read Greek. Each of these awaked their
audience for the time; but the destruction of the habit belongs to the sleeper
himself; and, if neither reason nor religion can excite him, why, he must, I
think, sleep on till death and judgment awake him!!

Mr. ROMAINE'S Advice, how to become a better Scholar in the School of Christ.
READ and pray for more self-knowledge. God's word and spirit will teach you
nothing about yourself, but what will humble you to the dust, and keep you
there. Read and pray for more knowledge of the person of Jesus, God-man; his
salvation work infinitely and everlastingly perfect; he is yours, now he is
received, and all he has, and all he is, as Jesus, yours in title, and, so far
as you believe, yours now in possession.

Read and pray for more faith, that what you have a title to you may take
possession of, and so make constant use of it. Your estate is great, immensely
great. Use it and live up to it: as you do in temporals, so do in spirituals.
Your money, your land, your air, your light, your meet and drink, and house and
clothing, these you use: but you have them not in you; only being yours, they
are used by you. So do with Christ. When the spirit would glorify Jesus, he
humbles you. When he would glorify his fullness, he makes you feel your
emptiness. When he would bring you to rely on his strength, he convinces you of
your weakness. When he would magnify the comforts of Jesus, he makes you
sensible of your misery. When he would fix your heart on his heaven, he makes
you feel your deserved hell. When he would exalt his righteousness, you find
you are a poor miserable sinner.

Can you, my friend, practice this? Let nothing keep you from Jesus. Whatever
you need, whatever you feel wrong, may it bring you to the Savior's fullness! O
that all things may help forward your acquaintance with him! I except nothing,
neither sin nor sorrow: I would carry all to him, as one great lump of sin, and
receive all good from him, as the only storehouse of good for wretched
sinners. In this communion I desire to grow; for this I desire to live. O that
you and I may learn it more, and get every day nearer fellowship with our sweet
Jesus, growing up unto him in all things!

On our learning this lesson depends our comfortable walk heavenwards. Every
moment we must live upon Christ's fullness, and be every moment receiving out of
it grace for grace. A beggar in myself, but rich with unsearchable, eternal
riches in Jesus. Ignorant still in myself, but led and taught by his unerring
wisdom. A sinner still, but believing in his blood and righteousness. Weak and
helpless still, but kept by his Almighty love, Nothing but sorrow in myself;
nothing but joy in him. Oh! this is a blessed life. No tongue can tell what a
heaven it is, thus to live by faith on the Son of God. Thanks be to him that I
know a little of it, and I cannot but heartily pray that you may know more of
it than ever you did. Blessings forever on the Lamb!

An original Letter addressed to the late Mr. JOHN YOUNG, while under Sentence
of Death for the Murder of RICHARD BARWICK.
SIR,
UNDER your afflictive state, give me leave to address you a few lines: not to
insult your misery, but to aid your necessary reflection. If reflection becomes
a rational mind; if it be, indeed, necessary for any man, it must be so to you,
in your near approach to dissolution. I said, I did not mean to insult your
misery; no, I am conscious of the universal depravity of man: the seeds of
iniquity lie deep in all, and, if any are preserved from open, gross offenses,
it is by superior aid than man's. With you, though you are now found a public
sinner, I would drop a tear, and offer my warm advice, to promote your deep
reflection and repentance.

Were I a DEIST, and with such believed, that "human crimes are only injurious
to our species," from this I would attempt to excite your keen reflection. You
have, in a sudden, violent and public manner, deprived a fellow mortal of his
natural existence; whose life must have been to him as desirable, sweet, and
important as your own; and life is indeed a blessing highly prized, and sacred
to us all. By this unhappy deed you must have injured your own peace, interest,
reputation, and happiness. You have at once deprived a wife of an husband, and
nine children of a father. With violent hands you have taken from the community
a member, a citizen, and an officer in the very act of discharging his duty.
And, I need not add, you have been found guilty of violating the most
important, and the highest law of nature, and of the country, at the vast
expense of your own life, in the most ignominious manner. And are not these
human offenses of the highest magnitude? Have not all civilized nations marked
them with the highest degree of punishment? And do they not appear flagrant in
your own eyes? Let others entertain what opinion they may of you, I am willing
to hope, the wound given to another gapes wide in your own breast. To be guilty
of such crimes, and to be within sight of a shameful death, and not to feel
conscious guilt, cannot be considered to act the part of man. Let me,
therefore, entreat you to exercise rationality, and review the sable train of
complicated evils which follow your offense. O that you may keenly feel the
guilt that covers you, and repent in deepest sorrow! Remember your crimes are
such as admit not the shadow of reparation; you cannot restore the life you
have taken; you cannot place the husband in the widow's arms; give to the
numerous children their lost father, nor bring back the citizen to society. No;
neither can you offer restitution to the law of nature, and the law of man, for
unprovoked murder, which peremptorily demands BLOOD FOR BLOOD!! How serious,
how distressing is your case! Were there no God; were there no divine law to
bind you to the authority of HIM who made you; were there no futurity, no
punishment beyond the vale of death, your state demands serious reflection, and
conscious grief.

But, my fellow mortal, ten thousand evidences pronounce the existence of an
independent, holy, righteous BEING; the first cause, and the last end of all
things; and to whom you and I are equally amenable. This throws a still more
solemn shade upon you. The providence of this unerring God now surrounds you,
as with a net of iron, and binds you over unto death. The hand of this God is
upon you: O that you may feel it, producing conviction and repentance. Attempt
not to stifle conviction of your accountability to God. Remember one conviction
of conscience; the least struggle against the powers of death not only
indicates eternity to man, but pronounces, in loud accents, the certainty of a
judgment to come, and to which you are now hastening. The sins you have
committed are not against your own species only, but against the God who made
you. Dare you say the man whom you murdered was not a creature of the Almighty,
brought into existence, nourished, supported by HIM? If so, was it not an high
offense against that God, intentionally and violently to deprive his creature
of life; thereby defacing the divine workmanship, and attempting to overturn
the government of your God? Was not this taking the right of government into
your own hand, and as much as to say, the life of the man was at your disposal?
That God against whom you have sinned, has declared, Whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God made he man.
Genesis ix. 6. And, you know, Sir, this precept has been solemnly obeyed by all
civilized nations for some thousand years. You cannot be disposed to controvert
another sentence selected from the same ancient records, That no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him. 1 John iii. 15. For, had you possessed the fear of
the Lord, you durst not have committed the foul offense. No, you followed the
cultivated, wicked propensities of your own heart, and cherished the
temptations of the devil, therefore you awfully fell. May God solemnize your
breast, and make you feel and lament your case! Condemned by the laws of God
and man, death with horror awaiting you; the doors of eternity unfolding to
receive you; and the inconceivable solemn tribunal of Jehovah prepared for your
final appearance! The sentence, O how shall I transcribe it! Murderers shall
have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the
second death. Rev. xxi. 8.

My dear Sir, construe not this faithful estimate of your case as intended to
insult your wretchedness. Far from it; I feel for you, and wish you to feel for
yourself. Great sins need great conviction, and great repentance. Think
seriously of your state. The hardened, the abandoned alone would stifle
reflection at such a time as yours. I have read of a felon who laughed at the
fate of the gallows; but, when the officer advanced to measure him for a
coffin, he trembled, turned pale, and wept.

But shall I aid your reflection, to realize your guilt, and not tell you of a
pardon? Shall I open the ghastly wound in your breast, and not point to you an
adequate balm? True, the law of your country cannot save you; the law of nature
condemns you; no mortal can pluck you from the jaws of destruction: yet, there
is an hand able and mighty to save; there is a pardon adequate to your offense;
there is a balm sufficient to heal -- JESUS, the Son of God, died for men --
for sinners -- for his very murderers; and, as recorded in Acts ii. three
thousand Jews, accessory to the death of Christ, were brought to conviction,
repentance, and salvation, through the very blood which they had shed!
Surprising mercy! rich grace! To that Savior I direct you; he of whom you have
had little thought, i^ not despised; that Savior alone can pardon, heal, and
save you. His blood cleanses from all sin. 1 John. i. 7. These are the
enviting accents of his lips, Come, unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. Mat. xi. 28. Him that comes unto me I will in
no wise cast out. John. vi. 37. Thus may you find that mercy in Christ which
you cannot receive from man! May your death, though awful in itself, be
accompanied with acknowledgments to man, and a pardon sealed upon your
conscience, by your Lord and Judge! With him I leave you, and shall follow this
address with my private and public prayers, that you may prove a brand plucked
from the burning.

To the EDITOR of the CHRISTIAN'S POCKET LIBRARY.
SIR,
IF consistent with the plan of your publication, you will oblige a constant
reader by procuring the sentiments of some of your correspondents, "Whether
Adam had the grace of faith?"

Yours, D. H.

POETRY.
REMEMBRANCE OF CONVERSION.
SWEET was the hour, the moment sweet,
Attracted by the Savior's charms;
I laid my burden at his feet,
And found a refuge in his arms.
My wretched state I called to mind,
And wondered at his grace so free:
Supremely good, profusely kind,
To such a rebel worm as me!
Although your numerous sins, he said,
Like mountains pil'd on mountains rise,
Be of good cheer, be not afraid,
My mercy is above the skies.
I heard, with joy, the Savior's voice;
Believed the soul-transporting sound,
And in his name can now rejoice,
For I have his salvation found.
My heart and treasure placed above,
With former sweets I now can part,
While the sweet lure of heavenly love
Draws the affections of my heart.
Embraced by his Almighty arms,
Secure from falling, there I rest,
No boding fears my soul alarms,
Completely saved, for ever blessed!
Come magnify the Lord with me,
Who feel redemption, join your lays:
Let all the ransomed race agree,
To give him the eternal praise.
J. COBBY.

Lord's Day MORNING.
MINE eyes survey the opening morn
With pleasure and delight;
They bid my thankful heart adore
The guardian of the night.
It Is God who caused my circling blood
To keep its wonted course;
And through its various channels run,
With new reviving force.
It Is he who raised my cheerful frame,
Refreshed with cordial sleep;
It Is he supports my feeble soul,
And does my slumbers keep.
Mine eyes with raptures view the day
When Jesus left the dead,
To show he vanquished death and hell
In all his people's stead.
To day he calls his favorite sons
To feast on food divine:
He feeds his church with living bread,
And soul-reviving wine.
O Lord, prepare my longing soul
TO approach before thy face:
O meet me in thy blessed abode,
And cheer me with thy grace.
Make every action, word and thought,
To thy sole glory move,
And every stubborn lust fall down
Before thy sovereign love.
Then will my thankful soul record,
How vast thy mercies be;
And patient wait, 'till thou shall say,
"Come hither up to me."
Lord's Day EVENING.
TO thee, my God, I lift my eyes,
And thankfully adore,
That I another day have been
Supported by thy power.
Into thy holy temple, Lord,
My soul found free access,
To feed upon thy precious word,
And hear the calls of grace.
How sweet, how solemn, thine abode!
How heavenly is the place,
Where Jesus feasts believing souls
With his redeeming grace!
Here mortals feed on angels food,
And drink large draughts of bliss;
They get a glimpse of thine abode,
They see where Jesus is.
Within thy solemn temples still
May I thy goodness prove,
'Till thou shall call my soul away
To join the church above.
Great guardian of my life and health,
To thee I now resign
My earthly frame and spirit too,
For both, O Lord, are thine.
May thou such cordial sleep afford,
And such protection too,
That in the morning I may rise,
Thy glory to pursue.
FRATER.

THE BACHELOR's PRAYER.
THOU great Redeemer of my soul,
My body too is thine:
And all my temporal concerns
I to thy choice resign.
Do thou direct my every step;
And guard from every snare:
I know I am no longer safe,
Than while I am thy care.
Keep thou my eyes, keep thou my heart,
And bridle thou my tongue:
Weaker than weakness, Lord, am I;
Hell and my lusts are strong.
Give me submission to thy will;
Thy glory be my aim:
What thou would have me, may I be;
And may I do the same.
Fix me in that estate, wherein
I most may honor Thee:
If what I wish would move me thence,
Lord, never let it be.
Grant a companion, if thou please;
A real child of thine:
And with thy blessing fill the hands
Thou shall together join.
May Providence direct my way,
Wisdom and grace afford:
And let me never fret against,
Nor act without, the Lord.
Choose thou for me, whose piercing eye
Can fathom every breast:
If I should choose, how soon may I
Be cursed instead of blessed!
Person and portion I would leave,
Supremely wise, to thee:
Thou only know who and what
Would be the best for me.
If riches would but lift me up,
Or somehow me ensnare,
Grant poverty to keep me low,
And grace, the weight to bear.
Or, should I flatter, fear, or faint,
Or steal, if I be poor,
Grant me the riches that I want,
And not one farthing more.
But rich, or poor, or fair, or plain,
Give me a wife with grace:
And this good token of thy love,
That she is a child of peace.
Her may I love, not idolize;
And mutual be the flame!
In quiet thus our days shall pass,
And we will praise thy name.
Better to live, if so thou please,
In cottage mean and cold,
Than in a mansion house to dwell,
Tormented with a scold.
Yet, if I need to have a shrew,
With temper sour and rough,
O may thy grace the plague subdue,
When I Have been tried enough.
One flesh with me may no one be,
And member of the devil:
But, well met here, may we meet there
Where never enters evil!
SOLOMON's SONG ii. 10, 11.
LET saints and angels join to tell
The glories of Immanuel!
This is my Savior, this my love;
The highest cedar of the grove;
The fairest, brightest, choicest rose,
That in his flowery Sharon grows.
The Lily he, divinely fair,
Outshines the lucid morning star:
This is my love, and this my friend,
Whose faithful mercy's never end!
Soft words of grace drop from his tongue
Sweeter than hymns by angels sung:
' The storms are past, the winter's over,
' And wrath and justice frown no more:
' The SUN of Righteousness appears,
' Whose healing beams dispel thy fears,
' And shed abroad eternal day:
' Arise, my love, and come away!
' Arise, from sin's dark hateful night,
' And taste the joy's of gospel light:
' From earthly playthings of a day,
' O turn thy lovely eyes away!
' Thy Lord invites: no longer stay!
' But rise, my bride, and come away!
' For though you are black, deformed and foul,
' Stained and depraved throughout thy soul,
' I call thee fair, and will not see
' A single spot of sin in thee:
' My righteousness hides all from view:
' I love thee, and will save thee too.'
Such were his words, so sweet, so kind,
They melted my rebellious mind:
What could I think? what could I say?
His SPIRIT won my heart away.
He is my love, and he my friend,
Whose faithful mercies never end.
MARIA DE F -- Y.
Dec. 27, 1776.
OBITUARY.
ON Lord's Day evening, October 29, 1797, died the Rev. CHRISTOPHER GODFEY
PETER, minister of the Moravian Church, in New York.

Mr. Peter was born (...) Greslow, Lower Silisia, in the dominions of the king
of Prussia. His father was a physician; and Mr. Peter enjoyed the affectionate
care of his parents until the seventh year of his age; at which time he lost
his mother by death. His father's second marriage proved to Mr. Peter a source
of disquietude, as his stepmother was to him so inattentive as to induce his
father to place him at a distant seminary, for his education; where he abode
with excellent moral reputation till his sixteenth year, when he underwent the
affliction of his father's death. Mr. Peter entered the university of
Konigsberg, where he pursued his studies until his nineteenth year, and then
was admitted a preacher in the Lutheran church. After preaching some time among
this denomination, he, with several other young ministers, were brought under
very severe exercises of mind, least they should professedly have preached to
others; while their own souls were destitute of the one thing needful. While in
this state of painful sensibility, they heard of the Rev. Augustus Gottlieb
Spangenberg, a very aged, venerable minister of the United Brethren, or
Moravian Church: to him they repaired, and from his lips they were informed,
"that if ever their burdens were removed, and their souls made happy, it must
be by a believing sight of a dear, crucified Redeemer, and who must be to them
their all, and in all." Relief was conveyed to their hearts: they found
happiness by believing in Christ; and, through their connection with this
venerable minister, they gave the principles of the Moravian Church an
investigation, entered as members, and, in due time, were appointed to the
ministry.

In the year 1786 Mr. Peter received a call to England, and took up his
residence at Fulneck, in Yorkshire, as a minister, and a teacher of languages.
August 12, 1791, he entered into marriage with Miss Sarah Bailey, his present
mourning relict, by whom he had two children, now living. In the same year he
came to America, and was ordained by the Rev. Andrew Huebner, Bishop of the
Moravian Church, and then resided for sometime at Hebron, exercising his
ministerial office. October, 1793, he was stationed with the Moravian Church in
this city; where, with the approbation and joy of his church, he affectionately
discharged the duties of his ministry, until the Lord removed him by death.

The manner, and the success attending the labors of Mr. Peter, I leave to the
more competent decision of the people of his charge. As my connection with him,
as a friend, commenced soon after his settlement in New York, and, though of a
different religious denomination to myself, having enjoyed in him, to the
moment of his death, the sweets of friendship, this OBITUARY is composed by the
EDITOR, as a small testimony of his esteem for Mr. Peter.

Never, perhaps, did a man sustain a literary, or ministerial character, with
greater undissembl^d humanity. His bowels yearned over the miseries of the
poor; and in one instance, known to myself, he could give himself no rest until
he procured relief for a necessitous family. Great was his desire for the
spread of the gospel throughout the world, and often he would express his wish,
if the Lord pleased, to preach to the unenlightened heathen. Every good man, of
every religious denomination, found a place in his heart. This city is indebted
to Mr. Peter, as a useful man. He was one of the first who meditated the plan,
and was zealously engaged in establishing the present existing society,
entitled, "The New York Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge and Piety
among the Poor, by the Gift of Bibles and other Religious Books."

But the most useful life must have an end. On the close of the last year, he
seemed to have some forebodings, that he should soon drop his clay. Nature
gradually appeared to break away; but, it was visible to those around him, that
he was often indulged in sweet communion with his Lord. His pillow appearing
wet, it was soon discovered to be with his own tears. On being asked the cause
of his grief, he replied, "Nothing grieved him; he was only enjoying nearness
to his dear Savior; that he could lay himself, his wife, his children, and the
church upon his dear Redeemer's heart." At last, upon that heart he died, in
serene submission, and expressive hope, that his soul should meet his Lord in
realms of endless bliss!

Mr. Peter was cut down in the prime of his days, being only in the
thirty-seventh year and fourth month of his age. Mrs. Peter, with her two
infants, retired to Bethlehem, where the benevolence of the United Brethren
have provided a house and every agreeable accommodation, for the reception of
their ministers' widows and children. An expression this of christian love,
highly worthy the imitation of every religious denomination.

THE CHRISTIAN's POCKET LIBRARY.
NO. III. -- VOL. II.
An ESSAY ON THE LIGHT OF LIFE FROM CHRIST JESUS SHINING INTO THE DARK MIND OF
MAN.
Light of those whose dreary dwelling
Borders on the shades of death;
Come! and thy dear self revealing,
Dissipate the clouds beneath.
The new Heaven and Earth's Creator,
In our deepest darkness rise!
Scattering all the night of nature,
Pouring eyesight on our eyes.
MADAN.
SCRIPTURE, and the conduct of mankind, evince, that the way of the wicked is
as darkness: they know not at what they stumble. Prove. iv. 19. Ignorance and
danger attend the evil path of man; nor is the boasted lamp of reason
sufficient to direct the soul to peace, and future blessedness beyond the
grave. There is a way that seems right unto a man, but the end thereof is
death. Prove. xiv. 12. A new light -- a light that shall overcome, and chase
away, the gross darkness from the mind, now becomes absolutely necessary; and
such a light the gospel announces to proceed from Christ, the Son of God: In
him was life, and the life was the light of men; the true light, which lights
every man that comes into the world. John i. 4, 9. Jesus said, I am come a
light unto the world, that whosoever believes in me should not abide in
darkness. John xii. 46.

While, in this essay, we attempt, in some humble manner, to explain the
excellence of that light which flows from a life-giving Savior, may its
celestial rays shine upon the writer and upon the reader, to conduct their feet
in paths of bliss!

I. It is pure, celestial light -- a light from heaven. Not a spark of our own
creating, or that blazed forth from under the dust and ashes of fallen nature;
but comes down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning. James i. 17. That God which caused the light to
shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. iv. 6. Saul
of Tarsus felt the force of this light upon his soul, on his journey to
Damascus. I saw, in the way, a light from heaven, above the brightness of the
sun, shining round about me. Acts xxvi. 13. Many years had he philosophically
contemplated the majesty and glory of the sun in the firmament, and its light
shone upon his natural path: but here is a light falling round him of a
different, more brilliant, penetrating nature -- a supernatural, celestial
light, unknown to him before -- the rising of Jesus, the Sun of Righteousness,
with healing in his beams, to create a new day of mercy upon his soul. This
event, Paul informs us, took place at midday. How transcendently great must
have been the appearance of Jesus, to cast the meridian sun into a shade!
Little did Saul think, when, in the excessive madness of his zeal, rising early
with the sun, to go to Damascus, to persecute and to destroy the christian
flock, that Jesus, the Chief Shepherd, would so miraculously meet him on the
road, change the purposes of his heart, and give him a commission to feed the
very souls he was pursuing unto blood! What a change is here! The light shining
on the dark chaos of nature, to produce the beauties and riches of creation,
but faintly resembles the superior light of grace, falling upon the dark,
depraved soul of Saul of Tarsus, to produce the beauties of virtue and true
holiness! In this light he saw himself, his Savior and his God; and, from this
light upon his mind, he afterward wrote and preached to others. Not Paul
alone, but all who set in darkness, and in the shadow of death, need to receive
this light, to guide them to everlasting peace. This heavenly light discovers
to us the evil of our corrupt natures: we see the transgressions of our past
lives in a new and convincing manner: the law of God, in its spirituality,
extent, demands, and inflexibility, appears in its august glory! and in this
heavenly light we behold, through the written word, the torments of hell! Happy
for the sinner, that this light never falls upon his heart, to show him his
danger, and then to leave him to perish. No: it guides him into the way of
salvation in Christ, as worthy of God, as it is suited to his own soul. I am
the way, the truth and the life, says the Lord: no man comes to the Father
but by me. John xiv. 6. The enlightened mind now perceives the difference
between knowing Christ as a Savior, and embracing him as his Savior --
professing the gospel, and of possessing its celestial virtues! What delight to
a believing soul, to call to remembrance the days of illumination -- the happy
resurrection morn to his soul, when Jesus, the Sun of Righteousness, arose and
shone upon him! It was, indeed, as the light of the morning when the sun
rises, even a morning without clouds; as the tender grass, springing out of
the earth by clear shining, after rain. 2 Samuel xxiii. 4. Glory be to GOD MOST
HIGH, for sending forth this heavenly light to fall upon any sinner's heart!
and glory be the riches of God's grace, if the writer and the reader can say,
He has delivered us from the power of darkness, into the kingdom of his dear
Son! Col. i. 13.

2. The light of Christ is attractive. I am the light of the world: he that
follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life. John
viii. 12. They looked unto him, and were lightened; and their faces were not
ashamed. Psa. xxxiv. 5. In thy light shall we see light. Psa. xxxvi. 9. As the
flowers of the garden, after being closed through the darkness and the tempest
of the night, expand their leaves on the rising sun, follow his course by
turning to his beams, and emit their fragrance -- so the believing soul,
through the darkness of affliction and the storm of temptation, equally opens
to receive the genial, animating rays of THE SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, and most
cheerfully follows him in all his holy ways. Nothing will spiritually engage
the heart of man, but the shining of the light of Christ! Ministers, with their
various gifts, may please, and engage the attention of the hearers; but, after
all, they are but as the branches of a spreading tree, through which the light
of life must shine, to quicken and attract the souls beneath. The poor
cottager, though clothed in rags, yet enriched with grace, may receive the
attraction of Christ's light, as the most distinguished monarch upon earth,
with a star upon his breast. So free are the rays of Christ's love and grace to
his people! Generally we find more sensibility and happiness, in Christ,
beneath the poor man's tent, than in the rich man's palace.

3. The light of life, in Christ, is real. It is expressly called the true
light, John i. 9. in opposition to the false lights of depraved reason -- the
doctrines of carnal men -- to the morality of heathen -- and to vain
superstition: especially as being the reverse to our native false light, by
which we were guided into erroneous notions of God, Christ, sin, grace, heaven,
and hell. It is no phantom or airy imagination -- no heated enthusiasm -- but
sincere, solid, heavenly, and divine; never resting short of communion with
God, as the center of joy in the soul! Its truth is evident from its own
purity; leading the subject of it from the practice of sin to the love of
holiness. It never did, nor can, deceive the soul on which it shines. It as
clearly discovers to a man's soul the nature and permanency of his interest in
Christ -- his right to the rich treasure of grace -- and to a blissful
immortality -- as the light of the natural sun discovers the objects around us,
of which we have no doubt nor hesitation. From this certain heavenly light
shining upon the heart, Paul could only say, I know in whom I have believed. 2 Timothy i. 12. I am persuaded that neither death nor life (with all their
attendant sufferings) shall never separate me from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus. Romans viii. 38, 39. Since, therefore, this illumination is so
great a privilege, and so rich a blessing, never let us rest until the Lord
lift up upon us the light of his countenance, and be gracious unto us!

4. We may, therefore, add, in the language of the preacher, Truly light is
sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun. Ecc. xi. 7.
The young man born blind, cured by Christ, and poor Bartimeus, healed through
the same means, could well attest the truth of this remark. To receive such a
cure naturally is a great blessing; but to have the eyes of the soul opened is
infinitely greater! No words can convey a satisfactory idea of light to a blind
man: but when the eyes are opened, there needs no words to describe; it bears
its own evidence. We may talk of the excellent properties of the light of
Christ to carnal minds, but they cannot understand: they love darkness rather
than light, because their deeds are evil: but no sooner are the eyes of a
sinner opened, than the light of Christ, bringing salvation to his heart, makes
it both sweet and pleasant. To contemplate the person, office, and glory of
Christ, in the light of life -- to feel this heavenly light so beaming upon the
heart as to draw forth heavenly desires, hopes and affections -- what can make
us so happy while on earth?

To conclude this essay, let us examine if this light has ever visited our
hearts. Night and day are not greater opposites in the natural world, than a
state of unregeneracy and grace are in the moral world. If ever you have been
made light in the Lord, you must certainly remember, that you were some time
darkness. Ephesians. v. 8. Should you be sensible of your blindness, and, like
Bartimeus, set by the highway side, begging -- Lord that I may receive my
sight, you may take encouragement; for none that ever cried to Jesus were
unanswered; none that ever came to him were cast out. Or, should the reader,
after many years enjoyment of the light of Christ, have lost the comfort of it,
and, like Job, go mourning without the sun, Job xxx. 28. remember that some
intervening cloud, from the corruption of your heart or the errors of your
life, has deprived you of your privilege. In God is no darkness at all. 1 John
i. 5. It comes from yourself. Try to search your hearts, and mourn over the
cause. Remember, Darkness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. That grace which God has planted in your heart will nor let you rest
as you are, nor let go your hope in Christ as the light of your soul. With the
amiable Mrs. Row, you can say, He is my Sun, though he refuse to shine;
Though, for a moment, he depart,
I dwell for ever on his heart,
For ever he on mine!
Why then art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me?
Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance.
Psa. xlii. 5.

If the light of life from Christ be so sweet to the heart, and so pleasant to
the eyes, in this earthly state, where we have so many intervening clouds, such
dark and dreary days, and such storms and tempests to fill our skies; -- what
joy and blessedness may we not cheerfully hope to enjoy when transmitted to
immortality! where every tint of iniquity is done away; where no sorrow enters;
and where GOD and the LAMB become the eternal LIGHT of the blessed! In
anticipation of this state, let every believing heart and tongue cry, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly! Amen.

ANECDOTE.
A MERCHANT of Antwerp, named JOHN DEANS, having lent some millions of money to
the Emperor Charles the fifth, begged him to do him the honor of coming to
dine with him. The Emperor, loath to refuse on account of the obligation under
which he was, accepted the offer, and went to his house at the time appointed.
The merchant spared nothing to gratify his royal guest; and, animated with a
generosity rarely to be met with, caused fire to be set to a pile of cinnamon;
and, taking the bond which his majesty had given him as a security for his
money, threw it into the flames, saying, SIRE, YOU ARE NOW OUT OF MY DEBT.
Could the Emperor ever have forgotten such an unexpected, unprecedented act of
friendship? Impossible!

Much less possible is it for that man who truly knows the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
to forget his unparalleled kindness and unsearchable grace! Vast the debt we
have contracted -- infinite in number and malignity, by transgressing the good
law of our ALMIGHTY CREATOR. Yet such was the condescension and astonishing
love of JESUS, that he willingly offered his own body and soul, infinitely more
precious than all the spices of the east to the fire of Divine anger, to
obliterate the bond of our obligation unto God! Or, as the apostle charmingly
expresses this amazing transaction -- Blotting out the handwriting of
ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of
the way, nailing it to his cross; and having spoiled principalities and powers,
he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. Col. ii. 14, 15.

With what astonishment must the Emperor have beheld the ashes of his consumed
obligation! How free the royal breast from this vast debt! Who now, therefore,
can make a second claim? Yet, still greater amazement, and more solid peace,
may possess our souls, while beholding Jesus cancelling our obligatory bond to
God, by his own bloody sacrifice! The debt paid -- salvation complete --
justice satisfied -- heaven smiles! Only the ashes -- the ashes of our corrupt,
fallen, disabled nature, remains; and this purposely to remind us, in time, of
what our Savior has done; so that, in those days, and in that time, says the
Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and
the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I
reserve. Jer. 1. 20.

Let, therefore, the Emperor Charles forget the act of the merchant at Antwerp;
and let his royal lips withhold the praises of his generous creditor; but let
us incessantly publish the honor due to IMMANUEL, who not only has paid our
immense debt in his own blood, but freely conferreth upon us those durable,
unsearchable riches, which constitute our present and eternal felicity!

Answer to the Query proposed in our last Number, page 84, by D. H. "Whether
Adam, in his Primitive State, possessed the Grace of Faith." We offer the
following Observations.
IF by "the grace of faith," that faith be intended which the gospel defines --
the fruit of the Spirit, Gal. v. 22. which is obtained through the
righteousness of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ -- 2 Pet. i. 1. is connected
with, and demonstrative of, the salvation of the soul, as the free,
unconditional, gracious gift of God -- Ephesians. ii. 8. if this faith is intended,
then we are of opinion that Adam, in his primitive state, had it not. Adam then
was in a state of moral purity; he had not sinned; nor does it appear that he
had the foreknowledge of his fall by transgression; consequently, he stood in
no need of that faith which embraces a savior, nor the experience of gospel
grace which is revealed to the sensibly guilty and condemned; however, it might
have been in secret counsel with God, prepared for him.

If by the "grace of faith," is only meant Adam's confidence in God's promise
for his preservation and supply, we must accord generally with that opinion.
Such sort of faith, or trust, we consider as a constituent part in the moral
constitution of our first parents; and by which they walked with God, and
enjoyed the most delightful satisfaction in the productions of Eden. Without
this faith, we cannot believe infinite wisdom would have pronounced his
workmanship of humanity, very good.

We cannot, however, but consider it injudicious to call Adam's faith, the
"grace of faith;" the term being unscriptural, and tending to confound the two
great and glorious dispensations of nature and of grace. While Adam was in
Paradise, he knew God only as God of universal nature, and enjoyed him in that
relation. That which our correspondent D. H. denominates "the grace of faith,"
is certainly a blessing which flows from a new constitution of things, founded
upon the covenant of grace, and forms a material part of the new creature in
Christ Jesus; by which the saved sinner enjoys God as his everlasting father in
Christ, the fruit of adopting grace and love.

After Adam's recovery, we believe that he had pure gospel faith in Christ, the
promised Messiah; the seed of the woman, who should bruise the serpent's head.
Genesis iii. And, that his subsequent walk with God, his worship by sacrifice, his
general obedience, was as fully centered in Christ's future atonement and
satisfaction, as did the faith of Paul, Peter, John, or any subject of
converting grace, in any period of the gospel dispensation.

The difference, therefore, of these two sorts of faith, cannot be too
accurately marked; the one of nature, the other of grace; one pertaining to a
pure, sinless creature, the other to such as are restored by regenerating,
converting, persevering grace. We hope, therefore, that these observations may
be instructive to our readers, and to D. H. in particular.

NATURAL HISTORY. depiction of a stag THE STAG,
OR dear, Cervus, in tetrapodology, is the name of a genus of animals, the
characters of which are like those of the goat kind; they chew the cud; but
they differ in this, that they shed their horns, which are internally solid,
every year. If we consider their structure, and compare them with the goat or
the ox, we shall find, what will at first appear strange, that they more
resemble the latter than the former. The ox and the stag differ rather in their
grossness and slenderness, than in any other anatomical distinction: the
skeleton of either is nearly alike; the internal conformation is nearly the
same; except that the deer kind want the gallbladder; their kidneys are also
formed differently; and their spleen is proportionably larger. Such are the
slight internal discriminations between two animals, one of which is among the
swiftest, and the other among the heaviest of the brute creation. The stag is
one of those innocent animals which nature has made to embellish the park, and
animate the solitude of the grove. Its color is, generally, of a reddish
brown; but differs according to the climate he inhabits. The stag has the most
beautiful eye; and his senses of smelling and hearing, are in no less
perfection. Should a person, at some distance, whistle, or call aloud, the stag
stops short immediately in his slow pace, and gazes on the intruder; and if he
perceives neither dogs nor any instrument of destruction levelled at him, he
then proceeds forward without any emotion of fear. Man, indeed, is not the
enemy he is most afraid of; on the contrary, the sound of the shepherd's pipe
seems to inspire him with delight; and the hunters sometimes make use of that
instrument to allure the poor animal to his destruction. This creature's voice
is stronger, louder, and more tremulous, in proportion as he advances in age.
At some particular seasons, the stag is extremely wild and furious. Some years
ago, William duke of Cumberland caused a tiger and a stag to be enclosed in the
same area, and the stag made so bold a defense, that the tiger was compelled to
submit. The stag seldom drinks in the winter, and still less in the spring,
while the plants are tender and covered with dew. It is in the heat of summer
that he is seen frequenting the sides of rivers and lakes to quench his thirst.
He swims with great ease and strength, and best at those times when he is
fattest, his fat keeping him buoyant, like oil upon the surface of the water.
As the stag is about five years coming to perfection, he lives above forty
years; and it is a general rule that every animal lives about seven or eight
times he number of years which it continues to grow. The horns of the stag are
greatly in use, and commonly known by the name of hartshorn. It is calcined for
some uses, and made into a jelly for others. The marrow of the stag is
preferred to that of any other animal to ease pain, and to supple callous parts.

It is well known that this animal is devoted to the chase in almost every
country; and generally forms a considerable part of the sport and pastime of
the noble and the great. The desertion of the chase has formed animated matter
for the pens of the most celebrated poets; and Mr. Hervey, the author of Thereon
and Aspasio, has so pleasingly described the scene, that we are disposed to
recite it particularly for the pleasure of our young readers:

"The stag, roused from his lare, shakes his dappled sides; tosses his beamy
head; and, conscious of superior agility, seems to defy the gathering storm.
First he has recourse to stratagem and evasive shifts; he plunges into the
copse; darts across the glade; and wheels about in doubling mazes, as though he
would pursue even the foe he avoids. The full-mouthed hounds unravel all his
windings, and drive him from his wily arts. Now he betakes himself to flight,
and confides in his speed. He bursts through the woods; bounds over the lawns;
and leaves the lagging beagles far behind. The beagles slow, but sure, trace
his steps through woods, through lawns, through half the extended forest.
Unwearied, still unwearied, they urge their ardent way, and gain upon the
alarmed object of their pursuit. Again he flies; flies with redoubled
swiftness; shoots down the steep; strains up the hill; and takes shelter in the
inmost recess of some sequestered grove. The sagacious hounds hang with greedy
nostrils on the scent: they recover, by indefatigable assiduity, the ground
they had lost. Up they come a third time; and, joining in a general peal of
vengeance, hurry the affrighted animal from his short concealment. Perplexed,
and in the utmost distress, he seeks the numerous herd. He would lose himself,
and elude his pursuers, amidst the multitude of his fellows. But they,
unconcerned for a brother's woe, shun the miserable creature, or ^xpel him from
the selfish circle. Abandoned by his associates, and haunted with apprehensions
of approaching ruin, he trembles at every leaf that shakes. He starts, he
springs, and, wild and swift as the wind, flies he knows not where, yet pours
out all his soul in flight. Vain, vain are his efforts! The horrid cry, lately
lessened, thickens upon the gale, and thunders in his ear. Now the poor,
breathless victim is full in view. His sprightliness forsakes him. His agility
is spent. See! how he toils in yonder valley, with faltering limbs and a
hobbling gait. The sight of their game quickens the pace, and whets the ardour
of the impetuous hounds. What can he do, surrounded as he is with insulting
tongues and ravenous jaws? Despair is capable of inspiring even the timorous
breast. Having nothing to hope, he forgets to fear. He faces about and makes a
resolute stand. The trunk of a sturdy tree covers his rear, and his own
branching horns defend him in front. He rushes upon his adversaries; goars
some; lays others grovelling on the turf; and makes the whole coward pack give
way. Encouraged by this unexpected success, his hopes revive. He rallies once
again his drooping spirits; exerts the little remainder of his strength; and
springs through the midst of the retiring route. It is his last, last chance.
He stretches every nerve; once more loses sight of the rabble from the kennel;
and, finding no security on the land, takes to the water. He throws his burning
sides into the river; sails down the cooling stream; and slinks away to the
verge of some little shelving island; there, finding a resting place for his
feet, he skulks close to the shady margin. All immersed in the waves, excepting
only his nostrils, he baffles, for a while, the prying eye of man, and the
keener smell of brute. Discovered at length, and forced to quit this unavailing
refuge, he climbs the slippery bank. Unable to fly any longer, he stands at bay
against an aged willow. Stands, all faint with toil, and sobbing with anguish.
The crowds that gather round him, with merciless and outrageous transport,
triumph in his misery. A multitude of bloodthirsty throats, joined with the
sonorous horn, ring his funeral knell. The tears, till this fatal instant
unknown, gush from his languishing eyes, and roll down his reeking cheeks. He
casts one more look on the woods, the lawns, the pleasing scenes of his former
delights; and, determined to die, prepares to sell his life as dear as
possible. At this most critical juncture, the royal sportsman comes up. He sees
the distressed creature, and, as soon as he sees, he pities. He issues his high
command. The prohibitary signal is given. The pack, though raving for blood,
are checked in a moment, and called off from the prey. Disappointed and
growling, they retire, and leave the intended victim of their fury to enjoy his
liberty, his safety, and his ease."

From this pleasing description of the stag-hunt, and the clemency of its
period, Mr. Hervey shows the sensibility of a sinner pursued by the law of his
creator, until he obtains mercy through Jesus the king of grace. Dialogues,
vol. ii. dial. ix. which our readers may peruse at leisure. We close this piece
with a few scripture remarks.

This animal, as parting the hoof and chewing the cud, was denominated clean by
the Mosaic law; and all might partake of it, with this prohibition, not to eat
its blood, but to pour it upon the ground like water. Exodus xiv. 5. xv. 22.

From the implacability of the deer to the serpent, the beauty of its form, the
swiftness of its motion, as well as its quickness of sight, and warmth of
affection, it is used as a scripture emblem of Christ the Lord Messiah. Turn,
my beloved, and be thou like a roe, or a young heart, upon the mountains of
Bether. Sol. Song ii. 17. He is, indeed, according to the Hebrew title of the
22d psalm, the hind of the morning, early appointed to visit the Bether
mountains of division between God and man; to destroy the works of the old
serpent, the devil; and, although like a stag upon the forest, he should be
hunted by men as a pack of the most voracious hounds, (accurately described in
this very 22d chapter) he should thereby be able to sustain the souls of his
people with his crucified flesh! Nor improperly is he called the hind of the
morning; looking lovely and beautiful as the morning; swift and cheerful as the
hind when it rises from its rest and runs its course; speedily hastening, as
the beloved of our souls, to relieve and to comfort us under the sorrows of our
life. And on the resurrection morning he shall come, with inconceivable
swiftness, to receive and to embrace the souls of his redeemed, transmitting
them to yonder state of blessedness for ever!

To describe the benefits of Christ, and the virtue of his grace upon the soul
of man, who, by nature, has neither will nor power to walk with God, and to
discharge those duties which are connected with our peace, holiness, and
happiness, God has said, by the prophet Isaiah, that the lame man shall leap
as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing. xxxv. 6. So great a change
does this grace make in healing and animating the soul in all holy exercises,
that the man who feels it acknowledges, with Habakkuk, the favor to come alone
from God. iii. 19. The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like
hind's feet, and he will make me to walk upon my high places. And how justly
does this animal of the chase describe the intense exercises of the christian's
heart and life? Like the over-driven heart, the believer finds himself pursued,
and sometimes is surrounded with a pack of vile, enraged foes! Yet, God is his
never failing refuge; he has waters to which he can repair to animate his soul;
and frequently he unites with persecuted David, as the heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. Psm. xlii. I. And as the
cooling stream of the brook refreshes the panting, hunted heart, to urge on his
way in spite of every pursuer, so the love and favor of God replenish the
parched soul of man until he shall cross the black sea of death, and gain the
shore of infinite blessedness, where neither tears, sins, nor foes invade; but
perfect, undisturbed repose for ever reigns.

ON HEARING THE GOSPEL.
SOME people hear the gospel as a butterfly rests upon a flower, without being
at all the better for it; others hear the gospel as a spider visits a flower,
and would, if possible, extract poison from the rose of Sharon: but there are a
happy few who attend the gospel as a be settles upon a flower, enjoy its
fragrance, imbibe its honey, and return home richly laden with its invaluable
sweets.

To the Editor of the Christian's Pocket Library.
SIR,
PERCEIVING you have gratified some of your correspondents with a solution to
several pleasing questions, you will give me leave to solicit the meaning of 1
Cor. xv. 29. Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the
dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?

A VISIT TO THE HOUSE OF WOE: A DIALOGUE.
TO me, no social duty appears more gratifying to the finer feelings of the
soul, nor more strongly recommended in the scripture, than to visit the needy
and the distressed. I therefore resolved to call upon a christian neighbor,
whom I heard was immersed in affliction.

On entering his chamber, I found him reclined upon his bed, so full of grief
and dejection as scarce able to direct his eyes to his visitor. I took a seat
at his side, and addressed him with all that tenderness my heart could dictate.
Silence sat upon his lips -- he bowed -- he mourned within his soul! Perceiving
his spirit full charged with sorrow, and that under his present oppression,
conversation might be ineffectual, I proposed to address the MOST HIGH in
prayer on his behalf. Acquiescing by an expressive change of countenance, I
attempted to pour out my heart in supplication. On rising, with an intention to
depart, I presented him my hand: while embracing it, the melting tear fell from
his eyes. Presuming his breast might now find a degree of vent, I resumed my
chair, and thus addressed him: --

A. Remember, Sir, no affliction can be too great for an ALMIGHTY GOD to
remove, or to support you under. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustain thee. Psalm. lv. 22. No man is without some burden, though some are
heavier than others; all are the fruit of our own sin; and, if God bestows
sustaining grace, the burden, eventually, shall prove a blessing in disguise.


B. O that I could so believe! -- my burden crushes me, almost, to the dust of
death! -- I sink, and feel not the virtue of sustaining grace.


A. Wait patiently, and submissively, upon the Lord; be of good courage, and he
shall strengthen your heart. Though he cause grief, yet will he have
compassion. Darkness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.


B. The loss of my dearest earthly joys, though torn from my breast by the
gristly hand of death, I could more easily support, had I the presence of my
God! -- But, alas! my soul mourns in thick darkness -- in darkness most
sensibly severe!


A. To lose a bosom friend, and to consign two lovely babes to the recess of
soul corruption, is an affliction that awakens our most tender feelings, and
leaves such deep impressions on the heart which nature cannot erase. The
absence of your Savior's smiles must assuredly add keenness to your sorrow; --
yet, in this, remember, your case is by no means singular; -- the most valuable
of the saints of God have felt the same. Job, under fore disease of body, the
loss of full-grown offspring, and the severe reflections, both of wife and
friends, had also the double calamity of an absent God. Oh, said JOB, that I
knew where I might find him! that I might come even to his seat! Behold, I go
forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him. On the
left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him; he hides himself on the
right hand, that I cannot see him. Job xxiii. 3, 8, 9. Yet, the Lord turned
again, and blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning. DAVID, who
had the honorable appellation of the man after God's own heart, knew the
sorrow occasioned by the withdrawment of the presence of his God. Why stand
thou afar off, O Lord? why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble? Psalm. x. I.
Now, my dear afflicted friend, do you think the dealings of God unmeasurably
severe to you? Have you any reason either to expect or devise, that God should
deal otherwise with you? This dark cloud, therefore, will make the beams of
heavenly love shine yet brighter upon your heart than hitherto you have felt!
God usually takes away the creature from his servants, that he might give them
more of himself. Yet a little while, and you shall exclaim with David, My heart
is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise! Psalm. lvii. 7.


B. Your advice is just: -- it awakens my grateful attention. But, O Sir, my
heart melts beneath the hand of God! I am all stupidity; -- I sometimes think
with Jonah, I do well to be angry; I look and wait for relief and comfort, but
in vain! I would pray, but a thick, impenetrable cloud covers my heart. I am
like a benighted, weary traveller, who has lost his guide and his path; and
lest danger, yet greater, should await me, I seem willing thus to cast myself
down! O for the morning light!


A. Is not our God the God of all grace? 1 Peter v. 10. And was it not said to
the Corinthians, God is able to make all grace abound toward you? 2 Cor. ix.
8. And why not the same grace abound to you? Are your iniquities great? Behold
grace to pardon all your sins! Are your troubles unsupportable? Here is great
grace from a great Savior, who says, My grace is sufficient for you. 2 Cor.
xii. 9. Are your sufferings greater than either Joseph's, David's or Paul's?
They are not; yet, let me tell you^ were all their successive sorrows collected
into one bundle, and laid upon your back, the God of all grace can support you,
for he has said, As thy day, thy strength shall be. Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 25. God
pardoned their sins -- he healed their souls -- he dried up their tears -- and
he turned their murmuring into joy! They lost nothing in the furnace of their
affliction, but their dross; and came forth as gold with double luster.


B. It is true. The recital might make impression upon any heart but mine.
Could I obtain supporting grace, and leave myself with God, my heart would feel
the reverse to its present complaint.


A. You may not now feel that comfortable support you wish; but supported you
undoubtedly are, and that by an unseen, gracious hand; else your frail nature
would bow still lower, and your spirits drive much farther on the borders of
deep despair. God can, even now, add to your affliction; give the roaring
tempter a few more links of chain to harrass you with vile, accursed things;
and, likewise, remove from you many creature comforts, which his goodness has
spared. Thus lower might he let you fall into the deep dungeon of affliction,
and, after all, raise you up again to sing of his goodness and his power!


B. I already feel the tempter's darts; -- from my present most wretched state
of soul, and my distance from the Savior's love, I am induced, notwithstanding
my long profession of religion, to question, if ever I knew the Lord aright, or
felt the power of changing grace?


A. It is evident, that God does not willingly afflict the children of men; and
that the fruit of all is, to take away sin. Isa. xxvii. 9. Although I never
heard you had offended in any public manner, yet I would wish you to examine if
the omission of some known duty, or the gratification of some known sin, may
not have been the leading step to your present sufferings. I will fold down two
or three passages on this subject, in the Bible I see here upon your table, and
you can read and meditate upon them at your leisure. Jer. ii. 17. Hosea iv. 17.
Hosea xiv. 1, 2, 8. As to questioning your former profession and experience, it
is not uncommon in affliction, and when the heart goes astray from the Lord.
This you will find in the 77th Psalm. and in Isa. xlix. 13 -- 16. My unbelieving
heart has too often been guilty of this folly; but, under such
God-dishonouring, soul-distressing frames, two duties appear very necessary.
Call to remembrance the former days in which ye were illuminated. Heb. x. 32.
The first impressions of your mind; your newborn hopes; the time, the place,
when you commenced the christian course; this, probably, may produce some
unexpected, deep conviction, you cannot deny, but that Jesus once obtained both
your heart and hand!


B. True, Sir; -- it is a necessary duty; -- I must confess I knew such days;
-- days, precious even in recollection! No, I will not, -- I dare not deny;
BLESSED SAVIOR, thou wast then most sweet to me! O that it were with me as in
months past! Pray, Sir, what other duty did you mean?


A. It is this -- Go to Christ as though you had never gone before; -- begin
again, as though you never had begun. For this you have many promises to
encourage you: Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. John vi. 37.
Whether you had been before or not, let your temptations, burdens, and
discouragements be what they may, Go to Jesus by faith and prayer, he will not
cast you out!


B. If you will bear with me, I will tell you one severe temptation that hovers
upon my heart: it is, that my present sufferings are the effect of God's
vindictive wrath, and are the marks of his vengeance.


A. This distressed apprehension may arise from your not duly considering the
nature of those afflictions with which God visits his children: Not as actual
punishments inflicted according to the demands of law and justice, but as
fatherly corrections, loving the child, yet chastising him for follies or
disobedience; and which fail not to produce the richest benefits. As Moses said
unto the Israelites, so will I say to you -- Thou shall consider in thy heart,
that as a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee. Deuteronomy.
viii. 5. This is a subject duly and seriously to be weighed by all; and
especially by those in affliction, that they might know the nature of the
Divine conduct to them: that it is not in vindictive wrath an absolute
punishment for sin is evident; for, Christ has once suffered for sin; and God
cannot require double satisfaction. Besides, what we are capable of feeling in
this life, is but a faint sense of sin; whereas the wicked in hell must have
both sense and punishment. These chastisements, which fall upon a man of grace,
are fruits of God's paternal love, and sooner or later will not fail to humble
the heart, and return the prodigal to his father's arms. Whom the Lord loves
he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives. Heb. xii. 6. Now, my
friend, kiss the rod. It is in a father's hand. It is intended for your good.
Pray for faith to view yourself in his most gracious hand; and beg, rather that
your soul may be sanctified under your sorrows, than that you should be
delivered out of them with hardness of heart. He that suffered on the cross for
your sins, can sustain you under your burdens, and give you an happy issue. --
I perceive company now to approach your gate; I must therefore take my leave of
you, wishing the God of all consolation may revive and restore both your body
and soul.


B. Adieu, my dear Sir, and while I thank you for your visit and salutary
advice, I hope I can say, you do not leave me worse than you found me. -- Adieu.


GLEANINGS FROM THE GOSPEL FEAST.
Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.
John vi. 12.
1. PRAYER is the breath of a regenerate man.

Gill.

2. Nothing can reconcile the mind to afflictive allotments, but looking on
them as covenant-dispensations.

W. Mason.

3. There will be mistakes in divinity while men preach; and errors in
government while men govern.

Sir D. Charleton.

4. As a weak hand can tie the marriage-knot, so a weak faith can lay hold on a
strong Christ.

Cripplegate's Lectures.

5. When the flowers in a man's garden die, yet he can delight in his land and
his money: so a christian, when the creature fades, can rejoice in the
inheritance, the riches of Christ in glory.

Ibid.

6. We may be losers for God, but we shall never be losers by him.

Ibid.

7. It is of the Lord's mercy, that our affliction is not execution, but
correction. He that deserved hanging may be glad to escape with whipping.

Brooks.

8. The cross of Christ (or suffering for his sake) is a crabbed tree to look
at, but sweet and fair is the fruit it yields.

Rutherford.

9. All the afflictions that a saint is exercised with, are neither too
numerous nor too sharp. A great deal of rust requires a rough file.

M. Brown.

10. David's pen never wrote more sweetly than when dipped in the ink of
affliction.

W. Mason.

11. To believe the gospel, is but to give God credit for being wiser than
ourselves.

Madan.

12. Some people, it is to be feared, follow the gospel, as a shark follows a
ship -- for a dinner.

Madan.

13. That which is now our idol may quickly become our burden; and we know not
how soon we may be sick of what we were lately sick for.

Henry.

14. As at the deluge, the waters covered the highest mountains, as well as
lowest hills; so, pardoning mercy conceals the greatest sins as well as the
least.

Bates.

15. By a work of grace in thee, thou may as surely know thou art elected,
as if thou had stood at God's elbow when he wrote thy name in the book of
life.

Gurnall.

A SCRAP, Found in the Study of the late Rev. R. B. --.
-- LAST Sabbath, a young man, newly brought to enjoy a Savior's love, called
upon me. Such a serious cheerfulness and child-like simplicity appeared in him
as won my heart, and made me recollect what I once felt, but feel not now. How
soon we step out of petticoats into breeches, and outgrow the charming
child-like simplicity of the new birth! Either we become wise by knowledge,
vain through our gifts, or important by our station. Self-sufficiency creeps
upon us insensibly, like the shades of the evening, till we are quite
overwhelmed by it; and the bloom of simplicity, like the bloom of a plumb when
wiped off, is not to be recovered, at least in its primitive blush. Many years
have I been praying for a child-like spirit; but did not know I was praying, or
did not intend praying for a furnace of affliction to produce it! Well! I have
been in the fire of tribulation six years, and have scarcely recovered a grain
of christian simplicity yet; -- some little bloom appears upon the plumb, at
times, but seems more like the painter's stroke than the tint of nature. I
preach against self-sufficiency, and renounce it stiffly in my creed, but
treasure it up secretly in my bosom. What a cheat and a rogue is a man to
himself! O for petticoats again, to look, and talk, and walk, like a child!

DIFFERENT CLAIMS TO THE MESSIAH SHIP.
FROM the sublimity of the character of the MESSIAH, and the innumerable
benefits to be derived from him by the world, as described by the ancient
prophets, no wonder so many impostors should have arisen, and laid claim to the
office. Of this Jesus Christ forewarned his disciples: -- There shall arise
false christ's, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders;
insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect. Behold,
I have told you before. Mat. xxiv. 24, 25. The event has verified his
prediction; and, to gratify our readers, we shall, from the best authority,
enumerate the chief of those impostors that have claimed the public attention!

SIMON, the sorcerer, set himself forth, in the apostlic age, and by multitude,
both of small and great, was acknowledged the great power of God; yet he soon
proved himself to be in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity.
Acts viii. In the following age, BARCHOCHEBAS, by his impostures, drew the most
terrible persecutions imaginable on the Jews: his name denotes Son of the Star,
applying to himself the prophecy of Balaam. Numb. xxiv. 17. The number of Jews
who perished on account of this impostor is incredible! -- In the fifth
century, about the year 434, in the isle of Candy, or Crete, appeared a false
Messiah, called MOSES, pretending to be the ancient legislator of the Jews,
come down from heaven to procure them a passage through the sea to Judea. Great
numbers jumped into the sea, expecting it would open and give them passage. In
this attempt many were drowned; after which the impostor disappeared. Socrat.
Hist. Eccles. -- In the following age, in the year 530, a false Messiah, called
JULIAN, appeared in Palestine: under him the Jews took up arms, but the emperor
Justinian sending some troops against them, Julian was taken and executed, and
his party dispersed. In 714, a Jew, called Serenus, pretended to the Spanish
Jews, that he would conduct them to Palestine; but they soon found him to be an
impostor. Marca Hist. de Bearn. -- The twelfth century was very fruitful in
impostors of this kind, there appearing no less than seven or eight in France,
Spain, Persia, etc. The last century produced a very famous instance: about the
year 1666, one ZABATI TZEVI, a native of Aleppo, or Smyrna, set up for a
Messiah. He was summoned before the heads of the synagogue at Smyrna, and being
convicted, was condemned to death; but none could be found to execute the
sentence; he was therefore banished; and, passing through Greece, came to
Alexandria, from thence to Gaza, where he found a Jew, named Nathan Levi, whom
he persuaded to act the part of the prophet Elias. Many of the Jews were
deceived. He afterward came to Constantinople, where he was apprehended, and
ordered to be run through with a sword; to avoid which, he turned Mussulman.
Basnage's Hist. de Juiss.

Some of our readers, probably, expect, in this enumeration, we should have
named Mahomet, the pretended prophet of Arabia, who made his appearance in the
year 622, but he lay no claim to the Messiahship, to the performance of
miracles, nor to be a subject of the prophecies. He approved the prophetic
character of JESUS CHRIST, as being extraordinary, and in his paradisaical
vision is said to homage the SAVIOR, though all other beings bowed to him. It
is well known that Mahomet built his fabric upon the supposed nullity of the
law of Moses, and the abuse of the christian religion by its professors; in
consequence of which, he said, God had sent him into the world, and appointed
him his prophet.

May not believers on the Lord Christ, the Son of God, in every age exclaim,
with the primitive disciples, We have found the Messiah, which is, being
interpreted, the Christ. John i. 41. With the Bible in our hand, we may clearly
perceive, that every feature predicted in the character of Messiah -- the
fullness of time in which he should appear -- the miracles by which he should
attest his mission -- his grand design in making an offering for sin -- his
province to build the house of the Lord, and to bear its glory -- his ability
to secure, in his own person, a triumphant resurrection from the dead, with
every blessing, spiritual and eternal, that can form the moral happiness of
man. These great and glorious things are found in Jesus; none of which have
been possessed by any before -- none since his appearing. He is full of grace
and truth, a suitable Savior for lost man; the experience of whose blessing
attunes the heart, and lays a solid basis for present peace and future glory!

" The seas shall waste, the skies in smoke decay,
" Rocks fall to dust, and mountains melt away;
" But fixed his word, his saving power remains;
" Thy realm for ever lasts; thy own MESSIAH reigns!"
POETRY.
PARENTAL COUNSEL: Addressed to a Youth on his Entrance upon the World.
As when a trav'ller, on his way, attains
An height which overlooks his neighboring plains,
While the declining sun adorns the scene,
With golden rays, enlivening and serene,
His soul revives as he pursues his way,
In hope to reach his home by close of day;
And there to his loved family impart
The joys which cheered, and pains which pressed his heart:
So I, long wandering in this vale of tears,
Though often assailed by threatening foes and fears,
With home in view, would thankfully survey
The toils and comforts of Life's checkered way;
And whilst with glowing gratitude I raise
An Eben-ezer to my Savior's praise,
Would point to erring inexperienc'd youth,
The path which leads to happiness and truth.
Attend, my Thereon, to a parent's voice:
It Is thine to make his trembling heart rejoice;
To sooth for him Life's last afflictive stage,
Or point with double force the pangs of age.
With many an anxious fear he marked thy way,
Through helpless infancy to youthful day,
And now commits thee to HIS guardian care,
Before whose presence we must soon appear;
Yet ere thou enter on a world of pain,
Where thoughtless mortals seek for bliss in vain;
Which spreads its snares and with delusive joy,
Like the soft Siren, smiles but to destroy.
Ere yet we part, perhaps no more to meet
Till we shall stand before the judgment seat;
Lend, I entreat thee, an attentive ear,
To my last counsel, and my earnest prayer.
Soon as the morning light salutes thine eyes,
To heaven present thy grateful sacrifice:
And through the Mediator's precious blood,
Implore the grace and blessing of thy God.
Thrice happy they who venture near his throne,
And in the Surety claim him for their own;
Their Father, Portion, Counselor, and Friend,
Whose mercy, like his nature, knows no end.
Dear to thy soul be every sacred page,
Youth's noblest monitor -- the staff of age.
Whatever the scoffing infidel may say,
"Retire and read thy Bible to be gay."
To guide our feet, its sacred precepts shine,
To cheer our hearts, its promises divine,
And heaven's own signature attests each line.
With holy reverence keep God's hallowed day,
Nor inforbidden paths with sinners stray;
With willing feet to Zion's gates repair,
Where kindred spirits join in praise and prayer;
And prove the Sabbath a delightful rest,
Of all our days the brightest and the best;
Wherein the saints, with ecstacy of heart,
Can "sing together though they dwell apart,"
To Wisdom's voice a fixed attention give:
"Forsake the foolish, and thy soul shall live."
Allured by Vanity's fantastic show,
They grasp the shade, and let the substance go,
How vain is all their restless search to find
A good to satisfy the immortal mind!
Man formed for God at first, can know no rest,
Till grace divine re-animate his breast.
But, while the giddy herd, with careless feet,
On Pleasure's flowery plains destruction meet,
Flee the enticing ruin, and attend
The invitation of the sinner's friend:
" Give me thine heart, my son," the Savior cries,
" And learn divine realities to prize:
" My ways are pleasantness, my paths are peace:
" The treasures I bestow can never decrease,
" More choice than finest gold, or rubies bright,
" Than health more sweet, more cheerful than the light.
" My powerful arm shall all thy foes control,
" And endless glory crown thy heaven-born soul."
Yield then thine heart to him, nor longer rove
From the blessed center of eternal love;
Acknowledge him in all thy future ways,
And be thy life devoted to his praise.
Seek first the Savior's grace if thou would know
True peace with God, or happiness below;
That grace enjoyed, thou will be truly blessed,
However by men despised or sorrow pressed;
United to the Lord by faith divine,
Pardon, and life, and righteousness are thine.
Saved from the power of Sin's detested reign,
Nor longer bound by Satan's cruel chain,
Thy favored soul true liberty shall prove,
And gladly urge its way to joys above.
Through devious wastes, and dangers yet unknown,
The gracious Comforter shall lead thee on,
Till, the last conflict won, thy spirit rise,
To join the holy triumphs of the skies!
There shall the shining hosts unite to sing
The reigning grace of Christ, their God and King,
And with increasing joy the theme prolong,
While ceaseless hallelujahs swell the song!
J. A. KNIGHT.

PRAYER FOR UNIVERSAL PEACE.
O HASTE the time, thou Prince of Peace,
When war no more shall lift the shield,
But wrath, and strife, and lust of spo^l,
To thee their sanguine trophies yield.
Repress the horrid waste of life,
Destroy the warrior's trade in blood,
And say, to all the tribes of earth,
Be still, and know that I am God.
Lord Jesus, speed the promised day
When Love shall hold unbounded reign,
And Union sheath the flaming sword
That hangs over Desolation's plain.
Ah! come, ye happy moments, come,
When the whole earth shall own one Lord;
And thou, THE PRINCE, THE KING OF PEACE,
In peace, for ever be adored.
THE DYING BELIEVER TO HIS SOUL.
DEATHLESS principle arise;
Soar, thou native of the skies:
Pearl of price, by Jesus bought,
To his glorious likeness wrought.
Go, to shine before his throne,
Deck his mediatorial crown;
Go, his triumphs to adorn;
Made for GOD, to GOD return.
Lo, he beckons from on high!
Fearless to his presence fly:
Thine the merit of his blood,
Thine the righteousness of GOD*
Angels, joyful to attend,
Hovering round thy pillow bend,
Wait to catch the signal given,
And escort thee quick to heaven.
Is thy earthly house distressed?
Willing to retain her guest?
It Is not thou, but she, must die;
Fly, celestial tenant fly!
Burst thy shackles, drop thy clay,
Sweetly breathe thyself away:
Singing, to thy crown remove,
Swift of wing, and fired with love.
Shudder not to pass the stream:
Venture all thy care on him;
Him, whose dying love and power,
Stilled its tossing, hushed its roar.
Safe is the expanded wave,
Gentle as a summer's eve:
Not one object of his care
Ever suffered shipwreck there.
See the haven full in view!
Love divine shall bear thee through:
Trust to that propitious gale;
Weigh thy anchor, spread thy sail.
Saints in glory perfect made,
Wait thy passage through the shade:
Ardent for thy coming over,
See, they throng the blissful shore.
Mount their transports to improve,
Join the longing choir above;
Swiftly to their wish be given;
Kindle higher joy in heaven.
Such the prospects that arise,
To the dying Christian's eyes!
Such the glorious vista faith
Opens through the shades of death!
A. T.

VARIOUS CHARACTERS.
A PROFESSOR.
WITH sober look and moderate walk,
And tongue smooth tipped with Bible talk,
Religion's track he will seem to tread,
Though numbered still amongst the dead.
A POSSESSOR.
With heavenly light and life possessed,
With genuine love of Christ impressed,
Both self and sin he daily flies,
And still on sovereign grace relies.
A HEARER.
With carriage grave and habit neat,
On leisure days he will take his seat;
Attentive seems, though what he hears
No further reaches than his ears.
A DOER.
With ready mind and steady pace
Behold him run the Christian race:
Encouraged by the prize in view,
He hears the word, and does it too,
And proves his faith divinely true.
P. P.

THE CHRISTIAN'S POCKET LIBRARY.
NO. IV. -- VOL. II.
AN ESSAY On the LAW and the GOSPEL. By the Reverend SAMUEL JONES, D. D.
Pennsylvania.
BETWEEN the Law and the Gospel there is both a connection and a material
difference. The blending of these together, or treating them in an indistinct
manner, has ever been a source of error. It is, therefore, the more necessary
to keep each of them in its proper place, especially as a legal spirit is so
natural to man, and so difficult to be guarded against.

The difference between the Law and the Gospel is very obvious. The Law
denounces wrath -- the Gospel publishes peace. The Law convinces of guilt --
the Gospel brings an acquittance. The Law pronounces sentence -- the Gospel
presents a pardon. The Law requires satisfaction to the last mite -- the Gospel
announces satisfaction made by Christ in full. The Law knows nothing of mercy
-- the Gospel knows nothing else. In the Law righteousness, justice, and truth,
shine gloriously -- in the Gospel, love, grace, mercy, condescension, and
compassion, shine with much more resplendent glory! In the Gospel we find free
grace, free mercy, free pardon, faith and repentance are freely given; and with
them a new heart, a new nature, new life -- all is new -- all is free. The
Gospel, as the word signifies, is good message, good news, glad tidings. The
language of the Angels, at the birth of Christ, was, Behold! we bring you glad
tidings of great joy. Luke ii. 10. The evangelic Prophet Isaiah, in that
memorable passage, applied by our blessed Lord to himself and the gospel day,
Luke iv. 18, 19. breaks out in the following gospel strain: The spirit of the
Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings
to the meek; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty
to the captives, and the opening of the prison doors to them that are bound; to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord; to comfort all that mourn; to appoint
unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness. Isaiah
lxi. 1 -- 6.

The Gospel is sometimes called the Gospel of the grace of God, Acts xx. 24.
because it publishes the rich grace and mercy of God in Christ Jesus. It is
also called the Gospel of salvation, Ephesians. i. 13. Acts xiii. 26. because it
brings to light the way of life and salvation, provided of God for lost,
perishing sinners. Likewise, the Gospel of peace, proclaiming peace, made by
the peace-speaking blood of Christ; diffusing peace and tranquillity into
depressed minds; producing a peaceable disposition, conducting the feet in the
paths of peace, and nurturing the soul for the realms of peace and blessedness
in an eternal state!

The Gospel brings glad tidings of good things, -- good things done for us;
atonement being made for us, our debt of sin fully paid, a righteousness
wrought out, pardon and acceptance procured; good things wrought in us,
regeneration, faith, hope; love, obedience, every grace habitually to prepare
us for heaven; all the good things of Providence and grace that are necessary
for our present use, during our passage through life, and, in their final
issue, the good things of heaven, the beatific state! The gospel, therefore, is
a discovery of all good things for time, and for eternity; such infinite
blessedness which is beyond what the tongues of angels and of men can express,
or the powers of the human mind conceive!

We add, the Gospel is a matter of pure revelation from God, entirely unknown
and imperceivable by the light of nature. The revelation of this Gospel has
been progressive in every age. The first dawning of the Gospel, consequently
the first solid ground of hope, appeared to Adam, in the promise that was made
of the seed of the woman who was to bruise the serpent's head. Genesis iii. 15.
Here the eternal counsels of the grace of God began to unfold! In the promise
made to Abraham, which was afterward renewed to Isaac and to Jacob, the same
gospel grace breaks forth with clearer light. What had before been spoken, in
more general terms, of the seed of the woman, is now said, in a more particular
manner, of the seed of Abraham. Genesis xxii. 18. To Jacob, the very time of
accomplishing the promise was pointed out. Genesis xlix. 10. Moses renders the
promise still more manifest, while he points out a character and likeness.
Deuteronomy. xvii. 15. In the prophets, who were much further advanced in the
dispensation of the promises, approaching to the fullness of time, hastening to
the coming of the Messiah, you have his virgin mother, Isaiah vii. 5. place of
birth, Micah v. 2. and other circumstances pointed out. Thus we observe the
order and progress of the divine promises, gathering light and strength as they
advance. When the first intimation of a Savior was given, he was to be sought
for among all the human race; afterward we are directed to the particular seed
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; of Jacob's numerous sons the tribe of Judah is
taken; of the tribe of Judah the family of Jesse; and of Jesse's sons the house
of David: thus reducing, as it were, to a point, what had at first been
delivered but in very general terms.

These are some of the leading and principal discoveries that were made to the
world of our blessed Savior before his incarnation. Thus did the promises and
the prophesies become brighter and brighter, until at last they shone more
clear in their full accomplishments, when the sun of righteousness rose,
dispelling darkness, and spreading the light of gospel-day.

The revelation of this Gospel has been made known to such nations, and the
application of it made to such individuals of those nations, as it seemed good
to the will and pleasure of God. It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. Romans ix. 16.

The application of the gospel, under the influence of the SPIRIT OF GOD, in
the work of conviction and conversion, is absolutely necessary, in order to our
receiving sensible benefit from it. In this precious work of grace on the
heart, the law, and the gospel, as means, go hand in hand, and are often
mentioned in the same verse. By the one is the knowledge of sin, by the other
the discovery of deliverance. The one works despair, the other faith and hope.

Thus, the glorious Gospel, in every point of view, is the work of the rich and
sovereign grace and mercy of God, that the plan of redemption was concerted,
published, and applied to the elect, with all its saving benefits. O the
glorious and blessed Gospel! O the sovereign grace and mercy of God, in and
through a precious Redeemer! to HIM be glory for ever and for ever -- and let
all the redeemed on earth and in heaven say, amen!

ANECDOTE OF PRESIDENT EDWARDS.
PRESIDENT Edwards tells of himself the following anecdote. -- I once told a
boy of about thirteen years of age, that a piece of any matter of two inches
square was eight times as big as a piece of one inch square. He seemed, at
first, not to think me in earnest; but when I had taken pains to convince him
that I knew what I said to be true, he appeared astonished I was so positive;
and would argue, how is it possible for two inches to be one inch. It seemed to
him to be as evident a contradiction as that that which was twice so long, and
twice so broad, and twice so thick, should be eight times as large, or that
twice one should make eight, or any other absurdity whatever.

When I afterward showed him the truth of it, by cutting out two cubes, one an
inch, the other two inches square, and then cut the two inch cube into eight
equal parts, he counted them over and over, and seemed as astonished as though
there had been some witchcraft in the case; he could hardly believe it, for he
was a stranger to the reason.

"I believe," adds that great man, "it was a much more difficult mystery to him
than the Trinity ordinarily is to men, and seemed more palpably contradictory,
than any doctrine of our religion to the Socinian and Deist. And why should we
not suppose that there may be some things that are true that may be as much
above our understanding, and as difficult to them, as the truth respecting the
cubes was to this boy? Doubtless there is a far greater difference between our
understanding and God's, than between this boy's and the greatest philosopher's
or mathematician's."

SACRAMENTAL REFLECTIONS ON JOHN XX. 26.
-- Then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said,
Peace be unto you.
THEN, after the sufferings, crucifixion, death and burial of the Lord Jesus;
when his disciples were depressed by unbelief, and harrassed by their
countrymen the Jews, being met together, the doors being shut, Jesus came and
stood in the midst, and pronounced peace upon their waiting souls. May the same
adored Savior meet with us, who now desire to meet with him at his own table!
May he graciously pronounce peace to every heart, and bid us go from strength
to strength, till we see his face in brightest vision in everlasting bliss!

1. This was a supernatural, miraculous visit. Jesus came, the doors being
shut; the account of which has given occasion to some to object to this part of
scripture history; because it is a philosophical maxim, that one material body
cannot penetrate another; consequently the material body of Jesus could not
pass through the material door unopened, and so appear to his disciples. To
this we reply, The body of Jesus, by death, was sown a natural body, but was
raised a spiritual body; consequently materiality is absorbed in spirit. And,
as a proof of his possessing this spirituality, he eluded the embrace of Mary,
saying, Touch me not yet, for I am not yet ascended to my Father and your
Father. Therefore we believe his spiritual body capable of such an
extraordinary visit to his disciples. -- The DIVINITY OF CHRIST gives us
another ground to object to this deistical sentiment. Where two or three are
met together in my name, there am I in the midst of them, said Jesus, as a
proof of his omnipresence. This Savior conversed with Abraham; with Moses in
the burning bush; with the three worthies in the fiery furnace; and could as
easily converse with his disciples, as met together in secret for fear of the
Jews. The reality of this visit is firmly and solemnly believed by all whose
heart, like Lydia's, the Lord has opened. Admit that one material body cannot
penetrate another -- we apply this to the human heart, that no man, minister or
friend, can open the heart, and convey blessings to another; yet Christ can,
and does; for he that made us can alone save us, and turn our hearts unto
himself. A proof of this I presume to believe is found in the breasts of many
of my readers; carrying with it the clearest conviction of the eternal power
and Godhead of the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. This visit of Christ to his disciples was highly seasonable. They were
persecuted by their brethren the Jews, and therefore shut the doors, for fear,
upon themselves: and at this time they were harrassed with doubts and fears,
"if Jesus was indeed the Christ." Full of despondency, they met together, no
doubt, to inquire into the reality of the resurrection of Jesus, and of his
being the Messiah that should redeem Israel. Thomas, in an especial manner,
disputed the case, and would receive no satisfaction. As it was with these
primitive disciples so it is frequently with the church and people of God in
every age. Persecution, temptations, doubts, fears, and a thousand other evils,
compass them about; and, if I may so say, the door of hope appears to them shut
and barred. At such a time as this, sudden and unexpected, for Jesus to
manifest himself to them, pronounce the charming words of peace, and make the
place of his feet glorious: what an astonishing alteration does it make in the
feelings, views, language, and pleasures of the happy company!

3. This visit was particularly intended for confirmation. They had doubted --
they had questioned -- if the crucified Jesus was indeed the Savior, long
foretold, and necessary to be enjoyed. Thomas, one of the twelve, absent at a
former meeting with the disciples when Jesus came, would not believe, and said,
" Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger
into the print of his nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not
believe." The dear Savior, knowing this despondent spirit to possess his
disciples, not waiting for the testimony or inquiries of Thomas, thus
unexpectedly addressed him: -- " Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold my
hands; and reach hither thy hand and thrust it into my side, and be not
faithless, but believing." Indescribable must be the feelings of Thomas at this
address! Self-abased, convinced, and believing, he now exclaims, " My Lord and
my God!" Just so the Lord often speaks to us at his table, bids us be familiar
with his wounds, his blood, and his heart; then, O then we are ashamed at our
neglect and unbelief, prove his love and grace each day more healing, and
ascribe salvation to his most blessed name!

4. Although Thomas, by reason of his extreme doubts, was particularly
addressed, yet, it is evident that the visit was general -- to one -- to all.
Jesus said unto them, Peace be unto you. They all had this address before
Thomas was selected and brought to acknowledgment; consequently, let their
fears, hopes, duties, trials, distresses, temptations, and unbelief, be what
they may, all heard the Savior's voice, all received the peaceful blessing. In
the same manner he meets his people now, and let their circumstances be what
they may, his loving heart, his watchful eye, his gracious hand, are still the
same, and upon all; rich and poor, young and old, lambs and sheep, all find a
place beneath his sacred smiles!

5. The visit was in a measure permanent; it was not a passing by, but a
standing still. He stood in the midst, so every eye might see him, and all
enjoy his gracious visit. And here, methinks, was no questioning one another,
no calling Peter to account for the denial of his Lord, no reproving John for
his precipitance in calling down fire from heaven upon those who followed not
Jesus, nor reproof to Thomas for his negligence and unbelief; but, every eye,
every heart was engaged toward Christ, who was not only the center of the
company, but the center of their joy! Just so it is where Christ makes his
visits and commands his love: all animosities vanish; human frailties are
forgotten; of one heart and of one soul, they all embrace the precious Christ,
who is the fountain of their mutual joy! This never fails to be the case where
a revival of religion is enjoyed.

6. This visit was attended with benefits: Jesus pronounced peace unto them,
and peace flowed into every heart! Peace is a term that comprehends every
blessing we can enjoy, and is peculiarly welcome to us, who by nature are
enemies to God, and need his pardon. Jesus obtained peace by the blood of his
cross: having satisfied for sin, he now has a right to speak peace to the
sinner's heart. O that each of us may hear and feel the blissful found! --
There were no superfluous, unnecessary acts in the life of Christ; his feet
went about doing good; his eyes were fixed with compassion upon the wretched,
and his hands constantly administered relief: even when his blessed hands were
nailed open to the cross, they were filled with his own blood, which conveys
the greatest blessedness to guilty men.

The privilege of these disciples, in the enjoyment of such a visit from
Christ, was certainly very great: they saw the Lord, and their hearts were
filled with joy: but, says the same divine Lord, -- because thou have seen me
thou have believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.
V. 29. And these things are written, that we might believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing we might have life through his name.
V. 31. Our privileges are greater than those of the disciples: Jesus is now
ascended, and set down at the Father's right hand, as a sure pledge of our
glorification in heaven. -- Now the promised Spirit is to us sent down, and,
under his influence, we know, love, and enjoy the Lord! May we live in the
experience of these inestimable blessings; and may the repeated visits of
Christ to us in his church below, be the delightful prelude to an eternal
communion with him in the church triumphant above!

Thoughts on 1 Cor. xv. 29. in answer to the Question proposed thereon in our
last number, page 120. " Else what shall they do which are baptized for the
dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead?"
OUR correspondent, perhaps, is aware of certain difficulties attending this
remarkable passage. Some have taken the liberty of rendering the words, What
shall they do who are baptized OVER the dead? "it being customary among the
primitive christians, to baptize converts over the graves of believing dead;
especially over the tombs of the martyrs." But the New Testament informs us of
no such sort of baptisms. If any had existed, and intended for example, we
should have been informed of this singular rite being performed, by preference,
over the tomb of Stephen, the first christian martyr. Instead of graves and
tombs we find the river Jordan chosen, and the river AEnon, near Salim, because
there was much water there. John iii. 23. -- On this passage we shall offer a
few plain thoughts; and should our correspondent, or any other of our readers,
possess better, they are at liberty to maintain them.

It is the obvious design of the Apostle, in the whole of this chapter, by many
different arguments, to prove the nature and certainty of the resurrection of
the dead. The argument in the text is drawn from the use and practice of the
ordinance of baptism: each one, observing that rite, is said to be baptized for
the dead.

The dead here intended, instead of being Stephen, or any other believing, or
martyred, buried saint, we believe, is none other than our LORD JESUS CHRIST
himself, who was dead, and is alive for evermore. Rev. i. 18. By the example
and authority of this Savior, and into his name and death, the primitive
saints were baptized -- Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death? Romans vi. 3. Of his death and
resurrection baptism is a most striking emblem; and all who are believingly and
truly baptized do thereby profess that their souls are washed from guilt in the
Redeemer's bloody death; and, as sure as Jesus rose out of the waters of
baptism in Jordan, and out of the grave on the third day, so, assuredly, shall
the dead bodies of his saints arise in the solemn day of judgment unto
everlasting life. Now (as if the Apostle had said) if Jesus be not risen -- if
there be no future resurrection of human bodies from the grave -- then there is
no meaning in baptism; a profession thereby is totally vain; and those who are
baptized have most certainly deluded themselves The question the Apostle
proposes upon such a supposition may therefore be readily answered -- What
shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if neither Jesus nor men arise
again? -- Ans. Let them renounce their baptism; let them protest against such
delusions; let them cast contempt on the institutor; let them return again to
their former state. For, as Paul says, they are sound false witnesses against
God. 1 Cor. xv. 15. The conclusion now is evident, and which the Apostle has
drawn with his own pen, verses 16, 17, 18, 19. If the dead rise not, then is
not Christ raised: for if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet
in your sins. Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.
But, it is our happiness to declare that, we have not believed a cunningly
devised fable. Christ is risen indeed. Abundant evidences prove the event; and
the spiritual efficacy of Christ's resurrection is felt by every believer,
raising his soul from a death of sin to newness of life. Ephesians. i. 19, 20.
Therefore, this will we DO who are baptized for the dead; we will contend
earnestly for the faith of the gospel; we will rest our souls, with all their
guilt and cares, upon Jesus, who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised
again for our justification. Romans iv. 25. Firmly believing, that if we have
been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection; which was to ascend on high, and to be crowned
with glory and honor.

We shall only add, that from hence it appears that the due administration of
baptism perpetuates the history of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ;
and that every one so baptized has the additional pleasure of handing down to
posterity, by their example, this most interesting subject.

NATURAL HISTORY.
THE SUN.
1. IN the center of our mundane system, and at a just distance from the
circumvolving planets, is fixed that most magnificent and beneficial orb of
fluid fire, the SUN; designed and formed, by gracious and almighty Wisdom, to
be the grand, unfailing dispenser of light and heat, to the animal, the
mineral, and the vegetable worlds.

So essentially important are its communications to the earth and her sister
planets, that the adorable SAVIOR of sinners is, in scripture, figuratively
shadowed forth to our conceptions, by an idea taken from this brightest of
visible objects. The Lord God is a SUN and shield: He will give to his chosen
people the light and warmth of grace, below, and crown that grace with
perfection of glory in the heaven of heavens above (Psa. lxxxiv. 11.) And the
Father's endearing promise, made and fulfilled to each spiritually awakened
sinner, is, to you that fear my name shall the SUN of Righteousness arise with
healing in his beams. Mal. iv. 2.

2. How extremely small the material Sun appears in comparison to its real
magnitude! Who that is guided merely by his naked eye would suppose that
luminary to be what in fact it is, not less than a million of times larger than
our whole extensive globe of earth and seas! When purblind Reason takes upon
her to sit in judgment on the mysterious nature, decrees, and dispensations of
God, she resembles the short-sighted optics of an unlettered Indian, who,
estimating the size of the Sun by his own inadequate perceptions, imagines it
to be of much less circumference than the floor of his hut; and, was a
philosopher to apprize him of his mistake; would ask, with an unbelieving
stare, if not with a contemptuous smile, How can these things be? Between the
Sun's real and apparent dimensions, some, though exceeding little, proportion
obtains. But when the second person in the Godhead deigned to clothe himself
with mortality, his appearance bore no proportion to his infinite and essential
dignity. Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary? was the decision of
unilluminated Reason. The eye of supernatural Faith alone was able to see
through the human veil, discern the latent Deity, and behold his glory, as the
glory of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.

3. The presence of the solar beams constitutes daylight; and stars, which,
during our recess from the Sun, spangled the sable canopy of night, and
glittered to the view of gazing nations, not only cease to dazzle, but even
forbear to twinkle, and become quite invisible when the lucid monarch of the
sky regilds our hemisphere with his gladdening smile. The superior luster
absorbs the inferior; and those shining drops which so lately attracted our
admiration are lost, absolutely lost, in one vast, magnificent ocean of light.
Such is the fate of human righteousness, when CHRIST, in his fullness of
mediatorial beauty and grandeur, rises on the soul of the benighted sinner. In
our pharisaical and unconverted state (a state of tenfold deeper than Egyptian
darkness), our good works, as we are apt flatteringly to style them, charm us
with their petty, evanid radiance, As stars from absent suns have leave to
shine. But no sooner is JESUS, by the internal agency of his SPIRIT, revealed
in our hearts, and his completely finished OBEDIENCE discovered to the eye of
Faith, than we cease going about to establish our own righteousness, and
joyfully submit to the imputed righteousness of the incarnate God.
Self-excellence and self-dependence vanish in that blessed moment; and the
language of the soul is, Thy merits, O thou Redeemer of the lost! are all my
salvation; and an interest in thee is all my desire.

4. Though the Sun constantly occupies the same part of space, and is, in that
respect, fixed and immovable, it yet turns upon its own axis, and completes
its central rotation in about 25 days and six hours. This regular and perpetual
actuosity contributes, probably, to that amazing force and swiftness with which
its rays are thrown off toward the distant worlds that revolve around. -- Thus
God is, necessarily and essentially, fixed and unchangeable in his Will. He is
of one mind; who can turn him? and what his soul desires, even that he does.
Job xxiii. 13. This divine immutability is, however, connected with incessant,
omnipotent, and universal activity: governing all beings and events by his
absolute providence; and diffusing sacred light and heat, through the entire
world of his converted people, by the energy of his grace. His own sovereign
DECREE is the axis on which he moves; and the only rule by which he regulates
the whole of his effective and permissive conduct.

5. Modern astronomers have discovered what are commonly called maculae
solares: i. e. certain spots which hover near the surface of the Sun. Sometimes
a considerable number of these are visible at once; and, very often, none at
all. Philosophers are greatly divided as to the nature and cause of these solar
spots: though it is generally agreed that they are not adherent to the Sun's
disk, but suspended at some distance from it; and there is reasonable ground to
believe, that, after a temporary suspension, they fall into the body of that
grand luminary, and are instantaneously transmuted into one splendid mass with
itself. -- Whether those reputed spots be really in the Sun or not, thus much
is infallibly certain, that GOD is light, and in HIM is no darkness at all; no
error, no impurity, no defect. The afflictive distributions of his providence,
and the limited communications of his grace, may, to the benighted eye of
unregenerated reason, appear like the transitory spots which sometimes seem to
disfigure the beauty, and to impair the luster, of the Sun. But, on the
contrary, the faith of God's elect teaches its happy subjects to give their
heavenly Father unlimited credit for being perfectly wise, and just, and good;
and to wait the END of his dispensations, when every seeming spot shall vanish,
and God will make his righteousness as evident as the light, and his just
dealing as the noonday.

6. How astonishingly rapid is the transmission of light from the Sun to our
planet! I cannot display this so well as in the words of the accomplished Mr.
Derham. Physico-Theology, B. i. chapter 4.
"It is a very great act of the providence of God, that such a benefit as light
is not long in its passage from place to place: for was its motion no swifter
than the motion of the swiftest bodies upon earth (such as of a bullet out of a
great gun, or even of sound, which, next to light, is the swiftest motion we
have), in this case light would take up, in its progress from the Sun to us,
above thirty-two years at the rate of the first, and above seventeen years at
the rate of the latter motion; the inconveniences of which would be, (1.) its
energy and vigor would be greatly cooled and abated: (2.) its rays would be
less penetrant: and (3.) darkness would with greater difficulty and tardiness
be dissipated, especially by the fainter lights of our sublunary luminous
bodies.

"But, passing with such prodigious velocity, with nearly the instantaneous
swiftness of almost two hundred thousand miles in one second of time, or (which
is the same thing) being but about seven or eight minutes of an hour in coming
from the Sun to us; therefore it is, that, with all security and speed, we
receive the kindly effects and influences of that noble and useful creature of
God. Now, forasmuch as the distance between the Sun and the Earth is 86051398
miles, therefore, at the rate of seven minutes and an half, or 450 seconds, in
passing from the Sun, light will be found to fly above 191225 miles in one
second of time."

Truly wonderful as these considerations are, they yet afford but a very
inadequate illustration of the power and swiftness with which the convincing
arrows of the HOLY GHOST are often found to pierce and illuminate the soul of
an elect sinner. How was the energy of his arm revealed! how mightily, and how
rapidly did the meltings of his grace catch from heart to heart, when no sewer
than three thousand rebels were savingly subdued, and born again, under a
single sermon! Acts ii. 41. What instantaneous and irresistible lightning
issued from the eye of JESUS when he looked his revolted apostle into
repentance unto life! And, to enumerate no more instances, how great was the
glory of THAT light, which (in a moment, or in less time, if less can be)
struck the bloody pharisee of Tharsus to the ground; transformed the furious
lion into a passive lamb, and compelled a blaspheming persecutor to groan, from
the inmost of his heart, Lord, what would thou have me to do! Nor is less
power, from on high, exerted in the soul of any man who is effectually turned
to God. The same omnipotence which conquered Paul; yea, the same omnipotence
which raised JESUS himself from the dead, has actually been put forth in thee,
O reader, if thou have experienced the renewing operation of the Holy Spirit. 1 Timothy i. 16. Ephesians. i. 19, 20.

Do we wonder at the account which philosophy gives concerning the speedy
transmission of this lovely element, from its created fountain to the earth?
Let us, rather, value and admire that infinitely transcendent and more
important blessing, which the following golden passage so charmingly describes:
God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has SHINED IN OUR
HEARTS; to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the person of
Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. vi. 6.

Once more. Light does not travel from the Sun, so swiftly as the quickened
bodies of the saints shall rise into glory, honor, and immortality, when the
SAVIOR of men shall appear, and the Archangel's trumpet sound. In a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye, the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall
be changed.

7. The Sun may, in some sense, be justly styled anima mundi, or the soul of
our revolving world. So universally pervading is its influence, that nothing is
totally hid from the heat thereof. Psa. xix. 6. In a greater or less degree it
permeates the whole region of air, penetrates the inmost recesses of the earth,
and distributes a competent portion of its beams through the vast expanse of
waters. Hence, in and on our planet, there is no such thing as absolute
darkness, truly and strictly so called. If our eyes were constructed in the
same manner as those of subterraneous animals, we should, like them, be able to
see without artificial help, at any distance below the surface of the earth,
and by night as well as day. Not less universal than the solar agency is the
all-directing PROVIDENCE of God. Nothing is exempted from its notice: nothing
is excepted from its control. Chance, like absolute darkness, has no real
existence. If some events seem fortuitous, it is because we have not a
sufficiency of knowledge, by which to trace the chain of combinations that
necessarily produced them: just as some places, and some seasons, seem totally
dark to us; because our optic system is so framed and attempered, that, on
various occasions, the human eye is unable to collect those scattered and
proportionably expanded rays, from which no place whatever is entirely secluded.

8. In common conversation we frequently speak of solar eclipses. But what is
called an eclipse of the Sun, is, in fact, an eclipse of the earth; occasioned
by the Moon's interference, or transit, between the Sun and us. This
circumstance makes no alteration in the Sun itself, but only intercepts our
view of it for a time. -- From whence does darkness of soul, even darkness that
may be felt, usually originate? Never from any changeableness in our covenant
GOD, the glory of whose unvarying faithfulness and love shines the same, and
can suffer no eclipse. It Is when the world, with its fascinating honors, or
wealth, or pleasures, gets between our Lord and us, that the light of his
countenance is obstructed, and our rejoicing in him suffers a temporary eclipse.

9. Mists and vapors, rising from the earth, sometimes operate as a vail, and
hide the Sun from our eyes; 'till the superior influence of its beams overpower
the ascending nuisance, and dissipate the noxious steams. -- Thus do the
remaining corruptions of a regenerate heart dim the prospect of salvation, and
damp the fervor of inherent grace. Nothing can again brighten the former, and
warm the latter into lively exercise, but the splendor of God's repeated
rising on the soul. Happy it is, for his benighted people, that, as mists and
clouds may seem to obscure the Sun, but cannot extinguish him, nor even hinder
the access of his rays beyond a certain time; so that faithful Jehovah, who
knows what is in man, and who is still greater [in mercy and power] than our
hearts 1 John iii. 20.
can be in point of sinful depravation, will finally subdue our iniquities,
shine away our fears, purify us from all our dross, and perfectly conform us to
the image of his holiness.

10. How preferable is the original, durable and vivifying light of the Sun, to
the borrowed, evanid, unanimating luster of the Moon! The former, while it
illuminates the eye, and uncovers the elegant scenes of creation, warms the
earth, and makes it fruitful; diffuses cheerfulness, and imparts enrichment, to
no fewer than six primary, and to ten secondary worlds. -- As great is the
difference between a cool, historical faith, that floats in a contemplative
head, and the faith of God's elect, which warms, invigorates, and purifies the
heart. The former is a mere moonlight faith, which, however clear, so far as
it goes, yet leaves us as cold and as barren as it found us. The latter, like
the solar communications, enlivens and fertilizes the soul; filling it with joy
and peace, through the power of the Holy Ghost, and adorning it with the gems,
and flowers, and fruits, of grace.

A. M. T.

The Difference between the GATES of DEATH and the DOORS of the SHADOW of DEATH.
Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? or have thou seen the doors of
the shadow of death?
Job xxxviii. 17.
IN this double interrogation are described the two passages through which all
mankind, the wicked and the righteous, pass from time to eternity; -- passages
these, infinitely more different in their nature and consequences, than the
terrifying gates which conduct a prisoner to a tremendous dungeon, and the
beautiful doors which admit us to a magnificent palace.

THE GATES OF DEATH is the passage of man from this to an unseen state, and,
figuratively, designs that truly affecting period when the powers of human
nature break up; -- the cutting of the cord of life; -- the separation of the
soul from the body. This dissolution, as a pair of massy gates, forms the
division between time and eternity. As these gates unfold, Eternity appears,
and its events rush, with solemn awe, upon the mind: -- as they close with the
present state, its unbounded enjoyments vanish; and the creature, stripped of
all, bids the world an everlasting farewell! These gates to some, through
lingering disease, may long appear in view; while opening, they may grate upon
the ear like harsh thunder; but, the passage through them is instantaneous, in
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. At this prospect, our nature recoils. The
expectation of our passage through these gates embitters the cup of life, and
bows our spirits to the dust.

But whence this dreadful passage to futurity? Can that wise and holy BEING,
who has enriched us with such noble powers, strowed in our path such a variety
of earthly pleasures, appoint us such an end? Is this worthy his attributes, or
consonant with his benevolence? Surely not. God cannot take pleasure in the
destruction of the work of his own hand. Sin, sin procured mankind this
terrifying exit from time to eternity. The soul that sins, it shall die. The
wages of sin is death. By sin came death. Dust thou art, and unto dust thou
shall return. How mortifying this to our carnal pride; and how alarming to our
fears? It was our transgressions against the good law of our Creator that
compelled the hand of his justice to raise those gates of death; the
wretchedness of man's death is but the fruit of his own disobedient life.

Let us ask, to whence these gates of death conduct mankind? To determine and
explore a future state, philosophers, in every age, have employed their
greatest powers; and although Nature herself dictates the existence of such a
state, it is Revelation alone that informs us what state it is. Here we learn,
that as it is appointed to men once to die, so after this the judgment. Heb.
ix. 27. That God has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by Jesus Christ, whom he has ordained. Acts xvii. 31. Solemn
period! big with pleasure or with pain! Jesus; surrounded with myriads of
angels, shall rend the heavens, raise the dead, bring forth the imprisoned
nations of the universe, and reward every man according to his works! Mat. xvi.
27. What reward can a guilty sinner expect from the hand of that God whose law
he has transgressed, whose unnumbered mercies he has abused, and whose
conscience condemns him of every evil that merits the severest frowns from
incensed justice? What, indeed, can be expected but the severe penalty of DEATH
annexed to that law which binds us to the authority of Jehovah! Men of cool
reflection must acknowledge that nature, reason, conscience, and revelation,
harmonize in pointing to this solemn period that shall terminate our state. It
must be so. The thousands who laugh at the bugbear death, have their secret
remorse and dread of a future state, though pride and boasting infidelity
prevent confession. It is folly in the fool to say he has not thought, nor
shuddered at the opening gates of death which lead a fellow mortal to that
judgment-feat from whence there is no appeal. Who then but must drop a tear
over the miseries of human nature: so miserable a life; so wretched an end! Is
there no balm to heal our woe? Can we discover no other passage from time to
eternity, which, at least, may mitigate the pangs of dissolving nature, and
give us some degree of hope? Yes, there is a way, worthy the God who has
appointed it, and, at once, delightful and secure for mortals. There are --

THE DOORS OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH. These were erected by Jesus, the friend of
sinners, the Son of the Most High God; whose eye beheld our wretched state, and
whose heart engaged him to redeem from the jaws of death and hell. For this he
assumed our nature, became incarnate, took our iniquities, with all their
heinousness and guilt, upon himself, that by the merit of his life, and the
virtue of his death, he might save us with a complete and everlasting
salvation. This is the sublime, the rapturous theme of the gospel! Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. He bore our
sins in his own body on the accursed tree; -- put an end of sin by the
sacrifice of himself; -- became obedient unto the death of the cross; -- and
arose from the tomb in testimony of his conquest, and to demonstrate our
justification in him. Thus Jesus entered the gates of death, and, in the
dominions of the dead, disarmed the King of Terrors of his sting; bound him in
chains; made himself master of the keys of death; tore down the awful gates,
and, upon their ruins, erected the DOORS OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH, as the passage
through which his redeemed people should walk, to inherit the mansions of
glory. Here is our happy relief! Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ has
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel.
Death and the grave are now at the command of Jesus: and in him we may
triumphantly exclaim, "O Death! where is now thy sting? O Grave! where is now
thy victory?"

These doors, erected by the Son of God, differ as much from the gates of death
as the shadow from its substance. As a shadow is created by the rays of light
falling upon an opake body, so Jesus, the glorious Sun of Righteousness, who is
the resurrection and life of his people, reflects his mediatorial light upon
death as a conquered foe, and thus his mortal shadow is produced. As the shadow
of the greatest enemy can do no one an injury, so believers will pass the
shadow of death in perfect safety. Behold! how different the prospect! Not the
terrible gates of an eternal dungeon, but the magnificent doors of a delightful
city; or, as the consecrated doors of the temple of Solomon, which introduced
the pardoned worshipper to audience with JEHOVAH, in the Holy of Holies!

As the doors of the shadow of death differ from the gates of death, so does
the avenue that conducts mankind to them. Jesus is the way, the truth and the
life to the Father. If any man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new creature. By a
spiritual, believing union with Christ, the soul experiences new light, life,
hopes and pleasures: Truth, love, meekness, benevolence, patience, every virtue
commanded by the law, or resplendent in the gospel, are more or less attendant
on this christian's path, and renders him honorable to God, beneficial to
society, and happy in himself. To him, to live is Christ, and, therefore, to
die must be his gain. David was a man enriched with such grace, and viewed his
passage to eternity with the utmost composure. Though I walk through the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me; thy rod and
thy staff, they comfort me. Psa. xxiii. This valley lies between God's two holy
hills of the church militant and the church triumphant. It was but the shadow,
the faint image, the sweet sleep of death, he was to pass. Every fear should
vanish as the vapor, and the presence of his Lord and Shepherd should sustain
him with the rod of his power, and comfort him with the sweets of his love.

This passage through the doors of the shadow of death, does not simply
mitigate the pangs of dissolving nature, but it bears the soul triumphantly
from time to eternity, in prospect of a final acquittal at the judgment seat,
and an introduction to the blissful presence of the Lord of glory. As the
christian draws near the close of life, the doors of the shadow of death
gradually unfold. It is peculiar to this man's hope to know at which passage he
is to make his exit. He knows Jesus has been his forerunner, and has, in great
grace, appointed him the delightful doors, and not the doleful gates. As these
doors open, the everlasting hills appear in view; Angels surround the passage
to welcome the dying christian to immortality; Jesus, his well-known, tried
friend, that sticks closer than a brother, stands ready to own and support
him in his last conflict, and introduce him to pleasures that never, never
decline. Here, at last, we must stop. Were we to collect the greatest
assemblage of earthly honors, riches, and delights, they would infinitely fail
in assisting our ideas to estimate the bliss, the glory of heaven!

Let me now prevail upon the attentive reader to take a glance of these two
passages to eternity. This becomes his duty, from a consciousness that through
ONE of these he must shortly pass, to return no more. One is beyond degree
terrible, leading the thoughtless, the profane, the unbelieving, the
self-deceived sinner to the judgment of the great day, and to miseries beyond
description awful! the other to the mansions of undisturbed repose, and
happiness coeval with eternity! The former is the necessary consequence of sin;
the latter is the fruit of God's everlasting love, and the sovereign grace of
the Lord Jesus. To which are we hastening? Let us, as sinners, fly to the
Savior's arms, to be pardoned in his blood, justified in his righteousness,
and made holy by his grace; then we shall anticipate the doors of the shadow of
death with cheerfulness, and know for ourselves, that "Blessed are the dead who
die in the Lord; and precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
saints."

OBITUARY.
Mr. JOHN COBBY.
WHILE the heroes of the field, the votaries of dissipation, and the professors
of art, each claim a place in the page of history, to perpetuate their names
and their actions to posterity, it shall be our ambition to allot a few leaves,
in this publication, to the memory of those whose better hearts and lives
proclaim the richest grace of God. Thus, while the memory of the just is
blessed, we set their example before our eyes, to stimulate us to walk in the
paths of Jesus, and await, with composure and joy, the period of our own
departure to an eternal state.

The person to be recorded in this obituary is Deacon JOHN COBBY. He was a
native of Great Britain, born at Brighthelmstone. Whatever may have been the
temper and conduct of his juvenile years, whether moral or vicious, we learn
that God was pleased to call him, by grace, at an early period; and which
stimulated his heart, through the successive stages of his life, to pray for,
and ardently desire, the conversion of youth. In the first exercises of his
mind he was remarkably lively, and frequented public worship, among christians
of different religious denominations. -- When the blaze of his zeal began to
fall, and the more solid influence of grace to operate upon his heart, he was
convinced that the Lord who redeemed him was King in Zion, that he was called
to have respect unto all his commandments, for public worship as well as for
private life; and that it was his duty to gain more satisfaction on the will of
the Savior than hitherto he had attained. He was constant in prayer, and
diligent in searching the scripture, as the only rule for his faith and
practice. At this period his judgment was greatly informed, by a discourse he
heard from Numb. x. 29. We are journeying unto the place of which the Lord
said, I will give it you: come thou with us, and we will do thee good: for the
Lord has spoken good concerning Israel. From clear conviction of duty, and
with that solemn reverence, the savor of which ever abode with him, he publicly
owned his Redeemer in baptism, by immersion, on confession of his faith; then
was received into christian fellowship by the church at Woolwich, under the
care of the Rev. Mr. M'Gregor, and walked with that people in honor for some
years. For good and sufficient reasons, unnecessary to be mentioned here, he
united with a new-gathered church in the same town, under the ministry of Mr.
Adam Freeman.

Mr. Cobby, although he held a place in his Majesty's dock-yard at Woolwich,
was, in political sentiment, a republican; which, united with a warm attachment
to America, induced him, with his family, to quit his native shore, and form a
settlement in New York. Perfectly satisfied with this favored land, Mr. Cobby
obtained an honorable and affectionate dismission from the church at Woolwich,
and united himself with the church in Fair-street, where, after due trial, he
was appointed a deacon, which office he sustained until his death.

He was a person of very great diffidence of spirit, possessing an abiding
sense of the evils of his heart, and his utter unworthiness, both in the sight
of God and man; frequently adoring the riches of God's abounding grace in the
salvation of him as the chief of sinners, and the vilest of the vile. Although
Providence had denied Mr. Cobby the advantages of education -- nor had he ever
possessed a dictionary -- yet he was enriched with a most agreeable poetic
talent, specimens of which have repeatedly been introduced into the Christian's
Pocket Library. He published a poetic essay on the Person and Glory of Christ,
and of the Holy Spirit; which met with good reception from many intelligent,
pious readers. He has left behind him a considerable number of hymns, and other
poetical pieces, which, was due encouragement given to his widow, their
publication might be of real benefit. His memory was remarkably strong and
accurate, particularly so in the knowledge of the sacred scripture, repeating
texts verbatim, with solemn emphasis. It always gave him extreme pain to hear
any one, especially a minister in the pulpit, torture a text by false reading,
or repeating. And, I cannot but recommend an accurate reading of the sacred
text to my young readers in particular; and, whatever passage they may commit
to memory, that it be done perfectly. If it is of no other benefit, it
certainly discovers an attentive and an honest heart toward the will of God.
But, what was still more commendable in Mr. Cobby, was his uniformity and
steadfastness in sentiment, and profession of the gospel, in his family, and in
the house of God. Through the influence of God's blessed spirit upon his heart,
he was planted in the house of the Lord, and flourished in the courts of our
God. He still brought forth fruit, even to old age. Psa. xcii. 13, 14. So far
from the prohibition of Solomon refering to him -- meddle not with them that
are given to change, Prove. xxiv. 21. like ancient Judah, he ruled with God, and
was faithful to the saints. Hosea xi. 12. None could attend to the voice of
this good man's prayer, whether in his family or in the social circle of his
friends, without a conviction that, in that solemn exercise, he really drew
near to God. Although, in private conversation, and when in the discharge of
his duty as a deacon, his words were few, and his lips slow of speech, yet in
prayer they were abundant, copious, lively, and truly solemn; every by-stander
feeling their weight upon the mind. Latterly, it was evident to myself and
others, that his communion with God was so great, that he was ripening, as the
standing corn, for the sickle of death, and for the heavenly garner.

When pestilence raged in our streets, and swept away thousands, young and old,
Mr. Cobby was therewith arrested, and laid upon his dying pillow. The process
of the dire disease, with him, was very short. He instantly felt the arrows of
death, and wished to depart, to be with Christ, whom, unseen, he ardently
loved. The nature of the malady prevented him from saying much; but he
evidently felt richly the presence of that Savior whom he then commended to
all around him as the Friend that sticks closer than a brother. Prove. xviii.
24. He repeated frequently the ninetieth and the hundred and third Psalm (Dr.
Watts') with infinite satisfaction. Perceiving his end to draw near, he called
his family around him, and, in a faithful, affecting manner, addressed his wife
and his children. A stranger, who came to attend him, was astonished at the
scene; to whom Mr. Cobby said, "My friend, I do not know you, or whether you
know the Lord, but I can now tell you, Christ is worth living for, and dying
for; and he is now precious to my soul" He then sent his christian love to his
minister, and to the members of his church, with others, mentioned by name.
This done, he piously committed himself to God; then resigned himself to the
last efforts of death. And, as though the pestilence was ordered by heaven to
withhold its fury until the good man had performed his last work of faith and
love below, it now rushed upon him; poured in its sharpest arrows; distorted
his body; silenced his speech; produced the most distressing groans; and, in
one hour, closed his eyes in death! aged 55 years. A discourse was delivered on
his death from these words: God took him. Genesis v. 24. Let us, therefore, fly
for refuge to a Savior's bleeding heart, and walk beneath his shadow; for
precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints, whether it be in
youth or in old age, at sea or on land, by slow disease, or by the nauseous
pestilence!



POETRY.
THE PRINCE OF PEACE.
ENOUGH of hostile arts, and war's alarms,
Of garments rolled in blood, and feats of arms;
Soon may the brazen trumpet cease to sound,
And the wide wasting scourge no more be found;
A nobler theme my glowing bosom warms
With brighter glories, and superior charms.
Blessed Comforter, who gave my soul to prove
In early life the drawings of thy love;
Deign from the heights of glory to impart
A beam divine to animate my heart;
To teach a worm Jehovah's name to sing,
And celebrate the praises of my King.
Eternal blessings crown thy sacred head,
O Jesus! first begotten of the dead.
Prince of all earthly kings, whose righteous sway
Thy creatures, both in heaven and earth, obey;
Thou brighest blessing of the Father's love,
Who bowed the heavens, descending from above,
And took man's nature, guilty man to raise
From sin and death, to triumph through thy grace.
Behold, my soul, with reverential awe,
The Lord of glory subject to the Law;
An offering made upon the painful tree,
Obedient to the death to ransom thee.
O matchless love! the Just the unjust to save,
Visits the dreary mansions of the grave,
Rises, ascends, and reigns at God's right hand,
With every throne and power at his command.
Hail, glorious Conqu'ror! may thy peaceful reign
Widely extend, and bless the earth again!
Give from thy radiant throne, the sovereign word,
And multitudes shall rise to preach their Lord.
Pity the millions of thy creatures bound
In chains of awful darkness all around,
And send thy light and truth with power divine,
'Till all the nations of the world are thine.
See, Lord, thy servants, touched with human woe,
Assembled in thy hallowed courts below, Alluding to the public meetings of the
Missionary Society.

And realizing mis'ry's groan, appear
To pour the fervent prayer, the pitying tear;
Look down from heaven with a propitious eye,
' Take thy great power, and bring thy kingdom nigh!'
Let vanquished sinners bow before thy throne,
And every tribe confess thee Lord alone.
I. K.

THE EPHEMERON, The Ephemeron is a species of the water-fly; usually seen about
Midsummer, near the mouth of the river Maese, and other branches of the Rhine;
its life, which is but of five or six hours continuance, is spent in sporting
upon the surface of the water.

A Monitor to Mankind.
WHAT is man in all his glory,
All his boasted power below?
Would thou trace the humbling story,
To the poor ephemeron go.
View the feeble, fluttering creature,
Hasty sojourner, yet gay;
Emblem of thy mortal nature,
Dying reptile of a day.
Soon the infant's smiling morning
Must to evening shades give way;
Made of dust, to dust returning,
Life is but a fleeting day.
Vain is youth, and beauty's power,
Vain the wisdom of the wise;
Death, at his appointed hour,
Hurls the dart -- the creature dies.
What are honors? what are treasures?
Glittering vanities at best;
Nor can all the worldling's pleasures
Yield one hour of solid rest.
Helpless worm, the Lord invites thee
To take refuge in his breast:
From the danger that affrights thee,
Fly, and hush thy fears to rest.
Grant me, Lord, an ear to hear thee,
Give an heart renewed by grace,
While this life endures, to fear thee,
And supremely seek thy face.
So, when called to yield my spirit
Into thine all-gracious hand,
I shall endless life inherit,
In the blessed Immanuel's land.
I. K.


THE CHRISTIAN'S POCKET LIBRARY.
NO. V. -- VOL. II.
AN ESSAY ON THE FULLNESS OF JESUS CHRIST.
In HIM all the fullness of God
Forever transcendently shines;
Though once like a mortal he stood
To finish his gracious designs.

TO contemplate the fullness of Christ, must afford the most sublime
satisfaction to a believing soul; not only as it leads to a discovery of the
glory of the Redeemer's person; but, as it is opposed to all the guilt, the
wretchedness, and the ruin of man; and is the only source from whence
restoration, peace, holiness, happiness, and glory can possibly flow. -- A
fullness that, at once, supplies the moral wants of the sinner in this life, and
constitutes his blessedness in the next! It is, nevertheless, confessed, that
the subject is infinite; and its publication better suits a glorified spirit
before the throne of heaven, than a frail creature here below. However, the
blessed Jesus has put his treasure into earthen vessels, and has commissioned
men, under the influence of his presence, to teach and preach his gospel. Our
attempt, therefore, in this Essay, to explain the fullness of Jesus, we hope,
will be attended with a blessing, and make known a ray of the glory of Christ,
who is our all and in all.

FULLNESS is a term used by the New Testament writers to express the glory of
the GODHEAD, the purity of the MANHOOD; the MEDIATORIAL SUFFICIENCY of the LORD
MESSIAH, and the perfection of his BRIDE THE CHURCH.

1. In Jesus Christ we see resplendent the fullness of all those attributes,
honors and productions that ever were, or ever can be ascribed to the
self-existent and eternal JEHOVAH. He is the first and the last, the beginning
and the end -- the Almighty. Isa. xli. 4. Rev. i. 11, 17. The God of the whole
earth. Isa. live. 5. God and none else. Isa. xlv. 22. Over all, God blessed for
ever. Romans ix. 5. The mighty God. Isa. ix. 5. Our God. Isa. xl. 3. My Lord and
my God! John xx. 28. Creation and Providence, which are the immediate and
exclusive works of JEHOVAH, are ascribed to Jesus; for, he was before all
things, and by him all things consist. Col. i. 17. The seas obeyed his voice;
devils trembled at his presence; angels worship at his footstool; and those who
were numbered among the polluted dead, arose at his command! The whole earth is
full of his glory. Isa. vi. 3. Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints! These are scripture
testimonies of MESSIAH; acknowledged, as such, by all christian writers; and
are demonstrative of his eternal power and Godhead.

2. The term fullness assists our contemplation on that HUMANITY which, in the
highest possible degree of perfection, was possessed by Jesus of Nazareth. His
body, passions, senses, emotions, life, all were the complete measure and scale
of human beings. As such, he was made under the law, Gal. iv. 4. and possessed
a moral capacity to obey all its spiritual precepts. Truth, love, benevolence,
holiness, magnanimity, constituting the fullness of human excellence, in its
highest luster, so shone through all his private and public character, as
confounded his adversaries, and compelled Satan to retire, without a
possibility of finding any evil in him; while it demonstrated the scripture
testimony concerning him, that he was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate
from sinners. Heb. vii. 26. Without this human excellence, he, by no means,
could have been competent to have answered for us, whether by precept or by
penalty. But, as the just One, the Messiah, he was represented by all the
perfect animals appointed for ancient sacrifice, and by the pure bodily
qualifications necessary to constitute the High Priest under the Mosaic law.
Thus, according to the prediction of Isaiah, we see in Jesus, the man more
precious than gold, even the golden wedge of Ophir. Isa. xiii. 12.

3. But the particular intention of the inspired writers in the use of the term
fullness, is to describe the completeness, ability, and richness of Jesus
Christ, as the BRIDEGROOM, MEDIATOR, and REDEEMER of his Church. This arises
from the union between the human and divine natures in one person; the recital
of which forms a distinguishing feature both in the Old and New Testaments.
Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh! 1 Timothy iii. 16.
Immanuel, God with us. Mat. i. 23. In him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. Col. ii. 9 This is the man, the shepherd, who bears the
wonderful appellation of Jehovah's fellow; Zech. xiii. 7. -- who could
confidently affirm, I and my Father are one. John x. 30. All things that the
Father has, are mine. John xvi. 15. And this is he whom Paul celebrates as the
brightness of his Father's glory, and the express image of his person. Heb. i.
3. In him we behold that distinguished personage, long predicted by Isaiah, THE
MIGHTY GOD, in his divinity; THE CHILD BORN in his humanity; THE SON GIVEN in
union of both natures, able and mighty to redeem. Isa. ix. 5. Stand, my soul,
and, with solemn reverence, behold the glory of the Lord Christ! possessed of
all the fullness of underived, self-existent Godhead, and all the fullness of
immaculate manhood; each nature admirably distinct, with their attendant
attributes; yet so wonderfully united as neither of them are confounded;
operating in the grand designs of grace in the oneness of a glorious Savior!

By this union, both natures were active to redeem; the natural body, and
rational soul of Jesus, were constituted, or accounted GUILT, as the substance
of the one offering for sin; while the INFINITY of the GODHEAD, communicated to
the acts of the humanity, rendered them meritorious to the important purposes
of our justification, pardon, sanctification, and eternal glory! To which we
add, that the human nature of Christ, being flesh of our flesh, and bone of our
bone, the Church, as his BRIDE, was found in him, as Eve in the person of Adam,
which conjugal union gave him a regal right to take all her contractions,
debts, evils, etc. etc. upon himself, become responsible, and to suffer and die
in her stead.

The same humanity of Jesus, the Bridegroom, forms the all-sufficient glorious
channel, through which very spiritual blessing or grace flows to the objects of
his love. For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of
one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. Heb. ii. 11. It
has pleased the Father, that in him all fullness should dwell; and out of his
fullness have we all received grace for grace.

4. We are, lastly, to consider the term fullness, as expressive of the
perfection of the Church of Christ. Paul asserts this in his epistle to the
Ephesians i. 22, 23. The head over all things to his church, which is his body,
the fullness of him that fills all in all. The head forms no complete body --
the members must be united to it; -- neither, if the members be incomplete, a
hand, an eye, or foot wanting, the body is not in fullness: Therefore, the
church, every elect, spiritual member, existing in every age and clime, united
to Christ the life-giving head, by covenant, and by grace, makes the fullness of
the Redeemer's body. The same charming truth is expressed from the nature of
man, as created to enjoy conjugal relation: -- neither is the man without the
woman, neither the woman without the man in the Lord. For as the woman is of
the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but all things are of God. 1
Cor. xi. 11, 12. Christ is the husband of his church; his character, as such,
must fail, without his bride; she is, therefore, his fullness. All his love,
power, grace, every part of his mediatorial riches are given to her. The
church, invisible or collective, or his spiritual members, individually, are
the fullness of Christ; their life, peace, comfort, happiness, they derive from
him; they have nothing they can claim as their own but what is freely bestowed
by marriage-contract. No inward grace; no outward privilege, but bears the
stamp of Jesus; -- his ministers are given for the perfecting of the saints;
for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Ephesians. iv. 11 -- 13. And when
the Bride, the Lamb's wife, shall have made herself ready, it shall be granted
unto her, that she shall be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the
white linen is the righteousness of the saints. And blessed are they that shall
be called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb. Rev. xix. 8, 9.

It is of infinite moment we learn, from the gospel, that the manner in which
the fullness of Jesus is communicated to his people is by the HOLY GHOST. He
shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. All
things that the Father has are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of
mine, and shall show it unto you. John xvi. 14, 15. This blessed Spirit is the
bond of the soul's union to Christ. He first regenerates and converts the soul;
creates that faith which enables the heart to embrace Jesus in all the glory of
his fullness, and then maintains the soul, day by day, in the reception of it,
to answer all the purposes of obedience, sanctification, comfort, perseverance
unto death. Thus, as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
God. And if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Romans
viii. 9, 14.

Accurately to estimate the value, variety, and debt of the fullness of Jesus,
is absolutely impossible by men or angels. Exalted on his throne as King in
Zion, he has a fullness of light to illuminate Jew and Gentile from pole to
pole. In the afflictions of his church, he has been her dwelling place in all
generations; stored with unsearchable riches for her consolation. Not a promise
in the Bible, not an office or relation which the Son of God sustains, nor an
ordinance which he has appointed, but proclaim the inconceivable excellence
and glory of his fullness! Who knows the number of immortal souls which, in
every age, of every tongue, and of every clime, for near six thousand years,
have derived virtue from the Redeemer's fullness, and were made whole and happy?
What blessedness is now enjoyed by the spirits of the just made perfect in
Heaven? A number that no man can number. And, what glories shall the Bride
receive, who is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all! Ephesians. i.
23. ZION, BEHOLD YOUR KING! this is he of whom the prophets wrote, and this is
he on whom we believe, for present peace and everlasting life. While,
therefore, we sojourn here below, in hope of endless bliss, let every tongue
exclaim. -- HALLELUJAH, FOR THE LORD GOD OMNIPOTENT REIGNS!

An Attempt to estimate Human Guilt, and the Virtues of Redemption, by our Lord
and Savior JESUS CHRIST.
THE moral law of God, which is the standard of human purity and obedience, and
which binds us to God's authoritative justice, cannot, in its own nature, make
any allowance for human infirmity, or admit any abatement of the perfect
conformity which it demands. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind,
and thy neighbor as thyself. Luke x. 27. Cursed is every one who continues
not in all things that are written in the book of the law to do them. Gal. iii.
10. The soul that sins, it shall die. Ezk. xviii. 4. In the eye of the law,
and in the estimation of the Lawgiver, the risings of wrath are tantamount to
murder; the calling any man a fool, exposes us to the penalty of hellfire; and
an impure thought brings us under the condemnation of actual adultery. Mat. v.
22 -- 28. What inference will a truly conscious, enlightened mind, draw from
these alarming premises? That which the apostle terms an evident one, and
evident indeed it is -- that, no man is justified by the law, in the sight of
God. Gal. iii. 11. For, a single breach of the law renders us guilty of the
whole. James ii. 10.

Supposing a person was to break the law once in twenty-four hours, to how many
would his sins amount, in a life of ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty,
seventy, or eighty years? -- At ten years of age, it would amount to 3,650 --
at twenty years end the catalogue would rise to 7,300 -- at thirty, to 10,950
-- at forty, to 14,600 -- at fifty, to 18,250 -- at sixty, to 21,900 -- at
seventy, to 25,550 -- at eighty, to 29,200.

What, if a person's sins are supposed to bear a double proportion to the
foregoing estimate; in that case his sins, at the age of ten years, will be
multiplied to 7,300 -- at twenty, to 14,600 -- at thirty, to 21,900 -- at
forty, to 29,200 -- at fifty, to 36,500 -- at sixty, to 43,800 -- at seventy,
to 51,100 -- at eighty, to 58,400.

We must go farther still. What if a man's sins keep exact pace with every hour
of his life? i. e. supposing him to sin twenty-four times a day, his sins will
then amount, in a life of ten years, to 87,600 -- at twenty years of age, they
will accumulate to 175,200 -- at thirty, to 262,800 -- at forty, to 350,400 --
at fifty, to 438,000 -- at sixty, to 525,600 -- at seventy, to 613,200 -- at
eighty, to 700,800.

Is there a single minute from the first of our existence to the very period of
death, wherein we come up to the fullness of that inward and outward holiness
which God's all-perfect law requires? Certainly not. Of how many sins then is
each of the human race guilty, reckoning only at the rate of one sin for every
minute? At ten years old, we, according to that method of calculation, are
guilty of no fewer than 5,256,000 sins -- at thirty, of 15,568,000 -- at forty,
of 21,024,000 -- at fifty, of 26,280,000 -- at sixty, of 31,536,000 -- at
seventy, of 36,792,000 -- at eighty, of 42,048,000.

The awakened conscious breast, reviewing his past life, and estimating his
transgressions, may ask, "When shall I pay off this immense debt?" Never.
Eternity itself, so far from clearing us from the dreadful arrears, would only
add to the score, by plunging us deeper and deeper, even to infinity. Stop,
thoughtless youth, no longer indulge thy follies, nor view them as obliterated
by the stream of time! No, they still exist -- how vast their numbers -- how
vile their nature -- how awful their consequences! Let manhood too, with old
age, reflect with grief on the great, the astonishing number of their offenses,
nor suffer the busy scenes of life, and the power of an infernal tempter, to
delude their souls! But, will not divine goodness compound for the debt, by
accepting loss than we owe? Impossible! Every attribute of the Most High God
guards every precept of his holy law; not one of these can fail; Justice and
judgment are the habitation of his throne. Psalm. xcvii. 2. Are we not able to
help ourselves, so as to elude the power of this sentence? We cannot. What
human law exists that has made provision for the restoration of that man who is
found a transgressor? There is none; but, immediately on conviction, pours down
the penalty of judgment, nor once presumes to accept of compensation. How then
can fallen man, indebted and undone, and naught to pay, offer restoration for
his soul? Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the
Most High God? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves of a
year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten
thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression,
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? Micah vi. 6, 7. These cannot be
accepted; the law demands personal, human, satisfaction; commensurate to its
requirements and its penalties. How truly wretched is the state of guilty man
lost in himself! No man can redeem his brother, or give to God a ransom for
him! An angel's arm cannot pluck him from the gulf of woe!

But, sing O heavens, and rejoice O earth! God's own arm brought salvation, and
his righteousness sustained him! Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
law, being made a curse for us. Gal. iii. 13. His merit, as GOD-MAN,
constituted by his Father, the second Adam, head and bridegroom of the Church,
answered every precept of the law by his life, and every penalty by his death,
for, and in the stead of his people. This is the grand theme of the gospel;
this it is that renders Christ worthy of all acceptance. In HIM, pardoned,
justified, accepted; and to him that has thus redeemed us to God, by his blood,
be all the glory!

Let now the true believer in Christ attempt, from the foregoing estimate of
the number of human crimes, to view the vast guilt of his immortal soul; then,
Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! John i. 29. What
peace, gratitude, and joy must flow into such an heart!

Who now shall urge a second claim?
The Law no longer can condemn;
FAITH, a release can show:
JUSTICE itself a Friend appears,
Loose him, and let him go!
But Jesus suffered not for ONE soul only, but for a people whom no man can
number. If, therefore, the sins of an individual amount to so vast a sum, who
can calculate the number of the whole Church at large, whom Christ has
redeemed out of all nations, languages, kindred and tongues? O thou divine,
incarnate, bleeding, atoning, rising, interceding Lord and Christ! Not all the
seraphs thou have created -- not all the saints thy love has ransomed -- not
all which thy mighty power has glorified before thy brilliant throne, can
comprehend the height, the length, the breadth, the depth, of gratitude and
love, a believing soul owes to THEE!



Observations on the TWO Ascensions of CHRIST, as the Pattern and Pledge of his
People's Reception to Heaven.
With joy like his, shall every saint
His empty tomb survey;
Then rise, with his ascending Lord,
To realms of endless day.

TO contemplate the ascension of Jesus, while we are in certain prospect of
death and the grave, must be deemed a necessary and an animating employ. A few
thoughts, therefore, shall now be offered upon it; not as it may be discussed
in its extensive latitude, but as more immediately restricted to the double
ascension of Jesus; once at death, and then forty days after.

To the thief upon the cross our Lord said, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise -- the heavenly state of bliss assigned for the reception of his
departed soul. The body of Jesus died; was taken from the cross; was embalmed
with spices; and then laid in Joseph's new tomb.

On the third day the soul of Jesus returned from the celestial paradise,
claimed its entomed body, reanimated it by union, burst the bars of death, and
came forward, performing many of the functions of natural life, as it had done
previous to its crucifixion.

After converse with his disciples forty days, and appearing to five hundred
brethren at once, -- to convince them of the resurrection of the very same
identical body, he went with many of his disciples as far as Bethamy, and
there, in the very act of blessing them, was visibly parted from them, and a
cloud received him out of their sight. Luke xxi. 50, 51. Escorted by myriads of
angels, he was then set down at the right hand of the Majesty on High, as a
proof of the glory of his person, the completeness of his works, and as having
become the first fruit of them that slept. From thence, according to his own
infallible prediction, he will come again to judge the world, and to receive
his people unto himself, to be partakers of his eternal glory.

This twofold ascent of the human soul of Christ, first without the body, then
with the body and soul united, is the same with the privilege of his redeemed
people. Their bodies first return to the dust from whence they were taken; and,
instantly, their souls, their immortal spirits, ascend to God who gave them.
Eccl. xii. 7. Absent from the body, present with the Lord.

But, on that glorious morning, when the trump of God shall sound, and the dead
in Christ arise from their graves, whether in earth, or in the bosom of the
seas, then shall their souls also, as did the holy soul of their Lord and Head,
each claim their own proper body, now, by the power of God, made like unto the
glorious body of the Son of God. Every man shall be raised in his own order:
Christ the first fruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. 1 Cor.
xv. 23.

Blessed and holy are they that have part in this first resurrection: on such,
the second death has no power; but they shall be priests of God and of Christ,
and shall reign with him a thousand years. Rev. xx. 6. Then, after Satan shall
be losed for a little season, Gog and Magog, the combined armies of sin and
Satan, filling up the measure of their iniquity, shall be prepared for the
final judgment; the Redeemer shall welcome his saints to ultimate final glory!
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from before
the foundation of the world.

How delightful the prospect! How worthy the risen Head of the ransomed Church!
How cheering to our hope, and how nourishing to our faith! Well may we say with
Paul, I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able (by
virtue of his divine power, and the merit of his resurrection) to keep that
which I have committed unto him, body and soul, against that day. 2 Timothy i. 12.

HOW TO LIVE AS A CHRISTIAN, AND TO GLORIFY GOD.
An original Letter from the late Rev. William Roman.
MY DEAR SIR,
WITH much pleasure I answer your inquiry: may God make it useful to you and to
yours! -- You wish to live as a christian, and to glorify God. A christian is
one who lives in Christ, and lives upon Christ. He is quickened by the spirit
of life, and made one with Christ; and he lives and performs all the acts of
spiritual life by the same way that he was made alive. He who lives most in
this manner is the best christian, and will bring most glory to God. This being
laid down as your great principle and leading truth, it should be very well
established that you are a believer.

HAVE I FAITH? -- DO I LIVE BY IT? -- ALWAYS? -- AND FOR ALL THINGS?

Your whole life will be only the use and application of these few questions;
but be sure you get scripture evidence of the first, left, when you have need
of the sword of the Spirit, you should question, as many do, whether it is
theirs or not.

As to the second, a main point is to know yourself still a son of the first
Adam, although a son of the second Adam, who is the Lord from heaven. If you
leave out this truth, you will be puzzled at every step; because you will
always find something in you acting against faith. Remember, then, the animal
man lives an animal life, the spiritual man lives a spiritual life; and you
have both these in you. The spring of all the animal man's actions is sense,
the spring of all the spiritual man's actions is faith. To this faith he was
quickened when the spirit of life, which is in Christ Jesus, enabled him to
believe the record of God concerning his Son.

In every real christian there are these two natures. He lives in the flesh,
although he lives by the Spirit. The old Adam is continually inclining him to
live an animal life; and the new man is continually inclining him to live a
spiritual life, and enabling him too, if he be then living by the faith of the
Son of God. So it is written, "The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh." Gal. v. 17. The great employment of every believer
is to be found using the means of God's appointment to deaden the life of
sense, or the lustings of the flesh, and to strengthen the life of faith by the
aids of the Holy Spirit. Hence appears the necessity of the word of God, both
to evidence what you are in Christ, and what you are to expect from Christ, in
fighting the good fight of faith: for the promises in the word are to teach you
what God has freely given to you, and has warranted you to come and to take out
of the fullness of his Son, and to use it for your own. His deed of gift is as
good a title as you can possibly have to any thing in the world; for all the
promises were made to Christ; all the promises have been made good to Christ;
and Christ has all power, in heaven and earth, to make them good to you. It is
his office and his glory to give you whatever God has promised, and you call
upon him to bestow even all things that belong to life and godliness. Your
dependence on his faithfulness engages him to bestow every needful grace. This
dependence is the life and soul of the true christian, and runs through all his
experience. Not only prayer and praise, reading, hearing, meditating on the
word, but also the common things of this life, should be carried on in this
dependence, both as to our union with Christ our head, and as to our communion
with him as his members.

Here, then, comes in our last inquiry -- If you live by faith, is it always?
is it for all things?

The command is, Trust in him at all times. -- Trust him night and day --
summer and winter. Trust him when things go wrong -- in sickness and in
adversity. That is the time to trust him for most grace, when you want most.
Trust and you shall have it; for the word cannot be broken. According to your
faith, so shall it be done unto you. Little matters call for his direction, and
call for his assistance, as well as great; because, without him you can do
nothing. By leaving Christ out, believers oftener miscarry in little things
than in great. He leaves them to themselves, and then they blunder, as it is
fit they should, who neglect such a guide. He offers himself to you, to be your
wisdom, and he would give you his counsel in all your matters. You cannot think
till you try, and by constant trial improve it, what a happiness it is thus to
live upon Christ as your teacher. He would keep you from ten thousand scrapes,
guide you through difficulties, bless you under troubles; yea, he would give
you a spiritual use of temporal things. Resolve upon something of this, and
wait the event. In your family, in your field, in buying and selling, consult
Christ about all. Improve this hint: eat and drink, and lie down and rise up;
do all, eyeing him, and then all will prosper.

Memoirs of the late Rev. OLIVER HEART, M. A. of Hopewell, New Jersey.
His walk so steady, and his hope so high,
He neither blushed to live, nor feared to die.

IN preserving memoirs of those whom God has distinguished by his goodness,
whether in private or in public life, is one mean by which, in the ages to
come, God sets forth the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward
us, by Christ Jesus; and never fails to stimulate the followers of the Lamb in
faith and love, to pursue the path with greater ardour that leads to
everlasting life. It is with these views we attempt to draw the outlines of the
life and character of the truly venerable Mr. Heart.

For the encouragement of our young readers, it affords us pleasure that we
have it in our power to say, Mr. Heart was enriched with the grace of Christ in
his youth; and, from a sense of his Savior's love, devoted himself to God, by
baptism, and was received a member of the church at Southampton, April 3, 1741,
being seventeen years and nine months old. How unspeakably happy this youth!
while many others of his age pursued the paths of corruption, that unavoidably
prepare them for deepest sorrows in old age, Mr. Heart had a long and happy race
before him, to promote the interest of his fellow mortals, enjoy the sweets of
virtuous life, and honor his God and Savior. Thus planted in the house of the
Lord, and rooted in Christ Jesus, Mr. Heart flourished in gifts and grace so
eminently, that the church beheld him as one evidently designed of the Lord to
bear the ministry of the gospel. Accordingly, after due exercise, on Dec. 20,
1746, they sent him forth, with testimonial letters, accompanied with fervent
prayers for his prosperity in the cause of Christ. Three years after he
received ordination, and accepted a call from the church at Charleston,
South Carolina; the pastoral care of which he honorably and successfully
maintained for thirty years. On the approach of the British fleet and army,
February 16, 1780, determining to preserve his political liberty, he retired to
the northern states. The attention of the church at Hopewell, New Jersey, was
soon directed to Mr. Heart, and on December 16, in the same year, he became
their Pastor, serving them with fidelity and success, until his removal by
death, December 31, 1795, aged 72 years, 5 months and 26 days.

As a testimony of respect to this good man, an excellent sermon was delivered
in Charleston, South Carolina, by the Rev. Richard Furman, M. A. February 7,
1796; and, on April 4, an animated discourse was delivered on the same occasion
at Hopewell, New Jersey, by the Rev. William Rogers, D. D. From those valuable
publications, and from some manuscript materials communicated by Mrs. Heart to
the Editor of the Christian's Pocket Library, we will attempt to draw some
general outlines of this pious man's private and public character, not only as
a memorial of the distinguishing grace of God upon him, but to stimulate our
own souls to copy after the pattern of so excellent a life, that was crowned
with so glorious an end.

1. As a christian he was, indeed, one with Christ, "To him, to live was
Christ." Phil. i. 21. The PERSON of Christ was the object of his affections;
the BLOOD of Christ was the fountain of his pardon; the RIGHTEOUSNESS of Christ
was the ground of his justification and communion with Jehovah; and the GLORY
of Christ was the determinate end of all his actions. His whole dependence,
living and dying, was upon Christ; for being near his end, a person sitting by,
observing his great bodily distress, said, "how happy for Mr. Heart that he has
but one work to do;" (dying was meant) to which Mr. Heart immediately replied,
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes. The
TRUTH, as it is in Christ, was deeply engraven upon the breast of Mr. Heart; so
deeply, that it was, indeed, to him, inestimably precious; and the TEMPER of
Jesus, in a most eminent degree, shone in all his conversation, by which he was
universally respected and beloved. He was a man of prayer; great was his
communion with God, and by this he was comforted and supported under all the
ills of life. This is evinced by the following lines, which he composed in a
time of distress: Foreboding thoughts, and gloomy fears,
Crow'd thick into my breast;
Perplexing doubts, and anxious cares,
Forbid my eyes to rest.
Happy ye saints, above the skies,
Beyond the reach of woe;
Dear Lord, command my soul to rise --
With joyful haste I Will go.
The world, in sackcloth and distress,
I Would have beneath my feet,
And mounting, in an heavenly dress,
I would my Savior meet.
Then why, my soul, sunk down so low,
When Jesus does depart?
He will return -- and thou shall know
The goodness of his heart.


2. In domestic life, the husband, father, friend and master, in their sacred
principles, and their most endearing ties, were highly eminent in Mr. Oliver
Heart. He was not a saint abroad and a devil at home, but steadfast and
invariable in private and in public; never so happy as when treading in the
steps of his Lord and Savior, and rendering every one happy that resided
beneath his roof. Mr. Heart was twice married. His first wife was Miss Sarah
Brees, by whom he had eight children, two only of whom are now living. His
second wife, his present relict, was Mrs. Ann Grimball, by whom he had two
sons: the first died young -- the other is still living, passing through his
studies, under the Rev. Mr. Stoughton; and, it is devoutly wished, that the
youth may form the amiable character of his father, and be a solace to the
declining days of his pious mother! Perhaps the domestic life of Mr. Heart
cannot be more sweetly pourtrayed than as drawn by the pen of his widow, in a
letter to the editor of this publication. -- "My loss is great, although my
dear husband's gain. I mourn not as those who have no hope: no! yet I have
cause to mourn. I miss him day by day. No more I hear his harmonious voice
sounding from the sacred desk the everlasting gospel. No more the morning and
evening sacrifice of praise. No more his presence gladdens my sight. My
protector, guide, head, best earthly friend -- gone! Yes -- the pious father of
my little son -- left without a guide, example, precept, in his giddy state.
Circumstances aggravate my loss -- yet I would not murmur, but be humble under
God's mighty hand! He has cut off the stream -- HIMSELF is yet the everlasting
fountain, and can consolation send through redeeming grace and dying love!" It
is often said, "He is a bad father that is not missed:" but what female eye can
forbear the tear over a widow who laments the loss of so kind an husband! and
what man's breast but must glow with ardour to leave so noble a testimony
behind him as husband, father, friend!

3. Charmed with this good man's character at home and abroad, let us glance at
him in his more public station, as a minister of the gospel of salvation. He
that first makes not good his claim to a christian, illy pretends the christian
teacher! The waters of spiritual life, in copious streams, flowed sensibly
through the soul of Mr. Heart, and from this source his mouth spoke the glories
of the Lamb -- the completeness of salvation -- the experience of the saints --
the beauties of Zion -- the vast, the inconceivable solemnities of the eternal
world! The churches at Southampton, at Charleston, and at Hopewell, have his
praises in their gates; which, probably, can be exceeded only by those
individuals, in the different parts of the continent, to whom God blessed his
ministry for the conversion of their souls. With what sensibility would he
visit the house of woe, and tenderly wipe away the tear of grief by gospel
consolation! -- The private and public duties of the pastoral office he
discharged with such fidelity, heavenly-mindedness, and amiable fortitude, that
every description of characters, among the flocks of his care, loved and
honored him as a man of God. With admirable justness has Dr. Rogers asserted,
in his sermon -- "In our association he has scarcely left his equal: in the
United States, with diffidence be it spoken, viewing him in the whole of his
character, he has not left his superior." And, while we thus speak his praise,
we disdain the flatterer's art. His life, his actions, were the fruit of grace,
and stand on record, to inspire our souls to tread the paths of Zion, with
equal honor and with equal success. Had COWPER heard him preach, and beheld
him standing, with his wonted solemn air, between the living and the dead, his
pen would not be charged with being dipped in soul flattery, while drawing his
portrait: There stands the messenger of truth. There stands
The legate of the skies. His theme divine,
His office sacred, his credentials clear.
By him the violated law speaks out
Its thunders; and by him, in strains as sweet
As angels use, the gospel whispers peace.
He 'stablishes the strong, restores the weak,
Reclaims the wanderer, binds the broken heart,
And, armed himself in panoply complete
Of heavenly temper, furnishes with arms,
Bright as his own, and trains, by every rule
Of holy discipline, to glorious war,
The sacramental host of God's elect.
Are all such teachers? Would to heaven all were!
COWPER'S Task, b. 2.

4. Although we have nearly extended the limits usually allotted to the several
pieces introduced into this publication, yet we must add, that the literary
character of Mr. Heart was worthy of esteem. -- Notwithstanding he had not the
advantages of a collegiate education, his own industry was so great, that he
made very considerable advancement in classical learning. The college at
Rhode Island was not inattentive to his worth; for, in the year 1769, they
conferred on him the degree of Master in the Arts. What is most worthy of our
remark is, that every acquisition in science he considered so far valuable as
to promote his spirituality, and his greater usefulness as a minister of Jesus.
Several of his valuable discourses, and other pieces, have been published, and
universally received. Other excellent manuscripts are in the hand of his widow,
which, with extracts from his diary, would prove highly advantageous, was
suitable encouragement offered for their publication.

5. From these general traits, happily evident in the character of Mr. Heart, as
a christian and as a minister, maintained with such uniformity and regularity,
with such solemnity and deep humility, for so many years, amidst so many
changes and variety of duties, we are anxious to mark the last scenes of his
life. In this we are charmed, and by this we have hope.

He sat like the sun, nor cloud possessed.
The nearer he drew to the verge of eternity, the brighter was his faith, and
the more ardently his love glowed to the Savior of his soul! Great and severe
were the conflicts of his dissolving body; and, although, by struggles, a
vessel was broken, he neither murmured nor complained. From a sense of his
emaciated animal nature, he would frequently lift up his hands, and exclaim,
Poor mortal man! to which a friend once replied, This mortal shall put on
immortality: he answered, Yes, yes! He would often say, I want, I want! Being
asked what he wanted, he replied, I want the will of the Lord to be done. He
called for all around him to help him praise God for what he had done for his
soul! When he died, he gently laid his head back, closed his eyes, as if he
were going to sleep, and expired!

NATURAL HISTORY. depiction of a dove THE DOVE.
DOVE is the English name of a bird of the pigeon kind, belonging to the order
of Columbine. From the stock-dove, it is said, the tame-pigeon, with all its
variety, derives its origin. The characters of the dove are, that the tongue is
whole and even, without any division: the beak is of an attenuated and conic
figure: the nostrils are oblong, skinny, and partly covered: it has no gall:
its eggs are very clear and beautiful. Linnaeus enumerates forty species of the
dove. Besides the variety of the pigeon kind, this bird is denominated the
ring-dove and the turtle-dove.

The RING-DOVE is of a larger size, and makes its nest, of a few dry sticks, in
the boughs of trees. The size of this bird is eighteen inches long, thirty in
breadth, and weighs about twenty ounces. The head, back, and coverts of the
wings, are of a bluish ash color. The lower part of the neck and breast is
purple, inclining to red, and dashed with ash color. On the hind-part of the
head is a semi-circular line of white; above and below which the feathers are
glossy, and of changeable colors, as opposed to the light. The belly is of a
yellowish white: the greater quill feathers are dusky, and the rest are
ash-colored.

The TURTLE-DOVE is much shyer than any of the other kind. It may readily be
distinguished from the rest by the iris of the eye, which is of a fine yellow,
and a beautiful crimson circle which encompasses the eyelids. The forehead is
whitish: the top of the head ash-colored, bordered with olive-brown, spotted
with black; the quill feathers are of a dusky brown; the breast of a light
purplish red, the verge of each feather being yellow; the belly is white, and
the sides and inner coverts of the wings bluish. The tail, which is three
inches and an half long, has two feathers in the middle of a dusky brown, the
others being black tipped with white. The head, and the exterior sides of the
feathers, are entirely white. The fidelity of the turtle-dove is proverbial. A
pair put into a cage, if one dies the other will not long survive its mate. The
union between the male and female is preserved with the highest degree of
chastity; and if any breach happen between them, they are soon reconciled, and
embrace each other. Of this beautiful bird very frequent mention is made in the
holy scripture.

1. As an emblem of the Holy Ghost, who, in the form of a dove, descended upon
Christ at the memorable period of his baptism, thereby showing the distinct
personality of the Spirit from the Father and the Son. And what bird more fit
to describe the swiftness of the Spirit's descent upon the soul of man? -- the
loveliness, integrity, purity and spirituality of his heavenly influences,
which, like the dove, is indeed without the gall of bitterness. In the
formation of the material world, the spirit of God moved (INCUBABAT) upon the
face of the waters, "to impregnate them (says Dr. Gill), as a dove upon her
eggs to hatch them" -- to separate the parts which were mixed together, and to
give them a quickening virtue to produce living creatues in them. This sense is
charmingly expressed by Milton -- -- And, with mighty wings out-spread,
Dove-like, sat'st brooding on the vast abyss,
And made it pregnant --
PAR. LOST, b. I. The targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem call the Spirit who
moved upon the waters "the Spirit of mercies -- the Spirit of the Messiah." Of
Messiah it was foretold, " The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit
of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. Isa. xi. 2. And, at the baptism of
Jesus, this prediction was accomplished, and abundantly verified, in all the
acts of his future life. Those blessed heavens, that were shut by man's
transgressions, were mercifully opened when Jesus, the Savior of man,
fulfilled all righteousness; the Spirit, in the form of a dove, descending and
resting upon him, to demonstrate his approbation, to qualify him for his
prophetic office, in order to preach the acceptable year of the Lord; while the
Father crowns the solemnity with an audible voice: This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased. Matt. iii. 13, 17. Thus the whole Trinity was
distinctly revealed on this memorable occasion, and demands our profoundest
reverence. As the Spirit before named had his part in producing the material
world, so also in the spiritual world of grace -- first on Christ, then upon
his members, who are compared to doves.

2. The church, the beloved members of Christ's spiritual body, are addressed
by him as doves. My dove, my undefiled, is but one. S. Song. vi. 9. One in his
eye, his heart, his hand; and but one in the possession of the same grace,
truth and love, by each individual member, in whatsoever nation, age, clime or
denomination, they may be found on earth. These persons, in their native,
corrupted state, by original and actual sin, are in abject slavery to the
powers of death, and to the evil bias of their own natures; for a deliverance
from which is the incessant cry of every one who feels the condition into which
they are fallen: O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove unto the multitude
of the wicked. Psa. lxxiv. 18. To which the blessed Savior grants a most
gracious reply, and promise of deliverance: Though thou have lain among the
pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her
feathers of yellow gold. Psa. lxviii. 13. As if he had said, "Though now
covered with dust and ashes, and reduced to a state of mental wretchedness,
more servile and base than Egyptian slaves among the sooty pots and cauldrons
of their masters; yet thou shall arise, and, by the merit of my righteousness,
and the renewals of my grace, enjoy the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
The fruit of my spirit shall so richly adorn thy soul, and the light of my
countenance shall so sensibly thine upon thee, that thou shall appear glorious,
as the beautiful plumage of an eastern dove, glistening interchangeably as with
silver and gold, while sporting its wings beneath the beams of the sun!" O my
dove! that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs,
let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and
thy countenance is comely. S. Song ii. 14.

From the perusal of the scripture, and from the analogy of experience of
christians, we may further perceive the justness of their comparison to doves.
In their repentance they are like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning,
every one for his iniquity. Ezekiel. vii. 16. In their conversion they eagerly fly
to Christ, and to his house, as doves to their window, for safety and for
happiness. Isa. lx. 8. The knowledge of their God, and of his truth, is like
the eyes of a dove, chaste and pure. S. Song i. 15. Often pursued and afflicted
by enemies, they cry, with David, O that I had wings like a dove: for then
would I fly away, and be at rest. Psa. lv. 6. In the temper of their minds,
like the innocent dove, they possess not the gall of malicious revenge, but
follow the precept of their Lord, Be ye wise as serpents, and harmless as
doves. Matt. x. 16. To which may be added, in their social union with the
saints in the church, they are faithful and affectionate, and, like the dove,
on the loss of its mate, is afflicted and mourns, though not without hope. 1
These. iv. 13. Their food, like the food of the dove, is clean and pure -- the
finest of the wheat, the truth of Christ and of his word, avoiding the carrion
of error or vile sensuality. Psa. cxix. 140. Of all the winged creation, what
bird more amiably and excellently sets forth its Maker's praise than the dove?
And, of the redeemed of the Lord it is said, this people have I formed for
myself -- they shall show forth my praise! Isa. xliii. 21.

To make any remarks on the dove sent by Noah out of the ark, or on the dove
appointed by the Jewish law for sacrifice, however fruitful of instruction,
must now be omitted, as it would unavoidably exceed the limits of this paper.

GLEANINGS.
1. GOOD works, like the golden earrings of the Israelites, are valuable in
themselves; but if once exalted into a golden calf, to be worshipped, they
become offensive to God, and pernicious to the soul.

2. Paulinus, when they told him that the Goths had sacked Nola, and plundered
him of all he had, lifted up his eyes to Heaven, said, " Lord, thou know
where I have laid up my treasure." -- Happy the suffering christian, who, under
loss of worldly enjoyments, finds durable riches and substance in God!

3. The truths of the Gospel are to be introduced in public discourses and in
private conversation, with discretion and propriety. A person once harangued on
the strength of Sampson: "I affirm," said he, "that this same Sampson was the
strongest man that ever did or ever will live in this world." "I deny it,"
replied one of the company; "yourself are stronger than he." "How do you make
out that?" "Because you just now lugged him in by head and shoulders."

4. Young christians are frequently great bigots. When we are first converted
to God, our brotherly affection, candor, and religious opinion of others, too
often resemble the narrowness of a river at its first rise; but as we grow in
the knowledge of ourselves, and advance sensibly nearer to God, the great ocean
of all good, the channel widens, and our hearts expand, until death perfectly
unites us to the source of uncreated love.

5. If a person who has been long in possession of a large estate, comes, in
process of time, to have his title disputed, he rummages every corner of his
scrutore, and of his strong boxes, to find the original deeds; which, having
found, he appeals to them with confidence, as authentic vouchers. -- Thus, past
experiences of the grace of God, though not our Savior, may yet be
recollected, and improved as the handwriting of God, by which we know our
interest in his love, and answer the cavils and lawsuits of the devil.



POETRY.
The TRAVELLER.
WHILE often from clime to clime I go,
Ordained to travel to and fro;
To be my guard by land and sea,
Who have I, who, my God, but thee?
And let me boast this glorious aid;
For who preserves like him that made?
What armor shields like thy defense?
And is there care like Providence?
When on the deep I take my way,
And round my bark the billows play,
How should I 'scape the greedy wave,
Were thou not ready there to save?
How should I climb yon summit's brow,
And shun the yawning gulf below,
Were thou not still, my Savior, by,
To fix my step, and point my eye?
I turn me often, the labor past,
To view some scene behind me cast;
An Alps, perhaps, or Appenine,
And wonder -- but the work was thine.
By thee my feeble strength sustains
The height of hills, and length of plains;
By thee I track the mazy wood,
And smoothly pass the rapid flood.
If now I urge my tedious course,
Till toil and daylight pall my force;
Thy hand brings on the evening close,
And marks the inn for my repose.
Or, if I start ere morning light,
And now bewail the lingering night,
Thou bidst the sun his beams display,
And look the darkness into day.
In wilds, where stroll the savage brood,
Or men, more savage, lurk for blood;
If those I awe, or these decline,
It Is by no art, nor power of mine.
Here flames of lighted sulphur rise;
Here sudden deluges surprise;
Here frequent earthquakes round me jar;
And here I breathe in poisoned air.
But don't I every where advance
Through ambushes of death and chance?
Yet all things wait on thy decree,
And death and chance are ruled by thee.
You Are still my present help and stay,
For, oh, thou can not be away!
I see thee, feel thee, all abroad,
And though it is nature acts, it is God.
Hail! Maker and Preserver, thou,
Thou Chief above, and Chief below!
Whose mercies no where, never fail;
Hail! Maker and Preserver, hail!
AT THE LORD's TABLE.
COME turn in hither, Savior, King,
While we engage our hearts to sing;
Around thy table, Lord, we stand,
And hope to meet in Canaan's land.
While we pursued the way of death,
Thou did redeem our guilty breath;
When we pursued the way to hell,
Thou turn'dst our feet to Zion's hill.
How often at this table, Lord,
Did thou to us thy love afford!
Here thou have gained our heart and hand,
And made us one in social band.
Dear Lord, thy glories now display,
O meet with us in this thy way!
Display thy sorrows and thy death,
That each may bow before thy feet.
Still nearer to thy bleeding heart
May each arrive, and share a part;
And while beneath thy cross we stand,
Crown every soul for glory's land.
S.

DESIRING CHRIST.
I AM needy, sick and sore,
Lord, I Am every thing that is poor;
To thine arms for help I fly,
O relieve, or else I die!
Whosoever will, to Christ may come --
In his heart there is always room;
Every longing soul may try --
Christ will hear them ere they die.
Nothing but a Savior's blood
Has redeemed lost souls to God;
That will every thing out vie --
Hear me, Christ, or else I die.
I Am encouraged by thy word,
To believe thy promise, Lord;
Hear my humble, plaintive cry --
Come, dear Christ, or else I die.
Here then, Lord, before thee now,
In my soul I humbly bow;
O by faith may I rely
On thy promise ere I die.
Take me, Lord, just as I am,
Full of sin, and guilt, and shame.
To thy bleeding arms I fly --
Save, O save, or else I die.
Jesus died that I might live;
Come, my soul, thy praises give --
Can I better spend my breath?
He redeemed my soul from death.
Glory to the eternal three,
For such love to sinful me;
But in glory bright above,
I shall better sing thy love!
B.

On JOHN xiv. 18. I will not leave you comfortless.
BY S. MEDLY.
COME, ye who know the Savior's love,
And all his faithful kindness prove;
In cheerful songs your joy express,
He will not leave you comfortless.
He ever acts the Savior's part;
With strong compassion in his heart,
His saints he will forever bless,
Nor will he leave them comfortless.
His wisdom, goodness, power, and care,
They largely, sweetly, (...) share:
He kindly does their fears suppress,
Nor does he leave them comfortless.
And while they sojourn here below,
And travel through this world of woe,
In storms, and floods of deep distress,
He does not leave them comfortless.
And when they come to Death's dark vale,
And heart and flesh begin to fail,
Their dying lips shall then confess,
He has not left them comfortless.
But when at last they meet above,
In that blessed world of joy and love,
Their rapturous song will best express,
He did not leave them comfortless.
We thank and bless thy name, dear Lord,
For this dear promise of thy word:
Deep on our hearts this truth impress,
Thou will not leave us comfortless.
AN INVITATION TO THE MARRIAGE SUPPER OF THE LAMB.
THE Bridegroom calls, make no delay,
Haste to the marriage feast:
Jesus invites: with speed obey,
And join the heavenly Guest.
Though you're oppressed with guilt and sin,
No fitness he requires;
To see and feel your need of him,
Is all that he desires.
Though you're as black as Kedar's tent,
And vile as vile can be,
Jesus to save the lost was sent,
To set the captive free.
The powers of earth and hell combine
To keep you from your God;
Into his hands your all resign,
He bought you with his blood.
He claims you his peculiar care,
He Will grace and glory give;
His power preserves from every snare,
He died that you might live.
I. E.

WRITTEN IN DISTRESS OF MIND.
ISAIAH xxvi. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night.
WRAPPED in awful midnight's gloom,
Lord, I lift my eyes to thee --
Light of life, descending come,
Break my chain, and set me free.
By thy voice dispel the anguish
Which pervades my guilty soul;
Savior look, nor let me languish --
Speak the word, and make me whole.
Friend of wretched sinners, hear me --
Wipe the trembling mourner's tear;
Prove that thou art ever near me;
Scatter every guilty fear.
Thou whose first creating power
Poured thy light upon the earth,
Shine in this tremenduous hour,
And attest my second birth.
Glorious star, upon me dawning,
(Sweet presage of brightest day),
Bring the blessings of the morning,
Smile, and shine my doubts away.
Come with healing on my spirit,
Sun of righteousness arise;
Now display thy saving merit,
Grant me faith to grasp the prize.
J. A. KNIGHT.

THE CHRISTIAN's POCKET LIBRARY.
NO. VI. -- VOL. II.
AN ESSAY ON MAN, Under the Emblem of a Flower.
Man, in society, is like a flower
Blown in its native bed. It Is there alone
His faculties, expanded in full bloom,
Shine out; there only reach their proper use.
COWPER.
THE study of human nature is pleasing and important. As there are
comparatively few lessons on this subject to be derived from nature, the God of
Grace has given us the revelation of truth by his dear Son; in which, by the
aid of his Spirit, every thing may be known necessary to constitute our present
and future happiness. Hence, nature and revelation are harmonious; though the
latter not only supplies the deficiency of the former, but adds such
discoveries as are suited to our fallen nature, and directs us to such sources
of peace and blessedness which otherwise never could have been ^^ained. In the
volume of revelation we are taught the knowledge of ourselves, by the most
familiar and expressive figures: that of a FLOWER shall now engage our
meditations.

God's ancient servant, Job, contemplated his own life under this emblem. Man
comes forth as a flower, and is cut down. Job xii. 2. He was a wise and a good
man. His knowledge of the sciences and of human nature was great. The brevity
of man was justly to be compared to a flower; and of this he was the more
convinced from his personal experience in life. As a flower he came forth, and
stood an ornament of virtue, grace, and godliness, fearing God above many,
while his family and his country enjoyed him with infinite pleasure. Health and
strength, children and friends, house and lands, invaluable riches, were his
portion. But, while in his fairest, fullest bloom, he was cut down by the hand
of affliction, and his beauty and worth apparently lost: his health is decayed
-- his children are no more -- his vast possessions are carried off by the
Sabeans -- his body is covered with biles, and his bed is a filthy dunghill of
the earth; and that hand which was industriously employed in communicating good
to others, now grasps the potsherd to cleanse the sores of the body. Who but
must drop a tear on reviewing the afflictive change of so excellent a man! Well
might he indeed say, Man is of few days, and full of trouble. In the morning,
as a flower full in its bloom; in the evening, cut down and withered! But this
is not only true, as it relates to the afflictive dispensation of God to his
people, but to the state of man, by life and by death. He comes forth as a
flower, and appears in all the stages of manhood, and is then cut down by
death, and consigned to the dust. This is a truth that bears its own evidence,
and should make solemn impression upon our hearts! We will attempt to enlarge
our reflections upon man as a flower, in expectation of usefulness to the
different classes of our readers.

1. We may begin with its origin. Every flower dictates to us a seed or first
principle, which owes its existence to the Creator of all things, who has
given to every seed its own body. 1 Cor. xv. -- 38. God is the parent of man;
we are his offspring; and it is in him that we live, move, and have our being.
The formation of the first man, Adam, is recorded, for our instruction, in the
two first chapters of Genesis; the antiquity of which record should create a
superlative esteem in our breasts for the bible, as the oldest and the best
book in the world. Our parents -- time, place, and manner of our birth, were
appointed by infinite wisdom; and however we may esteem our parents as the
natural cause of our animal production, we must direct our eyes to God as the
FATHER of all; by whose will and power our bodies and souls are formed, and
whose hand sows the seed that produces the flowers of human nature.

2. Let us mark the variety of the flowery tribe, expressive of the different
orders of mankind. In those parts of the world where the flowery tribes have
been cultivated with every possible art and industry, the florist has
acknowledged that he could no more estimate their variety than to number the
sands on the sea shore. A Linnaeus, a Turnfoot, and a Miller, the most eminent
in exploring the nature, virtue and beauty of this charming part of creation,
have only been able to glance upon the subject, in comparison to its extent.
This will aid our reflections on the variety of proportions, symmetry and
features of mankind. In the natural features of men, there may appear two,
perhaps, from family connections, so much alike as though cast into one mould;
but, on a minute examination, will be found to differ in a very astonishing
degree. While this diversity of human features evinces the wisdom of God, it is
evidently of the highest advantages to public society. The variety of man's
natural and acquired abilities is equally astonishing! In the lower department
of manufacture, husbandry, etc. in which the honest labourer obtains his bread
at the sweat of his brow, the higher departments of language and of arts each
bear some resemblance to the diversity of flowers. And, as from the variety of
flowers many medicinal virtues may be derived for the benefit of mankind, so,
by the different abilities of men, in the cultivation of science, benefit is
derived by the whole. The tempers and passions of mankind are likewise
expressed by the variety of flowers. I presume, though there may be some
analogy in the general dispositions of men, yet as their features, so in their
minds, there are not two alike, let their name or family be what they may. What
an infinite variety is there in the color, marks, size, and construction of
flowers! Some appear magnificently grand, and fill us with admiration; while
others, less adorned, give us leave to pass without attention. Just so it is
with men. Those whose temper and passions are eminent in goodness and grace,
bearing the image of JESUS CHRIST, engage our attention; while others, of a
different cast, make no pleasing impression upon us, and we pass by them with
indifference. From these observations it must appear obvious to my young
readers, that a general acquaintance with mankind is absolutely necessary to
their improvement and usefulness in the world. We meet with some persons
exceedingly contracted in their general sentiments, and who will scarce allow a
man to be either honest or gracious, because such may differ from them: but it
is obvious that these very persons have only viewed a few flowers in their own
scanty gardens, and are perfect strangers to that rich variety which adorns the
universe. Confining themselves to a circle of their own taste, they can have
little pleasure from the exercise of christian candor toward others.

3. The properties of flowers attracting our senses is another observation
worthy our attention. Some possess the most charming fragrance; others as truly
offensive; while some may be denominated neutral, having little scent at all.
It is so among mankind. Those who are enriched with the grace of God, and, from
love to Christ, bear the fruits of virtue and true holiness, laying out
themselves for the befit of others -- these are the excellent of the earth, and
yield more pleasure to a pious mind, than the most valuable collections of
carnations can gratify the scent. The vicious, the vain, the wretched and
profligate, fail not to render themselves noxious in our esteem. Others there
are who are not vicious enough to claim the denomination of wicked, nor have
goodness enough to esteem them righteous; therefore, as they are undetermined
in their own characters, you find that they pass through life little thought
of, and of as little use. These observations may apply in our general review of
human nature, or in circumscribed bodies. Kingdoms, cities, churches, families,
are as so many beds of flowers, to be visited and enjoyed according to their
nature; while the exhibition of the whole will not fail to enlarge your own
breast, and lead you to admire the goodness, power and glory of that ALMIGHTY
BEING for whom all things were created.

4. The general division of flowers of the field, and flowers of the garden,
deserves a few attentive thoughts. No doubt, the whole of this flowery tribe
was naturally wild; and the choice, culture, and benefit of any, by which the
difference is made, is attributed to the pleasure and the skill of the florist
and the botanist. As the scripture must guide us in these contemplations, we
observe the difference made in mankind by the grace and pleasure of God in
Christ. By nature we are all wild indeed! By nature children of wrath. Ephesians. ii.
1. Christ, by his grace, regenerating a sinner's heart, digs him out from among
the common field of the world, and transplants him into the garden of his
church, where he is watered, dressed, trained, bud, blossom, bear fruit, even
to old age. Blessed is the man whom thou, O Lord, chooses, and causes to
approach unto thee! He shall be as a plant, planted by the rivers of waters,
whose leaf fails not!

5. The shortness of our paper reminds us to make our last observation. This
must be on the period of the flower. Job tells us, Man comes up as a flower,
and is cut down. Behold! he speaks of the appearance of the flower, and of its
being cut down -- not one word of its continuance. This is purposely to teach
us the brevity of life, and that our age is, comparatively, as nothing -- a
vapor that vanishes away! no sooner come up, than cut down! Lord, what is
man! how few his days on earth! cut down by the scythe of death, at the command
of that righteous Being who made us, and to whom we are accountable! At this
spot our leaves must fall, our beauty fade! But is man cut down to be no more?
Does body and soul both lie down in the grave, and rot together? How important
the question of Job: -- Man gives up the Ghost, and where is he? Job xiv. 10.
May I be permitted, in reverence, to reply -- Either in HEAVEN or HELL! Cut
down as fuel for the fire -- or to be transmitted to bloom in paradise with
God! Let us, therefore, improve these reflections for our personal benefit; let
us examine into the state of our souls, and fly to the arms of that most
blessed Savior, who, to teach his worth, and to yield his grace, is known as
the Rose of Sharon, and the Lily of the Valleys. Interested in him, and fraught
with his grace, you need not fear to die. Though cut down by the hand of death,
you shall be delivered from this evil, tempestuous life, and be transmitted to
bliss that fades not away!

GLEANINGS.
1. A CHRISTIAN, as to his spiritual enjoyments, is not unlike a BAROMETER. As
the quicksilver, in this instrument, rises when the sun shines, and the weather
is fine, but sinks when the air is heavy, and loaded with damps; so the
christian's sensible comforts rise when God shines upon his soul, but subsides
when left to the workings of his own heart.

2. Dr. Grovesnor being at the funeral of Dr. Watts, a gentleman present said
to him, "Well, Dr. Grovesnor, you have seen the end of Dr. Watts, and you will
soon follow: what think you of death?" "Think of it," replied the Doctor, "when
death comes I shall smile upon death, if Christ smiles upon me."

3. When the rays of the sun fall on the surface of a material object, part of
those rays are absorbed, part of them are reflected back in straight lines, and
part of them are refracted in various directions. Thus, when Christ, the SUN OF
RIGHTEOUSNESS, shines upon a christian's heart, part of the grace he confers is
absorbed for the consolation of the soul; part of it is reflected back to the
Savior, in acts of faith, love, joy, prayer and praise; and part of it is
refracted every way, in acts of forbearance, gratitude, benevolence, and every
social virtue, for the benefit of mankind.

4. The mariner, when on a boisterous sea, finds his compass to direct itself
to its own pole, and guide him in a certain tract, although his compass box be
tossed in every direction. That heart which has received a touch from Christ,
the heavenly magnet, will, in desires, affections, hopes, obedience, ever
direct itself to Jesus, as his all in all, although the box of his mind be
tossed every way, by Satan, unbelief, or affliction.

N. B. A sure and satisfactory evidence of our state.

5. Louis XIV. of France, said one day to the famous father Masillon, "I have
heard many great orators in my chapel, and I have always been well satisfied
with them; but every time I hear you I am DISSATISFIED WITH MYSELF." -- Those
ministers of Jesus Christ who are most faithful, are, indeed, the most useful,
though often the least popular. And those discourses which tend to open to us
the true state of our souls, strip us of self-deception, and lead us, as the
chief of sinners, to the Almighty Savior, should be esteemed by us the most
valuable.

6. "How does your ladyship (said the famous lord Bolingbroke to lady
Huntingdon) reconcile prayer to God for particular blessings with absolute
resignation to the divine will?" "Very easily (answered she); just as if I was
to offer a petition to a monarch, of whose kindness and wisdom I have the
highest opinion. In such a case my language would be -- I wish you to bestow on
me such a favor: but your majesty knows better than I how far it would be
agreeable to you, or right in itself, to grant my desire: I therefore content
myself with humbly presenting my petition, and leave the event of it entirely
to you."

DIALOGUE between a Collegian and the President of his College, on the
Authenticity of Christianity.
COLLEGIAN. AS our class have completed their morning recitation, the
indulgence I have hitherto received from you, Mr. President, induces me to
request the favor of a few minutes private advice.


PRESIDENT. Certainly. What, Sir, is the subject of your inquiry?


COL. From my early youth I have been taught to imbibe prejudices against
christianity. Those prejudices have been confirmed by the writings of Voltaire,
which I was obliged to translate when learning the French language. I am
persuaded that no man of sound learning and good sense would condemn any system
unexplored; and although I still possess very great doubts respecting
revelation, I wish to examine it more thoroughly before I finally reject it. I
have never applied to a clergyman for assistance in my inquiries; for as I
could not believe their doctrine, I by no means venerated their character. If
the President would indulge me with his aid, though not a positive collegiate
duty, you will lay me under, an additional obligation.


PRE. The importance of the subject, and my good wishes for your happiness,
dictate my compliance, so far as my knowledge may extend. And in this I feel
myself the more cheerful, from the recollection of many embarrassments of a
similar nature which I myself labored under in the early part of my life.
However, from the nature of your inquiry you must give me leave to require of
you an answer to a previous necessary question.


COL. As you are so obliging, Sir, as to condescend to enter upon the subject
on my behalf, I promise, conscientiously, to answer any questions you may
propose, although, perhaps, it may expose my own folly.


PRE. Do you believe that there is a God? that good and evil are existing
realities in our present state of humanity? that, by the just law of your
Maker, you are amenable to his tribunal for all the acts of your heart and
life? and that, after death, a period of retribution will take place, to
justify the moral government of God on the earth, which will issue in the
happiness or misery of the individuals of mankind? These, generally, may be
denominated the articles of the religion of nature, which are capable of being
understood, although there were no bible in the world. Unless, therefore, you
believe the religion of nature, you can have no pretension to inquire after the
religion of revelation; neither will any of its external evidence which I might
name fall with conviction upon your breast.


COL. I have ever possessed an idea of a SUPREME BEING. On the other articles
you named, I have had repeated painful doubts, principally created in my mind
by the reading of deistical volumes; but I can assure you, Sir, no doubt of
their reality remains with me: if otherwise, I should have been content in my
faith, and not waited on the President with my case.


PRE. For such a deliverance you have cause to be thankful! Persons who
generally disbelieve the articles I named to you, can promise no benefit to
civil society; and, I am persuaded, they must be lost to true rational
felicity. You may now, Sir, proceed with your objections against the bible, and
state them fully.


COL. I begin by expressing my suspicion of the characters of the writers of
the testaments.


PRE. Your first blow is well directed; for if they can be impeached, the
whole, of course, must fall. If men fabricated the scriptures, we may justly
ask, What men were they? Either bad or good. The first could not have contrived
it, and the latter never would have done it. The doctrines, the precepts, would
be the reverse of their own nature. Would such men write a book to tell all the
world that all such men as themselves would be punished in hell? Good men would
never make a book out of their own heads, and then tell you that their lies
were the counsels of God. If men did counterfeit God's hand, how has it
happened that none has discovered the cheat? What! were they all deceivers?
Tell me for why? What could be the motive that induced them to such an
imposition, where they saw reproach, imprisonment, torture, and death, their
own rewards? Would no one out of the many repent, and disclose the scheme, even
when he found the world against him, and death before him? Could base liars,
wicked men, write a book so pure in its nature, and holy in its design, and
endure all manner of hardships in defense of it? Even the character and conduct
of Judas Iscariot furnishes a strong argument for the truth of the gospel. How
came it to pass that he first betrayed his master, and was then so stung with
remorse as to put an end to his own life? How came he thus to own himself
guilty of the vilest sin, when, if Jesus had been an impostor, he knew that he
had done an act of justice to the world in freeing them from him? Now, if there
had been any base plot, any bad design in the case, Judas, who had so long
lived with Christ and his disciples, with perfect intimacy, and who was
entrusted with the bag, would certainly have exposed it. I wish to ask you if
you have thoroughly examined the characters of the different writers of the Old
and New Testaments? Perhaps not. You would have found that they feared God;
they lived a life of prayer to God; they separated themselves from the
practices of the wicked; they preached, they wrote, they wept, to reclaim their
fellow mortals; and they cheerfully submitted to every loss of name, health,
friends, and property, to accomplish such benevolent purposes, all of which
they unanimously aimed at the glory of God! Is there any thing here
impeachable? Or ought we not to admire their character, and follow their steps?
Are the social virtues of the opposers of christianity more useful and
brilliant? -- Come, I perceive you blush -- let me hear another objection.


COL. There are many difficulties and contradictions in the bible.


PRE. That there are many difficulties in the scriptures I own, but that there
are contradictions I deny. But to whom do such appear? Do we expect a child to
read a newspaper that never learned his alphabet? Do we admit a youth to a
collegiate education that never read a grammar? Mention a few philosophical
experiments on air, or of the nature and effects of electricity, to a person
who never read on these subjects, nor saw an experiment, nor, perhaps, ever
beheld the apparatus; would you not smile while he expressed his opinion of the
supposed difficulties, the contradictions, and, perhaps, the fallacy of the
whole? And would not this evidently arise from a gross ignorance in first
principles? Let me, then, ask you, Sir, if it be good sense, or good manners,
in a person, to talk of difficulties and contradictions in religion, while he
himself be irreligious? Take a seat on the lowest form in Christ's school, and
then bring forward your difficulties: you will, then, soon find them to vanish.
-- I wish to inform you, my dear young friend, that the bible contains a
RELIGION FOR SINNERS, pardon for the guilty, health for the sick, sight for the
blind, comfort for the distressed; and, until you feel just as the gospel
describes, you will never wish to enjoy the blessings which the gospel
contains. I will just add, that the scriptures, however written by different
men, of different languages, and distant periods, every part of them harmonize
in pointing out the most august character of Jehovah, the miserable state of
man by sin, the completeness of redemption by Jesus Christ, the power of the
Spirit in applying the virtues of salvation to the heart, the privileges of the
godly in this life, and their glory in the next. Each of these are minutely
expressed, are easily understood by an illuminated mind, and afford ground and
reasons for moral and social actions, infinitely plainer and more certain than
the variety of axioms in natural and experimental philosophy. I conclude my
answer to your question nearly in the words of the celebrated Dryden: "Whence
but from heaven could men who were generally unskilled in arts, who were born
in different periods of time, and in different parts of the world, weave such
agreeing truths? How is it possible, and what end could they have in view, that
they should all conspire to cheat us with a lie, their pains unasked, their
advice ungrateful, starving their gain, and martyrdom their reward?" Come, Sir,
be free -- if you have any other objection let me hear it.


COL. Indeed, good Sir, I feel already so guilty and ashamed, for disbelieving
what I did not know, that I know not how to proceed: however, having your
leave, I will trespass upon your patience once more. The impropriety of
conduct, in some christians, has been an objection to my embracing the system.


PRE. True: we have to lament that some professors of christianity have and do
act improperly; but should the whole be condemned for the sake of a few? or
should this be laid as an evil to the charge of christianity? Certainly not. If
there was no intrinsic value in christianity, there would be no counterfeit: if
there were no real christians, there would be no hypocrites. All those torrents
of blood, shed by what are called christian princes, were not the dictates, nor
the fruit of christianity; but the lust of ambition, revenge, and love of
conquest. Probably this objection may also arise from your personal
observations on professors of the gospel. In this case I will say, I also have
been deeply affected when witnessing improper conduct of such persons. But, on
due reflection on the extreme depravity of the heart, and the many enticements
to evil, I have been more astonished that any live an honor to God, useful to
society, and happy in themselves, than that a greater number should not. It is
not uncommon for those who are unfavourable to the gospel to use both eyes to
mark the improprieties of its followers, and scarce ever glance upon their own
conduct. Very different from this is the temper dictated by the bible: for,
instead of being like the vulture, preying upon the carrion of others' conduct,
they are clothed with humility, under a due sense of their own infirmities. I
readily own to you, my young friend, if I have hitherto maintained a life in
any measure consistent with the office I hold in college, or beneficial to
society at large, I wholly attribute it to the kind influence of my God and
Savior upon my heart. Your proposed objection gives me an opportunity to name
two other arguments favorable to christianity, and, I think, must prove
alleviating to you. The very bible has predicted those false professors of whom
you complain, and marked out both their conduct and their end. Read, as a
proof, the parable of the ten virgins. Matt. xxv. 1 -- 13. Another argument is,
God has not hidden any of the evils and improprieties of his most distinguished
servants; but has lain the blackest mark upon them, and shown their just
aggravations for their repentance; and they still exist on record, that he who
thinks he stands may take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. x. 12. Remember,
christianity makes no man personally sinless, but corrects and subdues our evil
nature. It must be confessed, that the opposers of christianity are not more
brilliant in their moral virtues than others; neither, while they reflect upon
our bible, do they possess wisdom and benevolence sufficient to give us a
better rule of life, and a ground of hope. A celebrated deist once had candor
enough to acknowledge to me, in Boston, "Sir, after all our disputes with you
on the subject of christianity, I must own that you have two chances to our
one. If we are right, and our standing safe on the ground of nature, you must
be also. Should christianity be true, you are safe and we are lost." On this
concession, how true is the sentiment of Moses: Their rock is not as our rock,
even our enemies themselves being judges. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 31. [College bell
rings.] The bell now rings for my attendance on the senior class; I shall only
add, I wish you well: think coolly, read the bible for yourself, try to read
your own heart also; above all, if hitherto you may have lived without prayer,
go to God, and humble yourself before him for your sins and ignorance,
beseeching him to shine upon you in mercy: and, on any proper occasion, I shall
always be ready to give you my best advice. God bless you!


COL. Sir, I feel too sensibly sufficiently to return you my thanks. I hope
your advice will not be lost.


THOUGHTS ON JOB xiv. 20. Thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away.
BY sin came death: God's sentence prevails forever against man, and he
passes away -- from life to death, from time to eternity, from a state of
action to a state of judgment! Yes, thou, Lord, changest his countenance, and
sendest him away. How just the procedure; how sublime the sentiment! fruitful
of instruction to every attentive mind. It has been strikingly verified in the
person of Jesus, and is daily so, in the departure both of the wicked and the
righteous by death.

1. In the person of Jesus, whose countenance was fairer than the children of
men, grace without measure was poured into his lips. Psa. xlv. 2. His
countenance was the index, the mirror, through which all the variety of human
passions and qualities were seen, that once rendered him familiar with mortals,
and proved him to be, indeed, the SON OF GOD. But the FATHER had sent him into
the world to be the Savior of sinners, to atone for sin, and to ransom his
people from the power of the grave. His countenance, therefore, must be
changed, and exhibit to men, to angels and to devils, the torture which his
soul should endure in accomplishing his design. As he advanced into natural,
active life, he became a man of sorrow, and acquainted with griefs; and, during
the last few weeks of his abode on earth, his countenance was changed in such a
variety of ways as must fill the contemplative soul with solemn awe.

Preparatory to his future dreadful sufferings, and his consequent exaltation,
Jesus was transfigured upon Mount Tabor: in the very exercise of prayer his
face did shine as the sun. Matt. xvii. 2. Immediately after, he met his
disciples at the passover, and instituted the memorials of his own future
death, while his countenance beamed friendship and love to them all. From
thence he repaired to Gathsemane, when a change took place in his countenance
that spoke the awful sorrow of his soul, and the bloody sweat of his body in
prospect of that cup which his Father designed him to drink! At the bar of the
high priest his countenance was again changed, by the spitting and the smiting
of the Jewish rabble; so that his face was marred more than any man's. Follow
him to Calvary; behold him crucified between two thieves, and stand astonished
to see that countenance that never looked upon sinful man but with tenderness
and compassion, now covered with tears and with blood! Removed from the cross,
attend his corpse in Joseph's garden, prepared for its tomb; and behold his
countenance now changed by death! Ah, my soul! can thou behold these changes
of thy Savior's countenance without a tear? Shall not repentance flow from thy
guilty breast, while Jesus weeps, and bleeds, and dies! Behold the Lamb of God,
that takes away the sin of the world!

" So fair a face bedewed with tears!
" What beauty even in grief appears!
" He wept, he bled, he died for you;
" What more, ye saints, could Jesus do?"
The countenance of Jesus changed, God sent him away -- into the grave, to
satisfy justice, to fulfill prophecy, to vanquish death in his own kingdom, to
proclaim he was the Son of God, by rising from the tomb, as a proof of the
completeness of his redemption, and a certain pledge of his people's
resurrection to everlasting life, He was then sent away to abide with his
disciples, and, by the light, the form and the love of his countenance, to
convince them of the reality of his person and salvation -- to remove their
doubts and to comfort their hearts -- and to give them his final orders
concerning the kingdom of his grace. Then he was sent away from earth to
heaven, accompanied by multitudes of angels, and was set down at the right hand
of the Majesty on high, as the representative of his people; to conquer, by his
grace, the purchase of his blood, and to prepare mansions of glory for them,
where they shall enjoy the light of his countenance for ever! O! let it be my
constant employ, most blessed and highly exalted LAMB OF GOD, to behold thy
face amidst thy various changes! and let it be my daily mercy, while here on
earth, to enjoy thy life-giving countenance, shining upon my heart, to comfort
me under my sorrows, direct me in my duties, and to create in my breast a taste
of that heaven of felicity I hope to enjoy with thee above for ever!

2. How frequently are the words of Job verified in the truly unhappy death of
many wicked and impenitent mortals; thou changest his countenance, and sendest
him away! The opinion of David is seriously just -- The wicked, through the
pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his
thoughts. Psa. x. 4. In youth the countenance indicates the mirth and the folly
of the heart; in manhood, the intense desire of gain; in affluence, the
gratification of appetite; in affliction, the insuperable burden of life; in
old age, the unsatisfying enjoyments of all sublunary good, from the cradle to
the grave. In each of these stages how often is it that God, instantaneously,
or, at most, progressively, changes their countenance, and sends them away?
Like the king of ancient Babylon, the form of the visage is changed, when the
handwriting of God is read in his law, and eternity unfolds its dreadful
scenes! Ah! how often thus, is the charming, blooming countenance of youth
changed in a moment, and become pale in death! and how frequently is it that
the profligate, the voluptuous sinner, like Divez, whose eyes sparkled over the
flowing bowl, is arrested in a moment, and sent away from all his relatives,
honors, and rounds of mirth, and in hell lifts up his eyes, being in torments,
supplicating the aid of poor Lazarus, from whom he had turned away his
countenance when lying at his gate begging for a crumb, now to dip the tip of
his finger in water to cool his parched tongue! Ah! how fallen! What a change
of countenance, and of state! So true is it, The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness. Prove. xiv. 32.

3. Materially different is the case, yet equally just the sentiment of Job
with respect to the righteous, thou changest his countenance, and sendest him
away. Their countenance undergoes a most remarkable change, when, under a
dejection of mind, and conviction of heart, God reveals the riches of his mercy
in pardoning their sins, and granting them the joy of his salvation -- God
becomes the hea^^^ of their countenance, and their God. Psa. xlii. 11. In times
of their sufferings, God affords them his succor, turns their mourning into
joy, and their countenance is no more sad. 1 Samuel i. 18. In death their
countenance undergoes a natural change in common with other men; but, while
changing, it becomes a mirror, through which the nature, supports, comforts,
and triumphs of grace appear in their brightest luster, to the glory of the
Savior and the consolation of every beholder! Yes, of the death of a righteous
man it may be said -- His mind was tranquil and serene,
No terrors in his looks were seen;
A Savior's smile dispelled the gloom,
And smoothed his passage to the tomb.
The ransomed of the Lord have hope in their death: at this very solemn period
FAITH hangs upon a covenant God, LOVE ardently embraces a precious Christ,
PATIENCE endures the pangs of dissolving nature, BENEVOLENCE extends her wings
over friends and foes, while HOPE waits for the enjoyment of a crown of
righteousness in glory! To mark the difference between the death of the wicked
and the death of the righteous, the latter is called a sleep in Jesus. Of
Stephen it was said, he fell asleep -- On his dying countenance was seen
A smile -- the index of a soul serene.


The countenance being changed, God sends away the body to the grave, to rest
in hope -- the soul to the paradise of bliss, to await the first resurrection,
when body and soul shall be united, live and reign with Christ, and eventually
shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father for ever and ever.

ADDRESS TO A FRIEND ON HIS BIRTHDAY.
THE old custom of making particular compliments on a birthday, connected with
my warmest wishes for your felicity, induce me to employ my pen to congratulate
you on the day -- a day which, if rightly improved, will inspire your gratitude
to God, who has thus far conducted you through life; and also establish your
confidence for future supplies from the bounties of his hand.

When I myself review the path of life, seriously contemplate God's conduct
toward me, in the multiplied affections and mercies which, in close
succession, have followed me, I am filled with humble praise. Under such
serious impressions I have felt myself happy, have renewed my strength, and
looked with pleasure on the remnant of my days. I have sometimes thought that
David was as partial to the celebration of birth-days as myself, and on such an
occasion breathed that pious aspiration -- So teach us to number our days, that
we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. Psa. xc. 12. What a necessity is there for
attaining the knowledge of this heavenly arithmetic, in order to ascertain the
safety of our state, and the paths of future duty! He who despises or neglects
this necessary art, is like the heedless mariner who never keeps a reckoning --
makes (...) in the night, and, for want of a well laid cable in order to drop
his anchor, imperceptibly falls upon the rocks, and becomes a perfect wreck. To
number our days of vanity, temptation, trials and prosperity, cannot fail to
impress our minds with the high importance of seeking the friendship of Jesus,
as the one thing needful. From a conviction of our misimprovements, of which,
alas! we have so many, we cannot but wish to learn wisdom. To fly from the
appearance of evil, thirst after the invaluable blessings of a Savior, and
constantly to devote ourselves to the honor of his name, this, this alone is
substantial wisdom!

Perhaps there are some particulars in every man's life, which, on such a day
as this, would lead him more sensibly to admire the divine forbearance, mercy
and goodness. Such, I presume, you have often recorded -- Dangers on the seas
and mercies on the land -- yes, and with David you acknowledge, My soul has
them still in remembrance. O that on this occasion, reviewing the protecting
care of the Almighty, your soul may be clothed with humility and your lips be
filled with his praise!

And now, dear Sir, look before you -- short, at best, is the period of human
life. Man comes up like a flower, and is cut down. Every year leaves your
number less. Birth-days should be to us, on the journey of life, as mile-stones
on the road; each informs us how far we have advanced, and brings the period of
our race to view. It seems, the nearer we advance to our end, the swifter our
days and months pass away. But who, alas! knows his own distance? Carefully may
a man preserve the number of years that pass, and tell another how old he is;
but who is able to determine the number yet to come? This is wisely hid from
mortal sight, that we may hold ourselves ready to stop in our career whenever
God may call. Let us, my friend, on our birth days, set down as on the
way-side, look at the number on the milestone, ask -- have we an heavenly home
to go to? have we assurance of interest in our Father's love? are we ready,
supposing the next mile-stone brings us to our end? If so, what serenity of
mind and happiness of soul would attend our path! How successfully should we
improve the ills and the comforts which surround us! We trust the faithful care
of that God who has crowned our lives with tender mercies, and look for every
needful future supply. Perhaps such submission is better expressed in the
following lines: may they prove, this day, the true language of your heart!

Great God! I would not ask to see
What in futurity shall be;
If light and bliss attend my days,
Then let my future hours be praise.
Is darkness and distress my share?
Then let me trust thy guardian care.
Enough for me, if love divine,
At length, through every cloud shall shine.
Yet this my soul desires to know;
Be this my only wish below,
That Christ is mine -- this great request
Grant, bounteous God, and I am blessed.
May you, dear Sir, be crowned with the smiles of Immanuel, and your following
days be accompanied with greater blessings than hitherto you have enjoyed. And,
when you arrive to the last mile-stone, death, may you enter into the blissful
presence of the Lord, and be absorbed in the brightness of his glory!

Yours, etc.

POETRY.
ON PSALM cxlviii.
BY AN EMINENT PHYSICIAN.
BEGIN, my soul, the exalted lay,
Let each enraptured thought obey,
And praise the Almighty's name.
Lo! heaven, and earth, and seas, and skies,
In one melodious concert rise,
To swell the inspiring theme.
Ye fields of light, celestial plains,
Where gay, transporting beauty reigns;
Ye scenes divinely fair,
Your Maker's wondrous power proclaim --
Tell how he formed your shining frame,
And breathed the fluid air.
Ye angels, catch the thrilling sound,
While all the adoring thrones around
His boundless mercy sing.
Let every listening saint above
'Wake all the tuneful soul of love,
And touch the sweetest string.
Join, ye loud spheres, the vocal choir:
Thou dazzling orb of liquid fire,
The mighty chorus aid.
Soon as gray evening gilds the plain,
Thou moon, protract the melting strain,
And praise him in the shade.
Thou hea'vn of heavens, his vast abode --
Ye clouds, proclaim your forming God,
Who called yon worlds from night:
"Ye shades, dispel!" the Eternal said --
At once the involving darkness fled,
And nature sprung to light.
Whatever, a blooming world contains,
That wings the air, that skims the plains,
United praise bestow:
Ye dragons, sound his awful name
To heaven aloud -- and roar acclaim,
Ye swelling deeps below.
Let every element rejoice:
Ye thunders, burst with awful voice
To him who bids you roll:
His praise in softer notes declare,
Each whispering breeze of yielding air,
And breathe it to the soul.
To him, ye graceful cedars, bow;
Ye towering mountains, bending low,
Your great Creator own:
Tell, when affrighted nature shook,
How Sinai kindled at his look,
And trembled at his frown.
Ye flocks that haunt the humble vale,
Ye insects fluttering on the gale,
In mutual concourse rise:
Crop the gay rose's vermil bloom,
And waft its spoils, a sweet perfume,
In incense to the skies.
'Wake, all ye mounting tribes, and sing;
Ye plumy warblers of the spring,
Harmonious anthems raise
To him who shaped your finer mould,
Who tipp'd your glittering wings with gold,
And tuned your voice to praise.
Let man, by nobler passions swayed,
The feeling heart, the judging head
In heavenly praise employ:
Spread his tremendous name around,
Till heaven's broad arch rings back the sound,
The general burst of joy.
Ye whom the charms of grandeur please,
Nursed on the downy lap of ease,
Fall prostrate at his throne:
Ye princes, rulers, all adore;
Praise him, ye kings, who makes your power
An image of his own.
Ye fair, by nature formed to move,
O praise the eternal source of love,
With youth's enlivening fire:
Let age take up the tuneful lay,
Sigh his blessed name -- then soar away
And ask an angel's lyre.
Christ waiting at the Door of a convinced Sinner's Heart.
Rev. iii. 20.
BEHOLD a stranger at the door,
He gently knocks, has knocked before;
Has waited long, is waiting still;
You use no other friend so ill.
But will he prove a friend indeed?
He will; the very friend you need:
The man of Nazareth -- it is he,
With garments died at Calvary.
Rise, touched with gratitude divine,
Turn out his enemies and thine;
That hateful, hell-born monster, Sin,
And let the Heavenly Stranger in.
If thou art poor (and poor thou art),
Lo! he has riches to impart;
Not wealth in which mean avarice rolls,
O! nobler far, the wealth of souls.
You Are blind! he will take the scales away,
And let in everlasting day;
Naked thou art, but he shall dress
Thy blushing soul in righteousness.
Art thou a weeper? Grief shall fly,
For who can weep with Jesus by?
No terror shall thy hopes annoy,
No fear, except the fear of joy.
EPITAPH ON THE GRAVE OF JESUS CHRIST.
Here lies our SURETY,
Under arrest for our debts.
If he be released
His discharge will be ours.
Here is the SUN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS,
Set for a while,
To rise again in greater glory,
And set no more!
Here lies a seeming captive to death,
But a real CONQUEROR over death.
FOR
Here lies death itself slain,
And the grave conquered!
Thanks be to God, who gives us the victory!
HENRY.

MEMORIAL OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.
IN righteous judgment heaven has appointed unto sinful man once to die. The
shafts of death fly thick around. The beggar and the lonely peasant receive the
summons, and are conveyed to the dust in silence, and without regret. The
prince upon his throne, the noble and the great, receive an equal, deadly blow;
and, with solemn pomp, are laid within the marble tomb. The mortal part of
WASHINGTON is removed to the shades of death, and America drops the mourning
tear; while her most patriotic sons advance, each as with a laurel in his hand
to decorate the great man's grave! His birth, his youth, his manhood; his
qualities in private life, his valor in the field, and his wisdom in the
senate; "first in war, first in peace, and first upon his country's heart!"
these eminent traits have formed a subject for the orator and the panegyrist so
new and astonishing, as seldom occurs in the world of letters. While others
joined the numerous, mourning train, and the more eloquent lips publicly
pourtrayed his political character, testifying the respect in which the people
of America held their beloved chief, I will gratify myself (as more accordant
to his last will and testament) by closing this volume of "The Christian's
Pocket Library," in raising a plain, private MEMORIAL of WASHINGTON, as a
distinguished SERVANT OF GOD, the MAN whom the Lord has delighted to honor in
establishing the only government, then existing upon earth, where the
perfection of religious liberty is enjoyed by all, and the church of God stands
upon its spiritual basis, unconnected with civil power.

We will attempt to raise this memorial upon the back ground of a review of the
christian profession as engrafted in the stock of civil government. Our blessed
Savior declared, my kingdom is not of this world. John xviii. 36. Its nature,
subjects, laws, government, privileges, treasures, are wholly spiritual and
divine; tending to prepare the souls of men for a future state of endless
bliss. No sooner did the cause of Jesus begin to increase, than civil
governments, of different descriptions and of different countries, planted a
profession of christianity into the very heart of their political
constitutions. Immediately the primitive simplicity and spirit of Christ's
visible kingdom vanished; it became a tool of state, and a pretext for
committing the most daring depredations amongst mankind; which political bodies
were not ashamed to call them THE WARS OF THE LORD. No wonder that, from such
an union of church and state, whether denominated papal or protestant, the
ordinances and laws of christianity should be grossly mutilated, intentionally
to render them subservient to political purposes, and that a variety of
officers should be introduced whose names and functions are unknown in the New
Testament, to carry on the wheels of state, and to produce the temporal good of
the whole. Against such an heterogeneous mass, and under such features, no
wonder the scattered Hebrew race should increase in prejudice against
christianity, and that the heathen-world should abominate that system whose
fruit was rapine, cruelty, and bloodshed! Under such mixed governments, all who
presumed to attach themselves to the spiritual kingdom of Christ, disclaiming
all civil authority in matters of conscience, faith, and religious practice,
were held in contempt, excluded from the particular rights of citizens, and
frequently accounted as sheep for the slaughter. Thus, a profession of the
religion of Jesus, whose primitive nature is benevolence and love, was
corrupted, and became the fountain of partiality, tyranny, bondage, hatred, and
wrath, separating the very souls it was calculated to unite, and scattering
arrows, firebrarnds and death over the world, which it was intended to reclaim.

In what part of Christendom was it that this most wretched spirit did not
prevail? In what country has the kingdom of Christ been universally professed,
as entirely distinct from the civil powers? In none. Even AMERICA, though
emerged from heathen darkness, and cultivated by European hands, sat amidst the
same corrupted mass of civil and ecclesiastic powers. But God designated her
for a better state. Increasing in her wealth, her years tender, she felt the
galling fetters on her hand! At length she sighed -- she groaned -- she wept
beneath her load. But ah! whose eye could pity? What arm sufficient to relieve
a case like here is? That ALMIGHTY BEING who taught Columbus to explore her
hidden shores, beheld her suffering state, and deigned to relieve! He who
raised Moses to deliver the chosen race of Israel, and girded the arm of Cirus
to unfold the massy gates of Babylon, will raise a deliverer to set America
free. Behold a WASHINGTON arise! Heaven inspires his soul with wisdom,
fortitude, and love -- teaches his hands to war, and his fingers to fight.
And, left he should boast, my own arm has gotten me the victory, God
commits to his command an handful of raw, undisciplined men, destitute of
almost every equipment for the field, but ardent thirst to set their country
free. Through seven long years of horrid war, in hopes and fears, in sweat and
blood, the GENERAL urged his way. At length heaven opens, and lets down upon
his servant's head the VICTOR'S CROWN. Now the fabric of civil and ecclesiastic
powers, long combined, in one crash fall, like the walls of ancient Jericho.
Peace, with her thousand thousand sweets, extends through all the land, and
every pious heart exclaims, Hallelujah! for the Lord God Omnipotent reigns.
Now, the Lord judges among many people, and rebukes strong nations afar off.
The sons of America beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into
pruning hooks. Every man sits under his vine and under his fig tree, and none
makes them afraid. Micah iv. 3. 4. O sing unto the Lord a new song, for he
has done mavelous things: his right hand and his holy arm has gotten him
the victory. Psa. xcviii. 1. And while such effusions of gratitude flow to the
Almighty for our deliverance and independence, can we possibly forget the MAN
whom the Lord has delighted to honor, in martialling our armies, and
obtaining our victory? Impossible! Though WASHINGTON be now numbered among the
dead, his name shall live with millions yet unborn.

Thus far we speak but half his praise. The people saved were yet without
sufficient law. The peace obtained must be secured. The MAN whom heaven blessed
in the fields of war now takes the presidential chair, in full CONVENTION, with
a circle of worthies, chosen by the free suffrage of the people, to frame a
CONSTITUTION, by which the rights, the liberties, the wealth and happiness of
all may be preserved. On this strong basis every STATE builds a superstructure
of peace and commerce, while distant nations give a friend's embrace.

Civil rights and liberties are sweet; but sweeter still the sacred rights of
conscience. This blessing, too, flows to us from God in copious streams,
through the Constitution of the United States. No test-act here; no fines nor
chains; no horrid inquisition nor flaming faggots prepared for those who differ
in faith and practice from their fellow mortals for conscience sake. Here the
standard of the CROSS appears, and the voice of Jesus sounds aloud -- My
kingdom is not of this world. Hail, thou first spot of earth, consecrated by
IMMANUEL'S benediction, to show his arm in rescuing his church from the civil
powers, to ^^and alone upon the pure unshaken basis of his truth and grace!
First fruit of the Redeemer's national conquest! Go on, most blessed Lord, in
the glory of thy might, overturning the powers of darkness, until thou shall
reign king of nations, as thou art king of grace, diffusing celestial knowledge
both to Jew and Gentile, and sacred liberty prevails from pole to pole. Thus,
while every American's knee shall bow before the Lord, and their lips, in
purest gratitude, praise his glorious name for his boundless mercies, let the
memory of WASHINGTON, through whom these blessings came, be engraven upon every
heart. Not one exempt! Those whose judgments may not accord in some recent
traits of this great man's counsel, must unite with me in venerating his name
as a distinguished servant of the Lord, in procuring those streams of civil and
religious liberty, unknown in other lands.

What man, elevated to such an astonishing height of honor, and so signally
favored by the victorious arm of God, that ever wore the ARMOR with such
diffidence and profound humility? Which, among those numerous conquerors whose
names adorn the page of ancient and modern history, have maintained such an
assemblage of moral VIRTUES as shone through the diversified stages of
WASHINGTON's public life? Alas! although the victor's crown was placed on their
heads, what spots of vice were often seen upon their robes, that made their
country blush! Here let America lift her head, nor dare disown her General's
name, but hail him -- A SERVANT WORTHY OF THE LORD!



INDEX TO VOL. II.
ADAM 108 Anecdote 66 Bachelor's Prayer 89 Baptized for the Dead 159 Believer
(dying) to his Soul 142 Birthday, Address to a Friend on his 268 Characters,
various ones 144 Christ, Power of 49 Christ waiting at the Door of a convinced
Sinner's Heart 276 Christ, desiring 236 Christ, Ascension of 208 Christian, to
live as a 211 Christianity, a Dialogue 252 Cobby, John 182 Conversion,
Remembrance of 85 1 Cor. xiii. 13, on 63 Counsel, parental 137 Death, Gates and
Doors of 174 Deans, John 106 Dove 224 Dog 16 Edwards 151 Ephemeron 191
Gleanings 129, 231, 249 Guilt, Estimate of 202 Gospel, hearing of the 120 Heart,
Rev. Oliver 215 Horse 67 House of Woe, a Dialogue 121 Isaiah xxvi. 9, on 240
Jesus, fullness of 193 Jesus Christ, Epitaph on the Grave of 278 Job xiv. 20, on
262 John xiv. 18, on 237 King of Hungary 55 Law and Gospel 146 Letter to John
Young 78 Light of Life 97 Lord's Day Morning 86 Lord's Day Evening 87 Lord's
Table 235 Man, a Flower 241 Marriage Supper 239 Messiahship, Claims to 132
Occurrence, a solemn one 33 Ostervald 13 Peace, Prayer for 141 Peace, Prince of
189 Peter, Rev. Christopher G. 93 Psalm cxlviii. on 273 Redemption 45
Reflections, sacramental 152 Romaine's Advice 76 Scrap 131 Snow 25 Sol. Song
ii. 10, 11. 91 Stag 111 Sun 162 Thief upon the Cross 35, 56 Time 1 Traveller
231 Viol new strung 47 Washington, Memorial of General 279 Worshipper, the
sleepy 74

