DR. TRUMBULL's DISCOURSE ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.

Genesis GEORGE WASHINGTON. Commander in chief of the Armies of the United States.
Born Feb. 11th 1782 O. S. Died December 14th 1799


The MAJESTY and MORTALITY of created GODS Illustrated and Improved.

A FUNERAL DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT NORTH-HAVEN, DECEMBER 29, 1799. ON THE DEATH
OF GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON; WHO DIED DECEMBER 14, 1799.

BY BENJAMIN TRUMBULL, D. D. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN NORTH HAVEN.



NEW HAVEN: PRINTED BY READ and MORSE. 1800.

DEDICATION.
TO the CITIZENS OF CONNECTICUT, the CINCINNATI, the MASONIC BRETHREN, and to
ALL MEN to whom the name of WASHINGTON is dear, this mite, humbly attempted, as
a tribute of respect to one of the greatest and most useful men, whom any age
has produced, is most respectfully dedicated, by their condoling friend and
fellow citizen,

THE AUTHOR.

The MAJESTY and MORTALITY of created GODS.
THAT portion of Scripture which shall lead our meditations, while we most
sensibly participate in the general sorrow of our afflicted country, and pay
our mournful tribute of respect to the departed Hero and Father of the American
States, is written in the LXXXII PSALM, 6 and 7th verses. I have said, Ye are
Gods: and all of you are children of the Most High. But ye shall die like men,
and fall like one of the princes.



HOWEVER bright the sun may rise, however useful and cheering he may be in his
meridian course, yet, at the appointed hour, he will most certainly set. His
cheering light and genial influence will be withdrawn. In like manner men of
the greatest eminence, the most distinguished by genius, by mental improvement,
by exalted stations and public usefulness, to whatever degree they have
illuminated, gladdened and benefited the several ages and nations in which they
have flourished, after a short and precarious day, have set in the midnight
gloom of death. Their usefulness has soon terminated, and they lie in the dark
regions of the dead. Short is the whole term from the morning of life to the
sad evening of death. The author of our nature has made our days as an hand
breadth and our age as nothing before him. The term of public life and
usefulness is still much shorter. How soon is the arm, which, with manly vigor
swayed the scepter, wielded the sword of justice and of war, enervated with
years? How soon does the strongest memory fail and the greatest mental powers
decline with age? Nay, how often are men of the most distinguished characters
arrested by the hand of death, before the approach of old age? In the glory of
life, in the midst of usefulness they vanish, like the vapor, and appear no
more. They die suddenly, die in every period of life and usefulness, and by all
the diseases, casualities and misfortunes by which other men die. They exhibit
to the world the most melancholy and striking evidence, That every man at his
best state is altogether vanity.

OF this it is the design of the text to admonish all men, and especially all
the great and honorable among them: That notwithstanding the importance and
elevation of their character they are mortal. The text indeed concedes, that
some men are highly exalted above others. Magistrates are called by the awful
name of Gods, and all of them children of the MOST HIGH, on the account of
their office; the authority with which they are invested, the work to which
they are appointed, and the majesty which GOD has (...) put upon them. But to
check human vanity, make them better men, and more extensively useful, he who
makes them Gods, affirms also, That they shall die like men. His words not
only assert their mortality, but imply the great importance and utility of
their knowledge of it, and of their frequently and seriously contemplating upon
it, and on their responsibility to a tribunal higher than their own.

IT will therefore be natural in further discoursing on the subject I. TO show
the majesty of civil rulers: or that GOD highly exalts some men in genius,
dignity and usefulness above others. II. THAT however highly they may be
exalted in office, or in any other respects above other men, they are equally
with them subject to mortality and all its consequences.


I. I AM to show the majesty of civil rulers: or that GOD highly exalts some
men in genius, dignity and usefulness above others.

THE SUPREME MAJESTY, in the text and context, expressly terms the kings,
magistrates and rulers of Israel, Gods. This, of all names, is the most high,
venerable and glorious. When given by GOD himself, it must be with great
propriety; importing the high exaltation, majesty and importance of magistrates
and civil government: That they are instituted by him, and bear a resemblance
of his glorious majesty.

CIVIL government, however different, in different times and countries, is of
GOD. He expressly appointed it among his own people. It was his express
command, Judges and officers shall thou make thee in all thy gates Deuteronomy. xvi.18.
. The divine government is universal. HE has prepared his throne in the
heavens; and his kingdom rules over all Psalm, ciii.19.
. All other rulers are of GOD, as well as those of his own peculiar people.
Hence that remarkable passage, By me kings reign, and princes decree justice.
By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth Prove. viii.15,
16.
. The apostle Paul expressly affirms, The powers that be are ordained of GOD.
And there is no power but of GOD Romans xiii.1, 4.
.

CIVIL government is founded in reason. It originates in the divine
philanthropy; and has its foundation in the paternal care, justice and goodness
of the common parent of all his creatures. It is designed to be a resemblance
of him in the righteousness and purity of his laws and administration. When it
is good, it bears a glorious resemblance of him, and is one of the greatest
blessings enjoyed by man. As mankind are, this is the grand security of life,
limb, liberty, property, domestic, public, civil and religious peace and order;
and indeed of all the blessings of social life. This only defends us against
violence, injustice, robbery, war, and death. Without it there could be no
order, strength, beauty, unity, or peace in society. Nay, the unrestrained
lusts and passions of men, like a mighty tornado or inundation would sweep from
the earth every thing which is pleasant and valuable to man.

AS GOD has instituted civil government, so men of singular genius and mental
powers elevated to seats of earthly dominion are his ministers, and, in their
legislative and executive capacity, bear his image as the SUPREME RULER and
JUDGE of the universe. They stand in his place, act under his authority,
legislate and judge for him. They are his officers to suppress violence, fraud,
dissipation and every wickedness which injures the public weal, and to maintain
truth, order, righteousness and peace in the earth. Hence it is written, Take
heed what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in
judgment II. Chron. xix.6.
. The civil ruler must imitate GOD in the integrity of his heart, in the
righteousness and purity of his law, and in the impartiality of his government.
The divine throne is established in righteousness; justice and judgment are the
habitation of it. The divine law is perfect and pure. How great and awful is
the majesty of civil magis^^^tes in this view? They are lawgivers to guard the
life, property and liberties of the people; to defend, encourage and reward the
righteous, to punish the wicked, to cut off the violent man, and evil doers
from the earth. They are exalted to seats and thrones of judgment, to defend
the poor, the fatherless and the widow: to do justice and judgment, and to
establish truth, and righteousness, and peace in the earth. With the Lord,
whose resemblance they bear, there is no iniquity, nor respect of persons, nor
taking of gifts verse 7.
. It is therefore commanded with respect to them, Ye shall not respect persons
in judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the great Deuteronomy. i.17.
. Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons, neither take a
gift. That which is altogether just shall thou follow chapter xvi.19.20.
. They are vested with power to kill, and to keep alive, as law and justice
demand. They are ministers of GOD not only for good, but they are revengers, to
execute wrath upon them who do evil. They bear not the sword in vain. Romans xiii.


CIVIL magistrates should imitate the SUPREME RULER in his paternal care and
goodness over his creatures, in his compassion, and in the goodness of his
government. He rules in mercy as well as righteousness. He does good unto all,
and his tender mercies are over all his works. His whole government is good.
All the happiness of heaven and earth, in time and eternity flows from it. The
pure river of the water of life clear as crystal proceeds out of the THRONE of
GOD and the LAMB. In like manner their constitutions of government, the whole
body of their laws, and all their administrations should be directed to the
public good. They should exceedingly love the people, the public order and
happiness; -- be of a public, patriotic and noble spirit, possessing high
paternal affections toward all the people. They should consider their burdens
and study to make them as light as possible; -- to understand their interests,
and the means of promoting them, and employ all their abilities, honors and
influence for the common weal. This will make their government gladdening as
the light, refreshing as the gentle dews and showers which fertilize the earth,
and through the divine benignity, fill men's hearts with food and glad^^^^
Hence it is written, When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice.
The just man who rules over men, says GOD, Shall be as the light of the
morning, when the sun rises, even a morning without clouds; as the tender
grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain II. Sam. xxiii.4.
! The rising sun, in a clear morning, spreads an universal joy, and its clear
shining after rain, has the most extensive and beneficial effects. So the
influence of a good ruler extends its happy effects to every community, family
and individual in a whole nation. It gives order, safety, peace and joy to all.
In this view how amiable, dignified and glorious is the good ruler. In what an
high and important sense does he resemble the MOST HIGH? On these accounts it
has generally been supposed that magistrates, in the scriptures, are called
GODS.

THERE is yet another important, and perhaps a principal reason, why the Kings
of Judah and Israel were called Gods; Because they were illustrious types of
the MESSIAH, the SON of GOD. In this respect they might be called Gods: and
every one of them children of the MOST HIGH. But in this view no rulers since
the coming of CHRIST can be called by this high and reverend name. In the other
view, however, they are a happy resemblance of the DIVINE MAJESTY, and their
character is most venerable and useful. The more wise, righteous, patriotic and
extensively useful they are, the more happily they answer to the high and awful
name by which they are characterized. Such officers are the LORD'S, the PILLARS
of the earth, and he has set the world upon them I. Sam. ii.8.
.

HE raises them up with all their superior abilities natural or acquired; and
by his providence exalts them to the several stations in which he designs them
to act, for the defense, peace and prosperity of his kingdom. As known unto him
are all his works from the foundation of the world, so he qualifies men, in the
different periods of time, for the great purposes which he has in view. He
brings them on to the great theater of action; and makes them, through his
blessing, adequate to the emergencies of the church, and the admirable events
which he designs to accomplish.

THE natural and acquired abilities of men are exceedingly different. The
disparity between some men and others is, probably. nearly as great as between
some angels and men. David is represented, As wise according to the wisdom of
an angel to know all things that were in the earth II. Sam. xiv.20.
. GOD gives to some men, natural genius, largeness of heart, an acumen and
penetration far beyond the common share of their fellows. He forms them for
great actions and purposes. Thus he gave to Solomon wisdom and understanding
exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand which is on the sea
shore I. Kings iv.29.
. He also, so governs events, in his providence, that the natural powers of
some persons shall be greatly improved by literature and all advantages to form
them for public usefulness. To some men he gives great talents for government.
Like the men of Issachar they have an understanding of the times, so that they
discern both time and judgment; and know what Israel ought to do. On others he
bestows uncommon military abilities; magnanimity, and penetration of mind,
strength and agility of body, so that they are admirably calculated to defend
his church against her enemies. In some instances these are both united in the
same person. Thus, when the exigencies of the church required it, GOD raised up
David, and gave him not only great wisdom, policy, and military skill, but
uncommon strength and agility, so that the bow of steel was broken by his arms,
and he ran through the troops and leaped over the walls and ramparts of his
enemies Psalm xviii.29, 34
. For his assistance he gave him captains and generals, who were men of war,
fit for the battle, who could handle shield and buckler, whose faces were as
the faces of lions, and who were swift as the roes upon the mountains I. Chron.
xii.8.
.

WHEN GOD designed to deliver Israel from their bondage in Egypt, and to form
them into a distinct kingdom, he gave them Moses for a lawgiver and deliverer.
When they needed a general to lead them into Canaan, he raised up a Joshua.
When the holy seed were doomed to an universal and total destruction, by the
device of a wicked Haman, he prepared an Esther, with all the charms of nature
and good sense, and with the polish of a fine education, to ravish the heart of
the king of Persia, and by her influence to obtain a reversal of the fatal
decree. When it was his purpose to destroy Babylon, and to deliver his people
from the North country, he called Cyrus, and girded him with his might; That he
might let go his captives and build his city Isaiah xlv.13.
.

IN like manner, when he saw, that men were about to rise up against the people
of America, and swallow them up quickly, unless his merciful interposition
should prevent, he qualified and exalted men to places of trust, in the cabinet
and in the field, for their defense. At that period arose a Franklin, that
uncommon genius, who first discovered the philosophy of the electric fluid, and
taught how to conduct the tremendous bolts of heaven harmless from the
dwellings of men. Then appeared in mature age, and the full vigor of life, a
Randolph, a Hancock, an Adams, a Jay, and other distinguished characters, to
guide our counsels in the cabinet and negociate our affairs in foreign
kingdoms; and that illustrious man, GEORGE WASHINGTON, to command our armies in
the field, and be the Savior of America. For his assistance there appeared a
Green, a Montgomery, a Wooster, a Sullivan, a Lincoln, a Wayne, a Mercer, and
other heroic patriots to defend our liberties, and lead us to peace and glory.
These, with the other great and patriotic characters who labored with them in
the same glorious cause, were his instruments to effect the great work which he
designed. He gave them their powers and raised them to the elevated stations in
which they acted. For promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, nor from the South But God is the judge; He puts down one, and sets
up another. Hence the powers that be are of GOD. He creates and preserves them
for his own purposes, and removes them at his pleasure. Though he stands in no
need of creatures, means, or instruments; can work with or without them, as
seems good in his sight, yet it pleases him, ordinarily, to govern the
world, and accomplish great events by them.

This brings me to observe

II. THAT however highly they may be exalted in office, or in any other
respects above other men, they are equally with them subject to mortality and
all its consequences.

THIS is a truth however melancholy and deeply affecting it may be, which lies
so open to universal observation, that it needs no labored illustration. The
business of a preacher is rather to impress, than demonstrate a truth so
obvious. The experience of all ages, of every year and month from the apostasy
to the present time bears witness to it. Both the sacred and historic page
attest it. One generation passes away and another generation comes. The
fathers where are they? And the prophets do they live for ever? Where are the
fathers of New England, who converted the wilderness into gardens, orchards and
pleasant fields? Where are the Winthrops, Hayus's, Heatons, Cottons, Hookers,
Davenports, and other renowned politicians and divines, who formed her free
civil and religious constitutions, and first illuminated America with the light
of science and liberty, and the far more glorious light of the gospel? Long
since have those morning stars gone down in the regions of the shadow of death.
The greatest politicians, theologians, and generals, who have made the nearest
approaches to the glorious angels and to GOD himself; who have been most useful
and beloved in their day are but spirits in mortal flesh. Like their fellow
mortals, they have sinned and fallen under the general sentence of death; DUST
THOU ART, AND UNTO DUST SHALL THOU RETURN Genesis iii.19.
. They are equally exposed with other men to all the diseases, violences and
disasterous events which terminate the life of man. Neither their wisdom,
power, nor strength, can evade, over awe, or withstand the messenger of death.
Neither can their riches bribe him, and prevent the fatal blow. Where now are
all the ancient sons of fame, who built a babel in the plains of Shinar and
erected the pyramids and other wonders of the world? -- Where are the mighty
and the honorable who illuminated the world with the light of science, or made
the earth to tremble with their arms and military feats? Where are the
Alexanders, the Caesar's, and Scipios? Where are kings and princes, who had
gold, who filled their houses with silver? And counselors of the earth who
built desolate places for themselves Job iii.14, 15.
? Is not their rest together in the grave? The small and the great are there
verse 19.
.

NO righteousness and integrity in judgment, no public usefulness, no love to
our country, nor the love nor prayers of millions, can, for a moment, stay the
hand of this king of terrors. There is no man that has power over the spirit
to retain the spirit; neither has he power in the day of death: and there is
no discharge in that war Ecclesiastes viii.8.
.

THE chief men of a nation, the created Gods of the earth, die like men, as to
the manner of their death. They die suddenly; die in the glory of life. They
lie down in ease and apparent safety, slumber a few hours, and awake in sore
disease and the agonies of death. Nay, they lie down in health, close their
eyes in soft repose, and wake no more. They die in all the ways, in all the
agonies, swoons, faintings, fears and terrors of other men.

THEY fall like one of the princes, by the arrow from the bow drawn at a
venture, by the sword upon the high places, by the dagger of the assassin, by
the poisonous draught, and the numerous delicacies, dainties, and indulgencies
of high life. They die on beds of down, tapestry and fine linen; amidst learned
physicians, costly medicines, and royal attendants. Yes, in the midst of all
these, they must die; nor can they obtain a moment's reprieve. In magnificent
domes and stately palaces, in the presence of captains and mighty men, in all
the hurry and alarm of an affrighted court, they bid the world and time adieu.

THEY die like men with respect to all the consequences of death. Their bodies
like those of their fellow mortals drop into a state of insensibility and
inaction. They lie down in the grave, the land of darkness and silence, the
worms cover them, and they return to their original dust. They exchange their
robes of state, their palaces, their lofty domes and soft lodgings for the
winding shroud and the tomb.

THEIR immortal part passes instantaneously into the unseen, eternal world of
spirits, and becomes subject to the exercises, government and awards of that
endless and wonderful state. Their departed spirits will instantly be
acquainted with the glories of heaven, united with blessed angels, prophets,
apostles and all the holy ones redeemed from among men, or be associated with
infernal ghosts in the regions of despair and woe. The uncreated splendors of
the DIVINE MAJESTY, the awful glories of his dread tribunal will present
themselves to their astonished souls. Such unutterable scenes will rise into
view, as will make all the majesty and great affairs of men dwindle into
littleness and vanity, and annihilate them and all created glory before the
DIVINE MAJESTY, the INFINITE ALL in ALL.

LIKE other men they are accountable for all the principles, views, and ends
with which they have acted; for all they have done not only in their high
stations, but in their private and secret walks; for every thing which they
have done in the body. Indeed their responsibility instead of being diminished
by the greatness and exalted stations which they possess, is greatly increased,
and rendered far more high and awful. It is a responsibility equal to all their
greatness, advantages and opportunities. For unto whomsoever much is given, of
him shall much be required: and to whom men have committed much, of him will
they ask the more Luke xii.48.
. They appear before the tribunal of the SUPREME JUDGE of the universe, with
whom there is no respect of persons, nor taking of gifts, and who regards not
the rich more than the poor II. Chron. xix.7. and Job xxxiv.19.
.

IN these respects persons of the most exalted characters die like men, and
fall like one of the princes. They have the same things to hope and fear, to
enjoy or suffer, in the eternal world, as other men.

I SHALL now make some useful remarks on what has been discoursed, and then
proceed more particularly to notice the mournful event, which has led me to
these meditations.

I. AS civil magistrates are Gods, in the views we have taken of them, they
ought most certainly to be honored, obeyed, and supported according to the high
and awful character which GOD has given them, and the authority and dignity
with which he has clothed them. We must honor them, for the MOST HIGH has put
great honor upon them. He has commanded, Render therefore to all their dues:
tribute to whom tribute is due, -- honor to whom honor Romans xiii.7.
. We must obey them, because he who is the fountain of all power has given
them authority to rule over us, and commanded us to be subject not only for
wrath, but for conscience sake verse 5.
. Those who resist their authority and laws, who despise and revile them,
despise, resist, and dishonor GOD himself. They despise his goodness in giving
them the inestimable blessing of good government. They violate their
consciences and expose themselves to temporal and eternal judgments. How awful
are the words of the apostle on this subject? And they that resist, shall
receive to themselves damnation verse 2.
.

II. FROM a review of our subject we are led to acknowledge the divine wisdom
and goodness, in raising up men of uncommon abilities, in the various ages and
emergencies of the church, for her protection and prosperity, and for the
general happiness of mankind. In a particular manner, should they be
acknowleged, in his causing such a number of great, illuminated, bold, and
patriotic characters to appear on the theater of action, at the time of the
American revolution. Especially, do they shine with a conspicuous and
commanding luster, in raising up that pre-eminent man, General WASHINGTON, to
command our armies, and illuminate our councils, until he had established our
independence, and we had obtained the blessings of an honorable and
advantageous peace: and then in exalting him to the chair of the supreme
magistrate, to guide the affairs of the nation, for such a number of years,
until he had raised it to a high degree of dignity, prosperity and glory. This
demands the most lively gratitude and animated thanksgivings of the millions of
the American states. Nor is the divine goodness to be unnoticed in the great
talents, fidelity, and patriotism of the illustrious men who negociated the
peace. Adams, Franklin and Jay, are names never to be forgotten by America. Nor
are they less to be regarded, in the patriotism and valor of our officers and
soldiers, and in the capacity, fidelity, invincible fortitude and attachment to
their country, with which the members of Congress and the magistrates of the
American states in general, and of this state in particular, conducted our
public affairs. They have indeed embalmed their names; and, with a sweet
fragrance, they will be handed down, in the remembrance of a grateful people,
to the remotest ages. But whatever honors and thanks are to be given to men,
the SUPREME GOVERNOR is ultimately to be acknowleged and praised for all the
wonderful things which have been done for our country; and for the unrivalled,
public and private privileges and blessings which we enjoy. While therefore we
contemplate the amiable character of general Washington, his prowess and
military skill, his abilities as a statesman, his firmness, integrity and
fidelity in government, his generosity and usefulness, and mingle our tears of
condolence at his fall, let us in all these acknowledge the divine hand, and
give glory to him, whose kingdom rules over all.

III. THE views we have taken of the mortality and responsibility of created
gods, will lead us to a number of interesting and profitable reflections, with
respect to magistrates and all great men, and also with respect to ourselves.

THE solemn thoughts* that death will soon wrest the scepter and the sword from
the hands of the most exalted and powerful, and defile their crowns in the
dust: That their robes of state, and seats of dignity must be exchanged for the
winding shroud and the dark grave, are most powerfully calculated to check the
pride of office: To teach lessons of meekness, condescension and goodness: --
The vanity of human life, of worldly honor and greatness, and of all the
wealth, pomp and glitter of the present world. What can possibly impress with
greater energy upon the human heart that divine maxim, Verily every man at his
best state is altogether vanity Psalm xxxix.5.
. How does this consideration stain the pride of all human glory! What can be
more energetic to excite great men, and all men, So to number their days, that
they may apply their hearts unto wisdom Psalm xc.12.
? The thoughts of their responsibility to the judge of the universe, are
adapted with great energy to guard them against the thirst of domination,
against the numerous lusts and temptations to which, in high stations and high
life, they are exposed. They have a happy influence to guard them against
selfishness and sinister views, against oppression and violence, against the
taking of gifts and respect of persons. These thoughts are weighty to awaken
them to the most laborious diligence, activity and faithfulness in the duties
of their office: Nay, to be really pious, righteous, humane and temperate; and
to seek those substantial and permanent honors which come only from GOD. Happy
and honorable indeed will it be for magistrates and all great men, who shall
frequently dwell on these meditations, and who will suffer themselves to be
suitably influenced by them. Then when they shall put off the badges of state,
and the garments of mortality, and be removed from seats of dignity and thrones
of judgment on earth, they will be clothed in the robes of righteousness and
garments of salvation, and be exalted to seats and crowns immortal in the
presence of their GOD and REDEEMER.

THAT they must die like men, teaches us to put no trust in princes, since
they are vanity, and to make not flesh our arm. It speaks in this energetic
language, Cease ye from man whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he
to be accounted of Isaiah ii.22.
.

OUR subject should check all trust and glorying in ourselves, in the health,
strength, or beauty of our bodies, in the vigor and sprightliness either of
body or mind; since GOD will most certainly change our countenances and send us
away. These strong and beautiful bodies, will soon be pale, ghastly, and
moulder in the dust. Does not our subject and the providence we are
contemplating cry, nay does not heaven cry, All flesh is as grass, and all the
glory of man as the flower of the field I. Pet. i.24.
? How should these views awaken all our attention, exertions and prayers to
secure the one thing needful, that better part, that incorruptible and
undefiled inheritance which never shall be taken from us, and which never will
fade away? How should they engage us to do whatever our hand finds to do with
all our might? To improve every opportunity of doing good, and to fill up every
condition and portion of life with usefulness and duty?

IV. OUR subject teaches us to acknowledge the divine providence in the death
of great and good men, who have been the political fathers, saviors, and
benefactors of their country, and to be humbled and mourn under such awful
dispensations.

IT is GOD who puts them down, as well as sets them up. Our times are in
his hands. The number of our months are with him, and he has appointed our
bounds that we cannot pass Job xiv.5.
. He has not only determined the degree and extent, but the term of every
man's usefulness. He turns man to destruction, and has said, Return ye
children of men. His awful, afflictive providence therefore, in the late sudden
death of that great, useful and good man, general WASHINGTON, who for so many
years commanded the armies of the UNITED STATES of America, and sustained the
dignified office of their chief magistrate, calls us to deep humiliation and
mourning. Our sorrow ought to be, in some measure proportionate to his worth,
the magnitude of the services he has rendered us, and of the loss we have
sustained. Great bereavements call for great mourning and humiliation.

WHEN Moses that eminent servant of GOD died, who had delivered Israel from the
house of bondage, and was king in Jeshurun, all Israel mourned for him. When
that excellent prince Josiah fell, All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him, and
Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men and singing women spoke
of Josiah in their lamentations unto this day II. Chron. xxxv.24, 25.
. And is the first of men for genius, for military skill and prowess, for
wisdom and civil policy, for patriotism and the knowledge of men, the savior,
Father and glory of his country fallen; I say, is this prince and great man
fallen in our Israel, and shall not America mourn? Do not I see all her
citizens in sackcloth? While we contemplate his character, his services and
mournful exit, and condole with our country and with each other in our
incalculable loss, does not every breast heave with sorrow, and all eyes run
down with tears?

THAT we may form any just estimate of our loss, we must contemplate his
character and public usefulness.

HE was born in the parish of Washington in the county of Westmoreland, in
Virginia, on the 11th of February 1732, Old Style. He was considerably above
the middling size, his limbs were large and well proportioned, and his figure
was graceful and dignified "His was the first of fortune's gifts to claim,
And his the triumph of unbounded fame;
Indulgent nature emulously kind,
Gave to his form the graces of his mind;
While his bold stature towers supremely high,
And like his genius claims the lifted eye;
The kindly features peace and truth impart,
Calm as his reason, open as his heart."
Mrs. Morton's beautiful description of general Washington in her poem styled
Beacon Hill.
. His countenance appeared bold and thoughtful, but placid and winning. He had
a good, though not a public education. Such was the strength and accuracy of
his genius, the agreeableness of his manners, and his general acquaintance with
men and things, that he began, in early life, to be noticed as a man of
talents, and to be introduced to public business. In 1753, when he was about
twenty-one years of age, he was sent by the governor of Virginia Lieutenant
governor Dinwiddie. Washington at that period sustained the rank of a major,
and yet he took his provisions on his back, and traveled four hundred miles
with a single companion. One half of his rout lay through a trackless
wilderness, inhabited by none but savages.
with plenary powers, to the commandant of the French fort near the Ohio, to
demand of him the reasons of his encroachments on the British dominions, and of
the violence which had been offered to the subjects of Great Britain, in that
quarter; and to insist on his evacuating the fort which he had erected. The
French governor laid claim to the whole country and refused to give up his
fortress; but major Washington conducted the business of his commission with
such address, expedition, and accuracy, as further recommended him to public
notice. The next year he was made a lieutenant colonel, and commanded a
regiment of Virginians. In 1755, he went an extra aid-de-camp with general
Braddock. At the time of his memorable defeat, he behaved with such gallantry,
in preserving the remains of his broken army, as procured him still greater
honor He preserved the Virginians from the general panic, formed a bold front
to the enemy, and covered the regular troops in their retreat. President
Davies, in a note to a sermon which he preached before Capt. Overton's company
of volunteers, August 17, 1755, entitled, Religion and patriotism the
constituents of a good soldier, says, "As a remarkable instance of this, I may
point out to the public that heroic youth, Col. Washington, whom I cannot but
hope providence has hitherto preserved in so singular a manner for some
important service to his country."
. The supreme authority of Virginia was so deeply impressed with a sense of his
worth and military talents, that he was made adjutant-general of all the troops
raised, and to be raised in Virginia. In 1758, he commanded the van-brigade, in
the army of general Forbes, in the successful expedition against fort Du
Quesne. From about the year 1760 to the commencement of the dispute with
Great Britain, he was elected a member of the general assembly in Virginia, was
a magistrate, and a judge of the court of the county of Fairfax, in which he
resided. In 1774, he was elected member to the first congress. He was elected
also member of the second, in 1775, in which on the 15th of June he was
appointed commander in chief of the armies of the united colonies. This arduous
command he accepted at a time of great peril to America; and during eight
successive campaigns, subjected himself to the hardships of a soldier,
jeoparding his life in the high places, for the defense of the liberties, lives
and property of his fellow-citizens, and to secure the peace, safety and
prosperity of his country.

WHEN he took the command, the Americans had not a regular regiment nor
fortress, nor did they possess an armed ship. They were almost without arms,
artillery, ammunition and other means of defense. The colonies were attacked by
sea and land, by the most formidable force that ever invaded a young country.
He was called to act against the best generals and troops which Europe could
boast. They had gathered laurels in Europe and America, in Flanders, at
Louisburg, and on the plains of Abraham. They were furnished with the best
arms, and the finest train of artillery, served by the best engineers which
Great Britain or Germany could produce. A great part of his army, until nearly
the close of the war, consisted of militia and troops who were only temporary;
and he had often to disband one army and form another in the very face of the
enemy. Yet he made a surprising defense. He was never once surprised, never
lost an army, nor suffered any considerable defeat. His army was generally much
inferior to that of the enemy The continental army, at its best state,
consisted of about 22,000 men. According to the speeches in the parliament, and
historical accounts, Great Britain employed more than 5^5,000 regular troops,
first and last, for the subjugation of the UNITED STATES. They had a fleet of
ships of war and transports consisting of about 400 sail. The fleet under Lord
How at New York, in 1776, consisted of 300 sail. That which transported the
royal army to Quebec, consisted of more than an hundred sail. Besides, a great
number of armed boats and privateers were employed in the war against the
States.
, yet he finally baffled all their arts, totally defeated their designs, and,
under the superintendance of a gracious providence, raised the United States to
independence, peace, and glory.

DURING his command, he exhibited striking demonstrations of an uncommon
genius, a singular knowledge of mankind, and the most masterly strokes of
generalship.

WHEN he arrived before Boston, he found it invested with a half armed and
undisciplined multitude, hastily drawn together from their fields and shops,
the greater part of whom, though a bold and virtuous yeomanry, had never before
seen a campaign, nor the forming of a single regiment. In New England, he had
made no connexions, and was scarcely known. To its legislatures, to its men of
principal character, to the officers and troops, who composed his army, he was
an entire stranger. Yet he was able, of this chaotic mass, to form an army,
introduce system, obedience, discipline, and bravery. He at once possessed
himself of the affection and confidence of his officers and of the whole army.
Equally did he possess himself of the esteem of all the New England patriots
and colonies; and was able to point their whole force to the object of his
wishes. Though he had not only an army to harmonize, before a numerous enemy of
veterans, but, for a time, almost to create the means of defense When general
Washington arrived at head quarters at Cambridge, the army had neither tents,
nor commissaries, nor any regular supplies of provisions. They had neither
engineers capable of planning regular works, nor tools to erect them. They had
no proper train of artillery, their arms were very defective, and numbers had
none at all. With respect to ammunition, they were still more deficient. On the
4th of August it was found that the whole stock of powder in the four
New England colonies, was little more than sufficient to furnish nine rounds
for each man, then investing the town. After every exertion which could be
made, as late as February 1776, there were 2,000 troops without arms.
Enterprising and high spirited officers, with their adherents, had pushed
forward to the camp, without regard to rank, the appointments of Congress, or
their respective colonies. To assign to them the station which their rank and
services required, and much less to which their vanity aspired, and to
introduce subordination and discipline among freemen, was a task too great for
any man but a Washington. But he was able to adjust all these embarrassments
with safety, and to general satisfaction.
, yet he was able, for many months, to keep them in a constant state of siege
and alarm; and at length, notwithstanding all their force and vigilance, to
take such positions as to oblige them, to save their fleet and army, to
evacuate the town and port of Boston The troops in Boston consisted of between
seven and eight thousand. They were aided by two floating batteries and 150
ships of war and transports. To confine them within their limits the general
was obliged to form lines of about ten miles in circumference. His army when
most numerous consisted of no more than 14,500 men; but at the close of the
year, while the old army was disbanding, and a new one forming, it amounted
only to 9650. Yet his arrangements were so judicious, that the enemy never made
a single attempt upon his lines. With a view to drive the hostile army from
Boston, the general was reinforced with 7,000 militia; at which time he found
himself at the head of 17,000 effective men. But he was greatly embarrassed for
want of ammunition and military stores sufficient for such an attempt. However,
on the night of the 4th of March 1776, he ordered a detachment, under general
Thomas to take possession of Dorchester heights. The van was composed of a
covering party of 800 men. To these succeed 1200 fatigue men with carts
carrying on their entrenching tools. In the rear was a train of more than 200
carts loaded with fascines and bundles of hay. Here every thing was conducted
with the profoundest silence, while the attention of the enemy was drawn to
another quarter, by a brisk bombardment and cannonade: and such were the
preparations and dispositions made by the general, that by the morning light
the provincials had completed such lines of defense, as astonished the enemy.
General How in particular, in consternation, was heard to exclaim, "I know not
what I shall do; the rebels have done more in one night, than my whole army
could have done in months." By taking this position the general had such
command of the harbor and town, that the enemy determined on an immediate
evacuation of Boston.
.

HIS army afterward consisted of the troops of thirteen different states,
different in education, manners views and interests, of troops from Canada and
France, of different nations and languages, yet he shared deeply in the esteem
and confidence of the whole. How did he harmonize the armies of the United
States? -- The fleets and armies of France and America? In the darkest periods
of the war, and through the whole of it, how perfectly did he enjoy the
affections and confidence of the army, of Congress, and of every state in the
union? Indeed he had such command of the hearts of men, that his troops would
abide with him in cold, hunger, nakedness and in all hardships and dangers.

HIS retreat from Long Island, in 1776, was such a masterpiece of generalship
as is rarely exhibited in the history of man. In one short night, in the face
of a superior enemy, he brought off about nine thousand men, without the loss
of a single company. His retreat from the Island of New York, and through the
Jersies were exhibitions of the same great mind.

THE manner of his recrossing the Delaware, the surprisal and capture of the
Hessians at Trenton, the march which he stole upon Cornwallis, and the defeat
of the British troops at Princeton, were feats of greater brilliancy, and far
more important and glorious in their consequences. The affairs of the union
were now at their lowest ebb. The political pulse was almost gone; but these
unexpected and surprising movements and victories, snatched us from the jaws of
death, rekindled the vital spark, and diffused life and joy through all America
All the American fortresses had now fallen before the enemy; general Washington
had been hotly pursued through New Jersey across the Delaware into
Pennsylvania. His army was nearly annihilated, and the remains of it were in a
manner unclothed and unshod. The country was in a state of deep despondency,
and many were going over to the enemy and submitting to Lord How. In this
crisis general Washington, on Christmas evening, made dispositions for crossing
the Delaware in three divisions, with a view to attack the enemy's posts in so
many different places. The night was dark and severe; the storm roared, the
hail descended, and the Delaware rolled down in currents of ice; but he crossed
with 2400 men to the hostile shore, and after a march of nine miles just at the
dawn of the morning, December 26, surprised the Hessian post at Trenton. About
forty of the enemy were killed or wounded, twenty three officers, 886 privates
were made prisoners. Col Rall, who commanded the post, was slain. The same day
the general crossed the river into Pennsylvania. Two of the Americans were
killed, two were frozen to death, and six or seven were wounded. The general
having secured his prisoners, on the 2d of Jaunuary 1777, again crossed the
Delaware, and took possession of Trenton. His army consisted of about 5000 men,
of whom 1800 were continentals, whose time of enlistment was now expired, their
clothing was no ways sufficient for the season, and they were worn down with
services. But, by the persuasion of the general, they were induced to tarry six
weeks longer. The others were raw militia men, brought into the field in the
then present emergency. By this time the royal army had been assembled at
Princeton, and Lord Cornwallis at its head, was coming on, with great force, to
repair the injury they had sustained in their late defeat. At 4 o'clock in the
afternoon the enemy attacked an advanced post, which general Washington had
placed with four field pieces, a little north of the town. General Green was
sent forward with a detachment to support it; but the enemy were in such force
that it was with difficulty, that he made good his retreat. The American army
was hastily formed behind Sanpink bridge and the creek of that name, which runs
through the town. The general had a good train of field artillery, and a number
of pieces were so placed as to concentrate their fire upon the bridge and the
road leading to it. The enemy's grenadiers pressed on with great spirit to
force the bridge. Their attack was so warm, and their fire so heavy, that the
general was obliged to expose his person and use all his exertions to prevent
his troops from giving way; but the fire of the field pieces and of the troops
was so well directed that after three unsuccessful attempts the enemy retired.
The Americans kept their position until night, and both armies maintained a
cannonade upon each other. The feeble American army was now in a most critical
situation. To retreat and pass the river in the face of such an army was
impracticable. Besides, it would hazard the city of Philadelphia, and
extinguish every ray of hope which had begun to dawn in the late success. To
risk a general action with such inferior force, would have been madness. The
liberties of America, seemed, at this time, to be suspended upon a mere thread.
In this dilemma, general Washington determined, by a circuitous march, to get
into the rear of the enemy and attack Princeton. To deceive them he ordered the
fires to be kept in full blaze until the morning. About midnight the whole army
took up their line of march, and arriving near Princeton, a little before day,
fell in with Colonel Mawhood, at the head of his regiment, marching for
Trenton. The Colonel was a gallant officer, and commencing a close fire upon
the Americans and charging with bayonets, they gave way, and a general panic
seemed to be spreading. At this critical moment, the American Fabius appeared
with all the fire and boldness of Hannibal or the Scipios, encouraging his
troops, interposing himself between the two armies not more than thirty yards
distance from the enemy's front with the head of his horse toward them, while
they discharged their pieces. The Americans animated by his example, returned
the fire and encompassed the British on every side; upon which the colonel,
with what men he could, broke through and made his escape. While the general
was engaged in this quarter, the rest of the army engaged two other British
regiments, who fled before them. Some of the enemy retired into the College and
attempted to defend themselves in that; but the Americans no sooner began to
fire upon them with their field pieces, than they surrendered. Sixty of the
British were killed, many wounded, and three hundred taken prisoners. General
Washington marched off in safety to Morristown. The British generals were
filled with such consternation at these unexpected and brilliant movements,
that they immediately evacuated Trenton and Princeton, and, in a few weeks, the
whole state of New Jersey, except Brunswick and Amboy, to which the British
were confined, was completely recovered.

In these marches the continentals were in a manner barefoot and marked their
steps with blood.


.

NOT to mention the attack and capture of Stony Point, which was a plan of his
great mind, to prevent the further burning of towns and depredations of the
enemy, nor the battle of Monmouth, it is to be observed that, like a beautiful
climax, he rose in the force and brilliancy of his actions. The manner in which
he outgeneralled Clinton and the British officers in the removal of his army
from the vicinity of New York, to Yorktown in Virginia, and the capture of
Cornwallis, made the fullest display of the greatness of the man, and
gloriously finished his military career General Washington and the French
general had, a considerable time before, concerted the plan of the coming over
of the French fleet, and of attempting the defeat, or capture of Lord
Cornwallis. One great thing necessary to effect this was to amuse the British
generals with the idea that a formidable attack was to be made on New York,
until the Chesapeak should be blocked up, and such force concentrated in
Virginia, as would be adequate to the reduction of Cornwallis. -- For this
purpose a plan was concerted for the meeting of governor Trumbull and his
council at Danbury, in July or August, with a number of principal characters
from other states, to deliberate on measures for taking New York. This was
publicly given out, and great expectations were entertained from the meeting of
such a number of sages. The patriots met at the time the general wished, and
all the wise heads were laid together, and plans devised in their united
wisdom. All thought they were assisting the general, and that he was about
vigorously to pursue the wise schemes which had been concerted. Requisitions
had been made on the New England states of 6200 militia to fill up their
respective quotas, to be ready within a week of the time for which they should
be called for. Flat bottomed boats sufficient for the transportation of 5000
men had been brought down Hudson's river to the vicinity of the American army.
Count de Rochambeau, with the French army, had marched from Rhode Island, and
joined the American army. Ovens were erected opposite to Staten Island, and
appearances were made for the formation of a permanent camp in that quarter.
About the same time a letter from general Washington was pretended to be
intercepted containing a plan of the designed operations against New York. Such
a combination of circumstances induced the royal generals and the people in
general to believe that the reduction of New York was the grand object. At the
same time the general was marching his troops through the country to the
Chesapeak. Governor Trumbull had hardly reached Hartford, in his return from
the council at Danbury, before he received a letter from general Washington,
acquainting him, that the French fleet was arrived in the Chesapeak, and that
he was going to Virginia.
.

THE self denials, hardships, dangers and anxieties which he endured for his
country, admit of no calculation. The high places round Boston, the heights of
Dorchester, Long and York Islands, the White plains and the High lands in New
York, Trenton, Princeton, the Brandywine, Morris Town, Valley Forge,
Germantown, Monmouth and Yorktown, witnessed his fatigues and dangers The
general often endured hardship and great fatigue, sometimes lodged and fared
coarsely; as at Trenton and Princeton, in his retreat through Jersey, and at
Valley-Forge. The night after the battle of Monmouth, he lodged in his cloak
under a tree.
, the mighty labors and anxieties of his mind, the energies of his sword and
pen. A mind so illuminated and comprehensive as his, could not but feel a
mighty impression from the magnitude of the cause in which he embarked, from a
view of the difficulties and dangers with which, it was attended, and of the
extensive and dreadful consequences of not succeeding in his attempts. No other
mind could so fully know, comprehend, and deeply feel them. What calculation in
this view, can be made of his feelings for himself and his country, especially
in some of the most dark and critical moments At some times his soul was
harrowed up with apprehensions that his country would be conquered.
Confiscations and attainders presented themselves full in his view; and he had
sometimes thoughts of retiring beyond the mountains. See Ramsay's and Gordon's
histories. I have been informed by a credible gentleman, who lodged with him
when he was retreating through the Jerseys, that when he appeared to be in deep
sleep, he would suddenly leap his whole length from his bed and be instantly
erect upon his feet, having the appearance of surprise.
? The joy with which he received the news of peace, the dignity with which he
resigned his commission and retired to the peaceful walks of private life, when
the objects of the war were accomplished, are equally incalculable "I
hastened," said he, "with ineffable delight," to Mount Vernon.
.

WHEN the defectability of our first federal system became manifest, he again
came forward among our first patriots, and presided in the formation of our
present national constitution, under which the United States have arisen to
such respectability, opulence and glory. Notwithstanding his great predilection
for the enjoyments of private life, yet at the unanimous call of his country,
he accepted the high and arduous office of the chief magistrate of the nation.
With what solid and magnanimous principles, founded in morality and religion,
did he commence his administration? How soon did he demonstrate the wisdom of
the choice which America had made; and that he was not less distinguished by
civil policy and the art of government, than in that of war?

HOW did he remove difficulties, answer previous obligations, harmonize and
strengthen the union, clear and brighten the path to national peace, prosperity
and honor? How did the millions of the American States realize the happy
effects of his administration, and rejoice under its righteous, mild and benign
influence?

AS years increased the ardor of his desire to return to the rank of a private
citizen also increased. When the presidential term expired he had drawn up his
farewell address, and was prepared to proclaim his intentions. But at the
united and ardent solicitations of all around him, and upon a view of the
critical state of the union, he once more sacrificed private inclination to the
public weal. A second time was he unanimously chosen to the supreme magistracy.
What important services did he again render to his country? While war has hung
out its bloody flag through the principal nations in Europe, and through a
great part of the old world; and mankind have been slaughtered, cities erased,
and kingdoms shaken beyond all parallel in modern ages, through his wisdom, and
invincible firmness, the United States have not only enjoyed peace; but, beyond
all former precedent, have increased in number, settlements, husbandry,
navigation and commerce. The happy effects of his administration have extended
their benign influence to enemies, as well as to fellow-citizens. The hostile
Indians have not only been conquered and reduced to a state of peace, but
through his recommendation and influence, their condition has been greatly
ameliorated. Laws have been enacted providing not only for their peace and
safety, but for their convenience and prosperity.

AFTER more than twenty years of the most arduous, public services, and when
there were the fairest prospects, that he would a third time be unanimously
called to the chair of the supreme magistrate, he once more retired to the rank
of a private citizen. No man had ever rendered more essential and extensive
services to his country than he; yet, as though all this had been too little to
answer the public demands, and satisfy the great and generous impulses of his
own mind, when the exigencies of his country required it, he again accepted the
chief command of our armies, to defend us against the intrigues and violence of
a most terrible nation.

HE rendered all his services with a peerless generosity, totally declining
every pecuniary consideration When he accepted the command of the army he said,
in his address to the president of Congress, "As to pay, sir, I beg leave to
assure the congress, that as no pecuniary consideration could have tempted me
to accept this arduous employment, at the expense of my domestic ease and
happiness, I do not wish to make any profit from it. I will keep an exact
account of my expenses. Those I doubt not they will discharge, and that is all
I desire." The whole sum which passed through his hands during the war,
amounted only to fourteen thousand four hundred seventy-nine pounds eighteen
shillings and nine pence sterling. Actual disbursements had been managed with
such economy and fidelity, that they were all covered with this moderate sum.
. In every emergency he exhibited the same greatness of mind, the same
invincible fidelity and attachment to his country; sacrificing all private
considerations, and consecrating all the powers with which heaven had enriched
him, to the public good. No bribes, no offers of preferment, no dangers could
make him deviate from the path of honor and duty. Of him it might not with less
truth be said, than of the Roman Fabricius, WASHINGTON is the man who may with
more difficulty be removed from the ways of honor, than the sun from his course
Such was the necessity of the case, and such the confidence which congress
reposed in the general, that, at some times, they invested him with power
nearly equal to that of universal dictator; yet he has left no instance of his
abuse of power. He always paid a punctilious regard to the laws of his country,
and to the rights and property of his fellow-citizens. He might with the
greatest facility, like Caesar or Cromwell, have made himself king or lord
protector of America, but he chose rather to return to the rank of a private
citizen, than enjoy even the honors and emoluments which his country ever
wished to give him. At the close of the war public credit was at the lowest
ebb. The troops though they had performed the most essential services for their
country, were unpaid. Some of the principal officers, and many of the soldiers
were determined never to lay down their arms until they had redressed their own
grievances. An artful, insidious publication, circulated to inflame the troops,
and inviting them while they had arms in their hands, to do themselves justice,
was spread in the camp. In this alarming crisis, how did the magnanimity of the
general and his invincible attachment to his country shine forth? Instead of
giving the least countenance to such mutinous designs, he convened his
officers, and with a kind of paternal tenderness addressed them on the subject.
While he assured them of his esteem of them and affection for them, of his
concern for their honor and interest, he conjured them, "as they valued their
honor, as they respected the rights of humanity, and as they regarded the
military character of America, to express their utmost detestation of the man,
who was attempting to open the floodgates of civil discord, and deluge their
rising empire with blood." Taking hold of one of his venerable locks, he said
to this effect, See how my head has whitened in the service, and yet I have not
once doubted of the justice of my country: and assuring them that he would use
his whole influence for their advantage, he urged them to cast themselves upon
it. They were melted even into tears, and the apparent storm terminated in an
honorable and happy calm. The troops were soon after dismissed, and in the most
peaceful and orderly manner, returned to their respective homes.
. Indeed in him were united the three great characters of Fabricius, Fabius,
and Cincinnatus. He adored the divine providence, called the United States, and
his troops, on special occasions, to acknowledge and praise the GOD of armies!
How did he in his last address to his fellow-citizens, recommend morality and
religion as the most stable and sure basis of public happiness? He rose
superior to local prejudices for states or nations. He could not be intoxicated
with prosperity, nor be depressed with adversity. In his numerous speeches and
addresses, on various occasions, we find not a single expression of vanity, nor
an invective against his enemies. He was efficacious, but mild in government;
inoffensive and engaging in his manners, temperate and regular in his mode of
living, generous to public institutions, and charitable to the poor It is well
known that the general gave largely to some literary institutions; and in a
letter to the gentleman who had the care of his house, he writes thus, "Let the
hospitality of the house be kept up with respect to the poor. Let no one go
hungry away. If any of this sort of people should be in want of corn, supply
their necessities, provided it does not encourage them in idleness. I have no
objection to your giving my money in charity, when you think it will be well
bestowed. I mean that it is my desire that it should be done. You are to
consider that neither myself or my wife are in the way to do those good
offices."*
In him, in a high degree, were exemplified, the character which has just been
given of the good magistrate. Impartiality, justice and patriotism were
prominent features of his whole administration, both in his military and civil
capacity. How did the fruit of his victories, and of his wise, righteous and
peaceful civil administration, like the rising sun, diffuse joy and festivity
through the whole union? When through the energies of his wisdom and prowess,
the thunder of war ceased in all our coasts, and peace with her olive branch
quieted America; When her dispersed inhabitants returned, and repossessed their
abandoned cities and villages; Yes, when from captivity, doleful prisons, and
the high places of the field, he restored her hardy sons to the bosom of their
country, to the embraces of parents and brethren, of wives and children, was he
not to you as the light of the morning, when the sun rises, even a morning
without clouds? When under his happy administration, your ruined towns and
cities were rebuilt, your depopulated tracts repeopled, your settlements
extended, your navigation and commerce increased: nay, when he preserved your
peace, amidst the convulsions and wars of so many conflicting kingdoms, was he
not to you, as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining
after rain? Was not he the magistrate under whose government the people
universally rejoiced? In a word, he was the father, the patriot, the savior
and glory of his country. Above all men he possessed the hearts of his
fellow-citizens; and having lived well, he closed the scene of days with the
same composure, dignity and fortitude, with which he lived. These facts beyond
a thousand panegyrics, beyond all the pomp and swell of words, demonstrate the
greatness, the incomparable worth and services of the man, and the irreparable
loss of America in his mournful exit. But alas he is no more! His heart which
was so warm, and beat so high in his country's weal is cold and beats no more.
His limbs which were so beautiful, vigorous, and active, are frozen in the
embrace of death. Yes, the beloved Washington lies in the dark tomb. Death
feeds upon him there. O Mount Vernon, how do thou tremble at his fall? What
mourning spreads through thy spacious domes and humble cots? What lamentations
rise from all thy lofty groves and pleasant walks? How does the sorrow spread
from city to city, from state to state, and pervade all America? How will it
cross the Atlantic and urge the silent tear from thousands of Europeans eyes?
Weep, O Virginia, your glory is departed. Weep, ye sages of the nation, all ye
gods of America. Weep, O ye officers and armies whom he commanded, whom he
loved, and led to glory. Weep, O ye Cincinnati, ye Masonic brethren, and all
who have eyes to weep and hearts to mourn, come, show how you loved him, come,
water his tomb with your tears.

BUT mourn with entire acquiesence and submission. For GOD has said, He should
die like a man, and fall like one of the princes. He has determined the time
and circumstances of his death. And as for GOD his way is perfect. His language
to man is, Be still and know that I am GOD.

MOURN thankfully, that you have enjoyed your beloved Washington, for so many
years; and that GOD enabled him to render unto his country such extensive and
essential services: That we have an Adams, a man so distinguished in politics,
of such known and tried integrity, and who for such a length of time, has
rendered such essential, national services, to guide our political affairs; and
that while so large a portion of mankind are engaged in such bloody and
horrible wars, we enjoy such a degree of peace, such distinguishing privileges
and growing prosperity. What united, constant and animated thanksgivings do
such blessings demand?

MOURN with profit to yourselves. All the dispensations of GOD are full of
instruction. His chastisements are for our profit. Let us be sure to be
instructed and benefited by them. Let us learn the incalculable evil of sin,
which has subjected us, and the whole race of man to death: which opens every
grave and fills every bitter cup: which exposes every soul of man to
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, and let us tremble and repent
without delay. Let us entertain the deepest impressions of the vanity of human
life, and of all sublunary enjoyments; not only of the certainty, but nearness
of death. Realize, my brethren, how short and precarious is the term of life
and usefulness. How the short term of twenty, or twenty-five years, has swept
the stage of all the great men, who were upon it, at that distance of time?
Where now are our generals, the presidents of Congress, and the governors of
our states? Where are Randolph, Hancock, Huntington, Green and Washington,
Trumbull, Griswold, and Wolcott? Where are their compatriots and cotemporaries,
but in the grave? How nearly are those stepping off into eternity, who have
been upon it the same length of time, or even longer? How sudden may be the
awful transition? How did a few hours reduce our most beloved and useful
fellow-citizen, from a state of perfect health to a breathless corpse? With
what seriousness should every one enquire, am I ready for a change so sudden
and momentous? Shall we not all work while the day lasts, since the night
comes, nay, may so suddenly come, when no man can work?

WHILE we contemplate great and pre-eminent characters let us strive to imitate
them. Behold, ye magistrates of America, ye created and mortal gods, the
character of your political father, your beloved Washington, and while you
admire, imitate his exalted virtues. Like him, by patriotism, integrity,
impartiality and extensive usefulness, make glad the hearts of your
fellow-citizens, and embalm your names to the latest posterity. Like him
harmonize the measures and hearts of your countrymen, and promote our external
and internal peace and prosperity. Behold him, ye young men, and all ye
inhabitants of the United States and learn to love your country, to prize its
constitutions, to be public spirited and seek her peace, and with your lives
and property defend her just rights and important interests. Know how to
appreciate your inestimable privileges, your birth right and fair inheritance,
transmitted to you from the most worthy ancestors, and purchased at the expense
of so much blood and treasure. Defend them like men and never part with them,
but with your lives. Aspire to true greatness, consisting in piety,
righteousness, and universal goodness. Be rich in faith and good works, and
heirs of the kingdom which GOD has promised to them that love him I. Tim.
vi.18, and James ii.5.
.

IN a word, mourn not with despondency, but with a firm and humble confidence
in the power, wisdom and goodness of the SUPREME RULER. When creatures die, and
you have the most striking demonstrations, that all which comes is vanity, let
this be your consolation, that, The LORD reigns, that he will reign, and that
his mercy endures forever. He will never forsake his people. If we will be
willing and obedient, we shall still eat of the good of the land Isaiah i.19.
. GOD is in the midst of Zion: HE will help her, and that right early Psalm
xlvi.5.
. In HIM therefore let us repose all our hopes: To HIM render all obedience,
all honor and blessing, thanksgiving and power, majesty and dominion, now and
for ever.

AMEN.

