Circuit Court of the United States, Middle Circuit of the New Jersey District.
Indictment for murder. The United States, (a.) William Brigstock, otherwise
called John Johnston.
A true Bill. B. SMITH, Foreman.

The defendant being charged on this indictment, pleaded not guilty, etc. R.
BOGGS, Clk.
Et sic, etc. LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney. U. S. N. J. District.

Circuit Court of the United States, New Jersey District, to wit,
THE jurors and affirmants, in behalf of the United States of America, for the
body of New Jersey district, of the middle circuit, upon their respective oath
and affirmation, present, That William Brigstock, otherwise called John
Johnston, late of the kingdom of Great Britain, mariner, not having the fear of
God before his eyes, but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the
devil, on or about the twentieth day of September, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven, with force and arms upon the high
seas, near the coast of the island of Porto Rico, in the West Indies, and out
of the jurisdiction of any particular state of the United States, and within
the jurisdiction of this court, in and on board a certain armed frigate or
vessel, called the Hermione (whereof a certain Hugh Pigot was then commander)
then and there being, feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought,
did make an assault in and upon one Foreshaw, one of the lieutenants then and
there being on board of said armed frigate or vessel, in the peace of God and
of the United States, then and there being, and to the armed frigate and vessel
aforesaid, called the Hermione, then and there belonging, and that the
aforesaid William Brigstock, otherwise called John Johnston, with a certain
tomahawk of the value of eight-pence, which he the said William Brigstock,
otherwise called John Johnston, then and there had and held in his right hand,
did violently, feloniously, piratically, wilfully, and of his malice
aforethought, beat and strike the aforesaid Foreshaw in and upon the right side
of the head of the said Foreshaw, he the said Foreshaw then and there being on
the high seas, in the armed frigate or vessel aforesaid, and within the
jurisdiction of this court aforesaid, giving the said Foreshaw then and there,
with the tomahawk aforesaid, in and upon the right part of the head aforesaid,
of him the said Foreshaw, one mortal bruise, of which mortal bruise the
aforesaid Foreshaw, from the said twentieth day of September, in the year
aforesaid, until the twenty-first day of the said month of September, in the
year aforesaid, upon the high seas aforesaid, in the armed frigate or vessel
aforesaid, and within the jurisdiction aforesaid, did languish, and languishing
did live, on which twenty-first day of September, in the year aforesaid, he,
the said Foreshaw, on the high seas aforesaid, near the aforesaid coast of
Porto Rico, in the West Indies aforesaid, in the armed frigate or vessel
aforesaid, called the Hermione, without the jurisdiction of any particular
state of the United States, and within the jurisdiction of this court
aforesaid, did die; and so the jurors and affirmants aforesaid, upon their oath
and affirmation aforesaid, do say, that the aforesaid William Brigstock,
otherwise called John Johnston, him the said Foreshaw, upon the high seas
aforesaid, in the armed frigate or vessel aforesaid, and within the
jurisdiction of this court aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid,
feloniously, piratically, wilfully, and of his malice aforethought, did kill
and murder, against the peace of the United States, and against the form of the
statute in such case made and provided.

LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney for the United States for the New Jersey
District.
INDORSED.
Circuit Court of United States, Middle Circuit New Jersey District, ss.
BY the special command of the President of the United States, a nolle prosequi
is entered on this indictment the twenty-eighth day of June, in the year of our
Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety-eight.

LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney of the United States for the New Jersey
District.


I CERTIFY the foregoing, together with the indorsement, on the back or outside
of this paper, to be truly copied from the original indictment remaining on
file in my office.

ROBERT BOGGS, Clerk of the said court.
March 1st, 1800.


Circuit Court of the United States, Middle Circuit of the New Jersey District.
The United States, ( v.) William Brigstock, otherwise called John Johnston,
John Evans, otherwise called Michael Campbell, and Joannes Williams, otherwise
called Joannes Williamson, Indictment for piracy.
A true Bill. B. SMITH, Foreman.

The defendant being charged on this indictment, pleaded not guilty. R. BOGGS,
Clk.
Et sic. etc. LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney U. S. N. J. District.

Circuit Court of the United States, New Jersey District, to wit,
THE jurors and affirmants, in behalf of the United States of America, for the
body of New Jersey district, of the Middle Circuit, upon their respective oath
and affirmation, present, That William Brigstock, otherwise called John
Johnston, John Evans, otherwise called Michael Campbell, and Joannes Williams,
otherwise called Joannes Williamson, late of the kingdom of Great Britain,
mariners, on the twentieth day of September, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven, with force and arms, and so forth,
upon the high seas, and out of the jurisdiction of any particular state of the
United States, and within the jurisdiction of this court, to wit, about ten
leagues from Porto Rico in the West Indies, in parts beyond the seas, then
being mariners in and on board a certain armed frigate or vessel, called the
Hermione, belonging and appertaining to the king of Great Britain, whereof one
Hugh Pigot, a subject of the said king of Great Britain, was then and there
commander, did betray the trust in them reposed as mariners of the said armed
frigate or vessel, and then and there, out of the jurisdiction of any
particular state of the United States as aforesaid, upon the high seas
aforesaid, and within the jurisdiction of this court aforesaid, with force and
arms did turn pirates, and the same armed frigate or vessel, and the apparel
and tackle thereof, of the value of fifty thousand dollars lawful money of the
United States, and one silver tankard, of the value of fifty dollars like
money, and one gold watch of the value of one hundred dollars of like money,
and one silver spoon of the value of two dollars of like money, of the goods
and chattels of certain subjects of the said king of Great Britain (to the
Jurors and affirmants aforesaid as yet unknown) then and there being in the
said armed frigate or vessel, called the Hermione, under the care and custody
of the said Hugh Pigot, as commander thereof, then and there, upon the high
seas aforesaid, without the jurisdiction of any particular state of the United
States as aforesaid, and within the jurisdiction of this court as aforesaid,
with force and arms from the care, custody and possession of the said Hugh
Pigot, piratically, and feloniously did run away with (they the said William
Brigstock, otherwise called John Johnston, John Evans, otherwise called Michael
Campbell, and Joannes Williams, otherwise called Joannes Williamson, then and
there being mariners of the said armed frigate or vessel, and in and on board
the same, on the high seas aforesaid) against the peace of the United States,
and against the form of the statute in such case made and provided.

LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney of the United States for the District of
New Jersey.
I CERTIFY the foregoing, together with the Indorsement on the back hereof, to
be truly copied from the original indictment remaining on file in my office.

ROBERT BOGGS, Clerk of the said court.
March 1st, 1800.


Circuit Court of the United States, Middle Circuit of the New Jersey District.
The United States, (a.) William Brigstock, otherwise called John Johnston,
Indictment for piracy.
A true Bill. B. SMITH, Foreman.

Circuit-Court of the United States, of New Jersey district, to wit,
THE jurors and affirmants, in behalf of the United States of America, for the
body of New Jersey district, of the middle circuit, upon their respective oath
and affirmation, present, That William Brigstock, otherwise called John
Johnston, being a citizen of the state of New York, one of the United States of
America, late of the kingdom of Great Britain, mariner, on the twentieth day of
September, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and ninety-seven,
with force and arms, and so forth, upon the high seas, and out of the
jurisdiction of any particular state of the United States, and within the
jurisdiction of this court, to wit, about ten leagues from Porto Rico in the
West Indies, in parts beyond the seas, then being a mariner, to wit, the
boatswain's mate in and on board a certain armed frigate or vessel, called the
Hermione, belonging and appertaining to the king of Great Britain, whereof one
Hugh Pigot, a subject of the said king of Great Britain, was then and there
commander, did betray the trust in him reposed as a mariner, to wit, the
boatswain's mate of the said armed frigate or vessel, and then and there out of
the jurisdiction of any particular state of the United States, as aforesaid,
upon the high seas aforesaid, and within the jurisdiction of this court
aforesaid, with force and arms (together with diverse other persons whose names
are not at present known to the jurors and affirmants aforesaid) did turn a
pirate, and the same armed frigate or vessel, and the apparel and tackle
thereof, of the value of fifty thousand dollars, lawful money of the United
States, and one silver tankard of the value of fifty dollars like money, and
one gold watch of the value of one hundred dollars of like money, and one
silver spoon of the value of two dollars of like money, of the goods and
chattels of the said Hugh Pigot, and of other subjects of the said king of
Great Britain, to the jurors and affirmants aforesaid as yet unknown, then and
there being in the said armed frigate or vessel, called the Hermione, under the
care and custody of the said Hugh Pigot, as commander thereof, then and there
upon the high seas aforesaid, without the jurisdiction of any particular state
of the United States, as aforesaid, with force and arms, and so forth, from the
care, custody and possession of the said Hugh Pigot, piratically and
feloniously did run away with (he the said William Brigstock, otherwise called
John Johnston, a citizen of the state of New York, one of the United States of
America, as aforesaid, then and there being a mariner, to wit, the boatswain's
mate of the said armed frigate or vessel, and in and on board the same on the
high seas aforesaid) against the peace of the United States, and against the
form of the statute in such case made and provided.

LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney of the United States, for the New Jersey
District.
Circuit Court of United States, Middle Circuit, New Jersey District. ss.
BY the special command of the President of the United States, a nolle prosequi
is entered on this indictment the twenty-eighth day of June, A. D. 1798.

LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney of the United States for the New Jersey
District.


I CERTIFY the foregoing, together with the indorsement on the back hereof, to
be truly copied from the original indictment remaining on file in my office.

ROBERT BOGGS, Clerk of the said Court.
March 1st, 1800.


COPIES OF HABEUS CORPUS.
Answer and Commitment.
L. S.
Middle circuit court of New Jersey district, ss. The president of the United
States of America, to the keeper of the common goal or prison of the county of
Middlesex, in the New Jersey district, greeting: You are hereby commanded, that
the bodies of William Brigstock, alias John Johnson, Johannis Williamson, alias
Johan Jacob Williamson and Michael Campbell alias John Evans, in your prison
detained; as is said, under a safe and secure conduct, together with the day
and cause of their caption and detention, by whatsoever names they may be
called, in the same you have before the justices of the circuit court of the
United States, at the circuit court now holden before the justices aforesaid at
Trenton; in and for the New Jersey district on Thursday the fifth day of April
instant, to do, receive and submit to, what the said justices shall then and
there consider concerning them and each of them in this behalf: and have you
then and there this writ. Witness, Oliver Elsworth, Esqr. chief justice at
Trenton, the second day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven
hundred and ninety eight.

R. BOGGS, Clk.
L. H. Stockton. District Attr.

ANSWER.
The answer of Peter Keenon, the keeper of the common gaol or prison of the
county of Middlesex in the New Jersey district to the writ whereunto this
schedule is annexed.

The bodies of William Brigstock alias John Johnson, Johannis Williamson, alias
Johan Jacob Williamson, and Michael Campbell, alias John Evans, the persons in
the same writ named. I have before the court at the time and place within
mentioned, for the purposes therein contained, and the day and cause of their
caption and detainer, I do hereby certify to be contained in the warrant of
commitment hereunto annexed. Witness my hand this fifth day of April, An. Dom.
1798.

P. KEENON.

COMMITMENT.
State of New Jersey city of Perth Amboy. ss. The state of New Jersey, to the
marshal of the said city, and to the keeper of the goal at New Brunswick in the
county of Middlesex greeting: Whereas Johannis Williamson, John Johnson and
Michael Campbell, mariners on board the brig relief, now lying in the port of
Perth Amboy aforesaid, have been arrested for suspicion of felony by them, as
it is said, committed, in feloniously murdering on the high seas, the captain
and other officers of his Britannic Majesty's ship the Hermione, and together
with the rest of the crew of the said ship piratically delivering up the said
ship Hermione to the officers of the king of Spain, now at war with his said
Britannic Majesty -- And Whereas it is stipulated in the treaty of amity and
commerce between the United States and Great Britain, that persons committing
murder or piracy in one of the said countries or within its jurisdiction, shall
not receive protection or refuge in the other.

We therefore command you the said marshal forthwith to convey and deliver into
the custody of the said keeper of the goal aforesaid, the bodies of the said
Johannis Williamson, John Johnson and Michael Campbell, and you the said keeper
are hereby requir-to receive the said Johannis Williamson, John Johnson and
Michael Campbell into your custody in the said goal, and them safely keep until
they are delivered by due course of law, or removed by the proper authority.
Given under our hands and seals at Perth Amboy in the county of Middlesex, the
tenth day of March, An. Dom. 1798.

ANDREW BELL, Recorder.
JOHN RATTOONE, Aldr.
I certify the foregoing to be truly copied from the original habeus corpus
answer, and commitment, remaining on file in my office. March 1st 1800.

ROBT. BOGGS, Clk. of the said court.



Circuit Court of United States New Jersey District.
Copy of Minutes.
I certify the within to be truly copied from the Minutes of the Circuit Court
of the United States, in and for New Jersey District. ROBERT BOGGS, Clerk of
said Court.
March 1, 1800.
COPY OF MINUTES.
Circuit Court of the United States, holden at Trenton in and for New Jersey
district on wednesday the fourth day of April, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety eight.

Present the hon. Samuel Chase, esquire, one of the Justices of the supreme
court. Robert Morris esquire, District Judge.


The United States, us. William Brigstock, alias John Johnson, Johannis
Williamson, alias John Jacob Williamson, and Michael Campbell, alias John Evans.

The defendants being confined on a charge of piracy, in the common goal of the
county of Middlesex; on motion of the district attorney, ordered that a Habeus
Corpus, do issue, directed to the jailer of the said prison commanding him to
bring into this court, the bodies of the said defendants.

Thursday 5 th April, 1798.
Frances Martin, sworn as a witness to go before the grand jury.

Friday, 6 th April, 1798.
The grand jury came into court, and being called over, they all appeared, and
being asked if they had any thing to offer to the court, they presented the
following bills of indictment,

The United States, us. William Brigstock, otherwise called John Johnson,
Indictment for murder on the High Seas. The United States, us. The same.
Indictment for piracy. The United States, us. William Brigstock, alias John
Johnson, John Evans, alias Michael Campbell, Joannes Williams, alias Joannes
Williamson. Indictment for piracy.
The court being informed by the district attorney, that a traverse jury will
be wanted to try several criminals, on indictments for Capital offenses,
ordered that one be legally summoned accordingly.

Monday, 9 th April, 1798.
The United States, us. William Brigstock, alias John Johnson, John Evans,
alias Michael Campbell, Joannes Williams, alias Joannes Williamson. Indictment
for piracy.

On motion of the district attorney, ordered that the prisoner be set to the
bar that the marshal return the venire in this cause, and that the trial
thereof come on -- Whereupon the following persons, after all challenges, were
sworn and affirmed on the jury, viz.

1 Ellet Tucker 2 John Morris, Jun. 3 Albemarle Collins, 4 Joshua Newbold, afd.
5 Joseph Brumley, 6 Smith Hill, 7 John Bellerjeau, Jun. 8 Samuel Bellerjeau, 9
William Smith, 10 Joseph M'Culley 11 Enoch Cook, 12 Mahlon Reed.
For United States. LUCIUS H. STOCKTON, District Attorney. William Griffith,
counsel. Witness Frances Marten, Sworn.


For the Defendants, Samuel Leatre and Aaron D. Woodruff counsel. Witness for
Defendants Samuel Lay, Ann Huet John Bayley, Robert Boggs Richard Soderstrom,
Those. Lowrey.


The counsel summed up to the jury, and Judge Chase charged them, when they
withdrew to consider of their verdict, with a constable sworn to attend them.

Court adjourned for an hour, and met again pursuant to adjournment.

The jury came into Court, and being called over, they all appeared, and being
asked if they had agreed on their verdict, they said they had, and by their
Foreman, Ellet Tucker said they found the prisoners at the Bar, William
Brigstock alias, John Johnston, John Evans alias, Michael Campbell, and Joannes
Williams alias, Joannes Williamson, and each of them, not guilty of the charge
whereof they stand indicted respectively, and so they said all.

The Court order, that William Brigstock, alias John Johnston, be committed to
the safe and close custody of the Marshal of the District, there to remain,
until thence delivered by due course of Law.

In October Sessions 1798, Present the Honorable William Cushing Esquire. one of
the Justices of the Supreme Court; Robert Morris Esquire. District Judge.

The United States of America, us William Brigstock. On indictment for murder.

I will no further prosecute the above indictment.

LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney of the United States for the New Jersey
District.

The United States of America, us William Brigstock, (a citizen of the United
States.) On indictment for murder.

I will no further prosecute the above indictment.

LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney of the United States, for the New Jersey
District.

Notice to the Marshal, to discharge Brigstock.
Circuit Court of the United States; Middle Circuit, New Jersey District.
The United States. us. William Brigstock, otherwise called John Johnston. On
Indictment for Murder. The United States. us. William Brigstock, otherwise
called John Johnston, (a Citizen of the United States.) On Indictment for
piracy. On two Indictments.

Sir
Take notice that in obedience to the special command of the President of the
United States, I have this day entered a nolle prosequi, on each of the above
Indictments, and that it is the pleasure of the President of the United States,
that the prisoner be discharged from your custody; and from answering further,
or from being further held on the above indictments, or either of them. Dated
at Trenton this 28th. of June A. D. 1798.

I am Sir, Your Obedient Servant. LUCIUS HORATIO STOCKTON, Attorney of the
United States for the New Jersey district.
I certify the above to be a true copy of a notice remaning on file in my
office.

ROBERT BOGGS, Clerk of the said Court.
March 1st. 1800.


To Thomas Lowry Esqr. Marshal of the district of N. J. or Thomson Stelle, Esquire.
one of his deputies, or to the keeper of the common prison in the city of New
Brunswick in the district of New Jersey, or to any or either of them.

