PRESERVATION; OR, THE Hovel of the Rocks: A PLAY.

PRESERVATION; OR, THE HOVEL OF THE ROCKS. A PLAY, IN FIVE ACTS; INTERSPERSED
WITH PART OF LILLO's DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS, CALLED "FATAL CURIOSITY."

BY J. B. WILLIAMSON, DIRECTOR OF THE THEATER IN CHARLESTON.

Performed in LONDON, and at BOSTON (Massachusetts) with the most flattering
Success.

[COPY-RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.]

CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY T. C. COX, NO. 137, TRADD STREET, ONE DOOR FROM THE
^AY. M.DCCC.

Prefatory Address.
ENGAGED, professionally, for a number of years in the direction of theaters,
an intimate acquaintance with dramatic authors, early as well as modern, was an
unavoidable consequence: the plays of Lillo, preeminently claim attention; the
pure ethics, the striking example, the powerful sympathy, inculcated and
excited in them, together with the sublime and nervous simplicity of his
language, and pathos of his characters, rank him high as a dramatist: an
elegant French Critic quotes some scenes of Lillo's George Barnwell, as "a
standard of dramatic writing." To the mutations of manners, in part, and to the
improved state of the English stage, are ascribable, that extreme sensibility,
and refinement of taste, which condemn the plays of this author to the closet:
to purge the passions by scenes of terror and agony, is no longer held as an
essential of the Tragic Muse! The Play of " Fatal Curiosity" has been
frequently exhibited under the direction of that excellent critic, the late Mr.
Colman; but the sombre tints of the subject, the undivided interest of the
incidents, chaining the mind to the heart-rending catastrophe, (after repeated
efforts, on the part of the public, to relish the bold, but terrific coloring
of Lillo) returned it to the shelf; sealed up from future representations, by
faintings, groans, and every other possible expression of agony, in the
audience.

Impressed with its merit, and sedulously pursuing every research for the
public amusement, I took the Play to pieces, and interwove with it an
episodical plot; with a view, by dividing the attention, without weakening the
interest of the original, to relieve the incidents; and the course of events
opening a probable medium for changing the catastrophe, I adopted, it: -- In
the performance it has answered my most sanguine expectations.

If the admirers of Lillo, in his majestic terrors, will forgive the freedom I
have used; if the public can reap one additiona gratification at the theater
from my labors, my object is completely attained. I write not for applause; my
end is not fame: Lost, alas! is that talent, for which I was covetous of praise
-- mute is the voice, which, from the rapturous applause of theaters, caught
not the estimation of its own value, half so much, as from the reflected
expression of my gratitude. -- Peace, gentle Shade! yet, sweetly embalmed in
the memory of an enlightened public.

The AUTHOR.
Charleston, March 20, 1800. The Characters, and all the retained Passages from
LILLO, throughout the Play, are marked ['] with the note of quotation.



DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Original by Lillo: Charleston, 1800.
'OLD WILMOT, Mr. WILLIAMSON. 'YOUNG WILMOT, Mr. CHALMERS. 'RANDAL, Mr. TAILOR.
'CHARLOTTE, Mrs. PLACIDE. 'AGNES, Mrs. JONES. 'MARIA, Mrs. CHAMBERS.
Characters by the Author of Preservation:
ARNOLD, Mr. MARSHALL MALIGN, Mr. TURNBULL. FLINT, Mr. PRIGMORE. BOY, Mrs.
MARSHALL.
TIME -- Twenty-four Hours.

PRESERVATION: OR THE HOVEL OF THE ROCKS.
ACT I.
SCENE. A View of the BEACH from amongst the ROCKS, toward day-close; clouded
horizon; sea in motion; distant thunder, and some lightning.
Enter OLD WILMOT alone. O. WILMOT. HOW fierce and stormy night comes
blustering on!
The bending welkin threatens; and the wind
Seems pent to gather force: the boiling sea,
Self-agitated, from beneath heaves up
Its ponderous motion -- and the heavy swell,
With distant horror bodes the tempest's rage.
And yet, how fine the morn! Whose early beams
Danced over the rip'ling waves; and nature smiled
As if no change could ruffle her smooth reign.
Sad emblem of my life! Whose opening dawn
Soft nurture led; whose rising Sun broke forth
Without a cloud; whose full meridian,
The golden horn of ample Plenty crowned;
Whose afternoon's by chilling blasts deformed,
And age's evening ushered in by storms
Of furious want, loud grief, and bursting scorn!
My wife! Loved partner of my happier days,
And keenest curse of these -- fair form disgraced!
On some sad errand of precarious help,
Has sallied forth. -- This hour is mine, to spend
In luxury of grief amidst these rocks,
And horrors of the storm: congenial all,
With the sad ravage of my care-beat mind!
[Wind and rain is heard.] The breezes freshen! And the curling sea
Ascends in foam! Disast'rous mariners!
Whoever you are, exposed to its fell scope,
Accept a father's pity, and his prayers:
A father! Who has lost, for ever lost!
In some such crush of elemental strife,
An only son! If my poor feeble aid,
Should rescue in the hour of imminence
A life! But one, of all who are now in peril,
Some parent shall, with melting bosom, bless
The ruthless miseries that drive me forth,
Reckless of all the horrors of the night:
Mis'ries! That leave to chance, or fate, no hold
T'inflict one pang, beyond what I have felt.
[A distant gun is fired.] Ha! A signal of distress! Oh! Have mercy
On the poor suffering wretches, Heaven!

Exit O. WILMOT. SCENE II.
A view of the Sea running very high and breaking. Several Guns are irregularly
fired. A Vessel is seen dismasted and beating in the storm. She strikes on a
Rock and sinks. Thunder and lightning.

SCENE III. A Parlour in CHARLOTTE's House.
Enter CHARLOTTE and MARIA. 'CHARLOTTE. 'What terror and amazement must they
feel,
'Who die by shipwreck!

'MARIA. ''Tis a dreadful thought!

'CHARLOTTE. 'Ay, is it not, Maria? To descend
'Living and conscious to the watery tomb!
'Alas! Had we no sorrows of our own,
'The frequent instances of other's woe,
'Must give a generous mind a world of pain.

MARIA. This storm is felt at sea: Some ship has fired Repeated signals of
distress.


CHARLOTTE. Alas!
I fear no human aid can reach them.
To live a mere spectator near the coast!
To hear the furious equinoxial blast,
And see no week pass by, unmourn'd by some,
Is what the inland dwellers scarce have sense of.
[CHARLOTTE finds a letter.] 'What's this? A letter! Superscrib'd to me;
'None could convey it here, but you, Maria:
'Ungenerous, cruel maid! To use me thus!
'To join with flattering man to break my peace,
'And persecute me to the last retreat.

'MARIA. 'Why should it break your peace, to hear the sighs
'Of honorable love? -- This letter is --

'CHARLOTTE. 'No matter whence; return it back unopen'd.
'I have no love, no thought, but for my Wilmot,
'Nor would have any.

'MARIA. 'Strange infatuation!
'Wilmot is dead, or living, dead to you.

'CHARLOTTE. 'I'll not despair: Patience shall cherish hope;
'Nor wrong his honor by unjust suspicion.
'I know his truth, and will preserve my own.
'But to prevent all future importunity,
'Know, thou incessant foe to my repose,
'Whether he sleeps secure from mortal cares,
'In the deep bosom of the boisterous main,
'Or tossed by tempests, still endures its rage;
'No second choice shall violate my vows:
'High Heaven that heard them, and abhors the perjured,
'Can witness they were made without reserve:
'Never to be retracted, never dissolved,
'By accident, or absence, time, or death.

'MARIA. 'And did your vows oblige you to support
'His haughty parents to your utter ruin? --
'You well may weep to think on what you have done.

'CHARLOTTE. 'I weep to think that I can do no more
'For their support. What will become of them!
'The hoary, helpless, miserable pair!

'MARIA. 'What I cannot praise, you force me to admire;
'And mourn for you, as you lament for them.
'Your patience, constancy, and resignation
'Merit a better fate.

'CHARLOTTE. 'So pride would tell me,
'And vain self-love -- but I believe them not:
'And if by wanting pleasure, I have gained
'Humility, I Am richer by the loss.

'MARIA. 'You have the heavenly art, still to improve
'Your mind by all events. -- But here come one,
'Whose pride seems to increase with her misfortunes,
'Her faded dress, unfashionably fine,
'As ill conceals her poverty, as that
'Strain'd complaisance, her haughty swelling heart,
'Tho' perishing for want, so far from asking,
'She never receives a favor uncompell'd,
'And while she ruins, scorns to be obliged. --
'Let me depart; I know she loves me not.

Exit. Enter MRS. WILMOT. 'CHARLOTTE. 'This visit's kind!

'MRS. WILMOT. 'Few else would think it so. --
'Those who would once have thought themselves much honored
'By the least favor, though 'twere but a look,
'I could have shown them, now refuse to see me.
It Is misery enough to be reduced
'To the low level of the common herd,
'Who, born to beggary, envy all above them;
'But it is the curse of curses, to endure
'The insolent contempt of those we scorn!

'CHARLOTTE. 'By scorning we provoke them to contempt;
'And thus offend, and suffer in our turns: --
'We must have patience.

'MRS. WILMOT. 'No; I scorn them yet.
'But there is no end of suffering: Who can say
'Their sorrows are complete? My wretched husband
'Tired with our woes, and hopeless of relief,
'Grows sick of life --

'CHARLOTTE. 'Gracious Heaven support him!

'MRS. WILMOT. 'And urged by indignation, and despair,
'Would plunge into eternity at once
'By foul self-murder! His fixed love for me,
'Whom he would fain persuade to share his fate,
'And take the same uncertain, dreadful course,
'Alone withholds his hand.

'CHARLOTTE. 'And may it ever!

'MRS. WILMOT. 'I've known with him the two extremes of life --
'The highest happiness, and deepest woe;
'With all the sharp and bitter aggravations,
'Of such a vast transition. -- Such a fall
'Is the decline of life! -- I have as quick,
'As exquisite a sense of pain as he,
'And would do any thing -- but die -- to end it;
'But there my courage fails. Death is the worst
'That fate can bring, and cuts off every hope.

'CHARLOTTE. 'We must not choose; but strive to bear our lot,
'Without reproach or guilt. By one rash act
'Of desperation, we may overthrow
'The merit we have been raising all our days,
'And lose our whole reward. And now, methinks,
'Now more than ever, we have cause to fear,
'And be upon our guard. The hand of Heaven
'Spreads clouds on clouds, over our benighted heads,
'And, wrapped in darkness, doubles our distress.

'MRS. WILMOT. 'I came not to hear this!

'CHARLOTTE. 'Forgive my fears --
'It should excite our vigilance and care,
'(Now we are tried by multiplied afflictions)
'To mark each motion of our swelling hearts;
'Lest we attempt to extricate ourselves,
'And seek deliverance by forbidden ways --
'To keep our hopes and innocence entire,
'Till we are dismissed to join the happy dead,
'Or Heaven relieves us here.

'MRS. WILMOT. 'You will persist! --
'Unless you mean to offend me, spare advice.
'Your moral lecture may inflame, not heal.

'CHARLOTTE. 'Far be all thoughts from Charlotte's breast to pain,
'I hoped, at least, I should not give offense.

'MRS. WILMOT. 'You could not think so, had you thought at all.
'But I take nothing ill from thee. Adieu!
'I've tarried longer than I first intended,
'And my poor husband mourns the while alone.

CHARLOTTE. You must not go; I fear you are displeased;
You shall not part from me at all in anger:
The storm's not over; and he cannot expect you.
I have a little matter in debate,
And need your counsel. -- Nay, you must go with me.

Exeunt. SCENE IV. The BEACH. Distant view of the Sea.
Enter MALIGN and FLINT. MALIGN. The wind's abated, Flint, and there is less
surf! We shall go off by daybreak. Where are the men?


FLINT. Below upon the beach: They hauled the boat up as the gale came on; and
are now getting her afloat again. It was a smoaker!


MALIGN. Faith was it! So much the better for us who live by it. Were any of
the people saved, think you?


FLINT. Not a soul, I warrant; I saw her upon her beam ends by the lightning --
She drove stern in, and went down like a stone.


MALIGN. There was no boat went off at their signals!


FLINT. It was impossible: The wind blew in shore, the tide was in, and the
breakers rolled mountain high! She went down at the North Point. We shall get
at her at ebb. I shall not go to bed; but watch if any thing comes on shore.


MALIGN. That Is right! And mind we have no claimants saved on hen-coops and
spare yards -- to balk our industry -- no lingering wretches 'scap'd amongst
the rocks. You understand me -- 'twill be a friendly part.


FLINT. Psha! Never fear; do you think I Am grown too tender in your service, here
on the Cornish coast to risk our lives for gain, and give it back? No, No!
[Going.]


MALIGN. And, do you hear? Bring me her papers, if you find them -- bills of
lading -- they are the first to be taken care of. Besides I have a business for
you concerning my long-lived kinsman, Wilmot.


FLINT. A business! Why, what would you do further? They Have nothing left!


MALIGN. Do you, who have helped on their destruction, ask me that? I have enmity
and interest too to spur me on. His lingering days detain the inheritance, that
by young Wilmot's loss, must now be mine. Though he has mortgaged his
life-interest in it beyond its value, help may yet step in 'twixt him and
death. He lives too long: But of this hereafter. -- The wreck is our first
care; we, who endure the bleak blasts of the storm, must be rewarded for our
patience.


Exeunt. SCENE V. The inside of the HOVEL; A Lamp burning. Young WILMOT
discovered lying on a rude Couch, the BOY chafing his temples.
BOY. Poor drenched wretch -- how slowly he recovers --
Life's trembling flame yet hovers round his heart,
As if uncertain whether to return. --
He seems a foreigner of note. -- Alas!
This is a rough reception, in a land
Where he, perhaps, is but a curious stranger,
Intent on wisdom's humanizing gain: --
Experience will convince him, that our shores
Are not so easily accessible, as are
The expanding inmates our warm bosoms hold,
To worth of every clime: Partially known,
Our country thus, like her intrepid sons*
Wears a stern aspect, seeming full of peril,
And frowning in the approach -- but inward tried,
The genial streams of pure benevolence,
Safety and plenty, freedom, social virtues,
Flow unreserv'd to all.

Y. WILMOT. Oh-h-h! --

BOY. He sighs! O Heaven!.
What language shall I find to give him comfort?
But Nature's wants are limited in all;
And those, her general tongue (soft feeling guide!)
Her universal charity explains.

Y. WILMOT. (WILDLY.) She strikes! She strikes! I will not keep below --
The deck is safest -- oh-h-h! --

BOY. My native tongue --
Partial sentiment! -- Why should my bosom throb,
To hear those sounds, familiar to my ear?
A fellow creature saved, is nature's theme,
Of whatever climate, nation, sex, or kind;
And yet, I own, it amplifies the blessing,
And exalts the joy! -- What cheer, sir?

Y. WILMOT. (Still Wildly.) My friend --
Where are you? -- Oh! --

BOY. He is at hand, sir -- Pray, sir,
Be composed --

Y. WILMOT. (Recovering.) Amazement! -- What place is this?

BOY. You're amongst friends, and safe; though wrecked here on the coast of
Cornwall. --


Y. WILMOT. Cornwall! Blessed Providence!
Gentle youth! that seem in kind compassion,
So tender over a stranger in distress,
Inform me how I was preserved; by whom?
Already I perceive I am your debtor! --

BOY. The common offices of man to man,
You have received, no more. The very rock,
That running northward, out into the sea,
Proves often thus fatal, providently yields
This friendly hovel in your hour of need: --
No farther debtor have I means to make you.

Y. WILMOT. Amazement all! -- I have no trace of thought,
No memory past the moment of our danger!
You seem the gentle messenger from Heaven,
Of preservation! The strain of your discourse,
And soft benevolence, but ill agree
With this lone, unaccommodated dwelling!
What are you?

BOY. My labor, sir, is fishing.
An aged parent and myself, even here,
Wear the bleak winter through. Though once we knew
More affluent days; yet still our hearts
Are soft, as e're prosperity had spread
For other dwellings, her inconstant wing.

Y. WILMOT. Alas! --

BOY. In brief, this lowering afternoon,
My Mother waited my return from fishing,
With all a parent's fears. -- I saw your danger;
But ere the storm grew high, knowing the rocks,
I made the land. --

Y. WILMOT. You saw us then?

BOY. I did;
Marked your distress; and would have risked my life
To give you help: But 'twas not possible;
For now the tempest burst with wildest fury!
Our sleepless eyes still sought your danger out:
We heard your guns, and trembling wept and prayed;
'Till watching at the entrance of our hovel,
We heard the footing and the speech of men! --
An aged gentleman, whose family
Has fallen to decay, who frequent strays
Over these wild rocks alone, had seen your peril:
Your friend, almost exhausted, reached the shore;
And, with the assistance of that moody man,
Brought you, who then had perished else, to land;
And bore you up the rock.

Y. WILMOT. Say thou an ancient gentleman? --

BOY. Yes, sir, once of good estate:
But having fallen sadly to decay,
Sometimes, we fear, not in his perfect mind,
He lingers over the weather-beaten beach --
He said he lost an only son at sea;
And it must touch him nearly.

Y. WILMOT. What Is his name?

BOY. Wilmot -- Ah Wilmot! (Weeps and turns away.)

Y. WILMOT. Gracious God! My father! Aside.

BOY. It is a dangerous profession, sir,
And gives too many fatal cause to weep!
But you're preserved! And those thrice happy friends,
Who take a tender part in all your fortunes,
On mem'ry's page shall mark this perilous night,
To dedicate it in its round to joy.

Y. WILMOT. It is a blessing! More than I can tell you --
The tide of anxious bliss that fills my soul,
Over powers the weakness of my shattered frame!
You shall partake the joy those friends will feel,
And share in all the good of my deliverance.

BOY. My fate, alas! admits no hope of good. --
A parent's grief makes me not feel my own:
Her wants, are all the use I have for life:
Those once removed by Providence, I own
The world has no temptation, life no charm,
To make me wish mine lengthened past an hour.

Y. WILMOT. Why should you slight the treasure of a being,
On which you are too young to set a value?
The blended hope, and mutual inclination,
The extacies of love, the bliss of friendship,
And all the social bonds that link mankind,
Shall take their turn, and teach you yet to prize it.

BOY. Alas! Those fine emotions of the soul,
Full oft'ner lead to misery, than joy; --
They are but inlets to the tide of fate: --
But I o'er-stay your present need of rest:
That poor relief this dwelling may afford,
Is freely yours -- I Will wait you, sir, at sunrise,
When, if you will listen to an artless tale,
To prove me right, not a capricious railer;
And yet though young in years -- old in misfortune!
I Will lay my sorrows, one by one, before you --
The least of which might make me loath a being,
Exposed to such a depth of cureless woe.

Exit. Y. WILMOT. Poor Youth! The sport of fortune, like myself!
Wrecked on the coast of Cornwall! And preserved!
Saved by my father from the jaws of death!
By what mysterious, indirect events,
Our very wish is thwarted and fulfilled!
The long anticipated moment comes,
Fraught with its aim, and opposite, at once;
And proves our hopes and fears alike delusive: --
This morning, full of joy, I viewed the coast,
Long looked for, long possessed, by fancy's aid --
That very coast -- the harbor of my hopes --
With hostile fury dashed us to the bottom;
My father, wandering forth to feed despair,
Rescues his every comfort from the deep!

[Going.] Enter ARNOLD, meeting him. ARNOLD. My Wilmot! -- (Embracing him.)

Y. WILMOT. Arnold! --

ARNOLD. This is indeed to live --
How fares my more than brother? I have news
Will pain your heart with joy! But arm yourself
With fortitude to bear it. --

Y. WILMOT. I am armed --
May I not say I know it? My father --

ARNOLD. Amazement! --

Y. WILMOT. The gentle creature, in whose care you left me,
Unconscious of its moment, told me all --
Told me, my father! -- Ah! Does my mothe live?

ARNOLD. Yes, yes. --

Y. WILMOT. O, Heaven! -- But you have seen -- conversed
With the dear author of my being -- tell me --
I fear affliction, more than time, has changed him.

ARNOLD. But that the cause is past, I would conceal it;
Misfortune's heavy hand has bent his age;
Sorrow and desolation mark his look --
The smile that spread upon his furrowed face,
In cordial gratulation on our safety;
Vanished at once; and gloomy care returned:
I scarcely knew him -- in this foreign garb,
Thus changed, no wonder that he knew not me.

Y. WILMOT. Has he no knowledge whom he has preserved?

ARNOLD. No thought; nor did he seek to know: heedless
Of circumstance -- and pressed by inward grief --

Y. WILMOT. Could thou not end that pain -- and say his son --

ARNOLD. I feared to break it to him on the sudden;
Lest joy should be more fatal than his grief.
When we perceived you breathed, I led him forth;
Intending to reveal it by degrees --
But suddenly he turned, and cried, "His wife,
"His aged help-mate, mourned his lengthened stay.
"Her sorrows needed not vain fears for him!"
Bid me "be careful of my friend" -- and left me.

Y. WILMOT. O, Nature! Nature! Wherefore is this pang?
My heart is not a seat for anguish now,
Sorrow is past; and every hour to come --
And yet the sense of what they have endured,
Obstructs the rising bliss, and damps my joy.

ARNOLD. 'Your treasure's safe, I hope?

Y. WILMOT. It Is here, thank Heaven!
'Being in jewels, when I saw our danger,
'I hid it in my bosom.

ARNOLD. 'I observed you!
'And wond'red how you could command your thoughts,
'At such a time of terror and confusion.

Y. WILMOT. 'My thoughts were then at home. Soul-cheering spot,
'Thou seat of plenty, liberty, and health!
'After a long and tedious absence, Arnold,
'With what delight we breathe our native air,
'And tread the genial soil that bore us first!
It Is said, the world is every wise man's country;
'Yet after, having viewed its various nations,
'I'm weak enough still to prefer my own,
'To all I Have seen besides. -- You smile, my friend!
'And think, perhaps, it is instinct, more than reason.
'Why be it so: Instinct preceded reason,
'Ev'n in the wisest men.

ARNOLD. 'Believe me, Wilmot,
'Your grave reflections were not what I smiled at:
'I own their truth. That we have returned to England
'Affords me all the pleasure you can feel.
'Yet I must think a warmer passion moves you;
And feel my Lucy's image, too, confirm it.
'Thinking on this I smiled.

Y. WILMOT. O, Arnold -- Arnold!
'Thou know, and ever knew'st my ardent love;
'How much depends on this important crisis;
'And should not be surprised to see me thus.

ARNOLD. Surprised! It Is sympathy -- it is fellow feeling --
I know your cares, add weigh them by my own.

Y. WILMOT. 'The sinking fortunes of our ancient house,
'Compell'd me young to leave my native country,
'My weeping parents, and my lovely Charlotte. --
You were the willing part'ner of the venture;
To make your fortune worthy of your Lucy.
'Now should they, Arnold, doubtful of our truth,
'Or in despair ever to see us more,
'Have given themselves to some more happy lovers?
'Distraction's in the thought, and doubt is death!

ARNOLD. 'The wretch who fears all that is possible,
'Must suffer more than him who feels the worst
'A man can feel, yet lives exempt from fear:
'How have I seen you doubt, and weep, and fear
'Your parents might not live, your wished return;
'A woman may be false, as friends are mortal;
'And yet your aged parents still are living,
'And our fair mistresses may yet be constant.

Y. WILMOT. 'True, they may; I doubt, but I despair not:
'My hopes are strong, and lively as my fears;
'They tell me Charlotte is as true as fair;
'That we shall meet, never to part again;
'That I shall see my parents, kiss the tears,
'From their pale hollow cheeks, cheer their sad hearts,
'And drive that gaping phantom, meagre want,
'For ever from their board, their days to come,
'Crown all with peace, with pleasure and abundance,
'Receive their fond embraces, and their blessings,
'And be a blessing to them*

ARNOLD. My generous Wilmot --
Your feelings agitate beyond your strength.
Rest here, this night -- I find no need of sleep;
Trust to my friendly vigilance and care:
I Will seek your Charlotte out, and bring you news,
Before I clasp my Lucy to my breast.

Y. WILMOT. Thou best of friends -- But keep a cautious guard;
Nor hazard all, by an abrupt disclosure.

ARNOLD. Never fear! --

Y. WILMOT. It was a needless charge -- but
My Charlotte's gentle nature could not bear it!
Nor could I spare even thee, the ecstatic blessing,
To be, myself, the messenger of joy.

ARNOLD. I will observe you well. (Going.)

Y. WILMOT. I thank you. Yet stay --
My parents, too, you will behold them both;
There pour out all the measure of my bliss --
No, no! my heart -- even that I cannot yield thee --
I would enjoy it all! --

ARNOLD. Trust to my management; I understand,
And will minutely follow your instructions.

Y. WILMOT. Adieu, my friend! Oh, hasten, to me, back;
You Will find me with impatient throbbing heart,
Expecting vour return.

ARNOLD. Adieu! --

Y. WILMOT. Farewell! --

Exeunt. END OF ACT THE FIRST.
ACT II.
SCENE. The ROCKS. -- View of the Sea. Calm horizon. External view of the Hovel.
Enter Y. WILMOT alone. Y. WILMOT. HAIL smiling day! And thou my native land!
'With transport I behold thy verdant fields,
'Thy lofty mountains, towering over the flood;
'Thy numerous herds, thy flocks, and winding streams.
The storm is past! Again returning light,
With eye serene, has spread a general calm!
Even the rememb'rance fades; for now my mind,
By healing rest, and soothing hope composed,
To cheerful memory commits the past,
For gratitude alone! -- No Arnold yet!
Well I Will be patient; -- this kind humble pair,
The aged widow, and her gentle son,
Whose lowly minds, and winter-pierced roof,
In genuine hospitality, might shame
The affluent -- would teach a stoic patience:
Hopeless of change, they eat the bitter bread
Of toil, in scarcely-shelter'd solitude;
And patient resignation^ and even here,
Discharge the various debt of soft humanity.
[ The BOY appears defending the rock, with boat-hook and net for fishing.]
Here comes the boy! There is in his air,
Something that speaks him wretched; yet that shows
A governed spirit, yielding to his reason:
Such duty, such observant, tender love
He pays his mother, that fair nature smiles,
Even through the rugged front of their hard lot,
And tempers misery to meet their strength. --
Good morrow gentle youth! He comes forward.

BOY. How fare you, sir?

Y. WILMOT. Thanks, my kind host; the danger I Have escaped,
And all its perilous effects are past: --
The only traces it has left, are pleasing.

BOY. May those impressions never be effaced;
Nor yield to those, more poignant, which it leaves*
On minds more softened by affliction's hand:
That every gush of sorrow wounds anew!

Y. WILMOT. Alas! What mean you? -- Why do thou, fondly,
With that inquisitive, and tear-full eye,
Explore the surface of yon liquid plain?

BOY. I Will tell you, sir; -- but it is a useless sorrow --
Yet I must think, though you escaped, last night --
Many unhappy souls -- who have left to mourn
Life's dearest ties, met their untimely fate.

Y. WILMOT. Most true; it is still the lot of man to suffer,
In person; or in some fond tie more dear:
Yet life abounds with solid real ills,
Home-felt, and we must meet them face to face;
Without the evil-fruited pains of fancy,
To search for those are merely possible.

BOY. Alas, sir! Fancy will not be commanded;
But realizes every ill we know;
And memory will be busy: -- The eye
That Is dimmed by sorrow's trembling drops, finds out
A touching semblance in each stroke of fate,
Assimilating all! -- No step I take
But 'wakes my woes afresh within my mind --
I ask your pardon, sir; I am to blame. --

Y. WILMOT. You wrong me to apologize for grief; --
I am the child of misery myself;
And prone to pity, what I cannot relieve: --
You promised me the story of your life. --

BOY. The tale's but short: I see the tide's not in yet,
And 'till the boat's afloat, you may command me. --
Yet it is mournful -- why should I afflict you?

Y. WILMOT. I see you doubt, nature cast not my mind
In that soft frame, to sympathize in woe
Not strictly local -- yet, trust me, were it so,
What she withheld, adversity's supplied:
The tempest has revived your grief. --

BOY. Revived!
Is it revived -- that never yet has died?
O, sir! would nature yield to soothing time,
It is impossible! Since we are doomed for life,
To make our dwelling in the rifted rocks
That were the bane, and ruin of our peace;
To draw our daily pittance from the sea;
While all our wealth and hopes lie buried there!

Y. WILMOT. Alas! Can it be possible? Such cruel fate --

BOY. My father, sir, like most born near the coast*
Conceived an early passion for the sea,
And, many years, successful, followed it: --
'Till competence, my mother, and myself,
Smiled on his easy home, and made it dear.
He quitted sea; but still employed his wealth
In foreign traffic -- On some trifling losses,
He formed the luckless, fatal resolution,
To make one closing voyage, and risk no more.
My mother strove, with anxious boding heart,
And tears, in vain, to win him from his purpose:
He urged my fortune -- talked of large advantage;
Affectionate his motive -- and he conquered:
Expended wealth -- nay strained his credit too,
To make the voyage a rich one. He sailed;
Not to be tedious, he was fortunate; --
Reached his port safe, disposed of all his cargo;
Made a large profit -- and was freighted back. --

Y. WILMOT. And yet to fail -- Good Heaven!

BOY. Upon the coast
Of England, in the very sight of harbor,
A hurricane came on, and all was lost --
Wealth, happiness, and parent -- all were lost!

Y. WILMOT. Most sensibly I feel your great distress.

BOY. Oh! It was great -- beyond the reach of hope.
The underwriters, by a quirk in law,
Eluded right -- before one ray of comfort,
Broke through the all-surrounding gloom of grief,
A hungry train of hardened creditors,
Beset us close: those whom our brighter days
Had struck with envy, triumphed now; and ere
One year of truest sorrow had elapsed,
My mother and myself, stripped, robbed of all,
Driven from our home, were friendless in the streets.

Y. WILMOT. Merciless wretches!

BOY* One friend, one tender friend --
Pardon my streaming eyes -- he was a friend --
No more! -- who would have stretched a saving hand*
Had sailed for India -- we were quite friendless!

Y. WILMOT. Unfortunate! In that sad exigence,
What could you do?

BOY. Strength from despair rose up:
I saw my other parent droop, and bend
Before the storm; myself her only hope: --
I task'd my heart, I struggled with my grief;
And strove by work, to wait the wished return
Of our dear friend; to try our cause at law,
And see us righted: a year or two elapsed,
From bad, to worse. Even charity forsook us!
A poor reluctant gathering, of silver;
And scanty drops of ostentatious gold,
With frigid insult given, too plainly proved,
Public benevolence is private pride! --
At length no place would give us even a shelter.

Y. WILMOT. Oh Heaven! what power could then sustain your minds,
In such an hour of trial and distress!

BOY. A course there was -- but honor still was left. --
I could not tamely see my mother perish!
Frantic I flew along the beach, intending
To plunge from off that rock, into the sea. --
Within yon cliff, I found that lonely dwelling,
Which formerly an Hermit lived and died in:
His few conveniences of life were left,
Untouched, unvisited by human form:
A desperate hope appeared -- and in that hope,
Exhausted nature sunk in gentle sleep.

Y. WILMOT. 'Twas sure the hand of Providence that led you.

BOY. Methought I still was waking, but I saw
A little skiff with oars, and net for fishing; --
Methought, I ventured and threw in the net;
Which straight was filled! I drew it to the land,
And being pressed by hunger, made my meal;
Delicious, too, it seemed: I waked; part real,
And part fiction; yet agreeing! I despaired --
'Till at the foot of the o'erhanging rock,
I saw the skiff and net, lay dry and safe!

Y. WILMOT. O, Heaven --

BOY. I ran I flew, to my dear mother --
Brought her to the spot; clasped her to my bosom;
Comforted, saw her resigned and cheerful;
Then went and tried the net, with some success:
My skill improved: and thus, sir, we have lived:
Within the bosom of these rocks, we found
That shelter -- and from the stormy deep, that food,
More merciless and cruel man denied. --

Y. WILMOT. Thou just, inscrutable, and great First Cause!
How wisely thy own immediate aid,
Peculiar Providence, is pointed out,
And manifest to all! be skeptics ye who can.

BOY. Alas! my wretched story has distressed you.

Y. WILMOT. Of various mixed emotions of distress,
Not one, but found some antidote at hand;
For, while I felt the detail of your sufferings,
And thought your grief past cure, my fancy glanced
Upon your obvious preservation,
Anticipating all the wished event,
That yet shall crown your patience with deliverance,
And blessed the wide protecting hand of Heaven! --
Say, of that absent friend -- have you not heard?

BOY. Never: a story of his death was spread,
Yet nothing certain -- but that he came no more.

Y. WILMOT. During your residence here on the rock,
If I conceived you right, you have not held
An intercourse with any that you knew?

BOY. Never.

Y. WILMOT. How long is that?

BOY. Above three years.

Y. WILMOT. Perhaps that friend, returned by this, even now
Deplores your loss, and seeks, in vain, to find you.

BOY. It Is barely possible; -- nor is it fit we hope,
To sharpen woe, by bitter disappointment:
We Are now resigned, and humbled to our fate;
And would not crush his youth, and better prospects
With our sad weight. --

Y. WILMOT. Nay, there I blame you much;
You wrong the title which your story gave him;
If ever friendship glowed within his breast --

BOY. I pray you spare me --

Y. WILMOT. Think what pain he feels,
If hastening to your aid -- what have I said?
Your tears flow faster, something is concealed
You will not trust me with; perhaps your friend. --

BOY. Spare me, I pray you, and inquire no more;
Advice is fruitless: it is a private sorrow,
Belongs to me alone -- it is past all remedy;
And probing gives one pang, it may be spared.

Y. WILMOT. You do not know -- a tender friendly hand --

BOY. No more! I see the skiff afloat -- excuse me --
Necessity compels me, sir, to leave you.

Y. WILMOT. Nay gentle youth, forbear your work this day:
Let hope, and better prospects cheer your mind.

BOY. Oh! do not urge it; while I am employed,
My mind's engaged -- that is more than all to me:
For with the afflicted, who are past all hope,
Reflection, like the serpent in the fable,
Ungrateful turns, and fastens on the breast,
Whose ill-judg'd softness yields it an asylum!

Exit. Enter a SAILOR. SAILOR. What cheer, my master? Are you the gentleman
That was wrecked in the squall last night?

Y. WILMOT. I am, my friend.

SAILOR. A gentleman in foreign rigging, much like yours;
Hailed me, and bid me bring you this. Is it for you?

Y. WILMOT. It Is Arnold's hand! why should he write! I tremble --
Yes; It Is for me.

SAILOR. Very well, my master, that is all! Exit.

Y. WILMOT. I fear some fatal news; what can it be?
[Reads.] Be not alarmed my dear Wilmot, that I do not return; know that your
Charlotte is well, your parents both living, and oppressed by no care but what
your fortune will relieve them from; be perfectly at ease in this intelligence:
But, your friend, your unhappy Arnold, is undone. Lucy, his best beloved; the
mistress of his fate; what shall I tell thee? Is no more -- perhaps she lives
-- but where? -- I am distracted -- pardon this incoherence -- many years are
past since the family plunged in inextricable ruin, have left the place: My
enquiries are fruitless -- pity is a stranger here, they answer my impatience
with a coldness that tortures me to madness. Embrace your fortune, Wilmot,
while it smiles; let not my distraction damp your joy; you will find me, at the
inn -- but what time, I know not; for till my Lucy is found, life is for no
other purpose than to seek her, if living, or, by laying it down, to follow
her, if dead.

Thy unhappy ARNOLD.


Ah, most unhappy! -- but thy calm philosophy,
And cooler temper, with less swaying passion,
Will reason on events, when the first shock
Is softened, that would overwhelm your friend* --
Yes! -- I will embrace my happier fortune,
Now while she smiles* and from it comfort thee.

Exit. SCENE II. A room in OLD WILMOT's House.
OLD WILMOT, alone. O. WILMOT. 'The day is far advanced. The cheerful sun,
'Pursues with vigor his repeated course;
'No labor lessens, nor no time decays
'His strength, or splendour: evermore the same,
'From age to age his influence sustains
'Dependent worlds, bestows both life and motion
'On the dull mass, that forms their dusky orbs,
'Chears them with heat, and gilds them with his brightness --
'Yet man, of jarring elements composed,
'Who posts from change to change, from the first hour
'Of his frail being, to his dissolution,
'Enjoys the sad prerogative above him,
'To think and to be wretched! -- What is life
'To him that is born to die --
'Or what the wisdom, whose perfection ends
'In knowing, we know nothing?
'Mere contradiction all: A tragic farce;
'Tedious, though short; elab'rate, without art --
'Ridiculously sad! --
Enter RANDAL, 'Where have been, Randal?

RANDAL. 'Not out of Penryn, sir, but to the strand,
'To hear what news from Falmouth since the storm
'Of wind last night. --

O. WILMOT. 'It was a dreadful one.

RANDAL. 'Some found it so. A noble ship from India,
'Ent'ring the harbor, run upon a rock,
'And there was lost.

O. WILMOT. What came of those on board her?

RANDAL. It Is thought all perished.

O. WILMOT. Not so, Randal, hear
What befell. It chanced at Even, musing alone
Amongst the rocks, more ruffled in my thoughts,
Than the vexed sea, or wind; watching the event,
I marked the tempest's fury. Two wretches 'scap'd;
And human pity, kindling in my breast,
Told me the genial current that once ran there,
Was not dried up: One reached the craggy point*
And would have plunged again; -- but I restrained
His generous purpose: just within our reach
A surge now cast the other; ere its retreat,
We caught, and bore him up the oozy steep: --
The wretched tenants of the hovel took them,
For present shelter, and immediate help.

RANDAL. Too well I know your mind, to doubt its joy,
At this so timely succor.

O. WILMOT. Mere weakness,
Randal; and to be proved by the event:
How joyful! -- By this they had been past fear,
'Of future tempests, and a wreck on shore.
'Now they are exposed to both. -- Where Is your mistress?

RANDAL. 'I saw her pass the High Street, toward the min'ster.

O. WILMOT. 'To visit Charlotte; 'twas her last night's promise.
'In the soft bosom of that gentle maid,
'There dwells more goodness, than the rigid race
'Of moral pedants, ever believed, or taught:
'With what amazing constancy and truth,
'Doth she sustain the absence of our son,
'Whom more than life she loves! How shun for him,
'Whom we shall never see more, the rich and great
'Who own her charms more than supply the place
'Of shining heaps, and sigh to make her happy. --
'Since our misfortunes, we have found no friend,
'None who regarded our distress, but her:
'And she, by what I have observed of late,
'Is tired, or exhausted. Cursed condition!
'To live a burden to one only friend,
'And blast her youth with our contagious woe!
'Who that had reason, soul, or sense, would bear it
'A moment longer? Then this honest wretch!
'I must dismiss him -- Why should I detain
'A grateful generous youth to perish with me?
'His service may procure him bread elsewhere,
'Tho' I have none to give him. -- Prithee, Randal,
'How long have thou been with me?

RANDAL. 'Fifteen years.
'I was a very child when first you took me,
'To wait upon your son, my dear young master.
'I often have wished I Would gone to India with him,
'Tho' you, desponding, give him over for lost.
'I am to blame: this talk revives your sorrow.

O. WILMOT. 'Alas! Alas! -- Weeps.

RANDAL. 'The whole of my intent,
'Was to confess your bounty, that supplied
'The loss of both my parents: I was long
'The object of your charitable care.

O. WILMOT. 'No more of that: Thou'st served me longer since*
'Without reward; so that account is balanced;
'Or rather, I Am thy debtor. I remember,
'When poverty began to show her face
'Within these walls, and all my other servants,
'Like pampered vermin, from a falling house
'Retreated, with the plunder they had gained,
'And left me, too indulgent and remiss
'For such ungrateful wretches, to be crushed
'Beneath the ruin, they had helped to make,
'That you, more good than wise, refused to leave me.

RANDAL. 'Nay, I beseech you, sir! --

O. WILMOT. 'With my distress,
'In perfect contradiction to the world,
'Thy love, respect, and diligence increased. --
'Now all the recompense within my power,
'Is to discharge thee, Randal, from my hard,
'Unprofitable service. --

RANDAL. 'Heav'n forbid!
'Shall I forsake you in your worst necessity?
'Believe me, sir, my honest soul abhors
'The barbarous thought.

O. WILMOT. 'What! can thou feed on air?
'I have not left wherewith to purchase food
'For one meal more.

RANDAL. 'Rather than leave you thus,
'I'll beg my bread; and live on other's bounty,
'While I serve you.

O. WILMOT. 'Down, down my swelling heart!
'Or burst in silence. It Is thy cruel fate
'Insults thee by his kindness. He is innocent
'Of all the pain he gives thee. -- Go thy ways:
'I will no more suppress thy youthful hopes
'Of rising in the world.

RANDAL. ''Tis true, I Am young
'And never tried my fortune or my genius;
'Which may, perhaps, find out some happy means,
'As yet unthought of, to supply your wants.

O. WILMOT. 'Thou tortur'st me! I hate all obligations,
'Which I can never return: And who art thou,
'That I should stoop to take 'em from thy hand?
'Care for thyself; but take no thought of me;
'I will not want thee -- trouble me no more!

RANDAL. 'Be not offended, sir, and I will go.
'I never repined at your commands before;
'But Heaven's my witness! I obey you now*
'With strong reluctance, and a heavy heart.
'Farewell my worthy master! Going.

O. WILMOT. 'Farewell. -- Stay!
'As thou art yet a stranger to the world,
'Of which, alas! I Have had too much experience,
'I should, methinks, before we part, bestow
'A little counsel on thee -- dry thine eyes:
'If thou weep'st thus, I shall proceed no further.
'Dost thou aspire to greatness, or to wealth?
'Quit books, and the unprofitable search
'Of wisdom there, and study human kind!
'No science will avail thee without that;
'And that attained, thou need'st not any other.
'This will instruct thee to conceal thy views,
'And wear the face of probity and honor,
''Till thou have gained thy end: which must be ever
'Thy own advantage, at that man's expense,
'Who shall be weak enough, to think thee honest.

RANDAL. 'You mock me, sure!

O. WILMOT. 'I never was more serious.

RANDAL. 'Why should you counsel, what you scorned to practice?

O. WILMOT. 'Because that foolish scorn, has been my ruin.
'I've been an idiot, but would have thee wiser;
'And treat mankind, as they would treat thee, Randal,
'As they deserve, and I Have been treated by them:
'Thou'st seen by me, and those who now despise me,
'How men of fortune fall, and beggars rise;
'Shun my example; treasure up my precepts;
'The world's before thee: be a knave, and prosper.
'What! Art thou dumb?

(After a long pause.) RANDAL. 'Amazement ties my tongue.
'Where are your former principles?

O. WILMOT. 'No matter!
'Suppose I have renounced them: I have passions,
'And love thee still; therefore would have thee think,
'The world is all a scene of deep deceit;
'And he who deals with mankind, on the square,
'Is his own bubble, and undoes himself:
'Farewell -- and mark my counsel, boy.

Retires up. RANDAL. 'Amazement!
'Is this the man I thought so wise and just?
'What! Teach and counsel me to be a villain!
'Sure grief has made him frantic! Or some fiend,
'Assum'd his shape: I shall suspect my senses.
'High-minded he was ever, and improvident,
'But pityful and generous to a fault. --
'Pleasure he loved -- but honor was his idol; --
'O fatal change! O horrid transformation!

Exit Randal. O. WILMOT. Why there is one pang dispatched -- when will all end,
And settle into rest? -- Is life worth this?
This hourly compunction and despair,
This degradation, and this shame, I feel?
Oh, no! No! -- Why do I then endure it?
One friendly stroke -- and all would be at peace.
What bar? -- Conscience? No -- I can silence that,
And plead direful necessity: -- Is It fear? --
I Am at a point more cursed than fear can reach,
And desperate bay, would make a coward valiant!
My fearful wife, whom some fooled hope restrains,
Recoils herself -- and holds -- and pulls me back: --
Together, we have trod the changing scene;
Gathered the roses -- borne the thorns together;
And hand in hand, on the steep hill of life,
Have shaped our downward course: and can I then,
In all this wilderness of woe, forsake her --
Leave her to bear the winter of our fate,
In cheerless solitude, and pine alone?
Impossible! -- I must endure with her,
Till the cold, heavy, and oppressive hands
Of beggary and want, in hopeless age,
Shall bend her views with mine, to peaceful death.

END OF ACT THE SECOND.
ACT III.
SCENE. CHARLOTTE'S House.
Enter CHARLOTTE and MARIA. MARIA. 'Madam, a stranger in a foreign habit,
'Desires to see you.

CHARLOTTE. 'In a foreign habit! --
''Tis strange and unexpected: But admit him.
Exit MARIA. 'Who can this stranger be? I know no foreigner --
Enter YOUNG WILMOT. 'Nor any man like this.

Y. WILMOT. 'Ten thousand joys -- (Going to embrace her.)

CHARLOTTE. 'Sir, you're too bold: Forbear, and let me know
'What business brought you here, or leave the place.

Y. WILMOT. 'She knows me not! Am I forgot, or scorned?

CHARLOTTE. 'Can I forget a man, I never knew?

Y. WILMOT. 'With what aversion, what contempt, she views me!
'She's lost, my fatal absence has undone me. Aside.
'O! could thy Wilmot have forgot thee, Charlotte?

CHARLOTTE. 'Ha! Wilmot! Say! What do your words import?
'O gentle stranger! Ease my swelling heart,
'That else will burst! Can thou inform me ought?
'What do thou know of Wilmot?

Y. WILMOT. 'This I know:
'When all the winds of Heaven seemed to conspire,
'Against the stormy main, and dreadful peals
'Of rattling thunder deafen'd every ear,
'And drowned the affrighted mariners loud cries;
'When livid lightning, spread its sulphurous flames
'Thro' all the dark horizon, and disclosed
'The raging seas, incensed to his destruction;
'When the good ship, in which he was embarked,
'Unable longer to support the tempest,
'Sunk to the oozy bottom of the deep,
'And left him struggling with the warring waves;
'In that dread moment, in the jaws of death,
'When his strength failed, and every hope forsook him;
'And his last breath pressed towered his trembling lips,
'The neighboring rocks, that echoed to his moan,
'Return'd no sound articulate -- but Charlotte.

CHARLOTTE. 'The fatal tempest, whose description strikes
'The hearer with astonishment, is ceased;
'And Wilmot is at rest. The fiercer storm
'Of swelling passions, that o'erwhelms the soul,
'And rages worse than the mad stormy seas,
'In which he perished, never shall vex him more.

Y. WILMOT. 'Thou seem to think he is dead; enjoy that thought;
'Persuade yourself that what you wish is true,
'And triumph in your falsehood. Yes, he is dead;
'You were his fate: The cruel winds and waves,
'That call him pale, and breathless, on the shore,
'Spar'd him for greater woes -- to know his Charlotte,
'Forgetting all her vows to him, and Heaven,
'Had cast him from her thoughts. Then, then, he died;
'But never can have rest. Even now he wanders,
'A sad, repining, discontented ghost,
'The unsubstantial shadow of himself,
'And pours his plaintive groans in thy deaf ears,
'And stalks, unseen, before thee.

CHARLOTTE. ''Tis enough!
'Detested falsehood now has done its worst. --
'And art thou dead? And would thou die, my Wilmot?
'For one thou thought unjust? Thou soul of truth!
'What must be done? Which way shall I express
'Unutterable woe? -- Or how convince
'Thy dear departed spirit, of the love,
'Th' eternal love, and never failing faith,
'Of thy much injured, lost, despairing Charlotte?

Y. WILMOT. 'Be still, my fluttering heart; hope not too soon!
'Perhaps I dream, and this is all illusion. [Aside.]

CHARLOTTE. 'If, as some teach, the spirit after death,
'Free from the bounds, and ties, of sordid earth,
'Can trace us to our most concealed retreat,
'See all we act, and read our very thoughts;
'To thee, O Wilmot! kneeling, I appeal.
'If ever I swerved in action, word, or thought,
'Or ever wished to taste a joy on earth,
'That centered not in thee, since last we parted;
'May we never meet again; but thy loud wrongs
'So close the ear of mercy to my cries,
'That I may never see those bright abodes,
'Where truth, and virtue, only have admission,
'And thou inhabit'st now. --

Y. WILMOT. 'Assist me Heaven!
'Preserve my reason, memory, and sense!
'O moderate my fierce, tumultuous joys,
'Or their excess will drive me to distraction. --
'O Charlotte, Charlotte! Lovely, virtuous maid!
'Can thy firm mind, in spite of time and absence,
'Remain unshaken, and support its truth;
'And yet thy frailer memory retain,
'No image, no idea of thy lover?
'Why do you gaze so wildly? Look on me;
'Turn thy dear eyes this way; observe me well --
'Have scorching climates, time, and this strange habit,
'So changed, and so disguised thy faithful Wilmot,
'That nothing in my voice, my face, or mein,
'Remains to tell my Charlotte -- I am he?
[After viewing him some time, she approaches weeping -- he takes off his
turban -- she shrieks, and then turning toward him, sinks on his bosom.] 'Why
do thou weep? Why do thou tremble thus?
'Why does thy panting heart, and cautious touch,
'Speak thee but half convinced? Whence are thy fears?
Why art thou silent? Can thou doubt me still?

CHARLOTTE. 'No, Wilmot! No; I Am blind with too much light:
'O'ercome with wonder, and oppressed with joy --
'The struggling passions barred the doors of speech;
'This vast profusion of extreme delight,
'Rising at once, and bursting from despair,
'Baffles the aid of words, and mocks description.
'But for one sorrow, one sad scene of anguish,
'That checks the swelling torrent of my joys,
'I could not bear the transport --

Y. WILMOT. 'Let me know it --
'Give me my portion of thy sorrow, Charlotte;
'Let me partake thy grief, or bear it for thee.

CHARLOTTE. 'Alas! my Wilmot! These sad tears are thine;
'They flow from thy misfortunes. I am pierced
'With all the agonies of strong compassion,
'With all the bitter anguish you must feel,
'When you shall hear your parents -- the distress,
'The poverty, to which they are reduced,
'In spite of my weak aid --

Y. WILMOT. 'My joy's complete!
'From this blessed hour, the happiest of my life,
'I'll date my rest. My anxious hopes and fears,
'My weary travels, and my dangers past,
'Are now rewarded all! Now I rejoice
'In my success, and count my riches gain.
'For know, my soul's best treasure! I have wealth
'Enough to glut even avarice itself:
'No more shall cruel want, or proud contempt,
'Oppress the sinking spirits, or insult
'The hoary heads of those who gave me being.

CHARLOTTE. ''Tis now, O riches! I conceive your worth!
'You are not base, nor can you be superfluous,
'But when misplaced in base, and sordid hands.
'Fly, fly, my Wilmot, leave thy happy Charlotte;
'Thy filial piety, the sighs and tears,
'Of thy lamenting parents, call thee hence.

Y. WILMOT. 'I have a friend, the partner of my travels,
'Who in the storm, last night, was shipwrecked with me.

CHARLOTTE. 'Shipwreck'd last night! -- O you immortal powers!
What have you suffered! Terror and alarm
For unknown wretches, to the rage exposed
Of such a tempest, filled my restless mind --
Oh! had I known, that -- how were you preserved?

Y. WILMOT. Thou tested triumph of unblemished truth!
'Let that, and all my other strange escapes,
'And perilous adventures, be the theme
'Of many a happy winter's night to come.
'My present purpose, was to entreat my angel,
'To know this friend, this other better Wilmot;
To sooth the sad affliction of the soul,
Under the sharpest trial man ever suffered!
'And come with him this evening to my father's.
He is at hand --

CHARLOTTE. Thy friend, my Wilmot! sure
He wants no other claim to thy Charlotte's
Attentive care: and I consent with pleasure.

Y. WILMOT. 'Heav'ns! what a night! How shall I bear my joy?
'My parent's, yours, my friend's, all will be mine!
'And mine like water, air, or the free splendid sun,
'The undivided portion of you all!
'If such the early hopes, the vernal bloom,
'The distant prospect of my future bliss,
'Then what the ruddy autumn! What the fruit,
'The full possession of thy heavenly charms!

Exeunt. SCENE II. Another part of the Beach -- a Cave under the Rock.
Enter MALIGN and FLINT, from the Cave. MALIGN, with Bills of Lading. Reads.
"Muslins -- arrack -- silks -- raw-silk -- Calico -- "
What say thou, two of them escaped the wreck?

FLINT. Two, only!

MALIGN. "Cotton" -- She Is richly freighted --
Two! 'Sdeath, that is unlucky -- What are they, Flint?

FLINT. They say they are passengers, I think, and strangers --

MALIGN. The silks must be unpack'd: they are spoilt. --
"Ingots, four hundred ounces -- gold dust -- pearl -- "
Keep sharp look-out 'long shore; -- "the spices" -- spoilt.
"Wilmot!" -- How Is this? "Wilmot -- Wilmot!" Death! Hell!
Is Wilmot, then at last -- What think thou, Flint?
Here Is Wilmot's name; part owner of this freight!
If he is preserved we have made a blessed night's work!
All my long-labour'd -- high-built expectation,
Overthrown at last. But two! -- We must be speedy.
Why art thou dumb man? Something must be thought on!

FLINT. I Have news will make you dumb: Wilmot's returned --
It Is now explained! A while since, in the High Street,
(I would have told you, but you would not hear me) --
Two strangers passed me: and the crowd that star'd,
Said they had 'scap'd the wreck -- I kept aloof;
And followed -- till they gained the door of her,
Whose love to young George Wilmot, has supported
His parents, to her ruin. --

MALIGN. Ha! Say thou?

FLINT. They were admitted; and the rumor ran,
Wilmot was one! -- I came to tell you, and --

MALIGN. Perdition seize 'em! -- Shall I live to see
That ancient spendthrift, whose damned pride has scorned me,
Even in his poverty, lift up his head,
In contumelious affluence, again? --
Young Wilmot, too, inherit that estate,
Just tumbling in my grasp! Come Hell, rather;
And riot in the works of fair creation! --
I scare myself with shadows: If he is come back,
He Is beggared by the storm; there is hope; We'll find
A secret way of dealing with his claim.
Now, Flint's the time to show thy zeal and service:
No starts of conscience, nor no stops of fear,
If thou would have me able to reward thee!

FLINT. Conscience, I know but for my own advantage;
And fear -- but only that of being poor.
You Have seen me stand a gale -- and look in the teeth on it,
When the fierce blast, has turned our boat keel-upwards,
And there I Have strode, till the next breaker,
Dashed her in pieces on the shelvy beach!
I shall not back for trifles. --

MALIGN. I think it;
And therefore freely trust thee with my life. --
If Wilmot is returned, he must be dealt with:
I will be satisfied forthwith -- and know! --
Be you still diligent about the wreck. --
I Will strait to Wilmot's -- In The planted elms,
That open on the house, you will find me waiting,
At day-close -- there, be sure I see you, armed:
Be resolute -- succeed in this -- you're made forever!

Exeunt. SCENE III. A STREET, in Penryn.
Enter RANDAL alone. RANDAL. 'Poor! Poor! and friendless! Whither shall I
wander,
'And to what point direct my views, and hopes?
'A menial servant! -- No -- What, shall I live
'Here, in this land of freedom, live distinguished,
'And marked the willing slave of some proud subject! --
'And swell his useless train, for broken fragments;
'The cold remains of his superfluous board? --
'I would aspire to some thing more, and better. --
'Turn thy eyes, then, to the prolific ocean;
'Whose spacious bosom opens to thy view:
'There deathless honor, and unenvied wealth,
'Have often crowned the brave adventurer's toils.
'This is the native uncontested right,
'The fair inheritance of every spirit,
'That dares put in his claim -- My choice is made:
'A long farewell to Cornwall, and to England!
'If I return -- but stay -- what stranger's this,
'Who as he views me, seems to mend his pace?

Enter YOUNG WILMOT. Y. WILMOT. 'Randal! -- The dear companion of my youth!
'Sure lavish fortune means to give me all
'I could desire, or ask, for this blessed day,
'And leave me nothing to expect hereafter.

RANDAL. 'Your pardon, sir! I know but one on earth,
'Could properly salute me by that title,
'You're pleased to give me, and I could not think
'That you are he -- that you are Wilmot. --

Y. WILMOT. 'Why?

RANDAL. 'Because I could not bear the disappointment,
'If I should be deceived.

Y. WILMOT. 'Im pleased to hear it:
'Thy friendly fears, better express thy thoughts,
'Than words could do.

RANDAL. 'O Wilmot! O! My master!
'Are you returned? --

Y. WILMOT. 'I have not yet embraced
'My parents -- I shall see you at my father's.

RANDAL. 'No, I Am discharged from thence -- O, sir! such ruin --

Y. WILMOT. 'I've heard it all, and hasten to relieve 'em:
'Sure Heaven has blessed me to that very end:
'I've wealth enough; nor shall thou want a part.

RANDAL. 'I have a part already -- I am blessed
'In your success, and share in all your joys.

Y. WILMOT. 'I doubt it not. But tell me, do thou think,
'(My parents, not suspecting my return,)
'That I may visit them and not be known?

RANDAL. ''Tis hard for me to judge. You are already
'Grown so familiar to me, that I wonder
'I knew you not at first: yet it may be;
'For you're much altered, and they think you dead.

Y. WILMOT. 'This is certain; Charlotte beheld me long,
'And heard my loud reproaches, and complaints,
'Without rememb'ring she had ever seen me.

RANDAL. Is It possible! The tender maid, whose sighs
Have numbered every hour of your absence?

Y. WILMOT. It Is true: -- But has my Charlotte -- tell me, Randal,
So tenderly deplored my uncertain fate?

RANDAL. Like one, who cherished hope -- but as a duty,
To quell despair, and cheer the mourners round her.
It still has been her task to hide her grief,
To weep within -- and speak in strains of comfort,
With tender care assuaging the misfortunes,
That have o'ertaken my poor master's house. --
Touched by the Ithurial-spear of poverty.
Those hollow friends, who seem like angels fair,
In fortune's beam -- regained their reptile form:
She only stood the test -- and shared their ruin.

Y. WILMOT. The heavenly maid! -- I could for ever listen
To her deserved applause. -- Time presses now --
'My mind at ease, grows wanton: I would fain
'Refine on happiness. I would try, Randal,
'If it be possible, by seeing first
'My parents, as a stranger, to improve
Their pleasure by surprise. --

RANDAL. 'It may, indeed,
'Inhance your own, to see from what despair,
'Your timely coming, and unhoped success,
'Have given you power to raise them.

Y. WILMOT. I Have here, written,
A letter from my Charlotte, to my father,
'To recommend me, as a friend of here is,
'To his acquaintance. -- Meaning to defer
'Discov'ring who I am, till she arrives,
'And thou, and all who love me, every friend
'Who witnesses my happiness to night,
'Will, by partaking, multiply my joys.

RANDAL. 'May every joy you find, prove firm, and lasting.
'I will attend you, sir.

Y. WILMOT. 'I am much thy debtor;
'But, I shall find a time to quit thy kindness.
'O Randal! but imagine to thyself,
'The floods of transport, the sincere delight,
'That all my friends will feel, when I disclose,
'To my astonished parents, my return,
'And then confess, that I have well contrived,
'By giving others joy t'exalt my own. --
'As pain, and anguish, in a generous mind,
While kept concealed, and to ourselves confined,
Want half their force -- so pleasure, when it flows
In torrents round us, more extatic grows.

Exeunt. END OF ACT THE THIRD.
ACT IV.
SCENE. OLD WILMOT'S House. A Saloon, and entrance into the interior apartments.
Enter OLD WILMOT and MRS. WILMOT. O. WILMOT. 'Here take this Seneca: this
haughty pedant,
'Who, governing the master of mankind,
'And awing power imperial, prates of patience;
'And praises poverty -- possessed of millions: --
'Sell him, and buy us bread. The scantiest meal,
'The vilest copy of this book ever purchased,
'Will give us more relief in this distress,
'Than all his boasted precepts. -- Nay, no tears;
'Keep them to move compassion, when you beg.

MRS. WILMOT. 'My heart may break -- but never, stoop to that.

O. WILMOT. 'Nor would I live to see it -- but dispatch.
Exit MRS. WILMOT. 'Where must I charge this length of misery,
'That gathers force, each moment, as it rolls,
'And must, at last overwhelm me -- but on hope;
'Vain, flattering, delusive, groundless hope;
'A senseless expectation of relief,
'That has for years deceived me? -- Had I thought,
'As I do now, as wise men ever think,
'When first this Hell of poverty o'ertook me,
'That power to die, implies a right to do it,
'And should be used, when life becomes a pain;
'What plagues had I prevented? My poor wife,
'Is still a slave to prejudice, and fear --
'I would not leave my better part, the dear
'Faithful companion of my happier days --
'I'll try once more --
Re-enter MRS. WILMOT. 'Return'd, my life, so soon!

Enter YOUNG WILMOT. MRS. WILMOT. 'The unexpected coming of this stranger,
'Prevents my going yet.

Y. WILMOT. 'You're, I presume, [Gives a letter.]
'The gentleman, to whom this is directed.
'What wild neglect, the token of despair,
'What indigence, what misery appears
'In this once happy house! What discontent,
'What anguish, and confusion, fill the faces
'Of its dejected owners! [Aside.]

O. WILMOT. [Having read the letter.] 'Sir, such welcome,
'As this poor house affords, you may command. --
'Our ever friendly neighbor -- once we hoped
'T'have called fair Charlotte by a dearer name --
'But we have done with hope -- I pray excuse
'This incoherence -- we had once a son.

MRS. WILMOT. 'That you are come from that dear virtuous maid,
'Revives in us the memory of a loss,
'Which, though long since, we have not learnt to bear.

Y. WILMOT. 'The joy to see them, and the bitter pain,
'To see them thus, touches my very soul
'With tenderness and grief, that will overflow.
'They know me not, and yet I shall, I fear,
'Defeat my purpose, and betray myself. [Aside.]

O. WILMOT. 'The lady calls you, here, her valued friend;
'Enough, though nothing more should be implied,
'To recommend you to our best esteem;
'A worthless acquisition! May she find
'Some means, that better may express her kindness.
'But she, perhaps, has purposed to enrich
'You with herself, and end her fruitless sorrow
'For one, whom death alone can justify,
'For leaving her so long. If it be so,
'May you repair his loss, and be to Charlotte,
'A second happier Wilmot! Partial nature,
'Who only favors youth; as feeble age
'Were not her offspring, or below her care,
'Has sealed our doom: no second hope shall spring,
'To dry our tears, and dissipate despair.

MRS. WILMOT. 'The last, and most abandoned of our kind,
'By Heaven and earth neglected, or despised!
'The loathsome grave, that robbed us of our son,
'And all our joys in him, must be our refuge.

Y. WILMOT. 'Let ghosts unpardoned, or devoted fiends,
'Fear without hope, and wail in such sad strains;
'But grace defend the living from despair!
'The darkest hours precede the rising sun,
'And mercy may appear, when least expected.

O. WILMOT. 'This I have heard, a thousand times repeated,
'And have, believing, been as often deceived.

Y. WILMOT. 'Behold in me an instance of its truth.
'At sea twice shipwrecked, and as often the prey
'Of lawless pirates; by the Arabs thrice
'Surpriz'd, and robbed on shore; and once reduced
'To worse than these, the sum of all distress,
'That the most wretched feel on this side Hell,
'Ev'n slavery itself: yet here I stand,
'Except one trouble, that will quickly end,
'The happiest of mankind.

O. WILMOT. 'A rare example
'Of fortune's caprice; apter to surprise,
'Or entertain, than comfort, or instruct.
'If you would reason from events, be just,
'And count when you escaped, how many perished;
'And draw your inf'rence thence.

MRS. WILMOT. 'Alas! who knows,
'But we were rendered childless by some storm,
'In which you, though preserved, might bear a part?

Y. WILMOT. 'How has my curiosity betrayed me,
'Into superfluous pain! I faint with fondness;
'And shall, if I stay longer, rush upon 'em,
'Till with excess of pleasure, and surprise,
'Their souls transported, their frail mansions quit,
'And leave 'em breathless in my longing arms.
'By circumstances then, and slow degrees,
'They must be let into a happiness,
'Too great for them to bear at once, and live:
'That Charlotte will perform. I need not feign,
'To ask an hour for rest. [Aside.] Sir, I entreat
'The favor to retire, where for a while
'I may repose myself, You will excuse
'This freedom, and the trouble that I give you:
It Is long since I have slept, and nature calls.

O. WILMOT. 'I pray no more: Believe we are only troubled,
'That you should think any excuse were needful.

Y. WILMOT. 'The weight of this, to me, is some encumbrance,
'And its contents of value: if you please
'To take the charge of it, till I awake,
'I shall not sleep the worse.
[Takes a casket from his bosom, and gives it to Mrs. Wilmot.] 'If I should
sleep,
'Till I am asked for, as perhaps I may,
'I beg that you would wake me.

MRS. WILMOT. 'Doubt it not:
'Distracted as I am with various woes,
'I shall remember that. --

Mrs. Wilmot retires. Y. WILMOT. 'Merciless grief!
'What ravage has it made! How has it changed
'Her lovely form and mind! I feel her anguish,
'And dread, I know not what, from her despair.
'My father too! -- O grant him patience, Heaven!
'A little longer, a few short hours more,
'And all their care and mine, shall end for ever.

Exeunt into the interior apartment. SCENE continues.
MRS. WILMOT alone. MRS. WILMOT. 'Who should this stranger be? -- And then this
casket --
'He says it is of value, and yet trusts it,
'As if a trifle, to a stranger's hand. --
'His confidence amazes me -- Perhaps
'It is not what he says -- I Am strongly tempted
'To open it, and see! -- No, let it rest. --
'Why should my curiosity excite me,
'To search, and pry into the affairs of others;
'Who have t'employ my thoughts, so many cares
'And sorrows of my own? -- [She opens it.]
With how much ease
'The spring gives way! -- Surprising! Most prodigious!
'My eyes are dazzled, and my ravished heart,
'Leaps at the glorious sight! --
[After a long pause of admiration.] A pleasing dream!
'For sure it was a happiness to think,
'Tho' but a moment, such a treasure mine.
'Nay, it was more than thought, I saw and touched
'The bright temptation -- and I see it yet! --
It Is here! It Is mine! I have it in possession! --
'Must I resign it? -- Must I give it back?
'Am I in love with misery and want --
'To rob myself, and court so great a loss?
'Retain it then -- but how? -- ( Pauses.)
'There is a way --
'Why sinks my heart? -- Why does my blood run cold?
'Why am I thrilled with horror? -- It Is not choice --
'But dire necessity, suggests the deed.

Enter OLD WILMOT. O. WILMOT. 'The mind contented, with how little pains,
'The wandering senses yield to soft repose!
'He's fallen asleep already -- happy man!
'What do thou think, my Agnes, of our guest!
'He seems to me a youth of great humanity:
'Just ere he closed his eyes, that swam in tears,
'He wrung my hand, and pressed it to his lips;
'And with a look, that pierced me to the soul,
'Begg'd me to comfort thee: and -- do thou hear me?

MRS. WILMOT. My husband! -- Hush my heart -- it is yet unweigh'd!

Aside. O. WILMOT. 'What art thou gazing on? -- Fie, it is not well.
'That casket was delivered to you closed:
'Why have you opened it? Should this be known,
'How mean must we appear! --

MRS. WILMOT. 'And who shall know it? --

O. WILMOT. 'There is a kind of pride, a decent dignity,
'Due to ourselves; which, spite of our misfortunes,
'May be maintained, and cherished to the last.
'To live without reproach, and without leave
'To quit the world -- shows sovereign contempt,
'And noble scorn of its resentless malice.

MRS. WILMOT. 'Shews sovereign madness -- and a scorn of sense --
(Puts the casket open into his hand.) Read there an argument for life, more
strong,
Than the most firm opinionist ever hatched,
For foul self-murder! -- When you have thought on it,
I will expect your answer with my charge.

Exit Mrs. Wilmot. O. WILMOT. [After a pause.] An argument for life! -- what
can she mean?
It Is for the owner then -- How bright's the luster,
How immense the worth of these fair jewels!
Ay! Such a treasure would expel for ever
Base poverty, and all its abject train;
The mean devices, we are reduced to use,
To keep out famine, and preserve our lives,
From day to day, the cold neglect of friends;
The galling scorn, or more provoking pity
Of an insulting world -- possessed of these, --
Plenty, content, and power, might take their turn,
And lofty pride bare its aspiring head
At our approach, and once more bend before us!
O woman! Woman! Too powerful tempter!
How could thou form a thought, so very damning,
So advantageous, so secure and easy?
And yet so cruel, and so full of horror! --
Generous, unhappy man! What, what could urge thee,
To put thy life, and fortune, in the hands
Of wretches, mad with anguish! Self-defence,
Sounds the alarm, through all the tortured passions;
And apt occasion, with seductive stealth,
Points to the means! It Is but a single murder!
Necessity, impatience, and despair,
The three wide mouths, of that true Cerberus,
Grim poverty, demand: they shall be stopped!
Ambition, persecution, and revenge
Devour their millions daily: -- and shall I --
O! What is man, his excellence and strength,
When in an hour of trial, and desertion,
Reason, his noblest power, may be suborned,
To plead the cause of vile assassination!

Exit. SCENE II. The BEACH, amongst the Rocks.
First a gun is fired very near; then Enter the BOY, hastily and alarmed, with
a small Cabinet in his hand. BOY. Merciless dogs -- more barbarous than the
storm?
What have the poor unhappy suff'rers done,
That you should plunder what the waves have spared,
Adding your outrage to the bolts of fate?
I will preserve this from your ruffian hands --
O Heavens! -- This cabinet -- O! Providence!
Ten thousand terrors kindle at the sight; --
And fond remembrance startles over my thoughts --
What haste, my beating heart --
It was engraved -- here on --
[Rubs the ornament and reads.] Ha! Arnold! -- O Heaven!
Had I one hope reserved -- for last night's storm,
To make the number of my woes complete?

Enter FLINT and two FELLOWS. FLINT. Come hither, young one -- you must deliver
up that box, it belongs to the wreck.


BOY. Oh! Does it indeed? [Weeps.]

FLINT. Does it! Ay: so hand it over.

BOY. For what purpose, sir?

FLINT. What purpose! Why to be taken care of, to be sure.


BOY. I will take care of it, then sir; great care --
Till its right owner shall demand it of me --
I live here in the rock --

FLINT. You! No, no, my boy! The owner wont come in a hurry to claim it -- he is
gone to sea again.


BOY. Gone to sea? --

FLINT. Ay; in the maw of a shark. So make no more words, but hand us over the
box directly -- or we shall use you a little roughly. --


BOY. Oh my torn heart! I will not give it up --
It Is possible the owner may be saved --

FLINT. Saved or not, we'll have the box -- why you young robber would you
plunder the wreck? Seize him, lads, and duck him; that he may tell no tales --
but search him, first. He has more valuables about him that belong to the ship.


[They seize him.] BOY. Must I then lose the last -- oh! Arnold! Arnold!
Good masters, treat me not so rudely. -- You --
You have the law of might at least! It Is yours.
[Lets the cabinet go, and seizes it again, on seeing Arnold at a distance.]
Ha! -- Here Is help at hand! I will not part with it --
You have no right -- I Will lose my life first! -- Help! --

FLINT. Stop his mouth -- to the rock with him --

BOY. Help, stranger, help! -- Oh! Arnold! -- Help!

Enter ARNOLD. (Speaks entering.) ARNOLD. My name! --
And brutal violence! -- Villains let go the boy.

FLINT. Let go the boy! For what? He Is a thief: He has been plundering the
wreck.


ARNOLD. (After viewing him some time.) -- Impossible!
The gentle youth, whose tender care last night --
Villains! Unloose his arms: take off your hands --
Or I will cut them off. --
[Draws his sabre; they release the Boy.] What has he done?

FLINT. Done! Why stole that box there, in his hands,
We caught him at it.

ARNOLD. Ha! -- My cabinet -- Aside.

BOY. (Kneeling.) Kind stranger, hear me!
I am no thief: I found this cabinet,
Left by the tide, at ebb, upon the strand;
And as by certain marks, it witnessed strongly --
Of circumstances near to my affections --
(Weeps.) Would have preserved it from their russian hands.
Witness, that Power, which reads the human soul,
And blots the perjured utterly from grace,
The wealth of worlds, health, freedom, life, -- were poor,
Compared with that first bliss my heart could feel,
To yield it safely to its owner's hands.

ARNOLD. What means this tumult, and his eager warmth?
Fellows, begone! The cabinet is mine.

FLINT. Come lads! We Are losing time. Would we had silenced him!


Exeunt Flint and Fellows. BOY. (Alarmed.) Yours! -- Did I hear you rightly?
-- Said you -- yours?

ARNOLD. Yes: -- you have found that owner: -- I am he.

BOY. You! (Surveying him wiih fixed attention.)
Oh, my presaging heart! How -- how long. (Agitated*)
O, sir! Excuse the anxious perturbation, --
The wildness -- the disorder -- you behold --
How (With hesitation.) long has it been yours!

ARNOLD. These many years. (Alarmed.)

BOY. Confided to your hand by some dear friend?

ARNOLD. It was: by one much dearer to my heart,
Than is the vital stream, that lodges there.

BOY. His last bequest -- a dying token --

ARNOLD. No!
It was a pledge of love -- of living faith --
And fond remembrance!

BOY. (Eagerly.) Then lives he still?

ARNOLD. My kind,
My gentle boy! What means this wild alarm?
You search my very soul. -- I see some error --

BOY. O, generous stranger! Think, one moment think*
Your bosom glows -- I can perceive it does!
With every tender, and humane affection --
Think! that upon your voice -- your candor, truth,
In this most touching moment of my life,
My all of comfort -- or despair -- depends.

ARNOLD. What mean you?

BOY. Impatient heart! Oh! Give me
The respite of a moment; -- hence, disguise --
You say that it was once a pledge of love --
Indeed it was -- of tender faithful love;
As ever maid confessed -- or lover swore.
Friend of my Arnold, I will telll thee all!

(She takes off the cap -- her hair flows down her shoulders: he recognizes
her.] ARNOLD. Oh! heavenly Powers!

BOY. Has he never named -- his Lucy?

ARNOLD. Be still my transports! The dear maid herself! Aside.

LUCY. Sev'n woeful years are past, since that poor pledge,
(The picture of my former self enclosed,
Gift of our parting hour) my Arnold vowed
To keep -- to part from, only with his life. --
Judge of my feelings then -- when rolling years,
Of penury, and pining grief, and toil,
Have changed my prospects -- nay, my very sex,
And left no hope -- to wing my fruitless prayers;
To find that pledge, after a hideous storm,
Cast by the sea upon a ruthless beach, --
To hear a stranger claim -- O, sir! reveal
To me --

ARNOLD. My grief, my pains -- my joy -- my transport!
Think what my feelings are -- and such are his! --
To leave that tender maid -- to quit her arms,
Without one joy, save what this pledge contained.
[He takes a picture from his neck, and gives her, which she views with
agitation.] To wander through inhospitable climes,
Scorched in the torrid zone -- and dragging life
In slavery -- her truth his only hope!
To break his chains, and to accumulate
Unhop'd for wealth -- To hasten to her back,
With all a lover's constant, unchanged faith. --
Shipwrecked and saved -- to find a wreck on shore,
More fatal to his peace -- his mistress lost --
His happiness -- his hope! -- To find them thus
Again, when least expected! -- To remain,
(Changed by the burning sun, and foreign garb)
Unknown -- to hear the lovely mourner's truth --
To gaze on -- to enfold -- to clasp -- his Lucy!

(He embraces her, and she sinks in his arms.) LUCY. Arnold! Oh! --

ARNOLD. My life! Sole object of my thoughts,
Aim and reward of all my anxious toils,
Look up -- look up, my Lucy -- Heavenly Powers!
Where is that glowing tint, that robbed thy cheek?
The luster of thine eyes! -- Look up, or Arnold,
In sight of harbor, is again overwhelmed,
Beyond the reach of fate to save him more.

LUCY. Heigh ho! (Sighs.)

ARNOLD. Transporting sound! My Lucy -- lean --
Lean on my bosom. --

LUCY. Oh! --
[Recovering slowly, and gazing on him some time.] Can it be possible? --

ARNOLD. Why do thou view me with that doubtful look?
Thy faithful Arnold -- Ah! Why starts that tear?

LUCY. (Kneeling.) O Gracious Power! to whom my streaming eyes,
Have often been raised -- to whom the trembling drops
Of patient resignation, have been shed;
Accept the tear of heartfelt gratitude!
And such thanksgiving as a heart confused,
In its first moments of returning joy,
Can offer up!
[He raises her; she is turning toward him, but checks herself -- then hides
her face on his shoulder.] Excuse my blushes, Arnold!
You find me changed, indeed! -- A poor, poor creature! --
My mother, too! Oh! I have much to tell you --

ARNOLD. Let me behold thy face -- Ha! She Will faint again --

LUCY. No! -- 'twill away: A little overpowered;
Joy is a guest, has long been absent here.

ARNOLD. Receive it then with smiles, a welcome stranger!
Not as a sojourner for hours or days,
But one that is come to share your heart with Arnold --
To stay for years -- to pass a whole life with you!

LUCY. To share with Arnold! It is Arnold's self! --
Affliction's lesson to me has been patience:
Joy is tumultuous -- I cannot restrain it!
Teach me, calm daughter of successful hope,
Tranquillity -- teach me calmly to reason
And know myself -- thus happy as I am!

ARNOLD. My heavenly girl! -- But how thus changed?

LUCY. Will thou, my Arnold, enter our poor hovel,
And view the means that have preserved me for thee?
Methinks too, (I would banish every sorrow now)
I hardly feel this transport as I ought,
'Till my dear parent knows, and shares my bliss.

ARNOLD. Conduct me, angel, that my eyes may trace,
Each line of excellence, thy duteous heart
Has nobly filled; -- and may thy fair example,
Dart clear conviction through the skeptic tribe,
That virtue ever should repel despair;
Claiming that bounteous Pow'r's peculiar care;
Who, 'midst each worldly maze, preserves due rule,
Who loves, yet chastens in affliction's school;
Whose trials, no well founded hope destroy;
But fit the mind for scenes of lasting joy.

Exeunt. END OF ACT THE FOURTH.
ACT V.
SCENE. A PLANTATION, opening on Wilmot's House.
Enter MALIGN alone. MALIGN. I Have watched in vain his coming forth -- silent
And gloomy, as the mansions of the dead,
No cheerful sound is heard; no busy step,
In this, once riotous, deserted hall: --
The mournful Lares, on their altars mute,
Have long forgot the sacrifice of joy;
And sprigntly notes of music, and of mirth;
The sighing echo's, answ'ring but to sounds
Of wailings and complaint; -- the creaking doors,
And windows, ratt'ling to the evening blast.
Quick comes the close of day; the hazy clouds
Must'ring i'th'east, lead on the approach
Of sable-hooded night, before its time: --
Now! Or never. -- Tomorrow shall behold
Them guarded round with friends --
(Goes toward the entrance.) The door, on jar,
Bespeaks the fearless poverty within:
I Will enter. -- Come, coward spleen, provoke me:
If I can creep and sting him to the heart --
Genius of Italy, now guide it home;
Th'invention thy keen policy has formed --
(Draws a dagger.) And night's concealing veil shall cover all. --

(Enters the house.) SCENE II. OLD WILMOT'S, House. Leading to the interior
apartment.
Enter MRS. WILMOT alone from within. MRS. WILMOT. He sleeps secure: -- Would
it were done! -- Some Power,
Restrains my arm, and shields him from the blow!
[Takes the casket from a table.] Where Is my husband? -- The glorious vision's
here,
That fires my mind -- my blood is up in arms!
If he should wake, I must restore it back;
And face again grim poverty, and all
It Is yelling train; -- I cannot bear the thought:
My eager fancy has out-stripp'd it far;
Shook off dishonor -- and forbad despair --
And hailed the hour of joy! -- And shall I then
Encounter them again? Not for a world:
A fall from such a glorious height as this,
Is worse than death --

Enter OLD WILMOT. O. WILMOT. Aye, much worse than death, indeed,
These ardent struggles of the tortured mind!
It Is nobler far, to shut out life ourselves --

MRS. WILMOT. 'Pursue no further this detested theme:
'I will not die, I will not leave the world,
'For all that you can urge, until compelled.

O. WILMOT. 'To chase a shadow, when the setting sun
'Is darting his last rays, were just as wise,
'As your anxiety for fleeting life,
'Now the last means for its support are failing:
'Were famine not as mortal as the sword,
'This warmth might be excused: -- But take thy choice;
'Die how you will, you shall not die alone.

MRS. WILMOT. 'Nor live, I hope.

O. WILMOT. 'There is no fear of that.

MRS. WILMOT. 'Then we'll both live.

O. WILMOT. 'Strange folly! -- Where Is the means?

MRS. WILMOT. 'There. -- Those jewels --

O. WILMOT. 'Ha! Take heed --
'Perhaps thou do but try me -- yet take heed --
'There's naught so monstrous, but the mind of man,
'In some conditions, may be brought t'approve:
'Theft, sacrilege, treason, and parricide,
'When flattering opportunity enticed,
'And desperation drove, have been committed
'By those, who once would start to hear them named.

MRS. WILMOT. 'And add to these, detested suicide;
'Which, by a crime much less, we may avoid.

O. WILMOT. 'The inhospitable murder of our guest!

MRS. WILMOT. ''Tis less impiety -- less against nature,
'To take another's life -- than end our own.

O. WILMOT. 'It is no matter, whether this, or that
'Be in itself the less or greater ^rim^:
'Howe'er we may deceive ourselves or others,
'We act from inclination, not by rule,
'Or none could act amiss: and that all err,
'None but the conscious hypocrite denies.

MRS. WILMOT. Necessity has claims beyond all rule:
'Nature and reason, too, may justly plead
'For our own preservation.

O. WILMOT. 'Rest contented:
'Whate'er resistance I may seem to make,
'I am betrayed within: my will's seduced,
'And my whole soul infected. -- The desire
'Of life returns, and brings with it a train
'Of appetites, that rage to be supplied. --
'Whoever stays to parley with temptation,
'Parley's to be overcome! --

MRS. WILMOT. 'Then naught remains,
'But the swift execution of a deed,
'That is not to be thought on, or delayed --
Resolve, without a moment -- by what means
'Shall we effect his death?

O. WILMOT. Why, what a fiend --
'How cruel, how remorseless, and impatient,
'Have pride and poverty made thee!

MRS. WILMOT. 'Barbarous man!
'Whose wasteful riots ruined our estate,
'And drove our son, ere the first down had spread
'His rosy cheeks, spite of my sad presages,
'Earnest entreaties, agonies and tears,
'To seek his bread amongst strangers, and to perish
'In some remote, inhospitable land --
'The loveliest youth, in person and in mind,
'That ever crowned a groaning mother's pains!
'Where was thy pity, where thy patience then?
'Thou cruel husband! Thou unnat'ral father!
'Thou most remorseless, most ungrateful man!
'To waste my fortune, rob me of my son,
'To drive me to despair, and then reproach me,
'For being what thou'st made me. --

O. WILMOT. 'Dry thy tears:
'I ought not to reproach thee. I confess
'That thou have suff'red much: So have we both.
'But chide no more: I Am wrought up to thy purpose.
'The poor ill-fated, unsuspecting victim,
'Ere he reclined him on the fatal couch,
'From which he is never to rise, took off the sash,
'And costly sabre, that thou saw him wear,
'And thus, unthinking, furnished us with arms
'Against himself. Steal to the door,
'And bring me word, if he be still asleep.
Exit Mrs. Wilmot. 'Or I Am deceived, or he pronounced himself,
'The happiest of mankind. Deluded wretch!
'Thy thoughts are perishing, thy youthful joys,
'Touch'd by the icy hand of grisly death,
'Are withering in their bloom -- But thought extinguished,
'He'll never know the loss,
'Nor feel the bitter pangs of disappointment --
'Then I was wrong in counting him a wretch:
'To die well pleased,
'Is all the happiest of mankind can hope for.
'To be a wretch, is to survive the loss
'Of every joy, and even hope itself,
'As I have done -- why do I mourn him then?
'For, by the anguish of my tortured soul,
'He's to be envied, if compared with me. --

Enter Mrs. WILMOT, with the sabre of Young Wilmot. MRS. WILMOT. 'The stranger
sleeps at present; but so restless
'His slumbers seem, they cannot continue long.
'Here I Have secured his sword.

O. WILMOT. 'O Agnes! Agnes!
'If there be a hell, it is just we should expect it.

[Goes to take the weapon, but lets it fall.] MRS. WILMOT. 'Shake off this
panic, and be more yourself.

O. WILMOT. 'What's to be done? On what had we determined?

MRS. WILMOT. 'You're quite dismayed!

O. WILMOT. 'Give me the fatal steel:
It Is but a murder! Who would stick at murder,
Thus goaded, and thus tempted to the deed?
'But follow me -- and see how little cause,
'You had to think, there were the least remains
'Of manhood, pity, mercy, or remorse,
'Left in this savage breast.

[Going the wrong way.] MRS. WILMOT. 'Where do you go?
'The street is that way --

O. WILMOT. 'True! I had forgot.

MRS. WILMOT. 'Quite, quite confounded!

O. WILMOT. 'Well, I recover. -- I shall find the way.

[Exit into the inner apartment.] MRS. WILMOT. 'O softly! Softly! The least
noise undoes us --
'What are we doing? Misery and want,
'Are lighter ills than this! -- I cannot bear it --
'Stop, hold thy hand -- inconstant, wretched woman!
'What! Does my heart recoil? O Wilmot! Wilmot!
'What power shall I invoke to aid thee, Wilmot?

Exit. Enter CHARLOTTE and RANDAL, ARNOLD and LUCY. CHARLOTTE. 'What strange
neglect! The doors are all unbar'd,
'And not a living creature to be seen!
MRS. WILMOT returns. My friend! My mother! O, forgive the excess
Of pleasure, that transports me thus to see you!
Are you not my mother? --

MRS. WILMOT. What mean you? -- Ha! ( Looks round disturbed.)

CHARLOTTE. Too long that tender name has spoke our grief --
Mournful memento of our common loss! --
But why this coldness -- this reserve? O, where,
Where is the object, should inspire your joy?
Where is the stranger? --

MRS. WILMOT. What joy? -- What stranger? (Agitated.)

CHARLOTTE. Oh! We are come to give, and to receive,
A thousand greetings. -- The Heavens have heard
Our misery; and in the amplest bounty sent --

MRS. WILMOT. What stranger? And what greetings should we know?
Is misery but the subject of your scorn?
This insult cancels all -- speak, speak quickly!
What stranger should we know -- and why conceal --

CHARLOTTE. (Alarmed.) Why do you look with such amazement on us?
Where is he? Tell me, has he not been here?
Would he defer your happiness so long?
Or could a habit, so disguise him to you,
That you refuse to own him?

MRS. WILMOT. Oh God, and nature! --
What prodigy of horror is disclosing,
'To render murder venial?

CHARLOTTE. Your son! -- Your son --

MRS. WILMOT. Hush! --

[She stands stupid in astonishment. Looks round to the door, leading to the
inner apartment -- then on Charlotte, with great anxiety.] CHARLOTTE. You
terrify me, madam! -- It Is your son --
My ever faithful -- our dear, long-lost, Wilmot.

MRS. WILMOT. Ha ha! ha! ha! ha! --

[Bursts into loud laughter.] CHARLOTTE. Oh Heaven's! What have I done?
unthinking wretch!
It Is the effect of sudden bursting joy! --
Compose thyself, dear mother of my Wilmot --

MRS. WILMOT. Wilmot -- am I a mother? Nay -- It Is past recall --
His father slew him too! Oh! Don't reveal it. --

[Weeps bitterly.] ARNOLD. I dread some mischief lurks beneath this passion!
Her words are wild! Her accents are despair! --

MRS. WILMOT. No stranger has been here -- That Is not his blood!
Those jewels! -- Are not his -- he is not my son!
Yet 'twas a cruel deed -- a deed of horror! --
Some mother! Who has reared the blooming boy --
Frantic with grief, shall tear his body up,
Though we have buried it! -- Blasting the name of Wilmot.

ARNOLD. What means those dreadful words, and frantic air?
My mind misgives me! Patience, reason, help her!

[Mrs. Wilmot, after a pause, recovers; starts, and looks toward the inner
apartment.] MRS. WILMOT. Oh! Wilmot! Wilmot! -- Hold thy desperate hand! --

Enter OLD WILMOT, in great disorder, with Young Wilmot's dagger, smeared with
blood. O. WILMOT. (Wildly.) What voice is that? -- Is there more slaughter
toward?

MRS. WILMOT. It Is done! -- Your son! Your son! --

[Swoons and falls on the floor.] RANDAL. 'Ha! That is the sabre,
'My young master wore! --

ARNOLD. 'Do not stand to gaze,
'On those mute phantoms of despair and horror:
'Let us search further -- Randal lead the way.

Exeunt. Manent OLD WILMOT and MRS. WILMOT. O. WILMOT. Look up, Agnes! -- Blame
not my erring arm --
The treasure of a conscience undefiled,
Shall more than compensate the damned gains
Of such a deed! -- (He raises her.)

MRS. WILMOT. Can it be possible?
Has earth a place for misery like this?
Where -- where -- Oh! --
[Recovering slowly, looks around -- and seeing the bloody sword, screams
aloud.] The dreadful vision's here! --
Abhorred wretch! Fell murderer of my child!
Inhuman father! -- Lost, abandoned Wilmot! --

O. WILMOT. Grace defend us! Oh! We are not so cursed. --

MRS. WILMOT. Do not accuse thy erring mother, Wilmot,
'With too much rigor, when we meet above, --
'To give thee life, for life, and blood for blood,
'Is not enough! Had I ten thousand lives,
'I'd give them all to speak my penitence,
'Deep and sincere, and equal to my crime. --

[Snatches the sword, and attempts to stab herself -- he prevents her.] O.
WILMOT. Hold your rash hand! and know -- but tell me, tell me --
Is he our son?

MRS. WILMOT. Yes! Yes, thou cruel monster!
More barbarous now -- than is the deed we have done!
[Struggles for the dagger.] Unloose the steel, or strike it to my heart
In mercy. -- Here thou preaching suicide!
Behold thy convert -- Let thy practice seal [Kneels.]
(Now there is cause!) the doctrine with thy blood.
'Let life forsake the earth, and light the sun,
'Death and deep darkness, bury in oblivion
'Mankind, and all their deeds -- that no posterity
'May ever rise to hear our horrid tale,
'Or view the grave of such detested parricides. --

O. WILMOT. Bliss of my youth and comfort of my age!
Agnes! Look up, and hail a scene of wonder!
Let penitence atone our dark design,
And drive the fiend of desperation hence! --
Let thankfulness for mercy and deliverance
Overcome our conscious shame. -- Behold he lives!

The back Scene draws off and discovers MALIGN on the ground wounded. YOUNG
WILMOT supporting CHARLOTT RANDAL and ARNOLD. MRS. WILMOT. My boy! My boy! Ah!
-- do thou live indeed?

(She rushes to embrace him.) Y. WILMOT. In bliss unutterable! Nay, dry those
tears --
My ever honored -- my beloved parents! --
(Kneels and kisses them.) And that I live, next to the care of Heaven,
Is owing to my father's guardian arm: --
That villain else -- that most unnat'ral villain!
(Pointing to Malign.) Who has confessed, spite of the ties of blood,
And laws divine and human that he sought
My life -- had stolen on my defenseless sleep,
And dealt on me that death -- his just reward.

MALIGN. I own my crime -- nay more, my folly too!)
Had I, with patience, waited the event,
The father's desperate hand had done the deed,
And slaughtered his own son! -- I overheard,
But feared his resolution. -- May this awake
Fell rancour 'twixt your souls -- and hence may feuds
Spread discord through your families forever!
I die! Wilmot, remember this -- the blow,
That Is mortal here -- thy parents meant for thee.
Oh! -- [Dies.]

Y. WILMOT. Horrid effect of desperation's rage!
To plunge into eternity, thus bold,
With falsehood on his tongue!

[OLD WILMOT and MRS. WILMOT both kneel.] O. WILMOT. Not so, my son!
Thy parents kneel, and ask of thee forgiveness,
And intercession, at the Throne of Mercy,
For their acknowledged guilt! -- Yet, let me say,
And it is but justice -- that the guilty thought,
Whose soul conception punishes itself,
Was not imagined, thinking you our son.
That were impossible! -- Heaven made our guilt
Thy preservation! When most offended,
Restrained the self-inflicted scourge, and bid
Its amplest mercy beam upon our fault! --
Can thou forgive? --

Y. WILMOT. My ever honored parents!
This posture fits not you -- O, rise! And let
No thought of sorrows past, over cloud the joy,
That waits to crown us through our lives to come! --
Heaven weighs our trials, and compares our strength; --
And proves, in its vast mercies, it accepts
The sacrifice of penitence sincere. --

ARNOLD. Nay, multiplies our joys, by its afflictions! --
For know, thou happy father, it is thine,
Twice to have preserved the valued life you gave.
Let that appease each self-accusing thought:
For in your son, and me, his friend, behold
The objects of your charitable succor
In last night's storm! --

O. WILMOT. O, Providence! -- My son, my son!
(Embracing.) Thy mercies are too great! My old fond breast,
Will burst with the full transport. -- My daughter!
(Embracing Charlotte.) Thou, noble, generous girl! Wilt too, be happy!
Agnes! Thou faithful partner of my dangerous voyage,
Through life's tempestuous sea -- Oh, what a rock
We have escaped! Yet had we been forsaken,
As I, too often, have impiously urged,
Where, where had we been now! -- But dry thy tears;
And hail the harbor, where our days to come,
In peace and resignation, shall atone
The past -- be grateful for the present -- and
In the future -- know no will but Heaven's. --

Y. WILMOT. I Have here a grateful debt -- my gentle boy!
Enter LUCY. O, my Charlotte! When you shall hear his story --

CHARLOTTE. I Have heard it all, with wonder and delight!

Y. WILMOT. And now, my Arnold! Could I hope to find
Thee happy -- What were there left to ask?
Were but thy Lucy now --

ARNOLD. Behold her here!
In this poor garb -- by Heaven directed duty --

LUCY. Has proved that the unworthiest means,
The feeblest, poorest efforts of humanity,
Are in the hand Omnipotent -- a medium
Of great deliverance! Guilt only should create
Despair; where guilt is not, despair is guilt: --
Proud and impatient under our afflictions,
We often counter-work the hidden movement,
Of watchful Providence, to make us blessed. --
May heaven-born poesy, with art sublime,
Full, pregnant of the moral cause -- inspire
Some future poet, to enrich the scene,
To paint our humble, artless, homefelt-tale,
In plain simplicity -- to give the stage
Its noblest use -- To yield comfort with counsel,
And fair virtue's lesson -- in soft pleasure's garb!
To spread, by heart-adorning sympathy,
The bliss, which each in this fond circle feels;
From such a depth of darkness and distress,
Such great, unlooked for, timely PRESERVATION!

Exeunt. FINIS.

