MR. WHITNEY'S SERMON OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON.

WEEPING AND MOURNING AT THE DEATH OF EMINENT PERSONS A NATIONAL DUTY. A
SERMON, DELIVERED AT NORTHBOROUGH FEBRUARY 22d, 1800. OBSERVED AS A DAY OF
NATIONAL MOURNING, ON ACCOUNT OF THE DEATH OF GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON.

BY PETER WHITNEY, A. M. MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL IN NORTHBOROUGH.

PUBLISHED AT THE GENERAL DESIRE OF THE HEARERS.

PRINTED AT BROOKFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS, BY E. MERRIAM and Co. April, 1800.

A SERMON.
THIS day, which has for many years been observed with pious gratitude and joy,
and consecrated to social festivity as giving birth to so eminent a person as
General GEORGE WASHINGTON, is now turned into the deepest grief and mourning on
account of his final departure from this terrestrial state. That I may aid and
assist you in a due performance of the duties of the day, and in a religious
improvement of so affecting and painful an event in Divine Providence, I have
selected those words of the sacred historian to discourse upon, which you find
recorded in DEUTERONOMY THE 34 th CHAP. AND THE 8 th VERSE. AND THE CHILDREN OF
ISRAEL WEPT FOR MOSES, IN THE PLAINS OF MOAB, THIRTY DAYS: SO THE DAYS OF
WEEPING AND MOURNING FOR MOSES WERE ENDED.



This Moses was raised up, by GOD, to be the principal instrument, in the hands
of Providence, of redeeming the people of Israel from Egyptian bondage, of
leading them through the wilderness for the space of forty years, and
conducting them to the borders of the promised land. But it was the will of
Heaven that Moses should not go over Jordan. He was, indeed indulged with a
view of that pleasant, good and fruitful land which the Jews were soon to enter
and possess; and he saw the happy prospects before them of enjoying religion
and government, peace, liberty and plenty, unexampled prosperity and happiness
in the land of Canaan: But he must not live to enjoy them himself. For GOD had
expressly said unto him, "Get the up unto Mount Nebo, and die in the Mount
whither thou go up." "So Moses the Servant of the LORD died there in the
land of Moab, according to the word of the LORD." Then, says the sacred writer,
as in the text, "And the children of Israel wept for Moses, in the plains of
Moab, thirty days: So the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended."

From which words I observe -- that it accords with the divine will that a
whole people should be deeply affected with, and mourn and lament, the death of
eminent persons, such as have been public blessings, great benefactors to the
human race, and been made instruments of redeeming a people from misery and
wretchedness, and of vindicating them into freedom and happiness.

This appears from the following considerations.

In the first place; it is natural to the human race to be sensible of, to be
much affected with, and to be grieved and pained at heart, upon the removal of
any earthly comfort and blessing; and especially of any near relative, or great
friend and benefactor: -- And what is thus natural cannot be sinful; (unless
our grief and lamentation be indulged to excess, and we refuse to be
comforted,) but it is lawful, nay commendable and truly ornamental, and
agreeable to the will of the wise Author of our frame and constitution. To be
unaffected in such cases would argue a great insensibility of the worth and
value of such gifts and that we were not sufficiently grateful to GOD for
bestowing them upon us; and further, it would frustrate some of the important
moral purposes of the righteous Governor of the world in their removal. Such
feelings have been sanctified and sanctioned by JESUS CHRIST, our great pattern
and exemplar, who, in the days of his flesh, and when he dwelt among men, wept
upon the death of his intimate and endeared friend Lazarus.

Such grief and lamentation has been observed from the beginning: And
especially has the mourning been great and general upon the removal of any
eminent and good person, who had been a benefactor of mankind and a blessing to
the world. This appears from diverse scripture instances. When Jacob, who also
was called Israel, died, all the children of Israel, and all the Egyptians
mourned for him threescore and ten days: "And when the Canaanites saw the
mourning, they said this is a grievous mourning." So also, it is said "When all
the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron thirty days,
even all the house of Israel." So when that eminent king Josiah died, it is
thus written, "All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. And Jeremiah
lamented for Josiah: And all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah
in their lamentations, and made them an ordinance in Israel." There are other
instances recorded in the bible; but I must not stop to mention them. This of
Moses spoken of in the text and context, is very full and particular. The whole
nation of the jews deeply lamented the death of this man, who had been such a
mighty instrument, under GOD, of their temporal redemption and salvation. And
that such mourning and lamentation were agreeable to the divine will, appears,
further, from those instances wherein every thing of this kind upon the death
of persons of an opposite character was expressly prohibited by GOD himself: He
declared that no such tokens of respect and regard for them should be
manifested: As in the case of Aaron's two sons, Nadab and Abihu, who, for
offering strange fire before the LORD, were immediately devoured by fire from
the LORD: And GOD forbids Aaron and his other sons mourning for them at all. It
seems that thirty days was the length of time in general, in which they
exhibited their signs and badges of mourning for their dead. But it does not
appear that GOD gave any express statute to Israel, that they should mourn just
that term of time for persons of eminence and distinction, and who had been
great blessings to the nation, and to the world. Nevertheless, it was no doubt
from some divine intimation that they were led to observe so many days for
public mourning. The instances referred to above, are recorded in sacred
history with evident marks of the divine approbation, as what was highly
proper, and as becoming the relation and condition of mankind; they show that
this was a "reasonable service."

From the text and what has been said, we may infer, that it becomes us, that
it becomes the people of these United States, to mourn and lament the death of
that great and good man, General GEORGE WASHINGTON, who was, indeed, to this
people a Moses, in many respects.

But in a religious discourse of this kind, we must previously remark, that it
is highly proper that we look above means, instruments and second causes; to
the great first cause of all things, to the Supreme Arbiter and the Sovereign
disposer of all events which take place throughout the Universe; and to eye and
acknowledge the hand of the Almighty in all this, from the very first to the
very last.

GOD works by means and instruments. When Israel must go down into Egypt to
sojourn there, Joseph was conducted thither, by the unerring hand of heaven, to
be an instrument of their supply and support, preservation and salvation.
However unnatural and unjustifiable the means by which Joseph was at first
brought into Egypt, "GOD meant it unto good, to save much people alive."

When the people of Israel, after four hundred and thirty years, were to be
redeemed from cruel Egyptian bondage, then Moses was brought upon the stage,
and being of mature age, GOD sent him to be the ruler and deliverer of his
chosen people. He was furnished by the author of his existence, with proper
talents and gifts to be their leader, their captain, general, and commander in
chief: -- And besides being "learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians;" he
was divinely instructed to be their lawgiver and judge* And was a man approved
of GOD among them, by miracles and signs and wonders, which GOD did, by him, in
the midst of them. GOD led that people through the wilderness, for the space of
forty years, through the ministry of Moses, until they came to the borders of
the promised land.

When the reformation from Popery was to commence, GOD prepared his
instruments. He raised up and brought upon the theater proper persons to effect
the same, as Luther, Calvin, Wickliff, John Huss, Jerome, and a large catalogue
of others.

When these United States, but then British provinces, were groaning under the
oppressive acts of the parliament of England, and when the measure of her
cruelties was full and running over, and could no longer have been borne,
without hazarding all our rights liberties and property: -- And when we must
stand forth in their defense, or submit to be bound by the acts of the British
Legislature in all cases whatsoever: -- Then GOD, "who sees the end from the
beginning, and from ancient times the things not yet done;" brought our
WASHINGTON upon the stage, and of mature age, and well furnished with natural
talents, and acquired accomplishments to act a most conspicuous part upon the
theater of the world. Being born on the 11th of February, 1732, old style, he
was but a little more than 43 years of age, when the war between Great Britain
and these American Colonies, commenced. He was then a member of Congress for
his native state, and every eye of that august body was directed to him as the
most suitable person, to be the head and leader of our armies. For this high
and most interesting station, he was, on many accounts, the best qualified, of
any man in North America, and probably in the world; being then in his full
strength and glory, and possessing those great military talents, which had been
matured by age, and the experience of several years of actual service in
American wars; being but about eighteen years of age when he began his military
career in Virginia, his native State. In the year 1755 he came into more
general notice, when he acted as Aid-decamp to the unfortunate General
BRADDOCK, who was killed in the Western Territory, in the beginning of the last
French and British war on this Continent; and whose army had then been entirely
destroyed, had not HIS martial skill and prowess saved a remnant, as some of
you, advanced in life, can remember. Various reasons combined to lead the
American Congress to make choice of him: He had already manifested great
abilities as a commander, in diverse trying situations: He was a man possessed
of very large and most extensive property, which was at stake as well as the
dearest interests of his country: He was a man of a cool and dispassionate
temper, and of a moderate disposition, and yet firm in his country's cause; --
acting upon principle, and from a clear and full conviction in his own mind,
that we were injured and wronged by the parent State; and, finally, he was a
man of uncorruptible integrity and honor, in whom the fullest confidence might
be placed, if he entered upon a station of such high responsibility. That he
was formed and furnished, by the wise author of our being, "who distributeth to
every man severally as he will," to serve his country in the military
department, was apparent from his earliest youth; and his military genius he
cultivated and improved by reading, observation and experience. And in the
course of our revolutionary war, his martial spirit, genius and talents, were
fully tried in diverse critical and important situations, and, through the favor
of heaven, they were found superior to every difficulty and obstacle which he
had to encounter. In a word, when the future, faithful, impartial historian
shall record and dwell upon the following facts, that he at first, only headed
a body of men entirely unacquainted with military discipline or operations,
untaught in the principles of just subordination; but sanguine in those of
liberty: -- That, at best, they could only be styled an alert and good militia,
acting under very short enlistments, poorly supplied with clothing, arms or
military stores: And that with such an army he withstood the ravages and
progress of near forty thousand veteran troops, plentifully provided with every
necessary article, commanded by the bravest officers in Europe, and supported
by a very powerful navy, which effectually prevented all movements of ours by
water: -- When, I say, these things shall be impartially related and weighed,
WASHINGTON will be unanimously pronounced the greatest General of the age in
which he lived, or of any who had gone before him, and that his name will
command the applause and admiration of the latest posterity.

"Many nations have been favored with some patriotic deliverer: -- The
Israelites had their Moses: -- Rome had her Camillus: -- Greece her Leonidas:
-- Sweden her Gustavus: -- And England her Hamdens, her Russells, and her
Sydneys: But these illustrious heroes, though successful in preserving and
defending, did not, like WASHINGTON, form and establish empires, which we hope,
will be the refuge of the oppressed, and the asylum of liberty to the end of
time."

You must not expect that I give you a narrative of the various events of the
war: This is more proper for the history of his life, than for a sermon. No
doubt the life of General WASHINGTON, his great and noble acts, the might and
wisdom he showed, and how he warred, and all that he did, will be written in a
book of the Chronicles of the Patriots and Generals, the Presidents and
Worthies of America, and which will be read with avidity and delight by all
grateful Americans of every age.

Let it suffice for me to say, that he was always careful and tender of the
lives of the soldiery: -- And they in return, confided in, loved and cheerfully
obeyed him: -- That he never hazzarded a battle but where there was the
greatest human probability of success: -- That he gained diverse important
victories without much fighting, and sometimes without the shedding of blood.
GOD evidently owned him as his instrument of saving these States from the hands
of our enemies, of redeeming us from cruel oppression and bondage, of procuring
our independence, of securing our inestimable rights, liberties and
privileges, both civil and religious, and of enabling us to take our rank
among the Nations of the Earth. Through his wise and superior generalship, the
war was conducted to a happy and glorious issue in about eight years: -- A much
shorter space than we could rationally have expected. And then he nobly
resigned his command in 1783, and returned to enjoy the sweets of retirment,
and to pursue the agricultural arts wherein he greatly delighted.

But here he was not suffered long to rest: For when the confederation was
found inefficient to our security, honor and happiness, and a national
convention was called for, General WASHINGTON was chosen a member: -- And when
convened, he was elected president of that wise, faithful and august body, who
formed our present excelent constitution of government, which is the boast of
Americans, the envy of many nations, and the admiration of the world: -- And
under the benign influence of which, we have risen to an astonishing height of
national opulence and glory, prosperity and happiness. When this form of
government was put in operation, General WASHINGTON received the unanimous
suffrages of all the states to be our first magistrate and supreme executive.
Here he presided eight years, (from April 30th, 1789, to March 4th 1797) with
great wisdom and dignity, and made the government and people of America
respected through the world. In all his public conduct he seemed as one
inspired and directed of heaven. He had an amazing influence over the public
mind; and guided their measures without appearing so to do. He had great
knowledge of human nature; could see far into the views of men; and in most
cases knew in whom to confide. In the close of the year 1796 he declined being
a candidate for the presidency, at the then ensuing election, choosing to
retire from public life, and took his leave, in a most affectionate farewell
address to the people, which does honor to his head and heart; -- which ought
to be in every house and imprinted on the memory of every acting citizen. This
shows him to have been a great statesman and politician. The sentiments therein
contained, may serve as a political thermometer and ought to be as a pole star
to form and guide the political opinions and conduct of every lover of his
country's independence, honor and glory, and of every friend to man.

But in his longed for retirement he was not suffered to remain. When these
United States were loaded with insults and abuses, and endured the basest
spoliations, from a haughty, faithless, insidious nation; and we were likely to
be driven into war in self-defence, General WASHINGTON was appointed, by
President ADAMS, to the command of all our military forces, which he readily
accepted, in his advanced age, if thereby he could serve his country. This was
a most judicious appointment: -- For he was as an host of himself: -- Our
enemies trembled at his very name: -- And astonishment took hold of them, when
they found he would serve in that high and important station.

And here we must be careful to mention, that from the year 1775, to his death,
he utterly declined receiving any other compensation for his public services in
the cause of his country, than only the defraying his necessary expenses, which
greatly heightened our national obligations to him. THIS is what few men could
have done, and what we have no right to expect of any, since all have a just
claim to an equivalent for whatever services they render the people.

But to return; in the high office, of Lieutenant General and Commander of our
armies, was he acting when a sudden death, after a few hours illness, arrested
him, at his seat at Mount Vernon, on the 14th of December 1799, in the 68th
year of his age. His death in this day of our doubtful expectations,
notwithstanding he was grown gray in his country's service, may be a far
greater loss to this land than we are now apprehensive of: For whether we shall
be driven into war or not, is yet uncertain.

But let us not despond; -- let us place a rational trust in the everlasting
GOD, who has been our helper hitherto: -- And who says, "Put not your trust in
princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help: His breath goes
forth, he returns to his earth: In that very day his thoughts perish. Happy
are they who have the GOD of Jacob for their help; whose hope is in the LORD
their GOD, who made heaven and earth, the sea and all which therein is: Who
keeps truth forever." This GOD, who has begun to save us, will not leave nor
forsake us, if we do not provoke him, by denying the GOD who made us, and
lightly esteeming the rock of our salvation. Had the LORD been minded, to
destroy this land he would not have conducted us hitherto, nor have wrought for
us such great deliverances as in years which are past. With Him is the residue
of the spirit; he is able to raise up others who shall do worthily and well in
the cabinet and in the field. We need not distress ourselves, for as Moses saw
Joshua appointed his successor, and GOD said to him "As I was with Moses, so
will I be with thee;" So WASHINGTON saw his successor in the Presidency, and to
him could cheerfully leave the care of this people, knowing his superior
abilities, unshaken integrity, and disinterested patriotism. We have an ADAMS
at the head of our national government, possessed of great talents, following
the steps of his illustrious predecessor; a man of strict virtue, of real piety
and true goodness; and who has given many unequivocal proofs of his firm
attachment to the best interests, prosperity and glory of his native country.

Before I conclude my discourse, I would observe that while I have not the
remotest inclination, disposition or idea to detract from the merit, praise and
glory of General WASHINGTON, yet I think there is occasion to suggest two
cautions; -- One is, that we guard against every thing that favors idolatry. In
the writings of some Panegyrists upon this great and good man, we find
expressions which, when the feelings and passions of men subside, they cannot
approve or justify: And conveying ideas which WASHINGTON himself, could he hear
them and reply, would disclaim. We should remember that GOD formed him with all
his bright assemblage of talents lent him to us, preserved his important life
so long and made him all that to us which he was, even an ornament and blessing
to his country. While then, we highly extol the man, and celebrate his great
and patriotic deeds, let us ultimately ascribe the glory and praise to the Most
High GOD.

In the next place, we should guard against ascribing all, or too much, to one
man. General WASHINGTON may be justly viewed as one of the first and greatest
instruments of the temporal salvation and happiness of his country: But many
others members of Congress and officers and soldiers in the army, contributed
their share, according to their rank and station, to the emancipation,
independence and prosperity of these United States. And this General WASHINGTON
was always careful to allow and acknowledge. And throughout his whole life he
manifested this act of piety, that he was always sensible of, and failed not to
acknowledge that overruling Providence of GOD which made him an instrument of
so much good to the world, and which always appeared to second his wishes and
smile upon his exertions to serve and save his country. And when closing his
eyes upon earth, and looking forward into the eternal world, (being in the full
exercise of his reason) might he not humbly say and pray, "Remember me, O my
GOD, for good, according to all that I have done for this people."

And now, in the midst of all the sorrow and grief we ought to express at the
removal of this first of mere men from this world, let us never forget to
manifest our gratitude to the all-wise Former of our bodies and Father of our
spirits, for his goodness and benevolence in raising up such a person to adorn
and discriminate the eighteenth century; and that he so richly endowed and so
abundantly, furnished him to become so great and extensive a blessing to this
land. And, in particular, that when jeoparding his life in the high places of
the field, when leading our armies, and fighting our battles, GOD covered his
head, held him as in the hollow of his hand, kept him as the apple of his eye,
and preserved his life through a long and distressing war, and made him so
great an instrument of securing to us our inestimable rights, liberties, and
privileges, and of establishing us as an independent nation: -- And also that
he did preserve and capacitate him to be a rich blessing to these states in the
civil department, as their first magistrate and supreme executive officer; and
that under his wise and good administration, in conjunction with others in
government, we could lead quiet and peaceable lives, and have been a growing,
prosperous and happy people: -- And, further, that GOD did protract his days
almost to the allotted boundary of human life, to share in the enjoyment of the
sweets of liberty and peace, and all the rich blessings he was so instrumental
of procuring and establishing for this land.

And? Shall not the death of this eminent person, after having served his
generation by the will of GOD in various high and exalted stations, remind all
in our national and state governments, who are raised up among their brethren
to places of power and trust, whether in the legislative, judicial, executive
or military departments, that although they are called Gods, and all of them
children of the Most High, yet they must die like men, and fall like the
princes of the earth into the grave. May they remember their responsibility to
GOD who is higher than the highest among men: -- And consider that he stands
in the congregation of the mighty, and judges among the earthly Gods. May
these thoughts engage them to be instant in the faithful discharge of the
duties of their respective stations, and improving their various talents,
advantages and opportunities for bringing glory to GOD, and contributing each
his just proportion to increase the sum of human felicity. May a double portion
of that excellent spirit which dwelt in our WASHINGTON rest upon each of them,
and all their successors in office, from age to age: -- May they be actuated by
a spirit of true and disinterested patriotism, and unitedly and uniformly exert
their power and influence to raise their country to still higher degrees of
prosperity and glory: -- Thus shall they become ministers of GOD for good to
the people; raise to themselves a monument of fame on earth, and be exalted to
a crown of glory in heaven.

Finally, while we mourn the death of WASHINGTON, and particularly because he
loved our nation, and had done such great things for this people, let us all,
of whatever age, rank or station, remember to imitate the virtues and deeds
which have immortalized his name, according to our respective abilities and
opportunities. Like him let us be animated with an ardent love to our country,
and exhibit the most unremitted exertions to promote and perpetuate its
interest and prosperity. Let us remember his sage maxims in his farewell
address, and practice upon them. They are these, "Of all the dispositions and
habits which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are
indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim the tribute of patriotism,
who should labor to subvert these great pillars of human happiness, these
firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The mere politician, equally
with the pious man, ought to respect and cherish them. A volume could not trace
all their connexions with public and private felicity. Let it be simply asked,
where is the security for property, for reputation, for life, if a sense of
religious obligations desert the oaths which are the instruments of
investigation in courts of justice? And let us with caution indulge the
supposition that morality can be maintained without religion. Whatever may be
conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure;
reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can
prevail in exclusion of religious principle." Could all this people, from the
highest to the lowest, emulate the virtues of a WASHINGTON, and observe these
his wise sayings, then GOD would delight to bless us, to build us up, and plant
us, cause us to see the good of his chosen, to rejoice in the gladness of his
nation, to glory with his inheritance: -- The days of our mourning would cease,
and our peaceful, happy prosperous state should not, but with time itself, have
an end.

AMEN.
An Elegy on the death of General WASHINGTON. Set to music by Capt. ABRAHAM
WOOD, of Northborough, which being printed, was sung on the 2nd of February,
1800, at Northborough, and many other places.
KNOW ye not that a great man has fallen to day.
Yea we know it, yea we know it, yea we koow it.
Hold thou thy peace.
Mourn, mourn, mourn, mourn, O Americans for WASHINGTON's no more.
"Rest his dear sword beneath his head;
Round him his faithful Arms shall stand;
Fix his bright Ensigns on his bed,
The guards and honors of our land.
Fair liberty, in Sables dressed,
Write his loved name upon his Urn,
WASHINGTON! The scourge of Tyrants past,
And awe of Princes yet unborn.
Glory with all her lamps shall burn,
And watch this warrior's sleeping clay,
'Till the last trumpet rouse his urn,
To aid the triumphs of the day.
Great Soul, we leave thee to thy rest;
Enjoy thy Jesus and thy GOD,
Till we, from bonds of clay released,
Spring out and climb the shining road."
"Earthly cavern, to thy keeping
We commit our brother dust,
Keep it safely, softly sleeping,
Till the LORD demand thy trust.
Keep it safely, softly sleeping,
Till the LORD demand thy trust.
Sweetly sleep, dear Saint, in Jesus,
Thou with us shall wake from death;
Hold he cannot, though he seize us;
We his power defy by faith.
Jesus, thy rich consolation,
To thy mourning people send:
May we all, with faith and patience,
Wait for our approaching end.
Keep from courage, vain or vaunted;
For our change our hearts prepare:
Give us confidence undaunted,
Cheerful hope, and godly joy.

