AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT HANOVER, NEW HAMPSHIRE, THE 4th DAY of JULY, 1800;
BEING THE TWENTY-FOURTH ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY DANIEL WEBSTER, Member of the Junior Class, DARTMOUTH UNIVERSITY.

Do thou, great LIBERTY, inspire our souls,
And make our lives in thy possession happy,
Or our deaths glorious in thy just defense!
ADDISON. (PUBLISHED BY REQUEST OF THE SUBSCRIBERS.)

PRINTED AT HANOVER, BY MOSES DAVIS.

1800.

AN ORATION.
COUNTRYMEN, BRETHREN, AND FATHERS,
WE are now assembled to celebrate an anniversary, ever to be held in dear
remembrance by the sons of freedom. Nothing less than the birth of a nation,
nothing less than the emancipation of three millions of people, from the
degrading chains of foreign dominion, is the event we commemorate.

TWENTY FOUR years have this day elapsed, since United Columbia first raised
the standard of Liberty, and echoed the shouts of Independence!

THOSE of you, who were then reaping the iron harvest of the martial field,
whose bosoms then palpitated for the honor of America, will, at this time,
experience a renewal of all that fervent patriotism, of all those indescribable
emotions, which then agitated your breasts. As for us, who were either then
unborn, or not far enough advanced beyond the threshold of existence, to engage
in the grand conflict for Liberty, we now most cordially unite with you, to
greet the return of this joyous anniversary, to hail the day that gave us
Freedom, and hail the rising glories of our country!

ON occasions like this, you have heretofore been addressed, from this stage,
on the nature, the origin, the expediency of civil government. -- The field of
political speculation has here been explored, by persons, possessing talents,
to which the speaker of the day can have no pretensions. Declining therefore a
dissertation on the principles of civil polity, you will indulge me in slightly
sketching on those events, which have originated, nurtured, and raised to its
present grandeur the empire of Columbia.

As no nation on the globe can rival us in the rapidity of our growth, since
the conclusion of the revolutionary war -- so none, perhaps, ever endured
greater hardships, and distresses, than the people of this country, previous to
that period.

WE behold a feeble band of colonists, engaged in the arduous undertaking of a
new settlement, in the wilds of North America. Their civil liberty being
mutilated, and the enjoyment of their religious sentiments denied them, in the
land that gave them birth, they fled their country, they braved the dangers of
the then almost unnavigated ocean, and sought, on the other side the globe, an
asylum from the iron grasp of tyranny, and the more intolerable scourge of
ecclesiastical persecution. But gloomy, indeed, was their prospect, when
arrived on this side the Atlantic. Scattered, in detachments, along a coast
immensely extensive, at a remove of more than three thousand miles from their
friends on the eastern continent, they were exposed to all those evils, and
endured all those difficulties, to which human nature seems liable. Destitute
of convenient habitations, the inclemencies of the seasons attacked them, the
midnight beasts of prey prowled terribly around them, and the more portentous
yell of savage fury incessantly assailed them! But the same undiminished
confidence in Almighty GOD, which prompted the first settlers of this country
to forsake the unfriendly climes of Europe, still supported them, under all
their calamities, and inspired them with fortitude almost divine. Having a
glorious issue to their labors now in prospect, they cheerfully endured the
rigors of the climate, pursued the savage beast to his remotest haunt, and
stood, undismayed, in the dismal hour of Indian battle!

SCARCELY were the infant settlements freed from those dangers, which at first
environed them, ere the clashing interests of France and Britain involved them
anew in war. The colonists were now destined to combat with well appointed,
well disciplined troops from Europe; and the horrors of the tomahawk and the
scalping knife were again renewed. But these frowns of fortune, distressing as
they were, had been met without a sigh, and endured without a groan, had not
imperious Britain presumptuously arrogated to herself the glory of victories,
achieved by the bravery of American militia. Louishurgh must be taken, Canada
attacked, and a frontier of more than one thousand miles defended by untutored
yeomanry; while the honor of every conquest must be ascribed to an English army.

BUT while Great Britain was thus ignominiously stripping her colonies of their
well earned laurel, and triumphantly weaving it into the stupendous wreath of
her own martial glories, she was unwittingly teaching them to value themselves,
and effectually to resist, in a future day, her unjust encroachments.

THE pitiful tale of taxation now commences -- the unhappy quarrel, which
issued in the dismemberment of the British empire, has here its origin.

ENGLAND, now triumphant over the united powers of France and Spain, is
determined to reduce, to the condition of slaves, her American subjects.

WE might now display the Legislatures of the several States, together with the
general Congress, petitioning, praying, remonstrating; and, like dutiful
subjects, humbly laying their grievances before the throne. On the other hand,
we could exhibit a British Parliament, assiduously devising means to subjugate
America -- disdaining our petitions, trampling on our rights, and menacingly
telling us, in language not to be misunderstood, "Ye shall be slaves!" -- We
could mention the haughty, tyrannical, perfidious GAGE, at the head of a
standing army; we could show our brethren attacked and slaughtered at
Lexington! our property plundered and destroyed at Concord! Recollection can
still pain us, with the spiral flames of burning Charleston, the agonizing
groans of aged parents, the shrieks of widows, orphans and infants! --
Indelibly impressed on our memories, still live the dismal scenes of Bunker's
awful mount, the grand theater of New England bravery; where slaughter stalked,
grimly triumphant! where relentless Britain saw her soldiers, the unhappy
instruments of despotism, fallen, in heaps, beneath the nervous arm of injured
freemen! -- There the great WARREN fought, and there, alas, he fell! Valuing
life only as it enabled him to serve his country, he freely resigned himself, a
willing martyr in the cause of Liberty, and now lies encircled in the arms of
glory!

Peace to the patriot's shades -- let no rude blast
Disturb the willow, that nods over his tomb.
Let orphan tears bedew his sacred urn,
And fame's loud trump proclaim the hero's name,
Far as the circuit of the spheres extends.
BUT, haughty Albion, thy reign shall soon be over, -- thou shall triumph no
longer! thine empire already reels and totters! thy laurels even now begin to
wither, and thy fame decays! Thou have, at length, roused the indignation of an
insulted people -- thine oppressions they deem no longer tolerable!

THE 4th day of July, 1776, is now arrived; and America, manfully springing
from the torturing fangs of the British Lion, now rises majestic in the pride
of her sovereignty, and bids her Eagle elevate his wings! -- The solemn
declaration of Independence is now pronounced, amidst crowds of admiring
citizens, by the supreme council of our nation; and received with the unbounded
plaudits of a grateful people!!

THAT was the hour, when heroism was proved, when the souls of men were tried.
It was then, ye venerable patriots, it was then you stretched the indignant
arm, and unitedly swore to be free! Despising such toys as subjugated empires,
you then knew no middle fortune between liberty and death. Firmly relying on
the patronage of heaven, unwarped in the resolution you had taken, you, then
undaunted, met, engaged, defeated the gigantic power of Britain, and rose
triumphant over the ruins of your enemies! -- Trenton, Princeton, Bennington
and Saratoga were the successive theaters of your victories, and the utmost
bounds of creation are the limits to your fame! -- The sacred fire of freedom,
then enkindled in your breasts, shall be perpetuated through the long descent
of future ages, and burn, with undiminished fervor, in the bosoms of millions
yet unborn.

FINALLY, to close the sanguinary conflict, to grant America the blessings of
an honorable peace, and clothe her heroes with laurels, CORN-WALLIS, at whose
feet the kings and princes of Asia have since thrown their diadems, was
compelled to submit to the sword of our father WASHINGTON. -- The great drama
is now completed -- our Independence is now acknowledged; and the hopes of our
enemies are blasted forever! -- Columbia is now seated in the forum of nations,
and the empires of the world are lost in the bright effulgence of her glory!

THUS, friends and citizens, did the kind hand of overruling Providence
conduct us, through toils, fatigues and dangers, to Independence and Peace. If
piety be the rational exercise of the human soul, if religion be not a chimera,
and if the vestiges of heavenly assistance are clearly traced in those events,
which mark the annals of our nation, it becomes us, on this day, in
consideration of the great things, which the LORD has done for us, to render
the tribute of unfeigned thanks, to that GOD, who superintends the Universe,
and holds aloft the scale, that weighs the destinies of nations.

THE conclusion of the revolutionary war did not conclude the great
achievements of our countrymen. Their military character was then, indeed,
sufficiently established; but the time was coming, which should prove their
political sagacity.

NO sooner was peace restored with England, the first grand article of which
was the acknowledgment of our Independence, than the old system of
confederation, dictated, at first, by necessity, and adopted for the purposes
of the moment, was found inadequate to the government of an extensive empire.
Under a full conviction of this, we then saw the people of these States,
engaged in a transaction, which is, undoubtedly, the greatest approximation
toward human perfection the political world ever yet experienced; and which,
perhaps, will forever stand on the history of mankind, without a parallel. A
great Republic, composed of different States, whose interest in all respects
could not be perfectly compatible, then came deliberately forward, discarded
one system of government and adopted another, without the loss of one man's
blood.

THERE is not a single government now existing in Europe, which is not based in
usurpation, and established, if established at all, by the sacrifice of
thousands. But in the adoption of our present system of jurisprudence, we see
the powers necessary for government, voluntarily springing from the people,
their only proper origin, and directed to the public good, their only proper
object.

WITH peculiar propriety, we may now felicitate ourselves, on that happy form
of mixed government under which we live. The advantages, resulting to the
citizens of the Union, from the operation of the Federal Constitution, are
utterly incalculable; and the day, when it was received by a majority of the
States, shall stand on the catalogue of American anniversaries, second to none
but the birth day of Independence.

IN consequence of the adoption of our present system of government, and the
virtuous manner in which it has been administered, by a WASHINGTON and an
ADAMS, we are this day in the enjoyment of peace, while war devastates Europe!
We can now sit down beneath the shadow of the olive, while her cities blaze,
her streams run purple with blood, and her fields glitter, a forest of
bayonets! -- The citizens of America can this day throng the temples of
freedom, and renew their oaths of fealty to Independence; while Holland, our
once sister republic, is erased from the catalogue of nations; while Venice is
destroyed, Italy ravaged, and Switzerland, the once happy, the once united, the
once flourishing Switzerland lies bleeding at every pore!

No ambitious foe dares now invade our country. No standing army now endangers
our liberty. -- Our commerce, though subject in some degree to the depredations
of the belligerent powers, is extended from pole to pole; and our navy, though
just emerging from nonexistence, shall soon vouch for the safety of our
merchantmen, and bear the thunder of freedom around the ball!

FAIR Science too, holds her gentle empire amongst us, and almost innumerable
altars are raised to her divinity, from Brunswick to Florida. Yale, Providence
and Harvard now grace our land; and DARTMOUTH, towering majestic above the
groves, which encircle her, now inscribes her glory on the registers of same!
-- Oxford and Cambridge, those oriental stars of literature, shall now be lost,
while the bright sun of American science displays his broad circumference in
uneclipsed radiance.

PLEASING, indeed, were it here to dilate on the future grandeur of America;
but we forbear; and pause, for a moment, to drop the tear of affection over the
graves of our departed warriors. Their names should be mentioned on every
anniversary of Independence, that the youth, of each successive generation, may
learn not to value life, when held in competition with their country's safety.

WOOSTER, MONTGOMERY and MERCER, fell bravely in battle, and their ashes are
now entombed on the fields that witnessed their valor. Let their exertions in
our country's cause be remembered, while Liberty has an advocate, or gratitude
has place in the human heart.

GREEN, the immortal hero of the Carolinas, has since gone down to the grave,
loaded with honors, and high in the estimation of his countrymen. The
courageous PUTNAM has long slept with his fathers; and SULLIVAN and CILLEY,
New-Hampshire's veteran sons, are no more numbered with the living!

WITH hearts penetrated by unutterable grief, we are at length constrained to
ask, where is our WASHINGTON? where the hero, who led us to victory -- where
the man, who gave us freedom? Where is he, who headed our feeble army, when
destruction threatened us, who came upon our enemies like the storms of winter;
and scattered them like leaves before the Borean blast? Where, O my country! is
thy political savior? where, O humanity! thy favorite son?

THE solemnity of this assembly, the lamentations of the American people will
answer, "alas, he is now no more -- the Mighty is fallen!"

YES, Americans, your WASHINGTON is gone! he is now consigned to dust, and
"sleeps in dull, cold marble." The man, who never felt a wound, but when it
pierced his country, who never groaned, but when fair freedom bled, is now
forever silent! -- Wrapped in the shroud of death, the dark dominions of the
grave long since received him, and he rests in undisturbed repose! Vain were
the attempt to express our loss -- vain the attempt to describe the feelings of
our souls! Though months have rolled away, since he left this terrestrial orb,
and sought the shining worlds on high, yet the sad event is still remembered
with increased sorrow. The hoary headed patriot of '76 still tells the mournful
story to the listening infant, till the loss of his country touches his heart,
and patriotism fires his breast. The aged matron still laments the loss of the
man, beneath whose banners her husband has fought, or her son has fallen. -- At
the name of WASHINGTON, the sympathetic tear still glistens in the eye of every
youthful hero, nor does the tender sigh yet cease to heave, in the fair bosom
of Columbia's daughters.

Farewell, O WASHINGTON, a long farewell!
Thy country's tears embalm thy memory;
Thy virtues challenge immortality;
Impressed on grateful hearts, thy name shall live,
Till dissolution's deluge drown the world!
ALTHOUGH we must feel the keenest sorrow, at the demise of our WASHINGTON, yet
we console ourselves with the reflection, that his virtuous compatriot, his
worthy successor, the firm, the wise, the inflexible ADAMS still survives. --
Elevated, by the voice of his country, to the supreme executive magistracy, he
constantly adheres to her essential interests; and, with steady hand, draws the
disguising veil from the intrigues of foreign enemies, and the plots of
domestic foes. Having the honor of America always in view, never fearing, when
wisdom dictates, to stem the impetuous torrent of popular resentment, he stands
amidst the fluctuations of party, and the explosions of faction, unmoved as
Atlas,

"While storms and tempests thunder on its brow,
"And oceans break their billows at its feet."
Yet, all the vigilance of our Executive, and all the wisdom of our Congress
have not been sufficient to prevent this country from being in some degree
agitated by the convulsions of Europe. But why shall every quarrel on the other
side the Atlantic interest us in its issue? Why shall the rise, or depression
of every party there, produce here a corresponding vibration? Was this
continent designed as a mere satellite to the other? -- Has not nature here
wrought all her operations on her broadest scale? Where are the Missisippis and
the Amazons, the Alleganies and the Andes of Europe, Asia or Africa? The
natural superiority of America clearly indicates, that it was designed to be
inhabited by a nobler race of men, possessing a superior form of government,
superior patriotism, superior talents, and superior virtues. Let then the
nations of the East vainly waste their strength in destroying each other. Let
them aspire at conquest, and contend for dominion, till their continent is
deluged in blood. But let none, however elated by victory, however proud of
triumphs, ever presume to intrude on the neutral station assumed by our country.

BRITAIN, twice humbled for her aggressions, has at length been taught to
respect us. But France, once our ally, has dared to insult us! she has violated
her obligations; she has depredated our commerce -- she has abused our
government, and riveted the chains of bondage on our unhappy fellow citizens!
Not content with ravaging and depopulating the fairest countries of Europe, not
yet satiated with the contortions of expiring republics, the convulsive agonies
of subjugated nations, and the groans of her own slaughtered citizens, she has
spouted her fury across the Atlantic; and the stars and stripes of Independence
have almost been attacked in our harbors! When we have demanded reparation,
she has told us, "give us your money, and we will give you peace." -- Mighty
Nation! Magnanimous Republic! -- Let her fill her coffers from those towns and
cities, which she has plundered; and grant peace, if she can, to the shades of
those millions, whose death she has caused.

BUT Columbia stoops not to tyrants; her sons will never cringe to France;
neither a supercilious, five-headed Directory, nor the gasconading pilgrim of
Egypt will ever dictate terms to sovereign America. The thunder of our cannon
shall insure the performance of our treaties, and fulminate destruction on
Frenchmen, till old ocean is crimsoned with blood, and gorged with pirates!

IT becomes us, on whom the defense of our country will ere long devolve, this
day, most seriously to reflect on the duties incumbent upon us. Our ancestors
bravely snatched expiring liberty from the grasp of Britain, whose touch is
poison; shall we now consign it to France, whose embrace is death? We have seen
our fathers, in the days of Columbia's trouble, assume the rough habiliments of
war, and seek the hostile field. Too full of sorrow to speak, we have seen them
wave a last farewell to a disconsolate, a woestung family! We have seen them
return, worn down with fatigue, and scarred with wounds; or we have seen them,
perhaps, no more! -- For us they fought! for us they bled! for us they
conquered! Shall we, their descendants, now basely disgrace our lineage, and
pusilanimously disclaim the legacy bequeathed us? Shall we pronounce the sad
valediction to freedom, and immolate liberty on the altars our fathers have
raise to her? NO! -- The response of a nation is -- "NO!" Let it be registered
in the archives of Heaven! -- Ere the religion we profess, and the privileges
we enjoy, are sacrificed at the shrines of despots and demagogues, let the
pillars of creation tremble! let world be wrecked on world, and systems rush to
ruin! -- Let the sons of Europe be vassals; let her hosts of nations be a vast
congregation of slaves; but let us, who are this day FREE, whose hearts are yet
unappalled, and whose right arms are yet nerved for war, assemble before the
hallowed temple of Columbian Freedom, AND SWEAR, TO THE GOD OF OUR FATHERS, TO
PRESERVE IT SECURE, OR DIE AT ITS PORTALS!


