LECTURES ON DIET AND REGIMEN: BEING A SYSTEMATIC INQUIRY INTO THE MOST
RATIONAL MEANS OF PRESERVING HEALTH AND PROLONGING LIFE: TOGETHER WITH
PHYSIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL EXPLANATIONS, CALCULATED CHIEFLY FOR THE USE OF
FAMILIES, IN ORDER TO BANISH THE PREVAILING ABUSES AND PREJUDICES IN MEDICINE.

BY A. F. M. WILLICH, M. D.

Qui stomachum regem totius corporis esse
Contendunt, vera niti ratione videntur:
Hujus enim validus tenor firmat omnia membra:
At contra ejusdem ^ranguntur cuncta dolor.
SENENUS SAMMONICUS, De Medicina Praecepta saluberrim^. VOL. I. The First
Boston, from the Second London, Edition. Corrected and improved, with
considerable Additions.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY MANNING and LORING, For JOSEPH NANCREDE, No. 49,
Marlbro'-Street 1800.

THIS WORK IS DEDICATED, TO THOSE MOTHERS AND GUARDIANS OF FAMILIES, WHOSE
GREATEST PRIDE AND HAPPINESS IT IS, TO REAR HEALTHY AND VIRTUOUS CHILDREN; AND
TO THOSE FRIENDS OF SOCIETY AND THEMSELVES, WHO ARE SOLICITOUS TO PRESERVE
THEIR HEALTH, AND TO ADOPT THE PARENTAL HINTS OF NATURE, RATHER THAN SUBMIT TO
THE PALLIATIVE RELIEF OF ART.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE BOSTON EDITION.
TO prevent disease by so simple and intelligible an expedient, as a due
attention to Diet and Regimen, should become the most universal as it surely is
the most rational pursuit of every man who values health, and is desirous of
prolonging life. A judicious book, calculated to assist him in that pursuit, is
therefore entitled to preeminence in every man's library.

Books are not wanting which profess to teach us how to become our own
physicians, when we are sick: -- Indeed were we to credit implicitly the
numerous nostrums and specifics, so strongly commended by many writers on
medical subjects, we might almost venture to question the ordinary principle of
human infirmity, or man's mortality. Authors of that description have given
great encouragement to art, by discountenancing the suggestions of nature; and
have furnished the means of creating diseases, instead of assisting in the
purpose of cure or prevention. Before the present, no author had expressly
undertaken to instruct mankind in the faculty of shunning disease by means so
simple as the regulation of Diet. This omission has probably been owing to an
opinion, that the subject is too trivial and ordinary to authorize. grave
discussion, and that a man must first be acquainted minutely with the animal
functions, before he should hazard an attempt to preserve them in order, or to
rectify their derangements. The fallacy of such an opinion is most clearly
exposed in the present production; and we may here be convinced, that the best
and most effectual means of prolonging life, and securing the blessings of
health, are not only comprehensible, without the aid of great investigation,
but practicable without the necessity of great inconvenience or restraint. The
rules contained in the present volumes are deduced from the most simple and
obvious view of the subject; and although they may exhibit nothing very
mysterious or abstruse, we presume they are not therefore entitled to less
credit or attention. In these sentiments, we would not be considered to doubt
the profundity of the healing art; we only admire the simplicity of our
author's plan, for rendering the intervention of that art superfluous and
unnecessary.

It is true, indeed, the brute creation have no factitious guide to direct them
in the performance of their animal office; but nature, their only monitor, has
long since ceased to be the guide of man. She forsook him when he abandoned
her, to pursue the enjoyments of society, on the road of excess and
intemperance.

In the present highly improved state of society, when the efforts of talents
are on the stretch, to discover new pleasures, new gratifications, it is not
surprising that the line of sober enjoyment should be overlooked. Much time,
learning, and talent has been bestowed on the researches, made into the causes
of the late epidemic or endemic, or contagious fever, which has for a few years
past desolated the capitals of the United States. Hypotheses were broached,
opinions formed, parties raised, but no cause found. What would the American
faculty think, if, after so many inquiries, this mighty cause should be found
resolvable in the vicious diet and incautious regimen peculiar to the
Americans? Such are however the grounds of a very judicious treatise, written
in French, and sent to the President of the United States, that he might render
it public. The author, who has resided several years in America, paints in
strong colors the abuses of American diet, compares it minutely with the mode
of living of other nations, especially those who live in the same latitudes,
attributes all the autumnal diseases of the Americans, and namely their yellow
fever, to that cause; and is surprised that it does not produce still greater
and more frequent evils, in the capitals of America, where the abuse cannot be
exceeded. Nor is the conclusion rash, when we find all foreigners, who visit
this country, Frenchmen, Germans, and even Englishmen, exclaiming against our
copious and everlasting dinners. Not that feasts and sumptuous entertainments
are unknown in Europe, at which the rules of sobriety are trampled upon, but
they are given on particular occasions only, whereas the ordinary of an
American is an every day feast. Americans who have traveled abroad, know the
truth of this observation. To indulge in a party, where excess must follow,
once or twice a month, may hurt us; but to overload the stomach every day, must
kill us in a very short time.
Custom fortifies itself by appetites; it therefore requires no small degree of
sagacity to discern, and firmness to abstain from those excesses, where reason,
already seduced by the allurement of new dainties, readily yields to the
fascinating form in which they are presented to our senses. If it be an object
of magnitude to correct the present perverted taste of mankind, and to revest
pain with the power of self-defence, against a numerous train of mere
artificial maladies, then may we venture to declare, that this work is justly
entitled to more encomiums than we have faculty to bestow. Our Author, unlike
many others of his profession, seems to have been less desirous to discover the
occult properties of the various articles of sustenance, than to determine
their effects, when applied to the human constitution.

It is, moreover, a circumstance, adding not a little to the value and utility
of these volumes, that they are furnished with a minute and copious index,
referring particularly to almost every substance, vegetable or animal, in use
among men, so that the reader may discover, almost by a single glance, the best
rules by which to control his appetite, and the precise limits within which the
inclination of his senses may be indulged with impunity.

SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
BOSTON.
A.
AMORY Jona. Adi^ Alexander Avery, jr. John Andrews John Avers Mary-Ann
Archbald Azor G. Adams Ebenezer Alexander Jeduthan Athears George Alexander
William Austin John S. Ayers Lemuel Anins Sally Allen Mrs. Betsy Andrews
William Allen James Andrews William
B.
Blake George Blake Nathaniel Binney John Blake Martin Billings Samuel Baker
Luke Bowers Samuel Blake Thomas Blagge Samuel Bussey Benjamin Beale Robert
Blair, jr. Victor Brodarys Priscilla Barnes Benjamin Bangs Elisha Barker Moses
Bordman William Barrett Francis Blake Edward Bowman Edmund Burr Peter Burrill
James Baxter Daniel Bass Joseph Babcock Edward Bullard Jabez Benn Abraham
Butterfield Abraham Bayley Moses Blaney Aaron Badger Thomas Bray John Bancroft
John Brown Aaron Boynton William Bellows Darius Benjamin Daniel Brazer William
Blake Edward Bernard Samuel
C.
Claxton, jr. John Clarke Humphrey Cornish John Cooper Samuel Clarke John.
Bryant D. Coverly Samuel Cushing Henry Cazneau Samuel Canterbury Jacob
Cunningham Robert Clarke Nathaniel Coats Benjamin Caswell Richard Crosby Aaron
Chamberlin Samuel Cheever Sarah Carnay Daniel Carrel Jared Conning Martin
Campbell James Churchill Lemuel Cutter William Cheney, jr. Samuel Coleworthy
Nathaniel Chandler William Cunha Joao Crosby William Cushing Saml. Nichols
Clarke Lemuel
D.
Davis, jr. J. 8 copies Debassayns Henry Davis John Davis Isaac P. Dillaway,
jr. S. Dix Joseph Dexter William Dyer John D. Devotion Lewis Dodd William Drew
Job Dean, jr. John Ditson Joseph Dall William Davis, jr. Amasa Dorr Samuel
Davis Joshua Davis Charles
E.
Everett D. Ellison James Evans Robert Eaton Joshua Edes Edward Emmons Thomas
Ettinger Martin East Caleb
F.
Frazier J. Curley French Zadock Francis Ebenezer Fisher John Flanagan William
Farnham Henry Farmer William Fennelly Robert Frothingham Thomas Fitton Abraham
G.
Gay Martin Grew John Gurley J. W. Gould Samuel Greenwood Nathaniel Goodwin
Timothy Gay Willard Gardner Joseph Gay Jane Mrs. Garaut Francis Gustine Joel
Greenwood Wm. P. Gragg Jacob Glover Oliver Gay Ebenezer
H.
Hunnewell Richard Hancock John Hawkins Samuel Howard John D. Harris Leach
Hastings Henry Homes Robert (...) Joseph. Hayden John Hewes Nathaniel P. Hagger
Benjamin K. Hunnewell Jonathan Harris Samuel Hemmenway John Homes William
Hoffman John Heard John. Howard John C. Hovey Margaret Heard J. and W. Hodgdon,
jr. Benjamin How Thomas Hunt William. Harris John Holbrook Abel Hard Nathaniel
Hill, jr. William
J.
Jackson John Johnson, jr. John Jones Joseph Jackson Thomas Johnston Benjamin
Jackson Edward Johnston Edward Jones Thomas K. Jennings William Julien
K.
Kneeland William Kingsbury Ruth Knowlton Abraham Kuhn, jr. George Knower
Daniel Knower Benjamin Kirkwood James Kuhn John Kirkland J. T.
L.
Lodge Matthew Lee N. C. Lovering Joseph Lane J. M. Lewis Jonathan C. Lucas
Isaiah Laken David Loring C. Lawrence Asa Low William Leonard Catherine Leach
William Laugieur Mrs. H. Lord Richard Lion Ur^el Lewis Ebenezer Lilly Thomas
Learned Elisha Loring Matthew Loring, jr. Caleb Loring Joseph Lincoln, jr. Levi
M.
Moulton Ebenezer Micklefield William Messinger Henry May Samuel M'Kean William
Murphy Henry Mackay Mungo Mason Jonathan M'Farlane John Meacham William Maxwell
James Mann Ralph Mariarty John M'Intosh Peter M'Clench Joseph Martin William P.
Morton Andrew Morton Perez
N.
Nelson Hannah Nickerson Elijah Nickels John H. Noyes Joseph
O.
Osborn John Otis H. G. Odiorne Ebenezer Ockman Ebenezer
P.
Porter Jacob Pickman William Phillips Margaret Perkins Isaac Perkins James
Phelps Charles P. Palmer Joseph Perkins Samuel Pain Charles Phillips John
Prince H. B. Pearce, jr. David Perkins Jabez Pierpont Joseph Pierpont Robert
Powel Joseph Pelham Thomas Perkins James Pain William Plumback John G. Pierce
Nahum Pierce Erasmus Popkin Thomas Porter Charles
Q.
Quincy Edmund Quiner William Quincy Abraham
R.
Roulstone Michael Rogers Robert Ransford Josiah Collins Richards Eliakim
Robbins Samuel Ridgway James Read Joseph Robinson Robert Richards John S.
Robins Joseph Ray A. Howard Ross John Roulstone John Ruggles Samuel Richardson
Robert Roberts John L. Ruggles Nathaniel. Rice N.
S.
Selfridge Thomas, Shelton Charles Sumner Josiah Sigourney, jr. Charles Smith
Michael Sargent Daniel Shaw R. G. Stephenson William Salisbury Samuel Story W.
Stimpson William Stackpole William Sumner Benjamin Snow Joshua Stetson Lewis
Salter, jr. Richard Scholtz John G. Stevens Joseph Spear Samuel Smith Harry
Scholfield Isaac Swift Henry Smith Joanna L. Swett Benjamin J. Stillman John M.
Sumner Miss Hannah Starr Mrs. Stetson Barzillai Sanborn Reuben Sargent J. T.
Simson Polly Swett Samuel Stoughton Don Juan Seaver Ebenezer
T.
Turner William Todd, jr. William Tucker Beza Tucker Richard D. Tyler David
Thompson, jr. B. Thayer Elisha Tailor William Todd Samuel Tyler Joseph
Tuckerman John Trask John Tailor Levi Tyler Belcher Townsend David Thomson
James Tufts Frances Thayer Nathaniel Tuck Samuel J.
V.
Vose Elisha and Joshua Vose Isaac Villiers T. C. (not Mons.) Vinal David
W.
West N. P. West Samuel Wentworth Edward Warn William Wheelwright Lot Whitney
John Williams Elijah Wells Ebenezer Waterman Foster White Benjamin Winthrop
John Williams John Williams Elijah Weld Daniel Weller George Whiting George
Whipple Benjamin Watson Ebenezer Wilton Nathaniel Wendell Henry Wright Jonathan
Wheeler George Wheeler Samuel S. Warren John Webb Rufus
A.
AUSTIN Josiah, Salem Allen, jr. Edward, do. Abbot, jr. Moses, Andover Andrew
Nathaniel, Salem Andrews Catherine, do. Andrews Jonathan, do. Atkinson Joseph,
Newbpt. Atkinson William, Newbury Akerman Walter, Portsm. Adams Zabdiel B.
Charlest. Adams James, Cambridge.
B.
Brinley Robert, Tyngsb'ro. Blake Francis, Rutland, (Worcester County)
Bromfield John, Billerica Baker David, Roxbury Burrill Jerusha, do. Brewer
Ebenezer, do. Belknap Charles, do. Bangs Samuel, Brooklyne Bigelow Levi,
Pultney, V. Brown James, Danvers Briggs Elijah, Salem Balch Benjamin, do.
Brooks Asa, do. Butman Eliphalet, do. Bares Peter, do. Barnard Samuel, do.
Brooks Samuel, do. Bray John, do. Buffum Samuel, Salem Brown Nathaniel, do.
Beckford John, do. Barnes Thomas, do. Briggs Lemuel, do. Buffum Caleb, do.
Barnard Thomas, do. Bartlett Cornelius, do. Brooks Seth, do. Bray Aaron,
Newburyport Brockway Pardon, do. Boardman Benjamin G. do. Bass, jr. Edward, do.
Boardman Offin do. Brown Abraham, do. Balch Benjamin, do. Burbank David, do.
Bradbury George, do. Bartlett Samuel, do. Bass Edward, do. Bartlett Joseph,
Amesbury Brackett Joshua, Port^ N. H. Badger John, Portsmouth Bass Joseph, do.
Brown Jacob, Charlestown Barker Josiah, do. Bacon John, Medford Burridge John,
do. Brooks J. do.
C.
Crane Stephen, Newton Carter Joshua, Newburyport Clap John, Roxbury Curtis
Hannah, do. Cummens William, do. Chandler W. Salem Cleveland, jr. William, do.
Crombie Benjamin, do. Chase Abner, do. Clarke Daniel, do. Cheever Samuel, do.
Chase Henry, do. Chesholm William, Salem Cliff Peter, do. Clarke, jr. Daniel,
do. Cross Ralph, Newburyport Coffin, jr. David, do. Curtis Henry, do. Coffin
Lemuel, do. Choate Ebenezer, do. Curtis Samuel, do. Carter Benjamin, do. Chase
Samuel, do. Challis Timothy, Amesbury. Cutter William, Portsmouth. Coffin
Peter, do. Clark George, do. Curtis Samuel, do. Clark Joseph, do. Chadwick
Ebenezer, do. Coffin William, do. Cotton Samuel, do. Crosby Ziba, do. Clap
(...), Charlestown Carv^^ Reube^, do. Curtis Stephen, do. Call Jonathan, do.
Clarke Charles, Cambridge Craigie A. do.
D.
Dunham Josiah Dodge Pickering, Salem Davis Joseph, Roxbury Donnison James, do.
Daniels David, Danvers Doggett Elisha, Salem Derby John, do. Dale Philip, do.
Derby Samuel, do. Dole Matthew, Newburypt. Dupeton Poyen, do. Dana Daniel, do.
Dudley Elias, do. Dwight Josiah, Portsmouth Day James, do. Dame, do. Dexter
George B. Charlest.
E.
Elkins H. Salem Ely A. do. Epes Samuel and William, do. Eaton Daniel,
Portsmouth Evans Susanna Mrs. do. Evans John, do. Emes Robert, Charlestown
F.
Fillebrown John, Salem Fisher James Absalom, do. Fletcher R. Esquire. Amherst
Fisk, jr. William, Roxbury Faxon Eleb, do. Farley Abel, do. Frances John, do.
Foster Abraham, Salem. Frye Daniel, do. Felt Mary, do. Fenno Joseph, do. Felt
Benjamin, do. Frothingham Nathaniel, do. Floyd Gilbert, do. Fitz Aaron,
Newburyport. Fowler Samuel, Amesbury Fulton John, Portsmouth Foster Charles,
do. Foster James, do. Folsom Josiah, do. Farley John, Charlestown Floyd James
T. Medford Foster Bossinger, Cambridge
G.
Gardner John, Milton. Gilman Arthur, Newburypt. Greenleaf John, do. Gore
Samuel, Roxbury Glover Joseph, Salem. Goodale Joshua, do. Gardner, jr. John,
Salem Gardner Jonathan, do. Gavet Jonathan, do. Glover Ichabod, do. Gotter
Betsey, do. Gould Solomon, do. Gwinn Thaddeus, do. Gerrish Mayo, Newburyport
Gerrish, jr. Enoch, do. Goodwin John, do. Gunnison Ebenezer, do. Goddard
Jonathan, Portsm. Gilman Ward, do. Garland William, do. Greenleaf John, do.
Gardner William, do. Goodwin Edw. Charlest. Goodwin David, do.
H.
Hall George H. Brattleboro' Hunt Ebenezer, Northamp. How George, Roxbury.
Hutchings William, do. Harriman Moses, do. Hathaway Elisha, do. Haraden Andrew,
do. Hastings Simon, do. Hastings Seth, Mendon Holman, jr. Samuel, Salem Hacker
Isaac, do. Hathorne, jr. William, do. Haraden Jonathan, do. Hook Elias, do.
Howard John, do. Hovey Thomas, do. Hutchinson Benjamin, do. Hale Enoch,
Newburyport Hunt Woodbridge G. do. Howard Nathaniel, do. Huse Joseph, do. Hale
Samuel, do. Hodge Michael, do. Hale Thomas, Newburyport Hoyt Joseph, Amesbury
Ham George, Portsmouth Hamilton Jonathan, do. Hill John B. do. Hall E. do. Hyde
T. do. Huntress George do. Harris Job, do. Hill Samuel, do. Ham Samuel, do.
Harris, jr. Robert, do. Heart R. do. Hardy Charles, do. Hardy William R. do.
Holden Oliver, Charlest. Homes Melzar, do. Hall Benjamin, Medford Hall Richard,
do. Hall Isaac, do. Hall Bradshaw, do. Hall Elijah, do. Hall Willis, do. Hayden
John, Cambridge Hovey Josiah and P. do.
J.
Jones William, Concord Jones Ebenezer, Westminster, County of Worcester
Johnson Edward, Salem Jones William, Danvers Johnson William, do. Johnson
Jed^diah, Salem Jackson Nancy, Salem Jones Samuel, Newburyport Johnson John B.
do. Johnson, jr. Eleazer, do. Johnson, jr. Nicholas, do. Jones William,
Portsmouth Jack David, Charlestown
K.
Knox Genesis Henry, St. Georges Kimball Nancy, Salem King Daniel, Danvers Knapp
Benoni Eaton, Salem Knapp Silas, Newburyport Knowlton John, do. Knapp
Nathaniel, do.
L.
Lyman Wm. S. Northfield Lamson John, Charlestown Lee William O. Salem Lamson
Samuel, do. Low Caleb, Danvers Lang, jr. William, Salem Luscomb William, do.
Lawrence Abel, do. Lucas Richard, do. Lane Nicholas, do. Lunt S^las,
Newburyport Lunt William Pik^ do. Le Breto^ Peter, do. Long Robert, do. Lunt
Benjamin, do. Little Josiah, do. Little Jacob, Newbury Little Stephen, do.
Lovering Richard, do. Long Nathan, Amesbury Lord Nathan, Somersworth Langdon
John, Portsmouth Lock, jr. James do. Leverett Benjamin, do. Little Stephen, do.
Libbey Elias, do. Langdon H. S. do. Lloyd David, do. Laighton Luke M. do.
M.
Mann Elias, Medfield Mansfield Stephen, Roxb. Marshall Job, Salem Messer Asa
S. Danvers Mead Samuel, do. Marston Jonathan, Salem M'Intire Samuel, Salem
Morong John, do. Mills Levi, Newburyport Merrill Orlando B. Newb'y Merril
Melatiah, Salisbury Moulton Thomas, Portsm. M'Intire Neil, do. Meloon Mary, do.
March John, do. Manning Isaac, Charlest'wn Mead Nathaniel, Medford
N.
Nichols, jr. Ichabod, Salem Noyes Simeon, do. Noyes, jr. Enoch, Newbpt. Norton
Benjamin, do. Newman Joseph, do. Noble Joseph, Portsmouth Neil Charles, do.
Ne^^ll Abner, do. Nelson John, do.
O.
Osborn Richard, Danvers Orne J. Salem Oliver William, Salem Osgood John, do.
Osborn Henry, do. Oliver Thomas F. Salem Osgood Alfred, Newburypt.
P.
Pain Nathaniel, Worcester Pike Nicholas, Newburyp't Pratt William, Roxbury
Poignand D. do. Perkins Joseph, Salem Pearson Eliphalet, do. Pool Ward, Danvers
Pool Fitch, do. Proctor Ebenezer, Salem Payson Lemuel, do. Prescott S. J. do.
Putnam Ebenezer, do. Perley Jonathan, Salem Page John, do. Pierce Asa, do.
Peabody John, do. Peabody Samuel, do. Perley William, Rowley Pope Ebenezer,
Salem Pettingell Joseph, do. Peele Robert, do. Phippen William, do. Perkins
Jacob, Newburyp't Pettingell Benjamin, do. Pearson Isaac G. do. Peabody John,
do. Pierce Nicholas, do. Pierce Enoch, do. Pearson David, do. Pierce Jonathan,
do. Parley Ebenezer, Salisbury Pearson Ebenezer, do. Parry Martin, Portsmouth.
Plaisted George, do. Dame and Penhallow, do. Pickering William, do. Pollard
Levi, Medford Pearson Pro. Eliphalet, Came.
Q.
Quinby Henry, Newburyp't
R.
Rumrill Thomas, Roxbury Russell Samuel, do. Ruggles Patty, do. Rosseter
Erastus, Richmond Robbins Thomas, Salem Ropes Nathaniel, do. Richardson jr.
Josiah, do. Ravel Mary, do. Roberts Isaac, do. Rolfe Samuel, Newburyport
Rogers, jr. Samuel, Newbury Rogers Daniel R. Portsm. Richards George, do.
Rinard Frances, Medford Rowson Susanna, do.
S.
Savels John, Dorchester Smith Eleazer, Roxbury Smith Ralph, do. Sparhawk
Edward, do. Stetson Jesse, do. Sumner Madam Eliza. do. Smith Jonathan,
Randolph, (Vermont) Silver William, Salem Sprague, jr. Eben. Danvers Stevens
Benjamin, do. Smith Eliza, do. Shove Squiers, do. Safford Ebenezer, do.
Shillaber Robert, do. Symonds Charles W. do. Snelthen John, Salem Southwick
John, do. Secomb Ebenezer, do. Sweetser Samuel, do. Smith Joseph, do. Stevens
Nathan, do. Sanderson Elijah, do. Stuart Henry H. do. Swett Jacob, Newburyport
Smith Michael, do. Savory Ebenezer, do. Swett Edmund, do. Stanwood Abel, do.
Steel Ebenezer, do. Stanwood Nathaniel, do. Sawyer Jeremiah, do. Spalding
Oliver, do. Swett William, Amesbury Spalding Lyman, Portsm'th Sheaf James, do.
Stanwood William, do. Stavers John, do. Stanwood William, do. Shapley Reuben,
do. Shapley John, do. Sherburne Jonathan, do. Sherburne John Samuel, do. Sevey
Mark, do. Simes Thomas, do. Sweetser Isaac, Charlestown Sabels Thomas, Medford
Symmes Daniel, do.
T.
Thayer Stephen, Salem Tucker Gideon, do. Todd William, Newburyp't Titcomb, jr.
Jonathan, do. Toppan Benjamin, do. Toppan Abner, do. Toppan Daniel, Newbury
Toppan Stephen, do. Thompson Thomas, Portsm. Tarlton John, New Castle Thompson
Samuel, Portsm. Thomas Rebecca, Charlest. Turner Nathaniel, do. Tufts James,
Medford
V.
Valpey Joseph, Salem
W.
Walley, jr. Thomas, Roxb. Watson Nathan, do. Williams Stephen, do. Waldo
Joseph, Richmond Winchester Jacob B. Salem Weston John, do. Williams Mehitabel,
do. Winn Joseph, do. Whitmore James, do. Wait Aaron, do. Wing Cornelius, do.
Wain Gamaliel H. do. Wyatt Josiah, Newburyport Walleigh Edward, Newbpt.
Wheelwright Ebenezer, do. Willson Peter, Portsmouth Waldron, jr. Isaac, do.
Wendell George W. do. Walch Keyran, do. Wentworth Daniel, do. Wheeler Josiah,
do. Wiley William, Charlest'wn Warren Isaac, Medford Wylly Alexander C. do.
Wade John, do. Williams, jr. Gershom, do.
Y.
Young Israel, Newburyport Young Jonathan, do. Yeaton, jr. Robert, Portsm.
[The following Names were received too late to take their places in the
previous Arrangement.]
A.
Alden Jonathan Watertown
B.
Brattle Thomas Cambridge Bowen Daniel Little Cambridge Babcock Samuel
Watertown
C.
Cushing Bela Boston Cobb John do. Capen Samuel Little Cambridge Cromwell
Daniel Watertown
D.
Dana Isaac Watertown Dunlap, jr. Andrew Boston
E.
Everett Aaron Watertown Emerson Timothy do.
F.
Farrar Ephraim Watertown Fessenden Thomas
H.
Hill Joseph Cambridge Houghton Oliver Boston
L.
Lankester William Boston
M.
Makepeace Royal Cambridge
N.
Norcross John Cambridge
P.
Patten Isaac Watertown
R.
Redman Thomas Boston
S.
Stone Timothy Newton Swaney William Cambridge
T.
Tappan Professor David, D. D. Cambridge
Analytical TABLE of Contents.
VOLUME FIRST.
INTRODUCTION 1 State of Medicine, as a Science founded on facts ib.
Observations on the general laws of Nature 4 Necessity of applying to the study
of natural causes 5 Difference of opinions on medical subjects 6 The origin and
causes of diseases investigated 9 Cow-pox, a preventive of the Smallpox 13
Remarks illustrating the doctrine of temperaments 14 The absurdity and
dangerous tendency of Patent or Quack Medicines pointed out 22 Mr. James
Parkinson, on Quack Medicines 24 The nature of fashionable complaints defined
30 The source of them investigated 31 The function of the skin explained 34 The
necessity of bathing inculcated, as the best substitute for universal remedies
41 The nature and properties of Cosmetics examined 43 The only effectual
substitutes for them recommended, and injunctions relative to the improvement
of the skin 46 Strictures on the physical education of children 49 Frequent
bathing, an useful practice in infancy 53 The proper temperature of the Bath,
and its general effects ib. The cold Bath frequently dangerous to children ib.
The lukewarm or tepid Bath far preferable ib. Directions to use this Bath with
advantage 56 The utility of the Air Bath pointed out 57 Shortness of Sight and
weakness of the Eyes 58 Importance of spacious nurseries, and airing 59
Hufeland's picture of a child properly managed, with respect to washing,
airing, and bathing 60 Anecdote of a Russian postillion 62 Feather-beds and
cumbersome Dresses condemned 63 The origin of a sweating Skin ib. A proper
Couch for Children described 64 Cleanliness, a cardinal virtue in domestic life
ib. Rickets, cured by cleanliness alone 64 How the head and breast should be
covered 65 Historical anecdote from Herodotus ib. Sudden improvements not
successful 66 There is no perfect and permanent state of health 68 Quotation
from Cicero ib.
CHAP. I. On the Means of preserving Health and prolonging Life 69 Definition
of a good state of health ib. Reasons for being satisfied with our present
state 70 To avoid or cure diseases, we ought to be acquainted with the economy
of the human frame ib. The pretended purpose of Nostrums explained 71 Man has
always more or less valued a long life ib. The method of prolonging life
adopted by the Orientals 72 The same plan prescribed by Boerhaave 73 The
inefficacy of it demonstrated 74 The Egyptians resorted to Sudorifics and
Emetics 76 The Greeks employed natural means 77 The great advantage of
Gymnastic Exercises considered 78 Modern methods of bracing the body 80
Excellence of the Grecian method ib. Plutarch's golden precepts 81 Review of
the barbarity of the middle ages 82 The Alchemists in search of original matter
83 The Tincture of Gold introduced 84 Sketch of the Goldmakers, Rosencrucians,
etc. 85 Productions of Alchemy shorten life 87 They impair the susceptibility,
or power of receiving vital supplies 88 Theophrastus Paracelsus, an insurer of
lives ib. The world of spirits is summoned to assist 89 The professors of
Astrology begin their impositions 90 The noted Thurneisen appears at Berlin 91
Exposition of that occult science, Astrology ib. Cornaro shows the absurdity of
resorting to supernatural means, by his illustrious example 94 Bloodletting
came into general use 98 In what cases Venesection may be of advantage 100
Definition of the Art of prolonging Life ib. The nature of the Blood
investigated ib. Libavius discovers the transfusion of the blood 102 A short
account of the Paracelsian Theosophists 103 The process of Transfusion
described 104 Lord Bacon deviates from the true path of inquiry 106 He advises
the repetition of powerful laxatives every two or three years -- his theory
controverted 107 Modern method of computing the duration of life 109 Medical
imposture still prevalent in our enlightened age 112 Perkins' Metallic Tractors
exploded ib. The fanatical system of Jacob Bohmen ib. Messmer appears, with his
Animal Magnetism 113 An account of his artful proceedings ib. His advertisement
extraordinary 116 He imposes upon the French government 117 -- realizes a
princely fortune in Paris 118 -- is at length proved to be either a fanatic or
impostor 119 Lavater's Animal Magnetism and Somnabulism 120 Messmer's system
exploded 121 St. Germain's Tea for prolonging life ib. D'A^lhoud's deleterious
Powder 122 Cagliostro, an impostor with his Balm of Life, etc. ib. Father
Gassner ascribes all diseases to diabolical agency 123 Count Thunn, a German
fanatic, obtains no credit 124 All specifics and plans for prolonging life rest
upon erroneous principles 125 Conditions requisite to attain a long life ib. 1.
Bodily and mental disposition to longevity ib. 2. A sort of hereditary
disposition 126 3. A child's perfect birth, and mother's proper conduct ib. 4.
A gradual culture of the physical and mental faculties 127 5. A constant habit
of brooking and resisting the various impressions of external agency 129 6. A
steady and equal progress of life 131 7. A sound state of digestion ib. 8.
Equanimity of mind -- avoiding violent exertions 132 Concluding remarks on the
subject of Longevity 133 On the symptoms of actual Dissolution 134 Account of a
new Institution in Germany 135 Cases in which death can be clearly ascertained
136 Symptoms where death is less certain 137 Children and young persons should
not too hastily be considered as dead 138 Summary account of a Dietetic System
139 Explanation of the Six Non-naturals 140 Present mode of living compared
with that in a state of nature 141 Many writers misled by partial inquiries 142
Illustrations relative to a Dietetic System 143
CHAP. II. Of Air and Weather 147 Of Air in general -- Respiration ib.
Definition of Air and Atmosphere ib. Pressure of Atmosphere incumbent on our
bodies 148 Component parts of the Atmosphere 149 Concise History of Oxygen ib.
Properties of Oxygen, and its effects on respiration ib. -- Azote 151 --
Carbonic Acid Gas, or Fixed Air ib. -- Inflammable Air 152 Specific gravity of
the different Airs 153 Noxious effects of mephitic gases ib. -- the vapors of
Lead 154 The chemical process in improving and restoring Atmospheric Air
described 155 General Remarks relative to the advantages to be derived from a
systematic view of Dietetics 156 Effects of warm and cold air on the body 157
-- damp or moist air 158 -- dry and cool air 159 -- sudden changes of air ib.
-- the different winds 160 On the relative salubrity of the different Seasons
ib. Effects of strongly scented bodies 162 -- dwelling on lakes, marshes, and
rivers 163 Which is the most wholesome air to live in 164 Of the improvement of
Air in Dwelling-houses 165 Situation of a house in point of health 166
Criterion of a damp and unwholesome air ib. The most proper situation of a
sitting-room 167 Different strata of Air in a room ib. Modes of purifying the
air by ventilators ib. Rules respecting the admission of fresh air 168 -- in
moist and cold air -- moist and warm air 169 -- in hot and dry air ib. Effects
from exhalations of green plants and flowers 171 -- large trees with thick
foliage 172 -- the burning of candles ib. -- the steam of cooked provisions ib.
-- exhalation of green fruit, oil, tallow, etc. 173 -- the vapors of charcoal
ib. -- impure wool, oil, colors, etc. 174 -- keeping wet substances in
dwelling-rooms ib. General effects of Heat and Cold 175 -- sudden transitions
ib. Of the proper dress for the season 176 Of heating rooms in autumn ib. Of
exposing the body to the bracing effects of cold 177 Precautions respecting
changes of temperature 178
CHAP. III. Of Cleanliness 180 Extent of this domestic virtue ib. Rules for
practicing it, as to the body, face, neck, etc. 181 -- with respect to Eating
and Drinking 183 On the Management of the Teeth ib. Advantage of cleaning them
at night ib. Precautions in removing the Tartar from the Teeth 184 The use of
Dentifrices examined ib. Rules for preventing the Tartar settling on Teeth 185
How to remove the Tartar, when settled ib. Some of the best remedies for the
Toothache 186 Treatment of scorbutic Teeth and Gums 187 Directions for
preserving the Teeth -- Tooth-powders ib. -- cleaning them properly 188 Of the
Use of Baths 189 Bathing forms the basis of domestic cleanliness ib. Effects of
the Bath in general 190 Division of Baths -- Effects of the warm or tepid Bath
191 Of bathing in Rivers 193 Historical narrative of the practice of bathing
194 The nature, properties and effects of the cold Bath 196 Drs. Currie and
Franklin quoted 199 Rules for the use of the cold Bath 203 Cases in which the
cold Bath is injurious 204 The Shower-Bath recommended -- Substitutes for it
205 Advantages of the Shower-Bath ib. Account of the Aerial or Air-Bath 207
Friction of the body -- cutting the hair -- washing and shaving the head
recommended 208 Friction of the soles, and bathing of the feet 209 Of Pomatums
for making the hair grow ib. Of Corns, how to prevent and cure them ib.
CHAP. IV. Of Dress 211 Substance and Form of Dress ib. The general properties
of a good Dress 212
Of the Materials used for Articles of Dress.
Proper Color and Surface of substances considered ib. Of Animal Wool, Linen,
Silk, Wax-Cloth 213 Of Cotton and Fu^^ ib. Attention to be paid to the Season,
Climate, etc. 215 On the immediate Covering of the Skin ib. Advantages of
Animal Wool or Flannel explained 216 The objections against Flannel answered
217 Salutiferous effects of Flannel, worn next the Skin 219 Of Stockings --
proper substances for them examined 222
Of Dress, as to its Form.
On the most proper method of covering the Head 225 Of Shirts, Coverings for
the Neck, etc. 229 Of laced Stays, etc. 232 Of narrow Sleeves in Gowns 233 Of
Breeches and Pantaloons 234 Of Braces -- Drawers for females, and Garters 235
Of the form of Stockings and the size of Shoes 236 Of the substance for Shoes,
and the manner of rendering them water-proof 237 Of changing the Shoes from one
foot to the other 243
CHAP. V. Of Exercise Rest 245 The advantages and disadvantages of Exercise 245
-- 263 Of Friction of the body 265 On the conduct proper to be observed after
Exercise 267 How to satisfy Thirst after Exercise, etc. 268 -- 272
CHAP. VI. Of Sleeping and Waking 274 Necessity of this alternation 275 A
concise theory of Sleep 276 An inquiry into the nature of Dreams, etc. 277 --
284 Of Sleep 285 -- 293 On the most proper Couches and Coverings 296
Disadvantages of Feather-Beds, etc. 298 -- 301
VOLUME SECOND.
CHAP. VII. Of Food and Drink 13 INTRODUCTORY remarks on the nature and effects
of Food and Drink ib. Of Food in particular 17 Rules relative to the quantity
of food ib. On the different kinds of appetite 18 Remarks on the quantity of
aliment -- on the nature of digestion and nutrition -- mode and time of taking
food 20 On the propriety of sleeping after dinner 28 A discussion on the
general effects of animal food 34 Of Animal Food ib. The properties of game ib.
Different methods of dressing victuals investigated ib. Digestibility of animal
and vegetable substances 36 On preternatural hunger 38 Of animal jelly -- the
flesh of different animals compared as to its salubrity ib. On the properties
of Veal, Beef, Pork, smoked Hams, Sausages, Bacon, Lard, Sheep, Lamb,
House-lamb, Goats, Deer, Venison, and Hare 41 -- 49 On the properties of the
Lungs, Liver, Heart, Kidneys, Fat, Blood, and Milk of Animals 50, 51 Directions
for making artificial Ass's Milk 54 Properties of Cream, Butter, Butter-milk,
and Cheese 57 Cheese forms the strongest cement yet contrived ib. On the
relative wholesomeness of Birds in general 59 -- Bird's Eggs 62 On the various
methods of preserving Eggs 63 An account of Mr. Donaldson's Patent ib. The
properties and effects of Fish, amphibious Animals, Lobsters, Crabs, Oysters,
and Turtles 64, 65 The legs of Frogs used as food ib. On the properties and
effects of Snails and Muscles 67 Of Vegetable Aliment 68 Division of the
vegetable articles of nourishment into five orders ib. 1. The farinaceous
Vegetables: -- Bread, its nature and properties reviewed ib. Rice, Oats,
Barley, Millet, Mannagrass 72, 73 2. The leguminous productions, as Beans,
Peace, etc. 74 Green Peace 75 3. The various Salads and Herbs used for cooking 76
Asparagus -- Artichokes 77 Of Salads -- Spinach -- Sorrel ib. -- Red and White
Cabbage -- Sauer Kraut ib. -- Lettuce 79 4. The esculent roots used at table
ib. Of Carrots -- Turnips -- Beet-root 81, 82 Of Parsley, Smallage, Celery,
Parsnips, etc. ib. Scorzenera, Skirret-root, Salsafy 83, 84 Of Onions, Garlic,
Shallot, Chives, and Radishes ib. Arrow-root 85 5. Fruit, or the production of
trees and shrubs ib. Sago -- Of Cherries 87 Of Plums, Peaches, Apricots, Pears
89 -- Tamarinds, Apples, Quinces 89 -- 92 -- Lemons, Oranges, Limes, etc. ib.
-- Raisins 94 Vegetable Acids excellent correctors of Opium 93 Of Currants,
Goosberries, Grapes, and Strawberries 95 Strawberries, a preventive against the
Stone in the Kidneys 96 Of Cucumbers and Melons ib. -- Gourds, Olives 97 --
Almonds, Walnuts, Hazlenuts, and Nuts in general ib. -- Mushrooms 98 Of Drink
in particular 99 I. With respect to the quantity and time of Drinking 100 II.
With respect to its quality 103 Of Spring, Well, River, and Lake-Water 104 --
Rain, Snow, Hail-Water, and Dew 105 Various methods of correcting bad Water,
and preserving it when fresh 106 Division of Wines into five principal Classes
107 Of Cider and Perry 108 Constituent parts of Wine 108 Its properties and
effects in general 109 The state of Intoxication explained 110 How to treat a
person in that state 111 Effects of a copious use of Wine ib. On the
adulterations of Wine, and the dangers attending them 112 Directions for
detecting adulterated Wines 113 Hahnemann's Liquor vini probatorius 115 Of
ardent Spirits, their general properties, etc. 117 Of Beer, its ingredients,
adulterations, properties, etc. 119 -- Tea, its properties and effects on the
System 124 Substitutes for Indian Tea recommended 127 Of Coffee, its effects on
particular constitutions 128 -- Chocolate, Punch, Negus, Vinegar, Oil 131 --
134 Of Spices 135 Of Salt -- Lord Dundonald's method of purifying it ib. Of
Sugar, Honey, Pepper 136 -- 138 -- Cubebs, Cardamoms, Vanilla, etc. 139 --
Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cassia, Pimento (Allspice) and Ginger ib. --
Parsley, Marjoram, Thyme, Sage 141 -- Carraway, its effects in flatulency,
hysterics, etc. ib. Classification of the various articles used as Food, Drink,
and Spices 143 I. Food: Alimentary substances containing wholesome fluids ib.
-- unwholesome fluids 146 II. Drink: Watery Liquors -- Spirituous Liquors 147
III. Spices 148
CHAP. VIII. Of Evacuations 149 On the importance of these functions ib. The
three principal emunctories defined 150 Of Evacuations by Stool 151
Consequences of neglecting them ib. Means promoting them, and preventing
costiveness 152 Different appearance and effect of such discharges 154 The
causes of obstructions and costiveness ascertained ib. The means of preventing
them pointed out 155 How to guard against too frequent excretions 156 Necessity
of water-closets and other precautions 161 Of Urine 162 Of the quality and
quantity of this discharge ib. Of the prognostics from its appearance 163 Of
the nature and origin of urinary complaints 164 Of Insensible Perspiration 166
The nature and great importance of this function 167 Circumstances suppressing
and affecting perspiration 169 -- tending to promote it 170 Distinction between
perspiring and sweating ib. Effect of Cold on insensible perspiration 171 -- of
Food and Drink on the same 172 -- of the depressing passions and emotions ib.
How too violent perspiration should be treated 173 On the common treatment of
Colds 174 On excessive bleedings in general ib. Of the Saliva -- smoking
Tobacco censured ib. Of the mucus of the nose -- the habit of taking Snuff, and
its dangerous consequences 176 The acromatic belts and sneezing powders of a
certain empiric animadverted upon 177 Of the wax in the Ears 179 Of
Hemorrhages; the menses, hemorrhoids, etc. ib. Of the retention of the Milk 180
CHAP. IX. Of the Sexual Intercourse 182 On the important consequences
attending the exercise of this function ib. Conditions under which it is
conducive to the well-being of the individual 183 In what cases it is
detrimental to Health 186 Observations relative to the loss of semen 189
Situations unfavourable to the Sexual Intercourse 191 Nature and constituent
parts of the seminal fluid 192 On the proper time for this intercourse, etc.
193 Of the proper time and requisites to a married life 198 On the general
effects of too great abstinence 199 -- means of restoring the impaired energy,
aphrodisiacs 201 -- means of diminishing the desire of venery 202 View of the
principal theories of Generation 204 Of Panspermia -- generatio ^equivoca 204
Hammon discovers animalculae in the semen 206 Buffon's opinion on this subject
refuted 207 The theory of Evolution reviewed, etc. 208 Haller's and Bonnet's
theories examined 210 Remarks on the origin of the chicken in the egg ib.
Swammerdam's and Spallanzani's discoveries ib. Singular story of a miller's
wife 211 Epigenesis, or the theory of gradual formation 212 Blumenbach's
definition of the Nisus formatious ib.
CHAP. X. Of the Passions and Affections of the Mind 214 Origin of the passions
ib. (...) distinction between affections and passions 215 Influence of the
passions on the body -- they are either of an agreeable or disagreeable nature
216 General effects of Joy, Gaiety, Cheerfulness, etc. 218 (...) advice to the
passionate 219 Definition of Laughter, Hope, Love, etc. 219 -- 222 Of (...) of
Weeping 224 The (...) returning home, common among Swiss 225 The Nervous Fever
described by Manningham ib. Of extravagant Love -- Of Jealousy, etc. 226 -- 228
Of the origin of Envy, Fear, etc. 229 -- 236 Pythagoras's advice to avoid
passions and desires 239
CHAP. XI. Of the Organs of Sense 242 A short analysis of Sensation ib.
Soemmering's hypothesis of the feat and operation of the Soul ib. Definition of
the external and internal Senses 244 Specification of the Five Senses, and
conjectures respecting a Sixth 248 The Sense of Touch analyzed ib. Description
of the integuments of the body 249 Of the Epidermis, or scarf-skin, etc. 249 --
253 The Sense of Sight analyzed ib. Curious assertion of Baron Trenck ib.
Far-sightedness and Short-sightedness 256 Cautions how to place children in bed
257 The phenomenon of Sneezing explained ib. Of the Sense of Hearing 259
Substitutes for common ear-trumpets suggested 261 Of the Sense of Smell, and
its mechanism 262 Different size of the nerves in man and animals 264 On the
improvement of the Sense of Smell ib. Anecdote of Leonhard Zollikofer's dog 265
Of the Sense of Taste -- its mechanism and functions ib. Remarks on animal
motion, or muscular action 268 Summary of the powers inherent in the human body
ib. Description of a Muscle ib. Account of the Bursae Mucosa 271 Remarks on the
variety of Temperaments 273
CHAP. XII. On the treatment and preservation of the Eyes 274 I. Importance of
a proper care of these organs 276 II. Of Short-sightedness, and the reverse 277
Directions for preventing short-sightedness in children ib. -- for the use of
concave spectacles 278 Of Farsightedness in particular ib. III. General Rules
for the preservation of the Eyes 279 IV. Of the conduct to be observed in weak
Eyes 281 On the use of Candles, etc. 282 How to manage the Eyes in the morning,
etc. 285 Best situation of a sitting-room and desk 286 Cautions relative to the
Eyes 287 -- respecting candlelight in the night, etc. 288 Remarks on the
common Eye-cases 289 On the advantage of bathing the Eyes in cold water 290 V.
Dietetical Precepts respecting the Eyes in general 292 Facts related by
Montaldus and Russell 296 VI. Some additional Rules for the use of Eye-glasses
297 In what cases Eye-glasses may be used to advantage ib. How to choose
Spectacles properly 298 Green glasses, when to use them 299 Reading-glasses
condemned ib. Spectacles, when proper, and how to be chosen 300 Conclusion 303
-- 310 General Reflections -- On Moderation, etc. 303 Corollary 311 POSTSCRIPT
312
LECTURES ON DIET AND REGIMEN.
INTRODUCTION.
On the present State of Medicine as a Science.
WE apparently live in an age, when every branch of human knowledge is reduced
to a popular system; when the most important sciences lay aside the garb of
pedantry and mysticism; when, in short, the sources of information are open to
every rank, and to both sexes. An improvement, which is so conspicuous, must
ultimately be attended with the most desirable and extensive effects.

Among other beneficial pursuits to render the comforts of life more numerous
and permanent, we have occasion to observe, that Natural Philosophy and
Chemistry contribute a principal share in spreading useful knowledge among all
ranks of society.

Since Medicine, considered as a science, which rests upon practical rules of
experience, is in a great measure founded upon Natural Philosophy and
Chemistry, it will be allowed that with the daily progress of the latter,
Medicine also must necessarily partake of their improvements, and continually
receive accessions conducive to its further perfection.

With the progressive increase of refinement and luxury, a certain weakness and
indisposition, whether real or imaginary, has infested society in the character
of a gentle epidemic. It cannot properly be called a disease, but rather an
approximation to an infirm state, which almost involuntarily compels man to
reflect upon the relative situation of his physical nature, to acquire correct
ideas on health, disease, and the means of prevention or relief, and thus
imperceptibly to become his own guide.

Every individual of any penetration now claims the privilege of being his own
physician: It is not unfashionable to form a certain system concerning the
state of our own health, and to consider it as the criterion, by which we may
judge of ourselves and others, of patients and their physicians.

Formerly, people were not accustomed to think of the physical state of their
body, until it began to be afflicted with pain or debility: In which case, they
entrusted it to the practitioner in Physic, as we deliver a time-piece to a
watchmaker, who repairs it according to the best of his knowledge, without
apprehending, that its owner will be at the trouble of thinking or reasoning
upon the method, which he judged to be most proper.

In our times, we frequently undertake the charge of prescribing medicines for
ourselves: And the natural consequence is, that we seldom are able to tell,
whether we are healthy or diseased; that we trust as much, if not more, to
ourselves than to the physician, who is only sent for occasionally; and that we
cannot conceive him to be perfectly free from the systems of the schools, from
self-interest or professional motives. Thus, by an acquaintance with medical
subjects, which of itself is laudable, not only the skill of the physician is
frequently thwarted, but the recovery of the patient unhappily retarded, or at
least rendered more difficult.

No disease is now cured without demonstration; and he who can neither discover
nor comply with the peculiar system of health adopted by his patient, may
indeed act from motives dictated by reason and humanity; but his success as a
practical physician, in the common acceptance of that phrase, must ever remain
problematical. Yet this general propensity to investigate medical subjects, if
it were properly directed and gratified might be attended with very happy
effects. For the medical art ought not to be subject to an imperious and
fascinating demon, whose labors are chiefly carried on in the dark recesses of
mystery, whom we know only from his baneful influence, as he spares no objects
of prey, and holds his votaries in a perpetual state of dependence!

"The veil of mystery," says a modern popular writer, "which still hangs over
Medicine, renders it not only a conjectural, but even a suspicious art. This
has been long ago removed from the other sciences, which induces many to
believe, that Medicine is a mere trick, and that it will not bear a fair and
candid examination. Medicine, however, needs only to be better known, in order
to secure the general esteem of mankind. Its precepts are such as every wise
man would choose to observe, and it forbids nothing but what is incompatible
with true happiness."

Observations on the general Laws of Nature.
IF we reflect upon the admirable uniformity which prevails through the works
of nature, both in the production and dissolution of matter, we find that she
invariably moves in a circle; that in the perpetual construction, as well as in
the subsequent demolition of bodies, she is always equally new and equally
perfect; that the smallest particle, though invisible to our eyes, is usefully
employed by her restless activity; that death itself, or the destruction of
forms and figures, is no more than a careful decomposition and a designed
regeneration of individual parts, in order to produce new substances, in a
manner no less skilful than surprising. We further observe, that in the immense
variety of things, in the inconceivable waste of elementary particles, there
nevertheless prevails the strictest economy; that nothing is produced in vain,
nothing cousumed without a cause. We clearly perceive that all nature is united
by indissoluble ties; that every thing exists for the sake of another, and that
no one thing can exist without its neighbor. Hence we justly conclude, that
man himself is not an insulated being, but that he is a necessary link in the
great chain, which connects the universe.

Nature is our safest guide, and she will be so with greater certainty, as we
become better acquainted with her operations, especially with respect to those
particulars which more nearly concern our physical existence. Thus, a source of
many and extensive advantages will be opened; thus we shall approach to our
original destination -- namely, that of living long and healthy.

On the contrary, as long as we move in a limited sphere of knowledge; as long
as we are unconcerned with respect to the causes which produce health or
disease, we are in danger, either of being anxiously parsimonious, or
prodigally profuse of those powers, by which life is supported. Both extremes
are contrary to the purpose of nature. She teaches us the rule of just economy:
-- we, being a small part of her great system, must follow her example, and
expend neither too much nor too little of her treasures.

Although it be true that our knowledge of nature is still very imperfect, yet
this circumstance ought not to deter us from investigating the means which may
lead to its improvement.

We are assisted by the experience of so many industrious inquirers, of so many
sound philosophers, that we may flatter ourselves with the hopes of discovering
some of her hidden secrets, and of penetrating still further into her wonderful
recesses. This, however, cannot be accomplished, without much patience and
perseverance in the student.

All men, it is true, have not sufficient time and opportunities to acquire an
accurate and extensive knowledge of nature; but those are inexcusable, who
remain entire strangers to her ordinary operations, and particularly if they
neglect to cultivate a proper acquaintance with the constitution of their own
frame. If, indeed, we were fixed to the earth like the trees by their roots, or
if from mere animal instinct we were stimulated to inquire into the causes of
our physical life, we then should vegetate, or live like plants or irrational
animals. But, in the character of creatures, who ought to choose and to reject
agreeably to the dictates of reason, a more assiduous and minute study of
nature, as well as of our own frame, is indispensable; because the human body
cannot subsist, unless we second her intentions and cooperate with her
beneficent efforts.

Difference of Opinions on Medical Subjects.
IT is not unfrequently objected, that Medicine itself is an uncertain,
fluctuating, and precarious art. One medical school, for instance, considers
the mass of the fluids as the primary cause of all diseases; another ascribes
them to the irregular action of the solids, and particularly the nerves; some
again consider that as the cause of the disorder, which many are inclined to
represent as the effect. Thus, different schools propagate different tenets
relative to the origin of diseases; though ultimately, with respect to matters
of fact, they must all necessarily agree. Nor is this diversity of opinions in
the least degree detrimental to the practical department of Medicine; provided
that we do not regulate the mode of treatment altogether by hypothetical
notions. Of what consequence is it to the patient, whether his physician
imagines the nerves to be fine tubes, filled with a subtle fluid, or not?
whether he believes that catarrhs arise from noxious particles floating in the
air, or from catching cold? -- or whether he is prejudiced in favor of this or
that particular theory of fevers? -- It is a sufficient security to the
patient, if his physician be thoroughly acquainted with the symptoms of the
disease, and be able to distinguish them from those of any other malady. In
this respect, the medical art is truly excellent, and without a rival; for the
nature of diseases remains invariably the same. The accurate observations made
by Hippocrates, two thousand years ago, on the progress and symptoms of
diseases, recur to the medical practitioner of the present day, in a manner
sufficiently regular and uniform. -- And, in fact, how should it be otherwise;
when nature always pursues the same path, whether in a healty or diseased state
of the body?

Here again it will be asked, whence does it happen that two physicians seldom
agree in opinion, with regard to the case of the same patient? This question
may be briefly answered, by claiming the same right for the medical profession,
which is assumed by theologians in contested points of divinity; by lawyers in
arguing any part of their code, which is not perfectly plain; and by
philosophers who maintain different opinions on the same subject in
metaphysics; for instance, that of space and time. But there are more forcible
reasons which enable us, in some measure, to account for this diversity of
opinions in Medicine. One of the physicians, perhaps, is in the habit of
visiting fifty patients in a forenoon, so that he has not sufficient time to
investigate minutely the nature and origin of the disease; while another of
less extensive practice is enabled to do more justice to his patients, by
attending to their complaints with proper leisure and accuracy. One of them
shall distinguish some of the leading symptoms, and without hesitation
pronounce, that he has discovered the true seat of the malady; but as many
diseases of a different nature are attended with similar and common symptoms,
there is no small danger of confounding the one with the other. Another shall
enter the patient's room with a pre-conceived opinion on the subject of some
prevailing epidemic, or with his head probably full of the case which occupied
his attention in the last visit. With these impediments, how difficult will it
be to institute a cool and unbiassed inquiry? If, again, both should happen to
be called in at different stages of the disorder, each of them would prescribe
a different method of cure, and the judgment of him who was last consulted,
would in all probability be the most correct. Or lastly, a physician may be
sent for, who, having commenced his studies about the middle of this century,
has not (from want of time or inclination) sufficiently attended to the more
recent discoveries of this inquisitive age; how can it then be expected, that
he should agree in opinion with those, whose knowledge has been improved by the
numberless new facts and observations lately made in physics, particularly in
Chemistry?

Origin and Causes of Disease.
MAN is subject to the same destructive agents from without, by which the lower
animals are affected; but there is no doubt, that he is more easily and
frequently exposed to diseases than these. First, The inferior creatures are
unquestionably provided with a more active instinct, by which nature teaches
them, from their very birth, to avoid every thing that may prove hurtful, and
to choose whatever may have a salutary influence on their mode of living. Few
traces of this beneficial instinct can be discovered in the human race. Our own
experience, or the instructions of others, which are likewise founded upon
experience, must gradually teach us the wholesome or pernicious qualities of
the objects of the material world. -- Reason, indeed, that peculir faculty of
man, indemnifies him, in a great measure, for the want of this instinct; it
directs his choice in pursuing what is useful, and in avoiding what is
injurious. Yet at the same time, the want of instinct in man, is the source of
many sufferings in the earlier years of his life. -- He is born without
covering, to withstand the effects of climate; without arms, to defend himself
in his helpless state, and without instinct, if we except that of sucking. He
remains much longer incapable of providing, for his self-preservation, and
stands in need of the assistance of his parents for a much greater number of
years, than any other animal with which we are acquainted. Although his
parents, in general, acquit themselves of this charge with much greater
solicitude and tenderness than the lower animals, yet our imperfect instinct is
productive of much mischief to children, from ignorance and ill directed
tenderness in parents and nurses. Children are frequently furnished with
articles of food and dress which, at a more advanced age, nourish the seeds of
disease and dissolution. Thus, many infants are indebted for their obstructions
in the mesentery, and the consumptive habit attending them, to their uninformed
and over anxious parents or friends, who commit daily errors with regard to the
quantity and quality of the aliment, which in many instances they so liberally
administer to the objects of their care; even though it be of an indigestible
nature.

In the second place, it is a fact universally admitted, that mankind,
especially in large and populous towns, have much degenerated in bodily
strength, energy of mind, and in their capacity of resisting the noxious agency
of powers which affect them from without.

The progressive cultivation of the mind, together with the daily refinements
of habits and manners, are ever accompanied with a proportionate increase of
luxury. But as this change, from a robust to a more relaxed state of life, has
produced no difference in the causes generating disease, to which we are even
more subject than formerly, we must necessarily suffer by the concomitant
effects. For though luxury has assisted us in preventing the temporary effects
of external agents, such as cold, heat, rain, etc. and we can occasionally
guard ourselves against their severity, we are, upon the next return of them,
attacked with much greater violence, than if we had been more habituated to
their influence. And this state of things has imperceptibly introduced the use
of many articles, both of dress and aliment, which in their consequences often
prove detrimental to health. Hence we find, that in proportion as the
refinements of luxury increase in a nation, the number and variety of diseases
also increase. On the contrary, the more uncivilized a people continue, and the
more their habits and customs approximate to a state of nature, the less are
they affected by the causes of disease.

In the third place, we observe among the human race a greater number of
prevailing passions, and man is more violently, and, for the time of their
duration, more obstinately governed by them, than any other living creature.
These emotions variously affect the human body. But the most noxious and
oppressive than any other of all the passions, are terror and grief: The former
of which is sometimes so violent as to threaten immediate destruction.
Controlled by their powerful influence, and hurried away by the impulse of the
moment, the mind is rendered incapable of judging, and of properly selecting
the means of allaying those passions. -- Hence the remedies, to which we have
recourse during the prevalence of passion, and which then appear to us the most
proper, frequently lay the foundation of innumerable disorders, both of body
and mind.

A fourth source of diseases among mankind, are various specific contagions;
and perhaps the greater number of these originate in the atmosphere which
surrounds us. This is highly probable, at least with respect to marshy
exhalations, and the effluvia of regions rendered unwholesome by different
manufacturing processes. Another class of contagious miasmata consists of those
which cannot be traced to any certain origin. Indeed, we daily observe their
migrations; we perceive them moving from one individual to another, without
fixing any stationary residence: Yet they have hitherto frustrated every
attempt made toward their extirpation. Of this unsettled nature are, the small
pox, the measles, the hooping cough, the influenza, and many other epidemics.
The first of them, namely the small pox, has of late years been very
successfully treated; and it is well known that some of the most ingenious
practitioners in Italy and Germany are, at this moment, employed in a serious
attempt, wholly to extirpate this contagion from the Continent of Europe; an
object which has formerly been accomplished in the cases of the plague and
leprosy. The means employed by our ancestors, in subduing the virulence of
these malignant disorders, consisted chiefly in separating every infected
person from the healthy, and preventing all intercourse between them. For this
purpose, many thousand houses of reception were then established and supported
at the public expense, in every country of Europe; the diseased were instantly
and carefully removed to those houses, and not permitted to leave them till
perfectly cured. A measure somewhat similar to this has lately been proposed,
and laid before the Plenipotentiaries of the Continental Powers assembled at
Rastadt, by Professor Junker, Dr. Faust, and other German Physicians. This
proposal, however, differs essentially from the former method of extirpating
contagious disorders: as, according to the modern plan, we understand every
individual, whether willing or not, must submit to be inoculated for the
smallpox.

To deprive this loathsome disease of its destructive power, another method,
perhaps more plausible and less compulsory, has been lately attempted in this
country, and strongly recommended by Drs. JENNER, PEARSON, WOODVILLE, and other
practitioners. I allude to the inoculation for the cow-pox. It is sincerely to
be wished, that their humane efforts may be crowned with success: and if it be
true that persons inoculated for the cow-pox are forever exempt from the
infection of the smallpox, and that this artificial translation of morbid
matter from the brute to the human subject is not attended with danger, it is
of little consequence whether the cow-pox originate from any cutaneous disease
of the milker, or from the grease of horses. For my part, I am not very
sanguine in my expectations, which have often been disappointed on similar
occasions; and till I can persuade myself of the perfect analogy subsisting
between the two diseases, nay of their homogeneous nature, I shall patiently
wait for a greater number of facts tending to confirm the truth of the
hypothesis. This, however, in my opinion, can be decided only, when the
smallpox should appear as the prevailing epidemic.




On the Doctrine of Temperaments.
SINCE it is established by numberless facts, that the temperaments, as well as
the diseases, of whole nations, are in a great measure influenced by their
ordinary articles of food, it will no longer be doubted, that the most
important consequences result from our aliment, whether of food or drink.

As the doctrine of temperaments is in itself highly curious and interesting, I
think this a proper place for introducing some practical remarks, tending to
illustrate that subject, and presenting a concise view of it, chiefly derived
from the learned annotations of the celebrated Professor Sommering of Mayence.

"The doctrine of temperaments," says he, "in the general acceptance of that
term, must be allowed to have greatly misled the ancient physicians, and
particularly those who lived before the time of Galen. We are not, however, to
infer from this, that the doctrine itself is without foundation. -- They erred
not, by admitting the existence of temperaments; for that seems now to be fully
established; but by too great a fondness for generalization; by limiting the
number of them to four, and fixing their attention in this division simply on
the nature and composition of the blood, instead of regarding the whole animal
economy. Thus, for instance, they knew many parts of the human body scarcely by
their names, and were little, if at all, acquainted with the great influence of
the nerves; while our modern physicians pay an almost extravagant homage to
these fashionable co-operators in diseases, and frequently forget, in their
attention to their favorites, the more important, at least more obvious, parts
of the fluids.

"There is a certain line observable in all the more perfect animals, by which
nature is regulated in performing the functions of body and mind; in preserving
or impairing the health, and in exerting all those energies of life, on which
the happiness of the creature depends. This line is various in different
individuals, and the variety cannot be completely explained on the principle of
the ancients, by a difference in the qualities of the blood alone; though a
human body of moderate size contains not less than thirty pounds weight of that
fluid. Other terms must therefore be substituted for their sanguine, choleric,
phlegmatic, and melancholy temperaments; but before we attempt them, it will be
necessary to take a more extensive view of the economy of man.

"The causes of the difference of temperaments are various: First; a difference
in the nervous system, with respect to the number of the nervous fibers, their
strength, and sensibility. A large brain, coarse and strong nerves, and great
general sensibility, have always been found to be the marks of a choleric or
cholerico-sanguine disposition. Hence proceeds the quickness of perception and
capacity of knowledge in persons of this class, accompanied with great
acuteness and strength of judgment, from the multitude of their ideas of
comparison. These qualities are, however, in some measure counterbalanced by a
violent propensity to anger, and impatience under slight sufferings of body or
mind. Medicines ought, therefore, to be cautiously administered to them, and in
small quantities only. A diminutive brain and very delicate nerves have
generally been observed to be connected with dull senses, and a phlegmatic
languor -- sometimes with a taint of melancholy. To affect the organs of such
persons, the impression of external objects must be strong and permanent. Their
judgments are often childish from the want of ideas, and hence they are seldom
able to make great progress in science. They are, however, more fit to endure
labor, and the injuries of climate; consequently their medicines should be
strong, and administered in large quantities.

" Secondly: Difference of irritability is another cause of difference of
temperament. When the fibers are excited by the slightest stimulus to quick and
permanent contraction, we may justly infer the existence of a choleric
disposition; while a phlegmatic temper displays itself by opposite symptoms;
the muscles being slowly contracted, and excited with difficulty by the most
powerful stimulus.

" Thirdly: The fibers and membranes of a phlegmatic person are remarkably soft
to the touch; those of a melancholic person hard and dry, with greater tone and
facility of contraction.

" Fourthly: There appears to be sufficient reason for the opinion, that an
electric principle is dispersed through the atmosphere, which is communicated
to the body, in different degrees, by respiration; which supplies the fibers
with their natural tone; gives a more lively motion to the vessels; and
increases the serenity of the mind. This principle does not exist in the
atmosphere in equal quantities in all countries, nor even in the same country
at different seasons or hours of the day. Thus, during the influence of the
Sirocco in Sicily, all the fibers are oppressed by languor; but when the air
becomes more serene and elastic, the natural energy of body and mind returns.
All men do not inspire this electric matter in equal quantities, and thus a
remarkable difference of temperament is produced.

" Fifthly: To these causes must be added the different nature and quantity of
the blood. Thus, when the blood is highly stimulant, the heart is excited to
more violent action; an increased secretion of bile promotes the vermicular
motion, and a superfluity of mucus disposes to catarrh, etc. From these
considerations it is evident, that there are causes sufficiently powerful to
produce, at a very early period of life, an unalterable predisposition to a
certain temperament. That a complete change is ever effected, from a choleric
habit, for instance, to a phlegmatic, cannot be consistently admitted, at least
while the laws of nature remain unalterable. I will, however, admit that the
temperaments, though not completely changed, may be modified; -- that the
vehemence of some, and the languor of others, may to a certain degree be
lessened; but this must be done by remedies suited to the class of the causes
productive of a particular temperament. Of these the principal are:

1. A different regimen. Thus animal food imparts the highest degree of
strength to the organs, enlivens the senses, and often occasions a degree of
ferocity; as is evident in cannibals, in carnivorous animals in general, in
butchers and their dogs, in hunters, particularly when aided by the frequent
use of spices, wines, and stimulating medicines. Vegetable diet, on the
contrary, diminishes the irritability and sensibility of the system; in a word,
renders it phlegmatic. -- Some authors indeed have considered potatoes as being
the means of contributing to that end; but I am not inclined to subscribe to
this doctrine; since I have had occasion to observe the lively temperament of
the common people in Ireland. -- Yet attention to this is highly necessary in
those, who have the charge of children; as by the use of animal food,
additional energy may be given to the fibers, and when their irritability is
too great, it may be diminished by an opposite regimen.

"2. Education, both physical and moral, is another cause of alteration in the
temperament of man. Its power is almost unbounded, especially in the more early
periods of life; and hence it often happens, that whole nations seem to possess
one common temperament.

"3. Climate, in its most extensive sense, comprehending atmosphere and soil,
is a third cause of alteration. The activity and acuteness of a choleric habit
are seldom to be found in a region of perpetual fog; as for instance, in
Holland. They are the natural produce of a warm climate, and require a gentle
elevation of surface, with a moderately moist soil, and a serene, equal
atmosphere.

"4. I have often observed an astonishing degree of activity communicated to
the whole system, by an ardent desire of learning; so that the temperament
seemed to receive new life from every accession of knowledge.

"5. The want of the necessaries of life, on the one hand, or possession of the
means of luxury on the other, variously modify the disposition; -- and the
liveliness of the temperament is also observed to rise or fall, according to
the degree of political freedom.

"6. Age, company, and professional duties greatly affect the temperament.
Hence we seldom find any one who, at 56 years of age, retains the activity of
that choleric or sanguine habit which he possessed at 36.

"Those who follow nature, and not a plausible hypothesis, will be sensible how
difficult it is to classify and fix the characteristic marks of the different
temperaments; and it is rather a matter of doubt, whether the following rude
sketch will be more successful than the attempts of others.

"All the modifications of temperaments appear to be varieties of the sanguine
and phlegmatic.

"1. The sanguine is variable. It is marked by a lively complexion; the vessels
are full of blood; and persons of this habit are seldom able to bear great
warmth; they are predisposed to inflammations, and possess a high degree of
irritability and sensibility. All is voluptuous in this temperament. They are
sickle in every thing they undertake; are affable, and soon become acquainted,
but as soon forget their friends, and are suspicious of every body. Whatever
requires industry they abhor, and hence make little progress in science, till
they advance in age.

"2. The sanguineo-choleric enjoys all the health and serenity of the sanguine,
with all the perseverance of the choleric.

"3. In the choleric, the body is soft and flexible, without being dry and
meagre as in the melancholic; the skin has a teint of yellow; the hair is red;
the eyes dark and moderately large, with a penetrating expression, and
frequently a degree of wildness; the pulse full and quick; the muscular
contractions in walking, speaking, etc. are rapid; the bile is copious and
acrid, and hence the vermicular motion is active, and the body not liable to
costiveness. Persons of this class are particularly fond of animal food. They
possess great magnanimity, are fitted for laborious undertakings, and seem born
to command.

"4. He whose temperament is hypochondriacal, is a burden to himself and
others. Persons of this class are subject to diseases of the liver, and hence
have a sallow complexion. They are never content with their situation, and are
a prey to envy and suspicion.

"5. The melancholic temperament is marked by a gloomy countenance, small,
hollow, blinking eyes, black hair, a rigid or tough skin, dry and meagre
fibers. The pulse is weak and languid, the bile black, the vermicular motion
slow. The perceptions of persons of this disposition are quick; they are fond
of contemplation, and are slow in the execution of labor, which they patiently
undertake. They bear with resolution the troubles of life; and, though not
ensily provoked, are nevertheless vindictive.

"6. The Boeotic or rustic temperament has many of the qualities of the
sanguine, in common with many of those of the phlegmatic. The body is brawny,
the muscles have but little irritability, the nerves are dull, the manners
rude, and the powers of apprehension weak.

"7. The gentle temperament is a combination of the sanguine, choleric, and
phlegmatic. Universal benevolence is the distinguishing character of this
class. Their manners are soft and unruffled. They hate talkativeness; and if
they apply to science, their progress is great, as they are persevering and
contemplative. Lastly,

"8. The phlegmatic class is marked by a soft, white skin, prominent eyes, a
weak pulse, and languid gait. They speak slowly, are little hurt by the
injuries of the weather, submit to oppression, and seem born to obey. From
their little irritability, they are not easily provoked, and soon return to
their natural state of indifference and apathy."

On Patent or Quack Medicines.
ALTHOUGH there is but one state of perfect health, yet the deviations from it,
and the genera and species of diseases, are almost infinite. It will hence,
without difficulty, be understood, that in the classes of medical remedies
there must likewise be a great variety, and that some of them are even of
opposite tendencies. Such are both the warm and the cold bath, considered as
medical remedies. Though opposite to each other in their sensible effects, each
of them manifests its medical virtue, yet only in such a state of the body as
will admit of using it with advantage.

It is evident from these premises, that an universal remedy, or one that
possesses healing powers for the cure of all diseases, is in fact a nonentity,
the existence of which is physically impossible, as the mere idea of it
involves a direct contradiction. How, for instance, can it be conceived, that
the same remedy should be capable of restoring the tone of the fibers, when
they are relaxed, and also have the power of relaxing them when they are too
rigid; that it should coagulate the fluids when in a state of resolution, and
again attenuate them when they are too viscid; that it should moderate the
nerves in a state of preternatural sensibility, and likewise restore to them
their proper degree of irritability, when they are in a contrary state.

Indeed, the belief in an universal remedy appears to lose ground every day,
even among the vulgar, and has been long exploded in those classes of society,
which are not influenced by prejudice, or tinctured with fanaticism. It is,
however, sincerely to be regretted, that we are still inundated with a flood of
advertisments in almost every newspaper; that the lower and less enlightened
classes of the community are still imposed upon by a set of privileged
impostors, who frequently puzzle the intelligent reader to decide, whether the
boldness or the industry with which they endeavor to establish the reputation
of their respective poisons, be the most prominent feature in their character.
To illustrate this proposition farther, I shall quote the sensible remarks of a
late writer, Mr. JAMES PARKINSON, who expresses himself, in his " Medical
Admonitions," when treating on the subject of Catarrh, in the following
pertinent words:

"Most of the Nostrums advertised as cough drops, etc. are preparations of
opium, similar to the paregoric elixir of the shops, but disguised and rendered
more deleterious, by the addition of aromatic and heating gums. The injury
which may be occasioned by the indiscriminate employment of such medicines, in
this disease, may be very considerable; as is well known by every person
possessing even the smallest share of medical knowledge.

"It would undoubtedly be rendering a great benefit to society, if some medical
man were to convince the ignorant of the pernicious consequences of their
reliance on advertised Nostrums: but, unfortunately, the situation in which
medical men stand is such, that their best-intentioned and most disinterested
exertions for this purpose would not only be but little regarded, but
frequently would be even imputed to base and invidious motives. Those to whom
they have to address their admonitions are unhappily those on whom reason has
least influence. "Prithee, Doctor," said an old acquaintance to a celebrated
empiric, who was standing at his door, "how is it that you, whose origin I so
well know, should have been able to obtain more patients than almost all the
regular-bred physicians?" -- "Pray," says the Quack, "how many persons may have
passed us whilst you put your question?" -- "About twenty." -- "And, pray, how
many of those do you suppose possessed a competent share of common sense?" --
"Perhaps one out of twenty." -- "Just so," says the Doctor; "and that one
applies to the regular physician, whilst I and my brethren pick up the other
nineteen." -- P. 327 and 328.


-- It was justly observed by the sagacious and comprehensive Bacon, "that a
reflecting physician is not directed by the opinion which the multitude
entertain of a favorite remedy; but that he must be guided by a sound
judgment; and consequently he is led to make very important distinctions
between those things, which only by their name pass for medical remedies, and
others which in reality possess healing powers."

I am induced to avail myself of this quotation, as it indirectly censures the
conduct of certain medical practitioners, who do not scruple to recommend what
are vulgarly called Patent and other Quack medicines, the composition of which
is carefully concealed from the public. Having acquired their ill-merited
reputation by mere chance, and being supported by the most refined artifices,
in order to delude the unwary, we are unable to come at the evidence of perhaps
nine-tenths of those who have experienced their fatal effects, and who are now
no longer in a situation to complain.

The transition from Panaceas, or universal remedies, to Nostrums or Specifics,
such, for instance, as pretend to cure the same disease in every patient, is
easy and natural. With the latter also, impositions of a dangerous tendency are
often practiced. It will probably be asked here, how far they are practically
admissible, and in what cases they are wholly unavailing. It is not very
difficult to answer this question. In those diseases, which in every instance
depend upon the same cause, at in agues, the smallpox, measles, and many other
contagious distempers, the possibility of specifics, in a limited sense, may be
rationally, though hypothetically, admitted. But in other maladies, the causes
of which depend upon a variety of concurrent circumstances, and the cure of
which, in different individuals, frequently requires very opposite remedies, as
in the Dropsy, the various species of Colic, the almost infinite variety of
Consumptions, etc. etc. a specific remedy is an impudent burlesque upon the
common sense of mankind. Those who are but imperfectly acquainted with the
various causes from which the same disorder originates in different
individuals, can never entertain such a vulgar and dangerous notion. They will
easily perceive, how much depends upon ascertaining with precision the seat and
cause of the affection, before any medicine can be prescribed with advantage of
safety: -- even life and death, I am concerned to say, are too often decided by
the first steps of him, who offers or intrudes his advice upon a suffering
friend.

The following instances will show the danger attending the precipitate
application of the same medicine in similar disorders. -- A person violently
troubled with the colic took a glass of juniper spirits, commonly called
Hollands, from which he received almost instantaneous relief, as the affection
proceeded from flatulency. Another person, who found himself attacked with
similar pains, was induced by the example of his friend to try the same
expedient; he took it without hesitation, and died in a few hours after. -- No
wonder that the consequences here were fatal, as the colic in the latter case
was owing to an inflammation in the intestines. -- A third person was afflicted
with a colic, arising from poisonous mushrooms, which he had inadvertently
swallowed; the immediate administration of an emetic, and after it, some
diluted vegetable acid, restored him to health. A fourth person had an attack
of this malady from an encysted hernia or inward rupture. The emetic, which
relieved the former patient, necessarily proved fatal to the latter; for it
burst the bag of enclosed matter, poured the contents within the cavities of
the abdomen, and thus speedily terminated his existence. Again, another had by
mistake made use of arsenic, which occasioned violent pains, not unlike those
of a common colic. A large quantity of sweet oil taken internally was the means
of his preservation; whereas the remedies employed in the other cases would
have been totally ineffectual. Here I willingly close a narrative, the recital
of which cannot but excite the most painful sensations. To lengthen the
illustration would lead me too far beyond my prescribed limits: for cases of
this nature happen so frequently, that it would be easy to extend the account
of them, by a long catalogue of interesting but fatal accidents.

What is more natural than to place confidence in a remedy, which we have known
to afford relief to others in the same kind of affection? The patient anxiously
inquires after a person who has been afflicted with the same malady. He is
eager to learn the remedy that has been used with success. His friend or
neighbor imparts to him the wished-for intelligence. He is determined to give
it a fair trial, and takes it with confidence. From what has been stated, it
will not be difficult to conceive, that if his case does not exactly correspond
with that of his friend, any chance remedy may be extremely dangerous, and even
fatal.

The physician is obliged to employ all his sagacity, supported by his own
experience, as well as by that of his predecessors; and, nevertheless, is often
under the temporary necessity of discovering from the progress of the disease,
what he could not derive from the minutest researches. How then can it be
expected, that a novice in the art of healing should be more successful, when
the whole of his method of cure is either the impulse of the moment, or the
effect of his own credulity? It may be therefore truly said, that life and
death are frequently entrusted to chance. The late Dr. HUXHAM, a physician of
great celebrity, in speaking of Asclepiades, the Roman empiric, says: "This man
from a declaimer turned physician, and set himself up to oppose all the
physicians of his time; and the novelty of the thing bore him out, as it
frequently does the Quacks of the present time; and ever will, whilst the
majority of the world are fools."

In another place, Dr. Huxham thus curiously contrasts the too timid practice
of some regular physicians, with the hazardous treatment, which is the leading
feature of Quacks; "The timid, low, insipid practice of some, is almost as
dangerous as the bold, unwarranted empiricism of others; time and opportunity,
never to be regained, are often lost by the former; whilst the latter, by a
bold push, sends you off the stage in a moment."




From what has been premised, it may be confidently asserted, that a nostrum or
an universal remedy is as great a desideratum as the philosopher's stone. The
absurd idea of an universal medicine can only obtain credit with the weak, the
credulous, or the ignorant.

One of the most unfortunate circumstances in the history of such medicines, is
the insinuating and dangerous method, by which they are puffed into notice. And
as we hear little of the baneful effects which they daily must produce, by
being promiscuously applied, people attend only to the extraordinary instances,
perhaps not one in fifty, where they have afforded a temporary or apparent
relief. It is well known, that the more powerful a remedy is, the more
permanent and dangerous must be its effects on the constitution; especially if
it be introduced like many Patent. Medicines, by an almost indefinite increase
of the doses.

There is another consideration, not apt to strike those who are unacquainted
with the laws of animal economy. -- When we intend to bring about any
remarkable change in the system of an organized body, we are obliged to employ
such means as may contribute to produce that change, without affecting too
violently the living powers; or without extending their action to an improper
length. Indeed, the patient may be gradually habituated to almost any stimulus,
but at the expense of palsied organs, and a broken constitution. An Italian
Count, uncommonly fond of swallowing medicines, found at length that he could
take no more. Previous to his death he ordered the following inscription to be
placed on his tomb:

" I was once healthy; I wished to be better; I took medicine, and died."


Such are the melancholy effects of imposture and credulity! Were it possible
to collect all the cases of sacrifices to this mysterious infatuation, it is
probable that their number would exceed the enormous havoc made by gunpowder
or the sword.

A popular writer, Dr. BUCHAN, makes the following just remark on the subject
in question: "As matters stand at present," says he, "it is easier to cheat a
man out of his life, than of a shilling, and almost impossible either to detect
or punish the offender. Notwithstanding this, people still shut their eyes, and
take every thing upon trust, that is administered by any pretender to Medicine,
without daring to ask him a reason for any part of his conduct. Implicit faith,
every where else the object of ridicule, is still sacred here."

Analysis of Fashionable Complaints.
If these abuses of medicine be of consequence, how much more so are certain
manners, habits, and customs, which the united efforts of the Faculty will
never effectually remove or suppress, unless assisted by the female guardians
of helpless infancy. That I may not be misunderstood with respect to the real
intention of this address to the fair sex, I beg leave previously to observe,
that the following remarks apply chiefly to certain classes of the community,
among whom a due degree of attention is but rarely paid to the skin of their
offspring.

The greater number of our fashionable complaints and affections are nearly
related to each other. The gout, formerly a regular but rare disease, which
attacked only the external parts of persons advanced in years, has now become a
constitutional indisposition, a juvenile complaint, torturing the patient in a
thousand different forms. The famous Podagra and Chiragra of our ancestors are
now nearly obsolete, and instead of the gout in the feet or hands, we hear
every day of the nervous gout, the gout in the head, and even the fatal gout in
the stomach. No rank, no age, no mode of life seems to be exempt from this
fashionable enemy. -- The next and still more general malady of the times, is
an extreme sensibility to every change of the atmosphere; or rather, a
constantly sensible relation to its influence. We are not only more subject to
be affected with every current of air, every change of heat and cold, but the
feelings of some are so exquisitely delicate, that in a close apartment, nay in
bed, they can determine with accuracy the state of the weather, as well as the
direction of the wind. By consulting their bodily sensations, these living
barometers announce more correctly than the artificial ones, not only the
present, but even the future changes of the weather. I could never have
believed, that this additional sense, which is only of modern origin, could be
so much improved, had I not frequently witnessed the sensations of certain
patients, when a cloud is floating over their heads: -- a talent so peculiar to
our age, that it would undoubtedly excite surprise, but no envy, in our less
refined forefathers. In a climate, where the weather changes every day, and
almost every hour, it may be easily imagined, how dependent, frail, and
transitory, must be the health of the wretched possessors of this new sense;
and that beings so organized cannot warrant, for a single hour, their state of
health, their good humor, or their physical existence. Is it not then very
probable, that many strange and inconsistent events of our days may have their
secret foundation in this dependence on the weather? -- In judging of man and
his actions, we ought first to observe the state of the barometer; as our more
superstitious ancestors made the celestial constellations the criterion in
their prognostics.

Not less characteristic of the present generation, but more painful, are the
fashionable nervous and hypochondriacal diseases. These are formidable,
insidious tormentors, which not only destroy our physical well-being, but also
envenom our tranquillity and contentment, and cloud our fairest prospects of
happiness. Without depriving us of life, they render it an insupportable
burden; without inducing death, they make him a welcome visitor.

It is unnecessary to detail the diversified shapes, in which these maladies
present themselves. Let it suffice to observe, than however intimately the mind
appears to be connected with these phenomena, we can nevertheless account for
them from physical causes. They have rapidly increased with the propagation of
the gout, and experience shows, that they frequently alternate with it, in the
same individual patient. It is highly probable, therefore, that they are of a
similar nature with the gout; and that they originate from the same source,
which is peculiar to our age. Closely connected with the gout, and likewise
with the hypochondriasis, how frequently do we observe the haemorrhoids,
formerly a disease of the aged, now the companion of youth, and almost a
general complaint.

The last class of our fashionable diseases includes all those affections of
the skin, which are known by the name of eruptions, discolorations,
efflorescences, scorbutic taints, etc. Of late, these have alarmingly
increased, and appear daily to spread every where, like noxious weeds. Even in
the higher ranks, where neither a poor diet, nor want of attention to
cleanliness, can be assigned as causes, we frequently observe persons, whose
skin announces bad health, and on whom medicine can have no effect. Physicians
of different countries complain of new and unheard of cutaneous disorders, of
an extremely malignant tendency; and if the spreading of them be not checked in
time, Europe will perhaps once more be visited with that malignant and filthy
disease, the Leprosy.

It is however not sufficient to give a bare catalogue of these singular
affections. I shall, therefore, attempt to trace them to their source; to show
that they can be easily prevented; and to point out the most likely means by
which so desirable an event may be accomplished. -- It is to you, guardians of
future, and I hope hardier races, that I now appeal -- it is your aid I solicit
in so important a measure of national and domestic policy.

On the Nature and Functions of the Skin.
Much as we hear and speak of bathing, and of the great attention at present
paid to cleanliness, I am bold to affirm, that the greater number, if not the
whole of our fashionable complaints, originate from the want of care and proper
management of the skin. Through unpardonable neglect in the earlier part of
life, especially at the age of adolescence, the surface of the body is so
unnaturally enervated by constant relaxation, that it oppresses, and, as it
were, confines our mental and bodily faculties; promotes the general
disposition toward the complaints above alluded to; and, if not counteracted
in time, must produce consequences still more alarming and deplorable.

We often hear people complain, that their skin is uneasy; a complaint, which I
fear is but too prevalent among those, who give themselves little trouble to
inquire into its origin. -- But how is it possible, I hear many persons ask,
that the skin, which is a mere covering of the body, to shelter it from rain
and sunshine, can have such influence over the whole frame? I shall venture to
explain this problem, and hope to impress such as are inclined to be skeptical,
with more respect for that part of the human body.

The skin unites in itself three very essential functions. It is the organ of
the most extensive and useful sense, that of touch; it is the channel of
perspiration, the principal means which Nature employs to purify our fluids;
and through the most admirable organization, is enabled to absorb certain
salutary parts of the surrounding atmosphere, and to guard us against the
influence of others of an injurious tendency. For this purpose, innumerable
nerves and vessels are dispersed throughout the skin, which are in the
continual act of feeling, and at the same time of secreting and volatilizing
noxious particles, and absorbing those containing vital principles. It has been
proved by accurate calculations, that the most healthy individual daily and
insensibly perspires upwards of three pounds weight of superfluous and hurtful
humors. It may therefore be confidently asserted, that no part of the body is
provided with so many and important organs, by which it is connected with
almost every operation performed in animal life, as the skin. It is this, which
places us in the most immediate connection with the surrounding atmosphere,
which through that channel particularly affects us, and exerts its influence on
our health: -- we further feel, directly through the skin, the qualities of the
air, heat, cold, pressure, rarefaction, etc.: and hence we experience, at least
in their influence, other much more subtle and less known qualities, of which I
shall only mention the electric and magnetic fluids. From the spiritual and
highly penetrating nature of these fluids, we may easily conjecture, how
considerable a share they must have in the principle of vitality, and of what
important use the organ is, through which they affect us.

Important as the skin is to external life, it is no less so to the internal
economy of the body, where it appears to be peculiarly designed to preserve the
great equilibrium of the different systems, by which the human frame is
supported in its vital, animal, and sexual functions. -- If any stagnation,
accumulation, or irregularity arise in the fluids, the skin is the great and
ever-ready conductor, through which the superfluous particles are separated,
the noxious volatilized, and the fluids, stagnating in their course, set at
liberty; a canal being at the same time opened for the removal of those humors
which, if they should get access to the vital parts, such as the heart and the
brain, would cause inevitable destruction. By the proper exercise of this
organ, many diseases may be suppressed in their early stages; and those which
have already taken place may be most effectually removed. No disease whatever
can be removed without the cooperation of the skin. The nature and
constitution of this organ most certainly determine either our hope or
apprehension for the safety of the patient. In the most dangerous inflammatory
fevers, when the prospect of recovery is very faint, a beneficial change of the
skin is the only effort, by which Nature, almost overcome, relieves herself,
and ejects the poison in a surprising manner, frequently in the course of one
night. The greatest art of a physician, indeed, consists in the proper
management of this extensive organ, and in regulating its activity, where
occasion requires. To mention only one circumstance; it is well known to those
who have experienced the beneficial effects of a simple blister, that its
stimulus, like a charm, has frequently relieved the most excruciating pains and
spasms in the internal parts.

Cleanliness, flexibility and activity of the skin are, according to the
observations premised, the principal requisites to the health of individuals,
as well as of whole nations. But instead of contributing to its improvement, we
generally pay very little attention to it, except to the skin of the face and
hands, which are too often made the fallacious index of health. I am convinced,
however, that most of the patients and valetudinarians, who take so much pains
to refresh and fortify the internal parts of their body, by invigorating
potations, rarely, if ever, pay any regard to their external surface; -- an
object of equal importance, and perhaps standing in much greater need of
corroborants than the former. Hence it happens, that the skin of convalescents
is observed to be particularly relaxed and obstructed; that they are liable to
continual colds, upon the least change of temperature; and that every day of
their recovery renders them more subject to relapses.

In this country, the children of people in the middling and lower ranks are
perhaps better managed, than in most of the countries upon the Continent;
because frequent and daily bathing is, to my certain knowledge, no where so
generally practiced as in England. As soon, however, as children attain a
certain age, this practice is again as generally neglected: after the tenth or
twelfth year of age, the surface of the body is very little attended to. Thus a
foundation is laid for numberless evils, and particularly for that scorbutic
taint in the human system, which now almost universally prevails, and which is
more or less connected with other and more fashionable complaints. -- As we
advance further in years, this disposition of the skin increases still more,
particularly from the mode of life pursued in the higher ranks. We then begin
to accustom ourselves to sedentary habits, to think, and to partake of the
pleasures of life. The lady, the man of fortune, and the ill-fated man of
letters, all of them require more active exercise, than they actually take,
which alone can promote a free perspiration, and enliven the surface of the
body; but, by their indolent habits, the whole machine stagnates, and the skin
becomes contracted and debilitated.

The husbandman, indeed, labors diligently; and though, by the sweat of his
brow, his skin preserves more life and activity, it is neither kept
sufficiently clean, nor prevented from being obstructed by perspirable matter.
The artist and manufacturer carry on their pursuits in a sedentary manner, and
in a confined, impure air; the latter, in the duties of his occupation,
generally employs unwholesome articles, so that at length he loses the use of
this organ entirely, in some parts of the body. The voluptuary and the glutton
do not suffer less than the former, as they impair the energy of the skin by
excesses of every kind, and take no precautions to preserve its elastic
texture. -- Our usual articles of dress, flannel excepted, are not calculated
to promote a free perspiration; -- our coal-fires, and still more the large
potations of warm liquors, contribute greatly to relax the skin. If we add to
this list of predisposing causes, our inconstant climate, which at one hour of
the day braces, and at another relaxes the surface of the body, which
alternately heats and cools it, and consequently disturbs its uniform action;
it will be easily understood, that the skin must for these reasons be almost
generally vitiated, and that it really is a leading source of many of our
fashionable indispositions.

When the sensation of the surface is impaired; when the myriads of orifices,
that are designed for the continual purification and renovation of our fluids,
are obstructed, if not closed; when the subtle nervous texture is nearly
deprived of its energy, so that it becomes an impenetrable coat of mail, is
there any reason to wonder, that we are so often harassed by a sense of
constraint and anxiety, and that this uneasiness, in many cases, terminates in
a desponding gloom, and at length in complete melancholy? -- Ask the
hypochondriac, whether a certain degree of cold, paleness, and a spasmodic
sensation in the skin, do not always precede his most violent fits of mental
debility; and whether his feelings are not most comfortable, when the surface
of his body is vigorous, warm, and perspires freely? In short, the degrees of
insensible perspiration are to him the safest barometer of his state of mind.
If our skin be disorganized, the free inlets and outlets of the electric,
magnetic, and other matters, which affect us at the change of the weather, are
inactive. Thus the origin of extreme sensibility toward the various
atmospheric revolutions, is no longer a mystery. For, in a healthy surface of
the body, no inconvenience will follow from such changes. -- If we further
advert to those acrimonious fluids which, in an imperfect state of
perspiration, are retained in our body, and which settle upon the most sensible
nerves and membranes, -- we shall better apprehend, how cramps or spasms, the
torturing pains of the Gout and Rheumatism, and the great variety of cutaneous
diseases, have of late become so obstinate and general.

The equilibrium of the fluids, and the circulation of the blood, are also
determined in no small degree by the skin; so that if these fluids become thick
and languid, the whole momentum of the blood is repelled toward the interior
parts. Thus a continual plethora, or fullness of the blood, is occasioned; the
head and breast are greatly oppressed; and the external parts, especially the
lower extremities, feel chilly and lifeless.

In warm climates, in Italy for instance, the haemorrhoids, a very distressing
complaint, are but rarely met with, notwithstanding the luxurious and sensual
mode of life of the inhabitants; because perspiration is always free and
unchecked: while among us persons are found, who devote the whole of their
attention to the cure of that troublesome disorder.

May we not infer, from what I have thus advanced, that the use of baths is too
much neglected, and ought to be universally introduced? It is not sufficient,
for the great purposes here alluded to, that a few of the more wealthy families
repair every season to watering-places, or that they even make use of other
modes of bathing, either for their health or amusement. A very different method
must be pursued, if we seriously wish to restore the vigor of a degenerated
race. I mean here to inculcate the indispensable necessity for domestic baths,
so well known among the ancients, and so universally established all over
Europe, a few centuries ago, and which were eminently calculated to check the
further progress of the leprosy; -- a disease which, though flower in its
effects, is not less distressing than the plague itself.

Much has been said and written upon the various methods, and the universal
medicines, proposed in different ages, by different adventurers, professedly to
diminish the inherent disposition to disease, and to give a new and renovating
principle to the human frame. At one time they expected to find it in the
philosophic and astralian salis, at another in Magnetism and Electricity; --
some fanatics pretended to have discovered it in the light of the moon, others
in celestial beds; -- but, if I may venture to deliver my opinion, we may
search for it most safely and conveniently in every clear fountain -- in the
bosom of ever young, ever animating nature.

Bathing may be also considered as an excellent specific for alleviating both
mental and bodily sufferings. It is not merely a cleanser of the skin,
enlivening and rendering it more fit for performing its offices; but it also
refreshes the mind, and spreads over the whole system a sensation of ease,
activity, and pleasantness. It further removes stagnation in the larger as well
as in the capillary vessels; it gives an uniform free circulation to the blood,
and preserves that wonderful harmony in our interior organs, on the disposition
of which our health and comfort so much depend. A person fatigued, or
distressed in body and mind, will derive more refreshment from the luxury of a
lukewarm bath, and may drown his disquietude in it more effectually, than by
indulging in copious libations to Bacchus. The bath may be equally recommended
as an admirable retiring place, to evade, for a time, the influence of the
atmosphere; and persons that have the misfortune to be too susceptible of
external impressions, would find no small benefit, were they to repair in thick
and sultry weather to the bath, where they breathe in an element less loaded
with noxious particles.

The wish to enjoy perpetual youth, is one of the most predominant and
pardonable. Though it cannot be rationally asserted, that bathing will confer
continual youth, yet I will hazard an opinion, that it has a very uncommon and
superior tendency to prolong that happy state; it preserves all the solid parts
soft and pliable, and renders the joints of the body flexible. Hence it
powerfully counteracts, what I presume to call an insidious disease, viz. age,
which operates by gradually exhausting the humors, and depriving the
constituent parts of the human frame of their elasticity. It is no less
certain, that bathing is one of the most efficacious means of preserving
beauty; and that those nations, among which bathing is a prevailing practice,
are usually the most distinguished for elegance of form and beauty of
complexion.

A moderate desire to improve and beautify the surface of the body, is far from
being a frivolous pursuit. It excites as much interest, and is productive of as
beneficial consequences, as the exertions of many a pseudo-philosopher, who
devotes the toil of years, to arrange his notions in a certain systematic form,
and who yet is not fortunate enough to attain the great object of his wish. I
have had frequent opportunities to observe, that the desire of beauty, when not
inordinate, may prove the source of many virtuous and laudable pursuits, and
that it may be greatly instrumental to the preservation of health. I am also
persuaded, that this desire is often pursued by methods not the most proper,
and that from not having a just knowledge of beauty, we make many valuable
sacrifices, not only of things relating to health, but sometimes of life
itself. Instances are not uncommon, of young persons attempting to bleach their
skins, and beautify their persons, by avoiding a free air, using a mild and
weakening diet, long fasting, long sleeping, warming their beds, etc. etc.;
but, alas! the event does not answer their expectation, -- they lose both
health and bloom! -- Eating chalk, drinking vinegar, wearing camphorated
charms, and similar destructive means have been resorted to, by other more
daring adventurers, but with no better success. Those I have last enumerated,
may be called the minor cosmetics: others of a more formidable nature, I almost
hesitate to mention, as they are unquestionably the most deleterious substances
we are acquainted with. Mercury and lead, manufactured in various forms, are
unhappily too common ingredients in many of our modern cosmetics, whether they
consist of lotions, creams, powders, paints or ointments. That these substances
can be communicated to the circulating fluids, through the skin as well as by
the stomach, requires, I should suppose, no further proof, after the doctrines
already advanced on this subject. Lead, in particular, if once introduced into
the system, though in the smallest proportions, cannot be removed by art, and
never fails to produce the most deplorable effects; such as palsy, contraction
and convulsion of the limbs, total lameness, weakness, and the most
excruciating colic pains. Besides these more obvious effects, the frequent
external use of lead and mercury, as cosmetics, occasions cramps in every part
of the body, faintings, nervous weakness, catarrhs, tubercles in the lungs and
intestines, which occur together or separately, according to the different
circumstances, till at length a consumption, either pulmonary or hectic, closes
the dreadful scene.

Beauty of the skin, the subject under consideration at present, is but another
term for a found and healthy skin; -- a pure mirror of the harmony of the
internal parts with their surface, or, if I may be allowed the expression, " it
is visible health."

There subsists so intimate a relation between our interior and exterior
vessels, that almost every error or irregularity in the organs within, shows
itself first of all on the surface without, and particularly on the face. --
How often are we struck at the countenance of a person, who thinks himself in
perfect health, but whose illness, the result of some morbid cause concealed in
the body, justifies in a few days the serious apprehensions we entertained at
our last interview. Nature has wisely ordained, that the first appearance of
internal irregularities is indicated by the countenance; but to what use do we
generally apply this index? -- We refuse to avail ourselves of her beneficent
intimation; and the continued use of pernicious substances, instead of
promoting the object we have in view, ultimately tarnishes and impairs that
beauty, which we meant to adorn and preserve. We imagine it in our power to
improve the skin, without attending to the purity of the fluids, although it is
indebted to them for its very existence; and yet should smile at a person, who
attempted to cleanse an impure tongue, by constantly scraping it, when a
disordered stomach was the real cause of that impurity.

From the tenor of the preceding positions, I hope for indulgence, when I
venture to pronounce every cosmetic, whose composition is kept a secret from
the public, false and fraudulent ware. The three great and really effectual
SUBSTITUTES FOR COSMETICS, To such readers, whether male or female, as are
determined to make use of cosmetics, instead of attending to the more effectual
means to preserve the bloom of the skin, it may be of service to point out one
or two external applications, in order to prevent them from resorting to the
dangerous and destructive contrivances of Quacks. -- According to Dr.
WITHERING, a physician of great eminence at Birmingham, an infusion of
horseradish in milk makes one of the safest and best cosmetics. Another
preparation for clearing the skin of pimples and recent eruptions, if assisted
by gentle aperient medicines, is the fresh expressed juice of house-leek, mixed
with an equal quantity of sweet milk or cream. -- Yet all contrivances
whatever, to answer this purpose, are absurd and nugatory, if the inward state
of the body be neglected, or if they be looked upon as specifics of themselves.
Such things do not exist in nature; and we might as well try to bleach the face
of a Negro, as to remove any scorbutic or other eruptions from the face,
without bestowing proper attention on the whole state of the body, and
particularly the fluids, from which these irregularities derive their origin.
which I would recommend, are the following: First; due attention to insensible
perspiration; -- an important process, by which nature, if duly assisted, will
not fail to expel all acrimonious or useless particles. By this, too, the
surface of the body will be kept in a constant atmosphere of softening
exhalations, -- a species of volatile vapor-bath, and the most efficacious
means of preserving it soft and plaint, and of animating it with the color of
life. The next circumstance to be attended to, is the purity of the fluids;
this depends equally on a free perspiration, and on a vigorous state of
digestion. The third requisite to a fair, healthful complexion, is an uniform
distribution of the fluids; or in other words, a free and unrestrained
circulation of the blood; as the very purest fluids, when profusely propelled
to the face, are productive of disagreeable consequences, such as unnatural
redness, flushings, tumid appearances, etc. of which ladies of a sedentary life
are so apt to complain.

To these three general observations, I think, it may be necessary to subjoin a
few particular injunctions, relative to the improvement of the skin, as
connected with a state of good health. -- Carefully avoid all immoderate and
violent dancing, as the sudden alternations of heat and cold, not only impair
the general state of the skin, but are likewise of the greatest detriment to
beauty. -- Abstain from the too frequent and too copious use of heating liquors
of every kind, particularly punch and strong wines. There is scarcely any thing
which is, in my opinion, more destructive of the bloom of youth and manhood,
than this liquid fire, which fills the blood with inflammable particles,
propels them toward the face, parches the skin, renders it spotted, and lays
the foundation of that incurable disease, which is sometimes figuratively
called copper in the face. Neither sugar, nor any additional ingredient to
gratify the palate, can deprive these liquors of their noxious qualities, so
that even the most agreeable of these seductive potions is attended with
considerable danger.

Avoid, likewise, every excess in hot drinks, as coffee, chocolate, and tea,
particularly the last, in which the people of this country are given to
indulge, more than in any other beverage. I scarcely dare venture to impeach
this favorite solace of our morning and evening hours; but with all due
deference to the comforts of the domestic circle, I consider it as my duty to
denounce the too liberal use of this liquor, as not a little prejudicial to the
fairness and purity of the skin. Tea taken hot, and in immoderate quantities,
not only has a tendency to weaken the organs of digestion, but causes
fluctuations and congestions in the humors of the face, and frequently brings
on a degree of debilitating perspiration. Let us conceive the stomach inundated
with a portion of warm water, just at the time of digestion; its concoctive
powers are literally drowned, at the very instant when their assistance is most
required; and, instead of a pure balsamic chyle, or alimentary fluid, it
prepares crude, and acrimonious humors, which can only generate an unhealthy
mass of blood. Here, I cannot impress upon the attentive reader, in terms
sufficiently strong, the following truth: that a healthy stomach only can
produce healthy and uncontaminated fluids; and that two thirds of what we call
acrimony, or sharpness of humors in the system, proceed from a languid
stomach, and irregular digestion. -- If therefore the tea be made too weak, it
will operate merely as warm water, and like it will greatly relax the coat and
membranes of the stomach; -- if made too strong, it will give an unnatural heat
to the body, prove a dangerous stimulus to the nerves, occasion palpitations of
the heart, universal trembling, cramps, and a number of other complaints, which
it is needless to enumerate. That these effects do not take place, during the
first months or years of indulging ourselves in the intemperate use of hot and
strong tea, is no argument to controvert this position; they will, either
sooner or later, unavoidably follow.

I shall but slightly touch here, on another subject, scarcely of less
importance than the former; namely, the various articles prepared by the
pastry-cook and confectioner. These dainties would be less objectionable, if
any method could be devised of baking them without the pernicious ingredients
of yeast and fat, substances which load the stomach with a glutinous slime and
rancid matter, which obstruct the glands of the abdomen, particularly those of
the mesentery, and which have a strong tendency to produce the cutaneous
diseases before mentioned.

On the Physical Education of Children.
THE physical education To some readers it may be necessary to explain, that by
physical education is meant the bodily treatment of children: the term physical
being applied in opposition to moral.
of infants unquestionably forms an object of the first importance. The great
disproportion subsisting between healthy and diseased children, together with
the deplorable mortality which occurs among the latter, too plainly evince,
that their bodily welfare is not sufficiently attended to.

There is little room to doubt, that by a more rational mode of nurture, during
the first years of infancy, many subsequent diseases might either be wholly
prevented, or at least greatly mitigated. Nothing perhaps would contribute more
to meliorate education in general, than, what has been long and much wanted, a
serious and minute attention of the Faculty to this particular branch of
medical study: which at present, I am concerned to say, is almost totally
neglected.

The few books extant on this subject are neither written on scientific
principles, nor calculated, by their manner and style, to afford plain and
popular instruction. It is not enough for professional men to plan systems of
education in their study-rooms; -- let them also demonstrate in practice, that
they are familiarly acquainted with the true method of educating children; -- a
method which; in my opinion, implies somewhat more than merely prescribing and
administering medicines.

So long as the nursing of children remains exclusively in the hands of common
midwives and nurses, it is rather a matter of surprise, that so many infants
should survive the age of childhood. -- We ought therefore, above all things,
to inquire into the monstrous prejudices prevailing in this essential part of
domestic management, as the first step toward their extirpation.

How great would be my satisfaction, if, by the following strictures, I should
be able to prevail upon some intelligent mothers, who possess sufficient
fortitude, to throw off the bondage of old customs, or modern fashions, and to
return to the path of simple nature! -- In a system of practical education, it
is a judicious precept, which cannot be too much inculcated, to omit rather
than to undertake, or be too officious, in the physical treatment of infants.

From the difficulty of discovering the true cause and seat of the complaints
of children, especially if accompanied with any particular symptoms in the
excretory vessels, it is very usual to administer a gentle laxative or emetic,
upon the slightest occasion. -- It would lead me too far to examine, in detail,
the many bad consequences resulting from so absurd and detrimental a practice.
I cannot, however, forbear from remarking, that by dealing constantly in
aperient medicines (a strange infatuation among the vulgar!) the future
diseases of the child assume a particular character of the gastric kind -- the
juice of the stomach, which serves to concoct our food, being vitiated. As the
operation of the laxatives is in a manner mechanical, by impelling the fluids,
and particularly those of the mucous kind, toward the stomach and bowels, and
causing them to accumulate in a greater degree than usual, it will be easily
understood, that by the frequent repetition of this stimulus, the gastric juice
will be rendered unfit to effect the proper solution of food in the stomach.
For the same reason, persons subject to frequent costiveness soon begin to
complain of indigestion, when they once habituate themselves to take ANDERSON'S
or any other aperient pills: for by them the stomach is converted, as it were,
into a field of battle, where all the irregularities, that take place in the
system, are left to fight their way; where the limits of disease and health,
nay the alternative of life and death, are to be finally determined. That this
however is not the most proper place for such a contest, requires no
demonstration. The stomach is appointed by nature for very different purposes;
it is the only organ of nourishment and digestion; the source of restoration
and health. But how can it effectually answer this end, if it serves, at the
same time, as the constant laboratory of diseases? As it is always in a state
of impurity, it cannot act with uniform energy and a sufficient degree of
elasticity, to prevent frequent irregularities in digestion; -- hence arise bad
humors, hypochondriac affections, and nervous debility; all of which, I have
reason to fear, are, more or less, consequences of tampering with medicines,
especially in the period of childhood. I am further induced to think, though it
may to some appear rather a bold idea, that more children are destroyed by the
absurd practice of loading their tender stomachs with every sort of trash, and
afterward relieving them by repeated doses of physic, than by any natural
process. This likewise accounts for the great number of children who die in
towns, at an early age, before they become inured to such severe attacks made
on their digestive organs.

In order to check, and, if possible, to prevent, this general tendency to
diseases; to meliorate the constitution of children, by producing a regular
circulation of the fluids; and to direct the exuding morbid matter more
universally and uniformly through the pores of the skin, a more effectual
remedy cannot be suggested, than that of frequent bathing, and a very limited
use of aperient medicines.

These observations are not conjectural, but founded on experience, and it
gives me pleasure to add, that they are confirmed by many physicians of eminent
abilities, and extensive practice.

Frequent bathing in infancy is a powerful mean of counteracting and
suppressing the disposition to stomachic and bilious complaints, which, in our
days, are uncommonly prevalent among children and adults, and which are
frequently accompanied with diversified nervous symptoms. By the efforts of
nature, to throw off malignant humors by the surface of the body, in
consequence of a proper use of the bath, many infantile diseases may be safely
prevented, catarrhs suppressed, or greatly mitigated, teething rendered easy,
and the whole physical condition of the child considerably improved.

It becomes here a question, which is the most proper degree of heat in using
the bath for children. -- I shall venture to pronounce, upon the authority of
the best modern authors, confirmed by my own experience and observation, that
the lukewarm bath, between 84 and 96 of Fahrenheit's thermometer, rather more
than new-milk warm, is, upon an average, the most suitable temperature. An
erroneous notion too much prevails, that the good effects of bathing are
principally to be ascribed to the cold bath. The use of any bath, indeed,
whether cold or warm, that is, the stimulating impression excited by the water,
is, of itself, an excellent tonic, serving to brace and invigorate the whole
system. Not to mention the comfortable sensations, that must necessarily attend
the cleansing and opening so many millions of pores, with which the skin is
provided, it is farther remarkable, that water, formerly considered as a simple
element, is now pretty generally understood to be a compound body, consisting
of oxygen and hydrogen, or vital and inflammable air, the former of which, it
is well known, promotes the process of respiration, and literally feeds the
vital principle in the human body. Although this assertion rests chiefly on an
hypothetical foundation, so much is certain, that a lukewarm bath, used for the
legs alone, is found by experience to communicate new spirits to the weary
traveller, almost instantly to remove the sense of languor, and to re-animate
all his faculties. Bruce, the Abyssinian traveller, remarks, that in the
intense heat of that country, a lukewarm bath afforded him more refreshment and
vigor, than a cold one. We ought farther to consider, that infants are
accustomed scarcely to any other than a warm temperature. The cold bath belongs
to the class of heroic remedies, and in its sudden and vehement effects nearly
resembles electricity. It is moreover an axiom in medicine, that the means of
stimulating and corroborating the system, should be in proportion to the degree
of vital power in the individual; that a faint spark may be extinguished rather
than kindled by too violent a concussion of air; and that a degree of stimulus
and invigoration, which agrees with a firm and robust body, may prove
destructive to one that is weak and tender. It might therefore be extremely
hazardous to employ a remedy, in the delicate frame of infants, which even
adults should not resort to without the greatest precaution. I presume to go a
step farther, and do not hesitate to say, that the use of the cold bath, as far
as relates to the treatment of children, is even DANGEROUS. Its principal mode
of operation is by contracting the whole surface of the body, and by causing a
general repulsion of the fluids toward the internal parts. Hence in a young
and infirm body, which has very little internal reaction, the necessary
consequence of cold bathing will be an unequal distribution of the fluids, a
partial or local stagnation of them; and, what is worst of all, an accumulation
of humors in the head, by which infants are frequently injured, before it is
in their power to complain. -- The lukewarm bath, on the contrary, produces an
uniform revolution and salutary purification of all the fluids. For these
reasons, I consider the tepid bath as in every respect preferable, since it may
be used somewhat cooler for strong children, or warmer for those of a weakly
constitution, and the requisite degrees of heat be regulated according to the
increasing age and strength of the child. In summer, the water intended for
bathing ought to be exposed the whole day to the rays of the sun, which will
impart to it an agreeable and congenial warmth. Rain, or river-water, is the
most proper for this purpose; but if there be a necessity for using spring or
well-water, it should be previously softened with a small quantity of boiled
water, in which a quarter of an ounce of soap has been dissolved, with the
addition of a little bran or oatmeal; or if milk can be had, it will be found a
still more useful ingredient. Here I would particularly recommend not to boil
the whole quantity of the water to be used for bathing; as it would in that
case be deprived of its aerial constituents, which are not without their
importance in the bath. -- During the first weeks and months, the child should
not be suffered to remain in the bath longer than five minutes, which time may
be gradually increased to a quarter of an hour. During the whole process of
bathing, the body should not remain inactive, but be gently rubbed with the
hand, and afterward cleaned with a soft sponge. It is of consequence to attend
to the point of time, when the child is taken out of the bath; for in almost
every instance where warm bathing disagrees with the child, it will be found
owing to neglect in not wiping and drying the body with sufficient expedition
at this particular period. Hence it is highly necessary to keep warm clothes in
readiness, in which the child should be wrapped up, and dried, the very moment
it is taken out of the bath. Every one in the habit of bathing must have
observed, that the evaporation of water on the skin excites penetrating and
uncomfortable sensations of cold; and there is an astonishing difference of
temperature between actually being in the water, and having water on the skin
after quitting the bath. If, therefore, a child, from want of due precaution,
be kept for several minutes with a naked, wet body, it will be liable to
contract a cold, the more dangerous in its consequences, as it immediately
succeeds a state, in which the body is warm and the skin open.

It should be further observed, that bathing, immediately after a meal, or with
a full stomach, is highly improper, if not dangerous, both in children and
adults; nor is it advisable, in rough weather, to carry a child into the open
air too soon after bathing. The most proper time for using the bath is the
evening, when the child can be removed to bed, as soon as it is completely
dried.

There is another species of bath, equally indispensable, which I will call the
Air-bath; or the daily enjoyment of fresh air. This is usually considered as a
promenade, or walk of pleasure; and as children cannot judge of its great
utility, and the weather is not always favorable for excursions, parents are
sometimes guilty of unpardonable neglect, in confining infants for whole days
and weeks together within their rooms. But if air be essentially requisite to
animate the most subtle powers of man, it follows, that it is as necessary to
the organs of life as food and drink; and that its salutary influence on the
constitution does not so much depend on the state of it with respect to
pleasantness and serenity, as on its freshness and constant renewal. Hence I
would impress it on the reader, as a rule not to be departed from, to let no
day elapse, without affording the child an opportunity of imbibing the
salubrious qualities of fresh air. In the first months great precaution is
necessary, and children born in spring or summer have in this respect no small
advantages, as there is less danger in exposing them to the open air during the
warm months, than there is in autumn and winter. In the milder seasons, too,
violent winds, and moist weather, cannot be too carefully avoided. After the
two first months of its existence, if the child has been duly habituated to
fresh air, it may be safely carried out in any state of the weather: this ought
to be regularly done every day, if it be only for half an hour, as it is one of
the most nourishing cordials that can be given. I shall just notice here, in a
cursory way, the great benefit which the eyes of children derive from this
practice, and which, particularly at a time when complaints of weak and sore
eyes are heard in almost every family, is of the utmost importance. It is an
unquestionable fact, that the shortness of sight, and weakness of the eyes, so
prevalent among the inhabitants of towns, is chiefly owing to the injudicious
custom of confining children, during the first years of their lives, almost
constantly within four walls; so that the eye, being accustomed to near objects
only, becomes organized for a narrow view, and at length is rendered incapable
of forming the focus properly for distant objects. On the other hand, it is
equally certain, that by an early and daily exertion of the organs of sight, in
beholding remote objects, in the open air, the circle of vision is enlarged,
the power of sight increased, and a solid foundation laid for acquiring a clear
and comprehensive discernment of objects.

From the preceding observations, it will be readily admitted, that the proper
and daily airing of the nursery, in winter as well as in summer, is of no small
importance to the wellbeing of children. It has been proved by many fatal
instances, that a confined and impure air is of itself capable of exciting the
most violent convulsive symptoms, and consequently is one of the principal
causes, that so many infants die of convulsions, during the first months of
their lives. Would it not be more eligible, to select the most airy apartment
in the house for a nursery, than low and confined garrets, as is too frequently
the case in large families? The room, in which children breathe, should at
least be capacious and lofty, and exposed to the cheering rays of the sun,
which not only influence the temper and spirits of children, but serve to
purify the corrupted air in their apartments.

Persons unaccustomed to reflect on this subject, can scarcely conceive, what
salutary effects the simple means here recommended, namely, the early habit of
washing, bathing, and daily airing, produce on the constitution, and physical
formation of the child. The habit of body, growth, and appearance of children,
properly educated in this respect, will be totally different from those, who
are reared like foreign plants in a ho^-house. To point out still more forcibly
the peculiar advantages attending the regimen here recommended, I shall exhibit
a picture of such children, not taken from fancy, but authorized by facts, and
according with the experience of many modern observers, as well as my own, and
that of a respectable physician in Germany, Professor Hufeland of Jena, to whom
I am greatly indebted for the following observations:

1. A child thus treated is more hardy and less affected by the vicissitudes of
climate and weather.

2. Its body is straight and robust; its limbs are uniformly muscular, and well
proportioned.

3. The stages of evolution, in its different organs, take place in regular
succession; -- no power, no capacity, outstrips another; its teeth do not
appear too soon, nor at irregular periods; the child does not begin to walk too
early nor too late; and the same order is observable with regard to its
speaking. Even the mental faculties expand themselves more regularly, that is,
not too rapidly, but after the most important bodily changes have been
effected. Every period of its progress to maturity comes on in a natural and
gradual manner, so that the child, in a physical sense, longer remains a child;
-- he does not shoot up into manhood, before he has completed the proper term
of youth; and thus every stage, as well as the whole career of his existence,
is considerably prolonged.

4. By this treatment the circulation of the fluids, and all internal motions,
particularly of the lungs and intestines, together with the usual evacuations,
are beneficially promoted. Of no less advantage is the bath to those children,
that are subject to habitual costiveness; a distemperature which cannot be too
much guarded against, not only during the age of childhood, but also through
the whole life. Infants accustomed to the bath, and fresh air, are scarcely
ever known to suffer from this complaint.

5. The texture of their muscular flesh becomes solid, the color blooming, and
the body neither appears tumid and spungy, nor parched and meagre. The
complexion is lively and fresh; -- the head and lower belly are in just
proportion to the rest of the body, and the disposition to rickets, so common
in children, is not perceived in them.

6. Neither are such children as enjoy the benefit of the bath affected by that
excessive sensibility and diseased irritability of the nervous system, which in
many instances so fatally degenerates into spasms, fits, and convulsions. These
irregularities, in early life, are chiefly instrumental in bringing on that
pitiable state, in which some unhappy persons, through the whole of their
lives, are little better than loco-motive nervous machines -- organized beings,
that exist apparently for the sake of feeling only, not for acting.

7. Diseases of the skin, eruptions, catarrhs, coughs, obstructions of the
first passages, etc. are rarely observed to attack a child properly treated;
and if they do, their duration will be short, and the crises easy and natural.

8. Those diseases in children, which are commonly called dangerous, as the
smallpox, measles, scarlet fever, etc. and which are ultimately diseases of
the skin, are greatly alleviated in their symptoms, and more easily overcome,
when the skin is in full health and vigor; -- but as the usual management of
children deprives the skin of those properties, we need not be at all surprised
at the danger and subsequent mortality of children, in the abovementioned
diseases.

9. The early practice of washing and bathing may be also recommended, as
tending to strengthen that sense of cleanliness, which is so praiseworthy and
useful in itself; and which is not sufficiently cultivated among those nations,
where the bath is in disuse. The Russians, notwithstanding their ignorance, and
rusticity of manners, take the lead of the more relined French and Germans,
both in a delicate sensibility of cleanliness, and in the practical use of the
bath. I lately read of a foreign gentleman, traveling in Russia, who had hired
one of the natives as his groom or postillion. After having traveled several
days together in very sultry weather, the semibarbarian upon his knees
requested his employer to grant him leave of absence for two or three hours, to
refresh himself with the luxury of a bath, which to him was indispensable, and
the want of which he had long felt. The peasants in that country possess a
refinement of sense, with respect to the surface of the body, with which the
most elegant ladies in other countries seem totally unacquainted.


If the means above stated are expected to produce their full effect, it should
not be forgotten, that the whole management of the child ought to correspond
and keep pace with the preceding practice. Without attending to this condition,
constant washing and bathing may not only prove of little service, but may in
some instances be productive of mischief. Hence it is absolutely necessary to
prohibit the use of feather-beds, cumbersome dresses, etc. and to avoid all
suffocating rooms, whether occasioned by too great heat, or an offensive
corrupted atmosphere.

There is no practice more detrimental to the powers and energy of man, in the
first period of his evolution, than that of immediately sinking the tender
infant in a soft feather-bed. In this situation, all the organs become
extremely relaxed, and we lay the foundation of a very serious malady, a
sweating-skin; the source of constant colds, tooth-achs, head-achs, catarrhs,
and innumerable other complaints.

For these and similar reasons, I would advise parents to lay their children,
from the very hour of their birth, on soft and cooling mattresses, under thin
blanket covers, or cotton quilts, which do not incommode the body, lea^^ the
hands and arms at liberty, and are not liable to excite too great a degree of
heat. In the intense cold of winter, an additional blanket may be used, which,
however, should be removed when the weather turns milder, and the child grows
stronger. But the greatest mischief arises from bolsters or pillows filled with
feathers; which must, after a certain time, produce uncleanliness and a
disagreeable smell. Such a pillow is calculated to collect and retain mephitic
vapors; and for this obvious reason it cannot but be unsafe to sleep for a
whole twelvemonth wit^^ one's head reposed on such a mass of acrid exhalations.
This inconvenience may be easily avoided, by furnishing children with cushions
filled with horse-hair, or with the softest bran, previously well beaten; the
best for this purpose is the bran of oats. The great advantage of these pillows
is, that they admit moisture to pass through them, consequently they will
always remain dry; and may from time to time be renewed, while they preserve a
moderate and regular degree of warmth.

Cleanliness, in domestic life, is one of the cardinal virtues, and an
essential requisite to the proper physical education of children. Indeed, I
cannot help remarking, that this is perhaps the only province of parental care,
in which we never can do too much. For this end, we ought not to neglect the
article of linen, as the frequent change of it is of more consequence than many
parents are aware of. A child is much more liable to perspire than an adult;
the natural effect of which is, that its linen is more readily soiled and
rendered unfit for wearing. I would therefore advise all parents, who can
afford it, to give their children clean, dry linen every day. An undoubted
proof of the utility of this practice is, that instances have occurred of
children being cured of the rickets, when, from the first appearance of that
complaint, they have been daily furnished with clean linen, well dried, and
occasionally smoked with juniperberries, frankincense, or other perfuming
substances, in order to expel the moisture, which is absorbed by linen. But if
a clean change cannot be conveniently had every day, the night-shirt as well as
that of the day, ought to be regularly dried, and perfumed if necessary.

Lastly, let the dress of children be light; the head and breast during the
first months may be covered, though very slightly; but as soon as the hair is
sufficiently strong to afford protection, there is scarcely any necessity for
hats or caps, unless in rainy or cold seasons. The breast and neck too acquire
more firmness, and are rendered hardier, by keeping them uncovered; as our
frequent colds and sore throats chiefly originate from the absurd habit of
wearing bosom-friends and stiffened cravats.

I shall conclude these observations with an historical account from HERODOTUS,
which clearly illustrates the advantage attending the cool regiment of the
head. This judicious and learned writer informs us, that after the battle
fought between the Persians, under CAMBYSES, and the Egyptians, the slain of
both nations were separated: and upon examining the heads of the Persians,
their skulls were found to be so thin and tender, that a small stone would
immediately perforate them: while on the other hand, the heads of the Egyptians
were so firm, that they could scarcely be fractured by the largest stones. The
cause of this remarkable difference Herodotus ascribes to a custom the
Egyptians had of shaving their heads from the earliest infancy, and going
uncovered in all states of the weather; whereas the Persians always kept their
heads warm, by wearing heavy turbans.

I sincerely wish, that the rules and observations, here submitted to the
candid reader, were more generally understood and practiced, so far at least as
they are found to accord with reason and experience. I am not however disposed
to imagine, that plans of sudden improvement are the most likely to succeed;
and I am well aware of the difficulties we must expect to encounter, when we
attack old and rooted prejudices, with the hope of vanquishing them all at
once. For though I should be fortunate enough to substitute sounder opinions
and better practices, in lieu of those already established, yet, unless the
mind be prepared for such changes, by a proper philosophic culture, nothing is
more probable, than that a speedy relapse into former errors will be the
necessary consequence. The history of our own time has, in some recent
instances, evidently confirmed the truth of this observation. We find even the
mandates of arbitrary power insufficient to produce a thorough reform in the
manners and customs of a superstitious people. The philanthropic but weak
emperor JOSEPH II. was obliged to yield to the torrent of popular prejudice;
and, ^n spite of his better reason, frequently to repeal measures dictated by
the enlightened genius of philosophy. His obstinate and infatuated subjects
were not fully ripe for such salutary innovations. Our age is scarcely docile
enough to pursue those improvements, which a rapid and continual progress in
the sciences is daily suggesting. Upon this ground alone we can explain the
frequent and obvious contrast between the prevailing theories and practices,
both in the higher and lower walks of life. A great majority of the common
people, from their habitual indifference to literature, and their aversion to
serious reflection, still manifest their ancient prejudices to every thing
which falls under the description of novelty or improvement. More than one
generation will probably elapse, before even a part of the useful hints can be
realized, which lie dispersed in the later writings on subjects of health and
domestic economy. Whatever benefits can be attained by popular instruction,
both with regard to the treatment of children and adults, must be introduced in
a gradual manner. The ancient treatment of children, being consecrated by time,
must not be rudely and precipitately rejected; but old customs may be changed
by prudent and moderate management; and thus we may proceed from one step to
another, in extending the boundaries of truth and reason. A gradual transition
from a faulty to a better state of things, is commonly the most permanent. Let
us combat, at first, the most dangerous notions and prejudices: the conquest
over a single prejudice, if it be completely extirpated, is a triumph of no
little moment; inasmuch as it will shake the foundation of many others, more or
less connected with it.

In my earnest endeavors to caution the reader against inveterate prejudices,
I do not mean to insinuate, that a perfect and permanent state of health is
compatible with the delicate organization and complex functions of the human
body: I am well aware, that its most healthy condition closely borders on
disease, and that the seeds of distempers are already planted in the very
fullness or luxuriance of our fluids. Hence no absolute perfection is to be
found among mortals, whether we consider them in a physical or moral state.
CICERO illustrates this position, when speaking of man as a moral agent, with
equal truth and energy, in the following words: "He is not," says this
philosophical orator, "the most virtuous man, who commits no faults; but I
consider him as the most virtuous, whose conscience reproaches with the fewest."

CHAP. I.
A Practical Inquiry into the means and plans adopted among different nations,
with a view to prolong human life. -- An historical survey of this interesting
subject, in different ages; together with the success which has attended the
respective efforts made by nations and individuals. -- A brief statement of the
conditions requisite to the attainment of a long and healthy life. --
Observations, rules, and cautions deduced from the experience of ages. --
Symptoms of actual dissolution. -- Summary account of a dietetic system;
explanation of its design, and the vast diversity of objects comprehended under
this popular science.

AS the enjoyment of 'a sound mind in a sound body' is one of the greatest of
terrestrial blessings, it is incumbent on every rational inquirer, to devote
some portion of his time and industry to the research of such useful and
practical objects, as may contribute to improve and insure so desirable a state.

As long as the various functions of the human body, the voluntary as well as
the involuntary motions, are performed with ease, and suffer no interruption,
we usually pronounce the body to be in a state of health; in the contrary case
we call it diseased. I shall advance a step further, and assert, that when we
do not feel ourselves encumbered with the weight of our own frame, and when we
are not disposed to reflect, with uneasiness and solicitude, upon its physical
condition, then we have a right to consider our health as being in a perfect
state.

Although we are liable to suffer from the attacks of disease, in a variety of
shapes, yet we have abundant reason to contemplate with satisfaction the
chequered condition of human life: for, even in the present imperfect state of
things, we find comforts more than sufficient to counterbalance our sorrows.
Considering the innumerable accidents, to which we are daily and hourly
exposed, it is a matter of just surprise, that frail, imbecile man should
remain in health during the greater part of his life; and still more so, that,
upon an average, the number of healthy individuals should be found far to
exceed those in a contrary state. If we further advert to the want of thought
and circumspection, which marks the conduct of man in general, in the treatment
of his body, our astonishment will necessarily increase, that he so often
escapes the dangers prepared by his own hands. But parental Nature frequently
repairs the injury, though we are not conscious of her salutary efforts. She
powerfully co-operates, when art is called in aid, to restore that harmony and
order in the system, which had been imprudently or inadvertently disturbed. To
her healing powers we are principally indebted, if the sufferings resulting
from ignorance or obstinacy are less severe, than the extent of the mischief
seemed to portend.

It cannot be expected, that persons unacquainted with the economy of the human
frame should be able to discriminate between internal and external causes, and
their effects. Where a competent share of this knowledge is wanting, it will be
impossible to ascertain, or to counteract, the different causes by which our
health is affected; and should a fortunate individual ever fix upon a suitable
remedy, he will be indebted to chance alone for the discovery.

This has been the case in all ages, and alas! it is still deplorably the case.
Remedies have from time to time been devised, not merely to serve as Nostrums
for all diseases, but also for the pretended purpose of prolonging human life.
Those of the latter kind have been applied with a view to resist or check many
operations of nature, which insensibly consume the vital heat, and other powers
of life, such as respiration, muscular irritability, etc. Thus, from the
implicit credulity of some, and the exuberant imagination of others,
observations and experiments, however discordant with sound reason and
philosophy, were multiplied, with the avowed design of establishing proofs or
refutations of this or that absurd opinion. In this manner have fanaticism and
imposture falsified the plainest truths, or forged the most unfounded and
ridiculous claims; so that one glaring inconsistency was employed to combat
another, and folly succeeded folly, till a fund of materials has been
transmitted to posterity, sufficient to form a concise history of this subject.

Men, in all ages, have set a just value on long life; and in proportion to the
means of enjoying the same, this value has been felt in a greater or less
degree. If the gratification of the sensual appetite formed the principal
object of living, the prolongation of it would be, to the epicure, as
desirable, as the prospect of a life to be enjoyed beyond the limits of the
grave, is to the moralist and the believer.

In the Old Testament, the promise of a long life was held up as one of the
most important sources of consolation: and, conformably to the principles of
Christianity, a patient continuance in well-doing, or, in other words, a long
life rich in good works, can best insure the hope of a more happy state in a
future world. Hence the wish of a speedy termination of our existence here, is
one of those eccentricities, into which only persons deprived of reason are
liable to be drawn, either from extreme anxiety, or the want of mental
fortitude. The desire of longevity seems to be inherent in all animal life, and
particularly in human nature: it is intimately cherished by us, throughout the
whole of our existence, and is frequently supported and strengthened, not only
by justifiable means, but also by various species of collusion.

The possibility of prolonging human life was never doubted by the Orientals,
even in the earliest ages. One of the most ancient methods on record, is that
of placing the aged and decrepit in the vicinity of an atmosphere, replete with
the exhalations of blooming youth. It is not improbable, that a certain custom
then prevailing in the East, by alluring the fancy with beautiful images, and
by imposing upon the understanding through poetical fictions, first induced man
to entertain this singular notion. The bloom of a juvenile age, and
particularly the healthful virgin, was compared, by the Orientals, with roses,
lilies, and other elegant flowers; she was introduced in allegorical
description, to represent odoriferous spices, balms, and oils, and was made the
subject of pastoral and other poems. How easy, then, the transition from fancy
to belief, that the exhalations of vigorous and healthy persons must be highly
conducive to the support of exhausted age; that they were capable, like the
fragrant balms of the East, of softening the rigidity of the fibers, of
exciting the vital spirits, and, in short, of supplying the aged with a fresh
stock of health. The history of KING DAVID furnishes us with a striking
illustration of this renovating process.

In the writings of the ancient physicians, we meet with various accounts, from
which we learn, that this method has ever been a favorite resource of
invalids, worn out with age. Modern physicians also mention the practice, and
the celebrated BOERHAAVE informs us, that he advised an old and decrepit
burgomaster at Amsterdam to sleep between two young persons; and that his
patient, who before was sinking under the weight of infirmities, obviously
recovered strength and cheerfulness of mind.

The great age of some schoolmasters has likewise been ascribed to the benefit
they derive from breathing, almost constantly, among young and healthy
children. It has been farther observed, that young persons, if they sleep in
company with the aged, become lean and enfeebled. -- Upon more accurate
inquiries, however, it is pretty evident, that most of the benefits (perhaps
all of them) which the aged derive from this expedient, may be placed to the
account of the imagination, and its surprising effects on the body. It is this
power which, in my opinion, renews the languishing flame of the aged, and which
may preserve them for some time longer in that renovated state, provided it be
supported by a proper attention to diet and other circumstances. -- We
frequently see a debilitated and peevish old man assume a complacent smiling
aspect, when a sprightly maiden addresses him in the language of courteous
pleasantry. The most charming images recur to his stimulated imagination; and
the powers of life are, as it were, again roused, and directed to one object.
That such means of reanimating old age, may have a favorable effect on health,
cannot be disputed.

To imagine, however, that the vigor of health and the bloom of youth can be
transfused by insensible perspiration, or exhalation, into the body of the
aged, is to labor under a very palpable mistake. I shall prove, in the next
Chapter "On Air and Weather," that every living being necessarily corrupts the
air more or less by its respiration; and that the atmosphere, thus impregnated,
becomes unfit for other beings to breathe in; because every expiration contains
certain particles, which are separated by the lungs, as being useless and
noxious to the body. How then is it conceivable, that matters or substances
should be hurtful to one body, if retained in it, and useful to another, if
communicated to it? Or was it supposed, that the watery parts of insensible
exhalation from the young body, could moisten and refresh the parched fibers of
the aged? To accomplish this purpose, we are possessed of remedies much purer
and more effectual. Natural warmth or heat is the only means competent to
produce such a salutary effect; as that alone is capable of exciting the
slumbering energy of life. And in this respect, I apprehend, we ought to do
justice to the above-described method practiced by the ancients.

When young persons live or sleep with old people, and are observed to grow
thin and infirm, (which however is not always the case) that proceeds from
another circumstance, namely, that the former absorb or inhale the noxious
particles of the latter; but from this it by no means follows, that the aged
body attracts the vital principle from the younger. Although free caloric, or
matter of heat, may probably pass over from the young body into that of the
aged; yet this transfusion, under certain circumstances, would be rather to the
advantage than disadvantage of the former; inasmuch as this deprivation of
superfluous caloric is not unfrequently found to be serviceable and wholesome.

From the preceding remarks we may conceive, that a school-room filled with the
various exhalations of children, cannot conduce to the prolongation of life;
and, consequently, that the great age of certain schoolmasters must be ascribed
to some other cause. An accurate account of the mortality prevailing among that
class of men would satisfactorily demonstrate, that the age of schoolmasters is
in a just proportion to that of other classes of society.

I shall now consider several other plans, that have been adopted for the
prolongation of human life.

The Egyptians, who lived in a country rendered unwholesome by intense heat and
frequent inundations, could not long remain ignorant of the comparative
longevity of their northern neighbors, the Greeks. After many fruitless
attempts to discover the true cause of their short life, and to provide the
means of removing that cause, they at length became fanatical enough to imagine
themselves possessed of the grand secret for prolonging life -- in the constant
use of sudorifics and emetics. The air of Egypt, being impregnated with aqueous
and putrid particles, not only checked the process of perspiration, but also
generated various epidemic distempers. In such cases, sudorific medicines were
necessary and proper; and even emetics, by exciting a forcible commotion
through the whole system, not unfrequently restored the activity of the
cutaneous vessels, and thus produced a favorable effect in those maladies.
Farther, the heat of the climate inspissated their fluids; this circumstance,
connected with their usual mode of life, and their crude articles of food,
necessarily brought on an excess of bile, which overflowing the stomach upon
the least occasion, could not fail, sooner or later, to occasion very obstinate
diseases. The emetics, therefore, being eminently qualified to evacuate the
bile, would of course obtain general reputation among the Egyptians. These and
the sudorifics were for a long time considered as specific remedies; from their
tendency to expel the matter so dangerous to life; and because in those ages
diseases were considered the only enemies to longevity: the Egyptian physicians
and philosophers not being able to distinguish between effects and their
causes, the latter of which existed in the pestilential vapors of a hot
climate.

Thus it became a custom to take at least two emetics every month; to inquire
of acquaintances and friends, how those medicines had operated, and to wish
each other joy upon these occasions. I need not observe, that this singular
method of prolonging life is not to be recommended as worthy of imitation; that
the periodical custom of taking medicinal remedies renders their frequent
repetition necessary, while it destroys their occasional efficacy; and that it
therefore chiefly belongs to the department of the physician to determine,
when, and in what degree, such medicines are to be administered.

The Greeks lived in a more romantic and picturesque country; their conceptions
with regard to the structure and functions of the human frame were more correct
and conformable to nature. Their philosophers and physicians were more
enlightened and less prejudiced than those of Egypt; they were not, like the
latter, under the capricious influence of a wild imagination, too frequently
disordered by the effects of BLACK BILE. Nature, displayed in all her charms,
in the sublime and beautiful scenery of their country, every where invited them
to the enjoyment of free and pure air; the effects of this on their susceptible
nerves, combined with an excellent system of bodily exercise, proved the best
specific for counteracting the effects of time, and thus prolonging their
active, healthful lives. For this great and beneficial purpose, particular
methods and rules were contrived, in order to give the body the most varied and
effectual, yet gentle motions; -- these athletic exercises were judiciously
adapted to the different constitutions, situations, and ages of life, so that
the sagacious Greeks arrived at an extraordinary degree of perfection in the
gymnastic art.

The great advantage of such a course of bodily exercise cannot be disputed,
when we consider how many individuals in all countries die prematurely from
want of activity, motion, and nervous energy; though their organization may be
in no respect faulty. Besides, a body inured to frequent and laborious
exercise, will not be easily affected by external causes of disease; being
secured, as it were, by a coat of mail, against the attacks of many acute
disorders.

The Greeks carried, to a still greater degree, the system of gymnastic
motions. By the same method they attempted to cure diseases in their first
stages, not excepting such as were already formed, and to put a stop to their
further progress. They caused the patient to move in various positions; they
applied gentle friction to the whole surface of the body; and used different
methods to overcome the languor of the muscles, by exciting and stimulating the
muscular energy.

In relaxed, weakly individuals, whose organization is deficient in the proper
degree of tension or elasticity, this method must be allowed to possess great
advantages; but I do not conceive it necessary to prove here, that it cannot be
consistently applied to all diseases. It is not to be supposed, that the weary
traveller can be either strengthened or refreshed by additional exercise.

The modern methods of bracing the human body, such as frequent bathing in cold
water, exposing the body to all the vicissitudes of climate and weather, the
various modes of supporting bodily fatigue, as traveling on horseback and on
foot, etc. which are so indiscriminately recommended to our aspiring youth,
cannot in every instance fortify and render the human frame indestructible: --
on the contrary, all such violent efforts have a tendency to bring on the
symptoms of age, at a much earlier period than it ought to appear; as the
joints and muscles are thereby rendered liable to contract an uncommon degree
of stiffness and rigidity. -- To load tender youth with burdens
disproportionate to their age, and to impose upon them the task of men, can
never be the most proper means of hardening and preparing them for a long and
active life.

A distinction, however, should be made here, between bracing the fibers, of
which all solid parts of the body consist, and bracing the sense of touch or
feeling. The animal fibers may be solid, but should not be so rigid as to
become insensible; a certain degree of irritability is necessary to the proper
exercise of their contracting and relaxing power. If, further, there should
exist in the body a disposition toward rigidity and insensibility, any
artificial modes of bracing it will be of dangerous tendency. If, on the
contrary, the fibers should be too irritable, the Grecian method may, in that
case, be resorted to with safety and advantage. A striking instance of this
occurs in the history of Captain Cook. On his arrival in the Friendly Islands,
he was seized with an acute rheumatism, attended with excruciating pains. He
was soon relieved from this torturing situation, by the easy and instinctive
process of gentle friction, which the Islanders generally followed on such
occasions. Thus a few untutored persons completely effected what could not have
been sooner, nor more easily accomplished by the systematic art of the learned.

From these considerations we may safely infer, 1. That the cold bath,
gymnastic exercises, bodily fatigue of any kind, and all expedients to brace
and invigorate the constitutions, ought only to be adopted under certain
limitations, viz. with a proper regard to particular cases and circumstances:
and, 2. That these severe remedies cannot and ought not to be universally nor
indiscriminately recommended, as methods of prolonging life.

Let us not, however, disparage the merits of that ingenious race of men, whom
we only know from their inimitable works. For, although the method of the
Greeks cannot be safely introduced among us, without many and great exceptions,
we must do them the justice to allow, that in their operations of hardening the
human body, they proceeded in a more cautious, gradual, and judicious manner,
than the moderns seem willing to submit to. Sudden changes of any kind produce
a sort of revolution in the body, and this is necessarily attended with a waste
of strength, proportionate to the violence of the shock.

Plutarch possessed clear and rational ideas on the subject of preserving and
prolonging human life; the truth of which he confirmed by his own experience,
during a series of many happy years. He advises to keep the head cool and the
feet warm, not immediately to take medicines on every slight indisposition, but
rather to let Nature relieve herself by fasting a day, and, in attending to the
mind, never to forget the body. Much learning is compressed in these golden
precepts, which will be valuable as long as human nature remains the same. The
attention bestowed upon the mind, however laudable, should not authorize us to
neglect the care of the body; the intimate connection subsisting between both
requires a due proportion of care and attention to be paid to each. In the same
degree, as a diseased body sympathetically torments the mind, so does an infirm
mind agitate and harass the body; and such tortures and reciprocal affections
are unavoidably attended with the consumption of animal life. -- What Plutarch
enjoins, with respect to keeping the head cool and the feet warm, is agreeable
to reason and experience; we should not, however, imagine, that the grand
secret of prolonging life consists in the sole observance of these maxims. The
head and feet are not the only points, in which life is concentrated; they may
indeed have a beneficial or pernicious influence on the whole body, and in this
respect they demand a shore of our attention; but no other part ought on that
account to escape our notice.

I now enter upon a very unpleasant task, namely, that of reviewing a period of
darkness, during the barbarity of the middle ages, when the progress of true
knowledge was obstructed by the most absurd fancies and childish conceits; when
conjectures, caprices and dreams supplied the place of the most useful
sciences, of the most important truths. Chemistry, so essentially requisite to
explain the phenomena of known and unknown substances, fell into the hands of
jugglers and fanatics; -- their systems, replete with philosophic nonsense, and
composed of the most crude, heterogeneous materials, served rather to nourish
superstition than to establish facts and illustrate useful truths. Universal
remedies, in various forms, met with strenuous advocates and deluded consumers.
The path of accurate observation and experiment was forsaken; far from
penetrating into the mysterious recesses of Nature, they bewildered themselves
in the labyrinth of fanciful speculation; they overstepped the bounds of good
sense, modesty, and truth, and the blind led the blind.

The prolongation of life, too, was no longer sought for in a manner agreeable
to the dictates of Nature; even this interesting branch of human pursuits was
rendered subservient to Chemistry, or rather to the confused system of Alchemy.
Original matter was looked upon to be the elementary cause of all beings; by
this they expected literally to work miracles, to transmute the base into noble
metals, to metamorphose man in his animal state by chemical process, to render
him more durable, and to secure him against early decline and dissolution.
Millions of vessels, retorts, and phials were either exposed to the action of
the most violent artificial heat, or to the natural warmth of the sun; or else
they were buried in some dunghill, or other fetid mass, for the purpose of
apprehending this original matter, or obtaining it from putrescible substances.

As the substance called Gold always bore the highest value among metals, these
mongrel philosophers concluded, from a ridiculous analogy, that its value, with
respect to the preservation of health, and the cure of diseases, must likewise
surpass that of all other remedies. The nugatory art of dissolving it, so as to
render it potable, and to prevent it from being again converted into metal,
employed a multitude of busy idiots, not only in concealed corners, but in the
splendid laboratories of the palaces of the great. Sovereigns, magistrates,
counselors, and impostors, were struck with the common frenzy, entered into
friendship and alliance, formed private fraternities, and sometimes proceeded
to such a pitch of extravagance, as to involve themselves and their posterity
in ruinous debts. The real object of many was, doubtless, to gratify their
avarice and desire of aggrandisement, although this sinister motive was
concealed under the specious pretext of searching for a remedy, that should
serve as a tincture of life, both for the healthy and diseased; yet some among
these whimsical mortals were actuated by more honorable motives, zealous only
for the interests of truth, and the wellbeing of their fellow creatures. The
common people in some countries, particularly Italy, Germany, and France, often
denied themselves the necessaries of life, to save as much as would purchase a
few drops of the tincture of gold, which was offered for sale by some
superstitious or fraudulent chemist: and so thoroughly persuaded were they of
the efficacy of this remedy, that it afforded them in every instance the most
confident and only hope of recovery. These beneficial effects were positively
promised, but were looked for in vain. All-subduing Death would not submit to
be bribed with gold, and Disease refused to hold any intercourse with that
powerful deity, who presides over the trade and commerce of nations.

As, however, these diversified and almost numberless experiments were
frequently productive of useful inventions in the arts and manufactures; and as
many chemical remedies of real value were thereby accidentally discovered, the
great and general attention to those bold projectors, was constantly kept alive
and excited. Indeed, we are indebted to their curious operations, or rather
perhaps to chance, for several valuable medicines, the excellence of which
cannot be disputed, but which, nevertheless, require more precaution in their
use and application, and more perspicacity and diligence in investigating their
nature and properties, than the original preparers of such articles were able
or willing to afford.

All their endeavors to prolong life, by artificial means, could not be
attended with beneficial effects; and the application of the remedies thus
contrived, must necessarily, in many cases, prove detrimental to the health of
the patient. In proof of this assertion, it will be sufficient to give a slight
sketch of the different views and opinions of the Goldmakers, Rosencrucians,
manufacturers of Astralian Salts, of the Drops of Life, and Tinctures of Gold,
hunters after the Philosopher's Stone, etc. etc. Some of these enthusiasts
fancied life to resemble a flame, from which the body derived warmth, spirit,
and animation. This flame they endeavored to cherish and to increase by their
remedies, supplying the body with materials to feed the same, as we pour oil
into a burning lamp.

Others imagined they had discovered something invisible and incorporeal in the
air, that important medium in supporting the life of man. They pretended to
catch, to refine, and so to reduce and materialize this undefinable something,
that it might be swallowed in the form of powders or drops; that by its
penetrating powers it might insinuate itself into the whole animal frame,
invigorating and qualifying it for a longer and healthier duration than usual.

Others again were foolish enough to cherish a notion, that they could divest
themselves of the properties of matter during this life; that in this manner
they might be defended against the gradual approaches of dissolution, to which
every animal body is subject; and that thus fortified, without quitting their
terrestrial tabernacle, they could associate at pleasure with the inhabitants
of the spiritual world.

The Sacred Volume itself was interpreted and commented upon by the Operators
and Alchemists, with a view to render it subservient to their interested
designs. Indisputable historical facts, recorded in this invaluable book, were
treated by them as hieroglyphical symbols, which contained chemical processes:
and the fundamental truths of the Christian religion were applied, in a wanton
and blasphemous manner, to the purposes of making Gold, and distilling the
Elixir of Life.

The productions of Alchemy, far from answering the purpose of prolonging life,
have rather a contrary tendency. All the remedies which it affords, are of a
heating and stimulating nature. The person who takes them will feel himself
more cheerful for some time, and on that account he may fancy himself more
vigorous and juvenile; as they certainly give an additional impulse to the
sensations of life, like wine, spirits, and all other stimulants. But this
increase of the sensation of life should by no means be confounded with an
increase of the power of life. It may be even safely affirmed, that by the
increase of vital sensations, the career of life itself is accelerated, and the
consumption of it sooner exhausted; consequently the duration of the body is
necessarily shortened.

I should not omit to mention, that these remedies strongly increase the
sensitive power of man, they predispose him to sensual pursuits, stimulate him
to commit excesses of every kind, incite him to take continual or excessive
exercise, as dancing, and the like, and thus by inevitable consequence hasten
the waste and dissolution of the body. That, for instance, which, according to
the natural course, ought to be expended or consumed in three days, is
dissipated perhaps in as many jovial hours. This premature loss is attended
with relaxation, irksomeness, and even aversion to life, till a new dose of
stimulants reproduces the former false vivacity. It fares with the patient
here, as it does with the hard drinker, who trembles in the morning that
follows his nightly debauch, feels his whole frame relaxed, inactive and
torpid, and is in a manner obliged to take a fresh dram of his favorite
liquor, before he can enter on any serious business, with pleasure or effect.

These famous essences, balms, tinctures of life, etc. are farther dangerous,
as they contract the small vessels, so necessary to the preservation of life,
as well as to the reparation of the losses sustained, and thus render them
unfit to perform their offices. Hence arise rigidity or stiffness, and
exsiccation; the body shrivels, and the symptoms of old age appear at an
earlier period than they would otherwise have done. Man is seldom unprovided
with the supplies of vitality; -- every draught of air we inhale, and every
particle of food we swallow, is a fresh accession to the stock of life. But as
soon as the susceptibility or power of receiving those supplies becomes
languid, we then may be considered as unfit to perform the functions of life;
and all the medicaments of nature and art will be found insufficient to relieve
us. He who searches for the supplies of life in alchemical productions,
elixirs, balsamic essences, etc. will sooner or later, but always prematurely,
experience the want of susceptibility. Even that impudent boaster and
celebrated insurer of lives, THEOPHRASTUS PARACELSUS, although he pretended to
have in his possession the stone of immortality, died -- in his fiftieth year!
His vegetable sulphur was a heating and stimulating remedy, partly similar to
the Anodyne Liquor of Hoffmann.

The world of spirits also was invaded, and summoned, as it were, to contribute
to the prolongation of human life. Spirits were supposed to have the rule of
air, fire, earth, and water; they were divided into particular classes, and
particular services ascribed to each. The malevolent spirits were opposed and
counteracted by various means of prevention: the good and tutelary were obliged
to submit to a sort of gentle, involuntary servitude. From invisible beings
were expected and demanded visible means of assistance -- riches -- health --
friends -- and long life. Thus the poor spirits were profanely maltreated, nay
they were sometimes punished, and even miserably flogged in effigy, when they
betrayed symptoms of disaffection, or want of implicit loyalty.

As men had thus, in their weakness and folly, forsaken the bounds of this
terrestrial sphere, it will easily be believed, that with the help of an
exuberant imagination, they would make a transition to the higher regions -- to
the celestial bodies and the stars, to which indeed they ascribed no less a
power than that of deciding the destinies of men, and which, consequently, must
have had a considerable share in shortening or prolonging the duration of human
life. Every nation or kingdom was subjected to the dominion of its particular
planet, the time of whose government was determined; and a number of ascendant
powers were fictitiously contrived, with a view to reduce under its influence
every thing which was produced and born during its administration.

The professors of astrology appeared as the confidants of these invisible
rulers, and the interpreters of their will; they very well understood the art
of giving a respectable appearance to this usurped dignity. Provided they could
but ascertain the hour and minute of a person's birth, they confidently took
upon themselves to predict his mental capacities, future vicissitudes of life,
diseases, together with the circumstances, the day, and the hour of his death.
Not only the common people, or the less informed classes of society, but the
most respectable men for learning and abilities, nay even those of the highest
rank and station, did homage to those "gods of their idolatry," and lived in
continual dread of their occult powers. With anxious countenances and attentive
ears, they listened to the effusions of those self-appointed oracles, which
prognosticated the bright or gloomy days of futurity. Even physicians were
solicitous to qualify themselves for an appointment no less lucrative than
respectable: -- they forgot, over the dazzling hoards of Mammon, that they were
peculiarly and professedly the pupils of Nature. The curious student in the
Universities found every where public Lecturers, who undertook to instruct him
in the profound arts of divination, chiromancy, and the famous cabala.

Not to mention other instances, I shall cite that of the noted Thurneisen, in
the last century, who was invested at Berlin with the respective offices of
Printer to the Court, Bookseller, Almanack-maker, Astrologer, Chemist, and
First Physician. Messengers daily arrived from the most respectable houses in
Germany, Poland, Hungary, Denmark, and even from England, for the purpose of
consulting him respecting the future fortunes of newborn infants, acquainting
him with the hour of their nativity, and soliciting his advice and directions
as to their management. Many volumes of this singular correspondence are still
preserved in the Royal Library at Berlin. The business of this fortunate adept
increased so rapidly, that he found it necessary to employ a number of
subaltern assistants, who, together with their master, realized considerable
fortunes. He died in high reputation and favor with his superstitious
cotemporaries; and Thurneisen's Astrological Almanac is yet published in some
of the less enlightened provinces of Germany. But it may be asked, how it
happens, that an art which determines the fate of mortals, and ascertains the
impassable limits of human life, can at the same time serve as the means of
prolonging it? This I shall now proceed to account for. The teachers of
divination maintained, that not only men, but all natural bodies, plants,
animals, nay whole countries, including every individual place and family, were
under the government of some particular planet. As soon as the masters of the
OCCULT SCIENCE had discovered, by their tables, under what constellation the
misfortune or distemper of any person originated, nothing further was required,
than that he should remove to a dwelling ruled by an opposite planet, and
confine himself exclusively to such articles of food and drink, as were under
the influence of a different star. In this artificial manner; they contrived to
form a system, or peculiar classification of plants, namely, lunar, solar,
mercurial, and the like -- and hence arose a confused mass of dietetic rules,
which, when considered with reference to the purposes of health, cleanliness,
exercise, etc. form a remarkable contrast to those of the Greeks.

Neither was this preventive and repelling method confined merely to persons
suffering under some bodily disorder. In the case of individuals who enjoyed a
good state of health, if an unlucky constellation happened to forebode a severe
disease, or any other misfortune, they were directed to choose a place of
residence influenced by a more friendly star; or to make use of such aliment
only as, being under the auspices of a propitious star, might counteract the
malignant influence of its adversary.

It was also pretty generally believed and maintained, that a sort of intimate
relation or sympathy subsisted between metals and plants; hence the names of
the latter were given to the former, in order to denote this supposed connection
and affinity. The corresponding metals were melted into a common mass, under a
certain planet, and were formed into small medals or coins, in hopes, and with
the firm persuasion, that he who carried such a piece about his person, might
confidently expect the whole favor and protection of the planet thus
represented.

The transition from one degree of folly to another is easy; and this may help
us to account for the shocking delusions practiced in the manufacturing and
wearing of metallic amulets of a peculiar mould, to which were attributed, by a
sort of magic influence, the power and protection of the planet, to whom they
related: these charms were thought to possess virtue sufficient to overrule the
bad effects presaged by an unlucky hour of birth, to promote to places of
honor and profit, and to be of potent efficacy in matters of commerce and
matrimony. The German soldiers, in the dark and superstitious ages, believed,
that if the figure of Mars, cast and engraved in the sign of the Scorpion, were
worn about the neck as an amulet, it would render them invulnerable, and insure
success to their military enterprises: hence amulets were found upon every
soldier, either killed in battle or taken prisoner.

But let us quit a subject which excites disgust, as it exhibits such glaring
deviations from reason and truth. It is much more pleasant to dwell upon
examples, which afford satisfactory proof, that the human mind has never been
entirely and universally debased, and that there have always existed some
individuals, though few in number, who would not submit their necks to the yoke
of popular prejudice, and whose superior talents and virtues rescued them from
the impositions of general folly or depravity. A memorable instance of this
rare merit is to be found in the noble Venetian LEWIS CORNARO, whose history
illustrates this agreeable and instructive truth, that nature, left to herself,
or, in other words, a property chosen mode of life and diet, regularly
persisted in, will achieve great things; and that a frame, disordered and even
reduced to a state bordering on the grave, may yet be re-established, and
preserve its health and vigor for a great number of years.

Cornaro had been a professed epicure and libertine, till he entered into the
fortieth year of his age. His constitution was so far reduced by the colic,
rheumatic pains, fevers, etc. that his physicians at length gave him up,
assuring him he could not survive much longer than two months; that no
medicines whatever could avert this catastrophe, and that the only possible
means of preserving his life would be a regular adherence to a frugal diet. He
punctually followed this advice, perceived symptoms of convalescence within a
few days after entering on his plan of reformation, and, after the lapse of
twelve months, was not only completely restored, but found himself in a better
state of health than he had ever been during any period of his life. He
resolved therefore to confine himself to a still more parsimonious regimen, and
to take nothing more than what he judged to be absolutely requisite for his
support. Thus, during sixty years, he confined himself to exactly twelve ounces
of food a day, (bread and other nourishment included) with thirteen ounces of
beverage. It should be also observed, that during this long period he carefully
avoided violent heat, cold, passions, and extremes of every kind; and by
rigidly and uniformly adhering to this moderate diet, not only his body, but
his mind also, acquired so determined a tone, that no common incidents could
affect them. At a very advanced age he lost a lawsuit, which involved
pecuniary concerns of great importance, and on account of which two of his
brothers died of broken hearts; but he still retained his pristine health and
tranquillity. His carriage happening on some occasion to be overset, he was
dragged by the horses, in consequence of which his arms and legs were
dislocated. He caused them, however, to be reduced again, and, without taking
any medicines, we find him in a short time restored.

A striking instance of the dangerous effects likely to attend the slightest
deviation from long custom and habit, is the following: When Cornaro had
reached his eightieth year, his friends prevailed upon him to add a small
portion to his daily quantum of food; alleging that his advanced age
necessarily called for additional support. Although he was not convinced by
this argument, being of opinion, that, with the general decrease of strength,
our powers of digestion are likewise impaired, and that we ought to diminish
rather than to increase our food, in proportion to the decay of nature; yet he
yielded to the solicitations of his friends, and increased his food from twelve
to fourteen, and his drink from thirteen to sixteen ounces. "Scarcely," to
quote the words of our dietetic veteran, "had I proceeded in this altered mode
of living for ten days, before I found my spirits visibly affected; a fretful,
peevish temper succeeded to my former cheerfulness and gaiety, so that I became
a burden to myself and others. This change of temper was followed by other
symptoms still more alarming. On the twelfth day, I was attacked with a pain in
my side, which continued for twenty-four hours together, and soon after found
myself oppressed by a fever that raged with unabating fury for thirty-five
days, so that my life was at times despaired of. By the blessing of God,
however, on returning to my former regimen, I recovered from this shock, and
now enjoy, in my eighty-third year, perfect health of body and serenity of
mind. I can mount my horse without assistance; I can climb steep precipices,
and but lately I wrote a comedy, abounding with traits of innocent mirth and
raillery. When I return home, after being engaged in my private affairs, or
from attending the councils of state, I feel inexpressible satisfaction in the
company of my grandchildren, eleven in number, whose education, amusement, and
songs, are the comfort of my age. I frequently join them in singing, as my
voice is now stronger and clearer than I ever knew it to be in my youth, and as
my happiness is not disturbed by the complaints, the moroseness, and
discontented humors, so frequently the lot of intemperate old age."

In this happy frame of body and mind, Cornaro attained to his hundredth year;
his virtuous and memorable example, however, has hitherto had but few
followers. He found by actual observation and experience, that a strict and
uniform regimen, or a regular daily allowance of food and drink, ascertained by
weight, was the best method he could pursue, for the purpose of prolonging his
life. He did not wish however to be understood, nor does it follow in general,
that this or any other precise portion of nutriment is to be held out as a
proper standard, by which all persons are to regulate their diet. His advice,
that we should take no more food than what is absolutely necessary to our
subsistence, may be thus explained; namely, that the restoration of strength,
derived from supplies of nutriment, ought to bear an exact proportion to the
losses sustained by the body. He, for instance, who spends little of his time
in bed, and much in the open air, takes frequent exercise, is constantly
employed in some laborious occupation, makes long journies on foot or
horseback, or the like, will feel himself refreshed and strengthened after
partaking of a plentiful meal, and cheering beverage; and such a repast is even
indispensable to him, to recruit the sources of his muscular strength and
activity. If, on the other hand, a person who lounges away half of his time in
bed, or upon the sofa, were to consume a quantity of food equal to the former,
he would no doubt feel himself heavy and uncomfortable. Yet here too, the
consequent loss of strength may vary in degree, in different sedentary persons;
and this circumstance will afford me an opportunity, in the sequel, to apply to
individual cases the doctrine suggested by the experience of Cornaro.

There was another period, during which blood-letting came into general use,
and obtained great credit, as one of the most effectual means of prolonging
life: the superfluity and vitiated state of the blood, or what physicians term
a plethoric habit, being looked upon, at the same time, as a principal means of
shortening life. Through the veins thus regularly opened, at certain seasons,
the superfluous or vitiated blood was supposed to be emitted, while that of a
more salubrious quality was left behind. Considered as a medical remedy,
phlebotomy must certainly be allowed to possess its uses, and it is sometimes a
necessary expedient, to produce an immediate diminution in the fullness of the
blood, particularly when the time is too short, and the danger too pressing, to
admit of any other method for effecting that purpose. As there can be no doubt,
that blood-letting is an invaluable remedy in many disorders, it is the more
peculiarly incumbent on the practical physician, to distinguish with care those
cases, in which imminent danger may be averted, and health restored by the use
of it. I am of opinion, that there are two cases, and only two, in which
venesection is likely to be attended with real advantage; 1st, When it is
required to prevent the fluids gaining access to the parts more essential to
life; and, 2dly, Where means must be speedily used, to counteract a threatened
inflammation in the intestines. But, even in these two cases, the intelligent
physician is at no loss for other remedies, which may be frequently
administered with a greater probability of success. In the treatment of every
disorder, it is necessary to single out that remedy, which is found most
suitable to the stage of the complaint. And here we have no occasion to start
the question, Whether the method and the means, by which the disease is checked
and health restored, are, in the end, best calculated to prolong the life of
the patient? Physicians professionally look upon every disease as an evil,
which cannot be too speedily removed; and it would be to hazard the recovery of
their patients, in many cases, were they to waste time in reflecting upon the
consequences of the remedy with respect to its influence on the duration of
life. Hence the art of prolonging life, strictly speaking, is not a distinct
branch of medicine, but rather forms a separate art, and as such is the common
property of all: it should therefore constitute a part of the education and
studies of every rational individual, whatever be his other engagements and
occupations. The absurd notion, that blood-letting is useful and necessary to
the prolongation of human life, is still pretty generally received among the
common people of all countries. Neither the good nor the bad days,
superstitiously marked in the almanacks for amusing the vulgar, can palliate or
justify the mischiefs, with which this dangerous error is pregnant. Bleeding
can be of service only, when it is performed at a proper time; and to express
my opinion of it, in a few words, it is always noxious to the healthy.

The blood contains and affords to the bones, ligaments, tendons, membranes,
muscles, nerves, vessels, in short, to the whole organized body, all the parts,
which form the bones, ligaments, tendons, etc. Each of these parts is evolved
from the blood, and adapted to its proper place, in so artificial a manner,
that the human mind is totally at a loss to comprehend, how this operation is
performed; neither have the researches of the most acute and attentive
observers been able to account for it. And as the blood serves to replenish the
diminution, and to make up the losses, which those parts occasionally sustain,
it may be considered as the original source of our whole organization. By its
stimulating powers it also causes the heart and the arteries to contract; and
by that means preserves the circulating motion, by which it is propelled
through all the parts of the body, for the purposes designed by nature.

Now, it requires little reflection to perceive, that he who wastes this vital
fluid, thereby obstructs, and, as it were, cuts off the sources of his support
and regeneration. And though it be true, that the blood evacuated by periodical
bleedings is soon re-produced by the activity of the vital powers, yet this
restoration is not effected without considerable efforts, and at the expense of
the whole machine. As this exertion, therefore, is a great pressure upon the
vital powers, it must of course be attended with a proportionate degree of
their consumption. It is too well known, that the corrupted part of the blood
cannot be separated from the mass, so that the sound and uncorrupted particles
alone may remain behind. If the quality of the blood ever become vitiated and
diseased; if it be too thick and viscous, or too acrid, and dissolved, the
whole mass participates in the infectious taint; neither is it in the power of
art, to contrive any method, by which the corrupted part may be kept asunder,
from that which is in a sound state. It would be equally unreasonable to
expect, that a spoiled cask of wine could be cured of its tartness, by drawing
or tapping the acid and corrupted portion from the top, and leaving the sweet
and wholesome part behind. Lastly, experience has shown in numberless
instances, collected from different observations, that persons accustomed to
frequent blood-letting are not only rendered more delicate in their
constitutions, and thereby more subject to diseases, but also that they die,
for the most part, at an earlier age than others; and although cases have
occurred of some persons, who, having been bled twice or four times a year,
have nevertheless arrived at a considerable age, they can only prove, that
venesection was to them a proper medical remedy, perhaps adapted to their
peculiar habit of body; or that the activity of their vital powers, their mode
of life, and other favorable circumstances, internal and external, may have
been sufficient to counterbalance the dangerous consequences, resulting from
the frequent loss of this essential fluid.

On the Doctrine of Transfusion.
AT a time, when the shortness of life was imputed to a distempered state of
the blood; when all diseases were ascribed to this cause, without attending to
the whole of what relates to the moral and physical nature of man, a conclusion
was easily formed, that a radical removal of the corrupted blood, and a
complete renovation of the entire mass, by substitution, was both practicable
and effectual. The speculative mind of man was not at a loss to devise
expedients, or rather attempts, for effecting this desirable purpose; and this
undoubtedly was one of the boldest, most extraordinary, and most ingenious
attempts ever made to lengthen the period of human life. I allude here to the
famous scheme of transfusion, or of introducing the blood of one animal body
into that of another; a curious discovery, attributed to ANDREAS LIBAVIUS,
Professor of Medicine and Chemistry in the University of Halle, who, in the
year 1615, publicly recommended experimental essays to ascertain the fact.
Libavius was an honest and spirited opposer of the Theosophic System, founded
by the bombastic Paracelsus, and supported by a numerous tribe of credulous and
frantic followers. Although Libavius was not totally exempt from the
fashionable follies of that age, since he believed in the transmutation of
metals, and suggested to his pupils the wonderful powers of potable gold; yet
he distinguished rational Alchemy from the fanatical systems then in vogue, and
zealously defended the former against the disciples of Galen, as well as those
of Paracelsus. He made a number of important discoveries in Chemistry, and was
unquestionably the first professor in Germany, who read Chemical Lectures, upon
pure principles of affinity, unconnected with the extravagant notions of the
Theosophists. As this remarkable sect was founded upon the doctrines of
Paracelsus, during the latter part of the sixteenth and the beginning of the
seventeenth centuries; and as the society known by the name of Rosecrucians, or
Rosencrucians, has not been without its followers and propagators, in different
shapes, even to the present time, I shall here present the reader with a
concise account of the origin and tenets of that fanatical sect.

We find this order fi^^^ publicly announced to the world, in a book published
in the German language, at Regensburg, in the year 1614, with the following
title: " The Universal and General Reformation of the World, together with an
Account of the famous Fraternity of the Rosencrucians." In the work is an
intimation, that the members of the society had been secretly at work, for a
century preceding, and that they had come to the knowledge of many great and
important secrets, which, if communicated to the world, would promote the
happiness of man. An adventurer of the name of CHRISTIAN ROSENKREUZ is said to
have founded this order, in the fourteenth century, after being previously
initiated into the sublime wisdom of the East, during his travels in Egypt and
Fez. According to what we can learn from this work, the intention of the
founder, and the final aim of the society, appear to have been to accumulate
wealth and riches, by means of secrets known only to the members; and by a
proper distribution of th^se treasures among princes and potentates, to promote
the grand scheme of the society, by producing " a general revolution of all
things." In their "Confession of Faith" are many bold and singular dogmas;
among others, that the end of the world is at hand; that a general reformation
of men and manners will speedily take place; that the wicked shall be expelled
or subdued, the Jews converted, and the doctrine of Christ propagated over the
whole earth. The Rosencrucians not only believed that these events must happen;
but they also endeavored to accelerate the same by their exertions. To their
faithful votaries and followers they promised abundance of celestial wisdom,
unspeakable riches, exemption from disease, an immortal state of ever-blooming
youth, and, above all, the Philosopher's Stone. Learning and culture of the
mind were, by this order, considered as superfluous, and despised. They found
all knowledge contained in the Bible: this however, has been supposed rather a
pretext to obviate a charge, which has been brought against them, of not
believing in the Christian religion. The truth is, they consider themselves as
superior to Divine Revelation, and believe every useful acquisition, every
virtue, to be derived from the influence of the Deity on the soul of man. In
this, as well as many other respects, they appear to be followers of
Paracelsus, whom they profess to revere as a messenger of the Divinity. Like
him, they pretend to cure all diseases, through Faith and the power of
imagination; -- to heal the most mortal disorders by a touch, or even by simply
looking at the patient. The Universal Remedy was likewise a grand secret of the
order, the discovery of which was promised to all its faithful members.

I think it unnecessary to enumerate any more of such impious fancies, if the
founder of this still lurking sect, now partly revived, had not asserted with
astonishing effrontery, that human life was capable of prolongation, like a
fire kept up by combustible matter, and that he was in the possession of a
secret, which could verify his assertion. It is evident, however, from the
testimony of the above mentioned Libavius, a man of unquestionable veracity,
that this doughty champion in Medical Chemistry, or rather Alchemy, Paracelsus,
notwithstanding his vaunting assurances, died at Salzburg in Germany, in the
Hospital of St. Stephen's in 1541; and that his death was principally brought
on by the irregular and dissolute mode of life, which he had for a long time
pursued.




The first experiments relative to the transfusion of the blood, appear to have
been made, and that with great propriety, on the lower animals. The blood of
the young, healthy, and vigorous, was transfused into the old and infirm, by
means of a delicate tube, placed in a vein opened for that purpose. The effect
of this operation was surprising and important: the aged and decrepit animals
were soon observed to become more lively, and to move with greater ease and
rapidity. By the indefatigable exertions of LOWER, in England, of DENIS, in
France, and of MORITZ HOFFMAN, and others, in Germany, this artificial mode of
renovating the life and spirits was successfully followed up, and even brought
to some degree of perfection. The vein usually opened in the arm of a patient
was resorted to for the purpose of transfusion; into this a small tube was
placed in a perpendicular direction; the same vein was then opened in a healthy
individual, but more frequently in an animal, into which another tube was
forced in a reclining direction; both the small tubes were then slided into one
another; and in that position the delicate act of transfusion was safely
performed. When the operation was completed, the vein was tied up in the same
manner as in blood-letting. Sometimes a quantity of blood was discharged from
the patient, previous to the experiment taking place. As few persons however
were to be found, who would agree to part with their blood to others, recourse
was generally had to animals, and most frequently to the calf, the lamb, and
the stag. These being laid upon a table, and tied so as to be unable to move,
the operation was performed in the manner before described.

In some instances, the good effects of these experiments were evident and
promising, while they excited the greatest hopes of the future improvement and
progress of this new art. But the increasing abuses, to which it led bold and
inexpert practitioners, together with the great number of cases, wherein it
proved unsuccessful, induced the different governments of Europe to put an
entire stop to the practice, by the strictest prohibitions. And, indeed, so
long as the constitutions of men differ from each other materially as they now
do, this is, and ever will be, a hazardous, if not a desperate remedy. The
blood of every individual is sui generis, or of a peculiar nature, and suits or
accords, as it were, with that body only, to which it belongs, and in which it
is generated. Hence our hopes of prolonging human life, by artificial
evacuations and injections, must necessarily be disappointed.

We are not however to suppose, that these and similar pursuits, during the
times of which we treat as well as those which succeeded, were solely or
chiefly followed by mere adventurers and fanatics. No; the greatest wits and
geniuses of those times, together with the most learned and eminent men, deemed
them objects worthy of their sedulous attention. LORD BACON, that sagacious
explorer of the arcana of Nature, that luminary of science and talents,
represents life as a flame, which is continually wasted by the surrounding
atmosphere, and asserts that all the fluids of the body may from time to time
be renovated, and require such renovation. The remedies, which he prefers and
prescribes, are conformable to this hypothesis. To prevent the external
consumption produced by the circumambient air, he recommends the bath, and,
after quitting it, friction with oils and salves, with a view to fortify the
pores, and exclude the influence of the external air. As means to counteract
the internal waste of the body, he inculcates the propriety of a cooling,
moderate diet, and, above all, extols the narcotic or soporific remedies, as
the true balm of life, and the best adapted to attain the desired effect.
Tranquillity of mind, and a cooling diet, may no doubt be very necessary in
some cases, where there is too great an irritability of temperament, and where
the circulation of the blood is too rapid. But to a phlegmatic habit, they will
rather be injurious than serviceable. Narcotic remedies, too, are but ill
qualified to cool and to moderate the body, since they never fail to act as a
certain stimulus, are attended with heat and relaxation, and therefore must
accelerate the consumption of the vital powers: that sleep, also, which is
artificial, and which they have a tendency to procure, cannot upon the whole be
salutary. It is no less evident, that the vital power supplied by heat or
caloric (which is principally evolved from the air, We shall have occasion to
institute a particular inquiry into the properties of air, in the next Chapter,
from which it will appear, that one species of air is more noxious to the vital
power than another, and that there is a greater consumption of it in one, than
in the other.
and introduced into the body by means of respiration) must be much less
considerable during sleep, than while we are awake.

For improving the fluids of the aged, and renovating the dry and corrupted
part of them, Lord Bacon thinks nothing can be put in competition with powerful
laxatives, and advises the use of a full course of them, every two or three
years at least. These remedies are, in his opinion, the best qualified to
evacuate vitiated humors, and afterward to produce, in lieu of them, milder
and more healthy juices. The exhausted, and, as it were, thirsty vessels may be
replenished and strengthened, according to his ideas, by a refreshing and
nourishing diet.

However plausible this theory may appear, the execution of it is
impracticable, and the basis on which it rests, merely conjectural. If it were
possible to withdraw the corrupted part of the fluids from the body, by means
of evacuants, and at the same time to remove the causes, which produce this
tendency to corruption, then the doctrine laid down by Lord Bacon would deserve
every praise, and the most minute attention to its merits. But it ought to be
observed, that the activity and energy of the whole organized system is
indispensably necessary in the process of separating the noxious or useless
particles. As, therefore, laxatives remove only the more watery fluids; as they
have a bad effect on the stomach and intestines, by rendering them too
irritable, and consequently less tonic or vigorous; as the bile, a fluid so
essential to the concoction of food and assimilation of alimentary matter, is
thereby uselessly wasted; as the balance between the solid and fluid parts of
the body is in this manner destroyed; and as, upon the whole, the vital powers
must sustain a considerable degree of diminution in affording supplies, to
repair what is lost; -- the precarious nature of evacuants, as the means of
prolonging human life, appears too evident to require further illustration.

It is not, therefore, in such remedies as these, which can only be employed
with safety, where a judicious attention is paid to the case and circumstances
of the patient, that we ought to confide, as the most proper to prolong the
period of our existence: we must search for means less dangerous and more
effectual.

There is a pretty numerous class of men, who profess to calculate the length
of their lives, not so much by the number of years or days they have lived, as
by the use they have made of them, or, to speak more plainly, by the quantum of
sensual pleasure they have enjoyed. Persons of this cast, though fully sensible
of the unavoidable consequences, are not averse to what is called fast living.
Accustomed to reckon only upon the enjoyments of life, they wish to attain
these in a shorter period of time, and in more rapid success^^, rather than
slowly and by degrees; especially as the duration of our life ever remains
uncertain. Men of this sanguine character may be aptly compared to a plant
forced in a hothouse, which will indeed grow up suddenly, but, if contrasted
with a plant of flower growth, or any kind of fruit which gradually ripens to
maturity, will be found much degenerated, neither possessing the solidity and
strength of stalk, nor the astringent, aromatic, and other properties, in that
vigor and perfection, which we find in vegetables raised in the open air. Many
similar hothouse plants are discoverable among men, in the different stages of
society. In childhood, they display the premature acquirements of youth; in
youth, they show the sense, ambition, and other qualifications of manhood; and
before they have well passed through the prime of virility, they are either
snatched away by untimely death, or their faculties become blunted and impaired.

It is the unalterable plan of Nature, to proceed, in every one of her
operations, by degrees; all outrage and extravagance militate against her
established laws. The true enjoyment of life does not consist in the hasty
pursuit of pleasure, nor in the intemperate indulgence of our sensual
appetites. The epicure is soon laid up by dangerous surfeit, resulting from
indulgence in a variety of highly-flavoured dishes, and is obliged to spend
that time in reluctant confinement, which he proposed to devote to his bottle,
to his debauchery, or to some scene of gaiety; he is compelled to lead as it
were a vegetable life, scarcely pitied by his friends, and, in the fullest
sense of the word, to exist rather than to live.

In one respect, we have little occasion to extol our own enlightened age, at
the expense of those which are so frequently and justly termed dark: I allude
to the bold and artful designs of imposture, and particularly medical
imposture. We daily see illiterate and audacious empirics sport with the lives
of a credulous public, that seem obstinately resolved to shut their ears
against all the suggestions of reason and experience.

The host of empirics and mountebanks, to be found in our great cities, and the
tinctures, essences, and balms of life, so much in vogue with even the polished
classes; the celestial beds, the enchanting magnetic powers, lately introduced
into this country by Messmer and his numerous disciples; the prevailing
indifference to all dietetic precepts; the singular imposition practiced on
many females, in persuading them to wear the inert acromatic belts (which shall
be further noticed in the eighth chapter); the strange infatuation of the
opulent to pay five guineas for a pair of metallic tractors, The Monthly
Reviewers, in examining Mr. Perkins's pamphlet on that subject, after having
informed the reader that a Dr. Willard, ^n American practitioner, the author
himself, and four other persons, had purposely burnt themselves with a red-hot
piece of iron, so that blisters were raised, in order to experience the anodyne
effects of the tractors, and that all these living witnesses obtained relief in
a few minutes, proceed in the following words:

"This zeal for knowledge is truly edifying, especially as the tractors are
generously presented to the public at only five guineas a pair; and it is clear
that one pair would suffice to cure all the burns and scalds of a large parish.
Why are not such luculent experiments repeated here? If Mr. P. or any admirer
of the discovery, would submit to have a red-hot poker run into some part of
his body not necessary to life (into that part where honor's lodged, according
to Butler, for example,) in any public coffee-house within the bills of
mortality, and would afterward heal the wound in presence of the company, in
ten minutes, or in half as many hours, by means of the tractors, the most
stony-hearted infidel could not resist such a demonstration. Why trifle with
internal inflammations, when such an outward and visible sign might be afforded?

"Mr Perkins has taken some pains, in the first part of his pamphlet, to show
that the operation of his rods is not derived from animal magnetism. In our
opinion, this is an unnecessary piece of trouble in England, where there is a
constant succession of similar pretensions. The virgula divinator^a, and the
baguette of the juggler, are the genuine prototypes of this mystery. We were
indeed rejoiced on Dr. Perkins's account, to find that the Connecticut Society
had only denounced him as a Mesmerist; we trembled lest he should have been put
into the inquisitorial hands of the old women, as a white witch.

"To trace the relations and dependencies of projects similar to that of Dr.
Perkins, would now be a work of more labor than utility. The fund of public
credulity is an inexhaustible resource for those who can resolve to levy
contributions on it. In vain is the spirit of quackery exorcised in one form;
it rises again immediately, ' with twenty ghastly murders on its head, to push
us from our stools.' We, who have contemplated the progress of real knowledge,
during a long course of years, have seen many bubbles like this glitter for a
moment, and then disappear for ever. People may talk of Mesmerism or Perkinism;
but we consider all such varieties as belonging to the old and extensive class,
Charlatanism." -- Monthly Review, April, 1799, p. 463 and 464.


not worth a sixpence; the tables for blood-letting, and other absurdities
still inserted in popular almanacks, sufficiently evince, that this is far from
being the "Age of Reason;" that the Temple of Superstition is yet thronged with
numberless votaries; that human reason is still a slave to the most tyrannical
prejudices; and that there is no readier way to excite general attention and
admiration, than to affect the mysterious and the mavelous.

The visionary system of JACOB BOHMEN has lately been revived in some parts of
Germany. The ghosts and apparitions, which have disappeared from the times of
THOMASIUS and SWEDENBORG, have again, it seems, left their graves, to the great
terror of fanaticism. New and unheard of prophets announce their Divine
mission, and, what is worse, find implicit believers! The inventors of secret
medicines are rewarded by patents, and obtain no small celebrity; while some of
the more conscientious, but less fortunate adepts, endeavor to amuse the
public with popular systems of medicine! These, however, are harmless, in
comparison with the daring experiments, of which I shall briefly sketch the
history.

One of the most dazzling and successful Inventors in modern times was MESSMER,
who began his career of Medical Knight-errantry at Vienna. His house was the
mirror of high life; the rendezvous of the gay, the young, the opulent,
enlivened and entertained with continual concerts, routs, and illuminations. At
a great expense he imported into Germany the first Harmonica from this country;
he established cabinets of natural curiosities, and labored constantly and
secretly in his chemical laboratory; so that he acquired the reputation of
being a great Alchemist, a philosopher studiously employed in the most useful
and important researches.

In 1766 he first publicly announced the object and nature of his secret
labors: -- all his discoveries centered in the magnet -- which, according to
his hypothesis, was the greatest and safest remedy hitherto proposed against
all diseases incident to the human body. This declaration of Messmer excited
very general attention; the more so, as about the same time he established an
hospital in his own house, into which he admitted a number of patients gratis.
Such disinterestedness procured, as might be expected, no small addition to his
same. He was, besides, fortunate in gaining over many celebrated physicians to
espouse his opinions, who lavished the greatest encomiums on his new art, and
were instrumental in communicating to the public a number of successful
experiments. This seems to have surpassed the expectations of Messmer, and
induced him to extend his original plan farther than it is likely he first
intended. We find him soon afterward assuming a more dogmatical and mysterious
air, when, for the purpose of shining exclusively, he appeared in the character
of a Magician -- his pride and egotism would brook neither equal nor competitor.

The common Loadstone, or Mineral Magnet, which is so well known, did not
appear to him sufficiently important and mysterious: he contrived an unusual
and unknown one, to the effect of which he gave the name of ' Animal
Magnetism.' After this he proceeded to a still bolder assumption, every where
giving it out, that the inconceivable powers of this subtle fluid were centered
in his own person. Now the Mono-drama began; and Messmer, at once the hero and
chorus of the piece, performed his part in a masterly manner. He placed the
most nervous, hysteric, and hypochondriac patients opposite to him; and by the
sole act of stretching forth his finger, made them feel the most violent
shocks. The effects of this wonderful power excited universal astonishment; its
activity and penetrability being confirmed by unquestionable testimonies, from
which it appeared, that blows, resembling those given by a blunt iron, could be
imparted by the operator, while he himself was separated by two doors, nay even
by thick walls. The very looks of this Prince of Jugglers had the power to
excite painful cramps and twitches.

This wonderful tide of success easily instigated his indefatigable genius to
bolder attempts, especially as he had no severe criticisms to apprehend from
the superstitious multitude. He roundly asserted things, of which he never
offered the least shadow of proof; and for the truth of which he had no other
pledge to offer, but his own high reputation. At one time he could communicate
his magnetic power to paper, wool, silk, bread, leather, stones, water, etc. --
at another he pronounced, that certain individuals possessed a greater degree
of susceptibility for this power than others.

It must be owned, however, to the honor of his cotemporaries, that many of
them made it their business to encounter his extravagant pretensions, and to
refute his dogmatical assertions with the most convincing arguments. Yet he
long enjoyed the triumph of being supported by blind followers; and their too
great number completely overpowered the suffrages of reason.

Messmer perceived at length, that he should never be able to reach, in his
native country, the point which he had fixed upon, as the term of his
magnetical career. The Germans began to discredit his pompous claims; but it
was only after repeated failures in some important promised cures, that he
found himself under the necessity of seeking protection in Paris. There he met
with a most flattering reception, being caressed, and in a manner adored, by a
nation which has ever been extravagantly fond of every thing new, whimsical,
and mysterious. Messmer well knew how to turn this national propensity to his
own advantage. He addressed himself particularly to the weak; to such as wished
to be considered men of profound knowledge, but who, when they are compelled to
be silent from real ignorance, take refuge under the impenetrable shield of
mystery. The fashionable levity, the irresistible curiosity, and the peculiar
turn of the Parisians, ever solicitous to have something interesting for
conversation, to keep their active imagination in play, were exactly suited to
the genius and talents of the inventor of Animal Magnetism. We need not wonder,
therefore, if he availed himself of their moral and physical character, to
insure easy entrance to his doctrines, and success to his pretended
experiments: in fact, he found friends and admirers, wherever he made his
appearance. His first advertisement was couched in the following high-sounding
t^rms: "Behold a discovery which promises unspeakable advantages to the human
race, and immortal same to its author! Behold the dawn of an universal
revolution! A new race of men shall arise, shall overspread the earth, to
embellish it with their virtues, and render it fertile by their industry.
Neither vice, nor ignorance, shall stop their active career; they will know our
calamities only from the records of history. The prolonged duration of their
life will enable them to plan and accomplish the most laudable undertakings.
The tranquil, the innocent gratifications of that primeval age will be
restored, wherein man labored without toil, lived without sorrow, and expired
without a groan! Mothers will no longer be subject to pain and danger during
their pregnancy and childbirth; their progeny will be more robust and brave;
education's now rugged and difficult path will be rendered smooth and easy; and
hereditary complaints and diseases will be for ever banished from the future
auspicious race. Parents will impart to them the activity, energy, and graceful
limbs and demeanor of the primitive world. Fathers, rejoicing to see their
posterity of the fourth and fifth generations, will (...) drop, like fruit
fully ripe, at the extreme point of age! (...) and plants, no less susceptible
than man of the magnetic power, will be exempt from the reproach of barrenness
and the ravages of distemper. The flocks in the fields, and the plants in the
gardens, will be more vigorous and nourishing, and the trees will ^ear more
beautiful and luscious fruits. The human mind, once endowed with this
elementary power, will probably rise to still more sublime and astonishing
effects of nature: -- Who indeed is able to pronounce with certainty, how far
this salutary influence may extend?


What splendid promises! what rich prospects! Messmer, the greatest of
philosophers, the most virtuous of men, the physician and savior of mankind,
charitably opens his arms to all his fellow-mortals, who stand in need of
comfort and assistance. No wonder that the cause of Magnetism, under such a
zealous apostle, rapidly gained ground, and obtained every day large additions
to the number of its converts. To the gay, the nervous, and the dissipated of
all ranks and ages, it held out the most flattering promises. Men of the first
respectability interested themselves in behalf of this new philosophy; they
anticipated, in idea, the more happy and more vigorous race to proceed, as it
were by enchantment, from the wonderful impulsive powers of Animal Magnetism.
Nay, even the French Government was so far seduced by these flattering
appearances, as to offer the German Adventurer thirty thousand livres for the
communication of his secret art. He appears, however, to have understood his
own interest better than thus to dispose of his hypothetical property, which
upon a more accurate investigation might be excepted against, as consisting of
unfair articles of purchase. He consequently returned the following answer to
the credulous French Ministers: -- "That Dr. M. considered his art of too great
importance, and the abuses it might lead to, too dangerous for him at present
to make it public; that he must therefore reserve to himself the time of its
publication, and mode of introducing it to general use and observation; that he
would first take proper measures to initiate or prepare the minds of men, by
exciting in them a susceptibility of this great power; and that he would then
undertake to communicate his secret gradually, which he meant to do without
hope of reward."

Messmer, too politic to part with his secret for so small a premium, had a
better prospect in view; and his apparent disinterestedness and hesitation
served only to sound an overcurious public; to allure more victims to his
delusive practices; and to retain them more firmly in their implicit belief.
Soon after this, we find Messmer easily prevailed upon to institute a private
society, into which none were admitted, but such as bound themselves by a vow
to perpetual secrecy. These pupils he agreed to instruct in his important
mysteries, on condition of each paying him a fee of one hundred louis. In the
course of six months, having had not fewer than three hundred such pupils, he
realized a fortune of thirty thousand louis. It appears, however, that his
disciples did not long adhere to their engagement: we find them separating
gradually from their professor, and establishing schools for the propagation of
his system, with a view, no doubt, to reimburse themselves for their expenses
in the acquisition of the magnetising art. But few of them having clearly
understood the enigmatic terms and mysterious doctrines of their foreign
master, every new adept exerted himself to excel his fellow laborers, in
additional explanations and inventions: others, who did not possess, or could
not spare the sum of one hundred louis, were industriously employed in attempts
to discover the secret by their own ingenuity; and thus arose a great variety
of magnetical sects. At length, however, Messmer's authority became suspected;
his pecuniary acquisitions were now notorious, and our humane and disinterested
philosopher was assailed with critical and satirical animadversions from every
quarter. The futility of his process for medical purposes, as well as the bad
consequences it might produce in a moral point of view, soon became topics of
common conversation, and at length excited even the apprehensions of
Government. One dangerous effect of the magnetic associations was, that young
voluptuaries began to employ this art, to promote their libidinous and
destructive designs.

As soon as matters had taken this serious turn, the French Government, much to
its credit, deputed four respectable and unprejudiced men, to whom were
afterward added four others of great learning and abilities, to inquire into,
and appreciate the merits of the new discovery of animal magnetism. These
philosophers, among whom we find the illustrious names of Franklin and
Lavoisier, recognized indeed very surprising and unexpected phenomena in the
physical state of magnetised individuals; but they gave it as their opinion,
that the power of imagination, and not animal magnetism, had produced these
effects. Sensible of the superior influence, which the imagination can exert on
the human body, when it is effectually wrought upon, they perceived, after a
number of experiments and facts frequently repeated, that Contact or Touch,
Imagination, Imitation, and excited Sensibility, were the real and sole causes
of those phenomena, which had so much confounded the illiterate, the credulous,
and the enthusiastic; that this boasted magnetic element had no real existence
in nature; consequently that Messmer himself was either an arrant Impostor, or
a deceived Fanatic.

In the mean time, this magnetising business had made no small progress in
Germany; a number of periodical and other publications vindicated its claims to
public favor and attention; and some literary men, who had rendered themselves
justly celebrated by their former writings, now appeared as bold and eager
champions in support of this mystical medley. The ingenious LAVATER undertook
long journies for the propagation of Magnetism and Somnabulism Somnabulism is
the art of exciting sleep in persons under the influence of Animal Magnetism,
with a view to obtain, or rather extort, during this artificial sleep, their
verbal declarations and directions for curing the diseases of body and mind.
Such was the rage for propagating this mystical nonsense, that even the pulpit
was occasionally resorted to, in order to make -- not fair penit^^^s, but fair
proselytes to the system.
-- and what manipulations and other absurdities were not practiced on
hysterical young ladies in the city of Bremen? It is further worthy of notice,
that an eminent physician of that place, in a recent publication, does not
scruple to rank magnetism among medical remedies! Yet it must be confessed,
that the great body of the learned, throughout Germany, have endeavored, by
strong and impartial criticism, to oppose and refute Animal Magnetism,
considered as a medical system. And how should it be otherwise, since it is
highly ridiculous to imagine, that violent agitations, spasms, convulsions,
etc. which are obviously symptoms of a diseased state, and which must increase
rather than diminish the disposition for nervous diseases, can be the means of
improving the constitution, and ultimately prolonging human life? Every
attentive person must have observed, that too frequent intercourse between
nervous and hypochondriac patients is infectious; and, if this be the case,
public assemblies for exhibiting persons magnetised can neither be safe nor
proper. It is no small proof of the good sense of the people of this country,
that the professors of this fanatical art could not long maintain their ground;
that they were soon exposed to public ridicule on the stage; and that the few
who are still left, are banished to dark alleys and obscure cellars of the
metropolis.

Some other plans for the prolongation of life deserve to be mentioned, though
scarcely less absurd than the preceding.

The French Count of ST. GERMAIN made large sums, by vending an artificial Tea,
chiefly, composed of Yellow-Saunders, Se^na-leaves, and Fennel-seed; passing it
off by the specious name of Tea for prolonging life. It was once swallowed with
great avidity all over the continent; but its celebrity was short-lived, and
its promised beneficial effects were never realized.

Another impudent adventurer, the Chevalier D'AILHOUD, presented the world with
a Powder, which met with so large and rapid a sale, that he was very soon
enabled to purchase a whole Comte. Instead, however, of adding to the means of
securing health and long life, this famous powder is well known to produce
constant indisposition, and at length to cause a most miserable death; being
compounded of certain drugs, which are clearly of a poisonous nature, although
slow in their operation. And yet there are on the continent, even to this day,
several respectable families, who persist in the use of this deleterious
powder, from an ill-judged partiality for its inventor.

COUNT CAGLIOSTRO, that luminary of modern Impostors and Debauchees, prepared a
very common stomachic Elixir, which he sold at an enormous price, by the name
of " Balm of Life;" pretending, with unparalleled assurance, that by the use of
this medicine he had attained an age exceeding 200 years, and that he was
thereby rendered invulnerable to all attempts by poison. These bold assertions
could not fail to excite very general attention. During his residence at
Strasburg, while he was descanting, in a large and respectable company, on the
virtues of his antidote, his pride was mortified by a severe check. A Physician
who was present, and had taken part in the conversation, quitting the room
privately, went to an Apothecary's shop, where having ordered two pills to be
made of an equal size, and agreeably to his directions, he suddenly appeared
again before Cagliostro, and addressed him as follows: "Here, my worthy Count,
are two pills; the one contains a mortal poison, the other is perfectly
innocent; choose one of these, and swallow it, and I engage to take that which
you leave. This will be considered as a decisive proof of your medical skill,
and enable the public to ascertain the efficacy of your extolled Elixir."
Cagliostro took the alarm, made a number of apologies, but could not be
prevailed upon ^o touch the pills. His opponent swallowed both immediately, and
proved by his Apothecary, that they might be taken with the most perfect
safety, being only made of common bread. Notwithstanding the shame of this
detection, Cagliostro still retained numerous advocates and partisans, by
circulating eccentric notions, and concealing his real character by a variety
of tricks.

The inspired FATHER GASSNER, of Bavaria, ascribed all diseases, lameness,
palsy, etc. to diabolical agency, contending from the history of Job, Saul,
etc. recorded in Sacred Writ, that Satan, as the grand enemy of mankind, has a
power to embitter and shorten our lives by diseases. Vast numbers of credulous
people flocked to this fanatic, for, the purpose of obtaining relief. Whole
cargoes of patients, afflicted with nervous and hypochondriac complaints,
besieged him as it were in his quarters every day; all stimulated and heated
with a wild imagination, all eager to view and to acknowledge the works of
Satan! Men of literary character, even the Natural Philosophers of Bavaria,
were hurried away by the stream, and completely blinded by this sanctimonious
Impostor.

It is no less astonishing than true, that in the year 1794, a COUNT THUN, at
Leipzig, pretended to perform miraculous cures on gouty, hypochondriac, and
hysterical patients, merely by the imposition of his sacred hands. He could
not, however, raise many disciples in a place, that abounds with Skeptics and
Unbelievers.

It would be trespassing too much on the limits I have proposed to myself, were
I to enumerate the various remedies advertised in the daily papers, both
British and foreign, under the fictitious and fraudulent pretense of prolonging
life. I shall therefore only remark, in general, that all these celebrated
specifics are obviously composed upon wrong principles; inasmuch as their
inventors proceed on the hypothetical idea, that disease is the only cause of
shortening life; and, being thus mistaken, it is no wonder that they carry the
strengthening or bracing system to an extravagant degree.

The highest point of bodily vigor and health may of itself contribute to
shorten life; although no external causes should appear as cooperating to
hasten the consumptive process. Nay, the very remedies we use, and the regimen
we attend to, for the prevention or cure of diseases, may be of such a nature
as to promote that consumption.

Absurdity of Specific Remedies.
FROM the doctrines now laid before the reader, I hope I shall not be thought
unreasonable, in drawing this conclusion: -- That the plans for prolonging
human life are generally erroneous and injudicious; that all artificial means
have rather a tendency to shorten than to prolong it; and that we can never
safely expect the accomplishment of this great object, unless we pursue methods
more consonant to nature, more verified by experience.

The truth of this inference will be more evident, when we come to inquire into
the conditions, which are essentially requisite to the attainment of a long
life.

The first of these is a certain bodily and mental disposition to longevity,
not easily defined, yet sufficiently known and understood. In whatever this
disposition may consist, it is a matter of astonishment, and inexplicable by
the laws of animal economy, that many individuals, frequently under the most
unfavourable circumstances, and in the most unwholesome climates, have attained
to a great and happy age. It may indeed be confidently affirmed, that, without
this principal requisite, all other advantages are often of no avail; the most
salubrious country air, a district abounding with aged inhabitants, a rigid
adherence to the diet of Cornaro, a regular course of exercise and recreations,
with the best art of the physician, are not alone sufficient to insure the
felicitous prospect of a long and healthy life. If these rational means be
unavailing to insure longevity, still more so are those miraculous remedies
introduced by superstition. The ancients conceived the idea of a principle of
life, which they compared to a radical fluid; -- the Alchemists expected to
find this original entity in gold, by the use of which they pretended that the
human body might acquire the solidity and durability of that metal. Others
traced the germ of life in bodies of considerable duration; in plants and
animals; in the wood of the Cedar, and in the flesh of the Stag. BOERHAAVE has
made a facetious remark upon the subject: "This notion," says he, "is just as
ridiculous as that of the man, who, in order to prepare himself for the
business of a running footman, is said to have lived for some time entirely on
the flesh of hares; hoping thus to surpass all his fellows in agility."


Secondly: It is certain that there is, in most cases, a sort of hereditary
disposition to longevity; an innate principle or quality, which, like many
family diseases, is propagated from one generation to another. Perhaps nine out
of ten old persons could make it appear, that their parents and ancestors also
lived to a great age; a reason which may be admitted without having recourse to
any material substance, as the cause or effect of this inherent virtue.

The third requisite to longevity is a perfect birth of the child, and a proper
subsequent conduct in the mother; upon which subject it is not my intention to
expatiate in this place. That acute physiologist, Lord Bacon, somewhere
remarks, "that children partake more of the nature of the mother, the longer
time she has nursed them; and that those children which most resemble the
mother, will be generally found to have a claim to longevity."

Fourthly: A gradual, and not too precipitate culture of the physical and
mental faculties may be properly considered as an excellent preliminary step
toward prolonging life. The age of man bears a certain proportion to the
growth of his various powers; and the longer we can protract the different
stages of life, the more extended will be the whole compass of our existence.
As it is evidently the design of nature, that man should live longer than most
of the lower animals, he of course requires a greater space of time, to
develope the faculties both of mind and body. Animals, which arrive soon at the
perfection of their nature and form, live but a short time. Man requires
upwards of twenty, and according to some, twenty-five years, before he attains
to full maturity; and if it be a rule of nature, that animals in general live
eight times the number of years, which is requisite to the attainment of their
perfect growth, a strong presumption arises, that the age of man might be
extended to nearly two hundred years. In the works of the illustrious Bacon,
and particularly in his "Historical View of Life and Death," are given many
strong arguments to confirm this assertion. Surprising as it may appear to
some, there is a possibility at least, if not a probability, that the term of
human life might be still further extended, if mankind could by any means be
persuaded to return to that primeval state of nature, from which history and
tradition have furnished us with such astonishing and almost incredible
instances of longevity. It is not my intention here to inquire into the degree
of credit, which may be due to the accounts of some extraordinary facts of
individual longevity, recorded by the sacred historian; as the learned vary
much in their opinion, relative to the mode of computation, and whether the
Solar, the Arabic, or the Lunar year, or a still shorter measure of time, is
alluded to. This, at least, seems to be generally admitted, that the
antediluvians enjoyed an enviable, uninterrupted state of health; that their
vegetable aliment, and general mode of living, were extremely simple and no
wise prejudicial; that the constitution and temperature of the globe itself
must have been greatly affected and deteriorated, in consequence of the Flood,
or other causes of which we are ignorant; and, lastly, that those impetuous and
inordinate appetites and passions, which, like flames, may now be said to
consume the powers of life, were then either less violent, or exerted their
baneful influence at a much later period of life.

Nature resents every outrage committed on her treasures, and seldom fails to
punish the transgressors with lingering disease, or early dissolution. This
observation may be applied to the moral as well as the physical faculties of
man. It is commonly said, and not without some degree of truth, that very
forward children seldom live to any age; and that too early an exertion of
mental powers is in most cases destructive. The same remark holds good in what
relates to the body. The inhabitants of hot climates, who frequently marry at
the age of ten and twelve, or twelve and fourteen, begin to be old at thirty,
and rarely survive the sixtieth year. Every thing which hastens the evolution
of the natural powers, every exertion of strength, disproportionate to the
ability of the individual, should be carefully avoided, as of a dangerous
tendency. Hence the great art of education, the great art of living, consists
in following the path of nature.

Fifthly; We should constantly inure ourselves to the habits of supporting and
resisting the various impressions of external agency. -- Some persons who have
paid a very rigid attention to diet, have notwithstanding been unable to reach
even a middling age; while others, who have been addicted to the most irregular
and extravagant courses, have been observed to live to one very advanced. Hence
arise contradictory maxims in dietetics, which can only be reconciled by
deciding chemically between the two extremes, and ascertaining pretty nearly
the absolute and relative salubrity of things. All deviations from the rules of
diet are in a certain degree hurtful; although these may, in most cases, have
only a limited value. Many epicures have been known to reach their seventieth
and eightieth year, if they have once survived a certain critical period of
their lives. Experience shows, that there is a particular term of life which,
if we can pass in the fullness of health and vigor, leaves the greatest
probability of living to a considerable age. In the female sex, this period
generally arrives at, or before, the fiftieth year; in the male, it is about
the sixtieth year. GELLIUS, a medical author of credit, asserts, from
observations founded on long experience, that the sixtythird year is, to most
constitutions, a critical and dangerous one. -- The Egyptians called this
epoch Androclos, because man begins from that time to experience a rapid decay
of strength and energy. Others, rather more superstitiously, maintained that,
about this period, many individuals die, or at least are subject to severe
attacks of disease. -- The Emperor AUGUSTUS received the congratulations of his
friends, on having survived this trying period.
As soon as the body becomes accustomed to the use of certain things, at first
disagreeable and perhaps hurtful, the noxious tendency will not only be
removed, but we shall find our frame hardened and strengthened by the habit of
using them. Nature must stand many a shock, if she would familiarize herself to
the vicissitudes of climate and opposite modes of life, but every victory she
gains in these encounters, will be a means of rendering her more vigorous and
unconquerable. How could the sublime mind of FREDERIC THE GREAT have remained
so long in its earthly vehicle, if he had not improved, by constant culture and
discipline, his original disposition to a long life? A thousand other men, who
have endured as much exercise of body and exertion of mind in their younger
years, have yet not attained to any remarkable age. -- Severe and obstinate
diseases have also been thought, in many instances, to contribute to the
prolongation of life: this is at best, however, but a doubtful point; although
it cannot be denied, that many sick persons have, to all appearance, acquired
additional strength and spirits, after having recovered from a distressing
quartan ague, or some threatening pulmonary disorder.

Sixthly: We may take notice of a certain steady and equal progress through
life, as highly conducive to the great object in view, whether it flows in the
manner of a gentle stream, or resembles the more active course of a rapid
river. The mind, when accustomed to certain situations and pursuits, which
almost constantly affect it in an uniform manner, is most likely to preserve
its reasoning powers unimpaired and strong. He whom neither violent joy
convulses, nor deep melancholy corrodes, whose drama of life is not chequered
by too sudden vicissitudes, may, with some probability, expect a long enjoyment
of that life, to which he has become so habituated. There are many whose days
quietly glide away, like those of a simple rustic, in continual sameness: such
persons, it is observed, generally live to a great age.

Seventhly: A very necessary cause of the attainment of an advanced age, is a
sound state of digestion. In very old persons, we generally find the digestive
organs in excellent condition; nor is there a surer symptom of approaching
dissolution, than complaints in the stomach, or frequent returns of
indigestion. The Swiss are indebted, it is thought, to the vigorous tone of
their digestive powers, for the long preservation of their lives, in general,
and for the great number of aged persons among them. Milk and vegetable food
seem remarkably well adapted to invigorate the stomach. To effect the same
purpose, Lord Bacon advises old people to have recourse to strengthening baths,
fomentations, and similar external remedies, which operate upon the absorbent
system. At the same time, a thin but nourishing and moderate diet should be
observed, in order to spare the organs of digestion.

Eighthly, and lastly: We may recommend equanimity, or that state of the mind,
when, from the happy nature of its pursuits, it is not disquieted by too
violent exertions. In the literary professions, and particularly among such
individuals as are placed in easy circumstances, we discover as many instances
of longevity, as in the more laborious occupations. It was remarked by the
Ancients, that grammarians and rhetoricians commonly attained a great age. The
mind being engaged in scientific pursuits, and other objects in which it finds
pleasure, such as conversation on literary and mixed topics, collecting the
productions of nature, a continual series of mental research, diversifying the
pursuits or amusements, yet gradually and constantly persevering in exertions
toward the attainment of some principal object -- all supply the vital power,
as it were, with materials, like the cruse of oil, which proved a never-failing
support to the widow of Sarepta. On the other hand, it is a general remark,
that deep thinkers, speculative philosophers, and those whose powers are
continually absorbed in abstruse inquiry, soon feel the effects of age, from
the great exertions of their mental powers. This must be understood, however,
with exceptions, as in the cases of SIR ISAAC NEWTON, HALLER, EULER, and the
pride of his nation and age, the profound and venerable KANT, still living at
Koenigsberg.

I venture to say thus much on the various rules and precautions requisite to
attain a long and healthful life. Some of the particulars are, no doubt, found
united in a certain proportion of the individuals, who arrive at a respectable
age. It is commonly remarked also, that the inhabitants of mountainous
countries, for the most part live to a greater age than those of plain and,
particularly, marshy districts. This is in part true; yet we are not to
consider the lofty regions in the Alps and Pyrenees as possessing these
salubrious qualities; for it is only upon moderate heights, and in hilly rather
than mountainous countries, that we so frequently meet with people of an
unusual age. Persons who are constantly traveling, are likewise said to enjoy
a long and healthful life; and Lord Bacon further includes, in the list of long
livers, such as are of a melancholy temperament. It is a questionable point,
whether the great age of many Turks is to be ascribed to the serenity of their
climate, their daily use of the bath, or their uncommon temperance in eating
and drinking. For, as to their copious use of opium, which is considered by
them almost as necessary as food, we have already shown the noxious tendency of
such practice; opium generating, in a remarkable degree, a disposition of the
fluids, in many respects resembling that of hypochondriasis. There is scarcely
an instance of any person, that has attained to uncommon longevity, who has not
been particular in his diet and manner of living. But in this respect we cannot
hope to derive advantage from excessive solicitude: -- for, as when in want of
sleep, the more we think of it, the more it shuns us; so those who are most
anxious for longevity, are the least likely to attain it. Age is a gift, which
Heaven frequently bestows upon mortals, when they are asleep, or in other
words, when they are scarcely sensible of it!

On the Symptoms of actual Dissolution.
THAT many unfortunate individuals are consigned to the grave, before they are
actually dead, is a truth too well attested to require demonstration. If this
were not, or never had been the case, it could not have excited that degree of
attention on the Continent, and particularly in Germany, which of late years
has been bestowed on this important subject. The most respectable Physicians
have proved by incontrovertible facts, that sick persons have often been
hastily buried, or to speak more properly, smothered in their coffins, either
from accidental mistake, or from the most detestable motives. But, as many
false and scandalous reports are generally circulated, in addition to those
founded on truth, we need not wonder, that this business has not been
conducted, hitherto, with that degree of calm and patient attention, to which
it is justly entitled. Houses for the reception of persons apparently dead have
been, at length, erected in various parts of Germany, in Berlin, Jena, Coburg,
etc. This idea, at the first view of it, may to some appear whimsical; but
those who know the extent of the power of vitality, and the almost infinite
modifications of which that power is susceptible, will not ridicule a proposal,
which originated in motives of prudence and humanity. Into these houses every
inhabitant of the town, or district, has a right to send the body of a deceased
person, on paying a trifling sum per night, toward the expenses of the
institution. Here the body i^ deposited on a couch, lightly covered, and
provided with a string fastened to the hand, which pulls a bell on the top of
the house. A watchman is appointed to receive and register the bodies brought
into the house, and to give the alarm, if necessary. This, to say the least of
it, is no small convenience to families in a large city, crowded into narrow
apartments, with a number of children, who must necessarily suffer from the
pestiferous exhalations of dead bodies. But this is not the principal advantage
attending such establishments: it is unquestionably a great satisfaction to the
relatives of the deceased, to be assured that every means have been used to
preserve from the most dreadful of all deaths, a friend whose memory they
revere.

The cases, in which death can be clearly ascertained, are nearly the following:

1. When putrefaction has actually taken place over the whole animal frame; as
instances are common, in which a partial mortification of an arm or a leg is by
no means mortal.

2. In the nervous apoplexy of the aged; as such persons generally die in
consequence of slowly wasting disorders, various species of palsy, etc.

3. If the patient expires after a long standing consumption, hectic fever, or
ulcerations of the breast and lungs, diseases now very common.

4. If any of the larger blood vessels, or other parts essential to life, have
received external injury, by violent blows, bruises, or cuts, attended with
great loss of blood, which could not be stopped by artificial means. If we are
unable to supply the loss of this vital fluid, and to restore the organization
of the parts thus destroyed; particularly if the brain, the lungs, the heart,
the stomach, or any of the intestines, have suffered from a severe wound, a
speedy dissolution may be considered as inevitable.

5. After chronic disorders of the intestines, obstructions of the abdominal
vessels, and dropsy thence arising -- or if an incurable weakness in the breast
has occasioned the organic destruction, or ossification of the pectoral
vessels, there is little prospect of the recovery of such a person; as these
complaints of asthmatic sufferers, in general, are not in a just proportion to
the whole state of the body; for instance, if their appetite and digestion have
been unimpaired previous to their disease, or if their muscular strength has
not suffered from the like affections.

6. In persons of tender and debilitated nerves, who have been long subject to
spasms or epileptic fits, particularly if they die in childbed, in consequence
of violent hemorrhages, or after repeated and oppressive agitations of mind; --
in such cases there is no hope left, as it is too late to think of changing or
improving the constitution of the nervous system. Lastly,

7. If a person gradually wastes away in a malignant nervous or putrid fever,
or after long fasting from want of food. In these instances it is not in the
power of the medical art to restore the shrivelled vessels to their proper
tension and energy; consequently all our efforts to reanimate the body will be
unavailing.

There remains now to be stated also, in what cases and situations the symptoms
of apparent death are less certain, so that some hope of recovery is still left
to the disconsolate friend and relative. These are principally the following:
after faintings, sudden loss of blood from diseased intestines, -- in certain
cases of repelled morbid matter, for instance, in the smallpox, measles,
poisons, and the like, which frequently produce a spurious kind of apoplexy; --
after hysteric and hypochondriac spasms and colics of a transitory kind, which
have not too often recurred; after mental anxiety, perturbation, terror, and
other oppressive passions, where every thing depends on a speedy removal of the
causes. To this list we may likewise add the cases of drowned, hanged, and
otherwise suffocated persons, or those who appear to be dead, in consequence of
a fall from high scaffoldings, without any external injury. In such accidents,
an internal pressure or stoppage of the vital functions, as breathing, and
circulation of the blood, often produces a state of apparent death. -- Even the
suppressed pulse in the arteries, imperceptible respiration, the coldness and
rigidity of the limbs, the want of contractibility in the pupil of the eye, the
involuntary loss of excrementitious substances, -- all these symptoms of
approaching dissolution should not discourage us from trying the proper means
of recovering the patient's life. In children and young persons, in particular,
we must not too hastily decide, whether they be absolutely dead or not; --
teething is frequently attended with diversified convulsive symptoms, and the
tape-worm is capable of producing the most alarming effects, which the
inexperienced bystanders may unwarily ascribe to very different causes. Hence
every possible degree of precaution is requisite in managing the bodies of
infants apparently dead, and above all things not to remove them from the warm
temperature of the sick-room, before the last lingering spark of life is
extinguished. Indeed, it must strike even superficial observers, that the hasty
removal of a body from a warm to a colder temperature is highly improper and
dangerous. And here the excellent rules, published by the Royal Humane Society
of London, for the recovery of persons apparently dead, cannot be recommended
in too strong terms; although some of the more violent methods detailed in
their plan, such as inflation of the bowels with the fumes of tobacco, clysters
prepared of this herb, violent agitation, and too early and indiscriminate
application of the electric shock, might well bear a few modifications and
improvements.

Summary of Dietetics.
THE knowlede of those objects which relate to the preservation of the human
body, in its natural state, may be called the Doctrine of Health. Life and
Health are, therefore, the proper objects of this doctrine; as the second
department of Medicine solely relates to the preternatural states of man, viz.
Disease and Death, and forms that branch of professional study, which we call '
Pathology.'

The compass of the former science, or an investigation of the objects included
in the doctrine of health, must be very extensive. It furn^^^es us with rules
and cautions as to every thing we ought to do, or to avoid, in order to remain
healthy. This useful science is properly denominated DIETETICS, or a systematic
view of all objects relative to health in general, and to food and drink in
particular.

The following Chapters will, therefore, be exclusively devoted to Dietetics.
My principal object will be, to lay a solid foundation for that important
science, by investigating and combating the chief prejudices, which have
hitherto retarded the progress of this branch of knowledge. Hence, a System of
Dietetics must not only contain all those rules, which are requisite to guide
us in the preservation of health, together with such as relate to the choice of
a proper mode of life, but should likewise inform us with regard to the
beneficial or hurtful influence, which external objects produce on the health
and life of man, and teach us the just application, or practical use, of these
objects.

DIETETICS include the whole of what the Ancients understood by the singular
name of the SIX NON-NATURALS; namely, Air, Aliment, Exercise and Rest, the
Passions and Affections of the Mind, Wakefulness and Sleep, and Repletion and
Evacuation. Although these general heads do not comprise, strictly speaking,
every thing that relates to the different functions of the human body; yet they
contain all such conditions of life, as are absolutely necessary, and the
greatest part of those circumstances, which are connected with the health and
well-being of the individual. In each of these particulars we are liable to
commit errors, either by intemperate use, or an improper application. I
propose, therefore, to lay down a System of Rules, by which we may be assisted
to choose, according to particular circumstances, the best and most rational
means of insuring heath, and of avoiding whatever may have a contrary tendency.

Our mode of life is no longer that natural and simple one, which prevailed in
the primitive ages of mankind; in the present state of society such habits are
scarcely conceivable. Man in a state of nature had little occasion to attend to
his health; he wanted no rules for the preservation of it; for, as the seeds of
diseases are rarely scattered in such a state, instinct would be to him in most
cases a sufficient guide. It now seems to be impossible to return to that
primeval state, without returning, at the same time, from our present degree of
mental improvement to that of pristine barbarity. We have, to all appearance,
purchased our improved state of mental culture, by sacrificing to it a
considerable share of our bodily welfare; -- happy, however, we may still
consider ourselves, if we have actually gained in moral and intellectual
improvement.

Innumerable are the causes, which have conspired to render the true knowledge
of the means conducive to health, difficult in the acquisition, and uncertain
in its application. The chief of these are probably the following, which
include most of the subordinate particulars: -- the present very artificial
method of living; the prodigious number of the employments of mankind; the
different modes of dwelling and dressing; the endless variety of articles used
as food and drink; the great diversity of national customs and manners; and the
difference of climate and situation; -- all these circumstances have greater or
less influence, conjointly or separately, not only on the passions,
inclinations, and instinctive desires of individuals, but also on the general
state of the health and physical welfare of a people. By the present mode of
living we are exposed to diseases wholly unknown in the first ages of the
world, and we suffer from a variety of complaints, originating either in
artificial habits, or the constraint under which we labor, in consequence of
blindly complying with the caprices of custom, or fashion, without perhaps
apprehending any ill consequences from such pernicious practices.

Many ingenious writers have lately endeavored to point out the disadvantages
arising from causes apparently trivial. Thus the fashion of using paint,
hair-powder, and pomatum; of wearing ill-shaped shoes, laced stays, etc. have
deservedly incurred severe ridicule and pointed censure. The custom of applying
lead to earthen vessels has not escaped their attention: the danger, however,
resulting from the use of that substance, has been greatly exaggerated.
Writers, with the best intentions, have sometimes, from an excess of zeal,
descanted on the worst side of the question only, by attributing to certain
things many dangerous qualities, which in fact are owing to a great diversity
of circumstances.

This partial method of inquiring into the sources of the evil, is, generally
speaking, a serious error; as it not only leads to false conclusions, but also
draws our attention from other pressing injuries, to which, in a more
dispassionate state of mind, our care might be directed.

Many, and perhaps the greater number, of dietetic writers have fallen into
another error of an equally bad tendency. They judge of every thing, according
to the agreeable or disagreeable effect it produces on their own palates and
constitutions, and hence recommend their favorite articles to others; although
what is salutary in particular cases, may have a pernicious tendency, if
prescribed indiscriminately.

The multiplicity of our-wants, all deserving attention in a Dietetic System,
has also considerably multiplied the rules of health. Of all living beings,
indeed, none require such rules more than those, who servilely submit to the
arbitrary mandates of luxury and fashion.

Many are the open and secret enemies to the health and prosperity of man. Even
the most healthy, and those who rigidly adhere to the rules of Diet and
Regimen, cannot altogether evade their attacks. Hence we should make it our
study, to acquaint ourselves minutely with every thing, so as to be enabled to
judge of its good or bad qualities. Whatever we are obliged to have more
immediately about and around us, ranks in this class: the arrangement of our
dwelling places, beds, clothes, furniture, etc. in the choice of which we are
less accustomed to consult what nature requires, or to contrive what may be
most likely to promote the welfare of the body, than to follow fashion, vanity,
or our own habits.

Some of our organs of sense, and other faculties of the body, must unavoidably
suffer from inattention to a proper mode of living in general. From the great
exertions, to which we often subject them (the eyes, for instance, in reading)
they are liable to a variety of accidents, and frequently become debilitated
and impaired. It appears, therefore, perfectly consistent with the plan of this
work, to treat of the management of the eyes, teeth, and other individual parts
of the body.

In a complete System of Rules for preserving the health of man, attention must
be paid to the separate wants of individual constitutions; provided they be not
too minute and trivial. Such a system must contain more than what relates to
the first and most simple rules of living; -- its precepts must not apply to
the healthy alone, or those whose life is regulated by the simplicity of
nature, -- it should also lay down instructions, how, in all contingent
circumstances, we may be secured from danger and bodily injuries. It is not,
however, proposed to treat of diseases after they have taken place, if the
removal of them requires any thing more than a strict adherence to temperance,
and the other rules laid down in these Lectures. -- But to prevent any
misapplication of those rules which are established by the accumulated
observations of ages, it may not be improper to introduce here some previous
general remarks, relative to the individual use and advantage to be derived
from a connected view of Dietetics.

It may be laid down as a preliminary observation, that the rules contained in
this work are not to be considered as strictly applicable, in every instance,
to the particular situation of any individual, or as essentially necessary to
the preservation of his health. -- It is not so much the healthy, as the
valetudinary and infirm, who stand in need of minute precepts for their
conduct; and even the latter ought not to engage too solicitously in their
compliance with them; since it is only a very limited number that require such
accurate attention.

A vigorous and persevering method of inuring ourselves to the unavoidable
difficulties and diversified accidents of life, is of greater importance to the
preservation of health, than any dietetical rules whatever. Man is capable of
undergoing all the vicissitudes and inconveniences of air, weather, and
climate; he can digest any articles of food, if his stomach has not been
wantonly indulged; he can sustain the severest bodily exercise and labor,
without paying too minute attention to time or regularity, when his employment
or duty renders exertion necessary. But he who from his infancy has been
treated with extreme tenderness, or who, after having been previously
accustomed to a hardy mode of life, is seized with the whim of bestowing too
much care on his health, will suffer from the most trivial hardships, and catch
cold at every change of the air; every heavy or high-seasoned dish will be
oppressive, and the smallest deviation from the rules of temperance indispose
him. Yet, by the same rules, every healthy person will learn, that the grand
secret for preserving himself in that state, consists principally in the art of
moderating his desires and enjoyments. We may thus arrive at the knowledge of
such things, as are generally conducive to the welfare of the body; and more
than this ought not to be expected. Rules of health, universally applicable to
the state of every individual, are not discoverable in nature; nor can they be
derived from any experimental knowledge we possess of corporeal objects. -- The
best general precept is, that every one study himself, and his own particular
constitution; that he choose and regulate his mode of life accordingly; and
that he make his own experience his guide in whatever he finds most suitable
and convenient.

CHAP. II.
Of AIR and WEATHER; their influence on the Human Body; the means of improving
the former, and diminishing the pernicious effects of the latter.

Of Air in general.
AS soon as an infant enters into the world, the air of the atmosphere
penetrates into his lungs, filled up till then with aqueous mucus, and renders
them fit for the circulation of the blood, which immediately commences. From
that moment the alternate extension and contraction of the breast and lungs,
the inspiration and expiration of the air, or in other words, the function of
respiration, becomes indispensably necessary to the preservation of animal
life. While the child remained within its mother, it required no external air.
As soon, however, as it has drawn breath, as soon as the lungs are opened, the
act of respiration begins, is constantly renewed through life, and can never
absolutely cease, but with death. As, therefore, air is the principal medium by
which animal life is supported, it becomes highly important to acquire correct
ideas of this refined substance, that pervades all the parts of animate and
inanimate matter, and is so essential to man, for the preservation of both his
life and health.

Air is that colorless, transparent, compressible, heavy, and elastic fluid,
which every where surrounds our globe, and which generally receives the name of
Atmosphere. "Our bodies are equally pressed upon by the incumbent atmosphere,
and the weight they sustain is equal to a cylinder of the air, whose base is
equal to the superficies of our bodies. -- Every foot square of this
superficies sustains a quantity of air equal to 2660lb.; so that if the
superficies of a man's body was to contain 15 square feet, which is pretty near
the truth, he would sustain a weight equal to 39,900lb. The difference of the
weight of the air, which our bodies sustain at one time more than at another,
is also very great; that between the greatest and the least pressure of air
upon our bodies has been proved to be equal to 3902lb. Hence it is so far from
being a wonder, that we sometimes suffer in our health by a change of weather,
that it is the greatest miracle we do not always do so. For when we consider,
that our bodies are sometimes pressed upon by near a ton and a half weight more
than at another, and that this variation is often very sudden, it is surprising
that every such change should not entirely break the frame of our bodies to
pieces. And the vessels of our bodies, being so much strained by an increased
pressure, would stagnate the blood up to the very heart, and the circulation
would quite cease, if Nature had not wisely contrived, that when the resistance
to the circulating blood is greatest, the impetus, by which the heart
contracts, should be so too. For upon increase of the weight of the air, the
lungs will be more forcibly expanded, and thereby the blood more intimately
broken and divided; so that it becomes fitter for the more fluid secretions,
such as that of the (supposed) nervous fluid, by which the heart will be more
strongly contracted, and the blood's motion toward the surface of the body
being obstructed, it will pass in greater quantity to the brain, where the
pressure of the air is taken off by the cranium, upon which account also more
spirits will be separated, and thus the heart too more enabled to carry on the
circulation through all passable canals, while some others toward the surface
are obstructed."

(...) New Medic. Dict. -- Article, Air.


This ambient matter, in its common state, is combined with a great variety of
foreign ingredients. It contains water in a state of solution; by means of
water it combines with salts; in many places we find it impregnated with
sulphur, with putrid exhalations, and the like; nay, frequently we even meet
with earthy particles floating in this element. -- When all foreign ingredients
are separated from it, the subtle aerial body still remains of a compound
nature, and is by no means a simple elementary substance, as was formerly
believed.

According to the late discoveries in chemistry, the aerial basis of the
atmosphere consists of three different species of air, namely, of pure,
respirable, or dephlogisticated air; of azotic, or phlogisticated air; and of
fixed, aerial, or carbonic acid air. -- The proportion of the first, namely,
pure or vital air, consists, according to the French Chemists, who have given
it the name of Oxygen, of 27 or 28 in the hundred parts; the second, viz. the
Azote of the French, of 72 or 73 in the hundred; and the third, namely, the
Carbonic acid air, of about one part only in the hundred. The accurate
experiments made by the late SCHEELE and BERGMAN, in Sweden, do not much differ
from those of the French Chemists, with respect to these proportions. For,
according to Scheele and Bergman, the common proportion of vital air, or
oxygen, in the atmosphere, is about one fourth; that of azote about five
eighths; and that of carbonic acid nearly one sixteenth; the last of which, by
the French, is computed only at one hundredth part, that is, five parts in the
hundred less than the Swedish philosophers maintain.

The following is a concise history of Oxygen: -- In August, 1774, Dr.
PRIESTLEY, and much about the same time Mr. SCHEELE, in Sweden, discovered this
respirable part of atmospheric air, or rather they exhibited it, for the first
time, in a pure state. This elastic substance was first called dephlogisticated
air, agreeably to the hypothesis of phlogiston; -- afterward it went under
different names, as pure air, fire-air, vital air, until the late hypothesis of
Oxygen, or the acidifying principle, has procured it the name of oxygen gas. --
But still more diversified than these names, are the theories which have been
proposed on the nature and properties of this species of air, during the last
twenty years. With Priestley, it is the purest air freed of all phlogiston;
with Scheele, it is the nitrous acid deprived of its water; according to
Bergman, it is one of the unknown constituents of nitrous acid; with Fontana,
it is the dephlogisticated nitrous acid; Forster considers it as air united
with fire; Mr. Watt, of Birmingham, thinks to find in it elementary fire
combined with hydrogen or inflammable gas; Achard and Gren formerly believed it
to be water combined with much Caloric, or the principle of heat; but Gren
latterly maintained, in his System of Chemistry, that it is the unknown basis
of vital air combined with Caloric; -- if we believe Westrumb, it is elementary
air in a state of combination with Caloric, but the basis of the former cannot
be discovered; according to Fourcroy, it is an unknown elementary matter united
with inflammable air; in the opinion of Lavoisier, it contains the acidifying
principle, OXYGEN, and the principle of Heat, CALORIC; Mr. Cavendish maintains
that it is dephlogisticated water; and according to De la Metherie, it is an
unknown substance combined with water and ^ire; etc. etc.




Oxygen is much better adapted to the respiration of animals, than common
atmospheric air. If two animals be enclosed in vessels, one of which contains
pure oxygen, and the other common atmospheric air, in proportions equal to the
size of the animals, the former in the oxygen will be found to live from six to
seven times longer, than the latter in common air. It is properly this oxygen
which we inspire, and which is the grand support of animal life. Persons
apparently dead, or in a state of suffocation, have been instantly restored to
life by its influence, and from the corresponding testimony of several
respectable physicians, it appears to have been employed with advantage in many
obstinate diseases. -- The celebrated INGENHOUZ therefore gave it the name of
vital air. It promotes combustion in a very high degree. A candle will burn in
it from six to seven times longer than in common air, with a much greater
degree of heat, and a more brilliant flame. Bodies in a glowing state, are
immediately inflamed, when put into oxygen gas; and even metals, which are not
very fusible, are melted in it, and converted into oxyds, or calces, with the
greatest facility.

Azote, by others called phlogisticated, mephitic, corrupted, or suffocative
air, is absolutely irrespirable, and not miscible with water. It arises from
the change which atmospherical air undergoes in every process of combustion,
putrefaction, and respiration, whether produced by nature or art.

Azote enters into no combination with water, but may be rendered less hurtful
by shaking it with that fluid: this accounts in some measure for the salubrity
of the sea-air. It greatly promotes the growth of plants, and readily
accumulates in apartments filled with people, or containing articles
fresh-painted with oil-colours, or in which strongly fragrant flowers are kept,
without having any access of fresh air. We should be extremely cautious in
entering such places; as diseases of the breast and lungs are too frequently
the consequences of neglect, obstinacy, or ignorance.

The Carbonic acid of the French is the fixed air of Dr. BLACK, and the Aerial
acid of BERGMAN. This species of air is miscible with water; but in its pure
state equally irrespirable as the Azote. It derives its origin, partly from the
vinous fermentation of vegetables, and some animal substances, and partly from
the mild alkaline salts and earths combined with acids. Much of this air is
found in mines, where it frequently distresses the workmen by its suffocating
qualities. It is also observed in most mineral waters, where a stratum of it
sometimes swims upon the surface of the well. These waters, as well as
fermented liquors which contain a considerable portion of fixed air, receive
from it the well known pungency so agreeable to the palate. Hence flat and
spoiled beer, or wine, may be corrected and restored to its former briskness,
by the addition of fixed air evolved from chalk and vitriolic acid, or by
mixing it with new beer or wine in a state of fermentation.

This species of air quickly extinguishes fire, and strongly attracts the fumes
arising from candles. As it is unfit for respiration, animals cannot live in
it. The warm-blooded animals die in it much sooner than any other; those of an
amphibious kind somewhat later; insects are not irrecoverably killed by it;
irritability is suddenly destroyed, and the heart of an animal so deprived of
life, though still warm, no longer exhibits any signs of motion.

There is another species of mephitic air, which is not miscible with water,
which burns with a flame, and if mixed either with atmospheric air, or oxygen
gas, instantly catches fire, and is exploded: this has received the name of
inflammable air, This air may be obtained in a great variety of ways, from all
substances liable to inflammation, or containing combustible matter, by means
of heat, fermentation, acids, and the like; nay, even from metals, by directing
the steam of boiling water through a red-hot metallic tube. -- It is the
spontaneous production of nature; throughout her three kingdoms. In mines, in
subterraneous caverns, and particularly in coal-pits, it is known by the name
of choak-damp. It is copiously generated in the intestines of living animals,
and is frequently met with in common sewers, burying grounds, and places where
dead animal bodies are exposed to putrefaction.

The white Dittany, ( Dictamnus albus, LIN.) when in flower, generates so great
a quantity of inflammable air, that the atmosphere around it has been observed
to catch fire. In swamps, pools, and other stagnant waters, where a number of
plants, particularly sage, calamus, and the like, are putrefying, we find a
species of inflammable gas, which is known by the name of marsh-air, or more
commonly, the ignis fatuus, or Will-o' the-Wisp.


and deserves to be mentioned here, although it cannot be considered as a
constituent part of the atmosphere.

With respect to the specific gravity of the different airs before enumerated,
it is in this place only necessary to observe, that the heaviest is the fixed
air, or carbonic acid gas; next to this comes the azote and oxygen, both of
which are heavier than the common air of the atmosphere; and lastly, hydrogen,
or inflammable gas, which is the lightest of all; for it is even lighter than
the purest atmospheric air.

When the atmosphere is too much impregnated with any of the mephitic gases,
its influence on the human body is extremely noxious. Thus we see many of the
workmen in lead-mines dying in the prime of life, of an obstinate and incurable
colic, which is attended with the most painful obstructions. -- Painters,
glaziers, potters, and manufacturers of glazed carthen ware, are from a similar
cause exposed to the same dreadful disease; being obliged to make use of great
quantities of lead Whether this insidious and deleterious metal be communicated
by inhaling its vapors through the lungs, or by absorbing them through the
pores of the skin, the effects of it are equally dangerous and fatal. The
internal use of sulphur, and both the internal and external use of vegetable
oils, or animal fats, are the only antidotes hitherto discovered against this
virulent bane of the manufacturer and the artist.

Most trades and occupations are subject to peculiar diseases; in some the
materials of the manufacture have a pernicious influence on the body, and in
others the nature of the employment is hurtful, either from requiring a
sedentary life, a reclined, stooping, or standing posture, or from being
performed in a confined air, or at a great fire, and the like. Hence millers,
hair-dressers, and stone-masons, frequently die of a consumption of the lungs,
in consequence of the minute particles of dust which they are continually
obliged to inhale. -- Manufacturers of wool, and particularly hatters, are much
troubled with obstinate cutaneous diseases; and all those whose business is
attended with grease and dust, suffer more or less from the consequences of
uncleanness.


in different forms.

It is almost unnecessary to mention the frequent and sudden deaths that have
taken place from the explosion of inflammable air in mines, or from the opening
of pits, deep wells, and other confined places. Neither is any thing so much
calculated to corrupt and poison the air, to fill it with noxious vapors, and
to generate diseases, as the burying-grounds established within the walls of
populous cities, where human bodies are deposited, as if with an apparent
design to produce an atmosphere, which is particularly fatal to the tender
lungs of children, and in no small degree hurtful to adults.

As the mass of atmospheric air is incessantly corrupted by the respiration of
men and animals, by the burning of so many natural and artificial fires, by the
dissolution and putrefaction of innumerable substances, and by various other
phlogistic or desoxygenating processes, it would at length become altogether
incompetent for its original designation, if Nature had not provided effectual
means for its improvement and restoration. Among the most powerful of these, we
may place the growth and vegetation of plants. -- For this very important
discovery we are indebted to Dr. PRIESTLEY, who was so fortunate as to hit upon
it, after he had long employed himself in fruitless attempts, to improve and
restore corrupted air, by artificial means. He found that air, rendered mortal
by the breathing of animals which had expired in it, was again so completely
restored by the vegetation of plants, that, after the lapse of some days, an
animal could live in it with equal ease, and for the same length of time, as in
a similar quantity of common atmospheric air.

These experiments, indeed, did not succeed with some Naturalists; and Priestly
himself, upon repeating them with different plants, found the results rather
varying and doubtful: but Dr. INGENHOUZ removed the greater part of these
difficulties, by his book, "Experiments upon Vegetables, 8vo. London, 1779."
This ingenious philosopher remarked, 1st, That most plants have the property of
correcting bad air within a few hours, when they are exposed to the light of
the sun; but that, on the contrary, during the night, or in the shade, they
corrupt the common air of the atmosphere; -- 2d, That plants, from their own
substance, afford a very pure dephlogisticated air, or Oxygen, when exposed to
the rays of the sun; but a very impure air or Azote at night, or in the shade;
-- 3d, That not all the parts of plants, but only the green stalks of leaves,
particularly through the sides opposite to the soil, produce this beneficial
effect; -- 4th, That the disengagement of pure or vital air does not commence
until the sun has been some time above the horizon; that it ceases altogether
with the termination of daylight; and that the disadvantage arising from the
impure exhalation of plants, during the night, is far exceeded by the great
advantage they afford during the day; insomuch, that the impure air, generated
by a plant during the whole night, scarcely amounts to a hundredth part of the
pure vital air or Oxygen, exhaled from the same plant in two hours of a serene
day. -- Thus we discover a most striking phenomenon in the economy of nature;
since the vegetation of plants continually counteracts the noxious effects of
respiration, combustion, and putrefaction. It should be recollected here, that
when the growth of plants is interrupted by the cold of winter, so that they no
longer generate a beneficial air to purify the atmosphere, Nature has ordained
it, that this very cold of the winter itself contains the most effectual
virtues to stop the progress of putrefaction. We further find, that in the most
unwholesome, and particularly in marshy countries, those very plants appear to
be very profusely distributed, which most eminently possess the property of
purifying the air. And as the pure air, or oxygen, is of greater specific
gravity than the common air of the atmosphere, it is perfectly consistent with
the operations of nature, that the oxygen should settle toward the lower side
of the leaves of plants.


In this manner, the atmosphere is constantly preserved in that necessary state
of purity and temperature, which is the most salutary both to animals and
vegetables.

We have learnt the effects produced on the human body by the atmosphere and
the changes of the weather, partly from observations made by ourselves and
others, and partly from their influence on inanimate matter, by which we can
judge in some measure of its analogous effects on the human frame; but we
should not thence conclude that our knowledge, in this respect, is either
complete or infallible. Observations may frequently deceive us, since the human
body, besides the weather, is incessantly exposed to the effects of other
external agents, which may easily elude our attention. Further, the atmosphere
surrounding us, besides the properties cognizable by our senses, or
discoverable by the assistance of particular instruments, may also be
impregnated with substances which have hitherto escaped our researches, and
which nevertheless may have the power to effect important changes. Lastly, we
ought not to consider the arguments deduced from analogy as strictly
conclusive; we should remember, that the effects of external objects on the
living animal fiber are, in many instances, totally different from those which
they produce on lifeless or inanimate bodies.

Recommending these general remarks to the consideration of the reader, I
proceed to consider those particular and positive effects, which the different
states of the atmosphere produce on our frame, and in what manner they
influence our health.

Warm air relaxes the solid parts of the body, and occasions a stronger
circulation of the fluids. Heat is chiefly oppressive to the Nerves; hence the
tender and infirm suffer severely in hot weather; hence arise hysteric and
hypochondriac complaints, convulsions, and diarrhoeas. Cold renders bodies more
compact, particularly the solid parts of the animal structure, such as the
muscles, nerves, bones, etc. They become more elastic in winter; the appetite
for food is stronger, and digestion easier and quicker. On the contrary, the
resistance of the fluid parts becomes so great, that even the increased powers
of the solids cannot overcome it, if the cold be too violent. In winter the
blood is much disposed to inflammations; hence stitches in the side,
inflammatory sore throats, rheumatisms, etc. In persons who take little
exercise, the fluids are apt to stagnate, and the solids to chill during the
winter; -- upon the whole, however, the effects of cold weather may be rendered
less hurtful, and even salutary to the body, if proper exercise be not
neglected.

Damp or moist air suddenly relaxes and debilitates; it occasions a slowness in
the circulation of the fluids, which gives rise to obstructions, and impedes
both the circulation of the blood and the secretion of humors, by checking
insensible perspiration. If the moisture of the air increases, we experience an
unaccountable torpor and ennui; with the loss of energy we lose our gaiety, and
the mind is depressed with the body. Damp places and districts are always
unwholesome, but more particularly so in cold weather. Moisture, by diminishing
perspiration, produces disorders of the throat, the breast, and the abdomen.
But the most dangerous and fatal effects on the human body have been observed
to arise from moist air accompanied with hot weather; for, when moisture has
impaired our energy, heat increases the evil in a great degree, by opening the
pores through which the moisture penetrates into the body, and predisposing
every part of it to putrefaction and dissolution. This accounts for the great
mortality prevalent during the hot season at Batavia, and some of the West
India islands.

Dry and cool air, from possessing a due degree of elasticity, promotes in an
extraordinary degree the serenity and alertness of mind and body; hence it is
found uncommonly salubrious to hypochondriacs. But a dry and very cold air
generates inflammatory diseases; because it inspissates the blood. Dry and hot
air affects us like heat, and enervates the body. But a dry air, which is not
too warm, is both agreeable and healthy.

Great and sudden changes from a warm to a cold, or from a light to a heavy
air, are highly injurious to valetudinarians, and even to the healthy. Soldiers
in camp, and, sometimes, travelers, feel very severely the bad effects of cold
and moist night air, after long marches and journeys. Weakly and infirm persons
have frequently ominous sensations, previous to any remarkable change of the
air.

A moderately heavy and elastic air is the most agreeable and salutary to the
human body; hence nature has not assigned us our constant residence on the
summits of mountains. Yet a light and rarefied air, such as is felt on the
highest mountains, is not so unfit for respiration, nor does it manifest so
noxious an influence on the human body, as was formerly believed. The latest
travelers assure us of the contrary, and speak in decisive terms of the
salutary effects of the air, during a short stay in those elevated regions.

Among the different WINDS -- which are nothing else but strong commotions of
the air -- the long continued North wind is comparatively the most wholesome;
it purifies the atmosphere of noxious vapors, renders the air serene and dry,
and thus imparts to the human body elasticity, vigor, activity, and a lively
color. It is, however, troublesome to persons of delicate habits, and
occasions in them coughs, inflammation of the throat, pains in the side,
obstructions, and febrile diseases. The South wind weakens and relaxes the
body, and is very apt to produce catarrhal affections. The Morning wind is very
drying; but Evening winds are cool and moist, being frequently accompanied with
rain and changeable weather. All these winds differ materially in their
qualities, from local circumstances, and accordingly as they blow over a
Continent, over the Ocean, or over high mountains and icy regions, from which
they carry along with them more or less (...) cold and humid particles. But
upon the whole, too dry weather is always more healthy, than that which is too
moist.

Of the four SEASONS of the year, the Autumn is the most unhealthy; because
then the particles of perspiration not only remain on the body, but are in a
state inclining to putrefaction. This disadvantage, however, may be easily
obviated by guarding ourselves with proper dress and choosing a suitable diet.
Too light a dress, and too thin stockings, are not advisable at this season.
The Spring season is, in general, the most healthy. Spring, and the beginning
of Summer, are most salutary to children and young persons; while the Summer,
and the beginning of Autumn, agree best with the aged. The latter end of
Autumn, and the beginning of Winter, are commonly the most healthy seasons to
persons of a middle age.

It has been remarked by medical men, that certain diseases appear and
disappear according to the different seasons. Thus, putrid and bilious
disorders prevail in Summer; inflammatory diseases in Winter, and the
catarrhal, mucous, and gastric or stomachic affections, in Spring and Autumn.
It has been further observed, that in Spring the blood usually circulates more
freely; hence probably arose the ancient practice of blood-letting, and taking
laxatives at certain regular periods; both of which I have already pointed out,
in the preceding Chapter, as dangerous in their tendency, and always hurtful to
the healthy.

As the vegetable kingdom is renewed in Spring, and as vegetation, in general,
is most lively in that season, there can be little doubt, that the pure vital
air is then most copiously evolved, by means of the solar light and heat. Hence
it follows, that the vernal air is more wholesome than that of Autumn, which is
saturated with corrupted and putrefying particles. Still the cold of Autumn,
and the frequent winds then prevalent, prove extremely efficacious in
counteracting the baneful effects of corruption and putrefaction.

If the temperature of the air correspond with the natural constitution of the
season, we may expect what is called a healthy year, and that the prevalent
diseases will be of a mild nature; but if the weather does not agree with the
general laws of the season; if, for instance, the Winter prove warm, or at
least moderate, or the Spring cold and severe, with sudden alternations of
heat, we may expect to find the year pretty generally marked with serious and
obstinate diseases.

The temperature of the air depends not a little on the natural situation of
the country, whether it lie high or low; whether its mountains oppose or give a
free passage to the winds; whether it contains flowing or stagnant waters or
morasses, and whether it is open or covered with woods. -- Country air, upon
the whole, is always purer than that of towns, narrow streets, and crowded
buildings.

All strongly-scented bodies are more or less pernicious; as well those of a
disagreeable smell, as the greater number of fragrant perfumes. The latter, if
too strong, are more particularly dangerous, as a sense of disgust does not
naturally incline us to avoid them. Among these may be comprehended all
vegetable odours strongly volatile and pungent, and which thereby stimulate and
stupify the nerves. Hence people, who carry large nosegays in the hot days of
summer, are apt to feel themselves variously and strongly affected,
particularly with drowsiness. From this apparently innocent cause, head-achs,
vertigoes, fainting-sits, and apoplexies have frequently been produced in
persons of a plethoric habit. These, as well as people of a delicate
constitution, are liable to such affections, from the fragrance of many
balsamic plants, but particularly from the strong scent of lilies, roses,
pinks, the blossoms of oranges, hyacinths, and the like. -- Many flowers emit a
more powerful fragrance in the night than in the daytime, and the effluvia of
several trees and other vegetable bodies are peculiarly dangerous, and
sometimes mortal. Of this nature are the walnut and yew trees, under whose
shades persons have actually died, who had fallen asleep; and likewise the
deadly Upas of Surinam, and the no less poisonous Manchineel tree of the West
Indies.

Aromatics of every kind taint the air in a similar manner, introducing into
the human body particles foreign to its nature, all exciting more or less an
inclination to sleep. Saffron and hops have sometimes proved fatal; the former
in particular has often produced a sleep terminating in death, in those
incautious individuals, who had lain down in the warehouses or upon the bags,
in which it was packed. Ambergris and musk are also, on account of their
powerful fragrance, very hurtful to persons of an irritable and nervous
temperament.

Dwellings in the vicinity of lakes, fens, and marshes, are exposed to all the
noxious effects of a moist atmosphere, namely, to the various species of
intermittent fevers or agues; -- on the other hand, it has been observed, that
persons living on the banks of rivers, though at times subject to these, are
not very liable to other diseases, and that running water has a tendency to
purify the air, when it is saturated with inflammable particles.

Too sudden a transition from warm to cold air, or the reverse, is pernicious;
but to exchange, however suddenly, an unhealthy atmosphere for a healthier, is
at all times safe and highly advisable. Numberless instances have proved, that
such as were constantly indisposed in the corrupted air of a town very quickly
recovered their health, on removing to the purer atmosphere of the country. Yet
the question, Which air is the most wholesome to live in? will admit only of a
conditional answer. We must attend not only to the particular constitution of
the air, but also to the nature and habits of the individual. Neither should we
too hastily pronounce every air unwholesome, that does not appear to agree
^with us. The air of every climate, whether hot, cold, or temperate, may be
called healthy, provided it be pure and clear, and occasionally agitated by
wind: but a gross atmosphere, and one loaded with animal or vegetable
exhalations, is certainly deleterious. After all, perhaps the longevity of the
inhabitants may be considered as the best evidence of a healthy district. Thus
we find uncommonly long-lived persons in high countries, or such as are visited
by frequent winds, and also in small seaport towns. In villages and places
thinly inhabited, the proportion of aged people is considerably greater than in
cities or populous towns. This may be ascribed partly to a less degree of
corruption in the air, and partly to a more simple mode of life prevailing in
such places: for wealth and riches, the concomitant effects of which are
greater luxury and extravagance in living, usually keep pace with the increase
of population; and if the numerous chimney-fires of our populous cities did not
serve as so many well-contrived machines for rarefying the atmosphere,
incalculable mischiefs must inevitably ensue.

Of the Improvement of Air in Dwelling-Houses.
A HOUSE built on a rising ground, on a healthy soil, in an open, dry country,
and neither exposed to the greatest degree of cold in winter, nor to the
highest point of heat in summer, may be said to stand in a healthy situation.
Hence those apartments are the most healthful as well as comfortable to the
individual, which enjoy a pure and free circulation of air in summer, and the
cheering rays of the sun in winter: the heat of summer being considerably
tempered by the former, and the severity of winter much abated by the latter.
Farther, a proper size and height are requisite to constitute a healthful
apartment; for low rooms are detrimental to health, particularly when inhabited
by large families, and seldom aired, or rather, which is frequently the case,
when all air is carefully excluded by close doors, shutters, curtains, etc. The
most proper place of residence in winter is one with a southern aspect, not
only as being more dry, but also more cheerful, and therefore attended with a
favorable influence on the spirits. In summer, the situation of a room may be
chosen either to the North or to the East, the latter of which is preferable,
because it admits the first enlivening rays of the Sun.

Although it is not in every person's power to choose his habitation agreeably
to the laws of health; yet this choice of a pure and healthy air is not
sufficiently attended to, and it certainly deserves as much consideration in
purchasing an estate or country house as the quality of the soil or other
lucrative advantages.

The local constitution of the air depends not merely on the exhalations of the
soil itself, but likewise on the different vapors, conducted to and blended
with it by the winds, from adjoining places. Thus in a dry and sandy country,
considered of itself as healthy, the air may be rendered extremely unwholesome
from the vicinity of marshes or other stagnant waters.

The better to judge of the salubrity of the air in any district, we should
examine the properties of the wells and springs; for both air and water absorb
the saline and mineral particles of the soil. We may pretty certainly conclude,
that a country producing good water, enjoys likewise a salubrious air; and as
the best water is tasteless, so the purest air is free from any smell whatever.

The most certain marks, by which to distinguish whether the air in rooms be
damp or not, are the following: the walls or tapestry change their color;
bread in closets acquires a moldy surface; spunges in the rooms retain their
moisture; loaf-sugar turns soft; iron rusts; brass and copper acquire a green
color, or verdigris; and wooden furniture moulders and crumbles to pieces.

The sitting-room ought, if possible, to be above the ground floor, or in the
second story; it should be so constructed as to admit a free current of air;
but if this cannot be done, it should be frequently aired by opening the
windows in dry weather, or by fumigating the room, either with vinegar dropped
upon warm stones, or evaporated in a basin over a lamp, or with sugar,
juniper berries, and the like.

Every room is filled with three different strata of air: 1. The lower part of
the room contains the heaviest species of air, namely, fixed or carbonic acid
gas, particularly in apartments situated on the ground-floor, or even under
ground; 2. The middle part of the room is filled with the lighter atmospheric
air; and 3. The uppermost stratum contains the lightest or inflammable air, the
most corrupted of the three, in consequence of the processes it has undergone
by respiration and combustion. In lofty apartments this contaminated species of
air is not inspired by the lungs; because the middle stratum, or the most
wholesome of the three, extends to a height above that of a man.

A continual change of the air, by opening the doors and occasionally the
windows, however advisable, is yet not sufficient to preserve a healthy
atmosphere in an apartment. For this important purpose the following
improvements may be suggested as useful: 1st, Small apertures in the ceiling of
the room, or through the walls close to the ceiling, in an oblique direction,
so that the rain and snow cannot penetrate into it; 2d, Ventilators, that is,
small moveable wheels made of brass or sheet-iron, which are applied to some
part of the window-panes, and set in motion by the pressure of the external
air. This is an excellent contrivance to introduce fresh atmospheric air into a
room, by occasionally opening and shutting the door. The most proper height for
placing these ventilators is about seven feet from the floor; 3d, Air-tubes
running in a straight direction from the door to the fireplace, or rather to
the wall of the chimney, and concealed under the floor of the room. As such
tubes, however, are very expensive, and appear better calculated to convey the
smoke up the chimney, after all means have been tried in vain, than to conduct
the corrupted air from the upper part of a room, I shall mention a better and
much easier method of effecting this purpose. It is a late discovery of a
physician in France, who contrived it with a view to save the great expense of
ventilating or airing large wards in hospitals, filled with patients who
labored under putrid distempers, particularly in the heat of summer. He caused
a number of small holes to be made in the uppermost part of the window-frames;
into these holes he placed from without an equal number of funnels, presenting
an aperture of nine or twelve inches diameter, and terminating in the inside
almost in a point, or at least in an opening not exceeding the size of a small
quill. By means of these simple machines, the air in the sick rooms was so
effectually renewed, by the great and constant pressure of atmospheric air from
without, that any other artificial process for correcting the putrid air in a
large hospital was judged to be unnecessary.

Above all things, the windows and doors of sitting and bed-rooms, when it can
be done conveniently, ought to be left open for a certain space of time, every
day. This, however, requires to be done at the proper time, neither too early
in the morning, nor when it grows dark in the evening, during the vernal and
autumnal months; nor at the time when the horizon is overspread with a thick
fog. The windows should be opened, when the air is pure and serene; or, in
general, when there is less danger to be apprehended from the external air than
from that within. Sometimes it may be proper to make use of what is called
pumping the room, or moving the door backward and forward for some minutes
together; but in spring and autumn, our sitting-rooms, and even in winter,
bed-rooms, ought to be perflated every clear day, by currents of fresh air, for
a considerable time.

In the hot days of summer, the windows may be opened early in the morning and
in the evening, in order to cool and refresh the heated air of the room by that
from without. It is however not safe (and has sometimes proved fatal) to leave
the windows of a bed-room open at night during the summer-months, as there is
no small hazard of checking perspiration by the cool night-air; the
susceptibility of the pores being then very much increased by the heat of the
day, and the warmth of the bed. Rooms which we inhabit in the daytime may be
safely left open during the night. In summer-houses, or such as are surrounded
with plants and trees, it will be proper not to open the windows of bed or
other rooms, till some time after sunrise, and to shut them at sunset; they
require also to be opened and shut sooner in hazy than in serene weather.

The airing of apartments should not be neglected even in winter, as coal-fires
alone are not sufficient to carry off the corrupted particles of air, unless
they be assisted by ventilators. -- Here I must oppose and contradict a
prevailing, yet mistaken notion, that fire in a room where the windows are
open, introduces moist air. On the contrary, the most proper time for opening
the windows is after lighting up a brisk fire; as the warmer air of the room
will then be powerfully attracted by the colder atmospheric air, and the
corrupt particles of the air within most speedily dissipated.

In moist and cold air, the dress should be somewhat warmer than usual: Flannel
may then be worn with double advantage next the skin, and the rooms we inhabit
should be warmed, or at least fumigated, with the berries of Juniper or similar
shrubs. Fumigation is likewise attended with this advantage, that it
contributes to dry and in some degree to warm the air.

In moist and warm air the explosion of a little gunpowder will be of use, or
vinegar may be evaporated with greater safety, and the floor and walls
sprinkled over with this excellent antiseptic.

Hot and dry air may be tempered by placing vessels filled with cold water in
different parts of a room; or, as is often practiced in hot climates, by
sprinkling water over the floor. The greater or less degree of corruption of
the air, in an apartment, depends very much on the kind of labor or exercise
performed in it: Six watchmakers will not corrupt the air nearly so much as two
carpenters would do in the same space and time; hence appears the necessity of
appropriating lofty rooms instead of low garrets, for the workshops of
mechanics.

Green plants and flowers placed before the windows are both an agreeable and
useful ornament, if not of too strong a fragrance. In serene weather, it may be
expedient to strew fresh plants (not flowers) in a dwelling-room, exposed to
the rays of the sun, taking care, however, to remove them as soon as the sun
withdraws. This method of exposing plants, or even the branches of trees with
green leaves, in apartments, may have a beneficial influence on
valetudinarians, and particularly on asthmatic persons, as vital air, or oxygen
is thereby generated, and introduced very gradually into the lungs.

Large trees with thick foliage should not be placed very near the windows of a
house; for, besides that they obstruct the access of daylight and fresh air,
and have thus a tendency to make the rooms damp, their exhalations in the
evening, and during the night, are by no means wholesome. Trees planted at the
distance of eight or ten yards from the house, do not prevent the free access
of air; they present an agreeable object to the eye, and cannot be too much
recommended, both on account of their cooling shade in summer, and the salutary
exhalations they emit during the day.

It has been already mentioned, that the burning of candles corrupts the air;
for which reason the custom of illuminating assembly or other large rooms, with
a superfluous number of candles, must be very detrimental. This extravagance
becomes still more dangerous in places where, beside the crowd of people, great
quantities of provisions, dressed with the richest spices of the East and West,
contribute to saturate the air with the most heterogeneous particles. And as
persons of tender lungs must suffer extremely in such an atmosphere, it would
be proper to provide all public rooms with a competent number of conic
ventilators, of the description before mentioned.

Strictly speaking, we ought not to sit in the room where we dine, or take
victuals, until it be aired again: those who can afford this luxury, should be
careful not to stay for hours together over their bottle in the dining room:
the bad effects of such contaminated air are not perceived by the persons
continuing their libations after dinner, but are very sensibly felt by any one
coming in from the fresh air.

It is no less unhealthy to sleep in a room where a quantity of green fruit is
kept, a circumstance not attended to in country places, particularly by those
who deal in fruit. From its fragrance a portion of inflammable matter exhales,
which soon impregnates the air. Hence females of delicate habits have been
known to faint, in approaching places where a few quinces were kept. For the
same reason, store-rooms and pantries are extremely unwholesome, if provisions
of all kinds, animal as well as vegetable, be kept in them; especially oil,
candles, fat, flesh meat, whether raw, boiled, or roasted, pastry, and the like.

As foul linen readily imbibes the perspirable matter of the skin, it should
never be suffered to remain any time in a bed-room, or sitting-room.

If possible, we should not sit through the day in a room in which we have
slept; as the bed-clothes, and particularly feather beds, very slowly part with
the exhalations they have imbibed during the night, neither is it sufficient
for purifying the air of the room, that it has been ever so well aired in the
morning.

The vapor of charcoal produces, particularly in close apartments, dangerous
and frequently fatal effects. It fills the atmosphere with sulphuric particles
which may be inspired, but cannot be expired: -- they retard the motion of the
blood vessels, stagnate the blood itself, penetrate into the head, and produce
an acute pain, vertigo, and torpor. Hence the greatest precaution is necessary,
where charcoal is used, as innumerable fatal accidents have happened from this
source. Dyers, who employ it for drying their cloth upon frames, seldom fail to
experience great injury to their health.

All employments, in which persons work among impure wool, oil, colors, and
the like, are to a certain degree detrimental to health. Washing, ironing,
dressing the hair with greasy curling-irons, burning lamp oil, frequent
painting of the walls, all saturate the air of a room with pernicious damp and
sulphuric vapors. From the change, which oil and candles in a state of
combustion produce in the color of a white wall and white curtains, we may
infer, that this fetid steam must also penetrate into the human body, and if
so, must materially affect it.

It farther deserves to be remarked, that all damp vapors are prejudicial,
although they should not in themselves have a tendency to corrupt the air.
Hence the keeping of wet linen, or even wet clothes, umbrellas, and the like,
in dwelling-rooms, should by all means be avoided. Mechanics and others, who
are obliged to dry wet things in their strongly heated apartments -- joiners,
turners, potters, bookbinders, etc. are particularly liable to swellings, and
other disagreeable affections in the relaxed vessels of absorption.

Of Heat and Cold.
As observation and experience inform us, that immoderate heat relaxes the
body, overheats the blood, and exsiccates or consumes the other fluids; and
that the people who live in temperate regions are more hardy and vigorous, and
attain to a greater age, than the inhabitants of warmer climates; it follows
from these premises, that we ought not to enervate the human body by keeping it
immoderately warm, by dressing it with a superfluity of clothes, by plunging it
unnecessarily into hot baths, by using too strong fires in temperate weather,
or least of all, by sleeping in warm rooms, and perhaps on the most heating of
all substances, feather beds. The temperature of a sitting-room should not
exceed 60 of Fahrenheit's thermometer; that of a bed-room may be about 50, as
the medium temperature of our climate is between 50 and 55.

Although man is, no doubt, capable of inuring himself to a very great degree
of heat as well as of cold, yet sudden changes can be supported only by the few
who possess very hardened constitutions. The gradual changes of the seasons
prepare us in the safest manner to sustain all the alternations of cold and hot
weather. It is therefore an error, and of no small consequence, in the modern
system of education, that we generally endeavor to habituate our children to
the support of cold weather only. Persons who cannot bear the heat of the sun,
or strongly heated rooms, are, from their excessive delicacy, frequently
exposed to the most violent, nay to mortal accidents. Hence children ought to
be slowly and gradually accustomed to these inconveniences, which indeed occur
frequently, and are more dangerous than those arising from sudden transitions
to a colder temperature: for the effects of the latter may, in a great measure,
be obviated by exercise and muscular action.

In the sultry days of summer, we should be particularly on our guard against
violently overheating the body; -- in autumn, we should not dress too lightly,
and in the mornings and evenings always somewhat warmer; -- in short, we ought
to avoid every thing that appears likely to check and repel perspiration. The
baneful custom of accommodating our dress to the almanac and the fashion,
rather than to the vicissitudes of the weather, in this inconstant climate,
must necessarily be productive of many disagreeable consequences. Above all
things, we ought to change our summer-dress pretty early in autumn, and to
clothe ourselves gradually warmer, according to the variations of the weather.
Yet after all, perhaps it would be most advisable to accustom ourselves to one
kind of dress only for all seasons. The propriety of this custom I shall more
particularly consider in the fourth Chapter.

With respect to the proper time for heating rooms in autumn, it has been
supposed, that early fires are unwholesome and productive of frequent catarrhs.
This assertion is certainly ill founded; for in warming a room, as well as in
clothing the body, we should not so much be regulated by the particular time of
the year, as the state of the weather, and the degrees of actual heat and cold:
in attending to this circumstance, we cannot easily mistake. If, in the
temperate days of autumn, the room should feel colder than the external air, it
is time to make a moderate fire: in damp and cold weather this is an useful
precaution, even in summer. Those who from caprice, parsimony, or prejudice,
would rather shiver on some weeks longer, than consult their sensations, often
feel the consequence of a violent cold. The Dutch and German stoves certainly
afford more uniform heat in a room, though they might not be considered
cheerful enough for an English company.

As we can neither breathe nor live without fresh air, we ought not to withdraw
our bodies too much from the bracing effects of cold. In this respect, we
should act conformably to nature, that is, in the same degree as the warmer
weather changes to a colder state, we should gradually expose ourselves to the
various changes of temperature. The cold will then neither feel unpleasant, nor
impede the necessary perspiration; especially if we oppose it with vigor and
bodily exercise. We ought also to take more solid sustenance in winter than in
summer; because, by the longer continued motion or digestive process of the
stomach, the circulation of the blood is accelerated, from which the natural
heat of the body is produced. Nature herself dictates a compliance with this
precept, as she has provided us with more substantial articles of food during
the former season than the latter.

Lastly, as every sudden change of the weather from heat to cold, and the
reverse, is prejudicial to the body, we ought to guard against every
circumstance by which perspiration may be suddenly checked. Hence we never
should remove from a strongly heated apartment into a fresh and cold air,
unless we are provided with a warmer dress; -- in hot days, or after violent
exercise, we should not frequent vaults, cellars, or ice-houses, undress
immediately after overheating the body, nor take rest upon a damp soil or upon
stones, nor bathe in cold water. Such transgressions have often been punished
with instant death, or, what is still worse, have brought on a painful and
lingering species of consumption, which has hitherto baffled the united efforts
of the Faculty, and which annually makes dreadful havoc among people of a
middle age. According to the statement given by the Bills of Mortality, the
total number of deaths in London, during the three spring months of 1799,
amounted to 5271. Among these, no less than 1353, or upwards of one fourth,
were carried off by consumption! -- Although consumption and decline are terms
often used to express many other chronic diseases, as well as pulmonary
consumption, so that the above stated number probably includes various species
of decline, yet, even with these allowances, the number of victims to general
consumption is truly terrific. Let the reader reflect, for a moment, on the
following melancholy inference: -- If the population of the country consist of
between nine and ten millions, of whom the 30th or the 33d part, that is, about
300,000, die annually, it follows that this merciless disease, CONSUMPTION,
cuts off about 80,000 persons every year, in Great Britain alone, and these
generally in the prime of life, when Society ought to be benefited by their
mental and bodily exertions!!
It is devoutly to be wished, that the experiments, now pursued with factitious
airs or gases, and with the fox-glove, may afford some remedy against this
formidable destroyer of the human species, which cuts off incredible numbers in
the bloom of life, and spares neither age, rank, nor sex. And, as there is so
much reason to believe, that a great proportion of consumptive cases originate
from the sudden transitions above mentioned, no language can be strong enough
to deprecate practices, as injudicious as they are destructive.

CHAP. III.
Of Cleanliness, and its various modifications, so far as it is immediately
connected wiih Health; -- the management of the Teeth; -- the use of Baths, etc.

Of Cleanliness in general.
THIS domestic virtue ought to extend its influence to every object connected
with the human frame; to the preparation and consumption of food and drink; to
dress, habitation, household furniture, and all our physical wants; in a word,
cleanliness should not be confined merely to the interior domestic economy; it
claims our attention in every place which we occupy, and wherein we breathe.

Let our clothes, linen, beds, covers, blankets and sheets, be clean and dry;
as all these substances absorb perspirable matter, and check the process of
perspiration. Articles of dress which are soiled, and come into contact with
the skin, being placed immediately over the pores, reimbibe the humors already
perspired, and return them to the body by the absorbents. Dirty linen will
never attract the useless or noxious matter, which is secreted from the blood,
and ejected from the body; it remains on the pores of the skin, and is either
again absorbed by the vessels, or clogs those emunctories which require always
to be kept open. For a similar reason, it is highly improper and dangerous to
wear the clothes of sick persons, especially in contagious distempers.

Let the body, and particularly the joints, be frequently washed with pure
water, especially in summer, when the perspirable matter, being of an unctuous,
clammy nature, obstructs the excretion by the pores. The face, neck and hands,
being most exposed to the air, dust, and the like, ought to be daily washed,
both morning and evening. Attention should also be paid to the ears, by
cleaning them occasionally; so that the sense of hearing may not be impaired by
an accumulation of wax, which from its acrid nature may prove unpleasant as
well as injurious. The whole head ought to be frequently washed and cleaned,
even though no hair-powder be used; as it perspires very much, and is besides
exposed to dust and other particles in the atmosphere. Washing opens the pores,
while the comb, by its close application to the skin, dissolves the viscid
humors, and renders them fluid.

The mouth should be rinsed every morning, after dinner, and at night, with
cold water, but in winter the chill should be taken off. The frequent washing
of the mouth is otherwise necessary, because the viscid slime, and small
particles of food which settle about the interstices of the teeth, are very apt
to putrify, and, if not removed, will infect the breath, and gradually injure
the teeth themselves. Besides, this slime settles on the tongue, covers the
papillae by which food is tasted, and renders the palate less sensible.

It is scarcely necessary to observe, that the nose also should not be
overlooked, as by neglecting to remove the secreted moisture in due time, the
effects may become troublesome and detrimental to the organs of smell. In
children, the nose ought to be occasionally washed; it having been found that
the unpleasant smell, peculiar to some infants, is owing to the habitual
neglect of cleaning that organ.

The tongue should be cleaned every morning, either with a small piece of
whalebone, or with a sage leaf. This leaf is likewise useful for polishing the
teeth. To clean the throat, we should gargle it with fresh water, and swallow a
mouthful of water every morning -- the latter, however, must not be attempted
too hastily* but, when we once accustom ourselves to the practice, we shall
find it attended with advantage.

It is necessary, particularly in hot weather, to wash the feet frequently; as
they perspire much, and are more exposed to dust than any other part of the
body. The water should be warm, but not too much so, because hot water thus
used relaxes the fibers, drives the blood upwards, and occasions head-achs. The
proper degree of heat for young persons to wash in, between 96 and 98 of
Fahrenheit, and for the aged between 98 and 100, or somewhat more than
milk-warm.

The removing of the beard and nails is no insignificant matter in the care of
health, By shaving, we promote perspiration. Long nails, especially as they
were in fashion some years ago, disfigure the hands, and prevent the feet from
expanding properly: but the nails ought not to be cut too close, otherwise the
toes will be obstructed in their pressure on the ground, and the fingers in
feeling. They may also be easily wounded; and wounds under the nails are
generally attended with disagreeable consequences, on account of the many
nerves running in that direction. Too long nails on the toes are apt to grow
into the flesh, to become an obstacle in walking, and sometimes to occasion
considerable pain.

In the vessels used for preparing food and drink, we ought likewise to pay
proper attention to cleanliness. Every particle of filth introduced into the
stomach may prove hurtful to it, to the tender intestines, to the blood, and
consequently to the whole body. For the same reason, it is not only indelicate,
but also unwholesome, to dine or take any food in places where an offensive
smell prevails.

On the management of the Teeth.
THE principal requisite for the preservation of the teeth is, never to retire
to rest without having cleaned them: for this prevents the viscous matter of
food, collected during the day, from corrupting them in the night. The
toothache, now so common, is frequently owing to a hollow state of the teeth,
but still more frequently originates in a want of cleanliness. The cleaning of
the teeth, however, requires precaution. What is called the Tartar of the
Teeth, is of a corrosive nature, and should be removed with the greatest care.
The manner in which most Dentists treat the teeth, as well as their powders,
tinctures, and other dentifrices, although highly puffed off and strongly
recommended, are obviously pernicious. They deprive the teeth of their enamel,
make them loose, and spoil the gums. The various dentifrices, whether Royal or
Imperial, advertised in the public papers, are at least of doubtful, if not
injurious effect. It is an astonishing instance of credulity and infatuation,
that people will take external and internal medicines upon trust, when they
would hesitate to take any food, with which they are unacquainted.

If there be too much tartar, so that it adheres like a cement between two
teeth, its being incautiously removed will deprive the teeth of the tartarous
cohesion, and consequently of their support; thus, from the constant contact of
the tongue, lips and food, they will be shaken and loosened. The same will
happen, should the tartar be allowed to eat away the gum from the root of the
tooth. If in this case the foundation of the tooth be injured, it will
necessarily be rendered loose, the gums being no longer able to retain a tooth,
which is deprived of its intermediate cement.

The tartar therefore must not be broken, all at once, with iron or glass
instruments; but may be gradually scraped away with a blunt or broad cut quill,
or some similar substance, from which the enamel of the teeth can suffer no
injury. Most kinds of dissolvent drops, especially those sold as specifics for
whitening the teeth, are made up of vitriolic acid, diluted with some distilled
waters -- They are of no service, but, on the contrary, remove the enamel with
the tartar, and thus spoil the teeth for ever. The common tooth-brushes are
liable to the same objection.

To prevent the tartar from settling on the teeth, they ought to be kept clean,
by washing them every morning and evening. Certain articles of food and drink
should likewise be mentioned, as having a tendency to produce and accumulate
the tartar -- such are all viscous and saline substances, as salted and smoked
meat, cheese, roasted eggs, the flesh of tame and wild animals kept too long
for the sake of making it more tender and palatable, truffles, and all species
of mushrooms; beans, peace, chestnuts, vinegar, tart wines, and all kinds of acid
fruit.

An expedient equally safe and effectual, for removing the tartar, is, to cover
the teeth with a fine powder of Gum Tragacanth, or with soft wax, and by that
means to extract the tartar at once, together with this adhesive covering.

Although it does not enter into the plan of these Lectures to treat of the
various diseases to which the teeth are subject, or to describe the different
methods pursued in curing them, yet I judge it necessary to point out some of
the most simple and approved remedies in that very painful affection, the
toothache. If the complaint proceed from a hollow and carious tooth, some soft
extract of the Peruvian Bark may be placed in the cavity of the tooth; if this
should not remove the pain, a few drops of Cajeput oil upon cotton may be
applied to the hollow tooth, or rubbed externally upon the painful side of the
cheek. THUNBERG, the Swedish Traveller, introduced the use of Cajeput oil into
Europe, having often witnessed its powerful and almost instantaneous effects in
the East Indies, where it is the last and only comfort of gouty and rheumatic
sufferers.

Dr. Richter, an eminent Physician of Gottingen, informs us that he has
frequently relieved the most violent toothache, by applying externally the
essence of pimpinella, or Burnet-saxifrage, with an equal quantity of laudanum,
adding to it a drop or two of the essential oil of cloves. Though external
remedies are not likely to effect a radical cure of this malady, yet in urgent
cases they may be safely resorted to, especially if applied so as not to injure
the skin of the face; for they will often produce a temporary relief. If,
however, the toothache proceed from no local cause; if, for instance, it be
owing to a corrupted stomach, to catarrhal, rheumatic, hysteric, venereal, or
other affections; all the specifics ever discovered cannot remove the pain,
until the cause also be, wholly or in part, removed. In my own practice, I have
found the oil of Savin, or Juniper oil, preferable to laudanum, in its effects
on a hollow tooth; the latter is at best an uncertain remedy.

In scorbutic affections of the teeth and gums, a vegetable diet, consisting
chiefly of ripe fruit, and mucilaginous vegetables, will be found the best
corrective. Beside these, a fine powder, made of three parts of double-re^ined
sugar, and one part of burnt alum, may be employed with advantage for the
purpose of rubbing them. Sugar is an excellent antiseptic; and IMBERT DE
LONNES, a French Physician, reports, that a whole ship's company was once cured
of an alarming scurvy, by living for some time, from necessity, upon sugar
alone. We should also consider the connection subsisting between the teeth and
the stomach; if the former be unequal to the purposes of mastication, the
digestive powers will be gradually impaired, and the soundest stomach
corrupted. To neglect the teeth, therefore, is to neglect the stomach; and if
the stomach be weakened, the whole mass of the fluids, and particularly the
blood, will ultimately be tainted with crude, unassimilated, and acrimonious
humors.

To dissolve and wash away the superfluous, slimy, and unctuous matters which
produce the tartar, fresh water is sufficient; or it may be rendered a little
more acrid by the admixture of a small quantity of common salt. Acids and
alkalies, so frequently employed as dentifrices, are of too corrosive a nature;
and alkalies in particular injure the gums, perhaps the teeth themselves, while
acids deprive them of their enamel, and thus occasion a speedy external
corruption and inevitable gangrene within.

The most simple dentifrice is a crust of bread hard toasted, and reduced to a
fine powder. This is fully calculated to absorb the viscid, oleaginous
particles, and to remove the stony or tartarous matter. The bread, however,
should not be toasted too black, as in that case it would evolve an acrid
alkaline salt, which might prove hurtful. A still better dentifrice is a
moderately fine powder of the Peruvian Bark, particularly of the genuine red
species, which strengthens the gums, without inflaming them.

In cleaning the teeth we ought not to make use of brushes or sponges, but of
the finger, which being provided with the finest papillary vessels, is a much
better and more proper instrument, and precludes the necessity of resorting to
artificial means. Besides, the finger has the advantage of being soft and
pliable, and of feeling any immoderate pressure too sensibly, to permit us to
do injury to the teeth or gums: -- hence, it is an ill-judged delicacy alone
which can prevent us from making use of it, preferably to even the best
tooth-brushes.

For cleaning the interstices between the teeth, we should not employ pins or
needles, whether made of gold, silver, or steel; for all metallic substances
are apt to canker the teeth. If toothpicks be at all advisable, they should be
made of soft wood, or quills cut in a blunt point. In my own opinion, none
should be used; for, of whatever materials they are made, they open, loosen,
and injure the teeth, by making room for the tartar and other matters, to prey
upon the teeth and gums. To answer every purpose of toothpicks, a thick and
soft cotton cloth should be used, to rub the teeth over gently after every
meal: but if people have once accustomed themselves to regularly picking their
teeth, then indeed the cotton frictions may perhaps be too late.

Lastly, the cleaning and brushing of the teeth, however useful and necessary,
is insufficient to prevent the settling of the tartar, and the consequent
injury to the teeth; for the source of both evils does not exist in the mouth,
but really proceeds from the stomach, and a corrupted state of the fluids. For
this reason, the medical treatment of the teeth requires a particular regimen
and diet, according to the individual case of every patient.

Of the Use of Baths.
THIS important branch of dietetic regimen is of excellent use and efficacy,
both in the cure and prevention of diseases. Though the ancients could less
dispense with the use of the bath, on account of the frequently of their
athletic exercises, as well as from the want of linen, which was then much less
in use than at present, yet in our times it would be of great service, if the
use of baths were more general and frequent, and this beneficial practice not
confined to particular places or seasons, as a mere matter of fashion.
Considered as a species of universal domestic remedy, as one which forms the
basis of cleanliness, bathing, in its different forms, may be pronounced one of
the most extensive and beneficial restorers of health and vigor. I am not so
sanguine, however, in my expectations, as to think that the cure of all
maladies and diseases may be effected by the bath, as was lately promised by a
noted empiric in this country, who most sagaciously impregnated his vapor
baths with the collective produce of the vegetable kingdom. Such a general
remedy is just as chimerical as the most famous panaceas, the tincture of gold
not excepted.

Bathing, whether in warm or cold water, produces the most salutary effect on
the absorbent vessels; which would otherwise reconduct the impurities of the
skin through the pores, to the no small injury of health. To those in a perfect
state of vigor, the frequent use of the bath is less necessary than to the
infirm; as the healthy possess a greater power to resist impurities, by means
of their unimpaired perspiration, the elasticity of their minute vessels, and
the due consistence of their circulating fluids. The case is very different
with the infirm, the delicate, and the aged. In these, the slowness of
circulation, the viscidity or clamminess of the fluids, the constant efforts of
nature to propel the impurities toward the skin, combine to render the
frequent washing of their bodies an essential requisite to their physical
existence.

Baths, considered as the means of curing diseases and restoring health, if
judiciously applied, are likewise of peculiar advantage; and though, in this
respect, they do not properly make part of a regular system of dietetics, yet I
shall request the indulgence of the reader, while I make a few necessary
remarks relative to the proper application of the bath, it being so frequently
used as a mere dietetic remedy. Much depends on a clear and accurate knowledge
of the properties and effects of the different baths. I shall therefore divide
them into two principal classes, the warm and the cold bath.

The warm, that is, the tepid or lukewarm bath, being about the temperature of
the blood, between 96 and 98 of Fahrenheit, has usually been considered as apt
to weaken and relax the body; but this is certainly an ill-founded notion. It
is only when its heat exceeds that of the human body (as in the Hot Bath and
King's Bath at BATH, both of which are from 18 to 20 degrees higher than
blood-heat) that the warm bath can produce a debilitating effect. Indeed, baths
of the above immoderate heat ought not to be used in their natural state, that
is, without reducing their temperature by cold water, except in particular
cases, and under the immediate advice of a physician. On the contrary, the
lukewarm or tepid bath, from 96 downwards to 85, is always safe; and is so far
from relaxing the tone of the solids, that it may justly be considered as one
of the most powerful and universal restoratives with which we are acquainted.
Instead of heating the body, it has a cooling effect; it diminishes the
quickness of the pulse, and reduces it in a greater proportion, according as
the pulse has been more quick and unnatural, and according to the length of
time the bath is continued. Hence tepid baths are of eminent service, where the
body has been overheated, from whatever cause, whether after fatigue from
traveling, or severe bodily exercise, or after violent exertion and
perturbation of mind; as they allay the tempestuous and irregular movements of
the body, and consequently, in the strictest sense, invigorate the system. By
their softening, moistening, and tumifying power, they greatly contribute to
the formation and growth of the body of young persons, and are of singular
benefit to those, in whom we perceive a tendency to arrive too early at the
consistence of a settled age; so that the warm bath is particularly adapted to
prolong the state of youth, and retard for some time the approach of full
manhood. This effect the tepid baths produce in a manner exactly alike, in the
coldest as well as in the hottest climates.

From what has been advanced, it will not be difficult to discover, in what
particular disorders the tepid bath may be of the greatest service, and the
reason why they prove so eminently useful (particularly in a parched and rough
state of the skin) in paralytic, spasmodic, bilious, consumptive,
hypochondriac, hysteric, and insane cases, as well as in an acrimonious and
corrupted state of the fluids, such as scorbutic and leprous eruptions, lues,
etc. One obvious effect of the habitual use of the bath, particularly the
tepid, is, that it softens and renews the external integuments of the body. It
considerably increases the pressure on the body from without; hence breathing,
particularly on entering the bath, is frequently somewhat difficult, until the
muscles have by practice become inured to a greater degree of resistance. Yet
this effect, which in most instances is of small importance, requires the
greatest precaution in some particular cases, so far as to prevent the use of
the bath altogether; for instance, in persons of a full habit, who are in
danger of breaking some of the internal blood vessels, by the precipitate use
of the bath, whether warm or cold.

These few hints will be sufficient to determine the cases, in which the
lukewarm bath may be resorted to with safety and advantage, as a dietetical
remedy. Its application in the treatment of diseases is foreign to the object
of this Chapter, and demands the most minute inquiry into the nature of the
cases which indicate the use of it, as it is of itself a potent remedy, which,
if improperly used, may produce a contrary effect.

Bathing in rivers, as well as in the sea, is effectual for every purpose of
cleaning the body; it washes away impurities from the surface, opens the
cutaneous vessels for a due perspiration, and increases the activity of the
circulation of the blood. For these reasons, it cannot be too much recommended,
not only to the infirm and debilitated, under certain restrictions, but
likewise to the healthy. The apprehension of bad consequences from the coldness
of the water, is in reality ill-founded; for, besides that it produces a
strengthening effect, by its astringent property, the cold sensation is not of
itself hurtful.

The same precaution, however, is requisite in the use of the cold as that of
the tepid bath; for after having overheated the body, especially in the hot
days of summer, it may prove instantly fatal, by inducing a state of apoplexy.
Hence the plethoric, the asthmatic, and all those who perceive a great
determination of the blood to the head, should be very circumspect in its use.
For although the consequence may not prove immediately fatal, yet the too great
strain and pressure may easily burst some of the smaller blood vessels in the
head or breast, and thereby lay the foundation of an incurable disorder. To
such as are of a sound and robust constitution, bathing may be rendered an
agreeable exercise, by swimming against the stream; for, the fibers and vessels
being obliged to resist the power of the undulating waves, the nerves are
thereby excited into action.

Before I proceed to lay down dietetical rules for the use of the bath, I shall
premise a brief historical narrative of this excellent practice, and generally
explain its sensible effects.

Among the Greeks, and particularly the Spartans, bathing was not entrusted to
the caprice of individuals, but considered as a public institution, being
governed and arranged agreeably to the express laws of the State. We learn also
from Sacred History, that among the Jews, at a much earlier period, persons
under certain circumstances were pronounced unclean, and consequently unfit to
hold any intercourse or communion with others, until they had performed the
appointed ablutions. The Greeks, according to their own historians, learnt this
practice from the Egyptians, and the Romans from the Greeks. With those
celebrated nations, public and private baths formed an important branch of
useful and ornamental architecture. Many opulent individuals courted the favor
of the people by lavishing their treasures in the establishment and decoration
of public baths; and to this day we frequently discover the valuable remains of
these national edifices. Among the Romans, the baths were in time converted
into regular and luxurious dwelling-places, in which the sons of the patricians
and of the wealthy were educated; a circumstance sufficiently ascertained in
the history of CHARLES the Great.

The changes which the contact of cold water produces on the body, naturally
lead us to inquire into the physical nature and properties of the cold bath.
The lightest water is at least 800 times heavier than air; from which it has
been concluded, that the former presses upon the human body with a force
proportionally great. If, therefore, the column of air, which presses upon our
body with a force equal to 39,900lb. could be converted into water, the whole
weight of that pressure would amount to 31,920,000lb. Yet, as our health is
affected by a difference in the pressure of the air, occasionally varying from
3 to 4000lb. we may easily understand, that the human body is not calculated to
sustain, for any length of time, the great pressure of water. From this cause,
the most experienced negro diverse dare not venture beyond a certain depth of
the sea; well knowing it would be impossible to rise up against the additional
weight of water incumbent upon their bodies.

The sensible properties of the Cold Bath, in general, consist in its power of
contracting the solid parts, and of inspissating the fluids. Any part of the
body, which is exposed to the sudden contact of cold water, experiences at the
same instant a degree of tension and contraction, and becomes narrow and
smaller. Not only the blood vessels, but likewise the small capillary tubes,
are liable to this contraction and subsequent relaxation. What is vulgarly
called goose-skin is an effort of the cutaneous fibers, a contraction of the
orifices of the absorbent and exhalant vessels, occasioned by mental
perturbation, spasms, or the effect of cold. -- Hence it happens, that by the
cold bath all the blood vessels of the skin, and of the muscles in immediate
contact with it, are so constricted and diminished, that at the time of this
violent exertion they are unable to receive the usual quantity of blood. The
smaller vessels of the skin are likewise closed, and press upon the humors
contained in them, so as to prevent all perspiration during this pressure. Thus
all the fibers of the skin and muscles are brought into close contact; and if
the humors contained in these tubes had no other outlets, by which to
discharge themselves, they would become thick or inspissated, and lose their
natural warmth. Were this inspissation of the fluids really to take place, it
would be attended with dangerous stagnations and obstructions. That it does
not, however, produce these fatal effects, may be ascribed to the following
cause. As soon as the pressure is made against the external vessels, the blood
retreats from them, in search of places where it may find less resistance. All
the great vessels within the body afford receptacles, into which it (...)
flows, till the principal arteries, and the veins of the intestines, being
filled, extended, and enlarged, it rises to the heart. Although the effect
consequent on the cold bath may be considered as altogether mechanical, yet
this simple operation is frequently productive of the most important and
beneficial effects.

All other strengthening remedies, operating, in general, only on the fluid
parts of the body, require to be previously dissolved by the fluids, blended
with the mass of blood, and thereby conducted to the solid parts. The cold
bath, on the contrary, acts almost instantaneously on the solid parts
themselves, and produces its bracing effect, before a single drop of blood has
been commuted. From which remedy, therefore, is it most likely we should derive
the desired effect, that which immediately answers the purpose, or that which
must pass through so many canals, and undergo so many changes, before it
arrives at the place where it is to exert its efficacy? The sudden changes
arising from the application of the cold bath contribute in various ways to
brace the human body. The relaxed fibers of the skin and the muscles acquire
more solidity and compactness from contraction. Their elasticity is increased,
and thus a considerable defect removed: the nerves are stimulated and incited
to those powerful exertions, on which the ease, vigor, and habitual
sprightliness of the body so much depend. From that degree of irritability
which the nerves possess, when in a debilitated state, arise all hysteric,
spasmodic, and convulsive symptoms and affections. These may be mitigated or
removed by the cold bath; because it greatly affects and alters the state of
the nerves; it shakes and animates them, and by its forcible operation
overcomes their tendency to preternatural rigidity and other disagreeable
sensations. Here then we have two causes, which illustrate the excellent
effects of this remedy: there remains, however, a third, more important and
powerful, yet to be explained.

The blood, which by external pressure is driven into the internal vessels,
extends and enlarges them, without diminishing that contractile force or
tendency which is peculiar to every artery. At the moment when the external
pressure ceases, all the internal vessels exert their powers of
self-contraction more forcibly than usual, as they are more strongly extended,
and consequently enabled to exercise a greater force. The blood returned to the
cutaneous and muscular vessels, finds its reservoirs contracted and
invigorated; it flows through muscles, the fibers of which have acquired
greater elasticity and power of resistance. It is accelerated in its new motion
by these improved fibers and veins, and the result of the collective powers is
a fresh impulse and rapidity given to its circulation. Although, at the first
immersion, the uniform course of it is somewhat interrupted, this temporary
stoppage serves afterward to re-establish and promote it. The blood can now
penetrate with ease into the smallest capillary vessels; and it can circulate
freely through every part of the animal machine, without affecting or relaxing
the solids. Such are the advantages which the theory of bathing holds out. I
shall, however, quote a respectable authority, which may be of use to remove
some erroneous notions hitherto very prevalent, in the practice of cold bathing.

"In the earlier stages of exercise, (says Dr. CURRIE, of Liverpool,) before
profuse perspiration has dissipated the heat, and fatigue debilitated the
living power, nothing is more safe, according to my experience, than the cold
bath. This is so true, that I have for some years constantly directed infirm
persons to use such a degree of exercise, before immersion, as may produce some
increased action of the vascular system, with some increase of heat, and thus
secure a force of reaction under the shock, which otherwise might not always
take place. The popular opinion, that it is safest to go perfectly cool into
the water, is founded on erroneous notions, and sometimes productive of
injurious consequences. Thus persons heated and beginning to perspire, often
think it necessary to wait on the edge of the bath, until they are perfectly
cooled, and then plunging into the water, feel a sudden chilliness that is
alarming and dangerous. In such cases the injury is generally imputed to going
into the water too warm, whereas in truth it arises from going in too cold.

"But though it be perfectly safe to go into the cold bath in the earlier
stages of exercise, nothing is more dangerous than this practice, after
exercise has produced profuse perspiration, and terminated in languor and
fatigue; because in such circumstances the heat is not only sinking rapidly,
but the system parts more easily with the portion that remains.

"In his Essay on Smimming, FRANKLIN makes the following observation: --
'During the great heats of summer, there is no danger in bathing, however warm
we may be, in rivers which have been thoroughly warmed by the sun. But to throw
ourselves into cold spring water, when the body has been heated by exercise in
the sun, is an imprudence which may prove ^^tal. I once knew on instance of
four young men, who, having worked at harvest in the heat of the day, with a
view of refreshing themselves, plunged into a spring of cold water; two died on
the spot, a third the next morning, and the fourth recovered with great
difficulty.' The authority of the American Bacon is of great weight in
Medicine, as in every branch of science, and particularly in what respects
immersion in water; for doubtless he spent more time in this element, than any
philosopher of modern days. It may, however, be easily supposed, that he
adopted the commonly received opinion, that the injury arose from the persons
in question going in when hot, instead of from going in when cooling, after
having been heated; to which last circumstance it can hardly be doubted; that
the fatal accident he relates was to be imputed."

These remarks are worthy of the learned Dr. Currie; -- at the same time,
instead of advising any person to use the cold bath after exercise, I would
certainly prefer the tepid or lukewarm bath, both on account of the greater
safety attending the use of it, and because it possesses nearly all the
advantages of the cold bath, without being liable to so many strong objections.
Besides, the cold bath is altogether improper in a weak state of the lungs, in
all complaints of the breast, in dropsies, in plethoric habits, and for very
corpulent individuals; in all which cases the lukewarm bath may, if duly
modified, produce effects highly beneficial.




The healthy and the vigorous, who resort to the cold bath, on account of its
cleansing and bracing effects, may continue in it, with safety, for a
considerable time. But to strengthen and to give elasticity to the solid parts,
every thing depends upon the sudden impression of the cold. This primary effect
will be weakened or frustrated by remaining in the bath till the water feels
warm, whereby the pressing or vibrating action on the nerves at length ceases.
The most proper time of bathing is, when the stomach is not employed in
digestion; as in the morning or forenoon, or from three to four hours after
dinner.

The cold bath, between 65 and 32 of Fahrenheit, is not, strictly speaking, a
dietetic remedy; -- its effects are not so much calculated for the healthy and
robust, as for the infirm and diseased, under peculiar circumstances. The
external use of cold water is of singular benefit, when applied to particular
parts of the body, where its use may be much longer continued without danger,
and where we may accomplish the intended effects, in a manner, by compulsion
and perseverance.

Of all the parts of the body, the head receives most benefit from the affusion
of cold water; this is a simple and effectual remedy against too great an
impulse of the blood toward the head, where persons are threatened with
apoplexy; in disorders of the brain and cranium; in wounds and other
complaints, to which the head is subject. In these instances, its effects may
be still farther improved by frigorific or cooling salts. The affusion of water
upon the abdomen has likewise been employed with great advantage, in cases of
obstinate costiveness, affording almost instantaneous relief, when internal
remedies have produced no effect. This should not, however, induce any person
to try that remedy indiscriminately, or without proper advice.

On the contrary, in all those cases where the cold bath might repel certain
eruptive humors, which Nature determines toward the surface of the body, it
cannot be resorted to without danger. Apoplexies have been the frequent
consequences of an unwary use of the cold bath; more frequent, indeed, than is
generally suspected. And yet the popular opinion still prevalent, is, that
there can be no better practice, than to plunge into the cold bath at all
times, and in all states of the body, in order to strengthen the nerves.
Children, in particular, are indiscriminately accustomed to it from their
infancy, to restore them to that degree of bodily vigor, for which our
ancestors were so famed. That many children, by the daily practice of bathing
them in cold water, grow and continue healthy and strong, proves as little, as
that many infants become vigorous and robust in the most unwholesome climates,
and under the most unfavourable management. -- Some think to fortify the body,
by the use of the cold bath, against the vicissitudes of the weather; but it
can be proved that children, who from their infancy have been bathed in cold
water, are as much exposed to coughs and catarrhs, as those who have not been
habituated to this violent practice, provided they have not been mismanaged by
effeminating indulgence. In general, all artificial plans of hardening and
bracing the bodies of children, are commendable only, when the child shows no
strong and lasting aversion to them.

It should be considered that, as the cold bath powerfully contracts the fibers
by its frequent use, it imparts to the juvenile body an unnatural degree of
solidity and compactness, whereby it too early acquires the properties of an
adult. The skin of such children as have been too frequently bathed, is
generally much drier and harder than it ought to be at their age. It is a
remark of GALEN, that the cold bath does not agree with a growing person, and
he advises young people not to bathe at all till the body be completely formed.
Is it not inconsistent, that by cold bathing we expect to bring the body of
youth to the vigor of age, and that afterward, when age approaches, we should
wish to render it softer, and restore its energy, by lukewarm bathing? Hence
the cold bath, for the purpose of strengthening children, must ever be
considered as a doubtful remedy.

We now proceed to lay down some rules for the use of the cold bath, in the
cases where it may be of service. 1st, Every cold bath applied to the whole
body ought to be of short duration; all depends upon the first impression the
cold makes on the skin and nerves, it being this impression which hardens us
against the effects of rough and cold weather: -- 2d, The head should be always
first wetted, either by immersion, or by pouring water upon it, or the
application of wet cloths, and then plunging over head into the bath: -- 3d,
The immersion ought always to be sudden, not only because it is less felt than
when we enter the bath slowly and timorously, but likewise because the effect
of the first impression is uniform all over the body, and the blood in this
manner is not driven from the lower to the upper parts. Hence the Shower Bath
possesses great advantages, as it pours the water suddenly upon the whole body,
and thus in the most perfect manner fulfils the three rules above specified: --
4th, The due temperature of the cold bath can be ascertained only in relation
to individual cases: as it extends from 33 to 56 of Fahrenheit, except in
partial bathings, where, as has been already observed, the degree of cold may,
and often ought to be, increased by ice, nitre, alum, salt, sal ammoniac, or
other artificial means: -- 5th, Gentle exercise ought to precede the cold bath,
to produce some reaction of the vascular system in entering into it; for
neither complete rest nor violent exercise are proper, previous to the use of
this remedy: -- 6th, The morning or forenoon is the most proper time for cold
bathing, unless it be in a river, -- then the afternoon, or toward the
evening, when the water has been warmed by the sun, and the dinner has been
digested, are the most eligible periods of the day. A light breakfast will not
be detrimental before using the bath: -- 7th, While in the water, we should not
remain inactive, but move about, in order to promote the circulation of the
blood from the center of the body to the extremities: -- 8th, After immersion,
the whole body ought to be wiped, as quickly as possible, with a dry and
somewhat rough cloth. Moderate exercise out of doors, if convenient, is proper,
and indeed necessary.

To specify the various situations, in which the cold bath may be used with
perfect safety and advantage, would lead me too far, and does not belong,
strictly speaking, to the subject of this book. I shall, however, enumerate
generally certain cases, in which we must absolutely refrain from the cold
bath. 1. In a general plethora or full habit of body, and in the febrile
disposition which attends it; in hemorrhages or fluxes of blood, and in every
kind of inflammation. 2. In constipations or obstructions of the abdominal
intestines. 3. In diseases of the breast, difficult breathing, and short and
dry coughs. 4. In an acrimonious state of the fluids, bad color of the face,
difficult healing of the flesh, and the scurvy, properly so called. 5. In gouty
and rheumatic paroxysms. 6. In cutaneous diseases. 7. In a state of pregnancy.
And lastly, 8. In a deformed or ill-shaped state of the body, except in some
particular cases to be determined by a physician.

The best method of cold bathing is in the sea or a river. Where, from
necessity, it is done in the house, I recommend the Shower Bath, for which a
proper apparatus is to be had at the tinman's. Where the saving of expense is
an object, it may be effectually supplied by the following easy expedient: Fill
a common watering-pot with cold water; let the patient sit down undressed upon
a stool, which may be placed in a large tub; and let the hair, if not cut
short, be spread over the shoulders as loosely as possible; then pour the water
from the pot over the patient's head, face, neck, shoulders, and all parts of
the body progressively down to the feet, till the whole has been thoroughly
bathed. Let the patient then be rubbed dry, and take gentle exercise, as has
been already recommended, until the sensation of cold be succeeded by a gentle
glow all over him. When we first resort to this kind of bath, it may be used
gently, and with water having some degree of warmth, so as not to make the
shock too great; but, as the patient becomes accustomed to it, the degree of
cold may be increased, the water may be allowed to fall from a greater height,
and the holes in the pan may be made larger, so as to make the shower heavier.
A large sponge may, in some measure, be substituted for a watering-pot.

Although the Shower Bath does not cover the surface of the body so universally
as the usual cold baths, this circumstance is rather favorable than otherwise:
for those parts, which the water has not touched, feel the impression by
sympathy, as much as those in actual contact with it. Every drop of water
becomes a partial cold bath in miniature, and thus a stronger impression is
excited than in any other mode of bathing. The Shower Bath, for the following
reasons, possesses advantages superior to all others. 1. The sudden contact of
the water, which in the common bath is only momentary, may here be prolonged,
repeated, and made slow or quick, or modified at pleasure. 2. The head and
breast, which are exposed to some inconvenience and danger in the common bath,
are here at once secured, by receiving the first shock of the water; the blood
is consequently impelled to the lower parts of the body; and the patient finds
no obstruction in breathing, or undulations of blood toward the head. 3. The
heavy pressure on the body occasioned by the weight of the water, and the free
circulation of the blood in the parts touched by it, being, for some time at
least, interrupted, make the usual way of bathing often more detrimental than
useful. The Shower Bath, on the contrary, descends in single drops, which are
at once more stimulating and pleasant than the immersion into cold water, and
it can be more readily procured, and more easily modified and adapted to the
circumstances of the patient.

I shall conclude this Chapter with some account of what is called the Aerial
or Air Bath. This is a late invention, the effects of which have not yet been
sufficiently ascertained. Experience informs us, that by exposing the naked
body for a short time to an agreeable cool, nay to a cold air, we perceive
effects somewhat similar to those produced by the cold bath; particularly that
of a pleasant sensation of heat diffused over the whole body, after having
again dressed. There is little danger of catching cold upon this occasion: for
in a place where we already feel a certain degree of cold in our usual dress,
the sensation of it will not be much increased, if we undress altogether. It
may also be remarked, that with the whole body naked, we have much less to
apprehend from the effects of cold, than by exposing or keeping one part of it
less covered than another. Lord M^nboddo, the author of " Ancient Metaphysics,"
who died in May 1799, in his 90th year, till very lately accustomed himself to
take violent exercise, when quite undressed, in the open air. He also anointed
his body, like the ancients, with aromatic oils, especially in certain states
of the atmosphere: in the severest weather he never would enter a carriage,
which he looked upon as an unjustifiable effeminacy; but annually rode from
Edinburgh to London, and took other long journeys on horseback. And this
venerable judge and amiable man found himself, long after the age of 70 as
hale, and in many respects as vigorous, as he had been at 30 or 40.


This species of bath certainly deserves farther trials. A spacious apartment,
with open windows, may serve every purpose of moving in the free air. And here
I would recommend to all who are engaged in sedentary and literary pursuits, to
walk with their heads uncovered in an open, and even in the coldest air, as
being a simple and excellent means to strengthen the head, and to remove those
complaints which arise from intense thought and close mental application.

To rub the body with woollen cloths, or with soft brushes, is of great
advantage, by gently stimulating the fibers, increasing the circulation of the
fluids to the external parts, and promoting a free perspiration, together with
all the other evacuations. Persons of a delicate habit, of a sedentary life,
and those who are liable to sudden twitches of the tendons, cramps, and
lameness, may effectually relieve, or rather prevent these complaints, by
causing the whole body, particularly the limbs, to be rubbed every morning and
evening, for about half an hour, with rough cloths or soft brushes, till the
skin becomes red. This friction is still more beneficial to the aged than to
the young; and it may in a great measure produce the salutary effects of bodily
exercise.

Frequent cutting the hair is of advantage to the eyes, the ears, and to the
whole body. So the daily washing of the head with cold water, is an excellent
remedy against periodical head-achs. In coryzas, or defluxions of the humors
from the head, and in weak eyes, the shaving of the head often affords
immediate relief; while at the same time it opens the pores, and promotes
perspiration. It is altogether a mistaken idea, that there is a danger of
catching cold from the practice of washing the head, or leaving it exposed to
the free air, after having been washed. The more frequently the surface is
cleansed of scurvy and scaly impurities, the more easy and comfortable we feel.
The oftener the hair is cut, the more quickly it grows again; and this easy
operation supplies the place of a constant blister or artificial issue. All
secret compositions or pomatums for making the hair grow long and thick, are
little better than fraud and imposition, and generally consist of noxious
ingredients. In place of them, I recommend a simple mixture of olive oil and
spirits of rosemary; to which may be added, a few drops of oil of nutmeg. With
this mixture let the hair be anointed every night; but sparingly at first.

To change the hair to a darker color, the liquid remedies sold by the
perfumers are generally dangerous, as consisting of lead, antimony, and other
metallic solutions. The only method to be pursued with safety is, to cut the
hair pretty close to the head, and comb it morning and evening with a leaden
comb, which simple process cannot injure or check the perspiration of the head.




Friction of the soles of the feet is very advantageous; but, on account of the
great number of highly sensible nerves in them, such practice must not be
carried to excess. A proper degree of warmth and perspiration in the feet is
always a favorable symptom of health. Besides, they should often be bathed in
cold, or, still better, in lukewarm water, well rubbed, and the nails
cautiously cut. There will then be no danger of the nails growing into the
flesh, or of corns or other callosities arising in the feet. All the methods
hitherto discovered of extracting corns, afford only temporary ease; and it is
very dangerous to cut them too deep, on account of the many nerves running in
every direction of the toes. Easy shoes, frequent bathing the feet in lukewarm
water, with a little salt and potashes dissolved in it, and a plaster made of
equal parts of Gum Galbanum, Saffron, and Camphor, are the only remedies I can
recommend against this troublesome complaint.

CHAP. IV.
Of DRESS; -- the advantages and disadvantages of the usual mode of Clothing
considered, together with proposals for remedying its defects.

IN considering the various articles of Dress, attention must be paid both to
their substance and form. Our mode of clothing may occasion trouble, disease,
and death -- 1. When we attempt by it to improve some supposed defects of the
body, which cannot be done without injury; and, 2. When it consists of improper
substances, whether used from necessity, or in compliance with fashion and
caprice.

To avoid ridicule, we comply with the prevailing fashions of the day; but, if
this compliance be prejudical to health, it shows great weakness to allow
ourselves to be carried away with the stream; and although a deviation from the
mode may, for the moment, excite the ridicule of the thoughtless, yet those who
have the boldness to oppose the Tyrant, when his dictatorial mandates are
injurious to health, will in the end triumph, and they may themselves have the
satisfaction to introduce dresses, at once healthful and elegant. Happily, in
this respect, people begin in some degree to think for themselves; that rigid
adherence to the mode, which heretofore dressed both men and women as much in
uniform suits as a regiment of soldiers, does not now disgust us.

The general properties of a good dress are the three following: -- 1. That it
be not so hard and unpliable, as to obstruct the free and easy motion of the
joints, and be uncomfortable, either from its weight or tightness: -- 2. That
it preserve the body in that degree of temperature which is most agreeable, as
well as most suitable to the different functions and motions in a healthy
state; -- and, 3. That it do not produce any detrimental effects, by increasing
perspiration in an unnecessary degree, or too much absorbing the vapors of the
atmosphere.

On the Materials used for Articles of Dress.
THE property of receiving, repelling, and emitting heat and cold, depends not
only on the substance from which our dress is made, and its shape or form, but
also on the color. Clothes of a light color have the least attraction for
heat, and therefore are the most proper in hot weather. Substances of a very
smooth and shining surface strongly reflect the rays of the sun, which cannot
penetrate through them; hence the advantage, in hot climates, of hats covered
with oil-skin, particularly of a green or white color, of smooth and shining
shoes, glazed gowns, and the like. Dazzling colors are offensive, and a person
who suffers from weak eyes will injure them still more by wearing crimson or
scarlet, or being much in company with others thus dressed. For a similar
reason, splendid white dresses, steel buttons, gold and silver lace, and all
ornaments of this sort, are detrimental to vision.

Animal Wool produces a moderate warmth, on account of the stimulus and gentle
friction it occasions on the skin. By its use, animal electricity is elicited,
perspiration promoted, the perspired humors are absorbed, and again easily
evaporated, on account of the porous nature of this substance.

Linen Cloth, by diminishing the elasticity of the skin, increases the internal
warmth, and at the same time, from its compactness, retains too readily the
perspirable humors, and does not part with them so readily as wool. Soiled
shirts therefore produce a disagreeable cooling sensation, and stop
perspiration, especially if made of thick strong cloth, and not regularly
changed every day.

Silk occasions a gentle stimulus, but does not sufficiently promote
perspiration, though it attracts less humidity from the atmosphere than linen.

Oil-skin, or wax-cloth, increases perspiration in an uncommon degree, but does
not admit it to evaporate again, and is therefore applicable only in certain
diseases.

Cotton stands in the middle between animal wool and linen; it increases warmth
and perspiration, imbibes and retains the perspired humors, to the injury of
the wearer, and like wool readily attracts infectious matter.

All kinds of Fur are more noxious than useful, both with respect to their
structure and constituent parts. They contain many alkaline and oily particles;
they are generally too compact and unequal on the surface; they too much
stimulate and increase perspiration, by promoting the access of humors to the
skin; they do not allow the perspirable matter to escape, soon acquire an
intolerable smell, and, more than any other substance, attract and retain
contagious effluvia. Experience informs us, that nations who dress in fur,
particularly in hot countries, are frequently exposed to diseases, owing to a
want of cleanliness and free perspiration; such are the putrid fevers of
Hungary, the plague among the Turks, and the singular disease of the hair in
Poland, called plica polonica, which curls the whole hair into a number of
twists, that have the appearance of so many greasy strings, and afford a
ghastly spectacle.

We ought, therefore, to choose a dress agreeable to the season and weather, as
well as to the constitution of the body. Woollen clothes are the most proper in
spring, autumn, and winter; because they moderately warm the body, do not
weaken it by the abstraction of too many exhalations, and have the fewest
points of contact, or, in other words, do not attach so close to the body, as
any other materials of dress.

In summer, most people are accustomed to wear thin clothes, which are scarcely
proper in our changeable climate. It is not, in that season, advisable to take
much exercise in thin dresses, particularly in the heat of the day. Nor should
we venture to wear such clothes early in the morning, when the air is cool, and
the pores of the skin have been dilated by the warmth of the bed; -- but still
less in the evening, when the heat of the day has so much opened them, that
perspiration may be easily checked, and health materially injured.

In our variable climate, it would be preferable to adopt a species of dress,
which is nearly uniform in all seasons; for as thin clothes are more
immediately pervaded by heat, during the least exercise, it certainly would be
more prudent and rational to wear a dress that is calculated to withstand the
effects both of cold and heat. That there is no danger in adopting a general
dress for all seasons; that, on the contrary, it is the most beneficial plan of
managing the body, with regard to the most important function, namely, that of
perspiration, I shall endeavor to prove in the next Section.

On the immediate Covering of the Skin.
THE first and principal rule with respect to this subject is, that the
covering of the skin ought to be always the same, and not be changed according
to the season and the weather. The usual consequence of this change is, in the
first place, an uneasy and painful sensation. A skin accustomed to fine linen
only, cannot endure the sensation occasioned by a coarser kind; and cotton is
still more disagreeable, but, most of all, animal wool or flannel. In the next
place, to change the dress according to the weather, occupies more time, and
requires more expense, than is convenient to the great mass of the people.

Nevertheless, there are many who, from mistaken maxims of health, accommodate
the covering of their skins to the seasons: they dress themselves in winter in
flannel, toward spring and autumn in cotton, and in summer in linen; a method
as absurd as it is dangerous. Notwithstanding the difficulties, which each of
these changes must produce, while we undergo this new trial on our skin, we
expose ourselves at the same time, in every such change, to all possible
dangers arising from cold and repelled perspiration. This custom is the more
dangerous, as it is usually practiced by the infirm, the tender, and the aged,
who regulate themselves less by the temperature of the weather, than by the
days of the almanac, when they are periodically accustomed to change their
dresses.

The question, then, which is the most proper covering of the skin, is easily
answered. Animal wool seems to recommend itself to us by the very circumstance,
that hair is the general covering of those animals which most resemble man in
their structure. If men were habituated to go naked in the colder climates, the
human body would, no doubt, also be better covered with hair. Animals, in
winter as well as in summer, have the same coat, except that in the coldest
season their hair is uniformly somewhat thicker and longer, consequently also
warmer than in summer, especially in the northern countries.

Not only analogy, but experience also proves, that wool worn next the skin has
indisputable advantages over all other substances. For, 1. Flannel is but a
slow conductor of external heat to the body, and it the more easily attracts
internal heat, and allows it to evaporate the more readily, as it is more
porous than any other texture. 2. A sultry atmosphere is extremely troublesome,
particularly where great heat is combined with moisture, the humidity checking
perspiration, and at the same time conducting too many aqueous particles to the
absorbent vessels from without. Here then flannel is of incomparable service,
since it keeps the vessels of the skin constantly open, causes them to perspire
freely, and admits but a very small degree of external moisture.

The principal good effect of flannel, however, consists in its gentle and
beneficial stimulus, or that friction which it occasions on the skin, and by
which it opens the pores. We must not imagine, that flannel of itself heats
more than linen or cotton; for it is not the heat which occasions
inconvenience, but the circumstance of the perspirable matter adhering to the
skin. In flannel, we may perspire without danger, and undertake any exercise of
the body, without disagreeable sensations; not so, when linen remains wet on
the skin. If we taken violent exercise in flannel, perspiration is necessarily
increased, but the perspired matter is communicated through the flannel to the
atmosphere, and the skin remains dry, warm, and comfortable. If we take the
same exercise in linen shirts, perspiration is indeed also increased, but the
perspired matter is not imparted to the atmosphere, but is inspissated in a
fluid state, clogs the linen, and remains in contact with the skin.

Another advantage which flannel possesses over linen and cotton is, that
people perspiring profusely in flannel shirts, may safely venture into the open
air, and will not easily catch cold, because flannel does not absorb the
perspired humors. If we do the same in linen shirts, the skin will soon be
wetted by perspiration, which will occasion a sensation of coolness and
shivering; in most cases a violent cold, and very frequently an inflammation of
the lungs, will be the consequence. This danger arises from the fluid matter
settling on the skin; and we may be still more severely injured, if we at the
same time expose ourselves to the action of the wind, or a current of air.

Numberless writers, both ancient and modern, confirm the good effects of
flannel next the skin: of these I shall only quote COUNT RUMFORD, who says, in
one of his earlier Essays, that he is convinced of the utility of flannel
shirts in all seasons; that he has worn them in all climates, in the warmest
apartments, and in the most fatiguing exercise, without the least difficulty;
that he was relieved, by the use of flannel, from a pain in his breast he had
been frequently subject to, and never since knew an hour's illness; and that
nothing exceeds the agreeable sensation of this dress, when people have been
once accustomed to it.

Indeed after the praises bestowed upon flannel, by so many respectable
authorities, and by men who from long experience have ascertained its
beneficial effects, it is surprising that any individual, however great his
reputation, should be whimsical or hardy enough to dispute its general
salubrity, merely with a view to establish a favorite hypothesis.

It has been objected, that flannel worn next the skin is debilitating, because
it too much increases perspiration; but this is not founded on truth, since
perspiration, as long as the skin remains dry, never can be hurtful, nor
immoderate. Such mistaken notions have been propagated, from the circumstance,
that flannel is frequently ordered by physicians, to increase perspiration in
some diseases, where it is necessary to the recovery of the patient: but the
copious perspiration is then the effect of the disease, and not of the flannel.

The uneasy sensation occasioned by flannel is of very short duration. That it
may make the skin red and inflamed, if it be too much rubbed and scratched,
cannot be denied; but it is a palpable falsity that it produces cutaneous
eruptions. It has quite a contrary effect; as it preserves the pores open,
increases perspiration, and thus removes the cause of cutaneous diseases, which
arise chiefly from a checked and irregular state of excretion by the pores.

In answer to another objection against the wearing of flannel, it is certain,
that a flannel shirt or waistcoat may preserve the body as clean, and much
cleaner, than linen, if as frequently changed. This preliminary condition, I
presume, sufficiently answers the objection of a learned writer, according to
whom a flannel dress requires a more frequent change than linen, to promote
cleanliness, and consequently would produce a contrary effect among the lower
classes of people. Yet, in other respects, I fully agree with the celebrated
HUFELAND, who lays down the following conditions and limitations in what
relates to the use of flannel: -- "Upon the whole, says he, I am of opinion
that it would not be advisable, at least to children and young persons,
universally to adopt a woollen texture for the covering of the skin. It is,
however, a salutary dress to these who, in all probability, have commenced the
second half of their life; to all cold or phlegmatic temperaments; to all who
lead a sedentary life; to individuals subject to catarrhs, or frequent colds,
gout, diarrhoea, and partial congestions of the blood; to all nervous patients
and convalescents from severe chronic disorders; to persons who are too
susceptible of the impressions of the atmosphere; and, lastly, in such climates
and pursuits of life as are exposed to frequent and sudden changes of air. --
It is, on the contrary, hurtful to all those, without exception, who are
already subject to violent perspiration, or troubled with cutaneous eruptions,
and who cannot afford to change their under dress as often as is consistent
with cleanliness."

Professor Hufeland, doubtless, meant to say that the wearing of flannel next
the skin is then only hurtful, if none of the conditions before specified
reconcile its use; for, even in cases apparently doubtful, the temporary
wearing of flannel is not attended with such danger as might perhaps result
from neglecting its application. But although it he obviously conducive to
health, the Professor recommends only such a texture of wool, as is
sufficiently porous, and neither too rough nor too thick. Coarse woollen
stockings in winter, and thin ones in summer, ought in his opinion to be more
generally worn. Those persons, lastly, who are in a good state of health, and
have no particular reason for wearing flannel, or whose skin is too irritable,
may find it, he thinks, beneficial to wear a cloth fabricated of a mixed
texture of cotton and linen.

Medical and Physical Journal: No. I. p. 40 and 4^.




Wool, on account of its rough surface, is more calculated to absorb infectious
morbid matter, than a more smooth substance; but we have nothing to apprehend
from flannel on the skin, and under the usual dress. I am rather of opinion,
that it is a better preventive against contagion than any other; because, while
it encourages perspiration, it at the same time removes the inhaled poisonous
particles, particularly if, in cases of danger, perspiration be increased by
other suitable means. Hence people wearing flannel on their skin, never suffer
from cold. I have been informed, that the manufacturers in the different
founderies of Birmingham, as well as at the iron-works of Colebrook-Dale and
Kettley, in the most intense heat, wear no other but flannel shirts; and that
without these it would be impossible to prevent continual colds, and the most
fatal diseases. With this beneficent intention, the British soldiers upon the
Continent, some years ago, were furnished with flannel waistcoats, by the
liberal subscriptions of individuals, which, I am convinced, saved many lives
that must otherwise have fallen victims to the effects of a cold and moist
climate.

These advantages strongly recommend the use of flannel to every one anxious to
preserve his health, but particularly to those who are exposed to all kinds of
weather, as husbandmen, fishermen, mariners, soldiers, and travelers. As
flannel is suitable to all seasons; as it requires no great changes in the
under dress; and as it is a tolerable substitute for a deficiency of upper
dress; it deserves every attention among those who provide for orphan and
poor-houses, as well as for the indigent of every description. Many desperate
diseases in the legs of the common people, many inflammations of the throat,
breast and lungs, might be prevented, and many lives saved, both of children
and adults, if flannel were more generally worn.

Those who complain of cold legs and feet, are never comfortable nor healthy;
if they could be prevailed upon to wear worsted stockings and flannel drawers,
they would acquire a quicker circulation of the blood in the lower extremities,
and prevent many troubles and indispositions, from which, without this
precaution, they cannot escape. Most valetudinarians and patients slight this
advice, because they imagine that the wearing of flannel is attended with
uneasy sensations. This idea, however, ought not to prevent them from giving it
a fair trial; for the uncomfortable feeling continues only for a few days, as I
have myself experienced; and this trifling sacrifice cannot be compared with
the salutary effects, which flannel next the skin almost uniformly produces. By
continuing it sufficiently long, and changing it frequently, the most obstinate
gouty and rheumatic complaints have often been removed, and many other imminent
dangers averted. Children afflicted with rickets, cannot be better relieved
than by a proper diet, and flannel shirts, which may be daily fumigated with
amber, petroleum, or other fragrant substances; a process, which has been
frequently productive of the most beneficial effects.

Of Stockings.
COTTON stockings, which are so generally worn at present, are highly
objectionable. -- There is no part of the human frame, which perspires so much
as the feet. The disagreeable sensation cold feet produce is well known; for
the connection between the feet and head, the stomach, the uterus, and many
other important parts of the human system, is so intimate, that gout,
suppression of the critical evacuations, pain in the excretory organs, nay
cancer, inflammation of the uterus, and abortion, may be the consequence of
cold feet and legs, which are the necessary effects of wearing cotton and silk
stockings. Cotton and linen worn next the skin, if once filled with perspirable
matter, do not admit any more to pass through them; a glutinous and cooling
moisture accumulates, and it is not easy to keep the feet thoroughly clean in
this dress. Those who alternately wear cotton and worsted stockings, must soon
observe the difference in the exhalation and moisture peculiar to each. Cotton,
though somewhat better than linen, is still much inferior to wool, which is
alone calculated to absorb and exhale the noxious humors emitted by the pores.

The reciprocal effect of the perspiration of the feet, and of the leather of
the shoes, is greater than is commonly believed. Hence those, who wear cotton
stockings, ought, from respect to cleanliness, as well as health, to change
them according as their exercise increases perspiration.

Although the feet are the principal sources or conductors of exhalation from
the body, little attention has been paid to them, with a view of promoting this
salutary secretion. Instead of pro^iting by this hint of nature, mankind have
been imprudently and unaccountably studious to stop that canal; imagining this
to be the safest way of preserving the feet dry, and free from all disagreeable
smell. Dry feet are certainly preferable to moist: but the means of promoting
perspiration are also the only means capable of keeping the feet dry, and free
from any unpleasant fetor. It is also improper and unhealthy to wear any other
but woollen gloves, which ought to be worn by all females, who wish to improve
the skin of their hands and arms; no cosmetics OF washes are so certain and so
powerful in their effects: on the contrary, all external applications, unless
assisted by internal remedies, are attended with the positive ruin of skin,
bloom, and health.

Persons who have a great tendency to perspire in their feet, and who increase
this exudation by much walking or dancing, will no doubt be sensible, that
their cotton, thread, or silk stockings, instead of removing the transpired
matter, actually absorb it; bring it in contact with the skin; preserve it in a
state of heat favorable to putrefaction; and check all farther perspiration.

That the feet are more exposed to the effects of cold, and to stagnations of
the fluids, than any other part of the body, is unquestionable: 1st, because
they are the most remote parts from the heart, and the quickness of the
circulation of the blood decreases in proportion to that distance; and 2d, the
blood circulating downwards makes its way to the heart somewhat slower, on
account of its own gravity. By this slowness in the circulation, more watery
particles are deposited by the blood. It is therefore necessary to keep the
feet somewhat warmer than the rest of the body, in order to encourage the
motion of the fluids to the upper parts. Woollen stockings are excellently
adapted for that purpose, and they ought to be chosen rather thicker than those
flannels used for shirts and drawers. For the same reason, it is proper to
prevent all moisture from without, by means of water-proof shoes, provided with
thick cork soles for the winter, or with elastic socks of horse-hair.

The most disagreeable sensation produced by the feet in perspiring, is between
the toes: this can only be prevented by wearing stockings made with toes, like
the fingers of gloves; because these alone can absorb and prevent the viscid
and fetid particles from fettling there. But as this proposal is not likely to
meet with the approbation of the votaries of fashion, I shall substitute an
easier method of remedying the unpleasant effects of violent perspiration in
the feet. A powders of burnt alum will overcome this fetor, by neutralizing the
acrid particles; and, at the same time, will not obstruct the necessary
perspiration.

Of Dress, as to its Form.
ALL coverings of the head, of whatever kind, produce more mischief than
benefit. The well known and excellent rule of keeping the head cool and the
feet warm, is too much neglected, especially by the lower classes of the people
in many countries, as in Scotland, Holland, and Germany, and likewise among
people of a certain age and description in this country. The Scotch peasant
wears his heavy bonnet, the Dutchman his cap, and the Turk his turban, without
considering that such heavy loads are stupifying, and that, while no attention
is paid to keep their feet warm and dry, their heads are virtually converted
into vapor-baths. In all countries, the man who lives at his case, carefully
covers his head with a warm nightcap; he spends perhaps one half of the day in
this unnatural dress, and prepares his head for frequent colds, at every sudden
change in the atmosphere. Besides, weakness of the head, pains, eruptions,
local plethora or fullness of blood, loss of the hair, lethargy, and at length
stupor or insanity are often the effects of this imprudence. For some years the
ladies, instead of those horrid masses of frizzled hair, which used at once to
injure their health, and disfigure their faces, happily returned to beautiful
and elegant nature; having their hair hanging down in graceful ringlets, while
the only artificial covering was a simple turban, or an ornamental bandeau. Of
late, however, this tasteful style of decoration has been succeeded by
unnatural, disgusting, and unhealthful wigs; a fashion probably introduced by
some ugly and bald woman, to reduce her gay and beautiful imitators to her own
standard of deformity.


In our moderate climate, we might safely accustom our youth to go with the
head uncovered; as Nature has already provided it with hair for that purpose.
In very cold and hot countries, however, the head must be slightly covered, to
shelter it from cold, (...) from the still more dangerous vertical rays of the
sun.

It is an instance of improvement in the education of children in England, that
their tender heads are not so much shut up in close caps, and fur bonnets, as
those upon the Continent. A practice so injudicious and hurtful deserves no
imitation; and yet there are advocates for warm night-caps and wigs; they would
starve their feet, while the head is enclosed in an artificial stove, which
enfeebles their mental faculties, and diminishes their bodily vigor.

Newborn children, and those who are most tender, require only an easy and
moderately warm covering for the head, and this chiefly during the first weeks,
on account of the softness of their cranium, then but imperfectly ossified. Yet
such a cap should be loosely tied, that it may not press the head, nor cripple
the muscles of the ears.

That the ear is naturally capable of some motion, is proved by the muscles
with which it is provided. Its form, resembling a shell, is admirably adapted
to receive and convey sound. In the vain conceit, that a projecting ear, so as
the Author of nature has created it, is a deformity, nurses and overwise
matrons endeavor to press the child's ear, from its first appearance, close to
the head. Thus they render the shell of the ear immovable, and diminish the
capacity of hearing. A properly-expanded ear not only strengthens the acuteness
of hearing, but likewise preserves this useful sense to a great age, when the
muscles of the internal organs of hearing become relaxed.

To go with the head uncovered, in sunshine, is certainly improper, both for
children and adults; but our common black hats are ill calculated to avert the
mischief, as they do not reflect the heat, but rather concentrate it in the
most sensible manner upon the head. Hats of a white, or any other light color,
made of straw or similar light materials, would be far preferable, particularly
for people laboring in the fields, soldiers, and travelers. In very hot
weather, a piece of white paper may be fastened with advantage on the crown of
the hat.

As the hat ought likewise to shelter the eyes from too vivid a light, the brim
should be broad enough to protect them, and the inner side of a green or blue,
but not of a black, nor a dazzling color. From the present mode, however, it
appears that both ladies and gentlemen think a brim almost, if not altogether
unnecessary, even when the power of the sun is most oppressive.

Persons suffering from periodical head-achs, or whose heads are otherwise
unhealthy, should have their hair cut short. By this petty sacrifice, they will
promote the necessary perspiration, the head will remain cool, and the cold
bathing of it can be practiced with more advantage. In this point of view, wigs
cannot be altogether condemned, as long as hair-dressing, artificial braids,
and other ornaments, form an essential part of fashionable dress. Besides, the
wearers of wigs are, in a great measure, exempt from many inconveniences and
evils attending the use of powder and pomatum. Lastly, if we must choose one of
the two maladies of the times, it is most rational to adopt the least noxious
to health: and so far I think a light wig is justly preferable to a head
enveloped in an artificial paste of powder and pomatum. Those, however, who are
once accustomed to wear a wig, should not upon any account again let their hair
grow in order to have it dressed, pasted, and powdered anew.

With respect to Shirts, the most proper substance having been before
investigated, I shall only add, as to their form -- that they may be seriously
prejudicial to health, if too narrow in the collar, and in the wristbands. I
have seen several instances of people attacked with shortness of breath and
difficulty of speech, from this reason only, because the blood cannot circulate
freely, if the neck and wrists be tied or buttoned up too closely. I was once
present where a young man, playing at rackets, was suddenly seized with an
apoplectic fit, the cause of which seemed at first inexplicable. As soon,
however, as his shirt-collar, wristbands and garters were loosened, he
recovered.

Neckcloths, cravats, ribands, and necklaces of all sorts, when they are too
tight, stop the access and retreat of the blood to and from the head, occasion
accumulations of the blood and other fluids, head-achs, faintings, stupor,
apoplexy, corrosive ulcers of the skin, and innumerable other maladies. All
coverings of the neck ought therefore to be constantly worn loose. People who
are liable to sore throats, and diseases of the breast, might gradually
accustom themselves, in mild and dry weather, to go with their necks as
slightly covered as possible, and if fashion would permit it, to have no other
covering but the collar of the shirt. In cold and moist weather, a thin
handkerchief might be added. But the modern cravats, filled with a stiffening
of cotton or wool, are extremely injurious to the part which they are intended
to protect. For, by occasioning too great heat, they render the neck
unnaturally sensible to every change of the atmosphere. It is rather
surprising, that from a due sense of their perniciousness, we have rejected all
coverings of the neck in children, as being troublesome and useless; and yet,
in defiance of reason and experience, we continue to incumber our own necks
with such bandages.

Necklaces and ribands, likewise, are generally tied so close, as to press with
violence on that supposed deformity of the throat, vulgarly called the Adam's
apple, which projects less in the female than in the male sex. These ribands
and necklaces, when worn tight, are the more inconvenient and dangerous, if
they be narrow and edged. Upon taking them off, which is too frequently
neglected at night, they leave an impression on the neck, clearly proving the
impediment they are to free muscular action, and what stagnations, pain, and
dangerous consequences they may occasion. The neck and throat, being
alternately expanded and contracted, in speaking, chewing, and swallowing, it
is the highest degree of imprudence to obstruct its motion, for the sake of
appearance, vanity, or fashion.

Equally objectionable are those black stocks, that were formerly much in
fashion, and are still worn by some old beaux and military men. The latter
indeed deserve our compassion, from being obliged to wear these uncomfortable
collars; but the former ought to consider, that they expose themselves to
dangers, increasing as they advance in age, and rendering them every day more
liable to apoplexy. I knew a regiment of soldiers on the Continent, whose
Colonel was so excessively fond of what he considered a martial appearance,
that he caused his officers and men to have every article of their uniform
remarkably tight, particularly the stocks, waistbands, and knee-garters. The
consequence was, that in the course of a few months above the half of his
regiment became subject to very obstinate cutaneous diseases, and other
obstructions, so that they were unable to perform duty. Other regiments in the
vicinity also suffered from this destructive custom; but the proportion of
their disabled soldiers was like one to ten in the former. The late Dr.
FOTHERGIL asserts, that these tight stocks are productive of apoplexy, if a
person look for some time, with his head turned, without moving his body. By
this alone, he believes, people have brought on apoplectic symptoms. For such a
turn of the neck, when the body stands fixed, diminishes the diameter of the
jugular veins so much, that a proportionate quantity of blood cannot return to
them, from the vessels of the head and the brain.

Neckcloths or cravats, loosely tied, and not too thick, are therefore the only
proper ones for Men; but as to Women and Children, it cannot be disputed, that
they would be better without any.

Laced Stays are, among the better ranks of society, at present out of fashion;
since the Grecian form is justly preferred to all artificial shapes. Yet, when
we have adopted an useful habit ourselves, it is our duty to recommend it to
those also who are still following a destructive practice. And with this
intention I cannot but reluctantly observe, that nine tenths of the community
still wear these oppressive strait jackets, merely because their mothers and
grandmothers have done the same. I shall therefore briefly state a few of the
consequences, arising from this unnatural part of female dress, namely,
diseases of the breast, external callosities, and cancer itself; the ribs are
comp^^^^ed; the spine is bent out of its place; the free expansion of the lungs
is prevented; hence shortness of breath, indurations and tubercles of the
lungs, cramp of the stomach, defective digestion, nausea, irregularities in the
secretory and other organs, and the like: in short, the list of the maladies
thus produced is too long to be here detailed; and both married and unmarried
ladies, for the sake of compassion, should exert all their influence, to
convince the common people of the injuries occasioned by stiff laced stays. If
any such part of dress be at all admissible, it ought to consist of soft and
pliable materials, such as fine chamois leather, hatter's felt, or, what is
still better, the knitted and more elastic texture used for gloves and
stockings.

All that has been said, with regard to laced stays, is also applicable to
small waists, and tight coverings of the breast and the abdomen. Fashion
delights in extremes. No sooner had the fair sex abandoned the unnatural and
unhealthful custom of long taper waists, than they in a manner concealed the
waist altogether. Instead of the cincture round the middle of the body, as
nature and taste directed, they bound themselves over the breasts, -- a custom
not less preposterous than injurious to health.


Narrow sleeves in gowns and coats, tight wristbands in shirts, and bracelets,
occasion a swelling of the veins on the back of the hand, rigidity, weakness of
nerves, and incapacity of bending the arm. If the arms be in this manner
twisted from infancy, their growth and formation are impeded; and it is
probably owing to this cause, that we see so many persons with short, thin, and
ill-formed arms.

Women suffer much more by this bandage than men, whose arms possess more
muscular strength, and have not the interstices of the muscles filled with fat,
like the former. In this respect, the modern fashion of tying the sleeves of
ladies' gowns close to the elbow, deserves particular censure; as the
circulation of the blood, together with the motion of the arms, is thus
obstructed, and many disagreeable consequences wantonly induced. Farther, the
female arm is naturally somewhat fuller from the shoulder downwards, and again
becomes smaller toward the joints of the hand: but in man, it is always more
muscular a little below the elbow. From this difference in the structure, it is
obvious, that the sleeves in a female dress lie close to the whole arm, while
those of a man's coat but partially attach to it.

Many of the remarks already suggested, respecting the form and substance of
other parts of dress, are likewise applicable to the article of breeches. If
these be made of improper materials, or too tight in the waistband, they must
occasion both uneasiness and injury to the body. Yet the ingenious
observations, lately published on this subject by Dr. FAUST, an eminent
physician in Germany, are by no means so conclusive, as to induce us to abandon
an article of dress, not only rendered necessary by the laws of decorum, but
which, when properly constructed, is even of considerable service; inasmuch as
breeches, by their moderate pressure, tend to strengthen the relaxed parts of
the body, particularly at a tender age.

The most proper form of this vestment is, upon the whole, that of pantaloons;
but they ought to be sufficiently wide, of a thin cooling substance in summer,
and of a warm elastic woollen cloth in winter. Tight and contracting leather
breeches, purposely contrived to display an elegant shape of the limbs, are
extremely inconvenient, occasion numbness and chilliness all over the hip and
thigh, and a painful pressure of the pudenda. Leather is also an improper
substance for this part of dress; as, on account of its close texture, it is
apt to check insensible perspiration. If the waistband be too strait, the free
motion of the internal parts of the abdomen will be obstructed, the absorbent
vessels of the intestines prevented from performing their offices, and
hypochondriacal complaints be easily induced. This inconvenience may be
entirely avoided, by the use of braces, now almost generally adopted, and
which, as they render a tight cincture altogether unnecessary, cannot be too
much recommended, both to men and women, for the sake of health as well as
comfort.

There are many reasons, which delicacy forbids me to mention, why it would be
highly beneficial to the physical and moral condition of females, to wear some
kind of drawers, at least after a certain age. This additional piece of dress
would effectually prevent several inconveniences to which women are subject.
-- There are other circumstances attending their usual dress, which contribute
to bring on a premature sexual impulse, and are apt to induce them to habits
equally irregular and injurious to health. This hint cannot be misunderstood by
judicious mothers, and, it is humbly presumed, will not be totally disregarded;
-- especially as young females but too readily accustom themselves to sit in an
improper posture.

Concerning the clothing of the legs, I must in the first place censure the use
of tight garters, particularly in men, to whom they are altogether unnecessary.
Whether females can do without them, is scarcely fair to question: but if any
substitute or contrivance can be adopted in their place, it will amply
compensate any little trouble or inconvenience: the stockings can easily be
tied to some tape fastened to the waistband. This apparently trifling
improvement is of greater moment, than many are inclined to imagine; for
garters are undoubtedly the cause of much mischief, whether tied below or above
the knee. The part to which they are applied, acquires an unnatural hardness;
they dispose the thighs and legs to dropsy, induce great fatigue in walking,
and are very probably the cause, that certain persons so frequently stumble,
fall, and dislocate or break the knee-pan. The great difference in walking,
with and without garters, I have myself sufficiently experienced. Many years
ago, when in compliance with early habits and prejudices, I was accustomed to
the use of garters, I could not walk or ride half a dozen miles without
fatigue; which inconvenience I found immediately remedied, on abandoning those
improper ligaments.

The advantages of woollen stockings have been already pointed out. Upper
stockings of silk, cotton or linen, will be no impediment; and they may be
chosen of thicker or thinner quality, according to the weather and season. But
the best stockings may become hurtful, if too short in the feet, and may bring
on a spasmodic rigidity, and distortion of the toes. If, on the other hand, the
feet of the stockings are too wide, so that they make folds in the shoes, they
will injure the skin by their friction, and be attended with painful
consequences. The stockings of children ought neither to cover the knees, nor
be tied in any other manner, than by fastening them with strings to the
waistband; otherwise they will increase the size of the knees, render them
preternaturally thick, and may produce white swellings, and other dangerous
maladies.

Boots, if too tight, and made of thick leather, are so injurious to health,
and so troublesome in walking, that no reasonable being will be inclined to
force his feet and legs into them. The consequences of a practice, as hurtful
as it is injudicious, are obvious from the preceding observations.

The constant use of boots contracts the size of the legs, particularly the
calves, as may be daily observed in military men, and the fashionable loungers
of Bond-street and Pall Mall.

I now proceed to the last, but not the least important part of our dress,
namely, Shoes. The celebrated Dutch anatomist, CAMPER, did not consider this
subject unworthy of his attention, as he published a particular work, " On the
proper Form and Size of Shoes," as late as the year 1781. The shoes ought to be
of the size of the foot; they should be also accommodated to the degree of
motion or exercise, and to the nature of the soil and place, in which we wear
them; circumstances that are at present too little attended to. A shoe that is
bigger than the foot, prevents a firm step; while one which is too narrow
occasions pain and troublesome corns. Many volumes have been written on the Art
of Shoeing that noble and useful animal, the Horse: -- it is considered as a
fundamental rule in Farriery, that the shoe must be neither smaller nor larger
than the hoof; and yet mankind can submit to screw their feet into a narrower
compass than is intended by Nature. How frequently do we smile at the Chinese,
who, from a tyrannical custom, squeeze and compress their feet, that they may
remain small and crippled. Yet these feeble Orientals proceed more rationally
in this practice, than their European rivals. They begin with it gradually, and
from the earliest infancy. We do not think of contracting the feet of our
children, till they have almost attained the natural size, and thus endeavor
to counteract the progress of Nature, when it is too late to do it with
impunity. Who then are the greater slaves of fashion, the Chin^se, or their
enlightened antipodes? -- It is pitiable to see the young and old, of both
sexes, advancing into an assembly or ball-room, with the most painful
sensations. Without consulting Lavater's Physiognomy, it is easy to discover,
by their distorted features and compressed lips, what many whimsical persons
suffer from too tight, or, what is still worse, from short shoes. Our knees
would be more flexible, and our toes more pliable, more useful, and better
adapted to perform the various motions of the feet, if they were not
continually pressed and palsied by this improper casework. Nature has designed
the toes to be as moveable as the fingers. Those unfortunate beings, who are
born without hands, learn to perform with the toes the most astonishing tasks,
to write and cut pens, to sew, to draw; in short, to supply almost completely
the want of their hands.

Our feet, no doubt, would be more comfortable, easy, and useful, if we were
not at the greatest pains to deprive, them of their elasticity and vigor. The
numerous nerves, crossing the feet in every direction, plainly evince that
Nature has endowed them with peculiar powers, of which we can scarcely form an
adequate conception. The untutored Indian, or the wild African, excels not only
the enlightened European, but likewise the lower animals, in running, leaping,
and, in short, in swiftness and agility of every kind, where muscular motion is
required. Either of them would heartily laugh at us, when we are obliged to
employ professional operators for extracting corns, and to contrive ointments
and plasters for the cure of those evils, which we have wantonly brought on
ourselves.

The judicious BUCHAN says: "Almost nine tenths of mankind are troubled with
corns; a disease that is seldom or never occasioned but by strait shoes;" and I
presume to add, that the remaining tenth part do not envy their
fellow creatures for this modern improvement. Our ancestors, even within my
memory, wore their shoes with broad toes, which showed at once their good
sense, and due attention to health and comfort. He who is regardless of the
pain and trouble occasioned by warts, excrescences, and callosities of various
forms; he who wishes to convert his feet and toes into so many barometers, to
indicate the present state, and to foretell the future changes of the weather,
will ever agree with his shoemaker, to save as much leather as possible; and he
is scarcely to be pitied for his imprudence. Such a person will not
unfrequently be disappointed in his excursions, when his crippled feet require
temporary rest. I am further persuaded, that such cessations of exercise are
extremely detrimental to health in general, and that they may be registered
among the predisposing causes of the gout, rheumatism, and dropsy. Many people
are thus almost deprived of the use of their legs; and the pain of the more
virulent species of corns, as well as of the nails, when grown into the flesh,
is excruciating.

For these obvious reasons, the soles of the shoes ought to be sufficiently
broad, especially under the toes, where we are accustomed to see them so
pointed, that they appear to be intended for weapons of attack or defense. If,
for instance, the greatest breadth of the foot be four inches, the shoe should
not be three and a half, but rather four and a half inches broad, since the
bulk of the foot, and the seam of the leather, require an allowance of half an
inch. The soles also ought not to be bent hollow, as is frequently done in
women's shoes; for since the foot is not so constructed as to present a
spherical surface, it is improper to deprive it of that firm hold, which Nature
has given it by a nearly flat form. The foot must necessarily suffer from this
ill-contrived shape, which deprives it of its flexion, occasions difficulty in
walking, and renders every step unpleasant and unsafe.

In the same manner as some persons strangely endeavor to diminish the breadth
of the foot, others are equally dissatisfied with its length. Hence we see them
make use of an instrument, to force their feet into shoes perhaps an inch
shorter than is requisite for an easy motion. This custom is the most
destructive of any, and, though not much practiced at present, since a long and
narrow pointed shoe is the most fashionable, yet the inconvenience and danger
is not thereby removed. Instead of bending the toes with their nails inwards,
as was formerly the case with short shoes, we now squeeze them together, and
often lay them crossways over one another, so as to carry them about without
motion, like a mere insensible mass of matter. Upon striking the foot against a
stone, we feel the punishment due to such outrage. Shoes of this kind may be
aptly compared to the wooden boxes worn by the Dutch and French peasants, from
necessity, in wet seasons, and which admit of quite as much motion as the long
and sharp pointed machines, in which our beaux and belles cramp their feed from
choice.

A convenient shoe, therefore, ought to be somewhat round at the toes,
sufficiently long, with thick soles, and the upper leather soft and pliable. If
it be deficient in any of these requisites, the skin will be rendered callous;
the perspiration indispensable to these parts will be stopped; warts and corns
will appear in numbers; the nails will grow into the flesh, and various
complicated maladies be produced, which not only affect the feet, but the whole
body. Beside these more serious consequences, a person walking with narrow
shoes will be much sooner and more sensibly fatigued, than he whose shoes are
sufficiently wide and easy.

The poor, as well as country people, who wear shoes sufficiently large, have
not only a much safer step, but their feet are less subject to the multiplicity
of complaints, with which ours are annoyed. Those who, either from inclination
or frugality, go barefooted in summer, have not even to plead the reason of the
Ancients, who considered it as a mark of chastity; and I cannot help remarking,
that it is both indecorous and unwholesome, as well as an injudicious species
of economy. The shoe, in our climate and mode of life, is a necessary defense
against many accidental injuries, to which the foot is liable; and it is
likewise a crime against decency, to expose any part of the human body to dust
and mire.

With respect to the substance of which shoes should be made, no other general
rule can be given, than that it ought to be sufficiently compact, to prevent
the water from penetrating it; so elastic and soft, as to admit an easy motion
of the whole foot; and accommodated to the weather, exercise, and soil in which
it is used. To those who have not the means or opportunity of procuring the
patent water-proof leather, I shall suggest a method of preparing this species
of leather, at a very small expense. One pint of drying oil, two ounces of
yellow wax, two ounces of spirit of turpentine, and one ounce of
Burgundy-pitch, are to be carefully melted together, over a slow fire. Those to
whom the smell of pitch and turpentine is unpleasant, may add a few drachms of
some cheap essential oil, as of lavender, thyme, and the like. With this
composition new shoes or boots are rubbed, either in the sun, or at some
distance from a fire, with a sponge or soft brush: this operation is to be
repeated as often as they become dry again, until they be fully saturated. In
this manner, the leather at length becomes impervious to wet; the shoes or
boots made of it last much longer than those made of common leather, acquire
such softness and pliability, that they never shrivel nor grow hard and
inflexible, and, thus prepared, are the most effectual preservatives against
cold and chilblains.

To conclude, I shall only remark, that it is not advisable to change the shoes
from one foot to the other. Let us rather tread one of the shoes somewhat
crooked, than injure our feet and health, by an adherence to a custom, which
has nothing but custom to recommend it. If it be our serious wish to avoid
corns and other painful accidents, to which the rage of fashion subjects the
feet of its votaries, we should persuade the shoe-makers to provide us with a
particular shoe for each foot; and this can be done only by keeping separate
double lasts, for every wearer. Is it not injudicious and absurd, to have both
shoes made of the same size and form, when Nature has not formed both feet
alike, or at least not in the same direction?

It gives me great satisfaction to add, that since the first edition of these
Lectures was published, the rational practice of having separate shoes
purposely made for each foot, has already been adopted among the more
enlightened classes of society. From a full conviction of its great utility, I
sincerely wish that it may soon become universal!

CHAP. V.
Of EXERCISE and REST; their occasional advantages and disadvatages explained;
their manner and limits ascertained; together with directions for regulating
both.

MOTION, or bodily exercise, is necessary to the preservation of health, which
is thereby promoted, while the bounds of moderation are not exceeded. Too
violent exercise, and a total want of it, are attended with equal
disadvantages. Much also depends on the kind of motion, and the various
postures of the body.

The essential advantages of exercise are the following: bodily strength is
increased; the circulation of the blood and all other fluids promoted; the
necessary secretions and excretions are duly performed; the whole mass of the
blood is cleared and refined, so that it cannot stagnate in the minutest
capillary vessels; and if any obstruction should begin to take place, it will
be effectually relieved.

That exercise is enjoined by nature, we may learn from the whole structure of
the human body, from the number of muscles formed for motion, and from the
mechanism in the circulation of the blood itself. There are, indeed, no
healthier people than those who have continual strong exercise. Man in a state
of health is instinctively induced to muscular exertion; and children that are
perfectly healthy are constantly running about, and in almost uninterrupted
motion.

But if exercise, either by its violence, or too long duration, exceed the
proper limits, it naturally quickens both respiration and the circulation of
the blood, which may occasion the bursting of small blood vessels,
miscarriages, inflammations, and collections of blood toward certain parts of
the body, such as the heart and the brain. The saline acrimony of the fluids is
thus more disengaged; the fat is dissolved; and inflammatory fevers,
hemorrhages, and palsies, may be the consequences.

Violent exercise is particularly hurtful to those who are unaccustomed to it,
or who have committed excesses in drinking, and, what is still worse, in eating
more than is necessary: and those whose bodies have not been sufficiently
nourished by food and drink, may also be injured by too much exercise.

The sudden transition from a state of rest, to violent action, is likewise
hurtful, and still more so in hot than in cold weather. After strong emotions
of the mind, every species of bodily exercise ought to be avoided, till the
tranquillity of mind return with the rest of the body; yet we ought to guard
against the effects of cold, as it may prove extremely prejudicial in such a
state.

WITH respect to the manner of taking exercise, three principal points are to
be attended to:

1. As to the kind of exercise, -- the various species of which may be aptly
divided into active and passive. The active are of a very diversified nature;
walking, running, leaping, swimming, riding, fencing, the military exercise,
different sorts of athletic games, as well as every other kind that requires
muscular exertion. -- Passive exercise comprises riding in a carriage, sailing,
friction, swinging, etc.

The more active species of exercise are beneficial to youth, to those of a
middle age, to the robust in general, and particularly to the corpulent, the
plethoric, and those whose evacuations are not in due proportion to their
supplies. The passive kinds of exercise, on the contrary, are better suited to
infants, to old, dry, and emaciated persons, to the delicate and debilitated,
and particularly to the asthmatic and consumptive.

2. As to the time in which exercise is most proper to be taken -- this depends
on so great a variety of concurrent circumstances, that the rules by which it
may be regulated, cannot be universal, and must therefore be collected from the
preceding observations on the properties and effects of Air, Food, Drink, and
so forth. Other particulars, such as relate to greater or less degrees of
fatigue attending the different species of exercise, and the utility of it, in
certain states of the mind and body, must determine this, as well as

3. The duration of it; -- for it is almost impossible to lay down positive
rules, how long every individual, in every particular situation, may continue a
certain species of exercise, so as to derive advantage. These rules, as far as
they can be established, may be collected from the subsequent remarks, and then
applied to the particular kinds of exercise, by which we may be benefited in
different cases and situations.

It is necessary first to observe, that any kind of exercise which we are
accustomed to take, with a view to brace the body, is far preferable to an
unusual one, which may be attended with a contrary effect. We ought always to
begin gently, and to finish gradually, never abruptly. Exercise in the open air
has great advantages over that in houses and close apartments. Besides, strong
bodily exertions, such as dancing, fencing, turning, and the like, if practiced
in small and confined places, on account of the increased perspiration, soon
vitiate the air, and render it unfit for breathing.

If we take exercise for the sake of health, we ought to employ ourselves
during that time with some agreeable object, and not perform any labor nor
seriously occupy the mind. Hence certain kinds of exercise cannot be
unconditionally recommended to every individual, as means conducive to health;
though they should of themselves be proper, and in other respects agree with
the constitution. He who forces himself to any exercise, or performs it with
reluctance, will thence derive more injury than benefit: motions or tasks,
therefore, which we impose upon ourselves, as recreations after work, or after
sitting and long thinking, ought to be strictly relaxations, not toilsome
exertions.

Persons of an active mind ^ind a species of relaxation, and even satisfaction,
in a change of their pursuits, and particularly in the transition from hard and
difficult, to more pleasant and easy avocations. To such individuals any
exercise is frequently of great advantage, especially if it answer, or appear
to them to be conducive to any useful purpose. To one who has habituated
himself to grave and serious pursuits, it should not be recommended to join in
amusements requiring bodily exertion, and attended with dissatisfaction and
irksomeness; for his health will not be improved by exercise, at once unusual
and unpleasant.

To continue exercise until a profuse perspiration, or a great lassitude, take
place, cannot be wholesome. In the forenoon, when the stomach is empty, or at
least, not too much distended, muscular motion is both most agreeable and
healthful; it stregthens digestion, and heats the body less than with a full
stomach. A good appetite after it, is a proof that it has not been carried to
excess. But it is not advisable to take violent exercise immediately before a
meal; as this might occasion a deficiency of those humors, which are necessary
to promote digestion. If we sit down to a substantial dinner or supper,
immediately after a fatiguing walk, when the blood is heated, and the body is
in a state of perspiration, the worst consequences may ensue, especially if we
begin with the most cooling dishes, or with salad, or a glass of cold drink.

Exercise is likewise hurtful directly after meals; since it obstructs
digestion, and propels those fluids too much to the surface of the body, which
are designed for the stomach, to promote the solution of food, and without
which many crude and undigested particles are forced to enter, and to mix with
the blood. The old rule of the Salernitan School, "Post coenam stabis, seu
passus mill meabis," (i. e. after supper stand, or walk a mile) is as
frivolous as it is absurd; for experience sufficiently informs us, that most
persons, particularly the nervous and irritable, are liable to the heartburn,
eructations, and even vomiting, when they are obliged to move about or to take
any exercise immediately after meals. The instinct of the lower animals also
contradicts this rule; because the wildest creatures are inclined to rest after
food.

Persons who are under the necessity of moving immediately after their meals,
or who have no other spare time for walking, must endeavor to overcome these
inconveniences by custom, and a more rigid temperance: they should first take
the most gentle kind of exercise, and gradually increase it; and, as the late
hours of dining, now so generally in fashion, have in a manner abolished heavy
suppers, a moderate walk after a slight evening's repast cannot be injurious.
But at all events, fatiguing exercise, after a full meal, should be delayed
till the stomach has digested and assimilated the food, which generally takes
place in the third or fourth hour after eating. The most proper occupations
after dinner, are such as can be performed without trouble, or great efforts of
reflection and bodily exertion, and such as afford a kind of amusement.

Walking, the most salutary and natural exercise, is in the power of every
body; and we can adapt its degree and duration to the various circumstances of
health. By this exercise, the appetite and perspiration are promoted; the body
is kept in a proper temperament; the mind is enlivened; the motion of the lungs
is facilitated; and the rigidity and contraction of the legs, arising from too
much fitting, is relieved. The most obstinate diseases, and the most
troublesome hysteric and hypochondriacal complaints, have been frequently cured
by perseverance in walking.

The most proper walk for health, is in an agreeable country, in a healthy,
pure, dry air, amidst social and cheerful conversations, in a mild sunshiny
day, whether in spring, autumn or winter; in the summer mornings and
afternoons, but by no means in the oppressive heat of the sun. To walk in
towns, although it gives exercise, is less conducive to health; because the
atmosphere is generally filled with vapors arising from impure exhalations.

Those who are not hardened against the vicissitudes of the weather, must avoid
not only hail and rain, but also the cold mornings and evenings, and ought,
therefore, in rough and moist cold weather, rather to take exercise within the
house, but without preventing the access of air. Violent wind should also be
avoided; and if we are obliged to face it, we ought not to walk too fast,
particularly in winter, when the small pores of the skin are compressed by the
air.

In walking, the proper choice of places is a matter of much importance. Marshy
and damp fields should be avoided; and in autumn, when the foliage is decaying,
it is not advisable to choose woods, groves, and damp meadows, for our
pleasure-walks. In summer, on the contrary, a walk in the forests or meadows is
both agreeable and healthful. Hills and elevated situations deserve
particularly to be visited, not only on account of the purer air we breathe,
but also of the body enjoying a variety of exercise, in ascending and
descending.

The inhabitants of towns require longer walks for the preservation of their
health than country people. The latter, even with less exercise, derive vigor
of body and serenity of mind, from a purer air, and more simple manners.
Regular and daily walking, therefore, cannot be too much recommended to the
citizen, who in the present age is so much harassed with nervous and
hypochondriacal complaints; but, though this be an useful and excellent species
of exercise, yet some rules ought to be observed, if we expect to derive from
it the wished-for advantages.

1. We should contrive to procure as much pleasure and recreation after serious
occupations, as is possible and consistent with our situation in life.

2. To read during a walk, whether the subject be of a grave or amusing nature,
is a custom improper in itself, and detrimental to the eyes, besides the danger
it occasions of falling: this practice not only deprives a person of the
principal advantages of a walk, but people easily accustom themselves to an
unsafe and ungraceful manner of carrying the body. It is attended with the
worst consequences to the eyes, because the focus is continually shifted, and
the retina is thus excessively fatigued.

3. We should not frequent the same, perhaps often a dull and unvaried walk,
though most convenient. It is better to change the walk occasionally, and
gradually to extend the distance. The most agreeable prospects should be chosen
for variety; otherwise the perpetually uniform walk will excite melancholy and
unpleasant sensations, as much as the closet or the study.

4. We ought to accustom ourselves to a steady and regular, but not a quick
pace.

5. An agreeable companion contributes much to serenity of mind: but let us
rather go alone, than in dull or frivolous company, if we at all possess the
art of profiting by solitude.

6. In the choice of our companions, we should attend not only to congeniality
of character and taste, but should also, in this exercise, associate with those
whose pace accords with ours; for if the heavy and corpulent man make a lean
and light-footed person the companion of his walks, he will remain behind, or
be overheated and fatigued, if he endeavor to keep pace with his partner, who
must likewise suffer from the constraint of slower motion.

7. Some people cannot speak or converse in walking, without frequent stops,
and thus make little progress. From this singularity, they are generally much
fatigued at their return, without having reaped any benefit from their exercise.

Running not only shakes the body with greater violence than walking, but it
heats the head and face, and too much quickens the circulation of the fluids.
Soon after a meal, it prevents digestion, mixes the pure fluids with the
impure, and obstructs the secretion of humors. If long continued, it is
hurtful to every one, particularly to those unaccustomed to it, to the
plethoric, to those subject to hemorrhages, gravelly complaints, and frequent
nervous headache, and to sedentary persons employed in mental labor. To run up
a hill, too much fatigues and strains the muscles; and to run against the wind,
produces giddiness in the most robust, and makes them liable to various
accidents, that may be attended with danger.

Dancing, considered in itself, and under proper limitations, is an admirable
exercise, especially in winter, when the heavy atmosphere, much rest, and
sitting, render the blood thick, and dispose persons to hypochondriasis.
Moderate dances have every advantage of a gentle exercise, besides the
beneficial effects produced on the mind by cheerful company and music. On the
other hand, the more violent dances may be, and frequently are, attended with
the most pernicious effects. The exertion of so many muscles, the quick
inspiration of a warm atmosphere in a crowded assembly, impel the blood to
circulate with a rapidity equal to that in the hot stage of a fever, and propel
it to the head and breast, so that the vessels seldom possess a sufficient
power of resistance. If we add to this, the effect of heating liquors, of too
sudden an access of the cold air, so eagerly, courted, of exposing the face,
head and breast, suddenly to its influence, together with the imprudent use of
cooling drink, and ice itself, we can no longer be surprised, that spitting of
blood, consumption of the lungs, and inflammatory disorders, are the frequent
consequences of such excesses.

This violent species of exercise is particularly dangerous to females; and the
use of fans, in order to cool themselves, and thus check perspiration, (which
is wisely designed by nature to produce the same effect, in a more salutary
degree, if not wantonly repelled) is extremely imprudent. Delicate persons
ought, for their own sakes, to join in no other but the shorter and less
fatiguing dances, especially in summer.

A dancing-room ought to be cool, but without admitting currents of air, and
without too much smoke from candles. It would be advisable for the whole
company, after dancing is over, and before they venture into the open air, to
change their linen, and afterward to wait a quarter or half an hour before
they return home. During that time, they may be refreshed by tea, and thus
encounter the open air without danger. Every dancing assembly ought to conclude
with minuets. Persons of an indisposed and debilitated body, such as the
consumptive, those troubled with ruptures, gravelly and similar complaints,
should not attempt to dance. Lastly, this exercise is hurtful to every person
in the hot and sultry days of summer, when nature renders cooling drink
indispensable, and when we are much inclined to perspire, without any
additional inducement.

Riding in carriages is an exercise the more conducive to health, that the
gentle jolts tend to resolve stagnations in the intestines of hypochondriacs,
corpulent people, convalescents, and the consumptive. But, if the motion of the
carriage be too rapid, it is hurtful, as it not only accelerates perspiration
before the matter of it is properly prepared, but also injures the solid parts,
especially the kidneys, generates congestions of the blood toward the head,
and consequently headache, giddiness, vomiting, and obstructions. If, however,
we wish to derive all the good effects from riding in a carriage, the body of
it ought not to be too nicely suspended in straps and springs, nor should the
motion be too slow. One of the windows, at least, ought to be kept open, that
the perspiration and breath of several persons, enclosed in so narrow a place,
may not too much vitiate the air.

The infirm, who cannot enjoy the free air in bad weather, should take exercise
upon rocking horses, or similar contrivances, in halls and spacious apartments,
while the upper part of the windows is kept open, guarding, however, against a
current of air. Lastly, the furious driving in open carriages, in sultry
weather, may be indeed pleasant, on account of the agreeable current of air;
but it may also become dangerous to persons subject to violent perspiration.

Leaping, fencing, the fashionable military exercise, and maneuvering with
horses, are violent kinds of exercise, which cannot be recommended to those who
are not in a perfect state of health, or to the corpulent and plethoric, whose
blood vessels may be so overstrained as to burst, by motions which require the
muscular exertion of the whole body.

To those who are otherwise healthy, but cannot afford to take sufficient
exercise, either by their particular situation in life, or from want of time, I
would recommend a new species, which; in its salutary effects on the whole
body, is equal if not superior to any other. It simply consists in moving the
whole body, in the middle of a room, (and, if convenient, with open windows)
and let the operator, while he inclines forward upon his toes, raise his arms,
and drop them with the alternate motion backward on his heels. Thus the whole
muscular system will be duly exercised, without confining the motion to one
particular part. This is even preferable to the dumb-bells, which, like every
other species of partial exercise, if persevered in, are so far objectionable,
as they require the uncommon exertion of certain muscles, while the due and
uniform circulation of the blood to those parts is disturbed, to the detriment
of others which are at rest.

To persons who are deprived of the use of their limbs, and are weak and
delicate, the motion of a sedan chair is of great benefit, if it be continued
for a sufficient time; for it disposes the body to a free perspiration. Of the
same nature is the failing in barges or boats, either on lakes or rivers.

A much more active kind of bodily motion is produced by short voyages at sea.
Those who are unaccustomed to it, generally experience giddiness of the head,
nausea, and vomiting: hence it is beneficial to an impure stomach. To
consumptive patients it frequently is the last resource; but it is wrong to
delay it, till all other remedies have failed. For it is not in the last stage
of consumption, when the lungs are already ulcerated, or when an abscess has
already burst in the thorax, and the ichorous matter has been communicated to
the blood, that we can expect any benefit from voyages. The changes of scene
and climate, indeed, powerfully cooperate in effecting changes in the human
system; but, if the disease has preyed too much on the vitals of a patient, or
if he is spitting blood, the motion of the vessel must necessarily prove
injurious. On the other hand, the debilitated, the nervous, and particularly
the hypochondriac, cannot resort to a better remedy than a short voyage.

Riding on horseback is, in a certain respect, an excellent medical remedy, by
which all the muscles, from the toes to the head, are in reciprocal motion, and
which manifests its principal effects on the intestines of the abdomen. It
clears the intestinal canal, promotes the evacuation of crude substances,
strengthens the stomach and bowels, improves digestion, prevents or resolves
incipient obstructions, and facilitates the perspiration of the whole body. To
the hypochondriac it is an inestimable remedy; but, if the obstructions should
be too far advanced, riding ought either not to be attempted at all, or
practiced in as slow a pace as the horse can walk. In short, it is to be
undertaken with the same precaution as sailing, in those stages of consumption
which admit of these remedies.

Farther, riding is not advisable in cases of hemorrhoids, ruptures, and
gravel. The feeble and relaxed ought to begin with a gentle pace, and to
increase it gradually; for a moderate trot is the proper medicinal mode of
riding: and, if they expect to derive real advantage from riding on horseback,
they must neither trot too fast, nor make use of a heavy and jolting horse.
Such patients as are unaccustomed to this exercise, particularly
hypochondriacs, generally ride with great timidity. Their lives are, as it
were, in continual danger; by the awkward posture of their bodies on horseback,
they are frequently hurt in parts accessible to injuries; stitches in the side,
congestions of blood in the head, and violent perspiration, counterbalance
every advantage received from their excursions. To most of these patients, if
they can afford it, the riding-school cannot fail to be extremely useful; for
the regular manner of training the horses there, their uniform and steady
motion, the attention paid to the proper posture of the rider, by keeping his
breast and abdomen erect, and the legs properly extended; all are circumstances
very favorable to the patient and convalescent. But, even here, it is the
moderate kind of exercise only, that promises real benefit in a medicinal
sense; -- continued furious driving and hard trotting are always extremely
dangerous.

For similar reasons, riding on horseback, as well as in carriages, immediately
after a meal, is still more dangerous than walking. The most proper time for
riding is the morning, when the stomach is empty. It should, however, not be
long continued; one hour, in general, is quite sufficient; and in this respect,
riding is preferable to any other exercise, as it can be practiced by persons,
whose business does not permit them to devote much of their time to that
purpose.

Swimming is likewise an useful exercise, which at the same time has the
additional advantage of a cold bath. The motions and muscular exertions, which
it requires, increase its utility: some rules and precautions, however, must be
attended to. They have been stated at considerable length in CHAP. III. "On the
use of Baths." I shall, therefore, at present only remark, that we should not
enter with the feet, but with the head, into a cold bath; that the body should
be neither too warm nor too cold in applying this bath; and that we should not
choose dangerous rivers, or ponds, nor enter the water before the rays of the
sun have in some degree warmed it, and rendered it more temperate. The
sensation produced by cold water is indeed less to be apprehended, than the
consequences arising from imprudently plunging into it, when the body is either
too much cooled or heated.

Playing at Hand-ball, Cricket, and the like, have a more powerful effect on
the muscles than the abdomen; and are therefore, in one respect, unavailing to
sedentary people, and on the other hand unnecessarily fatiguing. Caroussels, or
riding on machines in a circle, are movements which require too much muscular
exertion of the debilitated, whose strength admits only of a moderate exercise.
These, as well as swinging machines, and the lately contrived swinging cars,
moving on a wheel with perpendicular pivots, are the least proper for those who
are inclined to giddiness, and nervous symptoms in general, on account of the
fear, and sometimes the dangerous accidents attending them. But, at the same
time, both species of exercise are extremely favorable in such states of
health, as require an uniform and gentle motion of the whole body, in the pure
and open air, particularly in the high swinging cars, which are well calculated
for that purpose.

Speaking, is one of the most healthful and necessary species of exercise; and,
without any ludicrous idea, I may assert, that this practice, is particularly
salutary to the female sex, who are more confined at home than men. Here,
however, as in other cases, excess is prejudicial. Loud reading and speaking
are of singular advantage to literary men, affording them good substitutes for
other kinds of exercise, for which they seldom have sufficient leisure or
opportunities. It is to this cause we may justly ascribe the longevity of many
schoolmasters, and teachers in universities, who, notwithstanding their
sedentary employments, and the vitiated air which they daily breathe in
school-rooms, attain to a long and healthy life. To speak very loud, and to
exercise the voice immediately after a meal, is pernicious to the lungs, as
well as to the organs of digestion.

Singing promotes the lively circulation of the blood through the lungs, and
all parts of the body; the lungs, as well as the abdominal intestines, are
shaken by the vibrating motion of the air, in a manner very conducive to their
salubrity. The phlegm, and other noxious matter, collected about the pulmonary
vessels, are thereby resolved and carried away, so that they cannot mix with
the blood, and the most dangerous stagnations in the smaller vessels are thus
prevented: the blood is uniformly distributed and driven to the larger veins
and arteries. For the same law of nature, by which river-water is preserved
sweet and fresh, while that of pools and ditches stagnates and putrifies, is
also fully applicable here. The air inhaled in singing is of similar service to
us, as the current to the water: perspiration is thereby promoted, and the mind
is enlivened with the body. Those sedentary artificers or mechanics, who from
habit almost constantly sing at their work, unintentionally contribute much to
the preservation of their health.

All Wind Instruments are more or less hurtful; for, as much air is thereby
introduced into the lungs, and as it is but gradually and partially emitted,
that organ soon becomes debilitated. Hence persons of weak lungs, who are very
fond of playing the flute, hautboy, or French horn, are frequently afflicted
with spitting of blood, cough, shortness of breath, and pulmonary consumption.
Besides, blowing checks the circulation of the blood through the lungs,
accumulates it toward the head, and disposes such musicians to apoplexy. By
the violent expulsion of the air, the abdominal muscles are contracted, all the
parts of the abdomen are compressed, the circulation of the fluids is retarded,
and many unpleasant and frequently fatal consequences are induced.

There are other kinds of musical instruments, which, in a dietetical view,
deserve to be condemned. Such is the Harmonica, which, by the rotation of the
glasses on the singers, (a kind of negative electricity) induces a great degree
of nervous weakness. And this effect is much accelerated by the acute and
vibrating sounds of this instrument, by which the organs of hearing are
intensely affected. Perhaps all stringed instruments, which are played by the
touch of the fingers, such as the harp, the guitar, and the violin, produce a
similar effect on the nervous system; especially if it be true, that the
papillae, or the points of the fingers, are the strongest conductors of the
supposed nervous fluid. It is at least probable, that to be able to play on
such instruments, with expression, requires a more than common sensibility of
the nerves, which indeed may be sometimes artificially acquired, but to the
detriment of health. For it cannot be doubted, that a local excitement of
irritability may be gradually propagated over the whole nervous system; and
that, from raising some parts of the body to a preternatural state of
sensibility, the common character of those who are called Virtuosi, is
generally marked with nervous debility. Every body knows in how extraordinary a
manner music may influence the mind; that the passions of persons of
sensibility may be most effectually roused and allayed by it; nay, that in some
individuals, every feeling of the mind can be affected at pleasure, by the
various modifications of harmony. As, therefore, sadness, grief, and other
depressing passions, may be alleviated by appropriate music, it is an exercise
deserving every commendation. Yet we must neither expect to cure by it diseases
of the mind, nor their concomitant bodily disorders: this is beyond the power
of music, which acts as a palliative only, or as a nervous stimulus, the effect
of which is instantaneous, but of short duration. For, as soon as the exciting
cause ceases, it is succeeded by an uncomfortable sensation of debility and
relaxation. It is even probable, that music, like all other anodyne and
soothing remedies, may in the end increase the disposition to nervous weakness,
by its too frequent repetition.

Lastly, the posture of the body, in practicing music, also deserves attention;
as the breast and abdomen may be compressed by stooping, so as to cause very
serious complaints; and as the eyes may be injured by reading the notes, at too
great or short a distance, especially for the double keys of the harp and
harpsichord: indeed, reading music is in general more fatiguing to the eyes,
than any other kind of exertion.

Friction of the body, which can be performed either by the naked hand, a piece
of flannel, or still better by a flesh-brush, is one of the most gentle and
useful species of exercise. The whole body may be subjected to this mild
operation, but principally the abdomen, the spine, the arms, and legs. It
clears the skin, resolves stagnating humors, promotes perspiration,
strengthens the fibers, and increases the warmth and energy of the whole
system. In rheumatism, gout, palsy, and green sickness, it is an excellent
remedy.

Daily friction of the whole body was with the ancients, and still is in the
East Indies, considered one of the most indispensable requisites of a people,
who by their indolent manner of life seem to have adopted it, more with a view
of indulging in sensual pleasures, than as the means of preserving health. It
is, however, one of the most salutary expedients, by which the whole body
receives nearly as much benefit as from a tepid bath, and which, as being in
the power of every person, ought to be more frequently and more generally used.
To the sedentary, the hypochondriac, and persons troubled with indigestion, who
cannot afford leisure to take sufficient exercise, the daily friction of the
belly, in particular, cannot be too much recommended as a substitute for other
means, in order to dissolve pituitous stagnations, which may be forming in the
abdomen, and to re-invigorate the vessels. And though it be not attended with
all the advantages enjoyed from exercise in the open air, it still produces a
powerful effect on the organs of digestion; for the moderate exercise of a
whole day will scarcely invigorate the abdominal vessels, and particularly the
stomach, so much as the friction of these parts, continued for half an hour.
But, if it be intended for these beneficial purposes, it should be performed in
the morning, on an empty stomach, or in bed before we rise, gently and
steadily, in a circular direction, and at least for five or ten minutes at a
time.

In a weak state of the abdomen, and the nerves in general, we may derive still
more salutary effects from friction, if the stomach and the whole abdomen be
rubbed every morning, and at night, before going to bed, with a sponge, or a
piece of flannel dipped in cold water. This possesses still greater advantages
over internal medicines, because it can be safely employed, even in cases where
the alimentary canal, from its obstructed state, scarcely admits of any other
remedies, while friction, and the affusion of cold water, generally relieve
these obstructions, and even habitual costiveness.

Motion or exercise ought to be continued only till we feel an agreeable
lassitude, and a sensible degree of perspiration. If it be carried farther, it
weakens instead of strengthening the body, and leaves behind disagreeable
consequences to the lungs, filled with heated blood. Even the robust man will
experience some, though less unpleasant effects than the debilitated, if he has
committed an excess of this nature.

After having taken exercise, we should not venture to rest in a cool place,
nor upon a green plot; still less should we expose ourselves to a current of
air; but rather frequent a place warmed by the mild rays of the sun in summer,
or a moderately warm apartment in winter, so that the sudden change of
temperature may not injure us, by suppressing perspiration.

For the same reasons, the thirst we generally feel after exercise, ought not
to be instantly satisfied by cooling drink. It is however allowable to drink
some warm or diluent liquors, if we cannot wait till the natural warmth be
restored. The late Dr. Fothergill very properly advised, that people in a state
of perspiration should, to avoid all danger, eat a mouthful of bread, with a
little salt, and thus gain time, till the blood and the liquor to be drunk had
acquired a more equal temperature. A small quantity of vinegar, or the juice of
lemons in water, is well calculated to quench thirst, and at the same time to
promote perspiration. Travelers on foot ought to be upon their guard against
too much drink; for, the more liquids they take, the more they will perspire,
and the greater will be the subsequent relaxation and danger of cathing cold,
when their clothes are saturated with perspirable matter. They should also
abstain from drink productive of a laxative effect, which would cause debility,
and even faintings. The most suitable of all substances to mix with water, is
the pure or essential acid of tartar, with a small quantity of sugar. This
affords a cooling and refreshing beverage, without relaxing the bowels, like
lemonade. Persons with whom vitriolic acid agrees, may take a tea-spoonful of a
mixture, consisting of six or eight parts of spirits of wine, and one part of
vitriolic acid, to a pint of water. A beverage made of a weak acidulated wine
and water is cooling and strengthening. In the very cold weather of winter,
people ought to avoid all heating liquors, such as ardent spirits and strong
wines. Warm diluents, such as tea and coffee, are equally improper, and a poor
protection against cold; for their warming property is of short duration; they
are productive of debility, a more torpid circulation of the blood, and
consequently of an increase of cold. It is much better to eat previously some
solid meat, by which the digestive organs may be exercised, such as cold animal
food and bread, and to drink after it some bitter ale or beer. On the other
hand, when we suffer from intense cold, or have been exposed to the wind and
weather, a few cups of strong tea, with plenty of cream and sugar, is then the
best and safest refreshment: and it is equally invigorating in summer after
extreme heat and fatigue. Feeble individuals, whose stomachs generate much
acid, and who are frequently troubled on their journies with a sudden voracious
appetite, are liable to the most painful attacks of weakness on the road, and
on that account they ought always to be provided with some kind of solid food
in their excursions. Such persons should carefully abstain from the use of
wine, brandy, or other heating and stimulating cordials, while traveling,
especially in the morning: they might with more advantage eat some bread and
butter, warm or buttered ale, strong broth, gruel, or the like nourishing
substances.

We are now to consider the consequences arising from the want of exercise.
This, indeed, is still more debilitating than too violent motion. The solid
parts of the human frame are relaxed by it; the circulation of the fluids is
retarded; they gradually stagnate in the smaller capillary vessels; the
secretions are diminished; and abundance of moisture or fat is generated, which
renders the body, as well as the mind, more indolent and lifeless: --
relaxation of the muscles, obstructions of the intestines, hemorrhoids,
apoplectic fits, various species of dropsy, and at length a premature death,
are the sad consequences. Men of letters are the most unhealthy of all human
beings, because their bodies have scarcely any other exercise but the
imperceptible motion of the arms. Want of appetite, flatulency, anxiety, at one
time obstructions, at another diarrhoea, and the most diversified nervous
symptoms, are their attendants. Sleep is beyond their reach; a thousand
tormenting inconveniences, hypochondriasis, and at length a complete state of
melancholy, is too frequently their lot. Temperance alone will not remedy all
these evils; for since we cannot remain vigorous and healthy for two days
together, with the same mass of blood, a new access of the purest and most
subtle parts of our fluids must daily support the nervous system, in order to
preserve its regular functions. If this be not continually restored, weakness
and relaxation of body and mind are the inevitable consequences; with this
difference only, that in a state of debility, from too much bodily exercise,
the thick and coarse particles of the fluids are carried into circulation with
the others, and the next meal, or the first sleep after it, very soon supplies
the deficiency: in mental labor, on the contrary, digestion is interrupted,
the crude and viscid parts of food remain unassimilated, and the body is
prevented from receiving its proper nourishment. In like manner, the sedentary
mechanics and artificers are affected; particularly shoe-makers, tailors, and
weavers. They experience hardships similar to those, to which men of letters
are subject; and it has been frequently observed, that they are very liable to
diseases of the mind, and especially to religious fanaticism.

Standing, though useful as a change after long sitting, is apt to occasion
accumulations of blood, or rather of the serous part of it, in the lower
extremities. Swelled legs are therefore common among printers. It is a posture
little calculated to relieve the studious, and the body is at the same time
more fatigued by standing than sitting. If we sit much, we must attend to the
two following rules: 1. that no part of the body be compressed: and 2. that it
be not too long continued at one time. The common manner of sitting, with the
head reclined, is extremely pernicious; for the circulation of the fluids in
the abdomen is thus checked; the intestines are compressed, and the vessels of
the breast contracted. The head also suffers by bending it too much forward; as
the blood is thereby impelled to circulate toward it more copiously than is
consistent with health. The studious, especially, would do well, not to perform
all their avocations in a sedentary posture, but occasionally to relieve at
once their body and mind, by standing, or walking about the room. The mode of
sitting ought also to be made as convenient as possible, so that both the body
and head may be kept in an almost perpendicular posture; that the breast and
abdomen may not be obstructed in their alternate expansion; and lastly, that
the arms and legs may not be held in a crooked and unnatural position: all this
should be particularly attended to, by those who teach children to read and
write. The pressure of the abdominal muscles may in a great measure be
prevented by high tables and desks, and by raised stools or chairs, upon which
a person rather stands than sits.

To lie or rest horizontally is attended with a cessation of all exercise. If
the head be placed low, and this too long continued, there may arise headache,
by the increased pressure of the blood on the brain. Here, likewise, a frequent
change of posture is necessary, in order to obstruct none of the bodily
functions, and to prevent the stagnation of humors.

Finally, the faculties of the mind deserve no less attention than those of the
body.

Alternate changes of tranquillity and activity are equally beneficial to the
mind, as rest and exercise to the body. Too long continued, too frequent, and
too profound reflections, are alike injurious to both. The same powers are
diminished here as in bodily labor, and in a still greater proportion; for
muscular exertions, though fatiguing, are reproductive of new vigor. This may
indeed be also applied to mental labor, by which the mind improves in
capacity, but the body is a sufferer from every unusual exertion of the mind;
and, with the body, the mind by degrees also becomes diseased: -- in profound
meditations the vital spirits are, as it were, withdrawn from the organs of
sense; the body is for the time almost deprived of sensation; and we frequently
become in a manner absent. Reflection always directed to one object, not only
debilitates, but also suppresses the other faculties of the mind, and does not
permit it to deviate from its favorite pursuit. Thus we sometimes see
melancholy, nay madness itself, overwhelm persons devoted to the contemplation
of oue particular object. Intense and abstruse thought, in general, if not
checked in time, may be attended with stupor or insanity.

To enable us to reflect seriously upon an important subject, time and place
ought to be so chosen that the mind may be diverted by no other object; for two
ideas cannot be conceived at one time. Hence we should study in an apartment
which is not too light, and where we are undisturbed by noise: -- the muscles
should not be actively employed during study: it is therefore improper and
pernicious, immediately after meals, or before digestion be completed. The
morning, indeed, is the most profitable time for study; though necessity and
custom make many exceptions; so that some persons, from gradual practice, are
able to perform their mental tasks during the greatest noise, and in a room
full of children.

Much and frequent inactivity of mind agrees, indeed, well with the body, which
in that state fully performs its functions, but it becomes unwieldy, insomuch
as at length to stupify the mental powers: the ideas become obscure and
confused; and a total loss of memory, or oblivion of the past, is but too often
the consequent effect of such indolence.

CHAP. VI.
Of SLEEPING and WAKING: their just proportion with regard to age, the
constitution of the body, mode of life, and other circumstances.

SLEEP and wakefulness are nearly in the same relation to each other as
exercise and rest. Waking always presupposes a certain degree of activity; all
the natural functions, digestion, the preparation of the chyle and blood,
assimilation, secretion and excretion, are then more vigorously performed, and
would soon exhaust their powers, if sleep did not restore to them the
beneficial and indispensable supplies.

Sleep is therefore necessary to existence and health, and it is an improper
and fruitless attempt, to deprive ourselves, by an ill-directed activity, of
the requisite portion of this refreshment; for Nature will maintain her rights,
in spite of our efforts to subvert them: and both body and mind suffer, without
attaining any real advantage from an extravagant watchfulness.

Before I proceed to inquire into the consequences arising from either too much
or too little sleep, it will be useful to premise a concise theory, or the
physiology of this suspension of the mental powers.

When the body is fatigued, when the senses, together with the voluntary
motions of the muscles, have been for some time active, we stand in need of the
alternation of rest, which is obtained by sleep. During a sound sleep, the
senses, and the voluntary muscular motions, are not exercised; but the vital
functions, such as respiration, and the circulation of the blood, as well as
most of the natural functions aforementioned, are regularly though more slowly
performed. During sleep, therefore, the motion of the heart and the
blood vessels, even the action of the brain and the nervous system, as likewise
the peristaltic or vermicular motion of the stomach and the intestines, and the
secretion of the fluids, are performed in an uniform and steady manner.
Previous to sleep, we perceive a languor of the senses, and of the muscles
which are subject to our will, and of those also which keep the body in an
erect posture; the head inclines downwards, the upper eyelid and the lower
jaw bone likewise sink, the venous blood accumulates toward the heart, and
compels us to yawn, in order to facilitate the transition of the blood into the
lungs, by the deep breathing which takes place: finally, the brain itself, as
the organ of the mind, appears to be fatigued; hence our ideas become
irregular, and there arises a kind of faint imbecility of the understanding.
That the motions of the heart are stronger during sleep, and that perspiration
is more active, must be ascribed to the warmth of the bed-clothes, by which the
insensible perspiration softens and relaxes the skin. But a person, who sleeps
in his usual dress, will feel chilly; and those animals that sleep long, as the
hedgehog, the murmur-deer ( Marmota Alpina, L.) suffer an extraordinary degree
of cold.

As the senses are inactive during sleep; as the nervous energy is less
exhausted, and its secretion continued, a new supply of it is collected, and
the organs of sense, as well as the muscles, receive additional vigor. This
occasions us to awake, particularly if roused by any stimulus. While we are
asleep, the nutritive particles can more easily attach themselves to the
fibers, and fat also is more readily generated, from the retarded circulation
of the blood. After we have slept sufficiently, we are apt, on awaking, to
stretch the limbs and joints of the body, and sometimes to yawn: the latter,
with an instinctive desire of promoting the circulation of blood through the
lungs, which was retarded during sleep; the former, namely stretching, in order
to assist the extensor muscles, which, by the flexion of the limbs in sleep,
had been more extended, and in order to expand again the flexor muscles, that
had been moderately contracted.

The proximate cause of sleep appears to be an impeded motion of the nervous
fluid in the brain. This motion is produced by a kind of collapse of the subtle
insertions of the nerves, as well as by a mechanical compression of them. Hence
we can explain, how things so totally opposite are able to produce sleep, when
they either exhaust or compress the tubes of the nerves. Of the former kind is
every violent and fatiguing species of labor, a considerable loss of blood,
perspiration increased by external heat, and every thing that withdraws the
blood from the head; for instance, warm baths of the lower extremities, a
stomach filled with much food, etc. Of the latter kind of incitements to sleep,
namely, those that act by compression, is every mechanical pressure on the
brain, whether it proceed from water accumulated in its ventricles, from a
local depression or fracture of the cranium, or from extravasated blood: -- in
like manner, the impeded regress of the blood from the brain, or the increased
access of it to that organ, may effect such a pressure, by distending the
blood vessels, as is the case in using narcotics, or wine and other spirituous
liquors; and, lastly, an intense degree of cold, as well as the state of an
approaching apoplexy. Sleep is promoted by tranquillity of mind; by the absence
of every stimulus to the body; by silence and darkness around us; by a complete
rest of the senses; by gently and uniformly affecting one of the senses, for
instance, by music or reading; and, lastly, by a gentle external motion of the
whole body, as by rocking or sailing. On the other hand, every painful
sensation, a great noise, a bright light, strong exertions of mental powers,
and particularly violent passions, are calculated to prevent sleep. Thus
likewise sleep may be impeded by hot, spicy, and other kinds of drink, which
are said to occasion a more speedy secretion of the nervous fluid.

Dreams are vagaries of the imagination, and in most instances proceed from
external sensations. They take place only, when our sleep is unsound, in which
case the brain and nervous system are capable of performing the motions above
described. We seldom dream during the first hours of sleep; perhaps, because
the nervous fluid is then too much exhausted; but dreams rather occur toward
the morning, when this fluid has been, in some measure, restored. Every thing
capable of interrupting the tranquillity of mind and body, may produce dreams.
Such are the various kinds of grief and sorrow, exertions of the mind,
affections and passions, crude and undigested food, a hard and inconvenient
posture of the body. Those ideas which have lately occupied our mind, or made a
lively impression upon us, generally constitute the principal subject of a
dream, and more or less employ our imagination, when we are asleep. Animals are
likewise apt to dream, but seldom; and even men living temperately, and
enjoying a perfect state of health, are seldom disturbed with this play of the
fancy. Nay, there are examples of lively and spirited persons who never dream.
The great physiologist, HALLER, considers dreaming as a symptom of disease, or
as a stimulating cause, by which the perfect tranquillity of the sensorium is
interrupted. Hence, that sleep is the most refreshing, which is undisturbed by
dreams, or, at least, when we have no clear recollection of them.

I have before observed, that most of our dreams are sports of fancy, and
derive their origin chiefly from external impressions: almost every thing we
see and hear, when awake, leads our imagination to collateral notions or
representations, which, in a manner spontaneously, and without the least
effort, associate with external sensations. The place where a person whom we
love formerly resided, a dress similar to that which we have seen her wear, the
objects that employed her attention, no sooner catch our eye, than she
immediately occupies our mind. And, though these images, associating with
external sensations, do not arrive at complete consciousness, within the power
of imagination, yet even in their latent state they may become very strong and
permanent. I have been informed, for instance, of a young man, who was attacked
with convulsions, every time he heard the name of Jesus repeated; owing, it
seems, to the circumstance of his mother having once invoked the name of Jesus
in a terrific voice and manner, when she, as well as the boy, were much
frightened by a tremendous peal of thunder. But this is only an indirect
demonstration of the existence of a faculty, which is very active in dreams,
and which may be aptly called the subreasoning faculty, or the power of
abstracting similarities. The conclusions, thus formed, are more frequent and
active, than in the waking state; because they are seldom controlled by the
reflections of reason. I shall make use of one illustration only.

Very frequently we find, that in a dream a series of representations is
suddenly interrupted, and another series of a very different kind occupies its
place. This happens, as soon as an idea associates itself; which, from whatever
cause, is more interesting than that immediately preceding. It then becomes the
prevailing one, and determines the association. Yet by this, too, the
imagination is frequently re-conducted to the former series. The interruption
in the course of the preceding occurrences is remarked, and the power of
abstracting similarities is in search of the cause of this irregularity. Hence,
in such cases, there usually happens some unfortunate event or other, which
occasions the interruption of the story. The representing power may suddenly
again conduct us to another series of ideas, and thus the imagination may be
led by the subreasoning power before defined, from one scene to another. Of
this kind, for instance, is the following remarkable dream, as related and
explained in the words of Prof. MAASS, of Halle: "I dreamed once," says he,
"that the Pope visited me. He commanded me to open my desk, and he carefully
examined all the papers it contained. While he was thus employed, a very
sparkling diamond fell out of his triple crown into my desk, of which, however,
neither of us took any notice. As soon as the Pope had withdrawn, I retired to
bed, but was soon obliged to rise, on account of a thick smoke, the cause of
which I had yet to learn. Upon examination, I discovered, that the diamond had
set fire to the papers in my desk, and burnt them to ashes."

This dream deserves a short analysis, on account of the peculiar circumstances
which occasioned it. "On the preceding evening," says Prof. Maass, "I was
visited by a friend, with whom I had a lively conversation upon Joseph II.'s
suppression of monasteries and convents. With this idea* though I did not
become conscious of it in the dream, was associated the visit which the Pope
publicly paid the Emperor Joseph at Vienna, in consequence of the measures
taken against the clergy; and with this again was combined, however faintly,
the representation of the visit, which had been paid me by my friend. These two
events were, by the subreasoning faculty, compounded into one, according to the
established rule -- that things which agree in their parts, do also correspond
as to the whole; -- hence the Pope's visit was changed into a visit made to me.
The subreasoning faculty, then, in order to account for this extraordinary
visit, fixed upon that which was the most important object^ in my room, namely,
the desk, or rather the papers locked up in it. That a diamond fell out of the
triple crown, was a collateral association, which was owing merely to the
representation of the desk. Some days before, when opening the desk, I had
broken the glass of my watch, which I held in my hand, so that the glass fell
among the papers. Hence no farther attention was paid to the diamond, being a
representation of a collateral series of things. But afterward, the
representation of the sparkling stone was again excited, and became the
prevailing idea; hence it determined the succeeding association. On account of
its similarity, it excited the representation of fire, and was indeed
confounded with it. Hence arose fire and smoke. But, in the event, the writings
only were burnt, not the desk itself, to which, being of comparatively less
value, the attention was not at all directed."

It is farther undeniable, that there are in the human mind certain obscure
representations, and that it is of great advantage to be convinced of the
reality of these images, if desirous of perceiving the connection subsisting
among the operations of the imagination. Of the numerous phenomena, founded on
obscure ideas, and which consequently prove their existence, I shall only
remark the following. It is a well known fact, that many dreams originate in
the impressions made on the body during sleep; that they consist of analogous
images, or such as are associated with sensations that would arise from these
impressions during a waking state. Hence, for instance, if our legs are placed
in a perpendicular posture, we are often terrified by a dream, that implies the
imminent danger of falling from a steep rock or precipice. The soul must
represent to itself these external impressions in a lively manner, otherwise no
ideal picture could be thus excited. But, as we do not become at all conscious
of them, they are but faintly and obscurely represented.

If we make a resolution of rising earlier in the morning than usual; and if we
imprint this determination on our mind, immediately before going to bed, we are
almost certain to succeed. Now it is self-evident, that this success cannot be
ascribed to the efforts of the body, but altogether to the mind; which probably
during sleep perceives and computes the duration of time, so that it makes an
impression on the body, whereby we are enabled to awake at an appointed hour.
Yet all this takes place, without our consciousness, and the representations
remain obscure.

Many productions of art are so complicated, that a variety of simple
conceptions are requisite to lay the foundation of them; yet the artist is
almost entirely unconscious of these individual notions. Thus, a person
performs a piece of music, without being obliged to reflect, in a conscious
manner, on the signification of the notes, their value, and the order of the
fingers he must observe; nay even without clearly distinguishing the strings of
the harp, or the keys of the harpsichord. -- We cannot attribute this to the
mechanism of the body, which might gradually accustom itself to the accurate
placing of the fingers. -- This could be applied only where we play a piece of
music, frequently practiced; but it is totally inapplicable to a new piece,
which is played by the professor with equal facility, though he has never seen
it before. In the latter case, there must necessarily arise an ideal
representation, or an act of judgment, previous to every motion of the singers.

These arguments, I hope, sufficiently evince the occurrence of such obscure
notions and representations, as lay the groundwork of all our dreams. That
among the thousands and millions of fanciful and supposed ominous dreams, some
are occasionally realized, is not a matter of astonishment; but many people,
particularly the victims of the lottery, too frequently find reason to regret,
that these omens are not always to be depended upon; if those deluded
visionaries would permit themselves to reason, and to calculate, they would
discover, that there are as many chances against their dream being realized, as
there are against their ticket turning up a twenty thousand pounds prize.

Before I quit this subject, I shall relate an extraordinary dream of the
celebrated Italian, GALILEO. When this great man, at a very advanced age, had
lost the use of his eyes, he was once conducted in his walks over a beautiful
plain, by his pupil, TORICELLI. "Once," said the aged sage, "my eyes permitted
me to enjoy the charms of these fields. But now, since their light is
extinguished, these pleasures are lost to me for ever. Heaven justly inflicts
the punishment which was predicted to me many years ago. When in prison, and
impatiently languishing for liberty, I began to be discontented with the ways
of Providence; COPERNICUS appeared to me in a dream; his celestial spirit
conducted me over luminous stars, and, in a threatening voice, reprehended me
for having murmured against him, at whose f^at all these worlds had proceeded
from nothing. "A time shall come," said he, "when thine eyes shall refuse to
assist thee in contemplating these wonders."

After this long, though I hope not uninteresting digression, I proceed to
state the consequences arising from too much or too little sleep.

To continue in a waking state, beyond a proper time, consumes the vital
spirits, disorganizes the nerves, and causes so many uneasy sensations, that a
considerable while must elapse before we can fall asleep, namely, until their
greatest violence has abated. The fluids of the body become acrid, the fat is
consumed, and there arises at length an inclination to vertigo, violent
headache, anxiety, actions without connection, without design, and without
consistency. Those who indulge themselves in much sleep, are seldom liable to
very strong passions. Persons, on the contrary, who sleep too little,
frequently contract a violent and vindictive temper. Long-continued wakefulness
is capable of changing the temper and disposition of mind of the most mild and
gentle; of affecting a complete alteration of their features, and, at length,
of occasioning the most singular whims, the strangest deviations in the power
of imagination, and, in the end, absolute insanity.

Excess of sleep, however, is not less prejudicial. The whole body sinks
gradually under a complete state of inactivity, the solid parts become relaxed,
the blood circulates slowly, and remains particularly long in the head:
perspiration is disordered, the fluids are incrassated, the body increases in
fat and thick humors, and is rendered incapable of being the medium of mental
exertion, the memory is enfeebled, and the unhappy sleeper falls into a
thoughtless lethargic state, by which his sensibility is, in a great measure,
destroyed.

Persons troubled with hypochondriasis and hysterics do themselves much injury
by sleeping too long, especially in the morning, when the body is much weakened
by its too long continuance in a heated and unwholesome atmosphere. To such
individuals, it is also dangerous to remain for a length of time in a state of
inactivity. Indeed, excess in sleeping is detrimental to the muscular powers of
every person; to the phlegmatic, especially, whose fluids will thus soon be
universally corrupted; and sanguine temperaments thereby acquire a
superabundance of blood. The melancholy, whose blood circulates slowly, must
suffer inconveniences in their secretions and excretions by this indulgence;
and we generally find, that long sleepers are afflicted with costiveness and
obstructions. -- Early rising, and timely going to bed, may alone render them
more healthy and vigorous.

If it can be advantageous to any description of persons, to sleep beyond the
usual portion of time, it is to the choleric. To sleep immediately after
supper, is apt to occasion the nightmare, or a stagnation of the blood, which,
by its pressure, produces the sensation or idea of this troublesome bedfellow.
It is principally the nervous, the debilitated, and those of an impaired
digestion, who are visited by such terrifying dreams.

The proper duration of sleep, in youth and adults, is usually settled at six
or seven hours; in children and the aged, from eight to nine hours. Yet the
individual deviations in the constitution of the body, and its various wants,
scarcely admit of any accurate rules. The more bodily weakness we feel, the
more we may indulge in sleep, provided it be refreshing. If people in a state
of health are perfectly cheerful in mind and body, when they first awake, this
is the most certain criterion, that they have slept sufficiently.

We should, however, be on our guard, not to confound the natural wants of the
body with a blameable custom. For most persons habitually sleep too much, or
remain longer in bed than they ought. The principal cause of this destructive
custom undoubtedly arises in infancy; when children are permitted to sleep in
very soft and heating beds, and encouraged to lie longer than is proper, from a
mistaken notion that they cannot sleep too much. From this injudicious
treatment, they cannot attain a solid texture of the body, and a foundation is
laid for many subsequent diseases. The rickets, so very common in many
families, in the present age, often originate in such indulgencies, since the
general relaxation of the body, and the tendency to profuse perspiration, is
thus promoted in an extraordinary degree. At the age of puberty, this
effeminacy of the body, and the inclination to sleep, together with the
pleasant sensation, which a soft and warm bed affords in a waking state, are
certainly the first and most frequent causes of a vice, that might be
effectually prevented by early rising.

The custom of sleeping long, when continued to the state of manhood, becomes
so habitual that it cannot be relinquished without great struggles, and a firm
resolution. Those, then, who are not possessed of this firmness, instead of
attaining a strong constitution, will acquire a phlegmatic, relaxed, and cold
temperament, which will render them irresolute, and incapable of energetic
efforts; and from which the mind, by degrees, becomes as indifferent toward
every object, as the body is unfit for muscular exertion. -- Hence, to listen
to the voice of Nature, in this respect, will contribute more to our happiness,
than to shorten our repose by many of the usual but violent means of
excitement, when the body is in want of rest.

To children, at a very early period of life, no limits of sleep can be
prescribed; but, after the sixth or seventh year of age, some regulations
become necessary, to habituate them to a certain regularity. The just
proportion of sleep can be ascertained only, by their more or less lively
temperament, by their employments, exercise and amusements through the day, and
according to the more or less healthy state of their bodies. In pursuing this
measure, however, we must not attempt to awaken children from their sleep, in a
violent or terrifying manner, which is frequently done, and is extremely
pernicious.

In great disquietude of mind, and after violent passions, sleep is the more
necessary, as these agitate and exhaust the frame, more than the most fatiguing
bodily labor. Hence, many persons never sleep so sound, as when they are
afflicted with grief and sorrow. A fretful and peevish temper, as well as a fit
of the hypochondriasis, cannot be more effectually relieved, than by a short
sleep. Frequently, after a sleep, of a few minutes only, we awake refreshed, we
can reflect on our difficulties with a calm mind, and again reconcile ourselves
to the troubles of life. In such situations, though we should not be able to
sleep, even a quiet posture of the body, with the eyes closed, is of some
advantage.

There is scarcely any misfortune so great, that it cannot be relieved or
alleviated by sleep; as, on the contrary, we should inevitably sink under its
pressure, if this beneficent balm did not support us. Yet, frequently too,
uneasiness of mind, by its continual stimulus on the censorium, prevents all
sleep: hence the unquiet repose and even whole sleepless nights of those, whose
heads are filled with cares or important schemes. As mental labors exhaust our
strength more than those of the body, literary men, who employ themselves in
long and profound reflections, require more sleep than others. Though some
persons, whose body and mind are equally indolent, have a greater inclination
to sleep, than the lively and laborious, yet it is not so beneficial to them;
since they are destitute of the essential requisites to health, namely,
activity and vigor.

The most healthy, and those who lead the most regular lives, frequently have
an uneasy and very short sleep: they also require less rest at one time than
another. He who digests easily, stands less in need of sleep than others. After
taking aliment difficult of digestion, Nature herself invites to the enjoyment
of rest, and to sleep in proportion to the time which is required for the
concoction and assimilation of food. -- Excessive evacuations of whatever kind,
as well as intoxication by strong liquors, render additional sleep necessary.
In winter and summer, we require somewhat more time for sleep than in spring
and autumn; because the vital spirits are less exhausted in the latter seasons,
and the mass of the blood circulates more uniformly, than in the cold of winter
or heat of summer, when it is either too much retarded, or accelerated.

It is very improper to sit up too late in the long winter evenings, whether at
the desk or the bottle, either of which is then more hurtful than in summer,
because the want of sleep is greater. Those who wish to spend the winter in
good health, and useful labor, should retire to bed at eight o'clock in the
evening, and rise at three or four o'clock in the morning. A winter morning,
indeed, is not very charming, but the evening is naturally still less so; and
there is no doubt, that we can perform every kind of work, with more alacrity
and success, in the early part of the day than at night, and that our eye^
would likewise be benefited by this regulation, after sleep has enabled them to
undertake any task in the morning; but they are fatigued at night, from the
exertions of a whole day.

Every stimulus may interrupt sleep, or at least render it uneasy, and often
occasion dreams, the cause of which is generally owing to an irritation in the
stomach, or in the intestinal canal. Dreams are, as it were, a middle state
between sleeping and waking, and generally indicate some defect in the body,
unless they give representations which originate in the occurrences of the
preceding day.

An uneasy sleep, which is obvious from starting up, or speaking in it, and
from a frequent change of the posture in bed, is at no time a good symptom; it
is as frequently a forerunner, as it is the effect of disease, and may be owing
to the following causes:

1. Emotions of the mind and violent passions always disorder the vital
spirits; -- at one time they increase, at another diminish, and sometimes
altogether check their influence, the consequences of which extend to the whole
circulation of the blood. Sorrows and cares produce a similar effect. Hence the
nocturnal couch is a very improper place to prosecute moral researches, or to
recollect what we have done, spoken, and thought through the day. -- To read
interesting letters, received late in the evening, usually too occasions an
unquiet sleep.

2. A bad state of digestion, and especially hard or corrupted food, on account
of the connection of the brain with the stomach.

3. A repelled perspiration, if we have not covered ourselves conformably to
the climate, season, and weather. -- In this case, a current of air is still
more hurtful than intense cold.

4. An apartment or bed to which we are not accustomed may also occasion an
uncomfortable sleep, as travelers frequently experience. It is therefore an
essential part of a good and healthful education, to accustom children to sleep
alternately upon different, and harder or softer couches, in various parts of
the house, more or less temperate, which consequently enables them to sleep
comfortably in a simple but clean bed, in whatever place or situation they may
find it.

Debilitated persons injure themselves much by sleeping during the day, against
the order of Nature, and keeping awake the greater part of the night. Daylight
is best adapted to active employments; and the gloom and stillness of the night
to repose. The evening-air which we inhale soon after sunset, and night-air in
general, which is vitiated in the country by the exhalations of plants, is very
detrimental to the delicate. The forced watchfulness of those who apply
themselves in the night to mental pursuits, is exceedingly prejudicial. A
couple of hours sleep before midnight is, according to old experience, more
refreshing than double the quantity after that period.

The question, whether to sleep after dinner be advisable, must be decided by a
variety of concurrent circumstances; custom, bodily constitution, age, climate,
and the like.

In a weak and slow state of digestion, after having taken hard or solid food,
we may indulge ourselves in a short sleep, rather than after a meal consisting
of such nourishment, as by its nature is easily concocted. But debilitated
young people especially should not sleep too much, though their weakness
incline them to it; for the more they indulge in it, the greater will be their
subsequent languor and relaxation.

Individuals of a vigorous and quick concoction may undertake gentle, but not
violent exercise, immediately after meals, if they have eaten food that is
easily digestible, and which requires little assistance, but that of the
stomach and its fluids. And even such persons, if they have made use of
provisions difficult to be concocted, ought to remain quiet after dinner, and
may occasionally allow themselves half an hour's sleep, in order to support
digestion.

To rest a little after dinner, is farther useful to dry and emaciated persons,
to the aged, and persons of an irascible disposition; to those who have spent
the preceding night uneasily and sleepless, or have been otherwise fatigued, in
order to restore regularity in the insensible perspiration; but in this case
the body must be well covered, that it may not be exposed to cold. Such as are
fond of sleeping at any time of the day, are usually more indolent and heavy
after it than before. A sleep after dinner ought never to exceed one hour; and
it is also much better sitting than lying horizontally; for, in the latter
case, we are more subject to fluctuations of the blood toward the head, and
consequently to headache.

Much depends upon the manner of lying in bed, and on the posture to which we
accustom ourselves. To lie on the back, with the arms over the head, prevents
the circulation of the blood to the arms, and is not unfrequently productive of
serious consequences. It is equally pernicious to lie in a crooked posture, or
with the breast very low and bent inwards; for the intestines are thereby
compressed and obstructed in their motions, and the blood cannot easily
circulate downwards; whence may arise giddiness and even apoplexy. Lying on the
back is equally improper, and produces frightful dreams, together with many
other inconveniences; the reverse posture is likewise noxious, as the stomach
is thus violently oppressed, the free respiration much impeded, and the whole
circulation of the fluids in the chest and abdomen wantonly prevented, to the
great injury of health.

The most proper posture, then, is on one side, with the body straight, the
limbs slightly bent (not stretched, because they ought to rest) so that the
body may lie somewhat higher than the legs. When the head is laid high, a short
sleep is more refreshing than a longer one when it is reclined too low. To
healthy people it is a matter of no consequence on which side they lie, and
they may safely, in this respect, follow their own choice. Some dietetical
observers allege, that it is better to lie in the evening on the right, and in
the morning on the left side; that in the evening the food may more readily
leave the stomach, and that afterward this organ may be better warmed by the
liver.

In the evening we should eat light food only, and that sparingly, wait for its
digestion, and consequently not lie down till two or three hours after supper.
The mind ought to be kept quiet and cheerful, previous to going to rest: we
should then, as much as possible, avoid gloomy thoughts, which require
reflection and exertion. It is therefore a pernicious and dangerous practice to
read ourselves asleep in bed. We would do much better, to exercise ourselves a
little before bedtime, by walking up and down the room.

Sleep without dreams, of whatever nature they may be, is more healthful than
when attended with these fancies. Yet dreams of an agreeable kind promote the
free circulation of the blood, the better concoction of food, and a due state
of perspiration. The contrary takes place in unpleasant dreams, which excite
anxiety, terror, grief, fear, and the like. In the latter case* they are of
themselves symptoms of irregularity in the system, of an approaching disorder,
or of an improper posture of the body. The functions of the body before
mentioned are impeded by such dreams; and the vital spirits, which ought to be
restored and cherished, are again dissipated by violent emotions, insomuch that
the body and the mind continue unrefreshed.

In order to preserve the body warm, we make use of feather-beds and covers: --
in summer, at least, we ought to sleep upon mattresses. It is a most essential
requisite to every person, who wishes to lead an agreeable, active, and useful
life, to provide himself in time with a proper couch. To insure all the
advantages which may be derived from this quarter, nothing is better than a
mattress filled with horse-hair, or, if cheapness be an object, with dry moss,
at least six inches thick. Several of such mattresses may be placed one above
another; the bolster ought to be well stuffed and elastic; in winter with
feathers, and during the summer with horse-hair, more or less high, according
to circumstances, but always so that the head may lie considerably more
elevated than the breast and the rest of the body.

The cover should never be tucked in too closely, that the access of external
air may not be altogether excluded. If we make use of a bedstead or a sofa
provided with steel springs, one of the mattresses above described, with a
similar bolster, and the light cover of a double blanket, will be found
sufficient. These beds are not only the most convenient for early risers, but
also the most conducive to health. The higher classes of society in Ireland
appear to be so well convinced of the salubrity of this mode of sleeping, that
their children, instead of being placed on enervating feather-beds, are
habituated to sleep upon bags filled with cut straw, with blankets laid over
the bags for softness, and but slightly covered. I understand, that this
praiseworthy practice is every day*becoming more general.

Indeed, there is no doubt that the muscles and nerves are more braced by a
proper elastic couch, than either by the most exquisite down of Norway, or the
most powerful tonic or strengthening remedies taken internally. Yet these
remarks are applicable only to the healthy state of the body, when Nature
requires no additional aid or precaution, in managing the organs of
perspiration -- Every bed ought to be so regulated, that it may slope down
imperceptibly toward the feet; and if the particulars before stated be
attended to, a healthy person will never sleep too long: he will generally
awake in six hours, feel himself refreshed, rise with cheerfulness, and be fit
to undertake any exertions, either of body or mind.

What has been remarked in a former Chapter on Dress, and the advantages
derived from covering the skin with animal wool, particularly in enervated and
infirm people, is likewise applicable here, with respect to the dress, and the
immediate covering of the skin, when in bed. Though we usually undress
ourselves as far as the shirt, partly for the sake of cleanliness, and partly
with the view of relieving the body from every pressure and encumbrance, and of
promoting a free circulation of the blood; yet we should be cautious, lest we
materially hurt ourselves by a sudden exposure to the air, when undressing,
especially after the hot and sultry days of summer. A long and commodious
nightgown of flannel would be a proper night dress; especially for those who
retire to their bed immediately after the bath, in order to preserve a gentle
degree of perspiration.

The head should not be covered with a warm flannel or worsted nightcap, as it
were to make it a vapour-bath; the thinnest cotton or linen cap being fully
sufficient. The consequences resulting from the pernicious practice of keeping
the head too warm, have been explained on a former occasion. The shirt-collar
should be loose, the wristbands open; and if from a bad habit we have been
accustomed to wear neckcloths during sleep, they should be tied as loosely as
possible. Persons who are naturally chilly in the lower extremities, or are
liable to pains of the stomach and abdomen, would do well to sleep in woollen
stockings, but not in the same which they have worn through the day.

The feather-beds, in which we usually sleep, are certainly hurtful in many
diseases, some of which they may even produce. For they absorb or imbibe the
perspired vapors thrown out of the body, without our being able to cleanse
them of these impurities, which are again re-absorbed and re-conducted through
the pores, to the great injury of health. For this reason, mattresses filled
with horse-hair, or moss, are in every respect preferable. But, as many
individuals have not sufficient resolution to use these, or are apprehensive of
the consequences attending a sudden change, they may at least cause their
feather-beds to be frequently and carefully shaken, aired in the sun, and
provided with a new covering. For the same reason, the bed ought not to be made
immediately after rising, as is generally practiced; but the clothes should be
taken off, spread out, and not laid on the bed, until the time of going to rest
draws near. Farther, it is highly improper to sleep in beds overloaded with
clothes* they heat the blood more than is consistent with health, and produce
an immoderate and enervating perspiration, which still more weakens the organs
already relaxed by sleep.

The custom of sleeping with the curtains drawn close, is pernicious to health,
because the copious exhalations which then take place, cannot be properly
dissipated, and are consequently again absorbed. It is also imprudent to hide
the head almost entirely under the bed-clothes. Persons who cannot sleep
without curtains, should tuck up the lower ends of them, or place them over
chairs, so that they may not lie close to the bed, but admit a more free access
of air; that side alone, which is next the wall, ought to be entirely covered
with the curtain.

For similar reasons, the large common sleeping halls, or wards in public
schools, as well as in hospitals, are extremely prejudicial to health; though
they may be necessary evils, and cannot be easily remedied in the great
seminaries of education. Neither the most healthy situation, with high, lofty,
and spacious apartments; nor the daily practice of airing and cleaning them,
are sufficient to counteract the bad effects arising from this baneful custom
of crowding so many persons together to breathe in a common and confined
atmosphere.

From these considerations, as well as in many other respects, the sleeping
together in one bed, whether children or adults, is at best a disgusting and
immoral custom; besides the positive disadvantages it has with respect to
health. Unless poverty or necessity render this custom unavoidable, it ought
not to be practiced, either among married or other persons, and still less
among children. It has been remarked, even in the domestic economy of barbarous
nations, that, in general, every individual has a separate couch.

The old custom of warming the bed also deserves to be condemned; as it has a
direct tendency to produce weakness and debility. This will be still more
dangerous, if it be done with a charcoal ^ire, which, by its poisonous vapors,
may prove very pernicious. A person who is accustomed to sleep in a cold bed,
will not feel much inconvenience in the severest cold; for, after being a short
time in bed, the natural warmth of the body will overcome it: as, on the
contrary, those who sleep in a warmed bed, will be the more liable to feel
cold, as soon as this artificial heat is dissipated.

If it can be avoided, the bed-room ought not to be on the ground floor, nor
toward the North. Many people prefer this situation in summer, on account of
the cool air; they should, however, consider that, in such an apartment, the
morning as well as the night-air, is damp and unwholesome. A bedchamber ought
to be exposed to the early rays of the sun, which awake man in a state of
health at a proper time, and enliven, strengthen, and incite him to leave the
bed, after having been refreshed by rest. It is, farther, more advisable to
endure a moderate degree of heat, which may be modified at pleasure, by various
means, than to inhabit damp and low-situated apartments, from which the
moisture cannot be easily dried up in summer.

A spacious and lofty room should always be chosen for a bedchamber; for small
closets and, above all, concealed beds are extremely objectionable. -- The
windows should never be left open at night; and as damp rooms are very
prejudicial to health, we ought to pay particular attention, that the bed may
not be placed near a damp wall. It is in every case preferable to place the bed
so, that all the sides of it stand free. This method of placing the bedstead,
in or about the middle of the room, has another advantage which, with timorous
persons, is perhaps of importance. It it well known, that a flash of lightning,
if it accidentally enter through a window, will take its direction along the
walls, and not touch any thing placed in the middle of a room.

Lastly, no candle or rush-light should be kept burning during the night in a
bed-room; for it not only vitiates the air in a very considerable degree, but
it disturbs and prevents the rest of those whose sleep is uneasy, particularly
the aged. In a dark apartment, sleep generally comes without much invitation;
as, on the other hand, the light of a candle stimulates the brain, consequently
the whole nervous system; and the approaching comforter, whose arrival we so
fondly wish, is thereby prevented, or easily interrupted, and banished to
calmer regions.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
ADVERTISEMENT TO THE FIRST EDITION.
THESE Lectures, with the exception of the Eighth and Ninth Chapters, were
delivered last winter In the months of January and February, 1798.
at Bath, and in the spring at Bristol, to numerous and respectable audiences.
The Author had no intention, at that time, to publish them; but as he found no
Work, in the English language, comprehending such a systematic view of the
various and important objects which came more immediately under his
consideration, and conceived that the dissemination of the rules selected by
him might be generally useful, he was induced to alter his resolution, and
submit them to the candor of the Public.

To many English and German writers he must acknowledge his obligations, in the
composition of his Work. Among the former, he has occasionally availed himself
of the excellent Writings of PRIESTLEY, on the subject of 'Air and Weather;' of
FOTHERGILL and VAUGHAN, on 'Dress,;' and of ARMSTRONG, CULLEN, and FALCONER, on
'Food and Drink.' To Dr. FOTHERGILL also, on the subject of 'Sleeping and
Waking,' he is much indebted, as well as to Mr. ADAMS'S useful Treatise on the
'Treatment and Preservation of the Eyes.'

Beside the valuable observations drawn from all these sources, he has been
greatly assisted by the opinions of several German writers, viz. INGENHOUZ,
HAHNEMANN, HUFELAND, MARCARD, SOEMMERING, UNZER, ZIMMERMANN, and others; having
derived considerable advantage from the general result of their respective
inquiries on the subject of Diet and Regimen.

Although it can scarcely be expected that a Work of this nature should be
perfect, or free from inaccuracy, the Author has spared no pains to render it
deserving of the public favor, and trusts it will be found a domestic guide
both to families and individuals.

Should the rules and cautions, interspersed throughout, tend, in the smallest
degree, to increase the knowledge of the inquisitive, dissuade the unwary from
injurious habits, or rescue the sensualist from the brink of destruction, the
exertions of the Author will be amply compensated.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE SECOND LONDON EDITION.
THE first Edition of these Lectures having met with a degree of approbation
beyond the most sanguine hopes of the Author, he has testified his grateful
sense to a discerning Public, not only by correcting and improving every page
of the Work, but likewise by enlarging and rendering it as complete as the
limits of a single volume would admit.

Many important and useful articles have been added, especially in the Fifth
Chapter, "Of Food and Drink." The principal new subjects the Reader will, on
consulting the Alphabetical Index, find under the terms -- Arrowroot --
Artichokes -- Asparagus -- Barley -- Beans -- Beet-root -- Cow-pox --
Consumption -- Exercise -- Figs -- Game -- Lobsters -- Manna-grass -- Metallic
Tractors -- Millet -- Oats -- Oil -- Olives -- Parsnips -- Rice -- Sago --
Salsafy -- Salt -- Skirret-root -- Smallpox -- Tamarinds -- Vinegar, etc. etc.

The quotations translated from Dr. Mead's "Medical Precepts," and inserted in
the conclusion of these Lectures, will be deemed interesting by every
reflecting mind.

To this edition the Author has added a " Postscript," to which he refers the
Reader with respect to the limited design of the present book, and the
practical tendency of a new work, "On the Dietetic Treatment and Cure of
Diseases;" which will contain the farther application of these Lectures in a
diseased state of the body.

With this view, he has thought proper to subjoin a series of Queries,
addressed to those patients who are anxious to give an accurate and
satisfactory account of their disorder, when consulting medical men, especially
if they cannot have the benefit of an interview.

LECTURES ON DIET AND REGIMEN: BEING A SYSTEMATIC INQUIRY INTO THE MOST
RATIONAL MEANS OF PRESERVING HEALTH AND PROLONGING LIFE: TOGETHER WITH
PHYSIOLOGICAL (...) CHEMICAL EXPLANATIONS, (...) CHIEFLY FOR THE USE OF
FAMILIES, IN ORDER TO BANISH THE PREVAILING ABUSES AND PREJUDICES IN MEDICINE.

BY A. F. M. WILLICH, M. D.

Qui stomachum regem totius corporis esse
Contendunt, vera nite ratione videatur;
Hujus enim validus tenor firmat omnia (...):
At contra ejusdem franguntur ^^ncta de^^ore.
SERENUS SAMMONICUS, De Medicina Praecepta saluberri^^. VOL. II. The First
Boston, from the Second London, Edition. Corrected and improved, with
considerable Additions.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY MANNING and LORING, For JOSEPH NANCREDE, No. 49,
Marlbro'-Street. 1800.

LECTURES, ON DIET AND REGIMEN.
CHAP. VII.
Of FOOD and DRINK; -- their Quantity, Quality, Proportion to each other, Time
of taking them, etc. -- Of SPICES. -- A Classification of the most usual
alimentary Substances, according to their individual Effect on Health.

ALTHOUGH it be certain, that animal life could not be supported without food
and drink, few individuals give themselves the trouble of reflecting, how the
very important function of assimilating our aliment is accomplished. That
office of the stomach, by which all living creatures are supported, deserves
the attention of every inquisitive mind. Were I not confined in my plan to the
relative salubrity of Food and Drink, without entering into physiological
disquisitions, how the digestive organs prepare and conduct the food from one
stage to another, till it is converted into chyle, and from that into blood, I
might amuse my readers with a variety of speculations and theories, none of
which are fully established; but such digressions, however entertaining or
gratifying to curiosity, would be of little service, either in making the
proper choice of aliment, or in ascertaining its wholesome or pernicious
qualities.

If, in the early periods of society, when men subsisted upon roots, plants,
and animal food, as they were promiscuously found, people did not reflect upon
the relative salubrity of things, we have no right to censure them; as they
often might have been starved, before they could have discovered their
qualities. But if we, in our present state of knowledge, neglect such
inquiries; if we indiscriminately ^eed on whatever is presented to our palate;
such conduct deserves severe animadversion. For, if man assume the right of
calling himself Lord of the Creation, it is a duty incumbent on him, to make
himself acquainted with the nature and properties of those substances, which so
essentially contribute to animal existence.

Hence it may be justly asked, what are the constituent parts of aliment -- how
are they to be distinguished -- are they of different kinds, or do they, with
all the difference of form and taste, still manifest the same properties,
powers, and effects -- do they promiscuously supply all the parts of the human
body, or are particular kinds of food more or less adapted to supply the wants
of different parts of the body -- and lastly, have all substances, we make use
of as food, an equal share in this nutritive principle?

Such are the questions, which must arise in every reflecting mind; and as the
preservation of the body depends so much on the manner in which the continual
waste is supplied, it is a matter of the first consequence, to choose the
substances which are most congenial to the different states and conditions of
the body.

An eastern Dervise was once asked by a wealthy Mohammedan, Of what service to
society is an order of men, who employ themselves in speculative notions of
divinity and medicine? -- If you were more cautious and temperate in your
meals, answered the Dervise; if you would learn to govern your passions and
desires, by a due attention to abstinence, you all might be sages, and have no
occasion for Dervises among you. But your appetite and aliment impair your
understandings!

In the consumption of food and drink we are liable to commit errors, both as
to their quantity and quality. The error in the quantity, however, is generally
the most detrimental. A small portion of food can be better digested and more
easily prepared into chyle, or that alimentary fluid, from which the blood
derives its origin, than a large portion of food, which injures the coats of
the stomach, and prevents them from exerting their force. Hence every satiety,
or superfluity, is noxious.

It is in infancy, and early age, that the foundation is laid for the many
diseases arising from indigestion, which are now found in almost every family.
If children are fed immoderately, and beyond the real wants of nature, the
first passages become too much distended, and their stomach by degrees acquires
an unnatural craving for food, which must be satisfied, whatever be the
consequence. These excessive supplies not only are unnecessary, but produce the
most serious and fatal disorders. There is a certain relation subsisting
between what is taken in, and what is lost by the body: if we eat and drink
much, we likewise lose much, without gaining any more by it, than we might do
by moderate meals. For that which affords the alimentary particles, is as it
were drowned by the current; and muscular energy is not only decreased, but in
a great measure destroyed. Yet eating too little would be going to the opposite
extreme, weaken the growth to bodily perfection, and eventually diminish the
digestive power of the stomach, by depriving it of its due share of exercise
and support.

Nature is easily satisfied, and is always best provided, if we do not intrude
upon her more than she is accustomed to. If we have, for some time, taken
little nourishment, nature becomes so habituated to it, that we feel
indisposed, as soon as the usual measure is transgressed; and both the stomach
and its digestive powers are thereby impaired.

The hardy countryman digests the crude and solid food, at which the stomach of
the luxurious citizen recoils. In order to strengthen the stomach, we ought not
to withhold from it what keeps it in proper exercise. But, for this purpose, we
should rather improve the quality, than increase the quantity of alimentary
substances. It is with this organ as with all other parts of the body: the more
exercise we give it, the more strength and vigor it acquires. Hence, it is
highly improper to leave off eating food of difficult digestion, as some people
are apt to do; for this is not the way of improving the energy of the body.

It would be a fruitless and impracticable attempt, to lay down fixed rules, by
which the respective salubrity or perniciousness of every species of aliment
might be determined, in its application to the individual. It has been before
observed, that such rules do not exist in nature; and that the particular state
and condition of the person, time, and circumstances, must serve as our guide.
Hence it may be considered as a general rule, that all incongruous mixtures and
compositions, for instance milk and vinegar or other acids, or milk and
spirits, are hurtful, by generating an acid and acrid whey in the stomach, and
at the same time producing an indigestible coagulated mass.

Having premised these introductory remarks, I proceed to treat

Of Food in particular.
1. As to its quantity. A much greater number of diseases originate, upon the
whole, from irregularities in eating, than in drinking; and, in the latter
respect, we commit more frequent errors with regard to quantity, than quality:
otherwise the heterogeneous mixture of provisions, with which we load our
stomachs, would disagree with all. This indeed but too often happens. One who
eats slowly, and a little only of a variety of dishes, will less injure his
stomach than another, who eats immoderately of one or two favorite articles,
and partakes of the others only for the sake of custom, or as a compliment paid
perhaps to a fair hostess. -- The gastric juice which is generated in the
stomach, is capable of dissolving and digesting the most diversified materials,
provided they be not unsuitably mixed; and a perfectly healthy stomach can
prepare a chyle, or a milky fluid, of the same nourishing principle, from all
eatable substances whatever.

The general rule then is, to eat as much as is necessary to supply the waste
suffered by the body; if we transgress this measure, we produce too much blood;
a circumstance as detrimental, though not so dangerous to life, as that of
having too little. If we were never to trespass the due limits of temperance,
our natural appetite would be able accurately to determine, how much food we
might consume, without diminishing our vivacity. But, from the usual physical
education of children, this can scarcely be expected in adults. We ought
therefore to pay strict attention to the state of those intestines, which serve
to prepare the alimentary fluid; and when these are in a relaxed or diseased
state, we should instantly begin to be more moderate in eating.

There are three kinds of appetite: 1st, The natural appetite, which is equally
stimulated and satisfied with the most simple dish, as with the most palatable;
2d, The artificial appetite, or that excited by stomachic elixirs, liqueurs,
pickles, digestive salts, etc.; and which remains only as long as the operation
of these stimulants continues; 3d, The habitual appetite, or that by which we
accustom ourselves to take victuals at certain hours, and frequently without a
desire of eating. -- Longing for a particular food is likewise a kind of false
appetite. -- The true and healthy appetite alone can ascertain the quantity of
food proper for the individual; if in that state we no longer relish a common
dish, it is a certain criterion of its not agreeing with our digestive organs.
If after dinner we feel ourselves as cheerful as before it, we may be assured,
that we have taken a dietetical meal. For, if the proper measure be exceeded,
torpor and relaxation will be the necessary consequence; our faculty of
digestion will be impaired, and a variety of complaints gradually induced.

The stomach being distended by ^^^^uent and violent exertions, will not rest
sa^^^fied with the former quantity of food; -- its (...) will increase with
indulgence in excess; (...) temperance alone can reduce it to its natu^^^
state, and restore its elasticity. Fullness (...) blood, and corpulency, are the
disagreeable effects of too much eating; which progressively relaxes the
stomach, and punishes the offender with headache, fever, pain in the bowels,
diarrhoea, and other disorders.

The more suddenly this expansion takes place, the more forcibly and
dangerously it affects the stomach; and its fibers, being too much extended,
are the more sensible of the subsequent relaxation. Slow eating, therefore,
preserves the fibers in a due state of elasticity. Hence, to eat slowly, is the
first maxim in Dietetics: the stomach suffering in this case but a very gradual
distension, as the food has sufficient time to be duly prepared by mastication.
He who observes this simple rule, will feel himself satisfied, only when he has
received a due proportion of aliment. But he who swallows his food too quickly,
and before it is perfectly chewed, will imagine he has eaten enough, when the
unmasticated provisions occasion a sense of pressure on the sides of the
stomach. -- The teeth are designed by nature to grind our food, and to mix it
with the saliva, produced by innumerable glands, and destined to promote its
solution.

A healthy appetite is also determined by the season, to the influence of which
the stomach is exposed, in common with the other viscera. Hence heat, in
general, relaxes and exhausts the body, from its tendency to dissipate the
fluids, or to diminish their quantity; and consequently the stomach cannot
digest the same portion of food in summer, which it does in winter. There are
however persons, who have the strongest appetite, and possess the most vigorous
digestive powers, in the extreme heat of summer. The bile of such individuals
is of a watery consistence, and too sparingly secreted; a defect, which is best
remedied by heat. Those who take more exercise in winter than in summer, can
also direst more food. But as individuals leading a (...) life usually suffer
in winter from a (...) state of digestion, owing to a want of exercise, they
ought to take less food in that season.

We call those substances nutritive, which restore and supply what has been
wasted. They conduct to the body homogeneous or assimilated parts, by means of
the intestinal canal, and by changing these parts into muscular substance or
flesh, or into the fluid form of blood. Since some alimentary articles
communicate their nutritive element sooner than others, as they contain coarser
or more delicate particles, which according to their nature are more or less
apt to be assimilated with the body, it follows, that all of them cannot be
equally nourishing.

Too little aliment debilitates the body, which thereby acquires less than it
loses by respiration; it hastens the consumption of life; the blood becomes
inert and rarefied; or is rendered acrid and liable to putrefaction. After long
fasting the breath is fetid, and the animal body becomes disposed to putrid
fevers. -- We can more easily digest a heavy meal, in four hours of accelerated
respiration and muscular action during the day, than in eight hours of sleep.
This circumstance has led mankind to make their principal meal about the middle
of the day. A person who sits up five or six hours after supper, will feel
himself much more inclined to take a second (...) to go to bed.

Abstinence readily induces (...) a fasting of twenty-four hours is (...) a
disgust and aversion to food, which (...) a symptom of putrescency, and is at
length succeeded by delirium. -- After taking for some time too little food,
the body is enfeebled; the vessels are not sufficiently supplied; their action
on the whole mass of the blood, and of the blood on the several vessels, is
interrupted; its free circulation is checked; and the smaller vessels
corrugate, so that the thinnest blood is no longer capable of pervading them,
as is the case in old age. When a person has suffered so much from extreme
hunger, that his fluids are already in a putrescent state, much food must not
be given him at once; for his contracted stomach cannot digest it. Such a body
must be supported with liquid nourishment, in small quantities, and be treated
altogether like a patient in a putrid or nervous fever. Hence, no animal food
of any kind, but subacid vegetables alone, can be given with propriety.

2. As to the quality of aliment, we must here investigate the nature of
Digestion. This function may be aptly divided into two different* processes:
Solution and Assimilation. Solution takes place in the stomach, where the food
is changed into a pulp, where it is dissolved according to its greater or less
solubility, and where its nourishing particles are absorbed. Assimilation only
begins, when the solution has already taken place in the stomach, when the
nutritive substance, or the alimentary juice, is inhaled by the absorbent
vessels, and conducted to the blood, by means of the lacteals. Assimilation,
therefore, is that function, by which the aliment is as it were animalized: and
hence it has been conjectured, that animal food is easier digested than
vegetable, as being more analogous to our nature, and more easily converted
into animal fluids.

There are articles of easy and of difficult digestion, in the animal as well
as in the vegetable kingdom: in both we find some substances, which are
completely indigestible, and which pass through the alimentary canal, without
affording any nourishment.

The most simple dishes are the most nourishing. The multiplied combinations of
substances, though they may please the palate, are not conducive to health. All
substances containing much jelly, whether animal or vegetable, are nourishing;
for this alone affords nutriment; and the hard, watery, and saline particles of
food cannot be assimilated or converted into chyle. Nourishing substances
would, indeed, be more conformable to Nature; but, as our appetite generally
incites us to eat somewhat more than is necessary, we should acquire too much
alimentary matter, and become too full of blood, if we were to choose only such
articles of food as contain a great quantity of jelly.

Dr. BUCHAN very justly observes, that the great art of preparing food is to
blend the nutritive part of the aliment with a sufficient quantity of some
light farinaceous substance, in order to fill up the canal, without
overcharging it with more nutritious particles than are necessary for the
support of the animal. This may be done either by bread or other farinaceous
substances, of which there is a great variety. Those, who are not employed in
hard labor or exercise, do not require such nourishing food as those, whose
nutritive fluids are in part consumed by muscular exertions and violent
perspiration. Such as have suffered frequent losses of blood, from whatever
cause, will best restore it by strong aliment; which, on the contrary, ought to
be avoided by the plethoric. Those, lastly, whose frame is weakened and
emaciated by irregularities and dissipation, should not attempt to eat much at
a time, but rather repeat their meals more frequently, at proper and regular
intervals.

Whether we ought to make use of articles of easy or difficult digestion,
cannot be determined by general rules: every person must attend to the effects,
which substances of different degrees of digestibility produce on his stomach.
The chyle, when prepared of substances not easily digestible, is solid and
concentrated, and consequently affords a substantial muscular fiber* but such
substances as the stomach cannot digest, ought never to be used as food.

It is an important rule of diet, to eat if possible of one kind of meat only,
or, at all events, to eat of that dish first which is the most palatable. The
stomach is enabled to prepare the best chyle from simple substances, and will
thence produce the most healthy fluids. And if we follow the second part of
this rule, we are in no danger of overloading the stomach. At a table
dietetically arranged, we ought to begin with those dishes which are most
difficult to be digested, and finish our meal with the most easy; because the
former require stronger digestive powers, and more bile and saliva, all of
which become defective toward the end of a heavy meal. The power of digestion
in the stomach is undoubtedly most vigorous and active, when that organ is not
too much distended; and the more coarse substances also require a longer time
for being duly assimilated.

To begin meals, as the French, Germans, and Scots generally do, with soups or
broths, is highly improper and noxious. These liquid dishes are ill calculated
to prepare the stomach for the reception of solid food; as they not only weaken
and swell it by their bulk and weight, but also deprive it of the appetite for
the succeeding part of the dinner. Every tension is attended with relaxation,
so that we imagine ourselves satisfied sooner than we are in reality. Besides,
broths and soups require little digestion, weaken the stomach, and are attended
with all the pernicious effects of other warm and relaxing drinks. They are
beneficial to the sick, to the aged, and to those who, from the want of teeth,
have lost the power of mastication; but for such persons they ought to be
sufficiently diluted, and not too much heated with spices; -- otherwise they
will be digested with some difficulty.

Many individuals are accustomed to spend the whole forenoon without breakfast,
and feel no inconvenience from it, while others of a more delicate stomach
could not bear such abstinence, without unavoidable cravings and debility. The
business of digestion is usually accomplished within three or four hours after
a meal; hence the stomach is empty at rising in the morning, and the body often
enfeebled by long fasting. Our breakfast should therefore consist of more solid
and nourishing substances, than are now generally used for that meal;
especially if our dinner is to be delayed till the late hours which modern
fashion prescribes. We should breakfast soon after we get up, dine about
midday, and not protract the hour of supper till the time which Nature points
out for rest.

A principal rule of diet is to take food with an easy and serene mind; hence
it is preferable to dine or sup in company: our food has thus more relish, it
agrees better with us, and we eat more slowly and cheerfully. But we ought not
to indulge ourselves in sitting too long at table, which is a ways pernicious
to health. For digestion takes place, even (...) we sit at table; and as the
stomach, when gradually supplied, craves for additional quantities of food,
especially when a variety of palatable dishes stimulates the appetite, we ought
to be much on our guard against these seductions. Hence it is most advisable to
make our dinner on one or two dishes; because we can eat more of a plurality of
dishes than of one or two only, and do not so easily perceive when the stomach
is overloaded. -- To read, or otherwise exercise the mind, during the time of
eating, is likewise improper.

Gentle exercise, before dinner or supper, is very conducive to increase our
appetite, by promoting the circulation of the blood. But too violent exercise
impairs the appetite, and weakens the powers of the stomach, by means of its
sympathy with the other parts of the body. In proof of this, we seldom see
people worn out with fatigue able to partake of their usual repasts. The
exercise, however gentle, ought to be over at least half an hour before dinner;
because it is hurtful to sit down to table immediately after great fatigue.

As to our conduct after dinner, it is scarcely possible to give rules that are
generally applicable, and much less so to every individual. From the
contradictory opinion of the most esteemed authors, they appear not to have
discriminated between the various states and conditions of animal life; and as
exercise was found to agree with some constitutions, and to disagree with
others, a diversity of opinions necessarily arose among those who were so
passionately fond of reducing every thing to general rules. In order then to
remove these difficulties, I think it necessary to observe, that though it be
apparently consistent with the instinct of nature to rest some time after
dinner, according to the example of animals, yet this time, as well as other
concurrent circumstances, deserves to be more precisely determined.

As soon as the food has entered the stomach, the important office of digestion
begins: the vigor of the organs exerted on this occasion ought certainly not
to be abridged by violent exercise; but muscular and robust people feel no
inconvenience from gentle motion about one hour after the heaviest meal. On the
contrary, it is highly probable that the abdominal muscles receive additional
impetus, by exertions of a moderate kind. But as the whole process of digestion
is of much longer duration than is generally imagined, the afternoon hours
cannot be employed advantageously to health, in any labor requiring strong
exertions.

The transition of the alimentary fluid into blood, which takes place in the
third or fourth hour after a meal, and in some people of a weak and slow
digestion much later, is always attended with some increase of irritability,
which, in persons of great sensibility, may degenerate into a painful sensation
or illness. At this time, therefore, nervous and hypochondriac persons are
frequently troubled with their usual paroxysms; they are seized with anguish,
oppression, and an inclination to faint, without any external cause. Persons in
this condition of body, as well as all febrile patients, and especially those
who are troubled with stomachic complaints, would act extremely wrong and
imprudent, to undertake any exercise whatever, before their victuals be
completely digested; as during digestion all the fluids collect toward the
stomach. In violent exercise, or in an increased state of perspiration, the
fluids are forced to the external parts, and withdrawn from the stomach, where
they are indispensable to assist the proper concoction.

As to the propriety of sleeping after dinner, we may learn from those animals,
which sleep after feeding, that a little indulgence of this kind cannot be
hurtful. Yet this again cannot be established as a general rule among men. For
the animals which sleep after food, are for the most part supplied with
articles of so very difficult digestion, and so hard in their nature, that
great digestive powers are required to convert them into alimentary matter.
Hence this practice can be recommended only to the nervous and debilitated, to
weakly persons in general, who are much employed in mental exercise, and are
past the middle age -- especially after a heavy meal, in hot weather, and warm
climates.

Experience, however, teaches us, that, in this respect, a short sleep, of a
few minutes only, is sufficient and preferable to one of longer duration; for,
in the latter case, we lose more by an increase of insensible perspiration,
than is conducive to digestion. -- But the position of the body is far from
being a matter of indifference. The best is a reclined and not a horizontal
posture, from which headache may easily* arise, when the stomach presses upon
the subjacent intestines, and the blood is thereby impelled to the head. The
old practice of standing or walking after dinner is so far improper, as it is
hurtful to take exercise, while the stomach is distended by food, the sensation
of which lasts at least for one hour.

In the primitive ages, people subsisted chiefly upon plants and fruits. Even
to this day, many sects and whole nations, the Bramins for instance, abstain
from the use of animal food. The ancient Germans, also, who were so renowned
for their bodily strength, lived upon acorns, wood apples, four milk, and other
productions of their then uncultivated soil. In the present mode of life, here
as well as on the Continent, a great proportion of the poorer class of
country people subsist chiefly on vegetables; but although they duly digest
their vegetable aliment, and become vigorous, yet it is certain, that animal
food would answer these purposes much better. Hence in countries where the
laboring class of people live principally upon animal food, they far excel in
bodily strength and duration of life.

A popular writer observes, that animal food is less adapted to the sedentary
than the laborious, whose diet ought to consist chiefly of vegetables.
Indulging in animal food renders men dull and unfit for the pursuits of
science, especially when it is accompanied with the free use of strong liquors.
This is so far true, but Dr. Buchan ought to have added, that the infirm, and
those who labor under complaints of indigestion, will suffer still more from
the use of vegetable substances, which by their peculiar nature produce too
much acid, and require stronger digestive organs, in order to be changed into a
good alimentary fluid.

Dr. Buchan farther observes, that consumptions so common in England, are in
part owing to the great use of animal food. To this assertion no one will give
his assent, who is acquainted with that class of men, who carry on the business
of butchers, among whom it is as rare to hear of a consumptive person, as it is
to find a sailor troubled with the hypochondriasis. I must quote another
observation of this gentleman, to which I cannot implicitly subscribe. Having
remarked, that the most common disease in this country is the scurvy; that we
find a taint of it in almost every family, and in some a very deep taint, he
says, -- that a disease so general must have a general cause, and there is none
so obvious, as the great quantity of animal food devoured by the natives. As a
proof, that scurvy arises from this cause, we are in possession of no remedy
for that disease equal to the free use of fresh vegetables. He likewise
remarks, that the choleric disposition of the English is almost proverbial, and
if he were to assign a cause of it, it would be their living so much on animal
food; and finally, that there is no doubt but this induces a ferocity of temper
unknown to men, whose food is chiefly taken from the vegetable kingdom.

There is much truth mingled with much fallacy in these assertions. I will
allow, that animal food predisposes people to scorbutic complaints, and that it
renders men more bold and sanguinary in their temper; (...) there are a variety
of other causes which produce a similar effect. Nor are the English (...)
choleric a people as the Italians and Tur^s, both of whom, though sparing in
the use of animal food, are uncommonly vindictive. It is farther not to be
imputed to the consumption of fleshmeat, or the want of vegetables alone, that
the scurvy is so frequent in this country, both on land and at sea. There
appears to me to exist a powerful cause, to which people pay very little
attention, and from which the scurvy more frequently derives its origin than
from any other; the difference of food being in fact only a concurrent cause.

If we consider the very sudden and frequent changes of temperature in our
climate; if we compare the present mode of living with that of our ancestors,
who did not interrupt the digestion of one meal by another, such as our rich
luncheons in the forenoon, and our tea and coffee in the afternoon, when the
digestive organs are, as it were, drowned in these favorite liquids; -- if,
farther, we reflect upon the irregular manner in which our time of repose is
arranged, so that we spend a great part of our life in the unwholesome
night-air, partly at late suppers, and partly in the modern practice of
traveling at night; -- if all these cricumstances be duly weighed, we cannot
be at a loss to discover a more general cause of scorbutic complaints, than
that of eating too much animal food.

After these reflections, it will not be difficult to comprehend, that the most
important of the human functions is materially injured, by these habitual
irregularities. I allude to the insensible perspiration which is so far from
being encouraged and supported by such conduct, that the noxious particles,
which ought to be evaporated, are daily and hourly repelled, again absorbed by
the lacteals, and reconducted to the mass of the circulating fluids. Here they
can produce no other effect than that of tainting the humors with acrimonious
particles, and disposing them to a state of putrescency and dissolution, which
is the leading symptom of scurvy. Upon the minutest inquiries among seafaring
people, as well as the inhabitants of the country, I have been informed, that
those individuals, who pay due attention to the state of their skin, by wearing
flannel shirts and worsted stockings, and by not exposing themselves too often
to night-air, or other irregularities, are seldom, if ever, troubled with
scurvy.

To return to the subject of animal food and its effects, it deserves to be
remarked, that a too frequent and excessive use of it disposes the fluids to
putrefaction, and, I believe in some sanguine temperaments, communicates to the
mind a degree of ferocity. Nations living chiefly upon the flesh of animals,
like the Tartars, are in general more fierce than others; and the same effect
is manifest in carnivorous animals: they emit a very disagreeable smell, and
both their flesh and milk has an unpleasant and disgusting taste. Even a child
will refuse the breast, when its nurse has eaten too much animal food. Those
who eat great quantities of meat, and little bread or vegetables, must
necessarily acquire an offensive breath. It appears, therefore, to be most
suitable and conducive to health, to combine animal with vegetable food, in due
proportions. This cannot be minutely ascertained, with respect to every
individual; but, in general, two thirds or three fourths of vegetables, to one
third or fourth part of meat, appears to be the most proper. By this judicious
mixture, we may avoid the diseases arising from a too copious use of either.
Much, however, depends on the peculiar properties of alimentary substances,
belonging to one or the other of the different classes, which we have now to
investigate.

Of Animal Food.
It may serve as a preliminary rule, that fresh meat is the most wholesome and
nourishing. To preserve these qualities, however, it ought to be dressed so as
to remain tender and juicy; for by this means it will be easily digested, and
afford most nourishment.

The flesh of tame animals is, upon the whole, preferable to game; and although
the latter be, in general, more mellow, and easier of digestion, it does not
contain the sweet jelly, and mild juices, with which the former is almost
uniformly impregnated.

By the usual mode of dressing victuals, they lose a considerable part of their
nutritious quality, and become thereby less digestible. Raw meat certainly
contains the purest and most nourishing juice. We do not, however, eat raw
flesh, but there are some substances which are frequently consumed in a state
nearly approaching to that of rawness. Such are the Westphalia hams, Italian
sausages, smoked geese, salted herrings, and the like.

Various modes of preparing and dressing meat have been contrived, to render it
more palatable, and better adapted to the stomach. By exposure to the air,
flesh becomes more soft, which obviously is the effect of incipient
putrefaction; for, by this process, the volatile particles of ammoniacal salt
are disengaged, and it is rendered more agreeable to the taste. Pickled and
smoked meats, It is remarkable, that smoked meat is more readily digested in a
raw than boiled state. Experience affords ample proof of this assertion,
especially in the articles of smoked hams and sausages; for the soft gelatinous
fluids which, by the joint processes of pickling and smoking, have been
effectually decomposed, or converted into a neutral substance consisting of
ammoniacal salt combined with animal jelly, are completely extracted by
boiling, so that little more than the dry fleshy fibers remain behind.
so commonly used in the northern and eastern countries of Europe, acquire an
unnatural hardness, and communicate a great degree of acrimony to the fluids of
the human body. By boiling, flesh is deprived of its nourishing juice, as the
gelatinous substance of the meat is extracted, and incorporated in the broth;
and it is thus converted into a less nutritive and more oppressive burden for
the digestive organs; because the spirituous and balsamic particles are too
much evaporated during the boiling. The broth indeed contains the most
nourishing part of it, but it is too much diluted to admit of an easy
digestion. A better mode of dressing meat is roasting, by which its strength is
less wasted, and the spirituous particles prevented from evaporating; a crust
is soon formed on its surface, and the nutritive principle better preserved.
Hence, one pound of roasted meat is, in actual nourishment, equal to two or
three pounds of boiled meat.

The boiling of animal food is frequently performed in open vessels; which is
not the best method of rendering it tender, palatable, and nourishing: close
vessels only ought to be used for that purpose. The culinary process called
stewing is of all others the most profitable and nutritious, and best
calculated to preserve and to concentrate the most substantial parts of animal
food.

When we expose articles of provision to the fire, without any addition of
moisture, it is called baking. That such articles may not be too much dried by
evaporation, they are usually covered with paste. Thus the meat, indeed,
retains all its nutritive particles, becomes tender and easily digestible; but
the paste is the more detrimental to the stomach, as it generally consists of
an undue proportion of butter, which cannot be readily digested in that state.
When meat is fried, it is in some degree deprived of its substance; but, if the
fire be strong enough, a solid crust will soon be formed on its surface, by
which the evaporation will be checked, and the flesh rendered mellow: the
butter, or other fat used to prevent its adherence to the pan, gives it a burnt
or (...) taste, and renders its digestion in the stomach rather difficult.

Vegetables are, in general, not so readily digested, as even hard and tough
animal substances; which from their nature are more speedily assimilated to the
body; but the flesh of young animals, with a proportionate quantity of
wholesome vegetables, is the diet best adapted to our system. The flesh of
fattened cattle is by no means wholesome; these animals lead a sluggish and
inactive life, and as they are surrounded in their dungeons by a bad and putrid
air, they consequently do not afford fluids salutary for the stomach.

Though fat meat is more nourishing than lean, fat being the cellular substance
of animal jelly, yet to digest this oily matter, there is required, on account
of its difficult solubility, a good bile, much saliva, and a vigorous stomach.
To prevent any bad effects, we ought to use a sufficient quantity of salt,
which is an excellent solvent of fat, and changes it into a saponaceous mass.

Luxury has introduced an unnatural operation, which makes the flesh of certain
animals at once delicate and nutritious; but the flesh of the same animals is
still more wholesome in their unmutilated state, before they have been suffered
to copulate. The mucilaginous and gelatinous parts of animals alone afford
nourishment; and according to the proportion of these contained in the meat, it
is more or less nourishing. We find mucilage to be a principal constituent in
vegetable, and jelly or gluten in animal bodies: hence farinaceous substances
contain the most of the former, and the flesh of animals most of the latter. A
substantial jelly, as for instance that of calf's feet, is more nourishing than
a thin chicken broth; but it is more difficult to be digested.

In summer, it is advisable to increase the proportion of vegetable food, and
to make use of acids, such as vinegar, lemons, oranges, and the like; the blood
being in that season much disposed to putresency. The man who continually takes
nourishing food, is liable to become fat and plethoric; while on the contrary
the parsimonious, or the religious fanatic, from their abstinence, become thin
and enfeebled: hence the medium, or a proper mixture of both vegetable and
animal nutriment, seems to be most conducive to health. I cannot sufficiently
recommend the following caution to those who are frequently troubled with a
craving appetite: the more food the stomach demands, it ought to be the more
sparingly furnished with strongly nourishing substances, in order to avoid
obesity, or fatness; and much vegetable food is in this case required, to
counteract that disposition to putrescency, which the frequent eating of
nutritive substances necessarily occasions.

There are people who feel the sensation of hunger in a painful degree, which
generally arises from too much acid being generated in the stomach. A vegetable
diet would be prejudicial to such individuals; they ought to increase the
proportion of animal food; and dishes containing oily substances, in general,
agree well with them. Bread and butter is useful to such persons, in order to
neutralize their acid acrimony, and at the same time, to change the fat into a
more soluble saponaceous substance. The cause of this acid is frequently a
weakness in the stomach, which cannot be cured in any other manner, than by
strengthening bitters, and articles of nourishment that are mildly astringent,
and promote warmth in the intestines; and in this respect, cold meat, as well
as drink, is preferable to hot.

The jelly of animals being the very substance, which renovates the solid
parts, is obviously serviceable and necessary to nourish the human body. As,
however, each kind of animal has its peculiar jelly and fat, which can be
nourishing only when assimilated to our nature by the digestive organs; and as
the different parts of animals require different degrees of digestion, it will
be necessary to enter into more minute inquiries, respecting these particulars.

Experience informs us, that the flesh and intestines of young animals afford a
thin, easily digestible, and nutritive jelly. Old animals, hard and tough
flesh, cartilages, sinews, ligaments, membranes, membranous thick intestines,
and the sinewy parts of the legs, produce a strong and viscid jelly, which is
difficult to be digested and assimilated to our fluids. The more healthy the
animal is, the stronger will be the jelly, and the more nourishing its fluids.
The most nutritious flesh is that of animals living in the open air, having
much exercise and a copious mass of blood, and particularly, if they are kept
in dry and warm places. The alkali contained in the flesh of carnivorous
animals is the cause of the bad nourishment it affords, and of the injurious
consequences attending its use. From the similarity in the structure of
quadrupeds to that of man, it may be conjectured, that their jelly is similar
to ours; that such as are fed upon milk give the best nourishment; and that the
flesh of female animals is more easily digested, but less nutritious than that
of the castrated males, which in every respect deserves the preference. After
quadrupeds, we may class birds, in point of nourishment; then fishes; next to
them amphibious animals; and lastly insects.

As animal food is strongly nourishing, it generates blood, fat, and spirituous
particles, in a much greater quantity than vegetable aliment. The activity and
courage of carnivorous animals prove, that the feeding upon flesh gives spirit
and strength, heats the body, and preserves the muscles in a lively state. For
these reasons, much animal food is improper for those of a full habit and
abundance of blood, for febrile patients, and those who are disposed to
hemorrhages or losses of blood. The phlegmatic, on the contrary, and those of
thin watery fluids, and a weak digestion, may with safety eat more animal than
vegetable food. -- Of the different kinds of flesh, game is most heating; that
of young domestic animals least; for instance, of calves and chickens,
particularly when they are eaten with vegetable substances containing an acid,
such as sorrel, asparagus, etc. That animal food disposes to putrescency, I
have before remarked; hence it ought to be sparingly used in summer, and in hot
climates. Persons, whose fluids already show a putrid tendency, and who are
reminded of it by frequent eruptions of the skin, or who are already corpulent,
should abstain from a too copious use of animal food.

I have also observed, that the flesh of carnivorous animals has an
extraordinary tendency to putrefaction, as is obvious from their fetid
perspiration; that it contains an acrimony and alkalescency foreign to our
nature; and that it does not afford mild nutriment. The flesh of granivorous
animals, partaking more of the vegetable principle, is less subject to
putrefaction; and though it be less nourishing, and less abounding in
spirituous particles than that of the former, yet it supplies us with a milder
and more congenial aliment.

The flesh of fishes, being, like the element in which they live, most distinct
from the nature of man, is of all others the least wholesome and nutritive.

The tame quadrupeds that suck the mother's milk, if they rest too much and are
quickly fed, do not afford a good and well-prepared food. In animals, which
have tender muscles and little exercise, those parts are probably the most
wholesome which are more in motion than others, such as the legs and head.

Poultry furnishes us with the most valuable aliment, as it has excellent and
well-digested fluids, from its more frequent exercise and constant residence in
the open and pure air. Some animals, when young, have tough and spongy flesh,
which is mollified and improved by age, and can be eaten only after a certain
time, such as eels and carp. Others are hard when young, and must be used
early, because that hardness increases with their age; as the haddoc, and many
other species of fish. The flesh of old animals, that have less muscular parts
than the young ones of the same species, is indigestible; and we may lay it
down as a general rule, that the more the flesh of an animal is disposed to
putrefaction, it is the more unwholesome.

Veal, although affording less nutriment than the flesh of the same animal in a
state of maturity, contains many nourishing and earthy particles, and produces
little or no disposition to flatulency: it ought, however, not to be brought to
market, till the calf is at least six weeks old, and fed, if possible, on the
mother's milk. Veal is not of a heating nature, and may therefore be allowed to
febrile patients in a very weak state, especially with the addition of some
acid; -- it is also the most proper food for persons who have a disposition to
hemorrhages. On account of the great proportion it contains of viscidity,
persons disposed to phlegm and complaints of the abdomen, ought to abstain from
its use. For these reasons, we recommend veal-broth, especially in pectoral and
inflammatory diseases. The lungs, the liver, and the tongue of veal, are less
viscous than the flesh; and being easily digested, soft, and mild, they are
very proper for sick persons and convalescents. No animal fat is lighter than
this; it shows the least disposition to putrescency; and it may therefore be
used, in preference to any other, by persons of a scorbutic taint. The fat of
veal should not be boiled; the operation of boiling softens its fibers too
much, dissolves the jelly, and renders it unfit for digestion. But, by
roasting, it becomes drier, and somewhat more solid; both the serous and thick
parts of the blood are incrassated in the external vessels, the fibers are
dried up, and a crust is formed, beneath which the fluids are moved, and
changed into vapor, by the continued application of heat. In this operation
all the fibers lie, as it were, in a vapourhath, and are perfectly softened
without losing any of the jelly. Roasting, therefore, may be considered as the
best mode of preparing this meat. Baking also forms a crust over it like
roasting, but the fat incrassated by heat may occasion inconvenience, as it
possesses an oily acrimony, and is with difficulty digested. For the same
reason, it is improper to eat the burnt crust of any meat, of which some people
are particularly fond, though it contains an empyreumatic oil, highly
pernicious, and altogether indigestible by the stomach. For roasting, the
mellow and juicy kidney-piece, or the breast of veal, deserves the preference:
the leg is too dry and fibrous; it requires good teeth to be well chewed,
renders the use of tooth-picks more necessary than any other dish, and is
frequently troublesome to the stomach. In short, veal does not agree well with
weak and indolent stomachs, which require to be exercised with a firmer species
of meat. When boiled, it is but slightly nourishing, and when we make a meal
upon veal alone, we soon feel a renewal of the cravings of the appetite. For
removing the acid from the stomach, veal is the most improper article of diet.
But to patients recovering from indisposition, first may be given veal-broth,
then roasted veal, and lastly beef; the properties of which we shall now
consider. A horrid custom has been introduced by luxury, of feeding calves
cooped up in boxes so small as to prevent all motion, and from which light is
totally excluded: by this cruel refinement their flesh is, by epicures, thought
to be rendered more white and delicate; but if humanity does not revolt at this
practice, those who have any regard for health should avoid the use of the
flesh of an animal reared in this unnatural and putrescent state.


Beef affords much good, animating, and strong nourishment; and no other food
is equal to the flesh of a bullock of a middle age. On account of its heating
nature it ought not to be used, where there is already an abundance of heat;
and persons of a violent temper should eat it in moderation. It is peculiarly
serviceable to hard-working men; and its fat is nearly as easily digested as
that of veal.

It deserves, however, to be remarked, that the tongue, the intestines or
tripe, and the sausages made of beef are more difficult of digestion than the
muscular part; and that it would be extremely improper to give them to nurses,
children, or lying-in women.

The meat of old bullocks, fed and kept in the stall, when unfit for labor, is
scarcely digestible; it is burdensome to the stomach, and contains, as well as
that of old cows, (which is still worse) no wholesome fluids. Though beef be
more frequently eaten boiled, yet it is more nourishing and digestible when
roasted. Finally, beef is almost the only species of animal food, with which
the stomach is not easily surfeited, and which is in proper season throughout
the whole year.

Pork yields a copious and permanent nourishment, which does not disagree with
the robust and laborious, but which, from its abundance of acrid fat, is not
wholesome to persons of a weak stomach or sedentary life; as these animals live
and are fed in sties without exercise, and in an impure air. From the want of
clean water, their flesh acquires a tough and strong consistence, and is
indigestible but by a strong and healthy bile. Persons who have impure fluids,
and a tendency to eruptions, as well as those who have wounds or ulcers, should
refrain from the use of pork; for this food will dispose them to inflammation
and gangrene: it is equally improper in a catarrhal state of the breast, in
weak stomachs, coughs, and consumptions.

The ancient physicians considered pork as the best and most nutritious meat,
if supported by proper digestive powers. But they were certainly mistaken in
this supposition; for, although its quality is such as renders a smaller
quantity of it necessary to satisfy the cravings of the stomach, yet veal and
beef, taken in increased proportions, afford equal, if not more nourishment,
and doubtless a more wholesome supply of animal jelly, than pork, under similar
circumstances of the individual, would produce. By allowing these animals clean
food, and the enjoyment of pure air and exercise, their flesh might be much
improved in salubrity; but the farmer is little anxious about the quality of
the meat, if he can produce it in greater quantity, which he is certain to
obtain from the present unnatural mode of feeding swine. People of delicate
habits may sometimes eat pork sparingly; but it is an erroneous notion that it
requires a dram to assist its digestion; for spirituous liquors may indeed
prevent, but cannot promote its solution in the stomach. It would be much
better to drink nothing after pork for a short time, as it is usually very fat,
and this fat is more subtle and soluble than any other, and has nothing in it
of the nature of tallow.

Pork, eaten in moderation, is easily digested. With those whose digestive
organs are weak, no other species of meat agrees in general so well, as a small
quantity of this. Hence the objections made against it relate more to the
quantity than to the quality or substance; for if it be eaten in too great
quantity, it is apt to corrupt the fluids, and to produce acrimony. We ought
therefore to eat it seldom and sparingly, and the appetite which many people
have for this food should be kept within moderate bounds. The most proper
additions to pork, are the accidulated vegetables, such as gooseberry or
apple-sauce; which not only gratify the palate, but correct its properties,
neutralize, in a manner, its great proportion of sat, and thus operate
beneficially on the alimentary canal. There is little to be apprehended from
the worms in swine, which, according to a late discovery of the celebrated
Naturalist GOTZE, in Germany, are natural to these animals. They reside in the
cartilaginous vesicles of the liver, and when these vesicles burst in very hot
weather, while the worms are yet extremely small, they pass into the blood with
other fluids, and gradually increase in size. But there is no instance, that
they have produced diseases, unless arising from disgust. Should it however, be
found, that these animalculae become visible externally, and in great
quantities, the butchers ought not to be permitted to kill such hogs, as the
flesh easily a^^^ires an uncommon acrimony, is much disposed to putrify, and
consequently, improper to be used as food.


The flesh of wild hogs, as they have more exercise than the tame, and do not
live upon substances so impure and corrupted, is more palatable, more easily
digested, less tough, not so fat, and on account of their residence in the open
air, is, like all game, purer, but more liable to putrefaction.

Smoaked hams are a very strong food. If eaten at a proper time, they are a
wholesome stimulus to the stomach; but boiling them renders the digestion still
more difficult. -- In salting any kind of meat, much of its jelly is washed
away, the fibers become stiff, and thus heavier for the stomach. The salt
penetrates into the jelly itself, prevents its solution in the alimentary
canal, and consequently makes it less conducive to nutrition. -- By smoking,
the fibers of meat are covered with a varnish, the jelly is half burnt, the
heat of the chimney occasions the salt to concentrate, and the fat between the
muscles to become rancid; so that such meat, although it may stimulate the
palate of the epicure, cannot be wholesome.

Sausages, whether fried or boiled, are a substantial kind of nourishment; they
require, therefore, a strong bile to dissolve them, and a good stomach to
digest them. They are not of an acrid nature, provided they have not too much
pepper in their composition, and be closely ^illed, so as to contain no air.
Blood Sausages, usually called Black Puddings, consisting of bacon and
coagulated blood, which is totally indigestible, are a bad and ill-contrived
article of food; and still more so, if they have been strongly smoked, by which
process the blood becomes indurated, and the bacon more rancid: thus prepared,
nothing can be more pernicious and destructive to the best fortified stomach.
The spices usually added to sausages, correct, in some degree, their hurtful
properties, but are insufficient to counteract the bad and highly disagreeable
effects of rancid substances.

Bacon is chiefly hardened fat, accumulated in the cellular texture under the
skin, and is of all meat the most unwholesome; it easily turns rancid in the
stomach, or it is so already by long hanging, and is particularly pernicious to
those who are subject to the heartburn.

Lard, a softer fat collected from the entrails and the mesentary of hogs,
becomes easily rancid, and is otherwise relaxing to the digestive organs: for
which reasons, it is seldom used in English cookery.

The mutton of sheep fed on dry pastures is a better and more nourishing food
than that of others reared in moist places. Those also fed upon the seashore
are excellent meat, the saline particles which they imbibe giving at once
consistency and purity to their flesh. The flesh of rams is tough and
unpleasant, but that of ewes and still more that of weathers, is of a rich,
viscous nature. Young mutton is juicy and easily digested, but it is rather
tough, and has not that balsamic alimentary juice peculiar to sheep above a
certain age. The best mutton is that of sheep not less than three, and not
above six years old. Under three years of age, it has not attained its
perfection and flavor.

A roasting piece of mutton ought to be exposed to the open air for several
days, according to the weather and season; it affords then a palatable dish,
which is easily digested, and agrees with every constitution. But the fat of
mutton is almost indigestible; for it easily coagulates in the stomach, and
oppresses that organ: hence the lean part of mutton is more nourishing and
conducive to health. -- The feet of this animal are nourishing, on account of
their jelly, and are of great service for injections, in those diseases which
originate from acrimony in the intestines.

Lamb is a light and wholesome food, not so nutritious as mutton, but extremely
proper for delicate stomachs. The vegetables most proper to be eaten with lamb
are those of an acidulated nature, as gooseberries, forrel, and the like. It is
fashionable to eat this meat when very young; but a lamb that has been allowed
to suck six months, is fatter and more muscular, and in every respect better,
than one which has been killed when two months old, and before it has had time
to attain its proper consistency.

House Lamb is a dish, prized merely because it is unseasonable. Like all
animals reared in an unnatural manner, its flesh is insipid and detrimental to
health.

The flesh of Goats is hard, indigestible, and unwholesome; hence the meat of
kids only is esculent, being more easily digested, and yielding a good
nourishment.

The flesh of Deer (Venison), and that of Hare, contain much good nutriment;
but, to the detriment of health, these animals are generally eaten when half
putrified, though they are naturally much disposed to putrescency. When
properly dressed, they afford a mellow food, and are readily assimilated to our
fluids. But as wild animals, from their constant motion and exercise, acquire a
drier fort of flesh than that of the tame, it should never be boiled, but
always ought to be roasted or stewed. From the same cause, the fluids of wild
animals are more heating, and more apt to putrify, than those of the domestic.
Persons, therefore, who already have a predisposition to scurvy or other putrid
diseases, should not eat much game, particularly in summer. This pernicious
tendency of game may be corrected by the addition of vinegar, acid of lemons,
or wine; salad also is very proper to be eaten with it. Those parts of wild
animals, which have the least motion, are the most juicy and palatable: the
back, for instance, is the best part of a hare.

The lungs of animals contain nothing but air and blood vessels, which are very
tough, solid, difficult to be digested, and afford little nourishment. Besides,
on account of the encysted breath, and the mucus contained in them, they are in
reality disgusting. The liver, from its dry and earthy consistence, produces a
vitiated chyle, and obstructs the vessels; hence it requires a great quantity
of drink, and ought never to be used by the plethoric: the blood vessels and
biliary parts adhering to it, are particularly disagreeable. The heart is dry,
scarcely digestible, and not very nourishing. The kidneys also are acrid, hard,
tough, and not easily digested by the delicate. These intestines, however, of
young animals, such as calves and lambs, produce aliment sufficiently wholesome.

The fat and marrow of animals afford, indeed, solid and elastic alimentary
juice, increase the blood and fluids, but are difficult to be digested; they
require a powerful stomach, perfect mastication, sufficient saliva and bile,
and agree best with persons who take much bodily exercise. If not duly
digested, they occasion diarrhoea, weaken the stomach and the bowels, stimulate
too much by their uncommon acrimony, and easily turn rancid, especially when
eaten together with meat much disposed to putrefaction. They are apt to destroy
the elastic power of the first passages, as well as of the whole body, to
produce the heart-burn, cramp of the stomach, and headache, particularly in
irritable habits, and, at length, to generate an impure and acrimonious blood.

The blood of animals is completely insoluble, consequently in no degree
nourishing.

The milk is of very different consistence and properties, not only according
to the different kinds and species of animals, but also in the same species, in
consequence of the difference in feeding, constitution of body, age, time of
milking, and so forth. Milk takes the lead among the articles of nourishment.
It affords the best nutriment to persons whose lacteals and blood vessels are
too weak for deriving nourishment from other provisions; because it is already
converted into an alimentary fluid in the intestines of an animal.

Nature has appointed this nutritive substance, milk, as the food of children;
because infants, on account of their growth, require much nourishment. From
this circumstance, we may also conclude, that milk is easily digested by
healthy stomachs, since at this early age the digestive powers are but feeble.
Milk-porridge, however, as well as those dishes in the composition of which
milk and flour are used, have a manifest tendency to obstruct the lecteals or
milk-vessels of the intestines and the mesentary; a circumstance which renders
them extremely unwholesome, particularly to children. Milk, although an animal
production, does not readily undergo putrefaction; as it is possessed of the
properties of vegetable aliment, and turns sooner (...) than putrid. It affords
a substantial alimentary fluid; and hence it is of service to persons enfeebled
by dissipation of disease.

As the milk of animals contains more cream than that of the human breast, it
ought to be diluted with water, when given to infants. It combines both
saccharine and oily particles, and is a very serviceable article of diet, in a
putrescent state of the blood, in inveterate ulcers, and in the scurvy. It is
well calculated to assuage rigidity, cramps, and pains, being a diluent and
attenuating remedy, especially in the state of whey; it promotes perspiration
and evacuation in general, and is highly beneficial in spitting of blood,
hysterics, hypochondriasis, dysentery, inveterate coughs, convulsive
affections, the putrid sore throat, and in complaints arising from worms. Milk
is also used for fomentations, baths, emollient injections, and washes for
inflamed and fore parts. If intended as a medicine, it should be drunk
immediately or soon after it comes from the cow. Through boiling, and even by
long standing, the best and most nutritious balsamic particles evaporate.

The milk to be employed for diet in diseases ought to be taken from healthy
and well-nourished animals; for we see in children how much depends on the
health of the mother, and how suddenly they suffer from an unhealthy or
passionate nurse. In Spring and Summer, the milk is peculiarly good and
wholesome, on account of the salubrious nourishment of herbs. In Winter it is
much inferior. It is farther necessary, that the animal furnishing the milk
should be kept in the free air, and have daily exercise. In order to obtain
good milk, it would be advisable, for persons who have the opportunity, to
keep a cow; for, besides the adulteration of that which is sold, cows are
frequently milked at an improper time, by which the milk is much injured, and
cannot be wholesome.

The best milk is obtained from the cow at three or four years of age, about
three months after producing the calf, and in a serene Spring morning. Good
cow's milk ought to be white, without any smell; and so fat, that a drop being
allowed to fall on the nail will not run down in divisions. It is lighter, but
contains more watery parts than the milk of sheep and goats; while, on the
other hand, it is more thick and heavy than the milk of asses and mares, which
come nearest the consistence of human milk. Ewe's milk is rich and nourishing;
and it yields much butter, which is so unsavory, that it cannot be eaten. Both
this and goat's milk produce much cheese, which is tough, strong, pungent, and
difficult to be digested.

As goats are fond of astringent herbs, their milk is superior in strength to
that of other animals; hence it has been sometimes used with the most happy
success in hysteric cases. Goat's whey and ass's milk are chiefly used in
pulmonary consumptions; where ass's milk cannot be got, that of mares may be
used as a substitute. Artificial ass's milk, not inferior in its properties to
the natural, may be made by the following process* -- Take of eryngo-root or
sea-holly, and pearl barley, each half an ounce* liquorice-root three ounces;
water two pounds or one quart; boil it down over a gentle fire to one pint,
then ^^^ain it, and add an equal quantity of new cow's milk.


Milk consists of caseous, butyraceous, and watery parts; that which contains a
well-proportioned mixture of the three, is the most wholesome. But this mixture
is not always met with in due proportion -- frequently the two first, namely,
cheese and butter, predominate; and in this case it affords indeed a strong
food, but is difficult of digestion. If the water form the greatest proportion,
it is then easily digested, but less nourishing. This is particularly the case
with ass's milk, which, more than any other, affects the urine and stool, while
it has a tendency to purify the blood.

On account of the warmth, and the mechanical process of the digestive organ,
joined to the chemical properties of the acid generated in it, milk necessarily
coagulates in every stomach. The caseous part is dissolved, and diluted by the
admixture of the digestive liquors, and thus prepared for being changed into a
pure chyle or milky fluid. Indeed, it makes no difference, whether we take
cream, cheese, and whey in succession, or whether we consume them united in the
mass of the milk: in the former case, the separation takes place without, and
in the latter within the stomach.

It is however improper to eat acid substances together with milk, as this mass
would occasion fermentation and corruption: while, on the contrary, the natural
coagulation is only a separation of the constituent parts, not a transition of
this mild fluid into the stage of acid fermentation; for this is prevented by
the saponaceous digestive liquors, though the milk itself be coagulated.

Yet milk is not a proper food for the debilitated, in all cases; nay, under
certain circumstances, it may even be hurtful. It does not, for instance, agree
with hypochondriacs; as it occasions cramp of the stomach, cholic, heartburn,
and diarrhoea. Febrile patients, whose weak organs of digestion do not admit of
nutritive food, and whose preternatural heat would too easily change the milk
into a rancid mass, must abstain from it altogether. It disagrees also with the
plethoric, the phlegmatic, and the corpulent; but particularly with tipplers,
or those addicted to strong spirits. Its butyrous and cheesy parts may obstruct
digestion and oppress the stomach.

Lastly, sour milk is unfit for use, on account of the chemical decomposition
which has taken place in its constituent parts, and because it can hardly be
digested by the most powerful stomach: even sweet milk ought not to be eaten
together with flesh meat, and in most cases the whey is preferable to the milk.

With these exceptions, milk is an excellent species of diet, which does not
require strong digestive organs, unless a variety of other substances be eaten
along with it. On the contrary, persons much reduced in bodily vigor have
received benefit, and in a great measure been cured, by eating milk only. We
daily observe that children at the breast, with the natural inclination to
acidity and viscosity, feel its bad effects only, when, together with milk,
they are fed upon cakes, pastry, gingerbread, and other trash. Milk being free
from all acrimony, produces wholesome, light, and sweet blood. Sugar and salt
are almost the only proper spices to be added to it.

Cream is exceedingly nourishing, but too fat and difficult to be digested, in
a sedentary life.

Butter possesses at once all the good and bad properties of expressed
vegetable oils; it is the sooner tainted with a rancid bitter taste, if it be
not sufficiently freed from the buttermilk, after churning, -- Bread and butter
require strong and well-exercised powers of digestion. -- It is a most
pernicious food to hottempered and bilious persons, as well as to those of an
impure stomach. The good quality of butter is marked by a very fat shining
surface, yellow color, agreeable flavor, and sweet taste. I am disposed to
think it would be beneficial to society, if* the making of butter were strictly
prohibited, as well as the importation of salt butter into every civilized
country, where the hurtful properties of it are sufficiently understood. --
Melted fat, or the drippings of baked and roasted meat, is equally, if not more
pernicious to the stomach, than even stale butter, and both ought to be used
only for greasing cart wheels, and not for injuring human organs.


Butter-milk is a species of whey, but contains a great number of butyrous
particles. If we drink it while new and sweet, it is refreshing and cooling.

Before I quit the subject of milk, I cannot omit remarking, that this fluid,
besides the qualities before enumerated, contains some spirituous parts, in a
latent-state, with which our chemists are little acquainted. And although these
parts cannot be disengaged from the milk, and exhibited in a separate form, yet
it is certain, that the Persians, and other inhabitants of the East, prepare a
kind of wine from milk, which possesses all the properties of intoxicating
liquors. Such is the report of respectable travelers; but I am inclined to
suspect, that these Orientals make some addition to the sweet whey, after the
caseous parts are separated from it, by which they induce a vinous
fermentation. Whether they add honey, sugar, or any mucilaginous vegetable,
containing the saccharine principle, I shall not attempt to decide: but it is
well known, that the Chinese ferment and distill a liquor from a mixture of rice
and veal, which is not unpleasant when new.

Cheese is obtained from the tough part of the milk, which subsides in
coagulation, and which must be completely freed from the whey. All cheese is
difficult to be digested, being the coarsest and most glutinous part of the
milk, which the healthy and laborious only can concoct in their stomach. To
others, it is too heavy; it imparts a thick and acrid chyle to the blood; it
hardens in a weak stomach, and accumulates an indurated earthy lump. When eaten
new, in any considerable quantity, it corrupts* the fluids; and if old, it
becomes putrid. In small quantities after dinner, it can do no great harm, but
it is absurd to suppose that it assists digestion; its effects, at best, being
of a negative kind, that is, by producing a temporary stimulus on the stomach:
and even this is the case only with sound old cheese which is neither too fat,
nor too far advanced in the process of putrefaction.

Toasted cheese, though more agreeable to some palates than raw, is still more
indigestible. Cheese, if too much salted, like that of the Dutch, acquires,
when old, a pernicious acrimony. The green Cheese of Switzerland, which is
mixed with a powder of the wild Melilot, or the Trifolium Melilotus, L., and
the milder Sage-Cheeses prepared in England, are the almost only kind which may
be eaten without injury; and even these should be used in moderation. To show
the strongly viscid quality of cheese, and what powers of digestion it must
require to assimilate it to our fluids, I shall mention a composition which may
be useful, as the strongest cement yet contrived, for mending china cups,
glasses, and the like. A piece of Cheshire or Gloucester cheese is boiled in
three or four different waters, till it form a soft and elastic mass, freed of
the whey and other extraneous ingredients. After having expressed all the water
from this mass, and while yet warm, it must be gradually rubbed upon a piece of
marble, such as is used by colour-men; and as much unslacked or quicklime in
powder must be added, as will be absorbed by the cheese, without making it too
hard. This compound forms the strongest possible cement; if allowed to dry
slowly, it is able to withstand fire as well as water.


Birds, as they move in the purest and most healthy atmosphere, possess the
best prepared and most wholesome alimentary substance; yet the flesh of birds,
though more easily digested, is less nourishing than that of quadrupeds; as on
account of their constant exercise the whole winged tribe have drier muscles,
consequently a less nutritious juice. Those birds particularly, which subsist
upon worms, insects, and fishes, are not wholesome; and if they frequent swampy
and filthy places, their flesh will afford meagre and impure nourishment.

Some parts of fowls are less wholesome than others. The wings of those whose
principal exercise is flying, and the legs of those that generally run, are the
driest parts of their bodies: hence the breast is, in all, the softest and most
nutritive part. Young poultry is preferable to that of some years old, which
have very tough muscles, and are heavier to the stomach.

Birds living upon grain and berries are in all respects the best; next, those
feeding upon insects; and last of all, that class of birds which preys and
subsists upon fishes. These indeed, like all other animals, whose proper food
is flesh, are eaten only by savage nations, wild and tame ducks and geese
excepted; which, by their strong flesh, and the inclination of their fluids to
putrescency, are less wholesome than any other bird. Water fowl afford the
least beneficial food. In general we find winged animals out of season in
Spring; partly because most of them are then pairing, and partly on account of
the long journeys of those that are birds of passage, by which they become
leaner than at any other time of the year; yet some birds of passage do not
arrive in this climate till toward Autumn.

It is remarkable, that most birds, when taken from their wild state, and fed
in captivity, such as partridges, larks, and others, lose much of their
peculiar flavor, which is also the case with wild quadrupeds. Yet those tame
and domesticated fowls and animals, that are well fed in yards and stalls, are
generally more fat and muscular than those which are obliged to seek their own
food. Old fowls are the most serviceable for broth; or they might be boiled in
close vessels, where they can macerate for some hours, till they are completely
softened by the steam. Fowls lose much of their fine flavor, if boiled; they
are therefore best roasted, except the smaller kinds, which ought to be baked.

All birds living upon grain and berries afford good nutriment, except geese
and ducks. The flesh of the goose is unwholesome, especially when fed in small
enclosures, without exercise; which practice is sometimes carried so far, as
cruelly to n^il the animal to a board through the feet, to prevent its motion.
Its fat is almost totally indigestible: its flesh produces a very obvious and
bad effect upon wounds and ulcers. It is also pernicious to those who are
disposed to inflammatory diseases, and to cutaneous eruptions. -- A young hen,
or chicken, is a very wholesome dish; its vegetable aliment produces a mild and
sweet chyle; and the whiteness of its flesh shows its excellent quality. As it
is easily digested, it is a dish to be recommended to the weak and debilitated;
and it agrees best with individuals of an acrid and mucous tendency, or such as
are troubled with biliary and stomachic disorders.

The Capon is one of the most delicate dishes; if eaten when young, he yields a
strong and good chyle; his flesh is not of a heating nature, is not disposed to
putrescency, and the fat itself is easily digested. Turkeys, as well as Guinea
or India fowls, yield a strong aliment, but are more difficult of digestion
than the capon; particularly the legs, wings and fat. These birds, when
roasted, are usually filled with some kind of heavy pudding, which is a
favorite morsel with many, but requires the strongest digestive powers. -- The
old prejudices, that the flesh of capons is productive of the gout, and that of
sparrows brings on epileptic fits, are too absurd to require refutation.

Among the birds subsisting on insects, there are few eaten, except the various
kinds of snipes and starlings. All of them, without exception, consist of hard,
unsavory, and scarcely digestible flesh.

It would be useless to enumerate the various birds living upon fish, which are
eaten in other countries. They all have a taste of fish, and afford a poor
aliment. The ducks and geese only are eaten in Britain: of these the former
afford the better nourishment, as they are generally not so abundantly fat as
the latter, and are permitted to move about in the open air. But they ought not
to be suffered to repair to stagnant waters, which they swallow, and which
taint their fluids and flesh with qualities detrimental to health.

Next to milk, no nutriment is so simple and salutary as that of bird's eggs,
among which those of hens justly deserve the preference, in respect of
nourishment, taste, and digestion. The albumen, or the white of eggs,
corresponds to our serum, or the water of the blood; it is dissolved in a warm
temperature, but considerable heat makes it hard, tough, dry, and insoluble.
The yolk of eggs is more soluble, contains much oil, and is uncommonly
nourishing, but has a strong tendency to putrefaction: hence eggs must be eaten
while fresh. People of a weak stomach ought to eat no kind of food easily
putrescible, consequently no eggs. To those, on the contrary, who digest well,
a fresh egg, boiled soft, (or rather stewed in hot water, from five to ten
minutes, without allowing it to boil) is a very light, proper, and, at the same
time, nourishing food.

Hard-boiled eggs, fried eggs, pan-cakes, and all artificial preparation of
eggs, are heavy on the stomach, corrupt our fluids, and are unwholesome. The
eggs of ducks and geese ought not to be eaten, but by persons of the most
active and powerful stomachs. All eggs require a sufficient quantity of salt,
to promote their solution in the digestive organ; yet butter renders them still
more difficult of digestion: hence it is equally absurd and pernicious to use
much butter, with a view to soften hard boiled eggs. We cannot be too
circumspect in the use of eggs, as to their freshness; for there are examples,
of persons, after having used corrupted, or only tainted eggs, being seized
with putrid fevers. Various modes of preserving eggs have been contrived in
domestic life. To prevent the external air from pervading the egg, is the
principal requisite. With this intention some smear them with butter, others
pack them in bran or common salt; the farmers in Germany suspend them in fresh
river-water, by means of a net; but all these methods are troublesome and
uncertain. The best way of preserving them to any length of time, is to place
them in a very strong limewater, to leave some lime at the bottom of the
vessel, and if the water should become turbid, to pour it off and supply it
with a fresh infusion. This may be done with boiling water, to dissolve more of
the lime; but it must be allowed to become perfectly ^old before the eggs are
placed in it.

I shall here take notice of a method lately contrived to preserve animal and
vegetable substances, to almost any length of time, without salting or
pickling. A Mr. DONALDSON has obtained his Majesty's Letters Patent, for
inventing a powder, which is said to possess the extraordinary virtues of
preserving the flesh of animals, as well as vegetable roots, to an indefinite
length of time. If this be true, (though I am much inclined to doubt it) it is
easy to conceive how the Egyptian mummies could be preserved for several
thousand years. Our East and West India vessels may now save themselves the
trouble of taking live stock on board.

In order to afford an opportunity of judging of the merits of Mr. Donaldson's
powder, or of giving it a fair trial, I shall briefly state its component
parts, as recorded in the Patent -- Any quantity of vegetable gum, such as Gum
Arabic, or that of cherry-trees, in fine powder, is mixed with an equal
quantity of fine flour of wheat or barley: this is made into a paste, and baked
in an oven, contrived for that purpose, with a very gentle heat, so as to
prevent it from forming a crust. The dry mass is again reduced to a sine
powder, and this is the great and astonishing preservative. -- Either animal or
vegetable substances surrounded with this powder, and packed in close boxes in
that state, according to the professions of the Patentee, keep fresh, and free
from corruption, for almost any length of time. -- Relata refero.




Fish, though of a tender flesh, afford upon the whole but a weak nourishment.
They are more or less difficult to digest, according to the different kinds of
water in which they live. Being of all animal substances the most putrescible,
they are much inferior in quality to birds and quadrupeds, on which account
they ought not to be eaten by febrile patients and convalescents. Their fat is
still more insoluble and indigestible than that of other animals, and readily
turns rancid. On account of their indifferent qualities, no satiety is more
noxious than that of fish.

Acid sauces and pickles, calculated to resist putrefaction, render fish
somewhat better, and more wholesome for the stomach, while butter has a
tendency to prevent digestion, and to promote the corruption of their flesh. On
the contrary, spice and salt, used in moderate quantities, stimulate the fibers
of the stomach to exert their action, and facilitate the digestive process.

Fish dried in the open air, and afterward boiled soft, are easily digested;
but all salted seafish, as well as smoked fish, are injurious to the stomach,
and afford little nutrition. The same remark, though in an inferior degree,
applies to fish preserved in vinegar and spice. In general, the heads and tails
containing the least fat, are the lightest parts for digestion, as on the
contrary the belly is the heaviest. Such as have a tender flesh are sooner
digested than those of a hard and tough consistence.

The soft and mucilaginous fishes, like the eel, are partly composed of an oily
slime, partly of tough fibers, and are consequently not easily digested. Those
living in ponds, ditches, and other standing waters, are certainly less
wholesome than river fish, whose exercise is greater, and whose natural element
is purer. For standing water easily putrifies, and the fish lodging in the mire
of such reservoirs, continually feed upon the putrid parts. But the same kind
of river fish is also of different qualities, according to their different
nourishment. Thus, those caught in rivers contiguous to great towns, are less
salubrious than others; because they necessarily receive great quantities of
the impurities thrown into such rivers.

Salt Water fish are perhaps the best of any, as their flesh is more solid,
more agreeable and healthy, less exposed to putrescency, and less viscid. These
excellent qualities they possess when fresh; when salted, they have all the
properties of salt-flesh, and consequently its disadvantages. With respect to
herrings, it is certain, that of all the seafish they are most easily
digested: and salt-herrings, in particular, if eaten in small quantities,
dissolve the slime in the stomach, stimulate the appetite, create thirst, and
do not readily putrify by long keeping.

Among the amphibious animals, the legs of frogs are in some countries esteemed
a delicate dish; yet, as they contain a large portion of fat, the stomach
cannot easily digest them, without the addition of much salt. The same
observation applies to the Turtle, as well as the West-Indian Guana, a species
of Lizard, two or three feet long, of a most forbidding appearance; but its
flesh is delicate and salubrious, much resembling that of a chicken. -- We also
eat lobsters and crabs, which are species of water-infects: as both of them,
however, generally arrive at a stage approaching to putrefaction, before they
are sold in inland towns, their consumption is attended with considerable
danger. Besides, the flesh of lobsters, in particular, is not easily digested,
as it possesses a peculiar acrimony, which in swallowing sometimes occasions
pain in the throat. Some people, it is said, have been affected with eruptions
of the skin, pain in the stomach, and rheumatisms, arising from the use of
lobsters. Their jelly, however, is mild and nourishing. The flesh of river
lobsters is more delicate than that of the sea-lobster; but it is at the same
time more subject to putrefaction, and ought therefore to be used in a fresh
state, with much salt or vinegar. In Germany and other parts of the Continent,
lake and river-lobsters are always boiled alive, and generally in milk: a dish
much esteemed in families, and of which children are particularly fond. -- The
Germans cook various species of fresh-water-fish in milk: and although
palatable dishes may thus be prepared, yet, on account of the incongruous
variety of substances, I cannot approve of the mixture. There is, however, a
method of obtaining from lobsters a very excellent and wholesome jelly, the
particulars of which I shall here communicate to the reader, upon the authority
of a respectable physician at Hamburgh. "Take the flesh of about thirty
river-lobsters sufficiently boiled; cut it in small pieces, and place it in a
capacious earthen vessel, over a gentle fire, with one ounce of fresh butter.
After the butter is completely absorbed, add the clean flesh and skin o^ two
calves' feet, and four quarts of pure soft water. These ingredients must be
simmered over a moderate fire, till the whole of the mass amount to rather more
than one quart. In that state, half a dram of powdered nutmeg, and a handful
of chervil, must be added; and after having allowed it to boil up again, the
purest part of this mass is to be pressed through a strong linen cloth. When
placed, for some hours, in a cellar or some other cool place, it forms a strong
jelly, two of three spoonfuls of which will impart uncommon richness and
flavor to a basonful of common veal or chicken broth." -- I make no doubt that
a similar jelly may be prepared of small sea-lobsters, if they can be had alive.


Oysters are eaten both raw, and dressed: when raw, they are in every respect
preferable; for, by cooking, they are deprived of the salt water which promo^^
their digestion in the human stomach, as well as of a great proportion of their
nourishing jelly. Raw oysters are easily digested, and may be eaten, with great
advantage, by the robust, as well as by the weak and consumptive; as this
shellfish possesses more nutritive animal jelly than almost any other. They
farther are generally attended with a laxative effect, if eaten in any
quantity: hence they afford an excellent supper to those liable to costiveness.

Snails, though seldom eaten in this country, are equally nourishing and
wholesome. On account of their gelatinous nature, they have lately been much
used against consumptions; and as these complaints are now very frequent in
Britain, it were to be wished that such patients may give this remedy a fair
trial, by boiling a dozen of the red gardensnails every evening in a quart of
sweet milk or whey, for half an hour, then straining the liquor through a
coarse cloth, and drinking it with sugar every morning gradually upon an empty
stomach; and repeating these draughts for a month or two, if required. This red
garden-snail (or the Helix Pomatia, L.) has also been used externally in the
open hemorrhoids, where fresh snails were applied, every two or three hours, in
a raw state, with remarkable success.

Muscles are of a more solid texture, and therefore not so easily digested as
oysters. The sea-muscles afford a hard, indigestible, and, as some imagine,
poisonous food. Although the examples of their deleterious nature be very rare,
yet they ought not to be eaten without vinegar, or some other vegetable acid,
acting as a corrector of their bad qualities, or, in the opinion of others, as
an antidote.

Of Vegetable Aliment.
The various articles of nourishment we derive from the Vegetable Kingdom, may
with propriety be divided into five orders:

1st, The different species of farina, or grain, such as wheat, rye, barley,
and oats.

2d, The legumes, or pulse, such as peace, beans, etc.

3d, The various kinds of salads and potherbs.

4th, All the different roots; and,

5th, Fruit, or the production of trees and shrubs.

The first of these, namely the farinaceous, are very nourishing, on account of
the copious mucilage they contain; but they are likewise difficult to digest.
Bread itself, though justly called the staff of life, if eaten too freely, or
to serve as a meal, produces viscidity or slime, obstructs the intestines, and
lays the foundation of habitual costiveness. All dishes prepared of flour, are
not only nourishing, but are emollient, attenuating, and correct acrimony.
Leavened bread, or such as has acquired an acidulated taste by a slow
fermentation of the dough, is cooling and antiseptic; a circumstance well
established by experience. By this process of preparing the dough, all the
tough parts are most intimately mixed with the drier parts of the ^^our, and
the fixed air is expelled in baking. New-baked bread always contains much of an
indigestible paste, which is remedied, either by allowing it to dry for two or
three days, or by toasting it. This ought to be done regularly, particularly in
times of scarcity, both on account of health and economy. Stale bread, in every
respect, deserves the preference: and persons troubled with flatulency, cramp
of the stomach, and indigestion, should not upon any account eat new bread, and
still less hot rolls and butter. Indeed, all pastry whatever is unwholesome,
especially when hot. Those who devour hot pies with avidity, should consider,
that they contain an uncommon quantity of air, which distends the stomach, and
produces the most alarming and dangerous cholics, and incurable obstructions,
insomuch that the stomach and bowels have been known to burst. The porous
quality of bread arises from the fixed air having been expelled in baking; and
the more spongy the bread, it is the more wholesome. But newbaked bread, and
rolls in particular, require a sound stomach; because they contain much
mucilage, not having parted with all their moisture; and wheat-flour is more
viscid than that of rye, which is the bread-corn of most nations on the
Continent.

Bread and butter, together with cheese, as they are eaten in Holland and
Germany, form a mass scarcely digestible. The external surface of bread, or the
crust, which has been more dried by the heat of the oven, is easiest digested;
it contains the empyreumatic part, expelled by fire from the flour; it produces
an emollient effect on the bowels; but, at the same time, is more heating and
less nourishing than the softer part, or crumb.

The great difference in bread is owing, partly to the different species of
grain from which it is made, partly to the time the flour has been kept; for,
when new, it is more difficult to deprive it of its tenacity; partly to its
being more or less cleaned from the bran; partly to the different methods of
fermenting and baking it; to the difference in the water with which the flour
has been kneaded; and lastly, to the various ingredients of which the paste has
been compounded. The softness of the millstones used in grinding the flour,
may also vitiate the bread, by introducing particles of sand and marble, so as
to make it equally noxious to the teeth, and oppressive to the stomach.
Well-baked, and thoroughly dried bread, is easily dissolved by water, without
rendering it viscid or gelatinous: hence it is well adapted ^or the use of the
debilitated, as well as for every age or temperament.

Hasty-pudding, on account of its tenacity, and the quantity of mucilage it
contains, is not so easily digested as people, who feed their infants upon this
dish, are apt to imagine. Porridge made of oatmeal, the common food of children
and the lower class of adults in Scotland, is not so heavy as that of wheat
flour; though both of them require vigorous digestive organs, robust
constitutions, and strong exercise, in order to produce a proper nutriment.

The vermicelli, and macarone of the Italians, as well as all the different
dishes made of flour mixed up into paste, and either boiled in water or stewed
in butter, are ill calculated for patients and convalescents, to whom they are
frequently administered. A paste, when it is so elastic that it can be formed
into balls, is extremely difficult to be digested. All unfermented pastry is
excessively trying to the stomach; and instead of wondering that the lovers of
such dainties are continually troubled with indigestion and other stomachic
complaints, it would be against the order of things if it were otherwise.

Bread ought not to be eaten with every dish; it is more useful and necessary
with those articles that contain much nourishment in a small bulk, in order to
give the stomach a proper degree of expansion. Besides, the addition of bread
to animal food has another advantage, namely, that of preventing the disgust
attending a too copious use of flesh, and its strong tendency to putrefaction.
But if we accustom ourselves to eat new baked bread, to provisions already
indigestible in themselves, such as fat geese, bacon, blood-sausages, and the
like, we make them still more insupportable to our digestive organs. Of the
different kinds of grain, from which bread is prepared, that of rye is by far
the most wholesome for people of a sedentary life, as well as the delicate and
nervous. For though it be less nourishing, it is likewise less tenacious, and
more easily digested, than bread made of wheat. A few years since, when serious
apprehensions of an approaching famine were entertained, in consequence of the
scarcity, or rather the high price of flour in this country, the minds of men
were sedulously employed in researches tending to avert the ^^pending calamity.
Compositions of various substances to serve as substitutes for bread, such as
grey-peas, horse-beans, potatoes* and many other farinaceous vegetables, were
repeatedly tried. And although a very nourishing and palatable bread was formed
of flour mixed with rice and potatoes, yet the prejudices of the lower, as well
as the higher classes of the people, in favor of wheaten bread, were too great
and inveterate, to admit so useful and beneficial an innovation.


Rice contains a thin, unelastic, and easily soluble mucilage. It is one of the
popular prejudices, that rice has a tendency to produce costiveness: this is
only so far true as the use of it, by persons of languid and debilitated
constitutions, is sometimes attended with flatulency, which sufficiently
accounts for its secondary effect. To avoid such unpleasant consequences, rice
ought to be eaten with the addition of some spice, such as cinnamon, fennel,
carraway, annis-seed, and the like; particularly by those of a phlegmatic
habit, and slow digestion. -- In India, where this plentiful grain is almost
the only food of the natives, it is regularly eaten with such quantities of
pepper, and other strong spices, that Europeans, on their first arrival, cannot
partake of this high-seasoned dish. From a custom so beneficial in its physical
effects, we may conclude, that the Indians, though directed more by instinct
than scientific induction, are not altogether unacquainted with the rules of
diet.

One of the best preparations of rice is the mucilage, or jelly, which is
obtained by boiling two ounces of it ground to fine powder, and a quarter of a
pound of loaf-sugar in one pint of water, until it becomes a transparent thick
broth: this, when expressed through a cloth, and allowed to cool, is a
palatable and wholesome jelly.

Oats, when hulled or deprived of the husk, and reduced to groans, are used as
the common dish for the infirm and sick in England, France, and Germany. They
impart to the water a thick mucilage, which, with the addition of a few
currants boiled in it, is of a nourishing and slightly aperient quality.

Barley, or rather pearl-barley, may be used with a similar intention, and is
perhaps still more nutritive; but, after decoction, the grosser parts which
remain ought not to be eaten.

Millet, or hirse, is inferior to either oats or barley; it possesses too crude
a mucilage for relaxed or inactive stomachs.

Manna-grass (the festuca fluitans) is so called in Germany and Poland, because
its seeds have a remarkably sweet and agreeable taste, particularly before the
plant comes to its full growth. It excels in richness and nutriment all the
other vegetable productions of Europe; and, boiled in milk, it affords
excellent soups as well as puddings. Two ounces of this manna, properly cooked
in milk and water, would be a sufficient meal for the most robust and laborious
man. Boiled in water alone, in the proportion of one ounce to three pints of
water evaporated to one quart, with the addition of some sugar and white wine,
it makes an agreeable and nourishing dish for lying-in women, and other
patients for whom animal food is improper, and whose situation requires the
occasional stimulus of wine.

The second order of vegetable aliment includes all the leguminous productions,
as beans, peace, lentils, and the like; these contain a solid gluten or
mucilage, and afford a rich and strong nutriment, which best agrees with a
vigorous stomach. They also have a considerable proportion of crude particles,
which cannot be assimilated to our fluids, and must therefore remain undigested
in the bowels, to the great detriment of the alimentary canal. The meal of the
leguminous class is digested with more difficulty than that of grain; besides,
it contains much fixed air; on which account it is extremely flatulent, is apt
to produce costiveness, and to communicate various kinds of acrimony to the
blood. These effects, however, it produces only when it is eaten too frequently
and copiously. Hence bread, made of peace or beans, either alone or mixed and
ground together with wheat, is improper for daily use.

Yet we must not imagine, that even the most wholesome articles of food are
altogether free from air: this element is a necessary and useful ingredient, to
promote the digestion of alimentary substances. The proportion of fixed air
varies extremely in different vegetables: -- all the leguminous plants
particularly abound with it; and even persons with whom they agree well, must
have experienced flatulency and torpor, after a copious use of peace or beans.
Those who are fond of peas-soup, would better consult their health, by boiling
the peace whole, than split and deprived of their husks; for these promote the
grinding of the peace, and prevent them from turning acid in the stomach, which
split peace readily do, while they are apt to occasion oppression in the bowels,
and a very troublesome heart-burn.

Green peace, as well as French beans, boiled in their fresh state, are equally
agreeable and wholesome; for they are less flatulent, and more easy of
digestion, than in their ripe state. It deserves to be remarked, in general,
that all vegetables of the pulse kind, as they advance in growth, become more
oppressive to the stomach, and consequently less salutary in their effects.

The third order of Vegetables comprises the various kinds of salads and herbs
used in cooking, such as greens, cabbage, spinach, and the like. These contain
a great proportion of water, and little nourishment: they serve to fill the
stomach, resist putrefaction, and may therefore be eaten more freely in summer
than in winter; being, besides, of a softening, laxative, saponaceous, and
consequently solvent nature, they are well calculated to relieve the bowels. On
account of their watery consistence, they are of peculiar service to lean
people, to those who lose much moisture by perspiration, or who are troubled
with flushings and undulations of the blood (in which case animal food is
improper) -- and as these vegetables assist insensible perspiration, they are
cooling, and assist all the emunctories of the body. Their nourishment is in
proportion to the mucilage contained in them; but as this is in a very diluted
state, the aliment they afford is inconsiderable. They are further
distinguished by the earthly, acrid, and aerial particles which they contain,
both with respect to their nutriment, and their effects upon the first
passages. They become soft by boiling, many of the aerial particles are
expelled, and they are thus rendered more digestible. But the practice of
boiling them in large quantities of water, which is afterward poured off, is
extremely absurd and injudicious; for, with the water, their best and most
nutritious parts are consequently thrown away: hence these vegetables ought to
be thoroughly washed, and, cabbage excepted, stewed in a small quantity of
water, which will so far be reduced by slow boiling, that it may be brought to
the table, together with the vegetables. To improve their relish, as well as to
render these vegetables less flatulent, we generally add spices, which also
assist digestion. And for the same reason, in a raw state, they are eaten with
vinegar, salt, pepper, and the like.

Salads, being in general eaten with oil and vinegar, call for all the powers
of the stomach, to digest these liquids, together with the raw herbs. Baked
vegetables with paste and milk, as they are prepared in some countries, lose
all their principal virtues, and readily acquire an empyreumatic oil upon the
crust, which is indigestible, and taints the fluids with a dangerous acrimony.

Asparagus is an excellent article of nutriment, although somewhat flatulent
and diuretic in its effects. The young shoots of this plant are not only the
most palatable, but at the same time the most salutary. -- As a good substitute
for sparrowgrass, I can from experience recommend the young buds of hops, which
are more easily procured, scarcely inferior to the former in taste, and, on
account of their aromatic quality, very grateful and wholesome.

Artichokes afford a light and tender food, perhaps still more nutritive but
less diuretic than asparagus; for this reason, they are preferable for culinary
uses.

Spinach, a favorite dish with many, affords no nutriment, passes quickly
through the stomach and bowels, almost undigested; and, being usually dressed
with butter, it weakens the alimentary canal, produces looseness, and
consequently is not proper food for the weak and debilitated. -- In languid
stomachs, spinach is apt to produce acidity and the heart-burn.

Sorrel possesses an acrid acidity, which deprives the teeth of their enamel,
and ought to be avoided by those who are already troubled with an acid taste in
the mouth.

Red Cabbage is one of the most indigestible vegetables, particularly as the
French and Germans eat it, with ham and chestnuts; it is thus rendered heating,
flatulent, and laxative, and contains no nourishment. -- More digestible,
cooling, and less hurtful to the bowels, are the young sprigs of cauliflower;
but the most indigestible of all is the Colewort ( Caulis rapicius.) What has
been said with respect to cabbage, is applicable also to the Orach, or
Atriplex, and the Lettuce, when eaten boiled or stewed.

White Cabbage is possessed of excellent properties; it is less flatulent than
the common greens, and, being full of water, it is diuretic, and somewhat
laxative. -- It is remarkable, that all herbs and plants, in general, are more
or less flatulent, according to their digestibility, and are disposed to
putrescency; in proportion to the time they remain in the alimentary canal.

Of White Cabbage sliced or cut in thin shreds, and afterward seasoned and
salted, the Germans make Sauer Kraut; which is easily digested, on account of
the salt mixed with it, and the acetous fermentation it has undergone, before
it is used, and by which the greatest part of its fixed air is expelled. Sauer
Kraut may be preserved fresh for a long time; it operates powerfully on the
first passages, being one of the most excellent antiseptics; it has proved of
singular service at sea, in resisting the ravages of the scurvy, and curing it
in the most alarming stages. We are indebted to Capt. Cook, for introducing
this salutary dish among the sailors, in spite of all prejudices, and thus
preserving the health of many brave mariners. Lastly, Sauer Kraut has been
found the best preventive against epidemic distempers, particularly against the
dysentery, and the putrid and petechial fevers, which it has even frequently
cured.

Lettuce contains many nitrous particles, is very cooling, and useful in the
evening to those who cannot sleep, from the too great heat and undulations of
the blood. But the copious addition of oil and the yolk of eggs renders it less
digestible than when eaten in its simple state; but if these must be used it is
better to add some sugar, which decomposes these substances. The most suitable
ingredients of Salads, besides the Lettuce, are the various Cresses, Chervil, (
Chaerophyllum bulbosum, Linn.) and the scurvy grass, which, together with other
cooling herbs, produce the effect of cleansing the humors, or, as some say, of
purifying the blood, and are at the same time diuretic; especially if eaten in
Spring, ^and upon an empty stomach.

The fourth order of Vegetables consists of all the esculent roots, or such as
are used at our tables. They are either of the mild, or of the astringent and
acrid kind. The former are much more nourishing and less flatulent than the
latter, which however possess some medicinal powers, such as the various
species of radishes, onions, garlic, and the like.

Roots are neither so nourishing, nor so easily digested as animal food. Yet we
may consider it as a certain rule, that any kind of aliment, for which we feel
a natural and permanent appetite, is conformable to our nature. Of this kind is
that beneficial root, the potato, which, in the most simple preparation, and
without any addition, affords an agreeable and wholesome food to almost every
person, and particularly to children. It is one of the lightest alimentary
substances, occasioning neither viscidity nor flatulence, and can be hurtful
only, when immoderately used. But, being a dry vegetable, and containing many
earthy particles, it requires a proper quantity of drink to prevent
obstructions. Its excellent nourishment is sufficiently obvious in the
healthiness of those country people, whose principal food is potatoes, as well
as animals that are fattened upon these roots.

The quickness with which the chyle made from potatoes is assimilated to the
blood, leaves no doubt that they are easily digested; for it is a general
remark, that laboring people sooner feel a renewal of their appetite, after
potatoes, than any other species of food. It is a groundless assertion, that
they generate a thick and crude chyle, and consequently a gross and viscous
blood. It is an equally unfounded supposition, which is amply refuted by
experience, that the potato is a narcotic root, and that it is apt to stupify
the powers of the mind. This effect is produced only from a too copious use of
it, together with want of exercise; in which cases any other food would be
attended with similar consequences.

The stimulating powers ascribed to potatoes appear to me merely fanciful.
Those of a farinaceous consistence are much more easily digested, than the
heavy and gelatinous kind. The flour made of potatoes is more wholesome for
pastry, and for all those dishes prepared of meal, than any other. The French
have lately contrived a method of preparing a granulated flour from this root,
which is grateful to the palate, and very nourishing. It is performed by a
machine of simple construction, a representation of which, together with a
description, was given, some time ago, in the Repertory of the Arts and
Manufactures; -- and it has also been used successfully, when mixed with wheat
flour, in making bread. Whatever has been formerly said against the use of
potatoes, it is now well understood that they are wholesome nourishing, and
light to the stomach, even in the weakest constitutions. -- M. Parmentier, of
Paris, lived for several weeks on potatoes only, without experiencing any ill
effects on his health.


The Beet-root contains a large proportion of saccharine matter. By the latest
experiments of M. Achard, of Berlin, it has been proved, that about fourteen
pounds weight produced one pound of raw sugar, exceedingly sweet, and without
the intermixture of any other taste. Independent of this consideration, the
beet is a valuable root, both in an economical and culinary respect; it is
possessed of mild aperient qualities, and ought to be eaten more frequently,
for supper, by those who are of a costive habit. Although it is not difficult
of digestion, yet some less flatulent root, such as parsley, celery, or even
potatoes, ought to be used together with the beet; which addition will render
it not only more palatable, but also more suitable to the stomach and bowels.

Carrots are extremely flatulent, and therefore an improper food for the weak,
and those inclined to acidity; by such individuals they can scarcely be
digested, unless taken with the addition of spice, and a proper quantity of
salt; by which means their fermentation and corruption in the stomach will be
in a great measure prevented. In other respects, they contain a good and
copious alimentary fluid, at the same time powerfully affect the kidneys, and
are likewise anthelmintic, or destructive of worms.

Parsnips, besides their sweet mucilage, contain somewhat of the aromatic
principle, being more nourishing and less flatulent than carrots. To deprive
them entirely of the latter quality, they ought to be boiled in two different
waters; but by this precaution they partly lose their sweet taste, and become
less nourishing.

Turnips are nutritive, but flatulent, and not easy of digestion; they become
still more indigestible with age. -- The least flatulent and most nourishing of
these roots are the long kind, or Swedish Turnip, lately introduced into this
country.

Parsley, as well as Smallage, are of a sweet, stimulating, and aromatic
nature. The former, especially, was by the older physicians supposed to purify
the blood; an effect which modern medical observers would not only doubt, but
even ridicule. So much, however, is certain, that parsley is a mild aperient
and diuretic. Yet, for these salutary purposes, it ought not to be eaten in a
raw but boiled state.

Celery is one of the most fragrant roots we possess in our climate, though its
shoots and leaves are more commonly used for salads, than the root itself.
There are two species of celery known among gardeners, both of which are
estimable: one produces thick knobby roots, not unlike the size and figure of a
short pineapple; the other has a variety of small white, tender, and odorous
roots. The latter species is more common in this country, while the former is
much esteemed in France and Germany, where it is eaten in thin slices,
previously soaked in vinegar; a preparation which, in summer, affords a cooling
and wholesome dish. In a raw state, celery is digested with some difficulty,
which may be removed by boiling it in water, or soaking it, as before observed,
for a short time in vinegar. -- The Germans prepare an artificial coffee from
this root, by cutting it into small square pieces, which are dried and roasted
in the usual manner. Dr. UNZER occasionally recommends this native coffee to
his patients, particularly to nurses and lying-in-women, as a wholesome
substitute for either tea, or the real coffee of the shops.

The Skirret-root, and the Scorzenera of Spain, possess more spicy and
stimulating than nutritive qualities. Both these roots, as well as the three
preceding, are diuretic, and consequently in a slight degree stimulating. The
skirret, in particular, has an agreeably sweet and spicy flavor, and is so
tender, that it can scarcely bear to be boiled. For this reason, it is most
properly eaten when raw, like fruit, or may be used as an excellent ingredient
in soups and broths. -- The Scorzenera, on the contrary, ought to be deprived
of its black skin, and only eaten boiled: by soaking the raw root for half an
hour in cold water, it loses its bitter taste, and is likewise rendered less
flatulent.

The Salsafy, or Goat's-beard, is a root containing still more of the
saccharine principle, than the scorzenera: being a good substitute for
sparrowgrass, and more easily reared in this climate, it certainly deserves to
be more generally cultivated in our gardens.

Onions, Garlic, Shallot, and Chives, are stimulants: they assist digestion,
relieve the bowels, expel flatulency, dissolve slime or mucus, and are
therefore beneficial in diseases which proceed from too much viscidity;
besides, they increase the appetite, and ought to be used principally as
spices, or medicines. They are powerful expectorants, but must be avoided by
very hot, irritable, and choleric temperaments. Although these roots are eaten
in quantities by whole nations, yet from their penetrating and volatile smell,
which they communicate to the human breath, it is certain they agree best with
individuals of a cold and phlegmatic habit, and those whose stomachs require so
powerful a stimulus.

All kinds of Radishes may be considered as medicinal roots; they are
peculiarly calculated to dissolve slimy humors, to generate, and also to expel
flatulency; moving the air enclosed in the intestines, and expelling it, by the
copious air contained in themselves. They are salubrious to strong and active
stomachs; but in those which are deficient in elasticity, radishes increase
flatulency to the highest and most troublesome degree. The small saladradishes
are more readily digested than the large root; they propel all the alimentary
fluids toward the stomach, increase the appetite, and are therefore proper to
be eaten before a meal. Old radishes are altogether indigestible, and the whole
genus, like onions and garlic, occasion a very offensive breath.

The Arrow-root powder, lately imported into this country from the East Indies,
appears to afford a larger proportion of nutritive mucilage than any vegetable
hitherto discovered: but it is to be regretted that the exorbitant retail-price
(eight shillings the pound weight) will preclude many invalids and
convalescents from using this excellent root in broths and jellies.

The fifth and last order of Vegetable substances comprehends the Fruit, or
productions, of the different trees and shrubs.

Fruit, in general, possesses strongly resolvent powers, and it is the more
beneficial, as it comes to maturity at a time when the body is relaxed by the
heat of summer, and when the blood has a strong tendency to inflammation. It is
besides of great service in attenuating the thick bilious impurities collected
during the summer, and of evacuating them by its laxative virtues. The acid
contained in most kinds is as useful to quench thirst, as to resist
putrefaction. In weak stomachs, however, or such as are filled with impurities
and slime, it is apt to ferment, and occasion some inconvenience; but this may
be avoided by a temperate use, and especially by eating it boiled.

The more sap or juice we meet with in fruit, it will prove the more flatulent;
and as the juicy, cooling, and watery species of fruit require strong digestive
organs, to prevent them from producing fermentation, flatulency, and diarrhoea,
a glass of old wine is very proper to promote their digestion. A gentle
diarrhoea, brought on by eating ripe fruit, in summer, has frequently a
salutary effect. -- Acrid and astringent fruit, being rather a medicine than
food, is less hurtful to the healthy, and to children, than is commonly
imagined. Instead of being noxious, as some imagine, in inflammatory disorders,
it is of the greatest service. Persons of a thick and black blood cannot eat
any thing more conducive to health than fruit, as it possesses the property of
attenuating and putting such blood in motion; but those of a watery and
phlegmatic constitution ought carefully to avoid it.

Fruit preserved with sugar is antiseptic and nourishing, but at the same time
flatulent; and if preserved with sugar and spices, it is heating and drying. It
is most wholesome when eaten on an empty stomach, which can exert all its power
to dispel the air disengaged from it, and to remove it, before it begins to
ferment. Boiling, as well as drying, corrects the flatulent tendency of fresh
fruit, so that, thus prepared, it will agree with every body. By either of
these methods it is deprived of its superfluous humidity, as well as of its
fixed air; whence it becomes more nourishing, but less cooling, than in the
fresh state.

Sago is the medullary part, or marrow, collected from a species of palm tree
growing in the Mulucca and other islands of the East Indies. This substance,
although not strictly the fruit of a tree, well deserves the first place here;
for it is used as bread by the natives of India, who macerate it in water, and
form it into cakes. The grains of sago, sold in the shops, are obtained by a
more artificial process: they furnish a nourishing and agreeable jelly with
water, milk, or broth; but require to be previously cleaned of the dust, mould,
and seawater. To make a complete solution of sago, the first decoction ought
to be strained, and afterward boiled a second time, for about half an hour.
Prepared in this manner, it is a proper dish for the consumptive and
convalescent, as well as those whose digestion is weak or impaired.

Cherries produce the effects now stated, in a very pre-eminent degree; they
are excellent in scurvy, in putrid fevers, and in dysentery; they correct the
blood when inclined to putrescency, and by their saponaceous and melliferous
juice, they powerfully resolve obstructions in the intestines. Those who use
them with this intention, may eat them at any time of the day, though they
operate most effectually in the morning, on an empty stomach. Even the sweet
species contain a stimulating acid, which, in proportion to their juicy
consistence, disagrees more or less with the weak and debilitated; for this sap
or juice easily ferments in the stomach, and produces flatulency, diarrhoea,
and acidity. On account of these peculiar effects, persons whose stomachs are
bilious and vitiated, who are troubled with putrid eructations, and an
offensive breath, ought to eat them freely, to counteract that disposition to
putridity.

Cherries are divided into the aqueous-sweet, aqueous-acid, and the dry pulpous
kinds. The Spanish cherries are the most difficult to digest, but are also the
most nourishing. The aqueous-sweet kind, as our early common cherries, are
unwholesome; because their juice easily ferments, and occasions colic and
diarrhoea. The watery-acid sort are the best of any; their juice strengthens
the stomach, purifies the blood, and is the least flatulent. Dried cherries are
in many diseases an excellent article of diet, on account of their cooling and
antiseptic properties. The swallowing of cherry-stones, however, is highly
pernicious, as these stones have sometimes been found to accumulate in the
intestines, to form lumps cemented together by viscid phlegm, and thus to
produce the most violent and fatal symptoms.

Plums also possess medicinal virtues; they are nourishing and attenuating.
Prunes, or dried plums, are of peculiar service to costive habits, affording an
agreeable and nutritive dish; but, as they are apt to produce flatulency, it
would be advisable to eat them either when the stomach is empty, or for
supper, without mixing them with other aliment. Under this limitation, they are
both aperient and cooling, and agree with almost every constitution; but plums
eaten fresh, and not quite ripe, especially in large quantities, are very apt
to occasion looseness, colics, and other maladies of the stomach and
intestines. The larger sort of plums are in general more dangerous, in this
respect, than the small ones, as they (particularly the green and yellow kind)
are seldom allowed to grow perfectly ripe.

Tamarinds are more frequently employed for medicinal purposes, than as an
article of diet. The pulp of this fruit is one of the most grateful acids;
which, if taken in the quantity of from half an ounce to an ounce or more,
proves gently purgative. By its acidity, it is well calculated to quench thirst
and allay immoderate heat.

Peaches abound with juice, and though not very nourishing, they are not
productive of diarrhoea. This salutary fruit was formerly decried as
unwholesome; but it is rather serviceable in obstructions and bilious
disorders. Sugar, wine, and the like, diminish the good qualities of peaches;
and even when preserved in brandy, they are not so wholesome as when fresh;
since they become hard by all artificial preparations. The kernels likewise of
peaches are a wholesome bitter, and are cleansing, on account of their
astringent properties.

As there are various kinds of peaches, of an inferior quality, it will be
useful to point out the distinguishing marks of that fruit, in a mature state.
The best sort of peaches have a delicate thin skin, which is easily separated
from the pulpous part. Those which are not naturally smooth ought to be covered
with only a small quantity of down; for too much down or wool on the surface is
a sign of their inferior quality. They are likewise not to be depended upon as
being wholesome, if they are of a size either too small or preternaturally
large. Their pulp ought to be delicate, yet solid, somewhat fibrous, and full
of juice; it should not adhere to the stone or kernel, and readily melt in the
mouth.

Apricots are more pulpy than peaches, but perhaps less nutritive: their juice
readily ferments and turns acid in weak stomachs; yet, when ripe, and used with
moderation, they are cooling and antiseptic, particularly for bilious and
plethoric individuals.

Of Pears, some are extremely hard, astringent, and difficult of digestion; but
the more juicy pears have a saponaceous, nourishing, and readily digestible
fluid; in their effects they resemble the sweet kind of apples, except that
they are less relaxing to the bowels. Pears are of a more flatulent tendency
than any of the fruits before mentioned, and especially the hard winter-pears,
which are eaten at a time when the stomach requires stimulating more than
cooling food.

Apples are, in their general effect, similar to other fruit, and, besides
their aromatic virtues, are possessed of laxative properties. They are
serviceable in diseases of the breast, to remove spasmodic contractions, to
neutralize acrimony, and to attenuate viscid p^^^gm. With this intention,
apples are most beneficial when eaten either roasted or boiled. The common
people in Germany are so sensible of their excellent properties, in
inflammatory diseases, that they boil even the wild apples, and drink the
water. This process deserves imitation, especially when apples become scarce in
Spring.

Apples may be divided into the spicy, the acidulated, and the watery species.
The first, the various kinds of rennet, for example, have the most delicate
flavor, and are certainly the best; they do not contain a superfluity of water,
and, from their vinous nature, are not apt to excite flatulency. Other kinds of
apples, like the pippins, are too hard, consequently heavy to the stomach,
though somewhat more nourishing than the former. Stewed apples are easily
digested and wholesome.

The kernels or seeds of apples are bitter and aromatic; Nature seems to have
intended the seeds for correcting the watery and fermentable fluids of this and
all other fruit, apricots excepted. Hence the kernels of apples and pears, as
well as those of plums and cherries, ought to be eaten with the fruit, and not
be thrown away as useless. -- The butter in the paste of apple-pies may be
considered as an useful addition, on account of its tendency to prevent
fermentation, though the pastry itself always disagrees with weak and irritable
stomachs.

Of Quinces we have two species, namely, the apple and pear-quince: the latter
are the most wholesome, particularly those of Portugal. They are an excellent
antiseptic, and in this respect the best kind of fruit, containing an acid and
much mucilage. They are not productive of obstructions; but their pulp, like
that of all other fruit, is digested with some difficulty. They are generally
eaten boiled with sugar, and are excellent in dysentery, on account of their
copious mucilage.

In Lemons, Oranges, and other fruit of that kind, we meet with three different
substances. The external rind contains an essential oil, strongly astringent
and heating; the second or white rind is without taste; the third part of them
is a salubrious, cooling, and acid pulp, highly efficacious in counteracting
the putrid tendency and dissolution of the blood. The juice of lemons and limes
is one of the strongest vegetable acids; If the objections started against the
use of these acids, by a late physician in Germany, Dr. UNZER, be well founded,
we ought to guard against their use. He maintains that, although lemons and
limes may be wholesome and refreshing fruits in their native country, yet as
they are packed up and sent to us in an unripe state, they possess an acrid and
unnatural acid; from not having undergone the vinous and acetous fermentations,
and which consequently cannot be wholesome. The juice, especially, which is
obtained from the middle of those fruits, having acquired, an highly astringent
though not unpleasant taste, from the styptic quality of the bitter kernels, is
extremely unwholesome. It is, according to the observations of Dr. Unzer, very
apt to impair digestion, and to occasion either diarrhoea or constipation of
the bowels. -- Such effects, however, will be produced only when these acids
are immoderately used; in which case the most wholesome substances will be
attended with bad consequences, and ever form exceptions from the general rule.
Yet I must agree with Dr. U. that the peel of lemons and oranges contains an
inflammable and heating oil, which, if rubbed on sugar, for making punch,
lemonade, etc. is apt to produce dangerous effects.
and that of oranges and shaddocks, though milder, is not less salutary.

These acids are of a very saponaceous consistence; they attenuate the fluids,
remove obstructions, encourage digestion, stimulate the appetite, quench
thirst, cool the blood, counteract putrefaction, are a principal remedy in
pectoral, bilious, and inflammatory diseases, as likewise in scurvy, in all
affections of the kidneys, and an antidote against the narcotic vegetable
poisons. Hence the largest dose of opium may be checked in its narcotic
effects, if a proper quantity of the acid of lemons be taken with, or
immediately after it. Four grains of pure opium, for instance, or one hundred
drops of laudanum, is a very powerful and sometimes fatal dose; yet if one
ounce of the pure acid of lemons, or two ounces of orange juice, be added to
every grain of opium, or to twenty-five drops of laudanum, it will produce a
very different effect. Instead of stupifying the person who takes it, and of
being attended with painful costiveness, it will not only prove laxative, but
induce first a cheerfulness, not attainable by the use either of opium or
strong liquors, and afterward bring on a gentle and refreshing sleep.

Of these effects I can speak from my own experience, as well as that of
others. Opium, used with this addition, is one of the most salutary and
beneficial substances with which we are acquainted. I am farther inclined to
believe, that the Turks, who eat very little animal food, could not bear the
large quantities of opium they swallow, were it not for the copious use of
vegetable acids. And that these form a principal part of a Turkish summer diet,
every traveller knows, who has visited the eastern climates.

For these reasons, I cannot sufficiently recommend the use of acids to
persons, who are either accustomed, or obliged, to take opiates in large doses.
In choleric, bilious, and plethoric habits, in those liable to obstructions,
whose alimentary canal is unclean, and lastly, in those who feel a
determination of the blood to the head, opium is an uncertain, and even
dangerous medicine, without the addition of vegetable acids. The want of the
acid of lemons may be effectually supplied by an indigenous production: --
barberries afford an acid fully as strong, and nearly as agreeable, as that of
lemons.

The juice of the various species of Raisins is not unlike that of ripe lemons
in its properties, but less efficacious. There are various kinds of that
excellent fruit. Among the larger sort, those of a blueish color, imported
from Marseilles, are the best; while the Spanish raisins, of a light brown
color, are inferior to those of any other species. Both kinds, as well as
Currants, contain much nutriment, but cannot be recommended for frequent use,
as they all tend to produce flatulency, particularly in individuals of relaxed
habits and a sedentary life. On this account, they ought to be eaten with other
food, in which case they are emollient, gently laxative, and sometimes anodyne.

Gooseberries, having less of the acid than either raisins or currants, are
perhaps more wholesome, especially if their skin and other impurities are not
swallowed together with the juice. When used in a green state, for sauces and
pies, they are cooling and refreshing; and, when ripe, possess similar
properties with cherries.

Figs abound with saccharine matter, and are uncommonly nutritive, though at
the same time of a flatulent nature, unless eaten with bread or other mealy
substances. -- Of similar effects are mulberries and raspberries: the former
have a more mucilaginous and nourishing juice, while that of the latter is more
of a vinous nature, and one of the best cordials for allaying thirst and
affording refreshment.

Grapes and Strawberries are both excellent fruits. They are uncommonly
resolvent, laxative without debilitating, and promote all the natural
evacuations; but at the same time, grapes are in a high degree flatulent.

The quality of grapes depends much on climate and soil. Those of a sweet
taste, and aromatic flavor, only ought to be used. They agree best when eaten
on an empty stomach, with a small quantity of bread. Besides their slightly
nourishing quality, it is affirmed by some writers, that they cool the blood
and animate the nerves.

Strawberries, if eaten plentifully, have been found a safe preventive against
the stone in the kidneys; as is attested by the experience of the celebrated
LINNAEUS. Yet the small stones contained in strawberries, as well as in grapes,
are said to accumulate in the intestines of some individuals, and to give rise
to the most obstinate constipations, nay even to the iliac passion. The best
method of eating strawberries is with pure water, and sweetened with a little
sugar; they are more heating with wine, but less wholesome; with milk or cream
they are an agreeable but improper composition. As a medicine, the wild
strawberry is far preferable to any other.

Cucumbers are a wholesome, gently opening, and cooling fruit, which may be of
considerable service to the consumptive, as it has the property of sweetening
acrid humors. They show a tendency to ferment, and produce diarrhoea; but this
may be prevented by the addition of vinegar and pepper, which also counteracts
their natural coldness. Prepared with oil, vinegar, salt, and pepper, they are
insupportable to some weak stomachs, and occasion frequent eructations and
flatulency. But properly pickled, they are an excellent antiseptic, though
unfit to be given to children and wet-nurses.

Much of the same nature with cucumbers are Melons; but they are more aromatic,
and, in this respect, more wholesome. Water-melons require more spice and wine
than Musk-melons; as they partake more of the nature of Cucumbers.

Gourds, a fruit of the melon-kind, but less sweet, and of a much larger size,
if boiled in milk, after the first water has been poured off, and with the
addition of salt and popper, affords sufficiently wholesome and nutritive food.

Olives, in their natural state, are bitter, acrid, and exceedingly
disagreeable; though their taste is much improved when pickled, as we receive
them from abroad, particularly in the smaller kind, or Lucca olives. On account
of the abundance of oil which they contain, they are unfit for delicate
stomachs, and are pernicious, especially when eaten for desert, after a heavy
dinner.

Almonds, Walnuts, Hazlenuts, and Nuts in general, are extremely difficult of
digestion, on account of the oil they contain, which readily turns acrid and
rancid o^ the stomach, and occasions the heart-burn. Bilious individuals should
by no means eat them; and there is nothing so absurd as to administer
almond-milk as a common diet-drink to febrile patients. This milk consists
altogether of oily and almost insoluble parts, which heat and vitiate the
stomach, stimulate the bile, and are easily decomposed from the water with
which they are mixed. It quickly spoils; frequently, indeed, before it is
introduced into the stomach: it is not in the least degree cooling, and its
nourishing quality is very improperly employed in fevers, and all those
diseases which are attended with debility of the alimentary canal.

Nuts and almonds ought to be eaten only while fresh, and when the skin, which
is extremely astringent and hurtful, can be removed. They should be well
chewed, and eaten with salt; for every piece swallowed entire is indigestible,
and the salt renders them miscible with our fluids as a saponaceous mass. If
eaten in large quantities, they remain in the stomach, cannot be expelled by
any medicines, and produce alarming and sometimes fatal disorders. In general,
they occasion difficult breathing, vomiting, and complaints in the bowels,
which have been observed to be very common in those autumns that were
productive of great quantities of nuts.

Last among the vegetable productions, we may class the various species of
Mushrooms. They are all of a tough, leathery consistence; and being almost
indigestible, they afford little nutriment, notwithstanding they, in a great
measure, resemble animal food.

Several kinds of mushrooms are said to contain a narcotic and acrimonious
poison. And as those of a harmless kind cannot be easily distinguished from the
bad ones, this might be a sufficient reason to abstain from the use of them
altogether. But if they must appear at our tables, vegetable acids, or vinegar,
are the best antidotes, to counteract their pernicious effects. Pickled with
vinegar, or salted, mushrooms become still more tough; and roasted with butter,
they are an indigestible mass, and extremely liable to turn rancid in the
stomach.

Of Drink in particular.
I. With respect to its Quantity.
Drinking is perhaps more necessary to the support of animal life than Eating;
for drink is indispensable to the solution and digestion of food. Those who
drink too little, people, for instance, of a sedentary life, and particularly
women, are subject to complaints of indigestion. Sufficient drink prevents the
incrassation of the blood, and the obstruction of the smaller vessels; it tends
to clear the blood of the acrid particles generated in it; and it promotes the
necessary secretions, such as the bile and the gastric juice of the stomach.

We ought to drink only when we are thirsty, and to desist when thirst is
quenched: but this is seldom the case, because many of our liquors stimulate
the palate. Pure water, therefore, is an inestimable beverage, as it will not
induce us to drink more than is necessary. We should drink in a greater
proportion than we eat; for the quantity of our fluids by far exceeds that of
the solids, and consequently there must be secreted more fluids than solids.
The general rule may be given, to take about double the proportion of liquid to
the dry food; but this cannot be accurately observed, nor is it applicable in
all cases.

The season, the weather, cold, heat, the nature of our food, and the greater
or less degree of our exercise, require more or less drink at one time than at
another. Thirst, however, is as good, if not a better guide than hunger; and he
who is accustomed to drink water only, will not easily transgress the measure,
if he drink as often as nature calls upon him. With a proper choice of food,
every one would drink conformably to his wants. Hence it is needless to
recommend water as a beverage to persons who will not be persuaded to change
their irregular mode of eating.

The more we eat in quantity, and the drier our victuals are, the more we ought
to drink. The phlegmatic have less inclination to drink than those of a
sanguine and choleric temperament. The laborious ought to drink more than the
sedentary, and still more in summer than in winter, to supply the humors lost
by insensible perspiration.

In the morning when we rise, we generally feel an inclination for drink, which
is relieved by tea, coffee, or other warm liquors. Water would unquestionably
be a more proper beverage at this time; and I venture to say, it would be
disagreeable to those only, whose stomachs are spoiled by the habitual use of
warm liquors and hot rolls. A glass of pure fresh water, and a while after it,
a piece of bread with some fruit, or even butter, would afford a very wholesome
breakfast, by which the stomach and the intestines might be cleared, the blood
and humors refreshed, and the whole body strengthened. If the stomach be not
loaded with mucus, or relaxed by tippling, a basin of sweet cow's milk, with a
piece of stale bread, is an excellent breakfast in Spring and Summer.

To drink immediately before a meal, is improper, because the stomach is
thereby swelled, and rendered less fit for the digestion of food. Hence, to
avoid the necessity of drinking, it is advisable, not to take any violent
exercise immediately before dinner. To drink much at night, previous to our
going to bed, is likewise hurtful. But the drinking before a meal is more
noxious than at any other time; because the stomach is filled with the liquid
we swallow; the bile and the gastric juice there collected are too much
diluted; and consequently the important office of digestion is checked.

To drink much during the time of taking food is also objectionable, as the
stomach is thus rendered incapable of receiving the due portion of aliment.
Cold beer or water does not well agree with warm victuals; and the teeth are
injured by taking hot and cold substances in immediate succession. In the hot
weather of Summer, it is scarcely possible to delay drinking till the dinner be
finished; and it is the more necessary, or rather less hurtful, at this time,
as the bile which serves to dissolve the victuals, then requires greater
dilution. In Winter, unless we eat very dry and salted provisions, we feel less
inclined to drink at table. But if we must drink in the intervals of eating, it
would be most conducive to digestion to drink water only, and in small
quantities; as pure water is more proper during the time of eating, because it
agrees with all dishes without exception. Yet a glass or two of wine, during
dinner, particularly for the aged and debilitated, is proper and conducive to
digestion.

Some advise us never to drink without eating something; but he who drinks only
when nature requires it, has no occasion to eat every time he drinks. Persons,
on the contrary, who are once accustomed to drink more than is necessary, or to
make use of hot, stimulating, and intoxicating liquors, would do well to eat
always some bread or other solid food along with them. Indeed we ought to begin
to drink only after our appetite for food is satisfied, and then it should be
done gradually during digestion. This function may be disturbed by large
draughts of liquor, which occasion fermentation and flatulency. -- Glass is the
most proper substance for drinking-vessels; for no other but the fluoric acid
will affect it. -- For the sake of delicacy, as well as health, every person at
table ought to be furnished with a separate glass or other vessel for his drink.

Much drink loads and oppresses the stomach, as it distends it too much; but it
is not nearly so hurtful as too much food. Every beverage relaxes the stomach;
and persons whose bowels are not sufficiently classic, should be careful in the
quantity they drink; for an immoderate proportion of it may weaken digestion,
dilute the fluids too much, and conduct the food too quickly through the
alimentary canal. An undue portion of drink renders the mass of the blood too
thin and watery; from a thin blood arises also a weak alimentary fluid,
consequently a general debility of the body, and relaxation of the urinary and
other passages.

On the other hand, too little drink is equally improper; digestion is
weakened; many parts of victuals remain undissolved, and are not conducted to
the lacteals, because the proper means of diluting them are wanting; the blood
becomes thick and viscid; and finally, the secretions and excretions are not
duly performed, because the different canals are too dry and contracted.

II. With respect to its Quality.
THERE is as great a diversity among the kinds of beverage, as there is among
those of food: water itself is of very different qualities, according to the
particles with which it is impregnated, and the places from which it is
obtained. That of wells, springs, rivers, lakes, swamps, and the various
mineral waters, all differ in their sensible properties. Even cold and warm
water produce different effects. The former, when moderately used, strengthens
the stomach, and proves debilitating only when it is drunk in too large
quantities. Warm water is always relaxing, and still more so when taken in a
large quantity; it remains longer in the stomach than cold water, and
consequently is more oppressive; cold liquor stimulates the stomach, but warm
drink diminishes its elasticity.

If the stomach be overfilled with drink, and its elasticity weakened, a glass
of strong wine, or other spirituous liquor, may remedy this inconvenience. --
Water can only so far be called nourishing, as it supplies the aqueous parts we
continually lose. It is the basis of all other liquids, and the greater
proportion of water they contain, the more fit they are to promote digestion.

Spring Water originates partly from that of the sea, which has been changed
into vapors by subterraneous heat, and partly from the atmosphere. As it is
dissolved, purified, and filtered in a variety of ways, before it becomes
visible to us, it is lighter and purer than other waters.

Well-water is more or less pure, according as it passes over beds of earth,
which contain soluble, or minute particles. Wells opened in a sandy soil are
the purest, because the water is there most completely filtered. The more
frequently a well is used, the better its water, provided that no impure
substances are introduced into it; for, the longer water stands unmoved, it
turns the sooner putrid. Well-water, finally, may be most effectually purified
by filtering it through a quantity of sand and small pebbles; and still more
conveniently by means of filtering-stones. The filtering machines lately
invented by Mr* Joseph Collier, of London, promise to be very useful for
domestic purposes, as they are applicable to all fluids, but more particularly
water.


River-water is more pure and wholesome, if it flows over a sandy and stony
soil, than if it pass over muddy beds, or through towns, villages, and forests,
from which it receives many impure substances: the water is rendered foul by
fishes, amphibious animals, and plants. Lastly, the more rapid the course of
the river, the easier it clears itself of feculent particles, and the water
becomes purer.

Lake-water much resembles that of rivers in its properties, but being less
agitated, it is more impure, and better adapted to washing than cooking.

The water, which in cases of necessity is obtained from swamps or ditches, is
the worst of all; because a great variety of impurities are collected in it,
which in a stagnant water and a soft soil readily putrify. And, as the mere
exhalations of such waters produce a pestilential atmosphere, it may be easily
conceived, that the use of them must be attended with putrid and other
dangerous diseases.

Rainwater is also impure, as it contains many saline and oily particles, soon
putrifies, and principally consists of the joint exhalations of animals,
vegetables, and minerals, of an immense number and variety of small insects and
their eggs, seeds of plants, and the like. -- Rainwater is particularly impure
in places filled with many noxious vapors, such as marshy countries, and large
manufacturing towns, where the fumes of metallic and other substances are mixed
with rain. In high and elevated situations, at a distance from impure
exhalations, if no strong winds blow, and after a gentle shower, rainwater is
then purest; because the vapors of the atmosphere have already subsided. In
Summer, however, on account of the copious exhalations, rainwater is most
objectionable.

Snow-water possesses the same properties as rainwater, but it is purer: both
are soft, that is, without so many mineral and earthy particles as spring,
well, and river waters. Still purer is hail-water, as being produced in the
higher regions of the atmosphere, and having a form, in which it cannot easily
partake of impurities. Lastly, Dew, as it arises from the evaporations of
various bodies of the vegetable and animal kingdoms, is more or less impure,
according to the different regions and seasons.

As the health of man principally depends on the purity and salubrity of the
water he uses, we ought, where necessary, to deprive it of its pernicious
qualities; and this can be done by boiling, filtering, and most effectually by
distillation. The putrid substances in the water may be corrected by the
addition of an acid. Thus, half an ounce of alum in powder, will make twelve
gallons of corrupted water pure and transparent in two hours, without imparting
a sensible degree of astringency. By the addition of a very small quantity of
quick lime, water may be preserved from corruption in long voyages: or, to
prevent water from putrescence at sea, add a small quantity of alkali and
vitriolic acid to every cask, which will preserve it pure and wholesome for a
twelve month. Charcoal-powder has also been found to be excellently adapted to
check the putrid tendency of water, and for this reason the slaves of the
casks, used on shipboard, ought to be well burnt in the inside, to keep the
water from corrupting. Vinegar, or other strong acids, are also well calculated
to correct putrid water; and may be either mixed with it, or drunk immediately
after, to prevent its bad effects.

Wine, that salutiferous liquor to the infirm and the aged, may be divided into
five principal classes:

1st, The sweet wines, for instance, those of Hungary, Spain, Italy, Greece;
the Malaga, Malmsey, Madeira, and Cape wines. If these be genuine; if they have
not been adulterated by the addition of sugar or honey, etc. if they have been
properly fermented, they afford a true medicine to the weak and convalescent.

2d, The weakly acidulated wines; such as old Rhenish, Champaign, those of the
Mosel. of the Neckar, Franconia, and Austria; of these the Rhenish, Mosel, and
Champaign wines are the best.

3d, The acid and tart wines; among which are most of the wines of Franconia,
Thuringia, Saxony, Silesia, and some parts of Brandenburg. These wines, in
general, are apt to occasion head-achs, complaints of the stomach, and are
besides of an unpleasant taste.

4th, The acidulated sweet wines, particularly those of France, as the common
white wine and claret, are wholesome, provided that they be neither too old nor
too new; and

5th, The sharp and astringent wines, such as Port wine, Burgundy, the dry or
hard kinds of Madeira, Sherry, and the like, which, on account of their heating
and binding nature, ought to be used chiefly for medicinal purposes.

There are a great variety of fruit-wines, which are fermented like wines from
the grape; for instance, the current and raisinwines: but the artificial wines
of this country are, in general, liable to many strong objections. Among our
home-made, wines may be reckoned Cider and Perry, which are properly wines of
Apples and Pears. Cider and Perry are, it is said, generally fermented and kept
in leaden vessels, or at least the Apples and Pears are passed through leaden
tubes; and the lead being readily dissolved by the acid, is gradually
introduced into the body, which produces painful and dangerous colics, and
frequently gives rise to the most desperate and incurable obstipations, among
those habituated to the free use of these liquors.

With respect to the constituent parts of wine, I shall only remark, that every
kind consists of three principal ingredients, water, alcohol, or a pure spirit,
and sugar. If these three substances could be so intimately combined as they
are in wines, and if afterward the proper aromatics were added, to impart to
them the particular flavor, there is no doubt, but we could perfectly imitate
every wine whatever. But the greatest obstacle to this speculation is the
length of time, which wines require to arrive at a proper state of maturity,
and which, in made wines, ought to be still further prolonged.

The more water the wine contains, it is the more suitable beverage at table,
and, when weak, it is in some degree calculated to quench thirst. The strong
wines, on the contrary, excite thirst, as they are drying, and affect the
organs of secretion. As every kind of wine contains a greater or less quantity
of acid, it is an excellent antiseptic remedy, and hence it is given copiously
in putrid ulcers and malignant fevers. Moderately used, it increases the
circulation of the fluids, and dilates the blood vessels, promotes both the
secretions and excretions, and invigorates all the functions of the body. Every
motion is performed with greater vivacity, as is obvious from the additional
luster of the eyes. But the strength and vigor which wine imparts to the body,
is of no longer duration, than while it remains in the stomach, before it
enters into the mass of the blood, and while the stimulus received by the
nerves of the stomach, is propagated to the brain. This explains the cause,
that strong liquors are so intoxicating, when drunk upon an empty stomach.

That wine operates on and through the stomach, is clear from experience; for
an emetic taken immediately after it, will soon make a drunken man sober. But
if its spirituous parts be communicated to the blood, so as to occasion
fluctuations, the body becomes disordered, weak, and relaxed. It is only a
stimulant, and not a permanently strengthening cordial; for most wine-drinkers,
who indulge in excess, die of relaxation and debility. There may, however, be
cases in which an occasional excess of this kind will be salutary; for
instance, to a person who has been long sitting at study, or whose mind is
depressed, and whose fluids are nearly stagnating: as passions sometimes
conduce to animate the mind, and tempests to purify the atmosphere.

The state of intoxication is in every respect similar to that of incipient
apoplexy or palsy. -- Drunken men stagger in various directions, their tongue
loses its power of speech; they stammer, and see things double and moving
circularly. The mind is equally affected, and imbecility is the concomitant
effect. All these partial palsies arise from the pressure of the blood vessels
on the brain, which are then surcharged with blood. If the intoxication has
arrived at its utmost height, there is no longer any difference between this
and the true apoplexy; all the other organs are paralised, except the heart,
which continues its action, and breathing is not suppressed. The imprudent
sufferer is deprived of sensation, and if one of the smaller blood vessels,
that press on the brain with an unusual weight, should accidentally burst, he
is in danger of instant death. But still more frequently does one of the
pulmonary vessels burst, and occasion spitting of blood.

In drinking, also much depends on the bodily constitution and other
circumstances. -- Thus, people are soonest intoxicated in a cold place, where
perspiration is checked, and when the blood is moving from the external to the
internal parts. The same is the case on an empty stomach, but this may be
prevented by eating a little at intervals, especially fat or oily substances.
Individuals of much sensibility and irritability, and persons after having
taken violent exercise, are more liable to intoxication, than those of a calm
and a phlegmatic temperament.

For these reasons, a person much inebriated ought to be carried without delay
into a temperate room, and placed in a bed between the blankets, with his head
raised, in order to promote the circulation of the blood, from the head and the
internal organs toward the surface of the body and the lower extremities. All
close bandages of the shirt and garters must be loosed, and the feet should be
bathed in lukewarm water, not exceeding the ninety-eighth degree of Farenheit.
Plenty of tea or other diluent drink ought to be given, and a gentle emetic is
frequently of great service.

After a good sleep, which has overcome the intoxication, the whole body feels
weak and tremulous; and the stomach disordered. In this state, persons are
generally troubled with much acid in the digestive organ, which may be removed
by the absorbent earths, such as magnesia; after which, some sedative and
strengthening remedies may be given, such as hot red-wine negus, warm ale with
ginger, strong coffee, and the like.

The copious use of wine, though not to a degree of inebriation, is exceedingly
debilitating to the stomach, checking digestion, exciting diarrhoea, if
white wind, and obstructions, if port-wine be the favorite liquor; it makes the
fibers dry and rigid; the cheeks and the whole surface of the body turn sallow,
a symptom of bad digestion; the powers of the body and mind are enfeebled, and
dropsy or gout, and sometimes sudden death, are the consequences. Plethoric
young men, and such as have weak stomachs and lungs, should not accustom
themselves to the use of wine. To give it to infants or children, is a practice
highly pernicious, except in very small quantities indeed. In short, wine
should be used as a medicine only, if intended to produce salutary effects. To
the phlegmatic, to the aged, and to those who are disposed to flatulency, and
after fat meat, it is highly beneficial, if used with prudence and moderation.

As wine encourages perspiration, it dries the body, makes it lean, and may
therefore be of service to cold and phlegmatic constitutions. It stimulates the
bile, and excites the appetite to a repetition of excess, so that persons once
habituated to drinking can but gradually relinquish this seductive practice. To
drink wine copiously every day, is as improper and pernicious as to take
medicines by way of diet: nothing is so much calculated to occasion habitual
indigestion. And as wines are frequently adulterated with sugar of lead, and
other poisonous ingredients, to render them more agreeable to the palate, I
propose to bestow some attention on this important subject, in order to enable
the reader to detect such pernicious mixtures, which may expose his health, and
even life itself to the greatest danger.

Some of the adulterations of wine are rather harmless, others extremely
dangerous. The common red-wines are frequently made of new, tart, and
half-spoiled white wines, by tinging them with red sumach, or other woods and
berries. In order to make wines stronger and more pungent, a variety of spices
are employed, such as galangal, cardamom, mace, and the like; or an unfermented
must, wort, or the mash for distilling spirits, are occasionally added, and
allowed to ferment together with impure wines. To impart to wine the flavor of
muscadel, the leaves of the Horminum, a species of Sage ( Salvia Horminium, L.)
are often used; though it be a plant of a strong stupifying smell, and very
pernicious effects.

All adulterated wines, and what we call British wines, if drunk in any
quantity, are more or less detrimental to health. For, even by the most
innocent mode of preparing them in large quantities, the manufacturers are
induced to season them with spices of a heating and stimulating nature. But the
most deleterious of all adulterations of wine, is that with the various
preparations of lead, to give it a sweet taste. This infamous practice was
carried on, some years ago, in Paris, to such an extent, that the Excise-office
could not account for the prodigious increase of Vinegar entered at the
city-gates. But it was at length discovered, that this vinegar consisted only
of tart and adulterated wines, imported under the pretended character of
vinegar, in order to avoid the high duty imposed upon wines, on their entrance
into Paris: and sugar of lead, joined to some absorbent earths, was employed to
change these vinegars into sweet wines, which destroyed the lives of many
thousand persons. This secret of the utmost importance to health and life, was
confessed by a rich old wine-merchant, on his deathbed, to relieve in some
degree his tortured conscience.

Such adulterated wines operate like slow poisons; they first occasion
headache, contraction of the throat, pain of the stomach, uneasiness, cough,
difficulty of breathing; afterward colics, and particularly the dry belly-ach,
with continual obstipations, and at length palsy, convulsions, consumption, and
death. -- The brass cocks also, which are by some people used to draw of wine
or cider, are of the most dangerous tendency; as they easily yield and mix
their verdigrise with the liquor.

To detect adulterated wines, we must attend to the following particulars:
every white or straw-coloured wine of a sweetish taste, afterward astringent,
and at the same time new; every wine that has an unusually high color, not in
proportion to its strength and age, or if it has the flavor of brandy,
penetrates the tongue, or lastly, if it has an uncommonly strong flavor, may
be justly suspected of adulteration. -- Red wines, either of a very deep or a
very faint color; of a woody or tart taste; and those which cover the inner
surface of the glass, as well as the bottom of the bottles, with a red
sediment, are generally tinged with some coloring substances. If such a wine
be passed through filtering paper, the coloring particles will remain behind
on the paper.

By the following method, we may easily discover, whether wines be adulterated,
or colored, with burnt sugar, raisins, whortle-berries, and the like. A small
phial must be filled with the suspected wine; the opening is stopped with the
finger, and the phial, being inverted, is plunged into a tumbler of water; the
finger being withdrawn from the mouth of the phial, if the wine be adulterated
the substance with which this is done, will visibly escape from the phial, and
mix with the water; in so far at least, as the addition is heavier than water,
which is generally the case.

These adulterations, however, are of little detriment to health, if they
contain no metallic particles. In order to discover these, we are possessed of
an excellent chemical test, contrived by Prof. HAHNEMANN, in Germany, and known
by the name of Liquor vini probatorius. It is prepared as follows: One dram
of the dry liver of sulphur, and two drachms of cream of tartar, are shaken in
two ounces of distilled water, till it be completely saturated with hepatic
air: the liquor is then filtered through blotting paper, and kept in a close
stopped phial. From sixteen to twenty drops of this liquid are dropped into a
small glass, filled with wine that is suspected to have been adulterated. If
the wine turn only thick with white clouds, and deposit no other but a white
sediment, we may be certain that it contains no metallic ingredients whatever;
but if it turn black, or even dark, if its color approach that of a dark red,
if it have first a sweet, and then an astringent taste, it is certainly
impregnated with sugar of lead, or some other preparation of that metal equally
destructive. If, however, the dark color be of a bluish cast, not unlike that
of pale ink, we may suspect the wine to contain iron in its composition.
Lastly, if the wine be impregnated with copper or verdigrise, it will deposit a
sediment of a blackish gray color. This experiment ought to be made with a
fresh-prepared test, and in the open air.

It further merits attention, that white wines are very frequently colored
with burnt sugar and other vegetable bodies; they acquire a darker color by
being kept in oak casks, or by containing much tartar; and in all these cases
they will be made somewhat darker by the above described test; but the sediment
will not be of an uniform color, and will consist only of some brown streaks.
-- It is well known, that all white wines must be impregnated with a small
quantity of sulphur, in order to preserve them: if this be done in moderation,
it is not detrimental to health; but if too great a proportion of sulphur be
used, such wine occasions great heat and thirst, it soon intoxicates, produces
eruptions of the skin and face, headache, trembling of the limbs, and
palpitation of the heart, hemorrhoidal complaints, gout, and a variety of
nervous symptoms. Nothing is so easily discovered as sulphur; for by putting a
piece of silver, or even the shell of an egg, into an oversulpherated wine, it
will instantly turn black.

Wines are sometimes adulterated by mixing quicklime with them, in order to
produce a beautiful ruby-colour. If such a wine be poured into a tumbler, and
allowed to stand for a day or two, a thin crust or pellicle will be formed on
the top, by which the lime held in solution will be detected. It is affirmed
that such wines, if used for any length of time, bring on gouty and gravelly
complaints.

The most innocent adulteration of wine, and perhaps the most frequent, is that
with water. If a small quantity of wine be (...) on quicklime, and if the lime
be slackened by it, the wine then certainly contains water. But if the lime
continues whole, the wine is pure and unmixed.

Ardent spirits comprise all those liquors obtained by fermenting vegetable,
and particularly farinaceous substances, to a certain degree, and afterward
subjecting them to distillation. All distilled liquors consist of a great
proportion of alcohol or pure spirit, a greater or less quantity of water, and
generally of a very small proportion of an empyreumatic oil, especially if
distilled once only, or if this process be carried on too quickly. Pure spirits
are perfectly free from this oil, which, from its burnt and acrid nature, is
altogether indigestible. Proof spirits ought to consist of 55 parts of alcohol,
and 45 of distilled water in 100: but rectified spirits of wine ought to have
only 5 parts of water in the hundred: the specific gravity of the former being
as 930, and that of the latter as 835, to 1000.

The intoxicating effects of spirits are but too well known; if they be
distilled over peppermint, balm, anniseed, or carraway, their strength is not
much increased; but if over cinnamon, cloves, mace, or other hot spices, they
are rendered still more heating, and pernicious to health.

If drunk in hot weather, or after violent perspiration, they check this
function, by contracting the vessels of the skin, and closing the pores. On
account of this contracting power, they are sometimes of service to a person
whose stomach is overloaded with beer or water, to assist their passage through
the proper emunctories. After violent exercise and heat, a dram of spirits is
more proper than cold water or beer, though a cup of tea or other diluent drink
is preferable. After fat or strong food, spirits are exceedingly improper: for,
instead of promoting the solution and digestion of food in the stomach, they
rather tend to retard it. We may be convinced of this, by attending to the
effects they produce on inanimate substances: for these are preserved from
dissolution and putrefaction more effectually in spirits, than in any other
liquid. Thus we may learn, that spirits will impede digestion, and render
strong food taken into the stomach still more indigestible. Many persons are
accustomed to take a dram as a remedy against flatulency: if the stomach be
clean and undepraved, they will certainly be relieved by it; but, in the
contrary case, their expectations will be disappointed.

Ardent spirits are rendered still more contracting, and prejudicial to the
stomach, when combined with acids, as in punch; and, for the same reason, the
habit of taking drams after fruit, or any acid vegetable, is absurd.
Notwithstanding the frequent abuse of spirits, they afford one of the most
excellent antiseptics; but, if the human body be already replete with vitiated
humors, and troubled with frequent eructations, it is too late to cure it with
gin or brandy. These liquors, however, are of considerable service in
pre^^nting the bad effects of a moist and cold atmosphere, of pestilential
vapors, of very unclean occupations, of a damp military camp, and occasionally
too, of a temporary abstinence from food.

To persons of relaxed fibers, distilled liquors may, under certain
limitations, be useful, as they increase the elasticity and compactness of the
vessels. But to those, whose fibers are already rigid, spirits are obviously
pernicious, and have a tendency to bring on a premature old age. They stop the
growth of, and are otherwise very improper for, young persons.

That spirituous liquors incrassate and coagulate the fluids, we may easily
discover in those who are addicted to the use of them: they have a thick blood,
are troubled with constant obstructions of the intestines, and their
unavoidable consequences; such as a gradual deprivation of the nervous system,
loss of memory, debility of mind, hypochondriasis, jaundice, dropsy, and at
length consumption of the lungs. The throat and stomach of habitual tipplers
are rendered callous, and at length almost closed, the glands are indurated,
and consequently digestion is in the highest degree impaired.

Beer, considered according to its ingredients, consists of water, malt, and
hops; Besides these ingredients, Brewers are apt to add a number of other
substances, some of which are extremely noxious, and all prohibited by law.
These are C^^^ulus Indus, Coriander Seeds, Alum, Liquorice and Liquorice Root,
burnt Sugar, Treacle, Capsicum, Ginger, Copperas, etc. etc. -- An useful
pamphlet has lately been published, called " Every Man his own Brewer,"
detailing this manufacture, and, at the same time, showing practically, how any
private family, or even lodgers, may make Porter and Ale in the smallest
quantities, at less than half the expense at which these articles are purchased.
and in proportion to the quantity, quality, and manner of compounding them, it
has received different names, and is possessed of various degrees of salubrity.
The more water there is used in brewing beer; it is the better calculated to
quench thirst; but less so, if it contain a great proportion of the
mucilaginous and saccharine principle of the grain. Strong beer, therefore, is
very nourishing, and may be employed with advantage as a medicine, in emaciated
habits.

The greater or less addition of hops to the malt, furnishes us with bitter or
sweet beer. The former kind is preferable as a medicine; the latter is more
used as a common beverage; but it is apt to excite flatulency and diarrhoea.
Hops, like other bitter substances, preserve beer in its, vinous state,
strengthen the stomach, and dissolve viscid phlegm. Beer made of a great
proportion of hops, and a small quantity of malt, is a good beverage, and well
calculated to allay thirst.

There are great varieties in beer, accordingly as it is fermented; some kinds,
such as those made of oats, in some parts of Germany, which are scarcely
allowed to ferment at all, are very cooling in summer, but soon spoil; others
are only half-fermented, such as the Dantzig spruce or black beer; others again
to a sufficient degree, like our porter and ale; and lastly some, which are
more than sufficiently fermented, such as Burton ale, and most of the strong
home-brewed ales. All these are different in their effects, according to the
various degrees of fermentation.

Every kind of beer is inclined to ferment, on account of its constituent
parts. If it be not properly fermented, this takes place in the stomach itself;
the fixed air, being disengaged within the body, distends the stomach and
bowels, and occasions flatulency and looseness. However, when drunk in small
quantities, it is not attended with any great inconvenience, particularly in
summer, or in hot climates. It is used with great advantage at sea, against
that great enemy of the mariner, the scurvy; those persons who have corrupted
gums, that are painful and bleed on the least touch, ought to drink half a pint
of wort, or unfermented beer, every morning and evening, keeping this liquor
for a good while in their mouth; and they may promise themselves great benefit
from this simple remedy.

Many consider beer or porter as excellent, when it foams much and makes a
head, as it is called, on the top of the vessel; which is drunk by some
tipplers with avidity, before it disappears. But this froth is not a proof of
its good quality; but rather of its imperfect fermentation, which is continued
and completed in the stomach. It is likewise often artificially increased, by
the addition of improper ingredients. The volatile vapor, or gas, disengaged
from such beer in the stomach and bowels, produces a quantity of stimulating
and contracting air, by which the alimentary canal is almost at the same time
expanded and contracted, so that the most dangerous spasms and colics may
thence arise. Such beer likewise emits a quantity of sulphurous vapors; and
for this reason it is dangerous to go into cellars, where it is kept in a state
of fermentation. A candle will often be extinguished by the vapor of cellars,
which is sometimes so noxious as to suffocate persons on their entrance.

If bottles filled with beer, ale, or porter, are not soon enough corked, it
turns flat or sour, acquires an unpleasant taste, produces flatulency, colics,
and spasms. If bottled and corked in proper time, the gas which it ought to
contain is not dissipated; its agreeably pungent taste is preserved, and it is
then a very excellent and nourishing liquor, which allays thirst, and does not
affect digestion, like wine. -- A person who has a good appetite, and takes
nourishing food, requires no beer for its digestion; and, by drinking it, he is
exposed to plethora, or a full habit, and all its concomitant complaints.
Those, on the contrary, who take a great proportion of vegetable food, and have
a weak stomach, will find a strong and bitter beer salutary.

As every new sort of beer is not equally grateful to the stomach, we would do
well to desist from using that kind, to which we cannot habituate ourselves in
the course of two or three weeks. On account of the great variety of this
liquor we meet with in traveling, it is much better to drink no beer at all on
journeys, and instead of it to use lemonade, in hot weather, and wine or
spirits mixed with water, when we travel in a damp and cold season.

Beer, in general, is nourishing, and has a tendency to fatten such
individuals, as are of dry and rigid fibers, and whose bile is good. Hence the
inhabitants of countries, in which beer is the principal beverage, are commonly
more phlegmatic and indolent than those of wine-countries. Many sorts of beer,
however, in which a greater than usual proportion of grain is used, contain
much spirit, and are of a heating and inebriating nature. Such is, for
instance, our Burton and several other ales, and all the strong kinds of
foreign beer.

Light and well-fermented beer is a wholesome and, at the same time, diluent
species of nourishment. With persons already plethoric, or disposed to become
corpulent, the lightest beer generally agrees best. Think and nourishing beer
is of service to wet-nurses and the debilitated. Sweet beers are only
nourishing, but all the bitter kinds are strengthening also. The latter are
beneficial in a weak state of digestion, and to people troubled with acid in
the stomach; yet sweet beer is more wholesome for daily use, and at the same
time less exposed to dangerous adulterations. In short, beer is no proper
beverage for people of a thick, black-bilious blood, and with a disposition to
melancholy: it is the most useful species of drink to the weak, the lean, and
the laborious; provided they are not very subject to flatulency, nor troubled
with diseases of the breast. In both of these cases, I have found it uniformly
to disagree, and to be much inferior in salubrity to water.

A moderate use of fermented or distilled spirituous liquors is far less
prejudicial to the constitution, than the habitual and excessive drinking of
warm liquors. Tea, the common favorite among all ranks, if taken regularly
twice a day, and in large quantities, is attended with bad consequences. It
thoroughly relaxes the coats of the stomach, weakens the bowels, predisposes
them to flatulency upon the least occasion, and destroys all the energy of the
digestive organ. These effects, however, are not so frequent, nor indeed to
that extent, if the tea be drank strong, sufficiently diluted with milk, and
sweetened with sugar: it is chiefly the warm water, which renders the tea of
the common people so destructive to the constitution, as they generally make up
for the indifferent quality of the tea, by the quantity of water.

The tea-leaf, which has employed the pens of so many eminent writers, still
deserves some attention; as the nature and properties of it are but imperfectly
understood. It certainly is an aromatic, slightly astringent, and somewhat
narcotic plant. Whether it possess any diuretic, diaphoretic, and other
virtues, for which it has been celebrated, is rather doubtful; as these may be
in part owing to the great quantities of warm water, with which the infusions
of it are made. Good tea, particularly the black sort, in moderate quantity,
and made strong, is antispasmodic and refreshing. It is, therefore, calculated
to relieve the cramp of the stomach, and pains of the abdomen, if they proceed
from flatulency. But, according to circumstances, it may even increase
spasmodic contractions; for instance, if it arise from a vitiated bile, from
worms, or from hysteric and gouty complaints; in all which cases tea will most
certainly not relieve, but rather prolong the spasmodic contraction of the
vessels. The relaxation which tea occasions in the first passages, renders it
peculiarly hurtful to females of lax fibers, a thin blood, and irritable
habits. To enumerate the great diversity of nervous symptoms, attending its
abuse in such constitutions, would lead me too far from the prescribed limits;
but so much is certain, that the vapors arising from liquors drunk very hot
like tea, weaken the lungs, and dispose their votaries to frequent colds and
cararrhs, which readily make a transition into consumptions.

Individuals of a rigid and (...), of a dry and firm body, may be allowed to
drink tea in moderation, as it will not easily hurt them. By adding a
table-spoonful of old Rhenish wine, or ardent spirits, to every cup of tea, it
may be so far improved, as to make it less flatulent; but the frequent
repetition of it, even in this form, must be detrimental to the body. A
moderate use of tea may sometimes be of service to persons in a perfect state
of health; yet, for daily use, it cannot be recommended. It doubtless occasions
a gentle stimulus, and rouses the mind for a short time; hence it is perhaps
the best and safest refreshment after violent heat and fatigue of the body. As
the means of increasing perspiration, tea is an useful beverage to travelers
in cold weather, when insensible perspiration is liable to be checked.

Hypochondriac and hysteric people, however, are much deceived in the efficacy
of tea, as a diluent drink; for all the evils arising from relaxation, a weak
stomach, and flatulency, under which such persons usually labor, are, by the
habit of drinking tea, increased to the most alarming degree. The cold stomach,
which they propose to warm by it, is a mere phantom of the brain; for this
sensation of cold is nothing but relaxation, which cannot be removed by hot
liquors, but is increased by every repetition of them.

It would be a great proof of a patriotic spirit in this country, if the use of
this exotic drug were either altogether abandoned, or, at least, supplied by
some indigenous plants of equal flavor, and superior salubrity. The Chinese
have good reason to smile at our degenerate taste, when they are informed, that
we actually possess an immense variety of the most valuable aromatic plants,
much better calculated by nature to invigorate our stomachs, and to revive our
spirits, than tea, which we purchase from them at great expense. These
sentiments may be ungrateful to tea-dealers, or East India merchants, but every
honest truth should be heartily told to an unbiassed public.

It would undoubtedly be more conducive to our health, if we could altogether
dispense with the use of warm liquors, at least when in a state of health. But,
if this practice must be indulged in, we ought to choose the herbs growing in
our own meadows and gardens, instead of making ourselves tributary to distant
nations. With this intention, the late Dr. Solander introduced his Sanative
Tea; not with a view of making it a secret or quackmedicine, under which
character it is now sold in this country, but of recommending the use of it to
those individuals who require diluent liquors, and to the heavy, sluggish, and
phlegmatic. Dr. Tissot had previously recommended the stalks of cherries, and
the leaves of peach and almond trees, to the poor people of Switzerland, as
substitutes for tea; but we possess a variety of plants infinitely superior to
these, of which I have myself occasionally made trial. I shall divide these
into three classes; namely,

1st, The strong, spicy, and (...) plants, such as balm, peppermint, sage, and
the like.

2d, The strongly aromatic flowers, among which those of the Rosa pimpinellae
folia (or the rose whose leaves resemble those of the Burnet-saxifrage) and the
wood-roof, or the Asperula odorata, L., deserve the first place, and far excel
in flavor all the teas imported from China; and lastly,

3d, The mild aromatic leaves and blossoms of trees and shrubs, for instance,
the blossoms of the lime-tree and the black thorn, the leaves of the peach and
almond-trees, and particularly the first tender leaves of the whortle-berries,
or the Vaccinium Myrtillus, L., which cannot be distinguished from real tea,
when properly gathered, and dried in the shade.

After having pointed out the best substitutes for Indian Tea, I cannot
suppress my earnest wish, that even these indigenous vegetables may not be
abused by decocting them in too much water, which, when swallowed hot, must be
detrimental to the stomach, the lungs, the nerves, and the whole human frame. I
cannot better conclude this important article, than by quoting the prophetic
words of an experienced physician. -- "Tea," says he, "will induce a total
change of constitution in the people of this country. Indeed it has gone a
great way toward effecting that evil already. A debility, and consequent
irritability of fiber, are become so common, that not only women, but even men
are affected with them. That class of diseases, which, for want of a better
name, we call nervous, has made almost a complete (...) of the one sex, and is
making hasty (...) toward vanquishing the other." And Dr. Buchan emphatically
concludes: "Did women know the train of diseases induced by debility, and how
disagreeable these diseases render them to the other sex, they would shun tea
as the most deadly poison. No man can love a woman eaten up with vapors, or
washed down with diseases arising from relaxation."

Coffee is a decoction of the well-known bean or berry of that name, roasted
and ground into a powder. The bitter and astringent powers of the beans, in
some measure, correct the bad properties of warm water; but if they be too much
roasted, their empyreumatic oil is expelled, and they acquire an insipid taste.
If, on the other hand, they be not sufficiently roasted, this burnt oil is not
evolved to the surface of the bean, and the coffee acquires a bitter and
unpleasant flavor. This beverage is generally considered as strengthening to
the stomach. It promotes digestion, dispels flatulency, removes vertigo and
torpor, exhilarates the mind, increases the circulation of the blood and
insensible perspiration, attenuates viscid humors, is diuretic, and sometimes
gently aperient. These properties of Coffee being, in a great measure,
confirmed by experience, justly make it a valuable medicine, which is eminently
qualified to cure the most troublesome head-achs, provided they originate from
the stomach, or from a bad state of concoction. Coffee drunk after dinner
promotes digestion; and agues, diarrhoeas, and giddiness, have been frequently
^^moved by it. Its subtle oil stimulates the solids, rarefies the blood, and
consequently is of particular service to females of a sedentary life, and to
those who suffer from phlegmatic and catarrhal diseases. If drank too strong,
it affects the nerves, and by its penetrating property often occasions
sleeplessness, and tremor of the hands; but, in some phlegmatic and indolent
individuals, it is apt to excite sleep.

If coffee be not used merely as a diluent for relaxing the fibers, it ought to
be made strong. The best proportion is, one ounce of well-roasted and ground
coffee to one pound or one pint of water, which should be just allowed to boil
up: for the longer it is boiled, it loses the more of its volatile and aromatic
particles, and consequently becomes weak and insipid. -- As coffee is
possessed, of excellent antispasmodic virtues, it is a favorite beverage with
the hypochondriac and the hysteric; and according to early observation, it is
also the best and most effectual remedy in spasmodic asthma.

The steam of boiled coffee has frequently been beneficial to weak eyes. If
drunk in the morning, and immediately after dinner, of a proper strength, and
not above one or two small cups, it is a wholesome substitute for tea or
spirits, particularly to persons in a good state of health, and to such as are
not habitual wine-drinkers, or of a very irritable temperament. -- Lastly, the
coffee of the Levant far excels that imported from the West Indies, which is
frequently steeped in seawater, in order to make it weigh heavier. This
fradulent practice may be easily detected, by soaking the raw coffee in water,
and examining its taste.

An immoderate use, however, of this decoction is prejudicial to the healthy,
and destructive to the diseased: it debilitates the latter still more, by
causing great undulations in the blood, tremor of the limbs, giddiness, and a
certain insupportable timidity. It leads people of a sanguine temperament, and
particularly females, to the long train of all the fashionable nervous
diseases. It frequently occasions a disagreeable eruption in the face, and
brings on many troublesome disorders, occasions bleedings of the nose, and
sometimes spitting of blood, induces frequent hemorrhoids, a hectic cough, and
at last consumption and death. -- If coffee be drunk after dinner, with a view
to promote digestion, it requires no milk to dilute it, and render it weaker:
but, if it be used for breakfast, some milk or cream is necessary, to sheath or
neutralize the empyreumatic oil it contains, which fires the blood, and
occasions violent flushings, accompanied with choleric sensations.

All the kinds of mock coffee, made of rye, wheat, peace, dried carrots, beet,
the succory-root, and the like, have little resemblance to it, except what they
acquire by their burnt taste and empyreumatic oil. A coffee made of acorns is
much recommended in asthmatic and spasmodic complaints; but as it contains an
uncommon quantity of oil, which is dangerous and heating to the blood, too much
circumspection cannot be employed in the use of it. From my own experience, I
recommend to begin with adding about one eighth, then one sixth, and gradually
a greater part of the burnt acorns to the coffee, till at length they may be
used in equal quantities.

Chocolate, especially when boiled with milk and eggs, is exceedingly
nourishing: but the spices with which it is mixed, such as cinnamon, cloves,
musk, vanilla, and the like, make it more heating and less wholesome. Vanilla,
which we always find in the Spanish Chocolate, is an extremely volatile and
pungent aromatic; even its flavor is frequently insupportable to hysteric and
hypochondriac persons; it occasions violent headache, trembling, giddiness, and
other symptoms, occurring in these complaints. The common chocolate, prepared
with sugar, eggs, milk, and water, is the most nutritive and wholesome; but a
too frequent and immoderate use of it is always hurtful, particularly to the
individuals before alluded to, as the cacao is too fat and indigestible to
them, and creates a false or forced appetite. Cacao, of itself, is less heating
and lighter than if made into chocolate, but it is not so nourishing. The
immoderate use of this oily beverage is apt to induce a febrile state in young
people, and to supply the sedentary with superfluous nourishment; while it
frequently brings on, like coffee, a state of irritability and uneasiness. To
the corpulent and weak it is improper; and if they be immoderate eaters, they
are hastening to contract inflammatory diseases and apoplexies. It also
disagrees with persons much employed in mental pursuits; and those who imagine
that it will supply their losses, sustained by nocturnal debaucheries of
whatever kind, will find themselves disappointed in their hopes: by continually
drinking chocolate, and using other nutritive substances, they will, indeed, be
stimulated to new irregularities, but eventually at the expense of their
palsied nerves, and their broken frame. In children threatened with a wasting,
or tabes dorsalis, as likewise in some kinds of consumption in adults,
Chocolate, with a sufficient quantity of milk, may be beneficial; but even in
these cases a strong decoction of roasted oatmeal in milk, with a small
addition of chocolate, is much better calculated to effect a cure.

Punch is a well-known beverage, the composition of which requires no
description, as it may be made of every kind of spirituous liquor, diluted,
with water, acid and sugar. If a proper quantity of acid be used, it is an
excellent antiseptic, and well calculated, to supply the place of wine, in
resisting putrefaction, especially if drunk cold and with plenty of sugar: it
also promotes perspiration; but, if drunk hot and immoderately, it creates
acidity in the stomach, weakens the nerves, and gives rise to complaints of the
breast. After a heavy meal it is improper, as it may check digestion, and
injure the stomach.

Negus is one of the most innocent and wholesome species of drink, especially
if Seville oranges be added to red Port wines, instead of lemons; and drunk
moderately, it possesses considerable virtues in strengthening the stomach;
but, on account of the volatile and heating oil in the orange-peel, negus, if
taken in great quantities, is more stimulant and drying than pure wine itself.
Persons troubled with the hemorrhoids, and diseases of the breast, should not
indulge themselves in this, nor in the preceding species of drink.

I cannot conclude this section without mentioning vinegar and oil, two
substances which partly belong to the department of drink, and partly to that
of spices.

Vinegar is an excellent preservative of animal substances from putrefaction,
especially in a warm temperature; and I cannot but regret that this invaluable
liquor is too little used in our kitchens, as well as upon our tables. It
promotes digestion, and is perhaps never communicated to the blood in its acid
state: hence it is an erroneous notion, that vinegar is detrimental to the
secretion and quality of the milk in wet-nurses. In some individuals, however,
it is apt to produce a sudorific effect, and even laxity of the bowels, on
account of its astringent property. Used with moderation, as an article of
seasoning rather than drink, especially in warm weather and with animal food,
it is both savoury and wholesome. But we ought to be careful to obtain good
vinegar; for various kinds of it, which are made of sloes, the husks of nuts,
and other strong astringents, certainly are pernicious to health. The best and
most palatable vinegar is that obtained from white wines, raisins, and sugar.

Oil is preferable to animal fat, but ought to be fresh, mild, and of a
sweetish taste. It seldom or never agrees with weak stomachs; for in them, even
in its mildest state, it easily generates a rancid acrimony, extremely
injurious to digestion. It should be eaten with much bread, when used in salads
or otherwise, as it requires a powerful and active bile to assimilate it to
alimentary matter. Olives and almonds yield the greatest quantity of oil; and
next to Province oil, that expressed from walnuts and chestnuts, is the
sweetest, and easiest of digestion.

Of Spices.
Spices, of themselves, are not nourishing, but are used merely to improve the
taste and flavor of substances, to prevent flatulency, and to promote
digestion. Some spices, being extremely volatile, and occasioning too strong a
stimulus, do more harm than good. As they are apt to heat the blood, to
increase perspiration, occasionally to affect the head, and to stimulate the
nerves, spices, in general, should be used only by persons possessing a strong
constitution, or by those of a lax fiber, and cold phlegmatic habit: as, on the
contrary, individuals naturally lean and dry, as well as the choleric and
phlegmatic, ought to be sparing and cautious in the use of heating spices. The
most conducive to health would be the indigenous spices, though some of the
foreign kind have now become indispensable in our present mode of living. The
most common, and perhaps the most useful, are:

1. Salt. It corrodes the fibers of plants and animals, disorganizes the
connection of parts too firm for the solution of the stomach, dissolves the
glutinous parts, and prepares them for being better digested by the stomach.
Provisions of a tough and viscid consistence, therefore, require much salt; for
instance, beef, mutton, fish, peace, beans, fat, etc. There is little danger of
using too much salt with fresh victuals, as the only consequence arising from
excess would be a slight laxity of the bowels. -- In order to obtain salt as
pure as possible, and free from the bitter magnesia, which is the great
promoter of putrefaction, I take this opportunity of recommending an ingenious
and simple process lately invented by Lord Dundonald, one of the most zealous
and able cultivators of the useful arts; Dissolve as much common salt in a
given quantity of boiling water as it is capable of containing in solution.
Take another quantity of salt not larger than the former, and put it into a
glass funnel, or similar vessel of wood or earthen-ware, which ought to be
lined with coarse thick lin^n cloth. While the strong brine is hot, pour it
over the dry salt, of which it will not dissolve a particle, but merely wash
away the magnesia and other impurities adhering to its surface; and by
repeating this effusion several times, the washed salt will become tolerably
pure. The whole of this process depends on the principle, that water can
dissolve only a certain quantity of salt, and that the magnesia may be washed
away by such a supersaturated solution, while the salt to which it adheres
remains insoluble. Salt thus purified will doubtless be more wholesome, and
more effectual for all the purposes of salting and pickling provisions; as the
magnesia contained in the common salt renders double, perhaps triple the
quantity necessary, which would be required, were it in a pure state, or
deprived of the magnesia.
-- Hence salt beef and herrings agree so well with vegetables, because the
abundance of salt in the former, seasons the latter. But too copious a use of
salted provisions is extremely prejudicial; they weaken the solids, and the
blood becomes thin, acrid, and disposed to putrescency; hence arise scurvy in
all its stages, eruptions of the skin, consumptions, and other diseases.

2. Sugar is at present one of the first necessaries of life. It is an
unfounded conjecture, that sugar renders the blood thick or viscid; on the
contrary, it is possessed of diluent and attenuating properties. But the
immoderate use of sugar, especially the moist and coarse sort, may in a
considerable degree prevent digestion, by consuming the oleaginous part of our
fluids, impeding the assimilation of food, and generating mucus and acidity in
the alimentary canal.

It has frequently been asserted, that sugar injures the teeth: this, however,
is not strictly true; for it is only by its vitiating the stomach, and
generating impure blood, that the teeth become sympathetically affected. Hence
persons of weak digestion, those with debilitated nerves, the hypochondriac,
hysteric women, and especially children subject to complaints arising from
worms, ought to use this luxurious substance sparingly, and only occasionally.
If moderately used, it promotes digestion, being a gently solvent and
stimulating salt. But, where people take it without moderation, sugar may
prevent digestion, not on account of its substance, but by obstructing the
assimilation of food, so that it produces slimy and acid matters in the
alimentary canal. The acid which sugar contains, renders it an excellent remedy
against putrescence. The finest sort of sugar being freed of all impurities, is
the best and most wholesome. Yet, in sore throats and other catarrhal
affections, I would prefer sugar candy or moderately fine loaf-sugar, to that
which is double refined, on account of some particles of lime and clay,
necessarily remaining in the latter, from the manner in which it is prepared.
-- Other sweet substances, such as honey, cannot altogether supply the place of
sugar, as they are not possessed of the same properties; but there have been
already made some very successful experiments with the American maple-tree, (
Acer saccharinus) which afford great hopes that we may obtain this valuable and
indispensable salt, in future times, from that quarter of the globe, in
sufficient quantities, and at a reasonable price, when the most flagitious of
all trades, that in human flesh, shall have been entirely abolished. I must on
this occasion refer the reader to the account I have given of the beet-root,
(p. 81.) which promises to become an invaluable, copious, and perma^ent
substitute for sugar.


3. Honey, like sugar, contains an acid, but many more inflammable particles;
it easily ferments, and therefore occasions flatulency. In some particular
habits it is apt to occasion gripes and looseness: as a medicine, it is useful
to the asthmatic, to promote the expectoration of tough phlegm; and so far it
is an useful detergent and aperient. But, as a part of diet, when immoderately
used, it is hurtful to weak stomachs, and ought to be avoided by people who are
troubled with a superabundance of bile, and whose humors incline to
putrefaction.

4. The different species of Pepper, being strongly heating and stimulating,
should be used with precaution. Yet its peculiar warming and stomachic virtues
make it an excellent spice, and proper to be used with fat, tough, and smoked
meat, with flatulent vegetables, with the cooling cucumbers and melons, as well
as with fish and other substances difficult of digestion. Pepper ought, for
these purposes, to be coarsely ground. If taken in whole grains, it imparts to
the stomach only a small part of its virtues, and cannot be reduced in
digestion. In this form it is an old and effectual domestic remedy of the
Germans, against viscidity in the stomach, flatulency, weak digestion, and
consequent giddiness. For these purposes, from six to ten pepper-grains should
be swallowed in the morning, on an empty stomach. Yet I would not advise this
practice to be followed, except to some very vitiated stomachs, which have been
accustomed to spices and spirituous liquors, and with whom the pepper may serve
as a substitute for drams.

5. Cubebs, Cardamoms, Vanilla and Cloves, are hot, pungent, and consequently
improper for daily use. -- Cubebs are much inferior in pungency to pepper. --
Cardamoms are a warm and grateful aromatic; they do not, like those of the
pepper kind, immoderately heat and inflame the bowels; hence they certainly
deserve the preference for common use. -- Vanilla Vanilla is the pod of the
Epidendron, L. growing in Cayenne and some parts of Spanish America. The
largest pods are sometimes six inches long, narrow, and almost triangular,
soft, oleaginous, externally of the appearance of leather, and internally
filled with a dark brown pulp, in which we find a great number of small black
or brownish red and shining seeds. These have a pungent aromatic and oily
taste, and a strongly balsamic odor, much resembling that of the Peruvian
balsam. A very small proportion of these seeds, for instance, a grain to an
ounce, is sufficient to impart to the Chocolate the very agreeable flavor
which we generally meet with in that imported from Spain and Milan.
is warming, resolvent, strengthening to the stomach, and a remedy for
flatulency. In chocolate, it assists the digestion of the oily substance of the
cacao.

Cloves are hot and stimulant aromatics, but formerly seldom obtained genuine
in this country, as the Dutch frequently mixed them with other cloves,
previously deprived of their essential oil by distillation. -- Mace and Nutmeg
are less heating, and therefore preferable for common use; but the former is
still more so than the latter, which is supposed to have an astringent virtue,
and is employed with that intention in diarrhoeas and dysenteries. -- Cinnamon
is undoubtedly the most delicate spice, but is seldom obtained pure from the
mercenary Dutch, who were accustomed to send us more Cassia than real cinnamon.
The Cassia bark, though resembling that of cinnamon in taste, is much less
heating, and certainly more beneficial for common use than cinnamon, which is
better calculated to answer medicinal purposes. The bark of cassia is thicker
and coarser; it breaks short and smooth, while the cinnamon breaks fibrous and
shivery. -- Pimento, or Jamaica pepper, resembles in its smell a mixture of
cinnamon, cloves, and nutmeg, whence it has received the name of all-spice; it
is milder than the East India pepper, and is an useful addition to broths and
stewed dishes, when used, as it ought to be, in whole grains. -- Ginger is one
of the most agreeable and wholesome spices, especially boiled whole in beer,
and drunk by people moving in the open air, and in cold weather. But this
spice, as employed by the bakers for gingerbread, does a great deal of
mischief, especially to the stomachs of children; though it may occasionally be
serviceable to travelers, early in the morning, and on an empty stomach. If
the bakers knew what the substance is, with which they gild its outside, to
invite children to eat their ill-contrived gingerbread, I venture to hope they
would desist from so pernicious a practice. This gold leaf, or Dutch gold, is
actually manufactured of brass or copper, one of the most virulent metallic
poisons. ^.


The indigenous, spicy, and balsamic herbs, such as parsley, marjoram, thyme,
sage, and the like, cannot be too much recommended for culinary use, especially
in broths; as they are well calculated, by their aromatic virtues, to assist
the digestion of many strong articles of food, which daily cover our tables;
and these excellent herbs are not liable to the adulterations with which most
of the foreign spices are vitiated.

6. Among all the native spices, there is none, in my opinion, which excels, in
medicinal virtues, the common Caraway. The seeds of this plant are the mildest
and most useful carminative we possess. To people of a weak digestion, troubled
with flatulency and colics, they afford the most certain relief, if used in
sufficient quantity; for instance, a table-spoonful at a time, early in the
morning, and one hour before a meal: or still better, if these seeds are
plentifully used in bread, and among cooked victuals. Yet here I must caution
those of a hot and bilious temperament, as likewise individuals liable to
obstructions and habitual costiveness, not to use these seeds indiscriminately,
and without consulting a professional man.

Caraway-seeds, finely pounded, with a small proportion of ginger and salt,
spread upon bread and butter, and eaten every day, especially early in the
morning, and at night before going to bed is successfully used in Germany as a
domestic remedy against hysterics, and will, no doubt, effectually cure the
disease, provided it does not arise from improper diet, obstructions of the
intestines and other vessels, passion, bile, acrid humors, and the like; in
all which cases the caraway and ginger will certainly do more harm than good;
as each of these causes must be removed by the apposite means.

If, however, caraway be kept in a pounded state, for the purpose of overcoming
the disposition to flatulency and indigestion, it soon turns rancid, and may
prove hurtful, on account of the strong oil it contains. -- The plant of
caraway is one of the early spring-herbs, and makes an excellent addition to
salads. The seeds, when distilled with ardent spirits, yield a very heating and
pernicious oil, which renders such spirits still more detrimental to health,
than when they are in a pure state.

CLASSIFICATION Of the various Species of Food, Drink, and Spices, according to
their individual salubrity.
I. FOOD.
Division First. Alimentary substances containing wholesome fluids.
CLASS I. Articles affording strong nutriment.

ORDER I. Vegeto-farinaceous substances. Genus, i. With soft juicy fibers.

1. Such as contain a saccharine matter; as the skirret or sugar-root ( Sium
Sisarum, Linn.) the common carrot, beet, and polypody-root ( Polypodium
vulgar, L.)

2. Sweetish substances affording a tender farina or meal; as the parsnip, the
turnip-rooted cabbage ( Napobrassica,) the colewort ( Caulis Rapicius,) viper's
grass ( Scorzonera, L.) the goat's-beard, or salsafy ( Tragopogon Pratense, L.)
the Solomon's seal ( Convallaria Polygonatum, L.) parsley-root, asparagus,
turnips, and potatoes.

Genus ii. Substances affording flour, or those of a viscous, earthy
consistence; viz. every species of grain, as wheat, rye, barley, oats,
buck-wheat, millet, maize, or Indian-Corn, the chickling-vetch ( Lathyrus
Tuberosus, L.) and the like.

ORDER II. Gelatinous animal substances.

Genus i. Of a soft and juicy muscular substance; viz. veal, lamb, young beef,
mutton, pork, venison, turtle, hare, rabbits, badgers, domestic fowls,
pheasants, partridges, the greater number of land-fowl, oysters, small
lobsters, and fresh eggs.

Genus ii. Of a hard and tough consistence; viz. all the animals before
mentioned, when old; as well as the bustard, the starling, the woodpecker, the
sparrow, the goose, the duck, the lapwing, muscles, snails, crabs, hard boiled
eggs, etc.

ORDER III. Fat or butyro-oleaginous substances.

Genus i. Of the sweet kind; viz. cacao, sweet almonds, walnuts, hazel-nuts,
water-caltrops, chestnuts, beech-nuts, cashew-nuts ( Anacardia,) pistachionuts,
wild pine-apples ( Karatas,) milk, and fresh cheese.

Genus ii. Of the bitterish and tart kind; viz. bitter almonds, acorns, all the
seeds of fruit, and olives.

CLASS II. Slightly nutrimental substances.

ORDER I. Those of a viscous and watery consistence, or whose vegetable
mucilage is diluted with much water.

Genus i. Of a sweet taste; viz. melons, and several species of pears and
apples, sweet citrons, lemons, oranges, figs, mulberries, raspberries, sweet
grapes, cherries, and plums, jujube-berries, dates, etc.

Genus ii. Of a sweetish taste; viz. green peace and beans, white cabbage,
cauliflower, spinach, orach, blite, or strawberry-spinach, cucumbers, and
gourds.

Genus iii. Of a compound sweet and bitter taste; viz. the succory, the rampion
( Phyteuma, L.), the borage, the sowwort ( Serratula, L.), the young shoots of
hops, the sow-thistle ( Sonchus, L.), the hedge-mustard, artichokes, capers,
the brook-lime, endives, and lettuce.

Genus iv. Of a mildly sweetish and spicy taste; viz. celery, angelica,
shepherd's-needle ( Scandix cerefolium, L.), fennel, and the common balm (
Melissa officinalis, L.)

Genus v. Of an acrid taste; viz. radishes, turnip-radishes, horse-radishes,
tarragon ( Artemisia Dracunculus, L.) scurvy grass, and rue.

Genus vi. Of an acid taste; viz. sorrel ( Rumex acetosa, L.), purslane (
Portulaca, L.), four citrons, lemons, limes, cherries, plums, etc.

Genus vii. Of a vinous quality; viz. all sweet apples, particularly rennets,
apples of Borstof, and some few varieties from America; the pineapple (
Ananas), the honey or paradise-apple, shaddocks or sina-apples,
bramble-berries, straw-berries, whortle-berries, goosberries, currants, grapes,
apricots, peaches, and nectarines.

Genus viii. Of a tart and astringent taste; viz. all the wild-growing apples
and pears, quinces, cran-berries, red whortle-berries, bar-berries, the green
summer and winter pears, four apples, medlars, the fruit of the dog-rose or
hip-tree, and of the service-tree, sloes or the fruit of the black-thorn, and
the green Brasilian plums.

ORDER II. Those of a gelatinous watery consistence.

To this order belong all the various species of fishes.

Division Second. Alimentary substances, containing unwholesome fluids.
ORDER I. Those of an acrid nature.

1. Coarsely viscous and saline substances; viz. all salted and smoked animal
food, both of quadrupedes and fishes.

2. Putrescent, or easily putrescible substances; viz. the ram, the he-goat,
the bull, the otter, water-fowls, the blood of animals, roasted eggs, tainted
eggs, and lastly all the flesh of wild and tame animals kept too long, with a
view of making it more tender.

3. Substances of a furry and leathery appearance, or such as discover a
suspicious acrimony; viz. truffles, morels, and all kinds of mushrooms.

ORDER II. Those of gross fluids, or a coarse earthy consistence; namely, the
various leguminous seeds, such as dried peace, beans, lentils, and the like.

II. DRINK.
(A) Watery Liquors.
I. Simple or uncompounded; namely all kinds of common water.

II. Mucous-watery-spiritous.

1. All fermented liquors known under the name of beer or ale.

2. Spicy-balsamic liquids; such as the vernal sap of the birch and
maple-trees, as well as the artificial preparations of tea, coffee, and
chocolate.

3. Sweetly-acidulated; namely, lemonade, orgeat, mead, must, and the like.

(B) Spirituous Liquors.
I. Distilled: namely, all kinds of ardent spirits, from whatever grain or
vegetable substance they may be extracted.

II. Fermented: All kinds of Wine.

1. Sweet wines; those of Hungary, Spain, Italy, Greece, and the Cape wine; as
likewise all wines made of currants, raisins, etc.

2. Slightly acidulated wines; among which Champaign, Rhenish wine, or old
Hock, and that of the Moselle, are the principal.

3. Acid and tart wines; to which chiefly belong the wines of Franconia and
Saxony.

4. The acidulated sweet wines; such are most of the French wines, and
particularly Claret; and, lastly,

5. The sharp and astringent wines; the chief of which are the wines of Oporto
and Burgundy.

III. SPICES.
1. Of the sweet kind; such as sugar, honey, manna, and the inspissated sap of
the maple and beech-trees.

2. Of the acid kind; namely, the juice of citrons, lemons, unripe grapes, etc.

3. Of the saline kind; namely, common salt, whether obtained in a solid form,
as rock-salt, or from the evaporation of the sea and salt-springs. Lastly,

4. Of the pungent and balsamic kind; such as garlic, shalot, onions, chives,
nutmeg, mace, pepper, pimento, cubebs, vanilla, cardamoms, bay berries,
juniper berries, ginger, calamus, cloves, cinnamon, saffron, carraway,
coriander, fennel, parsley, dill, sage, marjoram, thyme, pennyroyal, mugwort,
hyssop, peppermint, and rue.

CHAP. VIII.
Of EVACUATIONS; -- their different species, as well as their peculiar nature
investigated; together with the necessary directions for their management,
according to the different states of the body.

THE evacuations of the body, from its superfluous, impure, and noxious
particles, are no less necessary than its nourishment. The same power which
changes and assimilates our food and drink, likewise effects the due and timely
evacuation of what is secreted. It is an object of the first consequence, that
nothing remain in the body, which ought to be evacuated; and that nothing be
ejected, which may be of use to its preservation.

How many persons do we find complaining of bad health, notwithstanding every
attention they pay to the air they breathe, to aliment, exercise, sleep, etc.;
while others enjoy a good state of health, though totally careless with regard
to these particulars. Indeed, much depends on a proper state of the
evacuations. -- If these be disordered, the most rigorous observance of
dietetic rules is insufficient to insure our health; while, on the contrary,
most of those rules may be neglected, for some time, without any injurious
consequences, if the evacuations be duly attended to.

Nature removes not only the noxious matter, or such as is in a state of
corruption, but likewise the useful fluids, if they become superabundant; for
instance, the milk, the semen, the blood. In such cases, therefore, these must
be considered as objects of evacuation, equally natural and salutary.

By stool, the thick and feculent remains of assimilated food are evacuated;
for every article of aliment contains more or less dregs, and their smallest
particles only can be changed into the milky fluid, or chyle.

By urine, we eject the oily and saline particles secreted from the blood, in a
diluted state; which prevents these particles from injuring the external
membranes, by their irritating acrimony.

By insensible perspiration, which is carried on through the smallest orifices
of the pores, the most subtle and noxious particles of the fluids are
evaporated; which, if they were retained within the body, would lay the
foundation of its total corruption.

Nature expels all crude and acrid substances by these three principal
emunctories; and accordingly as they are disordered, diseases of different
degrees of malignity and duration will necessarily ensue. -- Nature also
frequently relieves herself by more unusual channels; such are, the bleeding of
the nose in plethoric young men, the hemorrhoids with which persons of a middle
age are sometimes troubled, the various ulcers common to those whose fluids are
in an impure state, the excretions of saliva, and the expectorations of others,
etc. By a premature suppression of these troublesome but salutary efforts of
nature, great mischief may be produced to the individual.

Many persons perspire much under the armpits, others in their hands or feet;
others again are subject to eruptions in the face or other parts of the body;
such canals, however, if Nature be once accustomed to eject by them certain
useless and hurtful particles, cannot be hastily stopped, without occasioning
greater and more dangerous inconveniences; cleanliness, in the strictest sense
of the word, is almost the only safe remedy to counteract their fatal effects.

Of Evacuations by Stool.
As the food and drink we consume every day, necessarily deposits useless
matter, a daily opening by stool is extremely salutary; particularly to persons
subject to costiveness and the many disagreeable consequences thence arising.
Of these I shall only enumerate frequent head-achs, difficult breathing,
flatulency, eructations, and spasms: hence peevishness of temper, general
lethargy, and at length, hypochondriasis; -- the abdomen of such persons feels
tumid; the circulation of the blood in the intestinal vessels is retarded; and,
consequently, the general circulation interrupted. These complaints, sooner or
later, certainly attend habitual costiveness; especially if no other kind of
evacuation, as that by urine, or insensible perspiration, be in an uncommon
degree increased.

In healthy individuals, the evacuation by stool usually takes place once or
twice a day; and, according to the habits of the person, either in the morning
or evening. Those who are troubled with costiveness should visit the customary
retreat, regularly every morning at a fixed hour, and thus endeavor to promote
this necessary evacuation by proper efforts, though they may not, at the
moment, feel much inclination; for it is well founded on experience, that
Nature at length will be habituated, by perseverance, to observe a certain
regularity in this respect. The most proper time for these attempts is early in
the morning, or late in the evening.

Whatever dietetic means may be adopted to promote stool ought to be employed
either from three to four hours previous to the time we wish to succeed, or
immediately before going to bed. If in the morning, we ought to rise early, to
take first a slice of bread with much fresh butter; then eat some boiled
prunes; drink two or three cups of the decoction; and, if necessary, assist the
operation of the whole with a tea-spoonful or two of cream of tartar in
treacle. Thus prepared, we ought to walk a little in the open air, or, if the
weather be unfavourable, about the room; to rub the lower belly with the palm
of the hand; and, when we sit down, to retain the breath, by frequently, though
moderately, inspiring; and, lastly, to change the posture of the body, from a
straight to a crooked and sidelong direction, till we succeed in the attempt.

Although these trials should repeatedly fail, we must not be discouraged from
persevering in them; nor ought we, without absolute necessity, to choose any
other than the wonted hour to attain the end proposed; so that this, at length,
may become the only time, when Nature shall spontaneously assist our
endeavors. During these practices, however, the choice of our diet is of the
greatest moment; as we can powerfully promote the desired end, by living
chiefly upon rye-bread, spinach, boiled fruit, particularly prunes, decoctions
of currants, the sweet and emollient vegetables, especially the beet-root, and
occasionally salted meat; the last of which should be assisted with much drink,
not of the spirituous kind, but rather of a mild and aperient nature, such as
sweet table-beer, whey, infusions of malt, apples, pears, and the like.

It deserves to be remarked, that if every effort of this kind prove abortive,
the voluntary exertions in promoting stool should not be carried to an
extravagant degree; as by such unnatural pressure we may bring on ruptures, the
bursting of veins in the rectum, or the piles. Hence it is more advisable to
abstain, for some time, from all crude and solid aliment, and to use only such
articles of food and drink as have been before pointed out. And if this also
should not be attended with the desired effect, we may then have recourse to
the mild purgatives, such as rhubarb, senna, cream of tartar, and the neutral
salts.

While too much rest, and a sedentary life, prevent this species of daily
evacuation, gentle exercise, accompanied with serenity of mind, almost
certainly promote it. In many families, costiveness is an habitual and
hereditary distemper. Sometimes too it originates from a weakness of the
intestinal canal brought on by diseases, but more frequently from the habitual
use of certain substances of food and drink; for instance, the lean flesh of
quadrupeds, game, the leguminous vegetables, red Port wine, strong and bitter
malt liquor, and the like. Hence the pre-disposing cause of the complaint
should always be attended to. If it arise from weakness, red wine, bitter ale,
and other corroborants, are well calculated to effect a cure. In every
instance, frequent exercise in the open air is extremely useful. Persons living
sparingly on animal food, and who are otherwise temperate in their passions and
desires, are seldom deprived of this natural benefit; and even though they
should be without it for two or three days together, they have little to
apprehend from such irregularity; for, as they do not wantonly overload their
stomach, the accumulation of impurities cannot be considerable.

Where weakness and atony, or laxity of the intestines, are the causes of a
costive habit, the external use of cold water, by affusion on the lower belly
or merely washing it with that fluid, is frequently preferable to all other
dietetic remedies. This is one of the most simple means of preventing painful
costiveness; though it ought not to be applied indiscriminately, and least of
all in those cases where the use of the cold bath is improper and hurtful. --
If debility and relaxation of the intestinal canal be the cause of costiveness,
clysters of cold water alone are generally productive of singular benefit; yet
these also cannot be used without many exceptions -- not, for instance, by
females, during the menses, by persons afflicted with the piles, or having weak
lungs, nor in certain kinds of colics and spasms.

The discharges by stool ought to be neither in too liquid nor too dry a state.
Strong labor, heating drinks, and long fasting, render them disagreeably hard,
even in the healthiest individuals; from the feces remaining too long in the
region of the lacteals, so that the nutritious or milky part of the concocted
mass is exhausted to the last drop, and there remains behind no other but dry,
excrementitious matter. These stools, therefore, are frequently a symptom of
good digestion, such as attends sound constitutions in general.

Too dry excrements, in the form of balls, especially in delicate individuals,
occasion headache, inflammation of the eyes, febrile complaints, hemorrhoids,
ruptures, paralytic affections, and frequently produce flatulency and spasms,
in persons subject to hysterics and hypochondriasis: nay, even the suppression
of flatulency is extremely dangerous. Those who are apt to delay going to
stool, expose themselves to many serious inconveniences. When this sensation is
lost, it does not usually return for some time. The feces collected in the
intestinal canal powerfully distend it, give rise to the blind hemorrhoids, and
sometimes even to a falling down of the anus; the excrements become dry, and
their re-absorbed fluid parts irritate and vitiate the blood, and produce many
obstinate distempers. If a person has been costive for several days, the
inclination to go to stool is sometimes lost, until restored by artificial
means.

Loose and too frequent stools are common with those, who take more aliment
than their stomach can digest; for the food, from the stimulus occasioned by
its corruption in the alimentary canal, is too soon ejected, without being duly
assimilated. Hence debilitated persons, who eat immoderately, generally are
thinner and less muscular than others, who observe a regular and temperate
diet. The stools are a tolerable criterion of the quantity and quality of the
food we have taken, and whether the digestive powers be adequate to its
concoction. For, in weak intestines, the unassimilated matter of food turns
acrid, and contributes nothing to the nourishment of the body. Thus it happens,
that debilitated individuals, and such as are of a phlegmatic habit, continue
lean and emaciated, whatever quantity of food they consume. For this reason,
they ought to live principally on milk, eggs, broths, tender meat, emollient
vegetables; and to eat only when they feel a true appetite, and after moderate
exercise. -- It is not the man who takes comparatively little food, that can be
called temperate; but rather that person who makes use of no more aliment, than
he is able to digest. Thin and copious stools, therefore, are a certain proof
of indigestion.

Some persons are accustomed to go to stool more than once a day, others only
every second day, and yet enjoy a good state of health. It is, however, more
desirable and wholesome to have a regular evacuation every day; and children
especially ought to have two or three discharges daily. Aged persons, in
general, have but one stool in a day. The air we breathe, makes, in this
respect, a remarkable difference. The more we perspire in summer, the fewer are
the evacuations; and, on the contrary, moderate exercise is productive of more
regular excretions, than that which is too violent. Robust and muscular
individuals perspire more than the weak and enervated; hence the evacuations of
the former, by other emunctories, are more limited; while the latter, whose
fluids are not duly determined to the surface of the body, have more frequent
openings by stool.

Obstructions and costiveness, of which many persons now complain, are owing to
a variety of causes, but chiefly to our luxurious mode of living, and to the
custom of making too many meals through the day. The time requisite to the
digestion of a meal cannot be well ascertained, as some stomachs concoct
quickly, and others slowly; and there is a remarkable difference in the degrees
of digestibility, among the various species of food; the nature and properties
of which have been already pointed out in the fifth Chapter. But this may serve
as a general rule, that we ought never to take a new supply of food, till the
preceding meal be digested.

Some moderate livers, after having deviated from their usual temperance, do
not feel any inconvenience till after two or three days, when they are troubled
with copious evacuations, headache, uneasiness and dejection of mind. Such
excesses are frequently accompanied with serious consequences, of which
costiveness is only the forerunner. Neither the emetics, or laxatives, to which
the glutton has recourse, nor the fashionable stimulants and strengthening
bitters, can prevent or remedy the ultimate effects of such brutal habits. The
emetics and purgatives inevitably weaken the first passages, and lay the
foundation of ^^nstant obstipations; while the stimulants deprive the
intestines still more of the necessary humors, and render the evil much
greater. The most proper means of preventing these hurtful consequences, are
the following:

1. A due degree of bodily exercise, by which the muscular power will be
invigorated, the nervous system strengthened, and the circulation of the blood
promoted.

2. We ought to take a proportionate quantity of drink to our victuals; a
circumstance not always sufficiently attended to, by persons of a sedentary
life. Drink dilutes the food, and softens the bowels. A weak, well-fermented,
and well hopped beer, is an excellent beverage: so is water with the addition
of a little wine. Warm diluents, on the contrary, have a manifest tendency to
increase obstructions, by the relaxation they produce in the intestines.

3. Let us choose the quality of our food, according to our constitutional
wants. Those who cannot digest well, ought to avoid all thick, mealy dishes,
pastry, onions, warm and new bread, and such as is not thoroughly baked.
Costive persons frequently complain of an acid generated in their stomach;
while others, on account of this acid, are subject to loose and very frequent
stools. Vinegar and tart wines are but rarely the cause of this acidity; never,
indeed, except when they disagree with the stomach. New wines on the contrary,
as well as vegetables of an acescent kind, and particularly long kept and
roasted fat meat, have the strongest tendency to produce acidity, the
heart-burn, and, at length, obstructions in some constitutions, and diarrhoeas
in others. The proper species of food, in such cases, are herbs, carrots,
sugar-peas, french-beans, parsley-roots, the scorcenera, artichokes,
horseradish, mustard-leaves, and similar plants, boiled soft in broth,
sufficiently salted, and without the addition of sat, or butter. Besides these,
only a small quantity of meat ought to be used, and this should be tender; but
no fat fish, nor game kept too long, for the purpose of rendering it mellow;
and lastly, all kinds of fruit ought to be eaten boiled rather than raw.

4. We should not too much indulge in sleep, which, particularly after dinner,
is hurtful to persons whose digestion is languid, and whose evacuations are
preternaturally slow. During sleep, all the motions in the system are performed
with less vigor, and more tardily: and, in this respect, to keep awake may be
considered as a spe^^es of exercise; as the nerves, in that state, are more
active, and the circulation of the blood is carried on with greater energy. --
Evacuations by stool can be suppressed, by sleeping an improper length of time,
for instance, ten or twelve hours instead of seven or eight; and we may prevent
these salutary discharges, by sitting down to any inactive employment, previous
to the usual inclination to retire to stool.

If it be our wish to preserve health, we ought not only to guard against
costiveness, but likewise to prevent, by all proper means, to frequent
excretions. Copious evacuations of this kind exsiccate the body, and deprive it
of that strength, which is necessary to support its exertions. Persons subject
to diarrhoea, cannot be too cautious in the use of watery, saline, and easily
fermentable articles of food and drink, and in avoiding violent fits of anger
and other passions. On the contrary, they will promote their health, by using
provisions of a drying nature, drinking a well-fermented, bitter beer or ale,
or, if they can afford it, good old wine: -- all of which have the beneficial
tendency to promote perspiration, and thus prevent superfluous humidity in the
body.

If too copious evacuations proceed from a relaxed state of the intestines,
daily exercise is of considerable efficacy; for the fibers of the whole body
are thereby invigorated; and, if irritating or peccant humors should be the
cause of the complaint, nothing is better calculated to expel them by
perspiration, urine, or stool, than spirited and persevering muscular motion,
until the body be tolerably fatigued. But, in this case, we must not attempt to
remove or suppress this material stimulus by astringent remedies; for, instead
of evacuating the noxious matter by the proper emunctories, such medicines will
necessarily produce dangerous, and often fatal diseases.

It would be a desirable object, in houses which are not provided with
water-closets, that every individual were furnished with his own night-chair;
as most of the common places of retirement are literally ventilators, where
some parts of the body are exposed to a current of air, which is frequently the
cause of disorders, particularly in persons subject to colds, and all other
complaints originating from suppressed perspiration; accidents, which may
injure still more those, whose lungs are unsound. Men who are troubled with the
piles, and, above all, women during the menses, ought to be very cautious in
resorting to such places. -- In the usual privies, there generally prevails in
summer a pestilential fetor; so that it becomes almost impossible to wait for
the proper evacuation, both because of the disagreeable smell, and the danger
of being infected with disease.

After every stool, there is a slight bearing down of the anus; a circumstance
which renders some precaution in the cleaning of it necessary. The substance
used for that purpose ought to be previously examined, whether its surface
contain any rough and loose particles, which would be immediately communicated
to the anus, and might gradually produce the blind hemorrhoids. -- Lastly, all
unnatural forcing and straining of costive persons, is not only useless, but
may also be attended with dangerous consequences. It is, therefore, more
advisable to use all proper means of keeping, if possible, this important
excretion in due regularity; and, to attain that desirable end, it is further
necessary to abandon all strait garments, especially laced stays, and tight
waistbands.

Of Urine.
IN a state of health, this discharge takes place oftener than once in a day.
The urine of those who live moderately, and take proper exercise, if examined
in the morning after rising, and after having spent a quiet and comfortable
night, is thin, clear, of a straw color or inclining to yellow, with a white,
loose, and uniform sediment rising in the middle; it makes no foam, but what
immediately vanishes, and has no unusually disagreeable smell. If it correspond
to this description, it is a symptom of good digestion, and of the body being
free from impurities. The quantity of this evacuation, in healthy persons,
depends on their constitution, the season and the weather. It is less in warm
than in cold climates, on account of the increased perspiration. In winter, we
generally eject more urine than in summer; and this nearly in proportion to the
degree of insensible exudation. In spring and autumn, it is probably voided in
an equal proportion.

We may judge (not prognosticate) respecting the state of the body, from the
appearance of the urine in the morning only; for, during the day, this would be
a fallacious criterion, from the nature and quantity of food and drink we
consume. The ancients were extremely fond of predicting the different states of
health and disease in the human body, from the appearances observed in the
urine. Among the moderns, who are better acquainted with the animal economy,
these appearances are not implicitly attended to, as they have frequently been
found to mislead the observer; yet, the early morning urine, if allowed to
stand for an hour or two, exhibits some phenomena, which render it an object
worthy the attention of the medical practitioner. Thus, a thin, pale urine,
which is voided by the hypochondriac, the hysteric, and persons afflicted with
spasms in the abdomen, indicates great weakness, or the approach of cramps,
originating from a contraction of the smaller secretory organs. It is likewise
of a whitish color, after taking much weak drink. In debilitated individuals,
the urine is foamy, and this froth remains on the top for a considerable time;
because it abounds in tough and viscid particles. The health of such persons,
however promising in appearance, is by no means permanently established.

The urine is of a red color, after too little drink, or after drinking
spirituous liquors, after violent exercise, profuse perspiration, and after
having spent a restless night. It yields a sediment resembling brick-dust, when
the stomach is impure, and the tongue white with a yellowish taint, and covered
with viscous matter. According to the higher or paler color of the urine, in
an ordinary state of health, the body may be considered as being more or less
vigorous. If, after long standing, no sediment be deposited in it, great
weakness is indicated: yet the conclusion is more favorable, although the
urine be thick and sandy, if a cloud be observed swimming in the middle.

Indeed it is less dangerous to suppress the evacuations by stool, than those
by urine; for, if this remain too long in the bladder, it becomes acrid and
corrosive. If the inclination to make water is accompanied with a discharge of
a few drops only, it is called a strangury; if the difficulty of voiding it is
attended with pain, a dysuria; and, if a total suppression of it takes place,
it is then called an ischuria. These diseases are frequently the effects of
some malt-liquors, or of certain articles of food, particularly vegetables
containing much acidity. In the beginning of such painful complaints, relief
can be given by fomenting the patient, about the genitals, with flannelcloths,
as hot as he can bear them, by keeping him sufficiently warm, and allowing him
plenty of warm, diluent drink.

Although the quantity of the urine to be voided through the day cannot be
accurately ascertained, yet this evacuation ought always to be proportionate to
the drink we have taken, and to the greater or less degree of perspiration. If
we perceive a deficiency in this discharge, we ought to take moderate exercise,
to drink light, thin, and acidulated diluents, and to eat a variety of such
herbs and fruits, as possess diuretic virtues: of this nature are, parsley,
asparagus, celery, juniperberries, strawberries, cherries, and the like. We
should be careful, not to retain the urine too long; a practice which would
occasion relaxation and palsy of the bladder, and which might at length produce
the gravel or stone.

Many maladies may arise from voiding too small a quantity of urine; hence the
necessity of attending to this excretion, from which we may frequently discover
the cause of the disease. The relative state of vigor or debility in the
individual, the mode of life, more or less drink, dry or damp weather -- all
produce a difference in the quantity of this evacuation. Robust persons eject
less urine than the debilitated: a copious emission of it is always a symptom
of a relaxed body, which is not possessed of sufficient energy to expel its
noxious particles by transpiration through the cutaneous vessels.

The more exercise we take, the less we lose by the urinary passage; since they
are drained by the pores. Cold and moist air checks perspiration, but promotes
the excretion by urine. When this canal is suppressed, the bladder sometimes
becomes so much distended that it bursts, as may easily happen to parturient
women; and hence arise incurable fistulae; or, if the passages be obstructed,
the urine retreats into the cellular texture of the whole body, and penetrates
even into the cranium. Women, however, are able to retain it longer than men.
-- Too copious an evacuation of urine constitutes a peculiar disease, known by
the name of diabetes, which not unfrequently proves fatal to the sufferer,
after he has discharged several gallons a day, for a considerable length of
time.

Among the rules and cautions for the proper management of this evacuation, it
deserves to be remarked, that it is hurtful to make water too often, or before
a proper quantity of it be accumulated in the bladder. By such practice, this
vessel gradually contracts into a narrower compass than is assigned by nature,
and cannot again be easily distended. Too long a retention of urine, on the
contrary, preternaturally enlarges the bladder, weakens its muscular power, and
may, with the advancement of age, occasion ischuria or a total suppression;
besides which it promotes the deposition of mucus and sand in the bladder, and
inevitably leads to that troublesome and painful complaint, the stone.

Of insensible Perspiration.
OF all the natural evacuations, none is so important and extensive, none is
carried on with less interruption, and none frees the body from so many
impurities, particularly from acrid and thin humors, as insensible
perspiration. The health of man chiefly depends on the proper state of this
function: the irregularities occurring in it, occasionally produce peevishness
of temper, headache, disturbed sleep, heaviness in the limbs, etc.; and, on the
contrary, we find ourselves most lively and vigorous, when it is duly and
uniformly performed.

A person of a middle stature, and in perfect health, perspires, according to
the calculation of some, from three to four pounds weight, according to others,
about five pounds, within twenty-four hours. The exudation by the pores is most
essential during the night; the noxious particles only being then separated;
which, on account of the disturbances we are exposed to through the day, cannot
be so well effected, as the circulation of the blood is thereby interrupted,
while at night it is comparatively more calm and regular; -- besides which, the
nocturnal perspiration is more copious, from the greater uniformity of the
surrounding atmosphere.

Most of the febrile diseases arise from a suppressed perspiration; as the
exuded matter is of an acrid and irritating nature. To transpire beneficially,
means, that the impure and pernicious particles only be ejected, in which case
the perspiration is invisible and imperceptible. This is so essential a
requisite, that without it the health of the individual cannot long subsist.
The reciprocal connection between the functions of the stomach, and of
perspiration, is so obvious, that if the latter be checked, the former is
immediately affected; and the reverse takes place, if the stomach be disordered.

The more vigorously a person perspires, (it ought to be well remarked, that
the question here is not of sweating) the more active are the powers of the
body, in the regular concoction of the alimentary juices; and the more certain
it is, that no fluids will superabound: for the fluids though refined and
subtle, far exceed in weight the more compact and solid parts of the system,
so that they would oppress the machine like a heavy burden, if not evacuated by
the pores of the skin. Most individuals; however, are accustomed to direct
their attention only to evacuations of a more gross nature, or such as are more
obvious to the senses. But insensible perspiration is of greater moment than
all the other excretions; and by paying due regard to that function, if it
should be accidentally disturbed, we may frequently discover the lurking cause
of a distemper, and remove it, before it has materially injured the body.

Yet, even in the most healthy, this perspiration is not at all times, nor at
all hours of the day, equally active. It is weaker after a plentiful meal, but
as soon is the food is digested, we again perspire with increased energy; for
the new chyle being changed into blood, imparts additional efficacy to the
vital powers, as well as to the circulation of the blood itself. As we perspire
considerably more in summer than in winter, our mode of life, with respect to
sleep, as well as to food and drink, ought to be regulated accordingly. We know
from accurate observation, that if we retire to bed immediately after supper,
the process of perspiration is checked in a remarkable degree: we also know,
that it is highly conducive to health, that this important function of the body
be preserved in the most uniform state; hence it necessarily follows, that,
after supper, we ought to sit up at least two hours; and to afford this benefit
both to the organs of digestion and perspiration, our suppers should not be
delayed to the late hours now so absurdly in fashion.

According to the experiments made by different inquirers into the nature of
insensible perspiration, this process is most forcibly affected, and sometimes
totally suppressed, by the following circumstances:

1. By violent pain, which in a remarkable degree consumes the fluids of the
body, or propels them to other parts.

2. By obstructions of the cutaneous vessels, which are frequently occasioned
by the use of salves, ointments, and cosmetics.

3. By severe colds, particularly those contracted at night, and during sleep.

4. When nature is employed with other objects. Thus perspiration is weaker
during the time of concoction, particularly after using food difficult of
digestion. This is likewise the case, when nature endeavors to promote any
other species of evacuation, which more engages the attention of the senses;
for instance, vomiting, diarrhoeas, considerable hemorrhages, and the like:
farther, when the efforts of Nature are too weak; hence the aged, the
debilitated, and poor persons, unable to supply the wants of the body, or to
pay due attention to cleanliness, perspire less than others: lastly, the same
must happen to individuals of a sedentary life, who neglect the necessary
exercise of the body; and those likewise who wear too tight garments, and
improper ligatures about the joints.

Perspiration, on the contrary, is promoted:

1. By stretching or expanding the limbs; as, by such means, the lungs and
muscles acquire an additional impulse, and the fluids circulating too slowly in
the smaller vessels, are propelled to the larger veins and arteries, and thus
forwarded to the heart; so that this principal muscle is then impelled to
extend and contract its ventricles with greater force, and consequently to
quicken the whole circulation of the blood.

2. By the lukewarm bath, which is well calculated to soften the skin, and thus
to open the pores for a better perspiration.

3. By moderate bodily exercise.

4. By mild sudorific remedies; -- and for this reason it is extremely proper,
in case of a recent cold, to drink two or three cups of tea, especially
previous to going to bed.

If perspirable matter collect in drops, it should then be called Sweat, and is
no longer a natural and necessary evacuation; on the contrary, we find very
healthful and robust persons who seldom or never sweat. By means of this
exudation, both noxious and useful particles are at the same time ejected from
the surface; the body is enfeebled; the blood is rendered impure; and the
secretion of bad humors is prevented by every violent effort of the cutaneous
vessels.

If sweating be carried to excess, it is extremely noxious, and may even be
productive of consumption. By insensible perspiration, on the contrary, the
superfluous particles only are expelled; because the circulation of the fluids
is slower, and more calm and uniform. This important purification of the blood
ought never to be checked: if, therefore, we wish to take a bracing exercise,
it should by no means be continued till profuse perspiration take place.

Cold then only checks perspiration, when it occasions an unusual stimulus on
the skin, and if we too suddenly remove from a warm to a cold atmosphere. Hence
the necessity of accustoming ourselves, from early youth, to the vicissitudes
of heat and cold, of walking every day in the open air, and of washing the
whole body, at least once a week, with lukewarm, or still better, with cold
water. By this practice the pores are braced, and inured to undergo the
different changes of the weather and seasons, without suffering (as most people
now do, upon the slightest occasion) by severe cold and catarrhs.

It is never too late to begin this strengthening process, by frequently
washing and rubbing the whole surface of the body with cold water; for, if
cautiously managed at first, it cannot fail to invigorate young persons and
adults, as well as the aged. -- To sleep on feather-beds occasions a constant
vapour-bath at night, which again destroys the beneficial acquisitions of the
day. -- To remove from a cold temperature to a still colder one, is not nearly
so prejudicial, as to exchange suddenly the air of a warm room, for that of a
moist and cold atmosphere. This accounts for the frequent colds caught in
summer, even by going from the burning rays of the sun to the cooling shade;
and hence too the first cold of autumn is most sensibly felt, because we are
then unaccustomed to that impression.

Much also, as has been before observed, depends on the nature and properties
of our food and drink, in respect to the state of insensible perspiration. The
subtle and rarefied fluids only, not those of a coarse and oily consistence,
can pervade the skin. Too many oleaginous, viscous, and crude articles of
nourishment, such as fat meat, pastry, boiled mealy dishes, smoked hams,
sausages, etc. have a strong tendency to obstruct the free perspiration of the
body, and consequently to affect the serenity of the mind.

All the depressing passions and emotions are a powerful check to insensible
perspiration; while, on the contrary, those of an exhilarating nature may
promote and increase it to such a degree, as sometimes to prove the
pre-disposing, though distant cause of consumptions. Moderate daily exercise is
eminently calculated to support this function, and to strengthen the whole
body. Cleanliness produces a similar effect; for some impurities continually
settle on the surface of the body; and these, if not removed in time, clog the
pores, and are so detrimental to health, that they may occasion many obstinate
distempers, which might be easily prevented, or at least checked in their
progress, by a proper and constant attention to the skin.

Too violent a perspiration indicates great debility of the body, or a laxity
of the cutaneous vessels, which may frequently be removed by cold bathing or
washing. When persons are troubled with unusual night-sweats, they may receive
benefit (if it be not a symptom of hectic fever) by taking, immediately before
going to bed, two or three drachms of cream of tartar, in either beer or water.
But if this simple remedy, after repeated trials, should prove ineffectual, a
professional man ought to be consulted; as long-continued night-sweats may in
the end produce great weakness, and even consumption.

In most of the common colds, the popular stimulant remedies, such as heating
liquors, and particularly sudorifics, are ill calculated to relieve the
complaint. If the patient, at the same time, be troubled with pain in the
bowels, headache, a foul tongue, etc. a gentle laxative will be of greater
service than the diaphoretics. But if the stomach be peculiarly affected, if
the tongue be clean and the appetite good; two or three cups of warm diluent
drink, a tepid bath of the legs, a moderately warm room and dress, gentle
exercise, and friction of the skin with warm cloths, are the most proper and
generally effectual means of relief.

As the retention of useless and superfluous matter is hurtful, it is not less
detrimental to health, if substances not ready to be evacuated are ejected from
the body. -- Of this kind are bleedings from the nose, the mouth, and the
vessels of the anus: though these are not natural evacuations, yet they may
occasionally be beneficial, as Nature sometimes makes an effort to expel
noxious matter in an unusual manner. But these parts or fluids ejected as
pernicious, strictly speaking, ought not to exist in the body; and though the
evacuation of them be beneficial, it is a symptom of disease. If, therefore,
such preternatural discharges take place too violently or frequently, they
ought to be checked with judgment and circumspection; and we should endeavor
to lead (but not to force) Nature to a more salutary canal, than that she has
chosen, either by accident or wanton compulsion.

Of the Saliva.
THE saliva should not be confounded with mucus, or slime; the former is a
fluid, not intended by Nature to be evacuated, as it serves the important
purpose of mixing and preparing the food for the stomach; hence it ought not to
be unnecessarily wasted by frequent spitting; the latter, mucus, may be safely
thrown out as burdensome and offensive. The absurd custom of smoking tobacco is
extremely prejudicial, as it weakens the organs of digestion, deprives the body
of many useful fluids, and has a direct tendency to emaciation, particularly in
young persons, and those of lean and dry fibers. To these it is the more
detrimental, that it promotes not only the spitting of saliva, but likewise
other evacuations. This plant is possessed of narcotic properties, by which it
produces in those who first begin to smoke it, giddiness, cold sweats,
vomiting, purging, and, from its stimulus on the salival glands, a copious flow
of the saliva.

Frequent and much smoking makes the teeth yellow and black; the clay-pipes are
apt to canker the teeth to such a degree as to infect the breath, and produce
putrid ulcers in the gums. Delicate persons especially suffer from this
nauseous habit; as it has a direct tendency, not only to exsiccate their
bodies, by contaminating the fluids, rendering them acrid, and vitiating the
digestion and assimilation of food, but likewise to impair the mental
faculties. These effects, however, are less to be apprehended from smoking
tobacco, if it has become habitual, and is not carried to excess. To persons of
a middle age, or those of full growth, particularly the corpulent, the
phlegmatic, and such as are subject to catarrhal complaints, it may
occasionally be of service, if used with moderation, especially in damp, cold,
and hazy weather. Yet such persons ought never to smoke immediately before or
after a meal, as the saliva is materially requisite to assist the concoction of
food, which is not accomplished till about three or four hours after a meal; --
they should smoke slowly; frequently drink small draughts of beer, ale, tea, or
any other diluent liquors, but neither spirits nor wine; and, lastly, they
should use a clean pipe with a long tube; for the oil of tobacco, settling on
the sides of the pipe, is one of the most acrimonious and hurtful substances,
and may thus be accidentally absorbed, and mixed with the fluids of the body.

Of the Mucus of the Nose.
THE secretion of this humor is intended by Nature to protect the olfactory
nerves: hence every artificial mean of increasing that secretion is
preposterous, unless required by some particular indisposition of the body. The
remarks, then, made with respect to the saliva and smoking, are also applicable
to the mucus of the nose, and the habit of taking snuff. The question here is
not of that catarrhal secretion of viscid slime, which is ejected as useless.
Snuff stimulates the mucous membrane of the nose, and, sympathetically, the
whole body; by which the mental powers are in a degree affected. If used as a
medicine By the persuasion of some friends, who were anxious to see the
farcical performance of an empiric, whose name does not deserve to be recorded
here, I this day (September 25th, 1798) joined a party, to witness the
pretended effects of a certain snuff-powder, together with what he calls his
a^^oma^i^ (...) which are at best but a clumsy imitation of M^ss^^^r's Animal
Magnetism; (vid. page 113 Vol. 1.) and, as such, have not even the merit of
originality. The medicated (...) appears to be an assistant mean contrived by
this Charlatan, to (...) the heads of his patient who were generally of the
lowest class. The German adventurer stood in need of no external remedies to
affect the nerves of the P^^^sian fanatic^, while our London Mountebank cannot,
without some additional stimulus, operate on English brains. -- All this is
characteristic of the vile and despicable plans adopted by quacks; but, to hear
an ignorant pretender to medicine descanting on the virtues existing in his
acromatic belts; maintaining that an universal magnetic spirit pervades them;
that this spirit alone cures all the diseases incident to the human frame, even
broken limbs and exfoliations of bones; and, lastly, to permit an audacious
impostor to impeach the honesty of the whole Faculty, before a deluded audience
-- such outrage loudly calls for the interference of the civil magistrate.
only, and on occasions that require such a stimulus, it may be productive of
some advantage; but a liquid sternutatory deserves every preference to a
powder, which, though at first stimulating and occasioning a flow of viscous
matter, in the end always obstructs the nostrils. And if this stimulus be too
violent; it may bring on so profuse a discharge of matter from the delicate
membrane lining the nose, as to relax and corrode it, and to produce a polypus,
or a concretion of clotted blood in the nostrils.

In several diseases of the head, eyes, and ears, however, the taking of snuff
may occasionally supply the place of an artificial issue; though an extravagant
use of it will most certainly produce a contrary effect; namely, accumulation
of matter in the head, bleeding of the nose, and other complaints. Farther, it
would be extremely injudicious to advise the use of snuff to persons of a
phthisical constitution, or those afflicted with internal ulcers, and subject
to spitting of blood; as, by the violent sneezing it at first occasions, such
individuals might expose themselves to imminent danger. -- Public speakers of
every kind, as well as teachers of languages, and, in short, all those to whom
a clear and distinct articulation is of consequence, ought to avoid this habit,
which, when carried to excess, is, in this respect, extremely prejudicial.
Those, too, who have a regard for cleanliness will not accustom themselves to
this hurtful practice. In short, the continual use of snuff gradually vitiates
the organs of smell; weakens the faculty of sight, by withdrawing the humors
from the eyes; impairs the sense of hearing; renders breathing difficult;
depraves the palate; and, if taken too copiously, falls into the stomach, and
in a high degree, injures the organs of digestion.

Besides the many bad effects already mentioned, taking snuff may be attended
with another consequence, equally dangerous to the alimentary canal. While the
nose is continually obstructed, and a free respiration is impeded, the habitual
snuff-taker generally breathes through the mouth only; he is always obliged to
keep his mouth partly open, and consequently to inspire more frequently and
with greater efforts. Thus, by inhaling too much air, he probably lays the
foundation of that troublesome flatulency, which is common among those
hypochondriacs who habitually take snuff. Hence every person, unless good
reasons can be assigned in favor of it, ought to be seriously dissuaded from
the use of snuff, as well as of tobacco: and it deserves to be remarked, that
both these practices may be safely, and cannot be too suddenly relinquished, as
soon as reason prevails over sensual gratifications.

Of Wax in the Ears.
IF the ears be seldom, or not properly cleaned, there sometimes accumulates a
species of wax, which grows tough and hard, diminishes the acuteness of
hearing, obstructs the passage to the ear, and may at length produce total
deafness. Copious ear-wax, if it become thin and acrid, may occasion pain, and
sometimes a running or suppuration in the ears. Daily washing with cold water
strengthens these organs, and is an excellent preservative of the sense of
hearing. -- If it be apprehended, that insects have made their way into the
cavity of the ear, it may be useful to introduce some sweet oil into the
orifice, and to repose on that side, the ear of which is the seat of the
complaint.

Hemorrhages.
THESE are fluxes of blood, salutary to both sexes, when required and regulated
by Nature; but, if suppressed, they may be productive of serious and fatal
consequences. The menses are irregular in their appearance and disappearance;
being much influenced by climate, and the constitution of the body: the
hemorrhoids, on the contrary, originate from the mode of living, joined to a
particular temperament of the individual. Bleeding of the nose arises either
from a superabundance of blood, and its impetuous circulation, or from the
bursting of one of the small arteries. -- As long as these fluxes continue
within proper limits, and do not exhaust the strength of the person subject to
them, there is not the least necessity to employ any artificial means of
suppressing them; because Nature must not be rudely checked in her beneficent
efforts. Nay, even the affections and passions of the mind ought to be duly
regulated, particularly by females of an irritable temper, during the
recurrence of the menses; for these may, according to circumstances, be either
preternaturally increased, or totally suppressed, to the great injury of health.

Lastly, it is extremely imprudent for young women to expose their feet and
legs to dangerous colds, in washing the floors of rooms and passages upon their
knees, at a time when they ought particularly to guard against the access of
damp and cold. Humane and sensible persons would not require their servants to
follow this prejudicial practice, by which they are liable to contract the most
obstinate disorders: it produces obstructions in the abdomen, swelling of the
legs, dropsical complaints, palsy, and even consumptions; -- hence the
multitude of female servants continually taking refuge in the different
hospitals.

Of the retention of Milk.
NOT less hurtful than the suppression of hemorrhages, is the retention of the
milk in the female breast. This, likewise, is generally occasioned by indulging
in fits of passion, or by exposing the body, and particularly the lower
extremities, to the influence of damp and cold places, or wearing wet clothes,
and linen not properly aired. Hence may arise nodules, or small lumps in the
breasts, troublesome swellings, especially if the milk be abundant,
inflammations accompanied with excruciating pain and violent fever, ulcers in
one or more parts of the body at the (...), or s^irrhous callosities; and, at
length, (...) neglected or mismanaged, cancer itself. (...) instances, a
premature stoppage of the (...) in lying in women, has produced inflammation of
the womb, and a severe childbed fever. Lastly, imprudence with regard to food
and drink, dress, air, etc. may occasion the suppression of the milk, as well
as of every other evacuation.

CHAP. IX.
Of the SEXUAL INTERCOURSE; its physical consequences with respect to the
Constitution of the Individual; -- under what circumstances it may be either
conducive or hurtful to Health.

A ^^^^ECT of such ^^^ensive importance, (...) to our physical and moral
welfare, as (...) consequences resulting from either a too (...) or extravagant
intercourse between the sexes, deserves the strictest inquiry, and the most
serious attention of the philosopher.

The inclination to this intercourse, and the evacuation connected with it, are
no less inherent in nature, than other bodily functions. Yet, as the semen is
the most subtle and spirituous part of the human frame, and as it serves to
the support of the nerves, this evacuation is by no means absolutely necessary;
and it is besides attended with circumstances not common to any other. The
emission of semen enfeebles the body more than the loss of twenty times the
same quantity of blood, more than violent cathartics, emetics, etc.: hence
excesses of this nature produce a debilitating effect on the whole nervous
system, on both body and mind.

It is founded on the observations of the ablest physiologists, that the
greatest part of this refined fluid is re-absorbed, and mixed with the blood,
of which it constitutes the most rarefied and volatile part; and that it
imparts to the body peculiar sprightliness, vivacity, and vigor. These
beneficial effects cannot be expected, if the semen be wantonly and
improvidently wasted. Besides, the emission of it is accompanied with a
peculiar species of tension and convulsion of the whole frame, which is always
succeeded by relaxation. For the same reason, even libidinous thoughts, without
any loss of semen, are debilitating, though in a less degree, by occasioning
(...) of the blood to the genitals.

If this evacuation, however, be pro^^ted only in a state of superfluity, and
within (...) bounds, it is not detrimental to health. Nature, indeed,
spontaneously effects it, in the most healthy individuals, during sleep; and,
as long as we observe no difference in bodily and mental energy after such
losses, there is no danger to be apprehended from them. It is well established,
and attested by the experience of eminent physicians, that in certain
indispositions, both of men and women, this is the only permanent remedy that
can be advised, to restore their languishing health. It is not uncommon to
find, that melancholy, incurable by any other means, has been happily removed,
in persons of both sexes, by exchanging a single state for that of wedlock.

There are a variety of circumstances, by which either the utility or the
insalubrity of the sexual intercourse is, in general, to be determined. -- It
is conducive to the well-being of the individual, if Nature (not an extravagant
or disordered imagination) induces us to satisfy this inclination, especially
under the following conditions:

1. In young persons, that is, adults, or those of a middle age; as, from the
flexibility of their vessels, the strength of their muscles, and the abundance
of their vital spirits, they can the better sustain the loss occasioned by this
indulgence.

2. In robust persons, who lose no more than is almost immediately replaced.

3. (...) ^prightly individuals, and such as are particularly addicted to
pleasure; for, the stronger the natural desire, the safer is its gratification.

4. In persons who are accustomed to it; -- for Nature pursues a different
path, accordingly as she is habituated to the reabsorption, or to the
evacuation of this fluid.

5. With a beloved object; as the power animating the nerves and muscular
fibers is in proportion to the pleasure received.

6. After a sound sleep; because then the body is more energetic; is provided
with a new stock of vital spirits; and the fluids are duly prepared: -- hence
the early morning appears to be designed by Nature for the exercise of this
function; as the body is then most vigorous; and, being unemployed in any other
pursuit, its natural propensity to this is the greater: besides, at this time,
a few hours sleep can be readily obtained, by which the expended powers are, in
a great measure, renovated.

7. With an empty stomach; for the office of digestion, so material to the
restoration of bodily strength, is then uninterrupted. Lastly,

8. In the vernal months; as Nature, at this season in particular, incites all
the lower animals to sexual intercourse; as we are then most vigorous and
sprightly; and as the spring is not only the safest, but likewise the best
time, with respect to the consequences resulting from that intercourse. It is
well ascertained by experience, that children begotten in spring are of more
solid fibers, and consequently more vigorous and robust, than those generated
in the heat of summer, or cold of winter.

It may be collected from the following circumstances, whether or not the
gratification of the sexual impulse has been conducive to the well-being of the
body; namely, if it be not succeeded by a peculiar lassitude; if the body do
not feel heavy, and the mind averse to reflection: all which are favorable
symptoms, indicating that the various powers have sustained no essential loss,
and that superfluous matter only has been evacuated.

Farther, the healthy appearance of the urine, in this case, as well as
cheerfulness and vivacity of mind, also prove a proper coction of the fluids,
and sufficiently evince an unimpaired state of the animal functions, a due
perspiration, and a free circulation of the blood.

There are, however, many cases in which this gratification is the more
detrimental to health, when it has been immoderate, and without the impulse of
Nature, but particularly in the following situations:

1. In all debilitated persons; as they do not possess sufficient vital
spirits; and their vigor, after this enervating emission, is consequently much
exhausted. Their digestion necessarily suffers, perspiration is checked, and
the body becomes languid and heavy.

2. In the aged, whose vital heat is diminished, whose frame is enfeebled by
the most moderate enjoyment, and whose strength, already reduced, suffers a
still greater diminution, from every loss, that is accompanied with a violent
convulsion of the whole body.

3. In persons not arrived at the age of maturity: -- by an early intercourse
with the other sex, they become enervated and emaciated, and inevitably shorten
their lives.

4. In dry, choleric, and thin persons: these, even at a mature age, should
seldom indulge in this passion, as their bodies are already in want of moisture
and pliability, both of which are much diminished by the sexual intercourse,
while the bile is violently agitated, to the great injury of the whole animal
frame. -- Lean persons generally are of a hot temperament; and the more heat
there is in the body, the greater will be the subsequent dryness. Hence,
likewise, to persons in a state of intoxication, this intercourse is extremely
pernicious; because in such a state the increased circulation of the blood
toward the head, may be attended with dangerous consequences, such as bursting
of blood vessels, apoplexy, etc.; -- the plethoric are particularly exposed to
these dangers.

5. Immediately after meals; as the powers requisite to the digestion of food
are thus diverted, consequently ^he aliment remains too long unassimilated, and
becomes burdensome to the stomach.

6. After violent exercise; in which case it is still more hurtful than in the
preceding, where muscular strength was not consumed, but only required to the
aid of another function. After bodily fatigue, on the contrary, the necessary
energy is in a manner exhausted, so that every additional exertion of the body
must be peculiarly injurious.

7. In the heat of summer, it is less to be indulged in than in spring and
autumn; because the process of concoction and assimilation is effected less
vigorously in summer than in the other seasons, and consequently the losses
sustained are not so easily recovered. For a similar reason, the sexual
commerce is more debilitating, and the capacity for it sooner extinguished, in
hot than in temperate climates. The same remark is applicable to every warm
temperature combined with moisture, which is extremely apt to debilitate the
solid parts. Hence hatters, dyers, bakers, brewers, and all those exposed to
steam, generally have relaxed fibers.

8. In a posture of body, which requires great muscular exertion, it is
comparatively more enfeebling; as, in this case, various powers are exhausted
at once.

It is an unfavourable symptom, if the rest after this intercourse be uneasy;
which plainly indicates, that more has been lost, than could be repaired by
sleep: but if, at the same time, it be productive of relaxation, so as to
affect the insensible perspiration, it is a still stronger proof that it has
been detrimental to the constitution. -- There are, as has been before
observed, two principal causes, from which the indulgence in this passion has a
debilitating effect on the constitution, particularly in men: -- 1. by the
convulsive motion of the whole frame, combined with the impassioned ecstacy of
the mind; and, 2. by the loss of this essential fluid, more than by any other
circumstance. But, if it be not emitted, the subsequent relaxation is
inconsiderable, and not much increased even on the following day, if the semen
should be ejected, upon a repetition of the intercourse. -- It certainly is
ill-founded, that swellings of the scrotum may arise from a stagnation of the
seminal fluid: such swellings, if they really take place, are not attended with
any danger; as experience informs us, that they are either again absorbed, to
the benefit of the body, or if the accumulation of the semen become too
copious, it is spontaneously evacuated by Nature.

The relaxation of those who keep within the bounds of moderation, in this
respect, does not continue long; one hour's sleep is generally sufficient to
restore their energy. Such temperance is highly beneficial to the whole body,
while it serves to animate all its powers, and to promote insensible
perspiration, as well as the circulation of the blood. The semen can be emitted
without injuring the body, is Nature alone demand it, that is, when the
reservoirs are full, and a material stimulus occasions it, without the active
concurrence of imagination.

As it is principally this fluid which affords vivacity, muscular strength, and
energy to the animal machine, the frequent loss of it cannot but weaken the
nerves, the stomach, the intestines, the eyes, the heart, the brain -- in
short, the whole body, together with the mental faculties; it in a manner
destroys the ^^dour for every thing great and beautiful, and surrenders the
voluptuary, in the prime of his life, to all the terrors and infirmities of a
premature old age, from which even the conjugal state cannot save him. The most
certain consequence of excess in venery is hypochondriasis, frequently
accompanied with incurable melancholy: the unhappy victim endeavors to
exhilarate himself by a repetition of these convulsive exertions of his vital
spirits, and thus precipitates himself into still greater misery. -- Many of
the diseases of the eyes originate from such intemperance; and these votaries
of pleasure are not unfrequently attacked with tabes dorsalis, or consumption
of the back, which generally proves fatal.

Here likewise, every individual ought to pay proper regard to his
constitution. Some are provided by Nature with an uncommon portion of bodily
vigor, while others are but sparingly supplied: the former, therefore,
overcome slight transgressions of this kind, without much danger, while the
latter cannot commit excesses with impunity. The natural instinct ought always
to be consulted, in whatever relates to this function; but it should not, as is
frequently the case, be confounded with the artificial stimulus.
Hypochondriacs, indeed, as well as those who make use of many nourishing
species of food and drink, are sometimes stimulated merely by a certain
acrimony in the abdominal vessels; such a stimulus, however, is totally
unconnected with the impulse of Nature.

Frequent and copious emissions, during sleep, are productive of equally bad
effects; they bring on the frailties of age at an early period of life, and
soon prepare the exhausted sufferer for the grave. But infinitely more
dangerous is the secret vice of Onanism, which debilitates the body more than
any other species of debauchery. By this execrable practice, a greater quantity
of semen is evacuated, than by the natural commerce between the sexes; the
vital spirits cannot operate so uniformly, as to counterbalance the convulsive
effects which agitate the whole animal frame; and the circumstances, which
render this hateful vice so destructive to both sexes, particularly at a tender
age, are, that the opportunities of committing it are more frequent than those
of the sexual intercourse, and that it but too often becomes habitual.

The imagination which, by the natural union of the sexes, is in a certain
degree gratified, becomes with every repetition of Onanism more disordered, and
is continually filled with libidinous images: and although the frequent loss of
semen, is, for a considerable time, supplied, by a fluid of an inferior
quality, yet, even by this imperfect supply, the body is drained of the
spirituous and most valuable parts of its fluids.

All kinds of evacuation, when immoderate, are prejudicial to health; but that
of the semen is particularly so; for it is an established fact, that every
stimulus increases the secretion of humors, and that Nature is necessarily
forced to make irregular efforts, to restore the losses sustained, in the most
speedy, though in its consequences, the most ruinous manner.

As most female animals refuse to receive the males, while they are in a state
of pregnancy, the connection with pregnant women appears to be physically
improper. Although the dangerous consequences thence arising, both to the
mother and child, may have been exaggerated, yet the embrace of women far
advanced in pregnancy is certainly not conformable to the laws of Nature, and
ought not to be considered as a matter of indifference. Such females as
wantonly submit to it may readily miscarry; for the fetus is thus much
compressed, and an additional flow of humors is thereby occasioned. If,
however, in married life, this intercourse, notwithstanding its impropriety,
should be indulged in, it ought to be practiced with precaution, and not too
frequently; as such excesses may not only enfeeble the mother, but likewise be
attended with effects very hurtful to the child. Nay, it is asserted by some
authors, that the frequent cases of hydrocephalus, or dropsy in the head, are
to be ascribed chiefly to this practice among (...) -- a conclusion which,
though hypothetical, is not unreasonable.

A connection with females suckling children, is not less improper; as the milk
is thereby vitiated, and the health of the infant affected. -- Nor is it
justifiable to gratify this passion during the menses; which may be either thus
suddenly suppressed, or, by the increased access of the fluids, may terminate
in an hemorrhage of the womb: besides which, the sexual intercourse during this
period, as well as for some days immediately preceding, cannot answer the
purpose of generation; because the ovum of the female, being but slightly
attached, is again separated by the periodical discharge. Hence the congress of
the sexes is most generally crowned with fertility, after the catemenia have
ceased; for then the female is in the most proper state for fecundation,
because that the ovum has sufficient time to be consolidated, before the next
menstrual evacuation.

Not with a view to satisfy idle curiosity, but for the information of the
judicious reader, I shall give some particulars, relative to the nature of the
seminal fluid. The semen in men, as it is emitted, consists of various compound
humors. Besides the real sem^n prepared in the scrotum, and deposited in the
proper vesicles, it is mixed with the peculiar moisture contained in the
latter, with the liquor secreted by the prostrate gland, and probably also with
some mucus or phlegm from the urethra. It is of a greyish color, inclining to
white, is glutinous and tough; has a very volatile, penetrating smell, and is
of considerable specific gravity. In water, the thicker part, which in all
probability is the pure semen, sinks to the bottom; another part appears in
fine threads, and forms a thin pellicle on the surface of the water. In persons
not arrived at the age of maturity, and likewise in enervated adults, it is of
a thin and serous consistence.

In the fresh semen of those who are capable of procreating, we find a great
number of animalculae, which can be perceived only by means of the most
powerful microscopes: these do not appear to be mere vesicles filled with air;
as they are formed irregularly, one extremity being somewhat spherical, the
other smaller and rather pointed; their supposed use will be mentioned toward
the conclusion of this chapter, when treating on the different theories of
generation.

As part of the small artery, through which the blood is propelled into both
testicles, runs immediately under the skin, and consequently the blood is
conducted from a warmer to a much colder place; as the seminal tubes in the
testicles are very delicate and long, and take throughout a serpentine course
-- the canal traversing the upper testicle ( epididymis) being alone thirty
feet long and upwards; as, lastly, the narrow seminal tubes pass over into the
wider canal of the epididymis, and this again into the still wider seminal
passage: it is obvious, that the secretion and evacuation of the semen not only
takes place very slowly, but also in very small quantities.

Nature seems to employ a considerable time in preparing and perfecting a
fluid, which is indispensably necessary to the propagation of the species. The
quantity, therefore, which is emitted in every intercourse between the sexes,
and which is computed to be equal to half an ounce weight, This assertion, as
well as that immediately following, rest upon the authority of Prof. (...) of
J^na; and I here refer to his excellent work: " Elements of Medical
Anthropology, etc." (in German,) p. 4^^. second edition. 8vo. (...). 1793.
can be but gradually replaced. Hence it happens, that even men of strong
constitutions cannot indulge in venery more than once in three or four days,
for any considerable time, without impairing their health, and diminishing
their strength. These remarks, however, apply chiefly, and almost exclusively,
to the male sex; for, with regard to women, it is an erroneous notion, that
they secret any semen; -- what has formerly been considered as such, consists
merely of a pituitous liquor, proceeding from the womb and the vagina.

To return from this short digression, I shall farther observe, that, where it
may be otherwise proper, it is an excellent and healthful rule, (however
ludicrous it may appear to the sensualist) to gratify the inclination for the
sexual commerce only at regular stated periods, so that nature may become
habituated to it, without making unusual and hurtful efforts. This might be
attended with the additional advantage, that persons, in a conjugal state,
would not be so apt to commit excesses, which, in the end, are productive of
satiety and indifference toward the object of former affection, and which are
undoubtedly the frequent cause of a feeble and degenerate offspring.

No irregularities whatever are more certainly punished than those of venery;
and, though the consequences should not immediately take place, they
unavoidably follow, and generally at a time when they are most severely felt;
sometimes in the organs of generation alone, and sometimes over the whole body.
Even the connection with the most beloved object, the possession of whom has
been long and anxiously wished for, does not exempt the voluptuary from these
prejudicial effects, if the bounds of moderation be exceeded: the imagination
at length becomes disordered; the head is filled with libidinous images; and
the predominating idea of sensual enjoyment excludes the reflections of reason.
Thus Nature becomes in a manner forced to conduct the fluids to the parts of
generation, so that such unfortunate persons cannot relinquish this destructive
habit; they are troubled with involuntary emissions of the semen, which are
extremely debilitating, and which either deprive them entirely of the faculty
of procreating, or destroy the elasticity of the parts, and exhaust the semen
to such a degree, as to produce only feeble and enervated children.

In those who lead a life of debauchery, spasmodic affections, and even
ruptures, are not uncommon: women are afflicted with the fluor albus, violent
fluxes of the menses, bearing down of the vagina, and innumerable other
maladies of a disagreeable nature. These destructive effects on the body are at
first manifested by a general relaxation of the solids: the whole nervous
system is reduced to a state of extreme debility, which is seldom, if ever,
removed by the most rigorous adherence to diet, and the most apposite medical
remedies. Hence necessarily arise, as has been already observed, the almost
infinite varieties of hypochondriasis, and imbecility, to so alarming a degree,
that persons of this description cannot direct their attention to one object,
for a quarter of an hour together: their spirits are exhausted; their memory as
well as their judgment are greatly impaired; and in short, all the faculties of
mind, all its serenity and tranquillity, are so much affected, that they
scarcely enjoy one happy moment.

The external senses do not suffer less upon these occasions: the eyes,
especially, become weaker, imaginary figures are continually floating before
them, and frequently the power of vision is entirely destroyed. -- The stomach
also, on account of its intimate connection with the nerves, in a great measure
partakes of these infirmities: whence arise diseases of various degrees of
malignity; -- the lungs too become disordered; hence the many lingering and
incurable consumptions, which destroy such numbers in the prime of life. If,
however, they survive the baneful effects of their intemperance, their bodies
become bent from absolute weakness, their gait sluggish and tottering, and the
residue of their days is marked with painful debility.

Young persons, as well as those whose employments require much muscular
exertion, are in an uncommon degree weakened by frequent debauches. Indeed, the
sexual intercourse, even within the limits of moderation, is more hurtful to
some individuals than to others. Thus, a person born of strong and healthy
parents is not nearly so much hurt by occasional extravagance as another, whose
parents were weak and enervated, or who is himself threatened with consumption;
and, lastly, those also ought to be abstemious in this respect, who feel an
unusual lassitude and weakness, after the least indulgence.

There are people who, from ignorance, have long been in the habit of
committing excesses, and who wish at once to reform their mode of life; the
consequence of this sudden change generally is an increased debility; and they
become very liable to fits of the gout, hysteric and hypochondriacal
complaints. As they are sensible of their growing weakness, they expect to
relieve themselves by strengthening remedies, which render their situation
still worse, being apt to occasion involuntary emissions of semen in the night,
to relax and destroy the stomach, and at length to produce an irritating
acrimony in the intestines, which is the frequent cause of such emissions. Even
the mild corroborants cannot be used here with any hopes of success; as the
body is overloaded with pituitous phlegm, from which readily arise jaundice and
dropsy. Hence it is more advisable, and, at least in a physical respect, more
salutary, to return from such irregularities by gradual steps, than by a too
sudden and dangerous change.

It is further remarkable, that most persons, especially in the higher ranks,
do not marry at a proper period of life; partly from caprice and
family-considerations; partly on account of the difficulty to maintain a
family, in the present more expensive mode of living; and partly from other
causes which are best known to bachelors. Thus they enter into the conjugal
state, when their frame is enervated by dissipation of every kind; but such
debauchees ought not to be permitted by the State to encumber the world with a
degenerate offspring.

On the contrary, to be married too early, and before a person has attained the
age of maturity, is likewise improper and hurtful. Every candidate for
matrimony should endeavor to obtain the most accurate intelligence, whether
the object of his affection be qualified for the various duties of that state,
or whether she be subject to phthisical, hysteric, and nervous complaints, all
of which ought to be guarded against; as, besides the misfortune of being
united to a valetudinary partner, healthy women only will produce sound and
vigorous children.

Those who do not marry for the sake of wealth and family-interest, should
choose a well formed and agreeable partner, as deformed mothers seldom bring
forth handsome children. The natural disposition of a woman likewise, deserves
to be investigated, previous to the union; for it is the opinion of accurate
observers, that children most generally inherit the propensities and passions
of the mother. There ought to be no remarkable difference between the age of
the married couple; and the most proper time in life for matrimony, in our
climate in general, appears to be that between the age of eighteen and twenty
in the female, and from twenty-two to twenty-four in the male sex.

Lastly, women who are hump-backed, or who have had the rickets in their
infancy, ought not to enter the state of wedlock; the former, in particular,
(according to the rules of sound state policy) should by no means be allowed to
marry; until examined by professional persons, whether there be any impediment
to childbearing from the preternatural structure of the pelvis: -- this
frequently renders the Caesarean operation necessary; or the artificial
separation of the pelvis is connected with imminent danger of life. For the
same reason, even elderly women should not be encouraged to engage in
matrimony, as they either remain barren, or, if not, they experience very
difficult and painful parturition.

In some rare instances, however, too great abstinence may be the cause of
serious distempers. A total retention of the semen is not indeed always
hurtful; but it may be so, occasionally, to persons naturally lascivious, and
to those of a corpulent habit. These are generally provided with an abundance
of the seminal fluid, which, if too long retained in the body, causes
involuntary evacuations, plethora, swellings, pain and inflammation of the
seminal vessels, the inspissation and at length corruption of the stagnating
semen -- and sometimes priapisms, convulsions, melancholy, and at length
furious lewdness.

The female sex are not less liable to diseases from inevitable abstinence:
loss of strength, chlorosis, fluor albus, hysterics, and even furor uterinus,
may sometimes be the consequence. Yet, I cannot upon this occasion omit to
remark, that these effects seldom, if ever, take place in those who live
regularly, and do not encourage libidinous ideas; and that both males and
females would undoubtedly derive greater benefit from total continence, till
marriage, than by an unlimited indulgence in venery: in the former case, they
would not only in a great measure contribute to their vigor of body and mind,
but also to the prolongation of life. -- Young women of an habitually pale
color, may be justly suspected of being troubled with the fluor albus; -- or
of having an ardent desire to change their state.

To repair the injuries brought on by an excessive indulgence in the sexual
commerce, such means ought to be employed, as are calculated to remove the
irregularities which have taken place in the functions of digestion and
perspiration, and to give new energy to the solid parts. With this intention,
the quantity of food is not of so much consequence as its quality; hence the
diet should be nourishing, of easy digestion, and have a tendency to promote
insensible perspiration: in all states of debility, a light and spare diet is
the most suitable to restore strength, without exerting too much the digestive
organs. Rich nourishment, therefore, as well as tough, flatulent, and crude
victuals, or those which are liable to ferment in the stomach, would, in such
cases, be extremely pernicious. -- But, above all, a rigid degree of abstinence
from the intercourse which has occasioned the weakness, cannot be too seriously
recommended; as this alone in generally sufficient to restore muscular vigor,
especially where youth and soundness of constitution are in favor of the
individual.

Although we are possessed of no specifics, strictly deserving the appellation
of aphrodisiacs, yet there certainly are means, which tend to promote the
desire, as well as the capacity, of carrying on the sexual intercourse; these
are either such as contribute to increase the seminal fluid, or stimulate the
genital organs. Of the former kind are those, which afford a rich chyle and
salubrious blood, which conduct this fluid more abundantly to the parts of
generation, and are on that account mildly diuretic; for instance, milk, eggs,
tender and nourishing meat, herbs and roots of a mild, spicy nature, and such
as promote the secretion of urine, moderate bodily exercise, particularly on
horseback, etc. Merely stimulating remedies, however, should not be employed
without great precaution, especially by the infirm, and those beyond a certain
age; for the emission of semen, in these, is generally attended with debility
and disgust: while in young and robust persons there is no necessity to
increase the secretion of that fluid by artificial means.

There are likewise remedies of an opposite tendency, more effectually
answering the purpose of moderating, or rather checking a too violent
propensity to venery, than those before stated, with a view to promote it. In
the presen state of society, and particularly among maritime nations, where a
great proportion of men and women are obliged to lead a single life, the means
conducive to diminish this passion, deserves every attention. Of this nature
are:

1. A laborious and rigid life, much bodily exercise, little sleep, and a spare
diet; so that the fluids may be more easily conducted to other parts, and that
they may not be produced in a greater quantity, than is requisite to the
support of the body. For the same reason, it is advisable, as soon as the
desire of committing excesses rises to any height, immediately to resort to
some serious avocation, to make use of less nutritious food and drink, to avoid
all dishes peculiarly stimulating to the palate, and to abstain from the use of
wine, and other spirituous liquors.

2. To shun every species of excitement; such as intimacy with the other sex,
amorous conversations, libidinous narratives, seductive books, pictures, etc.

3. A cool regimen in every respect: -- hence Plato and Aristotle recommended
the custom of going barefoot, as a means of checking the stimulus to carnal
desire; so that this indecorous practice was considered by the ancients as a
symbol of chastity. The cold bath was likewise suggested for the same purpose;
others again, among whom may be reckoned Pliny and Galen, advised to wear thin
sheets of lead on the calves of the legs, and near the kidneys. -- With the
same intention, and probably with better effect, may be used the cooling
species of nourishment, such as lettuce, water-purslane, cucumbers, etc. -- for
common drink, mere water; and, if the impulse of passion should increase, a
small quantity of nitre, vinegar, or vitriolic acid, may occasionally be added
to the water, to render it more cooling. -- Yet all these and similar remedies
are of little or no advantage to the habitual voluptuary, especially if subject
to hypochondriasis. The exciting cause in such persons not unfrequently
proceeds from a diseased abdomen, which, as has been before observed, may be so
much obstructed, that all other remedies are in vain, until the material
stimulus of such obstructions be removed. -- Lastly,

4. The various extenuants, such as spices of all kinds, and the smoking of
tobacco, violent exercise, etc. are equally improper; as these would inevitably
impair the health of persons naturally lean, sanguine, and choleric; while in
cold and phlegmatic temperaments, they would rather tend to increase than to
abate the stimulus.

Having now, as far as was consistent with the plan of this work, investigated
both the beneficial and detrimental consequences of the sexual intercourse, I
propose to conclude this subject with a concise view of the principal theories
of generation, which have been offered by the ablest physiologists, and which I
have extracted from the aforementioned work of Dr. Loder.

"The origin of the first germ of the embryo, (says the learned Professor) and
the manner of its formation, are so obscure, that of all the conjectures made
by the most attentive and ingenious observers, none has yet obtained general
credit, or arrived at any degree of certainty. The sexual function appears to
belong to those secrets of Nature, to the developement of which the powers of
the human understanding are altogether inadequate. Yet it is not undeserving
the attention of a reflecting mind, to become acquainted with the diversified
hypotheses that have prevailed on this subject, and particularly those which
have the greatest share of probability in their favor.

"Some of the ancient naturalists have searched for the first germ of the
embryo, not within the bodies of the parents, but absolutely in external
objects; while they maintained, that it is introduced from without, either by
the air, or particular articles of nourishment; and, if it happen to meet with
a body qualified to effect its formation, it then receives life, and grows;
but, in the contrary case, it passes away unchanged. This whimsical conjecture
is undeservedly transmitted to our times, by the name of panspermia; -- it is
unworthy of refutation, as it is unfounded, and totally inconsistent with
experience.

"By another hypothesis ( generatio aequivoca) it was asserted, that a variety
of insects, and even of the smaller animals, may originate from extraneous
substances, by mere fermentation and putrefaction, without previous generation,
or any intercourse of males and females. -- Thus maggots were said to arise
from putrefying meat, and in wounds; fleas to grow in urine and feces, etc. But
by more accurate observations we have learnt, that such vermin are only
generated in putrescible bodies, when the eggs of those insects, which feed
upon putrid substances, have been previously deposited in them. -- Yet there is
a certain kind of minute animals, which seem to receive life merely from the
vivifying powers of Nature, being bred, by infusion, in substances foreign to
their species; and to these perhaps the preceding theory is so far applicable,
as their origin is involved in obscurity.

"Other naturalists have ascribed the first germ of the embryo exclusively to
the semen of the male. Hence arose the singular opinion, that the small embryo,
with all its parts, is already deposited visibly in the semen; or that it may
be produced from this humor by mere fermentation, or chemical process, without
the cooperation of the animal body. Hence also the hypothesis formerly
maintained by several eminent writers, that the animalculae of the semen are to
be considered as germs of embryos; that, with every intercourse between the
sexes, an innumerable quantity of these is introduced into the female parts of
generation; that only one or two of such animalculae arrive at the ovaria, from
these return to the womb, and progressively grow there; but that all the others
necessarily perish. Ludwig von Hammon, a young man, born at Dantzig, during the
time of his studying medicine at Leyden, and in the course of his microscopical
pursuits, discovered, in the month of August, 1677, in a drop of the semen of a
cock recently dissected, a kind of ocean, in which swam thousands of little,
lively, active animals. The same phenomenon was also observed in the mature
semen of other male animals; and in these animalculae were immediately thought
to be seen the germs of subsequent perfect animals. By this discovery, a key
was supposed to be sound, which would unlock the whole mystery of generation.
-- This bold conjecture is not only incompatible with the wisdom of the
Creator, but, besides other strong arguments against it, in a manner refutes
itself by this circumstance, that in very different creatures, for instance, in
men and in asses, there are found animalculae exactly similar, while in animals
of the greatest resemblance in other respects, we meet with animalculae
altogether different. For this reason, they ought to be considered as little
creatures inherent in the animal body, and which indeed may form an essential
part of a fruitful semen, but the use of which is yet unknown.

"Another sect of natural philosophers, who attributed to both sexes an equal
share in the procreating function, maintained, that the germ of the embryo
originates in a mixture of the male and female semen, the latter of which
proceeds from the ovaria. Among later naturalists, the celebrated BUFFON was
the principal supporter of this opinion. He endeavored to establish this
hypothetical notion, by conjoining with it the idea of certain internal forms,
which were requisite to the formation of the parts of the body; in consequence
of which he maintained, that the sex of the embryo is determined by the
circumstance of its consisting of a greater quantity of male or female semen.
-- But, as the supposed female semen does not proceed from the ovaria, and as
the ovaria are not connected with the womb by any tubes, but merely by solid
(...), it follows that women secern no semen, and what is improperly so called,
is only, (...) I have already observed, a pituitous liquor secreted from the
uterus and the vagina. It is farther inconceivable, that the embryo could be
endowed with corporeal parts, different from those of father and mother, if it
originated merely in the mixture of the seminal fluids of both, and if these
should comprehend all the individual parts of the body. Besides, the fanciful
internal forms of Buffon cannot be proved by any argument or observation.

"Again, others have ascribed the germ of the embryo to the mother alone, while
they granted to the male semen no other power than that of vivification. These
philosophers, among whom we find HALLER and BONNET, seriously asserted, that
the whole body of the embryo lies already prepared in the ovary of the mother,
so that it requires only to be developed, and that the male semen communicates
merely the first impulse to this developement. They certainly went too far in
this assertion; yet it is highly probable, that the crude matter already exists
in the ovary, and that it is first animated by the semen of the male, and thus
qualified for its gradual formation.

"Respecting the manner in which the embryo is formed, there prevail two
principal theories, namely, that of evolution, "According to this theory, (says
the facetious Prof. BLUMENBACH, of G^ttingen,) we, and indeed all the children
of Adam, were at one time, ipso facto, pent up in the two ovaria of our common
mother, Eve. There we lay, as it were, asleep; and, though astonishingly little
creatures, yet completely organized bodies, and perfect miniatures of the forms
we have since attained; for, says HALLER, All our viscera, and the bones
themselves were then already formed, although in a kind of fluid state. That
which we call impregnation, is nothing else than the action of awakening the
germ from its lethargic state, by means of the male semen, which stimulates the
little creature's heart to the first pulsation; and so on.

"The same kind of idea has lately induced a very celebrated naturalist of
Geneva, and a warm advocate of this theory, to plan out for us a history of
organized bodies previous to the state of impregnation; from which we learn, 1.
that we are all much older than we suppose ourselves to be: 2. that all mankind
are exactly of the same age, the great-grandfather being not a second older
than the youngest of his great-grandchildren; 3. that this respectable age of
ours may be about six thousand years. The same natural historian also entirely
agrees in opinion with Bazin; that since this charming long series of years,
when we were all packed together, along with Cain and Abel, and the other two
hundred thousand millions of men, which, according to the best calculations,
have since that period gone -- quo pius AEneas, quo Tullus dives, et Ancus; in
a word, since the first creation, during which time we have been in a kind of
lethargic sleep, though not entirely motionless; that during the whole
fifty-seven centuries, I say, previous to our being awakened by the
abovementioned stimulus, we were, according to Bazin's opinion, always growing
by imperceptible degrees; for instance, we were most probably rather a little
bigger at the time we lay beside Cain's nieces, than when all their uncles and
aunts were of the party, as it is very natural to suppose, that we must then
have been considerably more straitened for room. In this manner, our apartment
became gradually more easy and commodious, in proportion as our forefathers
were evolved; and we kept continually expanding ourselves more and more, until
the succession of evolution at last came to our turn!!"

Such is the ludicrous account of a theory which, though leading to the most
extravagant and romantic conclusions, was supported by the great Baron HALLER,
and the late Italian philosopher, SPALLANZANI. These eminent men have
endeavored to support the doctrine of the pre-existence of complete organized
moleculae in the ovaria of females before impregnation, by many experiments and
observations, which at first sight, appeared to be so far conclusive, that they
obtained full and general credit for more than thirty years. Prof. Blumenbach
himself not only believed in the truth of this absurd doctrine, but defended it
in many of his earlier writings. At length, however, the success he
unexpectedly met with, in an experiment with a species of a green-armed polypus
( conferva fontinalis,) and its astonishingly rapid powers of reproduction,
induced this candid philosopher to acknowledge his former errors and to publish
an ' Essay on Generation,' in which he boldly attacks all former theories;
attempts to refute them, partly by argument, partly by his peculiarly humorous
mode of exposing the inconsistencies they lead to; and, at the same time,
proposes a new hypothesis, the substance of which I shall insert in a
subsequent page, when the the-of gradual formation will be considered.


and that of gradual formation (epigenesis.) Agreeably to the former, it was
conjectured, that all organic bodies, which have already originated, or which
may at any future time originate from one another, have been combined, or
enclosed one within another as germs, from the first creation of the world; and
that they required only a gradual evolution, to bring them to a state of
perfection. The supporters of this theory alleged the instance of the
vinefretter, which evidently contains in itself several generations, as
likewise that of the butterfly, which lies already formed in its case, and
various other plausible examples; but, above all, they endeavored to explain
their hypothesis by the origin of the chicken in the egg; To such readers as
are desirous to become more fully acquainted with the particulars of this
extraordinary conjecture, it may be useful to illustrate it with the following
account, extracted from the Essay before quoted, from the pen of Prof.
Blumenbach.

"Mr. Paul," says he, "a natural historian of great reputation, has (in his
preface to the 8th vol. of the Collection Academique, p. 22. and seq.) objected
to Haller's demonstration, that, allowing the membranes of the yolk with its
invisible vessels to have preexisted in the hen, yet it is possible that the
embryo is only formed during incubation, and that its blood vessels afterward
unite with the blood vessels of the membranes of the yolk, and thus form an
anastomosis.

"Baron von Haller immediately declared loudly against this objection, and
denied it, as a thing altogether impossible, that the tender vessels of the
microscopic embryo should be capable of anastomosing with the large
blood vessels of the giant yolk.

"But what is rather singular is, that this very ingenious and meritorious
author, who denies the possibility of such an anastomosis, supposes without any
hesitation, and in the same work, when explaining human conception, that the
very minute germ, as soon as it has arrived at the cavity of the uterus, forms
an adhesion with it, by means of the placenta; -- And how? -- Just in the same
way that he denies it to the embryo of the hen; that is to say, by an
anastomosis taking place between the microscopic and tender branches of the
umbilical vessels, and the giant ones of the maternal uterus.

"The modern advocates for the theory of evolution have taken this observation
of the yolk of the egg, as the prop of their hypothesis. -- Long before this,
however, the spawn of the frog had been employed for the same purpose.

"Nearly a century indeed before that period, SWAMMERDAM announced the
wonderful discovery, that the black points in the spawn of a frog were so many
perfectly-formed little frogs, and that they pre-existed in the ovaria,
although not discoverable by the naked eye.

"The good man seemed to have had a presentiment of the uncertainty and
instability of all vain worldly honors; and he therefore, as is well known,
soon after betook himself to a more solid enjoyment, in which Mademoiselle
Bourignon participated. And, indeed, it happened as he appears to have
foreseen; for the ungrateful world now ascribe the merits of that discovery to
the celebrated Abbe SPALLANZANI, who has maintained it in several of his
writings, but more particularly in the second volume of his " Dissertazioni di
fisica animale e vegetabile." Tom. xi. in Modena, 1780, 8vo.

"He calls the little black points of the fecundated spawn of frogs, tadpoles,
or young frogs; and, as this little black point exactly resembles the same in
the unfecundated spawn, he reasons agreeably to his logic, that the tadpoles
must have existed in the mother. -- I do not know what would be thought of a
chemist who should assert that the Arbor Dianoe pre-existed in a mass of
amalgam of silver, because, when a weak solution of silver was poured on it, a
little tree seemed to spring out of it. -- One ought to be ashamed of wasting
much tune in the refutation of an assertion, of the falsity of which any
unprejudiced person, who is not altogether unaccustomed to observations of the
kind, may convince himself, every spring.

"Whoever has taken the trouble accurately to examine the spawn of the frog,
must confess, that the idea of demonstrating the little black points it
contains to be so many completely formed tadpoles, resembles Brother Peter's
method of reasoning in the Tale of a Tub, where he demonstrates to his
brothers, that a brown loaf is a piece of excellent roast mutton. -- But the
abettors of the theory of organized germs have gone a step farther in support
of their opinions. They refer to cases where even young girls, in all their
maiden chastity, have become pregnant, from the untimely and premature
evolution of one of these organized germs.

"The concurrence of facts is sometimes most wonderful. It happened, that in
the very same year, in which Swammerdam announced his discovery in the spawn of
the frog, a case was published in the Ephem. rerum not. curios. delivered to
the society by a celebrated court-physician of those times. Dr. CLAUDIUS, which
exactly suited, as a confirmation of Swam^^^dam's opinion. -- A miller's wife
was delivered of a little girl, whose belly seemed of an unusual size. Eight
days afterward this big-bellied child was seized with such violent pains and
restlessness, that every one who was present thought it could not outlive the
next instant. The sick infant, however, in the mean time, actually bore a
well-formed, elegant, lively little daughter, about the size of one's middle
finger, which was regularly baptized. During the time, and after the birth, the
waters, placenta, and other impurities were duly discharged; but both the
little mother and daughter died early on the following day!!!" (Prof.
Blumenbach says, in a note subjoined to this account, that he has made use of
the very words of a contemporary physician, Dr. OTTO, who was consulted by the
grandmother (the miller's wife) during her pregnancy. His nephew has vindicated
and illustrated the whole history in a most learned and ingenious manner: 'D.
C. J. Aug. Ot^onis Epistola de foetu puerpera, sive de foetu in foetu.'
Weissenfels, 1740, 8vo.)

"Baron von Haller very judiciously classes this case with another from the
Transactions of the Academy of Sciences at Stockholm, where, on dissecting a
young girl, bones, teeth, and hairs, were found in a tumor of the mesentery.
These two cases he looks upon as principal evidences for the truth of the
doctrine of germs pre-existing in the mother.


which, however, is a direct demonstration of the contrary. The objections
which have been started against this opinion, concerning the minuteness of the
germs, and the production of monsters, or bodies of preternatural shape, may be
easily removed; but a more weighty objection made against this theory is that
which relates to the restoration of parts lost from the body, and which appears
to be irrefutable. Besides these considerations, many arguments may be produced
to show the futility of that doctrine.

"More probable than the former, unquestionably is the theory of gradual
formation: Another definition of Epigenesis deserves to be inserted here, as it
is more concise, and as its author, Prof. Blumenbach, has not only embraced
this doctrine as the most rational on a subject of so mysterious a nature, but
has likewise been at great pains to elucidate the gradual formation of animate
bodies by an additional hypothesis -- his nisus formativus (Bildungs-trieb), or
the spontaneous effort of Nature in forming homogeneous substances. -- "It is
supposed," says he, "that the prepared, but at the same time unorganized
rudiments of the foetus, first begin to be gradually organized, when it arrives
at its place of destination, at a due time, and under the necessary
circumstances. This is the doctrine of Epigeresis." And with a view to
corroborate this supposition, the learned Professor makes the following
categorical declaration: " That there is no such thing in nature, as
pre-existing organized germs; but that the unorganized matter of generation,
after being duly prepared, and having arrived at its place of destination,
acquires a peculiar action, or nisus, which nisus continues to operate through
the whole life of the animal, and that by it the first form of the animal, or
plant, is not only determined, but afterward preserved, and when deranged, is
again restored. A nisus, which seems therefore to depend on the powers of life,
but which is as distinct from the other qualities of living bodies,
(sensibility, irritability, and contractility,) as from the common properties
of dead matter: that it is the chief principle of generation, growth,
nutrition, and reproduction; and that to distinguish it from all others, it may
be denominated the FORMATIVE NISUS."

I shall only add, that this is, at present, the prevailing theory in the
German Universities; though, in reality, it leaves us as much in the dark as
any other.


according to which it is supposed, that previous to generation there exists no
real germ, but crude matter only, from which the parts of the organic body are
gradually formed. The power by which this formation is accomplished, is a
certain formative effort pervading all nature, (NISUS FORMATIVUS; vis plastica,
vis essentialis) manifesting its activity according to equal and determinate
laws, although in a different manner, in the functions of nutrition and
generation, as well as in the restoration of parts accidentally lost. It may be
safely asserted, that this is a mere modification of the universal power of
vitality; if no obstacle be opposed to this plastic effort, the young organic
body then receives its proper form; but, in the contrary case, there arise
various unnatural shapes and monsters. By the influence of climate, aliment,
mode of living, and other incidental circumstances, this effort of Nature may,
in the course of life, be variously modified; nay, it is liable to changes in
the very first crude matter, or in the plastic lymph, by the different
constitution of the male semen. -- But the principal arguments in favor of the
theory of gradual formation are justly derived from the first origin of plants,
from the formation of the chick in the egg, and from the reproduction of such
parts of the body as have been lost, either by accident or necessity.

CHAP. X.
Of the AFFECTIONS and PASSIONS of the MIND; -- their relative good and bad
effects on Health.

THE boundless ocean does not exhibit scenes more diversified, than the various
affections and passions of the human mind. They arise partly from the mind
itself, and partly from the various constitutions and temperaments of the
individual. While no other remedies but rational arguments can influence the
mind, the disposition of the body may be changed and improved, by an infinite
variety of means.

It is, indeed, principally from bodily causes, that many persons are violently
affected from the most insignificant motives, and others are little, if at all,
influenced by the most calamitous events. It is, for instance, obviously from a
physical cause, that violent medicines, poisons, the bite of mad animals, etc.
produce timidity, or fits of anger and rage; -- that accumulations of black
bile in the abdomen make people reserved, peevish, melancholy, and stupid. What
we wish to think, and in what manner to continue the operations of the mind,
frequently does not depend upon ourselves. The thoughts of the sober are very
different from those of the man in a state of intoxication. A certain dish, a
particular drink, may suspend the powers of reason.

The temperament of man is, as it were, the source of his mental operations.
Affections and passions are different one from another in degree only. The
former imply the inclination or propensity to a passion; the latter, the
realized affections, whether simple or compound; or in other words, they
constitute an actual and perceptible degree of sensual desire or aversion.
According to Lord KAIMES, passions are active and accompanied with desires;
affections are inactive and destitute of passion. He also distinguishes between
wishes and desires: the former he calls the highest activity of the affections.
Compassion and wishes for the better, are in his idea affections: pity, and a
desire after what is better, he calls passions.

Passions operate upon the body either suddenly, or slowly and gradually.
Sudden death, or imminent danger of life, may be the consequence of the former:
a gradual decline and consumption, that of the latter. The passions, as such,
may be aptly divided into two principal classes, those of an agreeable and of a
disagreeable nature. Men of strong imagination chiefly suffer from passions of
the violent kind, while those of more understanding, and less fancy, are
subject to slow emotions of the mind. Indolent persons, whose sensations are
dull, and less passionate, than those who combine acute feelings, and a lively
imagination, with a clear understanding. The greatest minds are generally the
most impassioned

All passions, of whatever kind, if they rise to a high and violent degree, are
of a dangerous tendency; bodily disease, nay death itself, may be their
concomitant effects. Fatal apoplexies have frequently followed sudden dread or
terror. Catalepsy and epileptic fits sometimes accompany immoderate affliction,
or distressing anxiety. Hypochondriasis, hysterics, and habitual dejection, may
indeed arise from a variety of physical causes; but they are as frequently
generated by the passions or sufferings of the mind alone, in individuals
otherwise healthy.

Diseases of the mind, after some time, produce various disorders of the body;
as diseases of the body occasionally terminate in imbecility. In either case,
the malady must be opposed by physical, as well as moral remedies.

It is only by the management of the constitution and education of the
individual, that the passions may be rendered useful; for, if uncontrolled and
left to themselves, they affect us as a tempest does the ocean, without our
being able to counteract their pernicious influence. Since all affections
whatever consist in desire or aversion, they must necessarily be accompanied
with representations of so lively a nature, as to induce the individual to
perform the corresponding voluntary motions. Consequently the affections must
also be accompanied by sensible motions within the body, not only by voluntary
actions, but by those also, which contribute to the support of life, and which
are more or less violent, according to the degree of the affection. Joy, for
instance, enlivens all the corporeal powers, and, as it were, pervades the
whole animal frame. Hope has nearly a similar effect; and these two affections
contribute to the preservation of health and life, more than all the medicines
that can be contrived. But of the other affections of the mind, we can, in most
instances, observe scarcely any other effect, than that of irregular motions,
which, not unlike medicines, in a limited degree, and under certain
circumstances, may be occasionally useful. Hence the dominion over our passions
and affections is an essential and indispensable requisite to health. Every
individual, indeed, is at his birth provided with a certain basis of
inclinations, and with his peculiar moral temperament: the most tender infant,
even before he is capable of speaking, discovers by his features and gestures
the principal inclinations of his mind. If these be fostered in his susceptible
breast, they will grow up with him, and become so habitual, that the adult
cannot, without the greatest exertion, overcome them by the power of reason.

The physical state of the body is most happy, when the mind enjoys a moderate
degree of gaiety, such as is generally met with in healthy and virtuous
persons. The circulation of the fluids and perspiration are then carried on
with proper vigor; obstructions are thereby prevented or removed; and by this
lively and uniform motion, not only digestion, but likewise all the other
functions of the body, are duly performed.

Joy is that state of the mind, in which it feels extraordinary pleasure; in
which it enjoys a high degree of contentment and happiness. The activity of the
whole machine is enlivened by it; the eyes sparkle; the action of the heart and
arteries is increased; the circulation of all the fluids is more vigorous and
uniform; it facilitates the cure of diseases in general, and forwards
convalescence. The different degrees of this affection are, Gaiety,
Cheerfulness, Mirth, Exultation, Rapture, and Ecstacy. -- Habitual joy and
serenity, arising from the perfection, rectitude, and due subordination of our
faculties, and their lively exercise on objects agreeable to them, constitute
mental or rational happiness.

Evacuations which are moderate, a proper state of perspiration, and all food
of an aperient quality and easy digestion, may be considered as contributing to
a joyful state of mind. A pure, dry air, and every thing that invigorates the
functions of the body, on the well-being of which the serenity of mind greatly
depends, has a tendency to obviate stagnations. Joy farther is more salutary,
when combined with other moderate affections: and the various bodily exertions,
as well as the employments of the mind, in reflecting upon different objects,
are then successfully performed. -- A moderate degree of joy removes the
noxious particles of the body, and in this respect is equal, nay superior in
salubrity, to bodily exercise; but excess and too long duration of this passion
attenuate and carry away not only the superfluous, but likewise many useful
fluids, and more than the natural functions can restore. Hence, this too
violent motion and dissipation of humors is attended with relaxation and
heaviness; and sleep also is prevented, which alone can re-invigorate the
nerves, that have suffered from too great tension. On this account, the
celebrated SANCTORIUS dissuades persons from gambling, who cannot control their
passions; because of the joy which accompanies their success, being followed by
restless nights, and great abstraction of perspirable matter. Sudden and
excessive joy may prove extremely hurtful, on account of the great waste of
energy, and the lively vibration of the nerves, which is the more noxious after
long rest. Nay, it may become dangerous, by causing expansion or laceration of
the vessels, spitting of blood, fevers, deprivation of understanding, swooning,
and even sudden death. If we have anticipated any joyful event, the body is
gradually prepared to undergo the emotions connected with it. -- For this
reason, we ought to fortify ourselves with the necessary share of firmness, to
meet joyful as well as disastrous tidings.

Laughter is sometimes the effect or consequence of joy; and it frequently
arises from a sudden disappointment of the mind, when directed to an object
which, instead of being serious and important, terminates unexpectedly in
insignificance. Within the bounds of moderation, laughter is a salutary
emotion; for, as a deep inspiration of air takes place, which is succeeded by a
short and frequently repeated expiration, the lungs are filled with a great
quantity of blood, and gradually emptied, so that its circulation through the
lungs is thus beneficially promoted. It manifests a similar effect on the
organs of digestion. Pains in the stomach, colics, and several complaints that
could not be relieved by other means, have been frequently removed by this. In
many cases, where it is purposely raised, laughter is of excellent service, as
a remedy which agitates and enlivens the whole frame. Experience also furnishes
us with many remarkable instances, that obstinate ulcers of the lungs and and
the liver, which had resisted every effort of medicine, were happily opened and
cured by a fit of laughter artificially excited.

Hope is the anticipation of joy, or the presentiment of an expected good. It
is attended with all the favorable effects of a fortunate event, without
possessing any of its physical disadvantages; because the expectation of
happiness does not affect us so excessively as its enjoyment. Besides, it is
not liable to those interruptions, from which no human pleasure is exempt; it
is employed principally with ideal or imaginary objects, and generally keeps
within the bounds of moderation; lastly, the sense of happiness contained in
hope far exceeds the satisfaction received from immediate enjoyment,
consequently it has a more beneficial influence on health than good fortune
realized. Although hope is, in itself, merely ideal, and presents its
flattering and embellished images to the fancy in a borrowed light, yet it is,
nevertheless, the only genuine source of human happiness. Hope, therefore, is
the most favorable state of mind to health, and has frequently preserved the
serenity and prolonged the existence of those, whose situation appeared to be
forlorn.

Love, viewed in its most favorable light, presents to us a picture of
permanent joy, and is attended with all the good effects of that passion. It
enlivens the pulsations of the heart and arteries, promotes the operations of
the different functions of the body; and it has frequently been observed, that
a strong attachment to a beloved object has cured inveterate disorders, which
had resisted all medicinal powers, and which had been considered incurable. The
changes which this passion can effect on the powers and the whole disposition
of the mind, are equally remarkable. For the extraordinary exertions, made to
obtain possession of the object of our wishes, excite a sensation and
consciousness of strength, which enables man not only to undertake, but also to
perform the greatest achievements. In that exalted state, he sets all
difficulties at defiance, and surmounts every obstacle.

Sorrow is the reverse of joy, and operates either suddenly or slowly,
according as the cause of it is of greater or less importance and duration. The
lowest degree of it is called Concern; -- when it arises from the
disappointment of hopes and endeavors, it is Vexation; -- when silent and
thoughtful it settles into Pensiveness or Sadness; -- when it is long indulged
in, so as to prey upon, and possess the mind, it becomes habitual, and grows
into Melancholy. -- Sorrow increased and continued, is called Grief; -- when
tossed by hopes and fears, it is Distraction; -- when all these are drowned by
sorrow, it settles into Despair. -- The highest degrees of sorrow are called
Agonies.

Sorrow seldom proves suddenly fatal; for, though it injures the nervous
energy, it does not hasten the circulation of the blood, with the rapidity of
other passions, but rather retards its course. Yet there are examples of its
speedy and fatal effects. -- Not unlike a slow poison, sorrow corrodes the
powers of mind and body; it enfeebles the whole nervous system; the heart beats
slower; the circulation of the blood and other fluids becomes more inert; they
frequently stagnate in their channels, and generate evils more serious than
sadness itself. Farther, the face at first turns pale, then yellow and tumid;
the body and mind are worn out; the course of the blood through the lungs must
be assisted by frequent sighing; the appetite and digestion become vitiated;
and thus arise obstructions, hysteric and hypochondriacal complaints, and, at
length, consumption, which is inevitable destruction to the body, frequently in
the prime of life, and in spite of the healing art. Persons who indulge
themselves in peevishness, very soon lose their appetite, together with the
power of digestion; their mouth has a bitter taste; flatulency, colic, spasms,
faintings, and the long list of stomachic complaints necessarily follow. Men
become subject to the blind hemorrhoids; and women to suppression or other
irregularities of the menses, costiveness, or chronic diarrhoea. The bile, on
account of the retarded circulation, either grows hard and produces indurations
of the liver, or it is mixed with the blood, and generates jaundice or dropsy.
Such persons in time become very irritable and peevish; and with the frequent
return of grief, the mind, at length, is totally employed in contemplating its
wretched situation, so that it finds new food for increasing it in almost every
object it beholds. Hence the whole imagination is by degrees obscured, and the
most usual consequences of it are, the deepest melancholy -- succeeded either
by a nervous fever, or insanity -- sometimes cancer, and at other times a
speedier dissolution, by what is then called a broken heart.

Solitude and idleness are not only the remote causes of many passions, but
also support and foster them, without exception: they collect and fix the
attention of the mind on the favorite objects, and make us reflect the more
keenly on the causes of the passions, the less we are interrupted in these fond
reveries by other sensations. Though it is certain, that it is not in our power
to avert grief, from which even sages and heroes are not always exempt, yet we
can do much to alleviate it, by denying ourselves the enjoyment which this
indulgence in certain situations affords. Moral arguments of consolation, if
properly adapted to the capacity and mental disposition of the sufferer, have
in these cases generally a powerful influence. Those whose minds are affected
by sorrow, ought to avoid as much as possible the company of persons, who are
fond of relating their calamities, and recounting their misfortunes. On the
contrary, whatever has a tendency to cheer the mind, and to divert it from
disagreeable objects, ought to be instantly resorted to. Of this nature are,
company, business, cheerful music, and the social affections. -- The body
should be frequently rubbed with dry cloths, perfumed with amber, vinegar,
sugar, and the like; the lukewarm bath may be employed with great advantage;
and, if circumstances permit, the patient should remove to a warmer and drier
climate. -- If temperately used, a weak and mild wine is of excellent service,
but an immoderate indulgence in wine may disorder the stomach, by the quantity
of acid it produces.

Weeping generally accompanies sorrow, if it be not too intense: tears are the
anodynes of grief, and ought not to be restrained by adults. We feel in weeping
an anxiety and contraction of the breast, which impedes respiration; probably,
because then a superfluous quantity of air is contained in the lungs, which is
forcibly expelled by sobbing. By this obstruction in breathing, the blood,
which ought to be reconducted from the head, accumulates in the lungs, and
consequently in the veins: hence arise redness, heat of the face, and a flow of
tears, which are regulated in quantity by the degree of sadness that produced
them. Their principal good effects are, their preventing the danger to be
apprehended from grief, by diminishing the spasmodic motions in the breast and
head, and by restoring regularity in respiration, as well as in the circulation
of the blood: hence persons find themselves much relieved after a plentiful
flow of tears, which however are extremely prejudicial to the eyes.

Grief arising from an ungratified desire of returning home and seeing our
relations, is productive of a disease very common among the Swiss, and which
sometimes, after a short state of melancholy, trembling of the limbs, and other
symptoms apparently not very dangerous, hurries the unhappy sufferer to the
grave, but more frequently throws him into a consumption, and generates the
most singular whims and fancies. Persuasions, punishments, medicines, are here
of no service; but a suddenly revived hope, or gratification of the patient's
wishes, have a powerful effect; provided that an incurable consumption, or
insanity, have not already taken place.

There is also a singular hysteric or nervous fever, which affects many
unfortunate sufferers in mental disorders, and which was first accurately
described by RICHARD MANNINGHAM. Debilitated persons, and those of great
sensibility, of both sexes, after melancholy affections and other exhaustions
of strength, are particularly subject to this disorder. It begins with
irregular paroxysms, and manifests itself by an undefinable indisposition, a
dry tongue without thirst, anxiety without a visible cause, want of appetite, a
low, quick, and unequal pulse, a pale and copious urine, occasional sensations
of cold and shivering, sometimes clammy sweats, sometimes colic, sleeplessness,
and insanity. According to the experience of Manningham, this fever generally
terminates, in the course of thirty or forty days, by faintings, silent
reveries, and death; unless it be removed in the beginning, by bracing and
strengthening remedies.

Among the mournful passions we may also include an extravagant degree of love,
or such as transgresses the bounds of reason. It is then no longer a pleasure,
but a disquietude of mind, attended with the most irregular emotions; it
disorders the understanding; gradually consumes all the vital powers, by a slow
fever; prevents nutrition, and reduces the body to a skeleton. All the
passions, indeed, may in their more violent degrees occasion a depravation of
the understanding; but sorrow and love are peculiarly calculated to produce so
fatal an effect. This mental disorder, to which both sexes, but especially
women, are subject, should be opposed in time, by physical as well as moral
remedies. -- Much may be done here by education, and a proper choice of
society. The imagination should be withdrawn from such images, as may encourage
inordinate and excessive love; and it cannot be denied, that young females
particularly are frequently precipitated into this weakness, merely by reading
improper novels. This imbecility of mind becomes the more dangerous in young
people, as it is generally increased by solitude, and their ignorance of the
real world. -- Exalted ideas of virtue, of magnanimity, and a generous
self-denial, are excellent antidotes; but, if the body sink under the weight of
passion, even these exertions are insufficient to support the energy of the
mind. The physical remedies to be resorted to in these situations are, rigid
temperance, a frugal and less nourishing diet, constant employment, and much
exercise; but the most successful of all, is a happy marriage.

Of all the passions that can aid the medical art, there is none from which we
may expect greater benefit, than from a rational gratification of love. On the
contrary, a too ardent passion is attended with the most dangerous physical
consequences: it is nearly related to disappointed love, and usually shows
itself by a reserved melancholy, a general distrust, and a gloomy misanthropy,
which, however, externally appears only under the character of lassitude and
depression. It is apt to be followed by a suppression of the menses,
consumption of the lungs, and even insanity.

Disappointed love is extremely detrimental to health, and gradually
destructive to the body; it sometimes produces furor uterinus in females of an
irascible temper and romantic turn of mind, unless the passion itself be
radically cured.

The most dangerous effect of love is jealousy; -- this pitiable passion, like
disappointed love and pride, is very liable to terminate in madness. In the
houses appropriated to the unhappy victims of insanity, we generally meet with
three different classes. The first consists of men deprived of their
understanding, by pride; the second of girls, by love; and the third of women,
by jealousy.
-- In sanguine temperaments, the excess of this affection is productive of
consequences most prejudicial to the body; their fluids are impelled to a more
rapid circulation, and secret, with preternatural velocity, that valuable
fluid which stimulates them to venery. Such persons are much addicted to ease,
pleasure, and every species of gratification, which suits their irritable
nerves: their skin and muscles being soft, and accessible to every stimulus,
and their fluids thin and rarefied, it may be easily conceived, that their
humors circulate with rapidity to the parts of generation, and that their
nerves are thus constantly excited to desire. The dreadful consequences are but
too frequently visible in young persons, whether single or married, who have
too early indulged in such excesses. Hence originate tabes dorsalis, wasting of
the limbs, spitting of blood, pulmonary consumption, hectic fever, and the
whole train of undefinable nervous diseases, so called for want of more proper
names; besides a host of other disorders, mostly incurable.

In order to prevent, or at least to oppose, the torrent of these and similar
passions, man must not only be seriously apprised and convinced of his danger,
and the dreadful misery attendant on intemperance and excess, but he must also
submit to a strictly temperate mode of life, if he aspire to rise to the
dignity of his nature, and above the rank of the lower animals. He is a
rational being, though his sensitive faculties every where remind him of his
animal nature. Hence the following rules cannot be too rigidly adhered to: a
constant and useful employment; salutary exercise of the body, till it be
moderately fatigued; temperance in eating and drinking; abstinence from strong
and heating food and liquors; avoiding the habits of effeminacy, solitude, and
too much rest; and lastly, a strict attention, from early youth, to the most
rigid modesty and purity of manners.

Envy arises from self-love or self-interest, particularly in such individuals
as have neglected to cultivate their own talents, or to whom Nature has denied
certain qualifications of body or mind, which they cannot avoid seeing in
others: it is principally excited, when they are witnesses of the prosperity of
persons who possess such superior endowments. People of a narrow mind, and
those of a confined education, are most subject to this mean passion. Envy
deprives those addicted to it of an appetite for food, of sleep, of every
enjoyment, and disposes them to febrile complaints; but in general it is
hurtful to those only who brood over and indulge in this corrosive passion. For
the world contains vast numbers, who show their envy at almost every event
productive of good fortune to others, and who yet often attain a very great
age. Joy at the misfortunes, or the discovered foibles of others, self-love,
calumny against their neighbors, satire and ridicule, are the never-failing
resources of their malignant dispositions. Medicines cannot cure a disease so
odious; education and improvement of morals are its only antidotes. Envious
persons commonly give too much importance to trifles: hence they ought to be
instructed to employ themselves in more useful pursuits; to judge of things
according to their true value, and to accustom themselves to a philosophic
calmness; they ought to learn how to overcome, or at least to moderate, their
selfishness; to counterbalance their expectations with their deserts, and to
equal or surpass others, in their merits rather than in their pretensions.

Fear or anxiety, is the apprehension of evil. Fear weakens the powers of the
mind, relaxes and congeals every part of the human body, retards the pulse,
hinders respiration, obstructs the menses, sometimes also perspiration; hence
it produces tremor and dread; frequently too it excites perspiration, since it
disorganizes every thing linked to the body by means of the nerves. It is apt
to occasion diarrhoea, and, in some individuals, an involuntary discharge of
semen. Some persons of a relaxed habit are, by great fear, thrown into a
perspiration resembling the agonies of death; and others cannot retain their
urine. Timorous persons are more readily infected by epidemical disorders than
those possessed of courage; because fear not only weakens the energy of the
heart, but at the same time promotes the absorption of the skin, so as to
render the timid more liable to contagion. In short, fear increases the
malignity of diseases; changes their natural course; aggravates them by a
thousand incidental circumstances, so that they resist all remedies; and
suppresses the efforts of Nature so as to terminate in speedy dissolution. The
usual consequences of violent and superstitious fear, produced by a disordered
imagination, are eruptions in the face, swellings, cutaneous inflammations, and
painful ulcers. In some instances, too, fear has produced palsy, loss of
speech, epilepsy, and even madness One instance of this effect I have myself
witnessed, in a gentleman, now living in Edinburgh, who was at Lisbon in the
awful earthquake of 1755; and who, from the great fright which seized him upon
seeing whole streets and churches tumble down before him, has been deprived of
his understanding ever since.
itself.

Bashfulness is an inferior degree of fear, which retains the blood in the
external vessels of the breast, and the whole countenance. Hence, in females of
a delicate constitution, and transparent skin, we observe the blush not only
overspread the face but also the bosom. If carried to a greater degree, it is
attended with dangerous consequences, particularly in the individuals
beforementioned: it may stop the flux of the menses and prove fatal, if an
attack of a fever should accelerate the catastrophe. -- A very high degree of
bashfulness may generate a dangerous fever, even in men; though, from modern
education, instances of this latter kind become every day more rare. An
extravagant degree of bashfulness closely borders on fear: if it does not
proceed from vice or corrupted manners, it may be corrected by social
intercourse with persons of a cheerful disposition.

Terror, or the dread of an evil surprising us, before we are able to prevent
it, is of all passions the most destructive, and the most difficult to be
avoided, because its operation is unforeseen and instantaneous. To shun all
occasions that may produce it, is perhaps the only remedy. Persons who are
feeble and possessed of much sensibility, are most subject to terror, and
likewise most affected by it. Its effects are, a sudden and violent contraction
of almost every muscle, that serves to perform the voluntary motions. It may
farther occasion polypous concretions of the heart, inflammations of the
external parts of the body, spasms, and swoons; at the same time, it may stop
salutary evacuations, particularly perspiration and hemorrhages; it may repel
ulcers and cutaneous eruptions, to the great detriment of health, and danger of
life. The menses are sometimes instantaneously suppressed: palpitation of the
heart, trembling in the limbs, and in a more violent degree, convulsions and
epileptic fits, or a general catalepsy, and sudden death itself, are the
subsequent effects of terror.

As terror quickly compels the blood to retreat from the skin to the internal
parts, it forcibly checks the circulation of all the fluids. If anger accompany
terror, there not unfrequently arise violent hemorrhages, vomiting, and
apoplexy. Terror has been known suddenly to turn the hair gray. -- An
inattentive and injudicious mode of educating children often lays the
foundation of this infirmity, which is difficult to be eradicated at a more
advanced age. Persons under the influence of this passion, should be treated
like those who suffer from any other spasmodic contraction. Tea, a little wine,
or spirits and water may be given to them; vinegar, lavender-drops, or spirits,
of hartshorn, may be held to the nostrils; warm bathing of the feet, and
emollient injections may be of advantage; and, lastly, the different
evacuations ought to be promoted; -- but, above all, the mind ought to be duly
composed.

Anger arises from a sense or apprehension of suffered injustice, and an
impetuous desire of revenge. Its different degrees depend upon the impressions
made by the injury, or the ardour of the disposition to vengeance. In the
former case, namely, when the sense of injustice is the prevalent feeling,
anger affects us like terror, and produces spasmodic contractions and
stagnations in the liver and its vessels, sometimes so considerable as to
change the bile into a concrete mass; from this cause alone often arise the
gravel and stone of the bladder. The more usual consequences of anger, if
joined to affliction, are paleness of the face, palpitation of the heart,
faltering of the tongue, trembling of the limbs, and jaundice.

If, on the contrary, the hope of revenge be the predominant feature in anger,
violent commotions take place in the whole system; the circulation of all the
fluids, as well as the pulsations of the heart and arteries, are perceptibly
increased; the vital spirits flow rapidly but irregularly, through the limbs;
the muscles make uncommon efforts, while some appear almost palsied; the face
becomes red; the eyes sparkle; and the whole body feels elated and inclined to
motion. This species of anger is by far the most common.

Anger and terror are, therefore, particularly injurious, to the tender bodies
of infants, who are possessed of extreme sensibility, easily affected, and
consequently much exposed to these passions, on account of the proportionably
greater size of their nerves, and their inability to restrain passion by the
influence of reason. They are liable to be so severely affected, that they may
die suddenly in convulsions, or retain during life an imbecile body and mind,
liable to be terrified upon the slightest occasion. When children are apt to
cry in sleep, when they start up and make motions indicating fear or terror, it
must not be always ascribed to actual pain, but frequently to dreams, which
fill their young minds with terrible images, especially if they have often been
frightened while awake. All parents know how much some children are addicted to
anger and malice, and how difficult it is to suppress the ebullition of these
passions. Hence we ought to beware of giving the most distant encouragement to
such destructive emotions. For it is certain, that both men and women of an
irascible temper generally die of a consumption of the lungs.

Persons of an irritable disposition are more frequently exposed to anger than
others; they are more easily affected by every passion. Hence the tendency to
anger is particularly visible in individuals troubled with hysterics and
hypochondriasis, as well as in debilitated and disappointed men of letters.
Persons of a hot and dry temperament, of strong black hair, and great muscular
strength, are likewise much subject to fits of anger.

A moderate degree of this passion is frequently of advantage to phlegmatic,
gouty, and hypochondriac individuals, as it excites the nerves to action; but,
if too violent and raging, it dissipates the more volatile part of the fluids,
and is productive of the most hurtful consequences. In the epileptic,
scorbutic, choleric, and such as have open wounds, it causes fever, spitting of
blood, convulsions, inflammations, throbbing pains in the side, jaundice,
apoplexy, etc.

No fluid is more affected by anger than the bile, which by its violent influx
into the duodenum produces a fixed spasmodic pain in the region of the navel,
flatulency, vomiting, a bitter taste in the mouth, anxiety and pressure about
the pit of the stomach, and, at length, either obstructions or diarrhoea. --
Wine or other heating liquors, drank immediately after a fit of anger, and
strong exercise or labor, are attended with consequences still more
pernicious, as are also emetics, laxatives, and blood-letting.

The propensity to anger is increased by want of sleep, by heating food and
drink, bitter substances, much animal food, rich soups, spices, and by all
things that have a tendency to inflame the blood. Persons subject to this
passion should use diluent, acidulated, and gently aperient drink, and observe
in every respect the most rigid temperance. Such persons ought to sleep more
than others; and employ the lukewarm bath, gentle cathartics of cream of tartar
or tamarinds, fruit, buttermilk, whey, vegetable aliment, etc.

Among other arguments against anger, young people, especially females, should
be informed, that besides the physical dangers attendant on this passion, it
deforms the face, and, like all the impetuous emotions of the mind, deprives
the passionate of every charm, and induces a strong aversion to such
companions. Those who feel the approach of anger in their mind, should, as much
as possible, divert their attention from the objects of provocation; for
instance, by reciting a passage they have learnt by heart; or, as Julius Caesar
did, by repeating the Roman alphabet.

Inward fretting, in which sadness is combined with anger, is the more
destructive, that it does not vent itself in words, or external actions. There
may arise from it giddiness, inclination to vomiting, sudden pain in the side,
great anxiety, and similar complaints. Somewhat related to this infirmity is,
what Dr. WEIKARDT, a German author, calls the " mal de cour;" a cruel malady,
which comprehends anger, avarice, envy, and sadness. -- From a sense of neglect
and unmerited injury, whether real or imaginary, which torments courtiers, the
habitual peevishness of a great proportion of men leads them to avenge their
disappointment, by oppressing and ill-treating their dependants. To accustom
themselves to consider the physical and moral vicissitudes of life, and the
perishable nature of all terrestrial happiness, with becoming firmness, and to
enlarge their minds by the acquisition of useful knowledge, are the best
remedies for this mental disease.

When sadness or fear have so overpowered the heart and the understanding, that
all hopes of averting the apprehended evils are extinguished, the mind sinks
into Despair. We then see no comfort in futurity, and our ideas of approaching
misery become so intolerable, that we think ourselves incapable to sustain it,
and seek no other remedy but death. There are attacks of despair, and an
inclination to suicide, in which people are, upon any unforeseen event,
suddenly deprived of their understanding, and reduced to temporary insanity.
This precipitate species of despair more nearly resembles terror. Others are
solitary and reserved; continually brooding over their misfortunes, till at
length all their hopes and resolution fail. Their despair, consequently, is
more nearly allied to melancholy, than any other passion.

A sudden fit of despair is owing to very irritable muscular fibers, which are
quickly excited to the most irregular motions, and from which arises confusion
in the senses and the imagination. In profoundly thoughtful and melancholy
individuals, the solid parts are weakened, the fluids become thick, heavy, and
stagnating; and this weakness of the solids gives them a sensation of peculiar
debility. They are dispirited and dejected; their stagnating, or, at best,
slowly circulating fluids, occasion in them a sense of anxiety and timidity;
whence gloomy representations are but too easily impressed on their mind. This
is very apt to be the case with persons who eat more animal than vegetable
food, which produces very rich and substantial blood. From this source some
authors derive the choleric disposition of the British in general; but I have
endeavored to prove, in the fifth Chapter, on Food and Drink, p. 31 and foll.
that this observation cannot be maintained on rational principles, and that it
is inconsistent with actual experience. It is also said of the Negroes, that
they are more subject to melancholy, and even to suicide, because their blood
is more compact, florid, and substantial, than that of the Europeans.

The ambitious are likewise frequently seized with this affection, when they
meet with any thing to give them offense or obstruct their projects. Prodigals,
and those who are strangers to the troubles and difficulties of life, are
subject to fits of despair, whenever they are reduced to a state of adversity.
Too rigid conceptions of virtue have also, though seldom, been the occasion of
this infatuated passion. The cautions and rules for preventing despair and
suicide are the same which must be employed to counteract such other passions
as depress the suffering mind; but they must be modified according to the
temperament of the individual; and the cure of such evils ought to be directed
principally to the body, and partly also to the mind.

Nothing, indeed, is better adapted to protect us against all the uneasy and
turbulent emotions of ^^e mind, than a temperate and active life: as, on the
contrary, intemperance unavoidably occasions irregular commotions in the
fluids, and may be the source of disease and imbecility. Hence PYTHAGORAS
advised his pupils to abstain from animal food, which excites wrath, with all
the other passions and desires. Idleness and want of exercise are not less
productive of many malignant propensities.

It cannot be doubted, that those who, at an early, docile age, combine solid
principles of virtue with a sober and active life, and who are by frequent
examples reminded of the turpitude and disadvantages attending violent passions
in others, will of themselves repress these enemies to human life. Yet it is
much more difficult to suppress passions that have already made some progress;
in which cases censure and rational remonstrances are seldom availing. To
those, however, who have not reached such a pitch of obstinacy, as to be above
taking advice, the following hints may not be unprofitable:

1. To remove, without delay, the object that gave rise to the passion, or at
least to deprive it of its nourishment, so that it may die of itself; by going
to some other place, which presents a different scene.

2. One affection frequently assists in subduing another of an opposite nature;
such as to inspire the timorous with courage; the angry, with fear; the too
violent lover, with hatred, and so forth. -- This, however, is seldom
practicable.

3. Let us direct our thoughts to other objects of pursuit, such as public
amusements, the chase, traveling, agreeable company, or other favorite
employments of an useful and assuasive nature.

4. Music. Nothing is so well calculated to moderate and calm the nerves, to
quiet the mind, and to assuage the passions; provided that the hearer possess a
musical ear and feeling, and the kind of music be adapted to his particular
taste and situation. Hence we cannot be too much on our guard in the choice of
music, as certain kinds of it have a tendency rather to increase than to allay
the paroxysm of passion.

5. The state of perspiration deserves particular attention. For it is
confirmed by numberless experiments, that passions decrease in the same degree
as perspiration is increased, particularly if they be of such a nature as to
check insensible perspiration; for instance, melancholy, terror, fear, and the
like. Indeed, all the different evacuations are beneficial in this case. Lastly,

6. Let us make use of no medicines immediately after a fit of passion. The
most advisable regimen consists in temperance in eating and drinking,
especially in abstaining from hard, indigestible food, cold drink, and cold
air. We should better consult our health, after any such emotions, by keeping
ourselves moderately warm, and drinking tea, or some similar beverage.

After a very violent paroxysm of anger it is sometimes necessary to open a
vein, in order to prevent inflammation; or to cause the evacuation of the bile
by an emetic; which cases, however, are to be determined only by professional
men. -- The saliva should not be swallowed in such a situation; for it is
supposed to have a slightly poisonous quality. Persons under the influence of
terror sometimes stand in need of a cordial; but the melancholy will find in
wine and other strong liquors rather an uncertain remedy, or which, at best, is
only palliative: and, if immoderately used, they must necessarily promote
sadness, as well as every other passion, which these supposed anodynes, in the
end, always increase by their alternately stimulating and relaxing effects.

CHAP. XI.
Of the different ORGANS OF SENSE, and their respective functions. -- Of the
supposed Seat and Operation of the Soul -- Motion -- Muscular Action.

BEFORE we proceed to investigate the peculiar functions of the different
senses, it will be useful, if not necessary, to premise a short analysis of
sensation, or in other words, of the seat and operation of the soul.

The ancients imagined the seat of the soul to be in the stomach, because of
the acute feeling of this organ, and the multitude of nerves with which it is
provided, and by which it is connected with other parts. But it is now
universally admitted by physiologists and anatomists, that the operations of
the mind are carried on principally in the brain; that this is the point of
union, in which all the nerves meet, and which is to be considered as the
assemblage of all sensations, or the sensorium commune. The brain is in the
most immediate connection with the perceptive faculty; and here all the nerves
are as it were concentrated into one point.

Prof. SOEMMERING, of Mayence, has lately endeavored to prove in a very
ingenious publication, that the ventricles of the brain properly contain the
more immediate cause of the various operations of the soul; that there is a
fluid, or at least a subtle vapor, secreted from these parts, in consequence
of the activity of the mind exercised in the ventricles of the brain; and that
all the varieties of intellect, in human beings, depend upon the diversity of
the structure of these ventricles, and the various states of vigor and mental
energy there exerted.

Without attempting to decide upon a question so remote from human
investigatio^, I may be allowed to observe, that all conjectures respecting the
seat of the soul are in reality frivolous and unsatisfactory, until we have
ascertained, in what manner the important functions of the brain, which is
intimately connected and thoroughly blended with the nerves, are affected
within the cranium; whether this be done by vibrations, by secretions of
humors or vapors; or by the peculiar manner in which the numerous
blood vessels are disposed in the brain, so as to allow the blood to exert its
influence, and to produce all the changes there, by the force and momentum of
its own circulation; -- all these particulars must be ascertained, before we
can form a decisive opinion respecting the situation of the soul.

This much, however, is certain, that one of the principal offices of the
nerves consists in communicating to the brain those impressions, which are made
on the body by external objects. As soon as, by means of this communication, a
certain change takes place in the brain, the mind becomes conscious of it. But
every perception must be acquired through the senses; because the impressions,
of whatever kind, must previously strike the organs of sense, before they can
be communicated to the nerves.

Although it be established and admitted, that the nerves are the medium of all
the operations between body and mind; yet no philosopher has hitherto been able
to discover the ultimate chain or link by which they are connected, or the
exact point in which they meet. Much, however, depends here upon our idea of
the mind. It appears, from the contradictory opinions which, from time to time,
have prevailed on this interesting subject, that the inquirers have been too
much in the habit of evading the materiality of the soul; and yet they assigned
it a certain place of residence in the body, which to this day is imagined to
be in either one or other part of the brain. I conceive the soul to be the
primary animating power and the maximum of all powers in the animal body. And
why should we hesitate to consider matter (of the primary properties of which
we are but little informed) as perfectly simple and yet extremely operative?

The mind, then, is probably not confined to any particular part of the body,
neither exclusively to the brain, to the stomach, nor to the blood; but
distributed through the whole system, always one and the same power, save that
it is sometimes more, sometimes less concentrated; and, if I may be permitted
to say so, it is a pure, elementary, ethereal agent. In the brain it displays
its principal energies: here are seated consciousness, the capacity of thinking
and judging, memory, and all the higher faculties of the mind. But again, it
must be observed, that different parts of the brain seem to contain different
faculties; so that memory, probably, occupies more the external crust, and the
power of thinking, the interior substance of the brain.

With respect to memory, it is remarkable, that nervous and epileptic patients
are usually deprived of that faculty, before any other of their mental powers
are impaired. Perhaps the efficient cause of the disease has not penetrated the
brain deep enough, so as to affect the seat of the understanding and judgment;
till at length, with the progress of the disease, the higher powers of the mind
become affected.

Even the lower faculties, the emotions of the mind, and the various passions,
appear to be situated in different organs. Thus, the seat of terror and anger
seems to be in the stomach, and in the biliary system; the more amiable
feelings, as philanthropy, compassion, hope, love, etc. seem to be situated in
the heart; fear and surprise, in the external surface of the head and back; and
sudden pain, in the breast.

The next question arises, how are these powers put in motion? Has the
assemblage of these faculties, or the sensorium commune, an original and
independent capacity of receiving ideas; of forming new ones from its own
materials; of being conscious of these internal sensations, and of comparing
them, so as to reproduce others, through itself, and from its own origin? I am
inclined to answer these questions in the affirmative. For, as soon as the
senses are stimulated, the sensation is communicated to the sensorium, where it
makes a real, corporeal, and sensible impression. All this is accomplished by
(...) of the nerves, because the nervous energy appears to be more nearly
allied to the mind, than any other power. The more frequently, therefore, the
same stimulus and impression is repeated, the more firmly the idea of it is
imprinted, and the longer we retain the impression. If the stimulus be too
violent and permanent, or if an impression of too many objects be at once made
on the brain, our nerves experience the same relaxation as the chords of an
instrument, after a strong and repeated tension.

Man, when he is without clear consciousness, and in the moment of confusion,
feels as if his mental powers were palsied, or had suffered a temporary
suspension. In a severe disease, and previous to death, we perceive the ideas
of early life vanish first; we lose the impressions of such ideas on the brain
more readily, in proportion to the distance of time when they were made, or
accordingly as they have been more or less frequently repeated. If eventually
the patient recover, he may without difficulty observe, how progressively the
suppressed ideas re-appear in the head, exactly as if they had been stored up
there, and remained in a latent state, till the soul attained sufficient energy
to use them. -- From this indubitable fact, I am disposed to deduce a stronger
argument for the immortality of the soul, than from any other physiological
source.

The organs by which the sensitive powers of the nerves can be excited from
without, are called the senses; in contradistinction to the internal faculties,
such as imagination, memory, attention, and the various affections of the mind.
The latter we exclude from the present inquiry, which is directed to the
external senses alone. The number of these has been hitherto limited to five,
or, it may be said with more propriety, that they are five modifications of one
sense.

This universal sense, which in a manner forms the basis of all others, is that
of Touch. If we abstract from the difference subsisting in the structure of the
organs, the other senses are subservient to that of touch, and little more than
a variety or modification of it. All the senses agree in this, that they may be
improved by exercise, or depraved and blunted by neglect: Nature has not formed
them to the same degree of perfection in every individual. The loss of one
sense is, in general, partly supplied by the greater perfection of another; yet
it is equally true, that exercise and attention are the principal sources of
this improvement.

In the most perfect state of our senses, we are liable to be misled by them
into many errors and mistakes; but the sense of touch or feeling is least
liable to deceptions, while that of sight is the most uncertain. The order in
which we shall consider the five senses, hitherto admitted as being distinct
from one another, is the following: viz. 1. Touch; 2. Sight; 3. Hearing; 4.
Smell; and 5. Taste. -- Beside these, there are perhaps several others, which
deserve to be added to that number; such as hunger and thirst, and the
sensations peculiar to the different sexes. If these be not admitted as
distinct from the five others, we may still discover a sixth sense in the
animal economy. And though this additional sense is chiefly manifested in
diseases, and scarcely perceptible in a healthy state of the body, yet its
existence is so obvious to patients in chronic disorders, and particularly in
palsy, gout, and rheumatism, that they are thereby enabled to ascertain, with
wonderful accuracy, not only the present state, but also to predict the
impending changes of the atmosphere.

Without losing time in abstruse disquisitions respecting these occult senses,
I proceed to examine those which are more generally known.

The first, namely, that of Touch, comprehends not only the sensation which is
excited by any particular impression, but also that change which external
objects produce on the skin, and particularly on the ends of the fingers. It is
in the latter, and more limited meaning, that I now consider the sense of
touch. In order to understand more clearly the great importance of this sense,
I shall premise a concise description of the external integuments of the human
body. For there is no doubt, that the skin is the medium of all the senses,
and, if I may be allowed the expression, it is the most unerring guide, and
least subject to the illusions of the imagination.

The whole human body is enclosed in certain integuments or covers: they
consist of three different layers, each of which is wisely designed by Nature
for protection, benefit, and ornament. The uppermost, that is, the scarf-skin,
or epidermis, is the thinnest of the three, and is nearly transparent. It
covers the whole body, both externally and internally, not only the mouth,
stomach, and bowels, but also every cavity and protuberance of the body; as it
forms the upper skin of most of the intestines, the lungs, the heart, the
liver, the spleen, etc. This covering is of great service to the whole frame,
by protecting the parts enclosed in it from external injury, by preventing them
from growing together internally, and by keeping every thing within the body in
its proper situation. It is destitute of sensation, which even children know,
since they run pins between it, without feeling pain. But it is possessed of
the admirable property, that it is very quickly renewed, after it has been
destroyed by accident, or by the measles, scarlet-fever, and similar diseases.

Immediately under this universal and uppermost covering of our body, there
lies a second, reticular, and mucous membrane, which has received from
anatomists the name of rete mucosum. It is in most parts of the body extremely
thin, but it grows considerably thicker in others, for instance, on the heels
and the palms of the hand.

This second skin deserves particular attention, as it is the seat of the
color in different nations; though the cause of this diversity has not yet
been discovered: -- in the Negroes it is black; in the American Indians nearly
of copper color; and in the Europeans generally white. That the color of the
human body is altogether contained in this second or middle skin, is
sufficiently ascertained; for not only the third or true skin of the Negroes is
as white as in the Europeans, but the uppermost, or scarf-skin too, though
rather of a greyish tint, is scarcely darker in blacks than in white people;
and in the latter also the middle skin frequently is of a yellowish, brown, or
blackish color; in which case the whole external skin exhibits a similar
appearance.

This variety of color has led some authors to suppose, that there is a
variety in the origin, as well as in the mental capacities of different
nations. So palpable an error, however, could not long remain unrefuted: and it
is now almost universally admitted, that there was originally but one species
of man, though diversified by the climate, the air, the sun, and the mode of
living, which produce all the difference in the color, as well as in the
structure of man. Thus we know that those Americans, who live in the calmer
western and mountainous regions, are not of so deep a copper-colour as those
who are more exposed to winds and other contingent causes; that the inhabitants
of the northern bank of the river Senegal are of a diminutive size, and of an
ash color, while those of the opposite bank are black, and at the same time
tall and robust. We farther know, that after some generations, the Negroes are
bleached, and people of a white color become black, when the former emigrate
to the cold northern, and the latter to the torrid southern climates. This
difference is also discoverable in our climate, where people moving much in the
open air and sunshine acquire a dark color, somewhat resembling that of the
swarthy Portuguese.

That there may be also a coloring substance in the blood, whether owing to
the iron said to be contained in this fluid, to the bile, or to an excess of
what the old chemists called phlogiston (or what would now be termed the want
of oxygen) -- all of which may have a share in the modification of colors, I
am much disposed to admit; because the blood, bile, brain, nay the very vermin
on the bodies of the AEthiopians, partake of their native color.

The third and innermost of the integuments of our body is the true skin, or
the cutis vera, which immediately covers the fat and the muscles. It is of a
compact, interwoven, cellular texture, which is very thick and smooth on its
upper surface, of a white color in all nations, loose or pliable on its inner
surface, and furnished with more or less fat. It not only possesses a
considerable degree of expansibility, and contractility, but is also provided
with numberless pores. Its thickness varies in different individuals. It is
traversed by a great number of fine arteries, interwoven in the form of a net,
and which may be exhibited to the eye by injecting them with a red fluid, so
that the skin then has the appearance of being thoroughly colored. It is
likewise furnished with an equal number of veins, and delicate absorbent
vessels.

From the many nerves which pervade the true skin, it possesses an uncommon
degree of sensibility, especially in those parts where we can perceive the
papillae of the nerves. These are small portuberances of different figures, of
a reticular structure, and a pulpy consistence. In some places, as the lips,
they are not unlike flakes, though they generally resemble little warts, such
we observe on the points of the fingers and toes, as well as on many of the
most sensible parts of the body, but particularly the tongue. They are most
visible on the ends of the fingers in delicate persons; they can be traced,
with the naked eye, by the spiral lines terminating almost in a point, and are
protected and supported by nails proceeding from the skin which grows over
them. It is in these papillary extremities, that every external impression is
most distinctly and forcibly perceived, on account of the number of nerves
lying almost exposed to view in these places.

The sense of touch can be improved, by practice, to an astonishing degree.
There are many examples of blind people having attained so great a perfection
of this sense, that they could with accuracy distinguish the difference of
coins, of metals, and even of colors, merely by the touch. I myself knew a
blind man, who had learnt to take a watch to pieces, to clean it perfectly, and
to put it together again, without any other assistance, but that of the
instruments commonly used, and the exquisite feeling of his fingers.

I have now only to describe the operation or mechanism of this sense. -- When
the nervous papillae are pressed against external objects, the nerves receive a
kind of vibration, which is communicated to their branches, and thence to the
brain. Thus we are enabled to feel the hardness, roughness, moisture, warmth,
gravity, figure, size, and even the distance of bodies. But, that this feeling
may not become painful, Nature has provided another cover, namely the
scarf-skin, which serves the important purposes of secluding the air from the
true skin, and preventing the body from being too much dried. -- The nails
increase the energy of touch, and render the sense of it more acute, as they
resist the pressure of external objects.

The second of our senses, though less essential to animal life, is more
conducive to our welfare and happiness. Without Sight we cannot justly
contemplate the wonders of Nature, and existence is deprived of its greatest
charms. An anatomical description of the eyes would lead us too far from the
object of these inquiries, and would not be intelligible without a more
particular analysis and demonstration than our limits allow.

In the sense of sight, we are far excelled by most of the lower animals.
Eagles and hawks, in particular, descry their prey, when beyond the reach of
our sight, though aided by a telescope. Yet in men, also, this sense may be
wonderfully improved, and I remember to have heard the celebrated Baron Trenk
assert, that during his long captivity in the state dungeon at Magdeburg, he
had so much improved his sight, that he could see the mice traversing his
gloomy cell in the middle of the darkest night -- whether this assertion was
exaggerated, I do not pretend to decide.

The operations of sight are performed in the most accurate manner. By the
structure of the eye, no rays of light can pass into it, unless emitted within
an angle not exceeding 90 degrees. Every thing here is regulated upon optical
principles, sensation excepted. This is situated in the retina, a membrane
having the form of a net, and being, as it were, the mirror by which external
objects are represented to the mind. If this mirror be destroyed, as is the
case in amaurosis, or gutta serena, our sight is irrecoverably lost.

All vision consists in the refraction of the rays of light, by means of the
crystalline humor, till all the rays are concentrated into one distinct image
on the retina. The rays of light, while they pass through the arched surface of
the cornea, or the horny skin, are broken and brought in contact with each
other; and this is still farther promoted, while they pass through the more
dense crystalline lens. They then converge at the spot where the vitreous
humor is contained: here they again diverge, once more come in contact, and
finally collect in as many points as are represented by the external object.
This image, which is depicted on, and stimulates the retina, is communicated to
the mind, and produces the sensation of sight.

It is partly owing to the abovementioned refraction, partly to the constant
and uniform reference to the internal sense, that in the act of vision we see
objects in an upright posture before us, though they are properly imprinted on
the retina, in an inverted posture. By this admirable mechanism, all objects
are invertedly presented to the eye, so that we cannot err in this respect,
since the relation and proportion of things uniformly remain the same.

But it will be asked, how does it happen, that with two eyes, we see only one
object? This question is easily answered by those, who inform us, that with two
nostrils we are sensible of only one particular smell, and with two ears we
hear but one distinct sound; that a similar external stimulus, in similar
nerves, will always produce the same internal sensation, and that accidental
deviations, or diseases only, can affect this principle. Yet the explanation
now given is altogether insufficient, as it proceeds from analogical reasoning.

If we wish to form a clear conception of this faculty, we must above all
things direct our attention to the axis of vision, or that imaginary line,
which we draw in a straight direction from the center of the eye to the object,
and which is prolonged before and behind that organ. We must next advert to the
situation in which the eyes are placed. They do not lie perfectly straight in
their sockets, but somewhat in an oblique direction toward the nose. If, then,
we prolong, for a short space only, the axis beyond the eye, we shall soon
find, that the two imaginary lines meet in a certain point. This is called the
Focus, or the point of vision -- the termination of the external rays of light.

If a person be able to see to a great distance, his lines of vision intersect
each other at a greater distance from the eye, and consequently his focus is
farther removed from it. This defect is called presbyopia, or far-sightedness,
and may be remedied by means of unequal glasses; but, if from the too great
convexity, or an extraordinary converging power of the eye, the rays of light
too soon unite in one point, and, as this point is placed before the retina,
from whence the rays of light again diverge, vision becomes indistinct, till
the object be brought nearer to the eye; in order to place the point of union,
as it were, farther behind the eye -- this deficiency of vision is called
myopia, or short-sightedness, and may be relieved by concave glasses. Of these,
as well as other defects of the eye, and the most proper methods of preventing
and curing them, I shall treat in the next Chapter.

It farther deserves to be remarked, that the optic nerves cross each other in
the brain, and that we are accustomed, from our infancy, to see only one object
at a time. Hence children should be so placed in bed, that they may not learn
to squint, or that the eyes may not be directed upwards and outward, but
rather downwards and inwards, in order to habituate them properly to form the
axis above described. That custom has great influence, in this respect, is
obvious from the circumstance, that those who squint, not unfrequently see two
objects at once; and that such eyes, as by accident or disease have become
double-sighted, may, by continued exertions, be again habituated to view
objects distinctly.

Every one must have observed, that upon entering suddenly from a very dark
place into bright sunshine, he could scarcely see any object, has felt pain in
the eyes, shed involuntary tears, or sneezed. This temporary deprivation of
sight is owing to the pupil of the eye being dilated in a dark place, and
contracted again at the approach of light. The dilatation and contraction of
the pupil is in proportion to the darkness or brightness of the place. If the
change from a dark to a bright place be instantaneous, the pupil cannot dilate
and contract quickly enough; it is, as it were, palsied, together with the
retina, and we cannot see at all. The pain of the eyes, and the flow of tears
under these circumstances, must be ascribed to similar causes. Every stimulus
whether occasioned by heat, cold, winds, colors, and the like, excites a
sensation, which is agreeable, if it be moderate and not too long continued;
but which becomes painful and disagreeable, as it increases in violence and
duration. There remains another curious phenomenon to be explained, namely,
that of sneezing, which often takes place, when we suddenly go from darkness to
a strong light. Here the same cause operates, though under different
circumstances. The optic nerves consist of the second pair of the nerves of the
brain; with these are united the third pair, the fourth pair, and some branches
of the fifth and sixth pair. Yet the second pair, or the peculiar optic nerve,
has the most important share in vision. It proceeds from the brain straight to
the pupil of the eye, pervades this almost through the middle of its posterior
internal part, where it terminates and dilates itself, or, as it were, melts
into a soft, downy skin, forming the retina, which covers a great part of the
posterior internal eye. -- Now, from the fifth pair of nerves there proceeds
but one branch into the eyes, while another takes its direction to the nose.
When the eye is suddenly impressed with the rays of light, that branch of the
fifth pair which extends to the eyes, is stimulated in common with the other
branch of the same pair proceeding to the nose. If the stimulus be violent, it
is communicated to both branches, that of the nose is likewise stimulated, and
we are compelled to sneeze.

To conclude the account of the sense of sight, I must remark, that the
representations of the mind scarcely display their influence on any other of
the senses, to so extensive a degree, as they do upon this: hence it happens,
that we sometimes imagine we see images before us, in the clearest manner,
though the representation of them be merely a phantom of the brain. The
impression forcibly made on the retina, remains there for some time, even after
the object itself has vanished; thus we imagine we see a fiery ring, when a
burning coal is swiftly moved in a circle. -- That we believe we see many
bright colors, when we rub and press the closed eye with the fingers, is owing
to this cause, that the same kind of effect is produced on the nerves of the
eye by friction, as usually accompanies the view of the colors themselves. But
whether colors, in general, depend on the different degrees of vibration of
the air, or on the elements of the rays of light, which, by their division,
appear singly and distinctly in the prism, is a problem not yet, and which
perhaps never will be, satisfactorily solved.

By the next sense, namely, that of Hearing, we perceive the vibrations of the
air which occasion sound. For this purpose our ears are formed partly of
cartilages, and partly of bones, in order to communicate these vibrations to
the auditory nerves, and thence to the brain. This sense also is more acute in
the lower animals, than in the human species. The hare, for instance, is warned
against approaching danger, by her exquisitely fine ear; and the owl, being
sensible of the softest sounds, makes use of her acute ear to assist her in the
discovery of prey.

The warm-blooded animals have an external and an internal ear; but in almost
every species it is of a different structure. Most animals can move their ears
-- an advantage not enjoyed by man; though it was not Nature which formed our
ears immovable, but an absurd custom, continued for many centuries, gradually
produced this effect. That the ears were not naturally designed to lie flat on
the head, is sufficiently obvious from the number of muscles with which they
are provided, and each of which is designed to perform different motions.

The manner in which the sense of hearing is produced, is shortly this. The
vibrations of the air, which take place by the concussion of any elastic body,
first strike the external ear; hence the sound agitates the tympanum. But that
the vibrations may not become too violent, and the tympanum may not burst, as
is to be apprehended from a very loud and near sound, the ear is provided with
a siphon, which anatomists call the Eustachian tube, and through which the air
collected on the tympanum again escapes. But the vibration of the tympanum is
also communicated through the four little bones of the ear; it is forwarded
through what is called the stapes, or stirrup, to the vestibule, or the first
entrance, and through the membrane of the fenestra rotunda, as far as the
innermost cavity of the ear, which resembles the shell of a snail, and is
therefore called cochlea. The whole labyrinth of the ear being filled with a
subtle water in small quantity, this fluid gently agitates the substance of
the auditory nerve; in consequence of which sound is communicated to the brain.
The humor contained in the labyrinth of the ear obviously serves the purpose
of preventing the soft, pappy substance of the auditory nerve from being too
violently agitated.

The use of the cochlea, which is very artificially constructed, cannot be
easily determined; it is probably rather designed for the more accurate
distinction of the varieties of tones, than for the perception of sounds in
general; for we may consider the delicate nerves, that run along the spiral
line of this cochlea, as a number of chords growing progressively shorter, and
which, in a manner, repeat the external vibrations of the air, in the internal
parts of the ear. This repetition appears to be performed according to a
geometrical scale, since the same vibrations of the air take place here in a
reduced proportion. Hence sounds, which are too loud and penetrating, offend
our ears, because they shake the auditory nerves too quickly and violently, so
that these may even be lacerated, and produce deafness; but this is not the
case, when the tympanum is broken by accident.

Some persons, who are defective in this sense, are obliged to make use of
ear-trumpets, and to turn their ear to the quarter whence the sound proceeds;
to place the hand at the side of the ear; to open their mouth, or use some
other assistant means. All this is done with a view to supply the motion of the
ears, of which we have been deprived by habits contrary to the laws of Nature:
these motions the (...) animals perform, by pointing their ears in the
direction from which the sound proceeds. In this manner, the ear receives a
greater proportion of sound; and many divisions of it, which might otherwise
escape, are conveyed to the nerves.

By means of the teeth, and other bones of the head, sounds may be conducted to
the auditory nerves, so as to communicate the necessary vibrations to the
internal ear, though we can hear more easily and distinctly, when the sound
comes through the organ itself. There is, however, a method of communicating
sounds to the deaf, with better success than by the common ear-trumpets, which
instruments, at length entirely destroy that sense. This is effected by means
of a cylindrical rod or tube of ivory, or any similar hard substance: the rod
may be from six to twelve inches long and upwards, and from a quarter to half
an inch in diameter; if it be made hollow throughout, the part which is placed
in the mouth between the front teeth ought to have a much smaller aperture than
the other extremity. This tube is well calculated to assist those deaf persons,
who wish to enjoy the music of a harp, harpsichord, or other instrument. I once
knew a gentleman, who was quite deaf, but with the assistance of a cylinder,
such as I have described, was enabled to hear the softest notes distinctly, and
to enjoy all the pleasures of music.

Lastly, it is a false assertion, that there is always a hole in the tympanum;
for it is owing to the double opening of the Eustachian tube, that many
jugglers can cause the liquor they drink to flow out of the ear, in the same
manner as they discharge the smoke of tobacco through the nose and ears.

Our fourth sense is that of Smell. It is nearly related to the sense of taste,
probably from the great similarity of structure in the organs of these two
senses, and their vicinity to each other. This is attended with the manifest
advantage, that man and animals are generally enabled to discover, without
danger, any unwholesome food. The functions of this sense are exercised by the
nose, and chiefly by the mucous membrane which lines that organ. The whole
inside of the nose is covered with this membrane, which is a continuation of
the general integuments of the body, but much softer, more mucous and porous,
full of vessels, exquisitely sensible, and covered with hair toward the lower
part of the nostrils, to prevent any impurities from ascending too far.

Of all the parts of the mouth connected with the nose, the most remarkable is
the cavity of the jaw bone, or the sinus maxillaris, which extends over the
whole breadth of the two upper jaw-bones, and opens itself into the nose
between the middle and lower shell. In newborn children, all these cavities are
not yet formed, and this is the cause of their imperfect smell. In order to
moisten the membranes, which otherwise would become too dry, by the air we
inhale through the nostrils, there descends a nasal canal from each cavity of
the eyes, which communicates with the lower shell, in order to conduct the
tears continually into the nose.

If we make an effort to smell, we draw up the air filled with the volatile,
oily, and saline particles of odorous substances: these particles come in
contact with the fine branches of the olfactory nerves, which have the capacity
of receiving impressions, and thus the sensation is imparted to the brain.
These nerves rise immediately from the brain, and are larger in many animals
than in man. The bigness of the nerves, however, is no proof of the greater
degree of sensation in the animal, or of the superior abilities of the mind. On
the contrary, it is now pretty generally believed, that the mental capacities
of organized beings are in an inverted proportion to the size of the nerves
rising out of the brain, and the medullary substance of the spine. Thus, for
instance, the amphibious animals have strong nerves, in proportion to their
small brain, and yet they are, in general, extremely insensible and stupid.
Lean people, and ricketty children, on the contrary, have very thin and fine
nerves to a large brain; and who has not observed their sensibility of mind, as
well as their quick and acute feelings?

But to return from this digression. -- The saline and oily particles which
affect the smell, are more volatile and subtle than those distinguished by the
taste; yet this difference may in a great measure arise from the nerves of the
tongue being covered with thicker membranes than those of the nose. -- In many
animals, the sense of smelling is more acute than in man, who would probably be
much incommoded by too refined a perception of this kind. But it may be much
improved by exercise, or depraved by neglect. Hence the American Indian can
discover the footsteps of man and other animals by smell alone; -- while
persons who live in a bad and fetid atmosphere, are scarcely sensible of the
difference between the most fragrant and offensive substances. -- It is
remarkable, that most maniacs and inveterate hypochondriacs, are excessively
fond of snuff, and every thing that stimulates the nose.

Of all the quadrupeds we know, the dog excels in the acuteness of this sense;
and there are many extraordinary instances recorded of his peculiar and
astonishing powers of smell; with one of which, as well authenticated as it is
extraordinary, I shall conclude this subject. -- In the year 1582 Leonhard
Zollikofer set out from his Chateau Altenklingen, in Switzerland, for Paris;
the distance of which is upwards of five hundred English miles. A fortnight
after his departure, his faithful dog, who had till then been confined, also
set out alone for Paris; where he arrived in the course of eight days, and
discovered his master in the midst of a crowd, after having searched for him in
vain at his lodgings.

We are now arrived at the fifth and last of our senses, the Taste, which is so
distinguished a favorite of a great number of persons, that it appears, as if
they wished to live only for the sake of its gratification. I have in former
parts of this work endeavored to inculcate the propriety and absolute
necessity of attending to the effects produced on this sense by food and drink,
without which animal life cannot be long supported. In this place, therefore,
there remains to be described only the mechanism and the functions of this
sense.

The principal organ of taste is the tongue, which in very few animals is as
sensible as in man. The former choose, indeed, among the herbs upon which they
feed, by accurately distinguishing the useful from the noxious plants; but this
appears to be more in consequence of their acute smell, than from the guidance
of their taste. To describe the figure and shape of the tongue, is not
consistent with my plan; but I shall briefly observe, that this organ is
provided with innumerable nerves, which terminate in certain warts, or
papillae, of a different size and figure, some of them pointed, others oblong,
and others fungous.

These nervous papillae are the peculiar seat of the sense of taste, or the
palate. But, to taste any thing whatever, either the tongue should be moist, or
the substance applied to the tongue should contain moisture. In ascertaining
the difference of taste, the little warts are, in some degree, dilated: every
substance we can taste, contains a greater or smaller proportion of saline and
oily particles, which must be soluble by the tongue. If the sensation of the
saline particles be acrid, the taste is strong, disagreeable, and at length
becomes painful: this is also the case, if the tongue, by burning or other
accidents, be deprived of any part of the epidermis, or scarf-skin.

Such bodies as contain no saline particles, as pure water, excite no kind of
taste whatever. The difference of taste cannot be accounted for from the
variety of figure in the crystals of the different salts, but appears to arise
from the chemical properties inherent in saline bodies. -- It may be laid down
as a general rule, that every substance, which affords an agreeable taste to a
healthy person of an undepraved palate, is wholesome: as, on the contrary,
substances of an acrid and disagreeable taste are commonly pernicious.

The different degrees of taste depend on the greater or less sensibility of
the nervous papillae before described, as well as on the quality of the saliva,
in a more or less healthy state of the body. If our nerves be blunted and
weakened by smoking tobacco, by too strong and highly-seasoned food, by the
copious use of spirituous liquors, by age, or other causes, we cannot
reasonably expect to possess the same degree of sensibility of taste, as if we
had been more attentive to the ordinances of Nature. -- The more simple our
usual aliment is, the less it is seasoned by hot spices and the less we
stimulate the palate by wine and ardent spirits, we shall the better preserve
our taste, together with the nerves of the tongue; and we shall have a greater
relish for rich dishes, when they are but occasionally presented to our palate.

The senses, then, are those organs, by means of which the mind perceives or
feels external objects. They may be considered as the satellites of the mind;
and although some animals enjoy particular senses more acutely than man, yet
his senses are more comprehensive, and he is amply compensated by the extensive
use he can make of them, while the inferior creatures possess a more intensive
application of their sensitive faculties.

We have now considered the mode in which the senses operate; we have seen that
every thing depends upon a nervous stimulus, which, by the most diversified
organs, is communicated to the mind: there remain to be added only a few
remarks and explanations, relative to animal motion, or muscular action.

The machine of the human body is put in motion by a great diversity of powers.
-- Of these, the highest and most energetic is that of the mind; the next
subordinate power is that of the nerves, immediately after which follows the
most operative of the corporeal powers, that is, muscular irritability, or the
peculiar faculty of the muscles to contract, in consequence of any stimulus
applied to them. I purposely omit in this place, what physiologists have called
the vital power, the peculiar power of life, or BLUMENBACH's vita propria; and
the healing power of Nature, or vis medicatrix naturae of the ancient
physicians. All these powers are, in a great measure, hypothetical, though
their frequent operations in a diseased state of the body cannot be denied.
And, as the muscular powers of men and animals are the most obvious to the
senses, I shall content myself with stating what has a reference to these.

A muscle is a bundle of thin and parallel plates of fleshy threads or fibers.
These are connected by a loose and generally fat cellular membrane; they
separate into greater bundles, till at length several portions of a muscle
lying parallel, or inclining toward one another, are again surrounded by a
tender membrane of a cellular texture, which forms one substance with the
collateral partitions; and these, being again separated from the contiguous
flesh, by a somewhat thicker cellular texture, are then considered as one
distinct muscle.

The human body has a considerable number of muscles, yet many of the lower
animals are provided with a much greater proportion of them. The caterpillar (
Phalaena Cossus, L.) has about 3500 muscles, while the human body can count
scarcely 450. The muscles of animals, in general, are more powerful than those
of man. What astonishing power, for instance, is the leaping chafer, or the
grasshopper, obliged to employ, in order to make jumps, which extend to several
hundred times the length of their own bodies! Another small insect, the flea,
excels all other animals in its prodigious leaps, and is able to carry a weight
80 times heavier than its body. All these apparent wonders are accomplished by
means of the muscles. The figure of them, in man, is very irregular; those
only, which are designed to perform certain valvular motions, such as the
muscles of the mouth, the eyelids, the bladder, the anus, etc. are of a
circular or round figure.

All the muscles contract in the direction of their fibers; the middle part or
the belly of the muscle swells, hence it gets shorter, and both ends approach
one another. Most of our muscles operate in the manner of a lever; the two ends
of every muscle, in the extremities of animals, are fastened to the bones, by
means of tendons or sinews; one of these extremities only being moveable, while
the other remains fixed. Hence, in the contraction of the muscles, the moveable
bone is drawn according to the direction of their fibers. If a muscle be
contracted, it necessarily swells in thickness, as may be distinctly felt by
placing the hand upon the masseter, a muscle of the lower jaw, and compressing
the back teeth. As soon, however, as the nerve of the muscle is cut, or tied
only, the contracting or swelling power instantly ceases, whence we are
inclined to suppose, that the nerves have the principal share in regulating the
powers of contraction, extension, and loco-motion. Whether this be done by the
influx of a fluid into the nerves, or by some other latent power, has not yet
been discovered.

The energy of muscular action is remarkable in every healthy individual, but
particularly in very strong men, and frequently too in maniacs. With the
assistance of a few muscles only, they are enabled to raise a weight, often
much exceeding that of the whole human frame. -- In order to support the
pressure of the lever, which is accomplished with a great loss of power, and to
preserve and consolidate the muscles in their situation, they run at one time
under cross ligaments, as is the case on the fingers; at another time they move
in rollers, for instance, in the eye; and, again, in other places, they are
supported in their position by the peculiar structure of the bones, as we find
on the upper part of the shoulders.

If a computation could be made of all the losses of power which the muscles
experience, partly by their frequent insertion at very acute angles, partly by
their being extended as a chord, and drawing a weight opposite to its fixed
point; partly by passing over certain joints which break the force to be
applied to a particular joint; and, lastly, by their fleshy fibers being
obstructed by the angles they make with the tendons; -- if all these
impediments could be reduced to an accurate calculation, we should be
astonished at the contractile force exerted by the muscles, as it would exceed
any amount of powers raised upon mechanical principles. It is confidently
asserted, that the effect is scarcely 1/60th part of that force which the
muscles employ; and yet a small number of them, the substance of which is equal
in weight to a few pounds only, possess the power of lifting, or at least
moving, several hundred weight, and this with inconceivable facility and
swiftness. It would be presumptuous to ascribe the great losses of muscular
power to any defect in the animal economy: for, if we had the full use of our
muscles, the just symmetry or proportion of the parts would be destroyed, and
it might otherwise be attended with many physical evils, the consequences of
which we cannot comprehend.

As an ample compensation for the want of this unnecessary strength, Nature has
provided the upper ends of the muscles, which bend the joints, and chiefly
those of the knees, with certain bags, bursae mucosae, which contain a
lubricating mucus, to facilitate the motion of the tendons. And to this
beneficent arrangement we owe the ability of exercising the power of the
muscles with such extraordinary activity, and without feeling them rigid and
inflexible, after violent and long-continued exercise.

Being now acquainted, in some degree, with the nerves and muscles; it will
also be necessary to say a few words relative to the blood; especially as the
doctrine of temperaments, already treated of in the Introduction, was
principally founded on the nature of these three substances.

The quantity of blood in a human body of full growth, is generally computed at
30 lb. This liquid apparently consists of two parts only, namely, the serum, or
water, and the ^rassamentum, or the thick and coagulable part of the blood.
But, as the latter can be again separated into two parts, namely, the cruor, or
the thick and red part, and the coagulable lymph, the blood consequently
consists of three principal constituents: the serum, the cruor, and the lymph.
Besides these, there is also a considerable quantity of air contained in the
blood, which is, as it were, the medium of combination in all vegetable,
animal, and mineral bodies; for, when the air is expelled, whether by
combustion, fermentation, putrefaction, or any other process, they hasten
toward their inevitable dissolution.

There is further contained in the blood, much water, a small proportion of
oil, some salt, earth, and a little iron, which, together with the heat
produced by respiration, is supposed to impart the red color to that fluid.
The red color is confined to the cruor, which consists of very minute red
globules, nearly resembling in shape the eggs of silkworms.

Much remains to be said on the properties of the blood, and its wonderful
circulation in the human body; but, as this subject, from want of room, cannot
be satisfactorily discussed here, I am under the necessity of concluding this
Chapter with the following remark: that the variety of temperaments in man
appears to be owing to the different mixture of the fluids, and the diversified
structure of the solids, particularly of the nerves and muscles. This is so
true, that the whole picture of his physical life, together with his moral
character, depend chiefly on the various combination of these parts. Yet there
are different means by which peculiar temperaments are generated; -- the first
of these is climate, which forms the national character; -- the second is a
certain hereditary disposition, which we derive from our parents; -- and the
third is the peculiar organization of the individual.

CHAP. XII.
Practical Remarks and Rules relative to the TREATMENT AND PRESERVATION OF THE
EYES: -- On the importance of bestowing proper care on these organs -- Of
Short-sightedness, and the reverse -- General Rules for the Preservation of the
Eyes -- Of the Conduct to be observed in Weak Eyes -- Dietetical Precepts
respecting the Eyes in general -- Some additional Rules addressed to those who
are obliged to make use of Eye-Glasses.

I. On the importance of bestowing proper care on these organs.
THERE is scarcely any part of the sensitive faculties, which contributes more
to our physical enjoyments than the unimpaired power of vision. Hence the
management of the eyes deserves the care and attention of every person, who
wishes to preserve them in a sound and perfect state, and to retard, although
we cannot altogether avert, the natural consequences which accompany the
advance of years. By our mode of life, this infirmity is much accelerated, and
the eyes are weakened and worn out, or at least rendered too irritable. Such is
particularly the case in those classes of people, who are much employed in
sedentary occupations, who work by candlelight, or are much exposed to dust,
etc.

The remarks, rules, and observations of this Chapter will relate chiefly to
the treatment, both of sound and weak eyes, and occasionally also to the
regimen of them in a diseased state.

More accuracy and attention is required in this respect, than inexperienced
persons generally imagine. Till of late years, proper attention has not been
paid, to lay down and establish well-founded and practical rules on the subject
of the eyes, and their treatment. Some modern physicians and oculists, however,
have usefully devoted much time and labor to inquiries into the maladies of
this organ. The fruits of these researches, as well as my own experience, on
this point, I now proceed to lay before the reader.

II. Of short-sightedness, and the reverse.
MAN probably enjoys his sight to a later period of life than any of the lower
animals, and might preserve it still longer, if he were better informed
respecting its preservation. Those who are naturally short-sighted, are
entitled to expect an improvement of vision with the advancement of age; for
their eyes then gradually begin to lose that uncommon roundness which produces
this defect, and thus to arrive at a greater enjoyment of the beauties of
Nature. Persons who can see objects distinctly at a great distance only,
cannot, however, be considered as less unfortunate; as they stand in need of
glasses, chiefly for the better distinguishing of more minute objects.

The nursery, or the room appropriated to the use of children, is generally the
smallest, if not the lowest apartment in the house; so that the infant, having
the opportunity to exercise its eyes on near objects only, often becomes more
short-sighted than it is naturally. Hence children ought at least to be
frequently carried to the window, and have their eyes directed to a distant
view. On this account, a nursery enjoying an extensive prospect is much
preferable to one where the view is confined. Many persons who see well at a
distance in their infancy, injure their sight by reading and writing by
candlelight, but particularly females, by fine needle work; as the eye is
thereby too much accustomed to near and minute objects.

One of the bad consequences of short-sightedness is, that people get into a
habit of making use of one eye only. The effort of directing both pupils to the
object before them is attended with too much trouble; hence they look at it
sideways. It would be less detrimental, if they were to use the eyes
alternately; but here too it is equally easy to acquire a bad habit; for the
eye, which is spared or not exercised, becomes inert and useless. Still worse
is the use of a magnifying or reading glass, by which people accustom
themselves to shut the eye then unemployed. The other, which is thus unduly
exerted, somewhat shifts its position, it becomes progressively less flexible
in its internal parts, and persons who take advantage of this temporary aid, do
not find their powers of vision improve with the advancement of age.

To prevent these bad habits, the following advice may be useful: -- Children
suspected of being short-sighted, should have their eyes directed to an object
held close to them; and if they appear to make use of one eye only, that eye
should be occasionally closed, so that they may be obliged to exercise the
other. When they learn to read, they should be taught to hold the book straight
before their eyes; thus they will exert themselves to discover the printed
letters at the greatest distance at which they are made to place it. The eyes,
by degrees, become accustomed to the necessary internal change of their
posture, and the child will, in time, certainly improve in the extension of its
sight. Many persons indeed have, at a juvenile age, got rid of their
short-sightedness; but there cannot be found one instance of this improvement
among those who have, either from fashionable indulgence or necessity,
habituated themselves to use only one eye.

It is to be regretted, that in short-sighted individuals the breast and
abdomen suffer much from compression during sedentary occupations, so that they
are frequently troubled with hypochondriasis, and, what is still worse, are
sometimes thrown into a consumption of the lungs. Though standing at intervals
agrees with employments that do not require great mental exertion; yet, in the
contrary case, it consumes more strength than is generally imagined; and, in
acute reflections, the mind ought not to be fatigued by the body. In this case,
well-chosen concave spectacles may be used with advantage, so that the body may
be placed, while reading or writing, in the most convenient posture: for such
glasses will oblige the wearer to remove the object somewhat farther from the
eyes.

After severe diseases of the eyes, one of them frequently becomes
short-sighted, while the other is scarcely, if at all, affected. The
consequence is, that we employ the sound eye alone, while the weak one is
totally impaired by this neglect. In such a situation, we ought to use glasses
in reading or writing, one of which should be carefully selected for the
short-sighted eye, (according to the rules hereafter to be specified) and the
other of plain, clear glass, chiefly for the sake of affording an equal degree
of light to both eyes. If, by this precaution, the weaker eye has perceptibly
gained strength, we may employ a less concave glass instead of that first used,
so that in time it may be similar with the other, and at length the patient be
enabled to do without this assistance.

Eyes which form too extensive a focus, require no aid, unless they be
extravagantly so. Then, indeed, we should not hesitate to make use of unequal
glasses. It is, however, a vulgar prejudice, that by such glasses the eye is
too much indulged, and rendered still more far-sighted. On the contrary, it is
generally improved during the use of these spectacles, and, after the lapse of
several years, they may again be dispensed with.

It is a consolation in many diseases of the eyes, that a long-continued
weakness is seldom the forerunner of total blindness. This fatal event
generally happens by sudden accidents, and is speedily decided. -- Adults are
not very subject to external complaints of the eye, or such as deprive the
cornea of its transparency.

Small round spots, hovering before the eyes like strings of hollow little
globules connected with one another, are defects of no great consequence, and
of which, perhaps, no eye is completely free.

III. General Rules for the Preservation of the Eyes.
IN all employments whatever, let us attend as much as possible to this
circumstance, that the eyes may have an uniform and sufficient light, so as to
affect the retina on all sides alike. -- The eyes materially suffer, when the
rays of the sun are strongly reflected from the opposite wall or window.

In children, many disorders of the eye, which would never have had so fatal an
issue, have terminated in total blindness, when parents have neglected to
provide the cradle or window with proper curtains. For this reason, we ought to
be extremely cautious in the choice of an apartment appropriated to the labors
of the day. We should not place ourselves directly opposite to the light, in
reading and writing; we ought rather to take the light in a lateral direction.

A great obstacle to this arrangement is the change of light in the same
apartment, by the progress of the sun. Where the sun dazzled in the morning, we
find in the middle of the day the most uniform light, which again in the
afternoon, particularly in towns, becomes reverberatory, and extremely hurtful.
This inconvenience should be remedied, if possible, by a frequent change of the
room; or, at least, we might produce more uniformity in the light by means of
window curtains, or blinds; and it may be observed, that blinds of green or
whited-brown linen are best adapted for this purpose.

It is an useful practice to protect weak eyes from the descending rays by
means of shades; because the vivid light striking them from above, is thus
intercepted. But we ought to consider, that the lower part of the eye is by
such means completely shaded; while the upper part of this organ is stimulated
by the light it receives from below; -- a practice which cannot be productive
of good consequences. If the malady be situated in the upper part of the eye,
this conduct is still more improper: for the healthy part is in this manner
protected, and that already relaxed is still more weakened.

Darkness, or shade, is then only beneficial to the eyes, when they are
unemployed, when the obscurity is natural, and consequently every where
extended. To rest a little during the twilight, is very suitable to weak eyes.
No artificial darkness during the day is ever so uniform, but that the eye must
exert itself at one time more than at another, and necessarily suffer by this
change. Persons with weak or diseased eyes, who spend the whole day in an
apartment darkened with green curtains, injure their sight still more by this
pernicious practice. It is far more prudent to repair to clear daylight and
the fresh air, and to direct the eyes to distant prospects, than to confine
them to the close atmosphere of a room, and to the sight of near objects.

Lastly, it is an error, that weak eyes, when employed in minute vision, ought
to have a faint light; for by this practice they are certainly still more
weakened. Thus green spectacles are very hurtful to some eyes, as they deprive
them of that light which is necessary to a distinct perception of objects.

IV. Of the Conduct to be observed in Weak Eyes.
THE artificial light of candles and lamps is detrimental to weak eyes; not, as
some imagine, on account of the light being too strong for the eyes, but
because the flame of a candle too powerfully illumines the eye in one point,
and does not uniformly stimulate the retina.

The means used to prevent the great stimulus from the rays of light are, in
general, so regulated, that the screen may not only cover the flame, but also
concentrate the greatest part of the light. Thus the room is darkened, and only
a small spot above and below the apparatus is illumined; a practice highly
injudicious. The study lamps, with large round screens, seem to be purposely
contrived to impair the soundest eyes, by their continued use. -- The green
parchment screens formerly used were likewise objectionable; for, though they
admitted the free access of light on both sides, yet they produced too great a
shade before the eyes. The best and most proper defense of weak eyes by
candlelight is a flat screen, projecting about two or three inches over the
forehead; or even a round hat, with a brim of a proper size.

Those who are afflicted with weak eyes should always make use of two candles,
placed so that their flame be neither too low, nor too high for the eye. This
is a circumstance of great importance, as the light, when placed too low, is
uncommonly stimulating and fatiguing. Candles have this advantage over lamps,
that their light is less offensive to the eye and less pernicious to the lungs;
as they do not, in general, emit so much smoke. But, on the other hand, all
candles have the following disadvantages: 1. that, by their burning downwards,
the fatigued eye is progressively more strained in the later hours of
candlelight; 2. that the unequal light they give is attended with the
additional trouble of snuffing them; and, 3. that by the least commotion of the
air, or, if made of bad materials, they offend the eye by their flaring light.
-- Hence a clear chamber-lamp, burning with the least possible smoke and smell,
is far preferable and more soothing to the eye, than even wax-candles. Some of
the lately-improved Patent-lamps, originally contrived by M. D' ARGENT, in
Switzerland, are well calculated to answer every useful purpose; but, instead
of the common round screens, I would recommend another, immediately to be
described.

Those screens are the best, which are applied to one side of the light only,
which are not larger than is necessary to cover the flame, and which still
admit a small quantity of light to pass through them. This is obtained by a
simple contrivance of taffety, slightly gummed, and folded so that it can be
carried about in the pocket. These little screens are very convenient in
traveling, and are possessed of the essential advantage, that they overshade
only the small angle formed for the individual who is affected with weak eyes,
without depriving the rest of the company of light. In the daytime, on the
occasion of sealing letters, for instance, the light of a candle or taper is
more prejudicial to the eye than in the evening.

In the morning we should not too much exert the eyes immediately after rising.
Hence it is advisable to remove the candle to some distance and under shade in
the long winter mornings, till the eye be gradually accustomed to it. For the
same reason, the window-shutters ought not to be suddenly opened in very bright
daylight. This immediate change, from darkness to the clearest light,
occasions sensible pain even to the strongest eye.

Writing fatigues the eyes less than reading; for the letters we form on paper
are previously imprinted on the imagination, and consequently require much less
acuteness of sight, than the series of letters and words we read. It is, for
the same reason, much easier to the eye to read our own handwriting, than that
of a stranger, however distinct. Besides, the letters and lines in writing are
more distinguishable by the lower part of the blank paper, than the lines in a
printed book, or on a manuscript; in both of which they appear to flow
together, and can be kept asunder only by great exertion of the eye. The case
is considerably changed, when we endeavor to write remarkably well; when we
make use of a glossy white paper, and particularly when we copy the writing of
another person with great accuracy -- in all which instances the sight is more
impaired than in reading, especially by changing the direction of the eyes too
frequently to papers, or books of different types.

The extravagant elegance in the letter-press of many modern books, the
splendid whiteness and smoothness of vellum paper, or of hot-pressed woven
paper, and the broad margin injudiciously contrasted with the printer's glossy
ink, are ill calculated to preserve our eyes. And if the lines be too close to
each other, the columns too long, as in our newspapers, the ink too pale, as is
now becoming fashionable, and the paper of a bluish cast -- the eyes are then
in a fair way of being totally blinded.

I read in the Gentleman's Magazine for April, 1794, a proposal, to print on
dark blue paper with white letters, or on green paper with yellow letters. This
plan certainly deserves a fair trial, though it might meet with great
difficulties in the execution. -- The eyes would also be greatly preserved, by
making use of a fine light blue writing-paper, rather of a greenish tint,
instead of the fashionable white or cream-coloured paper.

Every exertion of the eyes is most hurtful immediately after a meal, as well
as at any time when the blood is in great agitation. -- In the dawn, in
twilight, and in moonshine, we ought not to read or write, nor direct our sight
too attentively to objects.

Refracted rays afford an unpleasant light, and oblique rays are particularly
painful. When we take exercise in a long, irregularly-lighted apartment; we
feel sensible vibrations in the pupil of the eye. The most suitable apartment,
in this respect, is one forming a regular square, with large windows to the
east, in which there is an uniformly-divided light, or still better by means of
sky-lights. Garret windows afford a bad light; it being generally introduced,
as it were, by a funnel, and illumining only one part of the room, while the
rest remains dark.

A sitting-room is best adapted to preserve the eyes, the walls of which are
pale green, without paintings; two or three uniformly high windows, so as to
give an equal light; (yet so contrived as to prevent its being too strong)
close and moveable green blinds; a green carpet on the floor; and, lastly, such
shutters as may occasionally leave the upper part of the window uncovered, in
order to admit sufficient light -- To sit with the back to the window,
occasions a shade which forms a disagreeable contrast to the surrounding light.
The writing-desk, therefore, ought to be placed so, that the last window may be
on the left hand, and that the right hand may throw no shade on the paper, and
not too near a corner of the room, as this generally has an unfavourable light.
A space sufficiently broad, between two windows, is a still more convenient
situation for a desk; but we should not sit too near the wall; a custom which
is excessively hurtful to the eyes.

An oblique position of the desk is the most proper; for it presents to us the
writing materials in that position, in which we are habituated to place a book,
when we hold it in our hands, and from which the rays of light diverge more
gradually than from a horizontal table. It is less hurtful to the breast, to
the abdomen, and also to the eyes, to use a desk of this form, and to write
standing rather than sitting; provided that the height of the desk be
proportionate to the length of the body, that it stand firm, and that both arms
rest upon it, without being fatigued by raising them too high -- In standing
before a desk, we have this additional advantage, that there is less occasion
to direct the eyes upwards, than in sitting. Hence the conversation between
tall persons and those of a low stature is most troublesome to the latter, as
they are constantly obliged to look upwards. -- Those with whom we converse
ought not to stand between our body and the light, as it is both rude, and
prejudicial to our eyes.

At night we ought to place the candle so that we may receive light from it in
the same direction as we do from the window in the daytime. Even if it be
provided with a green screen, as before described, a weak eye will not long be
able to support its glare in a straight line. Were the candle to be elevated at
our back, so as to allow the light to come down over our shoulders, we should
then experience the same inconvenience, which attends that posture in
daylight. Hence it is necessary to place it sideways, and to keep the book or
paper in a lateral direction.

We should not expose ourselves in a straight direction to objects strongly
illumined by the flame of a candle, or fire from a grate. Thus the
highly-polished senders and other fire-irons are injurious to sight; and not
less so is a smooth and shining wax-cloth over a table, as refracting too much
the rays of light: a green cloth is preferable. In all cases, the light should
at least be of equal height with the forehead; not close to a white wall, and
still less before a looking-glass or other polished body. To walk up and down a
room lighted with a single candle, so that at one time we have the light full
in our eye, and at another are nearly in darkness, is very prejudicial to weak
eyes. It is better to place the candle in the middle of the room, in order to
illumine it more uniformly, or, what is still preferable, to hang it higher
than the shade of our own body.

Where persons must have a light during the night, it ought to be placed in the
next room, or at least within the chimney, that it may be entirely out of
sight. If neither of these methods be convenient, we should place it behind or
at the side of the bed, rather than in an opposite direction. For, if this be
not attended to, the light may produce very noxious effects during sleep, even
through the closed eyelids. The same attention is required, to prevent the
rays of the sun or moon, either directly or by reflection from the opposite
wall, from striking the eyes of the person asleep. -- As some men are known to
sleep with their eyes open, it would be advisable to employ somebody to shut
them, that they may not suffer by the accidents before mentioned.

Those who have weak eyes should carefully avoid strong fires and even hot
rooms; for heat still more dries the eyes already suffering from want of
moisture. Indeed, it is highly probable, that the weakness of sight and early
blindness, so common in this country, are in a great measure owing to the bad
custom of hastening to the fireside, whether coming from the cold air, or from
the dark streets.

Weak eyes must be indulged with shady places, and protected against every
dazzling object. But green arbours should be avoided, on account of the
twinkling light occasioned by the agitation of the leaves. The exercise of the
eyes ought never to be suspended for any considerable length of time: too much
rest is hurtful; and to sit whole hours of the evening without candlelight, is
extremely pernicious. It is, however, very soothing to the eyes, to let them
rest for half an hour during twilight. This should teach us to adopt the
general and salutary rule, to rise with the dawn, and gradually to accustom
ourselves to the artificial light of the evening. For a similar reason, those
who complain of weakness of sight, ought not to resort to places artificially
lighted in the daytime, such as theaters, etc. Even the soundest eyes must
inevitably suffer by a sudden change from light to darkness, or from darkness
to strong light.

If it become necessary to let the eyes rest, we should by no means press the
eyelids too closely together, which if long continued, is very hurtful. So is
strong and frequent friction, which powerfully stimulates the nerves and
injures the eyes. If we sit for any length of time with closed eyes, we are
easily overtaken by sleep, which, though beneficial, ought to be of short
duration, that the eyes may not be overheated. As a protection against injury
from external causes, it is most useful to wear a shade at such a distance, as
may allow the ey^ free motion, and not keep it too warm. The green veils worn
by ladies are, in this respect, well calculated to prevent the dust from
entering the eye, as well as to protect it against cold winds, and the burning
rays of the sun.

The common eye-cases, used by travelers, and by artificers who work in
substances abounding with dust, are, for the following reasons, improper: 1.
the glass in the case stands too prominent, and diminishes the horizon; hence,
as those who wear them cannot see sideways and downward, but only straight
forward, they travel unsafely on an uneven road; 2. the glass in these cases
being easily covered with vapor, both from internal perspiration and external
cold, prevents distinct vision. These eye-cases might be much improved by
making the brim somewhat narrower, and substituting a fine silken gauze, or
rather a thin plate of ivory, dyed green, with a small horizontal incision, in
preference to glass.

All glasses used to assist vision appear to require some effort of the eyes,
and, unless they be indispensable, they should never be employed by persons at
an early time of life. In proof of this assertion, I shall only remark, that by
looking through a window of the finest glass, we feel our eyes much more
fatigued, than if the window had been open. This is particularly the case in
locking through coach-windows, where additional injury is occasioned to the
eyes, by the motion of the carriage, and the impure air arising from
respiration. Green curtains in coaches are, therefore, judicious and proper.

Of all the remedies for preserving weak eyes (for diseased eyes require
professional assistance,) bathing them in pure cold water is the most
refreshing and strengthening. But this ought not to be done above three or four
times a day; otherwise it has a tendency to give an unnecessary stimulus to the
eyes. Nor should it be done immediately after rising in the morning, but only
when the moisture, which during sleep is deposited even in the soundest eyes,
is nearly evaporated. This partial cold bath may be repeated after dinner and
supper, at which times the eyes stand as much in need of it as in the morning.
Not only the eyes, but also the brow, the region behind the ears, sometimes the
whole head, and particularly the upper lip, which is closely connected with the
optic nerves, should be bathed or washed as well as the eyes. In the morning,
the eye ought not to be precipitately, but gradually exposed to the water: and
the washing should be expeditiously performed. In drying or wiping the eye, we
should proceed gently and with caution; and immediately after washing, we
should particularly guard against any rays of light, as well as every kind of
exertion.

A large piece of sponge, containing a good deal of water, so that it may not
too soon become warm, is far preferable in these partial bathings, to the warm,
smooth hand, or towel. The sponge should be frequently dipped into cold water,
and occasionally allowed to lie for a few moments on the eye, with the head
bent backward while the eye is generally moved and a little opened during the
operation.

The bathing of the eyes, in small glasses, is less advantageous, as the water
very soon turns lukewarm, and is perhaps too cold, when suddenly renewed.
These glasses occasion another disagreeable sensation, as their edges will, in
some degree, attach themselves to the skin, not unlike cupping-glasses.

The cold bath, under certain restrictions, is useful; as it invigorates the
whole body, and consequently strengthens the eyes; but in some cases it may
injure them, by propelling the blood too forcibly to the head. This may, in a
great measure, be prevented by not only washing the eyes and the whole head
previously to entering the bath, but also by diving the whole face and head
under water.

V. Dietetical Precepts respecting the Eyes in general.
ABOVE all things, we must observe the old rule; to try carefully what best
agrees with us, and to attend to moderation and regularity in our manner of
living.

Smoking tobacco, and taking snuff, are injurious; as by either practice the
eye is too much stimulated. It is a vulgar error, that people cannot resign
these improper habits, without injury to their health. They may be safely
abandoned at once, though occasionally prescribed as medicines. -- Tobacco The
tobacco*plant was first discovered growing wild in South-America; in the year
1496 it was also found in Saint Domingo; in 1520 in Jucatan; from which last
place the first seeds were brought over to Portugal in 1560, by the French
Ambassador Nicot, who gave it its present name from the Island of Tobago, where
it grew in great abundance. Hence Linnaeus calls it by the compound name of
Nicotiana T^ba^um.
has only been known in Europe since the beginning of the seventeenth century,
and was long merely used as a luxury. This plant is now much abused; and those
who are once accustomed to it, cannot leave it off without great resolution. To
such persons it does not afford relief as a medicine; their olfactory nerves
having become almost insensible to its stimulus. As a medicinal remedy, it
serves to draw superfluous humors from the head; but in those who use it
extravagantly, especially in snuff, it imperceptibly weakens the nervous
system, and especially the memory.

After meals, and the above-stated bathings, it is beneficial to the eyes to
remain in the open air, to direct our looks to a grass-plat, or to divert them
with some amusing employment. -- Some have observed, that their eyes are not so
strong after they have eaten weak soups or broths, as after solid food: they
further affirm, that their sight is stronger after a meal consisting entirely
of vegetable aliment, than after a very moderate portion of animal food. These
observations are far from being unimportant, and, if fully confirmed by
experience, they may throw some light on the dietetical treatment of the eyes
-- a branch of medicine that has hitherto been too much neglected.

A short sleep after dinner can only be beneficial to the eyes of those, with
whom this practice does not disagree; at all events, the eyes ought to be
protected from daylight, which would hurt them more than they can be refreshed
by a short slumber. -- The particular rules respecting this practice, I have
stated in the Seventh Chapter. -- The steam of boiled coffee, gently applied,
has also been recommended after dinner to persons afflicted with weak eyes; but
nothing has a more salutary tendency, in this respect, than to go to bed at an
early hour; for most people impair their sight by heavy suppers and heating
liquors, so that their eyes remain inflamed till next day. The same, indeed, is
also the case with those who indulge too much in sleep.

A pure, serene air is an essential requisite to the preservation of the eyes.
Fetid exhalations sometimes instantaneously affect the eye; hence we should
avoid the putrid effluvia from marshes and ditches, or other places in which
the air is filled with noxious vapors; for instance, the vicinity of
colour-shops, hartshorn-distilleries, and the like. It is, perhaps, unnecessary
to point out every species of mephitic vapors to be shunned as the enemies of
sight; yet it deserves to be remarked, that the exhalations of stables are
injurious, while the stalls, and other places where cattle are kept, are far
less hurtful. Lastly, the galleries of churches, as well as the higher boxes
and galleries of playhouses, are most pernicious places; for the exhalations,
ascending from a great number of people assembled below, are extremely
detrimental to sight.

On the other hand, the frequent enjoyment of a pure and fresh air, the
occasional resort to elevated situations, nay, even the exposure to a moderate
wind, are means of improvement. The more vigorous species of bodily exercise
also, are in a certain degree useful; provided we do not exert the eye by
reading, writing, etc. before the circulating fluids are reduced to their
proper medium. -- The application of electricity, which has benefited many weak
eyes, by its fluid being conducted through a wooden point, is somewhat
analogous to the going and standing against the wind; as it probably operates
more by the gentle vibrations of the air, than by the communication of the
electric fluid itself.

To read in the open air is hurtful to sound, and still more to weak eyes,
unless the light of a clear day be modified at least by the foliage of a tree
from above; yet even here the vivid light surrounding the book is fatiguing.

The greater or less interest we take in our employments, is of considerable
importance to the organs of sight; particularly if they be in a weak state. The
more alluring a book or any other amusement is, the longer we are induced to
continue it. Hence the important rule: to reserve the most interesting labors
for the half-wearied eyes; yet, with prudent severity, always to appoint a
task; for, without this precaution, the sight, though at a later period, will
inevitably experience more or less injury from such practices.

The state of the weather has great influence on the power of vision; hence
persons troubled with weak eyes should not be alarmed, if in a tempest or
thunder-storm, in rainy, or foggy weather, their sight be less acute, or even
much impaired. -- Such individuals are easily affected by standing too long on
cold or damp ground, by a too light dress, and particularly by a too thin
covering of the legs and feet.

Riding on horseback is beneficial to weak eyes, as is also walking and riding
in carriages. The principal advantage in all these exercises is, perhaps,
derived from employing the eye with a great variety of objects, none of which
occupies the attention too long.

Lastly, persons having black eye-lashes generally possess greater powers of
vision, than those whose eye-lashes are of a light color; because the former
are a better screen for the eye, and reflect no light from their outside, by
which the image on the retina would be rendered weaker and more indistinct.

MONTALDUS gives an account of a person whose eyelids and eye-lashes were
completely white; who consequently saw but indifferently in the daytime, but
much better in the evening and at night. This man happened to be taken prisoner
by the Moors, who dyed his eyelids black, by which his sight was much
improved: but, as soon as the color was lost, his vision also became weaker.

Dr. RUSSELL mentions, in his " History of Aleppo," that the Turkish ladies
usually dye the inner side of their eyelids black, not so much for the sake of
ornament, as with a view to strengthen their sight. -- It has farther been
observed, that when we lose the eye-lashes, as is often the case in the
smallpox, the sense of vision is thereby considerably weakened. For a similar
reason, the hair combed down the forehead, if of a dark color, will assist the
sight, as well as any other contrivance over the brow.

VI. Some additional Rules, addressed to those who are obliged to make use of
Eye-glasses.
THE cases in which eye-glasses may be used with advantage, are nearly the
following: 1. when we are obliged to hold small objects at a considerable
distance, before we can distinguish them: 2. when, in order to discern objects,
we require more light than usual; for instance, when we are obliged to place a
candle between the eye and the object; for this is one of the most destructive
practices, by which the optic nerves and muscles are much injured; -- and, as
the eye employs itself with the object in proportion to the degree of light
reflected upon it, the pupil ought to dilate accordingly; instead of which, it
is forced to contract, on account of the too powerful light produced by the
intermediate candle: 3. when a near object, upon accurate and attentive
examination, becomes obscure, and begins to appear covered, as it were, with a
mist or fog: 4. when, in reading or writing, the letters seem to flow into one
another, and look as if they were double or treble: 5. when the eyes are easily
fatigued, and we are obliged from time to time to shut them, or to direct them
to fresh objects, for temporary relief.

In the choice of spectacles we need not attend so much to their magnifying
power, as to the circumstance of their agreeing with our sight; that is, when
they enable us, clearly and without exertion, to see at the same distance, in
which we formerly were accustomed to read or work. Hence we ought out of a
number of glasses to choose those, which afford the best and clearest light in
every state of the eye. But, if a person be short-sighted, he should choose a
second glass, magnifying a little more than the other, but somewhat less
distinct, yet so that it may not obscure the object. This is unpleasant at
first, but the eyes in time become accustomed to it, and daily improve. If,
after some time, we make use of less concave glasses, there is no doubt, that
in the course of a few years, according to particular circumstances, the defect
of short-sightedness may be gradually removed.

He who observes this regular gradation with his spectacles, may preserve his
eyes to the latest period of life. But we should not make these changes too
suddenly, lest the aid of art be too soon exhausted, and the wearer of glasses
perhaps be unable to find any of sufficient magnifying powers. It is farther a
hurtful practice, to use any other but our own glasses, to which the eye has
been accustomed; -- every irregularity is injurious, and the preservation of
the eyes depends chiefly on uniformity, with respect to glasses as well as to
the light, in which the organs of sight are exercised.

In using one glass only, people accustom themselves to neglect one of the
eyes; and, on this account, spectacles are preferable. Yet both glasses must be
separately fitted to each eye, and by no means indiscriminately used; for this
would increase the disease. -- If, however we make use of one glass only, each
of the eyes ought alternately to be habituated to it.

Many persons wear glasses in the evening, and can dispense with them in
daylight. This is rather an imprudent practice; and, if it be not too late,
they should choose a second pair of glasses, somewhat more magnifying, and to
be used by candlelight only. In this manner, the retina would receive an equal
proportion of light, at one time as well as another, and the eye longer
preserve its vigor.

Green glasses are said to be most suitable to the eye, since they modify the
impression of light on the retina. Though this be in a great measure true, they
cannot be indiscriminately recommended, and certainly not to such as have weak
eyes. Green is indeed pleasing to the eye, more than any other color, but, at
the same time, it somewhat obscures objects, especially at first. Those of a
vigorous sight only should make use of them as preservatives, especially
against the fire or candlelight. But, if white or light-coloured objects
appear red, after having used green glasses for a short time, we should
discontinue their use; as this phenomenon is a certain proof, that they will in
the end destroy the eyes. If the green color does not in two or three days
become imperceptible, but appears constantly upon the paper as it did at first,
it is a farther criterion that the use of them is improper.

Many give the preference to large reading-glasses; in order to avoid wearing
spectacles. It is however obvious, that it must be a pernicious practice, to
keep the eyes in constant exertion, as is the case here, where every motion of
the hand and the head necessarily alters the distance. In addition to this
inconvenience, the dazzling splendor of the rays, reflected from the surface
of the glass, weakens the eye to such a degree, as to render the use of
spectacles ultimately indispensable, with this only difference, that the eyes
require greater magnifying powers, than might have been necessary without this
depravation.

Hence spectacles are in every respect preferable, as they are not only more
conformable to the nature and mechanism of the eye, but also more convenient:
they are uniformly placed before the objects by the imperceptible motion of the
head; they leave the space between the object and the eyes open and free; and
being generally thinner, and lying at an uniform distance before the eye, they
present the objects more clearly and distinctly than reading-glasses.

Those who have weak eyes, ought not to employ themselves, even occasionally,
in a manner that may be fatiguing to the sight. Particularly hurtful are those
occupations, in which one eye only is exerted, and must consequently be placed
in positions, different from those of the other eye, which is at rest. For this
reason, the use of magnifying glasses, of whatever kind, is more pernicious to
weak eyes, if we always use the same eye and purposely shut the other, than if
we alternately make use of either. On this account, microscopical
investigations are less hurtful, if, while one eye be employed, we can keep the
other open.

We should not make too frequent trials to discover, whether we have improved
in sight, or not; for the exertion necessary upon these occasions, is
uncommonly stimulating and fatiguing

Spectacles ought to be used only for the purposes for which they are designed;
namely, (...) such employments as require the assistance (...) art, and where
the eye is always kept at an equal distance; for instance, in reading or
writing. We should not without a full trial make choice of a pair of glasses,
nor be satisfied with those which, at first, exhibit the objects clearly and
distinctly. For objects will not always be at the same distance before us as
they appear at the first experiment. It would be proper to try a pair of
glasses for a short time, especially by candlelight; to use them in that
posture of the body to which we are accustomed; and, if with the usual kind of
labor, we do not feel our eyes fatigued, but rather somewhat relieved, we then
ought to adopt these glasses. But, as it is almost impossible to meet with a
pair of glasses in the shops, which fit both eyes, there is nothing more
absurd, than to purchase spectacles ready made. Certain as it is, it may not be
generally known, that there is perhaps not one person among thousands, whose
eyes are both of an equal size and constitution. For this reason, different
eyes should be accommodated with different glasses; and, if we consult our
interest in an affair of such consequence, we shall be cautious in selecting
for each eye a proper glass. The following advice is submitted to those who
have no optician at hand:

Short sighted persons, who wish for a proper concave or magnifying glass, may
take the exact focus, or point of vision, by presenting the smallest print very
close to the eye, and gradually removing it, as far as they can read the
letters distinctly, and without much ex^^^^on. When they have accurately
ascertained the focus, after frequent trials, let them employ another person to
take the measure of this distance, with a slip of paper, in the nicest possible
manner. An optician, on receiving this measure, and being informed at what
distance the glasses are intended to be used, will be able to judge, in a
certain degree, although by no means so accurately as by a personal conference
with the short-sighted person.

Such as observe their eyes to be inclined to far-sightedness, may proceed
exactly in a similar manner. But all eye-glasses ought to be furnished with
double joints or springs; as those with single joints are not only inconvenient
on the nose, but what is worse, they are apt to shift the point of vision with
every motion of the head, and consequently injure the eyes.

Lastly, in such occupations as require a more or less extended view of the
objects, for instance, in playing at cards, where the distance of the objects
must be frequently varied, it would be extremely injudicious to use spectacles;
as no eye whatever can bear such exertions, without uncommon fatigue. For a
similar reason, it is hurtful to these important organs, to keep the spectacles
on the head at close work, when by some accident we are obliged to search for
something dropped, or mislaid. Thus we force the eye to make uncommon efforts, in
seeing farther than it is enabled to do, by the construction of the spectacles.
I need not observe, that many good eyes are spoiled by such imprudent practices.

CONCLUSION.
THE preceding Chapters contain the principal outlines, relative to the
treatment of the human body in a healthy state, so far as the limits of this
work would admit, without transgressing too much on the indulgence of the
reader.

I shall conclude with a few general reflections, and recapitulate, in a
concise manner, several useful precepts, which have been more fully laid down
in former parts of this work.

Moderation, in every respect ought to be the first and leading maxim of those
who wish to live long and enjoy health. Extremes, in the most opposite things,
frequently border on each other. The greatest joy may occasion the most acute
pain; and, on the contrary, moderate pain is often accompanied with feelings
not altogether disagreeable. The highest animal gratification, indeed, is
closely connected with disgust, and it is difficult to avoid the latter, after
the enjoyment of the former. Hence prudence enjoins us to restrain violent
sensations and affections, before they have attained the highest degree.

The illustrious MEAD, in his "Medical Precepts and Cautions," originally
written in Latin, when treating of the affections of the mind, makes the
following remarks, the truth of which has induced me to insert them:

"All mankind," says that medical philosopher, "have a natural desire for the
enjoyment of pleasures, which are of two different kinds, namely, the sensual
and mental. -- The former engross the greatest part of men, while those few
only "whom kind Jove has befriended," are captivated with the charms of
intellectual pleasure. The reason why so great a proportion of thinking beings
indulge in sensuality is obvious: it proceeds from being unacquainted with the
serenity of mind resulting from a dignified conduct, and the joy that animates
a good man, when his reason presides over his passions. But the sensualist,
being devoted to grovelling enjoyments, is incapable of relishing the real
charms of Virtue, and the superior beauties of Nature. The man who wishes to
enjoy true happiness should habituate his mind to cherish Virtue, and carefully
avoid the opportunities which excite and inflame the passions.

"CICERO illustrates this by a sentiment of CATO, which he received from the
great ARCHYTAS, of Tarentum; -- "that Nature never afflicted mankind with a
more destructive disease than the pursuit of bodily pleasure, which stimulates
to enjoyment with ungovernable rashness." De Senectute, cap. xii.
Indeed, the perusal of that great philosopher's writings, on this subject,
must delight the mind of every rational man: and Virtue's exclamation, in
SILIUS ITALICUS, is equally just and impressive: -- Pleasure, by gliding on the
minds of men,
More mischiefs have thou wrought than hostile arms,
Than all the wrath of Gods!"
Punicorum, lib. xv. v. 94.


"As the rational subjugation of the passions strengthens the mind, so
temperance in diet renders the body less subject to these turbulent emotions.
And this observation is applicable not only to individuals who are naturally of
a hot constitution, but even to those who control their appetites; because
moderation is a great means of tranquillising the mind."

Cleanliness is a principal duty of man, and an unclean or filthy person is
never completely healthy. It is better to wash ourselves ten times a day, than
to allow one dirty spot to remain on the skin. On a place where impurities are
suffered to clog the pores, not only insensible perspiration, but likewise the
absorption by the skin is entirely suppressed; and if the whole body be, as it
were, covered with a varnish formed of perspirable matter, it is impossible
that a person in such a state can possess sound blood, or enjoy good health.

Many diseases originate from an impure atmosphere, but a still greater number
from the sudden changes of the temperature of the air. Hence the necessity of
exposing ourselves daily to such changes, and of renewing the air in the house
and apartments we inhabit, by opening the doors and windows every clear
morning, or during the day, as often as convenient. Indeed, to encounter cold
weather, however intense, has the effect of bracing the fibers of the system in
general, and is attended with danger only, when we suddenly remove to a warmer
temperature. For this reason, it is extremely injudicious, and a bad compliment
paid to a visitor, to invite him to the fireside, upon his first entering a
house; we should better consult his health, by conducting him to a cold room,
or to some distance from the fire, till the temperature of his body be more
equal to that of the apartment.

Every thing calculated to remove or cure diseases may also produce them; for,
whatever has a tendency to accomplish useful changes in the body, may, under
different and opposite circumstances, be attended with the contrary effect.
Hence no medicine whatever ought to be used as daily food -- a favorite
practice among invalids, valetudinarians, and the votaries in quack medicines.

Feeble individuals ought to eat frequently, and but little at a time: the
number of meals should correspond with the want of strength; -- for it is less
hurtful to a debilitated person to eat a few mouthfuls every hour, than to make
two or three hearty meals in one day; yet this observation is liable to
exceptions, respecting those persons who have naturally weak stomachs.

There is no instance on record of any person having injured his health, or
endangered his life, by drinking water with his meals; but wine, beer, and
spirits have produced a much greater number and diversity of patients, than
would fill all the hospitals in the world. Such are the effects of intemperance
in diet, particularly in the use of drink; for neither beer, wine, nor spirits,
are of themselves detrimental, is used with moderation, and in a proper habit
of body.

It is a vulgar prejudice, that water disagrees with many constitutions, and
does not promote digestion so well as wine, beer, or spirits: on the contrary,
pure water is preferable to all brewed and distilled liquors, both for bracing
the digestive organ, and preventing complaints which arise from acrimony, and
fullness of the blood.

It is an observation not less important than true, that by attending merely to
a proper diet, a phlegmatic habit may frequently be changed into a sanguine
one, and the hypochondriac may be so far altered, as to become a cheerful and
contented member of society.

The duration of work or exercise cannot be easily ascertained, with regard to
every individual. Generally speaking, we ought to work only when we feel a
natural inclination to either literary or mechanical labors. To force
ourselves to any exertions, particularly those of the mind, is productive of
imperfect performances. -- It is better to exercise the mind in fine than in
bad weather; but those who are continually making excursions in the former,
cannot usefully employ themselves in the latter.

Of the twenty-four hours of a day, we ought, in a good state of health, to
devote upon an average twelve hours to useful occupations, six to meals,
amusements, or recreations, and six to sleep. This would be at once a natural
and arithmetical proportion. It is, however, to be regretted that the hours
cannot be thus accurately divided. -- An industrious person frequently counts
but twenty-three hours in a day; as one and sometimes even two hours slide away
imperceptibly.

"Sleep," says Dr. MEAD, in the sequel of the work abovementioned, "is the
sweet soother of cares and restorer of muscular energy, which is wasted by
bodily and mental exertions during the day. But excessive sleep has its
inconveniences; for it blunts the senses, stupifies the mental faculties, and
renders both less fit for performing the duties of active life. The proper time
for sleep is the night, when darkness and silence invite and cherish it; but
sleep during the day is less refreshing. The observance of this rule, if proper
for the multitude, is still more necessary for persons devoted to literary
pursuits, whose bodies and minds are more susceptible of injuries."

The modern inventions for promoting luxury and effeminacy are really
surprising. It were to be wished, that the ingenious contrivers could be
persuaded, that their pernicious arts resemble those of the Quacks, whose
poisonous productions gradually, though ultimately consume the vital spirits of
their victims. -- Every new expedient we use, with a design to diminish the
labor of man, and encourage indolence, is an additional proof that our age is
not in a state of improvement, but rather on the decline. Wretched is the man
who requires the aid of Art, more than of Nature, to prolong his life, and to
support so precarious an existence! -- Convenience leads to effeminacy;
effeminacy to general relaxation; and this is eventually attended with total
enervation and imbecility.

"Although pleasure, riches, power, and other things (concludes the author
before quoted), which are called the gifts of Fortune, seem to be dealt out to
mankind with too much partiality, yet there is a greater degree of equality of
those things which constitute real happiness, than is generally imagined.
People in the lower ranks enjoy the common advantages of existence more
intensely than those in the higher walks of life. Wholesome food is acquired by
moderate labor, which improves the appetite and digestion: hence sound sleep,
uninterrupted by corroding cares, refreshes the wearied limbs; a healthy
progeny fills the cottage; and the sons perform their father's labor, making
his hoary locks sit comfortably on him. How vastly inferior to these blessings
are the delicacies of the affluent, which are ever accompanied with real evils.
Their appetites, in order to relish their food, must be stimulated by poignant
sauces, which heat and vitiate the blood, and render the body liable to
distempers. Their excesses disturb their repose; and as a punishment for their
vices, their sons, who ought to be the ornament and support of their families,
contract diseases from their mother's womb, and are afflicted with infirmities
through the course of a languid life, which seldom reaches to old age. They are
frequently tortured with anxieties for obtaining honors and titles, insomuch
that they lose the advantages of their possessions, by the vain desire of new
acquisitions: In wealth like this,
I always wish to be extremely poor?"
Horace, Satire I. v. 78.

"But the worst inconvenience that results from Epicurean modes of living is,
that by supplying the body with superabundant nourishment, the faculties of the
soul are stupefied, and the passions inflamed; while the sparing and homely
diet of the laborious poor neither oppresses the bodily functions, nor fosters
a propensity to vice. Hence, unless prudence be a constant attendant on
opulence, it is, in these respects, better and more conducive to the
preservation of health and prolongation of life, to live on a small fortune.

"Nor is Nature to be deemed an unjust stepmother, but a most provident and
beneficent parent. In short, it behooves a wise man, in every stage of life, To
hold the golden mean,
To keep the end in view, and follow Nature.
LUCAN, Book II. Ver. 381.

"Whoever investigates the imperfections of human nature will find, that as
some men are vastly superior to others in the endowments of the mind, yet,
mournful reflection! even the best minds are blended with some degree of
depravity; so the healthiest bodies are often afflicted with diseases; and
these, being the seeds of death, ought to remind us of the shortness of this
life, and that, in the words of LUCRETIUS, None have a right to life, all to
its use.


COROLLARY.
A LUXURIOUS life, and dissolute manners, not only impoverish a people, but
ultimately depopulate the country itself. Such mischievous consequences can be
averted only by laws wisely enacted, duly administered, and experimentally
adapted to the natural capacity and disposition of a people: for, if their
artificial propensities and desires be not controlled in time, and directed to
useful ends, the citizen must degenerate into a feeble and irresolute slave,
and his progeny will gradually wither away, like a plant in a foreign soil. --
Thus Rome was subdued, when she departed from her ancient simplicity of
manners, when she adopted foreign and effeminating refinements, and when her
feasts and public amusements became too frequent.

THE END.
POSTSCRIPT.
IT has been frequently and justly remarked, that popular books on medical
subjects are generally deficient in their practical application; insomuch that
they leave the reader doubtful, whether and when he is to apply for
professional advice. As my design, in these Lectures, has not been to lay down
particular rules for the distinction and treatment of diseases, but rather for
their prevention, and consequently for the preservation of health, I think it
my duty to remark here, that a work seems to be wanting, which should impart
instruction to general readers, how to distinguish diseases, and how to treat
them by a due and strict attention to diet and regimen, as well as to regulate
the habits, peculiarities, temperament, and, in short, the whole state of the
patient's mind and body: -- such a work being a desideratum of the present age.

When I began the revisal of these Lectures, for the second edition, I had it
in contemplation to give the outlines of a treatise corresponding with this
description: but being confined within the limits of a single volume, and
conscious that a mere sketch of so extensive and important a work could be of
little if any practical benefit, I have purposely delayed the publication of
the whole to another year, when a separate volume shall conclude my dietetical
labors.

Having treated, in the present volumes of almost every subject that relates to
the management of the human body, in its healthy state, my next work shall be
entirely appropriated to its treatment in a diseased state. The Editor has for
some time expected this second volume, with a view to propose it to the public
as soon as it is received.
It shall comprehend an accurate and clear description of Diseases, together
with a plan founded on the rules of experience, how to treat and eventually to
cure them, especially those of a chronic nature. The administration of medicine
ought, in such a work, to be only a secondary mean of removing disease, as it
will be admitted by the most enlightened and candid of the Profession, that, by
strictly medical remedies, we can cure symptoms, and afford occasional
alleviation of pain; but that we cannot effect a favorable change in the
nature and progress of a disease, whether chronic or acute, without due
attention to food, drink, air, sleep, exercise, or rest, etc.

Hence I hope to be exempt from the charge of presumption, when I venture into
a larger field of inquiry than has hitherto been explored by practitioners;
for, as novelty is not my object, though I think that too little has been done
by professional men, in guiding the unhappy sufferer, and assisting him with
those simple remedies which are placed more immediately around him, I shall
enter upon my proposed work with the confidence arising from the importance and
utility of the undertaking in which I am engaged.

It is much to be regretted, that the boundaries between safety and danger
cannot be perspicuously ascertained in a popular book, without deviating from
the usual terms and definitions adopted by medical writers: but I shall not
hesitate to avail myself of such familiar phrases and expressions as will
render my works intelligible to the generality of readers. To afford a short
specimen of this deviation, for which I allege the respectable authority of the
late Dr. TISSOT, I have subjoined a few Queries, which ought to be distinctly
answered by individuals who consult a physician, whether personally or by
letter. Indeed, it is not always an easy or practicable task to form an
accurate judgment of the state of a patient, without an interview, let his case
be ever so accurately and circumstantially described: yet most of the
difficulties will be removed, if the following questions be answered with
candor and precision. For, as the success of the medicine entirely depends on
a previous knowledge of the disease, this knowledge can, in such cases be
derived only from a clear and faithful account communicated to the physician.

General Questions.
Of what age is the patient?

Had he previously enjoyed perfect health?

In what manner has he lived -- frugally or luxuriously?

How long has he been ill?

How did the disease commence?

Is he disposed to be feverish?

Does the pulse beat strongly or weakly?

Has the patient still muscular strength, or is he much debilitated?

Does he remain the whole day in bed, or alternately walk about?

Is his state the same at all hours of the day?

Is he uneasy or quiet?

Is he troubled with heats or shiverings?

Is he afflicted with pains in the head, throat, breast, stomach, abdomen,
thighs, or the extremities?

Is his tongue dry, accompanied with thirst; disagreeable taste in the mouth;
nausea; and has he an aversion to, or appetite for food?

Has he any stools, and how often?

Of what appearance and consistence are the excrements?

Does he evacuate urine freely and copiously?

Of what color and consistence is the urine -- is there any sediment in it?

Is he troubled with night-sweats?

Does his skin feel soft and pliable, or dry and parched?

Is there any expectoration, and what?

How is his sleep -- quiet or disturbed?

Does he breathe with or without difficulty?

To what mode of diet and regimen has he been accustomed since the commencement
of the present complaint?

What remedies has he used, and with what effect?

Has he ever before been attacked with the same malady?

In female and infantile diseases, there occur circumstances peculiar to the
sex and age; -- these, as well as the preceding general questions, require to
be attended to, in consulting a medical man.

Queries relative to Females.
Do the menses appear regularly and in moderation?

Is the patient pregnant, and how long?

If in childbed, how was the delivery -- successful, or attended with
difficulty?

Were the discharges easy and regular?

Has the patient a good breast of milk?

Does she suckle the child herself?

Is she subject to fluor albus, hysteric fits, etc.

Queries relative to Children.
What is the exact age of the child?

How many teeth has it, and has it suffered much pain in teething?

Is it ricketty? -- Is it of a stature corresponding with its age?

Has it had the smallpox -- natural or inoculated?

Has it a large and hard belly, with strong, or emaciated limbs?

Does it sleep quietly, or start up, grind the teeth, scream, etc.?

Does it discharge worms, and of what kind?

If worms are suspected to exist in the child (and the same observation will
apply to adults), it ought to be examined whether some of the following, that
is, at least four or five of the principal symptoms (marked with italics)
concur, which warrant such a conclusion: -- viz. Slight cholic pains --
frequent discharge of water from the mouth -- fetid breath -- itching of the
nose -- a swollen or chaped upper lip and nose -- a ravenous appetite for, or
aversion to food -- oppression at the stomach -- vomiting -- an effort to
swallow during sleep -- costiveness, or diarrhoea -- bloody excrements --
sudden and frequent inclination to go to stool -- a large belly and thin limbs
-- continual thirst -- occasional debility, and sadness -- frequent change of
color -- languid eyes, with a livid hue around them, and standing half open
during sleep -- terrifying dreams -- frequent startings of the tendons --
grinding the teeth -- uneasiness and anxiety -- a milky urine -- palpitation of
the heart, fainting fits, convulsions -- a profound and long sleep -- cold
sweats, appearing and vanishing suddenly -- temporary dimness -- dumbness, or
difficulty of speech -- weakness or lameness of the joints -- corroded gums --
frequent hiccough -- a small and irregular pulse -- delirious fits -- a slight
and dry cough -- evacuation of thick, slimy matter -- worms discharged from
fistulous ulcers, etc.

Besides the general questions which ought to be made and answered in all
diseases, those likewise must not be neglected which more immediately relate to
the present affection of the patient. For instance, in a quinsey, we ought to
be informed of the particular state and condition of the throat: -- in diseases
of the breast, the seat of the pain, the straitness of the chest, the nature of
the cough, and expectoration, should be distinctly mentioned. It would be
useless here to enter into farther particulars, as the intention of these
questions must appear self-evident to every intelligent reader: and although
the queries appear numerous, they may be easily answered, and in as few words
as they were formed.

The immortal Tissot observes, in his valuable work "On the Diseases of
Country People," that it would be a desirable object, if persons of all ranks,
in their letters to physicians, were to adopt a plan similar to that above
specified, as this would be the means of insuring satisfactory answers, and
preventing the necessity of repeating their applications, and explaining the
contents of former letters.

INDEX.
A.
ABSTINENCE from sexual intercourse ii. 199 Acids, vegetable, when useful in
colic i. 27 -- their general properties ii. 93 -- good correctors of opium ii.
ibid Agency, external, should be habitually resisted i. 129 -- diabolical in
diseases, maintained by Gassner i. 123 Air, its general influence on the body
i. 147 -- definition of i. 149 -- atmospheric, how it may be improved i. 154 --
effects of warm and cold, on the body i. 157 -- damp or moist i. 158 -- dry and
cool i. 159 -- sudden changes of i. ibid -- the most wholesome to live in i.
163 -- criterion of a damp one i. 166 -- different strata of it in a room i.
167 -- how to admit when fresh i. 169 -- the different states of i. 170 -- and
atmosphere, general reflections upon ii. 305 Air bath defined and recommended
i. 57 Alchemists, in search of original matter i. 86 Alchemy, its productions
tend to shorten life i. 87 Aliment, on the quality of ii. 22 -- vegetable,
generally considered ii. 68 Almonds, properties of ii. 97 Amphibious animals,
properties and effects of, as food ii. 65 Anger, its origin and consequences
ii. 233 Animalculae, discoverable in the semen ii. 206 Aphrodi^^^^s, how far
admissible ii. 201 Appetite, different kinds of ii. 18 -- a preternatural one,
how to remedy ii. 269 Apples, properties and effects of ii. 91 Apricots,
properties and effects of ii. 90 Arrow-root, properties of ii. 85 Artichokes,
properties of ii. 77 ASCLEPIADES, his character i. 28 Asparagus, properties of
ii. 77 Ass's milk, directions for making artificial ii. 53 Astrology, its
professors are impostors i. 90 Atmosphere, definition of i. 149 -- account of
its pressure i. 148 -- component parts of i. 149 -- general reflections upon
ii. 305 Azote, proportion of, in the atmosphere i. 151 -- properties of, and
effects on respiration i. 149
B.
BACON, LORD, quotation from i. 24 -- deviates from the true path of inquiry i.
106 -- recommends the bath, frictions with oil, etc. i. ibid -- erroneously
advises laxatives for the prolongation of life i. 107 -- his theory refuted i.
108 -- his remarks on longevity i. 126 Bacon, properties of ii. 48 Ball, hand,
effects of playing at i. 261 Barbarity of the middle ages reviewed i. 82
Barley, properties of ii. 73 Barometers, living ones described i. 31
Bashfulness, its origin and consequences ii. 231 Bath, its temperature and
general effects i. 53 -- the cold, frequently dangerous to children i. ibid --
the tepid, or lukewarm, far preferable i. ibid Bathing, not sufficiently
attended to i. 42 -- the necessity of, inculcated i. 52 -- frequent, in infancy
recommended i. 53 -- in rivers, is useful i. 193 -- historical account of i.
194 Baths, general effects of i. 191 -- division of i. ibid -- effects of the
warm or tepid i. ibid -- cold i. 195 -- cold, rules for using i. 203 -- when
injurious i. 204 -- shower, advantages of them i. 205 -- air, account of i. 207
Beans, properties of ii. 74 Beans, French, properties of ii. 75 Bed, time and
manner of going to i. 294 -- should not be warmed i. 300 Bed-room, the proper
situation of one i. 301 Beef, properties of ii. 43 Beer, ingredients,
adulterations, and properties of ii. 119 Beet-root, properties of ii. 81 Belts,
acromatic, an imitation of animal magnetism ii. 176 Bile, black, produces a
wild imagination i. 78 Birds, their relative salubrity as food ii. 59 -- eggs,
whether wholesome ii. 62 Bleedings, if excessive, detrimental to health ii. 174
Blood, the nature of, investigated i. 100 -- the transfusion of, described i.
102 -- of animals, whether eatable ii. 51 -- account of the constituent parts
of ii. 272 Blood-letting, how it became fashionable i. 98 -- when beneficial i.
99 -- always noxious to the healthy i. 100 -- persons accustomed to, die at an
early age i. 101 BLUMENBACH's Prof. remarks on the theory of Evolution ii. 208
-- Nisus formativus ii. 212 BOERHAAVE's singular advice i. 73 -- facetious
remark on longevity i. 126 BOETIC or rustic temperament described i. 21
BOHMEN's fanatical system revived in Germany i. 112 BONNET's theory of
generation examined ii. 207 Braces, the great use of i. 235 Bread, the nature
and properties of ii. 68 Breeches and Pantaloons, form of i. 234 BUCHAN, DR.
various quotations from i. 3. 30. ii. 23 BUFFON's opinion on the subject of
generation refuted ii. 207 Bursae mucosae, great use of ii. 271 Butter,
properties of ii. 56 Butter-milk, properties of ii. ibid
C.
Cabbage, red and white, properties of ii. 77 CAGLIOSTRO's Balm of Life, an
imposition i. 122 Cajeput oil, a good remedy for the toothache, etc. i. 186
Caloric, its influence on the living principle i. 75 Candles, or rush lights,
how to be placed at night ii. 288 -- of their use in general ii. 282 Carbonic
acid air, properties and effects of, on respiration i. 151 Cardamoms,
properties of ii. 139 Caroussell, a particular kind of exercise i. 261 Caraway,
effects of, in flatulency and hysterics ii. 141 Carrots, general properties of
ii. 82 Cassia, properties of ii. 140 Causes, natural, ought to be studied i. 9
Cheerfulness, general effects of ii. 218 Cheese, properties of ii. 57 Cherries
ii. 87 Chicken in the egg, remarks on the origin of ii. 209 Child, a perfect
birth of, necessary to longevity i. 126 Children and young persons ought not to
be too hastily buried i. 134 -- how to place them in bed ii. 256 Chiragra of
the ancients, nearly obsolete i. 31 Chives, properties of ii. 84 Chocolate,
properties of ii. 131 Choleric temperament described i. 21 CICERO's idea of
moral perfection quoted i. 68 Cinnamon, properties of ii. 140 Classification of
food, drink, and spices ii. 143 Cleanliness, in children, inculcated i. 64 -- a
domestic virtue i. 180 -- general rules for practicing i. 181 -- reflections
upon ii. 305 Cloves, properties of ii. 139 Coffee, properties of ii. 128 Cold,
general effects of i. 175 -- bracing to the body i. 177 -- how it affects
insensible perspiration ii. 171 -- the common treatment of ii. 173 Colic may
arise from a variety of causes i. 26 Consumption, alarming increase of i. 178
COOK, CAPT. relieved from rheumatic pains by friction i. 80 Copper of the face,
origin of i. 47 CORNARO's illustrious example in diet i. 94 Corns, how to
prevent and cure i. 209 Cosmetics, minor account of i. 44 -- modern, dangerous
i. 45 -- nature and properties of i. ibid -- substitutes for i. ibid
Costiveness, how to prevent ii. 152 -- the causes of it ascertained ii. 153
Couch, a proper one for children i. 63 Couches and coverings, what they ought
to be i. 297 Cow pox proposed as a preventive of the Smallpox i. 13 Crabs,
properties of ii. 66 Cream, properties of ii. 56 Cricket, what species of
exercise i. 261 Cubebs, properties of ii. 139 Cucumbers, properties of ii. 96
Currants, properties of ii. 94 CURRIE, DR. quoted on the use of the cold bath
i. 199 Curtains, disadvantages of i. 299 Custom, a singular, among the
Egyptians, i. 76 Cutis vera, or true skin, described ii. 251 Cider, properties
of ii. 108
D.
D'AILHOUD's deleterious powder i. 122 Dancing, violent, a great enemy to
beauty i. 47 -- rules to be observed in i. 254 Day, proper division of it ii.
307 Death, causes in which it is certain i. 136 -- uncertain symptoms of i. 137
Deer, properties of the flesh of ii. 49 DENIS promoted the transfusion of the
blood i. 105 Dentifrices, their uses examined i. 188 Desk, the best situation
of it pointed out ii. 286 Despair, origin and consequences of ii. 237 Dew,
whether wholesome ii. 106 Diet, effects of a proper ii. 307 Dietetic system,
summary account of i. 139 -- further illustrations of i. 140 -- advantages to
be derived from i. 145 Difference of opinions on medical subjects accounted for
i. 6 Digestibility of animal and vegetable substances ii. 36 Digestion, a sound
state of, requisite to longevity i. 131 Digestion, the nature of, explained ii.
18 Diseases, origin and causes of, investigated i. 19 Disposition, a certain
hereditary, requisite to longevity i. 126 Dissolution, actual, symptoms of i.
136 DONALDSON, Mr. account of his patent ii. 63 Drawers, for females,
recommended i. 235 Dreaming, definition of, by Haller i. 277 Dreams, on the
nature and origin of i. 278 -- a curious one related by Prof. Maas i. 281 --
another of Galileo i. 284 -- influence of i. 295 Dress, on the substance and
form of i. 211 -- general properties of a good i. 212 -- on the different
materials used for i. ibid -- form of i. 225 Drink, on the nature and effects
of ii. 99 Drinking, quantity and time of ii. ibid -- with respect to the
quality of liquors ii. 103 DUNDONALD's, Lord, invention for purifying salt ii.
135 Dwelling near lakes, marshes, and rivers, whether wholesome i. 163
E.
Ear-trumpets, a better substitute for ii. 261 Ear-wax, short account of ii.
179 Education, physical, of children, is much neglected i. 49 -- practical
remarks and strictures upon i. 50 Efforts of the body, if violent, bring on the
symptoms of age i. 79 Eggs, various methods of preserving ii. 63 Egyptians, the
cause of their thick sculls i. 65 -- formerly made use of sudorifics and
emetics to prolong life i. 76 Electric principle in the atmosphere i. 17
Emetics, when useful in colic i. 27 Emunctories, the three principal, defined
ii. 150 Energy, if impaired, how to restore ii. 200 Envy, origin and
consequences of ii. 229 Epidermis, or scarf-skin, use of, to the body ii. 249
Epigenesis, or the theory of gradual formation ii. 212 Evacuations, great
importance of ii. 151 Evacuations, consequences from neglecting them ii. 152 --
means of promoting them ii. 153 Excretions by stool, if too frequent, effects
of ii. 160 Exercise, advantages and disadvantages of i. 245 -- various species
of i. 247 -- duration of i. 248 -- conduct after i. 267 -- consequences from
the want of i. 269 -- reflections on the continuance of i. 307 -- new species
of i. 257 Exhalations, the effects of, arising from various substances i. 171
Eye-cases the common, censured ii. 289 Eye glasses, rules relative to ii. 297
-- when used with advantage ibid. Eyes, the weakness of, etc. i. 58 --
treatment and preservation of -- weakness -- shortness of sight accounted for
-- rules for preserving -- cure and importance -- if weak, how to treat -- how
to manage in the morning -- reading, writing -- should not be long without
exercise -- dietetic precepts respecting them ii. 274 -- 302 Exercise, a new
species of i. 257
F.
Faculties, to be gradually cultivated i. 127 Faculty, the existence of a
sub-reasoning, proved ii. 245 Fashionable complaints, nature of them defined i.
31 Fat of animals, whether wholesome ii. 251 Fear or anxiety, origin and
consequences of ii. 230 Feather-beds censured i. 63 Fencing, what kind of
exercise i. 257 Fever, nervous, described by MANNINGHAM ii. 225 Fibers, the
bracing of, explained i. 79 Figs, properties of ii. 95 Fish, properties and
effects of, as food ii. 64 Flannel, objections against, answered i. 219 --
effect of, when worn next the skin ibid Flesh of different animals compared 45
Fluids, wholesome, in alimentary substances ii. 143 -- unwholesome ii. 146
Food, nature and effects of, on the body ii. 16 -- on the quantity of ii. 20 --
animal, general effects of, discussed ii. 34 -- classification of ibid
FOTHERGILL, DR. quoted i. 231 FRANKLIN, DR. quoted on the use of the cold bath
i. 199 Fretting, inward, mal de cour, what ii. 236 Friction of the body and
soles of the feet, etc. i. 209 -- salutary effects of i. 210 Frogs, their legs
used as food ii. 65 Fruit, properties of, in general ii. 85 Gaiety, general
effects of ii. 218 Game, properties of ii. 34 Garlic, properties of, as food
ii. 84 Garters ought to be abandoned i. 236 GELLIUS's remark on the sixty-third
year of life i. 130 Generation, principal theories of ii. 203 Gentle
temperament described i. 22 Gloves, woollen, ought to be worn by females i. 224
Goats, properties of their flesh ii. 49 Gold, the tincture of, introduced i. 83
Gooseberries, properties of ii. 95 Goose-skin, how it arises i. 196 Gourds,
properties of ii. 97 Grapes, properties of ii. 95 Gravity, specific, of the
different airs i. 153 Greeks, employed best means to prolong life i. 78 Grief,
or sorrow, definition and consequences of ii. 222 Gums, scorbutic, how to treat
i. 187 Gymnastic, the great benefit of i. 78
H.
HANNEMAN's Liquor vini probatorius ii. 115 Hair, how to promote the growth of
i. 209 HALLER's theory of generation examined ii. 207 Hams, smoked, properties
of ii. 47 Hare, properties of its flesh ii. 49 Hazel-nuts, properties of ii. 97
Head, the most proper method of covering i. 227 Health, perfect state of,
defined i. 67 Hearing, the sense of, analyzed ii. 259 Heart, of animals,
whether wholesome food ii. 50 Heat, general effects of i. 175 Hemorrhages, or
bleedings, what ii. 179 Hemorrhoids, or piles, connected with gout, etc. i. 32
-- origin of, explained i. 31 Herrings, properties of ii. 65 HOFFMAN, MORITZ,
recommends the transfusion of the blood i. 105 Hollands, when useful in colic
i. 26 Honey, properties of ii. 138 Hope, definition and effects of ii. 220
Houses, improvement of the air in i. 167 -- situation of them in point of
health i. 165 HUFELAND's picture of a child properly treated in its physical
education i. 60 Hunger, preternatural, what ii. 38 HUXHAM, DR. quoted
respecting Quacks i. 28 Hypochondriacal temperament described i. 21
I.
Jealousy, nature and effects of ii. 227 Jelly, animal, properties of ii. 38
Imagination has a great share in prolonging life i. 74 -- may be disordered by
black bile i. 78 Impostures, in medicines, still prevalent i. 111 Inflammable
air, how obtained i. 152 INGENHOUZ's experiments upon vegetables i. 155
Inquiry, partial method of i. 119 Institution, account of a curious one in
Germany i. 134 Instruments, wind, what effects they produce i. 263 -- stringed
ibid Intoxication, the state of, explained ii. 110 -- how to be treated ii. 111
Joy, general effects of ii. 218
K.
KAIME's, LORD, distinction between affections and passions ii. 215 Kidneys of
animals, whether wholesome food ii. 50
L.
Lamb, properties of, as food ii. 49 Lard, properties of ii. 48 LAVATER
promulgates animal magnetism and somnabulism i. 120 Laughter, definition and
consequences of ii. 219 Laws, general, of Nature, commented upon i. 4 Lead, a
frequent ingredient in cosmetics i. 44 -- its noxious vapors described i. 153
Leaping, what kind of exercise i. 257 Lemons, property of, as food ii. 92
Lentils, properties of, as food ii. 74 Lettuce, properties of, as food ii. 79
LIBAVIUS discovers the transfusion of the blood i. 102 Life, a long one has
ever been valued i. 72 -- the art of prolonging, defined -- duration of
computed by Moderns i. 110 -- cannot be prolonged by specifics, or any
artificial means i. 125 -- principle of, as conceived by the Ancients i. 126 --
conditions requisite to the prolongation of ibid -- critical period of i. 129
-- a steady and equal progress of, required to longevity i. 130 Light, candle,
how to manage at night ii. 281 Limes, properties of, as food ii. 92 Liquors,
heating, are a liquid fire i. 47 -- watery, division of ii. 147 Liver, of
animals, whether wholesome food ii. 50 Living, the present mode of, compared
with that in a state of nature i. 141 Lobsters, properties and effects of, as
food ii. 66 Longevity, bodily and mental disposition to i. 76 -- concluding
remarks on the subject of i. 84 Love, definition and effects of -- extravagant
degree of -- disappointed ii. 221 -- 227 LOWER, promoted the scheme of
transfusion i. 105 Lungs of animals, whether wholesome food ii. 50 Luxury, the
effects of modern ii. 308
M.
Mace, properties of, as a spice ii. 139 Magnetism, animal, account of i. 111
Manchineel-tree, poisonous shade of i. 163 Manna-grass, properties of ii. 73
Married state, proper time and requisites to ii. 191 Matter, original, of the
alchemists i. 83 MEAD, DR. quotations from ii. 303 Meals, reflections on the
frequency of ii. 306 Meat, on the method and time of taking ii. 24 Medicine,
present state of, as a science i. 1 Melancholic temperament described i. 25
Melons, properties of ii. 90 Menses, what ii. 79 Mercury, a frequent ingredient
in cosmetics i. 44 MESSMER's medical knight-errantry -- animal magnetism
described -- his advertisement extraordinary -- impositions on the French
Government -- realizes a princely fortune -- is detected as a knave or fanatic
-- his system exploded i. 111 -- 121 Metallic Tractors, quotation from the
Monthly Review respecting them i. 111 Military exercise, effects of, on the
body i. 257 Milk, properties of, as food ii. 51 -- retention of ii. 186 Millet,
properties of ii. 73 Mind, equanimity of, essential to longevity i. 132 -- of
exercising its functions i. 272 Moderation, general reflections upon ii. 303
MONBODDO, LORD, an original character ii. 207 Mothers, proper conduct of,
essential to the longevity of their children i. 126 Mucus of the nose, what ii.
176 Muscles, description of -- number of, in human and animal bodies --
peculiar structure and power of -- properties of, as food -- muscular action,
or animal motion, what ii. 268 -- 269 Mushrooms, properties of ii. 98 Mutton,
properties of ii. 48 Myopia, or shortsightedness, what ii. 256
N.
Negus, relative salubrity of ii. 133 Nerves, the different size of, in man and
animals ii. 263 Non-naturals, six, explained i. 140 Nostrums, definition of i.
23 Nostrums, pretended purpose of, expounded i. 71 Nursery, should be spacious
and airy i. 59 Nutmeg, properties of ii. 139 Nutrition, the nature of,
investigated ii. 2^ Nuts, in general, properties of ii. 97
O.
Obstructions, the causes of, pointed out ii. 157 -- the means of preventing
ii. 158 Oil, vegetable, when useful in colic i. 27 -- properties of ii. 134
Olives, properties of ii. 97 Onions, properties of ii. 84 Opium, much used by
the Turks ii. 133 Oranges, salutary effects of ii. 92 Orientals, their method
of prolonging life i. 72 Oxygen, proportion of, in the atmosphere i. 149 --
concise history of i. 150 -- properties and effects of, on respiration i. 151
Oysters, properties of ii. 67
P.
Panaceas, or universal remedies, defined i. 22 Panspermia, what ii. 204
Papillae, nervous, described ii. 252 PARACELSUS, an impudent insurer of lives
i. 88 -- his early death i. 103 PARKINSON, MR. JAMES, quoted on the subject of
quack medicines i. 21 Parsley, properties of, as food -- as a spice ii. 82
Parsnips, properties of ibid Passions, origin of -- influence of, on the body
-- are either of an agreeable or disagreeable nature -- means of opposing them
-- how to prevent and mitigate them ii. 214 Pastry-cooks and confectioners
prepare unwholesome mixtures i. 49 Patent or Quack medicines exploded i. 22 --
why dangerous i. 29 Peaches, properties of ii. 89 Pears, properties of ii. 90
Peace, properties of ii. 75 -- green, properties of ibid Pepper, properties of
ii. 138 PARKIN's metallic tractors exploded i. 111 Perry, properties of ii. 108
Persians, the cause of their thin skulls i. 65 Perspiration, insensible, on the
nature and importance of -- how affected and suppressed -- how promoted -- how
influenced by food and drink -- by the depressing passions and emotions -- if
too violent how to be treated -- perspiring and sweating, how distinguishable
ii. 166 -- 174 Phlegmatic temperament described i. 22 Pimento, properties of
ii. 140 Plica polonica, a singular disease of the hair i. 214 Plums, properties
of ii. 89 PLUTARCH's golden precepts ii. 81 Podagra of the Ancients, now almost
unknown i. 31 Pomatums for making the hair grow i. 209 Pork, whether wholesome
ii. 96 Postures, the most usual, of the body examined i. 271 Powers, inherent
in the human body, specified ii. 268 Preshyopia, or farsightedness, what ii.
275 PRIESTLEY's important discovery i. 154 Punch, properties and effects of, on
the body ii. 133 PYTHAGORAS's advice to the passionate ii. 239
R.
Radishes, properties of ii. 84 Reason, this is not the age of i. 110 Religion,
the Christian, misapplied by the alchemists i. 86 Respiration, the principal
function of the animal body i. 147 Rete mucosum, or middle skin, what ii. 249
Rice, properties of ii. 7^ RICHTER's, DR. prescription for the toothache i. 186
Rickets cured by cleanliness alone i. 61 -- relieved by a proper diet and
flannel shirts i. 222 Riding in carriages, what kind of exercise i. 256 -- on
horseback i. 259 Rooms, sitting, the most proper situation of i. 166 -- of
heating, in Autumn i. 176 -- what is the best situation of ii. 285 ROCENNREUZ,
a great adventurer and founder of a Sect i. 103 Running, what kind of exercise
i. 254 RUSSELL, DR. mentions a curious fact ii. 296 Russians, great friends of
bathing i. 6^
S.
Sage, properties of ii. 141 Sage, properties of ii. 87 Sailing in barges and
at sea, what kind of exercise i. 258 Salads and herbs for cooking, properties
of ii. 76 Saliva, use of, to the body ii. 174 Salsafy, properties of ii. 84
Salt, properties of ii. 135 -- new mode of purifying ibid SANCTORIUS's advice
to the passionate ii. 219 Sanguine temperament described i. 20 Sauer Kraut,
properties of ii. 78 Sausages ii. 47 Scented bodies, effects of i. 162
Schoolmasters, their great age accounted for i. 73 Screens, the most proper
form of, described ii. 283 Seasons, the different salubrity of i. 160
Sedan-chair, what kind of exercise i. 258 Semen, observations on the loss of
ii. 182 -- nature and constituent parts of, explained ii. 192 Sensation, short
analysis of ii. 242 Sense, organs of, expounded ibid Senses, external and
internal, defined ii. 247 Sensibility to every change in the atmosphere i. 30
Sexual Intercourse, how important -- when conducive to health -- when
detrimental -- situations unfavourable to -- the proper time of -- consequences
arising from excess ii. 182 Shallots, properties of ii. 84 Shirts and coverings
of the neck reviewed i. 229 Shoes, on the proper size of -- on rendering the
leather water-proof -- of changing them from one foot to the other i. 237
Sirocco, influence of, in Sicilly i. 17 Skin the diseases of, become
fashionable -- the functions of, explained -- how it may be improved --
sweating, how it arises -- on the immediate covering of i. 33 Sleep, concise
history of -- consequences arising from too much or too little -- the proper
duration of -- in what situations more or less necessary causes of a disturbed
and uneasy i. 274 Smallpox, to be prevented by the Cow-pox i. 13 Smoking
tobacco, a bad custom ii. 175 -- how injurious to health ibid Snails,
properties of ii. 67 Sneezing, origin of, explained ii. 257 Snuff-taking,
injurious to the eyes, nerves, etc. ii. 292 SO^^MERING's doctrine of
temperaments -- hypothesis of the seat and operations of the soul i. 14.
Somnabulism, what i. 120 Sorrel, properties of ii. 77 Sorrow, definition and
consequences of ii. 221 SPALLANZANI's discovery quoted ii. 210 Specifics,
defined and commented upon i. 22 -- for prolonging life are absurdities i. 125
Spectacles, concave, when to be used -- unequal, when to be used -- how to
choose properly -- green, when useful -- when proper and how to fit -- when
improper and hurtful ii. 278 -- 302 Spices, properties of, in particular ii.
135 Spinach, properties of ii. 77 Spirits, ardent, their general properties ii.
117 Stays, laced, how hurtful i. 232 ST. GERMAIN's Tea for prolonging life,
what i. 121 Stockings, the proper substance for them examined i. 2^2 Story, a
singular one of a miller's wife ii. 211 Strawberries, properties of ii. 96
Sugar, properties of ii. 136 SWAMMERDAM's discovery quoted ii. 210 Sweating and
perspiring, how to be distinguished ii. 163 Swimming considered as a kind of
exercise i. 260 Swinging considered as a kind of exercise i. 261 Swiss, their
desire of returning home, a disease ii. 225
T.
Tamarinds, excellent properties of ii. 89 Tartar on the teeth, how it
originates i. 184 -- how to remove and prevent it i. 185 Taste, mechanism of,
explained ii. 265 Tea, if drunk hot, its effects on the skin -- properties and
effects of, in general -- Indian, substitutes for it i. 48 Temperaments,
peculiarities of, investigated i. 14 -- remarks on the variety of ibid
Temperature, cautions relative to the changes of i. 175 Terror, origin and
consequences of ii. 231 Theosophists, a short account of i. 103 THUN, COUNT, a
late fanatic at Leipzig i. 124 THUNBERG introduced Cajeput oil into Europe i.
186 THURNEISEN, a noted astrologer, etc. at Berlin i. 91 Thyme, properties of
ii. 141 Toes, how to prevent their offensive smell i. 225 Toothache, some of
the best remedies for i. 186 -- powders, some of them recommended i. 188 --
brushes and sponges objected against ibid Touch, the sense of, analyzed ii. 248
-- the mechanism of, explained ii. 249 Transfusion of the blood described i.
102 Turtles, properties of ii. 65
U.
Upas, the deadly, of Surinam i. 163
V.
Vanilla, properties of ii. 139 Veal, properties of ii. 41 Vegetables, divided
into five classes -- farinaceous, nature and properties of -- leguminous ii. 68
Venery, means of diminishing the desire of ii. 102 Venison, properties of ii.
49
W.
Walking, effects of, on the body ii. 146 Walnut, properties of ii. 98 Water,
of springs, wells, rivers and lakes -- of rain, snow, and hail -- dew, whether
wholesome -- if bad, how to purify and preserve ii. 103 Water, drank
habitually, preferable to other liquors ibid Weeping, nature and effects of, on
the body ii. 224 Wines, division of into five classes -- cons^^^uent parts of
-- general properties and effects of -- effects from a copious use of -- the
adulterations of and dangers attending -- Directions for detecting different
adulterations ii. 113 WITHERING's DR. ^imple cosmetic i. 46 Work, or exercise,
should not be too long continued ii. 307

