At A GENERAL COURT Held at Boston, in the Year (...)
IT is Ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that the following
Order shall be directed and sent by the Clerks of the several Shire Courts, to
the Constables of the Towns within their Shire, who are enjoined faithfully to
Execute the same; and if upon the Return made, it does appear that the Select
men are negligent in executing the Laws therein mentioned, the Court shall
proceed against them by Admonition, or Fine, as the merit of the case may
require and shall also dispose of single persons, stubborn Children or Servants
to the house of Correction, according to the intent of the Law, any Law,
Custom or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

To the Constable of (...)
WHereas the Law published by the Honored General Court Lib. 1. Page 67, Sect.
3. Do require all Towns from time to time, to dispose of all single persons and
in-mates within their Towns to service, or otherwise, and in page 16. tit.
Children and Youth. It is Required of the Select men, that they see that all
Children and Youth, under Family Government, be taught to Read perfectly the
English Tongue, have knowledge in the Capital Laws, and be taught some
Orthodox Catechism, and that they be brought up to some honest employment,
profitable to themselves and the Common wealth; and in case of neglect on the
part of the Family Governors, after Admonition given them, the said Select men
are required, with the help of two Magistrates, or next Cout of that Shire to
take such Children or Apprentices from them, and place them forth, with such as
will look more straightly to them.

The neglect whereof, as by sad experience from Court to Court abundantly
appears does occasion much sin and profaneness to increase among us, to the
dishonor of God, and the ensnaring of many Children and Servants, by the
dissolute lives and practices of such as do live from under Family Government,
and is a great discouragement to those Family Governors, who conscientiously
endeavor to bring up their Youth in all Christian nurture, as the Laws of God
and this Common wealth does require:

THese are therefore in His Majestyes Name, to require you to acquaint the
Select men of your Town, that the Court does expect and will require, that the
said Laws be accordingly attended, the prevalancy of the former neglect
notwithstanding: And you are also required to take a List of the Names of those
young persons within the Bounds of your Town, and all adjacent Farms, though
out of all Town Bounds, who do live from under Family Government, viz. do not
serve their Parents or Masters, as Children, Apprentices, hired Servants, or
Journey men ought to do, and usually did in our Native Country, being subject
to their Commands and Discipline; and the same you are to return to the next
Court to be held at (...) on the (...) day of (...) and hereof you are to make
a true Record under your hand, and not to fail.

By the Court Edward Rawson Secrat.


