LAMENTATIONS Upon the never enough bewailed Death of the Reverend Mr. John
Reiner, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Dover who was gathered to his Fathers
DECEMBER, 21. 1676.
WHen Heathen first assailed our peaceful Land
My Comfort was, ours is Immanuels Land.
When Robbers us impov'risht thought I then
We may be poorer and not worser men.
I hope't when our young men in the field fell down
God brake our Arm of flesh to bare his own.
When treacherous Foes did with success out-brave us
I said God meant to humble us, then save us.
But when that doleful word REINER is dead,
I heard, Lips quiver'd, Belly trembled,
My Spirits failed, Corruption seized my Bones,
My Face grew pale, my heart as cold as Stones:
Me thought I saw engraven on this Rod
Plain to be read that fatal Ichabod.
This single Death I count more wrath discovers
Then the removal of some hundred others.
Here Is Anger great, Displeasure boiled up,
And that is the Gall and Wormwood in our Cup.
By former blasts our Leaves and Boughs did fall,
This terrible gust has blown up Roots and all.
Some smarting Wounds we had received before,
This lays us welt'ring in our Blood and Gore,
Under the fifth Rib struck; you that pass by
Stand still and see, and sigh to see us dye.
Some of us saw of late our Houses burning,
Gods House lies waste now, Highway thither mourning,
Sanct'ary-doors shut up, a Famine not
of Bread, but Bread of Life's our threatened Lot.
How many has this Right'ous Man's Lips fed,
Who now must pine, 'cause no man breaks them Bread?
So much as Heaven exceeds the Earth, so far
As Souls than Bodies more excelling are,
So much is this more then our former woe,
These Iron Bands our Souls have piere't into.
What ever other ailes upon us were
Had God been pleased but to spare us here
Our Bread and Water of affliction would
Been less afflictive far, Oh that we could
Our Teacher see! but that sight of our eyes
Is gone, and He close in a corner lies.
Sure God a way for further Anger makes
When such a Man out of the way he takes.
In's latest Text too true a Prophet found, (...)
(Not one of Samuels Words fell to the (...)
(...) against us ar(...) (...)
A precious Soul he was, not old but sage,
Grave, wise and prudent far above his age,
Cheerful but serious, merry too but wise
(Sour Leven pleases not for Sacrifice)
His Courtesy obliged most and best,
His Innocence did stop the Mouths o'th'rest.
In Supplications mighty, fervent, bold
Like Jacob he with confidence took hold
Of God in Prayer, wrestling with him till
He wrestling got the name of Israel.
(Ah such a Moses we shall dearly miss
In The Mount; when Amalek a fighting is)
His Sermons were Experiences, first wrought
On his own Heart, then lived what he taught.
He blameless was, unless you blame him shall
Because he was well spoken of by all.
His Life desired, his Death bewailed you see
(Lord let our last end like the Righteous be)
A faithful Friend, plain-open-hearted he,
His words and heart in one did well agree.
Study what should or we would wish to be,
And say 'twas here, fear no Hyperbole.
Such pregnant young ones are but seldom found
Such pregnant young ones seldom stay when (...)
Not the Worlds field but Heavens Barn is (...)
For forward Souls, so early ripe in Grace.
Though green in years, yet he was gathered i(...) (...)
Like shock of Corn that fully rip'ned been.
My Brother John, I am distressed for thee,
Thou very lovely, pleasant were to me:
I thus bewail thee, but great sorrows will
Not drein themselves dry at a little quill.
Heart full, eyes full, too full themselves to vent
By words, a little taste is only meant.
I Will not attempt his worth, our loss to write,
Unless I had some A^^^l to indite,
To him that gav't the former's only known,
By sad effects the latter may be shown,
And best by him that is yet unborn be told,
But Lord while we thus weep our Foes grow (...)
We sigh, they sing, we mourn, Blasphem(...)
(...) God of Vengeance and then (...)
(...)

