Upon the DEATH of the Virtuous and Religious Mrs. Lydia Minot, (The wife of
Mr. John Minot of Dorchester;)
The Mother of Five Children, who Died in CHILDBED of the Sixth; and together
therewith was Interred January 27. 1667.
H Ere lies the Mother, and the Child, Interred in one;
Both waiting for the same Blessed Resurrection.
She first to it was Life; Then to it became a Grave,
Dead in her Womb: To fetch it thence, Death to her gave.
The Life and Death of both, his Sov'raignty Makes known,
Who gives and takes at will, and no Control can own.
The Fruit and Tree together here lies plucked, yet sure
That Root whence a Saint's All does spring, must firm endure,
Eternal Love, in which the Sap's the same, that feeds
Each Branch, be it (...) so it needs.
ANAGRAMS. LYDIA MINOT.
1. I di to Al myn'.
T O All mine Earthly Joys and Friends I die,
To whatsoever below the Sun does ly;
To All that shadow cast, and hastes to change;
To All that is pursued within the Range
Of Sublunary Vain's, tossed to and fro
Of sons of men that seek to th'Pit to go.
I die to Husband, Children, Parents dear:
Mine they were once, I theirs; ('twixt hope and fear
No unmixed Sweet I found) But now no more
These mine can be, as they were heretofore.
My Interest's translated up on High,
To things now mine, to which I never can die.
Then happy Death, my welcome I Will thee give,
'Cause now to God and Christ I ever live.
2. I di, not my Al.
I Die, it is true, but yet it is not my All,
That with this dust into the Grave does fall.
Life has my Better part; which soon did post
By Angels Conduct, to the Heavenly Host.
Life unto Life is gone, through th'Living way;
But that which Mortal was, makes yet some stay.
When Breath expired, my Life came flowing in;
My Soul revived, made free from th'death of Sin,
New Light, new Love, new Joy me now do fill,
New Robes I have, new Company, new Skill
To sing th'new Song: Sure this is Life indeed;
My All Is alive in dying thus to speed.
Naked o'th'Body, my Soul in Bliss is sheathed
My Garland of ne're-dying Flowers is wreathed.
Then naught but Dust is dead; at Life's Return
This also shall be quickened from its Urn:
My Death, my Grave, shall then for ever die,
And Life shall Triumph in the Victory.
3. Dai in my Lot.
L ight sown is for the Righteous; its full Crop
Y ields Glory's Harvest, Souls filled up to th'top
D ay in my Lot is now, still calm, still bright.
I n leaving your dark World, I left all Night;
A scended where, nor Sun, nor Moon, we crave:
M y God, and th'Lamb's the light that here we have.
I n his Light we see light, and light'ned stay;
N o light to that of th'Everlasting Day!
O pleasant Lines that thus are fallen to me!
T o make that Day my Lot which aye shall be.
W e'le wait (Blessed Saint) till this Day break, and th'shadows flee:
S o shall our wish be crowned, to have One Lot with thee.


