THE ANSWER Of the Subscribers to the DECLARATION Given in by the
Representitives, of the several Towns of the Colony of the Massachusetts, which
was Publicly Declared at the Townhouse.
Boston, May 24 1689.
UPon the Occasion of the Revolution of the Late Government under Sir Edmond
Andross, and at the Instance and repeated desires or Demand of most of the
Towns and Villages within the Massachusetts Colony, manifested in their
Respective Places, and sent to us by their Representatives. We who are of the
(...) Chosen and Sworn Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistants (according
to Charter) in the Year 1686. From the present necessity, and for satisfaction
of the people, do Consent to Accept the Care and Government of the people
according to the Rules of the Charter, for the Conservation of the Peace, and
Safety of the People, and putting forth such further Acts of Authority, Civil
and Military, as shall be necessary, according to any Emergency, until (...) by
Direction from England, there be an orderly Settlement of the Government.

Provided such Addition be made of fit persons to Assist us as has been
Desired: and farther Consent, that the Respective Towns, send their
Representatives for our Assistance, so far as they may be Concerned therein,
and as need shall Require, expecting that all Encouragement be given, by the
due and ready Obedience of the People: and that what has been acted by the
Council, for the Safety of the People, and Conservation of the Peace:
Respecting the management of the Public Affairs be allowed, and the present
Stewards be Re-imbursed in Convenient Time.

Voated, this was Accepted Cheerfully by the Representatives as Answer to their
Declarations, for the settling Civil Government within the Colony of the
Massachusetts in New England. As Attests, Ebenezar Prout, Clerk to the
Representatives,
Simon Bradstreet. Tho. Danforth. Nath. Saltonstall. James Russel. Peter
Tilton. Samuel Appleton. Robert Pike. John Richards. Elisha Cook. William
Johnson. John Hathorn. Isaac Addington. John Smith.


Upon the Publication hereof, it was Declared by the Gentlemen Subscribers,
that they do not intend an Assumption of Charter Government, nor would be so
understood.

Printed for Benj. Harris. 1689.


