Civitat. New York, April. 17. 1691. Annoque Reg. Regis and Reginae Gulielm.
and Mariae tertio.
By His Excellency the Governor and Council, and House of Representatives for
the Province of New York, viz.
Die Veneris April. 17. 1691.
UPON further Consideration of the Petition presented to this House by many of
the Freeholders and the Inhabitants within this City and Province,

Resolved,
Nemine Contradicente, That Jacob Leister, Samuel Edsall, and diverse others,
Aiding, Assisting, and Abetting him, in Dissolving the Convention that was
convened at the City of New York for the Preservation of the Peace, the
Execution of Justice, and the Security of this Province for Their Majesty's
Service, King William and Queen Mary, King and Queen of England, etc. was
Tumultuous, Illegal, and against Their Majesty's Right over this Their
Province, being a Dominion of Their Crown of England.

Resolved,
That the Imprisoning of Their Majesty's Protestant Subjects into Doleful and
Nauseous Prisons, and there keeping them by Force and Violence without any
Commitment, or the Assigment of any Legal Cause, was Arbitrary, Illegal, and
against the Peace and Dignity of Their Majesty's Crown of England; and also a
Violation of the Rights and Privileges of Their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting
within this Province.

Resolved,
That the proscribing, and the forcing Their Majesty's Protestant Subjects to
fly their Habitations, and forsake the Care of their Families, by which the
Strength of this Province was much weakened, was also Arbitrary, Illegal, and
Destructive to Their Majesty's Interest in this Province.

Resolved,
That the Depredations made by the French and Indians upon Schenectada, and
other Plantations in the County of Albany, by which many of Their Majesty's
Protestant Subjects were Slain, their Houses burned, and several carried into
Captivity, which severe Loss is only to be attributed to the Disorders and
Disturbances that were raised by those who had usurped a Power contrary to
Their Majesty's Authority and Right of Government over this Province.

Resolved,
That the seizing, and forceable taking away the Goods and Merchandises from the
Merchants and Persons inhabiting within this City and Province, was a Violation
of Their Majesty's Peace, and the Destruction of their Laws, and to the
manifest Ruin of many of Their Majesty's good Protestant Subjects within this
City and Province.

Resolved.
That the Levying and Raising of Money upon Their Majesty's Subjects without
Lawful Authority, is Arbitrary and Illegal, and against the Rights and
Privileges of Their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting within this Province.

Resolved,
That the Raising of Force, and keeping Their Majesty's Fort of New York against
Their Majesty's Officers and Soldiers lately arrived, was Rebellious, and in
Prejudice to Their Majesty's Right and Dominion of this Province.

Resolved,
That the denying the Surrender of Their Majesty's Fort to His Excellency after
his Arrival, and the Publication of Their Majesty's Commission to him, was
Rebellious, and against the Dignity and Authority of Their Majesty's Crown of
England.

Ordered,
For the Prevention of the like Mistakes and Disorders amongst Their Majesty's
Subjects in this Province for the time to come, that these Resolves be sent to
the Governor and Council, with the Desire of this House, that they would be
pleased to give the Concurrence of their Board thereunto.

Ordered,
That an Address be made to His Excellency, of the Resolutions of this House to
Support and Defend Their Majesty's Right and Dominion over this Their Province,
as it is now Established by Their Majesty's Authority, in the Administration of
His Excellency, with our Lives and Fortunes, against all Their Majesty's
Enemies.

By Order of the House of Representatives, Ja. Graham, Speaker.

At a Council held at Fort-William-Henry, the 18th of April, 1691.
UPON Reading this Day the Resolves of the House of Representatives, and their
Address to His Excellency thereupon presented to this Board, the Governor and
Council do accept the same, return them Thanks, Consent and Agree therein, and
desire the Concurrence of the Representatives that they may be forthwith
Published.

Per Order, David Jamifon, Cl. Concilii.


