An Account of the Proceedings at New York. 1689.
A DECLARATION Of the Inhabitants and Soldiers, belonging under the several
Companies of the Traind-Bands of New York.
WE Declare, that notwithstanding our several Pressures and Grievances these
many years under a wicked Arbitrary Power exercised by our Late Popish
Governor Dongan, and several of his wicked Creatures and Pentionaries,
especially now under Lieutenant Governor Nicholson: We were resolved to expect
with great patience, our Redemption from England, expecting to have part of
that blessed and glorious Deliverance procuted under God, by his Royal
Highness, William Henry, Prince of Orange; but when we challenged our Liberty,
Property, and the Laws, we were cajolled and terrifyed out of our reason, but
at last some being threatened by the said Lieutenant Governor Nicholson, and
with a Pistol presented against the Corporal, and said to the Lieutenant
Cuyler, that he would set the City on fire, for doing our Loyal Duty. We have
thought fit for our Conservation, and fear, to be liable to answer for the Life
of every Protestant that might have perished, and every House burnt or
destroyed, if we had remained longer in Security; and also seeing daily Arrive
from several parts Officers and Soldiers, who were entertained by the said
Lieutenant Governor Nicholson in the Fort, besides his several Soldiers, of
which there was a number of Papists, contrary to the Law of England; by which
New-comers, some of the Burgers being threatened of some Design against them in
few days, we thought Delay dangerous, so we have unanimously Resolved to live
no longer in such a danger, but to secure the Fort better, which we have under
God; with success without Resistance and bloodshed effected: And we Declare to
be entirely and openly opposite to Papists and their Religion, and therefore
expecting Orders from England, we shall Keep and Guard surely and faithfully
the said Fort in the behalf of the Power that now Governs in England, to
surrender to the Person of the Protestant Religion, that shall be Nominated, or
Sent by the Power abovesaid.

These are our most sincere Intententions, that we are glad to manifest, as
well to the Power abovesaid, that God has pleased to submit us to, as to other
persons, to avoid their Reproaches, that they could otherwise unjustly lay upon
the abovesaid Inhabitants.

New York, the last day of May, 1689.
The Testimony of Hendrick Cuyler.
H Endrick Cuyler, Lieutenant to the Company of Captain Abrah. de Peister, Aged
about Fifty Two Years: Deposes, That on the Thirtieth Day of May last past, he
Commanding half a Company of the Trained-bands, in the Fort of New York, gave
Order to one of his Corporals, to place a Sentinel at a certain Sally-port in
the said Fort; but that the said Corporal returning, Declared to him the
Deponent, that the Corporal of the Kings Soldiers in Pay in the said Fort
would not suffer him to place a Sentinel there: And that afterward, the
Lieutenant Governor, Captain Nicholson the then Commander in Chief, returning
to the Fort, sent for him the said Deponent to come to him in his Chamber in
the said Fort, which he the said Deponent did, and desired his Corporal
Hendrick Jacobs to go along with him, because he the said Corporal could speak
better English, and that as soon as the said Deponent was come up into the said
Chamber, he called for his said Corporal, who followed him to come into the
Chamber; which he did, and that as soon as the said Lieutenant Governor saw
the said Corporal, he rose up in a passion, and said to the said Corporal, You
Racal, what do you here, with that the said Corporal returned answer, that he
came to be Interpreter to him the said Deponent; whereupon he the said
Lieutenant Governor, took down a Pistol that hung by the wall, and threatened
to shoot him the said Corporal, and drove him out of the Room, and that
afterward the said Deponent remaining still in the said Room alone with the
said Lieutenant Governor, the said Lieutenant Governor told him the said
Deponent, that there were so many Rogues in the Town, that he was not sure of
his life, nor to walk the streets, and that he the said Lieutenant Governor
farther said, that before it should longer go after this manner, he would set
the Town on Fire, and further says not.

L. Henry Cuyler.
Sworn before me this 10 th. of June, 1689. in New York. Samuel Mulford,
Justice of Peace.

A PROCLAMATION.
Whereas our Intention tends only but to the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, and the Fort of the City, to the end that we may avoid and Prevent
the Rash Judgment of the World in so just a Design, we have thought fit to let
every Body know by this Public Proclamation, that till the safe Arrival of the
Ships that we expect every day from his Royal Highness the Prince of Orange,
with Orders for the Government of this Country, in the behalf of such Person as
His Royal Highness shall honor with the Charge of the Government; that as soon
as the Bearer of the said Orders shall let us see his power, then and without
any delay we shall Execute the said Orders punctually, declaring that we do
intend to submit and obey, not only the said Orders, but also the Bearer
thereof Committed for the Execution of the same. In witness hereof we have
Signed these Presents: June 3. 1689.

Signed by Six Captains and about 400 men.

BOSTON, Printed by Samuel Green. 1689.


