A SERMON Preached at The Election of the GOVERNOR, AT BOSTON IN New England,
May 19th 1669.

BY JOHN DAVENPORT.

Printed in the Year, 1670.

2 Samuel 23. 3. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me, He that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.
THese words may be considered two ways; 1. As holding forth a Prophecy of the
Kingdom of the Messiah, who is the Mediator, Surety, and Head of the Covenant
of Grace, for his People. In which Covenant David comforted himself whatever
decays should befall him, or his house in aftertimes. 2. As holding forth a
Rule for the choice and ordering of Rulers over men. According to this
consideration of the words, I purpose to handle them at this time, as best
suiting with the present occasion. And so the words hold forth a Rule of
Wisdom, whereunto the Lord teaches his People to apply their hearts, in
settling Civil Government according to God's Ordinance, so as they may expect
the presence and blessing of God, through Jesus Christ with them, and upon the
Commonwealth.

I shall sum up all in one Doctrinal Conclusion, which shall be this;

That it is the Ordinance of God, in reference to Civil Government in
Commonwealths, that some men orderly chosen should rule over other men: and in
reference to the qualification of Rulers, that they be just, ruling in the fear
of God.

Which is twofold. 1. Concerning the thing; that some men should rule over
others. 2. Concerning the qualification of the persons that are to rule; that
they be just, ruling in the fear of God. In this way of his Ordinance you see,
in my Text, both these are joined together, and noted as the Ordinance of God,
in the Trinity of Persons, God the Father said it, who is called the God of
Israel, by virtue of his gracious Covenant with them: and God the Son spoke it,
who is styled, the Rock of Israel, for that title is ascribed to Christ the
Mediator, and second Person: 1 Cor. 10.4.
For they drank of the Spiritual Rock that followed them, and the Rock was
Christ.

And they both spoke it to David by the third Person, the Holy Spirit, who
spoke by David, ver. 2. But I shall handle them severally.

1. The first, that in reference to Civil Order in the Commonweal, God has
ordained. That some men; orderly chosen, should rule over other men.

It is not my purpose to discourse of the several Forms of Government,
Monarchical, Aristocratical, and Democratical, nor to trouble you with the
diverse readings of the words, according to the Original, being content to
handle them as they are translated, and read in all your Bibles. From whence
the Doctrine is collected. And the first thing to be proved, is,

That Power of Civil Rule, by men orderly chosen, is Gods Ordinance.

For,

1. It is from the Light and Law of Nature, and the Law of Nature is God's Law.

2. The orderly ruling of men over men, in general, is from God, in its root,
though voluntary in the manner of coalescing: It being supposed that men be
combined in Family-Society, it is necessary that they be joined in a
Civil-Society; that union being made, the power of Civil-Government, and of
making Laws, follows naturally, though the manner of union, in a Political
Body, is voluntary. That we defend our selves from violence and wrong, is a
consequent of pure Nature: but that we do it by devolving our Power into the
hands of Civil Rulers, this seems to be rather positively moral, than natural.

3. Because this special Form of Civil Government of Commonweales, by men
orderly chosen, the Scripture ascribes unto God; and also Civil Government,
administered by Judges and Magistrates, as Christ spoke concerning Pilate, Joh.
19. 11. Jesus answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it
were given thee from above: and they are said to judge not for man, but for the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. hence they are called Gods, Psalm. 82. 6, 7. as appointed
by him, according to Christ's exposition of those words, Joh. 10. 35. If he
calls them Gods, unto whom the Word of God was given. See what the Wisdom of
God, which is Jesus Christ, says in Prove. 8. 15, 16. By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice.

Object. In 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. Civil Government by Civil Rulers is called a
humane Ordinance,(...).

Answ. Not to show that it is a mere humane invention, and no Ordinance of God:
for that is contradictory to Romans 13. 1. The Powers that be, are ordained of
God. ver. 2. and he that resists, resists the Ordinance of God. But it is
so called, 1. Because men are the subject recipient of this Power. So the
Syriack expresses it, Leculhum benai aushe, Obey all sons of men that are in
Authority. 2. Because the Choice hereunto is from God by men, Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
Bring you men of Wisdom, and of Understanding, and known among your Tribes, and
I will make them Rulers over you. 3. Because humane Concernments are the proper
objects of it. 1 Cor. 6. 4.
If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them up which
are least esteemed in the Churches. 4. Because the good of humane Societies is
the end of it. Therefore Durandus, in his Book, De Origin Juris, says well,
Civil Power, according to God's Institution is of God, and according to its
acquisition and use, it is of man. And whereas Peter extends this subjection to
two sorts of objects; to the King as Supreme, and to other Governors as sent by
him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well;
He therefore establishes the Ruling Power over men in all sorts of
Magistrates, who may be said to be sent by the King, either immediate (as some
are sent by express designation of the Person to such an office) or mediately,
by his Royal Charter given to Corporations, to choose from among themselves,
such as they account fit for such a trust. This is our case, who have by Patent
from the King, liberty and power to choose a Governor, and Deputy Governor,
and a limited Number of Assistants, invested with Magistratical Authority over
the People. My Text says, He that Rules over men, whether as Supreme or
Subordinate, as being sent by him upon the Peoples choice, must be just, ruling
in the fear of the Lord: Therefore we must distinguish between Family-Rulers,
and Commonwealth-Rulers: Family-Rulers, viz. Husbands and Parents, are the
Ordinance of God, without designation of the Persons thereunto, by Commission
from the King, or Election of the People: but it is not so with Rulers of the
Commonwealth: For the designation of these, or those, to be Civil Rulers,
leaving out others, is from God, by the Peoples free Choice, at least by the
Suffrages of the major part of them, wherein the rest must acquiesce: This
Power of Rulers of the Commonwealth is derived from the Peoples free Choice
(therefore it is said in the Doctrine, being orderly chosen) for the Power of
Government, is originally in the People, and that Three Ways:

1. Radically and vertually, as in the first Subject. For these Reasons. 1.
Because, if living Creatures have radically in them a power of
self-preservation, to defend themselves from violence and wrongs; men united in
Societies, being reasonable Creatures, must have that power in a more
reasonable and honorable way, to put this power into the hands of Civil Rulers;
nor does a Community, in choosing Civil Rulers, surrender so much their right
and liberty to their Rulers, as their Power, both Active to do, and Passive to
suffer unjust violence, so as the People shall not have Moral Power to do, or
avenge injuries, proprio mart, without punishment. 2. Because, if men United
in a Civil Society, may give Magistratical Power to such and such, leaving out
others; (then this Power was in this united Society; but it was not in them
formally (for then all should be Rulers) therefore this Power was in them only
virtually; for Nemo dat quod non habet, None can give that which they have not
either formally, or virtually in themselves.

2. Communicatively, By way of free Donation; the People giving to this or that
man, and not to others, the Ruling Power over them. For, 1. In regular actings
of the creature, God is the first Agent; there are not two several and distinct
actings, one of God, another of the People: but in one and the same action,
God, by the Peoples suffrages, makes such an one Governor, or Magistrate, and
not another. 2. God regulateth his People exercising their Power, in choosing
such and such, and not others, to Rule over them; therefore they have Power
from God's Ordinance to do it: for none can regulate a Non Ens, nor will God by
his Word regulate unwarrantable actions, as he does this. Exodus 18. 21.
Moreover, provide thou among all the People men of courage, fearing God, men
dealing truly, hating covetousness; and appoint such over them, to be Rulers
over thousands, Rulers over hundreds. etc. Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. And I charged your
Judges, that same time, saying, Hear the Controversies between your Brethren,
and judge righteously between every Man and his Brother, and the Stranger that
is with him; ye shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall hear
the small as well as the great; ye shall not fear the face of man, for the
judgment is Gods, etc.

3. Limitively; For the People so give Magistratical Power unto some, as that
still they retain in themselves these Three Acts, 1. That they may measure out
so much Civil Power, as God in his Word allows to them, and no more, nor
less. 2. That they may set bounds and banks to the exercise of that Power, so
as it may not be exuberant, above the Laws, and due Rights and Liberties of the
People. 3. That they give it out conditionally, upon this or that condition; so
as, if the condition be violated, they may resume their power of choosing
another.

Thus you see the first part of God's Ordinance, concerning Civil Rule and
Government in Commonwealths, by some orderly chosen hereunto. The second part
of God's Ordinance in this matter, follows, which is concerning the
qualifications of such Rulers over men.

2. That, as to the qualifications of Rulers over other men, it is God's
Ordinance, that they be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord.

1. They must be just. They are to be termed just, in the sense of this Text,
whose wills are sanctified and inclined by the Spirit of God, to perform to men
whatsoever is due to them according to the Rules of the Word. 1. The principal
and efficient hereof, is the sanctifying Spirit: therefore it is said, Ephesians. 5.
9.
the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness, and truth. 2.
The proper subject recipient of this gift of Grace, is the sanctified will,
into which it puts a bent and inclination unto righteousness. For the faculties
of the Soul are not by nature bent to that which is good, but contrary; Genesis 4.
But unto Cain and his Offering he had no regard, wherefore Cain was exceeding
wroth, and his countenance fell down. There may be light in the understanding,
showing what is good, but that which inclines to good must be in the will,
Romans 7 18, 22. For to will is present with me, but I find no means to perform
that which is good: for I delight in the Law of God concerning the inner-man.
He is truly just, who acts justly out of love to Righteousness; unjust men
may do just actions, upon other motives, as Absalom pretended, 2 Samuel 15. 4. O
that I were made Judge in the Land, that every man which has any matter of
Controversy might come to me, that I might do him right. And the unjust Judge
acted in Luke 18. 4, 5. Though I neither fear God, nor love man, yet because
this Widow troubles me, I will do her right. 3. The effect of it is the
performance of whatsoever is due to men. Hence Children doing their duties to
their Parents, is said to be just, Ephesians. 6. 1. Children obey your Parents in the
Lord, for this is right. And of Servants to their Masters is said to be just
and equal, Col. 4. 1. And all things due to men are performed by living
righteously, Tit. 2. 12. Teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. 4.
The Rule is, not man's corrupt Reasons and Affections, but the Scripture. Mich.
6. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require
of thee but to do Justice, and Judgment, and to walk humbly with thy God. 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness.

Thus Rulers over men must be just, 1. In their personal Conversation, else
that may be applied to them in Romans 2. 1, 3. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O
man, whosoever thou art that condemnest, for in that thou condemnest another
thou condemnest thy self, for thou that condemnest do the same things; and
think thou this, O man, that condemnest them which do such things, and do
the same things, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? 2. In their
administration of Justice and Judgment toward all men impartially, and
promised, Psalm. 72. 2. Then shall he judge thy People in righteousness, and thy
Poor with equity. This God required, Exodus 18. 21. Moreover, provide thou among
all the People, men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating
covetousness etc. And Job practiced, Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17.
Job. 29. 14. and Samuel pleaded, when the People would alter the frame of
Civil Government, 1 Samuel 12. 3. Behold, here I am, bear record of me, before
the Lord and before his Anointed; whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I
taken? or of whose hand have I received any bribe, to blind mine eyes
therewith, etc. to the 6th verse. Wherein he showed, 1. His Integrity, in that
he adjured them before the Lord. 2. His Modesty, 1, In that he speaks only
negatively, that he had done them no wrong, though he could have spoken
positively of much good they had received by his Government. 2, In that he
mentioned the lesser things, Oxen, and Asses, implying, that much less had he
wronged them in greater things.

2. They must Rule in the fear of God; Which contains in it all matters of
Religion contained in the first Table of the Law, whereof the filial,
reverential, obediential fear of God is the sum and foundation and
head-points; Eccles. 12. 13. Let us hear the end of all: Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. 1 Prove. 7. The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of knowledge: The fear of God is a sanctifying gift of
Grace, wrought by the Holy Ghost in the hearts of the Elect, proceeding from a
right knowledge of God, whence they exalt him above all, and are inclined to
the obedience of his revealed will in all things. 1. The fountain hereof is
sanctifying Grace; therefore I call it a gift of Grace; Heb. 12. 28.
Let us have grace, whereby we may so serve God, etc. 2. The principal
efficient hereof is the Holy Ghost, Isa. 11. 2. And the Spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him.3. The subject recipient of it is the heart of the Elect,
Jer. 32. 40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will
never turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. 4. The rise of it is from a right
knowledge of God, Jer. 22.15, 16. Did not thy Father eat, and drink, and
prosper, when he executed Judgment and Justice, when he judged the cause of the
afflicted, and Poor, he prospered: was not this because he knew me, says the
Lord. 1. In his Sovereignty, Jer. 10.6. 2. In his Immensity, Isa. 40. 15, etc.
Behold the Nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the dust of
the balance, etc. 3. In his Omnipresence, Psalm. 130. 7. Whither shall I go
from thy Spirit? or, whither shall I flee from thy presence? 4. In his Justice;
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Hos. 3. 5. 1 Samuel 12. 24. Heb. 10. 31.
5. The property of it is, 1. To exalt God above all, as the highest object of
our submission. Prove. 22. 4. By humility and the fear of the Lord, are riches,
honor, and life. 2. Affiance, Psalm. 147. 11. But the Lord delights in them
that fear him. 3. Love, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy
God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to serve him, and love
him.

And God is thus exalted, 1. Which his word prevails above all other words,
Isa. 66. 2. To him will I look, even to him that is of an humble and contrite
spirit, and trembles at my word. Acts 5. 28, 29. Did not we straightly command
you, that you should not teach in this Name? Then Peter and the Apostles
answered and said, We ought rather to obey God than Men. 2. When the
Omnipresence of God, causes us to approve our selves, and ways, to him. Genesis
17. 1. I am God alsufficient, walk before me, and be thou upright. Job 1. 5. He
sanctified his Sons, and offered burnt Offerings; for Job thought, It may be my
Sons have sinned, and blasphemed God in their hearts. Eccles. 8. 12. Though a
sinner do evil an hundred times, and God prolong his days, yet I know it shall
be well with them that fear the Lord, etc. 3. When the fear of God overcomes
all carnal fears. Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered
and said to the King, O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in
this matter; behold, the God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King: but if
not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy God, nor worship
the golden Image which thou have set up. Heb. 11. 27.

Hence follows, 1. A firm cleaving to God, in the obedience of Faith, Deuteronomy. 10.
20. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, thou shall serve him, and cleave to him.
Thus they must fear God in their persons.

2. In their Families, Psalm. 101. 2. I will do wisely in the perfect way till
thou come to me, I will walk in the uprightness of my heart, in the midst
of mine house. Josh. 24. 14.
Now therefore fear the Lord and serve him in uprightness and in truth, and put
away the Godds which your Fathers served beyond the stood, and in Egypt, and
serve ye the Lord.

3. They must exercise it in their Civil Government in the Commonwealth, Psalm.
2. 10, 11. Be wise now therefore ye Kings, be learned ye Judges of the Earth;
serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, Psalm. 27. 5.

III. These two, Justice and the fear of God, must be conjoined by Gods
Ordinance in Rulers over men, if they would have his presence, assistance, and
blessing with them in their public Administrations.

Reas. 1. From the order of the conjunction of Justice with the fear of God,
which is as of the Effect with the Cause; therefore the fear of God is first to
be exercised, and Justice is to be regulated by it. The Scripture plentifully
shows what a strong and powerful influence and efficacy, the true fear of God
exerteth in reference to all Moral duties among men; Moderation in Joseph, who
would not abuse his public Authority unto private revenge, giving this for his
Reason, I fear God, Genesis 50. 19, 20. Mercy with the Midwives preserving the
Male-Infants, Exodus 1. 21. Justice in Judges against Usury and Oppression, 2.
Chron. 6, 7.
Neh. 5. 9. and his different carriage from former Governors, in easing the
People of burdensome Charges, what he could, Psalm. 14. 15. against the
profaning of the Temple, and of the Sabbath, and neglect of the Priests and
Levites, and the Marriages of strange Wives, Chap. 13.

Reas. 2. From the great Trust committed to Civil Rulers,

1. To do Justice, according to Scripture-Rules, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7.

2. To see that others do justly toward one another; Romans 13. 4.
for he is the Minister of God for thy good, etc.

3. To protect men in every good way. 1 Timothy 2. 2. Pray for Kings, and for all
that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty.

4. To uphold the Churches walking in the order of the Gospel. Isa. 49. 23.
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing Mothers, etc.

5. Their End should be to exalt Christ in dispensing his Government in Textu,
Psalm. 2. 10, 11. and 72. 1. to 18.

Exhortation. 1. To the Freemen, Use.
who are entrusted by the Community, to choose Magistrates by their suffrages,
to follow the counsel of Jethro to Moses, Exodus 18. 21. Moreover, provide thou
among all the People, men of courage, men fearing God, having covetousness,
etc. as Moses did, verse. 25. which also Moses gave to the Tribes, Deuteronomy. 1. 13.

Motive. 1. The choice of good Rulers will be a sign and pledge of Gods
intendment to bless their Government and his People thereby. For when God gives
Rulers, whom he intends to make a blessing to his People, they shall be such as
are blessed of him in Christ for the good of that People, Isa. 1. 25, 26. Then
I will turn mine hand upon thee, and burn out thy dross, till it be pure, and
take away all thy tinn; and I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning. If this be neglected, the Government will not
be blessed, and the welfare of the People will be ruined. But if Christ bless
the Governors, he shall be our peace, whatsoever Enemies come against us, or
rise up among us: And he shall be our peace, when Asher shall come into our
Land, Mic. 5. 5, 6.
etc. he will raise seven Shepherds, and eight principal Men, that shall be our
Relief. But you have no Instance in Scripture, that ever God was with a People
to bless them, in a course of special Providence, when they that feared not
God, were their Rulers, by their own consent and choice: Let Christ therefore
have the pre-eminence in all things, and in your choice of Rulers for the
Commonwealth; and in order thereunto, see that they whom you choose to be
Rulers, be men interressed personally in Christ: For when they that are called
to Ruling Power, cease to exert it in subserviency to the Kingdom of Christ,
there will be an end of New-England's Glory, and Happiness, and Safety.

Mot. 2. You must submit to their Authority, and perform all duties to them,
whom you have chosen to be your Rulers, whether they be good or bad, by virtue
of the Relation between them and you; So Wives to their Husbands, though
Unbelievers, 1 Cor. 7. 13. And Servants to their Masters though froward, 1 Pet.
2. 18. Therefore as this should Caution Women and Youngmen to beware of choosing
bad Husbands, and Masters; so, and much more, it should Caution you in your
choosing public Rulers, if you mind the public or private good of yours.

Mot. 3. If men unjust, and that fear not God, be chosen Rulers of the
Commonwealth, all the People are in danger of being punished by the wrath of
God for the sins of their Rulers; Bad men being in public place, will give bad
counsel to corrupt Religion, Ezekiel. 11. 1, 2. Jaazaniah and Palatiah, Princes of
the People, are said to be the men that imagine mischief, and devise wicked
counsel in the City; the end will be ruin. See when the men of Shechem chose a
bramble, Abimelech, to be their Ruler, see Judge. 9. 2, 14, 15, 23, 52, 53. The
sins of Jeroboam, and of those that succeeded him, their corrupting Religion,
ruined not only their own Families, but also all Israel, which was threatened, 1
King. 14. 15. For the Lord shall smite Israel as when a Reed is shaken in the
Water, and he shall weed Israel out of this good Land, which he gave to their
Fathers, and shall scatter them beyond the River, because they have made
groves, provoking the Lord to anger. The same befell Judah for the sins of
Manasseh, Jer. 15. 4. And for the sins of other Rulers, by corrupting Religion,
and unrighteous dealings, whereof the Prophets complained.

Exhort. 2. To those, who by the consent of the Freemen, Use.
are according to Gods Ordinance, to be invested with Magistratical Power and
Authority, to observe Moses his Charge to the Judges, Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. And I
charged your Judges that same time, saying, Hear the Controversies between your
Brethren, and judge righteously, etc. and Jehoshaphats. 2 Chronicles. 19. 9, 10. Be
wise therefore ye Rulers, and consider that your Life, and all our Good, your
Prosperity and Protection lies, not in this or that Politic design, or
whatsoever else under the Sun, but alone in Gods gracious Presence with you,
Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Oh! provoke him not to depart from us, but seek the continuance
of his presence with us, and fix your thoughts on the things which tend to
assure Gods special providential Presence with us. The things incumbent on you,
in order hereunto, are such as respect either Persons or Things; my desire is
to speak in love to the Truth and Peace.

1. For Persons: Provide for the Protection, Encouragement, and Liberty of all
those whom God owneth to be his People, that fear him; take care that they be
not trodden under foot, nor swallowed up, nor exposed to the rage and contempt
of men; only for those that walk orderly, and peaceably, not offensively to one
or other, or to the Church of God; though they differ from others in their
Apprehensions and Persuasions, though misguided; yet are willing to receive
Light in Gods way and time: These are to God as the Apple of his Eye, and let
their Safety be also to you. Be not ready to receive ill reports against them.
Jer. 20. 10. Report say they, and we will report, etc. Psalm. 15. 3. nor
receives a false report against his neighbor, 1 Timothy 1. 19.

2. For Things: They are either the things of God, or the things of Men: 1. For
the things of God; the public Profession and Practice of Religion, which is in
great danger by two extremes; misguided Zeal, and Formallity: Let the Honorable
Court therefore approve themselves to Rule in the fear of God, by their
personal knowing, embracing, and obeying the Gospel of Christ; and by their
protecting the Churches that are orderly gathered, and walk according to
Gospel-Rules, from the violence and injuries of their opposers, remembering that
dreadful threatening, Isa. 60. 12. For the Nation and the Kingdom, that will not
serve thee, shall perish, etc.

I shall add a few Caveats. 1. Take heed of a various management of matters of
Religion, to the advantage of the present postures and condition of your Civil
Affairs. The things of Christ should be as Joseph's Sheaf, to which all other
should bow. When they are made to cringe and bend to men's Policies, they are no
longer the things of Christ: All Gods Truths are Eternal and Unchangeable by
men: Give them all at once the sovereignty of your Souls, and have not the
least thought of making them bend to serve your worldly ends, but cleave to the
Truth of the Precepts, and live by the Truth of the Promises; for performance
whereof, the God of Truth has engaged his Alsufficiency. 2. Take heed and
beware that you deprive not any Instituted Christian Church, walking according
to Gospel Rules, of the Power and Privileges which Christ has purchased for
them by his precious blood, and given unto them, Mat. 16. 19. God calls Civil
Rulers to protect and preserve such Churches; if he has given them liberty,
and you subject them to bondage; if he has given them power in their proper
concernments within themselves, and you countenance and uphold others to
exercise power over the Churches, in such things to whom Christ never gave such
puwer; you will have a sad reckoning* Remember Jeptah's Argument, against the
encroachments of the Amonites upon the Rights of Israel, Judge. 11. 14. 3. Avoid
carefully imposing upon the Churches any thing that Christ has not put upon
them, viz. 1. Men's Opinions, especially when they are such as prevailed in an
hour of Temptation, though consented to by the major part of a Topical Synod,
yet disliked by some of themselves, and by other godly Ministers, both in this
Country, and in other Countries, so that they are things Controverted and
under Dispute. Impose not such things upon Churches, lest Contentions arise in
the Churches about Opinons, which are no part of the Faith once given to the
Saints, for which we are called to contend earnestly, Jude 3. 2. A standing
Council, for which we find no warrant in the New Testament, nor Example in the
Primitive Churches, nor in Succeeding Ages, for some hundred years after
Christ. Nor is it safe for the Churches, which are thereby subjected under an
undue Power out of the Church, which under a pretense -- of helping the Church
with their Light, bereave them of their Power; in re propria, binding them to
rest in their Decisions, and to practice accordingly. As for occasional
Councils, two extremes must be avoided. 1. A total rejecting Councils: For,
when the need of any Church requires such helps, through want of Light, or of
consent within it self, in weighty and difficult questions, it is their
Liberty, and Prudence, and Duty, voluntarily to seek help from others chosen by
that Church, being approved for their Orthodoxy, and Faithfulness to Christ,
and to his Cause, and Interest; And when their Counsel i^ given, it is the Duty
of the said Church to try it by the Scripture; and if it be found to agree with
the Oracles of God, to acquiesce in it, else not; according to that Rule, 1
These. 5. 21. 2. A preferring the Judgment of a Council when it suits? with men's
own minds, wills, and ends, above any Light for the contrary, though it he held
forth from the Word of God, so as to rest in what the Council says, without
considering whether it be according to the holy Mind and Will of God, declared
in the Scriptures. This is an abuse of Councils, which has sharpened the Pens
of Godly Learned men in their Writings against it, not only against Popish
Councils, which bind People to receive their Superstitious Devices and
Impositions, as matters of Faith; but against other Councils, which have too
peremptorily and absolutely obtruded their own Determinations without
Scripture Proof. Hence Luther affirmed of the first general Council at Nice
(which was accounted the best) That he understood not that the Holy Ghost speak
in it; and that the Canons and Articles thereof, were but Hay, and Straw, and
Stubble. And Beza (in his Preface to the New Testament) says, That such was
the folly, ignorance, and ambition of many Bishops, in the best times, that you
would have supposed the Devil to have been President in their Assemblies. And,
long before these, Nazianzen complained, That he never saw good end of any, and
resolved never to come at them more; yet he lived under the good Emperor
Theodosius. When Councils seek to please themselves and other men, more then to
serve Christ, their Conclusions will be answerable to their scope. Hence the
German Interim was agreed upon by sundry Ministers to please the Emperor, but
other Orthodox Ministers dissented, and wrote against it. The Synod in England,
under the Prelacy, published Superstitious Ceremonies; against which many godly
learned Ministers wrote, and were silenced; who are, to this day, called, The
good Old Nonconformists: The late Reverend Teacher, to reestablish a Church,
published a Catechism for the Children of it, wherein he taught them concerning
the Power of Councils; that the Question is carried to the Council, but the
Cause still remains in and with the Church. This shall suffice, for the
present, to have been spoken to the Care that the Honorable Court is to
Exercise about the things of God. The next things to be spoken to briefly, are
the things of men; they are righteous Administrations of Justice in matters of
this Life. These wheels also you are to set going. 1. If upon revisal of your
Body of Laws any one be found to be unjust and oppressing, let it be expunged,
and altered; And for those that are good, provide for good execution. 2. Let
the sovereign Dictates of Nature, be constantly ^^ended by you, which Christ
notes to be the sum of all Moral Duties, in the two Tables, Quod tibi furi non
vis, alteri ne faeceris, Mat. 7. 12. Would you enjoy peace and liberty in
Professing and Practicing according to the Rules of the Word, as you are
persuaded; let others also that fear God, and walk orderly and justly, and
peaceably with them, enjoy the like Peace and Civil Liberties, lest other
Rulers be encouraged by your Example, to measure to us again, with what measure
we mete unto others, they accounting, as we do them. This is threatened in Mat.
7. 2. I shall conclude with a brief reminding you of the first beginning of
this Colony of the Massachusetts, which I have the better advantage, and more
special engagement to do; being one of them, by whom the Patent, which you
enjoy, was procured; and to whom it was committed, by King Charles the first,
and His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. My Name was not mentioned in
the Patent, because I desired it might be left out, lest the then Bishop of
London, who was of the Privy Council, should have an ill eye upon me for my
appearing so far in that work, whereunto he was opposite: but in expenses for
any Helps to promove the Work, in the first beginnings of it, I bore my part,
merely for the service of Christ, and for the help of his People, I not knowing
that ever I should remove unto these parts, by virtue of that Patent. When it
was obtained, and committed to us, we were made a Corporation for New England,
and accordingly acted, in sundry Meetings, and chose Mr Endicot to be the first
Governor, and sent him hither; and for his encouragement, we gave him an House
at Salem, which was built for the use of the Corporation in London; and he
carried with him two Ministers. The next year the Corporation in London,
understanding that honorable Mr Winthrope, inclined to remove himself and
family to New England chose him to be Governor, who came to Boston, and with
him we sent the Patent, to prevent future inconveniences; and God blessed it
to that end, as it appeared soon afterward. In the first General Court, after
his Arrival, the Civil Order was settled in a Select Company of Free Planters,
such as were accounted most fit to manage public Trust, to Christ's Ends; these
choose a Governor, and Deputy Governor, and a limited number of Assistants,
invested with Magistratical Power, and Deputies from the respective
Plantations, according to the Patent, which gave liberty to order Civil
Affairs, as they found best. Churches also were gathered in a Congregational
way, and walked therein, according to the Rules of the Gospel, with much peace
and consent among themselves, which that now blessed Servant of Christ, Mr John
Cotton, the first Teacher to this Church, so approved, that he wrote unto me,
being then in Holland, to encourage my coming to New England, that the Order of
the Churches and of the Commonwealth was so settled, by common Consent; that it
brought to his mind, the New Heaven and New Earth, wherein dwells
Righteousness, advising me to come hither free from Engagements to others. But
Satan, in a short time, stirred up Strifes and Dissentions, to the great
disturbance of the Churches and of the Country, which God at last mercifully
quieted; not has the Gospel come unto you empty handed, out has brought unto
you in its right hand, Spiritual Good Things, through Jesus Christ, with
Eternal Salvation to those that believe in him; And in its less hand, Riches,
and Honor, with Protection and Deliverances from Enemies of all sorts. Now
therefore take heed and beware, that the Lord may not have just cause to
complain of us, as he did of those in Jer. 2. 21. and Rev. 2. 4. lest you lose
by Gods punishing Justice, what you received from his free Mercy, lest he
remove the golden Candle-sticks, and the burning and shining Lights in them, as
he has already done many eminent Lights; and woe to them from whom the Gospel
is removed, for their abusing it, and the Messengers of it. Would you yet fee
good days, and enjoy good things as in times past? They the counsel that the
Spirit gave to the Church at Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5. And to the Angel of the Church
in Sardis, Rev. 3. 2, 3. And take the course that Jehoshaphat took, and was
blessed therein, and all Judah with him. 2 Chronicles. 17. 3. The Lord was with
Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his Father David: And see
that your fruitfulness in good, answers the cost and pains that God has been
at with you in his Vineyard, lest the Lord be provoked to deal with us, as he
did with his ancient Vineyard, Isa. 5. from the first to the eight verse.

FINIS.

