A SHORT CATECHISM FAMILIARLY TEACHING THE KNOWLEDGE Of GOD, and of our SELVES.

First Composed, and improved, for the private instruction of the younger sort
in Cambridg in New England.

By THOMAS SHEPARD late faithful Pastor of the Church of Christ there

And now published at the earnest desire of sundry well-affected persons.

TOGETHER With the Doctrine of Conviction of SIN, and RIGHTEOUSNESS, and
JUDGMENT. Delivered in Diverse Sermons upon John 16.8, 9, 10, 11. and thence
Summarily drawn into Quest: and Answers by the same AUTHOR.

2 Pet: 1.15 Moreover I will endeavor that you may be able after my decease to
have these things always in remembrance.

Printed by Samuel Green at CAMBRIDG in New England 1654.

A CATECHISM.
WHat knowledge is necessary toward the attainment of eternal Life?

A. 1 The knowledge of God Joh 17.3 2 The knowledge of our selves Ps: 9.20

Quest. What are you to know concerning God.

Answ. 2 Things. 1 That he is. Heb: 11.6. 2 What he is. Isay: 1.3.


Quest. How may it be proved that there is a God.

Answ. 1 From the voice of God in the scriptures, confirmed with so many
visible signs, and wonders from heaven.

2 From the works of God, the heavens and earth have a being, which could not
possibly make themselves, therefore there is a God which made them. Psalm: 19.1.
Romans 1 20.

3 From the daily providence of God wherein we may sensibly perceive such
wisdom, power goodness put forth as cannot be but from a God. Psalm. 145.10.

4 From time, for we see that months are before years, and weeks before
months, and days before weeks, and hours before days, and one hour before
many hours, and a minute of time before an hour, and therefore there must
necessarily be some minute of time wherein the world began, and therefore a God
who gave it this beginning.

5 From the voice of conscience in all men when it is awakened, accusing men of
sin, arraigning them sometime before God for sin.

6 Because there is a Devil, as is evident from the familiarity he has with
witches, and unnatural and horrid temptations some men have, and therefore there
is a God from whom those Spirits had their being and by whom they are
restrained.

Quest. What is God therefore?

Answ. He is far more glorious and wonderful then we can conceive of him: Nehe
9.5. 1 Timothy: 6.16 yet he has revealed himself to us in 5 things, and therefore
we are to know what he is in these 5 things 1 What his Essence is: 2 What his
Persons are: 3 What his Thoughts be: 4 What his Works are: 5 What his Word is:


Quest. What are you to know concerning the Essence or Being of God?

Answ: These things following, which are called his Attributes, or Propertyes:
whereby his Being is made known and distinguished from all other things

Quest. What is therefore the Being of God appearing in his Attributes?

Answ. 1 It is the first Being, whereby he is of himself, and all other things
of him, and for him. Romans 11.35 36. Isay. 44.6.

2 It is one only Being, whereby there is no God beside him, and none like to
him. Isay. 44.3. Deuteronomy. 33.26.

3 It is an All sufficient Being, whereby he alone is sufficient to satisfy man's
heart, and make him happy therein. Genesis 17.1.

4 It is a Spiritual Being, whereby he is without any created form, or bodily
shape, and therefore is Invisible. John 4.24. 1 Timothy 1.17.

5 It is a Living Being, whereby he Living of himself, gives life and motion,
to all other things and is able to quicken the dead. John 5.26.

6 It is an Infinite Being, whereby he having no Limits of Being, is present in
every place, yet included in no place. 2 Chronicles. 2.5, 6. Psa. 139 7, 8. Isay 6.3.

7 It is an Eternal Being, whereby he remains the same from Everlasting, to
Everlasting. 1 Timothy 1.17. Psalm. 90.2.

8 It is endued with Understanding, whereby he sees and knows all things, past,
present, and to come, at once in himself. Heb. 4.13.

9 It is endued with Will, whereby he purposes to bring to pass all things for
himself, according to his good pleasure. Ephe. 1.11. Math. 11.25. Proverbs
16.4.

10 It is an Allmighty Being, whereby he is able to do all things, and by which
all things are. Math. 3.9. 2 Chronicles. 20.6.

11 It is a most Holy Being, whereby he hates the least sin, and the best
creature for the least sin. Hab. 1.13. Psalm. 5.5. 2 Pet. 2.4.

12 It is a most Faithful and True Being, whereby speaks of things as they are,
and shall be. Titus 1 2.

13 It is a most Blessed and Good Being whereby he is ready to communicate
Blessedness, and Goodness unto others, in the enjoyment of himself and does
communicate all that good and sweetness that is in any creature there-unto.
Psalm. 119.68. Psa. 16.2, 6.

14 It is a most Just Being, whereby he will render unto all men according to
their works, and will not clear the guilty and impenitent sinners Romans 2.6.

15 It is a most Patient, and Long-suffering Being, whereby he is slow to pour
out all his anger. Psa. 78.38. Romans 2.4.

16 It is a most Merciful Being, whereby he is apt to pity the creature in
misery. Judge. 10.16. Isai 63.9.

17 It is a most Gracious Being, whereby he is ready to forgive sin freely unto
penitent sinners Joel. 2.13.

18 It is a most Pure and Simple Being whereby what ever is in himself, is
himself, or what ever is in God is God. Exodus 3.14.

Qu. What use are you to make of all these things.

Ans. 1 To see him and to give glory to him. Romans 1.21.

2 To seek the love and favor of him, and to cleave to him. Heb. 11.6.

3 To be thankful to him that ever he should reveal himself thus to us. Romans
1.21.

Quest* What are you to know concerning the Second thing which is to be known
of God. viz: his Persons.

A. These 6 things 1 Their Number. 2 Their Essence or Nature. 3 Their
Distinction. 4 Their Glory. 5 Their Cooperation. 6 The Manifestatio^ of them to
man


Quest. What are you to know concerning the First viz their Number.

A. That they are 3 in Number God the Father Mat. 28.19 God the Son God the
Holy Ghost Mat 3.16


Quest. What are you to know concerning the Second viz their Nature or Essence.

Answ. 1 That they are not three Gods but one God in respect of their Divine
Essence or Nature. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Isa. 54.5.1. John 5.7.9. Joh. 1.1, 2. Acts 5.3 9.

2 That whatsoever therefore belongs to the Essence of God, belongs to the three
Persons, as to be Eternal Almighty, Infinite etc:

Quest What are you to understand concerning the Third thing, viz: their
Distinction.

Answ. 1 That they are Distinguished, but not Divided one from another, and
therefore the Spirit is called another Comforter John. 14.16 and the Father
another Witness. John. 5.32. and yet both to be with God and in God. John.
1.1.2. 1. Cor. 2.11. Pro. 8.30.

2 That they are Distinguished by their Relative and Incommunicable Propertyes,
or diverse manner of Subsisting, for it is Proper to the Father to beget the
Son, and to the Son to be begotten of the Father, and to the Holy Ghost to
proceed from both. Ioh. 1^8. Ioh. 15^26. Gal: 4.6.

3 That they therefore are not merely distinct Names, or distinct Appearances,
or distinct Opperations, but distinct Persons, and therefore such Actions as are
proper only to Persons, are Attributed to them, and hence the Son is said to
be Incarnate, to Redeem his people, and to be an Advocate with the Father.
John. 1.14 1. Ioh. 2 1. the Holy Ghost also to be the Comforter, to lead into
all truth, to raise from the dead, and to give Spiritual gifts. John. 14.16
17. Romans 8.11. 1 Cor: 12.4.

Quest. What are you to know concerning the (...) thing, viz: their Glory.

Answ 1 That they are all equal in glory one to another, and therefore are to
be equally and a like worshipped, and gloryfied of all men. John. 17 5. Rev.
1.4, 5, 6. 2 Cor: 13, 14.

2 That although the Son was inferior to the Father by voluntary humiliation;
yet in regard of his Person he was equal to him. Phil. 2.6, 7.

3 That although one Person be set before an other, yet this is not in respect
of any eminency of glory one above another, but in respect of the order of
subsisting one in another, and in the same glory.

Quest. What are you to know concerning the fifth thing viz. their Cooperation
or working together.

Answ 1 That all the three Persons do concur together to work every work which
is done out of themselves throughout all the world. Genesis 1.26. John. 5.17, 18,
19. John. 1.2, 3. Romans 11.36.

2 That therefore when any work is Attributed to any one of the three Persons,
Father, Son, or the Holy Ghost, it is not because any Person is excluded from
the work, but because the manner of the working of one Person appears chiefly
in that work, and hence Election and Creation, is given to the Father,
Redemption to the Son, Sanctification to the Holy Ghost.

3 That their manner of working is according to their order of subsisting,
hence the Father being of himself, works from himself by the Son and the
Spirit, the Son from the Father by the Spirit, the Holy Ghost from them both.

Quest What are you to know concerning the sixth thing viz: the manifestation of
them to man?

Answ 1 that allthough nothing is more difficult to conceive, then how there
should be three Persons in one God, yet there is nothing more clear in all the
scriptures then that it is so.

2 That therefore we are to adore this mystery and to believe that it is so, and
not too curiously to dispute and question how it can be so.

3 That the chief end why God has revealed this mystery to man, is not only
that we might see and worship all the three Persons in all things but that we
might behold and be satisfied with the love and mercy of all the three in the
salvation of man, viz, with the free Grace, and Election of the Father, the
precious blood of the Son, endless consolations of the Holy Ghost, and so
enter into an eternal fellowship and communion with all three. 1. John. 1.3.
Gall. 4.4, 5, 6.

4 that all men might fear to sin, especially against the Gospel, and the
Spirit of God which accompanyes it, lest they despise the love of the Father,
the blood of the Son, and Comforts of (...) the Holy Ghost, which are offered
therein. (...) (...).28, 29. Math: 12.3^.

Quest What are you to know concerning the (...) thing which is to be known of
God, viz: his Thoughts Decrees or Purposes.

Answ They are either 1 General concerning all things, 2 Special concerning
all men,

Quest What are you to know concerning the Thoughts of God which generally
concern all things.

Answ 1 That there is nothing done in time, but he thought and purposed to do
it before all time. Acts 15.18. 1 Cor. 2.7. Dan. 4.35.

2 That all his thoughts and decrees are with great wisdom and Counsel. Ephe.
1.11. Job 9.10, 11, 12. Romans 11.33, 34, 35, 36.

3 That they are all for his own Infinite glory. Pro. 16.4. Isai. 25.1.

4 That they are Powerful, and Unchangable Psa. 135.6. Isa. 46.10. and the
first cause of all things. Rev. 4.11.

Quest What are the thoughts of God in special concerning all men.

Answ 1 He has thought and purposed to make some men whose number is but small
vessels of mercy which is called Election. Ephe. 1.4. Romans 9.23. Mat. 22.14.
Luke. 12.32. and 13.24

2 He has thought and purposed to pass by the greatest part of men, and to
make them vessels of wrath which is called Reprobation. Romans 9.22, 27

Quest How does God execute or bring to pass his Eternal Purpose or Thoughts
of Election.

Answ 1 The Lord Jesus is sent to lay down his precious blood for them. 1 Pet.
1.19, 20.

2 The gospel is sent to them to reveal the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 2.7.

3 The spirit is sent to open their eyes, to see their sin, and misery without
the Lord Jesus. Ioh. 16.7.9.

4 The Lord then softens and breaks and humbles their hearts in sense of sin
and misery. Mat. 11.27, 28. Ezekiel. 36.26.

5 The Lord then irresistebly reveals Christ, calls, and draws them, and so
makes them come to the Lord Jesus. Romans 8.30 Romans 9.23.24. John. 6.37. John.
10.14. Mat: 11.25.

6 The Lord then so sanctifiyes them as that they are made better, or drawn
nearer and nearer to God by all things till they come to glory. 2 These 2.13,
14. Romans 8.28.

Quest How does God execute or bring to pass his Eternal Thoughts or Purpose
of Reprobation.

Answ: 1 The Lord Jesus is not sent either to die, or pray for them. John. 179.

2 Hence the gospel is either not sent at all to them, or if it be, it is hid
from them. 2 Cor: 4.3, 4. Pro: 29 18.

3 Their minds are blinded from seeing their sin, and misery, or Christ the
Remedy. Romans 11.7, 8.

4 Their hearts are hardened. Rom: 9 18.

5 They are shut up under unbelief, so to despise Christ, that either they
dare not come, or cannot come, or will not come, or do not come effectually to
the Lord Jesus. John 12.40. john 10.26. john 6.65, 66. Acts 13.41, 46.

6 they are so left under the power of their sins, as to grow worse and worse
and further off from God by all things which befall them, till Eternal wrath
light upon them. To: 9.22. 2 Timothy: 3.13. To: 11 9.

Quest What are you to know concerning the fourth thing which is to be known of
God, viz: his works.

Answ That all the works of God are either works of Creation or of Providence.

Quest What is the work of Creation?

Answ Whereby God made all things in the world out of nothing, by his word
exceeding good in six days. Genesis 1.

Quest What is the first thing God made and chiefly to be observed in the first
day?

Answ the creation of the third heavens: together with the Angels the
inhabitants thereof Genesis 1.^. Psa. 148.1.2.

Quest What are you to know concerning the third heaven, and angels?

Answ 1 That the third heaven is a most glorious place above the starry heaven,
where the face of God is seen, Christ's humane nature is ascended, to which the
souls of just men go when they depart this world, wherein their bodies and
souls shall enjoy their gloryfied estate, wherein also they are to have their
conversation in this world. Psa: 16.11. Acts. 1.11. Acts. 3.21. Phil. 1.23. 2.
Cor: 5.1. John. 14.2.3. Mat. 25.34. Phil: 3*20. Heb: 11.10.

2 that the Angels were by creation holy, blessed and glorious spirits,
standing before god, glorifying of God, Heb. 1.14. Job 18.7. Psa: 103.20.

3 that the number of these angels was exceeding great, and innumerable. Heb:
12.22. Dan: 7.10.

4 that an exceeding great number of these fell from God by sin, which are
therefore called devils, 2. Pet: 2.4. Mark. 5.9. Mat: 13.4. with 1^. Jude. 6.

5 that the place of the blessed estate of the elect angels which stand, is
chiefly the third heavens where they see God, yet so as that they minister also
unto God in the government of the world. Mat: 18.10. Psa* 103.20.21.

6 that the place of the cursed estate of the lapsed angels or devils, is
especially the earth and the air where sinful man dwells. Ephesians: 2.2. Job. 1 7.
1. Pet. 5.8.

7 that the office of the good angels is manifold especially to keep the elect
while they live, and to translate them to heaven when they die. Heb: 1.14 Psa:
34.7. Luke. 16 ^2.

8 that the work of the devils or bad angels is manifold, especialy to hold the
wicked in bondage while they live, to take away their souls at their death, and
to tempt and to try the godly in this world. Act: ^6.18. Ephesians: 2.2. Heb. 2.14.
Ephe: 6.12.

Quest. What is the best thing god made and which is most observable on the
(...) and ^^st day.

Answ The Creation of Man, the chief end of all Gods workmanship. Genesis 1.26.
Psalm: ^.

Quest What are you chiefly to take notice of in the Creation of man;

Answ 1 That man was Created of two parts body and soul. Genesis 2.7.

2 that he was made in Gods image. Gen: 1.26.

3 that his soul is a spirit endued with two noble facultyes viz
Understanding. 1, Cor: 2.11. and Will. John. 1.13.


4 That his soul is Immortal and lives after death. Eccle: 12.7.

Quest How do you prove the Immortality of the soul?

Answ 1 Because it is able to understand what things are past present and to
come throughout all the world;

2 Because it has Immortal principles engraven on it as that god is and is
worthy to be for ever worshipped, that there is an account to be given to god
one day of all things don here.

3 Because it knows, and wills, and feeds upon Immortal, and Eternal things,
truth feeds it, and the knowledge of God feeds it.

4 Because it can act without the body, and then act best when it is most freed
of the body, when the body is in pain it can rejoice, and contrarily when a man
is most retired from the world he can then see and know things best.

Quest. What are you to know concerning the second work of God, viz: his
Providence?

Answ 1 that by his Providence he upholds, and governs all things in the world.
Heb: ^ 3. Psalm: 29.10.

2 that this Providence of God extends it self to the smallest as well as to
the greatest matters that are done in the world. Mat: 6.26.27 Amos. 3.6.

3 That though he be no cause of sin, yet he orders all the sins of men for
his own glory. Pro: 16.4. Gen: 50.20*

4 That though his ordnary Providence is by means yet he puts forth sometimes
extreordinary Providence, above and without means.

Quest What are you to know concerning the fifth thing which is to be known
concerning god viz his word

Answ 1 that god is pleased to reveal himself to man (so far as is needful
for man to know of him) by his word. Deuteronomy: 30 14. Rom: 10.8.

2 That this Word is now written in the Sriptures of the Old and New Testament
Hoseae 8.12. John 20.31. Isai 30.8. Hab: 2.2. 2 Pet: 1.21.

3 That these Scriptures are a perfect Rule of Faith and Holiness, according to
which all doctrines are to be tried, and all controversies decided. 2 Timothy:
3.16, 17. Ephesians: 2.20 Deuteronomy: 4.^. John 12.48. Acts 17.11.

4 That the chief end of writing them was, that thereby all the Elect might
come to the knowledge and fruition of eternal Life. Joh: 5.^9. and ^0.31. 1 Jo.
^ 16

5 That we may know these Scriptures to be the word of God. 1 From the
testimony of Gods Spirit; and holy men that writ them and by miracles
confirmed them. 2 Pet: 1.21. Heb: 2.4.

2 From the majesty, glory, holiness, truth of a God which shines forth in them.

3 From the power of God by them revealing the secrets of men's hearts,
quickening the dead, terrifying men with the terrors of God, and comforting
with the comforts of God.

Quest What are the principal things revealed in the word?

Answ. 2 things 1 The Law or the Covenant of works. 2 the Gospel or Covenant of
Grace. John 1.17

Quest' What is the covenant of works;

Answ The promise of Eternal life to all those that perfectly keep it,
together with the threatening of Eternal death and curse of God on all those
that break it. Gal: 3.10 12.

Quest; What are you to know concerning this Covenant?

Answ. 1 That the obedience which it requires is 1 Personal 2 Perfect 3
Continnuall obedience. Gal: 3.10.

2 That all men by nature are under this Covenant and bond to keep it. Gal*
4.3, 4.

3 That all men have broken it and hence can never have life by it.

4 That the Lord has revealed it to show man his sin, and to prepare his soul
for Christ. Rom 10.^. Rom: 3.19 20. Gal* 3.22, 24.

Quest What is the Covenant of Grace?

Answ: The promise of Eternal life by Jesus Christ to all that d^e or shall
believe. John 3.16. Rom: 3.22. Rom: 1.17.

Quest What are you to know concerning this Covenant?

Answ 1 That because man is apt to doubt of this love of God, he has therefore
given two Sacraments, baptism, and the Lord Supper, as signs and seals to
confirm this Covenant. Mark. 16.16. 1 Cor* 11.23.

2 That God must work the condition of this Covenant viz Faith. Ephesians: 2.8 Heb:
12.1, ^.

3 That they that believe are free from the Law or first Covenant of works, as
a covenant of life. To 6.14 though not as a rule of life. Ps: 1*9.5.6.

4 That whoever are once in this Covenant shall never be cast out of it. Ioh:
11.25, 26. Joh 5.24.

2 Part

Quest WHat are you to know concerning man?

Ans. 5 Things 1 what a blessed estate he was at the first made in.

2 What a miserable estate he is now fallon into.

3 What a glorious estate he may be in by Christ

4 What he should be when he is in Christ.

5 What he shall be at the end of the world by Christ.

Quest. What is the blessed estate man was at first made in?

Answ. He was made at first in the Image of God. Genesis 1.26.

Quest. What is this Image of God?

Answ. It consists chiefly in two things.

1 In a clear and saving knowledge of God in his mind. Colos 3.10.

2 In perfect Holiness and Righteousness, whereby his Will was able (though not
necessarily determined) to will and do all the will of God. Ephesians. 4.24

Qu. What followed upon this?

A. 1 He was in special favor with God.

2 He was free from all sorrows, and therefore set in Paradise, a place of all
pleasantness.

3 All the visible world was for his good, and he was Lord of it. Gen: 1.28.

4 He had Fruition of God in all his blessedness.

Qu. How had every man this blessed estate?

A. They had it in Adam, their head, root, and surety, and it should certainly
have been conveyed to them if he had stood.

Quest. What use are you to make of this?

A. 1 Not to blame the Lord of injustice for Commanding what is now impossible
for man to do, because he once had power to do it in this estate

2 To blame our selves for all our sorrows, and to mourn the more under them
and our sins, because God made us happy, and once we were blessed.

Quest. What are you to know concerning the second thing which is to be known
concerning man, viz* his miserable estate that he is fallen now into?

A. Four things. 1 His misery present. 2 His misery to come. 3 The aggravatio^s
of this misery 4 How he is made thus miserable


Quest. What is his present misery?

A. 1 He is departed from God by sin. Jer: 2.13

2 God is departed from him in wrath for sin. Is. 59 2.

3 He is full of all sin. Romans 1.29. and 7.18.

4 He is dead in sin, and cannot do the least spiritual good. Ephesians. 2.1.

5 What ever he does it is sin. Isay 1.13. Pro. 21.4

6 He is under the power of Satan for sin. Acts 26 18. Eph^. 2.2.

7 He is already condemned to die for sin. Ioh. 3.8

8 He is an enemy to God. Cor. 1.21. Rom: 8 7.

9 All things in this world which may comfort him are curses to him. Deu*
28.15, 16. Rom: 1.9.

10 He may look for the everlasting fire of the wrath of God to break out upon
him every moment in this condition. Luke 12.20.

Quest. What is his misery to co^^

Answ. 1 He must die an accursed death.

2 Presently after death comes Judgment, or Gods shall (...) made known never
to show mercy (...) 9.27.

3 At the end of the world he must rise to judgment both body and soul, to
everlasting shame to answer for all he has done. 2 Cor 5.10.

4 when the day of judgment is past he must ly tormented in the everlasting
fire of the wrath of God prepared for the devil, and his angels. Man. 25.4^.

Quest. What are the agravations of this misery.

A. 1 He knows it not and many times cannot believe it. (...) 3.17.

2 If he does know it, yet he feels it not, mourns not for it, but thinks
himself well enough under it. Ephesians 4.18, 19. 3 If he does sometimes feel it yet
he is utterly unable to help himself out of it 1 Cor 2.14. Rom: 7.14.

4 He is unwilling that Jesus Christ should save him out of it. Math: 23.37.

Q. How comes it to pass that he is thus miserable

A. Thus, 1 As soon as ever he has the being of a son of Adam, Adams sin is
imputed to him, because as he stood so he sinned in Adam. To. 5.12.

2 Hence God justly forsakes him for sin. Hab. 1.13

3 Hence all sin and misery lays hold on him, and thus sin and misery is
propagated by natural generation to all men. Rom: 5.7.

Q. What learn you from all this?

A. 1 That sin is the greatest evil Because it is the cause of all misery. 2
To mourn under this miserable estate until the Lord Jesus deliver me out of it.

Quest. What is the third thing to be ^^own concerning man, or what is the
glorious renewed estate he may be in by Christ.

A. 1 He may have remission of all his sins, and so freedom from death and
condemnation. Ephesians. 1.7. Rom: 8.1.

2 Reconciliation, and everlasting peace with God. Romans 5.1. 3 Adoption, and
the fatherly love of God, from which nothing can separate. 1 John. 3.1, 2. Rom:
8.35.

4 The Spirit of Adoption to assure of the love of God, and thereby peace that
passes all understanding, and joy unspeakable and full of glory. Rom: 28.15.
Romans 15.13. John. 16.7.

5 Access to God at any time with holy boldness and promise of answer to all
prayers. Ephesians 2.18. Ephe: 3.12. 6 An everlasting Covenant of Grace, and all the
promises that concern this and another life his own. Jsay 55.2, 3. 1 Timothy: 4.8.

7 Power against all his sins. Rom 6.1, 2.

8 Every thing a blessing to him, working for his good. Rom: 8.28. Psalm: 25.10.

Quest. What is Jesus Christ?

A. 1 In respect of his Person; he is the Second Person in the Trinity, the
Eternal Son of God made man by assuming our nature, John. 1.14. Heb: 2.14.
Rom: 1.3, 4. and so a fit Mediator. 1 Timothy 2.5.

2 In respect of his Offices, he is first a Prophet to teach his Church. 2 A
Priest, to sacrifice himself for it. 3 A King to rule and govern it. Heb* 3.1.
and 8.1. Zach: 6.13.

Quest. Whom does Christ bring into this estate?

Answ Only the Church, which is the whole number of Gods elect, called in time
out of the world. Ephe. 5.27. John 17.9.

Q. How does Jesus Christ bring any into this estate?

A. By Redeeming them out of that miserable estate they are in, 1 By price. 2
By power. Romans 3.24. Luke ^.68, 69.

Q. How has Christ redeemed them by price?

A. By doing perfectly what ever the justice of God in the Law required in
their stead;

2 By suffering what ever death and curse for sin the Law threatened. Th: 2.8. 2
Cor: 5.20. (...) 3.13

Quest. How does Christ redeem them by power.

A. By the Power of his Eternal Spirit irresistably drawing them to himself.
John. 6.44. Ier. 3.19. John. 16.14. Col: 1.13.

Quest. How may you come to this glorious renewed estate by the power of Jesus
Christ.

A. 1 By mourning under my sin and misery, until I see my extreme need of
Jesus Christ, to save me out of it Luke 15.17. Acts 2.37.

2 By seeing the glory and worth of Christ as the greatest good, and my
unworthiness of him. Isay 52.15. John 4.10. 2 Cor 4.3, 4, 5.

3 By coming to Christ upon Gods call, or receiving of Christ upon Gods offer.
John 6.37. John 1.12 rom: 5.17. Ier: 3.22.

Quest What are you to know of the Fourth thing concerning man, viz: what he
should be when he is in Christ?

Answ. 1 He should be exceeding thankful, and wonder at God, that ever he
should call him to the fellowship of his grace in Christ, and receive him to
mercy. Mat. 11.25. Col: 1.12. 1 Timothy 1.16.17

2 He should be willing to suffer any thing for the sake and name of Christ.
Mat. 10.37, 38, 39. rev. 12 11. romans 8 36.

3 He should be willing to do any thing for Christ through the grace and
strength of Christ rom: 16.1. acts 9.6. rom: 12.1. John 15.5. Phil 4.13.

Q. What are those things a believer is to do for Christ?

A. 1 He is to seek him in all his Ordinances diligently. Psalm. 119.2.

2 He is to serve him, or walk humbly before him continually. Micah 6.8.

Q. What are those Ordinances of Christ, wherein he is to seek him.

A. 1 In hearing the word preached* act. 10.33. 1 These. 2.13.

2 Reading the Scriptures often. Io. 5.39. 1 timothy 4.13

3 Prayer, both fervent and frequent. Jude 20 verse.

4 Daily meditation, John 1.8.

5 Communion with the Saints, especially by joining to some particular Church,
heb* 10.24. Act 2.47

6 Christian watchfullness. Mat: 26.40 41. Mar: 13.37.

7 Receiving the Sacraments. 1 Cor: 11.26.

Quest How is a believer to serve Christ?

Answ: He being delivered out of the hands of his enemies is to serve him
without fear in holiness, and Righteousness, before him all the days of his
life. Luke. 1.74 75.

Quest What is it to serve Christ without fear.

Answ It is to serve him out of love which casts out slavish fear. 1 John. 5.2.

Quest What is it to serve him in holiness and righteousness;

Answ. It is to make the whole moral Law or Ten Commandments the rule of
Christian obedience, whose first Table sets down duties of holiness toward God,
and the Second Table duties of righteousness toward man. Psalm: 119 6.

Q. What is it to be holy and righteous before him?

A. It is not only to do the things commanded, but to do them as in Christ's
presence, and because commanded of him, Isay 38.2. Gen: 17.1, 2.

Quest Why is it added that we must serve him all the days of our life?

Answ. Because we are not to serve him by fitts and starts, and for a time (as
hypocites may do) but to continue therein, till death. Mat. 24.13.

Q. How is a believer to walk with God, or serve Christ every day?

A. In respect of a christians ordinary course, there are these 6 things to be
attended,

First to awaken with Christ, or to desire to have every morning the first
stirrings of his thoughts and affections toward Christ Psalm 139.18.

2 To go immediately to secret prayer, unless Gods providence casts in some
hinderance Psalm 5.3

3 Then to follow the works of his calling diligently and as unto the Lord Col.
3 23:24.

4 Meditation and examination how the day has bee^ spent when the end of the
day is come. Jer. 8.6. ps 11^9* 59

5 To conclude every day with such prayer, as sets all even, and makes peace
with God Ephesians. 4.26 Psalm. 55.17. Gen: 32.26.

6 When he goes to ly down in his bed, or awakeneth in the night, to have his
last thoughts and his waking thoughts as much as may be about the things of
God, Psalm. 4.4. and 119.55, ^2.

Quest. What are you to know concerning the Fifth thing which is to be known
concerning man viz. what he shall be by Christ?

Answ. At the end of the world,

1 The godly shall be raised up by him from the dead to everlasting glory.

2 The wicked to everlasting shame John 5.29.

Q. What is this glory, and how shall the godly be raised up to it?

^. 1 The Lord Jesus shall descend from heaven into this visible world, in the
air, with a shout, and with all his mighty Angels and the Trump of God for
their glory 1 These. 4.16. Mat. 25.31.

2 The dead in Christ shall be first raised, and the living suddenly changed
and their very bodies made like to Christ's glorious body 1 These. 4.15.1^. 1
Cor: 15 52. Phil. ^.21.

3 They shall then be both together caught up to meet the Lord in the air, and
be presented before him with exceeding joy 1 These. 4 17. Jude 2^ ver.

4 They shall be set at Christ's right hand where together with him they shall
judge the world, in whom he will be admired before the world Math. 25 33. 1 Cor:
6.2. ^ These. 1.10.

5 When the day of judgment is done, they shall be carried up with Christ unto
the third heaven, to be for ever with the Lord, to behold his glory, praise the
riches of his grace, where God shall be all in all Math. 25.34. 1 These. 4 17.
John 17 24. 1 Cor: 15.28.

Q. What is that shame, and how shall the wicked be raised up to everlasting
contempt?

A. 1 Their bodies shall be raised up with great ugliness.

2 They shall then see the Lord Jesus appearing terrible against them, in
flaming fire and great wrath ready to judge them, and they shall mourn to see
him 2 These. 1.7. (...). ^.7.

3 They shall then every one in his order come trembling, and appear before
Christ's judgment seat to answer for all the sins they have done ^ Cor. 5.10

4 When the judgment is ended, they shall then receive that fearful sentence,
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire Math. 25.41.

5 As the place of the glory of the Saints is the Third heaven in the other
world, so the place of the wickeds punishment shall be this world 2 Pet: 3.7.

Quest. How do you prove that there shall be this general resurection?

Answ. Because there must be a day of general judgment.

Quest. How do you prove that there shall be such a day of judgment?

Answ. Because God is Just, and must apear so to be, but his justice does not
apear fully in this world: therefore there must be a day of the manifestation
of it. Rom: 2.4.

Quest. How does it appear that Gods justice is not fully manifested in this
world?

Answ. 1 Because we see wicked men not punished here according to their desert.

2 Nor the godly rewarded according to grace Psalm. 73.12.13. Eccle. 9.2. 2
These. 1.6, 7.

FINIS.
A BRIEF EXPLICATION OF John 16.8, 9, 10, 11. In way of Question and Answer,
delivered first in some Sermons at Cambridg, When the Comforter is come, he
shall convince
the world of Sin, Righteousness, and judgment etc:

WHat is the scope of our Savior in these words?

Answ. To set forth both the work, and the method, or order of the work of the
Spirit, upon the hearts of the whole world of the Elect.

Quest: What is this work and the method of it?

A. The First work of the Spirit is to convince of Sin. 2 Of Righteousness. 3
Of Judgment.

Q. What does the Spirit do when he thus convinces?

A. Three things, 1 By conviction of Sin, he discovers man's misery

3 By conviction of Righteousness, he reveals the Remedy.

3 By conviction of Judgment he declares man's Duty.

Q. What does he work by this conviction?

A. Three things, 1 By conviction of Sin and misery, he works humiliation.

2 By conviction of Righteousness the Remedy, he works Faith.

3 By conviction of Judgment and man's Duty, he works Obedience.

Quest: What is the reason that the Spirit works after this Order or method?

Answ: The reason generally is this,

1 Because as the great evil and curse that lies on all men by nature, is
ignorance and unsensebleness of their sin and misery, hence the first work of
Mercy by the Spirit is conviction of sin, and humiliation under their misery.

2 Because as the next great curse and evil, after men know their misery, is
ignorance and unbelief of the remedy: hence the second work of Mercy by the
Spirit is conviction of Christ's Righteousness to be received by Faith.

3 Because when Christ is applied by faith, the third great evil is ignorance
and weakness of walking worthy of this grace and love of Christ: hence the
third and last work of the Spirit is to convince the soul that therefore it is
its duty to walk, and that he shall be enabled to walk in all thankful
obedience before Christ, all judgment being committed to Christ.

Q. What therefore do you learn from hence, to be the principal care and study
of your life?

A. To seek to God for his Spirit to work three things in me. 1 That I may feel
my misery by sin, and be deeply humbled under it.

2 That I may know the Remedy out of this misery, Christ Jesus and his
Rightousness, and by Faith apply it.

3 Then to study my Duty, how to walk thankfully in all holy and thankful
obedience for this mercy

Quest. Does the Lord work thus by his Spirit in this order in all men?

A. Yes; unless it be in an extraordinary way, and not by ordinary means.
Because it is expressly said in the text, he shall convince the whole world of
this.

Q. But is not by world, meant the wicked of the world?

A. No; but the world of the Elect, as sometimes they are called, 2 Cor: 5.19.
For none of the wicked of the world are truly convinced of these things.

Q: What is it therefore to convince?

A. To make a thing plain and evident to ones mind, by demonstrative argument;
so as that he has nothing to object against it, for so the word (...)
signifies.

Q. But what kind of conviction is here meant?

A. 1 Not natural, which comes by the light of natural conscience, Rom: 2.15.
But spiritual and supernatural: because it is here expressly said, the Spirit
shall convince etc:

2 Nor (yet) common and ineffectual conviction for that tends to confusion of
face, and to leave the men the more without excuse, but special and effectual,
unto the conversion and salvation of the soul.

Quest: How may that appear?

Answ: Because no common work is attributed to the Spirit as a Comforter,
throughout all the Scripture as this is; for conviction of the soul to
confusion is no comforting act, but rather matter of mourning.

2 Because it is such a work of conviction, as whereby Christ comes to be
glorified by the soul, verse 14. which is no common work.

3 Because the scope of the words is to comfort the hearts of the disciples
against Christ's absence viz: that the Spirit shall come, and thus convince the
world; now it is no joy of heart to see men convicted so far only as may leave
them without excuse, and breed more confusion of face, but it is a joyful
thing to see the Spirit work on the hearts of a world of men to conversion.

Quest: Why does the Lord use this word conviction which is but an act of the
mind and understanding?

A. 1 Because words of sense among the Hebrews do allway imply affection and
action, and therefore conviction being a word of sense, it implies suitable
affections of the heart and therefore conviction of sin implies humiliation and
sorrow of the heart for sin, conviction of righteousness implies Faith in
coming to Christ for it etc:

2 Because the Lord Jesus in all saving works of his Spirit, by the light let
into the understanding and mind, lets in life into the heart Ephesians. 5.14. Math.
11.25

First of Conviction of Sin.
Quest. WHat is therefore the first work of the Spirit in the conversion and
salvation of man?

Answ. To convince of Sin.

Quest. Does not the Law convince, and show a man his sin?

Answ. Yes; as an instrument in the hand of the Spirit. Rom: 3.20. But the
Spirit does it as the principal agent by the Law.

Q. Is there not a natural conviction by the light of nature (or the light of
natural conscience) and not by the light of the Spirit?

A. Yes; Rom: 2.15. But the conviction of sin here is of a higher nature, it is
supernatural, by a supernatural power of the Spirit.

Q. What difference is there between natural and supernatural conviction of sin?

A. 1. Natural conviction by natural conscience is much defiled and corrupted.
Titus 1.15. It will show some gross sins, but it brings not to light those
which are most secret, and most dangerous; but supernatural conviction or the
Spirit by supernatural conviction deals plainly, and discovers the most
secret sins of the soul. 1 Cor: 15.14, 15.

2 Natural conviction is usually dark and weak, without deep affection, because
it is a dim light; but supernatural conviction is strong and over-powering and
mightily affecting the heart. Acts 2.37. because this is a clear light.

3. Natural conviction if it be sometimes strong and affecting the heart, yet
it hurries the soul from God, it made Adam flee into the bushes to hide
himself, it sent Saul to the witch, and Judas to the halter. Because natural
conscience is but the Sergeant of Divine justice, before whose throne it drags
the soul, and so works fear and flight; but supernatural conviction inclines
and draws the soul unto God, and to seek after Christ, because it is the fruit
of mercy from a merciful Redeemer, from a comforting Spirit.

Quest. Why does the Spirit undertake this work to convince of sin?

Answ 1. That the Lord Jesus might have all the glory of the conversion of a
sinner, which is begun in this first act of conviction, for if it were in man's
power to convince himself of sin, then the begin^ing of men's conversion (which
is conviction) should be attributed unto man, and so Christ should not have all
the glory.

2 Because no man can or will see his sin effectually until the Spirit first
comes, because without the Spirit men flatter themselves in their evil ways
Psalm: 36.2, 3. Love their own peace, fly from the trouble of sin as from the
biting of a Serpent, or a temptation of the devil toward despair, and Satan
seeks by all means to blind men's eyes here Luke 11.21. and allthough sin be the
greatest evil, yet a carnal heart can never see his sin till the Spirit comes.

Quest. If the Spirit only does, and can convince of Sin, What use are you to
make of it?

Answ: 1. That it is no easy matter to be effectually convinced, because the
eternal Spirit of the Lord Jesus only can do it, and therefore it is impossible
to any created power.

2. Not to be discouraged though I find a blind mind, and a hard heart, that I
cannot be convinced of sin, because the Spirit only is able to do it, and
allthough the Word and Spirit has given many knocks upon my heart, to break
it, yet as it is in hard things one knock at last may do it.

3. To go to Christ for this Spirit in prayer, when I find my heart hard; and
to believe, that it is one of the most pleasing requests that I can put up unto
Christ, to desire his Spirit to convince and humble my heart; all the glory of
Christ (in some sort) being raised from this one work of the Spirit, to
convince and break the heart for sin.

Quest. What is meant here by Sin?

Answ Not only the act of sin, but all the misery that follows upon sin,
especially the wrath of God for sin.

Quest. Why does that word conviction of sin comprehend Humiliation for sin?

Answ. Because effectual conviction is here to be understood.

Q. Why does the Lord Jesus say the Spirit shall convince of sin, without
mentioning conviction of the wrath of God, and that misery that follows on
sin?

A 1. Because sin is the greatest evil, and the cause of Gods wrath, and
therefore in saying Sin all other misery is included.

2. Because by effectual conviction and humiliation the Spirit of God sets on
sin upon the soul and makes it ly most heavy upon the heart, and although he
makes the sense of wrath heavy, yet the Spirit by that does but raise up the
soul to make it the more fearful of sin the cause of it. Ier. 2.19.

Q. Why does the Lord Jesus use convince rather then humble?

A. 1. That he might show where true humiliation begins, and that is in
conviction.

2. That he might not only show the work of humiliation, but the manner and way
of it, which is not by any blind fears and fleabitings (as it were) as in many
reprobates, but by clear light and demonstration out of the word, over-pouring
all reasons and shiftings (which is in the nature of conviction) that their
condition is sinful and miserable.

3. To teach us that not only the great work of humiliation upon the heart is
the work of the Spirit but that the first and least beginings of it even the
very first sight and conviction of sin is his work also, and not our own.

Quest. What is there in sin, of which the Spirit convinces and humbles?

Answ. Three things. 1. The exceeding great evil and horrible nature of sin it
self.

2. The terrible wrath of God for sin.

3. The pollution of the person that sins, that he is wholly possessed with
sin, and universally defiled by sin in every thing be does and is able to do,
and all this because he has no part in Jesus Christ by Faith.

Quest. What need is there that the Spirit should set forth the exceeding evil
of sin?

Answ Because sin is that evil which principally grieves the heart of God, and
therefore when the Spirit comes to correct and humble for sin, he makes it to
grieve our hearts most, and to be exceeding bitter to the soul. The Devils and
reprobates, to whom the Comforter never comes, they feel the terror of sin,
but never feel the evil of sin.

Q. What need is there of conviction of the wrath of God?

A. That the soul of man might be more deeply and sensibly humbled for sin the
cause of it, for the heart of man being sensual, it cannot so immediately feel
sin which is a more spiritual evil, but by means of Gods terror, (as by the
burning of the cole) the soul is made more sensible and is smitten with the
foulness of sin, so as to cry out Lord what evil have I done.

Quest. What need is there of convincing the soul of its universal pollution
by sin?

Answ. Because otherwise the heart would be lifted up from what little good it
sees in it self, and never go to Christ for all good.

Quest. What measure of conviction and humiliation for sin is necessary?

A. So much sight and sense of sin is necessary as may make sin a burden
unsupportable to the soul Psalm. 38.2. Math. 11.28.

Q. What necessity is there of such a measure?

A. 1. Because sin and the wrath of God are in themselves the greatest and most
unsupportable evils hence the soul must feel them so, or else the Spirit
should not let them feel them as they be.

2 Because Christ has felt sin as a burden unsupportable, therefore the soul
must feel it so, otherwise it should not feelingly know what mercy Christ has
showed unto it in bearing sin for it.

3. Deliverance from sin and wrath of God, would not be matter of unspeakable
joy, unless sin was matter of unsupportable burden.

4. Because such is a man's love of sin, and contempt of Christ, that he will
never go to Christ to take sin and wrath of God away, while he can bear them
quietly without intolerable pressure under it: and therefore we see many that
having only some co^victions and light fears and troubles for sin, they can
ease themselves by some light confession and praying or by business, or sports,
or mirth, hence they live in their sin and must perish for it.

Quest. How much sense and feeling of this unsupportable burden is needful?

Ans. Such a measure as makes the soul unpeaceable and restless until it come
to Jesus Christ: Lam. 3.49. For though the Devils and reprobates feel sin as an
insupportable burden, yet it makes not this impression upon them so as to make
them restless until they come to Jesus Christ.

Quest. What necessity is there for such unpeaceablenes and restlesness of
heart?

A. 1. Because if a cut finger or an akeing tooth will make men restless till
they have ease, if there be any hope of ease, much more those that feel far
sorer evils upon them, if there may be any hope of help by Jesus Christ.

2. Because the end of all troubles in the Elect is to bring them to Christ,
they must come to him, John 10.16. Hence they must be restless till they find
peace in him, and can never be said to be humbled if they can find any rest
without him: hence that promise, Mat: 11.28. is the first and most ordinary
support and ground of comfort to an humbled sinner.

Q. Wherein does this restlesness appear?

Answ: 1. In thinking of their evil and misery continually; Their sin is ever
before them, as David says Psalm 51.

2. In mourning bitterly for the evil they see, as Josiah did, and that
sometimes in such a measure as that they can neither eat or drink, or take
delight in any creature, as Paul did Acts 9.

3. In praying and sighing under their burden, with unutterable groans Rom: 8.

4. In desiring to go to some Minister of God to open their hearts and griefs
to him, and to enquire of him what they should do: as they did Acts 2.37 when
they heard this they were pricked and

5. In objecting against all promises, and grounds of consolation in regard of
their sins.

6. In wondering when they ly down, and rise up, that they are not consumed,
and that they are yet out of hell, considering the greatness and multitude of
their sins.

Quest. Is this restlesness equally in all those whom the Spirit works upon?

Answ* No; but just like some ships, some are carried with more rough winds,
some with more gentle and still winds to the harbor, yet by both the vessel
is kept from resting, until it comes to the harbor; So it is here, some are
carried with more rough and boisterous temptations and fears toward Jesus
Christ, some in a more still and gentle manner unto Christ; Nor is this
restlesnes a monkish and forced unquietness, but a special spiritual and
secret push of the Spirit, which puts them daily forward, either in a more
gentle or terrible manner.

Quest. But may not some be thus restless, and yet not know it?

Answ. Yes, and the reason is because usually many judge of this restlesnes only
by terrible afrightments, when as there may be an intellectual sense of sin, or
a deep apprehension of sin and wrath in the mind and understanding, which may
make the soul restless without such affectionate affrightments As there may be
great joy from a deep apprehension of some good, without laughing and dancing,
and as there may be great affrightments without light, as sometimes in a dream,
so there may be a great humbling light without affrightments, and violent
raging fears.

Q. How may such come to know it that think they never have been thus affected
with sin, and yet indeed have been so?

A. Two ways. 1. If the soul does esteem Christ considered as a Redeemer from
sin and wrath of God, as the greatest good, it is a certain sign that such an
one has been sensible of sin and wrath of God as the greatest evil, though
they should think they were never so, for how else could deliverance from sin
and the wrath of God be so precious, if sin and wrath were not most heavy; as
(for example) how can a man esteem bread and water as a greater good then all
the gold and silver in the world, if he was not sensible of a hunger-bitten and
thirsty condition before.

2. If any soul has a part in Christ without sense of sin (as he thinks) at
his first conversion, yet he shall find that it was there indeed by his after
conversions to God, for Peter and the rest of the disciples, after they were
converted, were to be again converted Math: 18.3. Now many gracious christians
shall find much sense of sin, and terror of God affecting them all their life
in their humiliations before God which they never felt at first, yet
notwithstanding these after-returnings do evidently show what ingredients were
in them at first.

Quest. Is not this conviction and humiliation a consequent of faith, and
following ones being in Christ?

Answ. There is indeed some kind of conviction and humiliation for sin which
follows faith, but in this place Christ expressly speaks of that co^viction
and humiliation for sin which is wrought by the Spirit in the soul because it
believes not in Christ, and therefore is before faith is fully wrought.

Quest. How may it appear that conviction of sin is the first work of the
Spirit?

Answ: 1. Because none without this can feel their need of Christ and his
righteousness, and seek after him before they have him. For the whole need not
a Physician, but the sick Math. 9.12.

2. Because otherwise none would be glad of Christ when he is to be given to
them. A condemned man is only glad of pardon; and they only that were pricked
at the heart Acts 2.37. gladly received the word of the Gospel. verse 41.

3. Otherwise none would stay with Christ after they had received him As the
stony ground sell away Math. 13. because it had not depth of earth (or deep
humiliation) if sin was never very bitter, a small temptation to sin would make
men easily to forsake Jesus Christ.

Quest. What use are you to make of this doctrine viz: conviction of sin?

Answ. I learn hence, that the first work of the Spirit upon the soul, is not
that mystical Union which is between Christ and the soul (as some think) Christ
does not first unite himself to the soul, and then it is convinced of sin and
humbled for sin, and then believes in Christ, but the soul is convinced of sin
before this union; for if the Spirit first convinces the soul of sin because
it believes not in Christ, and consequently because it has no part in Christ
by any union to him; then the Spirit does not first unite the soul and Christ
together, and afterward convinces it of sin. He that is united to Christ is in
actual favor with God, but he that believes not is out of favor, condemned
already, and the wrath of God abides on him. John 3.18. Chap 3.36. if
therefore the Spirit first convinces the soul of sin because it believes not
in Christ, then because it is out of favor with God, condemned already
abiding under the wrath of God, and consequently not as yet united to Christ.

Quest. What evil is there in holding this opinion that the soul is united to
Christ first before it be convinced and humbled for sin?

A. 1. Because by this principle, it is not fit to preach the Law to any of the
Elect, to show them thereby their cursed estate: for if they be united to
Christ before any conviction of sin by the Law, their estate is not cursed but
blessed, union to Christ being the root of all blessedness.

2. Because by this principle there is no need of preaching the Gospel, to draw
the separated soul from Christ, to unite it to Christ: because before
conviction of sin, and therefore much more before conviction of Christ's
Righteousness in the Gospel, this union is supposed to be wrought.

3. Because by this principle one may be united to Christ, and yet have a heart
corrupt and wholly united to sin: because it supposes such an union to Christ
which is before so much as the least sight and sense of sin.

4. Because by this principle the soul is united to Christ before it has any
faith either in the habit or act of it, which is expressly contrary to the
Scripture. Ephesi. 3.17. Romans 11 20. John 3. last. for that passive faith which
some say is concurrent to our union, is but a mere sound of words: for it is no
grace indeed, but only that obedie^tiall or passive power of the soul to
receive the impression of the Spirit upon it as a mud wall does an arrow or a
bowl of water receives a ball of gold, which passive power is no grace but is
in the most reprobate heart living.

5 Because by this principle, a man must be justified, adopted, reconciled to
God, not only before faith, but even before he either sees or feels his sin,
or need of Christ: for at that instant a man has his union to Christ, he has
communion necessarily in all the benefits of Christ, as Justification,
Adoption, Reconciliation, Rom 8.1. 1 John 5.12. But this is contrary to the
whole current of Scripture, which affirms that we are not justified without
faith, but by faith; and that not only declaratively in the Court of our
consciences, but in the Court of heaven, and sight of God. Gal. 3.11. Also that
we are adopted by faith. Gal. 3.26. and reconciled by faith. Rom: 5.1. Coll.
1.21, 22.

6 By this principle a man may be in a happy and blessed estate (because united
to Christ) without any Repentance or sorrow for sin, which is a ground of all
looseness of life.

Quest. But how can the soul be convinced of sin or humbled for it, unless
Christ be there to work both: and therefore it seems that Christ is first
united to the soul before it be convinced of sin?

Answ. It is true, no man can be convinced of sin unless Christ work it by his
Spirit, conviction of sin is a fruit or an effect of the Spirit of Christ: but
it does not therefore follow that it is a fruit of our union by the Spirit unto
Christ: it is a fruit of the Spirit acting on the soul as an efficient cause,
but not a fruit of the Spirit as uniting the soul to Christ and so inhabiting
or dwelling in it; Union it self to Christ is a fruit of the Spirit, but it is
no fruit of a former union, so conviction of the Spirit is a fruit of the
Spirit, but not a fruit of union. The Spirit like a wise carpenter hews and
cuts the soul to make it fit for union, as he does the beams of an house; but
this hewing and cuting and humbling the soul is no fruit of union, no more then
hewing the rafters of a house are a fruit of union to the main beam.

Quest. If this conviction of sin be the first act of the Spirit, what
follows hence in the second place?

Answ. That the Law is first to be preached to sinners and unconverted persons
before the Gospel: For, if the Spirit does first convince the soul of sin, the
Law is first to be preached, by which the apostle says we come to the
knowledge of sin. Rom 3.20 Not that the Law of it self can convince of sin but
as it is an instrument in the hand of the spirit there unto; for if the Gospel
reveal nothing but Christ's righteousness by faith; then it cannot reveal a man's
sin and unrighteousness, and therefore the spirit must use the Law as a means
thereunto, and hence it is that they who are enemies to the preaching of the
Law, are great enemies to Jesus Christ his righteousness. For by co^viction of a
man's own unrighteousnes he comes to feel a need of Christ's Righteousness.

Q. What follows from hence, in the third place?

A. That it is very dangerous to shake off trouble of conscience for sin, so as
to hide it, extenuate it, excuse it, because it is such a sin as quenches the
very first motions of the Spirit, which appear first in conviction and
consequently a great enmity against the Spirit is seen in these.

Quest. What besides follows hence?

Answ. That all those that look for salvation should first seek for an humble
and broken heart to be wrought in them by the spirit in this effectual
conviction of sin.

Quest. What means may be used that the soul may be thus humbled?

Answ. Four means. 1. Consider Gods exceeding great Holiness, and how ill the
Lord does take the least wrong, and how heavily the least sin and what an
unsupportable burden and grief it is to the soul of God. And that appears in 3
things.

1. In that he spared not the Angels that sinned 2 Pet. 2.4. but cast them out
of his sight, into everlasting chains of darkness; not because they committed
this or that great sin, but because they sinned.

2. In that he cast Adam, and in him all mankind into a state of everlasting
death and sin, for the first fault, which seemed but little, in eating the
forbidden fruit. Rom 5.12.

3. In that Jesus Christ himself did bear the unsupportable wrath of God for
sin, only imputed to him, not inherent in him.

Second means. Consider the unsupportable wrath of God which lies on the soul
of every man already for the least sin. John 3.18. and ver. 36. He that
believes not the wrath of God abides on him For the wrath of God in Hell,
chiefly consists in Two things. 1. In the souls departure from God. 2. In
Gods departing from the soul.
Now in the least sin, both these are already upon the soul; For in the least
sin the soul departs from God, and for the least sin God departs from the soul.
Esaiah 59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God.

Third means. Consider that no sinner has any thing to bear up his heart under
this unsupportable burden, for if he has any comfort, it is from and in the
creatures, but they are all but snares and curses to him while he remains
accursed of God in his sins. Gal. 3.10.

Fourth means. Consider the eternity of this wrath that never shall have end to
ly burning in the fire for ever is intolerable, to famish and pine away
without God for ever: as a man that Is starved to death for want of bread, oh
what a misery is it.

5. Consider notwithstanding all this misery and sin, Christ calls to every
weary sinner to come to him. Math. 11.28.

Secondly Conviction of Righteousness.
Quest. Thus much of Conviction of Sin, what is the Second thing which the
Spirit convinces the soul of after it is convinced of sin?

Answ. Of Righteousness.

Quest What is meant by this word righteousness?

Answ. it appears in four things.

1. As by sin or unrighteousness is meant the breach of the law, so by
righteousness is meant the fulfilling of it.

2. Its not our own fulfilling of the law or a righteousness inherent in us,
but a righteousness inherent in Christ, a righteousness in him out of us, for
it is no argument to prove that we are righteous because Christ is gone to the
Father, but it is an argument that he is so.

3. It Is such a righteousness inherent in Christ, as whereby he is righteous for
us, and whereby sinners convinced of sin become righteous.

For it is such a righteousness; the manifestation whereof comforts a sinner
convinced of sin, which cannot be any other righteousness of Christ then such
as whereby he is made righteousness for a sinner. 4. It Is such a righteousness
as perfectly pleases the Father; because it is said I go to the Father, and ye
shall see me no more: For if Christ by this righteousness had not perfectly
pleased him, either he should never have gone to heaven to the Father, or if he
had, he should never have stayed there, but now he says I go to the Father
and ye shall see me no more; so that in one word by righteousness is meant
Christ's perfect righteousness or fulfilling of the Law to make a sinner
righteous before God the Father.

Quest. What is meant by these words because I go to the Father and ye see me
no more.

A. The absolute sufficiency and perfection of Christ's righteousness is set
forth in it.

Quest How does that appear from hence?

A. Christ being our suerty and undertaking to pay our debt, hence if the debt
was not discharged he durst not appear before the Father, that exacted the
full payment, nor could he be able to stand before him in heaven, or if he
could, yet he should not have stayed with him but should have come down again
to have satisfied for the rest which was due, but now his going to the Father
evidently declares that the debt is paid, and therefore we shall never see him
any more to satisfy for any one sin of the elect all being sufficiently and
perfectly satisfied for.

Q. What is meant by conviction of righteousness?

A. To have a clear revelation of Christ's righteousness made to be an humble
sin^ers own by faith^

Quest. How does this appear to be the meaning of conviction of righteousness?

A. Because look as when the Spirit convinces of sin he convinces a man that
he is the sinner, and that because he believes not in Christ, and has no
Christ in him; so when the Spirit convinces of Christ's righteousness by Faith,
he lets a sinner see that it is his righteousness by Faith.

Quest. What are you now to do after God has convinced you of sin and humbled
the soul for it?

Answ. To seek a part in Christ's Righteousness and to see my self righteous by
faith in the righteousness of Christ Jesus.

Quest. May not I stand before God with mine own righteousness by reforming
what is amiss, and doing what God requires for time to come?

Answ. No; for Christ himself could not appear before God without perfect
righteousness, when he undertook for a sinner, nor without satisfaction for all
their unrighteousness and sin, much less can I stand before God with mine own
polluted righteousness.

Quest. What is the reason that no man can stand before God with his own
righteousness?

A. 1. From the nature of Gods holiness which abhors the least sin, or
unrighteousness and is never pleased but with perfect righteousness, which all
men fall short of.

2. From the sentence of God in his Law, which curses all that continue not in
all that is written in the book of the Law to do it. Gal. 3.10.

Quest. How can Christ's righteousness make a sinner righteous?

Answ. In this manner. First. The Lord Jesus performs all the rightousness
which the strict justice of God in his Law requires in a sinner. Gal. 4.4, 5.
John 8.29.

2. He did all this willingly for a sinner. 1 Pet. 3.18. Romans 5.6, 17. John.
17.19. For if he had kept all the Law, but not for a sinner, it would have done
a sinner no good, but now paying his debt as a suerty for another, it may stand
in Law.

3. The Father accepts this for a sinner as if he had done it himself. Mat. 3.
last. Ephe. 1.6. Otherwise Christ our suerty had not been made a sinners
righteousness.

4. God the Father and Christ hereupon, plead the sinnless and spotless
condition of a sinner against all accusers. Romans 8.3. 1 John. 2.1, 2* Heb.
7.25, 26. Zach. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Quest. What learn you from hence? viz: that Christ's righteousness makes a
sinner righteous?

Answ. To see the golrious excellency of Christ's Righteousness, as also of the
Gospel which reveals it, for the Law reveals how a man may be righteous, but
neither men nor angels, can ever see how a sinner could be made righteous, but
by the Gospel.

Q. When does the Spirit reveal this righteousness of Christ to be a sinners?

Answ. Immediately after it is convinced, and humbled for sin, for so it is said
here the next thing after conviction of sin is conviction of righteousness and
not before, so that God never reveals Christ's righteousness by faith to an
unhumbled but an humbled sinner.

Quest. How does the Spirit then reveal Christ's righteousness when it is thus
humbled?

Answ. 1. It reveals this righteousness to be his by Faith, if the soul receive
it. Romans 3.24, 25.

2. That it is his by faith having received it. Rom: 5.17. John 1.12.

3. That having received it by Faith God is now fully pacified. Romans 5.1.

Quest. Why must the soul be thus humbled before it be justified by Christ's
righteousness?

A. 1. Otherwise the soul would not care for Christ's righteousness Rom 9.3.31.
An unhumbled sinner cannot but tread the Gospel underfoot.

2. Because if he did care for it, yet an unhumbled sinner will afterward abuse
it, and turn Grace into wantonness. Gal. 2.19.

3. Otherwise an unhumbled sinner would boast of his righteousness. Romans 4.2.

Quest. Is not a man justified by Christ's righteteousness before he believe or
be convinced of sin?

Answ. No, for if the time of conviction of righteousness be before conviction
of sin, then it is while a man is hardened in sin, and unbelief; but if the
Spirit first convinces a man of sin because he believes not, (and consequently
that he is under condemnation) then the Spirit never convinces a man of Christ's
Righteousness, (and consequently that he is freed from condemnation) before he
believe. John. 3.18. And if the Corinthians were once wicked, (as the Apostle
tells them) but now are justified, now are Sanctified, then they were not
justified before, viz when they were wicked. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

Q. But were we not Justified in Christ's Redemption?

Answ. Meritoriously we were, but not actually, the garment of Christ's
righteousness to justify us, was then made ready but it was not actually put
on until we believe, and allthough the sins of the elect were then impured to
Christ, and laid upon him for satisfaction, yet not for actual justification;
merited justification and Reconciliation is one thing, actual justification is
another, Christ merited our justification, and his righteousness was the matter
of our justification before we believe, but he purposed never to make it
actually ours, unless we first believe. Romans 3.24, 25.

Quest. But are we not said to be justified by faith only declaratively, and in
the court of our conscience only?

Answ. No; but really, for though Faith is not the matter of our justification,
yet it is the instrument (or isntrumental means of aplying it) and therefore
is before it, for if any should be really justified before Faith, then it might
be said there is no condemnation to some of them that be out of Christ Jesus
who walk not after the spirit, but after the flesh, but that is directly
contrary to Romans 8.1.

Quest. But what evil is there in this opinion to affirm that justification is
before faith.

Answ. The scope of it is that a man may be in an estate of grace and actual
favor with God, and yet live in all manner of sin, without faith, and
repentance, which is most abominable, for sin can not have dominion over a man
while he is under grace. Romans 6.14.

Quest. But does not the Gospel belong to sinners as sinners?

Answ. The curse of the Law belongs to sinners as sinners, but not the
promises. Gal. 3.10. And if the Gospel belongs to sinners as sinners, then all
sinners shall be saved throughout the whole world, the Gospel indeed is offered
to the vilest sinner, but the promise of it is actually applied to none but
humbled and believing sinners.

Quest. What follows from this?

Answ. That one reason why some are so long before they see their
justification, is because there is some flaw in their humiliation; unsound
humiliation unsound peace, little humiliation, little peace in sense of our
justification; for though an humbled heart has many objections against
believing, yet when the Spirit comes, he will convince you of righteousness as
he did formerly of sin.

2. That sight and sense of sin should not discourage any one from believing in
Christ's righteousness because to such persons only Christ's Righteosness is
revealed by the Spirit.

3. Hence it follows, that when a sinner is humbled he may then without
presumption believe a proud and unhumbled spirit cannot believe, an humbled
sinner cannot presume, nor yet believe too soon; presumption is the proper
quality of an unhumbled soul, for if now is the time of Christ's revealling his
righteousness while the soul is humbled, then it is the time of our aplying of
Christ's righteousness without presumption.

4. Hence it follows, that an humbled sinner should not seek first for
sanctification, but justification, or a clear revelation of Christ's
righteousness.

5. Hence it follows the way to keep assurance of our justification is to keep
our hearts in an humbled frame, effectually convinced of sin; and therefore
hate that doctrine as hell it self which under a color of advancing the
glorious estate of a Christian in Christ, would not have him lament, mourn and
be humbled for sin; when as Christ dwells with a contrite and broken heart.
Isa^. 57.15, 16. And those that confess sin under the Gospel (which is
therefore no old Testament spirit only as some ignorantly and perversely
upbraid it,) God is righteous to forgive their sin. 1 John. 1.9. And when the
Spirit of grace, and supplication, is poured out on men, under the Gospel, then
there shall be a great mourning. Zach. 12.10, 11.

Thirdly Conviction of Judgment.
Quest. What is the last comforting act of the Spirit upon the souls of the
elect after conviction of righteousness, or free justification by Christ's
righteousness?

Answ. Conviction of Judgment, or to convince them of judgment, under which is
contained Sanctification, and new-obedience flowing from it.

Quest. What is meant by judgment?

Answ. Not man's judgment, but Christ's judgment, because it is said the Prince of
this world (or Satan) is judged, which is only done by Christ.

Quest. What judgment of Christ is here meant;

Answ. Not his judgment of punishment on the wicked, for Christ speaks of that
judgment which is a comfort to the elect, now judgment of punishment is not
such a great comfort to them, but it is his judgment of Government whereby
Satan the Prince of this world is judged, or subdued, and consequently all
power in heaven and earth is in the hands of Christ to do for his people, and
hence it is said, John. 5.22. God the Father judges no man, but has put all
judgment into the hand of his Son.

Quest, Is this judgment of government meant of Christ's universal government,
and of governing the world, or of his special government in governing, and
ruling in his peoples hearts?

Answ. It is meant of both, yet so as that the general government of Christ is
in respect of the special government of his peoples hearts, for consider the
world without Christ's government of it, so Satan is God and Ruler and Prince
of it, especially in men's hearts, so the Lord Jesus crushing this power of
Satan, and destroying this god and prince of this world, he now governs all
things that he may rule especially in men's hearts subduing Satan* and sin.

Quest. But is not by judgment meant sanctification, and new-obedience
following our justification?

Answ. Yes because it is part of Christ's judiciary and special power, to give
power against sin, and satan, unto all fruitful obedience, and thence it is
that sanctification is called judgment. Isai. 42.3. till judgment come to
victory, But this only is not meant here, but also his universal power of
government over all creatures as well as Devils for as by conviction of sin,
the Spirit humbles, or thereby is wrought humiliation, and as by conviction of
righteousness, Faith is wrought, so by conviction of Christ's universal power
of government the soul falls down before Christ, and submits to Christ, and so
sanctification is wrought,

Quest. What is meant therefore more particularly by conviction of judgment, or
what does the Spirit cenvince a justified person of, when he convinces of
judgment?

Answ. 3 Things; 1 That the Prince of the world being judged, and conquered by
Christ in abolishing all sin by justification, that now Jesus Christ has
therefore all lawful power of right to rule them as their King.

2. That now they ought therefore to submit to Christ, he being now King as
well as Savior to them. Romans 14.8, 9.

3. That they also shall submit to him and that their sins shall be subdued by
Christ their King. To: 6.14.

Quest. Why does the Spirit thus convince of Judgment in the last place?

Answ. Because the great and last complaint of a person justified by Christ's
Righteousness is the power of sin, crying out who shall deliver me from it,
and saying what am I the better if my sins are pardoned and not subdued, hence
at last the Lord comforts them by revealing him unto them who has all judgment
and power to subdue their sin, and also how they ought and shall be subdued to
his blessed will.

Quest. What think you then of such as live loosly after Faith in their
justification?

Answ. Their Faith is but a fancy, and a mere delusion, beaause all that are
justified are lastly convinced of judgment also.

Quest How may it be known when Christ sets up this judgment of rule in
subduing his peoples sins?

Answ. In three degrees. 1. When the soul cannot but yield to Christ. Romans 6.2.
That as the soul when sin reigned was necessarily acted by sin, so now it is
necessarily holy when Christ reigns in it. Rom: 5.21.

2. If the soul yields for a time to sin, yet at last it goes to Christ to
take it away. Psalm: 119.6, 7. Christ is then set upon his throne of judgment
when this honor is put upon him by us to subdue our enemies.

3. If Christ does not come presently and remove sin, then the soul sighs under
his bondage till Christ comes and takes it away. Romans 8.23. Romans 7.24.

Quest Is not their sin great therefore who are justified and think that their
sins shall never be subdued?

Answ. Yes verily; for this is directly cross to what the Spirit witnesses,
and convinces of when he comes to comfort, and it is therefore the great sin of
many who come to Christ that he would take away their sin, yet do not believe
that he will; for those that be convinced of righteousness shall be also
convinced of judgment, and that Christ shall reign to subdue their sins by
some means or other, by little and little, by Ordinances, Temptations,
Aflictions, frowns, smiles, and by death it self at last.

Quest. Why is so much sin unsubdued left in them which they see they cannot
subdue?

Answ. To convince them that this judgment or this power is in the hand of
Christ only and not in their own.

Quest. What is the duty therefore of such as are now justified?

Answ. 1 To see that now they ought to live to Christ, and submit to Christ who
has all judgment committed to him for their sakes.

2. That they not only ought, but also shall do so because the Prince of this
world is judged, and therefore all righteousness and judgment to subdue sin is
in the hand of Christ.

Quest. What are you to learn from all these three things here together, sin,
righteousness, and judgment?

Answ. 1. That such as intend the ministry, and would have the Spirit succeed
their labors should principally endeavor three things, 1. To convince the
people of sin and humble them. 2. To reveal Christ's righteousness in the free
offer and promise of his Grace. 3. To convince them how they ought to subsubmit
to Christ, and live to him, all judgment being committed to him.


Secondly To all Christians.
1. If ever you would be comforted seek first to be humbled for sin.

2. Then in the Second place, Seek Christ's Righteousness for your Justification.

3. Then in the Last place Walk in all holiness and fruitful Obedience before
God and man.

FINIS.

