An Order for the Holding of COURTS etc. BY THE PRESIDENT and COUNCIL OF HIS
MAJESTY'S TERRITORY And DOMINION of NEW ENGLAND in AMERICA AN ORDER FOR THE
HOLDING OF COURTS And EXECUTION of JUSTICE. Published the 10th of June 1686.
TO the end that Justice may be equally distributed within This His Majesty's
Territory and Dominion; and Criminal Offenders against His Majesty's Laws
duly punished, It is Ordered by the PRESIDENT and Council, That in each
several County and Province within this Government, there shall be Erected, and
Settled, and by the AUTHORITY aforesaid there is hereby Erected, Appointed and
Settled a COUNTY COURT, to be held and kept as a Court of Pleas and of General
SESSION of the Peace, within each County and Province aforesaid, The times,
places and order of which County Court are as follows ( viz.)

For the County of Suffolk to be held at Boston, Four Courts in the year,
The first on the last Tuesday in July next. The second on the last Tuesday in
October following. The third on the last Tuesday in January. The fourth on the
last Tuesday in April. And so on the same days annually.
For the County of Middlesex:
The first at Cambridge on the first Tuesday in October. The second at
Charlestown on the third Tuesday in December. The third at Concord on the first
Tuesday in April The fourth at Charlestown on the third Tuesday in June. And so
on the same days annually.
For the County of Essex.
The First at Ipswich on the last Tuesday of September. The Second at Salem on
the last Tuesday in November. The Third at Ipswich on the last Tuesday in
March. The Fourth at Salem on the last Tuesday in June, And so Annually.
For the County of Hampshire,
The First at Springfield on the last Tuesday in September. The Second at
North-Hampton on the last Tuesday in March, annually.
For the Province of New Hampshire.
The First at Great-Island, the first Tuesday in October. The Second at
Portsmouth, the First Tuesday in April.
For the Province of Main,
The first at York, the second Tuesday in October. The Second at Wells, the
second Tuesday in April.
And for the more Regular and certain Keeping of the aforesaid COURTS, It is
Ordered that they shall consist of such Member or Members of the Council in
each County and Province as shall be therein resident (not excluding any others
of the Council who shall think fit to be present) together with such Justices
of the Peace, as (where need is) shall be particularly commissioned thereunto:
So that the number in each County Court be always three at the least, and one
of them a Member of the Council, who being assembled at the times and places
appointed, have full Power and Authority to open and hold the said County
Courts and to proceed to the hearing, trying, and issuing of all Civil Causes
and Pleas whatsoever, and of all Criminals not extending to Life or Limb, and
upon Judgment given to award Execution making such Adjournments as to them
shall seem fit, and punishing all Contempts, as unto such a Court of right
does belong; from which several County Courts, and the Judgment in them given
in all Civil Cases, there shall an Appeal lie to be orderly made and brought to
the President and Council at their next Court, to be held for that end, as
hereafter is appointed, unto which Court of Appeals the Appellant shall bring
the whole Case as it was pleaded and tried in the Inferior Court between the
Appellant and Defendant, and both shall have further Liberty of all such
additional Evidences and Pleas to be brought as does not alter the Issue that
has been between them.

It is further Ordered, Declared and Appointed, That there shall be held by the
President or in his absence the Deputy-President and Council, a Stated
Superior Court of Grand ASSIZE and General Jail-delivery for this His
Majesty's whole TERRITORY and DOMINION, to be kept Thrice in the Year at
BOSTON; i. e. On each First Tuesday in the Months of November, March and July,
and so Annually. In which Superior Court so to be held shall be here tried and
finally Issued all Cases of Appeal, all Capital Cases, and all such Pleas of
the Crown, and other matters of greater Concernment as are above the Cognizance
of inferior Courts, and proper thereto to be determined, saving always unto
all persons Liberty of Appeal unto His Majesty in Council as in and by His
Majesty's Royal Commission is granted, limited and appointed*

And for the more ready Dispatch of small Causes, where the Damage besides
Cost shall not exceed the Sum of Forty shillings, It is Ordered and declared
that the President and each Member of the Council has Power to hold Plea of,
and to give Judgment, and award Execution in all such Causes, as heretofore
has been in use. The like Power have any two of the Justices joining together.
And from the Sentence and Judgment in these Cases to be given, there shall be
an Appeal to the next Court of the County and no higher.

It is also further Ordered by the Authority aforesaid. That in all Legal
Process within this His Majesty's Territory and Dominion to be allowed and
accounted valid in the several Courts now constituted, the Original Writ shall
always be under the Hand and Seal of the President, or of some Member of the
Council, or of the Clerks of the County Courts within their several Precincts:
And in small Actions, under the hand and seal of such as are to try them. And
all such Writts as shall be aabove Twenty Pound value shall be also stamped
with the SEAL of the Secretaries Office; all which Original Writts abovesaid,
and all Executions upon Judgment given shall be directed to be served by the
Provost-Marshal, County-Marshal or their Deputyes and no other, except in small
Cases, where the Constable of the Town shall be sufficient; and where the Cause
is to be tried in the County Court, every Original Writ shall be served
fourteen days before the Sitting of the said Court, and pursuant thereunto a
Declaration of the Plantiffe shall be also entered with the Clerk of the Court
seven days before its Sitting, and the same time (of seven days) is given for
the Entrance of the Reasons of Appeal with the Secretary in all Cases of Appeal
to the Supreme Court.

It is further Ordered, That the Acknowledgment of all Deeds or other Legal
Instruments that are to be Entered upon Record, shall be made before and be
signed by the President or some Member of the Council and no other.

Further, That the Office for the Probate of Wills and Granting
Administrations, be holden by the President for the time being, and his Clerk,
at the Council-House on Thursdayes at Ten of the Clock in the morning; and in
the other Provinces and remote Countries, by such Judge and Clerk as the said
President under his Hand and Seal shall Authorize, and at such Time as shall be
a appointed, taking Fees according to the Statutes, and said Clerks being
herein accounted as Deputies to the Secretary and Register, and from him to
take Deputation accordingly.

Further, That such as from time to time shall be allowed and sworn Attournyes
by the Council and County Courts, (and they only to receive Fees and plead in
any of His Majesty's Courts,) and no other presume to offer Pleading, save that
every man is allowed to plead his own Case.

That no Affidavit or Testimony is in any Civil Case to be taken out of the
Court where the Trial is Holden, except before some Member of the Council where
the Witness is at a great distance from the Court, or incapable of coming, or
bound to Sea before the Trial, and then in presence of the Opposite party if he
may be had, and seasonable Notice be given to him thereof: And all Witness in
Criminal Cases to give their Evidence in open Court.

That where Judgment has passed in any former Court within this TERRITORY and
DOMINION, and Execution has not been taken out and Levied, the party for whom
Judgment has passed shall have a Writ of Scire facias from the Secretary or
Clerk of the Court, whence a new Execution should proceed to the Adverse party
to appear before the Court that has proper Cognizance thereof and show cause
why Execution should not go out, and incase of Nonappearance, or that
sufficient cause be not shown to the Court for Arrest of Judgment, Judgment
shall be affirmed and Execution granted accordingly

That the County Courts shall appoint in every Town a fitting person for Clerk
to take the accounts of Births and Burials, (unto which Office, Mr. Richard
Buckley is appointed for BOSTON) which shall be quarterly brought into the
Clerks of the County Courts, for which such Clerk shall receive threepence for
each Name and pay one penny for every Name to the Clerk of the County Court,
and every person next related or concerned is hereby Ordered to give notice and
make payment as abovesaid, within the space of one week upon the poenalty of
five shillings; and that the several Ministers and Justices do in like manner
at every County Court make Return of the Marriages by them severally
solemnized, and pay to the Clerk three pence for every Couple.

That Licenses for Holding of Taverns, Inns, Strong-water Houses, and Retailers
in and without doors, and public Victuallers, be granted by the County Courts
of the several Shires and Provinces to which the several Inn-holders shall give
Bond and pay accustomed Fees and Duties, as has been in Use; and the Treasurer
and such others as shall be from time to time appointed, have hereby Power
granted them to agree with the Duties of Excise, and no person licensed shall
presume to draw until he has made such Agreement with the Treasurer as
abovesaid. And it is Ordered that none presume to draw Drink without License
upon the poenalty of Five pounds for every Conviction (according to the late
Usage) to be made before some Member of the Council, or any Two of the
Justices, within the County, and the Fine to be Levied by Writ from such
Member of the Council, or Justices, and the same to be divided, one half to His
Majesty and returned to His Treasury here, and the other half to the Informer.

For the orderly and equal Appearance of Juries to serve in Courts,

It is Ordered, That the Constables and Select men in the several Towns within
this His Majestyes Territory and Dominion, do before the first day of July next
give into the several Marshals of the Counties in which the Towns severally
lie, a full and true List of all the Freeholders and Inhabitants meet to serve
on Juries, and that the Marshals thereupon in their several Counties, with the
Assistance of one of the Justices thereto Appointed, shall prick the Panel or
Pannels for the Grand or Petty Jurors, who shall be summoned by the Marshal
fourteen Days before the Court, and the Panel delivered to the Clerk of the
Courts under the Marshal's Hand, that they may serve accordingly.

That the Fees to be paid in all Trials and Issues at Law shall in no case pass
the particular Orders of the President and Council

In the Trial of Small Cases. VIZ.
l. s. d. For the Attachment or Summons 0 1 0 A Sub-poena to summons Witness 0
0 3 Entrance 0 3 4 Fileing the Papers, each paper 0 0 2 Judgment 0 0 6
Confessing Judgment 0 1 0 Execution 0 2 0 Affidavit out of Court 0 1 0
Acknowledgments of Deeds and other Instruments 0 2 6 If the Deed be above a
hundred pound 0 5 0 In Trials of the County Court,
For Stamping the Writ in ye Secretary's Office 0 0 4 Attachments if above a
hundred pound 0 2 0 The Juryes, for every Verdict 0 6 0 Entrance of the Action
0 10 0 Confessing Judgemont 0 2 0 Additonal Entrance of Judgment above 20 l. 0
10 0 License to Keep Public Houses 0 5 0 Judgment 0 2 0 Execution 0 2 6
Probate of a Will and Administration) Copies of the Will, Attestation and
Inventory) 0 6 0 If the Estate be above two hundred pounds 0 7 0 In all Appeals
before the President and Council,
Entrance 1 0 0 Judgment 0 5 0 For Serving Executions accustomed Fees. Return
of a Proclamation 0 1 0 Serving a Replevin 0 1 6 Release of a Fellon 0 1 6
Besides accustomed Fees for Travel.

The Keepers Fees, in all Causes as are accustomed

The Coroners Fees
For the Inquisition of untimely Death,) and of the Goods of the Deaceased,) 1
0 0 Besides Allowance for Travel. And where no Goods from the Country. 0 13 4

OFficers for the Several Courts Viz.
For Suffolk,
Clerks Mr. Daniel Allin Mr. Thomas Dudley

Mr. John Blake, Coroner.
Marshals. Mr. John Winchcombe Mr. Nathaniel Page

For Middlesex,
Capt. Laurence Hammond Clerk. Mr. John Green, Marshal. Mr. Samuel Gooken
Coroner.
For Essex,
Mr. Stephen Sewal, Clerk Lievt': Jeremiah Neal, Marshal. Mr. Samuel Gardener,
Coroner.
For Hampshire,
Clerks Mr. John Holioak Mr. Samuel Patrick

Mr. Samuel Marshfield, Marshal. Mr. Joseph Hawley, Coroner.
For the Province of New Hampshire.
Richard Chamberlain Esquire Clerk. Mr. Pheasant Estwick Coroner.
Who shall be all sworn to the faithful Discharge of their Trust.

An ORDER for the Encouragement of SURVEYERS of Ships and Vessels. etc.
WHEREAS In the several Counties and Seaport Towns there have been appointed
meet Persons for the Surveying of Ships (either which are building or
defecttive) and damnified Goods;

It is hereby DECLARED, That the said Persons, are Continued in that Service,
and for their Satisfaction shall receive each of them from the Employers, Four
shillings, for every Survey Made and Returned under their hands.

IT is ORDERED and DECLARED, That the Bounds of all Townships shall Be and
Continue as heretofore settled, and that they shall be run between Town and
Town for time and manner as has been formerly required and used; And that each
Town have the same Liberty and Power of Choosing and Instructing their
Select-men, Constables and other Officers for the Management of their own
Affairs as they have used and exercised, and all such Elections to be made by
the Freeholders in every Town

It is also Ordered, That all Contracts, Agreements, and Orders regularly made
in any Town, respecting either their Ministers or Schoolmasters as to their
Maintenance, or any other Person Concerned or the public Benefit of the Town,
shall remain good and valid for the whole time that they were made for, and
shall accordingly be Pursued, put in Execution, and Fulfilled.

And for the future Raising and Defraying of all such Public Charges in Towns
as shall be needful;

It is Ordered, that Whatsoever Sum or Sums shall be granted by the
Inhabitants for that end, in any of their Town-Meetings regularly assembled*
shall be by the Select-men first presented to two of the next Justices of the
Peace within the same County, or to One of the Members of the Council therein
Resident, to be by Him or them allowed and underwritten, which being so
obtained, the Select-men or such Raters as shall be specially chosen by the
Town for that Service, shall assess the said Sums upon each particular
inhabitant that is within their Town (the Members of His Majesty's Council
excepted) in due proportion to their known Abilities and Estates, and thereof
shall make a distinct and perfect List under their Hands, setting down every
man's Name and particular Proportion, with which List so perfected the Select
Men shall apply themselves to one of the Justices of the Peace for that County,
or to any Member of the Council, who shall make his Warrant* thereupon under
his Hand and Seal directed to the Constables of each Town respectively, for the
speedy Levying and Collecting of all such Assessments within a fitting time
prefixed, with Power of Distress in case of refusal or neglect of Payment by
any one, as formerly, and all Sums so collected shall be by the Constables
carefully and duly paid in according as the Select-men shall appoint: And if
any Constable shall neglect to perform his Duty in the premises, he shall be
liable to respond all such Sums as through his default shall not be collected
and paid in.

And further, It is Ordered, That whereas there are several small Towns and
Villages by the late Government put under the Direction of several Committees
the said Committees are hereby continued in their full Power until the
President and Council shall take further order:

The Narraganset Country called the Kings-Province having hitherto been
unsettled is not to be understood to be intended in this Order or any thing
contained therein.


