At a CONVENTION of the REPRESENTATIVES Of the Several TOWNS and Villages of
the Massachusetts-COLONY in NEW ENGLAND.
WE the Representatives of the several Towns and Villages of the Massachusetts
Colony in New England, convened at Boston, May 22 nd. 1689. having fully and
deliberately examined the Minds and Instructions of the several Towns belonging
to the said Colony; do find it to be the General Consent and Concurrence of our
several Towns to Reassume the Government according to Charter-Rights: Having
also Weighed and Considered the Propositions presented and tendered to us by
our Honorable Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistants chosen and sworn
Anno 1686: Do therefore with Respect to the Directions by our several Towns,
and in Prosecution of our former Declaration presented (...) DECLARE our Minds
and Resolutions for the Settlement of Civil Government amongst us, according to
Charter-Directions: Having seriously Weighed the present Circumstances and
shattered Condition this Colony is in;

And being tenderly sensible of the Afflicting Hand of GOD which is at present
upon us in regard of our Unsettlement and Want of that Civil Jurisdiction that
in former days we have rejoiced in; and Knowing also the earnest Desires and
Expectations of the several places we belong unto, to receive a comfortable
Answer and Return in order to their Re-instating and Settlement under their
former Patent-Rights, that so they might enjoy Tranquillity, as in former days
and pleasant years that are past. This Colony having likewise solemnly
Addressed themselves to Almighty GOD by Fasting and Prayer, for Pardon of our
manifold Wilderness-Provocations, and Restoring to us our Pleasant things, and
for Direction in this present Juncture to such Methods and Ways of Settlement
of Civil Rule, as may most conduce to His Glory, and the Peace, Safety and
Prosperity of this our poor distressed Land: And taking signal Notice of a
Gracious Answer to our Prayers, in the Unanimous Agreement of our several Towns
and Villages, concurring in their Apprehensions and Desires of the Reviving of
our Charter-Rights and Privileges; and that we do again Settle upon that firm
Foundation that we have already built upon, and have signally observed the
Presence of GOD attending the same,

We do therefore so far prize our former Liberties and Enjoyments both Civil
and Sacred, as to resolve (by the help of God) to venture our Lives and Estates
for the Reviving and Maintaining of them; knowing and believing such a way of
Settlement comfortable to and safe for our selves; and Correspondent to the
noble Undertaking of His Royal Highness the Prince of Orange, in the late
Settlment of Affairs in the Renowned English Nation, etc. Whose ancient
Liberties and Rights in their several Cities and Corporations, He has
reinvested them withal; and (we doubt not) will encourage and Commend us (in
the middst of our Oppression) for imitating so Noble and Prince-like a Pattern
in using all due means for the Recovery of what was so unjustly and
unreasonably rent out of our hands.

The Reasons inducing us to these our Resolutions premised are

1. That it is an Undertaking allowed and countenanced by His Royal Highness
our Renowned Prince that we be reinstated in our Patent Privileges, and be
found in such a Method of Government according to our ancient Charter Rights,
which He has given Patterns of and Directions to in the Realm of England,
which Realm we have a Dependence upon and stand in so near a Relation to.

2. That there is an absolute Necessity of Settlement of Civil Government
amongst our selves, without which we cannot enjoy Peace Safety and Tranquillity.

3. That the Dependence and Method of Settlement of the said Government in this
present Juncture, lies wholly in the Voice of the People.

Being Sensible also of the great Disadvantage and Danger we are all in, in
this present Vacancy of Government, subject to Violence. Likewise understanding
the great Disadvantages th^s Merchants and Traders, and all honest men are in
of Recovering of their honest Debts and Dues, whereby they may maintain their
Trading, and approve themselves faithful to those (not only at home, but in
Foreign Countries) they Correspond withal.

We do therefore trust in Almighty GOD to carry on and prosper our Desires and
Endeavors, which GOD has so far succeeded.

The Representatives of the several Towns in said Colony, having seriously
weighed the sad Circumstances that this our Country is at present under; Do
hereby (in behalf of our selves and Country) Declare this to be our mind and
full Resolutions (by Divine Assistance) to settle a Government according to
Charter-Directions, and our Patent-Priviledges. And do hereby declare the
Honorable SIMON BRADSTREET Esquire our Governor, Thomas Danforth Esquire
Deputy Governor, with the rest of the Assistants chosen and sworn Anno 1686,
to be Reinstated as formerly, and take the present Care and Conduct of this
people, together with the Deputies sent from the respective Towns of this
Colony, according to ancient Custom, and as need requires: And that there be
Acts of Jurisdiction put forth, for the Preservation of our Peace, Prosperity
and Safety. Likewise that there be a Choice made of a Major General, for the
Regulating of Military Affairs; and also Assistants for the Supply of such as
are wanting in Government; and that this Method of Government may be found
amongst us when Order shall come from the higher Powers in England

We do therefore Devolve the full Power of Government upon, and Entrust it in
the Hands abovesaid, fully Confiding in the said Honorable Persons for the
Administrations of Government for the ensueing part of this year, till a
further Choice be made according to Charter-Direction as aforesaid; But in case
Order from Higher Power from England (upon whom we have Dependence) be
transmitted for any Alteration: Then the said Government thus Constituted do
signify the same to the respective Towns of this Colony, That so they may be
Consulted with in Order to their Approbation and Compliance.

Further, We do expect, and signify our Desires (and that according to our
several Instructions from the Several Towns, whose Representatives we are) that
there be an Enlargement of Freemen for the annual Choice of Government and all
Votes relating thereunto, and that the Government thus Re-instated do
faithfully endeavor the Confirmation and Settleing of Charter-Priviledges.

And we do further Declare our High Esteem of those Honorable and Worthy
Gentlemen, who have intervened in an hour of our greatest Extremity and
Temptation, and implore Almighty GOD to retaliate their great Kindness, and
grant them the Blessings of this and a better Life, and hope we shall pay all
honorable and due respects to them, and perform for them what may be justly
expected at our hands.

This we present as a full and Final Declaration of our Minds and Votes,
expecting the Conservation of our Peace from the Government thus Constituted,
further depending upon Your Honors Compliance, in such and no other way of
Settlement, Knowing in this our Act. we have discharged our Consciences to our
Country, contrived the best Expedient for the present Settlement, and must
leave it to Your Honors Defect, if any evil Occurrence shall for the future
happen to this Country, by your Noncompliance with us.

Unanimously Voted by the Representatives Convened at Boston, May 24 th. 1689.
Ebenezar Prout, Clerk to the Representatives.
Collected by some of the Representatives out of their Declaration, for the
Satisfaction of their several Towns.
Printed at Boston by R. P. Anno supradict'.


