AT A SESSIONS of the GENERAL COURT Held at Boston the 11th October 1676.
THis Court having had manifold Exper(...) (...) in former days, so lately of
the most High God his maki(...) (...) (...)ath given his people for their
Encouragement at all (...) make their humble Supplications to his Divine
Majesty (...) Christ, who says not to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in
(...) (...)aise his holy Name for his wonderful working for us, a poor
unwo(...) (...) this Wilderness, in the times of our greatest need. And it
being (...) with us, (notwithstanding the Inequality of our ways toward him,
(...) (...)metimes to Israel, how shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall I
delive(...) (...) Cause to lie low before him; to search and try our ways and
turn us (...) (...)retching forth his hand against us, as by the Heathen in the
Northern P(...), wasting (...) (...)ing of many hopeful English Plantations, to
the breaking up of many Families, and bringing g(...)t distress upon several
persons, so also by sickness and deaths this latter End of the Year; we have
also upon us the sense of our need of the Lords favor as for the Preservation
and guidance of ou(...) (...)y Friends, our Messengers in their way and work,
and that they may find favor with his Majesty in England; and that we may be
found in an humble submissive frame to what ever the Lord shall dispose toward
us, and may obtain Grace from him; that we may be kept from dishonouring his
holy Name: for which Ends:

This Court does appoint and set apart the first Thursday in December, being
the seventh day of the Month to be kept, a day of solemn Humiliation and
prayer in the several Churches, Congregations and Towns throughout this
Jurisdiction, and all persons in their several Capacities are hereby Ordered to
attend the same, and to forbear all servile labor, or other Course that may
hinder them from a serious Attendance to the duties thereof, that so we may
jointly implore the Lords favor and grace, that he may please to give Ear to
us being our Sheepherd, and turn us again that we may be saved.

By the Court, Edward Rawson Secret.


