The Oath of ALLEGIANCE
I A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare in
my Conscience befo(...) God and the World, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles
is lawful and rightful King of t(...) Realm of England, and of all other his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries, And that the Pope (...)there of himself, nor
by any Authority of the Church, or See of Rome, or by any other means with all
other has any power or Authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdom or Dominons, or to Authorize any foreign Prince to Invade
or Annoy him, or his Country, or to dischar(...) any of his Subjects of their
Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty; or to give license or leave to any
(...) them to bear Arms, raise tumults, or offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal person State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's Subjects
within his Majesty's Dominions: Also I do swear from (...) heart, that
notwithstanding any declaration or Sentence of Excommunication, or deprivation
made (...) granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope or his Successors, or
by any Authority derived, or (...)tended to be derived from him or his See
against the said King, his Heirs, or Successors, or any absolute of the said
Subjects from their Obedience, I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, his He(...) and Successors, and him and them will defend to the
uttermost of my power against all Conspiracies (...) Attempts whatsoever which
shall be made against his or their persons, their Crown and Dignity by (...)son
or color of any such Sentence or declaration, or otherwise, and will do my
best endeavor to dis(...) and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs, and
Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies (...) I shall know or hear
of to be against him, or any of them. And I do further swear that I do from my
(...) abhor, detest, and abjure as Impious, and Heretical, this damnable
doctrine and position, that Pri(...) which be excommunicated or deprived by the
Pope may be deposed or murdered by their subjects, (...) (...)ny other
whatsoever. And I do believe and in my Conscience am resolved that neither the
Pope (...) (...)ny person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, or
any part thereof, which I acknowle(...) by good and full Authority to be
lawfully ministered unto me; And do renounce all pardons and dispensa(...) to
the contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and
swear according to (...) express words by me spoken, and according to the plain
and common sense and understanding of the words, without any equivocation, or
mental Evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. And make this recognition and
Acknowledgement heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true Fai(...)
Christian, So help me God.

That this is a true Copy compared with the Original sent in his Majesty's
Letter and is (...) published by Order of the General Court sitting in Boston
in New England the second of October, (...).

Edward Rawson S:


