By the PRESIDENT and COUNCIL of His Majesty's Territory and Dominion of
New England in AMERICA.
WHEREAS The PRESIDENT and COUNCIL are Informed that Many false Representations
and Reflections have been made upon what was lately spoken and declared by the
President in the Council-House at Boston when He together with the Members of
the Council did there Shew-forth and publish to such of the late Magistrates
and Deputys and other principal Inhabitants as were then present, the
Exemplification of the Judgment of His Majesty in His High-Court of Chauncery
against the late Governor and Company of this Place, as also His Majesty's
Royal Commission for the Erecting of the Present GOVERNMENT, They have
therefore thought it Expedient that the PRESIDENT's SPEECH taken verbatim by
credible Persons, be forthwith Printed and Published.

Council-House, Boston June 3d. 1686. Edward Randolph Secr':

THE SPEECH OF THE HONORABLE JOSEPH DUDLEY ESQUIRE: PRESIDENT OF HIS MAJESTY'S
COUNCIL of This HIS TERRITORY And DOMINION of NEW ENGLAND, To the Late General
Assembly in the COVNCIL-HOVSE In BOSTON: May 17. 1686. Is as follows.
Gentlemen,
HEre are present of His Majesty's Council, Several of this place, besides whom
there are other Gentlemen whom we have desired to be here as Witnesses of what
we have in Charge to declare unto you.

And First, I must aquaint you, that we may take you now only for such as you
are, (viz.) considerable Gentlemen of this place, and Inhabitants of all parts
of the Country, and so a proper Assembly to have His Majesty's Commands
Communicated to you, and under that Notion we treat with you, we may not deal
with you as a Governor and Company any more.

The first Thing we notify to you is the Exemplification of a Judgment
^ntered on His Majesty's behalf, given in His High Court of Chauncery against
^he Charter and Government of this place; We are commanded to make ^t known to
His Majesty's Subjects here, and we are willing to do it first to yourselves.
From your Attorney (while you were in Being) I had a Copy of it, and it was
communicated to the Council here, read in the House of Magistra^es and in the
House of Deput^es, the Difference between them is in these words [ Where a Copy
of the INSPEXIMUS was read] I leave it with you to be added to what I formerly
gave you: If any Gentlemen desire further Satisfaction, there will be an Office
open suddenly where it may be seen.

The next Thing is, His Majesty's pleasure to settle a GOVERNMENT here; The
Copy of His Royal COMMISSION for that end we sent to you and understand it has
been Communicated. We are next to notify unto you His Majesty's GRACE and
FAVOR for the Encouragement of Trade, in Settling a VICE-ADMIRALTY here, with
Power and Authority to extend from the Territory of New York to ^he utmost
bounds of His Majesty's Dominion Eastward, the Management of which is to be in
this place, each Page is Signed with His Majesty's ^wn Hand, (His Majesty being
pleased to manage the ADMIRALTY ^n His own Royal Person) and I here present you
with the Sight of it.

We have further, Letters from His Majesty and the Honorable the Lords
Committees for Foreign Plantations, and I am willing His Majesty's ^ubjects
here should know (so far (...) concerns them) the Directions and Instructions
therein Contained. And we have other particular Instruct^ions for His Majesty's
Service; but if any be so hardy (as is said) to object to any Clauses in His
Majesty's Commission, we have no Direction or Allowance to capitulate with you
about His Majesty's Command therein. We hope you will not ask things of us, we
are not allowed to argue, Such most apply themselves immediately to His Majesty.

It may be thought the Unkindness of This good People, and the many Injuries
they have done me may have put me forward to do more in this matter than
other-wise I would have done* I will endeavor, and (I will assure you) I will
pray to God to enable me I may forget all Injuries and and prejudices, and if I
can do any thing toward an Idulgence in matters of Religion, and put forward
the Good of this Place, and represent their Grievances (when I shall orderly
know them) I shall be glad to serve you as well as ever I have done and more.

The Address of this Countries Governor and Company could not come to the
King's ear, nor obtain the sight of His Majesty, but if these Gentlemen whose
Estates and Interests are here amongst you can assist to the advanceing of any
thing that can secure you, or represent your Interest to the King, His Majesty
has allowed us and graciously commanded us so to do; and there will be always
something for you to ask which cannot be laid before His Majesty but by the
humble Address of the Persons now betrusted, and you need not solicit them to
assist in what they know requisite for this Peoples Good.

Mr. Danforth. I suppose you expect no Reply from the Court?

Pres: I Know no Court here in Being, till the King's Court be in Order and
settled; and it will incurr the Kings Displeasure so to understand yourselves,
and I suppose what I now speak is the mind of the rest of the Council here
present.

To which the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Council then assented.

The SPEECH of JOSEPH DVDLEY Esquire: President of His Majesty's COUNCIL of this
His Territory and Dominion of New England, To the Assembly in the Council-House
in Boston, May 25 th. 1686, when the KING's Commission was read, and the
President and Council sworn, and took their Places accordingly.
Gentlemen,
BOth my Self and the other Honorable Members of His Majesty's Council
present, have taken this Government and Bench by His Majesty's Special Command,
wherein we are required, all Excuses set aside, to take the Charge and Manage^
(...) ^his His Majesty's Territory and Dominion of NEW ENGLAND, and by all
means carefully to intend His Service, and the Growth and Flourishing of these
Plantations; and you have now seen us solemnly sworn according to the Direction
in His Majesty's Commission even now read and published unto you. And you must
allow me to tell you. That it is impossible for my self and these Gentlemen, of
all whose Ability, Industry and Loyalty I have no reason to doubt, except for
my self, I say it is impossible for us to bring to pass His Majesty's Desire
and Expectation, which we are well assured is no other than the happy Increase
and Advance of these Provinces by their more immediate Dependence upon the
Crown of England, unless all His good Subjects intend and conspire the same, by
a sober, Loyal, and Dutiful Demeanor toward His Majesty's Government here,
which therefore we now advise you of, as the plainest path unto your own
Happiness, and of which we may not doubt that you will fail us.

The necessary Alterations in the Rule and Form of Administration of this This
His Majesty's Government from the Methods late used by the Government while it
stood by Char^er, as (by His Majesty's Indulgence and Favor) they need be but
a few, so we assure you shall with all Care and Prudence be contrived as plain
and easy as is possible, and we shall hasten humbly to lay them at His Most
Gracious Majesty's Feet for His allowance and Confirmation.

I may not omit to remark unto you in His Majesty's Commission that gracious
and favorable Clause of Indulgence in Matters of Religion, so necessary for
the Peace and Flourishing of this place, as also that of His Command unto His
President and Council here, that they further lay before Him such Methods and
Rules in Government as are necessary for you; and when we are commanded to ask,
we are assured that so just and wise a Prince as our Sovereign ^whom we serve)
is, does not mean to deny. It greatly imports us there^^^e, and I humbly pray
to God that we may improve both the said ^ndulgence and Direction of Address to
His Majesty, to His Majesty's Satisfaction and our own future lasting Benefit.

If there be any so ill-minded as to suppose they are now escaped from under a
strict and severe Government, and think to allow themselves i^ Debauchery and
ill-Living^, (which have hitherto happily been prevented from ove^^running
these Plantations, and which has been the true cause ^f their being so much
more considerable than their neighbors) we do assure them, and we do humbly
render our Thanks to God and His Majesty tha^ His Commands and Directions to us
are expressly to the Contrary, and most a^ (...) our own Inclinations: And we do
therefore justly expect from (...) ^ustices of the Peace, Constables and other
Officers now presently (...) be commissioned and established, that they
carefully intend the Suppression of (...) Vice and Ill-manners, and we shall
always strengthen your Hands therein, and God can make the Success happy.

I shall have done when I have told you, that for (...) ^es late offered to ^y
self by this people I should not once have mentioned them but to assure ^ou
that I have perfectly forgotten them, and that I am a true and sincere ^over of
my Country, and shall by all means (if I may be therein assisted and advised)
not fail to demonstrate it un^o you by the following short Administration of
Government; and this I say, as remembering that (you well ^now) I have my
Account to make immediately to His Majesty, and finally ^o GOD the Judge of all.

BOSTON Printed by Richard Pierce for Samuel Phillips, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the West end of the Exchange. ^DCLXXXVI.


