A PREPARATORY SHEET, occasioned (...) the Author's being asked at Sea, SHALL
ALL that have never heard of JESUS CHRIST, be ETERNALLY DAMNED?
ETERNALLY DAMNED, ^^w^^ds, that he to whom the^ (...) propounded, in remote
Parts, has ever since been so dissatisfie^ ^^bout, that he is thence moved to
take in hand so grand an E^quiry, [as, Whether DAMNATION, or the Torment of the
Dam^ or of Hell it self, shall be so eternal, as never to have any End (...)*
Whether that Damnation shall be only Eviternal and have an End ^^ter the
Duration of a certain Number of limited Ages, suppose a ^sand thousand Years,
or longer?

And the best Expedient that is known in this controverted Case, may be (^^ter
solemn seeking the LORD about it) a diligent consulting with, and (...)
considering the holy Scriptures of Truth, by the teaching of the holy Spirit*
^^^cording to the proper significacy of the Words and Expressions, of the
Hebre^ (...) the old, and in the Greek of the New Testament.

Not to insist now on Catacrima, Crima, Crisis, or Apoleia, which three (...)
Words are sometimes translated Judgment, and sometimes Damnation, we (...) here
only take notice, that the word Englished Damnation, so far as does co^^ the
present Question, and is commonly intended by Translators and Annotato^^ that
which does denote a Judicial, both sentencing of guilty Transgressors (...) as
live and die in unpardoned Sin) unto, and also the executing upon them (...)
deserved Destruction, or Torment in Hell, commonly accounted Eternally.

This Damnation has many Expressions both in Hebrew and Greek (...) whereby it
is set out, which distinctly to (...), and much to enlarge upon not h^^e my
present Purpose, who would at present confine my new first (...) Apprehensions,
within one Sheet, reserving the rest to another Discourse, Call, and also
Encourragement (as needed) be given hereunto.

The Word, and meaning of the word, Eternal, is that, which in this short ^^pe^
my Thoughts and Meditations are more taken up about, and confined un^* As for
the common Acceptance of it, relating to Damnation, or the Torme^^ the Damned
in Hell, or in the Lake of Fire, which is the second Death, as (...) should
never have an end, and as if it did signify such a Perpetuity as is e^ (...)
now dissatisfying me* gives me an occasion and motive at the present to search
^y diligently, Whether in those Scriptures, where it is most ordinarily used,
it ^^th not, in the intendment of the holy Spirit, hold forth rather
Eviternity, or ^ge-wise, if I may so speak, or a Plurality of Ages, in the
space of the different ^urations of the old first Creation, and new second
Creation, in Correspondency ^ith the Generations of both, and the like; all
which, after a definite Continuance, ^f a certain Number of limited Ages, shall
have an End put to it. And this, in his inquiring Age, is mainly the
Subject Matter queried here.

Let me therefore, as one, who is made, both serious in this Enquiry, and
wil^ing either to receive or give Satisfaction, as the LORD shall graciously
send forth ^is Light and Truth, with more cleerness, not at all to favor any
the least Sin, much less those exceeding odious intolerable Sins of Atheism,
and Infidelity, in my present Disobedience against Christ and his Gospel, much
less for any Curiosity, ^ere Scepticisms or Contentiousness, but with a quite
contrary Design of Practical ^mprovement thereof, for the promoting of the
great Ends of that which is true and sound Christianity, and good and pure
Religion, with that now seasonable love, that now waxes cold, if I may meet
with any winning Invitations, Let me, I say, for Intents and Purposes thus
approved, be allowed the modest Liber^y, of a tractable Disciple of Jesus
Christ, to argue for an Eviternity of Damna^^on only, till I can be farther
convinced of the contrary, by any better instructed ^aithful Friend, under
Christ, who may be otherwise helpful to me herein. This ^viternity only I thus
argue for.

Arg. 1. From the Significancy of Gnolam, and Gnolomim in the Hebrew, and ^f
Aion, Aiones, and Aionios in the Greek, as they relate to mere Creatures.

1. Gnolam and Gnolamim, a part ante, or in what foregoes, do in diverse
Scrip^^res denote the foregoing Ages and Generations; hence the Latin Olim,
from Gnolam, where it is taken, of past time; so Deuteronomy. 32.7. Remember the days
of Gnolam, (seculi, i. e olim, praeteritorum) of old, consider the Years of
Generation and Generation, of the Age past, Psalm. 77.5, 11. and 119.52. Isa.
40.9. so Joshua 24.2. ^n passing over the River your Fathers have dwelt
Megnolam a seculo, i. e. olim, ^^om of old, Eccles. 1.10. that has already
been Begnolamim, aliquot retro Seculis, in ^ome Ages past.

2. Also a part post, in what Gnolam and Gnolamim are consequent toward, and
wherein they have respect to a future Duration, Genesis 17.7. a Covenant Gnolam of
^he Age, where it does respect Abraham's Seed in their future Generations, and
^er. 8, about their Possessions (where it is not everlasting, but Gnolam, of
the Age, Exodus 21.6. He shall serve thee Legnolam in Seculum, not for ever, but
unto the Age, i. e. unto the Years of Jubilee.

3. Sometimes it takes in both, a part ante, and respects Duration past, and a
part post too, and respects Duration to come, as Psalm. 145.13. Where Christ's
Kingdom is said to be a Kingdom Col-Gnolamim, omnium Seculorum, of all or every
of the Ages, his Dominations in all Generation and Generations, Isa. 45.17. a
Sal^ation (not everlasting,) but Gnolamim of the Ages* and ye shall not be
ashamed, lord, Heb. 1.2. that Christ made the Ages* fecit secula, o^ that the
Father (...) the Ages by Christ. Hence the Rabbis speak, amongst their
Traditions, of a th^^^^fold Gnolamim, the upper, middle, and lower Gnolam, all
whith three Gnolam^^ they apply, to the Worlds created in time, and may be
understood of the Ages (...) the World, as made in their course of Duration,
and the Forms thereof, by Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 1.17. Christ may be there called
the Kingdom ton Aionon, of the Ages, but what refers to Aion may fall in under
the next Particular, where,

4. More particularly of the Greek Aion, Aiones, and Aionios, and Arguments, o^
Reasons, why they in Scripture mostly, or therein most ordinarily and usually
sig^nifie not Eternity, but rather Eviternity, or Age-wise. The Reasons here^^
follow.

1. Because these Words are used in Scripture not to express God's absolut^
Eternity, such as 1 Timothy 6.16. but even in relation to us his Decree is but (
Gr.) ^^ton Aionon, Ephesians. 3.11. that is, of the Ages, and not eternal^^ (...)

2. Because as here the Predetermination of the Ages is made in Christ so (no^
the Cosms or Worlds,) but Aiones, or the Ages are made by Christ, Heb. 1.2. an^
as these Texts are of Ages past, or a part ante, so is also Col. 1.26. where
Aion^^ also thus signifies, and is englished, the Ages.

3. Because Aionios also being made an Epithet to Chronos plurally, Romans 16.2^
2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2. is yet more evidently made not to signify, a part ante,
an other than what is temporal, for so it is also used with a Greek pro, i. e.
before.

4. Because as it is an Epithete to Cronos, time plu. of which Cronos the Angel
swea^ that it shall be no more, Rev. 10.6, 7. so a part post, it also cannot
ever signi^^ eternal, because made an Epithete to hope, Tit. 1.2. beginning,
which shall fail an^ cease, as 1 Cor. 13.13. so that the Ages and Generations
coupled together, Col. 1.2^ seem much of the same Duration; Christ in the
Original being called the Father (...) the Age, Isa. 9.6. and as Aion plurally
is used according to the Greek, in Jude 2^ with an all, so are Generations also
used with an all, Ephesians. 3.21. where, accordin^ to the Greek, it is word for
word, Unto all the Generations of the Age of the Age^* Thus will not Christ's
last of Generations be the last of his Ages?

5. Because this a part post, what the Translators englished the end of the
World, ^ the ends of the World, Mat. 13.29, 40. chapter 24.3. chapter 28. v. 20. Heb.
9.26. 1 Co^* 10.11. it is only Aion, whether singularly or plurally.

6. Because Gnolam and Aion would be plainly cleared, to signify not that which
(...) eternal or endless, but age-wise, were they not so much concealed, when
Englishe^ of old, for ever, from the beginning, from the beginning of the
World, for eve^ more, for ever and ever, and with a Negative, never, World,
both singularly an^ plurally, and so used plurally is Aion also englished
World, Course, World with^^^ end, and the like.

Arg. 2. I argue Damnation not to be only Eternal, but Age-wise, from the ve^^
nature and being of God himself, and of his glorious Excellencies, and singu^^^
Attributes, and from God the Father his choosing, appointing, and covenanti^^
(...), many to ^^ve all Men, and consequently the whole World, when (...) shall
become a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, 2 John 2.2. with (...).
3.17. And thus according to my Understanding, the said Excellencies and
At^^^butes seem best reconciled this way, and thus do they offer matter of
sweetest ^editation to all Mankind, God in Christ being Philanthropo^, Tit.
3.4. Prove. 8.31. (...) well as Theanthropos, God-man, or Emanuel, God with us.

But how many hard Thoughts have risen in the Minds of many, yea of some
^^^ring God, about the common Opinion, that by far the most shall everlastingly
be ^^^mented, for a short whiles temporary sinning? and how many have been
vexed and ^^rplexed in their Minds and Spirits, with that dreadful and amazing
Question, ^hether it be better or more eligible for rational Creatures, not to
have any being at (...), and to be utterly annihilated, rather than to be
endlesly miserable, and to be tormented (...) ever in Hell?

And let it be further minded, notwithstanding God's just Judgment upon and
a^^inst fallen Angels, yet he has given them much Relaxation, and Liberty for
thou^^nds of Years, here in this World, Genesis 3.15. with Mat. 12 43, 44, 45.
Mat. 8.30, 31. ^^k. 8.30, 31. Whereas God is gracious, long suffering and great
in Goodness; ^^d how does he testify it, Act. 14.17. and how exemplarily does
he reach out ^^d extend Good to all, Mat. 5.45. thereby to encourage us to love
our very ^^emies! For thus his tender Mercies are over all his Works, and all
his Works ^^^ll praise him, Psalm. 145.8, 9, 10. and his Mercy triumphs over
Judgment, Jam. ^^ 13. Psalm. 103.8, 9, 10. and therefore he judges no Man, but
has committed (...) Judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.22. But this may appear
farther under the next ^^gument.

Arg. 3. I argue from Christ's two natuures in one Subsistence, and
consequently ^^m his Office of Mediatorship, or Priest, Prophet, and King, and
accordingly ^^m his two States, both of Humiliation and Exaltation; There being
Scriptures ^y express concerning his dying for all actually, as Joh. 3.16, 17.
2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Tim. 2.4, 5; 6. Heb. 2.9, 10. Psalm. 6.8, 10. he being the Head
of every Man, 1 Cor. ^.3. and this being plainly spoken of the Son, of his
being manifest, on purpose (...) destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8.
with Heb. 2.14. and thus also is it ^^ke testified of his being sent into the
World, not to condemn the World, but that the ^^rld through Him might be saved,
Joh. 3.17. and therefore he claims it accordingly (...) says, All Souls are
mine, Ezekiel. 18.4. how willing may he be therefore, that (...) or last all may
come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and Repentance, and that (...) may thus
actually in effect, all be saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9. also Christ said to
be the Savior of all Men, 1 Timothy 4.10* and he thus giving himself, is said
(...) a Ransom for all, 2 Pet. 3.9. as also he is the Propitiation for the Sins
of the ^^^le World, 1 John 2.2.

And thus it may be herewith also farther supposed that Christ did actually
feel (...) undergo, for all fallen Mankind, all that Death, all those Deaths in
the several ^s of them, which were threatened against Sin and Sinners, even the
whole (...) full Wrath of God due to Sin, even the very Torments, as some
apprehend, of Hell; or else, that however his Soul was sorrowful unto Death,
wherein h^ might and did undergo the sorrows of Death and Hell, as Genesis 2.17.
and 3.15. with Psalm. 18.5, 6. Mat. 26.38. Mark 14.34. Luke 22.44. Act. 2.31.
Gal. 3.10, 13. 1 Cor. 15.22. 2 Samuel 22.5, 6. and Psalm. 19.4, 5.

Neither is the Everlastingness of the Torments to be suffered in Hell, as some
suppose, or in the Lake of Fire, any part of the Penalty threatened by way of
Satisfaction to infinite Justice. For so, God's infinite Justice could never be
fully satisfied, no not by the endless Torments of the Damned, if they were to
be endless* for more and more Justice would still call for further
Satisfaction, which mere Man can never fully satisfy, by all his Sufferings;
but rather, that full Satisfaction was an Effect of somewhat annexed to infinite
Justice, the Punishment it self in the whole of it, being not endurable by any
mere guilty Creature; and thus the long-lastingness of the Torment in Hell has
no place, where that which is full Punishment for Sin, is actually born, and
fully satisfied, as that was which was performed in and by Christ, so that
henceforth on this account no Man therefore was or now is, or shall be
tormented in Hell, for want of a Remedy, but only for rejecting the one only
Remedy, Heb. 2.3. Such things which may be well proved and cleared by
Scripture, may help to a right Determination in the Case. For Christ's Kingdom
is that which is age-wise, 2 Pet. 1.11. and yet not of this World, John 18.36.
and must at last have an end, 1 Cor. 15.24. and yet then first bring forth
Judgment unto Victory, in the moment when that which is perfect shall come,
Matthew. 12.20. with 1 Cor. 13.10. after all its increase, Isa. 9.7. that
corruption shall thus in a moment, ^t last, put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.51,
52, etc. and the Triumph be then accordingly, ver. 54, 55, 56. with ver. 57.
and thus shall Christ reign, till he make all his Enemies his Footstool, ver.
24, 26. he exercising, doing, or executing all his victorious Judgment, John
5.22, 27. in humane nature, and to the especial honor of his Saints in this
World, Psalm. 149. last; that when God's Judgments shall be thus in the Earth,
the Inhabitants (not of the Earth only, but) of the World may learn
Righteousness, Isa. 26.9. and thus Christ be glorified and admi^ed in his most
believing Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. to the benefit of all Crea^ures every where,
as Rev. 5.10, 14.

Arg. 4. I argue the like hereto, from the never-failing all-efficiency, which
in the irresistible and effectual application of Christ's Universal Redempti^^
i^ most manifestly the very Office and proper Work of the Holy Spirit. For this
Holy Spirit, who is one with the Father and Son in his testimony, 1 John 5.7.
being ^^onian, or agewise, as well as Christ's Kingdom is aionian, Heb. 9.14.
with 2 P^^. 1.11. How is the Spirit alike judicial also with the Son in its
changing and renewing Work, on all, how diversely soever, Isa. 4.4. with 1 Cor.
15.51. and with Ezekiel. 17.24. and being already given to this very purpose, in
way of Earnest, and first Fruits, 2 Cor. 1.22. Romans 8.23. and why? but in order
to the residue of the Spirit, that it may bring in the residue of Men, after
Israel's Restitution, Mal. 2.15. Romans 11.32, 15. with Acts 15.16, 17. in a
transforming way changing, (...) by degrees, in their Light, Life* and Liberty,
2 Cor. 3.17, 1^. with (...) ^rov. 4.18. 1 Cor. 13.10. till that all shall at
such a perfect day have the benefit thereof accordingly, in seeing by this
revealing Spirit, all that the Father has, to become the Glory of the Son, who
is the Age-wise Lord, Heb. 11.40. 1 Cor. 15.51. with Chap. 2.9, 10, 11. Isa.
40.5. Joh. 16.14, 15. 1 John 3.2. and how universal, on all flesh, shall this
effusion of the Spirit be, Joel 2.28. and that to an answerable universal
effect of the Spirit, in and on all Flesh, Isa. 40.5. and that after foregoing
Judgment and Tribulation, Joel 2.28. with v. 18, etc. and with Mat. 24.22.
(Gr.) with Isa. 40. v. 7, 6, 5. Hab. 3.2.

Arg. 5. This I might largely argue also (if I had space here) from the
capacity and expectation of the humane Nature and Rational being in all
Mankind, in the which is a hope that is aionian or age-wise, Tit. 1. v. 2. beg.
alike with such things, as Heb. 6.2. Mark 3.29, etc. which seems to good
purpose, to reach the very Creature it self indefinitely, without exception,
and that with, and from the very now first suffering Saints, Romans 8.2O, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25. and therefore the Gospel to be Gospel so universally preached, as
Mat. 28.18, 19. with Mark 16.15, 16. in all the World, to every Creature, as
with a regard had therein to every Creature, and that in order to put us
therefore upon an abounding in the Work of the Lord, as 1 Cor. 15.58. having
our Senses exercised so well, to discern between Good and Evil, in such
soundness of Principles, as may conduce to the going on to Perfection, Heb. 5.
lat. with Chap. 6. beg. and therefore the Gospel of Christ's Kingdom sometimes
is hinted at as alike aionian with his Kingdom it self, as Rev. 14.6. Matthew.
24.13, 14. with 2 Pet. 1.11. and is not in vain so called aionian.

Arg. 6. I argue it from the New Covenant, about the New Creation that is to be
established, through and by means of, and upon the taking away of the first old
Covenant, Jer. 31.31, etc. Heb. 8.8, etc. Heb. 10.9. and that unto the making,
not only of a new Heaven and Ear^h according to Promise, 2 Pet. 3.13. Rev.
21.1. but to the making of all Things new, v. 5. So that God causing so great a
shaking, as well in Heaven as in Earth, most remarkably: Why is there so great
a shaking, [thereby to remove that which is shaken] but in order to establish
that which cannot be shaken, that that may remain in the room and stead of
that, which being shaken, is to give place, and to be no more, and all this for
encouragement to serve God acceptably and aright, Heb. 12.26, 27, 28, 29. And
therefore it is all spoken of, as assuredly as if already done, how that with
respect had to the New Creature in Christ, all old Things are done away, and
all Things become New, 2 Cor. 5.17, 18.

Therefore if the first old decayed World, and this corrupt Creation-state of
things shall be but near an hundred such Generations, as Psalm. 90. v. 10. or
according to the seven days of its Creation-week, Genesis 1 st, 2 d, 3 d,
Chapters, with 2 Pet. 5.8. Yet there are a thousand Generations mentioned Psalm.
105.8. 1 Chronicles. 16.15. Deuteronomy. 7.9. with Exodus 20.6. and do they not hint out the
Son's special Generation, proper to the New Creation and Covenant, of which his
Kingdom shall in particular especially consist? And which of these thousand
Generations shall be less than a thousand Years? For did not Methuselah, in a
World destroyed, live near a thousand Years? which may have something of Type
in it, there being to be a Season, wherein a hundred Years shall be but an
Infants Age, Isa. 65.20. And at the latter end of this World, when the Beast
and False Prophet shall suffer, shall not the suffering Saints reign then a
thousand Years, Rev. 19. lat. with Rev. 20.4? And is not all this something to
intimate, that Christ's Age-wise special Kingdom, in Type and Antitype both,
shall be more than a thousand thousand Years? And in all this time, and at the
end of it, such as at the last Change, shall not Judgment, for and in the
behalf of Incorruption, be indeed victorious: as 1 Cor. 15.51, etc. with Matthew.
12.20. that there may be a deliverance out of the hands of all Enemies, Luke
1.74. and there be then also no more curse, Rev. 22.3. but Sin it self, or Sins
be made an end of, Dan. 9.24. and so the very inferior Creature also be no more
made Subject to the vanity which it is at present groaning under, Romans 8.21, 22?

Arg. 7. Lastly, I argue it from the final destruction of Death, the Gulf,
Hell it self, and the very Abyss or Deep, which is become the special place of
the great Leviathan, spoken of as the Dragon in the Sea. For what though
gradual Death was threatened, Genesis 2.17. ( Heb.) yet this shall not prevent
Death, the last Enemy, 1 Cor. 15.26. but this second Death at last, after all
the time of the first Death and Hell, before the last Judgment unaccomplished
and unfixt, shall become Death to the very last change of all Creatures, 1 Cor.
15.51. with Romans 8.21. even till then a Death of Deaths, a Hell-death, the
Death of Hell, made up of the two special Ingredients; the one Ingredient of
and from that of the former first Death, and of and from the other this of
Hell, as it was before unfixed, as if then formerly it had been in the Air, and
Sea, or Abyss, rather than in Gehenna, or the Lake of Fire and Brimstone on
Earth, in that which is in respect of the Holy City and its Appurtenances,
called the without, Rev. 22.15. And how is this place of outward and utter
darkness decyphered or deno^ed, in its Type or Antitype, as before, but as 1
Cor. 15.26. Rev. 1.18, and 2.11. and 20.1, 10, 14. and 12.8. Ezekiel. 28.10. and
32.21.24 -- 32. and 18.23. and 33.11. with 1 John 5.16, 17. and the like.

But yet shall it not however be a Death, as great and long a Death and as long
as it is, and shall endure, that shall be final and destroyed? And therefore
shall there not be a season when the Sea it self shall be no more, and that as
(...). 1 end, as an earnest of a full issue, to what results from thence, which
is therefore the more considerable, according to Isa. 27.1, etc. with the end
of the former Chapter, and with Isa. 57.20, 21. and so with Rev. 13.1. and
11.7. and 17.8. and 20.1, 3. and 9.1, 2, 11. Luke 8.31. Romans 10.7. Deuteronomy. 30.12.
and the like. And therefore shall not all this be that which Christ has not in
vain triumphed against, Hos. 13.14. speaking then so long ago to this purpose;
From the hand of Sheol will I free them, from Death I, says the LORD Christ,
(who by consanguinity and propinquity, have a Right, Authority, and Power
thereunto) will redeem them: I will be thy killing Pestilence, O Death: I will
be thy exterminating Excision, O Sheol, that is, O thou gulf and Hell!)
Repentance (as to this thus determination ^^ all the Ages, and all the
Generations thereof, in victory against Hell-death) shall be hidden from mine
eyes. Neither does the New Testament disagree from ^his, in 1 Cor. 15.54, 55,
56, with 57. Where the Apostle does triumph, first, in the ^eneral, against
Death, ver. 54 end, and then more especially make a more par^icular Triumph; 1.
Against Death's great sharpness, as quite enervated, ver. 55 ^eginning; and
then, 2ly. against Hades, v. 55, latter end, which does more properly signify
Hell than the Grave, as Psalm. 16.10. For who would not conceive the Soul here
in this of the Psalmist, to be distinct from the Flesh, in the former verse;
and if then the Flesh may be understood of the Body in the Grave, where bodily
corruption is usually suffered, how can the Soul be understood but of the
incorruptible part of Christ's Humanity, even of his inward man elsewhere? For,
did not his Soul continue elsewhere separate from his Body all the time his
Flesh or Body was in the Grave? Surely his Flesh, or Body and Soul, may not
both of them be thought to have their being and abode, after his Death till his
Resurrection, in the same place, till the very hour of his Resurrection, or the
third day. But this will appear more evidently from the following 56th verse,
where Sin, as the cause mostly and principally of Hell's Victory, is therefore
most directly triumphed against, and that as to its Sting, which is not without
torment, whereas the Flesh or Body has no torment at all, or sensible
suffering in the Grave. Nay, there also in that same verse, the Law it self,
that of Nature, and of the first Covenant broken, yea and of both Covenants not
continued in, or of what ever is Law, and is transgressed, and become any way
the strength of Sin, is here explicated, and that also under this head of
Triumph, which is the Triumph that is here made against all the greatest and
most powerful Enemies of the Creature, and therefore against Hell it self, as
an ^nemy, that all will confess does last longer than the first Death, and also
than the Grave; and that is that which does take in all Deads, otherwise than
the Grave ^oth. Thus therefore is that which is concluded on in v. 57. that
which is to nikos, (...) cat'exochen, that which is the Victory, as the whole
and full Victory through our Lord Jesus; only my Preparatory Sheet will now
admit no more but the following (...)*

APPENDIX.
THis is but a small taste to begin with, and peradventure opposition may
follow i^ (...) so, the hope, under God in Christ, is, That a few chosen may
^^and by seasonable Truth, and by a favourer of it, sometime under more
Soul-distress, whence still a sufferer in Body, by Wind and otherwise, and from
whom to the value of hundreds, or nearer thousands of pounds may have slipped,
without the discouraging him from his Studies in Scripture-Prophecies, whereon
this Sheet is founded, and which may therefore be willingly attended with
progress, ^s there shall be occasion, if he may be thereunto encouraged, and
his Family-Concernments may not be so overlooked, that enforcing Neces^^^^
should there^nto disenable him.

FINIS.

