HIS HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF ORANGE His LETTER to the LORDS SPIRITVAL and
TEMPORAL Assembled at Westminster in this present Convention. January 22. 1688.
My Lords
I Have Endeavored to the utmost of my power to perform what was desired of
me, in order to the public Peace and Safety; and I do not know that any thing
has been omitted which might tend to the preservation of them, since the
Administration of Affairs was put into my hands. It now lies upon you to lay
the Foundations of a firm Security for your RELIGION, your LAWS, and your
LIBERTIES.

I do not doubt, but that by such a full and free Representative of the Nation,
as now is met, the Ends of my Declaration will be attained: and since it has
pleased GOD, hitherto to bless my good Intentions with so great Success, I
trust in HIM that He will complete his own Work, by sending a Spirit of peace
and Union to Influence your COUNCILS. that no Interruption may be given to an
Happy and Lasting Settlement. The Dangerous Condition of the Protestant
Interest in Ireland, requireing a Large and Speedy Succor, and the present
state of Things abroad, oblige me to tell you, That next to the Danger of
unseasonable Divisions among your selves, nothing can be so fatal as too great
Delay in your Consultations. The States by whom I have been enabled to Rescue
this Nation, may suddenly feel the ill Effects of it, by being too long
deprived of the service of their Troops which are now here, and of your early
Assistance against a powerful Enemy who has Declared War against them. And as
England is by Treaty already engaged to help them upon any such Exigencies, so
I am confident that their cheerful Concurrence to preserve this Kingdom, with
so much Hazard to themselves, will meet with all the Returns of Friendship,
and Assistance, which may be expected from you as Protestants and Englishmen,
whenever their Occasions shall require it.

Given at St. James's this 22 nd of January 1688. To the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal Assembled at Westminster in this present Convention.



The ADDRESS of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons assembled at
Westminster in this present Convention,
Die Martis, 22. Jan. 1688. To His Highness the Prince of Orange.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons assembled at Westminster,
being highly sensible of the great Deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and
Arbitrary Power and that our Preservation is (next under God) owing to your
Highness: Do return our most humble Thanks and Acknowledgement to Your Highness
as the glorious Instrument of so great a Blessing to us. We do further
acknowledge the great Care Your Higness has been pleased to take in the
Administration of the public Affairs of the Kingdom to this Time: and we do
most humbly desire your Highness, that You will take upon You the
Administration of Public Affairs, both Civil and Military, and the Disposal of
the Public Revenue, for the Preservation of our Religion, Rights, Laws,
Liberties and Properties, and of the Peace of the Nation. And that Your
Highness will take into Your particular Care the present Condition of Ireland,
and endeavor by the most speedy and effectual means to prevent the Dangers
threatening that Kingdom. All which we make our Request to Your Highness to
Undertake and Exercise, till further Application shall be made by us; which
shall be Expedited with all convenient speed. And shall also use our utmost
Endeavors to give Dispatch to the Matters Recommended to us by Your Highness's
Letter.

The Prince's Answer. Die Mercurii. Jan. 23. 1688.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am glad that what I have done, has pleased you and since you desire me to
continue the Administration of Affairs, I am willing to accept it, I must
recommend to you the Consideration of Affairs Abroad, which makes it fit for
you to Expedite your business, not only for making a Settlement at Home upon a
good Foundation, but for the Safety of all Europe.

Die Mercurji, Jan. 23. 1688.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled at Westminster, That no
Papist, or reputed Papist, do presume to Come into the Lobby, Painted Chamber,
Court of Requests or Westminster Hall, during the Sitting of this Convention:
And it is further Ordered, That this Order be Printed and Published, and set
upon the Doors of the said Rooms.

An Order of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled at Westminster, for the
Non-Observing the sixth day of February; Die Sabbati February 2. 1688.
Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Assembled at Westminster, That
the Day of Thanksgiving on the sixth of February Instant. On which Day the
Late K. James the Second, came to the Crown, shall not be Observed in this
Kingdom.

Jo. Brown Clericus Parliamentorum.

Boston, Printed by R. P. for Benjamin Harris at the London-Coffee-House. 1689.


