An Awakening CALL From the Eternal GOD, To the UNCONVERTED.

OR, Seasonable ADVICE to them that are under Convictions, to prevent their
Miscarrying in Conversion: And some Scruples of the Tempted Resolved.

By SAMVEL CORBIN, M. A.

Isa. 66.9. Shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth? Says the
Lord.

Boston, in N. E. Reprinted by T. Green, for Nicholas Buttolph, at his Shop,
at the Corner of Gutteridges Coffe-house, 1702.

An AWAKENING CALL From the Eternal GOD, To the Unconverted.
Poor Condemned Sinner,
I Have a Message from God to thee that did never experience a New Birth, nor
the power of Christ's Resurrection, but are Dead in thy Sins to this day, how
far soever thou have gone in a refined form of Godliness to deceive the World,
and the Saints, and thine own Soul; Evil is certainly determined against thee
by the Lord, the day of thy Calamity is at hand, and the thing which shall come
upon thee make have Deuteronomy. ^2.25. Destruction and Misery an^ in thy ways, and
these lines are sent from the Lord to stop thee in thy desperate course: who
can express how wonderful thou shall for ever triumph in the Riche^ of Free
Grace, if the Spirit of God open thine eyes, who are hastening on blind-fol^ to
the Damned with a Lie in thy righ^ hand? I have endeavored to show the thine
abominations, and the misery of thin^ Estate; for many see they are great
sinners, but are not convinced of sin, because they believe not in Christ, and
that the^ are undone Condemned sinners. Thou ar^ a dying Man or Woman, and it
may b^ have but a few Sands in thy Glass to ru^ out, and then where will thou
appear^ Refuse not a Pardon now freely tendere^ to thee without money or price;
slight no^ the blood of Christ, tread not underfoo^ the Son of God, for then
there remaine^ no more Sacrifice for thy sins; quench n^ the Spirits motions;
for the time is a^ hand when it will strive with thee n^ more for ever. Awake
thou that sleepes^ and arise from the dead, and Christ sha^ give thee light,
Ephesians. 5.14. Reject not the counsel of God against thy self: Be not a mocker,
lest thy bands be made strong, Isa. 28.22. When that the Lord heretofore saw
the wickedness of man was great, He destroyed the world by a deluge of Water:
and Jesus Christ shall shortly be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, to take
vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel. Although thou art in such a dead
sleep, that no Created power can awaken thee; Yet is the Lord able by the
exceeding greatness of his Power to say to thee, now thou art in thy Blood,
Live, and he can make this a time of Love. Awake, awake O Arm of the Lord, as
in the ancient days: Thou have promised that the hour is coming, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live, Joh. 5.25. If the Father has given thee to Christ, thou shall come to
him, and he will in no wise cast thee out; but if he has appointed thee to
wrath, he will let thee alone in thy false peace, because he reserveth thee to
the day of Judgment to be punished. Whether thou hear, or forbear, be it known
that the Kingdom of God is come near unto thee.

1. Reflect upon thy heinous sins, thy heart is most desperately wicked, from
hence proceed all thine evil Thoughts, thine Adulteries, thy Fornications, thy
Murders, thy Thefts, thy Covetousness, thy Wickedness, thy Deceit, thy
Lasciviousness, thine Evil Eye, thy Blasphemy, thy Pride, these defile thee,
Mark 7.21, etc.

Because of these things the Wrath of God is coming upon thee, Ephesians. 6. Deceive
not thine immortal Soul, thou which committest such things shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, 1 Co^ 6.10. Which of Gods Righteous Laws have thou not
broken? God made man upright; but he has sought out many inventions. Every
imagination of the thoughts of thine heart is only evil continually, Genesis 6.5.
Thy carnal mind is at enmity with God: Whilst thou art in the flesh thou can
not please God. There is no fear of God before thine eyes. Is it not a wonder
of mercy, that God should not consume thee in a moment, for thy gross
ignorance, and sloth, and stupidity, thy hardness of heart and unbelief, and
for thy secret Abominations? Are not thy sins exceedingly aggravated? Are any
sins like thine? Have not Gods Servants labored and spent themselves in vain
for thy Soul? Surely thou a^ f^ in into the hands of the living God, a^ may*
well be a terror to thy self. I wonder not if thou fear, left thy sins shall
never be forgiven: but that thou art in danger of Eternal Condemnation, lest
thou ^alt drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured without
mixture into the Cup of his indignation: lest thou shall have the s^rer
punishment, and live under a fearful expectation of Judgment, and fiery
indignation which shall devour thee: Repent therefore, before thou have sinned
till there be no remedy, 2 ^hron. 32.16. Art thou not deaf to the joyful Sound
of free Remission of sins by the blood of Christ proclaimed to thee? How shall
thou escape, who do neglect so great Salvation* Take heed lest thou prove
like the Earth which drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it, and yet
bears Thorns and Briars, and is rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose end
is to be Burned, Heb. 6.7, 8. Thou have cause to fear continually, lest the
Lord should say of thee as of the barren Fig Tree; Cut it down, why cumbreth it
the Ground? Luke 13.7.

2. Reflect upon thy present dreadful Estate.

1. Thou art Condemned already, because thou believe not: John 3.18. Thou art
reprieved a little only from Execution through the wonderful patience of God.
Thou shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on thee? Is this a state
to rest in thus securely one moment longer? Give thy Conscience leave to speak

2. Thou have no hopes; if thy breath was but but stopped, thy Case is desperite.
Thou savest I hope to be saved by Jesus Christ; but the Lord says. The
Hypocrites hope shall perish, and shall be cut off, for what is his hope when
God shall take away his Soul? Joh 27.3. The way of Peace thou have not known;
thou art without Christ, a Stranger to the Promises, without Hope, and without
God in the world, Ephesians. 2 12.

3. Or which is worse and more dangerous, thou have but Dead hopes Are thy
hopes begotten by the power of Christ's Resurrection? Has not a deceived heart
turned thee aside, that thou can not deliver thy Soul, nor say, is there not
a lie in my right hand ^sa. 44.20 The strong man armed keeps thee in a false
Peace, Luke 11 2^. Thou sleep whilst thy Damnation slumbereth not, but
hastes greatly. Thou a^ like a man sleeping upon the top of a Man of a Ship;
walk a little longer in the light of the sparks, which thou have kindled, and
then thou shall have this at the hand of God, thou shall lie down in sorrow,
Isa. 50.11.

4. Thou art near Destruction, and ought to be under the continual
expectation of inevitable misery coming upon thee. Thou hangest over the Flames
of hell, only by the thread of thy life, if it were cut thou would sink down
presently into remediless misery. When thou lie down to sleep, who, knows but
thou may awake with flames about thine ears. When the night comes, thou
may say with an ^king heart, now is my Damnation nearer thou it was in the
morning. Thou that have been often reproved, and still hardenest thy neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29.1^ That word may
well terrify thee every night: Thou Fool this night shall thy Soul be required
of thee, Luke 12.20.

5. Thou know not how soon God may if He has not already, clapped a secret
Curse upon thee and sworn in His wrath, that thou shall never enter into his
rest, Heb. 3.11. Since thou art joined to thine Idols, thou have cause to fear,
lest God has said, Let him alone. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still;
thou shall sleep a perpetual s^p, and not awake, Isa. 51.57. In thy filthiness
is lewdness, because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall
not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest
upon thee; thou shall not mourn nor weep, but shall pine away in thine
iniquities, Ezekiel. 24.13, etc.

6. Thou may be reprieved from Hell for a further aggravation of thy sins,
till thou have filled up the measure of thine Iniquities. O fearful Estate* For
a man to live only to he^p up fuel for his own Everlasting burnings, even
treasures of wrath for the last day, Jam. 5.3.

7. The reason why God does not strike thee dead in thy sins may be, because
thou art reserved for greater Torments, that wrath may come upon thee to the
uttermost. God could easily crush such a crawling Viper as thou art to pieces
in a moment; but he reserveth the wicked unto the day of Destruction; they
shall be brought forth to the day of Wrath, Job. 21.^^. To this end and purpose
may thou be raised up that God may show his wrath, and make his power known,
and therefore endures with much long-sufferings the Vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction.

3. Consider thine Enemies.

1. The Law Curses thee, for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them: It tells thee thou shall surely Dye, Gal. 3.9. Ezekiel. 33.8. The Lord will
rain snares upon thee in the fullness of thy sufficiency thou shall be in
straits, Job 20 22. All thy enjoyments are Cursed to thee. Read Deuteronomy. 28.
Tremble thou secure sinner, for God is coming in the fire of his Jealousy to
smite the Earth with a Curse to the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
Unrighteousness.

2. Death and Hell wait for thee; the whole Creation is burdened with such a
Cumber-ground; the Sun to shine upon such a Dunghill, and shortly the Heavens
will reveal thy secret Iniquities, and the Earth will rise up against thee;
this is thy ^ortion from God, and the heritage appointed unto thee by God, Job.
20.^7, 29. Now consider this thou that forgetest God, lest He tear thee in
pieces, and here be none to deliver, Psalm. 40.22.

3. The Devil roars like a Lion for his ^rey to devour thee; when he accuses
^hee before God thou have none to plead ^y cause in Heaven; Consider with thy
self, What shall I do in the day of Visitation, and in the desolation which
shall come from far, to whom shall I flee for help, or where shall I leave my
Glory? Isa. 10.3.

4. God is thy deadly Enemy: The face of the Lord is against thee. Can thy
heart endure, or thy hands be strong in the day when God shall deal with thee?
Ezekiel. 22.14. Who can stand before his indignation? And who can abide the
fierceness of his anger? N^hum 1.6.

4. Consider thy future misery.

1. Thou must shortly Die, and then thy Time and day of Grace shall be no more.
Thou shall no more find then what thy Soul lusts after, Apocal. 18.4.

2. Christ will come with ten thousands of his Saints to convince thee, who
wilt not be awakened. The power and coming of the Lord Jesus in the Clouds will
be most dreadful, when He shall come in His own, and in his Fathers Glory. The
last Trumpet shall found, the Graves be opened, and the Sea, and Death, and
Hell shall give up their Dead; then will Christ bring forth his Enemies, which
would not that he should Reign over them: Then will thou Cry to the Rocks and
Mountains, Fall on me and hide me from the face of Him that sits on the
Throne, and ^om the wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath (...)
come, and who shall be able to stand? A^oc. 6.16, 17. But there will be no
dark^ess nor shadow of death, where the work^rs of iniquity shall hide
themselves, Job ^4.22. The very hearing of these things might awaken the most
desperate sinner in England.

3. Thou shall be judged and a^g^d ^t the Tribunal Seat of the Righteous G^,
where we must all appear, 2 Cor 5. (...) thou shall have all thy secret s^ ^ipt
(...) to thy Eternal shame. The time is (...) that Judgment must begin at the
House (...) God, and if it first begin at us, (...) be the end of them that
obey not (...) ^el of God? And if the Right^ (...) be saved, where shall the
(...) and Sinners appear? 1 Pet. 4.17, 8 (...) that did once offer his Blood to
thee, w^n (...) come to Judge and Condemn thee, (...) whose final Sentence
there is no Appeal Then every faithful Sermon and Reproof will rise up in
judgment against thee, and condemn thee. Thou will not agree with ^hine
Adversary quickly, before he deliver ^hee to the Judge, Mat. 5.25. Thou will
^ot hear the loving voice of Christ which ^alleth thee, Come, for all things
are now ^eady, Luke 14.17. But thou must hear that voice by constraint, Arise
ye Dead, and come to Judgment. It would be thy great mercy, if the forethoughts
of the terror o^ that day might seize upon thy senseless Conscience where ever
thou go. Thy Judge stands at the door, and the coming of the Lord draws
high: Awake therefore thou that sleep, and prepare to meet the Lord in the
air; Jesus Christ himself will pronounce that dreadful Sentence against thee,
Depart from me ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. What doleful outcries will condemned Souls express for Mercy, or for a
Reprieve then, that hate now to be Reformed, and Blaspheme the Spirit of Christ?

4. Thou that wilt not be warned to fly to Christ, shall lie in the hottest
flames of Hell. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah at the day of
Judgment than for thee. Thou must go away into everlasting Punishment, when the
Righteous shall go into Life eternal, Mat. 25. Thou shall desire to die, but
death shall flee from thee. Thou would fain fly out of Gods hand, Job
27.22. but it will be impossible* Thou shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction, being banished from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his Power. Then shall the Righteous have dominion in this Morning, shining
forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father; Who has ears to hear, let him
hear, Mat. 13.43 God will delight to glorify his Attributes in thy
Destruction. He will ^augh at thy calamity, and mock when thy fear comes: When
thy fear comes as desolation, and thy destruction comes as a whirlwind, when
distress and anguish comes upon thee, Prove. 1.26, -- No heart can conceive,
nor can the tongues of Men or Angels express what wrath the Eternal Righteous
Almighty Lord God shall pour out upon a Vessel of wrath fitted for destruction.
There shall thou weep, and wail, and gnash thy teeth, where the worm of
Conscience never dies, nor shall the fire be quenched. Art not thou yet
awakened to Cry out, What shall I do to be saved from this dreadful wrath to
come? Have I been writing to a Stock, or to a Stone, or to a Rock of Flint?
Take heed ^est these warnings come in Judgment to thee, that thou may be
snared and broken, and taken, Isa 28.13. Be sure of this, thy sins will find
thee out, Numb. 32.23.

Object. 1. Why do you thus affright poor ^inners? Is not God merciful?

Ans Why do then the^ stand o^ (...) the offers of mer^? The good (...) of
God should lead thee to Repen^ (...). Though God is merciful, yet for (...)
first Parents sin, judgment is com^ upon all the world to Condemnation an^ ^e
(...) that believes not shall be Damned. S^^ait is the gate, and narrow is the
(...) leads to life, and few there be that s^n (...). 7.14.

Object 2. I will never believe that (...) present (...) a^d^nl and damnabl^

Answ. (...) is not humane Writing but Gods Word, which i^ here opened thi^
(...) shall judge thee at the last day Joh. 12.18.

2. Y^ believe not, because ye are no^ (...) Sleep, says Christ. It is a
Prog^^ck of approaching wrath to reject the Counsel of God against thy self:
Rea^ (...) 29.18, etc* ^est the should be (...) ^g you, Man or Woman, o^
Faculty, wh^ be be^reth the words of this C^se, that bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall ha^ peace, though I walk in the imagination (...)
Drunkenness to th^st; (...) (...) him b^hen the ^ng (...) Lord, and (...) ^se,
shall smoke again (...), and all the Curses that are writ^ (...) shall lie upon
him, and the Lord shall blot out his Name from under Heaven Paul says, The
Election (...), but the rest were blinded. If our Gospel be hid, is ^s hid to
them that are lost, (...) whom ^he god of this world blinds the man^ them that
belie^ not, 2 Cor. 4.4. Beware therefore, lest that come upon thee which is
spoken of in the Prophets; Behold ye (...), and wonder and perish, for I work a
(...) in your days, which ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it
unto you, A^t. ^3.4^.41.

3. I can forever ^e day ^y Calamity at hand, w^e thou shall feel what thou will not now believe, then thou shall justify me, and condemn thy self.

If thou art not now awakened in mercy the time hastens when the ^ost ob^urate
^nner shall certainly be awakened in judgment, either at the hou^ (...) or i^
furthest at his Arraignment before Gods Tribunal. Were Co^ah and his Company
secure when the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed them a^, when they went
down alive into the Pi^, (...) Earth closed upon them, when all (...) that were
round about them fled at the (...) of the? Numb. 16.32, 33, 34. D^ (...) ^zars
security end, when (...) his Idolatry, Excess and (...) Alarmed the same hou^
(...) upon the Wall, when his Countenance was changed, and his Knees smote one
against another, and he was slain the same Night, D^. 5.

It is impossible to continue long in this stupid frame of Heart, when thou art
judged and condemned to suffer the vengeance of Eternal Fire, shall thou then
be (...) and senseless? No, no; there is no security amongst the Demand It is
revealed from Heaven there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

4. Do thou thus provoke the Lord to jealousy, art thou stronger than He?
God is wise in heart, and mighty in strength, who has hardened his heart
against Him, and has prospered? Joh 9.4. There is no wisdom, nor understanding
against the Lord. Prove. 21.30. If therefore thou will not search the
Scriptures, nor hear the voice of God, nor cry for the Spirit to convince thee
of thy unbelief; and to put forth the exceeding greatness of his power to make
thee willing to come as as an ungodly lost sinner to Christ? If the Kingdom of
Heaven do not suffer violence, if thou do not press into it and take it by
force; I thee testify to thee from the God of heaven, that the door of mercy
will shortly be shut, thou shall hereafter stand without, and cry dolefully,
Lord, Lord, open to me: But He will answer with a frown; Verily I know you not.
Mat. 25.11.

Object. 3. But I am admitted into Church Fellowship, and enjoy Previledges.

Answ. Let Sinners and Hypocrites in Sion fear; for God is come to search
Jerusalem with Candles. Do not therefore deceive thine own Soul, thou may
have a Name to live, and yet be dead; thou may be united to a Gospel Church
and yet perish for want of Union to Christ. Remember Judas and tremble*
Remember the five Foolish Virgins walking with the Wise in all their
sufferings, neither suspected by the Wise, nor by themselves, till that Cry at
midnight, The Bridegroom comes, go ye out to meet him, Mat. 25.6. Many ruin
their Souls by resting upon unsound Evidences. Thou self deceived Hypocrite,
Hell beneath will be moved for thee at thy coming* all they shall speak and say
to thee, Art thou become weak as we? How art thou fallen, O Lucifer, son of the
Morning, for thou said in thy heart, I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt
my Throne above the Stars of God, I will be like the most High, yet thou shall
be brought down to Hell. Isa. 14 10. etc.

Object. 4. I have Saving Graces, as Faith, Repentance, Holiness, Zeal, etc.

Answ. Does not the very profane world say, that they believe and repent? An
awakening Ministry, slavish fears of Hell, godly Education, or legal
Principles, carry many far in these days, who shall shortly be weighed in the
balance, and be sound too light. Thou may receive the Word with joy, and
believe for a while, Luke 8.13. Thou may be in Christ, as a withered Branch
is in the Vine. Thou may sink under the sense of Wrath with Came. Thou may
cast of thy sins with abhorrency under the racking of Conscience, and yet lick
up thy nauseous Vomit again, 2 Pet. 2.20, etc. The Unclean spirit may go out of
thee, and yet return with seven worse spirits, Luke 11.24. Thou may
vehemently long to die the Death of the Righteous, and that thy last end may be
like his; and yet be undone for ever. Take heed therefore of Building without a
sure Foundation Thou may be admired for thy strict Conversation, whilst
thou only go about to establish thine own Righteousness, being ignorant of
Gods Righteousness of Faith, Romans 10.3. Thou may suffer the loss or all
things, and yet for want of Love, thy sufferings profit thee nothing, 1 Cor.
13.3.

Object. 5. I have been deeply wounded, and have had peace since.

Answ. Every wound and conviction is not the saving work of Gods Spirit, nor
all healing, from the Peace of God through Union with Christ by a Faith of the
operation of God, not thy concomitant joy always from a true sense of Gods
love. Many compass themselves about with sparks of their own kindling, who
never knew the Grace of God in truth, nor the witness of the true Spirit.

More ADVICE to Sinners under Convictions, to prevent their miscarrying in
Conversion.
Quest. 2. I Beseech you, since my present condition is so dreadful, as Gods
Word reveals it, tell me if there be any hopes for such a Sinner, and what
course I must take?

Answ, When the Keeper of the Prison asked Paul and Silas, Sirs, What must I
do, to be saved? They said, Bel^eve on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, and thy house, Act. 16, 30, 31. Therefore immediately under the means of
Grace, wait for the Spirit to draw thee by the Gospel. Thou will there hear
that Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for
us, Gal. 3.13. God has sent forth His Son made under the Law, to Redeem them
that were under the Law. God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes on Him shall not perish, but have Everlasting
Life, Joh. 3. Go not therefore about to Establish thine own Righteousness, for
Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that believes,
Romans 10.3. Thou will there here the joyful Sound, that the chiefest of sinners
have believed, and are saved; and that it is not the highest aggravation of the
sins, nor thy present accursed state ^all hinder thee from Mercy, if thou art
made willing in the day of Gods power, to come out of thy sins and self to
Jesus Christ. The Lord will Pardon abundantly, Isa. 55. The Grace of Christ
does superabound; He has gifts for the Rebellious, Psalm. 68.16. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, of whom I am Chief, (says Paul) 1 T^. ^ 15. Him that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out, says CHRIST, Joh. 6.37. Therefore
don't take a desperate course, because thou think no sins are like thine;
for the Blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.7. God
does justify sinners freely by his Grace, through the Redemption which is in
Christ Jesus, Romans 3.24. Let it overcome thy heart to consider how freely
Christ proclaimed himself to sinners when he dwelt among us, Joh. 7. when he
stood and Cried, If any thirst, let him come unto me, and drink: His precious
blood is more able to justify, than thy crying sins are to condemn thee. Come,
says Chri^ to thee, for all things are now ready. The Spirit says Come, and
the Bride says Come, and let him that hears say Come; and let him that is
athirst Come, and whosoever will, let him take of the water of Life freely,
Apocal: 22.17. There is Righteousness in Christ to cover thee, and Faith to
receive it too. God will have mercy on them that have not obtained mercy, and
makes them his people, which were not his people. Hos. 2.25. Christ is exalted
to give Repentance, and why not to thee that need it? Has not Christ ca^
and waited long till his Locks were wet w^ Dew? Poor condemned sinner! How
can thou choose but be overcome with his Love, who still beseeches them to be
reconciled, though he could glorify himself in thy destruction. 2 Cor. 5 20.
If God would show thee a little of the love of his heart, and of the heart of
Christ to sinners, it would dissolve thy frozen heart, and make thee admi^ it,
that there should be forgiveness of the greatest has still for so a vile a wre^
Cry in secret to God, that thou may know what it is to find me^cy, since he
delights in mercy. W^n Christ was here upon E^h, see what a winning Sermon he
Preached to Publicans and Sinners, Luke 15. When he insinuated unto them their
lost estate, and that he was come to seek, and save them and to encourage
returning Prodigals, who is ready to fear there is no mercy for them; He shows
them though they are far off, his Bowels shall (...) toward them, and he will
run to them leaping (...) Mountains to embrace them. ^ine thee there is as much
love ^owe^s in the (...) of Christ now he is ascended as when he was upon the
Earth. Though thou art a Scorner at Christ's Spirit, yet says the Lord, How
long (...) with a delight (...) your scor^ing, (...) you at mysterious, behold
I will (...) Spirit up^ ^o^, Prove. 1.23. Thu^ do thou ^ake^ ^o the a^ing and
ravi^ing voice of Christ, (...) thou art overcom^ with his love, and art
compelled and necessitated to come in, Luke 14.23.

Quest. I have had some convictions, but I fear no through Conversion. I f^d
(...) called, but few are chosen: what to (...) can you give me, that I may not
miscarry for ever?

Answ. Besides what is written in my Advice to sinners, which I shall have
reference to; take these Directions.

1. Work out thy Salvation with for and trembling. Cherish the God (...) of
coming to the Birth without streng^ (...) be brought forth: beware lest thy
con^^ons die and come to nothing; rest not in ease without healing through the
sprinking of Christ's Blood.

2 Rest not in legal horror, short of Godly sorrow: Dig deep that thou ma^st
build upon a Rock. If God turn thine eyes inward, and show thee what an open
Sepulcher full of deadly poison thou art, thou will justify God though He
should spurn thee into Hell immediately; and wilt wonder what has held the
hand of revengeful Justice from consuming thee long since. The Lord will not
crush under his feet such a Prisoner of the Earth, Lam. 3.34. Nor will he
condemn thee that do thus justify him, and condemn thy self, and lie at
his feet longing to be found in Christ: Wait therefore for the Spirits
conviction of sin, because thou believe not on Jesus Christ, Joh. 16.8, 9.
When the Comforter is come, he will reprove the world of sin, because they
believe not on me, ( i. e.) shall convince them of this sin chiefly, the Spirit
does aggravate this sin of Unbelief, where he comes to work with power
savingly. This is promised in the latter days, that the chiefest of sinners
shall look upon Christ whom they have pierced, and mourn for him, as one
mourns for his only Son, Zech. 12.10.

3. Long insatiably to be found in Christ, not having thine own Righteousness,
which is of the Law, but the Righteousness which is through the Faith of
Christ, Phil. 3^ Never expect to be healed by the Law: but through the
Righteousness of Christ without the deeds of the Law: for the Law can only
wound thee, and give thee the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20, and there it leaves
thee in a helpless and perishing condition; it only works wrath, and Curses
thee, and Judges and Condemns thee. It is very usual with troubled Souls to
run to their Duties, or Tears, or Purposes to sin no more in their own
strength, instead of looking to Christ who was made sin for them who knew no
^in; that they may be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. They
should come without money as sinners to Christ whom it pleased the Father to
^ruise, Isa. 53. Christ has finished transgression and made an end of sins,
and made reconciliation for iniquity, and brought in everlasting Righteousness,
Dan. 9.24. Herein Christ's Ambassadors need to be ^aithfully warned, when they
press duties upon awakened Sinners, to teach them to ^ook for Justification by
Faith, without the deeds of the Law, lest they make a Generation of
self-righteous Hypocrites, in^end of sound Believers. Maledicta si^ ^nis
doctrina, vita, (...), qua cona^ ^ge aut ope^bus pa^ s^tam coram De^ ^utheri
Anathema.

4. Therefore if thou would ^e accept^d of Christ, come as Ungodly, as
Un^ghteous unto him, who dyed for sinners (...) such, and finds them dead in
sins when ^e comes to call them. The work of the ^aw is only to convince us
that we are Un^odly, Dead in sins, having no Righteousness, nor Strength. If
thou would not be rejected and prove a Pharisee, come a^ a sinner, helpless
and hopeless. Thoug^ the feel thy self dead, senseless, asleep (...) though
thou knew not that tho^ a^ wretched, and miserable, and poor, and bl^d, and
naked; yet says Christ, I counsel thee to buy of me Gold and white Raiment,
that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not
appear, Apoc. 3.27, 28. Instead of refusing Christ by infidelity, upon
apprehensions (...) unworthiness, or the want of this, or the other work of the
Law, qualification, o^ preparation, thou should rather wonder that there
should be Justification b^ Free Grace tendered to such a Rebel; tha^ thou being
an Enemy should be commanded and invited to come to Christ.

5. Let the threatenings against Unbelie^ awaken thee not to dare to refuse
Chri^ offered to thee. It is a most heinous, dreadful sin* to make light of one
tender of fre^ Pardon of sins by the blood of Christ, which the Devils never
had; for this sin w^ Jesus Christ are long break through t^ Clouds, in flaming
Fire, with his Ho^ Angels, 2 Tre^. 1.

6. ^ear Unbelief chiefly, Heb. 3.1^ Many awakened persons are troubled wi^
groundless fears, lest there is no re^i^ on for such abominable wretches; they
fear that such hard, filthy, secure sinners shall not be accepted. Fear lest
thou should refuse Christ, or not welcome him: Fear lest a Promise being
left thee of entering into rest, thou should seem to come short of it through
Unbelief, Heb. 4.

Object. You know not what a wretch I have been: I cannot but fear, that my
heinous sins will ruin me?

Answ. If thy Conscience often smites thee with tormenting fears, that thy
Uncleanness, Self-pollution, Glutton^, Passion, Pride, or Covetousness, or the
like, will be thy ruin; there is a great sin, which is Unbelief; they not
coming to Christ, nor welcoming the glad tidings of free Remission of sins by
Christ's Blood, for the chiefest sinners with all acceptance. It is this
Soul-damning-sin, thou have most cause to fear; It is he only that believes
not the Son, that shall not see life, Joh 3.36.

7. Be assured it is not Presumption, but thy Duty to believe, though thou
apprehendest thy self to be the chiefest of sinners: for God will account
himself glorified by thy believing in hope against hope, Romans 4.20.

Object. Why do you put me thus upon Believing since you grant I have no power?

Answ. Because the Lord causes His Commands to come with Almighty power upon
his Elect, and does convey his Spirit and Strength in the use of his instituted
Ordinances, 1 These 1 4, 5.

8 Destroy not thy precious Soul, by mending Mortification before Regeneration.
There is no Communion before Union: First make the Tree good and its Fruit will
be good, Mat. 12* 33. Many persons know they must perform this and the other
Duty; this and the other Grace they want; and set upon the work in their own
Strength, and are always Learning; many shall thus seek and shall not be able.
If thou would^st not miss the narrow way here, then seek to be first planted
into Christ by the power of his Resurrection, and then let thy Faith work by
Love abundantly. Mr. Co^ observes upon the A^ocal. that the Romish Priest in
their Doctrine, like the ^ou^s, do sting the Conscience with the Law, and heal
the wound by urging upon persons External works of Mortification, being
ignorant of the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, without the Deeds of the
Law.

Let Christ's Ministers beware of putting awakened sinners preposterously first
upon Works before Faith, and to bring forth good Fruit, before they press them
to look for a Principle by their Union with Christ through the teachings of
God. This is to put a man upon Building a Superstructure without a Foundation;
I fear many thousands perish by such Preaching: Consult Dr. Owen of
Mortification.

9. Especially beware of resting short of Union with Christ. There is a
glorious and mysterious Union with God manifest in the Flesh by the Spirit.
When Christ bethroth's a sinner to Himself forever in Righteousness; and in
loving kindness, and in judgment, and in faithfulness, then shall he know the
Lord, Hos. 2.19. Then is Christ's Prayer answered, That they all may be one, as
the, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one ^n V^, Joh.
17. It is he that has the on, has life, and he that has not the Son has not
life, but the wrath of God abides on him: The vilest wretches will love
Christ's benefits, especially when they come to die. The Sound Believer falls in
love with CHRIST Himself. Thou must be cut out of the Olive Tree which is wild
by Nature, by the hand of God, and graffed contrary to Nature into the good
Olive Tree, else Christ will not own thee as his Member, but thou will wither
as a rotten Branch, and be gathered of Men, and cast into the Fire, John 10.
Thou must eat Christ's Flesh, and drink His Blood, else thou can have no
Spiritual Life in thee. Joh. 6.

Some Scruples of the Tempted Resolved.
Object. I Am still sensible that I cannot Believe?

Answ 1. May not Christ rather complain of thee, as of those, Joh. 5.40. Ye
will not come to me that ye might have life.

2. Under the sense of thine impotency, Pray, and wait continually for the
experimental knowledge of the Power of Christ's Resurrection, Phil. 3.10. That
God may put forth the exceeding greatness of his Power, enabling thee to go to
Christ's fullness, that Grace may reign in thee, Ephesians. 1.

3. The Spirits end in convincing thee of thine impotency, is chiefly to teach
thee to look unto Christ, who is full of Grace, and in all Gods appointments to
wait for the drawings of the Father, who has promised his teachings, Joh. 6.44.

4. Jesus Christ has purchased and promised the Spirit, the Comforter, to
convince the World of unbelief, and to beget Faith, Joh, 16.8, 9. Therefore
instead of unbelieving despondencies, look for the effusion of the Spirit,
under the means of Grace, to enable thee to believe.

Object. What have I to do to come to Christ, who am Ungodly, Asleep,
Unprepared, the Chiefest of Sinners; Alas, I am condemned, and expect nothing
but Hell?

Answ. 1. It is the Lord who has begun to open thine eyes, and to show thee
thy present condition, according to his promise, Isa. 35.5.

2. Thou only art the person that art called, and shall be welcome to Jesus
Christ, notwithstanding all thy guilt, and want of preparations, and
qualifications in thy own sense and apprehension. God does command thee not to
work ( i. e.) for thy peace, but to believe in God, who justifies the Ungodly,
and thy Faith shall be accounted for Righteousness; thou art to believe in God,
who quickens the dead, Rom 4.5. God who is rich in mercy for the great love
wherewith he loved dead sinners, quickneth them together with Christ, that he
might show forth the exceeding riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 2. Christ commands and
invites sinners and no other to come to him; and professes plainly, that he
will have mercy, and not sacrifice, and that he came not to call the Righteous,
but Sinners, Mat. 9.13.

Quest. This rejoices my heart that such a wretch as I may come to Christ: but
may I now come to Christ so soon after I am awakened?

Answ. Come and welcome now to Christ. Christ gave great encouragement to
Nathaniel, because he embraced the first offer. Jesus said to him, Because I
said to thee, I saw thee under the Fig Tree, believe thou? Thou shall see
greater things then these, Joh. 1.50.

Object. The Lord is withdrawn from me, says a distressed Soul, and I fear my
Experiences are a delusion of the Devil, and sparks of my own kindling?

Answ. 1. After thou have sung the Praises of God, do not thus soon forget his
wonderful works as the Israelites of old did, Psalm. 106.12, 13.

2. Cast not away thy confidence. Christ's Love Tokens are Pledges of his
Faithfulness in his absence. When ^saph was at a loss, he said, I will remember
the years of the right hand of the most High; sure I will remember thy Wonders
of old, Psalm. 77: 10. Has not the Lamb that was slain rent the vail of
unbelief, and opened the Sealed ^ook, and showed thee plainly of the Father?
Did he never Seal his Love in one Promise? Did never triumph over one Lust?
Have thou not met with the smiles of Gods countenance then, when thou expected
to be consumed in a moment, being caught as it were out of the belly of Hell,
and laid in Christ's bosom? Why do thou thus unworthily and ungrateful forge
the day, when thy Lord delivered thee not from one, but from all thy fears?
Then thou sattest under Christ's shadow with great delight, and his Fruit was
pleasant to thy taste, Cans. 2. Then his Banner over thee was Love; then thou
could sing, M^ beloved is mine, and I am His. O the height and depth, the
length and breadth of the love of Christ to my Soul, that passes knowledge.
Can thou not remember the day, when Christ came leaping over the Mou^tains,
and skipping over the Hills to thy fainting Soul; then thy Beloved spoke, and
said to thee, Rise up my Love, my fair One, and come away; for lo the winter
is past, the Ra^ is over and gone. Let not the Consolations of God be small
with thee. Reflect upon the time of thy fist Espousals, when Christ discovered.
himself and opened the everlasting love of his heart to thee; when thou wast in
a doleful and forlorn condition, and then ravished away thy heart. Thy love then
was as strong as Death, and many waters could not quench it; then thy Language
was, Stay me with Flaggons, Comfort me with Apples, for I am sick with Love:
then perfect love did cast out fear, and by his light thou walkedst through
darkness. Call to mind the days of old, when thou reseedst thy weary Soul in
everlasting Arms, rejoicing as more than a Conqueror over Sin and Law, Death,
Hell and the Devil, through Christ who loved thee. Look to a full Christ, thou
empty-nothing Creature thy Lord will turn again, He will not cast thee off
forever, Lam. 3. Resolve with Job Though he s^ay me I will-trust in him, ^e
also shall be my Salvation, Job 13.15. The Lord has appeared unto me of old,
sayin^, Yea, I have loved thee with an everla^^ing love, therefore with loving
kindness have I drawn thee, Jer. 31.3. What though I am now in darkness in the
Deeps, in the lowest Pit, like the slain in the Grave, whom God remembers no
more, yet does He not show wonders to the dead? The Lord will command his
loving kindness in the day time, He will bring me forth to the Light, and I
shall behold his Righteousness, Mi^. 7. Though thou now go mourning without
the Sun, yet abide in Christ by the power of God, that raised him from the
dead; the day will dawn, and the shadows flee away: thou shall shine forth,
thou shall be as the Morning, thy Light shall rise in Obscurity, and thy
Darkness be a^ the Noonday, the Lord shall be thine Everlasting light, and the
days of thy mourning shall be ended, Isa 60 Pray for new Bottles to hold the
new Wine upon thy Lords return. The Lord has had a long Controversy with many
of his dear Children in these Nations for the spilling of it.

3. Consider Gods gracious ends in withdrawing. It is chiefly in Love to teach
thee to live by Faith in Christ, (...) not upon thy enjoyments, to lean upon
thy Beloved in the Wilderness If ^e should have asked Paul, how it was with his
Soul? See the account, Gal. 2.20. The life I now live in the flesh, I live by
the Faith of the Son of God: Though thou walk in Darkness, and have no
Light, yet thou art commanded to trust and stay on thy God, Isa. 50.10. Blessed
is he that has not seen, and yet has believed, Joh. 20.29.

Object. But I am a Back-slider, and the Lord has righteously hid his face.

Answ. It is very supporting to consider the heart of God and Christ toward
his Children under Backslidings, which appears in the many Gospel-calls, and
promises of Remission, and healing made to tempting Souls, when gone astray,
and cast out of Gods sight: Re^d Isa. 54. Jer. 3.30, 31. Hosea. 14. Luke 15.

Object. Surely it were better for me to destroy my self, (says another under
Temptation) than to live only to aggravate m^ Damnation: I am Condemned
already, God has set me up as a Monument of his wrath; why should I live any
longer in this Torment?

Answ. 1. Take heed of Soul-wounding sins, and left you run away from Christ by
Unbelief, after falls into them. Some sin against ^ight, and then instead of
flying to the Blood of sprinkling, they depart away further by their Unbelief,
than they did by their Backsliding into sin; and entertaining hard thoughts of
God and Christ, in the Pride of their hearts, they will rather attempt to take
a desperate course, than submit to the Righteousness of God, and fall down at
the feet of Christ, whose Arms are open to receive the chiefest of Sinners.

2 If thou had lain scorching in Everlasting Burnings, thou would think it
a rich mercy to be on this side Hell again, there are none to sympathize with
thee, or to pray for thee, or to give thee a drop of water to cool thy tongue.

3. Although thy present condition be deplorable, yet be not thine own
Executioner, if God will give thee a Reprieve in the world. When thou art
tempted to it, I solemnly Charge thee to remember that God has forbidden it,
saying, Thou shall not Kill.

4. In the hour of Temptation go not out in thine own strength; look to Christ,
and keep thine hold of him, who is able to keep thee from falling. The Lord
has laid help upon one that is mighty, Psalm. 89.19.

5. Give no place to the Devil. Be not affrighted from continuing in thy
Calling: the Lord has promised to keep thee in all thy ways, and his Angels
shall have charge over thee, Psalm. 91.11, 12.

6. Thou art grossly mistaken in thinking no case like thine, for no temptation
has taken you, but such as is common to man, 1 Cor. 10.13 Many of Gods dear
Children have been as vehemently assaulted with such hellish temptations,
though thou think thy Case cannot be paralleled, and have been recoverd, and
their Unbelief, and all their sad Conclusions confuted.

7. When thou art tempted to this sin, flee to that Promise, Isa, 54.17. No
w^ap^ (...) against thee shall prosper. The God of ^e shall bruise Satan under
thy fe^ (...) Rom 16.20 God is faithful, who will not suffer thee to be tempted
above that thou art able; but will with the temptation, also make a way to
escape, that thou may be able to bear it.

Object. I fear I shall faint in an hour of Trial?

Answ. 1. This Godly Fear is a special preservative Promise in the New Covenant
against all temptations to Sin, and Apostasy, Je^. 12 40.

2 Watch and Pray always that thou may be accounted worthy to escape all
things, that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man, Luke 21.36.

3. Go not out in thine own strength; for the Eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are Everlasting Arms. Be thou partaker of the afflictions of the
Gospel according to the power of God. Be strong in the all-sufficient Grace,
which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1. Look to Christ to strengthen thee with all
might according to Gods glorious power unto all patience, and long suffering
with ioyfulness. The Archers sorely grieved Joseph, and shot at him, but his
bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the Hands
of the mighty God of Jacob, Genesis 49.23.

4 Gods Word is a tried Word. Behold the great Cloud of witnesses, from the
beginning of the World to this day, all setting their Seals of the faithfulness
of God, to his exceeding great and precious Promises.

5. Behold Christ's wonderful love in leaving his Throne of Glory, and his
Fathers bosom, and hanging upon the Cross in thy Nature, bearing the wrath of
God for all thy monstrous sins; this will constrain thee to follow God fully,
to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, and to continue with him in his
Temptations. Look to Christ to shed abroad his Love in thy heart by his Spirit.
Love is strong as Death; many waters cannot quench Love, nor f^ouds drown it.

Object. Says another, I have been long under fearful Temptations to foul and
damnable Sins, surely I am an Hypocrite, I love an Hell upon Earth?

Caution. I would not have any self deceived Hypocrite, who allows himself
delightfully in a course of secret sinning to ^ct himself with this, that his
reigning ^s are out infirmities, because his Conscience stings him after the
Commission of sin.

Answ. 1. Flee to the blood of Christ, to wash away the guilt of thy Scarlet
sins; and the sense of Gods pardoning Love shed abroad in thy heart, will be
one of the most effectual means in the world to keep thee from returning again
to folly. It is most evident from Paul's experience, Gal. 2.20. That looking to
Christ Crucified for thy sins and backslidings, is the most expedite help to
be Crucified together with him, that the body of sin may be destroyed. The
Corinthians experienced, that by beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord,
( i. e.) the Riches of Gods Grace and Forgiveness through the Blood of Christ,
they were changed into the same image, 1 Cor. 3.18. The manifestation of Gods
pardoning Love to thee will constrain thee: This will be thy practical
judgment; if Christ dyed for thee when thou wast an Enemy, therefore thou that
live should not henceforth live unto thy self, but unto Him that dyed for
thee and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. If the Grace of God which brings Salvation
appear to thee, 'twill teach t^ee to deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts; it
will work Evangelical Repentance in thee, it will dissolve thy frozen heart
that thou shall remember thy ways and be confounded, and never open thy mouth
because of thy shame, when thou beholdest that God is pacified toward thee for
all that thou have done. Ezekiel. 16 61.

Therefore after thy falls, though thy heart be dead and stupid, yet run quickly
to Christ with confusion of face, who is exalted to give Repentance, and
Remission of sins, Act 5. Believe steadfastly, tho^ thou have sinned, yet thou
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the Righteous, who ever lives
to make intercession for transgressors, 1 John Do not work at all for peace, or
healing, thereby f^ustrating the death of Christ, but believe in Christ who was
delivered for our offenses, Romans 4 25.

2. When thou have sinned, run not further from God by Vnbel^e, than thou have
done by thy Buck^i^lings. Pluck not up the Foundation presently. This is one or
Satan's subtilties, by e^ticing thee to (...) to break thy peace, to torment and
bewilder thee, and to take thee off thy work and usefulness for God. Many (...)
may cause matter of Humiliation, but not of questioning our estate.

3. Go out in the strength of Christ, and thou shall overcome at last, (...)
^0, One cause of ou^ falls in the hour of temptation, is our going forth in the
confidence of received Grace. Therefore live continually under the actual
conviction, and sense of thine inability to resist the least temptation, and
abide in Christ, in whom all fullness dwells.

4. It will be distinguishing love from God, if through the injection of fiery
darts and other temptations, thou art kept awake from lukewarmness, and from a
spirit of slumber and security, the epedemical sin of this hour of temptation
which prevails exceedingly upon Saints, and the world, notwithstanding all
awakening Dispensations, according to Christ's Prediction, Mat. 34.25.

5. It may be thy temptations may continue all thy life. Long not so much for
deliverance, as for strength to resist: out of a sloathful principle, we often
cry earnestly for victory, therefore Temptations still continue; observe
Christ's answer to Paul, 2 Cor. 12. there was no deliverance from the thorn in
the flesh; but, My Grace is sufficient for thee, for. my strength is made
perfect in weakness. Be confident of this, Sin shall not have dominion over
thee, Romans 6. Because thou art not under the Law, but under the reign of Grace;
and that God will give thee power when thou art faint, and will increase thy
strength when thou have no might, Isa. 40 And in the Faith of the full
Promises, purchased by Christ's blood, take courage, glory in thine infirmities,
because of the power of Christ shall rest upon thee. Rejoice not against me, O
mine Enemy, when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in darkness the Lord shall be
a light unto me. Rejoice in Christ Jesus, by, and in whom thou have already
overcome the world, and art more than a Conqueror, and art raised up together,
and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

6. Fight against Sin, the World, the Law, Death, and the Powers of Darkness,
as against Conquered Enemies. Pray believingly for that purchase of Christ,
Romans 5. That as sin has reigned unto Death in thee, Grace may now reign
through Righteousness to Eternal Life Rejoice in hope of everlasting rest,
where thou will more admire the Power and Wisdom of God, in leading and
upholding a poor weak worm through such sad Desertions, and Temptations, and
inexecrable Labyrinths, then if thou had a calm way to Glory. To him ^at
overcomes, says Christ, will I grant to sit unto me in my Throne, even as I
over^, and am set down with my Father in his Throne, Rev. 3.21. Pray for me who
am frequently exercised with an infirm Body, and inward Conflicts.

Now to^m who is here to keep us from falling, and to present us faultless
before the presence of his Glory, with exceeding joy, be Honor and Dominion
for ever.

ADVICE to SINNERS under Convictions to prevent their Miscarrying in Conversion.
Poor Undone Sinners.
I Send these Truths from the Eternal GOD to you in Love and Faithfulness,
unfeignedly desiring that you may be convinced of your Unbelief, and of all
your sins, and of ^our present Accursed and Condemned ^tate, and that you may
be taught of God ^o rely upon Christ, who dyed for the Ungodly. If you continue
Unregenerate, you will certainly ere long be the most miserable of the whole
Creation and Monuments of divine Justice, although you now enjoy the world in
its glory. Since diverse of you were awakened, I hope that God may have thoughts
of everlasting love to some of your Souls: therefore as I have warned you to
flee for refuge from the wrath of God which is coming upon you* and without
delay, presently to come out of this dreadful condition to Christ, who will
embrace you; so I write to you and to all others to whom these truths may be
communicated, to prevent their miscarrying in Conversion.

1. Seek to know, and be convinced by the Spirit through the Scriptures, that
you are born Dead in sins, and Children of wrath, without Christ, and without
hope, Ephesians. 2.3. And that you lie every moment under Gods Curse and Wrath, in
danger of Eternal Condemnation, Gal. 3.10. The wicked shall be turned into
Hell, Psalm. 9.17. The Soul that sins it shall die, Ezekiel. 18.4. Unbelievers
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on them, though they are
insensible of it. The Lord says, Except a man be bo^n again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God, and ^e that believes not is Condemned already, Joh. 3.18, 36.
Consider seriously th^n each of you, I beseech you, what will become of you who
are not born again, not ever had the experience of a work of Grace? O that your
eyes were open to behold all the sins of your hearts, and lives, in order
before you, which may cry aloud continually for vengeance against your guilty
Souls* 'Twere enough to make you tremble, who are now most senseless. (...)
alone quickly, and reflect upon your ways as in the ^ight of God. But these
Questions to your selves, Have (...) ^times Lied; or Stole, or ^e an (...)?
Have I not profaned the Lords day? W^ I ne^ Proud, nor Wanton, nor Man? Have I
never taken the Lords Name in v^in? Have I not been disobedient to my Parent?
Have I not a Carnal, Unclean, Ha^ and Unbelieving Heart? Did I never break God^
Law? A^ not I dead in Sins to their day? Yea surely I must cry out Guilty,
Guilty: my Conscience condemns me; what will become of me if I die in this
dreadful condition* For the Righteous God has said, Curse^, every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do
them. He that spared not the Angels when they sinned, but cast them down to
Hell, He that spared not the Old would nor the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah,
but Condemned them with an overthrow, making them an Example unto those which
should after live Ungodly, will not spare me long. Does not Hell gape for me?
Is there any hopes that such a sinner as I have been, (...) ^o washed in the
blood of Christ? God (...) righteously damn me for these (...) the least sin,
Romans 3.23. It is the Lord mercy that I am not consumed, and now in Hell
howling among the Damn^d ^^^ing out for a drop of water to cool my tongue, Lam.
3.22. Luke 16.24.

2. Seek the Lord in secret for his Spirit while he may be found, Isa. 55.6.
Cry out each of you for the Blood of Christ, as Condemned Malefactors do for
Mercy; as they did Act. 2.37 Or as the keeper of the Prison said trembling,
What must I do to be saved? Act. 16.30. Rest not one day nor one hour longer
quietly or securely, till you have some hopes that Faith is wrought in you by
the Spirit, and that Jesus Christ will plead your cause at the day of Judgment;
for without the imputation of his Righteousness there is no remission. Follow
Christ, Crying after him as the blind man did, Lord that our eyes may be
opened, Mat. 20.30. Pray as the Leper did, Mat. 8. Lord, if thou will, thou
can make me clear: Plead importunately for the Spirit, which is promised in
these last days to be poured out upon all flesh, Act. 2.

3. If the Lord by his Word and Spirit makes you sensible of your fearful,
undone condition, beware of resting, short of a through work of Grace, lest you
fall short of Union with Christ through the teachings and drawings of the
Father, lest you rest in a false Peace, Luke 11.21. compassing your selves
about with sparks of your own kindling, through slight wounding, or
slight-healing, Isa. 50.11. Take heed of building foolishly upon the Sand, Mat.
7.26, And lest thou prove at best but a foolish Virgin walking with the Wise,
Mat. 25. Fear lest you should make a CHRIST of Duties, of Praying, We^ping,
^arp^sing or Reforming; for the Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to
the Lord, Prove. 15.8. There is a way which seems right to a man, that the end
thereof are the ways of Death, Prove. 14.12. There is a Generation that are
pure (...) own eyes, and yet are not washed from (...) filthiness, Prove. 30.12.
A man may go very far under the awakenings of Conscience, and have a zeal for
God, and yet being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, go about all his life time
to establish his own Righteousness, and get nothing at l^st, but the Hyp^^^ is
hope, which shall perish. Thou thus (...) a covering for thy nakedness out of
thine own bowels, thy trust shall be like a Spiders with in the day of thy
Calamity, this thou s^^lt have at the hand of God, thou shall ^ie down in
sorrow: for Christ is the (...) the Law for Righteousness to every o^e that
believes, Joh 8.13 Ro^^ 10.2, 3. By the deeds of the Law there (...) be
justifihd in the sight of God, Romans 3.20. If ever thou find mercy, thou must be
justified freely by the Grace of God, through the Redemption which is in Christ
Jesus by Faith, without the deeds of the Law, ver. 24. It Is true, Faith comes
by hearing, and it is our duty to attend to Gods appointments where the spirit
works; but if Righteousness come by any work of the Law, then Christ is dead in
vain, Gal. 2.21. To him that works not in the point of Justification, but
believes on him that Justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for
Righteousness; Blessed is that man to whom God imputes Righteousness without
Works, Romans 4, 5.

4. Look to the Lord to convince you of sin, because you believe not in Jesus
Christ which is promised, Joh. 16.7, 8. In your attendance on the means of
Grace, be willing to be convinced by the Comforter, that your hearts are so
desperately wicked that you will not come to Christ; and to feel your
impotency, that you cannot believe in him unless the Lord put forth the
exceeding greatness of His Power, Ephesians. 1.19.

5. Know assuredly, and welcome these glad tidings, that Christ is come of a
truth into the world on purpose to save sinners, and the chiefest of them, 1 Timothy 1.15. God so loved the World that He gave His only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in Him should not perish, but have everlasting Life, Joh.
3.19. Christ has once suffered for sins, the Just for the Unjust, that He
might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. Flee to this Refuge when thou see thy
self Ungodly, and Accursed by the Law of God, and fear thou shall be
Condemned. Consider with thy self, though I am Ungodly, yet Christ dyed for the
Ungodly, Romans 5.6. Though I am an Enemy, yet Christ has reconciled Enemies to
God by his Death, ver. 10. Though I am Rebellious, and so abominable, that I
fear lest the Earth should open and swallow up such a Wretch, and God should
righteously sink me to Hell living, and in his Wrath; yet here is good news and
encouragement for me, that Jesus Christ when he ascended on high received gifts
for men, yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord might dwell amongst the
rebellious, Psalm. 68.18. Though I am Accursed, and I see evidently God threatens
to Damn me in many Scriptures, yet is there hopes for such a Condemned sinner,
since Christ has redeemed coursed sinners from the Curse of the Law, being
made a Curse for them, that they might receive the Blessing of Abraham, and the
promise of the Spirit, Gal. 3.13.

6. Believe in Jesus Christ, because it is the Command of God, and pleasing in
his sight; and thy Duty, though thou can see no other warrant or ground of
encouragement. It is not only thy Privilege but thy Duty to Believe. This is
his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3 22. Believe on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, Act. 16 31.
Christ tells Hypocrites that sought him for their bellies, This is the work of
God, that ye believe in Him whom God has sent, Joh. 6.28. Apply the Word thus
for thy self; the righteous God that knows all my heinous sins, instead of
Condemning me for them, commands me to Believe on his Son, and assures me that
I shall be saved. The Lord give thee the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of Christ, and the obedience of Faith. The voice of the Lord Jesus is
powerful, and his Sheep hear it, pray earnestly that his commands may come with
power to thy Soul.

7. Rejoice to hear that Jesus Christ is become an earnest Suitor for thy love.
The Lord that was Crucified for the chiefest of sinners, now says to thee,
Beheld I stand at the door and knock if any man hear my voice and open the
door, I will come in to him, Rev. 3.20. I am (...) come to call the Righteous,
but Sinners, says the Lord, Mat. 9.13. Come unto me all ye who labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come, Isa. 55.1.
The Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears say come, and let
him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him take the water of Life
freely, Rev. 22.17. Hearken therefore to the ravishing voice of Christ,
although thou may judge thy self the vilest and chiefest of Sinners, and
may verily think there may be mercy for others, but there is none for such a
great monstrous sinner as thou have been; yet here is the joyful Sound, that
the Son of Man, God manifest in the flesh, is come to seek and save that which
is lost, Luke 19.10.

How dreadful soever thy condition may be in thy own thoughts, yet Christ
says, Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. Joh. 37. Though you
therefore feel hard and dead hearts, yet come as sinners unto Christ, who came
to seek and save such. The Lord calls Stout-hearted-sinners who are far from
Righteousness to hearken unto him, Isa. 46.12.

8. When your hearts are sinking under the sense of Gods wrath, then resolve in
the strength of Christ to rely upon him, to cast and roll your selves upon him,
whatever be the issue. If I perish, I will perish at the feet of Christ, for
otherwise I am sure to perish; if he condemn me he is righteous, if he save me,
'twill be riches of Free Grace for ever to be admired. Venture thus upon Christ
against a thousand discouragements was the Lepers ventured into the ^ents of
the S^rian^, 2 King. 7.4, 5. Press in upon Christ, resolving to take no denial,
as the Woman of Canaan did, Mat. 15.22. These had a blessed issue out of their
difficulties, and thou shall find at length that the bowels of Christ will
yearn over thy ^ing Soul, lying at his feet for a Crumb, (...) will embrace
thee with mispeakable (...). Thus let the Kingdom of Heaven suffer violence;
press thou into it, and take it by force.

Never attempt to believe or repent in thy own strength; but Look unto Jesus in
whom it has pleased the Father all fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19. As thou
would not proved ^o^n Hypocrite, beware of a dead Faith of thy own forming,
which is not the Faith of the operation of God, Col. 2.12. Look not for that in
thy self which is to be found in Christ, nor for that in the Law which is to be
found in the Gospel: this has been the cause of the long troubles of many
precious Souls. When thou fear thou shall die Eternally because thou can
not believe, look out of thy self unto Christ, who is full of Grace, and behold
his Glory, Joh. 1.1^ Look unto me and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth,
Isa. 45.22. Look unto Jesus the Beginner and finisher of Faith, Heb. 12.2.
Christ never comes expecting to find Faith or Repentance, but looks upon a
filthy Soul polluted in his own Blood, and says unto him, Live, and this time
is the time of Love, Ezekiel. 16.6, -- The Grace of the Lord is exceeding,
abundant to the chiefest of sinners; with Faith and Love which is in Christ
Jesus, 1 Timothy 1.14. When thou turnest thine eyes in^ and fear t^ the
hardness and impenitency of thy heart will surely be thy ruin; flee to that
reviving Word, Act. ^ 30, 31, God has raised up Jesus, and exalted Him with
His right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance to Israel, and
Remission of sins. The Lord has promised in the latter days to destroy the
vail of Unbelief which is spread over all Nations, Isa. 25.7. Do thou find by
experience that Word true, No man can come to me except the Father which has
sent me draw him Behold in the next verse what a full promse of help is made to
thee They shall be all taught of God; every man therefore that has heard and
learnt of the Father comes unto me, Joh. 6.44. Psalm. 25 Good and upright is
the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners ^n the way. Christ says, I am the
way unto the Father, Joh. 16.4. Follow the ^d at the Throne of Grace with Cries
and Groans unutterable, without ceasing; O draw me to Christ, help me to close
with and to rely upon him. If thou find still it is impossible for thee to
believe, hear the Lord saying to thee, Let him take hold of my strength that he
may make peace with me, and in shall make peace with me, Isa. 27.5. He gives
power to the faint and to them (...) have no^ might he increases st^ength,
Chap. ^0.29. There are trust in the Lord for ever; for the Lord JEHOVAH is
everlasting strength, Chap. 26 4. It is my earnest desire and prayer, that this
may be the time of Gods special love, and the day of his power, that you may be
United to Christ by Faith wrought in you by the power of Gods Spirit, that you
may thirst after, and receive a full assurance of Gods Love, and that you may
have the love of Christ shed abro^ (...) ^ts; and may abide in Christ, be (...)
the Grace which is in Him, whi^ (...) ^fficie^ for you in the gr^t (...) and
that you may be taught of God is (...) his Praises, and to rejoice with ^ng;
and may never lose (...) love; or fall into a spirit of (...) or ^lusion, but
may grow in the (...) of Christ, and being Planted in the house of God, may
bring forth much fruit (...) your selves, and taking up the Cross of Christ,
walking worthy of the Lord all your few days, to the Praise of his Free Grace,
who has called you into His Kingdom and Glory*

O that these Lines may not hereafter rise up in Judgment at the last Day
against any of you which slight them, and Condemn you, and that they may be the
Voice and Call of God, His Arm and Power revealed to your Salvation. The
presence of the Comforter be with you forever.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press, a small Book, Entitled, A New-Years-Gift for
Fainting Souls. Or a little Handful of Cordial-comforts, Scattered throughout
several Answers, to Sixteen Questions and Objections: As also Doubting
Christians invited to Christ. Intended chiefly for the good of those that walk
Mournfully before God: And are worthy to be gathered up, and regarded of all
such as wish well to their own Peace, By Mr. Richard Standfast, Minister of the
Gospel in Bristol.

Printed for, and Sold by Nichola^ Bu^telph, at the Corner of Gatteridges
Coffe-House in Boston.


