To their Excellencys, THE Lords Justices OF ENGLAND The Humble MEMORIAL of
Chidley Brook and William Nicolls,
SHOWS,
THat they were sent from the Governor, Council and General Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of New York about the Month of November (...), with an
humble Address of Thanks to His Sacred Majesty, for his Royal Care of and
Bounty to that Province, with all dutiful Acknowledgment of their hearty
Affection and Zeal to His Majesty's Person and Government.

That they had also Commission and Instructions to lay before his Majesty the
State and Condition of that Province, in relation to the War with the French;
and further, to move and appear in any matter or thing that may conduce to the
Good and Welfare of that Province.

That being on heir Voyage hither, in the Month of January last, near the
Islands of Silly, they were taken by a Privateer of St Malo, and carried into
France, where they remained Prisoners till the beginning of the Month of April.

That when they found the Ship they were in was not capable of any longer
Defense, they sunk all such Papers and Writings as did any ways concern the
Public or the War.

That they were instructed humbly to offer to and acquaint His Majesty, That
the French of Canada have Re-settled a Fort at a place called Cadaraque, from
whence they were driven by the Indians, the beginning of the War.

That since the said Settlement, the Indians of the five Nations have seemed
much colder in their Friendship to the English, and it is to be feared, they
will not only strike up a Peace with the French, but make open War upon the
English.

That it has not been possible for the Governor of New York, with the Forces
he has there, to hinder the settlement of the French at Cadaraque, it being
situate more than Five Hundred Miles from the uppermost Plantations, and the
way thither through a Country of thick Woods and great Lakes, without any Road,
and where no Provisions for any considerable Party of Christians are to be had.

That if those Five Nations of Indians should be drawn over to the French, all
the English Plantations on the Main Land, that are settled at great distance
from one another, will be liable to be wholly Ruined and Destroyed by small
Parties of French and those Indians.

That the Province of New York, by its Situation, yearly Presents and
Assistance given to those Indians, (to the great Impoverishing of that Country)
has hitherto (except any Defection has happened since November last) with great
difficulty kept those Indians from quitting the English Interest.

That in that Province, consisting of about three Thousand Families, toward
the defraying the Charge of the War, has been raised, since the year 1690.
above 30000 l. and all the Assistance had from the Neighboring Colonies, has
only been about 3000 l. though all the English Plantations on the Continent are
equally (if not more) concerned in the danger.

That notwithstanding so much Money has been raised from that Province, and the
other Assistance given by its Neighbors, the Expense of the War has been so
great, that the Government at present remains much in debt, and will not be
longer able to subsist, unless some effectual Methods are found to support it.

That the Indians being weary of the War, observing the great Recruits of Men,
Arms and Stores yearly sent from France, are very sensible of the Danger
threatened them by the Neighborhood of the French in Cadaraque, who are much
better fortified there than formerly; and by this they are inclined to hearken
to the Proposals made from those of Canada, who by Menaces, Gifts, and other
means, endeavor to get those Indians to engage on their side.

They humbly therefore pray Your Lordships to Intercede with His Majesty, To
order some speedy and effectual Care to be taken, that the Evils, which
apparently will attend the Indians Confederating with the French, and their
settling in those Parts may be prevented.

Given in May 19th, 1696. Signed by Chid. Brook, W. Nicoll.



