A Congratulatory Address, Of the House of Representatives of His Majesty's
Province of New Hampshire, Convened in General Assembly, August 7th. Anno
Domini. 1699. To His Excellency RICHARD, Earl of BELLOMONT, Captain General and
Governor in Chief of His Majesty's Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay,
New York, and New Hampshire, in New England, and Vice Admiral of the same.
May it please Your Excellency,
WE His Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of this
Province, being deeply sensible of the many hazards which attended Your Noble
Person both by Sea and Land; cannot but acknowledge the Benign Influences of
Heaven in bringing Your Excellency safe unto this part of Your Government.

Particularly that it has pleased Almighty GOD to incline the Heart of our
gracious Sovereign, to Commissionate one of so great and deserving a Character
as Your Lordship; and Your Self SIR, in the acceptance thereof, under whose
Administration, we promise our selves an impartial managment of Affairs.

More especially considering the late irregular Methods transacted among us;
when such only for the most part have been advanced unto Office, whose Fortunes
have been desperate, Sacrificing the Public to a private interest.

No wonder therefore if some Malcontents have represented us to Your
Lordship, under the Character of an uneasy and ungovernable People, the
contrary of which will soon be evinced by our inviolable Loyalty to His Sacred
Majesty, Submissive and hearty Obedience to all Your Excellencies Commands.

Your Excellency's great zeal and integrity in promoting the privileges of our
English Nation, and Your steady Conduct in the Government of Affairs in the
Neighboring Provinces; together with Your great Prudence exercised since Your
Lordships Arrival here; do give a lively prospect of some more than ordinary
Blessing to attend us.

Our daily Prayers shall therefore be, that His Majesty's Reign may be long and
prosperous, that Your Excellency's Government over us may be continued, Your
Health increased, and that Heavens Benediction be bestowed on Your Noble Person
and Family.

By Order, and in behalf of the House of Representatives. Samuel Penhallow,
Speaker,

BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. 1699.


