The Answer Of the House of Representatives, to His Excellency the Earl of
BELLOMONT'S Speech, to the Honorable the COUNCIL, and House of Representatives,
delivered by the Speaker and the whole House in the Council Chamber in Boston,
on Tuesday the 6 th. of June, 1699.
May it please Your Excellency,
WE His Majesty's most dutiful and loyal Subjects the Representatives of this
Province, render our Humble and Hearty Thanks, to Your Excellency, for Your
most favorable SPEECH, at the opening of this Assembly, wherein Your
Excellency has been pleased to Express Your kind Acceptance, of the
manifestations of our real and sincere Rejoycings, at Your Lordship's Arrival
to this Province; and thence to Calculate that which will be our greatest
happiness, and withal to assure us that Your Excellency's Care and Study shall
not be wanting thereto.

We have all the reason in the World to hope the Advancement of our Interests,
under Your Excellency's Government, when Your Lordship proposes as the Royal
Law of Your Administrations, the Example of our Great Master the KING; the
Pillars of whose Reign and Government, are Righteousness, and Truth, which will
never fail to Exalt a Nation.

We Return Your Excellency our most humble Acknowledgments, that You have been
pleased to assure us, of being undisturbed in the Exercise of our Consciences,
which we hope Your Lordship shall always see, we will Endeavor to Exercise
void of Offense.

And now after our Acknowledgments of Your Lordships most favorable
Expressions of Your Resolutions of Studying our Interest, We humbly Acquaint
Your Excellency, that we are Resolved obediently to observe Your Lordship's
Directions, in Reviving the Courts of Justice; and shall endeavor to form such
Acts of Assembly, as may be meet for His Majesty's Allowance when laid before
Him.

That We will consult such ways as may engage the Neighbor Indians, by some
proper regulation of the Trade. That we will diligently Enquire into the Stores
of War. That we will await and be ready to receive Your Excellency's
Directions, referring to the Fortifications on the Castle-Island.

We also look upon our selves peculiarly obliged, to Express our most grateful
Resentments, of Your Excellency's favorable Inclinations, to promote the
Settlement of the College; which under Almighty GOD, has been the great
Barrier against the Invasions of Barbarism, and Irreligion in this Country, and
if settled upon an agreeable foot, will be the peculiar Glory, as well as
Interest of this Province, above all other His Majesty's Plantations in
America. And we shall be glad to take such proper steps, for the Incorporation
of that Society; as it may (...) the (...) be liable to such Inconveniences,
as of late have happened to it. We are about to order Mr. Treasurer to lay
before the House, the State of the Treasury of this Province.

The House also Declare their Readiness, to receive and consider of such Bills,
as Your Excellency shall offer to them, which are of a public nature, and for
the service of this Province; and most humbly thank Your Excellency, that You
are pleased to give them such (...) of Your Readiness to pass such other Laws,
as may be (...) the promoting the Trade, and the general Interest of this
Province; Hoping, we shall be careful to Square our Laws with the Laws of
England, according to the Directions of His Majesty's Royal Charter.

We hope we shall always bear in our minds, the Indispensable Duty and Loyalty
we owe to the KING, our most Glorious Deliverer under GOD, from Popery and
Slavery; Circumstances most intolerable and odious to true English men, above
any men in the World. We shall ever look upon it our Duty, to Celebrate the
Glorious Achievements of our Sovereign Lord KING WILLIAM; whose Heroic
Conduct has restored the English Nation to it is ancient Character; And pray
Your Excellency to believe, that we shall always be most ready to besiege the
Throne of Grace, with our most fervent Supplications, for His Majesty's long
and prosperous Reign, and join with all Good men in the like Loyal and Pious
Devotions, with our Sincerest AMEN.

BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. Sold at the Printing House. 1699.


