THRENODIA, Or a Mournful Remembrance, of the much to be Lamented Death of the
Worthy and Pious Capt. ANTHONY COLLAMORE.
(...)

THE Great Jehovah is the Lord and King,
Both in the Heavens and on the Earth and Sea;
What things Pleas Him in each to pass does bring
Nor can He in His Will resisted be.
He in His (...) retains the Boisterous Winds,
And Raging Waters in a Garment binds.
It Is but to Loose His Little Finger then,
And the most Furious blasts do Issue thence;
Enough to Terrify the stoutest Men,
Nor can they find against it a Defense.
It Is But to Slack the binding of the Seas,
And they will soon accomplish what He pleas.
December last upon the Sixteenth day,
Within the Harbor lay at Situate;
Some (...)
Which for Fair Wind and Weather there (...)
(...) the Rest was Captain Collamore,
(...) disaster, we must now Deplore:
(...) Expanded led the way,
Out of the Harbor; and did fairly glide
Thus one by one stood out into the Bay,
Which Wind at East North East and Flowing Tide.
The Captain in the Rere did Hoise up Sail,
(...) after with a steady Gale.
He did his best with speed to quit the Shore,
And seemed in his way to Prosper well;
He Lufft up to the Wind and North ward bore,
For near an Hour as Spectators tell:
That so he might be gaining of the Wind,
And to his Port the fairer Passage find.
But Dangers great did quickly him Surprise,
The Clouds did gather and obscure the Sun;
Winds Whittled (...) came thick (...) did rise;
And He (...) which way (...)
As did appear to some that were before,
Who quickly after, saw, (...) no more.
With him Five Persons more (...) were,
Two Men, one Woman, and two (...) beside:
None did (...) alive on Shore appear;
But were all Drowned in the Ocean wide,
No more but two are yet to this day found,
Which does the Hearts of their Relations (...)
Whether some hidden Rock with fatal stroke,
At once gave Final (...) unto their Course;
By which their (...) and (...), were Broke
Not able to with (...)
Thus some conceive who saw and viewed the (...)
Which quickly to the Shore was hurled back.
Or whether (...) over deep with Wood,
The Swelling Waves did (...) her by degrees;
If then their Frozen Pump would do no good,
They soon became a Prey unto the (...):
Which Violently (...) them did go,
(...) bore them down, into the deeps below
What happened to them we can only guess,
Because none of them did Survive to tell;
Nor can we think what Anguish did Possess,
Their SOULS when this Disaster them befell,
We humbly must Adore GOD'S Providence,
Who in the (...) His Judgments does dispense.
One Ephraim Turner (...) the Fatal place,
Was cast upon the (...) next day found;
Most sorely battered on (...) and Face,
Who decently was (...) ground,
Relations of (...) the Shore,
For thirteen days but they (...) no more.
(...) on the Fourteenth day one did epsy,
A Corpse he judged was Captain Collamore;
(...) not know (...) a Certainty,
By any thing, but (...) the Clothes he wore.
His Forms and Visage, (...) was lost,
Having by Waves on (...) been so long tossed.
His Friends, his Neighbors, (...) all,
Prepare his (...)
His Soldiers also at the (...)
Appear with Drooping hearts and Dripping eyes.
With many Tears they laid him in the dust,
To wait the Resurrection of the Just.
And now although Relations of the Rest,
Know their own Sorrows and Distress of mind;
While for the quieting their troubled Breast,
They in the Creature no relief can find.
Our Duty binds us all to Sympathize,
With such as Mourn in their Adversities.
But Public Persons are a Public loss,
Because more useful, and more Eminent;
They in their places were the greater cross,
And the more sad Occasion to Lament.
The Death of Collamore we must bewail,
Our Glory's going when the Faithful fail.
What Offices he bore of any kind,
He did adorn with Carriage full of Grace;
His Modest, Humble, Condescending mind,
Could freely yield to any in their Place,
To all Degrees above him and below,
His rightly Ordered Courtesy did flow.
Unto this Province and the Government,
He was a Faithful and a Constant Friend;
In all the troubles which they under went,
And what he had, was willing to Expend
For the Promotion of the Public good,
At any time in what he understood.
In Situate let each Inhabitant,
Greatly lament this worthy Person's fall;
Both Rich and Poor his Courtesy will want,
Who still was ready to oblige them all.
It was to many by Experience known,
His valued others good before his own.
He was the Captain of the (...)
Love was his Banner, Love was his (...)
Their Cheerful Service was returned (...)
His Acceptance was their (...)
(...) that Great Company (...)
Where Mustered two hundred (...)
In Judgment sound, in Life Upright (...)
A Zealous Member of the Church was he;
His Studies and Endeavors were (...)
That so CHRIST'S Kingdom (...)
A (...) also Faithful to (...)
To do that only which (...) Just.
The North Society in Situate,
Has lost a Leading Man and Loving Friend;
Who ready was (...)
On every good (...)
His Care and (...) plainly (...)
To settle and maintain GOD'S (...)
A Faithful (...) (...)
He also Tender was (...)
True Peace they (...)
Enjoying what they had (...)
GOD'S Blessing on their care and Industry
Did yield them (...) Prosperity.
A Father careful of (...)
Whose Love to Souls and (...)
He spared not the best that he could do,
In Warning them to mind their latter end.
He did his just Commands meekly Dispense,
And they did humbly (...)
He was a Master full of Gentleness,
Whose care it was things honest to Provide;
Obliging thus his Servants Faithfullness,
As he did In their (...)
So that to Serve him we may well Conclude
Was rather Freedom than Servitude.
But GOD has by his Sovereign Providence,
Of such an Useful Man this place bereft
A deep Affecting and Afflicting sense,
Is well becoming each one that is (...)
We all in his (...) loss (...)
Which sure GOD only can (...)
Since therefore All things come (...)
This Comfort in our (...) does (...)
Though Duty binds (...)
Yet in our Loss, He has (...)
For Dying in the LORD, (...)
And of such Upright (...)
To Old and Young this (...)
Does Testify with loudest (...)
God tryes by others DEATH us to Provoke,
While it is Day to work with diligence.
Let then both High and Low the Rich and Poor,
Lament the DEATH of Captain Collamore.
(...) Deodat Lawson.
Printed at BOSTON by Bartholomew Green, 1694.


