HIS EXCELLENCY'S SPEECH, TO THE HONORABLE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY MARYLAND,
April the 26 th. Anno Domini 1700.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU have now had a Year and an half's Experience of me, which I hope will
Confirm you in the Truth of what I have publicly assured you of, my best
Endeavors for your Service, which I promise I will allways justly perform.

I cannot but acknowledge that all your Actions in our last meeting gave me
great satisfaction, for it was managed with that Accord and good agreement,
that there was not the least shadow or Color for any ill disposed People to
make any malicious remarks upon: And that good Understanding which we were so
happy at first to Create, will I hope be mutually preserved on both sides; as
it is my fixed Resolution it shall be inviolably on mine. After which I will
give you all the convincing Proofs of what I have solemnly averred, in my
Regards for the Province in General, and every one of you in Particular.
Wherefore if you labor under any difficulties, I am ready to redress them and
assure you I will suppress all unnecessary charges and expenses to make you
easy, And have the Vanity to believe your Examination of the public Accounts
will convince you of what I have already done in that, not having since the
last ASSEMBLY, which is Ten Months ago, Entailed Ten Pounds Charge upon you, or
any individual Person in the Province: But on the contrary, Averted what lay in
my Power.

GENTLEMEN,

SINCE it is and ought to be the Great End of all GENERAL ASSEMBLY'S, to
consult the Honor of GOD and the Service of their King and Country, the
Ignominious Report which is handed about by some, leads me to acquaint you of
an Order of his Most Sacred MAJESTY in Council, for the disanulling the Law
which is Entitled the Act for Establishing the Protestant Religion. The
Repealing the said Law, gives no Room to any Person to suggest it is being
disassented to, upon any other grounds then it mentions; you having clogged and
loaded it with things of different Natures, which I hope you will wisely
Correct without the least Hesitation. For we are happy under the Wings and
Protection of a Prince whose Delight is to run the greatest Hazards for the
Conservation of our Property's, and never yet obstructed his People in pursuing
that Blessed Name of Liberty.

YOU are sensible how useful Religion is in the good Government of a Nation or
Province. It Is the uniting the People, the keeping Men good, and deterring them
from committing of Rapines of all degrees, upon each other. Much may be said
upon this Subject, which is not so proper here, and not being my Tallent,
neither is it necessary, where I am morally assured those Persons to whom I
apply, are so well inclined, and are so good Judges of the Fatal Consequences
would attend us in the Loss of that good Law.

GENTLEMEN,

I shall not here enumerate what other affairs we are to concert this Sessions
of Assembly, but will leave you to proceed in the usual way of Conference and
Message, being ready to join with you wherein we may promote his Majesty's
Service, on which depends the Good of this Province.

THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY'S ANSWER TO HIS EXCELLENCY'S SPEECH
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,
WE have observed the Progress of your EXCELLENCY'S Government, and gratefully
acknowledge your sincere endeavors for the good of his MAJESTY's Liege People
in this Province; And without any jealousies assure our selves the same for the
future

WE are extremely satisfied to have your Excellency acknowledge our Actions in
the last Sessions to have been to your satisfaction. We assure your Excellency
we are come again with the same Candid and Honest Resolution, inviolably to
maintain the same good agreement, and right understanding, which has hitherto
been betwixt us; And confess have had convincing proofs of your Excellency's
reguard for the Province in general, and every one of us in particular.

WE thankfully acknowledge your Excellency has managed the affairs of this
Province with the least charge, and expense that could be. Your Government has
been disce^e^, just, easy, and most acceptable to us all; and if any
difficulties come upon this Province and us, we will never seditiously,
factiously, nor with anger and reflections secretly murmur and grumble, But
with upright and honest hearts, according to our duty, with Candor and Freedom
in proper place, will represent such grievances to your Excellency, being
entirely confident of your Excellency's Redress, and in the mean time we have
no apprehension that any difficulty will be to us by your Excellency's
procurement.

THE Glory of GOD. And the Advancement of this his Majesty's Province, and good
Correspondency with our neighboring Colonys shall be our endeavors. And if
his Majesty has been pleased to Repeal the present Act for establi^hing the
Protestant Religion, yet will we not be discouraged, but endeavor by your
Excellency's Conduct, to adju^t matters so agreeable to his Majesty's Pleasure,
and the general satisfaction of this Province; that we hope his Majesty, will
at length by Law establish Religion amongst us according to the Church of
England; that our Children and Posterity being preserved in the unity of the
Church, from Faction and Schism in Honesty and Charity, may become good and
sober Men loving Virtue, flying Vice, the rational consequence of true
Christian Doctrine, which God preserve amongst us. We never had the least
apprehension of his Majesty's obstructing our Liberty, and we have a sufficient
assurance of his Royal Achievements for the preservation of it. If it be at
any time unjustly obstructed, we are assured that such obstruction proceeds not
from his Majesty, the whole course of whose Government proclaims his Goodess to
his Subjects; neither have we any fear of your Excellencies perverting his
Majesty's Instructions. We acknowledge you have well represented his Majesty's
Clemency, and discreetly managed the Prerogative, and are truly sensible (...)
our own happiness under your Excellencies Government, of which we heartily wish
the continuance.

ABOUT the a^fairs that may happen to be considered of this Sessions, since
your Excellency leaves it to us, we shall be willing to proceed in the usual
ways of Conference and Message, and desire to decline all strife and contention
without any jealousy or suspicion, with one heart to promote his Majesty's
Service, from which the true Interest of this Province can not be separate.

By His Excellency the Governor and Council in Assembly; April the 27 th. 1700.
Gentlemen,
YOU having not only ingeniously, but so heartily expressed yourselves in answer
to what his Excellency was yesterday pleased to say to you, (which is here very
kindly received) this Board cannot have any apprehensions, but that you will
cheerfully exert your utmost endeavors this Session, to approve your selves
worthy of the honor and happiness you have to profess your selves good
Christians, and his Majesty's faithful Subjects; and therein first to consult
the Honor and Glory of GOD.

Whereupon his Excellency is pleased to recommend to your consideration, his
most Sacred Majesty's Order in Council herewith sent you, and that you would
apply your selves to concert such rules and measures, as may best establish,
and secure to you, and your posterities, your Religion, (which at present by
the said order seems to be altogether unhinged) and make such reasonable Laws
therefore, as may not meet the least objection in passing his Majesty's Royal
Assent.

Licensed by Order of the House of Delegates. Tho: Smithson SPEAKER.


