Instructions for Children: OR, THE Child's and Youth's Delight, TEACHING An
easy way to Spell and Read TRUE ENGLISH. Containing the Father's Godly Advice;
Directing Parents in a Right and Spiritual manner to Educate their CHILDREN.

With a Christian Catechism, wherein all the chief Principles of True
Christianity are clearly opened.

Together with many other things both Pleasant and Useful for the Education of
Children.

Written by Benj. Keach.

Printed and Sold by Will. Bradford at the Bible in New York, 1695.

Courteous Reader;
THis little Book, called, Instructions for Children, I have read (...) have
taught Scholars above 40 Years in London^ And as (well know) este^em the
Author, so I do commend it to all Religious Parents who are willing to
Catechize their Children, and Teach them to know the holy Scriptures: And I
could wish that all the English Schoolmasters in and about this City (nay
throughout the Nations) would make use of it for the Instruction of their
Scholars, finding it so well agreeing with the Mind of God (...) Scripture
(...)

The English Capitals.
A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P ^ R S T V W X Y Z.

The English small Letters.
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r r s s t u v w x y z.

The Capital Roman Letters.
A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T U W X Y Z.

The small Roman Letters.
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t u v x y z and

(...) Italick Letters.
(...) M N O (...)

Double Letters.
ct ss si ssi ^^ ff fi ffi f^ ^^ sh etc.

Easy Syllables.
ab eb ib ob ub ba be by bo bu by ac ec ic oc uc ca ce ci co cu cy ad ed id od
ud da de di do du die af of if of uf fa fe fi fo fu fie ag eg ig og ug ga ge gi
go gu gy ak ek ik ok uk ka ke ki ko ku ky al el il ol ul la le li lo lu ly am
em im om um ma me mi mo mu an en in on un na ne ni no nu ny ap ep ip op up pa
pe pi po pu py ar er ir or ur ra re ri to ru ry as es is os us sa se si so su
sy at et it ot ut ta te ti to tu ty va ve vi vo vu vy wa we wi woe wu wy ax ex
ix ox ux
A Vowel has a perfect sound by it self, without any other Letter; but
Consonants, without Vowels, will make no sound, nor can they be pronounced.

bat bet bit bot but cad ced cid cod cud dap dep dip dop dup gad ged gid god
good hac hec hic hoc huc lap lep lip lop lup bra bre bri bro bru cha che chi cho
chu dra dre dri dro dru fla fle fli flo flu
Words of one Syllable.
A Are, ale, are, age, art, ant.

Babe, blaze, bone, bore, born, brake, brave, bring,

Charge, child, chide, choice, crum, cage, chance, cure.

Dale, dance, did, do, done, dote, dove, drove, dog.

Edge, else, ear, eye.

Face, fence, fine, force, for*

Gate, give, gone, grove.

Hate, ha^^e, hedge, hole, huge

Isle, inn, judge, juice.

Lead, leave, live, life, love.

Mace, made, make, ma^^, (...), mi^^, mixed, mole, m^, moth.

Not, neck, nine, noon*

Oats, oak, one, once.

Plow, play, plunge, peace, pipe, pope.

Q^ick, quake, quire.

Reap, read, road, rot.

Seed, said, side, Saint.

Time, tide, told, ten.

Words of two, three, four, five and six Syllables.
A-base, a-bide, a-broad, a-bode, a-ba-sed, a-ba-ted, a-bi-ding, a-ca-de-my,
a-bo-mi-na-ble, a-po-the-ca-ry, de-no-mi-na-ti-on, ex-a-mi-na-ti-on,
Phi-la-del-phi-a, fa-mi-li-a-ri-ty, pro-pi-ti-a-ti-on, qua-li-fi-ca-ti-on,
Re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on.

Precepts for Children.
TO learn to Read good Child, give heed,
For it is a precious thing:
What may compare, with Learning rare?
From hence does Virtue spiring.
2.
In time of Grief, i^ yields Relief;
Yea* in Adversity
'Twill cheerful make, when Friends forsake,
And when dear Parents dye.
3.
When Foes annoy* 'twill yield thee Joy*
With much Delight and Pleasure:
If Poor thou be, this will to the^
Exceed all earthly Treasure.
4.
Though others have, and Riches crave,
Unto their hearts desire.
It may decay, and fly away,
(...) ^e c^nsu^'d by ^ire:
5.
Thy Portion's sure, and will endure*
Naught can undo that youth
Whom God does learn, for to discern
The worth of sacred Truth.
6.
Take therefore care Learning's more ra^^
Than Chains of purest Gold;
Look, look about and find it out,
Its worth cannot be told,
7.
Consonants know, and Vowels (...),
^ay, learn r^g^tly to Spell;
Be not a Fool, but go to School,
Till thou read English well;
8^
Yet (...) ^ere, but learn to fear
The Blessed GOD of Truth;
O understand it is Gods Command
To serve him in thy Yo^o^.
9.
Learn to deny the Company
Of Children who are vile,
That Lie and Swear, so wicked are,
As good Men to revile,
10
O learn to know what filth does flow
From every poisonous Evil,
And look within, to find out Sin,
It Is worser than the Devil.
11^
What Adam's Fall htah brought on all,
His whole Posterity*
Strive to find out, then without doubt
To Jesus thou will fly.
12.
For fit releif, under thy Grief,
On him do thou depend;
And he will ^ear, and will appear
To save thee in the end.
Lessons for Children.
1. Lesson.
Father, COme ye Chil-dren, and hear-ken un-to me, and I will teach you the
fear of the Lord.

2. Lesson.
Chil-dren o-bey your Pa-rents in the Lord, for this is right.

3. Lesson.
Be dutiful and obedient to your Parents, Masters, and other Superiors; not
entering into many Words when you are bid to do any Business, but with all
Readiness of Mind obey all their lawful Commands with Diligence and
Cheerfulness.

4. Lesson.
Adorn your selves with Faithfulness, Meekness, and Patience; and let your
Behavior be modest, courteous and gentle toward all* ^^d do unto others as
you would be done unto your selves.

5. Lesson.
SUbmit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake; whether it be
to the King, as supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by
(...), for the Punishment of Evil doers, and for the Praise of them that do
well.

6. Lesson.
Honor all Men, Love the Brotherhood, Fear God* (...) the King. Servants, be
subject to your Masters, with all Fear; not only to the Good and Gentle, but
also to the Froward.

7. Lesson.
FOR what Glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your Faults, ye shall take
it patienly: But if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it Patiently;
this is acceptable with God.

8. Lesson.
FOR even hereunto were ye called; because Christ also suffered for us leaving
us an Examples that ye should follow his Steps, who did no Sin nither was Guile
found in his Mouth.

9. Lesson.
Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously.

10 Lesson.
Who his own self bore our sin, in his own Body upon the Tree, that we being
dead to sin, should live unto Righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed.

Above all things have ferven^ Charity among your selves. Use Hospitality one
to another with-grudging, that God in all things may be glorified, through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

The little Child's Catechism.
Father. CHild* How Old art thou*


Child, I am told, Fa-ther, that (...) am be-tween three and fou^ years Old.


Fa. Can thou tell who was the first Man God made?


Chapter Yes, A-dam was the fi^ ^an.


Fa. Who was it that kill-ed* (...) Bro-ther?


Chapter Cain.


Fa. Why did he kill him?


Chapter Be-cause his Works w^ onile, and his Bro-thers gord.


Fa. Who did walk wiu^ (...) three hun-dred years, and was (...) fla^^ed that
he should not see (...)


Chapter E-n^^h.


Fa. Who was the (...) that e-verli-ved?


Chapter Ma-thu-^


Fa. Who built the A^k, and w^ on-ly Righ-te-ous in his Day?


Ch No-ah.


Fa. Who was the most faith-ful Man?


Ch A-bra-ham.


Fa. Who wrest-led with the Angel of God, and pre-vail-ed?


Chapter Ja-cob.


Fa. Who was ha-ted of his Brethren.


Chapter Jo-seph.


Fa. Who was the meek-est Man?


Ch^ Mo-ses.


Fa. Who did the ground o-pen and swal-low up a-live?


Chapter Co-rah, Da-than, and A-bi-ram.


Fa. Who was the strong-est Man


Chapter Samp-son.


Fa. Who was a Man af^ God's own heart?


Chapter Da-vid.


Fa. Who was the pa-ti-ent^es^ Man?


Chapter Job.


Fa. Who was the wi-sest Man?


Chapter So-lo-mon.


Fa. Who pray-ed that it might not rain, and it rai-ned not for three years
up-on the Earth?


Chapter E-li-jah


Fa. Who did the Ra-vens feed with bread and meat?


Chapter E-li-jah, 1 King. 17.6.


Fa. Who were cast in-to the ho^ fi-ry Fur-nace?


Chapter Sha-drach, Ma-shach, and A-bed-ne-go*


Fa. Why were they cast into the Fur-nace?


Chapter Be-cause they would not Wor-ship a gol-den I-mage the King of Ba-by-lon
had made.


Fa. Who was cast in-to the Ly^ns Den?


^h. Da-ni-el.


Fa. Who did Je-sus Christ raise from the dead?


Ch^ La-za-rus.


Fa. Who de-ny-ed Je-sus Christ?


Chapter St. Pe-ter.


Fa. Who be-tray-ed his bles-sed Ma-ster with a kiss?


Chapter Ju-das.


Fa. Who were struck with death for tel-ling of a Lie?


Chapter A-na-ni-as and his Wife Sa-phi-rah.


Fa. Who was con-ver-ted as he was go-ing to Da-mas-cus?


Chapter Saul, who was call led Paul.


Fa. How did Sin en-ter in-to the World?


Chapter By A-dam's eat-ing of the for-bid-den Fruit?


Fat. What is Sin?


Chapter The break-ing of God's Com-mand-ment.


Fa. Who made you?


Chapter God made me and (...) Mankind.


Fa. What is God?


Chapter God is a spi-rit.


Fa. Why did God make you?


Chapter That I should serve, Wor-ship, and ho-nour him.


Fa. How ought you to serve and wor-ship God?


Ch^ God must be wor-ship-ped in Spi-rit and in Truth.


Fa. What is meant by wor-ship-ping God in Truth?


Chapter To Wor-ship God in Truth, is to wor-ship him according to his own
Ap-point-ments, or In-sti-tu-ti-ons, re-cor-ded in the ho-ly Scrip-ture.


Fa. What is it to wor-ship God in Spi-rit?


Chapter To wor-ship God in Spi-rit is to wor-ship him in sin-ce-ri-ty, or in the
up-right-ness of my Heart, and by the in-flu-ence of the Ho-ly Ghost.


Fa. Who is the Sa-vi-our of Mankind?


Chapter Je-sus Christ.


Fa. What did Je-sus Christ do (...)?


Chapter He dyed and shed his pre-ci-ous blood to save me.


Fa. What must you do if you would be sa-ved by him?


Chapter I must be-lieve in him; and be con-ver-ted.


Fa. Can you believe in him?


Chapter Not without God gives me his spe ci-al Grace


Fa. What must you do to ob-tain God's spe-ci-al Grace?


Chapter I must pray to him for Christ's sake to give me his Grace that I may
be-lieve.


Fa. Be-lo-ved Child, the Lord help you so to do; and be sure you a-void the
Com-pa-ny (my Child) of wic-ked Chil-dren, and take heed of Ly-ing,
Stub-born-ness, Dis-o-be-di-ence, and all man-ner of e-vil Words and Deeds, and
God will lo^^ you, and your Fa-ther and Mo-t^ will love you; nay, and you will
(...) be-lo-ved of all that fear and lo^^ God.


1.
O Child most dear, incline thine ^a^*
And hearken to Gods Voice:
Hi^ Counsel the^ and that will make
Gods Angels to rejoice.
2.
Be not like those, who Grace oppose*
And give their Minds to play;
But let thy Mind be well inclined,
In seeking Wisdoms way.
3^
Learn in thy Youth Gods holy Truth*
Christ's blessed Cross to bear:
And so shall thou though hated now,
In ^eaven have a share.
4.
Don't Lie nor ^wear to Steal don't da^^*
T^ke heed of such great E^ils;
For ^uch must die and in Hell lie
With damned Souls and Devils*
5^
(...) right (...) thou (...)
(...) Thy F^^her and thy Mother*
It Is ^^so right (...) Gods dear (...).
To love Sister and Brother.
7^
^pend all thy days in righteous way,
Gods holy Name to hallow,
That at the last, thy days being past,
A blessed end may follow:
8.
And though thou die, and in the Grave lie,
Yet Christ will thee awake,
And Angels send to attend,
And into Glory take.
9.
Where thou shall rest with Saints the best,
(...) all eternity
And have the Crown of bl^st Renown,
Gods Name to magnify,
10.
that thus with Christ in Peradice
Thou ever more may Reign
(...) that thou pray both night and day,
That Glory to obtain.
Now, my lit-tle Child, stand a-side and let me ask your El der-Bro-ther some
Que-sti-ons.

The Youth's CATECHISM.
Father. CHild, how old ar^ thou?


Child I am, most honored Father, about ten years old.


Fa. What have thou learned, or do thou know of God?


Ch I am a Child, and know but a little; I understand as a Child, and think as
a Child.


Fa. Do thou not understand my Question?


C^. I fear I do not.


Fa. Do thou not believe there is a God?


Chapter Y^^, Sir, I do believe there is a God; for I have often read of him in my
bible.


Fa. Who i^ God?


Ch* I do not know very well; Is it not an old Man?


Fa. Thy little Brother answered better. But why do thou think God is a Man?


Chapter Because I read God made Man in his own Image.


Fa. That does not mean form or shape:


Chapter Pray, Father, tell me who God is, and what the meaning is of that place of
Scripture I mentioned*


Fa. God is (as thy little Brother has said) a Spirit; and a Spirit has not
Flesh and Bones as we have: Also the likeness and Image of God, is
Righteousness and (...) Holiness, together with a Sovereign Power and Authority
over all Creatures and Things. An^ (...) this son^^ God ma^^ Man in his own
Image, and after his own likeness. Man was created holy and upright, and made
chief Ruler and Governor of all Creatures and Things on Earth.


Chapter Do all Men retain this Image of God still?


Fa. No, Child, Mankind is degenerated, and has lost the Image of God.


Chapter Pray* Father, tell me how Man came at first to lose the Image of God.


Fa. Man lost Gods Image by his Sin: Adam, who was the first Man God created,
brake God's Commandment, in eating of the forbidden Fruit; and thereby defiled
and Poluted himself and all his posterity: And so long as Men continue in an
un^onverted Stat^, being under the power of Sin and natural Depravity, they
more resemble the Devil, o^ have more of his Likeness, than of the Image and
Likeness of God in them.


Chapter Father, Pray tell me what my State and Condition is?


Fa. What do thou mean by State and Condition?


Chapter I do not mean my outward State in this world, for I thank God through his
Blessing and your Care of me, dear Father, I want neither Food nor Raiment.


Fa. My good Child, I am glad to hear thee enquire after thy spiritual
Condition; thou would I perceive, not only know God, but also know thy el^;
that is to say, the state of thy immortal Soul?


Chapter Have I, Father t^en an immortal Soul?


Fa. An immortal Soul* Child, Yes; more worth then all the World.


Chapter Pray, Sir, what is my Soul?


Fa. It Is a Spirit, an immortal Spirit, created by the Lord and infused into
thee: the Lord formed the Spirit of Man, which is within (...) what shall I do,
if I am by Nature a Child of Wrath, and thus prone to sin against God?


Fa. God has, Child, provided a Remedy; he has sent his Son Jesus Christ, to
save thee from thy Sins, and deliver thee from this thy woeful Condition.


Chapter But, Sir what would you have me do? For I heard our Minister say, That
such who die unconverted shall be damned.


Fa. You must strive against the Evils of your heart: I do forewarn you of the
danger ^f ^in, and charge you before the Great God, not to keep Company with
wicked Children; for some do not only now-a-day go astray from the Womb,
telling Lies; but also learn to Swear and Blaspheme the Holy Name of God as
soon, nay, before they can speak plain, and their evil and wicked Parents do
not reprove them. Secondly, I exhort you to pray to God to give you Grace, and
change your evil Nature; for except a Man be born again, he cannot see the
Kindom of God, John 3.3.


Chapter Father, wh^ (...) it to be born again?


Fa. It is not to enter the second time into your Mothers Womb, and be born;
but, it is to have a spiritual Birth, it is to have a new Life, to have the evil
Qualities and Habits of your Heart changed, and holy and heavenly Qualites and
Habits infused in the room of them.


Child. Would to God I did rightly understand what you say, and could but
experience this New Birth wrought in me.


Fa. If you follow on to kno^ the Lord, he will give Understan^ding, and work
this work in you.


Chapter But, Father, I am very young, may I not do as other Children do, and de^er
the minding of these things until I am older?


Fo. No, Child, you must not defer these things to another time; '^is the Devil
that darts such vile thoughts into thy Mind. I do therefore command you and all
your Brothers and Sisters, as you expect to abide in my love and favor, or do
hope to enjoy the love and favor of God, to resist such insnaring and
Soul-undoing Thoughts.

1. Because God requires you to remember him now in your youth, before the evil
days come, Eccles. 1^.1. First (says Christ) seek the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6.33.

2. I charge you to see your Heart Heavenward, and to labor to know God, and
to love and serve him now, because you were made and sent into this world to
this very purpose.

3. Consider, my good Child, God does graciously preserve, feed and cloth you
likewise, to the end you might live to him: would you have God be at the charge
of you^ Maintenance, and refuse to do his Service, and rather choose to serve
the Devil, as all wicked Children do?


Chapter No, dear Father, God forbid.


Fa. Why then did you ask me whether you might not defer the great things that
concern your Soul, and the Knowledge of God and Christ, and his Service, until
you are older; for such who resolve to defer seeking after Gods Grace and
Holiness ti^l they are old, secretly purpose to be wicked and ungodly whilst
they are young.


Chapter But, Father, I cannot see that many Children do regard or mind these
things; besides, they laugh at me and mock me, when I speak to them of God, and
of praying to him, and of getting an interest in Christ.


Fa. My Child, I know there are great multitudes of wicked and ungodly
Children; and woe last thou be wicked as well as they? And because they serve
the Devil, would you serve him? If you do so, you may lie in Hell with them at
last; t^erefore matter it not, Child, though they laugh at you and reproach you;
for blessed are they that are reviled and reproached for Christ's sake.


Chapter But, Father, do not some People find Mercy with God when they are old, who
never minded to seek after God whilst they were young?


Fath. God has not promised that they who seek him late, shall find him; but
his Promise runs to them that seek him early, Prove. 8 17. But, Child, God does
not, it may be, afford some the means of Grace whilst they are young; they may
live in some d^rk corner: Nor does he call all a^ (...) t^^rd Hour. But, Child,
you do not know whethe^ yo^ shall live till you are old; and if death comes and
c^ts you off in yo^^ sins, what will b^come of you then? Many go dow^ to Hell
with their Bones full of the sins o^ their Youth; Do you not see many little
Graves, as well as great ones?


Chapter But pray, Father, what other Reason is there, why I should seek after God,
and strive to lead an holy Life in my Youth?


Fa. 4. Because God accepts of such and their Service, exceedingly, who yield
the first and best of their Days to him: God ought not to be put off with old
Age, which are the dr^gs of our days. Besides, thy dear Savior spent all his
days on Earth that so he might glorifi^ thee in Heaven, therefore should thou
spend all thy days in his Service, and to Honor him. He lived for thee, that
thou should live to him; and died for thee in the prime of his days, that
thou sh^^l^st not spend the primest o^ thy days in sin. Moreover, most of those
Renowned and Eminent Saints we read of in the Scripture, who were greatly
beloved and honored by the Almighty, were early seekers, or such that gave up
themselves to God in their youth: as namely, young Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Moses,
Solomon, Josi^h, the Apostle John, Timothy, and diverse others. Furthermore,
What ground is there for any to think, that after they have spent all their
youthful and primest days in the Devils Service, in doing his will and pleasing
him by living in wicked and ungodly ways, that when they are old, and their
Nature almost spent, that God will accept them? Nay, and it is hard to know
then whether they for^ sake Sin, or Sin forsakes them.

5. Further to persuade thee in thy youth to cleave to God, and to be holy
betimes, consider that hereby thou will prevent and escape m^n^ g^ievous sins
(which others run into) to the great dishonor of God and grief of their
Parents? which will also more and more polute and defile thy Soul, and cause
the Lord to loathe and abhor thee; and by this means also will Satan get the
greater Power over thee; and the more difficult will it be for thee to leave
the ways of sin, and the vanities of this World; for evil habits and customs in
sin, are not easily broken; which made the Prophet say, Can the Ethiopian
change his skin, or the Lepord his spots? Then may ye also do good that are
accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13.23.

9. God calls thee now in thy youth, and this may be the only time of thy
visitation; and if thou should slight and neglect this season, probably God
may call thee no more. Prove. 1.24. many who refuse God's Call in their youth,
and cleave to the Lusts and Vanities of the World, when they come to be old,
are wholly rejected of the Almighty, and given up to unbelief and hardness of
Heart; so that they sin without any remorse of Conscience, and perish eternally.

7. And lastly, That I may prevail with thee to be holy betimes, or to fear the
Lord now in thy youth; consider, Child, that God wi^ br^ng thee for all thy
youthful Lusts and vanities unto Judgment: Rejoice, O young Man in thy youth;
let t^y Heart cheer thee in the days o^ thy youth; and walk in the ways of thy
Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes; But know thou, for all these things, God
will bring thee unto Judgment; Therefore remove sorrow from thy Heart, and put
evil from thy Flesh; for Childhood (...), Eccles. 11.9, 10.

What think thou now (my dear Child) is it not (...) f^r thee to hearken to
the Counsel of thy Father, and mind that one thing needful, and with Mary choose
that good Part? To prefer Heaven before Earth; and ^he Joys above, before all
the vain Joys here below. Is not the love of God, better than all the World?


Ch, I have cause to bless God, I have such a Father, who takes care not only
of my outward Man, but also of my Soul, and I thank you, my dear Father, for
all your good Counsel: but still, I find such tho^ghts arise in my Heart, that
tends to keep me from closing in with your Advice at present.


Fa. What Thoughts are they you do meet with?


Chapter That I am ^oo young, and that I may live many years in the World, and that
hereafter it will be time enough: and 'twill be more proper ^or me to m^nd such
things when I am older, and of a riper Age.


Fa. I have told you already, these Thoughts the Divil puts into your Heart;
and therefore I charge you in the fear and dread of the great and terrible God
of Heaven and Earth, not to close in with them; for he that tells you now you
are too young, and it is time enough to mind the good of your Soul, and so seeks
to destroy you, and split you upon the Rock of Presumption, will tell you, if
you should live till you are older That then it will be too late, and that your
Day is gone; and thereby endeavor to dash you against the Rock of Despair.
Have I not told thee why thou wast made? And truly, Child, I cannot give better
Co^nd Instruction, or Advice, then to do in this ca^e as a good Marchant's
Factor does use to do when he arriveth in a Foreign Country, who presently
does w^igh and consider deeply for what cause he came thither, why he wa^ sent,
to what end, what to attempt, what to prosecute, what to perform, what will be
expected at his Return by him that sent him. For such Cogitations (without
doubt) tend to stir him up to set upon the Business for which he came, and not
to employ his time in impertinencies and trifling vanities. Will you not lay to
Heart, why you were created and sent hither, until you are ready to depart from
hence? Shall the business of your Great Master and Glorious Sovereign, be
neglected, whilst your Service would be most acceptable to him. Suppose the
Merchants Factor should not have his time prefixed, how long he shall stay in
the Country to which he is sent; and therefore knows not ^ut that in a few
Months he may he called home: And yet as soon as he comes thither, should
wholly neglect his business, and spend his time in Hawking, Hunting, and other
foolish Vanities, and should be called home before he has done any thing for
which he was sent; what an account will he be able to give to his Master? Would
he not be laughed at, and justly, if he should have spent and wasted all his
Masters Money upon his Lust; What shame, Confusion and punishment must he then
look ^o meet with^l? Even so, what an account will thou have to give to God in
the last dreadful day, ^f thou should neglect the Rich M^^chandize of the
Kingdom of Heaven to Trade in, and for which thou came into the World; should
God call thee away before th^^ have done any thing effectually in it? O do not
foolishly waste thy time, and lose the Flower of thy Age, which are those
choice Talents the Lord calls upon thee to improve; It Is I may say, thy Masters
Money, and thou will be called to give an account of them.

Alas! Experience shows thee this,
Man's Life but like a Vapor is;
Thy Days on Earth may be but few,
They pass like to the Morning Dew;
Like (...) the Cloud or Shadow flies,
Or Dew is gone* when Sun does rise;
So fly thy Days, thy Months and Years.
Like the gay Bl^ssom that appears
Fair this day but to morrow's gone;
This this* my Child, think thou upon:
Thy Age I to the Spring compare,
When flowers do appear so rare;
Bu^ Child, receive Instruction now.
Does not Experience teach us how,
The fl^wer now fade; and hangs its head,
Which yesterday so flourished;
The Meadows clad in brave array,
Are soon cut down, and turned to ^ay;
Like Jonah's Gourd* which in one Night
Sprang up* and prerish'd when 'twas light;
Or like a Post which passes by,
Or Weavers Shuttle, which does fly;
Or as a Ship when under Sail,
Does run most swift with a strong Gale;
Even so thy Days do pass and fly;
Lo. Thousands in their Truth do die.
Thy Life's uncertain, it is a blast;
Thy Sand is little, 'twill not last;
Thy House* though now is very Old,
'Twill soon fall down and turn to Mould:
Thou wast born to die, and dead you were,
Before you lived or breathed in the Air;
And die you must* ere live you do;
Except you die to live, it is so;
There Is none can live, but such who die
To Sin and all Vanity.

Chapter I hope I shall now, dear Father, more seriouslly consider and lay to Heart
what you have said, and receive the ^nstr^ction you have given m^; for I am
sensible how short and uncertain my days are on Earth: But, pray Sir, have any
Children so young as I am, attained to the Knowledge of God and Jesus Christ?
Does God, I mean, call any so young?


Fa. Yes, Child, and younger too, than thou art: Worth Mr. Janeway tells us of
a Poor Child, not above five years old, who minded the good of his Soul more
then all things in the World; and was greatly affected, by Considering what
would become of him when he should die; and his Discourse made Christians stand
astonished: He was wonderfully swallowed up with the love of Christ, in dying
for Sinners, and with Tears would speak of it; before he was six years old, he
made Conscience of secret Duties. And when he prayed, it was with such
extraordinary meltings, that his Eve^ looked red and sore with weeping for his
Sins.

The same Minister gives us an account of another Child, who when she was about
four years old had a great sense of her Duty to her Parents, because the
Commandment says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. She would weep if she saw
her Parents troubl^d, (though her self had been no occasion of it) and would
often get into one hole or another to pray, with Tears in his Eyes: She said
she believed in Christ, and desired and longed to be with him.

Moreover, He tells us of another Child about nine years old whom God
graciously wrought upon; her name was Sarah Huml^y: She was very much in secret
Prayer; she could scarce speak of sin (or be spoken to about it) b^t her Heart
was ready to me^t. ^he spent much time in reading, and was exceeding dutiful to
her ^arents; She abhorred Lying and allowed her self in no know^ Sin: After she
had long waited for an Answer of Prayer, she said, Well, I will venture my Soul
upon Christ.

Nay, He speaks of one that God wrought upon, that was not above three or four
years old: This Child, he says, would oftentimes complain of the naughtiness
of his Heart, and was troubled for his w^nd^ing thoughts: He was very fearful^
of wicked Company: When he had committed a Fault, he was easily convinced of
it, and would get in some corner or secret place, and with Tears beg pardon of
God. This Child also abhorred Lying with his Soul: When other Children were a
playing, he would many times and often be a Praying.

One Charles Bredgman, says our Author, had no soone^ learn ^ to speak, but he
betook himself to prayer; and as he grew up, took much delight in reading the
Scriptures, he would not sti^ out of doors, before he had poured forth his ^oul
to the Lord* nor lie down in bed, till he had been upon his knees In his
sickness (for he died when he was about twelve years old) b^ing asked, whether
he had rather live or die? He answered, I desire to die, that I may go to my
Sav^ur. Besides these, he speaks of diverse other Children whom God called
before they were ten years old. What do you say now, my Son* were not these
sweet Children, w^o t^us early learned to fear God, and fall in love with Jesus
Christ?

Come, learn of them, and hate ^ying and all Childish vanity: Would you be
saved when you die? (And you know not h^w soon it may be) O then tremble at the
thought of deferring o^ putting off the serious thoughts o^ an endless
Eternity. Or are yo^ willing to be damned and to go to Hell and be burned with
the Devil and his Angels? Hell Child, is a terrible Place; Can you bear the
thought of that Word, Go, ye Cursed, into Ever lasting Fire, etc. What say you
Are you resolved to get upon your k^ees, and beg Grace and Knowledge of Go^,
through Christ and entreat him for hi^ Sons sake to open your Eyes, and deliver
you from the power of Sin and ^a^an?


Child. I do resolve in Gods strength so to do, dear Father.


Fath. Will you say and hold? Take heed you do not forget your Promise: Give
your self up my Child, to reading God's Word and other good books; and labor
to be deeply affected with your lost and undone Condition without Christ's; and
attend upon the Ministry of Christ's painful Laborers; and never be contented
nor rest, until you can say, Christ's is yours. Ah! See how his Arms stand open
to embrace you! He calls thee, will thou not go to him? My Child, remember God
says, It Is good to bear the yoke in your youth, Lam. 3.27, It Is not only good to
submit to his Yoke, and to his Authority, to obey his Commands, but to do it
betimes. O shake off the Devil's Yoke, Sins Yok, and the Worlds Yoke, and put
on Christ's Yoke. The longer a Person wears the Yoke of sin, the harder it will
be to get it off: Christ's Yoke is easy, and the more easy it will be to put
it on now, than it will be hereafter: A Plant which is newly set, is more
easily removed, then when it has taken root: If they break a Horse to the
Harness, or a Bullock to the Yoke, as one observes, it is while they are young.
It Is good to bear the Yoke in thy youth, because it is God's Will, God's
Command; and also because it will bring so much good, Peace, and comfort, to
thy own Soul; and not only Peace, but profit also: In keeping thy Commandments,
there is great Reward, Psalm. 19.11. O there is Pleasure, Child, and profit too,
in God's Ways! No sweetness like Divine Sweetness!


Child. But, Sir, does not this debar us of earthly pleasure, and the delights
of youth?


Fath. Godliness deprives us of no lawful Delight and Pleasure which others
enjoy; and I hope thou will not say, That stolen Waters are sweet, etc. That
pleasure which is had in a sinful way, will be bitter sauce in the end: And
then again, Religion has its peculiar Pleasures, which wicked ones never
tasted of? What is so sweet as God's Love! His Favo^r is better than Life.
There is in this a Soul satisfying good, and Soul-filling, and a
Soul-delighting sweetness, and that which will abide good always; good and
sweet, when all the Things and Enjoyments of this World, will be bitter: Sinful
pleasures, are Soul-defiled, Soul-debasing, nay, Soul-damning Pleasures: They
bring shame and confusion sometimes here, and eternal shame and ruin hereafter.

Never say now any more, I am too young to seek after God, to learn to be
good, and virtuous. Art thou old enough to serve the Devil, and too young to
serve and honor God? Nay, old enough to be damned, and too young to be saved?
O take heed you spend not your time in idleness and in play with wicked
Children: I charge you as ever you hope for Mercy, and would have my love, do
not dare to take God's Name in vain, nor tell a Lie to escape the Rod, nor
break the Lord's Day, nor fall out and quarrel with your Brothers and Sisters,
nor give them the Lie, nor no other evil Words. My sweet Child, be dutiful and
obedient to your Parents. O learn to pray and pour forth your Heart to the
Lord: Will you do it? I charge you think upon it: Now begin presently, defer it
not one day longer What do you say?


Child. My dear Father, I can hold out no longer, my Heart is smitten and my
Soul trembles; the Lord in mercy lead me in the Path of Life to the Springs of
living Water, that I may drink thereof and never die: I am resolved to take
your Advice.


Fath. The Eternal God grant thee strength that thou may do as thou have
Promised. And now, my Daughters, I have something further to say to you,
Observe well what Counsel I have given your Brothers; for it is to you as well
as to them: But since I see those of your Sex are in these evil days, so
exceedingly addicted to Pride, I do fore-warn you of it; For my part, while ye
are under my Roof, I will never suffer you to wear foolish and antic Garbs and
Fashions: It Is a shame that Parents professing Godliness, should be alured by
the Divil to please their Childrens natural and pernicious Appetites; by which
means they become mere Slaves to Lucifer, by sending their little Daughters to
School to learn to Dance (as Herodias did) where they are taught the hellish
Mode of naked Breasts and Shoulders, Antic and Fantastic Garbs, Spotting,
Patchings and Paintings, Towers, Bulls, Shades, Curlings and Crispings and
other Curiosities of the Devil's devising; as to deck their Fingers with Rings,
their Ears with Jewels, their Neck with rich Bracelets or Necklaces of Gold and
Pearl, whereby they seem rather like little Morris Dancers, than the young
Offspring of Christian People: And thus being bravely dressed up and the sparks
of Pride kindled in them, they go with stretched out Necks and haughty Hearts,
that in a short time they are too high and proud to know themselves: And thus
growing wanton, the Devil teaches the^ other hellish Inventions, viz. How to
make set Faces, to cringe A-la mode de France, the sober Smile the quaintest
Dialect to humo^ Discourse well, to get rolling Eyes, to cast amorous Glances,
to read Love-Romances, and frequent Play Houses, and also to get store of
filthy and obscene Draughts or Pictures, decored with all sorts of alurements,
and the secret Discharges of Venus's lascivious Mysteries, painted with the
true Colors of Ovid's Works; as the disguising of naked Gods, and Venus
dallying with Adonis, Tarquin at strife with Lucretia, and suchlike wanton
Objects, with Pretty conceits to encourage the unwilling, and warm the cold
humor of their Ravage.

God deliver you, my Daughters, from this Poisonous Infection and Epidemical
Disease? I charge you to dread it more than the Plague, as ever you do hope to
enjoy the Favor of God, and abide in my love. Come, give your selves up to
Prayer, and strive to be Sober and virtuous betimes; and take heed you do not
learn of the wanton and vain ones of the times; Don't gad abroad like Jacob's
Daughter, to behold the Daughters of the Land, lest you are one way or another
defiled; and particularly be content with modest Apparel, and labor after the
Ornaments of the inward Man. Let your Souls be adorned with Grace, which will
make you aimable in the sight of God, and all holy Men: Get your Sins
mortified, and you will soon see what Habit will best become you. If the Heart
be but healed of its inward Pride, that will soon put a curb to the Excesses of
the outward. Nothing God hates more then Pride and a haughty Heart.


Daugh. But, pray Sir, does not God allow some things for Ornaments?


Fa^ Yea, doubtless God has allowed of some Ornament, Genesis 24. 23. Isai.
61.10. But whatever pretends to Ornament, which is inconsistent with Modesty,
Gravity and Sobriety, or is not according to Godliness, is instead of an
Ornament, a Defilement. Modesty will teach you not to expose those parts to
view, which no necessity, no good end nor use can justify: Who dares plead for
that which exposes persons to S^ares and Temptations, and Religion to shame
and reproach? Some nowadays that attend on Sermons in Christian Assemblies, do
more become Play Houses, and yet brazen it out in the face of the Pre^cher! O
horrid Impudence! Godliness teaches not to lay out so much Money to adorn the
Body, when so many poor Families want Bread; and not to expend foolishly on
Superfluities on the Carcass, when some poor Children of Christian People want
necessary Clothing. Besides, all Children should be contented to go in
Apparel, according to the Degree, Quality and Ability of their Parents.

My Daughters, and such of you that fear God, pray consider the Rule laid down
by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3, 4. for Regulating Ornaments, is, That they be
consistent with a chaste Conversation; may, visibly consistent: Whilst they
behold your chaste Conversation, etc. That pure vestal fire (says one) of
Chastity, that burns upon the Altar of a holy Heart, must flame out and shine
in Chastity of Words, Actions, Cloathings, and Ornaments: For when God commands
Chastity, he commands whatsoever may feed and nourish it, manifest or declare
it, and forbids whatsoever may endanger it.


Daugh. But, Sir, may such who are rich and wealthy men's Daughters, go in
gallant Attire?


Fa. No degree of Wealth can justify those Garbs which speaks out Pride and
vainglory; yet Richer (if comely) Ornaments may be lawful in some, that are
not in another: But let the Rich see they are Rich in good Works* and that
they do not show they love their Sons and Daughters more then Christ: Some care
not what they bestow on their Children who can spare but little to Christ's
Poor, his Church, and painful Ministers.

But I hope I need say no more of this, concern^ng vain Garbs and Fashions to
some of you; for it rejoices my Heart to see how you labor to adorn your
Profession in every respect. But as for you, my little Daughters, I have many
thoughts and fears concerning you and shall, till I see Christ formed in you. I
exhort you to remember what I have said to your Brothers; and endeavor to learn
of one Mary Warren, born in May 1651. aged ten years, who had a blessed Work of
Grace begun upon her Soul, and gave clear evidence of a victory over Sin and
Satan; who when she was asked, whether she was willing to die? replied, Ay,
very willing; for then I shall sin no more: For (said she) I know Christ's Blood
has made satisfaction for my Sins, etc. I am a Brand plucked out of the fire,
and Christ will put on me his Robes of Righteousness.

Moreover, there was one Mary ^ not five years old, who was greatly affected in
hearing the Word of God, and would weep bitterly to think what would become of
her Soul in another World: She was often observed to be in secret Duty, and
many times came off of her knees with tears: she was also (says my Author)
greatly afraid of Hypocrisy, and of doing any thing to be seen of Men to get
Commendation or Praise: Her Book was her delight; and O that this little Book
may be so to you! She was greatly concerned for the Souls of others, to think
of their miserable condition; and wonderfully affected with the love of God to
her. Come, my Children here are Examples for you; one of you is much older then
she was; but how little do you mind these things! What pity is it that such
tender Branches as you are, when grown up, should go to Hell! Ah! that you
would remember why you were made, and why redeemed by Christ's most precious
Blood! My Prayers are and shall be to God for you. Moreover, I would have you
get that little Book, called, A Token for Children, and another, called, A
Looking Glass for Children: Next to your Bible, pray read in them pretty Books.


The Youths Catechism.
Fa. COme Son, thou art grown up to a mature age; how know thou that there is
a God?


Son. I know there is a God by his Works of Creation: The Heavens declare the
Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy Works, Psalm. 19.1. Romans 1.


Fa. What other means have thou to teach thee there is a God?


Son. The holy Scriptures.


Fa. What Grounds or Arguments have thou to believe the Scriptures are the Word
of God?


Son. By the Contents or Matters therein discoursed and treated of; which are
so transcendently Sublime and Mysterious, that they could never be the product
of humane Invention.


Fa. How else?


Son. By its Antiquity: The Books of Moses being, as Tertullian well observes
in the 19th Cap. of his Apology, the first Writings in the World.


Fa. Thou say well: What other Arguments have thou?


Son. The Majesty and Authoritativeness of the Spirit of God speaking in them,
and the inimitable style wherein they are written, shows, doubtless, they are
of God.


Fa. How else?


Son. By the excellent Spirit of Holiness, which every where breathes in them;
this is another fair lineament of the hand of God in the framing of them.


Fa. It Is a good Argument: What other have thou?


Son. The sweet and admirable Agreemnet, Consent, Dependence and Harmony that
is found in every part of holy Scripture, though there are so many Books
thereof written by so many different Persons, of various conditions, of many
Ages, removed in several places, and different Languages; ^et all agreeing with
each other, and every part with the whole, is a great Argument, doubtless, of
its Divine Authority.


Fa. What other Argument have thou besides these?


Son. The approved Credit and sincerity of the Penmen, whom none could ever
prove guilty of the least Imposture.


Fa^ I like these too* Have go^ any more?


Son. Another proof that the Holy Scriptures are from God, is, the exact and
punctual fullfilling of the Prophecies therein contained: To foretell Events
is the Prerogative of God only, Isai. 41.22. This, Sir, I could make very clear.


Fa. I don't doubt it, my Son; proceed to another.


Son. Those Writings, and that Doctrine that was confirmed by so many real
Miracles, must needs be of God; but the Books and Doctrine of Canonical
Scripture, were so confirmed, nay, by such Wonders, that Satan himself could
not imitate, nor malicious Enemies deny to be Divine.


Fa. This is one of the best of all: To the next.


Son. To these astonishing Miracles, I may fitly add the wonderful,
preservation of these hol^ Writings for so many Ages: Ha^ not the Bible been of
God, sinc^ it pretends so to be, certainly Go^ would have blotted it out long
ago; but his special care to pre^serve it, shows whose it is, consi^dering what
implacable Enemie^ it has met with in every Age.


Fa. Yea, doubtless, my Son, Go^ would never have suffered such Book to
continue from the beginnin^ of Time, falsely pretending his Nam^ and Authority:
I am glad to h^^ thee mention this; proceed.


Son. Sir, the Scripture did no^ only survive, notwithstanding a^ the Arts,
Contrivance and Malic^ of Men and Divils; but has tri^umphed over all
opposition; mean, the blessed success the Go^spel has had in converting s^
many thousands, though accoun^^ed by the wise Men of the Worl^ foolishness,
proves its Divine Authority, especialy considering the Publishers of it were
generally but weak, ignorant and illiterate Persons, as Fishermen,
Tent-makers, etc.


Fa. And thou may add, It had no force of Arms, or Temporal support on its
side, but against both Wind and Tide, in opposition to the Interest, Will, and
Wisdom of carnal Men, it prevailed. My Son, have thou any other?


Son. Yes, Sir, with the last I may add, besides those outward and more visible
Trophies of its Glory, the marvelous luster of its Empire, Efficacy, and power
within; I mean upon the Hearts of others: Certainly it must be God's Word, were
this only considered.


Fa. Thou say well; and I hope thou have found the power and truth of it upon
thy own heart; and this Argument, if so, thou can never lose; but I will
forbear, and hear what thou have further to say.


Son. To all these Arguments, I must add the Testimony of Gods Church, I mean
Believers, and holy Martyrs in all Ages, who have seal^d the Truth of the holy
Bible with their own Blood.


Fa. If thou have any other Argument, I would have thee add it; not that I
dislike this.


Son. Sir, The Doctrines and matters of fact in the Scriptures, are not only
avouched by its own Votaries, but many most considerable parts of it have been
acknowledged by its Enemies, first, the Creation of the World is intimated by
Ovid in his Metamorphosis, Lib. 1. The extraordinary long Lives of the
Patriarchs in the first Ages of the World, by Manetho the Egyptian, Borosus the
Chaldean, and others. The Floo^ is mentioned by the same Borosu^ Josaphus, Lib.
1. Antiq. 4. The Star that appeared at the Birth of our Savior, is taken
notice of by Pliny, Lib. 2. Cap. 5.


Fa. I know you have many other instances to give in proof of this; But proceed
to another Argument.


Son. If the Scriptures are not the Word of God, then God has left us no
certain Rule of Faith and Practice.


Fa. What say you to Revelation?


Son. There may be twenty persons who may all walk in different ways of
worship, and yet pretend they make Revelation their Rule: How shall I know
which of these is in the true way?


Fa. Thou say right: He that says Revelation is his Rule, must do more to
prove what he professes to be true, then any Impostor can pretend unto; that is
to say, raise the Dead, and open the Eyes of the Blind.


Son. Then Father, if you please to hear me, It is clear and evident, since
Miracles are no where to be found, if the Scripture be not our Rule, or of
Divine Authority, God has left us no certain Rule at all; and that infinite
Wisdom should deal thus with Mankind, is absurd and unreasonable to conceive.
But I have one Argument more: If the Scriptures be not the Invention of Men,
then it must be from God alone: If of Men, they must either be good Men or bad
Men. Good Men they could not be; for nothing could be more opposite to
Goodness, nay to common Honesty, than to assume the Name of God, and falsely
feign Miracles, and cheat People of their Souls. Again, on the other hand, bad
Men could not be the Devisers of so holy a Book; can any Man think, that wicked
Deceivers would so highly advance the Glory of God? Would they so abase
themselves, and brand and stigmatize their own Practices? Could such an
admirable Righteousness, and Self-denial, as runs through a very vein of the
Scriptures, proceed from the Invention of wicked Men? Would they have laid such
a design against the Flesh and all worldly Happiness? Now if we cannot gather
Grapes of Thorns, nor Figgs of Thistles, then we may be sure no ill Men had
any hand in writing and promoting this Good and Holy Bible.


Fa. You say wll, my Son; and besides, if it were devised by evil Men, let such
Atheists show us who those wicked Men were, and in what Age of the World they
lived, who did compile it: But have you any thing more to say?


Son. Only this I have in the last place to say: Were not the Scripture of
Divine Authority, the Devil certainly would never have been in such rage
against it* nor endeavored as he has, and continually does, to hinder Men
from closing in with the Truth therein contained.


Fa. I see, Son, you have a most sure Word of Prophecy to build your Faith
upon, in the belief of a Deity: Are there more Gods than one?


Son. There is but one Eternal Holy and True God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Cor.
8.4.


Fa. How many Persons are there in the Godhead?


Son. Three; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. ^ John 5.7.


Fa. Who is God?


Son. God is a Spirit, of and from Himself, without Beginning and without
Ending, Wonderful, Immense, and Infinite in His Essence, and Glorious also in
His Attributes.


Fa. What are the Attributes of God?


Son. His Power, Wisdom Mercy, Justice, Omnisciency, Faithfulness, Holiness,
etc. Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 147.5. Romans 4.8.


Fa. What call you the Work of Creation?


Son. God's forming or making all things out of nothing in six days, Genesis 1.1.
Heb. 11.3.


Fa. What are God's Works of Providence?


Son. His most Holy, Wise and Powerful Ordering, Preserving, and Governing all
Men, and all Things in this World, Psalm. 145.17. Isa. 28.29. Heb. 1.3. Mat.
10.29.


Fa. What are the most Glorious Creatures that God has made?


Son. Angels and Men.


Fa. Why did God make this World?


Son. To manifest his own Glory, Greatness, Power and Wisdom, Rev. 4.11.


Fa. Why did God make Man?


Son. God made all things for himself, but Mankind more especially to Serve and
Worship his Creator, Acts 17.26, 27.


Fa. Of what matter did God make Man?


Son. Of the Dust of the Ground, Genesis 2.7.


Fa. In whose Image did God make Man?


Son. In his own Image and after his own Likeness, Gen, 1.28.


Fa. In what respect do you believe God made Man in his own Image?


Son. In respect of Holiness and Righteousness, together with that Power and
Dominion God gave him over all other Creatures on Earth, Ephesians. 4* 24.


Fa. Did Man abide in that State in which he was treated?


Son. No; he sinning against God, fell from that estate.


Fa. What is Sin?


Son. Sin is the Transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4.


Fa. When did Sin enter into this World?


Son. When Adam broke the Law of his Creator, Romans 5.12.


F. Why did God make man a Law?


Son. To show that Man ought to be in subjection to his Creator.


Fa. Why did God suffer Man to break his Law?


Son. That thereby God's Justice, Wisdom, and Mercy, might appear.


Fa. How does God's Justice appear thereby?


Son. In Punishing him for his Offense, according to his threatening, Romans 5.18.


Fa. What punishment did God bring upon Mankind for that Transgression?


Son. A twofold punishment; first, the loss of earthly Paradise; secondly,
Death both Spiritual and Temporal, Genesis 2.16. Romans 5.12.


Fa. Do all Mankind sin and fall in Adam?


Son. Yes; for he being a public Person, the Covenant was not made only for
himself, but for all his Posterity; and so we all sinned in him, and fell by
the same Transgression, Romans 5.15, 16, 17, 18.


Fa. What is the state of Mankind through this original Transgression?


Son. A woeful state and condition, prone to commit sin, having lost Original
Righteousness, are brought under the power of Corruption, and pravity of our
whole Nature, and liable to the Wrath and Curse of God, Romans 5.19. Gal. 3.10,
13.


Fa. Are all Men in this woeful condition?


Son. Yea, all Men are by Nature the Children of Wrath, being dead in Sins and
Trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. Romans 3.21.


Fa. How did God's Mercy appear to Mankind?


Son. In promising the Seed of the Woman should break the Serpent's head, Genesis
3.15.


Fa. Who was meant by the Seed of the Woman?


Son. Our blessed Savior.


Fa. Why did God add the Law of the Ten Commandments?


Son. Not only to show what Man's Duty is, but also to make known to him his
woeful estate; and to make sin appear exceeding sinful, and to discover how
unable Man is in his fallen state to fulfill the Righteousness of God, Gal.
3.19. Romans 7.8, 9.


Fa. What did the Law require?


Son. perfect Righteousness: Do this and thou shall live, Luke 10.21.


Fa^ Were any able to keep the Law perfectly, and so be justified thereby in
the sight of God?


Son. No, not one for by the works of the Law no Flesh can be justified Gal.
2.16. and 3.28. Romans 3.10.


Fa. How then must we be justified?


Son. By the Merits and Righteousness of our blessed Savior and Redeemer.


Fa. Who is our Savior and Redeemer?


Son. The Lord Jesus Christ.


Fa. Why was our Redeemer called Jesus?


S. Because he should save his people from their sins (for the Name Jesus
signifies a Savior) Mat. 1.21.


Fa. What moved God to send the Lord Jesus Christ to be our Redeemer?


Son. Only his tender Love and Mercy to Mankind, Joh. 3.26.


Fa. Was there no other Person or means could Redeem us, but Jesus Christ?


Son. No verily, neither Men nor Angels: There is no other Name given under
Heaven whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. Rev. 5.4, 5.


Fa. Why is our blessed Savior called Christ?


Son. Because he was Anointed with the Holy Ghost, that Oil of Gladness, above
his Fellows: The Name Christ signifies Anointed, Heb. 1.9.


Fa. Who is Jesus Christ?


Son. The Eternal Son of God, Mat. 16.16.


Fa. Is Jesus Christ God or Man?


Son. Jesus Christ is both God and Man in one Person; God of the Substance of
the Father, begotten before the World began, and yet truly Man: He took our
Nature upon him, and therefore is called the Seed of the Woman, Mat. 22.44, 45.
Phil. 2.6, 7. Joh. 1. 1, 2.2.14.


Fa. Why did Jesus Christ take our Nature upon him, and become both God and
Man?


Son. It behoved him to be both God and Man, that so he might become a fit
Mediator between God, the offended Creator, and Man, the offending Creature,
Joh. 9.33. 1 Timothy 2.5.


Fa. Wherefore is it necessary that Jesus Christ should be very Man, Holy,
Just and without sin?


Son. Because God required Man to keep the Law Perfectly, if he would be
justified in his sight; and the Justice of God could not be satisfied, unless
the same Humane Nature which had sinned, do likewise make a Compensation for
Sin, Romans 5.12. Pet. 3.18. Heb. 7.26^


Fa. Why must Christ be very God as well as Man?


Son. That he might by the worth and preciousness of his Person and Sacrifice,
give a plenary satisfaction to Divine Justice, and sustain by the Power of his
Godhead in his Flesh, the heavy Wrath of God. As he was God he could not
suffer; and as he was mere Man, he could not have overcome Death, Isai. 53.4.
Acts 2.24. 1 Pet. 3.18. John 1, 2. and 4, 5.


Fa. What has Jesus Christ do^^ for us?


Son. As he was Man, he perfectly, kept the whole Law of God for us in every
point, and laid down a complete and perfect Sacrifice for us; and as God, he
overcame Death, and him that had the power of Death, which is the Devil and so
rose again the third day for our Justification, Gal. 4.5. Heb. 2, 14, 15. 2
Cor. 5.18, 19.


Fa. Where is Jesus Christ now?


Son. Jesus Christ is in Heaven, he sat down at the Right Hand of God, and
there appears to make Intercession for us, Heb. 1.3. Heb. 8.3.


Fa. Do all receive spiritual Benefit by Christ's Undertaking?


Son. No, none but those only who by a true and lively Faith, do rely upon him,
and are ingrafted into him, Mark 16.16. John 3.36. Rom* 11.20.


The End of the First part.
The Second Part.
Fa. I Am glad to find you are so well instructed in the Grounds of the
Christian Religion hitherto. What are the Offices of Christ, which he executes
as Mediator?


Son. The Offices of Christ are many, but more especially three, viz* His
Priestly, Kingly and Pro^hetical Offices.


Fa. How does Christ execute the* Office of a Priest?


Son. Christ executes the Office of a Priest in his once Offering up himself
as a Sacrifice for our Sins, to satisfy Divine Justice, Heb. 7.28. and 2.17.


Fa. How else does Christ execute his Priestly Office?


Son. In his making continual ^ntercession for us in Heaven, Heb. 7.25.


Fa. What use were the Priests and legal^ Sacrifices of, under the Law?


Son. They were Types and Figures of Jesus Christ, by whose Blood or Sacrifice
of himself only Atonement is made, Heb 16.1, 2, 3.


Fa. Are there any who^ partake of Christ's Priesthood, and minister under him
as his Successors or Vicars here on Earth?


Son. No verily, he has no Successor nor Vicar, because he abides himself a
Priest for ever, to discharge the whole Work of his Priestly Office; and so did
not Aaron nor the Priests of his Order, Heb. 7.25.


Fa. Are there any Sacrifices to be offered up to God under the Gospel, besides
that one Sacrifice which Christ himself offered.


Son. No, for Christ has offered a Sacrifice himself once for all: Christ has
once suffered to bear the Sins of many, Heb. 9.28. N^w once at the end of the
World, he has appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself, verse. 26.
This he did once, Heb. 7 27. By one offering he has perfected forever them
that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14.


Fa. Why ought not any other Sacrifices be offered up to God now?


Son. Because this would render the Sacrifice of Christ, weak and imperfect;
besides, the Apostle says, Where Remission of sins is, there is no more
Offering for sin, Heb. 10.18.


Fa. How does Christ execute his Kingly Office?


Son. Christ executes the Office of a King in his making, instituting and
appointing of Laws, Ordinances and Statutes, to show how God in Gospel Times
ought to be Worshipped, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Jam. 4.12.


Fa. How else does Christ execute his Kingly Office?


Son. Christ executes also his Kingly Office in subduing our sins, and in
destroying the enmity that naturally is in our Hearts against God, and himself,
by his Spirit ruling and reigning in us, and also by defending us, restraining
and conquering all his and our Enemies, Mich. 7.19. Romans 6.14.


Fa. In what Books are the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, the
King of Saints, written?


Son. The Laws of Jesus Christ are written and contained in the sacred
Scriptures, which we call the holy Bible, Joh 20. 2 Timothy 3.


Fa^ What a King is the Lord Jesus Christ?


Son, He is King of Heaven and Earth, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; yea,
King of Saints and King of Nations; and though his Kingdom is more spiritual
and invisible now, yet he shall have a glorious and visible Kingdom in the
World in the latter days; which Kingdom he requires us to pray for, Mat. 6.10*
Dan. 7.


Fa. How does Jesus Christ execute his Prophetical Office?


Son. Jesus Christ executes his Prophetical Office in revealing to us by his
Word and Spirit, what he had done for us as a Priest, and what Laws he has
appointed as King, Acts 3 32,


Fa. How else does he execute his Prophetical Office?


Son. By his expounding the Law of Moses showing what is past and fulfilled?
and also by showing what shall be hereafter, Mat. 24.


Fa. How are we made partakers of the Redemption purchased by Jesus Christ?


Son. By the effectual application of his Blood and Merits to our Souls* by the
Holy Spirit, John 1.12. Tit. 3.5.


Fa. How does the holy Spirit apply to us the Redemption purchased by Jesus
Christ, or the Merits of his Blood and Righteousness?


Son. The Holy Spirit applies this to us by working Faith in us* and thereby
uniting us to Christ in effectual Calling or Vocation* Ephesians. 2.8, 9. and 3.17. 1
Cor. 1.9.


Fa. What is Effectual Calling?


Son. Effectual Calling is the Work of God's Spirit, whereby he convincing us
of Sin, and o^ our woeful Condition by Nature, enlightens our Minds in the
knowledge of Christ, and infuseth a principle of Grace and new Habits in our
Souls, ^ Tim. 1.9. Acts 2.36, 37* 38, 39. Acts 26.18. 1 These. 1.^.5


Fa. What Blessing and Benefit do they partake of that are effectually called?


Son. They that are effectually called, partake of the glorious Blessings of
^ustification, Sanctification, Adoption, etc and those bring an Assur^^ce of
Gods Love, Peace of Con^^^ence, joy in the holy Ghost, with an ^ncrease of
Grace, and Perseverance to the end, Romans 8.30, 31. 1 Cor^ 1.30.


Fa. What is Justification?


Son. Justification is an Act of Gods rich Grace, through the Redemption which
is in Jesus Christ, wherein he freely Pardons and Acquitteth us of all our
Sins, and accepts us as Righteous, through the Imputation of Christ's perfect
Righteousness, Romans 3.23. Romans 5.1^ Gal. 2.16.


Fa. What is Adoption?


Son. Adoption is also an act of Gods free Grace, whereby we are made the Sons
and Daughters of God by his special Love and Favor, who are the Children of
Wrath by Nature, John 1.12. 1 John 3.1. 2 Cor. 6.18.


Fa. What is Sanctification?


Son. Sanctification is likewise of God's precious Grace, whereby we are
renewed in the whole Man after the Image of God; and are through the Blood of
Sprinkling, Washed and made Holy in Heart and Life, 2 Tit^ 3.5. 2 Timothy 2.13.
Ephesians. 4^24.


Fa. What is Regeneration?


Son. It is the work of God's Spirit, called the new Birth and the new
Creature; by the means of which we are Born again, or have a new Heart, a new
Spirit, and a new Life; the evil Qualities and Habits of our Hearts being
changed, Holy and Heavenly Qualities and Habits are infused in the room of
them, John. 3.3.5. 2 Cor. 5.17.


F. By what signs may a sincere Christian, that is both justified, sanctified
and regenerated, be known?


Son. First he is a Penitent Person, or one that has True Repentance wrought
in his Soul, Psalm. 51.3. Jer. 31.18. Acts 11.18*


Fa. What is True Repentance?


Son. True Repentance is a Grace wrought in the Soul by the Holy Spirit,
whereby, first a Sinner comes to have a true sense of sin, and of his lost
Condition by Nature; which also by the Illumination of the Holy Ghost, works in
him Godly Sorrow and Grief for Sin.


Fa. How may a weak Christian know his Repentance is true and of the right
kind?


Son. True Repentance causes the Soul to hate and loath Sin, being convinced of
the great Evil that is in it, and how contrary and hateful it is to the pure
nature of God.


Fa. What other sign can you give of one who has True Repentance wrought in
him?


Son. He that has true Repentance wrought in him, does not only hate and loath
Sin, but also leaves it, and turns from it, yea, from every Sin; yea, from his
secret Sins, as well as from open and scandalous Sins, Psalm. 19.12.13. Prove.
9.17. Psalm. 51.4. Jer. 44.4.


Fa. What other sign do you give of a true penitent Person?


Son. He desires as much to have his Sins mortified as to have them Pardoned;
to be freed from the filth of them, as from the guilt of them, in a word, to be
made Holy as well as to be made Happy; to be Sanctified here, as well as to be
Saved hereafter, Psalm. 71.6.7^8. Mat. 5.6.


Fa. What sign else can you give of a Person who has the Grace of True
Repentance wrought in him?


Son. He loves the Law and Word of God because it is pure; he likes the purity
of its Precepts, as well as the sweetness of its Promises; and to live to God
on Earth as well as to live with God in Heaven; to glorify him here, as well
as to be glorified by him hereafter, Psalm. 119.1, 40, 16.7. Psalm. 73.24. Heb.
12.14. Phil. 3.10.


Fa. Can you give any other sign of a true Penitent Person?


Son. Yea, he is one that does truly believe in Christ, or has obtained the
precious Faith of God's Elect, 2 Pet. 10.1. Act 13.39.


Fa. What is true Justifying Faith, or the Faith of God's Elect?


Son. True Justifying Faith, is a Saving Grace of God's Holy Spirit, whereby we
receive Jesus Christ in all his Offices, and wholly rely upon him and his
Merits for Eternal Life, Phil. 3.8.9.10.


Fa. Has every Christian who believes, a full assurance, that Christ is his,
and that he shall be saved?


Son. No verily, Assurance is a great Degree of Faith; yea, such a measure,
that but a few Believers attain unto, and does not appertain to the being or
essence of Faith; a sincere Christian may have doubts, yea, walk in Darkness,
and have no Light, Psalm. 88.4.5. Isa. 50.10.


Fa. What Person may be said to Believe, or rightly to rely on Jesus Christ?


Son. He that may be said to believe, and in a true manner to rely on Jesus
Christ, who has no dependence for Salvation on any thing done by him or in him
but as a poor Undon Creature goes to Christ, and relies upon his Merits and
Righteousness alone, Romans 3 22. and 4.2. 1 Cor. 4.4.


Fa. What other sign give you of saving Faith?


Son. He takes up all Duties in point of Performance, but lays them all down,
in point of Dependence, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10, 11.


Fa. What think you of that Faith which an Ungodly Person has, some men who
are very wicked, say they believe in Christ, and rely on him for Salvation?


Son^ A wicked and impenitent Sinner, who loves and lives in sin has not one
dram of true Faith; and though he says he believes in Christ, yet it is
Persumption in him; for the nature of true Faith is to cleanse and purify the
Heart and life, Acts. 15.9. 1 John 3.3.


Fa. What is another sign of true of true Faith?


Son. He that truly belives, has a high esteem of Jesus Christ; To you that
believe he is precious, Psalm. 74.25. 1 Pet 2.7.


Fa. Can no man be Justified but he that in a humble, holy and sincere manner
does believe and rely on Jesus Christ, notwithstanding a righteous and sober
life, or moral righteousness?


Son. No verily, Mat. 5.20.


Fa. Why so?


Son. Because no other Righteousness will nor can be accepted or avail to
Salvation, but that which is perfect: it is such a Righteousness only, that God
and his Holy Law requir^s in point of Justification. Now our best Works and
Righteousness are Imperfect, and defiled with Sin: Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10.
Hence, He that believes not in Christ shall be damned, Mark 16.16. Isa. 6.4.6.
Phil. 3.8.


Fa. What other sign give you of a true Believer?


Son. He is Obedient to all the commands of Christ; Luke 1.6.


Fa. What are the signs of True Obedience?


Son. 1. True Obedience is Evangelical; it is Gospel Obedience, it flows from
Love to God. 2. It Is a willing Obedience; it is from the Heart, Romans 6.17. 3.
Such obey God in the hardest things, thus did Abraham. 4. It Is Universal
Obedience; they have a Respect to all God's Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. 5. It Is a
continual Obedience; they obey God always, even to the End, Psalm. 119.112.


Fa. What means does God use to bring men into a state of Grace and
Regeneration?


Son. The outward and more ordinary means whereby God does this, is by
Preaching the Gospel, Romans 10.17. and 1.16. 1 Cor 1.21.


Fa. What is the inward, and more special means by which God does this?


Son. The inward and more special means, is by the Powerful Working and
Operation of the Holy Ghost, by which the Word Preached, becomes effectual; for
without this, the Word does profit none to Salvation, Psalm. 19.7. 1 Thessalonians. 1.6.
1 Cor. 3.7.


Concerning Baptism and the Lord's Supper.
Fa SEeing then, my Son, that Faith alone, by the Operations of the holy Ghost,
makes us Partakers of the Benefits and glorious Redemption, purchased by Jesus
Christ, and so unites us to him; What are those Gospel Ordinances or
Sacraments, which tend to confirm us in this Faith?


Son. They are Two.


Fa. Which are they?


Son. Baptism and the Lords Supper.


Fa. What is Baptism?


Son. Baptism is an Holy Institution of Christ, and the literal and proper
Signification of the Word Baptism, as most learned Men ( Lighs Critica Sacra,
Grotius, Vossius, Seldom, Passor, Beza, Illyricus, Erasmus, etc.) readily
grant, who understand the Greek Tongue; for it is a Greek word, Baptiso, is
Mergo, Immergo, Obruo, item tingo, quod sit Immergendo; that is, drown,
immerge, plunge under, over-whelm, as also to dip, which is done by plunging,
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Spirit, Mat.
28.19.20. Act. 2.40, 41. Romans 6.4.


Fa. May it not be done by sprinkling also?


Son. No, by no means; because the word Baptiso or Baptism, does not at all
signify Sprinkling; the Greeks have another peculiar word to express
Sprinkling, viz. Rantiz^.


Fa. What other Reason do you give to show why it cannot be sprinkling?


Son. Because the Scriptures positively say, That John Baptized in the River
Jordan, and after in E^^^ near Salem, because there was much Water: Now had it
been done by sprinkling a little Water, he need not to have went to Rivers,
etc. Mat. 3.6. John. 3.25.


Fa. What other Reason have you to show why Baptism is not sprinkling?


Son. Because it is said, Our Savior when he was Baptized, and John who
Baptized him, went both down into the Water, and he Baptized or dipped him,
which is all one; the like is said of Philip and the Eunuch, They went down
into the Water, and came out of the Water, Mat. 3.16. Act. 8.38.39.


Fa. What other Reason have you?


Son. Because sprinkling does not, cannot answer the end of Christ, in his
instituting and ordaining of this Ordinance; neither does sprinkling a little
Water, Represent or Answer those things, which are signified by Baptism


Fa. What was the End of Christ, in his Instituting of this Ordinance, And
what does it Represent to us?


Son. The end of the Lord Jesus was doubtless to confirm our Faith in the
steadfast belief of his Death, Burial and Resurrection; for it held forth all
these three things to our very sight: for 1 st, he that is Baptized, is
baptized as one dead, I mean dead to Sin, which answers also unto the Death of
Christ.

2 dly, He is Buried in Water, to hold forth the Burial of Christ.

3 dly, As the Body is raised up out of the Water, it holds forth also Christ's
Resurrection, and tha^ we should walk in newness of Life Now sprinkling cannot
be a Figur^ of any of these things, Romans 6.2, etc


Fa. I would to God, my Son, that this thing were more seriously considered by
ou^ (...), who differ from us: But will you Explain this matter a little
further?


Son. Why Sir, I understand that our Blessed Savior in Ordaining those two
great Ordinances, viz. Baptism and break^ing of Bread, did design in a Gracious
manner, to Preach the Gospel to the Sense of Seeing, as in Ministry of the
Word, its preached to the Ear and Sense of Hearing; For, as breaking of Bread
and the Cup hold forth to our sight* Christ's Body was broken, and his Blood
shed, So Baptism shows, as I have observed, He was not only Dead, but also
Buried, and did rise again, that so we might the more clearly and fully be
Confirmed into the Mystery of his Death and Resurrection.


Fa. What think you then of sprinkling or Christning, as its called?


Son. Why, I think that the Rite of Aspersion, or sprinkling, was invented, as
Vosstus and others Ingenuously confess, to Accommodate the Tender Bodies of
Infants in these Northern Parts, when the Practice of Baptizing of them
prevailed. And Since sprinkling comports not with ^e Litteral nor Metaphorical
Significations of the Word, nor to those great Mysteries represented by it; it
ought in the fear of God to be rectified or laid aside, as being no Ordinance
of God, Levit. 10.12.


Fa. Who are the proper Subjects of Baptism?


Son. Only such who Believe, and are actually Capable to enter into a Visible
Covenant with Jesus Christ; for it is an Ordinance of the Solemnization of the
Souls Marriage with Christ, Gal. 3.27.


Fa. What is required of Persons that are to be Baptized?


S. Repentance, whereby they forsake Sin, and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the Promise of God made to them in that Ordinance, Act. 2.36.37. Acts
8.36.


Fa. May not Infants be Baptized?


Son. No verily, because there is no Command of Christ, nor Example in all the
Scriptures for any such Practice.


Fa. Why may not the Children of Belivers be Baptized under the Gospel, as well
as the Children of the Faithful were Circumcised under the Law?


Son. God Expressly commanded Abraham to Circumcise his Male Children under that
Dispensation, but he has not commanded Believers to Baptize their Children
under the Gospel; and to do that in God's Worship, which God has not commanded,
is dangerous, as appears in, Nadab and Abihu's Case, Levit. 10.1.2.


Fa. But did not the Covenant belong to Abraham and to his Seed?


Son. Yea it did; and all that believe and are Christ's, the same are the true
Seed of Abraham, and Heirs, according to the Promise, Gal. 3.37. or in that
Covenant with Abraham, and none else; for Birth or Fleshly Privileges, avail
not in Gospel times; think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to
our Father, Mat. 3.9.


Fa. But were not whole Households Baptized?


Son. It does not therefore follow, any Infants were Baptized, unless our (...)
could prove there were no whole Households, but such in whom were some Children
in Nonage; besides, it is said, That St. Paul Preached the Gospel to the
Jailer, and to all that were in his House; and that he Believed in God with all
his Heart, and Rejoiced with all his House: As well as it is said, He was
Baptized, with all his House, Acts 16.32, 33.


Fa. But Son, What do you think should be the reason, since Believers Baptism
lies so plain in the Word of God (and that none else were in the Primitive
Times Baptized) that so many Learned and Holy men should not see it?


Son. Sir, I have often wondered at it, I must confess, and I have been a
thinking it may be from God, as a Just Rebuke upon some of them, because they
have Magnified Humane Learning (which is very good in its place) above what
they ought; and have too much slighted ^ome who have not such Humane
Literature; for God would have no Flesh Glory in his Presence, but that he that
Glories, may Glory in the Lord, ^ Cor. 2.2^.31.


Fa. What other Reason have yo^ thought of?


Son. It may be also as a Rebuke upon those good Christians, who have been too
ready to Build their Faith upon Worthy men, upon the account of their Learning;
and God would not have the Faith of his People stand in the Wisdom of Men, but
in the Power of God, 1 Cor. 2.5. Besides, the Doctrine of self-denial is hard
to learn.


Fa. How do you prove that the Baptism of Water is Christ's Ordinance? It Is not
said, Mat. 28.19.20. Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in Water, etc.


Son. But though Water is not there expressed, it is employed, because the
Apostles could not Baptize with the Holy Ghost, for that is the Prerogative of
Christ alone; besides, that which the Lord Jesus commanded them to Baptize
with, was that which they did Baptize with; but palpable it i^, that that which
the Apostles Baptized with, was Water. Can any man forbid Water, that these
should not be Baptized? etc. Acts 10.47.


Fa. Does not Paul say, Christ sent him not to Baptize, but to Preach the
Gospel?


Son. Paul does not mean Christ did not at all require him to Baptize, or that
it was not in his Commission, but rather that he was not in the first place
only, or chiefly sent to do that; for if (...) had no command at all to
Baptize* he did evil in Baptizing Crispus and Gaius, with diverse others. Read
these Scriptures, which (...) after the same manner to be understood, John
6.17. 1 Timothy 2.14. Ephesians. 6.12. Morover, it is evident, Christ required St* Paul
to baptize, because he and other (...) did baptize in Christ's Name, and
commanded others so to be; that is, by his Command and Authority, Acts 10.47. 1
Cor. 1.13, 14.


Fa. Ought those who are Baptized with the Holy Spirit, to be Baptized with
Water?


Son. Yea, they ought; for the highest attainment cannot free Persons from
subjecting to this Ordinance; Our Blessed Savior, who had the Spirit without
measure, was Baptized, as an Example, that we shall follow his steps; also
Cornelius, and those with him, who were baptized with the holy Ghost, were
commanded by St. Peter to be baptized in Water, Acts. 10.44.


F. What Ordinance follows Baptism?


Son. Laying on of Hands, Acts 8.17* and 19.6. Heb. 6.1.2.


Fa. What is the Church of God?


Son. The Church of God is a company of Believers, or Godly Christians,
Incorporated together into an Holy Fellowship and Communion in Love and
Heavenly Concord according to the Apostolical Constitution, among whom the Word
of God is truly Preached and the Holy Ordinances of Christ are duly and rightly
Administered, Acts 2.40, 41, 42, 43, 44, etc.


Fa. Is not the Church of God then in Gospel Times National, as it was under
the Law?


Son. No, the Dispensation is changed, the Fleshly Seed is cast out by him that
has the Key of David, that opens, and no man shuts; that shuts and no
man opens; God's People are a Separated People, and are commanded so to be,
and not to be conformable to this World in their Constitutions, Ordinances and
Worship, 2 Cor. 6.17. Romans 1^.2. Mat. 3.9. Rev. 18.4. Gal. 4.2, 3.


Fa. Who ought to be received into Gods Church?


Son. Only true Penitent and believing Persons, Act. 2.42, 45. Pet. 2.5, 6, 7,
8, 9.


Fa. Ought all Persons to be Baptized before they are received into the Church
of God?


Son. Yea, all who ever they be, ought to be Baptized before they are ^eceived
into the Church of God. Baptism is acknowledged by all Christians, generally to
be an initiating Ordinance, Acts^ 2.40, 41, 43. Gal. 3.27.


Fa. What is the Lord's Supper?


Son. The Lords Supper is a holy Ordinance of Christ, instituted the very Night
in which he was betrayed, 1 Cor. 11.23.


Fa. What External Matter does the Lord's Supper consist of?


Son. It consists only of Bread and Wine, Mat. 26.26, 27. Luke 22.^9, ^0. 1.
Cor. 11.23, 24.


Fa. What does (...) Bread and Wine signify?


Son. The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ.


Fa. Is the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper, after they are Blessed, the
real Body and Blood of Christ?


Son. No, they are but Signs or Figures of his Body.


Fa. But does not Christ say, This ^s my Body?


Son. It Is a Figurative Speech; he says also in another Place, I am a Vine, a
Door, a Way, etc. He is called, a Rock, it is said that Rock is Christ, 1* Cor.
10.4. Which Scriptures, are all to be taken figuratively; This is my Body, it is
as if he should say, this is a Sign or Figure of my Body, for it is called Bread
before it was Blessed, and also after it was Blessed; and it is called Bread,
which the Disciples did eat, 1 Cor. 11.26. The Bread which we bless, is it not
the Communion of the Body of Christ? etc. 1* Cor. 1^ 16. Besides, it is against
^eason and our very Senses, to believe it to be any other thing.


(...)* What does the breaking of the Bread signify?


Son. God's giving of Christ for us, and also to us, to be the Bread and Food
of our Souls.


Fa. What does the taking of the Bread bold forth?


Son. Our taking or accepting of Christ for Justification and Eternal Life.


Fa, What does the eating of the Bread signify?


Son. It holds forth that we do spiritually feed, and live by Faith on Jesus
Christ.


Fa. What further use is the Ordinance of the Lords Supper of, to us?


Son. It strengthens our Faith in Christ, and increases our Love to Christ, and
gloriously refreshes our Souls, by Communion with him in all the Graces and
Comforts of the Holy Spirit.


Fa. What other use is it of to us*


Son. It shows that blessed Nearness or sweet Union, which is, and ought to be
among God's People; for as many Corns of Wheat ground in a Mill, tend to make
one Loaf of Bread, so we being many, are one Bread and one Body, of whom Christ
is the Head, 1 Cor. 10.17.


Fa. What does the pouring forth of the Wine signify?


Son. The pouring forth of the Wine, signifies the pouring forth of the Blood
of Christ.


Fa. What does the taking and Drinking of the Cup hold forth?


Son. It signifies our applying the Virtue of Christ's Blood to our Souls; as
that which did Atone, and make Reconciliation for our Sins.


Fa. What else does this Ordinance of the Lords Supper hold forth?


Son. It holds forth, not only the inconceivable Love of Chrst, in giving his
Body to be broken, and his Blood to be shed for us; but also the horrible
Nature, or exceeding sinfulness of Sin, in that nothing could Atone, or make
Reconciliation with God for it, but the precious Blood of Jesus Christ.


Fa. Who ought to receive the Lord's Supper?


Son. Only Godly Men and Women, or such who are truly converted, and are
approved Members of Christ's Church.


Fa. What is required of them that come to the Lord's Table?


Son. They ought to examine themselves; it calls for due Preparation, viz. a
sincere Confession of Sins, and godly Sorrow for the same* They ought to come
with clean Hands, and a pure Heart; also forgiving all that have offended them;
they must not eat with the Bread of Malice and Wickedness: Faith also is
required in the Death and Blood-sheding of Christ: And lastly, a Sin-loathing,
and Self-abhoring of themselves.


F. May not Swearers, Whore-mongers, and such like, partake thereof?


Son. No, by no means; for such are Unworthy Receivers, and if they eat, they
Eat and Drink their onw Damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29.


Fa. But may not Believers partake with such Unconverted Persons?


Son. No, for its directly against the express Word of God; with such do not
Eat, 1 Cor. 5.11.


Concerning the Resurrection.
Fa^ WHat believe thou concerning the Resurrection of the Dead?


Son. I believe that the Bodies of all Men and Women, shall rise from the dead
at the last Day, Dan. 12.2. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. Rev. 20.15.


Fa. Shall the same Body be raised?


Son. Yea; for if it were not the same Body, it could not be called a
Resurrection, but rather a New Creation; and if it were not the same Body, then
it would not be that Body of the wicked, that sinned, nor that Body of the
godly, that suffered; and consequently God would punish an innocent Body, Job
19.25. Joh. 11.24. cap. 5.28.


Fa. It is said, our Bodies shall be changed?


Son. It will be a change of the Qualities of our Bodies, but not of the
Substance.


Fa. What believe you concerning the Souls of Men when they depart this Life?


Son. The Souls of the godly at Death, go immediately to Christ, and the Souls
of the wicked into Chains of Darkness, Luke. 23.42, 43. Luke 16.22, 23, 24.
Phil. 23.


Fa. What believe you concerning the Souls of men when they depart this Life?


Son, The Souls of the godly at Death, go immediately to Christ, and the Souls
of the wicked into Chains of Darkness. Luke 23.42. and cap. 16.22. Phil. 23.


Fa. What believe you concerning the Day of Judgment?


Son. I believe that after the Resurrection at the last day, all men, both
Saints and Sinners, the Just and Unjust shall all appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ, to receive the thing done in their Bodies, Eccl. 12.14. 2 Cor.
5.10. Rev. 20.11, 12.


Fa. What will be the state of all men after the last and dreadful day of
Judgment is over?


Son. The Wicked shall both Body and Soul be cast into Hell fire, and the Godly
shall be received into that glorious Kingdom prepared for them from the
Foundation of the World; the one shall be Eternally Miserable, and the other be
Blessed in the perfect enjoyment of God, for Ever and ever. Amen, Rev. 20.14,
15. Mat. 25.33, 46.


Concerning Prayer.
Quest. WHat is Prayer?

Answ. Prayer is the pouring forth of the Desires of the Soul to Almighty God,
or an humble asking of God such things as we need, 1 Samuel 1.15.

Quest. What Rule has God given to direct his People in Prayer?

Ans. The whole Word of God is of use to direct us in Prayer, but the special
Rule is that form of Prayer which Jesus Christ taught his Disciples, Mat. 9.6.

Qu. May all Persons (Sinners as well as Saints) use those words, or pray so as
Christ taught his Disciples?

Ans. No verily, Ungodly and Sinners ought not so to Pray.

Quest. Why so?

Ans. Because they cannot go to God as to a Father, they may Pray to him as to
a Merciful Creator; but not as to a Father, because they are not his Children;
also, they cannot Pray, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that
Trespass against us, because many of them do not forgive such who Trespass
against them.

Qu^ Must Children Pray to God?

Ans. Yea, they and all others by all means ought to pray, for Prayer is a
Branch of Natural Religion.

Qu. Ought Parents to Teach their Children a form of Prayer?

Ans. Parents ought to give Directions to their Children how they should Pray,
and what they should Pray for, and exhort them to Pray; but we do not read in
Scripture, that any of Gods Servants taught their Children a form of Prayer.

Qu. What kind of Directions are necessary for Parents to give their Children
upon this account?

Ans. They ought to command them to Cry to the Real and Merciful God, in a
Humble and Reverent manner to show them their lost and undone Condition without
Christ, and to give them Wisdom and his Heavenly Grace to renew his Image in
them, lost by the Fall of Adam, and to bestow these and all other good things
upon them for Christ's sake.

Qu. How should God's Children Pray, according to those Directions given in the
Lord's Prayer?

Ans. From the Preface, Our Father which art in Heaven; we learn to draw near
to God with holy Reverence, as Children to a Father, able and ready to help us;
and that we ought to Pray for all God's Children likewise; it is not said, O
Father, nor my Father, but Our Father; we must bear all the Saints upon our
Hearts when we Pray, Psalm 64.1.

Quest. What are we taught to Pray for in the first Petition?

Ans. In these words, Hallowed be thy Name, we are taught to glorify God in
all his Attributes, or howsoever else he is made known to us and that every
thing may ten^ to his own Glory, and to seek his Glory before our own good.

Quest. What do we desire in the second Petition?

Ans. In the second petition Thy Kingdom come, we are taught to Pray that God
would destroy the the Kingdom of Satan, that so the Kingdom of Grace may come
with power upon our Hearts; and that the Kingdom of Glory, or God's Visible
Kingdom may be hastened and set up with power in the World, Psalm. 68.1. Psalm.
51.18* Dan. 7.27.

Quest. What are we directed to to pray for in the third Petition?

Ans. In the third Petition, Thy Will be done, we are taught to Pray that God
by Grace would help us to do (and submit to) his Will in all things, as the
Angels do it in Heaven.

Quest. What is it we desire or are to Pray for in the fourth Petition?

Ans. In the fourth Petition, Give us this day our daily Bread, we are taught
to Pray that God would give us all things which are needful for us in this
Life; by which we acknowledge God to be the Fountain of all Earthly Mercies of
Good Things, as well as of Spiritual, Psalm. 90.17. Acts 1.727.

Quest What do we Pray for in the fifth Petition?

Ans. In the fifth Petition, And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them
that Trespass against us, we are taught to ask Forgiveness or Pardon of God,
viz. that he would through the Atonement Christ has made by his Blood,
forgive us all our Sins, and impute Christ's Righteousness to us by Faith, Romans
3.23. and not only to beg pardon, but also the sense or sight of Pardon and
Forgiveness.

Quest. What do we ask of God in the sixth Petition?

Ans. In the sixth Petition we are taught to beg of God that he would not
suffer us to fall into such a State or Company, that may lead us into
Temptation to Sin against God.

Qu. What does the Conclusion of this Prayer teach us?

Ans. The Conclusion of this Prayer which runs thus, For thine is the Kingdom,
the Power and the Glory for ever, Amen, does teach us to ascribe all Praise and
Glory to God, whose Power, Kingdom and Glory is over all for ever and ever, 2
Cor. 1.20. 1 Chronicles. 29.11. 2 Timothy 2.13

Quest. How ought thou to Pray then, do thou learn from hence and other
Scriptures in general?

Ans. I learn* that we ought to Pray in the Spirit, that my Spirit must Pray;
and that too, by the help of the holy Spirit of God; ad that I ought to Pray
with Understanding. And moreover, we must Pray in Truth, viz. Speak no more
with our Tongues, then does agree with our Hearts; and that we ought to lift up
holy Hands, Pray with an Heart set against, hating and loathing all manner of
Sin and Evil, and to Pray fervently, in Faith, Constantly, and to Pray
according to the Will of God, and to put up all Prayer in the Name of Jesus
Christ. And lastly, That we ought in the first place to seek the Honor of God
before our one good, and to seek the good of our Souls before the good of our
Bodies; and that we should in Prayer design and seek the good of others, as
well as our own good.

Quest. How is Jesus Christ Our Mediator made known or manifested to us?

Ans. Negatively, our Mediator is not made known by the Works of Creation, nor
by the Light which is in all men; by the visible things that are made, we may
know there is a Creator, yet hereby we cannot know there is a Redeemer or
Mediator, who was Born of the Virgin, Crucified, Dead and Buried, Raised again,
and ascended into Heaven; therefore in the Affirmative, Christ (as our
Redeemer) is only made known by the Divine Revelation of the holy Scripture.

Fa. Since I perceive (my Son) thou art so well Instructed in the Principles of
the Christian Religion, pray give me a short Confession of your Faith.


Son. I believe with my Heart, and confess with my mouth, That God is one
Almighty, Eternal, Infinite and Admirable Essence, and is unspeakably Glorious
in all his Attributes; who by his mighty Power and Wisdom made Heaven and Earth
and all things therein.

I also believe in Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the only begotten Son of God,
being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person; and as
he is verily God of the Substance of the Father, so he is truly Man; he took on
him the Seed of Abraham, being conceived by the holy Ghost; he was Born of the
Virgin Mary, and was Condemned by Pontius Pilate, and that he suffered Death to
Redeem me and all those who truly believe in him, and that there is no
Remission of Sin but by his Blood; I also believe he Rose again the Third Day,
and Ascended into Heaven above, and sits now at the right hand of God, to
make Intercession for us; and that from thence he shall come again at the End
of the World, to be the judge of the quick and dead.

I also believe in God the holy Ghost, who is one with the Father and the Son,
proceeding from them, who is my Sanctifier, and the Sanctifier of all the Elect
People of God.

I believe likewise that God has one Holy and Blessed Church on Earth (who are
a select People separated from the evil customs and worships of the World) and
I believe the Resurrection of the Dead, the Eternal Judgment with the Life
everlasting, Amen


Advice to Youth.
WHen in the Morning you do rise,
Lift up to God ^our Hands and Eyes.
And praise his Name^ ^ho did all Night
Keep thee unto (...) M^rning Light,
And then betimes see thou do pray,
That God would keep thee all the Day
From those great dangers which befall
Often times on Young, on great and small;
And pray to God his Grace to give,
In his blessed fear all day to live,
And not to sin, and him offend,
Who does to thee all blessings send;
And when down stairs, Son, thou do go,
Salute thy Parents, Brothers too,
And thy dear Sisters, let them see
How to behave themselves by thee.
Then wash thy hands, and thy head comb,
Keep clean thy Clothes abroad and home:
A Chapter read in the next place,
With a sweet voice and heavenly grace^
And when to Prayer thy Parentts go,
(...) on thy Knees, join with them too.
(...) When at the Table thy Parents sit,
that they command, see thou do it,
Whether to sit, or otherwise
To wait on them until they rise.
Stare in the face of none, be sure,
Good Parents cannot that endure.
Would thou be Vir^uous whilst Young!
Then learn to bridle well thy Tongue.
The End of the Second Part.
Of TIME.
TIme consists of Years, Months, Weeks, Days, Hours and Minutes, of which 60
Minutes makes an Hour, 24 Hours a natural Day, 7 Days, a Week, 4 Weeks a Month,
13 Months 1 day and 6 hours, makes 1 Year. But in the ordinary computation of
Time, the Year is divided into 12 Kalander Months, which are commgnly called,
January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October,
November, December; but in Scripture, a^e called, The first Month, 2 d Month,
3 d Month, etc.

Thirty Days has September,
April, June and November.
February has Twenty Eight alone,
All the rest Thirty and One.
So that the year contains 365 days and six hours, which hours are saved
together, and every fourth year one Day added to February, which then contains
29 days, and that year is called Leap-Year.

The four Quarter-Days in the year, are March 25, called Lady Day, June 24,
called Midsummer-day, September 29. called Michaelmass-day, and December 25.
called Christmas day.

Besides learning these useful Notes about Time, observe well the following
Advice.

REdeem thy Time dear Youth, with care.
For preciousness, what may compare
With thy sweet Time? O then, it prize!
Time hastes away, and swiftly flies.
The Time which God unto thee sends,
On it ETERNITY depends.
Then waste not Time* like foolish Boys,
In Games and Sports and ^ily Toys:
To thy great ^urt, don't Time abuse,
Most wickedly thy Time to use.
Time that is past none can Re-call;
Time to come's uncertain all:
The present Time Redeem therefore;
(...) Time ^'er long will be no more.
Of Scripture Weights, Measures and Coyns.
AN Hairs Breadth, the 48th part of an Inch. A Hands breadth, three Inches. A
Span, nine Inches. A Foot, twelve Inches. A Cubit, a foot and a half. A holy
Cubit, a Yard. The Kings Cubit, a foot and 9 Inch. A Reed, six Cubits and a
Hands breadth. A Pace, five Foot. A Furlong, 125 Paces. A Mile, 1000 Paces. A
Sabbath days Journey, 600 Paces.
Measures of Capacity of things that are Dry.
A Kab, Quart. An Omer, 3 Pints and an half* A Measure or Seah, a Gallon. An
Ephah, half a Bushel and a Pottle. Half Omer, or Lethe^, seven bushel and a
quart. An Omer, or Cor, 14 bushel and a pottle.
Measures of Liquids.
A Log, half a Pint. A Hin, three Quarts. A Bath, 9 gallons and 3 quarts. A Pot
or Sextary, a pint and half. A Measure or Choe^ix, ^ Quart. A Firkin, 4 Gallons
and half.
Weights of Appension or Counterpoize
A Sheckle in weight, a quarter of an Ounce. A Sheckle of the Sanctuary, half
an Ounce. A Pound, twelve Ounces. A Talent, 62 Pound A M^les burden, 200
weight.
Weights used in England.
IN England they commonly use two kinds of Weights, viz. Troy and Averdupoize;
by Troy weight they weigh Wheat, Bread, Gold, Silver, and the like, the least
Denomination of which is a Grain, the weight of a grain of Wheat gathered out
of the middle of the Ear, well dried.

24 Grains, make 1 Penny weight 20 Penny weight, 1 Ounce. 12 Ounces, 1 Pound.
By A-ver-du-poize Weight, that is, Have you weight? or You shall have your
full weight, is weighed all kind of Grocery and Physical Drugs, as also Rosin,
Tar, Wax, Pitch, Tallow, Hemp, Flax, Iron, Steel, Lead, Tin, Copper, Allom,
Copper as, and all such kind of Garble, whence there may issue a waste. The
smallest Denomination of this Weight is a Dram.

16 Drams, make 1 Ounce. 16 Ounces, 1 Pound. 28 Pound, 1 quarter of a hundred.
58 Pound, half a Hundred. 4 Quarters, or 112 Pound, make 1 Hundred weight. 20
Hundred, 1 Tun.
English Measures, Liquid.
2 Pints make 1 Quart. 2 Quarts, 1 Pottle. 2 Pottles, 1 Gallon. 8 Gallons, 1
Ferkin of Ale. 9 Gallons, 1 Ferkin of Beer. 2 Ferkins, 1 Kilderkin, 2
Kilderkins, 1 Barrel. 2 Barrels, 1 Hogshead. 42 Gallons, 1 Tierce of Wine. 63
Gallons; 1 Hogshead. 2 Hogsheads, 1 Pipe or Butt. 2 Pipes or Butts, 1 Tun.
English Measures, Dry.
2 Pints, 1 Quart. 2 Quarts, 1 Pottle. 2 Pottles, 1 Gallon. 2 Gallons, 1 Peck.
2 Pecks, 1 Bushel. 8 Bushels, 1 Quarter. 4 Quarters, 1 Chaldron. 5 Quarters, 1
Wey.
Long Measure. Long Measure is deduced from Barley Corn taken out of the ^iddle
of the Ear, and well dried, ^f which
3 Barley Corns, make 1 Inch. 12 Inches, 1 Foot. 3 Foot, 1 Yard. 3 Foot 9
Inches, 1 E^^. 5 yards and a half, or 16 foot and hal^, 1 Pole or Perch. 43
Poles, 1 Furlong. 8 Furlongs, 1 English Mile. 40 square Poles or Perches, 1
Rod. 4 Rods, 1 Acre.
Of COIN.
4 Farthings, make 1 Penny. 12 Pence, 1 Shilling. 20 Shillings, 1 Pound.
Note, That l. stands over Pounds* over shillings, d. over pence.

Figures and Numeral Lette^^.
1. I. One. 2. II. Two. 3. III. Three. 4. IV. Four. 5. V. Five* 6. VI. Six. 7.
VII. Seven. 8. VIII. Eight. 9. IX. Nine. 10. X. Ten. 20 XX Twenty 30 XXX Thirty
40 XL Forty 50 L Fifty 60 LX Sixty 70 LXX Seventy 80 LXXX Eighty 90 XC Ninety
100 C a hundred. 200 CC 2 hundred 500 D five hundred 600 DC six hundred 1000. M
a thousand 1500 MD one thousand five hundred.
The Pence Table, Necessary to be learned by heart.
Pence. shill. Pence. Shillings Pence 20 is 1 8 1 is 12 30 2 6 2 24 40 3 4 3 36
50 4 2 4 48 60 5 0 5 60 70 5 10 6 72 80 6 8 7 84 90 7 6 8 96 100 8 4 9 108 110
9 2 10 120 120 10 0

Of Numeration.
NUmeration teaches how to set down any Number spoken of or proposed; to read
it truly when written. To which purpose you are to take notice, that we
commonly express all Numbers by these nine Figures, 1 One, 2 two, 3 three, 4
four, 5 five, 6 six, 7 seven, 8 eight 9 nine, and 0, which is called a Cipher,
and by some Naught, because of it self it stands for nothing, yet increases the
Value of other Figures that stand behind it, in the same manner. Every Figure
augments its proper Value, according to the place it happens to be in, except
the first.

Any of the Nine Figures in the first place, signifies only its own single
value; in the second place, so many times Ten; in the third place, so many
Hundreds; in the fourth place so many Thousands; in the fifth place, so many
ten Thousands; in th sixth place, so many hundred Thousands; and in the 7th
place, so many Millions.

As for Example, In this Number 1234567, the 7 is barely seven Unites or Ones;
but the 6 in the second place, is six times ten, that is, sixty; the 5 in the
third place, is one hundred Times five, that is, five hundred; the 4, a
thousand times four, or four thousand; the 3, three times ten thousand; that
is, Thirty Thousand; the 2 in the sixth place, is two hundred Thousand; and the
1 in the 7th place, is one ten hundred Thousand, or a Thousand Thousand, which
is one Million.

All which being put together in your Understanding, you must read the
aforesaid sum (1234567) thus, One Million, two hundred thirty four Thousand,
five hundred sixty seven. But this Number, 7654321 (which consists of the same
Figures, but contrary wise placed) must be read Seven Millions, six hundred
fifty four Thousand, three hundred twenty one; so 9010400, is Nine Millions,
ten Thousand, four Hundred.

Of Addition.
ADdition is that part of Arithmetic, which shows to collect or add diverse
Sums together* and to express their total Value in one Sum.

As for Example; Suppose you had disbursed for your Master the Sums of Money
following; as, For Wine 5 lib. For Sugar 4 lib. For Candles 3 lib. For Nails 2
lib. In all 14 lib.


Now to know how much the Total of this is, you must add them up together,
beginning at the bottom, say, 2 and 3 makes 5, and 4 is 9, and 5 is 14, which
set down underneath; and by that it appears you have disbursed 14 Pounds.

Of Substraction.
THis Rule teaches to substract a lesser Sum from a greater, and then to know
what remains; as suppose you have received of your Master 120 l. and have
disbursed 75 l. and would know what is remaining in your hands: To do this you
must first set down the 120 l. and under that the 75 l. and say, 5 from 0 I
cannot, but 5 from 10, and there remains 5: Then say, 1 which I borrowed and 7
is 8, 8 from 12, and there remains 4, which set down; and thereby it will
appear you have remaining in your hands 45 l.

A Table of MULTIPICATION.
2 times 2 is 04 3 times 3 is 09 3 06 4 12 4 08 5 15 5 10 6 18 6 12 7 21 7 14 8
24 8 16 9 27 9 18 4 times 4 is 16 5 times 5 25 5 20 6 30 6 24 7 35 7 28 8 40 8
32 9 45 9 36 6 time^ 6 is 36 7 times 7 is 49 7 42 8 56 8 48 9 62 9 54

8 times 8 ^ 64

8 9^ 7^ 9 tim^^ ^ is ^^

A Receipt in full.
Received the 26 of March 1695. of A. B. the Sum of Forty two Pounds ten
Shillings, (in Money and Goods) which is in full of all Debts, Dues, etc.
whatsoever, from the said A. B. I say, Received in full,

per me, J. T.

A Bond.
KNow all Men by these Presents, That I A. B. of the County of Bucks, in the
Province of Pennsilvania, Weaver, am held and firmly ^ound unto John True of
the County and Province aforsaid, in the Sum of One hundred Pounds, current
Silver Money of the said Province, to be paid to the said John True, his
certain Attorney, Executors, Administrators or Assigns; To the which Payment
well and truly to be made, I bind my my self, my Heirs, Executors and
Administrators firmly by these Presents. ^ealed with my Seal, dated the 24th
day of March, 1695. Annoque Regni Regis and Reginae Gulielmi and Mariae,
Angliae, etc. Septimo.

The Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden A. B. his
Heirs, Executors or Administrators shall and do well and truly pay, or cause to
be paid unto the abovenamed John True, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, the full Sum of Fifty Pounds, current Silver Money aforesaid, at or
before the 24 day June next following the date hereof, without fraud or further
Delay, then this Obligation to be void, and of none effect, or else to be and
remain in full force and virtue.

A. B.
Sealed and delivered in the presence of Thomas Telltrue, John Memory.


Common Stops, to be observed in Writing and Reading.
TRue Pointing is necessary in Writing, to prevent Confusion, and therefore I
have set down the most usual Stops or Points, as follows:

A Comma [,] is a Note of sho^^ stay or stop in reading.

A Colon [:] is a Note of perfect sense, but not of a perfect sentence, because
there is more of it behind* As for Example, Psalm. 22.28. For the Kingdom is the
Lords: And he is Governor among t^^ Nations. This requires a longer stop or
pause than a Comma.

A Semi-colon [;] differs not much* from a Colon, but requires somewhat a
shorter pause. E. G. Psalm. 3.5. I laid me down and s^ept; I awaked, for the
Lord sustained me.

A Period [.] is a full stop, and is placed at the close of a sentence. As,
Rejoice evermore. Pray without ceasing. Here the stop or pause must be longer,
that the Reader may recover his breath, and the Hearer have time to reflect a
little on what is delivered, before they proceed to new matter.

An Interrogation Point, [?] is placed after the asking a Question. As, Why do
the Heathen rage? And the people imagine a vain thing? In reading, make near as
long a pause here, as at a Period.

A Parenthesis () is put to enclose any new clause or matter that is added
before a man has fully expressed his Mind, the sense being good, if that which
is added were left out. As where Paul says, For I know in me, (that is, in my
flesh) dwells no good.

An Admiration [!] is put after words that express something strange, or to be
wondered at, as, O the depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God!

The Apostrophe ['] is a point made* as you see) like a Comma, and is set over
the place where a Vowel is left out, which you often meet with in Verse, to
shorten the feet, or to make it run smooth. As penned, heavens, sinned,
the other, 'twas, it is, etc.

A Hyphen [-] is a note of Connection, as, Lawgiver, Penmen.

An Index, thus is to note something remarkable.

An Oblisk, thus, refers to the Margent.

A Section [] it denotes the beginning of a new Head.

Contractions in Writing fit to be observed by Youth and others.
IN our English writing there are many Abreviations we make use of, which are
borrowed from the Latin, as e. g. ex^moli gratia) for example; and over our
Accounts (...) commonly write l. s. d. q. which is (libri, s^liai, denarii,
quadrantes) Pounds, Shillings, Pence, Farthings. So also we write, viz.
(videlicet) to wit, or that is to say; sc. (scilicit) that is to say; i. e. (id
est) that is; v. (vide) see; N. B. (not^ bena) note well, Per Ann. (per annum)
by the year; per Cent. by the Hundred.

There are also other Contractions of English words, as Admrs. for
Administrators, agt. against, Bp. Bishop, Comrs. Commissioners, Dr Doctor, Esquire
Esquire, Mr. Master, Mrs. Mistress, Ma^ie. Majesty, Sr. Si^, St. Saint, Coll.
Colonol, Capt. Captain, Lieut. Lieutenant, ye. the, y^. your, yt. that, ym.
them, w^. ^hen, which. which, Qu. Question, Sol. Solution or Answer, Ans. Answer,
Obj. Objection. We also sometimes contract two words into one, as I Will for I
will, I^m for I am, the other for the other, let us for let us.

A short Dictionary, interpreting several hard Words and Names.
ABba, a Father. Abreviate, short. Abandon, forsake. Abridge, shorten. Abjure,
renounce. Abolish, make void. Absurd, foolish. Adjacent, lying, or joining to.
Acute, Ingenious. Adopt, to choose or take for his Child Affinity, Kin by
Marriage or Agreement. Allusion, pointing to. Allegory, another thing meant*
Anathema, Cursed. Alias, otherwise. Adam, Earthly. Aaron, a Teacher. Abel,
just. Abraham, Father of many* Alexander, Helper of Man. An^nia^, the Grace of
the Lord. Anthony, Flourishing. Abigal, the Father's Joy. Alice, Noble. Agnes,
Chaste. Amy, Beloved, Conqueror, French.
B.
BAptism, Dipping or plunging. Babylon, Confusion. Blasphemy, Evil-speaking.
Brevity, shortness. Bishop, Overseer. Basilick, a Cockatrice. Benedict,
Blessed. Bigamy, having two Wives at once. Barrabas, Son of Confusion.
Benjamin, Son of the Right Hand.
C
CElestial, Heavenly. Center, the midst. Catholic, Univerasal. Conjunction,
joining together. Consecrate, to make Holy. Callendar, Almanac. Casual,
Accedental. Christ, Anointed. Caleb. Hearty.
D.
DEacon, One overseeing the Poor Dehort, dissuade. D^ty, Godhead. Derivation,
going from. Defacto, actually done. Daniel, Judgment of God. Dinah, Judgment.
Deborah, a Word or Be. Dorothy, the Gift of God. Dorcas, a Roe-Buck.
E.
ECclesiastical, Spiritual. Eden, a Place of Pleasure. Edict, Commandment.
Egress, forth-going. Election, Choice. Essence, Substance or Being. Elevate,
Lift up. Eunuch, One gelded. Evangelist, a B^^nger of good News Ed^und, Blessed
Peace. Edward, happy Keeper. Elisha, the Lamb of God. Esaiah, Reward of the
Lord. Enoch, Taught or Eeduca^e. Ezra, Peace of the Lord.
F*
FAllacy, Deceit. Fervent, Holy. Finis, the End. Fraternity, Brotherhood.
Function, Calling. Future, Time to come. Flagitious, Hanious, Wicked. Filial,
belonging to a Son. Falix, Happy. Francis, Free. Ferdinando, Pure Peace.
G
GEnitor, A Father* Geographer, a Describer of the Earth. Gospel, Glad Tidings,
good News. Gradually, by degrees. Gratis, freely, for nothing* Generous, of a
noble Mind. Gabriel, the Strength of God. Gamaliel, God's Reward. George, an
Husbandman. Gideon, a Destroyer.
H
HAllelujah, Praise ye the Lord. Helmet, Head piece. Homage, Worship.
Hostility, Enmity. Habakkuk, a wrestler. Hannah, Merciful, a taking Rest.
Helkiah, the Portion of the Lord.
I.
INfinite, without Number. Ignominy, Reproach. Illegitimate, unlawfully born.
Interrogation, Question asking. Jesus, a Savior. Jubilee, Year of joy. Junior,
Younger. Israel, a Prince with God. Jebez, Sorrowful. Jacob, a Supplanter.
Jehoshaphat, the Lord my Judge. Jonah, a ^^ve. James, a Maintainer. Job,
^ighing, Sorrowful. Joseph, Increasing* Josiah, Fire of the Lord. Isaac,
Laughter. Jane, Gracious.
L.
LAtitude, Breath or Wideness* Legible, easy to be read* Lascivious, Wanton.
Lampoon, a Libel in Verse. Legatee, one to whom a Legacy is Bequeathed.
Legitimate, Lawful. Liber, a Littel Book. Licentious, Loose, Disorderly. Leah,
Painful. Laban, white Skin, or gentle. Laza^^s, Sores, help. Leonard, Lyon-like
Disposition. Lo^, joined. Lettice, Joyfulness, Mirth. L^ke, Ri^^^g or Lifting
up
MA^anat^a, Acc^^sed. Magna^^^, Greatness. Major, the Greater. Minor, the
Lesser Modern* of our Times. Morality, Civil Behavior. Manassa, not forgotten.
Mark, High. Matthew, God's-Gift. Mary, Exalted. Martha, Bitter.
NArration, Declaration. Neuter, of neither side. Novice, a young Scholar.
Nullity, nothing or of no Effect. Novel New. N^omi, Fair. Nathaniel, the Gift
of God. Nehemiah, Comfort of the Lord. Noah, Increasing or Rest. Nathan, Given,
Reward.
OBscure, Dark. Oblivion, Pardon, forgetting. Obdurate, Harden. Omniscient,
knowing all things. Omnipotent, Almighty. Original, Beginning first. Oracle, a
Speech from God* Obliterate, blot o^t. Obscene, Fi^thy, Unchaste. Obvious,
easy to find o^ ^^derstand. Obstacle, an Hinderance. Ocean, the main Sea.
Omnipresent, every where present. Obadiah, Servant of the Lord. Obed, a Servant
or workman.
PRedestination, Fore-appointed. Prodigy, a Wonder. Paradise* a Place of
Pleasure. Paraphrase, Exposition. Prohibition, for-bidding. Procreate, to
beget. Phanatick, a Madman. Perpetuity, Eternity. Pervert, Subvert, deceive.
Peter, a Store or ^ook. Philip, a lover or ^o^^es. Phebe, clear, or b^ight.
RAdical, belonging to a Root. Rational, Reasonable. Radiment, first
Instruction. Repugnent, contrary. Rabbi, Master, Regression, Returning, going
back. Rachel, a Sheep. Richard, Rich Lord. Robert, famous in Counsel. Roger,
strong Counsel. Reuben, Son of Vision. Rebecca, Eat and full. Ruth, watered or
filled. Rosamond, Rose of the World.
SAbbath, Rest. Schism, a Breach. Sanctification, Holiness. Subscribe, write
under. Substract* take from. Superlative, Highest in Degree. Scrutiny, a
Search. Sedate, Quiet, Appeased. Senior, Elder. Senses, Hearing, Seeing,
Smelling* Tasting, Feeling: These are the Five Senses. Sentiment, a feeling
Apprehension. Samuel, Heard, or placed of God. Solomon, Peaceable. Sarah, Lady
or Dame Susanna, Lilly or Rose. Stephen, a Crown.
T
TA^tology, Repeating the same thing. Tabernacle, a Pavilion or Tent.
Temporary, for a time. Terrestrial, Earthly^ Theology, Divinity. Thomas, a
Twin. Timothy, the honor of God. Theophilus, a lover of God.
V.
VAcant, Empty, Void. Verbatim, word by word. Vital, Lively. Unanimous, of one
Mind and Heart. Vegetables, Plants. Vege^ive, Lively, Strong. Venery, Carnal
Lust, also Hunting. Verbal, belonging to words. Vigilant, watchful. Vincent,
Victorious*
A short Dialogue, showing the W^ful s^ate of an Ungodly Youth.
Youth, THose days which God to me does send,
In Pleasure I resolve to spend:
Like as the Birds in the lovely Spring,
Sit Chirping on the Boughs, and Sing;
Who straining forth their warbling Notes,
Do make sweet Music in their Throats.
So I resolve in this my Prime,
In Sports and Play to spend my Time;
Sorrow and Grief I Will put away*
Such Things agree not with my Day:
From Clouds my Morning shall be free,
And nough^ on Earth shall ^rouble me.
I will embrace each sweet Delight
T^^ Earth affords me, Day and Night.
T^o Parents Grieve, and me Correct;
(...) their Counsel will Reject;
I matter not so I can have
My lovely Sports* and Pleasures Brave*

DEVIL The ^esolution which you take,
Sweet Youth does me most merry make;
Thou shall become my lovely ^oy,
and I will fill thy Heart with joy,
If thou my Council wilt Embrace.
And shun the ways of Truth and Grace:
And learn to lie* to curse and swear,
And be as Proud as any are;
And with thy Brothers wilt fall out;
And Sisters with foul Language flout:
Yea, fight and scratch, and also bite;
Then in thee I will take Delight.
If thou will be Ruled by me,
An Attist thou shall quickly be
In all my ways, which lovely are,
There Is few with thee who shall compare.
Thy Parents always disobey;
Don't mind at all what they do say.
Though they should whip thee very sore,
Be worser for it ever more.
And rather hate them in thy heart,
For all the Counsel they impart:
And also pout and sullen be,
And thou shall be a Child for me.
when others Read* be thou at Play;
Th^nk not on God* don^t Sigh nor Pray;
Nor be thou such a silly Fool
To mind thy Book or go to (...)
(...) fear not
And what Earth yields or can afford,
I Will give to thee upon my Word
Come ^ow to me, uphold my Crown;
And I^ll raise thee to high renown.

YOUTH. These Motions I will cleave unto,
And let all other Counsel go:
My Heart against my Parents now
shall hardened be, I will not bow,
No, nor submit at all to them;
But all good Counsel will contemn;
And what I list* that do well I,
And stubborn be continually.

Christ. Will thou, O Youth! make such a choice,
And thus obey the Devils Voice?
Vile sinful ways will thou Embrace,
And not regard Tenders of Grace?
Will thou to me a Rebel prove,
And from thy Parents quite remove
Thy Heart also? Then thou shall see,
What will e^re long become of thee.
Come think of ^od who did thee ^ake,
(...) at his Presence Dread and Quake;
(...) him now in thy Youth (...)
^
His Sweet will into Sower turn,
If in his ways thou still wilt run;
Lift up thine Eyes and steadfast look,
Under his Bait is a sharp Hook*
With speed from him thy self recover,
Or else he will thy Soul devour;
And will thee into Pieces tear,
Like Lions, which most hungry are.
Grant me thy Heart, thy Folly leave,
And from this Lion I Will thee save;
And thou shall have sweet Joy from me*
Which last will to ETERNiTY.

Youth, My Heart shall cheer me in my Youth*
I Will have my mind too, in good Truth:
What e're seems lovely in in mine Eye*
My Self of it I cannot deny;
^n my own ways I still must wa^^,
And take Delight amongst ^oung Folk;
Who spend their Days in Joy and Mirth*
There Is naught like that, I Am sure, on Earth*
Thy ways, O Christ! are not for me,
They with my Age do not agree:
If i unto thy ways should cle^ve,
No more good Days then shall I have.

Christ, Would thou live long and good Days see?
Refrain from all ^niquity*
True good alone from me does flow.
It cannot be had in things below.

Christ. Are not my ways, O Youth! for thee,
Then thou shall never Happy be:
Nor ever shall thy Soul obtain.
True good, whilst thou do here remain.

Youth, To thee O Christ! I Will not adhere,
What thou speak^st of does not appear
Lovely to me; I cannot find
It Is good to set or place my mind
On ways from whence such sorrows spring,
And to the Flesh such Crosses bring:
Don't trouble me, I must fulfill
My Fleshly Mind, and have my will;

Christ, Unto the self then I Will thee leave,
That Satan wholly may thee have;
Thy Heart in Sin shall hardened be,
And blinded in Iniquity:
And them in Wrath i will Cut thee down,
Like as the Grass and Flower 's Mown,
And to thy Woe thou shall espy.
Childhood and Youth is Vanity;
For all these things I Will make thee know,
To Judgment thou shall come also,
in Hell at last thy Soul must burn,
When thou thy Sinful race have run;
Consider this think on thy End.
Least God does thee to Pieces rend,

Youth, Amazed great i now begin;
Ah! Must i leave these ways of Sin,
Which unto me so sweet have been.
i Tremble and do greatly fear,
To think upon What i do hear;
Must i Religious be so soon,
And my Sun set before it is noon.

Devil, No, foolish Youth don't change thy mind;
Unto such thoughts be not inclined:
Religion's an invented thing,
Which from some Crafty Head did spring,
To Awe Men's minds; a mere Bugbear*
Such Foolish Youths to fright and Scare;
is VVinter come? The Spring's not past;
What can not bear with one such blast ^
Shall the brave Flower that seems so gay,
in one poor hour fade quite away?
It Is Pity one so Young as thee,
Should thus be brought to Misery:
Come, cheer thy Heart, rouse up, be glad;
There is no Hell, why art so sad?
Eat, Drink, be Merry with thy Friend,
For when thou Dyest, that is is thy last End.

Youth Ah! would such thoughts i could receive
Gods Word I can^t but must believe
It Is He^^ fear amaz^ed am i*
At that dread Word [ETERNITY]
And if my Soul immortal be,
At Death, what will become of me*

Devil. Tush, these are silly things to think upon.
Shall Clouds thus dark thy Horizon;
i will scatter the^, and soon make clear
Thy lovely Morning, do not fear;
Yet to thee in some things i will yield,
So be i may but gain the Field;
That there is a Heaven i cannot deny,
Yea, and a Hell of Misery;
That Heaven is a lovely place,
i cannot deny, it is a clear Case,
And easy it is for to come there,
Poor Youth, take thee no farther Care*
Where Prayers are Read, set thou do go,
Where thou may Sleep as others do,
Thou may swear, drink healths and Curse,
And Churchmen love thee ner^e the worse*
At any time thou may Repent
Twill serve when all thy Days are spent,
Thou may have Christ and the World too,
And saved be with half the do
Which many make, if thou at last,
Do up thine Eyes to Heaven cast,
And do on thy dear Savior roll,
And beg him to receive thy Soul;
Thou shall be saved, do not fear.
But take thy fill of Pleasures here.

Christ. Take heed or else thou art undone,
These thoughts are from the Evil One,
Narrow's the Way that leads to Life,
Heaven is not had without much strife,
Few shall be saved, Young man, know,
Most do unto destruction go:
If Righteous ones scarce saved be.
What will at last become of thee?
O don't reject my gracious Call,
Least suddenly to Hell you fall;
Unless that you converted be,
Gods Kingdom you shall never see.

Youth, Now Lord, I am at a great stand,
To turn to the right, or to the left Hand,
Obey the Devil, or Gods Command.
If I to Godliness should cleave,
And my old Company should leave.
With great Reproaches I shall meet,
And loose my Pleasures, which are sw^^^*
My Comforts will me much deride,
And never more will me abide.
Moreover, this I also know,
God can at last great Mercy show*
Excuse (...) then, you do me wrong;
To mind Christ's ways I am too Young,
When i am Old and Pleasures gone,
Then what God says i will think upon.

Christ. Nay, hold vain Youth, thy time is short,
I have thy Breath, I^ll spoil thy sport;
Thou shall not live ti^ thou art old,
Since thou in sin art grown so bold:
I in thy youth, grim Death will send,
And all thy Sports shall have an end.

Youth, I am too Young, alas! to dye,
Let Death some old gray Head espy.
O spare me! and I will amend;
And with thy grace my soul befriend;
Or else I am undone, alas!
For I am in a woeful Case.

Christ, When I did call, thou would no^ hear,
But did to me, turn a deaf Ear;
And now in this Calamity
I will not mind, (...) hear thy Cry:
Thy Day is past; be gone from me,
Thou which do love Iniquity
Above thy Soul, and Savior dear,
Who on the Cross great pain did bear.
My Mercy thou did much abuse,
And all good Counsel did refuse.

(...)
