Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. seal By His EXCELLENCY,
Richard, Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and GOVERNOR in Chief of the said
Province, etc. A Proclamation.
WHEREAS I have Received credible Information That some evil-minded and wicked
Emissaries, maliciously designing and intending to disturb the peace and
tranquillity of His Majesty's Good Subjects within His Majesty's Provinces and
Colonies in America, have been employed and industriously endeavored falsely
to suggest and insinuate to the Indians of the several Plantations within the
same, as if his Majesty had withdrawn his Protection from them; and designed to
cut off and utterly extirpate them. By which lying Reports many of the said
Indians have been abused and put in fear, and are said to have entered into a
Combination and Confederacy, and to be drawn together in considerable Numbers,
threatening a general Insurrection, and in a hostile manner to fall upon his
Majesty's Subjects the English.

I have therefore, upon a motion from the Assembly now Sitting, and by and with
the Advice and Consent of His Majesty's Council, thought fit to Emit and
Publish this Proclamation; hereby Commanding and Requiring all His Majesty's
Loving Subjects within this His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay,
speedily to endeavor by all opportunities and possible ways and means that
they can, to undeceive the said Indians, and to inform them of the utter
Falsehood and Untruth of any such Report; and on the contrary to assure them,
as I do hereby assure them of His Majesty's good Inclinations and Favor, and
continuing of them under His Protection, whilst they demean themselves
peaceably, and remain in their Subjection and Obedience unto His Majesty and
His Government. Also Requiring all persons to avoid giving any just provocation
unto any of the Indians, or begetting any quarrel with them: however in the
mean time and during the threatened danger, to be very careful and vigilant in
observing the behavior and motions of the Indians, and for that purpose to
keep out Scouts and Espials; and by all due ways and means to provide for their
own safety and defense: And by force of Arms to Repel and Resist any hostile
Attack or violence which the Indians shall attempt to offer or make upon them.

Given at the Council Chamger in Boston the Fourteenth Day of March, 1699. And
in the Twelfth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the Third by
the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland KING, Defender of
the Faith, etc.

BELLOMONT By Order of His Excellency and Council. Isaac Addington Secr.

GOD Save the King.
BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green and John Allen, Printers (...) 1699.


