A JOURNAL KEPT BY Coll. Stephen Courtland, and Coll. Rich. Beyard, Of Their
Majesty's Council for the Province of New York, Being appointed by the COUNCIL
to Attend His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in
chief of the Province of New York Province of Pennsilvania Country of
New Castle, and Territories and Tracts of Land depending thereon in America,
and Vice Admiral of the same, TO ALBANY In Treating with the Indians of the
Five Nations, and River Indians of that Province, in the Months of June and
July, 1693.

Together with the Propositions and Conferences of the said Indians with his
Excellency. And his Excellency's Answers, etc.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to their Majesty's, King William
and Queen Mary, at the Sign of the Bible in New York, 1693

A Journal, etc. Province of New York ss. June the 3d. 1693.
HI^ Excellency arrived this day from his Government of Penn^^^^^^ia, to
New York, and being indisposed by his Journey* g^ve Orders that all things
should be put in (...) for his Journey to Albany, and that the Present^
provided for (...) Indians should (...) addition of Aims and Ammunition.

(...) His Excellency being recovered, set forth about eleven a (...) the fore
noon.

June 14. The Wind being favorable, arrived at Albany, about two a Clock in
the afternoon, being 150 Miles from New-Yo^k.

About 12 miles from Albany, his Excellency received L^tter from Mr. Samu^ll
P^rtridge of Ha^field in New England, acq^^^^^^g him (...) Christians were
lately killed, and th^ee more wounded in Deerfield, and that a party of the
Mobaques and River- Indians of this Province were suspected guilty of the Fact,
and some of them in Prison, for the rest marched toward Albany.

June 15 His Excellency sent Leiut. John Schuyler to meet that party, with
Orders to make diligent search (by opening all their Packs and Bun^les for
suspected Goods, taken from the Christians, which Orders were executed
accordingly, and nothing could be found to ground supposition of their guilt,
and the Indians were very forward to throw open all their packs and bundles.

This day arrived the Party of Indians at Albany, and his Excellency ordered
the Coun^ellors present to examine them concerning that Morther, who had a full
Account of their Negotiations there, and by sundry Circumstances and Reasons
which they offered, did be^ieve them innocent.

June 16. They reported their Opinion upon the Examination t^ his Excellency,
who ordered them to write a Letter to C^ll. John Pinch^on, desiring that a
(...) might be put to any violent proc^eding against the Indians in Prison
(...) further discovery be made, (...) i^ cause a defection in (...) Ind^ans of
this Province in al^^a^ce with us.

Major D^ W^s^ells* with a small guard, was sen^ express with that Lett^^ and
had ^ctions to use his endeavor to qualif^e the New England People, who were
violent in prosecuting (...) Indians

June 19 This being the day appointed for the coming in of the ^ndians of the
five (...) to Albany, and they not appearing, an Express was sent with (...)
^ands of Wampum, to hasten their coming.

This (...) arrived from Canada Joseph and Henry, two Christian Mohaqu^^, with
twenty four Indians, bringing two French scalps, and a young French Prisoner,
etc.

June 20. His Excellency, attended with forty Horse, went and viewed the
Garrison at Schenectady, put (...) that night.

June 21. The praying Mohaques desired Audience of his Excellency, and
presented to him the French man, who was then Prisoner, as a particular Mark of
their Affection. In the afternoon his Excellency returned his Answer, and gave
them Kettles, Knives, Rum, Drink, etc. to refresh themselves.

June 22. Two Schackhook Indians that were sent last fall to the Onogungoes
with a Belt of Wampum, to withdraw their Hatchets from against the English,
and turn them against the French in Canada, came to his Excellency, presenting
to him a round Plat of Wampum, with four spots in it, signifying four Castles,
and four Propositions which they had to offer.

The first was, That the Plat of Wampum came from four Castles of the
Onogungoes, that there was twelve more, who made one Nation with them, and that
they would communicate the Message to the other twelve Castles, and give an
answer in the fall.

The second, That they were a free People, and do not depend upon the French,
nor any other Nation: That a French Priest had been among them, desiring them
to come over to Mont. Royal, and assist the French against the Indians of the
five Nations in this Province, and that they did refuse it, because they had
received Protection and former Kindnesses from the Indians of the five Nations
and Christians of Albany.

The third, That they cannot tell how to trust the People of New England when
they speak of Peace, and therefore propose it to his Excellency, the Governor
of this Province, to whom they have more faith and credit.

The last, They desire his Excellency will please to send a Token, wherein
their Agents will confide, and be assured of safety in treating here with his
Excellency the next Fall.

Whereupon his Excellency gave them a large Belt of Wampum, wrought with the
figure of a Tree at one end, and an Ox at the other, in signification of
Protection and Plenty, which they were ordered to present to the sixteen
Castles of Onogungoes.

June 25 Major Wessells returned, with a Letter from Coll. Pincheon, and the
Depositions of some Women, who had their Scalps taken off by some Indians,
which were very positive against the Prisoners, and said the People of
New England were violent and stiff in their Opinions against them.

June 26 His Excellency went and viewed the Garrison at the Flats, gave Orders,
and returned in the Evening.

June 28. His Excellency having received further satisfaction of the Innocence
of our Indians from the Murder at Deerfield, sent a second Express, with
Letters, to Sir William Phipps and Coll. Pincheon for their Releasement.

July the 2d. At night the Indians of the Western Nations arrived, some of the
principal Sachims had private Conference with his Excellency.

(...) His E^^^llency made a public Speech to the Indians of the (...) Nations
in the City Hall at Albany, and gave them larg^ P^^^^^^.

July 1. (...) the Nations (by a Woman Interpretess) made ^^^ver a^ the (...)
Hall, and gave (...) Excellency some P^l^^y

H^^ Ex^^^^ency having given them two fat B^lls yesterday, (...) Young Men
might (...) them with Bo^ and Arrow in his fight, which (...) did. Then his
Excellency entertained the Sachims on board their Ma^^sties Ketch A^brought

July 5. His Excellency had private Conscience with the Sachims, and gave to
them, and some of their most valiant Captains, particular Presents for their
Encouragement, and desired them to return to their Castles.

July 6. His Excellency made a Speech to the River Indians, and gave them
Presents.

July 8. His Excellency left Albany, and the 14th following, the Wind being
Southerly, arrived at New York, where his Excellency was received with Guns,
and other Signs of Joy.

S. V. Courtland, N. Beyard.


Propositions made by the Schackbook Indians to the Gentlemen of the Council,
in behalf of his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, at Albany the 15th day of June,
1693.
Present Stephanni Courtlande, Nicholas Beyard, Peter Schuyler,
Esqrs.

WE have been as if in great Darkness, or Cloud, for some time, and now the
Light is come again, the Sun shines.

We return our hearty Thanks for the Preservation of our Wives and Children in
our absence, while we were hunting in the Winter. Give two Beavers.

Twen^y Years ago we were received as Children of this Government, and have
lived peaceably ever since under its Protection. And seeing several of our
People are detained Prisoners in New England, upon suspicion to have killed
some of their People at Deerfield, we sub^i^ the whole matter to the judicious
Consideration of his Ex^ (...) three Beavers.

Our Governor is a great Man, we pray that he would (...) our future
Preservation; and since the French are also potent, (...) have our Eyes open,
and bend all our Strength against them. Do (...) four Beavers.

Propositions made by the Mohaques Indians, to his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher
at Albany the 21th day of June, 1693.
Present His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. Coll. Stephen Courtland, Coll.
Nicholas Beyard, Major Peter Schuyler, Rode was Speaker.


Brother Cajenquiragoe;

i.e. Lord of the swift Arrow. A Name given to his (...) for his expeditious
March to their Assistance when the French and Indian had destroyed 3 of their
Castles in February last.

WHen our Castles were destroyed by the French this Spring, you came up very
speedily for our Succor and Relief, which was extreme acceptable to us; and
when you went away to New York, you promised to come up this Summer and see us,
which you have done accordingly* We are heartily glad to see you, for we were
afraid we should never have seen you more, and we bid you heartily Welcome. Do
give a Beaver Skin.

Brother Cajenquirago; When you went back to New York this Spring, you was
pleased to order us to look out and keep good Scouts and Videts, which we have
done, by sending a party out into the Enemies Country, who had a small brush
with them, and got three Scalps, which b^ing a noisome fight, we do not think it
convenient to bring them forth to our Brother Caj^nquirago. You and we have
done this together; for the Ammunition and Provision was yours, which we used
in this ^^^cution, and we are jointly concerned in doing this Mischief to the
Enemy. Do give a Beaver Skin.

Brother Cajenquiragoe; We must acknowledge, that your Kindnesses to us have
been very great, you have supplied us with Provision and A^^^nition ever since
the Enemy destroyed our Castles; We earnestly (...) the continuance of your
favor and affection toward us, for we are (...) poor People, and have lost
all by the Enemy. You are ^sed ^ir our Arms, when any of our People break their
Gun or (...), you cause your People to mend them, for which we are very (...).
We could not stay for the other Nations, since our Obliga^^^^ are greater than
theirs, and we have received the greatest Kindne^^^ (...) ^^me first to return
our the (...) ^^dgment^. (...) B^a^^r Skin.

Brother C^ (...) we knew that our men were ^^^^med t^ the People (...) ^o were
so kind to send an Ex^ress (...) a Kindness and Favor* (...) an especial
manner. When Major (...) wi^h our People, he lost many men (but the ^earing o^
the Fre^^^ that time was the means that preserved us) We have thoughts ever
since of supplying the Rooms of those Christians who were killed there* with
P^^on^^s taken from Canada, but cannot get ^^ch a Number, never^hele^s having
one now, we freely deliver him to Cajenquiragoe, as a particular taken of
Gratitude.

His Excellen^y's Answer.
I Did not expect to see you before the arrival of the other four Nations, but
perceiving you are (...) our Affection and Zeal to the service of the great
King and Queen of England* and gratitude for those Marks of favor you have
received from their Ma^esties, I am heartily glad to see you, and well
satisfied with the service you have done against the French and their Indians,
by which I perceive you have not lost the ancient Courage, since you dare
attack them in the face of their Castles.

I am come up according to my Promise, to strengthen the Fronteers, to condole
the Dead, and give you more Marks of their Majesty's Favor to you, but shall
defer the giving those Presents until the other four Nations are come. I accept
the Prisoner from you, and shall be always willing that the War be made with
Honor, and no Prisoners put to death, but in the heat of Action, unless for
such Crimes as do deserve it by Martial Law. I have sent to New England for
those of your Nation detained Prisoners there, and hope they will be returned.

You may always depend upon my readiness to assist you, if you give me such
Notice that I may have time enough to come up to you; You must consider the
length of the way, it is 150 Miles by Water, and the Journey depends upon the
chance of Winds and Tide, therefore be sure give early Notice. His Excellency
made them presents.

July the 2d. About 9 a clock at Night, the Speaker of the five Nations, with
two of the Sachims of the Onondages Nation, (...) a private Conference with his
Excellency the Governor, which was granted them.

Brother Caj^nquirago;
WE a^ ^d to see you here, and are come to discourse with you in (...) Matters
of Import: We have heard much of a design to subdu^ Canada, with a Fleet; our
Young Men are eager and ^^ll (...) Heat (...) man (...) of that War; pray tell
to the Truth; for if (...), we must manage ou^ Youth accordingly.

Brother Cajenquirago; We h^^^ often had ^^^^ges of Governors here, and it was
a long time before (...) c^uld be acquainted with our Constitution and Affairs*
so soon as they come to understand us they are gone. We desire to know how long
you will stay? We would not have you depart: We know your heart is good, you
have demonstrated it by your swift coming to our assistance with so
considerable a Force, when the French and Indians had made an impression upon
our Mohaque^ Country; for which we return our hearty Thanks. Do give seven
Beavers.

His Excellency's Answer.
BRETHREN;
THe great KING, my Master, knows best his own time and season to make an
attack with a Fleet, and subdue Canada, as yet I have advice of no such Design,
whenever I shall have notice thereof, I shall acquaint the Brethren.

As for my stay here, it must be only ^^^ing my great Masters ple^sure, yet
doubt not but I shall continue so long as to see Canada subdued.

A Speech made by his Excellency to the Indians of the Five Nations, viz.
Mohaques, Oneydes, Onondages, Cajonges and Sennekes, in the City Hall at
Albany, the 3d day of Ju^y, 1693.
BRETHREN;
WHen I saw you in this place last February, I proposed to be here early in the
Summer, at the time the Bark would run, as you desired. In this I was
disappointed, by the Commands of the great King and Queen of England, etc. who
were graciously pleased to send their Royal Mandate, requiring me, upon receipt
of it, to repair unto Pennsilvania, and take that Province into their Majesty's
immediate Care and Government.

I received this Commission in April, and the Execution of it took up the
remainder of that Month, and all the Month of May. At my Return to New York, I
found my self indisposed, but in six days I was ready for this Journey. I have
taken care to strengthen our Fronteers, with Recruits of Christian Soldiers,
and Warlike Necessaries.

I formerly told you, and must tell you again, That our Enemies cannot easily
hurt us, unless you are careless, and by your Drunkenness ^^^^ble your selves;
This is a Vice strictly to be proh^bited and punished. It is a greater in me to
Martial Men (...) their Sleep like Death, and so they become an easy Prey
(...) though weak Enemy. Let me th^r^fore desire you to be ^o^er and vigilent,
then you will alw^^^ (...) a condition to make good your ground, till Relief
come, or at least to retreat with Arms in your hand

The Blow you received last Winter, is fresh in our Memories; y^u know it came
by a supine watchless Humor of the Brethren the Mohaq^^^, you also know I
marched into Sch^, the same (...) the Enemy (...) defeated, not far from it;
but that is over, let it c^^^^on you to for the future; could I have joined you
before the Engagement, (...) appearance, very few, if any, had escaped.

In my last Conference with you, I told you, that some of your Yo^n^ Men had
killed several Horses of ours near Sch^nectady* you prom^sed me that
satisfaction should be made, and that (...) should be restrained for the
future, in which I hope you (...) effectual Care.

In my way to this place I met Intelligence of a b^r^ Murder committed at
Deerfield in New England, and that three Indian^ (...) with this Government
were imprisoned there upon suspicion of the Fact; I caused the matter
immediately to be examined, and have (...) two Expresses to New England, to
give them ^he best satisfaction that I can gather by such Evidence as appears
to me here.

Since my arrival two small parties of the Mohaques came in from Canada, with
some Marks of their Success, by which I observe they retain that Courage, for
which they have been so long famed: They brought in one French Prisoner, whom
they have presented unto me, he informs me, that the Enemy lost eighty men of
that party which they had sent last Winter to destroy the Mohaques Castles, and
that thirty three more wounded were brought into Mount Royal, several whereof
since dyed, and that the French were upon quitting all their small Forts, to
strengthen their great Ones, and withal that they intended to Reinforce
Cadara^qui.

I have received an Information as if some of the Brethren are wavering, and
inclined to a Peace with the common Enemy, I desire to know the truth of that
matter, and am assured that such Thoughts must only arise from the ^^stigation
of the Jesuit M^let, which some of the Brethren have so long suffered to live
amongst them, and whose only Practice i^ to delude and betray them, let me
therefore advise you to remove that ^ll Person from amongst you.

I am now come to condole your Dead, and to ^ssur^ you of the Favor of Their
Sacred Majesty's, the great King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc. and in their Royal Names, as their ^ervant and Lieutenant here to
renew and confirm the ancient Covenant Chain not only in behalf of this
Province, but those of New England, Virginia, Maryland and Pennsilvania; and as
a Mark of their sacred Majesty's Esteem and Value which they have for your
Courage and steady Adherence to Their Interest; and as a Seal to this Covenant
Chain, which must ever be preserved Inviolable, I have brought you Presents
from Their Majesty's.

The Answer of the Five Nations to his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, etc. in
the City Hall of Albany, the 4th day of July, 1693.
Brother Cajenquirago;
WE are involved in a Bloody War, which causes us to sit i^ sorrow and grief:
And since we are about to speak o^ Matters of Import, we clear the Mouth and
Throat of the Interpretess, that she may speak our meaning plainly and truly to
you. Do therefore give her three Beavers.

Then having repeated some part of his Excellency's Speech to them yesterday,
said,

Brother Cajenquiragoe, We are much rejoiced that the great King and Queen of
England do take notice of us, so far as to extend their gracious Favors to us,
by so considerable a Present, for which we return our hearty Thanks, and more
especially for the Guns and Ammunition.

We are glad that our Brother Cajenquirago renews and confirms the Covenant
Chain, not only between us and this Government, but also for New England,
Virginia, Maryland and Pennsilvania, which Covenant shall forever be kept
inviolable by all the Five Nations as long as the SUN shall Shine. We pray that
our Brother Cajenquirago may have a watchful Eye, that none of those Collonies
hold correspondence with the common Enemy, but use their endeavors to destroy
them.

We heard nothing of that which you proposed yesterday concerning the Priest
Millet living in Oneyde, until we came to this Town; we forthwith made inquiry
amongst our Brethren the Oneydes, who told us there was an Indian sent with
Letters to Canada by Millet the Priest, which surprised us very much.

Brother Cajenquirago; You are our great Tree, whose Roots extend themselves to
the utmost parts of the Government. We desire you may not be disturbed when any
of our Prisoners, who are our Slaves, do mis^be^ave themselves, for it shall
never be countenanced by us, but all proper Methods shall be taken to prevent
the like Mis-behaviour for the future. And in like manner we beg, that care may
be taken, that none of the Prisoners you have do any harm, or correspond with
the Enemy, as we suspect was done by Chav^leer Deaux, and that he was sent to
Canada with Letters, by some of our Brethren.

B^other Cajenquirago, In former times our Propositions were quite otherwi^^:
Our Discourses were then of Peace, and giving of Presents to one another, but
now the ^ase is altered. Our Speeches are now of nothing but War, prompting one
another to (...): As for our parts we are resolved to stick close by the War to
the last drop of our Blood; and though we are tossed to and fro we will remain
steadfast to the last Man, according to our first Conclusion. This we acquaint
you of, our great ^other, for your own Satisfaction.

Brother Cajenquirago* W^ h^^ Information in our (...) ^rother Cajenquirago had
(...) received Commands from (...) King to be Governor of Pennsilvania, (...)
that you were fit^^^g out a Fleet to go and take Canada, this was extreme
joyful News to us, and all our Young Men, who were to be commanded by
Sodogarees, Sachim of the S^^n^k^^, were glad to end the War at one push, to
facilitate the Fleets success i^ subduing that place, to remove all our
Troubles, and make an end of this Bloodshed, but to ou^ great sorrow, now we
hear of no such design.

Brother Cajenquirago, You are the great flourishing Tree of our shelter, that
keeps the Covenant Chain bright, we have one Request to make, which is, that
you will be pleased to stay with us, and not return to England, since you are
acquainted with our ways and methods; and if there be any thing you have to
acquaint the great King and Queen withal, you may write to them, and not go
from us, for the King knows you to be a Wise man, and therefore will believe
you.

Brother Cajenquiragoe; We are very glad that the Province of Pennsilvania is
come under your Government* We pray that you would bring some of their Men
hither with their Bows and Arrows, and Hatchets in their heads; for this is
the place of Action which ought to be defended

We are glad that the Showannoes (who were our Enemies) d^d make their
application to you last Fall for Protection, and that you sent them hither to
endeavor a Peace with us, as also, that you have been pleased to send
Christians along with them to their Country to conduct them back again; we wish
they were come to assist us against the common Enemy.

Brother Cajenquirago; We beg of you to let us have a Smith and Gunstock maker
in our Castle, to mend our Arms when they are broken.

Now we have done, only must tell you again, that we are extremely glad, and
roll and tumble in Joy that our great King and Queen have been pleased to
enlarge their Favors to us in our greatest Necessities, and that there is so
much Unity amongst all the Brethren.

Albany, the 4th of July, 1693
This Evening, after the Young Indians had ended their spot of killing the two
fat Bulls, (which were presented by his Excellency) with Bow and Arrow, and
roas^^^g and eating, his Excellency invited several of the chief S^chims and
Captain^ of most Not^ and Bravery on board his Majesty's Ketch Albrought,
riding before the (...) of Albany, and treated them to their extraordinary
satisfaction. Upon their desire, his excellency gave them and count of the
success the King of England has had against the French (...) beyond the great
Lake, o^ the great Victory which the English Fleet ob^ained against the French
the last Summer, with the part (...) that D^se^t (...) o^ great Fight that had
been on Land, where (...) in their Camp, because they would (...) have many men
were slain on both sides* but the (...) no N^ ye^ (...) Summers Action.

H^s Excellency d^ ^^courage them to ^^nifest their Valor and Courage against
the common Enemy, as their Ancestors have done. Reminded them of the Priest
Millet, that they must expect that all their Designs will be destroyed so long
as he is kept amongst them, and therefore advised them speedily to remove that
dangerous Person.

His Excellency also bid them be mindful of what he said to them, and true to
the Covenant they have renewed. Which they all promised to observe and keep
inviolable. Whereupon, as a Seal thereunto, his Excellency ordered the firing
of five Guns, which they answered with the like Number of Shouts.

It was particularly observed, that Odongaowa, the long Oneyde, who was the
only suspected Indian, and the most particular Friend of the Jesuit, did rise
up, and sing a Song of War, (which after their way is the same with a Vow) that
he would now presently go and fight the French, Praying Indians of Canada, and
promised further to his Excellency, that he would take particular care that no
Letters from Canada should come to the Priests hands, but would have them
secured at their first coming, and sent down to his Excellency to be read, that
the Poison may be discovered, which is hid therein. Whereupon they went on
Shore, with great Satisfaction. His Excellency ordered them a Salute of five
Guns, which they answered with so many Shouts, after their wild manner.

Albany, the 4th of July, 1693.
His Excellency sent for the Sachims of the five Nations, to have a private
Conference, and said,

Brethren, It is high time for you go home to your Castles, and see that they
be secured from all attempts of the Enemy. I design to go to New York, to take
charge of that Trust the great King, my Master, has reposed in me.

But I must tell you before we part, that I cannot but take Notice, that you
have omitted the answering these three Proposals which I made to you the day
before yesterday.

First, about the Horses, which your Young Men have killed; I do hear of no
Satisfaction yet made, but Complaints come to me every day of this nature.

Then relating to the Priest Millet at Oneyde, whom the Brethren of Oneyde do
still harbor among them. I must tell you again, that he betrays you, and all
your Councils; and that you may see that I desire not to diminish your Number,
I am willing to give you a pretty Indian Boy, in lieu of the old Priest; and
accordingly the Boy was brought and delivered them.

And then concerning the two Expresses that I sent to New England, about those
two Indians detained in Prison there upon suspicion of the Murder committed at
Deerfield.

The Sachims of the five Nations answered,
Brother Cajenquirago; We forgot that Article concerning the Horses, but shall
take care, that whoever kills any Horse^ or Cattle belonging to the Christians,
the Person or Persons offending shall make Satisfaction for the same.

As for the Jesuit Mi^let, the Oneyde Sachim said, He would (...) Promise
relating to that matter, which was, That so soon as the (...) Messenger did
return from Canada, all the Letters and Papers should (...) from him, and
forthwith brought to our Brother Cajenquirago he^ (...) Priest shall see them.
I am willing to take the Boy in Exchang^ (...) Priest, but the Priest must stay
at Oneyde till the Return of (...) from Canada. I desire the Boy may stay here
until we bring the (...) which shall be so soon as the said Messeng^r returns

We are very Thankful to you, our g^e^^ Brother Caj^nquirago* (...) sending two
^xpresses to New England about that Accident at Deerfi^ld and our People
imprisoned there We doubt not but in a short time i^ will be made appear, that
the Canada Indians have committed this Mu^^der; and the Brethren of
New England, who are in Covenant with us, must have patience* till such cases
can be found out* We doubt not but the Governor of New England is a Man of
that Prudence and Conduct, who will not be so hasty, since it cannot be long
undiscovered

Brother Cajenquirago, We acquaint you, that it is proposed by all (...)
N^^ions to make Peace with the Dionondadees, a Nation (...) that are in
Alliance with the French of Canada, which will strengthen us and weaken the
Enemy; the S^nneks, who live nearest to them, have undertaken to effect this
business, and do take Presents of Wampum from the rest of the Nations to
confirm (...)* we desire your co^currence in the Matter, and that as you are
our eldest ^rother you ^end Tokens also, and receive them into the Covenant
Chain.

Whereupon his Excellency replied, That he approved of then Proposals, and was
willing they should proceed to make Peace with the Dionondadees, and for that
purpose gave them a Belt of Wampum

Whereupon the Indians gave ^^ve Shouts.

Albany, the 5th of July, 1693.
After the private Conference, his Excellency this Morning did further
recommend to the chief Sachims and Captains of the five Nations the necessity
of their speedy return to their several Castles, their keeping continual Scouts
to observe the Enemy's Motion.

It is reported, they are drawing up their Forces toward Cadaracqui (which is
their uppermost Fort upon the Lake, deserted by them about four Years ago.)

That h^s Excellency did not know whether the Enemy's design was to make an
Attempt against the uppermost Nations, the Onondages* (...) and S^^neks, or
upon the lowermost, the Mo^aques and (...). Did recommend to them to join the
Forces of the upper most Nations* as it was formerly agreed to, if attacked,
promising to take care of the lower most Nations, if his Excellency have but
timely Notice of their approach, as he did last Winter.

His Excellency wished them a safe Return and good Success in all their
Undertakings against the common Enemy, assuring them of the great King and
Queens Favor; nothing doubting but that all of them, as Men of Courage and
Honor, will stick close to their Majesty's Interest, as they have always done
since the first settlement of this Country, equal to their Promises, and the
Covenant Chain, which they have now renewed; And bid them Farewell.

Whereupon the Speaker of the five Nations, in behalf of them, returned hearty
Thanks for his Excellency's great Favors, and his care for their Safety,
assuring his Excellency, That they would strictly observe his Commends, and by
their future ^ol^^^ss and Behavior against (...) Enemy, manifest their true
Affections and Z^^^ to his Excellency's (...) and Government. And thereupon
made ^^ve Shouts, and took leave

His Excellency having private Account of the great Services of particular
Sachims and Captains to this Government, sent for them to his Chamber ^oart,
commended their Bravery, repeated his (...) Recommendations, and presented them
by his own Hands with fashionable laced Coats and Hats, and several other
Presents* suitable to their Services. Which they received as a more particular
sign of His Excellency's special Favor, repeating their former Vows; and so
departed, with Signs and Expressions of perfect Satisfaction, more than ever
was observed in any former Treaty.

His Excellency's Speech to the River Indians at the City Hall of Albany, the 6
of July, 1693.
CHILDREN;
THis is the first time I have seen you since my coming to the Government, though
you are seated near this Garrison, and derive your Protection from it.

I have now sent for you, to let you know what part of your Conduct and
Behavio^r I like, and what I dislike* Some of you have done well and like
valiant Soldiers in joining with the five Nations, to attack the Enemy in
Canada; This deserves Commendation.

But on the other hand, its very unlike Soldiers and dutiful Children, to draw
out the whole Force of your Castles to h^^t leaving your Women and Children
exposed to the Accidents and Hardships which attend a Country engaged in War
against so watchful an Enemy as this is.

For the future you must give notice, and have permission to go on these
Occasions, and take care to leave sufficient Force behind you.

There is another stupendous Folly you are guilty of* when your Hunting is
over, you will sit down near some place, wherein a few days ^ou drink out what
has cost you the labor of some Months, and then ^ome home Beggars, as you
went. The (...) of (...) appeared lately unto you at Deerfield, and I hope will
caution you for the future. I must advise you, That from henceforth you bring
all the Effects of your Hunting into your own Country, which by pruden^
management will support you the rest of the Year.

I am informed, the Enemy comes in small Parties, and does (...) here, killing
some, taking others Captive^ it is your Duty, and will be your Honor to send
out Parties to clear the Woods, and knock such on the Head; and for your
encouragement you shall receive a Reward of Fifty Shillings for every Head you
shall bring in, which is killed within three Miles of this Garrison or
Schenectady.

I now renew the Covenant with you, and take you under the Pro^tection of the
great King and Queen of England, etc. and expect (...) will endeavor to
dese^ve the favor of their August Majesty's, by your strict adherence to this
Covenant, and your due Obedience to all the Directions and Commands of my Self,
or others their Majesty's Governors of this Province. Gave some Presents.

The Answer of the River Indians to His Excellency the 6th of July, 1693.
Interpreted by R. Sanders.
FATHER;
WE thank you for your great Care over us, and we shall observe all your
Directions and Commands now given us; You are that high Tree, under whose
Branches we shelter, whereby our Old Men, Women and Children have been
protected in our absence, from the late Incursion of the French, our common
Enemy* we shall not for the (...) abroad a hunting, or against the Enemy,
without leaving a (...) Guard. We will make frequent Rounds from this City, on
both sides the River, to discover the skulking Enemy, and doubt not but our
Young Men shall receive the promised Reward when they bring in the Heads of
those lurking Foxes.

Father, We give our Hearty Thanks for sending two Expresses to New England on
our behalf; we assure you that we are innocent of the mischief done at
Deerfield, and so are likewise those Prisoners that are there in Custody.
Believe us, our Hearts are good, and we desire only to Hoe under your
Protection in peace and quietness.

Father* We return you also our Hearty Thanks for renewing and making ^ht that
Covenant Chain* We will always oil and g^ease it, that it shall (...), but be
kept inviolable with you, our Father, and with all the Breth^^n of New England,
Virginia, Maryland and Pennsilvania And thereupo^ ^resented His Excellency with
half a Belt of W^mpum

FINIS.

