A FUNERAL ELEGY Humbly Dedicated to the Renowned Memory of the HONORABLE,
Thomas Danforth Esquire. Of Cambridge, Sometimes Deputy GOVERNOR in the Colony of
the Massachusetts Bay, and President of the Province of Main; and One of His
Majesty's Honorable COUNCIL, Judge of the Superior Court in the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England; Who (after He had long Served His
Generation by the Will of GOD in several High Stations) Did to our
inconceivable loss, but His Unparalled Gain, Rest from all His Labors, on
the Sacred Day of Rest, the Memorable 5th. of November, Anno Domini. 1699.
Aetatis Suae, 77. Ho^s, (...): Mors, Pax.
JUDGE of the Quick and Dead I am not, Yet
HIM and my self should very much forget
If that I should decline the Bench to take
Nor give my sense and sentence of this Fate.
Pardon me, Sir; 'Twere better first to Die
Than prove Disloyal to your (...)
It Is Conscience gives Commission not to be Mute
Justice and Gratitude shall Execute.
The Isle which ( Alfred sings) no Help desires,
Yet all the World supply from Her requires
Able to Glut King Solomon with Pleasures
And Surfeit Great Augustus with Her Treasures:
Whence the First Christian Emperor did spring
And (...) that, Many an Hero, Many a King
Rich in all Merchandise: More Rich in Men:
((...) such an (...) in the (...))
And whence New England (...) It did (...)
Him, to this Land who was of Glorious Use.
He, Nature drew from Him whom Grace Divine,
Rather than Worldly Grandieur, made to Shine.
Who urged to Knight Him, Him, He followed not
Followed a Greater King, to Desert Lot;
Like (...), when He saw Saints to Go
Would fain be Knight of their Winged Order too.
Such was His Father: And poor Framingham
Lost a Choice Lecture when He hither came
By Prophets Preached; But He procured the same.
After His Father's Death This Son was blessed,
Rudeness and Lewdness much He did Detest;
Feared God from's Youth, like good Prince Obadiah
An Early Convert, tike Renowned Josiah.
Glowing His Love; most Ve^^ment His Desire
Like Coals of Juniper and Flames of Fire,
To Jacobs Portico: Angels, Powers, Life, Death
Heights, Depths, could not put either out of breath
(...) and Rigged with the Christian (...):
Well under gift with found Sincerity:
In every State, undelug'd, could Sail Right;
His Anchor held, on something out of Sight.
Left not his (...), when He Promotion wan
His (...) Cheered the Heart of God and Man.
His Speech well Seasoned both for Time and Grace
For in His Soul, most Sav'ry Salt had Place.
He had (...), He practiced to the last,
What (...), in Spiritual mould to Cast.
God's (...) Amongst those that on Him call
'Mongest (...), an Expert General:
Nobly Seraphick, and most Rapturous,
In Prayer; A Secon'd Theodosius.
What Is Parent came Three Thousand Miles, to (...)
That, to neglect, He dare'd not Count no Sin.
God's Temple had Him, a Professor Pressed
Gods (...) found Him Young, a Worthy (...)
'Twas Time, a Vine Grew up on His House side.
Washington's Halls afford the Saint a Bride.
Precious as Gold Their (...), yet as Behooved
'Twas by both Fining Pot and Furnace Proved;
Them Ten Rare Pledges, only fledged, forsook
And the Directest way to Heaven Took:
Amongst whom count Chief the Famous Samuel
Whose Excellencies England both can Tell.
During that Wondrous Term of Seven times Seven,
Co heirs They Lived, of the Grace of Heaven.
Just in the Fiftieth year of Jubilee
His Aged Virtuous Comfort went out free,
Yet not so Free, as He ^o Follow was,
And to over take Her, mends His Heavenly Pace.
'Twas His High (...) when first He saw that (...)
Of Earthly (...)
Its Dreadful Fiery (...) even
Of Difficulty in the way to Heaven;
That Sin bred Fate, cannot curse of Law out-root
A Gospel Course, He found might greatly do it.
Saw on His Hand that (...) Venomous:
To Alms it tempered, Made a Treacle thus
Honors to seek or shun H'was never buisy.
His Head could bear Great Height and not be Dizzy.
Blessed by Blessed Wilson (...) Bench when sat
Regaled with the Anagram, Handsome for that.
Edicts, Examples, and Sharp Punishment
States, warping from their Standard ought prevent.
Sagacious He betimes to Meet and Mate
Ill Humors, threatening to subvert the State.
(...) fell They who would said New England flat;
Thank GOD and the MAN (...) Little Band, for That.
Him, and His Country, who would Wast, in Have
He made Repent, Their (...) came in so fast.
Iv'e some imes heard Him say that He had ever
As lieve die by the Ax as by the Fever;
In a Good cause, and with a Conscience Good:
For Church and State, so Truths Great Champion stood.
Like Samuel Rode the (...) Judged each Tribe,
And like (...).
So Good, Great, Wise, (...) Steady Trusty, Free;
We Will never want Men when we have Such as Thee.
His Thoughts Pure Spirits were, He therefore used
Physician like, to give them, well infused
In some sweet proper (...) of Wit,
Some Proverb, Story, Simile, most fit.
When Men of Sense addres'd Him; 'twas His fashion
Reasons to show, and leave the Application!
And when some nimble Case out ran His (...)
Still Gave forth Sentence, (...) a (...).
Dangers, as soon as meant He often Suspected
Forgers, He often Sagaciously Detected:
At Helm in Tempests, yet His Courage Stout
'Though Dangers were Extreme, would ne'ver give out.
Of Them, like Nicodemus He was One,
And stood like Him, stout Protestant alone
Against a Committee, whose blind Indignation
Condemned the Best Men of that Generation.
I know not where to stop; His Course was thus
To make New-Englands Journal Glorious:
Has stood our CHurches Pillar ever since,
Not without Envy, for His Recompense.
Harvard! For Honorable, Thou must go;
Who was thy Steward, Treasurer, was foe.
Charged and Discharged were the Quarter Bills,
Drained not thy Stock, but with large Hundreds fills
A Bounteous Patron unto many a Plant.
In thy (...), whose Means were scant.
Resolves so to continue, 'Spite of Death,
By Lands and Rents, His last (...) witnesses.
Bring Tribute to thy Benefactors Dust
To be Ungrateful is to be Unjust.
Church Messengers Christ's Glory are, so He
(In that Relation,) often was seen to be;
Nor was 't a Shame for a Professed Divine,
To be beholden to His Golden Mine.
So well-read in all Points, Men of best fashion,
Unto His Judgment paid a Veneration
When Church Disturbances required His Best
He signally with great Success was Blessed.
In's Family as exact Order's Seen,
As if that it a Sovereign State had been:
Reading, Instruction, Prayer, and Repetition
So constant were, You Would envy their Condition.
From Families would Spring New Englands Bliss
Might all be taught and Governed as was His.
Great is the Loss of such a Men as This!
Full of Good Works, not therefore void of Fears;
No Works so Good but call for Fasts and Tears;
Justification through his Saviors Blood, --
And Righteousness, (His Aged Souls last Food,
His Readings, Meditations, here, were spent
So Views His Title, and Receives Content.
Like Solomon, All Gainful Arts He trys
To Dye in Christ, Best Gain He finds; so Dies.
His Arms, On Gold, the single opened Eye,
(Man's Noble Part) imports Sincerity,
And Wisdom too: That Gemm, the Di'mond dwells
Invulnerate, 'though it cutts all things else.
He left with his Children Dear a Numerous Race,
Lord! Give 'em Portions of their Grandsire's Grace
Thousands up springing so, in His rich Heap
Shall Love Thy Name, and Thy Commandments keep.
John Dunforth.

Amen.

