A TRUE COPY OF THE OATHS That are appointed by Act of Parliament, made in the
First Year of Their present Majesty's Reign; to be Taken instead of the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance, and the Declaration appointed to be made, Repeated
and Subscribed
I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to Their Majesty's, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

So help me God, etc.

I A. B. do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, that Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do Declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

So help me God, etc.

I A. B. do solemnly and sincerely in the presence of God, profess, testify
and declare, that I do believe that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there
is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body
and Blood of Christ, at or after the Consecration thereof, by any person
whatsoever, and that the Invocation or adoration of the Virgin Mary or any
other Saint, and the sacrifice of the Mass as they are now used in the Church
of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous. And I do solemnly in the presence of
God, profess, testify and declare, that I do make this Declaration and every
part thereof in the plain and ordinary sense of the words read unto me, as they
are commonly understood by English Protestants, without any Evasion,
Equivocation or mental Reservation whatsoever, and without any Dispensation
already granted me for this purpose by the Pope, or any Authority or Person
whatsoever, or without any hope of any such Dispensation from any Person or
Authority whatsoever, or without thinking that I am or can be acquitted, before
God or Man, or absolved of this Declaration or any part thereof, although the
Pope or any other Person or Persons or Power whatsoever should dispense with,
or annul the same or declare that it was null and void from the beginning.


