A TRUE COPY OF THE OATHS That are appointed by Act of Parliament, made in the
First Year of Their present Majesty's Reign; to be Taken instead of the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance, and the Declaration appointed to be made, Repeated
and Subscribed.
I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to Their Majesty's, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. So help me God, etc.

I A. B. do Swear, That I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest, and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, that Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
Excommunicated or Deprived by the P open, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do Declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate, has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. So
help me God, etc.

I A. B. do solemnly and sincerely in the presence of God, profess, testify
and declare, that I do believe that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper there
is not any (Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body
and Blood of Christ, at or after the Consecration thereof, by any person
whatsoever (...) that (...) or adoration of the Virgin Mary or any other Saint,
and the sacrifice of the Mass as they are now used in the Church of Rome are
Superstitious and Idolatrous. And I do solemnly in the presence of God,
prefess, testify and declare that I do make this Declaration and every part
thereof in the (...) and ordinary (...) of the words read unto me, as they are
commonly understood by English Protestants without (...) Evasion, Equivocation
or mental Reservation whatsoever, and without any Dispensation already granted
me for this purpose by the Pope, or any Authority or Person whatsoever, or
without any hope of any such Dispensation from any Person or Authority
whatsoever, or without thinking that I am or can be acquitted before God or
Man, or absolved of this Declaration or any pope thereof, (...) Pope or any
other Person or Persons or Power whatsoever should disputee with, or (...) the
same, or declare that it was null and void from the beginning.

Boston, Printed for, and Sold by Benjamin Harris, at the London-Coffee-House
1692.


