May 28th. 1706. To my Worthy Friend, Mr. James Bayley, Living (if Living) in
Roxbury, A POEM.
MY Old Companion! and my Friend!
I cannot Come, and therefore send.
Some pity should be shown to One
That Is heavy laden with the Stone;
That Is wearied out with fits of pain
Returning like Clouds after Rain.
Alas! my Brother, what can I
Do for thee, more than Pray and Cry,
To Counsel, and to comfort try,
And bear a part by Sympathy?
Excuse me, though I Write in Verse,
It Is usual on a Dead man's Hearse:
Thou many a Death have under-gone,
And Elegies made of thine own.
Our Saviors Funeral Obsequies,
One Celebrates before His eyes;
And He the Ointment kindly takes,
That for His Burial she makes.
Two Saints arrayed in glorious dress,
Appear, and talk of His Decease;
Whose Death from thine did take the Sting,
And wholesome make that Poison thing.
And I have seen thine hand, and Pen,
Play on that Cockatrices den
In measured Lines, as if inspired,
And Paroxisms had only fired
An holy Soul with flaming zeal,
That flesh-pains it could scarcely feel.
What, in one breath, both Live and Dye,
Groan, Laugh, Sigh, Smile, Cry, Versifie?
Is this the Stone? are these the pains
Of that Disease that plagues the Reins?
That slyly steals into the bladder?
Then bites, and stings like to the Adder.
Is this the Scourge of Studious men?
That leaves unwhipt scarce five of ten
And Whips them once, and over again.
In Christ's School there is smart Discipline,
To make His Scholars more divine;
Blessed they who do not take offense,
Whose joy lies in the Future Tense;
Who when they are in most distress,
Love Christ the more, and not the less.
His Yoke is easy, burden light,
To them that understand things right;
And none will afterward complain,
Who Hell escape, and Heaven obtain.
Well! if this Stone should do its worst,
It cannot make thee be accursed:
For if thou should be Stoned to Death,
And this way Pelted out of Breath,
Thou will like Stephen fall asleep,
And free from pain for ever keep.
Great Pains, with as great Patience, may
Fall little short of Martyrs Pay:
For Christ's Rewards are all of Grace,
No Merit but His, in either case.
Our Lord thee good Example offered,
Who learned Obedience while He suffered,
Who for the joy was set before Him,
Endured the Cross He bore, and bore Him,
Who though He Prayed it might be gone,
Yet also said, Thy will be done.
That Stone which builders did refuse,
For thy Foundation choose, and use.
Think also when thine Agonies
Are most intense, and force loud cries;
They are not worthy to compare
With those that Christ for thee did bear:
Yea, think what Christ for thee has done,
Who took an harder, heavyer Stone
Out of thine Heart; and it is gone.
Who did thy Wounded Spirit cure
Of Soul-pains, that none can endure,
And this is easyer to be borne,
For in the Flesh abides this thorn:
And if Christ do not it remove,
Sufficient is His Grace, and Love,
To give thee comfort, and Support,
Because this pain is light, and short;
And works for thee the Glory great,
That does exceed in length, and weight.
Besides, these Torments cant compare,
With Torments that Eternal are:
For they are utterly undone,
That roll the Sisypean Stone;
Not they whose pains are limited,
And are released, as soon as dead.
Add one thought more; that this distress
Makes thee partake of Holiness:
The more the flesh is hacked, and hewed,
The more Corruption is subdued.
Life is to thee the less endeared,
And Death by (...) is the less feared:
For it is but once thou have to dye,
And then Live to Eternity.
Thy weary Body shall have Rest,
Thy Soul from thence forth shall be blessed;
Thy dust be (...); for Christ shall find it,
And leave thi^ cruel Stone behind it.
One Stone Gold's truth does bring to light;
Another makes Iron sharp, and bright:
A third our grain does Pulverize,
And Separate the chaff likewise.
Thine, all these profits bring to thee,
In nobler sense than the other three.
Thine proves thy Grace to be Sincere;
Of rust, and dullness, does thee clear.
And makes thee Watch, and Pray, and long
To change thy groans, for (...) Song.
Though grinding pains thy nature bruise,
They fit thee for thy Masters use:
And when thy dust shall be resin'd;
Thou shall be neither pained, nor pined;
Nor full of petrifying juice,
Hard Studies, Heats, and Colds produce.
Then shall hid Manna be thy fare,
In which no gritt, nor gravel are;
Yea, Christ will give thee a White Stone,
With a New Name engraved thereon,
To the Enjoyer only Known.
Lord, once thou said, Arise and Walk;
Thy Words Were Works; Mine are but Ta^^
Be pleased to bid thy son, Good cheer!
And say, Thy Sins forgiven are!
Then, Sink, or Swim; or Live, or Die,
He will thee greatly Glorify.
Say so to me too, so will I.
A Man of Sorrow once Thou wast,
And still a fellow-feeling have,
So to Thy Pity, I commend
My self, and my afflicted Friend!
Nicholas Noyes


