THE English Physician. CONTAINING, Admirable and Approved REMEDIES For several
of the most usual DISEASES. Fitted to the meanest Capacity,

By N. Culpepper, Doctor of Physic.

Licensed, According to Order.

BOSTON, Reprinted for Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the BIBLE, near the
Corner of School-House-Lane. 1708.

TO THE Reader.
I Have here made Public to (...) World, some of my choicest (...) in the Art
of Physic, which had once thought never to Publ^^^ but the Importunities of
the Publ^^ Good, has so prevailed with me, above my private Interest, to serve
my (...) and Station in which I live. Be (...) and good to your Poor Neighbor,
(...) which you may expect the Blessing of God. And in so doing you will Compel
(...) to Oblige the World with several (...) useful things, which I shall fit
to the common Capacity of all People.

I am Your Humble Servant, N. Culpepper.

THE English PHYSICIAN.
Aches, and Lameness in the Body, Joy^ts, L^mbs and Bones.
An approved Searcloth for all Aches.
TAke Burgundy Pitch, one Pound; White Virgins Wax four Ounces; white
Frankincense, two Ounces, powdered: Melt them all together in (...) Pipkin,
^^^^^ing all well together; then pour out all into a Basin, or Pan of Water;
then anoint thy Hands with Butter, and make thy Plaist or Searcloth into Rolls.

An Excellent Ointment for the same.
Take the Gall of an Ox, Whi^^ wine Vinegar, Oil of Excester, Aq^^^ Vitae, of
each a like quantity, b^^ them gently on a Fire. Keeping scum'd, till it grow
clammy, and w^^^ this bathe well the aching part* (...) it in well, by rubbing
it in, before Fire, with a warm Hand, Morning Evening, still laying a Linen
Cloth upon it.

For Bone-ach, and the Gout.
Take of the best Aqua Vitae. (...) Oil of Bays, of each a like quantit^ mix
them well together, and (...) the part well with a warm Hand before the Fire,
and bind on it a Linen Cloth, Morning and Evening.

For the Joint Ach, and the Gout, most Excellent.
Take the Juice of Sage, Aqua Vitae, the Oil of Bays, Vinegar, Mustard, and of
an Ox^^ Gall, of each a like quantity, put them all together in a large Ox
Bladder. Tie it fast, and chafe it up and down with your hand, during one hour
and half, then keep it for your Use, and anoint the grieved part Morning and
Evening.

A Process against all Pains and Aches in the Back, Hips, Sides, Knees, or any
part of the Body.
Take first Pil^ Foetida, one dram, to Purge now and then, and take them in
Syrup of Roses; after Purging, procure Sweat thus.

Take Guaiacum, one Ounce, Sarsaparilla, one Ounce and a half, the Root of
Enulacampain, one Ounce; boil them in a Pottle of small Ale, till half be
consumed, then drink thereof a Quart in a Hot House, and Sweat often; Then in
the House, bathe all the Body with this Oleaginous B^lsome.

Oil of Amber, Oil of Turpentine, Oil of Foxes, Oil of Excester, and Oil of
Chamomil, of each a like quantity, and mix it with some Brandy.

And if his Pains and Aches fall out to be most painful in the Night (as many
times they do.)

Then at Night let him take this Potion, Syrrup of Poppy, 3 Drachms; Syrrup of
Betony. one Dram and a half; Waters of Bugloss and Sage, of each an Ounce,
mix them well together.

This Cured a Man Perfectly, when he was ^^ame all over his Body.
Take the Gall (...) an Heifer, for (...) Man; the Gall of (...) Steer for a
Woman Brandy, of each (...) like quantity, b^^^ them together 'ti^^ it begin to
be clammy, and before the Fire with a warm hand strongly bathe the Party
Morning and Evening, th^^ he be whole.

To heal and strengthen weak Limbs (...) Children, and those which cannot stand
(...) Most wonderful and Excellent (...) cure the Rickets.
Take Sage, sweet Marjoram, Rosemary, Time, Chamomil, Hysop, Fever few,
Lavender, Balm, Mint, Wormwood, Rue, Winter Savory, and Bays of each a handful,
beat them together to a Mass very well in a stone Mortar, then strain out the
Juice and put it in a double Glass, the which stop well, and pa^^e it all over
with Dough, and set it in an Oven with Household Bread, and when it is drawn
break off all the Past, and if the Juice be thick break the Glass, and put the
Juice into a Galls-pot: And when you use it, take the quantity of 2 Spoonfuls
of it, and put to it as much of the Marrow of an Ox Leg, melt them together,
stir them well, and add to it a little Brandy; and Morning and Evening anoint
well before a Fire the Child's Arms, Sides, Thighs, Legs, Knees, Feet and
Joints, bathing it well in with a warm Hand. Then give it some Syrup of
Rheubarb (to open the Obstructions of the Liver) and mingle it with two ounces
of Mint-water, mix it well, and give it the Child fasting. This will mightily
strengthen the Limbs, and make the Child to stand and go. Probat.

Apoplexy to Cure.
TAke of the best Aqua-vitae well rectified from Phlegm one Pint Oil of Vitriol
one Spoonful, mix the^ and let him drink thereof one Spoonful first in the
Morning, and another last at Night.

Then let him Sweat in a Sto^^ twice a week, and every time there^^ bathe him
with Oleaginous Balso^ This is Excellent.

For the Joynt-ach and Numbness.
Take six Spoonfuls of Dragon-water, dissolve in it one dram of M^th^^date;
drink the same draught three Mornings together fasting, and swear two Hours
after it. (...) Cures.

Agues and Fevers to Cure.
A rare Secret to Cure all Agues whatsoever
TAke Venice Turpentine half an Ounce; Incorporate it with as much Mastick
beaten into fine Powder, as will make it a Plaster; then take of it and spread
it on a piece of Sheeps Leather cut round, and lay it on the Navel pretty warm,
a day before the Fit comes, Probat.

Against an Ague.
Take a Pint of Milk, set it on the Fire, and when it boyls put in a pint of
Ale, take off the Curd, then put into it nine heads of Cardius, then boil it
till half be wasted, then to every quarter of a pint put in a good Spoonful of
Wheat Flour and a quarter of a Spoonful of gross Pepper, stir it well, and
take that half Pint an Hour before the Fit comes, and be sure to Sweat him in
his Bed upon the taking of it.

A Plaster against an Ague.
Take a piece of Leather pricked full of Holes, spread it over with (...)
Turpentine, and on that spread all over Rue and Frankincense, beaten into
Powder, of each a like quantity, then bind it on the Wrist a little before the
Fit comes, and let it lie till the Fit be gone.

Against a Tertian Fever.
Take(at the coming of the cold Fit) half a pint of the distilled water of
Germander: It helps assuredly; for Germander is styled by Physicians, the
Scourge of a Fever.

Against all burning and pestilent^^ Fevers.
Take of the Herb Fluellin cut sma^^ and infuse it 2^ Hours in White Wind then
Distill it, and drink of this Distillation, with three Drops of Oil (...)
Vitriol in every Draught, when he (...) thirsty. This has cured Old and Young
that took it.

An excellent Process of Cure of all Quotidian, Tertian, Quartane, Pe^^^^ent^^
and Burning Fevers and Agues.
Take (at the first access, Purge the Patient with this Excellent Medicine
Aloes three drachms, Myrrh on Dram; Saffron half a Dram, Sugar Three
Drachms; and beat them well together, then infuse them in a Pint of White Wind
over Night, and give it two several Mornings, half a Pint at a time.

His Drink a Julep.
And for his ordinary Drink, when he is Thirsty, let him use this Excellent
Julep. Take White Wind Vinegar half a pint, Rose Water 1 pint, Conduit or
Fountain Water, 1 Pint; Seethe them together with a Pound of Sugar.

Phlebotomy.
If the Sick be high Colored, then let him Blood as a chief Remedy; if no
Spots appear in his (...)

Sleep to Procure.
If he want Sleep, Take Syrup of white Poppy, one ounce; Distilled water of
Lettice, two ounces, mix them and take it at Night, for Sleep cools the Body,
and prevents motion, and Motion is one of the Principal causes of heat.

Sore Mouth to Heal.
If the Mouth be sore, Take one Pennyworth of red Sage, gros^ cut, one handful
of French Barley beaten, Roach Allom one ounce: Boil all these together in a
Pint and half o^ Spring Water then dulcify it before it be cold with Honey, and
therewith wash the Mouth, and gargle the Throat.

To make the Costive Laxative.
If he be Costive, make him Laxative with my Pilulae Magist^al^s, nothing
comparable.

His Diet.
His Diet must be Broths of Chickens, Knuckles of Mutton or Veal; but no Flesh,
for that increases (...) feeds the Fever.

Against a new Ague.
Take one dram of pure Toba^^^ in the Leaf, infuse it all Night in ha^ a pint
of White Wind, then strain and drink it, fasting two Hours after it. This will
purge Phlegm a^ Choler thoroughly.

Against a burning Fever.
Take distilled Wall-nuts, a w^^^ or two before Mid-Summer, and give of that
water one ounce and a half a^^ a time, an Hour before the Fit. (...) Cures.

To keep the Belly open in a Fever.
Take the Decoction of Prunes four ounces, wherein dissolve Manna one ounce;
then when they boil up, distrain them, and drink four ounces o^ the Liquor
fasting.

An excellent Julep in all Fevers.
Take what quantity of Prunes y^^ please, bruise them and distill them, and keep
the Distillation in a great Glass, with a Tap in it at the bottom; then take
four ounces of Prune-water, Juice of Oranges, Syrup of Gilli-flowers two
ounces, a few drops of Spirit of Vitriol; mix them, and let the Patient drink
two or three spoonfuls at a time often.

Note, That all Volatile Salts of Rue, Sage, Marjoram, Rosemary, and the like
being drunk in Wine, and Sweat upon it, cures all Fevers. Van. Helmont^.

To preserve your Juice of Oranges, buy your Oranges when they be cheapest, and
good ^^ore; then press out their Juice, then clarify it, and put it in a great
Glass, that has a Tap and Spicket in the bottom of it; then cover the Juice in
the Glass one Inch thick with good sweet Sallet Oil; and so you may preserve
your Juice as long as you will.

To strengthen the Heart in all Fevers mightily.
Take of the dried Leaves of Mary-gold-flowers, beat them to powder, then take
Turpentine and Rosin each a like quantity; then put them into an equal quantity
of fine Hogs Lard, and incorporate them well together over the Fire, then
spread thereof on a shield plaster of Leather, and lay it on the Breast over
the Heart, and (...) will strengthen the heart unspeak^^

Bleeding to Stop in any Part, Inwardly, Outwardly.
To stop the Bleeding at the Nose.
TAke Bole Armoniack, stamp finely to Powder; then blow some of it with a Quill
into the (...) Nostril of the Patient, and (...) presently. Probat.

Against P^ssing of Blood.
Take Sheeps Milk (highly praise herein above all) Fasting 4 ounce mix with it
a dram of fine Bole Armoniack in Powder, and drink it up.

Against the Bloody Flux, and P^ssi^^ of Blood.
Take Conserve of Roses 1 ounce Crocus Martis 1 Scruple, mix the^ well, then
take it on the point of Knife in a Morning fasting, and do (...) three several
Mornings together (...) whole Probat.

Against all Fluxes in Men and Women.
Take Syrup of Roses, and Syrup of Mints, 1 ounce of each, Bole Armoniack in
Powder 1 Dram, incorporate them in red Wine, make a Potion and drink it off.

To cool the Bood, Liver and Reins.
Take Strawberry-Leaves, with the roots, what you will, bo^l them in white wine
and Water, then strain them, and drink off the Decoction fasting, (...) pint.

Judgment on the color of the Blood.
If the Blood come Wheyish, it comes from the weakness of the Reins.

If it come from fullness and largeness of Veins, then the party feels no pain.

If it come from breaking a Vein then the Blood comes more abundantly.

If it come by some sharp Humor gnawing the Veins, then the Blood comes by
little and little, and the Reins are pained.

If the Blood appear red of Color, and white Water flows with it, then the
Blood is sound.

If bubling Blood issue, the Stomach (...) the Party is Diseased.

If the Blood be green, then (...) Heart is grieved.

Against spitting of Blood.
Take Mastick and Olibanum, (...) Powder, 2 Scruples of each, conser^^^ of red
Roses 2 Ounces, Diascordiu^^ half an ounce; mix them together, (...) make an
Electuary, then take there^^ (...) Morning and Evening on the point (...) a
knife, as much as a Nutmeg at a time

Against Passing of Blood.
Take the Juice of Purslain, make (...) into Pills with Gumtragacanth an Gum
Arabic, of each alike in Powder and take 5 Pills at a time, It helps

To stop the Bleeding caused by Leeches.
Take a Bean, slit it in twain, take away the Skin, and lay it on a place where
a Leech has drawn, that bleedeth too much, and it will stop the bleeding.

Against spitting and vomiting of Blood.
Take of the Seed of St. John's Wort, with its Herb and Flowers, and boil them
in White Wind, and drink of the Decoction (being strained) it helps, though it
come by Bruises, Falls, breaking a Vein, or howsoever.

To expel Blood or Choler out of the Stomach.
Take 2 Drachms of the Seeds of St. John's Wort beaten into Powder, and drunk
in a little Broth, does gently perform it.

To stop Bleeding, or casting of Blood in a Consumption.
Take 3 Spoonfuls of the Juice of Sage, with a little Honey fasting, it
presently does stop it.

Against the spitting of Blood with a Cough.
Take Bole Armoniack, Terra Sigilla^, white and red Corral, of each half a
Dram, all powdered, Sugar of Roses half an ounce, stir them well together,
with the white of an Egg, make a Looch thereof, and take a little often.

A Clyster against a sharp Humor, that ^iss^eth out Blood instead of O^dure.
Take one pint and a half of new Milk, boil it to a pint with a handful of red
Rose Leaves in it, then sweeten it with powdered Sugar, and give it up into the
party, and let him keep it; long as he can.

Belly Infirmities to Cure.
To reduce a hard Belly, and hard Sides.
TAke Ungentum Dialthaeae ounces, Ungent, Agrippae, (...) of Chamomil, of each
(...) ounce, incorporate them together wi^^ a little Brandy, and anoint the
pa^^ Morning and Evening before the Fir^ rubbing of it in strongly with a wa^^
Hand, half an hour at a time.

Another for the same.
Take your own Urine, and drink good Draught thereof Nine Morning together.
Probat.

Against the griping Torments a^^ fretting of the Guts.
Take the Juice of Plantain clarified and drink it by it self, or in oth^^
Drink for diverse days together, (...) wonderfully prevails, as aforesaid; (...)
also, against all Distillations from th^^ Head, and all manner of Fluxes in Men
and Women.

Against Wind, and gripings in the Belly.
Take of the Roots of Kneeholm, Anniseeds and Fennelseeds, half an ounce of
each, make them all into Powder, and mix them well together with half an ounce
of Sugar, and take every Morning of it as much as will lie on a Shilling in
Wine or Posset Drink.

Against the Griping in the Guts.
Take Salt of Wormwood half a Dram, Andromachus Treacle two Drachms, Conserve
of red Roses what suffices to be made up into a Bolus, and to be taken first
in the Morning.

To Cure an extraordinary Flux of the Bowels.
Take 2 hard Yolks of Eggs, temper them with good Rose Vinegar, and give it to
the Patient to eat first in the Morning. By this Medicine alone a Man was Cured
of this Distemper, who had daily 70 Stools a day, when all other means failed.

Against Gripings and Wind in the Guts.
Take Oil of Ivy one Dram in a Cup of Wine mixed, and drink it Fas^^^ does the
Work.

A Clyster against pain and griping the Bowels, Dysenteria.
Take Cows Milk 1 Pint, fresh Butter 1 Ounce, Gumtragacanth 1 Dra^^^ the Yolks
of 3 Eggs, Oil of R^^^ 2 Ounces; make it Blood warm, to (...) dissolving of the
Gum, and so put up.

Breath, stinking or short, to Cure.
Against a stinking Breath.
TAke a good quantity of Rosemary Leaves and Flowers, boil the^ in White-wi^e,
and with a little Cinnamon and Benjamin beaten to Powder, being put therein,
let the Patient wash the Mouth often therewith, and it will presently help.
Probat.

Against shortness of Breath.
Take of Saffron in Powder 1 Scruple, of Musk in Powder 1 Grain, give them in
Wine.

For the same.
Take sweet Marjoram and boil it well in Water, and drink of the Decoction
first and last, and at other times. This helps all diseases of the Chest and
will make you breathe freely.

Against shortness of Breath with a Cough.
Take the Roots of Valerian and boil them with Liquorice, Raisins s^o^ed, and
Anniseeds, and drink of the Decoction often; this is singular good against the
said Diseases, for it opens the passages, and causes the Phelgm to be spit
out easily.

Against a stinking Breath.
Take Myrrh, what you will, boil it in Water, and with the Decoction wash your
Mouth often.

Breasts Infirmities to Cure.
A Pultess for a sore Breast.
TAke new Milk and grate white bread into it, then take Mallows and red Rose
Leaves 1 handful of each then chop them small, and boil the^ together till it
be thick, then put (...) some Honey and Turpentine, m^^ them, then spread it on
a Cloth, a^^ apply it.

For an Ague in the Breast.
Take good Aqua-Vitae and Li^se^ Oil and warm them together on Chafing Dish of
Coals dip therein Cloths made fit for the Breasts, and lay them thereon as hot
as may (...) suffered Morning and Evening.

Milk hard in the Breast to Cure.
Take Mint, Wallwort and Vervain of each a like, and with Hogs Great stamp them
together, and make a Pultess, and apply it.

To bring long and great Breasts to little Proportion.
Take Hemlocks, shred them and boil them in White Wind, then (...) a Plaster
of them, and apply them (...) the Breasts.

To Heal an Inflammation in the Breasts.
Take the whites of two Eggs, and two handfuls of Housleek, let the Egg be
first well beaten, then stamp them both together and apply it.

If Milk Curd in the Breast, to Cure.
Take Gumtragacanth and Gum Arabic, of each a like, dissolve them in
Rose Water, then put to the Mu^^lage the whites of raw Eggs, and Oil of
Violets; compound all well together, then make a plaster thereof, and apply it.

To heal Ulcers in the Breast, although very grievous.
Take Oil of Sulphur and touch them, then make this Ointment; Take the Yolks of
new Eggs, 2 ounces, Turpentine, Butter, Barley Flower, and Honey of Roses half
an ounce of each; Incorporate them all in a Mortar, and therewith dress them
till they be whole.

Back Infirmities to Cure.
Against Pains in the Ba^k, and coldness and weakness in the Reins, and want of
an Appetite to a Woman.
TAke Parsnip Roots, as many as you please, let them be fair and great, cut
away the tops, then (...) them into an Earthen P^t with ^^ter and double the
Roots in Sug^^^ then boil them with a slow Fire (...) they be tender, then take
them (...) and lay them on a Grid-Iron to (...) then pair them and take out
their Pi^^^^ and then put them into a new Earth^^ Pot glazed, put to them as
much ^^^rified Honey as will cover them, (...) boil them till the Honey do
through penetrate them; then take them from the Fire, and put to them two (...)
of Cloves, and one part of Cinnam^^ and Ginder, then bray them with (...) Roots
together, and being well mix^^ take thereof fasting one Ounce a^ time, and you
will find a marvello^^ Effect.

Against Pain in the Back an^ Reins. This has helped many grievou^^^ afflicted.
Take a new laid Egg, beat it we^^ in a Porringer; then take four Spoonfuls of
White Wind, and two Spoonfuls of red Rose Water, one Pennyworth of Sugar Candy
in powder, m^^^ them well with the beaten Egg, and drink it up fasting: as much
at Night will not hurt you.

To Strengthen the Back, and to take a^^ ^ay pains and aches there.
Take Paracelsus's plaster, Melilot plaster, Diapalma, Diachylon, and
plaster of M^^ium of each a like, incorporate them together over the Fire,
make a plaster on Sheeps Leather, and apply to the Reins and Back.

To strengthen a weak Back.
Take N^p, Clare, and the Pith of an Ox-back, chop them very small together;
then take the Yolks of 3 new laid Eggs, beat them well, then strain them, and
fry them together, then eat it fasting and drink a draught of Sack after it.
Use this six or seven times together.

Bruises, Hurts, Congealed Blood to Cure.
To take away black and blew Spots, coming of stripes and bruises.
TAke Rheubarb and boil it in Wine, and bathe the part, or anoint the place
with Oil, when Rheubarb has been boiled.

A Powder against falls, and inward bru^^^
Take Bole Armoniack, D^^gons Blood, and Mummy; (...) Drachms of Each; Sperma
(...) One Dram, Rheubarb Half (...) Dram; make them all into Powder and
give half a Dram or more a time in Wine.

For all sorts of bruises and hurts in (...) part of the Body.
Take the Leaves of Bugle, Scab^^^ and Sanicle, of each a like quantity bruise
them and boil them in (...) Grease, until the Herbs be dry, the strein all into
a Pot, and stop it (...) close. It is of singular use to cure (...) hurts in
the Body, if anointed therewi^^

Against all Bruises, Hurts, Woun^^ and Inflammations.
Take Paracelsus Plaster half a Ounce, Diapalma as much, gree^ Melilot one
quarter of an Ounce; it corporate them over the Fire, make Plasters o^ it and
apply it. This good also against all Inflammation coming of heat.

The Virtue of Paracelsus's Styptick Plaster.
Its Virtues are great and excellent; (...) keeps back the concourse and
falling down of Humors; it dries super^^uous Moisture, it will expel Wind, it
cures a Bruise or Ache, it heals Wounds and Ulcers, breeding nothing but ^ound
Flesh; it defends from Putrefaction, and will keep free from Corruption forty
Years.

For black and blue Spots and Crecks in the Neck.
Take Mustard Seed, powder it well, then mix it with Honey, and apply, or make
the Powder up in Wax and apply it. This is good also against the crick in the
Neck by Cold.

Burnings and Scaldings to Cure.
Against burning with Gunpowder.
TAke the whites of Eggs, and stamp and beat them well together; then wet a
Linen Cloth in the liquid Matter, and lay it the^^ where it is burned, and
still wet* Cloth there with on the outside th^^ of, that it may not remain dry,
(...) this will fetch out the Fire and (...) Probat.

For a Burn.
Take Castile Soap, put it in a (...) Pan over the Fire, and stir it (...) it
be as thick as a Salve, then (...) Plasters thereof, and lay on the (...) place.

To heal a Burning or Scald with^^^ any Scar.
Take Sallet Oil, well beaten in (...) Water, or (...) there with anoint the
Burned or Scalded place three days twice a day, a^^ it will fetch out the Fire.

Then take the inner Bark of Eld^^ Ha^ts Tongue and Hous^^^k, of (...) four
Drachms, Sheeps Trickles (...) Handful, Sheeps Suet four Drachms boil them
together to a good thickness, and put thereto Wax 1 Dram then strain it, and
Plaster-wise apply it to the Grief, twice a Day 'till it be whole, without Scar.

Another for the same.
Take of the Juice of Plantain, Hous^^^k, and the lesser Comfrey, of each four
Ounces, of Sheeps Dung dissolved in the said Juices) 2 Ounces, Sheeps Suet 1
Pound shred, then boil them together over a gentle Fire to a due height, then
strain it, and reserve it for your Use.

Against Burning and Blasting, by Gunpowder, or Lightning.
Take of the Juice of Purslain, and mingle it with as much Oil of Roses, and
anoint the part therewith, Morning and Evening.

To Cure Burning and Scalding.
Take the Ointment of white ^^llies, and anoint the part first, and then
Morning and Evening apply the said Ointment Plaister-wise.

Baldness to help
And this will bedeck a bald Head, or other part with Hair.

Another.
Take the Distilled Water of the Sperm of Frogs, and bathe the part well,
letting it dry of it self, and then by Clouts wet therein on it.

Bitings by Mad Dogs, Serpents, etc.
For the Biting of a Mad Dog.
TAke of Gentian Root in Powd^^ one Dram, and give in (...) Water. Or,

Take Gentian Root in Powder Grains, of Rue in Powder, 1 Scrupl^^ of Pepper,
powdered 5 Grains, (...) it in Angelicae Water.

Against the Bitings of Serpents, (...) of a Mad Dog.
Take Agrimony, boil it in Wine and drink the Decoction for Serpents and for a
Mad Dog take the Leave of Agrimony, bruise them and bi^^^ them to the bitten
place.

Against the Biting of an Adder or V^^^per.
Take 1 Dram of the tops of the Stalks and Flowers of great Century beat them
into Powder, and drink them in Wine. This is a very good help.

Against the Stinging of Bees and Wasps.
Take of the Leaves of Marshmallows, bruise them, or rub them on the place,
and it will take away the pains, redness, and swelling.

Cordials.
An Excellent Cordial.
TAke the Flowers of Marygolds, and lay them in Brandy, till the Tincture be
fully taken out then pour is out from the Flowers, and over a few Coals vapor
away the Tincture, till it come to be thick like an Electuary.

A Cordial against Wind in the Stomach, or any other part.
Take 6 Spoonfuls of Pennyrial-water, and put thereto 4 drops of the Oil of
Cinnamon, mix them, and drink it any time, Fasting two hours after.

A Cordial for the Head and Stomach.
Take a preserved Nut^ed, and cut it in Four Quarters; and eat O^^ Quarter of
it at Breakfast, and another in the Afternoon. This very good.

A Cordial to be taken at Sea, and g^^ any where else.
Take Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowe^^ one ounce, Confectio Alkermes o^^ Dram,
Borrage water one ounce (...) a half, of Mint-water as much, (...) Mr.
Mountford's Water, or other (...) Cordial Spirit as much, and as m^^^ Cinnamon
Water; temper all th^^ together, and take a Spoonful at (...) time, when you
see cause.

Two Cordials to be taken in a Burn^^^ Fever.
Take a quarter of a pint of Ma^^ Ale, sweeten it with half an ounce (...)
Syrup of Gilly-flowers, and give it (...) Drink in their Burning Fit.

Or,
Take the Juice of an Orange, and as much red Rose Water, mix them and sweeten
them with White Sugar Candy: These will refresh th^^ Spirit, and Cool and Allay
the^^ Drought.

Coughs and short Breathings.
For a Cough of the Lungs.
TAKE Green Box dried, powdered fine, and take of it as much as will lie on a
Groat at a time in White Wind warmed, first and last, till you be well, which
will be when you see your self spit Blood, then leave your Medicine for you are
well. Probat.

Another for the (...).
Take 1 pint of pure English Honey, set it over warm Embers in a new glased
Pipkin, that holds a little more than a Pint, and as the Scum or Froth rises
scum it; then take 2 ounces of red Currants and put it into the Honey, and let
them simper together a good while; then put to them two ounces of Powder of
Liquorice, as much of Anniseeds in Powder, one ounce of pulverized Elicampane,
and incorporate them well together. Then take of it first in the Morning, at
(...) in the Afternoon, and last at Night, (...) quantity of a Nutmeg at every
time

For a Cough.
Take Sallet Oil, Aqua Vitae, an^ Sack an equal quantity of each, b^^ them well
together, and before (...) Fire rub the Soles of your Feet with (...)

An Electuary against a Cough.
Take of pure honey 4 ounces, Powd^^ of Elicampane 2 drachms, powder of
^^quorice 1 dram: mix them, and ta^^ thereof on the point of a knife often.

For a Cough coming of a then Rheum
Take Mastich and Olibanum Powder, of each 2 Scruples, Conser^^ of red Roses 2
Ounces, Diascordi^^^ half an Ounce, mix them, and take thereof first and last
the quantity of Nutmeg.

For a Chin Cough.
Take a handful of Rue, stamp (...) and mingle it with English Honey, and make
a Conserve; give of it first and last, and at other times, the quanti^^ of a
Damson at a time.

For an extreme Cold or Cough.
Take Hysop Water 6 Ounces, re^^ Poppy Water 4 Ounces, 6 Dates, 10 Fig^^, slice
them small, 1 handful of Raisins of the Sun stoned, the weight of a Shilling
of the Powder of Liquorice; put these into the said Waters, then let them stand
5 or 6 Hours upon warm Embers, close covered, but not Boil; then strain it
forth, and put in as much Sugar of Roses as will sweeten it: Drink of this
first and last, and at 4 in the Afternoon, four Ounces at a time.

Against a Cough and Distillation of thin Rheum.
Take Olibanum in Powder, and mix it with Conserve of Roses, and first and
last, and oftener if need be, take the quantity of a Nutmeg on the point of a
Knife at a time.

Against a Cough, Wheesings, Distillations, and Shortness of Breath.
Take of Wood Betony in Powder, mix it with pure Honey, and take it as in the
last Receipt before is specified. It is available.

Another for the same, most Excellent.
Take Hysop and Rue of each a like quantity; out them and boil them in white
Wine; then dulcifie the Decoction with Honey, and take a D^a^^ of it first and
last, and oftener i^ (...) be It is excellent.

For a Chin Cough.
Take wild Thyme, boil it in white Wine, and drink of the Decoction ^^ten, and
first and last. A better Re^^dy for this Infirmity scarce grows.

For a perilous Cough.
Take Sage, Rue, Pepper, and C^^^min; of each of the Herbs a like quantity, and
sees them together in white Wine; dulcifie the Decoction (...) Honey, and take
thereof first and (...) and oftener if need be, 1 Spoonful a time.

Consumption.
Against a Consumption.
TAke Rice beaten to Powder, and ^i^ted clean from the Husk, the^ sees it in
Milk of a Red Cow, the^ season it with Sugar, and a little (...) and Mace; then
take a few ^^lanched sweet Almonds, and stamp them, then strain them into the
Milk; he eating a Breakfast of this cures a Consumption, and helps Conception.

Another, and which restores Nature ^ost.
Take good Malmsey, or Malaga (...) Pottle, put in it as much Crum of white
Bread, hot out of the Oven, as will suck up all the Wine; add theteto of
Cinnamon powdered 4 Drachms, and to Cloves bruised, then distill them in Balneo
Mariae; then add to what is come over, so much Sugar as will fit your Taste,
with 2 grains of Musk. The Dose is Three Spoonfuls first and last.

For a Consumption, a Distillation, and (...) restore Strength.
Take Rose Water 3 Pints, Old Ma^aga 3 Pints, new Milk, 1 Pottle, gross Pepper
1 Ounce, Cinnamon 2 Ounces, of sliced white Bread 1 or 2 Penny ^^^ves, the
Yolks of 12 new laid Eggs ^^^ten, or more, of Sugar 1 Pound: ^^stil; all these
so long as any Water (...) come: take of this Water(with a little Pepper) a
Draught fasting, you will find much good by it.

For a Consumption and Cough of Lungs.
Take new Milk of a red Cow (...) Quarts, a quantity of Shell-snails, (...) out
of their shells, what suffic^^^ Flower of Sulphur half an Ounce less, the Yolks
of 4 new laid (...) beaten; boil them well together, (...) strain it, and
dulcifie it, and Eat th^^^ of first and last.

Another for the same.
Take Benjamin in Powder, as (...) as will lie on a Groat, as much Flo^^^^ of
Brimstone, the Yolk of a new (...) Egg, one Spoonful of red Rose (...) brown
Sugar Candy, as much (...) Wallnut in Powder, mix them, (...) take this Dose in
the Morning Fast^^^ and Fast 2 Hours after it. Do (...) nine mornings together
and be (...)

An Excellent Remedy against a ^^^sumption.
Take a Pottle of Rose Water, (...) Goats or Asses Milk, or the Milk (...) Cow
all of one Color (in want of (...) other) and put therein only the (...) (...)
Fifty Hens Eggs, new laid, beat the Yolks, and mix them well with the Milk and
Rose Water; then Distill them, and give of the Water Distilled (...) the
Patient, first and last warm, (...) a Cake or two made of Gold and ^erls. This
is Excellent.

For a Consumption, and Cough of the Lungs.
Take one Pound of the best Honey-dissolve it in a Pipkin; then take it off the
Fire, and put into it two Pennyworth of Flower of Brimstone, as much of Powder
of Elicampane, as much of Powder Liquorice, two Pennyworth of red Rose Water;
then stir them well together, and put it in a Gally Pot close stopped: Take as
much thereof at a time, as half a Wall-nut, first and last, and at any time in
the Day or Night when the Cough troubles you, and let it melt down your ^^roat
by degrees.

To restore a weakened Person by Sickness and to preserve from a Consumption.
Take 3 Pints of good new Milk, ^^d put thereto 1 Pint of red Wine, ^^th the
Yolks of 24 Hens Eggs, new laid beaten together; then put in (...) much fine
white Bread, as shall (...) up the Milk and Wine; then Distil^^ with a soft
Fire, and (...) a Spoon (...) of this Water in your (...) Drink; and this in
one (...) prevent the Consumption.

For a Consumption.
Take a Breast of fat Pork, boil it red Cows Milk, and drink thereof good
Draught first and last, and (...) in the Afternoon.

Against a Consumption, and to (...) a decayed Nature.
Take Goats Milk one Quart, (...) beaten and lifted four Ounces, Sug^^ one
Ounce, the Flesh of Dates, (...) Ounce, Beef Marrow two Spoonful Cinnamon half
an Ounce; Boil the all together and Eat thereof Morning and Evening.

Convulsion and Cramp.
Cramp to cure.
TAke Brimstone and Vervain, beat them together, and bind them on the Pulse,
and be ever freed.

Against convulsions in Old and Young.
Take Thirty Piony Berries, husk them, then make them into Powder, and drink
off as much as will lie on a Sixpence at a time in white Wine, first and last.

Against the cramp and shrinking of sinews.
Take one handful of Chick (...), 1 handful of dried red Rose Leaves (but not
distilled) boil them in a Quart of Mu^k^dine, till a fourth part be consumed;
then put to them a Pint of Sheeps-foot Oil, then let them boil (...) good
while, still stirring them well; then strain it out, and anoint the (...) warm
before the Fire, with a warm Hand. This (by God's Blessing) (...) in three
Dressings.

Pills against the Convulsion.
Take Opoponax, Rue, Serapinum Pepper, of the Juice of Lovage. Myrrh of each 1
Dram; Powder what is to be powdered, and with the Juice (...) Cowslips make
it into a Mass for Pills. The Dose is a Dram every second or third Night, if
need require.

For the Cramp.
Take the Philosophers Oil of Tiles and anoint the part therewith by the Fire:
It quickly penetrateth, and is (...) Sovereign Remedy against the Cramp, Gout,
etc.

Oil of Rue does the like.

Another.
Take of Juniper Berries fasting every Morning, they heat and (...) the Cramp,
and keep the Body in Health.

Canker.
For a Canker in the Breast, or elsewhere,
TAke Pulverized Antimony, and convey it into it, it will kill it.

To cure a Canker or Soreness in the Mouth most wonderful.
Take Pennyroyal, red Sage, red Fennel Rosemary Tops and Mints, of each a good
handful, half a handful of Hysop: Shred them, and boil them in a quart of white
Wine, and thereto put the quantity of 2 Wall-nuts of Roch Allom, and as much
Honey as will make it sweet; then strain it through a fine Cloth, and wash and
gargle the Mouth well, for it will cure it.

For the Canker in the Mouth or Nose.
Take the green Leaves of Holly, and burn them to Ashes; then mix them with
(...) so much of the Powder of Burnt Allom, and blow it with a Quill into the
grieved part, and it will Cure Man, Child, or Beast.

Corns and Warts.
To Destroy Corns.
TAke of a Cows Gall, and we^^thy Corns therewith (...), (...) let them dry of
themselves; it will pluck them up by the Roots.

A Plaster to take away Corns.
Take Galbanum, Ammoniacum, of each alike; dissolve them in Vinegar of Squills,
then boil them to a just consistency, adding a few drops of Oil of Vitriol;
then spread it on Leather, and apply it to the Corn.

Against Warts.
Take Water of Agrimony, make it ^ower as Vinegar with Oil of Vitriol; and wash
your Warts therewith, and they will fall out without pain.

For Warts and Corns.
Take fair Water half a Pint, Mere^ri^s Sublimate 1 Pennyworth, Allom as much
as a Bean; boil all together in a double Glass in Water, till a Spoonful be
wasted, and rub them therewith, always warming it before you use it.

To take away Warts.
Take Shell-snails, prick them, and with the Juice that comes from them rub thy
Warts every Day, for seven or eight Days together, and it will destroy them.

Childrens Infirmities to Cure.
To prevent the Falling Sickness, and Convulsions.
TAke of red Coral in powder 10 Grains, give it in Breast Milk to a new Born
Child, for the first Food it takes after its Birth. It mightily strengthens the
Brain.

To make them Teeth easily.
Take pure Capons Grease well clarified, as much as a Nutmeg, twice as much
Honey, then mix them together; three or four times in a day anoint the Gums
when they are Teething.

Against Agues and Fevers, coming by pain in breeding of Teeth, or otherwise.
Take one spoonful of Ungent. Populeon, two spoonfuls of Oil of Roses, mix
them, then before the Fire anoint the Child's bowing places of his Arms, Legs,
soles of its Feet, Forehead and Temples, twice a Day, chasing it well in with
a warm Hand.

Against Wind and Phlegm.
Take Sugar Candy in Powder, and in Saxifrage-water give it in a Spoon often.

Against the Worms.
Take Myrrh and Aloes of each a^ like, finely powdered; and with a few drops of
Chemical Oil of Wormwood, or Savin, with a little Turpentine, mix them, and
make them up for a Plaster for the Child's Navel.

For a Thrush, or sore Mouth.
Take an empty Egg-shell, by sucking the meat out at a hole on the top, then
fill the Shell with Honey and burnt Allom mix together, let it boil on the
Fire, still stirring it with a Bodkin, and dress it.

A Clyster for a Child, or for a Woman with Child, very safe.
Take a pint of new Milk, put in it 3 Ounces of Sugar Candy, boil it well, and
being a little cool, put it up into the Body.

Against the Cough in Children.
Take 1 Ounce of Hogs Grease, half an Ounce of Garlic, bruise and stamp them
together, and anoint the Soles of the Feet at Night warm, and then bind a
Plaster thereof on the Soles

Against the sticking out of the Navel.
Take the Juice of Purslain, and mingle it with as much Oil of Roses, mix them,
and wet Clothes therein, and bind them on the Navel.

A Purge for tender Children
Take a quantity of Liquorice, Anniseeds, small Raisins, and a handful of
Hysop, slice the Liquorice, beat the Seeds, shred the Hysop, and boil them all
in white Wine; then strain it, and give of it in a Spoon or otherwise, from
half an Ounce to an Ounce, or more at a time.

Colic.
For the Colic.
TAke of the Electuary of Bayberries one Dram, Oil of Amber 6 drops, Oil of
Anniseed 8 drops, Oil of Vitriol half a Scruple; mix them, and make a Bolus,
take it in a Wafer wet in water on the point of a Knife.

Against the Wind-Colick and Stone.
Take Electuarium Reginae Colo^iens^ is an excellent Remedy against the Colic
and Stone: the Dose is (...) Dram taken every Morning, which is commended as
a Jewel.

Against the Colic.
Take Castoreum one Dram in a Cup of sweet Wine, or in 3 Cyathes of Aqua
Mulsa. This is exceeding good Fasting, or often in Beer.

Another.
Take of Manna one ounce, Oil of sweet Almonds two Ounces; dissolve the Manna
in Oil, and give it.

Note, Manna must not be boiled, but dissolved and strained.

Against the Colic and Stone.
Take a Cup of Wormwood Wine Fasting; it is an excellent Preservative against
the Colic and Stone, and to walk much, but fit little.

Against the Colic and Iliack Passion.
Take a Lodestone, and lay it to the Navel, and presently the Grief will cease.

An Electuary for the same.
Take the best Treacle one ounce, Castoreum, Long Pepper, of each one ounce and
half, Opium one Scruple (...) mix them exactly into an Electuary.

Clysters.
A Clyster to Purge Choler and Phlegm,
TAke a pint of Milk, brown Sugar three Ounces, a little Salt, whereof make a
Clyster, and with a Pipe put it into the Body.

This must be given not too hot, nor too cold, about F^ur of the Clock in the
Afternoon, and two Hours after drink a Draught of Mace Ale.
Take a pint of Milk, make it into clear Posset Drink with a Quart of Beer;
then take off the Curd; then put in the Posset Drink, Anniseed, and sweet
Fennel-seed, of each 2 Ounces; boil these to half a Pint or more, then strain
it out hard, and dissolve in it 2 Ounces of brown Sugar Candy, and a little
Bay Salt, with two Spoonfuls of Oil Olive, and put it up.

Another.
Take a pint of new Milk, making (...) scalding hot, then take it from the
Fire, and put into it the Yolk of a (...) laid Egg beaten, with 2 Ounces o^
brown Candy, or brown Sugar, and put it up Blood warm.

To heal the Ulcerations and Flux of the Guts.
Take the Juice of Purslain, and put it up into the Fundament with (...)
Clyster-Pipe.

Dropsy.
Against the Dropsy, and Ointment.
TAke Ungentum Artanitae Mesue^ and Ungentum Agrippae of each alike, mix them
well, then anoint th^^^. Belly twice a Day: If you anoint the Stomach, it will
cause to Vomit, if the Belly then it Purges by Stool, and emptieth the Belly
of much Water.

Note, That before every anointing, you must rub the Belly well with a dry
Cloth that is pretty course.

An Excellent Drink for the Dropsy.
Take one Pottle of white Rhenish Wine, Cinnamon beaten one Ounce, one Pint of
green Broom Ashes; put them together in an Earthen Battle 48 Hours, stir them
often, then drain them through a piece of Cotton twice, then drink of it one
quarter of a pint cold in the Morning, another 1 Hour before Dinner, another 1
Hour before Supper, and another when you go to Bed. Usually 1 Pottle heals, if
not, use more.

Another.
Take the inner rind of Elder, and boil it well in sweet Wort, then drink half
a pint thereof Fasting, it cures, Probat.

An Excellent Purge against the Dropsy.
And every third or fourth Day Purge the party with your usual Purge in
Conserve of Roses.

Ears, Noise and Deafness.
Against Noise and Singing in the Ears.
TAke the Juice of Summer Savory, heat it, and mix with it a little Oil of
Roses, or of Amber, and drop thereof into the Ears warm.

Another for the same.
Take a Clove of Garlic, peel it, make two or three holes through, and fasten
it to the end of a thread, then dip it in fine English Honey, and so put it
into the Ear, and stop it in with black Wool, and lie on the other side; let
it lie in 7 or 8 Days, you may pull it out by the Thread.

Another for the same, very excellent.
Take Oil of Castor, Oil of Roses, Oil of sweet Almonds, of each 1 Ounce;
mingle them with a little quantity of Aqua Vitae, boil them to the Consumption
of the Aqua Vitae, and put 3 or 4 drops in the Ear to Bed-ward, and stop it
with Cotton and a grain of Musk.

To get an Ear-wig, or other Worm out of the Ear.
Take the Juice of Wormwood Rue, and Southernwood, of each alike, mingle them
well, whereof put some into the Ear, and bind a Plaster of the said stamped
Herbs to the Ear. This will kill it in five Nights.

Or,
Take a piece of an old Apple, and bind it into the Ear all Night, and lie on
the same side all Night, and in the Morning quickly pull out the Apple, and the
Worm will come with it.

EVIL Digestion to Cure
To help Concoction.
TAke common Salt one ounce and a half, Pepper ^ix Drachms, Cummin-seed half an
ounce, Caraway-seed, Cinnamon, Zedoary, of each 3 Drachms, Ginger and Mace of
each 2 Drachms and a half; powder them, and mix^, eat it as Salt with your meat.

To help Digestion.
Take half a dram of the dried Root of Lovage in fine Powder in wine often;
it does wonderfully warm a cold Stomach, helps Digestion, and consumes
superfluous Moisture there, eases inward Gripings, expels Wind, and
resists Infection.

An excellent help to Digestion.
Take Mustard Seed and Cinnamon one dram of each, beat them together into
fine Powder, then add half as much of Mastich in powder, and with Gum Arabic
dissolved in Rose water, make them up into Troches of about half a dram
weight a piece, and eat one of them 1 Hour or 2 before meals. Let Old People
make much of this Medicine.

Eyes Sore, to Cure.
To take away all spots in the Eyes, and superfluous Water.
TAke of clear Antimony to grains, red Rose water 3 ounces, mix them together,
and let them stand 24. Hours, then drop 4 or 5 drops of the clearest into the
Eyes twice a day.

A Powder to preserve the Sight.
Take Eyebright, Betony, of each 1 handful, Mace and Fennel-seeds, of each 2
drachms, make them into Powder, and give thereof at a time half a dram first
and last, in Broth or Beer.

A Jerusalem Collyrium for sore red Eyes, which Itch and Burn.
Take Tutia Alexandriae 1 ounce, beat it into fine powder, then mingle it with
1 quart of white Wine, and put thereto dried Roses 1 ounce, boil it with a
soaking Fire, till half be wasted, then strain it into a Glass, and stop it
close, and Morning and Evening drop some in your Eye. But Purge the Head first.

Pills to Purge the Head and Eyes of Rheum.
Take Extractum Rudi^ 1 Scruple, Resin of Jalop 4 grains, Oil of Guaicum 2
drops; make them into Pills, and take them at once.

A water to heal all manner of sore Eyes.
Take Fennel, Vervain, Roses, (...) ^andine, and Rue, of each 2 ounces: distill
them, and wash thy Eyes therewith twice a Day.

To clear the Sight very well.
Take Rose Water in a Saw^er, then take clean Myrrh the quantity of a Nut,
bring it into powder, then tie it in a Linen Cloth that is clean, and let it
lie in the Rose Water Twelve Hours, then with a Feather wash thy Eyes therewith
twice a Day. Probat.

To keep back the Humor that flows to the Eyes and Teeth.
Take Mastich and Frankincense in fine Powder, of each alike, make them up into
a Plaster, with white Wine and the white of Eggs; lay it to the Temples.

An excellent Collyrium for sore Eyes.
Take old white Wine 1 pint, white Rose Water 4 ounces, Tutia Alexandriae mix
these and strain it, then beat the Whites of roasted Eggs in a Mortar, then
pour the Wine and Rose Water on them, then strain (...) hard, keep it close,
and wash with a Feather twice a Day.

For a West on the Eyelid, that darkens the Sight.
Take the Juice of Fenel, and wash it therewith, and drop thereof 3 drops into
the Eye, twice a day* It will take away the West immediately, and restore the
sight.

An excellent Water to Cure all Griefs in the Eyes whatsoever.
Take of unslacked Lime 3 Ounces, infuse it in a pint of Rain Water in a Jar
Glass 3 days; stir them well together, then let them settle 24 Hours, then cant
off the clear very clean, add thereto the whitest Sal Ammoniack, powdered very
finely 10 drachms; let it dissolve therein by standing and by stirring often,
then let it settle, and filtre it, drop 3 drops of this into thy Eye at a time,
Morning, Noon, and Night, till you be well* This cures all Spots, Perls, Webs,
Films, Cankers, Burnings, or any thing else in the Eye.

To destroy a Pin and Web in the Eye.
Take of Spirit of Vitriol 1 drop, drop it into the white of an Egg hard
roasted, and it will turn it into Water, of which water drop into thine Eyes
Morning, Noon, and at Night.

To heal all sorts of Sore Eyes.
Take the Herb Bucks-ho^^ Plantain, a quantity, bruise it and boil it in Ale or
Wine, and drink thereof for some Mornings and Evenings together, a Draught; it
stops all Distillations, and helps.

To cure the Obstructions of the Optic Nerves.
Take the true Herb Valerian, seethe it in Wine, then strain it, and let the
Patient drink of it as his common Drink 3 or 4 Months together.

The best Remedy for Redness of the Eyes.
Take white Vitriol, make it very pure by often dissolutions and coagulations,
1 dram; then dissolve it in Rain water 10 ounces, then filtre it diverse times
through brown Paper, then add to it (...) scruple of common Salt.

For a Pin, Web, or Perl in the Eye.
Take white Ginger, and grind it to Powder on a Whet-stone into a fair Basin,
and add to it as much Salt as the Powder, then grind them well together in the
Basin, and temper them with white Wine; then let them stand 24 Hours, then cant
off the thin part that lies above into a Glass, stop it, and going to Bed, with
a Feather wash thy Eyes, and be whole.

A precious Pill against all Fluxes of the Eyes.
Take the Leaves of Senna, of Turbith, of each 2 Drachms, Pil sine quibus esse
nolo 3 Drachms, Fenel-seed 2 Drachms; powder them, mix them and with Syrup of
Fumitory, or of Apples make a Mass; the Dose is 1 Dram, till you be whole.

Falling Sickness.
Against the Falling Sickness.
TAke of the best rectified Aqua Vitae, without Phlegm, one pint, Oil of
Vitriol 1 Spoonful, mix them well together, and let the Patient drink thereof
first and last, and he shall be helped, although he have had it 10 Years, and
fell every Hour.

Another.
Take that part of a Woman's Skull that grows on the hinder part of the Head
(it is whiter than the ^e^^ of the Skull) beat it very fine to powder, and give
the party as much as a Pea at a time in Syrup of Violets.

To ^^^se one that (...) fallen quickly.
Take of Rue and Wormwood of each a handful, and make them into a mixed Powder
together, and blow some of it by a Quill into the Nose of the party that does
fall, and he will ^^se presently.

To cure the Falling Sickness.
Take the Roots of Male Peony, (...) a Man (and the Roots of Female Peony for a
Woman) wash them clean, then stamp them somewhat small, and put it in Sack to
infuse 24 Hours a^ the least; then strain it and drink a good draught thereof
first and last, for sundry days together, next before and after the Full of the
Moon.

Against the Falling Evil.
Take single Peony Seeds and beat them in a Mortar to powder, take as much of
it as will lie on a Shilling^^^^ or 4 spoonfuls of black Cherry Water, before
and after the Full of the Moon, for diverse days together Fasting.

Another that will not fail, good for Women.
Take the Roots of Peony beaten to powder, 1 dram in Wine, Ale, or Broth,
given in a Morning some days before and after the full of the Moon, it Cures
the Falling Sickness, if not too far spent; for it drives away all passions
from the Brain, Heart and Spleen: also it helps the windiness of the matrix,
suffocation of the Mother, and stopping of the Courses; and will give easy
Deliverance to Women in Labor.

Fistulaes.
A perfect way to Cure a Fistulaes
TAke Alum 2 Pound, as much of white Copperas, beat them to a fine Powder, then
put it into an Earthen Pan, let them dissolve to Water over a quick Fire, then
take 6 ounces of Verdigrease, 4 drachms of white Mercury, both made into fine
powder, then put them into the former water. stir them well together, and let
them boil to a Stone then beat it into powder, and mix with it 6 ounces of Bole
Ammoniack made into fine powder, which keep in a Box for your use: Then take a
gallon of Smiths oldest Water, let it boil in a Kettle, and s^^ke in as much of
the said powder by little and little, as will lie 6 times on a Shilling, let it
boil a w^^m or two, then take it from the Fire and let it ^^ttle, then pour the
clearest into a Glass, or Bottle, and keep it for use And (...) is, to pour out
as much of the Water as will wet two Cloths three or four times double, and lay
them one after another all over the place grieved hot, wringing them first to
prevent the running about of the Water. Do th^^ with clean Cloths twice a day,
the Water stains and poisons that which drinks it in. This is an absolute Cute
or the Fistula, and never fails.

To Cure Fistulaes, and old Sores and Cankers, most admirably.
Take Oil of Vitriol 1 ounce, put it to 3 pound of Saturn filed into 5 parts,
and let it be all eaten with the oil of Vitriol by degrees, one part after
another, and when you have a good quantity of it, put it into a Retort, and put
in with it 1 pint of white Wine, and distill it in Sand twice from the Faeces,
and your Medicine is perfect.

This is excellent. To Cure a Callous Fistula.
Take of the Root of black Hellebore, bring it to powder, and leave of it in a
callous Fistula, two or three days together, it will consume it quite.

A Drink to Cure the Fistula.
Take Valerian, Tormentil, Clovegilly flowers, red Beets, red Chickweed,
Pellitory of the Wall, Galanga, Zedoary, Bay Berries, of each a like quantity,
boil them all in white Wine, then strain it, and give of the decoction first
and last, four spoonfuls at a time.

Fluxes.
Note, Venice Treacle is good against all Fluxes of the Belly.

For the Flux, a pleasant Medicine.
TAke Sallet Oil half a pint, Nutmegs beaten half an ounce, Cinnamon in powder
1 ounce, Mace one quarter of an ounce, fine Sugar half a pound; mingle these
together, and eat of it 3 or 4 times a day. This has Cured many.

An excellent Potion against all sorts of Fluxes.
Take Syrup of Roses, and Syrup of Mints, of each 1 ounce, of Bole Ammoniack 1
dram; incorporate them together, and with some red Wine make a potion. This
also is good too against many Reds and Whites in Women.

A perfect Cure of the Bloody Flux.
Take Conserve of Roses 1 ounce, Crocus Martis 1 scruple; mix them well
together, and take it on the point of a Knife first in the Morning, and Fast 2
Hours after. It cures though it has been of a long continuance, Probatum.

Against the Flux Diarrhoea and Dysenteria.
Take every third day at a time 10 grains of Crocus Martis in Juice of Sloes of
the Wood:

This is a most Excellent Medicine.

Another for the Dysenteria.
Take 20 Yolks of boiled Eggs, Nutmegs beaten to powder, 2 ounces, red Wine 2
quarts; let them infuse one Night, then distill them in Balneo according to Art:
The Dose is 2 ounces Fasting.

A Plaster of great use.
Take Bole Ammoniack, Dragons Blood half a dram of each, Mastich 1 dram,
Myrrh half a drachm^. Venice Turpentine 3 drachms; beat what is to be beaten
into fine powder, and with Rosin and Wax what suffices, make them all into a
plaster, and lay it upon the (...) and Belly.

French Pox.
If Buboes appear, then let him not Blood by any means. But no Buboes
appearing, then let him Blood in the beginning in the Vein called Hepatica in
the right Arm. Then empty the Body by degrees of all the Evil Venomous and
Malicious Humors, for which none are better than Extractum R^d^j in Pills; or
Mercurius Dulcis proportionably made up in the said Extractum, will do far
better: But if that do not succed, then if necessity require, you must empty
the Humors by Fluxing.

Pills to Flux, in the Cure of the French Disease.
TAke Sagapenum dissolved in white Wine 2 ounces, Salt of Guaicum, Colocynthis,
Diagridij, of each of them 1 ounce, Turbith Minerale 10 drachms, Musk 1
scruple, Oil of July-flowers 12 grains; make them into a Mass; the dose is from
12 to 20 grains, for ten days together in the morning, or until the Patient
sufficiently does Flux at the Mouth.

If his Throat or Mouth be sore to Cure.
Take one penny worth of red Sage, French Barley two handfuls, Roch Allom in
Powder 2 Ounces, with Mint and roses half a handful of each, boil them all in
one quart of water, then strain it, and while it is hot dulcify the Colature
with honey with this warmed, wash, gargle, and serringe the Mouth and Throat 2
or 3 times a day.

If Pushes, Scabs and Sores break out, heal with this Ointment.
Take Ungent Egyptiacum 1 ounce, mingle it with one dram of Mercurius
Sublimate, and anoint therewith: and if it smart beyond Suffering, then take
Plantain water, Fumitory water, and Rose water, of each alike, mingle them, and
touch the smarting part with it, and it will assuage the Pain.

If Nodes, or Knobs, or Wheals appear, then use this.
Take Plantain and Rose Waters of each 1 pint, roch Allom and Sublimate of each
2 drachms, bray the two last into powder, put them together into a pipkin boil
them till half the water be consumed, then let it settle, and cant off the
clear into a glass: and when you use it, mingle some of it with a tripple
portion of plantain and rose water together, and then touch them therewith: And
if they be on the face then first anoint them with Oil of Scorpions, or the fat
of a Hen.

To preserve the Nose.
Take waters of Rose, violet and plantain, of each alike, a little wine
Vinegar, Roch Allom in Powder a little, and a little honey, dissolve them over
the Fire, and let the Patient snuff up strongly into the Nose; this cures and
heals.

If the Teeth be loose, fasten them with this.
Take Plantain water, mix it with Oil of Sulphur, and touch therewith the Gums,
and after they be mundified, wash well thy Teeth and Gums with thy lotion
aforesaid.

If a Bubo appear in the Grain, cure it thus.
Take Emplastr. Paracel^, diachylon Magnum, flos Ungentorum, diachylon cum
gummi, Emplastr. Mucilaginis, Emplastrum de Melilot, of each alike, then
incorporate them together, over a gentle fire, then make plasters on sheeps
Leather, and apply it to the Bubo morning and evening warm.

And when it is broken, use the same plaster, only add to it in the melting
more of ^los Ungentorum and Emplastr^^ Betonicae more than the rest, and that
will draw it and heal it.

Now when all the evil humors are prepared, purged and emptied, you must come
to your diet drink.

The first simple Decoction.
Take (in Winter) one Pound and a half of Guaicum 18 pints of Water; but in
Summer (when it will not keep so long) Guaicum 6 ounces, and water 6 Pints, in
both which the wood must be infused 12 hours or more Let the water for the
infusion be warm, almost seething hot, and keep the pot close stopped, let the
decoction boil till half be wasted* so much for the first Decoction: always
remembering, to save the Scum or Froth, for that is good to anoint the Pustules
and Scabs.

To make the second Decoction.
Take the same wood without infusing any more, and boil it again in the same
quantity of Water to the consumption of a third part.

The quantity of these is to be taken according to the strength of the party
from 4 ounces to 8 ounces, and in a Child from 4 ounces to 6 ounces, and not
exceeding 10 ounces when the disease is most rebellious, and always must be
taken very hot, and sleep upon it if you can.

The first Decoction you must take first and last; and the second Decoction, at
and between Meals: some take this Decoction 30 days, some 40 some 60 days, to
make the more surer Cure.

Their Meat must be roasted dry at Noon, and their Supper must be sweet
Almonds, Raisins of the Sun sto^ed, and fine Biscuit, or Bread made of the
finest Flower.

And let him forbear Venery as he tenders his Life, and all chasing, fretting,
and impatiency, for that inflames the Blood, stirs up Choleric Humors, and is
a great Enemy to the Cure.

N^te, In this Sickness, let the patient beware of taking cold: And beware of
Costiveness.

Against the Falling of the Fundament.
TAke Ungent, sumach, when the fundament is fallen, anoint it therewith, then
put it up, and it will out no more.

Others for the same.
You may do the like, with Bole Ammoniack, and with Dragons Blood, and with
Myrrh every one by themselves, brought into fine Powder.

Another for the same.
Take Olibanum in Powder, and s^rew it on the ^uell fallen down, and then put
it up.

Face.
To Cure a Swelled Face.
TAke wild Crabs, gathered on Midsummer-day, and distilled in a Limbeck, and
with the distilled water of them, wash thy Face often, and the intent will
follow. Probatum.

To take away Spots, Morphe^, Freckles, and Sun-burning from the Face, Neck,
Arms and Hands.
Take of the Juice of Lemmons 2 ounces, Rose Water, Mercurius sublimate in
powder, 2 Drachms, ceruss in Powder 2 Drachms; put it all together, then add to
it Borax 2 Drachms, Camphire 1 Dram, both in Powder; mix them well together
into an ointment, with which anoint your Face going to Bed, and let it dry on.
And in the morning, wash thy Face with Butter and Rose Water mingled together.
Probat.

A rare Secret to preserve the Beauty of the Face, Neck, Hands, Arms, etc.
Take Spanish Wine 9 times distilled, to every Quart put 2 ounces and half of
sweet Benjamin in Powder; it is made in 12 Hours thus: Wash your Bottles clean,
and let them be well dried; put in your Wine and Benjamin, and for 2 or 3 Hours
shake them well together, then let it settle, and so ^se it thus; put a
Spoonful or two of it into a Basin of fair water, and it will turn it like
Milk, with which wash; for it is the most excellent thing in the world to the
purposes aforesaid, and for the rareness of the Secret, is commonly sold for 20
s. a Pint.

For a white Scurf, or Pimples in the Face.
Take a Pint of white wine Vinegar dissolve in it 1 ounce of Camphire, of Roch
Allom one quarter of an ounce, and a little Bay Salt, and let them stand
together well stopped in a Glass, 14 days, then wash the part therewith.

For a red Face.
Take the distilled water of Cucumbers; it cures the reddest Face that is, if
often washed therewith.

GOUT.
A mavelous Remedy to Cure the Gout, it never fails.
TAke half a pound of unwrought Wax, as much of Rosin, Labdanum I ounce,
Litharge of Gold Four Ounces, White Lead in Powder and s^arsed 12 Ounces, then
take a pint of Neats-foot Oil, and set it over a Fire in a Pot, and mingle it
with the Wax and Rosin, and when it is melted, put in all the other Powders,
then stir it with a Stick as fast as you can, until dropping a Drop into a
Sawcer it appear hard, then take it from the Fire, anoint some clean, even
Board, with Neats-foot Oil, and as soon as you can handle it for heat, make it
up into Roles, and with Plasters of Leather made thereof, apply it to the part
grieved Morning and Evening, and if it remove, follow it with your Plasters
till it be quite gone.

An excellent Remedy against the Gout and the Dropsy.
Take Extractum Catholicon, Pil. Hermodac Pil. Arthritic of each three
scruples, mix them well and make them into Pills as big as a little Pea, take
thereof at a times Pills, three mornings together, about three or four of the
Clock in the morning. It cures.

And for the Dropsy, take the same Pills as before is last spoken of only
observe before you take the Pills, role hard the place grieved, for two or
three days together (or as cause requires) with a Roler wet in Vinegar and
Water. Both approved.

To Cure the Gout perfectly.
Take quick Lime, what you will, quench it in running Water, and then stir it
about, till it be like a Hasty-pudding, then spread of it Plaster-wayes upon a
Cloth and apply it to the part grieved, only one Plaster to a grieved part and
no more, and lay on your Plaster as hot as the Patient can suffer it. Color
your Lime with Saunders, or Bole Ammoniack, or Dragons Blood, that it may not
be known

Against Pain in the Gout.
Take Aqua vitae 4 drachms, Sage 1 ounce, Opium 1 dram, Saffron half a
dram, Camphire half a dram, Oil of Foxes 2 Ounces, let all these be well
mixed, and make a liniment, and anoint the grieved part, this is very Sovereign.

Against the hot and cold Gout.
Take Garlic and Houseleek of each alike quantity, stamp them very well
together, till they be like a salve and plaster-wise apply on a Cloth.

To ease any kind of Gout.
Take Opopanax and pulp of raisins of the Sun of each alike quantity, eases
any kind of Gout being applied plaster wise to it.

A sovereign Ointment against the Gout.
Take Oil of Bays, Aqua vitae, Juice of Sage, Vinegar Mustard, and Ox gall of
each alike quantity, put them into a Bladder, that is far too big to hold them
and ^ye them up close, then chafe them up and down with your Hands one hour and
half together; then have you as good an Ointment for the Gout as the World can
afford:

Another for the same.
Take the herb Sparagus and stamp it very well, and then fill a walnut shell
full of it stamped, and apply it to the place pained, bind it on, and in six or
eight Hours, it will draw a blister, the which cut, and let out the water then
take a Colwort-leaf, and lay to it, till the Malady be remedyed.

Note, The flower Crowfoot will do the like, so Cant^^ades and Leven.

For all sorts of Gouts.
Take 1 dram of the Electuary Catholicon going to Bed, and in the Morning
drink a good draught of warm posset drink, and then go about your affairs it
helps Gouts of all sorts.

Another.
Take dwarf Elder, mingled with Bulls suet and stamped into a plaster, it is a
present remedy for the Gout.

Green Sickness.
To Cure the Green Sickness. First cleanse the Body by gentle Vomits, then by
Purges, or both together: Then
TAKE of Steel in fine powder 1 ounce, fine Sugar beaten small 5 ounces, Mace,
Cloves, and Cinnamon, of each 1 Dram, dry the Sugar and Spices very well by
the Fire, then beat them to powder and keep them very dry by the Fire in a Box,
that the Steel may not (...), and keep them well mixed; then take every day
Fasting a good spoonful of it dry, and Walk One Hour or more upon it.

Against the Green Sickness.
Take of Nutmegs pounded half a pound, put to them 1 quart of Sack, 1 pint of
Water of Sloes, boil this in a clear Decoction close, then strain it, and put
to this Liquor, Cinnamon one Ounce, rinds of Pomegranates one ounce, Mace 1
dram; boil it again close, then strain it hard, and give it Fasting 3
spoonfuls warm. And it will Cure.

Another for the same.
Take one quart of white Wine, 2 handfuls of Marygold Flowers, Pennyrial, red
Mints, of each one handful stamp them small, and put the Wine to them, with a
Pennyworth of Saffron, then strain it (it must not be boiled) and put it in a
Glass close stopped, and let the Party drink thereof (only Lukewarm) 4 days
together, and let the Patient use vehement Exercise, and abstain from rest and
sleep in the day time.

Another for the same.
Take an Orange, and cut off the top of it, then take out a little of the meat;
then put there in a little Saffron and clap on the top and ros^ it gently, and
when it is roasted put it presently into a pint of white Wine; keep it very
close covered, and drink 4 ounces thereof, first and last.

Heart Infirmities, to Cure
To put away all Venoms from the Heart.
TAke Bole Ammoniack, Sanguis Draconis, of each 3 ounces, of the best Cinnamon
4 ounces; bring them severally by themselves into fine Powder, then mix them
well, and take thereof at a time as much as will (...) on a six pence, in a cup
of Cana^^^, Wine, and it will do it.

Against Heart-burning, or (...) the Mouth of the Stomach.
Take Twenty corns of (...) and eat them raw; it help (...) Take 5 or 6 corns
of (...) Bed chew them a little (...) them, it does the (...)

Against the beating of the Heart.
Take the Waters of Borage, Bugloss, and Balm, of each a like quantity, and put
to them as much Oil of Vitriol, as will make them like Verjuice, and drink
thereof first and last a spoonful at a time, and this will heal, though of a long
continuance.

Another for the same.
Take a pottle of the best Claret Wine, and put therein Baum and Borage, of
each one handful, 6 tops of Rosemary, English Saffron 1 dram, of the best
fine Sugar 4 ounces; mingle them well together, then put them into a close
Vessel, well stopped, and let it stand by the space of Twenty-Four Hours, then
drink thereof a good draught first and last for Seven or 8 ^^ves together, or
more, and you shall stopped thereby.

(This is Excellent.

(...) ^^^^^gthen a fainting Heart, and a (...)
(...) Conserve of red Roses, and (...) a Nutmeg at a time, (...) Evening, is a
very great (...)

For Fatness about the Heart.
Take the Juice of Fennel and Honey, of each alike, boil them till they be
hard, then eat thereof first and last, and be whole.

Good at any time when you are ill.
Take Brandy one ounce and half, Carduus Water one ounce, Sugar Candy powdered
one dram, Saffron one grain, Mace 3 grains; mix them and drink it up.

Haemorhoids.
A Plaster for the Haemorhoids.
TAke Bole Ammoniack, Frankincense; Aloes, Mastick, of (...) half an ounce,
Dragons Blood (...) Drachms and a half; powder the (...) then mingle them well,
and (...) white of an Egg beaten, and (...) of Plantain, make them (...)

A Plaster for the (...)
Take Dyachylon and (...) of each a little quantity (...) a Sawcer, and when
they are well incorporated, spread it on a Linen Cloth, and lay it on the
Piles warm, Morning and Evening, and in 4 days he shall be whole.

A Suppository for the Haemorhoids.
Take Aloes powdered, then mingle it well with Honey, make a Suppository, put
it up into the Body, and keep it so long as you can; use this Two or Three
times, and be whole.

Another, (...) good also for the Fig in the Fundament.
Take the Yolk of an Egg, Oil of (...) Roses one ounce, beat them well
together, then add white Sugar Candy, fine Sugar Powdered, (...) of Saffron in
powder two Scruther, an^ apply it to the Fundament (...) wise, and if the pain
be more (...) make a Pessary, and put it (...)

(...) the Haemorhoids.
(...) of Eggs, it is a notable (...)

Hicket, or Yelking
For the Hicket.
STop both your Ears with your Fingers, and the Hicket will presently leave you.

Against the Hicket.
Take the Decoction of Organdy, boiled with a few Cloves, and dulcified with a
little Sugar, and drink thereof, it helps exceedingly. And so also it
provokes Urine, and opens the stoppings of the Liver, Spleen, and Womb

To stay the Hicket.
Take Dill, boil the tops (...) Wine; then tie some of it in a (...) Cloth, and
only smell to it, and it (...)

Hoarseness, and loss of (...)
Speech lost, to resto^^ (...)
TAke the Juice of (...) Juice of Primrose (...) boil them in white Wine, and
gargle it in the mouth.

For a Hoarseness in the Throat.
Take Penny-^^al and seethe it in running Water, then strain it, and at Night
take a dishful sweetened with a little Sugar, and in 3 times be whole.

Hoarseness, lost Speech, and all Diseases of the Chest and Lungs, to Cure.
Take the Herbs and Flowers of Hedge Mustard, boil them in Wine or Ale, and
drink of the Decoction strained for a little time. Those by this have been
recovered, who have utterly lost their Speech, and almost their Spirits also.

Health to preserve.
(...) to provide in hot Countries.
(...) you travel into Hot Coun^^^^^ (...) you must observe that (...)
prescribed in a Fever, (...) over eat themselves; (...) Lemons, Rice, white
Wine mixe^ (...) Vinegar, (...) Water (...)) a (...) drinking of (...) hot
Drinks, (...), or (...) cold; and to provided (...) Butter, and not to be (...)
Treacle, that is very (...)

How to provide in cold (...)
Those which Sail into cold (...) may feed more liberally, (...) hot drinks
safely, because the (...) Air is colder, and so it (...) the heat into the
inward parts (...) Body, where it fortifies, the (...) Concoction, and helps
(...) digest as liberally as it were (...) I commend unto them also, (...)
Tobacco with Oil of (...) they be not of (...) that take it.) And I (...) to
Bala^^ their (...) in Sand, and (...) preserved, for (...) good against the
(...) the Body.


