A CONFERENCE Between a Parish- PRIEST, AND A QUAKER: Published for the
preventing (if possible) the vile Deceits of Priestcraft in America.

London: Printed, and Reprinted by SAMUEL KEIMER, in Philadelphia. 1725.

SIR,
YOU have given us lately a fine and just Dialogue between a Dutch Magistrate
and a French Hugonot Preacher; let me here present you with one between a
Clergyman and a Quaker. It lately happened at a Meeting of some Gentlemen of
our Country; and I was so taken with it, that as soon as I came home, I
recollected what had been said on both Sides, and think I have done both Sides
Justice. This Dialogue will show that the Quakers are not such contemptible
Reasoners as Men of more Learning and Name would generally make them; and that
good Sense is sufficient Match for Art, and some Sorts of Education.

I am Sir, your humble Servant, W. F.
Essex, Feb. 1.
Clergyman. I am glad of this Opportunity of talking with you. It was what I
wanted.


Quaker. And why did not take it before? I never shunned thee.


Cler. I am your Minister: It became you to come to me.


Qua. I promise thee, thou art none of my Minister: I Will have none but of my
own choosing. Besides, if thou mindest thy Pride more than my Salvation, and art
too great to come, to thy Parishioners, small is my Encouragement to come to
thee: The Apostles stood not thus upon their Dignity.


Cler. The Apostles went to those who could not come to them


Qua. And to those that would not.


Cler. A modest Man would have doubted, and heard what I had to say.


Qua. Friend, have thou thy self no Doubts about the Streightness of the Way
thou art in?


Cler. Certainly no.


Qua. Then am not I more modest than thou art? I often doubt, and go to God
with my Doubts.


Cler. But you should go to him in proper Way.


Qua. I go to him in Prayer, and in his Word: Know thou a Way more proper?


Cler. Do you understand his Word?


Qua. It is thy Fault, and the Fault of thy Brethren, if I do not. The Clergy
have translated it.


Cler. But there are still many difficult Places in it which the Clergy
understand best.


Qua. If the Clergy understand them, then are they not difficult to Laymen, who
know all Languages: And why do not the Clergy explain them?


Cler. That is their Business.


Qua. Then they ill understand their Business, since they vary and quarrel so
much about it.


Cler. They only differ in Controverted Points.


Qua. No more don't thee and I.


Cler. But I mean Points controverted amongst us.


Qua. That is to say, ALL Points. Even where you say, you believe alike, you
explain differently; which shows a manifest Difference also in believing. And
art not thou unreasonable to expect, nay to demand Union amongst the People,
when the Clergy themselves are the Authors of Disunion?


Cler. Therefore we renounce such Clergymen.


Qua. And they renounce thee. And do not the Quakers act wisely to renounce you
ALL, as you ALL do one another?


Cler. You speak harshly, and untruly; There are Numbers of us who adhere
together in our Sentiments.


Qua. And there are Numbers who adhere together against you, and yet call
themselves of the same Church with you.


Cler. I am sorry for it.


Qua. So ought thou to be for charging me with speaking untruly, when thou
thy self bear Testimony to the Truth I speak.


Cler. But you go too far.


Qua. I do not, nay, I will go farther, and maintain, that the Numbers thou
boastest of in Union with thee, were every Man to explain his Belief his own
Way, would all vary from thee, and from one another.


Cler. I do not think so: However, their varying in Belief is no Reason against
believing.


Qua. But it is a good Reason why every Man should have his own Belief.


Cler. Then there will be no End of Confusions.


Qua. No more there is not in Opinions and Doctrines.


Cler. And is not that a deplorable Case?


Qua. So is the Fall of Adam: can thou cure it?


Cler. They are not parallel Cases.


Qua. Depend upon it, thou may as easily bring back Adam into a State of
Innocence, as all his Posterity into one Mind.


Cler. What! cannot I reason a Man into my Opinion?


Qua. Yes, if he like thy Opinion, and thy Reasoning: Perhaps he will think
them both stark naught.


Cler. That may be his Fault.


Qua. And it may be thine. How are thy Opinions better than mine? I think them
worse.


Cler. They are warranted by the Word of God.


Qua. I think mine are: I Will promise thee I try them by that Word, which I
think I can interpret as well as thou can. I Will tell thee further, that I am
satisfied the God of Mercy never damned any Man for mistaking it; for I take
it, in revealing his Word he mocketh not Men, by giving them a Riddle instead
of a Revelation.


Cler. You know little of Scripture, if you do not know there are Places in it
which you cannot understand.


Qua. Nor can thou. As to those Places, though they may be his Will, yet I am
sure they are not his revealed Will, because he has not revealed it; and if I
take thy Interpretation and Conjectures for his Word, then do I believe in thy
Word, and not in his. Now, where has he commanded me to believe in thee?


Cler. He has commanded you to believe me when I speak in his Name.


Qua. And so art thou to believe me when I speak in his Name?


Cler. But I am his Ambassador.


Qua. There I do not believe thee, because thou speak in thy own Name.


Cler. Why, does not St. Paul say, We are Ambassadors in his Stead.


Qua. Yes; Art thou St. Paul?


Cler. No, I am only his Successor; he himself is dead.


Qua. So are his Gifts and Miracles: Can thou work Miracles? If not, how
do thou succeed him.


Cler. I preach the Gospel which he preached.


Qua. So do I, and bear my own Charges as he did his; and why should I pay thee
for doing what I can do as well my self? I do not find that Paul has left thee
any Wages, and I am sure he has left thee nothing else; his Epistles are left
to every Man.


Cler. Yes, he has left Ministers to wait upon God's Ordinances in the House of
God. I am one of those Ministers.


Qua. Friend, as thou art a Christian, thou must needs know that every House is
alike to Almighty God, who fills Heaven and Earth, and dwells not in Houses
made with Hands: And as to what you call Ordinances, thou know that the
Apostles administered none. Every Man did it for himself, and it was done from
House to House. There were no bloody Sacrifices in the Religion of Jesus, and
consequently no Priests, their only Office being to slay Beasts.


Cler. Dare you say that God has appointed no Body in his Church to preach and
explain his Word?


Qua. No; I neither do, nor dare say it; and thou may spare thy big Words.
He has left every Man to preach it to another; nor have thou any more Call
from him than every one of thy Parish has. If thou would resemble the
Apostles, go and preach to the unconverted without Money, and without Price.
Thy whole Parish believe in Christ already, as much as thou do, and did
before they knew thee. They have the Bible themselves; and if thou bring
them any Tidings that are not in it, and that they themselves see not in it,
they ought not to believe thee.


Cler. You argue very insincerely with me. Just now you contended that I had
none of St. Paul's Gifts; and now you would have me go without those Gifts; and
do what he did with them; namely, travel over the World, and convert the
unconverted.


Qua. No, I only would show thee, that as thou do not resemble him, thou art
vain in pretending to succeed him; and so far I reason consistently, as thou
do weakly, if thou claimest all his Reverence, without any of his Merit.


Cler. I do not set up for the Abilities of St. Paul; but still have
Qualifications superior to Laymen.


Qua. What are those Qualifications?


Cler. I know Languages; I have had an University-Education; and --.


Qua. All these are civil Qualifications, common to all Men, who would be at
the Pains and Charge. Laymen understand Latin and Greek as well as thou do.
The Gospel wants no Embelishment from those thou call Virgil and Horace;
and Christ crucified, is not sought nor found in Universities, nor indeed the
Flesh crucified. If I am not misinformed, they abound with young Men who are
too often Sinners, and with old Men who are no Saints. They are Schools of
Words; but the Gospel has nothing to do with thy Logic and vain Philosophy.


Cler. I was going to tell you too, that I had studied Divinity.


Qua. Know thou any Divinity, but what is in the Bible? and have not I the
Bible? I think, and am sure, that it is a plain and intelligible Book, at least
as much of it as is meet for a Christian, and to turn it into Doubtfulness, and
Disputation, and Science, and Gain, favors not of Christianity.


Cler. This is insolently said: Who turns it into Gain?


Qua. He who makes a Gain of it; which is worse than Insolence, whereof, thou
do groundlesly accuse me.


Cler. What! do you not declare against Preachers?


Qua. I have already told thee, I do not: I would have all Men Preachers.


Cler. Ay, Tinkers, Tailors, and Cobblers.


Qua. Friend, beware of thy Words: What were the Apostles? They were no
University Gentry.


Cler. But you say we want the Apostles Gifts.


Qua. I wish thou could confute me. However, we have all of us the Apostles
Books; and can thou mend them?


Cler. No. But I can enforce them; and the Labourer is worthy of his Hire, if
you will believe St. Paul.


Qua. But if he labors for himself, why should I pay him? I profit not by
thy Labor, why should thou profit by my Substance? I believe Paul; but Paul
has given thee no Property in my Pigs and Barley.


Cler. But the Law has.


Qua. The Law is not Paul: But I perceive, whoever is the Giver, thou will be
the Taker.


Cler. Sir, you are rude.


Qua. How? Because I do thee Justice.


Cler. Let me tell you, Sir, there is Reason in it, as well as Law.


Qua. Thy Interest may be Reason to thee: But thou will be put to it, to give
me a Reason for giving thee something for nothing.


Cler. Don't you know, that, under the Law, the Priests had their Lot in the
Land?


Qua. Yes: But they were Jewish Priests, or Sacrificers. Art thou a Jew? and
do thou kill Cattle, as they did? And would thou reconcile Judaism to
Christianity?


Cler. No; I would only show, that it is reasonable that Priests should have a
proper Appointment.


Qua. I have already shown thee the Unreasonableness of having any Priests in
Christianity.


Cler. In this you saucily differ from all the Societies of Christians in the
World.


Qua. I do not differ from Christianity; nor am I saucy in differing from those
that do. The blessed Jesus has left thee no Legacy, that I know of, nor so
much as named thee in his Will.


Cler. The Man grows profane.


Qua. Thou meanest unanswerable. Is it any Article of thy Creed, that Truth is
profane?


Cler. Your having no established Ministers amongst you, is enough to render
your Sect odious to all Sorts of Christians.


Qua. We have Religion established amongst us. Is Religion odious in thy Eyes,
where there is not a Livelihood to be got out of it? We establish no Clergy,
lest they should disestablish the Peace and Purity of the Gospel; and whilst
our Preachers have Grace, we reckon they will seek no Money. We therefore do
not keep in Pay Men who sell Speech.


Cler. The Truth is, the Speeches uttered amongst you are not worth buying.


Qua. Friend, no Speeches in the House of God ought to be bought, nor the
Tabernacle be turned into a Shop. Why sellest thou thine, which, as Report
says, are not alluring? Freely you have received, freely give. Friend, what
did the Gospel cost thee? Or why should we purchase it at thy dear Price, when
we have it in our Houses in more Purity and Plainness than thou can give it?


Cler. Yes, and you understand it by the Spirit!


Qua. Thou say it. We trust to the Spirit to direct us, who is promised to
all that ask him. Thou trustest to John Hammond and Daniel Whitby for
Direction. Whether art thou or we best directed?


Cler. I shall not believe that the Spirit is the Author of the Enthusiasm and
Dreams that are found amongst you.


Qua. The Carnal Man discerns not the Things of God. Paul was called a
Babbler by the Athenians, whose Priests, who were many, had no Illumination,
but being Men of dark and voluptuous Minds, and feeding upon Sacrifices and
Offerings, preferred Bacchus and his Grapes to the Spirit of Christ.


Cler. The Comparison you would insinuate is impudent and profane.


Qua. Friend, Meekness becomes a Preacher. Thou have the Passion of a Priest,
but not the Meekness of a Minister of the Gospel. Why do thou fall upon me
with bitter Words, for telling thee a Fact, which, in Answer to thee, it was
necessary to tell. Is it profane to say that the Heathen Clergy took Offerings?
Nay, since thou do urge me, do not thou take Offerings? and did the
Apostles take any? I have put thee between these Priests and the Apostles, that
by comparing thy self with both, thou may see whom thou resemblest most.


Cler. If this is not Profaness, I know not what it is.


Qua. The Profaneness is not on my Side.


Cler. Let me inform you, Sir, that for this Language, in some Countries, you
would have your Tongue cut out of your Head.


Qua. I know it; and praise God that I am not in those Countries, and that thou
can not bring those Countries hither. It is plain, thou approvest their
Barbarity, else why do thou think it due to me? I beg thou would not be
provoked, if I mention to thee once more the Example of the Apostles: Where did
they justify Savageness and Severity to any Man for any Opinion, or any Words?
Where did they ever talk to Pagans as thou do to me, who am a Christian, and
endeavor to possess the Temper of the Gospel?


Cler. Yes, you have a Form of Godliness: But --


Qua. Friend, in the first Place, judge not: and secondly, beware what thou
say against Forms, for thy own Sake.


Cler. I say, if your Preachers had Power, they would quickly find Texts for
Persecution.


Qua. I guess thou judge by thy self; and thou judge well. We know it; and
therefore give them no Power, nor the Sinews of Power. Pride and Impatience are
inseparable from it: It destroys all Humility, and makes Men imperious, and
Persecutors. Why are the Popish Priests more cruel and mischievous than
Protestant Priests, but because they have more Power? And why is the Pope the
most mischievous of all Priests, but because he has most Power?


Cler. You carry every Thing too far. Preachers of the Gospel ought to be kept
above Contempt.


Qua. Friend, they who are rich in Grace, want no other Riches to save them
from Contempt; and they who are rich without it, ought to be contemned. Riches
may render them formidable; but Piety only, and a holy Conversation, can make
them reverenced. Revenues do not place them above Contempt, but only encourage
them to despise their People. The Poverty of the Apostles was great Part of
their Glory.


Cler. Of all People I think the Quakers have the least Pretense to glory in
their Poverty.


Qua. Thou seem in this, to aim at being severe, but I feel it not. Our
moderate Wealth is the Effect of our honest Industry, and we are no ashamed of
it.


Cler. As well you might, if you got it by you Preaching.


Qua. I do not find that thou art ashamed, as yet thy Income is great this Way.


Cler. Then you make Comparisons forsooth!


Qua. Assuredly, no, thy Motives ours a not akin.


Cler. I warrant you preach by the Spirit.


Qua. How preachest thou? By the Sheet?


Cler. I read my Sermons to avoid Incoherences.


Qua. Thou need not, had thou the Spirit, it would help thy Infirmities.


Cler. Does the Spirit help you to your low Language, and your silly
Repetitions?


Qua. If Repetitions are silly, why shuttest not thou thy Common Prayer Book,
which abounds therein? And as to our Language, if the Spirit was a Dealer in
Style, why does Paul write such bad Greek, as the Learned say? But I can tell
thee, we have many Men amongst us, who preach in as decent Language, and as
free from Tautologies, as thou can read out of thy Note-Book. I could mention
the different Efficacy too, and the manifest Disinterestedness of our
Preachers; but I spare thee.


Cler. Spare me! I fear you not.


Qua. Why truly, nor I thee, since thou defiest me. I have found thee no
terrible Adversary, which may not be the Fault of the Man. Thy Bishop would not
do better, though his Pay is greater.


Cler. It is too true, he could not: Reason is thrown away upon you, and such
as you.


Qua. To deal freely with thee, as I am not the richer, so neither art thou the
poorer, for any Reason thou have thrown away upon me.


Cler. Where Men pretend to the Spirit, it is in vain to argue with them.


Qua. Then why do thou? But especially why floutest thou the Spirit?


Cler. I hope there is a wide Difference between the Spirit of God, and the
Spirit of Enthusiasm.


Qua Doubtless there is: but I would be glad to hear thee explain the
Difference.


Cler. The same Difference as there is between a good Understanding, and a wild
hot Imagination.


Qua. Thy Words sound well, but thy Reasoning is naught. Is not the Gospel
above the best Understanding? and was it not to the Greek Philosophers
Foolishness? They had as much Sense as thou or thy Bishop, and knew their own
Language better, but could not comprehend the Incarnation and Crucifixion of
God, nor Original Sin and the Resurrection. The Light of the Spirit has
therefore no Analogy with the natural Understanding, as you your selves contend
when you would confute or punish People for following their Reason, and
departing from your Systems. I must tell thee too, that the Spirit warmeth both
the Heart and the Imagination; for which Cause Festus reckoned Paul mad, and
the first Christians sought Martyrdom. And if --


Cler. Be shorter, we see you can preach.


Qua. If I do, it is Truth, without Tithes, and can but half offend thee.


Cler. Mighty witty, I just mentioned Preaching, and presently Tithes must be
brought in for Company.


Qua. Why, do thou love them asunder?


Cler. Fiddle, faddle, what has all this to do with Enthusiasm?


Qua. Nothing; and wherefore did thou begin it? I have shown thee thy weak
Reasoning about Enthusiasm: What say thou in Answer?


Cler. That the Quakers are Enthusiasts.


Qua. And give no Reason. Is it thus thou convincest Gainsayers, edifiest thy
Flock?


Cler. My Flock will not come to you for Edification.


Qua. It is well for thee they do not. But to keep thee to the Point if I can,
I tell thee, that we are no Enthusiasts, and I will give thee a Reason: We
pretend to no more of the Spirit than influences our Actions, and our Actions
are sober and rational. Have thou found in me the Speech and wild Behavior of
an Enthusiast.


Cler. You have no ill Knack at Prating.


Qua. Friend, my Prating costeth no Man any Thing.


Cler. Though it is enriched with the Spirit.


Qua. I thank thee; thou give a Reason why it should cost nothing. The Spirit
is not bought nor sold, nor are the Works of the Spirit: Wherefore he neither
receives Fees, nor claims Dues. Simon Magus, who traded in Conjuration and
Spells, was profanely for making a Commodity of the Holy Ghost, and offered
Money for him, doubtless with a Design to make more. Thou know his Doom; and
yet, Friend, there are many Simon Magus's in the World, yea worse than Simon
Magus. There be many who raise great Revenues out of the Spirit, yea, and have
him not.


Cler. Who goes from the Point now?


Qua. I do not. I feared thou would think me too much in Point. We were
speaking of the Spirit.


Cler. Which you think you have. How do you know it?


Qua. There is but one Way. I feel him.


Cler. But how shall I be satisfied of that?


Qua. The same Way, thou must first feel him too


Cler. So say all the Enthusiasts in the World.


Qua. Friend, are all who have the Spirit Enthusiasts?


Cler. No.


Qua. How do distinguish?


Cler. By their Works.


Qua. Thou say well. Now by what Work of ours do we appear to be
Enthusiasts? We are sober in Society, sober in our Families: We fear God, and
have an awful Reverence for his Word, which we read continually, insomuch, that
for this our Love to the Bible, some of thy Brethren laugh us to Scorn, and
scoffingly say, that we are Bible-mad. We fast and we pray in private, and
preach and pray in our religious Assemblies, and we have universal Charity. We
open our Purses cheerfully for the Support of the Public; we are dutiful
Subjects, and meddle not in Factions; we maintain all our own Poor, and
contribute not the less to thine; and even the Clergy have Part of our
Substance. See thou in this true Character, the Marks of Enthusiasm.


Cler. You indeed maintain a fair Outside.


Qua. Can thou see further?


Cler. I can see your Ghostly Hummings and Hah-ings.


Qua. Is it not as easy for thee to call them Sighs and Groans which cannot be
uttered; whereof thou must have read, but seem not to understand?


Cler. Why who can understand the Use of your silent Meetings?


Qua. We do, and thou may. Friend, our Devotion and holy Exercises are not
taken out of a Book, but begin first at the Heart; and when the Heart dictateth
not, we speak not. Our Godliness is not performed like a Play by Rehearsal.


Cler. This is a villainous Reflection upon the Common Prayer.


Qua. Thou make it then. I am only defending the religious Worship of the
People called Quakers; and I have defended it. I do not revile the
Church-Exercise: Why revilest thou me?


Cler. Who are they that perform their Devotion by Rehearsal like a Play?


Qua. We do not: And is it not lawful to say we do not? Know thou any that
do?


Cler. We have a Form of Prayers, the best that ever was composed, and find
great Devotion in it.


Qua. I rejoice in it? I like all Devotion that is paid to God, and warranted
by his Word. I find not Fault with thine, only it is not meet for me, who find
more Fervency in my own, and more Edification. And what is the End of Devotion
but Edification?


Cler. Yes, the Glory of God.


Qua. God is not glorified, where Men are not edified. Hence every Man must
glorify God his own Way.


Cler. What in an erroneous Way?


Qua. Those are Words. No Man errs who pleases God, who is, doubtless, pleased
with our best Endeavors to please him: Know thou any better Rule?


Cler. Yes, the Rule of Certainty.


Qua. This is Certainty. Other Certainty than this is not found amongst Men,
who must all answer for themselves, and therefore must all worship God, as each
thinks best.


Cler. Which would introduce a thorough Anarchy in Worship.


Qua. So there is in Faces; and what Harm ensues? God made Faces different;
can thou make them uniform?


Cler. No; but Minds are different from Faces. The Mind may be altered by
Reasoning.


Qua. Sometimes for the worse, as well as the better; and so may Faces be
altered by good or bad Keeping. But thou may depend upon it, Minds will
always vary as infinitely as Faces; and for ought I know, more as their
Substance is more delicate and quick, and knows no particular Figure and
Dimensions.


Cler. There is, however, no Harm in reasoning with them.


Qua. I concur with thee, if that Reasoning be free from Deceit, the next worst
Thing to Violence, which ought never to be employed about the Mind, which it
can never change.


Cler. But in Case of Obstinacy and Disobedience, what Remedy is there?


Qua. None. God only can judge the Heart; which he only can see. Thou may
think me obstinate: But I declare sincerely I am not; and thou in Charity
ought to believe me. If thou do not, thou art not a good Christian; and if
thou would punish me, thou art no Christian. I do not think thou art
obstinate, and adherest to Opinions thou dislikest; and I would not hurt a Hair
of thy Head, no, not though I thought thee obstinate.


Cler. This is plausibly said: But God keep me out of your Power.


Qua. I desire not to have thee in my Power I know the Frailty of human Nature,
and the Deceitfulness of Power, which perhaps I might abuse. Wherefore I would
neither have thee in mine, nor be my self subject unto thine.


Cler. Ay, but you are only a private Man.


Qua. Friend, all Christians, as Christians, are private Men. There is neither
High nor Low in Christianity, but in the Degrees of Grace; and to found
Dominion in Grace, is indeed Fanaticism, as the Clergy, in their Disputes with
the Presbyterians, have justly called it.


Cler. Ay, but they meant Civil Power.


Qua. Know thou any Power in Society but Civil Power?


Cler. Yes, certainly, Power Ecclesiastic.


Qua. What to do?


Cler. To coerce and punish Offenders against the Laws of the Church.


Qua. What in their Bodies and Property?


Cler. Without Doubt.


Qua. And is not this manifest Civil Power?


Cler. Yes, in its Effect.


Qua. Then it is in Effect, and in Truth, and entirely Civil Power, which
Christianity is a Stranger unto; and which is an Enemy to Christianity, when it
meddleth therewith.


Cler. How! are we not all subject to the Laws of the Church?


Qua. To the Laws of Christ, if thou please; my Conscience knows no other
Master: Does thine?


Cler. No; But my Conscience tells me that there ought to be spiritual
Governors in the Church.


Qua. Governors are Masters; and the Conscience cannot be mastered.


Cler. What, not directed?


Qua. If by Direction, thou meanest Instruction, it has no Relation to
Government. And all Men that can instruct, ought to instruct.


Cler. What, without a Call?


Qua. To be able is a sufficient Call; and no Call suffices without Ability.


Cler. But who shall judge of that Call?


Qua. He who has it, and they to whom he ministers.


Cler. The Common People are rare Judges!


Qua. The common'st Man is a good Judge, whether he is edified by his Preacher,
or not.


Cler. Perhaps they are both Enthusiasts.


Qua. They may be pious Christians for all that: If their Affections are good
toward God, they will certainly be saved.


Cler. Nay, I don't wonder at your Charity for Enthusiasts. It is but natural.


Qua. I have Charity for all Men, as every true Christian has even for thee.
Art thou an Enthusiast?


Cler. No; I am a Member of the Church of Christ.


Qua. Show it by thy Charity. Thou have neither Charity nor Understanding, if
thou would exclude all Enthusiasts from Christ's Church.


Cler. They exclude themselves.


Qua. Thy Censure is passionate and cruel. No Man chooses to be an Enthusiast,
nor knows that he is: Would thou damn him for invincible Weakness?


Cler. What shall I do with him, if he will not be reclaimed?


Qua. That is Part of his Weakness; and thou have nothing to do with him. What
would thou have to do, where thou can do nothing? Those who have Conscience
know that it is not to be commanded nor plied.


Cler. A Whipping-Post has some Times worked great Cures that Way.


Qua. Upon Hypocrites. Do thou reckon Conscience an Evil? and would a
Whipping-Post cure thee of thine?


Cler. You are an unmannerly Fellow.


Qua. Would that were the worst I could say of thee.


Cler. Sir, What can you say of me?


Qua. What I will not say. I do not like thy Example so well, as to follow it;
nor will I fulfill the Character thou give of me. I will only assure thee,
that thou art not qualified to rebuke, unmannerly Language; and that for my
self, I would rather want Breeding than Charity.


Cler. I perceive my Censure of your Brethren, the Enthusiasts, touches you.


Qua. With Compassion for thee, who art the greatest Enthusiast I ever met with.


Cler. Hey dey! Mr. Pert; what, is your Head turned?


Qua. I am going to show thee that thine is: For Reasoning has no Manner of
Effect upon thee; and thou reckon'st every Man who is out of thy Favor, to be
moreover out of the Favor of God. All which is manifest Enthusiasm, and the
worst Parts of Enthusiasm, the Enthusiasm of Monks and Dervises, and of Bigots
and Persecutors of all Sides and Sorts.


Cler. Thou art a very merry Fellow.


Qua. I am not merry: Thou make me melancholy to see such an Antichristian
Spirit in thee.


Cler. Are you really in Earnest, when you change me with Enthusiasm?


Qua. Thou chargest thy self, by declaring for Persecution; a Crime against the
very Essence of Christianity. If thou art not an Enthusiast, thou art worse.


Cler. Why, I tell you, I am an Enemy to Enthusiasts.


Qua. In that very Thing thou art one. Thou art an Enthusiast against
Enthusiasm. If Enthusiasts hurt not thee, why should thou be their Enemy?


Cler. I am sure you talk like a wild Enthusiasts.


Qua. So thou say; but thou provest nothing. I talk against Persecution.


Cler. To punish Disobedience to our spiritual Governors, is, forsooth,
Persecution!


Qua. I thought I had already shown thee the Vanity of thy Language about
spiritual Governors, which Words contradict each other. None but God can govern
the Spirit of Man. All Government amongst Men is human Government, which
meddleth only with the Peace and Property of Society: When it would control
the Consciences of Men, it invadeth the Jurisdiction, and usurps the
Prerogative of the Almighty, and is guilty of Persecution.


Cler. But don't you disturb the Peace of the Church, which is Part of the
Government!


Qua. We our selves are Part of the Church of Christ, and give no Disturbance
to the rest; and if thy Pride is disturbed at our Christian Liberty, the
Scripture condemns thee. We cannot, as we are Christians, sacrifice our
Conscience to any Man's Ambition. Can a peaceable Compliance with private
Conscience, disturb any Man who has the Spirit of Christ? The Business of
Religion is to find a Way to Heaven: Art thou disturbed because I choose that
which appears the shortest, and which to me is the only comfortable Way?


Cler. But if you are in a wrong Way, and I would compel you in the right Way,
I do you no Injury, but real Service.


Qua. Friend, have thou ever been there? And have not I the same written
Directions from the Hand of God as thou have, about the Length and Difficulty
of the Road? If thou would take my divine Rules for Traveling out of my
Hand, or force thy self upon me for a Guide, and drive me into a Road which I
do not find in my Book, and make me pay for all this, I shall suspect thee for
mine Enemy, and for a Freebooter, who would carry me out of the Way into a
Wilderness, to rob me. Let me ask the Question; Would thou be compelled to
accompany me in my Journey Heavenward?


Cler. No Faith for two unaswerable Reasons: First, you are not going thither.


Qua. I dare neither think nor say the like of thee: Only thy Road is not my
Road.


Cler. Secondly, you have no Warrant to compel me.


Qua. Thou speak Truth: No Man has a Warrant to force Faiths, or to carry
another Man's Conscience.


Cler. But you allow me a Right to direct Conscience.


Qua. Yes, if it likes thy Direction. I have the same Right.


Cler. You have Self-Conceit in Abundance.


Qua. When thou art free from it, thy Rebuke may be seasonable. I think I have
Impartiality too; my Religion brings me no Rents; I only seek Salvation from
it.


Cler. Smart again, forsooth!


Qua. Do thou feel it?


Cler. If I do, I ought to bear it, you know, from a Teacher.


Qua. I wish thou were one. I am sure thou have hitherto taught me nothing. I
have fully confuted all thy Propositions, and thou have not answered mine.


Cler. You are too wise a Man to be confuted or convinced.


Qua. By thy Arguments, undoubtedly.


Cler. By any Arguments.


Qua. That are insufficient.


Cler. In short, you are the most incorrigible Sect living.


Qua. And art thou not vain to endeavor to correct what thou say cannot be
corrected?


Cler. I would, at least, do my Duty, and save your Soul, if I could.


Qua. My Soul is safe in the Blood of Christ. Know thou any other Safety?


Cler. Your Safety will fail you, if you do not worship him in a proper Manner.


Qua. I believe in him, I pray to him, and to God thorough him; I pray for his
Spirit, I seek his Will in his Word, and beg Grace to understand it, and praise
him for it; and I live soberly. Is not this the Whole of Religion, and of
religious Worship? Can thou teach me any better?


Cler. If you were to be taught, I could teach you to worship him decently.


Qua. Thou meanest, I suppose, to bow at Sounds, to make Legs to a Table, and
to say after thee. This is not religious Worship, but a Task which any Infidel
can perform; nay, we have Creatures amongst us that are not rational, and yet
can perform it.


Cler. Was there ever such profane Buffoonry?


Qua. Why truly I think not.


Cler. None but a Pagan could jest thus with sacred Things.


Qua. Thou art mistaken, Friend; Pagans reckon them sacred, and solemnized in
their Temples a Number of merry Motions, which were a Jest to the primitive
Christians.


Cler. Good Things are not the worse for having been abused by the Heathens.


Qua. True, nor foolish Things the wiser for being used by Christians.


Cler. What! do you call the Ceremonies of our holy Church foolish?


Qua. No; But to me they are not edifying.


Cler. To me they are; but your Heart is hardened.


Qua. Do not Things that are edifying soften the Heart? else what are they good
for?


Cler. Grace must go along with them.


Qua. Friend, will not Grace do without Ceremonies? Whoever has Grace is already
edified? And cannot I pray for Grace without Ceremonies?


Cler. Our Church has established them as necessary to Decency and Edification.
Has the Authority of the Church no Weight with you?


Qua. Yes, great Weight, where she erreth not?


Cler. Of which you pretend to judge.


Qua. Do thou follow any Church without knowing why? or should any Man?


Cler. No.


Qua. Then every Man ought to judge of every Church, as thou do, by
separating from every Church but thy own, doubtless, because thou art most
edified by her. And when she edifieth me also, I will also join with her.


Cler. You ought to join with her: She is the established Church.


Qua. If ours were established, would thou join with us?


Cler. How! I join with Fanatics!


Qua. It becomes not me to return ill Language: But it is plain thou valuest
not Establishments; and why would thou expect it from others, and set up Duty
against Conscience.


Cler. Conscience! -- Cant!


Qua. By our Conscience we must please God: But if it offends thee, I will
call it by another Name; I will call it Opinion. Now, suppose I differ in
Opinion with thee and thy Church, would thou have me be an insincere Man, an
Hypocrite, and a Liar, by declaring my self of thy Opinion, when I am not?


Cler. No: -- But --


Qua. Have Patience: I have another Question to put to thee. -- Would it thou
have me change my Mind, when I cannot change it?


Cler. No Man shall tell me, that it is impossible for him to be of the true
Religion.


Qua. I am of the true Religion; and so thinks every Man, it being every Man's
nearest Interest to be of the best.


Cler. A Medley of Religions is pernicious to Society.


Qua. Pernicious (if thou please) to the Pride of Men who would ride upon
Society, over the Belly of Conscience. But what has human Society to do with
what is in the Heart of Man, concerning a future State, wherewith rhere can be
no human Commerce? Human Society, indeed, should beware of those Men who, under
Color of conducting to the other World, would engross this; of Men who would
make the whole Body Politic their Slaves and Tenants, and would take so much
Care of Posture and Opinions, as to leave them nothing but Postures and
Opinions to take Care of.


Cler. A fine Harangue, truly! Who are the terrible Fellows that do, or would
do all this?


Qua. All who would bear no Religion in the World but their own. The Popish
Clergy have done it; and all other Clergy who make the same Demands upon
Society that they do, would do the same. Do not all thy High Brethren make the
same Demands, and contend for all the Tyranny, and Wealth, and Pomp of Popery?


Cler. I am not for Popery: But I am for the Church's having all her own Power
and Lands.


Qua. That is, thou art for the worst Parts of Popery, but not for Popery.
Friend, Religion claims neither Power nor Lands: Our Savior had none, the
Apostles had none, and we claim none; and we cannot interfere with Society, as
they do who demand every Thing that is great and good in Society.


Cler. A pretty Fellow to regulate Society!


Qua. I meddle not with Society: I only desire its Protection.


Cler. What have you to do then with Church Lands?


Qua. Nothing. What have thou? They were robbed from the Laiety by the Popish
Monks. -- Art thou one? At the Reformation the Laiety resumed them again: And
does the Church of Christ condemn the Reformation? Or what has she to do with
the Cheats and Robberies of Monks, but to condemn them?


Cler. I hope you will allow us to keep what the Law gives us.


Qua. But why claimest thou more? And has not the Law that gave, a Power to
take away?


Cler. I dare say, you don't mean your own Estate.


Qua. Yes, surely, if I robbed the Public to get it, or turn the Bounty of the
Public to the public Detriment.


Cler. Have you the Impudence to say the Clergy do so?


Qua. Friend, there are Clergy who do so; who for their own Pride and
Debaucheries starve the Laiety that feed their Luxury; who receive all their
Power and Revenues from the Laiety, and leave the Laiety none. And there are
others who have great Benefices for the Exercise of Religious Functions, and
never exercise any, but convert them into Sine Cures, or leave them to a
Hireling. This, Friend, is worse than Impudence, whereof I am not guilty. Does
the Spirit call them to this? For if I am not deceived, you all declare your
selves called by the Spirit.


Cler. I know you are nibbling at our keeping Curates; and yet you keep a
Bailiff upon your Estate.


Qua. Yes: and I will turn him out, if he neglects my Affairs, or trust them to
a Carter. How do thou like the Example? It is of thy own choosing. And thou
put the Cure of precious Souls, for which Christ died, upon the same Foot
with the Care of Corn and Cattle, which Men eat, and upon a worse Foot, if thou will not suffer us to choose our Spiritual Bailiffs.


Cler, And so you would have the same Authority over Clergymen, as over your
Ploughmen! Mighty Civil!


Qua. We maintain both, but at very unequal Wages. Where would be the
Incivility or Injustice of laying out our own Money for our own Use?


Cler. Then the Church might starve for you.


Qua. Friend, thou may be learned, but thou art very ignorant. The Church of
Christ cannot starve, because it lives not upon Meats, and Drink, and Money.


Cler. Nor consists of solemn Faces, prim Cravats plain Coats, and broad Hats.


Qua. Thou speak Truth, notwithstanding thy Intention.


Cler. Then why are you singular in your Habits?


Qua. Why art thou?


Cler. I am a Minister of the Gospel.


Qua. Which never gave there that Tippet, nor that long and unhandy Coat with
many Plaits.


Cler. But it is decent.


Qua. My Coat is more decent, and would become thee better. It is plain and
warm, and has no long Train nor vain Superfluities.


Cler. That solemn Gait and Mein too is very becoming.


Qua. Would thou have me cut Capers, and practice Smiles?


Cler. And be sure never alter the Figure of that broad Hat.


Qua. It is not broader than thine.


Cler. I tell you I am a Minister.


Qua. Thy Hat is none; and I make no ministerial Use of mine. I do not go to my
Neighbor, and say, Neighbor, I demand the Tenth of thy Substance by Virtue of
this broad Hat.


Cler. Sir, WHO does!


Qua. Friend, thou art very passionate. I am only defending my Hat, whereof I
make no other Use but to keep my Head warm.


Cler. Why don't you pull it off upon Occasion?


Qua. I do upon proper Occasion, that is, when I seek God.


Cler. But never to Man.


Qua. Therefore I do not, because I do it only to God? I think that the Acts of
Worship, which we pay unto God, ought not to be confounded with Ceremonies of
Civility paid unto Men. Thou bowest at the Name of Jesus: Do thou bow also at
the Name of the King?


Cler. But you are inconsistent with your selves. Your Style to God and Man is
the same; and you thee and thou them both alike.


Qua. We speak properly, to one God, as one God, to one Man as one Man. Thou
art more inconsistent with thy self. Thou reckonest thee and thou disrespectful
to Man: Why usest thou the same Language to God?


Cler. It is the Scripture-Stile.


Qua. To Man as well as to God. Besides, Friend, let me tell thee, that the
using the plural Number to single Persons, was begun in Flattery to Princes and
great Men; as was also the Ceremony of the Hat and the Knee, and came to be
practiced as Marks of Adoration paid to Men, who were thereby set up in God's
Stead; and where they cannot go that Length, yet they feed natural Pride, and
make Differences amongst Men, where Nature has made none.


Cler. We do not use them as Marks of Adoration.


Qua. I believe thee; but still they are Marks of Insincerity, and of a
Submission which is not due from Man to Man. Friend, these civil Ceremonies are
of evil Efficacy, and apt to deceive the Mind into a slavish and superstitious
Veneration for Persons. They make unnatural Distances in Society; and set Men
too far above and below one another. By such Steps Kings came to be worshipped
as Gods, as several of the Roman Emperors formerly, and lately thy Friend Louis
was deified by many of thy French Brethren.


Cler. Does the Light within teach you all this?


Qua. My Natural Light, which thou call Reason, suffices to confute thee.
The other Light seems to be withheld from thee, and therefore thou mockest
it; it better becomes a Christian to pray for it.


Cler. You are an impudent Man: Is it from your inward Light that you reproach
me, as if I were not a Christian?


Qua. Thou art very tender: I do not reproach thee with any such Thing: But I
am sure that Christianity teaches no Man to deny the inward Light, and to wax
angry and revile.


Cler. I do not deny that there is such a Thing as the Light of the Spirit, but
I deny that you have it.


Qua. Thy Censure is rash. How know thou what is within, me?


Cler. By what comes out of you.


Qua. I judge not of thee by the same Rule; I hope thou have Charity, though I
see it not. But I will abide by thy Rule in Relation to my self. What have thou
heard me utter but the Words of Truth and Soberness?


Cler. Not a Word of the Spirit, I am sure.


Qua. Know thou him? If thou do, thou must know, that he is the Author of
Truth.


Cler. But not of Sauciness ane Schism.


Qua. True, Doctor; and therefore the Quakers do not saucily insult, nor
uncharitably damn all those, or any of those who differ from them. That is the
only Antichristian Schism, which damneth all Men-as Schismatics, except its
own cruel Club.


Cler. A smart Casuist, I Will assure you, to vindicate the Quakers from Schism!


Qua. I wish thou could vindicate thy self as well upon the same pious and
benevolent Principle


Cler. What do you charge the established Church with Schism?


Qua. God forbid; I only wish thee, and such at are like thee, a more peaceable
and more merciful Spirit. Thou art not the established Church.


Cler. And dare you say, that the Quakers are not Schismatics?


Qua. Yes, certainly: I think that all good Men, of all Professions, will be
saved. This is Charity; I separate from no Church out of Pride or Interest, and
am therefore no Schismatic.


Cler. And here, I suppose, the Spirit is your Voucher.


Qua. I desire no other, and can have no other for the Thoughts of my Heart.


Cler. For which we are to take your Word; for I think you never take Oaths.


Qua. The Scripture forbids us to swear at all.


Cler. It forbids profane Cursing and Swearing.


Qua. Doctor, it forbids all Swearing.


Cler. But the Solemnity of an Oath in the Presence of God is an Act of
Religion.


Qua. All Speaking is in the Presence of God, and speaking the Truth is an Act
of Religion. When we are called upon to give our Testimony to the Truth, we
never refuse it.


Cler. I should be sorry to have my Property depend upon your Affirmation.


Qua. If I am a good Man, thou need not distrust me; if I am a bad Man, my
Oath will not secure you.


Cler. I believe, indeed, the Affirmation and Oath of a Quaker are much alike.


Qua. They ought to be alike amongst all Christians, and all moral Men; and
therefore let thy Meaning be ever so bitter, thou give an honorable
Testimony to our Friends: I hope thou find the same Faithfulness and
Sincerity amongst thine. Is not the Word of a Churchman as good as his Oath?


Cler. I hope better than a Quaker's, at least.


Qua. Not if a Quaker speaks the Truth.


Cler. That if was well put in.


Qua. Be it so; though thou might have spared thy Reproach, by which thou wo't
gain nothing. None of us have been accused of false Evidence; and doubtless
thou have heard of many Churchmen punished with public Infamy for Perjury.


Cler. I suppose you do the Thing more slyly.


Qua. I thank thee for allowing us to have more Discretion than thy Disciples:
If they have, at least, as few Restraints, and more Folly than we have, how are
they bettered by thy Teaching? and how is their Oath better than our
Affirmation.


Cler. You are the most unmannerly of all Sects: So unmannerly, that there is
no living with you; and all that do, despise you.


Qua. Doctor, I in particular have given thee no Cause for thy Accusation, nor
for thy Contempt; and what thou say of us in general, thou say
passionately, and it comes from Prejudice or ill Information. In Pensylvania,
where we have the Power, we do not molest nor revile any Man of any Religion;
and thou thy self, for all thy intemperate Spirit, might live there with
full Freedom.


Cler. I live amongst you! I live amongst Fanatics!


Qua. I do not invite thee: There are no Tithes there to allure; but there are
Indians to convert. How likest thou the Employment, and the Terms thereof?


Cler. Sir, I have no Call there; I have Employment in my own Parish.


Qua. I hope thou had a Call thither?


Cler. Yes, Mr. Pert, to preserve Peace and religious Order, thou you are an
Enemy to all Order.


Qua. Thou have not a more orderly Man in thy Parish: And many of thy Flock are
very disorderly, especially upon Holidays, which, I think, are Part of your
Order, and celebrated with Drunkenness, and breaking my Windows.


Cler. Did I exhort them to it?


Qua. No; thou did only paint out Quakers to them, as a People not fit to
live among Christians.


Cler. I preached what I thought it my Duty to preach.


Qua. And they practiced what they thought thou had taught them to practice.


Cler. If you would wisely remove to Pennsylvania, you might live there with
Freedom, you know.


Qua. So I would, if my Affairs would let me; as I might here, under the
Protection of the Law, if thou would let me. Let me tell thee, Friend, for
the Credit of the Quakers Government in Pennsylvania, there is not a more
thriving Colony in America. They encourage and protect all Men, and persecute
none: They are friendly to the savage Indians, who come freely into their
Houses by Day, and by Night; and any Man in a Quaker's Habit may travel safely
and singly through all the Nations of North America, who will be ready to receive
and assist him.


Cler. The Quakers are obliged to live peaceably with their Neighbors: You
know they must not fight.


Qua. Know thou any better way to avoid Fighting, than a peaceable Spirit?
And ought not all Men to avoid Fighting? The Quakers, since their first
Establishment there, have had no Wars: It is not so in New England, where Men
like thee, are for spiritual Dominion, and trust to the Sword. There they use
the poor Natives ill, who make frequent Incursions upon them. Men who will take
away by Violence the Lands and Goods of others, and domineer over them, must
fight to defend what they do. The Quakers have hurt no Man, and no Man offers
to hurt them.


Cler. Commend me to their human Prudence! the Quakers will make no Man their
Enemy by Their Zeal for Christianity.


Qua. Friend, thy Abuse ends in Praise. The Quakers use no Man as an Enemy for
his Religion; and they who do have not Zeal, but Fury and Fanaticism. Our
Savior and his Apostles had no such Zeal. Ill Usage, Fierceness, and
Barbarity, convince no Man; nor is any Man made a Christian by Rage and Power.


Cler. It would be great Pity that such as you should make any: A Pagan
converted into a Quaker, makes but a sorry Exchange.


Qua. Those Words would fit the Mouth of a Pagan better than thine; and a
Quaker is better qualified to reason with a Pagan than thou art: We have
nothing to desire of him but to be a Christian, and we gain neither Money nor
Authority by his Conversion. But with what Face can such as thou art, tell a
Nation of Heathens, Gentlemen, be of my Religion, and in Requital I will be
your Lord and Master, and take the Tenth of all you have, and all else that I
can get: None of which can ever return to you again, let me use it, or abuse
you how I will. And yet can Men of thy Spirit and Pretensions reason in
Sincerity at any other Rate with any Set of Men in the World.


Cler. The Man raves. -- Can People pay too much for their Souls?


Qua. They ought to pay nothing: The Blood of Christ is already paid. Is not
that sufficient? And do thou really confess that thou would not save Souls
without Payment?


Cler. I will bear no more. -- This is audacious beyond human Patience!


Qua. Doctor, Nothing is beyond Christian Patience.


Cler. Too much Liberty makes you insolent. -- We shall find some other Way of
confuting you.


Qua. Thou meanest Force, which is the Champion of bad Reasoning, and a bad
Cause.


Cler. Hold your Tongue, Prater.


Qua. I have Liberty of Speech from Christ and the Law. Would thou restrain
it by thy Breath?


Cler. It is pity thy Breath were not restrained.


Qua. Friend, God forgive thee. Farewell.


Books printed and sold by S. Keimer, in Philadelphia.
THE Charter of Privileges granted by the Honorable William Penn, Esquire to the
Freeholders and Inhabitants of Pennsylvania, October 28. 1701.

2. The Crisis: Or a Discourse representing from the most authentic Records,
the just Causes of the late happy Revolution: And the several Settlements of
the Crowns of England and Scotland on her Majesty without Issue, upon the most
illustrious Princess Sophia, Electress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, and the
Heirs of her Body being Protestants; by previous Acts of both Parliaments of
the late Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and confirmed by the Parliament of
Great Britain. With some seasonable Remarks on the Danger, of a Popish
Successor, By Richard Steel, Esquire

3. The Independent Whig, in Sheets, a Piece highly valuable for the detecting
some of the many vile Deceits of Priestcraft. Price 4 s. 6 d.

4. The Craftsmen: A Sermon or Paraphrase upon several Verses of the 19th
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Composed by the late Daniel Burgess, but
prevented being preached by the burning of his Meeting House.

5. A Free Gift to the Clergy: Or the Hireling-Priests of what Denomination
soever, challenged to a Disputation on this Question, Whether the Hireling
Preachers of this Age, who are all Ministers of the Letter, be not Worshippers
of the Apocalyptical Beast, and Ministers of Antichrist? This is a choice
Piece, rightly understood, since the Writing of which, the Author has been
presented with a Doctorship by the University of Cambridge.

6. A Dialogue betwixt a Burgomaster of Roterdam, and Monsieur Jurieu, a French
Calvinist Preacher, concerning a Question of great Importance, viz. Whether the
Civil Magistrate ought in Conscience to take Cognizance of Ecclesiastical
Disputes, so as to prevent them, or any Ways punish the Authors of them.

7. The Doctrine of Baptisms reduced from its ancient and modern Corruptions;
and restored to its Primitive Soundness and Integrity, according to the Word of
Truth, the Substance of Faith, and the Nature of Christ's Kingdom, By William
Dell, Minister of the Gospel, and Master of Gonvil and Caius College in
Cambridge.

8. A Dialogue betwixt a Learned Divine and a Beggar.

9. A short History of a Long Travel, from Babylon to Bethel, by that eminent
Servant of Christ, Stephen Crispe.

10. An English Dictionary, explaining the difficult Terms that are used in
Divinity, Husbandry, Physic, Philosophy, Law, Navigation, Mathematics, and
other Arts and Sciences. Containing many Thousands of hard Words, etc.

11. The fighting Sailor turned peaceable Christian: Manifested in the
Convincement and Conversion of Thomas Lurting. With a short Relation of many
great Dangers and wonderful Deliverances he met withal. With a true Account of
George Pattison's being taken by the Turks; and how redeemed by God's Direction
and Assistance, without Bloodshed, putting the Turks on Shore in their own
Country.

12. Ways and Means for the Inhabitants of Delaware to become rich: Wherein the
several Growths and Products of these Countries are demonstrated to be a
sufficient Fund for a flourishing Trade. Humbly submitted to the Legislative
Authority of these Colonies.

13. The History of Diodorus Siculus, containing all that is most memorable,
and of the greatest Antiquity in the first Ages of the World, until the War of
Troy.

14. The Mirror of Divine Love unvailed, in a Poetical Paraphrase of the High
and mysterious Song of Solomon. Whereunto is added a Miscellany of several
other Poems, sacred and Moral.

15. The History of the Wars of his late Majesty Charles XII. King of Sweden,
From his first Landing in Denmark, to his Return from Turkey to Pomerania.

16. Serious Reflections during the Life and surprising Adventures of Robinson
Cruso: With his Vision of the Angelick World.

17. The Farrier's Dispensatory.

18. The State of the Proceedings of the Corporation of the Governors of the
Bounty of Queen Anne, for the Augmentation of the Maintenance of the poor
Clergy.

19. Cheyney's Essay of the true Nature and due Method of treating the Gout.

20. Distinct Notions of the Plague.

21. Arabian Nights Entertainment. Vol. XI.

At the same Place may be had Bonds, Bills, Indentures, etc. and various sorts
of Almanacks by Wholesale, much cheaper and more useful than formerly sold in
America.

Now in the Press, and will be (...) on, with the utmost Expedition.

The History of the Rise, Increase, and Progress of the Christian People called
Quakers, Intermixed with several Remarkable Occurrences. Written Originally in
Low Dutch by William Sewel, and by himself translated into English


