Drops of Myrrh, OR, MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS, Fitted to diverse of the
preceding Arguments.

O Lord my strength, be not silent unto me, lest if thou make as though thou
hear me not, I become like them that go down into the pit,

Psalm. 28. 1. My Beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of Spices,
to feed in the garden, and to gather the Lillies.

I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine; he feeds among the Lillies,

Cantic. 6. 2, 3. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Rich. Davis in Oxon. 1653.

The Arguments.
1. A Prayer for a distracted Church and State. 2. A Prayer for the Spirit of
moderation and discerning. 3. A Meditation and Prayer concerning the perfection
of Gods Word. 4. The hopeful Soul's conflict between extremities. 5. The humble
Soul's Agony with natural pride. 6. The mortified Christian tolling his own
knell. 7. The delivered Soul's Iubilee. 8. The Authors concluding vote for
himself and the Reader.
An Advertisement to the READER.
BEcause there are abundance of excellent forms of Meditations and prayers for
all occasions already in Print, and the generality of men now, with Readiness
Army, choose rather to fast and faint, then save such honey from dropping on
the ground (which probably, if tasted, might illuminate the eyes,) I shall not
add much of this nature (as namely particular Forms of confession and
humiliation, of supplications and intercession and thansgivings;) but only some
few Portions excerpt or enlarged from my own private Devotions, which I thought
most pertinent to some of the matters foregoing. God sanctify them to the
humble Readers use.

For a distracted CHURCH and STATE.
Prayer I.
OH Lord God, the great and terrible, that rulest heaven and earth, that
put down one, and set up another, and none may say unto thee, what do
thou? Look down from the hibitation of thy holiness, and thy glory, and behold
with an eye of pity this wretched Nation. O Lord, things are now at that pass,
that we know not which way to look; Our eyes are up unto thee, merciful God,
save or we perish! Let not the oppressions and calamities that have already
befaln us seem small in the eyes of thy compassion, though we confess thou have
punished us much less then our iniquities deserve: But for thy mercy sake,
which is over all thy works, for thy sons sake, who takes away the sins of
world, let it be enough: Let there be no more such terrible shakings, and
earthquakes among us: Let the prayers of thy small remnant more prevail with
thee for pardon and mercies, then the abominations of wicked men and hypocrites
for judgment, and vengeance. Sanctify thy bitter providence to such as it
has pleased thee to afflict and debase: Give them submiss patience under thy
all-ruling-hand, and a joyful harvest from their sorrows, even if it be thy
will in this life, if otherwise, in the next: and however thou disposest (O
thou most Just and most Wise) of particular persons, and interests; yet let the
interess of thy Gospel be Advanced, the hearts of thy people established and
comforted, and the patient expectation of the humbled and injured satisfied.
Arise Oh Lord! let not man prevail. Thou who ^^^est between the Cherubims show
thy self. Show thy self a Defender if the innocent, One that humbles those
that exalt themselves, that takes the crafty in his devices, and makes the
hypocrite a terror to himself. Lord God of Hoasts! Let not them have occasion
to say with their mouth, or in their heart, that thou God hear not, or see
not; or that thou God have forsaken the Earth. Let a Book of Remembrance be
written for those that fear thee, and yet speak often for thy truth; and put up
into thy bottle every tear shed by those, whom it pitieth to see our Zion thus
in the dust. Return Oh Lord! how long stoppest thou thy ears and wilt not hear
thy people pray? Be pleased for thy Sons sake, yet at length to make this Land
a praise in the Earth, an holy Church, and a Religious prosperous State. Take
away from amidst us the spirit of delusion and strife, and hatred, and
hypocrisy; and pour out a Spirit of love, of equity, and of truth: Remove
every stumbling block and rock of offense, every galling thorn, and pricking
briar to the spirits of such as desire to fear thy name: and make the way of
the Lord so plain in the Land, that the waifaring man, though a fool, may not
err therein. And cause all of us, however at present unhappily divided, yet at
length with unanimous hearts to say; Not any of our wills, but the will of our
Lord be done.

Amen.
For the Spirit of moderation and discerning.
OH Lord, the Father of Lights Pray. 2.
and fountain of Wisdom! Into how many parties and interests are those that
profess thy name divided? How many lay claim to thy truth, that in the same
particulars contradict each other? And how many colors are found out to make
each pretense seem probable? How difficult is it to determine which is right?
how uncomfortable to hover between uncertainties? how dangerous to resolve at a
rash adventure? Oh Lord, thy unworthy Servant has a long time sadly considered
these premises; and amidst those floods of doubts and controversies which now
cover the face of thy Church, can scarce (with Noah's Dove) find one dry place
whereon to rest his foot: Oh my God, I betake my self to the Ark, my refuge: My
eyes are up unto thee, Thou have bid those who want wisdom to ask of thee, who
give liberally, and upbraidest no man: Vouchsafe me I beseech thee for thy
Sons sake a share in that thy promise, That thy Spirit shall lead me into all
truth. Give me a discerning spirit, that I may discern between things that
differ, and a stable mind, with a settled judgment, that I may not be tossed
about with every wind of doctrine, but let my senses be so exercised, that I
may prove all things, and firmly hold whatsoever is good: And because knowledge
puffs up, but love edifieth, join humility and charity with my knowledge, and
effectually bow my heart to do thy will, and then thy promise is, That I shall
know it. Furthermore, O Lord, because of all thy attributes, thou commendest
none more to our imitation then those of love and mildness, grant O Lord, that
I may not deceive my self, and think it a piece of Religion to be bitter
against my Brethren; but make me to study and practice that wisdom which is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy,
and good fruits, without partiality and hypocrisy. O Lord, grant me my request
for thy Sons sake.

Amen.
Meditation and Prayer concerning the Word of God.
HOw perfect is thy Law, O Pray. 3.
God, which converteth souls; Thy Testimonies, O Lord, which make the wise
simple, how sure are they?

Thy Statutes are pure, and r^joyce the heart; Thy Commandment is pure, and
enlightens the eyes.

Thy Word is quick and powerful, sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing
even to the d^^^ding asunder of soul and spirit.

Let others seek for grounds to believe the Scriptures, thy inspiration; This
satisfyeth me, that none could so lay open the inmost secrets of the heart, but
thou alone who only know it.

O Lord, I many times think that in reading other books, I have discovered
mysteries, and yet upon review of thine, I see the same things there; and oh
how much clearer!

Oftentimes, O Lord, I meet with things both within me and without, which when
I seek to know, they are too painful for me: until I fly unto this thy
sanctua^^, and then I understand them.

O Lord, I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy Commandments are
exceeding broad.

To thy Law, and to thy Testimonies let all men have recourse; They that speak
not according to this word, have no light in them.

Behold all they that kindle fires, and compass themselves about with their own
sparks; Though they walk never so presumptuously and pleasantly in the fire,
and the sparks they have kindled; yet this shall they have at thy hand, they
shall lie down in sorrow.

As for me, O Lord, I am a stranger upon Earth, oh hide not thy Commandment
from me.

Suffer me not to choose unto my self any of those blind guides my vain mind
or subtle adversary would accommodate me with. Lord whither should I go from
thee? Thou have the words of eternal life.

Let thy word be a Lamp to my feet, and a light unto my path* Let thy Statutes
be my Song in the house of my Pilgrimage.

Grant that here beholding thy glory in this glass, when I awake up, I may be
satisfied with thine Image.

The hopeful Souls conflict between extremities.
SVffer thy Servant, O Lord, who Pray. 4.
is but dust and ashes, thus to expostulate with thee in the bitterness of his
Soul.

Lord, what a riddle, and a wonder am I to my self! How many characters read I
in my heart, which I understand not; and how many see I there, which I cannot
read?

How often am I in a great straight, my Soul being dejected, and my Spirit
confounded within me? how often am I at a loss, and know not what to think of my
self?

One while I find my Soul somewhat confident in thee, and am ready to say, I
shall never greatly be moved; Thou Lord, of thy goodness seem to have made
my ^ill so strong.

Anon, thou but hidest thy face, and oh how am I troubled!

One while my fingers seem to drop Myrrh in following after thee; and ere I am
aware, my Soul carries me like the Chariots of Ammi-nadab.

Anon, all my Wheels are taken off, and I find nor foot, or heart, to draw or
move toward thee.

One while I can with joy and cheerfulness look into the Holy of Holies,
through the vail of thy Sons flesh.

Anon, with the Publican, I dare not so much as lift up my eyes unto heaven,
and say, I am deservedly cast out of thy sight.

One while I think the high holds of my heart levelled to the foot of Christ,
and the way of the Lord prepared in my Soul.

A while after, I seem to descry Mountains yet unremov'd.

Now I persuade my self thou have in good measure cast my heart into the mold
of Christianity; Anon, I cry out, oh in how little am I a Christian!

I one while laugh at my weaknesses, follies and mistakes; to consider how
oddly, and strangely I cheat and deceive my self; soon after I am astonished
and confounded at fouler discoveries* and then again, in hopes of thy pardoning
and subduing my corruptions, I say return unto thy rest o my Soul; and yet I
keep not long there.

Every day new wonders appear within me, and I know I am far still from seeing
to the bottom of my heart.

Lord, all things are naked and bare before thee; thou understandest my
thoughts afar off: thou know my foolishness, and none of my sins are hid
from thee*

Lord, though I know not what I am, yet I know thou can make me what thou will.

Search me, O God, try my heart and my reins, suffer not any way of wickedness
to remain with me, but guide me in the way everlasting.

Work truth in my inward parts, and in my hidden part make me to understand
Wisdom.

O let my heart be sound in thy Statutes, that I be not ashamed.

The humble Soul's Agony with natural Pride.
O Lord God of Hoasts, the Pray. 5.
terrible, and Omnipotent; thou set thy self in battel-array against the
proud.

How shall I approach thy presence with a proud heart, when the Mediator
between thee and man admits none to him, but the humble and lowly?

Yet, oh meek Jesu! amongst them certainly thou invitest those that are
sensible of, that are heavy laden with their pride, and desire to be humble.

Holy Father! thy poor creature has all the causes in the world to be humble;
whether I respect thee above, or hell beneath, or the weaknesses of body and
mind in my self, or without me, the eminent gifts thou have bestowed upon
others, of the least of which I am not as uncaple as unworthy.

Yet O Lord, none of these considerations will prevail on my corrupt perverse
treacherous heart, without thy blessing, without thou set them home upon me.

Thou can level the Mountains, and bring down the high and lofty, and make
the rough smooth, and the crooked straight; Thy smallest breath can rend the
Cedars.

My sad experience with my natural fears, make me almost despair of prevailing
against this corruption; of ever performing the least part of my duty without
this taint attending it.

My God, my whole trust is in thee; with thee I know all things are both
possible and easy.

I cast my spirit into thy hands, undertake for me.

Be surety for thy servant in that which is good, that the proud do me no harm.

Suffer me not to think the pride of my heart then mortified, when charmed
only by some passionate reflection, or warm application*

Suffer me not to think it extinct, when with*drawn only, or hid in some
corner of my breast.

Suffer me not to make terms with this enemy, or conceit I am humbled, and be
proud in that.

Rather, oh Lord! let the Messenger of Satan buffet me, so that thy grace be
sufficient for me: Rather let him foyl me, so that I rise by my falls, and
through thy grace prevail, by being overcome.

Yet, oh Lord! how long shall I cry out by reason of the oppression of the
enemy?

I beseech thee for thy Anointed's sake (and thou will not turn away his face)
let me not go all the day long this heavily, whilst the enemy magnifies
himself, and triumphs over me.

Arise, O Lord! command deliverances for me: Attend unto my cry, for I am
brought very low; deliver me from my persesecutor, for he is too strong for me.

Bring my Soul out of prison, that I my praise thy name; O compass me about
with Songs of deliverance.

Open my mouth wide with thanksgiving, and let my tongue sing aloud of thy
righteousness.

The mortified Christian tolling his own knell.
LOrd! since death is my passage Pray. 6.
into thy presence, why suffer thou the thought thereof to be terrible unto
me? This consideration affrights me more then death it self.

O Lord, I cannot without some reluctance think, that suddenly I shall see man
no more upon the face of the earth.

Doubtless the light is pleasant to the eyes, and a joyful thing it is to
behold the Sun.

The Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee, they that go down
into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.

The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I desire to do this day.

Consider o Lord, I desire to walk before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart.

O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days; Thy years are throughout
all Generations.

Have thou so little work for me to do, that thou allottest me so short a time,
and bring upon me sorrows and weaknesses so fast?

Lord, I came into the world on thy errand, and I live only upon thy
allowance, I am not to be my own carver.

My God, my goodness extends not unto thee, thou need neither my service,
nor my being; certainly it is but nature in me, that thus affects to serve thee
in life, when thou call on me to glorify thee by death.

Let it abundantly content me, O Lord, that whether waking or sleeping, dead or
alive, I shall be always thine, and always live together with Christ.

Lord, help me to consider what a poor derivative thing I am, what a mere
dependant upon thee: And let the consideration of thy Majesty and glory swallow
up all those petty interests of my own, which I create in my self, to my self.

Help me in every passage and particular of my life and death, to say as is
right meet, and my bounden duty; the will of my Lord be done.

O Lord, let me not dare to be displeased at any thing, whatsoever it be, that
is thy pleasure.

Suffer me not, though with the softest voice of my Soul, to interrogate upon
thy proceedings, or to whisper to my self what is the reason the Lord will thus
deal with me.

Though thou should cut off like a Weaver my life, and deprive me of the
residue of my years; Though thou should like a Lion, break all my bones, and
from day even till night with pining sickness and faintness make an end of me;
Yet let me be dumb and not open my mouth, because it is thy doing.

Nay, O Lord, open my mouth wide, to say, Behold the unprofitable servant of
the Lord, be it unto me as thou please: Into thy hand Lord, I resign my Body
and Soul; Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Amen.
The Jubilee.
THy Vows are upon me, O God, Pray. 7.
I will sing and give thanks.

Open thou my lips, that my mouth may show forth thy praise; That I may extol
thee with the best member I have, and that my tongue may sing aloud of thy
righteousness, and of thy goodness.

Why is it Lord, that I am thus straightned toward thee, who art so enlarged
unto me? Why is it that my thanksgivings are usually confined to the very
enquiry only what I shall render unto thee for all thy benefits toward me?

But O Lord, what can I render unto thee, since all I have is thine?

First, O Lord, I praise thee, that thou have put it into the* heart of thy
servant, thus to ascribe all I have unto thee, and thus to give unto thee of
thine own.

From thy goodness, O Lord, I have received my being, and every thing, which
makes it not a burden and a misery unto me.

Thou openest the hand of thy liberality, and suppliest all my necessities.

Lord, I praise thee for the many temporal blessings thou have here afforded
me; and yet that thou have not given me my portion in this life, or my good
things in it.

I praise thee for those unutterable and endless joys which thou of thy grace
have prepared for me, and of which thou have already wrought in me some
participation by hope, through Christ, the fountain of all my good.

Praised be thy name for that discipline and method of grace which thou art
pleased to take to fit me for that thy Kingdom.

I praise thee, O Lord, for bringing me into the wilderness, to humble me, to
prove me, to know what was in my heart, and then to speak comfortable words to
me.

That thou art pleased, as a man chastneth his son so to chasten me; to cross
my will, and frustrate my designs, and all to do me good in the latter end.

I praise thee for correcting me in measure; for considering how frail a
creature I am, and not suffering my spirit quite to fail under thy hand.

Oh, what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me! and yet did
thou turn and refresh me, and broughtest me from the deep of Hell again.

O Lord, thou knew my Soulin all her adversities: When I said, I was cast
out of thy presence, yet then were thou near unto me, and receivedst my prayer.

In the multitude of terrible and distracting thoughts within me, thy comfort,
O Lord, through thy sons blood, refreshed my Soul.

I praise thee, O Lord, for the long striving of thy Spirit with me, whereas
thou might without me offer of grace, have left me unto that Death, which I
have more than once chosen.

Lord, thou continually bear with my evil manners; Thou sparest when I
deserve punishment, and according to thy unspeakable goodness, rewardest me
good for evil.

O Lord, I daily undo my self, and loose the works thou have wrought: I daily
pierce my Soul through with poisoned darts, yet thou art my continual help, and
my constant health.

How many times do both my flesh and my heart fail me? Yet Lord, thou art
always the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

They that follow after lying vanities, for sake their own mercies.

But it is good for me to draw nigh unto my God; I have put my trust in thy
name, oh thou most High!

The Authors concluding Vote for himself and the Reader.
O Lord, let the dross, and the Pray. 8.
hay and the stubble in this book be burned with fire; but the Author saved at
thy great day, through thy Sons blood.

Suffer no Reader to turn that to an occasion of uncharitableness toward me,
which I designed for his good.

Suffer no Reader to think I sought my self, in that I have told him somewhat
that thou have done for my Soul.

Grant also, that none may think of me beyond what with judicious and
charitable eyes and ears he hears of me, or sees in me; And Lord, thou
know I have not the least cause to be proud of that.

FINIS.

