CHOICE OBSERVATIONS OF ALL THE KINGS OF ENGLAND FROM THE SAXONS To the Death
of KING CHARLES the First. COLLECTED Out of the best Latin and English
VVriters, who have Treated of that Argument.

By EDWARD LEIGH Esquire, and Master of Arts of Magdalen Hall in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Cranford, at the Sign of the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES the Second, King of Great-B^ittain, France and
Ireland.
Most Gracious Sovereign;
I Hope this Dedication of these my Collections concerning all the Kings of
England to your Sacred Majesty, from the first of them (of whom there is any
thing credible in story) to the decease of your Royal Father, will not be
interpreted either a fruit of ambition or over-bold presumption. I have had the
honor formerly to dedicate Books to very eminent Societies and Persons, but
never to any so signally eminent and public a Person as your Majesty. And
should not have taken the confidence to have begun now, but that (in regard of
the Argument I treat of) I thought there was an obligation upon me; and that of
right such a Work was to be presented only to Him, who is the just and
unquestionable Successor to all those Kings I here mention. Beda to King
Ceolwolph. Speed his History of Greatbrittain to King James.
I find it usual with those who either wrote Chronicles in general, or the
reigns of some particular Princes, to inscribe the Name of the King or Prince
then living to their Works. How his Annals, or Continuation of Stow and Bacons
Henry the 7th to your Father when Prince.
I wish my Observations were as choice, as the subject is suitable. Since
Cadwallader, the last King of the Britains, there was none born Prince of
Great Britain but your Majesty. Hactenus Anglorum nulli was therefore the Motto
on the Medals made in memory of your Birthday the 29th of May 1630, with three
Laurels upon them betokening three Kingdoms. May your reign be as prosperous
and happy, as your birth was glorious and It was illustrious both in respect of
the bright Star which then appeared at high-noon in the presence and sight of
all, (See Stella meridiana) and also in respect of your near alliance to the
greatest ^rinces of Christendom.
illustrious; your deliverance by Sea at your entrance into Scotland, and your
escape by Land at Worcester-fight, and after in England; and your happy
restitution to your Kingdom, was wonderful and conspicuous. Kings have their
regal Titles and Ornaments. To the Kings of Spain from the time of Alphonsus
King of Castile, about 800 years ago, for expelling the Arians, was given the
Title of Catholic, as Michael Ritius a Neapolitan writes. To the French King
the Title of most Christian from the time of Philip the Emperor, about 400
years since, Doway Notes on Josh. 3. 8.
as records Nicol, Gillius. To our King Henry the 8th of England for his Book
of the Sacraments against Luther, Pope Leo the 10th gave the Title, Defender of
the Faith See Dr Basire of Sacrilege.
, which his Successors have since enjoyed, though in another sense than it was
first intended. Henry the 5th reigning amongst us, his Subjects gave him the
Title of Montacu^ii Antidiatribae ad Diat. 1. Bulengeri.
Grace. Under Henry the Saint, the 6th, Excellent was added to Grace: Under
Henry the 8th the acclamation of Majesty began; a little after excellent
Majesty, most excellent, and at last Sacred Majesty, which now is generally
used.

Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy. l. 8. It is by diverse Charters granted to the
Church of Westminster, to be locus Coronationis Regis, and repositorium
Regalium. Liber Regalis. The Sword presents the Princes power, the Crown their
glory. B. Bilson in his Sermon before K. James at his Coronation.
Kings are crowned, enthronized, and anointed; the Crown was a sign of a
Military dominion; the Throne of sedentary or judicial; the Oil of Religious
and sacred power.

A King by virtue of his Kingly Office has two things to perform; 1. To
govern, 2. To defend.


His Governing also divides it self into two branches; First, To direct,
Secondly, To recompense.


He directs, by appointing what shall be done and forborne of all his subjects
in his Jurisdiction.

He recompenceth or requiteth, by punishing those which disobey the Laws, with
such punishments as himself thinks good to appoint, and to signify to them
in his penalties by which he ratifieth his Laws; and by rewarding those which
keep the Laws, with such rewards as he sees fit to specify in his Statutes,
and in general, by making them partakers of the wealth, peace, quietness and
happiness of his government.

He defends his subjects against the hostility of open enemies, and the
injuries of their fellow subjects.

It was an excellent speech of Henry the Great, King of France, your
Grandfather by the Mothers side; When I was born there were a thousand other
souls more born, what have I done for God more than they? Learned King James
your Grandfather by the Father, in his Book dedicated to Prince Henry, would
have him to remember, that he differed not in stuff, but in use, from the rest
of the people; and that by Gods Ordinance. Kings as well as others are bound to
read the Scriptures, See the (...) of Worcester (...) Sermon at the Coronation.
Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. and some think that Book of the Kings and Chronicles
especially worthy their diligent perusal: others would have them study well
the 101 Psalm. Next the Scriptures, Ecclesiastical History is to be preferred;
King James comm^ndeth Caesar above all pro^^e Writers, both for the sweet
slowing of the style, and the worthiness of the manner it self.
some highly commend Polybius as useful for Kings to read; and Causabon
dedicating it to Henry the 4th King of France, much magnifieth that Book, and
likewise the reading of History in general. The Chronicles and Annals of their
own Predecessors, surely must needs be both delightful and profitable for
them. Your Majesty may observe many things in them well worthy imitation: in
Learned and valiant Alfred, how thriftily he spent his time, how he encouraged
Learning and Learned men; in little Edgar, great Canutus; William the
Conqueror; the many worthy Henry's and Henry the first, the fifth, the
seventh, the eighth. Edward the first, the third, the sixth, especially, who
first began our happy Reformation in Religion.
Edwards; your own wise Grandfather and Father of happy memory. Yet in the
whole series of the Kings and Queens of England (as others have made several
parallels of some of our English Kings) I have not found a fitter parallel in
every respect for your Majesty than Queen Elizabeth. I will not speak of her
skill in the modern Languages, and how she often answered Ambassadors her self,
nor how gracious and gentle a Princess she was to her very enemies; wherein
your Majesty is not unlike to Her. What troubles and hazards did she undergo,
before she came to the Crown? with what joyful and general acclamations was
she received into this Metropolis? I need not apply this to your Majesty, its
sufficiently obvious to every vulgar capacity how you agree herein. After her
Coronation, At the Coronation of King Ioash, the High Priest delivered him the
Testimony, not only that he might know and do it himself, but take care (as
much as lie in him) that it might be known and observed by the people. Dr Hardy
his Apostolical Lyturgy revived, on 2 King. 11. 12. Read the Scriptures
diligently, and with an humble spirit, and in it observe what is plain, and
believe and live accordingly. Dr Ier. Tailors Letter to a person newly
converted to the Church.
being presented with a Bible, as she passed by the little Conduit in
Cheapside, she received the same with both her hands, and kissing it said; That
it had ever been her chief delight, and should be the rule by which she meant
to frame her Government. Your Majesty in your entering into the City, at the
presentment of the Bible to you by the Reverend London Ministers, used this
speech, worthy to be written in Gold; I thank you for this Book above all other
gifts, and assure you, I shall make it my first care to set up Gods Worship and
service; this is the Book must guide us all; and I will make it the rule of my
Life and reign. Queen Elizabeth was a courageous and stout spirited Princess.
In 88, when the Spaniard was coming, she went to the Army at Tilbury-Camp,
riding with a Truncheon or baston in her hand to the several Companies, and by
her presence and speech encouraged both Commanders and soldiers, saying to
them as I have heard; If her brother Philip came, she would give fire to the
first Piece against him: I might allege the testimony of your greatest enemy,
in confirmation of your Majesty's valor at Worcester-battle.

Kings bear a double image of God, as they are men and as they are Magistrates.
The Scripture says; 2 Samuel 23. 3.
Those which rule over men should be just, ruling in the fear of God. One
Molinier in his Essay^^.
says; They should labor to be more religious and pious toward God than
ordinary persons, because of the great need they have of his illumination in
their counsels, of his conduct in their enterprises, of his force in their
executions, and of his provident care in their various occurrents, dangers and
difficulties. The Kings seat was so set in the Temple, that all might see him
there, Ezekiel. 46. 10. 2 Chronicles. 6. 12, 13. All that we beg at the hands of our
Superiors, is a liberty to worship God according to his word, that we may have
no thing imposed upon us, but what we may be directed in our compliance with,
by the rule of Scripture; we desire that men may not command where God is
silent. The Examinat. of Dr Heylins History of the Reformar. of the Church of
England. Those of the Presbyterian judgment, that out of a real tenderness
cannot comply in all particulars, will beyond doubt receive from his Majesty
such savor and indulgence, as may abundantly suffice to their relief. Mr
L'estrange his Holy Cheat. p. 78. of the 2d Edition.
2 King. 11. 14. and 23. 3. that by his example the devotion of his people
might be stirred up. God having done such great things both abroad and at home
for your Majesty, expects great things from you. I shall humbly implore the
Almighty, that he would so guide you in all your ways, that you may make his
Interest your great interest, by reforming what is amiss in Court and Kingdom,
by promoting his pure worship, encouraging the power of godliness, and all such
as walk according to Scripture-rule, are peaceable, and hold the Fundamentals;
by discountenancing Atheism, error, and profaneness, the fruits of abused
peace and prosperity, altering the old speech for the better,

-- Exeat aula
Qui vult esse pius; into impius.
So shall White Hall answer its name, and your Majesty approve your self to be,
what your Father desired, Charles the Good, which is the earnest prayer of

Your Majesty's most humbly devoted and Loyal subject Edward Leigh

TO THE COURTEOUS AND CANDID READER.
Reader:
I Here present thee with Choice Observations of all the Kings of England. I
suppose the Subject will not be unpleasing to an Englishman, if the work be
answerable to the Title. I have excerped my Materials out of the best Latin
Writers; the Monks (to whom we are especially beholding for the History of our
Kings of England) and chiefest English Chroniclers and Annalists, and such as
have written of a few, or any one of our English Princes. Bedes Historia Gentis
Anglorum, set out by Wheelock, of whom Petavius in his History of the world,
lib. 8. cap. 4. says thus, Bid made his Britain famous with no less
Godliness and Learning than History, who even unto the year 735 has concluded
the Christian beginnings of that Nation. Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores post Bedam
praecipui, See Mr Wheare De Method^ legendi Historias, page 52.
in Latin in folio, set out by Sr Henry Savill, containing the History of
Gulielmus Malmesburiensis, Henry Huntington, Roger Hoveden and others. Anglica,
Normannica, Hibernica, Cambrica, a veteribus Scripta, in Latin also in Folio,
put out by Camden. Matthew Paris his Works, set out by Dr Watts, who is a
faithful Historian, and has written the Reigns of the first seven Kings after
the Conquest. Daniel does very well so far as he goes, He is continued by
Trussell.
Of the English Chroniclers, Speed, Martin, and Baker seem to be the best.
Voluminous Hollingshead, Stow and How are not much esteemed by the Learned. Sr
John Hayward has written well of the three Norman Kings, and Edward the sixth,
he has written briefly also of Henry the eourth. Godwin of Henry the eighth,
Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary, and also of the Bishops of England, in Latin
and English. Sr Robert Cotton of Henry the third, Habington of Edward the
fourth, Sr Thomas More of Richard the third, both in Latin and English, and
Buck, my Lord Bacon excellently of Henry the seventh, my Lord Herbert of Henry
the eighth, Camden Annals of Queen Elizabeth, and Dr Heylin (as is said) of
King Charles the first. Historia est testis temporum, lux veritatis, vita
memoriae, magistra vitae, nuncia vetustatis, Cicero l. 2. De Oratore
History is both pleasing and profitable, especially the memorable things of
all our own Kings and Governors, who have for so many years Reigned amongst
us. Examples of Superiors especially are very prevalent, which of the Rulers
believed in him Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.
One Aschams Schoolmaster, l. 1. p. 20.
says, if King Edward the sixth had lived a little longer, his only example
had bred such a Race of worthy learned Gentlemen, as this Realm never yet did
afford. Here are examples of all sorts, good and bad, to be followed and
eschewed. Some loose, vain, and licentious; others learned, wise, valiant,
minding the public welfare of the Nation. The Pope could but little prevail
here in England, during the Reign of King Edward the third, and Richard the
second. Henry the eighth cast him out then, when he had too great power and
command over other Princes. As he cast out the Pope, so did his children Edward
It was a very pious care, and of singular example in so young a Prince, to
intend and endeavor the reformation of Religion, and the Church within his
Realms. For which even at this day we have cause to acknowledge the good
providence of Almighty God in ^aising him up to become so blessed an instrument
of his glory and our good. BP Sandersons Episcopacy not prejudicial to Regal
Power. In the time of King Edward there was more I suppose, than what one calls
it, a wambling toward the Genevah Discipline; but neither very earnest, nor
very popular.
the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth cast out Popery out of England, and so freed us
from his spiritual bondage, as the other did from his Temporal May their
memory be therefore still precious amongst us, as the Reformation we enjoy
chiefly by their means, is a singular blessing. Let Him be accounted our
English Josias, and Her our English Deborah, on whom those Verses were made,
Spains Rod, Romes Ruin, Netherlands Relief: Earths Joy, Englands Gem, Worlds
Wonder, Natures chief.

Prince Henry likewise, eldest Son to King James, was a virtuous and hopeful
Prince, had he not been taken away in the flower of his youth, he would (its
thought) have much opposed the Pope and Spaniard. I have read somewhere of him,
that he would not swear, no, not at his Sports and Recreation; and being
demanded the reason t^ereof, he said, they were not of that weight, as to draw
an oath from him. I hope therefore this Nation, having had such worthy Princes,
and not being ignorant of the slavery they formerly endured, when the Pope
called England his Ass, will never be so foolish, as to turn back again into
Egypt. As long as Mr Fox his Martyrology is so common to be read, eighty
eight, and the fifth of November are so fresh in our remembrance, let us value
the loss of Rome here amongst us, no more than that Emperor Honorius did, of
whom Zonaras Annal Tom^ (...). p. 33.
writes, that he had a Hen called Roma, and it being told him Rome was last, he
was troubled, and said, She was here even now, yea said the other, the Hen is
here, but the City is lost, he was then well pleased. Our Countriman Beda has
prophetically expounded that Roman S. P. Q. R. of our Englishmen traveling to
Rome, Stul^us Populus Quaerit Roman. Though perhaps in some Whereas the Papists
unjustly charge the Protestant Churches with Schism for departing from their
Communion: it could not but be a great scandal to them, to confirm them in
that their uncharitable opinion of us, if we should utterly condemn any thing
as unlawful, because it had been used in the times of Popery, or abused by the
Papists. B. Sanders. Epise. not prejudicial to Regal Power.
cases, one may go too far from Rome; yet since some of our Bishops formerly
have written well against Antichrist, and others have made the Pope to be
Antichrist; and since also the Jesuits are still busy amongst us, I wish
there may be no unwarrantable compliance either with the Romish Doctrine or
Rites.

Thomas Lever (who Preached before King Edward the sixth, and escaped the fury
of Queen Mary's days) is commended by Bullinger, in his Epistle to Hooper. He
was the first settled constant Preacher at the Temple, As Father Gilpin, and
Father Latimer.
Father Lever, for so by my Father and others, I always heard him styled. Mr
Gatakers Discourse Apologeticall against Lilie. I have two Sermons of his,
Preached in the same year at Paul's 1550, one in Paul's Church, the other at the
Cross, St Thomas Chaloner was ordinary Ambassador from Queen Elizabeth into
Spain almost four years, Annal. Rerum Anglicarum part prima. p. 101, 102.
Ubi (says Camden) de Republica Ang^icana instauranda terso and erudito
Carmine quinque libros composuit, dum ut ille dixit, hieme in furno aestate in
horreo degeret; which is thus Englished by one Darcie, who first (after a
fashion) Translated Camden into English, though it be better rendered since. St
Tho. Chaloner wrote a Book whilst he was in Spain, which he Entitled, Hieme in
furno aestate in horreo, not so jolly an Inscription, as that Libell Entitled,
The Arraignment of Persecution, etc. Printed for Bartholmew Bang-Priest, Mr
Lyfords Conscience Informed touching our late Thanksgivings.
and are to be sold at his Shop in Tolleration-street, at the Sign of the
Subjects Liberty, right opposite to Persecution Court, 1645. I remember I have
heard a story of a valiant man, that thus answered one inquiring after his name
and lodging: My name is Dangerfiel'd, I lie at the Sign of the Sword and
Buckler, over against the Bleeding-Heart, in Gunpowder Allie: But too much of
this. I hope this Book with the other already out, will give some light to the
knowledge both of the Kings and Kingdom of England, in confidence whereof, I
rest

Thy hearty well-wisher Edward Leigh.

Choice Observations OF ALL THE KINGS of ENGLAND, FROM THE SAXONS, To the Death
of King CHARLES I.
CHAP. I.
ENgland was five times plagued by other Nations: First, Fox his Acts and
Monumen^ vol. 1.
By the Romans: Then by the Scots and Picts: Thirdly, By the Saxons: Fourthly,
By the Danes: Fifthly, By the Normans.

The Nation of the Saxons was generally most warlike and martial. Cambd Brit.
English Saxons. Saxons e^oient tous extreme^ent belli queux and comme es^rit
Zosine, l^ plus vaillants and renommez de tous les Germanis, en grandeur de
Courage, en forces de ^^^ps, and en patience au ^ravail Histoire D^ Angleterre
Par Andre Da Chesne. l. 6. p. 1^6.
They gave unto those Saxons their first original, who now inhabit the
Dukedom of Saxony.

They left very few Cities, Towns, Villages, Rivers, Woods, Fields, Hills or
Dales in Britain, which they gave not new names unto.

As the name of Oxford, or Oxenford, on the River of Thames, after the Town of
like name in Germany, situated on the River of Oder.

Our Hereford near unto Wales, after Her^ord in Westphalia.

And so in like manner may be said of Stafford, Swinford, Bradford, Norden,
Newarke, Bentham, Oxenbridge, Buchurst, Sconethorp, Holt, Mansfield,
Swinefield, Hamsteed, Radcliffe, Rosendale, and many more. After that these
Nations had now gotten sure sooting in the possession of Britain, Verstigans
Antiq
they divided it into seven Kingdoms, (...) tamen in (...) dominium, and
Hexa^ch^ ab (...) Anglorum (...) primordiis (...) dictum) co^rcebantur. Sold.
Analect. Anglo^bris. l. 2. ^* 4.
and established an Heptarchy; in which notwithstanding the Prince which had
the greatest power, was called King of the English Nation: So that in this very
Heptarchy there was always Monarchy.

The Saxon Government is usually divided into the Heptarchy, Monarchy.

In the Heptarchy are these seven petty Kingdoms: 1. Kent. 2. Sussex. 3. East
Sax. 4. East Angles. 5. Mercia. 6. Northumberland. 7. West Sax.


In Kent with Hengist the first Invader, seventeen or eighteen are said to
reign.

South Sax from Ello to Adhamus had about ten Kings, of which Adlewolf was
first Christened.

East Sax from Er^hwin to Swithred had thirteen Kings, whereof Sigby the third
was first baptized.

The East Angles had fourteen Kings.

Mercia twenty Kings.

Christianity was first received by Penda, that founded Peterborough, as
Ethebald did the Monastery of Crowland, and Ossa of St. Albans.

Northumberland about twenty four Kings.

West Saxon nineteen Kings.

CHAP. II.
Hengist.
When he first arrived in England, The first King of Kent became the first
Monarch of the English men.
he was a goodly young Gentleman, under the age of thirty years, and of an
excellent wit: He was brought up in the service of the Emperor Valentinian the
third, and last of that name. Verstegan.

He deserves to be reputed the first Monarch of the English Nation.

Non minus acer ingenio, quam alacer in praelio. Malmesburiensis de Gestis
Regum Anglorum.

He sailed out of Holland into Britain; he built the Castle of Leiden in
Holland.

The Saxons had only the Isle of Thanet first given them, Cam^^. B^it English
Saxons.
where they first landed.

Hengist after obtained of King Vortiger, the property of so much ground, as he
could enclose with a Bulls Hide: which cutting into thongs, he there built the
Castle called Thong-Castle, Histoire (...) Ang^^t re lar (...) ^^Ches^e. l 6.
p. 1^. (...) Brit English Saxons.
by Sittingbourine in Kent.

Why our first Progenitors Hengist and Horsa took their names of an Horse (for
both their names in the Saxon tongue do signify an Horse) surely I know not,
unless it were for a fore-token of their warlick prowess, Hengist signifies ^
stoned Horse.
according to that Verse of Virgil.

Bello armantur equi, Equus bellicosorum Saxoniae principum antiquissimum
insigne, pugna^it^^is, celeretatis, and immoderati impetus symbolum. Spelmanni
Aspilogia.
bella haec armenta minantur. l. 3. Aineid.

Hengist and Horsus, Britains harms,
Their Ens^gnes signing both their names,
The Saxon Horse their Arms,
Brave Warriors hither came.
Slatyers Palae-Albion Ode 7. p. 157. Krantzius in hist. Saxon. l. 2. tells
us, that the Saxon-Princes in Germany before they became Christians, gave a
black Horse for their Escutcheon; but being baptized, a white Horse; with
reference happily to Rev. 6. 2.

The Saxons to the number of nine thousand, came in certain long Vessels they
called Keeles, with their leaders, two Brothers, Hengist and Horsa, nobly
descended; whose Ensign, as it was an usual and honorable device of
antiquity, alluding to their names, their Banner being a white or silver Horse,
in a Field Gules; Arms which the noblest Families of Saxons, and others thence
descended, have born.

They were not all one people, but consisted of three several Nations, viz.
the Angles, the Iutes, and the Saxons; but they were all the inhabitants of
some part, or other of Denmark. Ays^u.

He reigned thirty four years.

CHAP. III.
ELLA.
THe first King of the South Saxons, and second Monarch of the English men.

He reigned six years.

Cherdik.
The first King of the West Saxons, and third Monarch of the English men.

He reigned twenty one years.

Kenrik.
The second King of the West Saxons, and fourth of the English men.

He reigned twenty six years

Cheuline.
The third King of the West Saxons, and fifth Monarch of the English men.
C^aulini spectatissimum in praeli^s robar annals ad invidiam esserunt, quippe
qui fuis Anglis stupori, Brittonibus odio, ^trisque exitio. Mal^esburiensis de
Gest is Anglorum. l. 1. c. 2.


He reigned thirty one years.

Ethelbert.
The fifth and first Christian King of Kent, and the sixth Monarch of the
English men.

He was eminent for first receiving the Christian faith, brought from Rome by
Austin, and for converting ^ebert King of the East Angles to Christianity, and
assisting him in building St. Paul's in London, and St. Peter's in Westminster.

That the Christian Religion was here in Britain before the coming of Austin
the Monk, may be proved out of Beda, who makes mention of British Bishops,
but names none of them. Hist. Ang. l. 2. c. 2

Eusibius in vita Constantini l. 3. c. 18. says that this Country was
Christian three hundred years before.

Mr Saller in his Rights of the Kingdom, says, The first times of Christian
Religion here, were much higher then Austin the Father, who might have been
great Grandfather to Austin the Monk.

He brought the Laws of his Country into their own mother tongue, and left
nothing unattempted, which might advance the glorious Gospel of Christ.

He built St. Augustines, a goodly Church in Canterbury. He built also St.
Paul's Church in London: and St. Andrews in Rochester.

He died in the three and twentieth year of his Monarchy, and the fifty sixth
of his Kingdom of Kent.

Redwald.
The third King of the East Angles, and seventh Monarch of the English men.

Of this Redwald Cambden reports out of Bid, that he was baptized; and that
(to make sure, as he thought, of the right way of worship) he had in the same
Temple one Altar for Christian Religion, and another for sacrifice to Devils.

He reigned eight years, and was King of the East Angles thirty one.

Edwine.
The Great King of Northumberland, and the eighth sole Monarch of the English
men.

He was slain in Battle by Penda and Cadwallo the seventh year of his
Monarchy, Polydor Virgil. Ang. hist. l. 4 p. 80. relates the manner of the
Battle.
the seventeenth of his Kingdom.

He lived forty eight years.

Oswald.
King of Northumberland, and the ninth Monarch of the English men.

He was a religiou^ King, Oswaldus fide quam ferro instruct^or.
and took such care for the co^version and salvation of his Subject^, that he
sent into Scotland for aid, and a Christian Bishop to instruct his
Northumbrians in the Gospel of truth.

Mira fuit in homine sanctitas, H^jus regis lauds historia Bedae panegyrico
prosequitur stylo. Malmesburiensis de Gestin Regum Anglorum. l 1. c. 3. vide
plura ibid.
mirum pietatis studium, nulli unquam malum pro malo reddidit, sed Christi
regis summi exemplum imitatus, ijs etiam been precabatur, beneque voleba^, a
quib^^s accepisset injurias. Polyd. Virg. Ang. Hist. l. 4. p. 82.

He left the name to Oswalster in Shropshire.

Of this Oswald (as also of Stephan King of Hungary) it is storied, Inclytus
ille and plurimis animi virtutibus (aa pietate pr^esertim in Deum) Princeps
merito celeberrimus, Osuualdus, cum Northumbrorum regno anno salutis 634
fuisset potitus. God w. de Pra^sul. Angl.
that their right hands though dead, never putrified, because they had been
much exercised in almsdeeds. Bed. hist. Angl. l. 3. c. 6. Bonsinius.

Quis suit Alcides? quis Caesar Julius, aut quit
Magnus Alexander? Alcides se superasse
Fertur, Alexander mundum, sed Julius hostem.
Se simul Osuualdus, and mundum vicit, and hostem.
He died in the 23. year of his Monarchy, and the 56. of his Kingdom of Kent.

Oswy.
King of Northumberland, and the tenth Monarch of the English men.

He was Brother to Edwin and Oswald.

He founded the Cathedral Church in Litchfield, for a Bishops See.

Upon an occasion Oswin humble ^ himself before the holyman Adrian, Beda.
who upon sight thereof wept, and gave this reason of his weeping, I know this
King will not live long; and this reason of his reason, for I never before this
saw an humble King.

He lived fifty seven years, and reigned the space of twenty ei^ht years.

Wulphere.
The sixth King of the Mercians, and the eleventh Monarch of the Engl^^^ men.
wulpherus, ne spem civium falleret, edulo satagere, magnis and animi and
corporis viribus utilem se principem ostentare; denique Christianitatenst vix
in regno suo palpitantem, and per fratrem initiatam favore suo enixissime
suvit. Maimesburiensis de Gestis Regum Anglorum l ^. c. 4.


He becoming a ^hristian destroyed all those Tem^les, wherein his Heathen Gods
had been worshipped, converting them all into Christian Churches, and religious
Monasteries.

He reigned King over the Mercians seventeen years, and Monarch of the English
fuily four.

Ethelred.
The seventh King of Mercia, Ethelredus animi religione, quam pugnandi
exercitatione celebrtor* Malm. de Gestis Regum Angl. l. 1. c. 4.
and twelfth Monarch of the English.

A modest Prince, which loved better to preserve then to increase his power by
Arms.

He reigned above thirty years.

Kenred.
The eighth King of Mercia, Quipietate in Deum, probitat^ in patriam
perinsignis, magna morum sinceritate vitam cucurrit, quintoque anno regni Romam
ire pergeus, reliquum temporis illic rel^giose complevit. Malmes. de Gestis
Regum Angl. l. 1. c. 4.
and the thirteenth Monarch of the English men.

He reigned in peace four years; then weary of Government, and desirous of
contemplation, be sought a more private and religious life; and thereupon
appointing ^helred his Cosen-germane to rule in his place, in the fifth year of
his Reign, abandoned his Kingdom and Country, and departed to Rome, and in a
Monastery in that City was made Monk.

Chelred.
The ninth King of the Mercians, Celredus immatura morte miscrabilis; siquidem
non ultra octo annos regno satisfaciens Liceselda conditus est. Malmes. de
gestis Regum Ang. l. 1. c. 4.
and the fourteenth Monarch of the English.

He had got as great reputation of military valor, as any Prince of his time,
if he had not died so soon.

He reigned only seven years.

Ethelbald.
The tenth King of the Mercians, and the fifteentth Monarch of the English.

A peaceable Prince, but was over amorous.

Boniface the Archbishop of Mentz, an Englishman by Nation, sent an Epistle to
him.

This is one passage in it.

Quapropter, ^^li charissime, paeniteat te and memora quam turpe sit, ut tu,
qui multis gentihus dono D^^ dominaris, al injuriam ejus sis libidinis servus.

The Epistle is full of good counsel to be seen in Malmesbury. Lib. 1. c. 4.


He ruled forty two years.

Offa.
The eleventh King of the Mercians, and the sixteenth Monarch of the English
men.

He was a warlike Prince, and for the most part fortunate.

He built a Church in Warwickeshire, where the adjoining Town from it and him,
bears the name Off-Church, and caused a great Ditch to be made, large and
deep from Sea to Sea, betwixt his Kingdom and Wales, whereby he might the
better defend his Country from the incursions of the Welsh men. And this Ditch
is to be seen in many places as yet, and is called Offas Ditch at this day.
Lords History of Wales.

The Ditch began at the River Dee by Bassing-werke, between Che^ter and
Ruthlan, and ran along the hills sides to the South Sea a little from Bristow,
reaching above a hundredth miles in length. Id. the description of Wales.

He first gave the Peter Pence to Rome, and was himself at the length shorn a
Monk.

He reigned thirty nine years. Or Elfrid.


Egfrid.
The twelfth King of the Mercians, and the seventeenth Monarch of the English.

He re-establisht the privileges and liberties of all the Churches which his
Father had suppressed.

He reigned only four months; he was taken away by sudden death in the
hundredth forty first day after his Fathers decease.

Kenwolfe.
The thirteenth King of the Mercians, Kenul^hus magnus vir and virtutibus famam
supergredicus, nihil quod livor digne carperet unquam admisit, domi Religiosus,
in bello victoriosus vir, cujus merito lauds ^itentur in altum, quamdiu aeq
nus arbiter in Anglia invenietur; laudandue tum regni sublimitas, tum mentis
humilitate, qua cuisuit amplissime, Malmesb. de gest is Reg. Angl. l. 1. c. 4.
and the eighteenth Monarch of the English men.

At home he was an example of piety, peace, justice, and Religion: abroad
temperate, humble, and courteous, without vain ostentation, or ambitious
conceits. In Wars he was stout and victorious; in peace studious to enrich
his Subjects: he carried himself so at all times, that envy could not touch him
with her tongue.

Bid dedicateth his Ecclesiastical History to him.

He reigned twenty two years.

CHAP. IV.
OF the Saxons that reigned sole Kings of this Island. Anglorum Reges, postquam
in Monarchiam septem regna coaluerunt, Egbertus. Aethelwalphus.


1. Egbert reigned thirty seven years. 2. Ethelwulf (the son of Egbert) twenty
years. 3. Ethelbald (the eldest son of Ethelwulf) five years. 4. Aethelbaldus.
Aethelb^^us. Aetheltedus. Alfredus, Edvardus sen, Aethelstanus, Edmundus.
Edredus. Edwinus. Edgarus. Edwardus martyr. Ethelredus. Edmundus. ferrcum
l^tus. Canutus. Haroldus. Harde-Canutus. Edwardus Confessor. Haroldus,
Boxhornij Metamorphosis Anglorum.
Ethelbert (the second son of Ethelwulf five years. 5. Ethelred (the third son
of Ethelwulf) five years. 6. Alfred (the youngest son of Ethelwulf) five years.
7. Edward (surnamed the elder) twenty three years. 8. Aethelstane (the eldest
son of Edward) sixteen years. 9. Edmund (the second son of Edward) six years.
10. Edred (the youngest son of Edward) nine years. 11. Edwin (the elder son of
Edmund) four years. 12. Edgar (the younger son of Edmund) sixteen years. 13.
Edward: (the elder son of Edgar) forty years. 14. Ethelred (the younger son of
Edgar) thirty seven years. 15. Edmund (the son of Ethelred) in whose time the
Danes possessed the greatest part of England.
Egbert.
The eighteenth King of the West Saxons, Regnavit inde Egbertus, co autem
faeliciue quod Alcuinum viderit, omni (quae aetas illa tulerit) literatum
genere doctissimum cu^us quidem operain Parisicus^ Academia instituenda Carolus
Magnus usus est. Seldeni Analect. Anglobrit l. 2. c. 2.
the nineteenth, but first sole and absolute Monarch of the English men.

Upon report of the death of Britic, he with great speed returned out of
France, where (during the time of his abode) he had served with good
commendation in the Wars, under Charles the Great; by means whereof (his
reputation increasing among his own Countrymen) he was thought worthy of the
Government, before he obtained it.

He first gave this Kingdom the name of England. Egbertus conscendit Thronum
avitum omnibus ante se regibus merito praeserendus. Mulm. de rebus gestis Angl.
(...) l. 1. c. 2.


He ordained by public Edict, that the Heptarchy possessed by the Saxons,
should be called thence forward the Land of the English, whence the Latins
took also their name Anglia, and the French that d' Angleterre.

There were three hundred years from King Egbert unto William the Conqueror.

He reigned over the West Saxons thirty six years and seven months, Thirty
seven says Mr. Fox.
and Monarch of the whole Island seventeen.

Ethelwulfe.
The nineteenth King of the West Saxons, Anno Dom. 837 Ethelwulphus (quem
quidam Athulphumvocant) filius Egberthi regnum sortitus regnavit viginti annis,
and quinque mensibus, natura leuis, and quisub quiet degere, quam multis
provincijs imperitare mallet. Malmesb, de gestis Regum Anglorum l. 2. c. 2.
Omnis Anglia hoc tempore istuc vectigal pietatis and Religionis causa, Romano
pontifici pendit domesticatim collatum, and nominum illi argentei vocantur
vulgo denarij divi Petri, quos pontifici quaestor exigit qui publico bonas
arts prositerentur, quo multi doctrina clari constuxerunt, docend^ gratia. Nos
hanc olim quaesturam aliquot per annos gessimus, ejusque muner^ obeundi causa,
primum iu Angliam venimus. Polyd. Virg. Aug. hist. l. 4.
and the twentieth Monarch of the English men.

He being once himself nuzled in that order, Quis facile crediderit
Aethelwulfum Regem decimam partem non solum bonorum and facultatum, sed and
mansionum praediorumque totius Ecclesiae contulisset Spelm. Epist. Dedicat. ad
lib. de Council.
was always good and devout to religious orders.

He was so well learned and so devout, that the Clerks of the Church of
Winchester did choose him in his youth to be their Bishop, which function he
took upon him, and was Bishop of Winchester for seven years before he was King.
The History of Cambria by Lhoyd, augmented by Doctor Powell p. 32.

A Monk, a Deacon, and a Bishop, yet elected King, because they could not find
a fitter person for the Crown. Necessitate cogente factus est Rex, Roger
Hoveden.

He ordained that Tithes and Church Lands should be free from all taxes and
Regal services.

Ethelwolphus Rex omnium historicorum consensu and fide praestantissimus, nec
pietatis magis quam rerumoptime gestarum laud celebri^ and illustris. Anti
Sanderus Dialogo secundo.

Polyd. Virgil in the fifth Book of his English History says of King Alfred:

Atqui Neotum inprimis monas^icae professionis virum sanctissimum, ob eximiam
eruditionem, miro amore complexus est, quo hortante, Oxonij gymnasium
instituit, proposita mercede omnibus.

His second son by his Queen Judith, daughter of Charles the bald Emperor,
King of France, Neote, was much addicted to learning, and was one of the first
Divinity readers in the University of Oxford.

He was interred in the County of Huntington, St. Needs in Huntingtonshire why
so called.
at a place then called Arnulphsbury, and afterward in regard of his interment
St. Neots, and now St. Needs.

This King was famous for having four sons, Ethelbald Ethelbert and Ethelred
successively reigned, and dying left the Kingdom distracted by continual
conflicts with the Danes; and Alfred having faithfully served his Brothers, as
Viceroy in each of their several Raigns, survived, and in the twenty second
year of his age succeeded in his Kingdom. Powells life of Alfred.
who all of them were Kings of this Land successively.

He reigned twenty years, one month, and nine days.

Ethelbald.
The twentieth King of the West Saxons, Anno Dom. 857 duo silij Ethelwulphi
regnum paternum partientes, Ethelbaldus in West-Saxonia, Ethelbertus in Cant^a
regnaverunt. Ethelbaldus ignavus and perfidus patris ejus thorum polluit, in
conjugium Judith n^ver^ae post ^ar^ntis obi^^m devolutus; sed post quinquennium
eo defuncto, and Schireburniae co^dito, totum regnum ad alterum derivatum est
Malmesb. de gestis Regum Angl. l. 2. c. 3.
and the twenty first Monarch of the English men.

He took Judith his stepmother to be his wife; this prodigious incest was soon
punished by his untimely death.

He reigned five years.

Ethelbert.
The one and twentieth King of the West Saxons, and the two and twentieth
Monarch of the English men.

The first Christened Prince of all the Saxon Nation. Primus ille, nodum Cantii,
praeter Northumbriam totius Angliae Rex, sacro font^ ab Augustino Monacho
Anglorum, ut a^unt Apostolo, tinctus. Seldenjanus Anglorum.


Omnium Anglo-Saxonum regum Christi nominis primus hospes. Twini Comment. de
rebus Brittanicis.

His name signifies nobly-conceited or advised, or of noble conceit or
advisement. Verstegan.

He reigned over the Kentish-South, and East Saxons ten years, and was Monarch
of the whole only five.

Ethelred.
The two and twentieth King of the West Saxons, and the twenty third Monarch of
the English men.

Great was the valor of this King; Regnum paternum obtinuit ^odem numero,
annorum quo fratres miserabili prorsus and dolenda sort, ut immatura omnes
occumberent morte, nisi quod tantis matis obstrepentibus regij pueri magis
optarem honestum exitum quam acerbum imperium, Malm. de gestis Regum Angl l. 2.
c. 3.
for in his short time of Reign, as Malmesbury and other Writers record, he
fought no less than nine set Battles against the Danes in one year, in most of
them victorious.

At Wintburne in Darset-shire there is this Epitaph written on his Tomb.

In hoc loro quiescit corpus S. Ethelredi Regis West-Saxonum Martyris, qui anno
Domini DCCCLXXII. XXIII. Aprilis per manus Danorum Pag^norum occu^^uit.

He reigned in great trouble five years, Six says A^dre Du Chesne.
says Malmesbury.

CHAP. V.
Alfred, Aelfred, or Alvred.
THe twenty third King of the West Saxons, Alfridus, qui and Ae^fredus, and
Alvredus de bellavit Danos, and unicus sui sae^ust Maecenas fuit. Lelandi
^omment in Cygn^am Cantionem. Insignem hunc Regem Saxo-nes passim, and ipsus
semet, Aelfredum nominant, nonnulli Alfre^um and ^lfridum: recentiores (litera
[f] ^u [v] consonantem versa) Alvredum. Filius erat Regis Ethelwulplhi
pihntissimi, ^atu certe minimus, e virtute autem and rebus gestis, magnus ab
^^horibus appellatus Pu^rum adhuc a patre Romam delegatum, Leo Pap^ ^0.
Prophetico velut ductus ^piritu in Anglorum futurum aliq tando Regem ^^xit,
dum^tres sui fratres omnes, qui paterno prius fruebantur diademate, superstites
(...), ^ and insolumes Reg^are capit anno Christi 872. des^it anno 901. cum
annos 28 v^l 29 reg^minis tenuisset gubernaculum, multas interea utriusque
fortunae expertus vi^^ssitudines. Spelm. de Council. p. 378. Hic octarum
Saxo^^corum (...), in Dei servitto vigilantissimus, and in exequendis jud^^ii^
erat discretissimus. Hoved. Annal pars prior.
and twenty fourth Monarch of the English men.

He was the first anointed King of England, Erat Rex ille in exequendis
judiciis, sicut in caeteris al^is omnibus rebus discretissimus indagator*
Asserius Men^vensis.
as glorious for his most excellent Laws, transcendent Justice and Civil
Government, as for his martial exploits, victories, and for his incomparable
piety and extraordinary bounty to the Clergy and learned men.

Of his great memory when he was young, Vide Asserium de Alfredi rebus g^^tis.
vide Asserium de Aelfredi rebus gestis.

He was accounted a good Grammarian, Rhetorician, Philosopher, Musician, and
Poet.

His Reign began with troubles and Wars, Nec vero des^erunt dulcissimi Jovis
^ Mercurii been positorum influxus; nec Musae (Rex enim. faelix seculum vere
philosophabatur) ne^leg^^ inter arma (...). Sel^en^ Analect. Anglo brit. l. 2.
c. 5.
in defense of the Land which the Pagan- Danes intended to destroy; and though
his powers were small, yet was he forced into the field within one month after
his Coronation.

He fought no less than forty six bloody Battles (says Spelman) with the Danes
by Land and Sea, for his Countries liberties.

Vir in bell^ per omnia strenuissimus. Asserius.

He was once brought to that extremity, that he was forced to leave his
Companies, and lurk in Somersetshire Marshes.

The solitary place of his most residency, was an Island enclosed with two
Rivers Thane and Parret, at their meetings in the County of Somerset, commonly
called Edeling se^, where he in very poor attire disguised, was entertained
into a Cow-heards service, where on a time as he sat by the fire in trimming
of his Bow and sha^ts, a Cake of dough baking on the hearth before him, chanced
to burn; the Cowheardess coming in, and seeing him mind his Bow more than his
bread, in a great ^ury cast away both his Bow and arrows, and checking him
said, Thou fellow do thou see the bread burn before thy face, and wilt not
turn it, and yet art thou glad to eat it before it be half baked?

Of the natural days twenty four hours, eight he allotted for devotion and
contemplation, eight for refection and recreation, and the eight remaining for
matters of the Commonwealth.

Julius Caesar having spent the whole day in the field about his military
affairs, Vide Asserium Menevensem de Aelfredi rebus gestis. p. 9.
divided the night also for three several uses, one part for his sleep, a
second for the Commonwealth and public business, the third for his studies.
Peacham.

He translated Gregory's Pastorals, And also Paulu^ Orosius his History.
B^les History, and Boethius de Consolatione Philosophiae into the Saxon
tongue, and began to do the like with David's Psalms.

In divinis libris and sacra lectione tam assiduus erat, quod Davidicum
Psalterium, vel aliquem alium librum aedisic^^torium in sinu suo semper ferret;
Vide Malm. de gestis Reg. Angl. l. 2. c. 4. To furnish i^ with able Scholars,
he drew thither out of France Grimbald and Scotus, and out of Wales Asser, (who
(...) his life) whose Lectures he honored often with his own presence.
and viros literatissim^s de terris exteris ad se accersens, aliquandiu in
Palatio suo secum pro sacris literis addiscendis retentos, demum diversis
praelatiis and dignitatibus premoveret. Ingulphi Historia p. 870. vide plura
ibid. and p. 871.

He restored the decayed University of Oxford, by fixing therein a College,
(now bearing the name of Vniversity-Colledge) and annexed ample maintenance
unto it.

He divided his Kingdom into Shires, Hundreds and Tithings, for the better
ordering and administering of justice, and for the abandoning of thieves, which
had formerly increased by the means of long Wars; whereby notwithstanding
the multitude of Soldiers continually employed, it is reported that a Virgin *
might travel alone in his days through all his Dominions, without any
violence offered; and that Bracelets of gold were hanged in the high ways,
Quin and provincialibus graudem amorem studtiorunt in^u^it, hos praemiis, illos
injuriis hortando; neminem illiteratum ad quamlibet Curiae dignitatem aspirare
perinittens. Malmesh de gestis Regum Auglorum, l. 2. c. 4.
and no man so hardy as to take them away.

William the first so well provided for execution of Justice upon offenders,
that a young maiden well charged with gold, might travel in any part of the
Realm, without any offer of injury unto her. Hayw.

He permitted none in office in Court, or elsewhere, unless he were learned,
which incited his Nobles to the earnest pursuit of learned Arts, and to train
up their children in good letters.

He caused all former Laws to be surveyed, Aluredu^ a Decalogo suas leges pie
auspicatur Vide Lanibardum de priscis ^nglorum legibus.
and made choice of the best, which he translated into the English tongue.

He begins his Laws with a religious Majesty, Loquutus est Dominus ad Mosem
hos sermones, etc. and cites all the Decalogue.

Abbot Ethelred gives this encomium of his Laws, Leges Christianissimas and
scripsit, and promulgavit, in quibus fides ejus and devotio in Deum,
sollicitudo in subditos, misericordia in pauperes, justitia circa omnes cunctis
legenti^us patet.

He had so great a love to learning, that he made a Law, that all Freemen of
the Kingdom, possessing two Hides of Land, should bring up their sons in
learning, till they were fifteen years of age at least, that so they might be
trained to know God, to be men of understanding, and to live happily.

He bestowed the sixth part of his riches and Rents, Dum gesta ejus commemoro
militaria, miror unquam cum cogitasse civilia. Dum civilium ejus intueor
molestiarum cumulos; miror utique quod in aciem prodiit. Dum vero religio^em,
pietatem, and ardorem rerum c^lestium contemplatus sum, vixisse Monachus visus
est and regularis; hoc solo infaelix, quod inter gentes barbares sub faedissimo
literarum deliquio. f^loruit and interiit circiter an. Dom. 900 Spelmanni
Glossarium Vid^ ejus Epist. Dedicat. ad Lib. de Consil.
upon the poor strangers of the Country, and sent every year little less to
foreign Churches without the Realm. Dalechamps Christian hospitality. c. 3.

He was very learned, a quality rare in his time; and as Solomon, Alexander the
Great, Julius Caesar, Augustus, and our Charlemagne, (says Andre Du Chesne) he
joined learning and valor, and was clement, liberal, pious and devout, and
adorned with all royal virtues and endowments. I may in some respects compare
him with Almansor, the learned and victorious King that conquered Spain.

He was at fifteen years so skillful in the seven liberal Sciences, that they
who were the most learned in them, spoke of them in his presence with much fear
and bashfulness; for at every other word he corrected the imperfections which
proceeded out of their ignorance. At the five and twentieth year of his age, he
spoke eleven languages, reading and writing them as perfectly as the very
Naturals themselves. He divided the days of the week after this manner. The
Friday for matters of his Religion, in which he was very devout. The Saturday
for matters of Justice. The Sunday for matters of War. The Monday for the
government of his Kingdoms. The Tuesday and Wednesday for his recreations and
private affairs. And the Thursday for matters of learning.

He chastised thieves so severely, that none durst take any thing from other,
neither in City, nor in Country; as well in deserts, as in peopled place^. And
in so great awe they were of him, that if any one had lost ought in the street,
or Marketplace, none durst meddle therewith, otherwise than to leave it at the
next Shop, and cause it to be cried, till the owner were found, to whom it was
to be restored.

None ever ^ought for alms or succor at his hands, whether he were Moor,
Christian, or Jew, that went away unrelieved.

He was worthily called the Conqueror, being never overcome. He won eighty six
Battles by Sea and by Land; and took five Kings, subdued three parts of the
world, Asia, Afric, and Europe. His life and death by Ashley.

Alfred's Arms are to be seen in the public Hall of University-Colledge in
Oxford.

The Archdeacon of Huntington speaking of the continual travail he had during
his Reign, relates these Verses of him.

Nobilitas innata tibi probitatis honorem, His Epitaph.

Armipotens Aelfrede dedit, probitasque laborem;
Perpetuumque labor nomen, cui mixta dolori
Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori.
Si modo victor eras, ad crastina bella pavebas,
Si modo victus eras, ad crastin^ bella parabas:
Cui ve^tes sudore jugi, cui ^^eca cruore
Tincla jugi, qu^^ntum s^t onus regnare, probarunt.
Non fuit immensi quisquam per climata mundi,
Cui tot in adversis vel respirare liceret,
Nec tamen aut ferro contritus, poncre ferrum,
Aut gladio potuit vitae finisse labores.
Iam post transactos vitae, regnique dolores
Christus ei sit vera quies, sceptrumque perenne.
He reigned twenty seven years say some; Anno dominicae incarnationis 872,
Elfredus filius Ethel^ wulphi junior regnum accepit, and 28. and semis annos
laboriosissime, and fortissime ^enuit. Malmesb. l. 2. c. 4 Some say above 29.
years. So Rog. de Hoveden annal part 1.
twenty eight says Powell, the writer of his life. Ingulphus says he died in
the twenty ninth year of his Reign.

CHAP. VI.
EDWARD the elder.
THe twenty fourth King of the West Saxons, Dictus senior, eo quod post illum
plures ejusdem nominis regnaverunt, quorum omnium ipse primus erat. Literarum
scientia multum inferior patre, sed regni potestate incomparabiliter
gloriosior. Malmesb. de gestis Reg. Ang. l. 2 c. 5.
and twenty fifth Monarch of the English men.

Fuit Edwardus forma eximia, ac per omnes aetatis gradus decentissima. Polyd.
Virg. Ang. hist. l. 6.

Before the conquest of the Normans, there were in England three Edwards, 1.
This Edward the elder; 2. Edward the Martyr; 3. Edward the Confessor.

We have had more Kings of England of this name, than of any other; nine in
all, Idem fere habet Ingulphus. Edwardus, Cognomento senior, literarum cultu
patre inferior, sed dignitate, potentia pariter and gloria superior.
three before the conquest, and six after it. Verstegans Etymology of our Saxon
proper names.

Henry, the name of seven Emperors of Germany; eight Kings of England, four
Kings of France, four Kings of Castile. Phillips his new world of English words.

He was heir apparent to his Father Alfreds valor and virtues, Nam multo
latius, quam pater fines regni, sui dilatavi^. Rog. de Hoveden. Annal. part. 1.
p. 421-^
as well as to his Crown.

Some say he was the great Justinian of our Nation.

Our Laws being suppressed by the Danish Kings, were revived and reinforced in
the time of Edward the Confessor; whence they had the name of Edward the
Confessors Laws.

He reigned in great Wars and honor the space of twenty four years. 23.
says Malmesb.
So Henricus Huntingdoniensis says, 24. Polyd Virg.
Paternum regnum tenuit 24. annis. 34. says Roger de Hoveden.


Ethelstan or Adelstan.
The twenty fifth King of the West Saxons, and the twenty sixth Monarch of the
English men.

He was crowned at that Kingly Town Kingston. In Regia villa, in Regem levatur.
Rog. de Hoveden.

He began his Kingdom with War, and ended in peace and tranquillity.

He was the worthiest Prince (says Lhoyd) of Saxon blood, that ever reigned.

Being seduced by the bad Counsel, and false suggestions of one of his
favorites, he banished his Brother Edwin unjustly, Malmesb. de gestis Regum
Ang. l. 1. c. 6. A young English Gentleman in a sally forth at Ostend had one
of his arms shot off with a Canon, which taking up he brought back with him
into the Town unto the Chyrurgion, and coming into his lodging, showed it,
saying, Behold the arm which but at dinner did help its fellow. This he did,
and endured without the least fainting, or so much as reposing upon (...) bed.
Dr. Dillingham Veres Commentaries in the contin^ation of the siege of Ostend.
commanding him to be sent to Sea, with only one servant, and in a Boat without
Oar or Sail, wherein he perished.

His Cup Bearer after in his service upon festival, stumbled with the one
foot, and recovering himself with the other, pleasantly said, You see how one
Brother helps another; upon which speech, the King with grief and touch of
heart, called to mind the death of his innocent Brother, occasioned by his
wicked Counsel, and forthwith commanded execution to be done on him the
procurer; and himself was ever after more tender and careful toward his other
Brethren.

Leyland in his new years gift to King Henry the eighth, reckons him amongst
other learned men of the Kings Progenitors.

The chiefest of his works for the service of God, and good of his Subjects,
was the translation of the Bible into the Saxon tongue, (which was then the
mothertongue of the Land) out of the Hebrew.

Of this work Leyland also speaks in the work beforementioned.

His Laws are mentioned by Lambard in his Saxon Laws.

He reigned in great honor the space of fifteen years, 16. years says
Malmesbury.
and odd months.

Edmund.
The twenty sixth King of the West Saxons, and twenty seventh Monarch of the
English men.

The good Laws he made are extant in Saxon and Latin, by the industry of Mr
William Lambard.

He had by his Queen Elgina two sons, Edwin and Edgarus, surnamed Pacificus,
which both reigned after him.

By him were expelled the Danes, Scots, Normans, and all foreign enemies out
of the Land.

He reigned six years and a half.

At his Manor of Puclekerkes in the County of Gloucester, Tenuit regnum anuis
6. and semis. Malmesb. l. 2. c 6.
whilst he interposed himself between his Sewer and one Leof, to part a fray,
See Milles his Catalogue of honor, and Mr. Prynne his seasonable, legal, and
hystoricall vindication of the fundamental Liberties, Rights, and Laws of
England. p. 106.
he was with a thrust through the body wounded to death, when he had
prosperously reigned the space of five years and seven months. Rogerus de
Hoveden annal part 1. Malmesbury l. 2. c. 7. and others, say this Leof was a
thief, which the King espying at a festival, he pulled him by the hair, and
cast him to the ground; but he drawing out his weapon, stabbed the King. Vide
Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 6.

Edred.
The twenty seventh King of the West Saxons, and twenty eighth Monarch of the
English men.

He suffered his body to be chastised at the will and direction of Dunstan
Abbot of Glassenbury; unto whose custody he also committed the greatest part of
his treasure and richest Jewels, to be locked in his chests, and under the keys
of this Monastery, where it remained, till the King fell sick of his last
sickness; at which time it was demanded, but never restored; for Dunstan being
on his journey with the same to the King, a voice from heaven spoke unto him,
and said, Behold King Edred is now departed in peace; at the hearing of which
words, Anno Dominicae incar^ationis 946. Edredus tertius ex filiis Edwardi
regnum suscipiens, rexit annis 9, and dimidio. Malmesb. l. 2. c. 7.
his horse immediately fell down and died* Whereupon he returned again to his
Monastery; and though he lost his horse, yet was he recompensed thereby with
the gain of the Kings treasure and Jewels.

He reigned in great honor nine years and odd months.

Edwin or Edwy.
The twenty eighth King of the West Saxons, Anno Dominic^e incar^ationis 955.
Ed^inus regno potitus tenuit annis quatuor, petulans adoles^ens, and qui
speciositate corporis i^ libidinibus abuteretur. Malmesb. de gestis Reg. Ang. l
2. c. 7. Ea tempestate facies Monachorum saeda and miserabi^is ^rat. Caeterum
long horret nostra memoria, quam immanis fu^rit in reliqua caenobia. and
propter aetatis lubricum, and propter pellicis consilium, qua^ tenerum jugiter
obside^at animum Malmesb. de gestis Reg. Ang. l. 2. Vide plura ibid. and Polyd.
Virg. Ang. hist. l. 6.
and twenty ninth Monarch of the English men.

He was but thirteen years old when he began to reign.

He was Nephew to Edred.

He favored not the Monks, which made them write so scandalously of him. He
thrust them out of Malmesbury and Glassenbury, placing married Priests in their
room; and banished Dunstan their great Champion into Flanders.

The true causes of his banishing him, ejecting the Monks, and seizing their
lands and treasures, was, that Dunstan had so bewitched Edmund, Edward,
Aethelstan, and Aedred his predecessors, with the love of Monkery, as they not
only took violently from married Priests their livings, to erect Monasteries,
but also lavishly wasted much of their own royal treasures, lands, and
revenues upon them, which they should rather have employed in resisting the
common enemies of God and their Country, the Danes.

Ioscelin the Author of Antiq. Brit. Bishop Godwin, Speed, and others conceive,
that the true cause why the Mercians and Northumbrians, (and those only, not
the rest of his Subjects and Kingdom) rejected him, and set up his Brother
Edgar, (whose vices were more exorbitant in some degrees than Edwins) was the
malice of Dunstan and Odo (the pillars and Oracles of the Monkish Clergy) who
stirred up the Mercians, and seditious rebellious Northumbrians against him, to
set up Edgar in his stead, who was totally devoted to them and Dunstan, by
whose counsels he was afterward wholly guided, and built no less than forty
seven new Monasteries for the Monks; besides all those he repaired, intending
to build three more had he lived, to make them fifty complete.

He reigned but four years.

CHAP. VII.
EDGAR.
THe thirtieth Monarch of the English men.

The Reign of this King is said to have been altogether in a calm tranquillity,
He was surnamed Etheling, after the signification of the Saxon speech, Outlaw,
because he was a banished man in the former time of his life, through the
cruelty of the Danes. Laci^s Nobility.
and therefore he was surnamed Pacificus, the Peaceable. His virtues were many,
and vices not a few; the one gloriously augmented, and the other fairly
excused, by those Monkish writers, unto whose professions he was most
favorable.

Tunc ordo Monasticus jamjudum lapsus p^acipue caput erexit. Although in his
younger days he was subject to many vices, and committed some in urious
tyrannical acts, recorded by Malmesbury, Fox, Speed, and others; yet repenting
of these his youthful, lustful vices, he proved such a just and prudent King,
that our Historians of elder and later ages, give large encomiums of his
justice, prudence, virtues, and politic Government, worthy perpetual memory
and imitation. Mr. ^ryn's seasonable, legal, and historical vindication of
the fundamental Liberties, Rights. Laws of England, p. 126, 127 Vir and animi
virtute, and corporis ro^ore long princeps. Polyd. Virg. Ang* hist. l. 6.
Malmesb. l. 2. c. 8.

He unravelling the web his Brother had weaved, recalled Dunstan out of
banishment, and made him Archbishop of Canterbury.

His Summer progresses, and yearly chief pastimes, were the sailing round about
this whole Isle of Albion, guarded with his grand Navy of four thousand sail at
the least, parted into four equal parts, of petty Navies, each being of a
thousand Ships. Dee's British Monarchy, p. 56, 57. he calls him there that
Saxonicall Alexander. See more there; and p. 55, 58, 59, 60.

He appointed the Prince of North- Wales to bring him yearly three hundred
skins of Wolves, Malmesb. l. 2. c. 8.
for a tribute, which continued for three years space, but in the fourth was
not a Wolf to be found; and so the tribute ceased.

Upon the River Dee he had seven petty Kings to row his Barge, to show his
greatness.

He was very lascivious. Id. ibid.


Leges apprime utiles tulit, quas vetustas in oblivionem ferme adduxit.

Of his Laws, Polyd Virg. Ang hist. l. ^.
vide Lambardum de pris^is Anglorum legibus.

It is sure enough there have not been more famous men, Dr. Barwick's life of
B. Morton.
than some of no great stature, as the instance of King Pipin in the French
History, and this King in our own, will make manifest.

In the time that the Saxons had this Realm in subjection, he had subdued all
the other Kings Saxons, and made them his Tributaries. On a time he had t^all
all with him at dinner; Licet, ut fertur, staturae fuerit. and corpulentiae
perexilis; tantas vires in illo corpusculo dignatio naturae incluserat, ut
ultro ad congrediendum lacesceret quemcunque audacem nosset; hoc maxim timeus
ne (...) tali colludio timeretur. Malmesb. de gest is Regum Anglorum. l. 2. c.
8.
and after it was showed him, that Rynaud King of Scots had said, that he
wondered how it should happen, that he and other Kings, that were tall and
great personages, would suffer themselves to be subdued by so little a body, as
Edgar was; Edgar dissembled, and answered nothing, but faining to go on
hunting, took with him the Scottish King in his company, and purposely withdrew
him from them that were with him, causing by a secret servant, two swords to be
conveyed into a place in the forest, by him appointed. As soon as he came
thither, he took the one sword, and delivered the other to Rynaud, Vide plura
ibid. Malcome ^ King of Sco^s hearing of a conspiracy plotted to murder him,
whereof one was author, he dissembled the knowing of it, till being abroad one
day a hunting, he took the fellow apart from the company, and being alone, said
unto him, Here is now a fit time and place to do that manfully, which you have
intended to do treacherously. Draw your weapon* and if you kill me, none being
present, you can incur no danger. With which speech of the King, the fellow was
so daunted, that presently he (...) down at his feet, confessed his fault,
humbly asked forgiveness, and being granted him, was ever after serviceable and
faithful to him. Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England in
William the 2d Sir Thomas Elyo^'s Govern^ur, out of Malmesb. In h^norem Christi
ejusque divini nominis cultum, quadragin^a caen^bia ve a fundamen^is ^x^ruxit,
vel pa^um sarta t^cta (...) de reb. Brit. (...) pacificus, ^a^ria and
Monosticae disci^li^^ propugnator ard^n ^ssim^s qui sem^t ^ ^^achorum caet^^,
Reg^nem (...) ^^alium pras^^^t guber^^^res S^elm. d^ Council p 489. (...)
aunorum 16.
bidding him to prove his strength, and to essay whether his deeds would
ratify his words. Turpe est enim Regi in convivio esse dicaculum, nec esse in
praelio promptulum. Whereat the Scottish King being abashed, beholding the
noble conrage of Edg^r, with an horrible fear confessed his error, desiring
pardon, which he (with most humble submission) at the last obtained.

For his excellent virtues and prosperou^ Reign, he was called Honor and
deliciae Anglorum. Malmesbury. Or as Ingulphus ter meth him, Honor and Rosa
Regum.

In his time all Ecclesiastical Orders flourished; learned and virtuous men
were highly esteemed; all Civil and forrign Wars ceased; and he was called
the King of Albion, being no less powerful by Sea, than by Land. Mexia's
Treasury of time. vol. 2. l. 7. c. 1.

He was Angliciorbis flos and decus, n^^n minus mem^rabilis ^^nglis, quam Cyrus
Persis; Romulus Romany: Alexander Macedonibus; Arsaces Parthis* Carolus Magnus
Francis; as Malmesbury, Abbot Ethelred, Florentius Wigorniensis, Simeon
Dunelmensis, Henry Huntingdon, Matthew Westminster, R^ger de Hoveden, and
others record of him.

Immediately after his death, Res and spes Anglorum retro sublapsae sunt,
totius Regni status est per^urbatus; and post tempus laetitiae quod illius
tempore vigebat pacified, caepit tribulatio undique advenire; as Malmesbury,
Wigorniensis, Hoveden, Simeon Dunelmensis, Regnim adipis ^^ns c^dem num^ro
(...) de gestis Reg. Aug. l. 2. c. 8.
and Bromton observe. Such an incomparable loss was the death of so just,
pious, and prudent a King to the whole Nation, Qui (...) viti^, pos^e^ (...)
virtutibus delevi^, when most others do quite contrary.

He reigned sixteen years and two months, in great tranquillity and honor,
and died in the 37th year of his age.

After Edgar's death, The three conquests of England by the Saxons, Danes, and
Normans, proceeded from the sins of the Princes, or of the people, or both.
Mexia's Treasury of time. vol. 2. l 7. c. 1^.
the Danes so plagued this Realm, that there was nothing settled in it, either
in Church or State, till finally they obtained the Kingdom.

The Danes reigned in England 25. years.

But Speed says they molested England for two hundred eighteen years. See
Ayscu his Declaration of the first Inhabitants of this Island.

The Danes by strength caused Husbandmen to ear and sow the land, Dani
populationibus, ^caelibus and incen^iis miseram Anglianm multos per annos adeo
affl^x^runt, ut Clades (...) Romany, Scotis, ^ictis, and Sax^nibus jam an^ca,
postea^; deinde a Normannis huic Insulae illatae, si aerumnis and calamita ibus
quibus isti p^triam hanc nostram affecerunt conferantur, quasi ludus quidam and
tragadia scenica poss^^t aestimari. Nam bellum nobiscum gesserunt temporis long
inquitate diuturnum, omni crudelitatis genere immanissimum, and belli ge^endi
ratione difficilimum. Godw. de Praesul Ang. Comment. p. 67. vide plura ibid.
and p ^9.
and to do all other vile labor that belonged unto Husbandry; and the Dane
held his wise at pleasure, with daughter and servant. When the Husbandman came
home, he should scantly have of his own, as his servants had; so that the Dane
had all at his commandment, and did eat and drink his fill of the best, when
the owner had scant his fill of the worst.

Besides this the common people were so oppressed by them, Vide Reg de Hoved.
part 1. p^^t 2. See Verst^g^^ of our names of contempt. p. 33^
that for fear and dread they called them in every such house as they had rule
of, Lord Dane. But in process of time, after the Danes were voided the Land,
this word Lord Dane was in derision and despite of the Danes, The Danes used
when the English drank, to stab them, or cut their throats; to avoid which
villainy, the party then drinking requested* some of the next fitters to be his
surety or pledge, whilst he paid nature her due, and hence have we our s^all
custom of pledging one another.
turned by English men into a name of reproach, called Lurdane, which yet is
not forgotten; for if one English man will rebuke another, he will say, Thou
art but a Lurdane. Grafton.

Edward, surnamed the Martyr. The thirty first Monarch of the English men.

He began his Reign at twelve years of age.

Adolescens summae sanctitatis and frugi, Infestabant illius maxim imperium
Clericos inter and Monachos de sacerdo ^um celibatu schismata, Seldeni Analect.
Anglobrit. l. 2. c. 6.
ea modestia regnare caepit, ut omnibus charissimus esse^, quippe qui paternas
virtutes gnaviter imitabatur. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 6.

The end of this young King was lamentable, being stabbed (by his Stepmothers
treachery) when he was drinking a cup of wine on Horseback, when he in kindness
came to visit her; Died in the 16^^ year of his age. Tribus annis and dimidio
potesta^e ^otitus est. Malmesb de gest^s Reg Ang l 2. c. ^.
through which wound fainting and falling from his Horse, he was dragged to
death by his foot entangled in the stirrup.

He reigned three years, and six (some say eight) months.

CHAP. VIII.
ETHELRED.
FOx calls him Egelred or Elred.

The two and thirtieth Monarch of the English men.

He was a man neither for ward in action nor fortunate in proceedings, and
therefore, commonly called the unready.

He defiled the Font at his Baptism with his ordure; Cum infans primum s^cro
admotus esset fonti, alimon^ae excremento Baptisterium (unde Constantinum etiam
pessimum Imperatorem ^opronymum dictum fuisse scribunt) faede^ inquinavit;
exclamavit exinde subito Danstans, Per sanctam Mariam pu^r^iste ignavu^ homo
^rit. Seldeni Analect. Anglob^it. l. 2. c. 6. Vide Malmesb. de gest^^ Reg. Aug.
l. 2. c. 10. and Hunting. hist. l. 5.
whereupon Dunstan being troubled in his mind, by the Lord (said he) and his
blessed mother, this child shall prove a sloathfull person.

He was half Brother to King Edward, who was treacherously murdered, and so
much lamented his Brothers murder, (says Malmesbury l. 2. c. 10.) being then
but a child of ten years old, and so detested it, that his Mother Elfrida
falling therewith in a rage, took wax Candles (having nothing else at hand)
wherewith she scourged him so sore (well near till he swouned) that after the
same he could never abide any wax Candles to but^ before him. Ejus vitae cursus
saev^s, in principio, miser in medio, turpis in exitu asseritur. Malm. l. 2. c.
10.


Of his Laws vide Lambardum de priscis Anglorum legibus.

The Danes grew upon him so fiercely, Ea nox par^ulo temporis momento vetustam
Danorum dominationem, diuque majorum virtute elaboratum finivit imperium. Sed
neque id postera nostris fortuna restituit. Ita Anglia dominandi ju^^ignavia
perd^tum scelere recuperavit. Saxo-Grammat. hist. Dan l. 10. Krantzi^ hist. D
n. l. 4.
that he was forced to purchase his peace from them, with great sums of
money, to the undoing of his poor Kingdom.

To put a period to this insufferable vass^lage, a bloody massacre was executed
upon them, by the Kings secret Commission on St Brices day; but such brutish
courses never find a wished close.

He most unfortunately reigned thirty seven years and nine days.

Edmund, surnamed Ironside.
The thirty third Monarch of the English men, and the third son to Ethelred.

He was of personage tall; Magni roboris and animo and corpore, and pr^pter hoc
ferreum ^atus nuncupatus Malmesb. de gestis Reg Aug. l. 2 c. 10. Pal^d Vi^g.
Ang hist. l 7.
for courage, hardy; strong of limbs, and well could endure the travels of
War; whence some conceive that surname was given him; not for that he used to
go always in armor, as some would have it.

He fought with Cnute a royal single du^ll, first on horseback, then on ^oot,
in the Isle of Olerenge, or Olney (near Gloucester) in the midst of Severn, in
the view of both their Armies, with extraordinary courage, and equal success,
Vide Malmesb. de gestis Reg. Ang. l. 2. c. 10. and Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l.
7. p. 132.
till they were both quite tired, but neither of them vanquished. At last upon
Cnu^es motion they began to parley in a friendly manner, and divided the Realm
between them; Edmund enjoying that part which lay coasted upon France, and
Canutus entered upon the rest.

But Ironside enjoyed not long his part; for Duke Edrick a very compound of
treasons, contrived the end of renowned Edmund, who being retired to a place
for natures necessity, he thrust from under the draught a sharp spear into his
body; and having thus murdered him, he cut off his head, presenting it to
Canutus, with this ^awning salutation, All hail* thou now sole Monarch of
England, for her^ behold the head of thy Co-partner, which for thy sake I have
adventured to cut off.

Canutus though ambitious enough of Sovereignty, yet abhorring in his heart so
detestable a murder, and knowing that he who was faithless to his natural
Sovereign, would never be faithful to him a stranger; commanded his head to be
divided from his shoulders, and placed upon the highest gate in London.

Mors hujus Principis sane miserabilis fuit, Polyd. Virg. Ang hist. l. 7.
tum quod florem ejus aetatis rapuerit, tum quod totum regnum in praeceps
dederit.

His Reign continued only seven months, Some say one year, and a few months.
in which time he fought seven or eight Battles, in defense of his Country,
People, and their Liberties. By his untimely death, the English Saxon^Monarchy
was devolved to the Danes.

CHAP. IX.
The Danes Monarchs.
CANUTUS.
THe first Danish King reigning in England, and the thirty fourth Monarch of
the English men.

He is more truly called Cnute, Cui ex magnitudine rerum gestarum magni nomen
accessit. Krantzii hist. Daniae l. 4.

A valiant and prudent Prince.

This Invader of Edmund Ironside's Kingdom (the better to secure his Empire
against Prince Alfred and Edward, Edmunds Brothers) married Emma his Queen.

After this marriage, to establish his Monarchy over England, he endeavored by
all means to reconcile the English to him.

1. By advancing some of the English Nobility to places of honor and trust.

2. By granting to the English equal rights and privileges with his Danes, in
consessu, in consilio, in praelio, and advancing them both alike.

3. By favoring and enriching the English Clergy, and Churchmen, and
manifesting extraordinary piety, devotion, bounty, in repairing, building,
endowing Monasteries and Churches throughout the Realm.

4. By easing them of his Danish Forces.

5. By ratifying all their former good old fundamental Laws, rights,
liberties, privileges, which they used, enjoyed under their Saxon Kings, by
enacting other good wholesome Laws, repealing all unjust Laws, and redressing
all exactions and grievances.

A company of flatterers which extolled his greatness and power to be
unmatchable, Vide Polyd. Virg. hist. Ang. l. 8. p. 135. Scians omnes habitantes
or^em, vanam and frivola^ regum esse potentiam. Hunting. hist. l. 6.
he caused to place him in a chair, where the Sea ebbs and flows at
South-hampton, that by the disobedience of the Tide, that would not stop at his
command, but presumed to dash his royal garments, they might learn how low man
is at the highest, and not to applaud his fortune, but fear his fall.

He acknowledged God alone to be King of this great Element, because the Sea is
his, and he made it.

The flatterers of Alexander the great, made him believe that he was the son of
Jupiter; Erat Dominus totius Daciae, totius Angliae, totius Norwagiae, simul
and Scotiae. Hunting. hist. l 6. Ea fuit optimi Regis diligentia, ut optimis
legibus patriam, cives, milites, intra honestatis praescriptum contineret.
Tulit legem de singulis rebus, omni^q^e praevi^it quae ab optimo legum latore
sunt providenda. Et quum inter alia homicidio quoque paenam decreviss^t,
accidit ut ipsae (...), is praevaricator, occiso milite inve^iretur. Qu^mqu
factum majesta^is reverentia ^u^ripot ^isset, militari se animadversiou^
substravit. Kran^^zii hist* Dani^ l. 4. Vide plura ibid. Leges Canuti
poste^^ati tam gratae fuerunt sibiqu^^am satutares Angl^ semper dux^runt, ut ad
eas sirmite^ observandas sub nomine Edward^ Regis (non quod ill^^ st^tu^rit,
sed quod observaverit) Principes reg^o inaugur^^dos solio sepius, obstrinxerint
juramento. Seldeni Anal^ct. Anglobrit l. 2 c. 6. Ex Malmes^. l 2. c. 11. Nou
refero confessoris has leges ad certum regni cjus anuum aliquem, quod non ab eo
institutas c^ns^o^^sed ex Antecossorum suoru^ legth^s (praesertim Regis Canuti*
ut animadvertit Malm^sburius) ducta plerunqu^ essent and promulga^a. Innuit hoc
idem ipsarum titulus in quo decitur, Iucipiunt lege^ S. Edward^ Regis, quas in
Anglia (...). Id est observavit Non quas tulit, hoc est instituit. Spelman. de
Council. p 625 l.^ide Lambardum de priscis Anglorum legibus.
but being one day sore hurt, and seeing the blood gush out of his wounds, What
think you of this? (said he unto them) Is not this blood of a lively red hew,
and merely humane?

He was the greatest Prince of power that ever before him reigned over the
English people.

England, Denmark, Norway, (some add also part of Sweden) together with
Scotland, were wholly subject unto him.

Filiam suam Imperatori Romano cum ineffabilibus divitiis maritavit. Hunting.
hist. l. 6.

In a Parliament at Oxford he made good Laws, whereof these were some that
concern Religion.

First, For the celebration of divine service, it was ordained, that all
Ceremonies tending to the increase of reverence and devotion, should be used as
need required.

Secondly, That upon the Sabbath day, all public Fairs, Markets, Synods,
Huntings, and all secular actions, should be forborne, unless some urgent
necessity should require it.

Thirdly, That every Christian should thrice in the year receive the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Fourthly, That a married woman convict of adultery, should have her nose and
ears cut off.

Krantzius much extols him as the most famous of the Kings of Denmark. Quo
nemo Damcorum Regum (tam e^si piura alii victor it is illustraverint) splendidi^r
fuit. Equidem sanctitate ac fortitudine inst^^ctiss^mus, non minus religionem
quam r^gnum proferre curae h^huit. Cra^zii hist. Daniae. l 4.


He was a just Prince in all, saving his tyranny against the two young Princes,
the sons of Edmond.

The luster of this new erected Monarchy, had no sooner displayed its beams in
Canutus, but like an unthrifty Taper it began to glimmer in Harold, and
absolutely expired in Hard knute, who dying issueless, the current of royalty
ran back again into the channel of the Saxon blood, which flowed in the veins^
of Edward, surnamed the Con^essor. Philpot's Preface to his Villare Cantianum.

After he had in great glory reigned about nineteen years, Some say twenty.
he deceased at Shafiesbury in the County of Dorset, St (...).
and was buried in the Church of the old Monastery at Winchester, where Queen
Emma made her abode ever after.

Harold.
The second Danish King reigning in England, and the thirty fifth Monarch of
the Land.

He was called Hare-foot, by reason of his swiftness. Canutus had him by a
Concubine, a Shoomakers daughter.

This base son of Cnute, dispossessed his legitimate son Harde-Cnute of the
Crown of England, contrary to Cnutes will and contract; banished and spoiled
Queen Emma of her treasure and Jewels; oppressed the people with taxes; and was
soon cut off by death, without any issue.

He was an oppresser of his people, and vicious.

He reigned four years and four months.

He was neither in Wars so hardy, Malme^b.
nor in Government so prosperous, as his Father Canutus before him had been.

Harde-Canute.
The third Danish King that reigned in England, and the thirty sixth Monarch of
the English men.

For his noble courage he was called Harde-Canutus.

(The first great Prince of the house of Burgundy, was Philip, surnamed the
Hardy.)

His recalling his Mother Emma, and half Brother Edward, and entertaining them
respectively, deserves commendation.

His Epicurism left an ill custom to all posterity. Dani (ut patria pace
loquar) s^ecandis certatim calicibus assueti Saxo-Gram. Hic tributum
inex^rabile and importabile Angliae imposuit, ut classiariis su^^ pers ingulas
naves viginti marcas ex pollicit^ pensitaret. Malm. l. 2 c, 12.
Four times a day his Table must be covered, to invite men to intemperancy;
through which at a marriage, he is thought to have choked himself at Lambeth,
most rejoicing to be rid of him; in memory whereof Hock-tide, a Feast of
scorning or triumphing, was a long time continued after.

The English men learned of him their excessive gormandizing, and unmeasurable
filling of themselves with meats and drinks.

At the death of this King, died all rule of the Danes in this Land, after they
had miserably afflicted the Kingdom for the space of two hundred and forty
years, though in Regal government, but only six and twenty, under these three
last Kings.

He reigned two years, lacking ten days.

The Danes ruled in this Land almost thirty years, and raged (without all
rule) about three hundred and fifty. Lamberts Perambulation of Kent.

CHAP. X.
Edward the Confessor.
THe son of King Ethelred, Edwardus Cognomento, ob p^etatem Confessor. Seldom.
Ianus Ang.
the thirty seventh Monarch of the English men.

He was born at Islip near unto Oxford, and tenderly educated by Queen Emma his
Mother, and after his Fathers death, for safety sent into France.

He was the last King of the Saxon race.

Such was the opinion conceived of his holiness of life, as that shortly after
his decease, he was canonized amongst the Saints, and named Edward the
Confessor.

To gain the more love of his Subjects at his first entrance, It was imposed by
his Father, and paid for forty years continuance, cut of the lands of all,
except only the Clergy. Danegeldum s^u Danageldum* ^d est, Tributum Danicum
dicebatur. Seldom. Mar^ clausum. ^ ^^ c. 11. vid plura. ^ Ibid.
he remitted the tax of forty thousand pounds, yearly gathered by the name of
Dane-gilt, so grevous to the Commons.

Fertur Edwardus Confessor (test Ingulpho) cum se daemonem vidisse, super
dcervo Daingeldi exultantem protestatus esset, aspectunique exhorruisset;
collecium illico restitui juss^sse, and retento ne iota uno, feram exactionem
perpetuum relaxasse. Spelmanni Glossarium Danegaldi redditio propter pyratas
primitus statuta est. Hoved. dnnal. pars posrerior* p. 603. vide plura ibid.

He collected the Laws of his predecessors into a body, for the administration
of justice, which some say are the ground of our Common Law, though the
pleading be altered, since the Norman conquest.

He found the Realm governed by three different Laws; the West Saxon Law; the
Mereian Law; and the Dane Law. Out of these three Laws, partly moderated, and
partly supplied, he composed one body of Law, commonly called St Edwards Laws,
which were of so great equity, that when they were abrogated by the Conqueror,
A Treatise of union of the two Realms of England and Scotland* c. ^.
and the Crown fell into controversy between Maud the Empress, and King
Stephen, the people always inclined to favor that part, who put them in
fairest hope of restitution of those Laws. And afterward in many Civil
dissensions, the greatest demand of the people appears to have been the
restitution of King Edwards Laws.

These Laws are partly Ecclesiastical; partly Civil.

Lambard de priseis Anglorum legibus, mentions Leges boni Regis Edwardi, quas
Gulielmus Bastardus postea confirmavit.

In these Laws it is observable;

1. That all capital, corporal, pecuniaty punishments; fines for criminal
offence^* (...) all reliefs, services, and duties to the King, are reduced to a
certainty, not le^t arbitrary to the King, his Justices, or other Officers, for
the Subjects greater liberty, ease and security.

2. That they protect, preserve the possessions, privileges, persons of the
Church and Clergy, from all invasion, injury, violence, and disturbance.

The Reign of this King was very peaceable.

He first used the broad Seal.

His Wife was named Editha, the virtuous Daughter of an infamous Father, Earl
Godwin.

Sicut spina Rosam, genuit Godwinus Editham.

His unnatural dealing with his good Mother Emma, and virtuous Wife Editha, in
whose breast there was a School of all liberal Sciences, says William
Malmesbury, cannot be excused. For upon a poor surmise of Incontinency, with
Alwin Bishop of Winchester, his Mother in his presence was put to the E^ymon
ipsius habe primum nominis Op (...) privativa est particula d^el pars sonat,
totum, expers quasi criminis. Purgationis autem sive Ordalii g^^us duplex,
i^ncum and aqu^um. Dupl^^i etiam forma ign^^^, ^^simul^tus cum quis criminis
aut nuda man^^ s^rrum gestabat, aut pedibua m^dus ig^i^o^ ve^^^res premebit.
Distinguebant porro juxta ferr^ magnitudinem, quod si uni^s esset pondo,
simplex; si trium, triplex Ordalium nominabant. Seld. Analect Auglebrit. l 2.
c. 8. Vide ejus Janum Anglorum. l 2. p 253, 254, 255, 256. Vedesis Glossarium
annexum legibus Henrici primi apud Lamba^ lu^ de pr^s^^^ Anglorum legibus. See
Dr. Hackwels Apology of Gods p^^vidence in the government of the world. l. 4.
c. 2. Sect. 5 against the Ordeal Laws.
Ordalium, to pass blindfolded between nine glowing Coulters, which she did
without hurt.

His refusing carnal copulation with his Queen, Sr John Hayward alleges two
other causes, impotency of nature, and suspicion against her.
either out of a vowed virginity, as most Historians conclude; or out of a
detestation of Earl Godwins traiterous race, quod Rex religiosus de genere
proditoris, haeredes, qui sibi succederent, corrupto semine regio, noluerit
p^^r^ari, as Ingulphus, Matthew Westminster, and others record; whereby he
exposed the Kingdom for a prey, to the ambitious pretenders aspiring after it.

The King after this craved mercy and pardon from his Mother, for the infamy
and injury done unto her, for which he was disciplined and whipped by his
Mother, and all the Bishops there present.

The first curing the Kings Evil, is referred to him, and thence to have
continued to his successors.

Solebat Rex Edwardus divinitus solo tactu sanare strumosos, hoc est, strumam
patientes. Est enim srruma morbus, quem Itali scrophula^ vulgo vocant, a
scrophis, quae ea mala scabie afflictantur. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 8.

Struma gutturis vitium, quod nonnulli scrophulam dicunt, solo tactu in quam
plurimis sanasse dicitur. Lil. Ang. Reg. Chronicon.

He reigned twenty three years, and six months, and died in the Painted
Chamber at Westminster.

He built St Peter's Church in Westminster, Ediderat a ^undamentis Ba^dicam seu
Ecclesia^ S. Petri Westmonasterii, supra modum saeculi augustissim^m; qua
nostratibus etiam exemplum dedit condendi Ecclesias in formam Crucis Christi
passioualis, id est, productiore radio inferiori. Spelm. de Council p. ^36.
and was there buried.

In hoc Rege linea Regum Angliae defecit, Matthew. Paris. hist. Ang. p. 2.
quae a Cerdicio primo Westsaxonum Rege, ex Anglis, quingentis and septuaginta
uno annis, non legitur interrupta, praeter paucos Danos, qui peccatis
exigentibus gentis Anglorum, aliquandiu regnaverunt.

Harold.
The second of that name, Earl Godwin Father to King Harold, having procured
the untimely death of Alfred Brother to King Edward the Confessor, denied is
continually with solemn oaths; and especially once when he dined with the
King. At what time occasion being offered to speak of that matter, he took a
piec^ of broad, and prayed to God that the same might be his last, if he were
any way consenting or privy thereto; and so eating the bread, was choked
therewith, and died there in the Kings presence. Henry Hunting hist. l. 6.
Ingulphus hist. Ang. 153. Polyd. Virg Ang. hist
the thirty eighth Monarch of the English men.

Son of Earl Goodwin, a man of excellent parts, and approved valor.

He driven by tempest into Normandy, was affianced to Adelizi, the Dukes fifth
Daughter. He covenanted with the Duke to make him successor to Edward, in the
Kingdom of England.

Mr. Fox's Acts and Monuments vol. 1. Mr. Cambden in his Brittannia; Holinshed;
Sir John Hayward; Sir Richard Baker incline to this opinion, that Harold by his
might, power, craft, policy, usurped and invaded the Crown without any right,
against his Oath.

After Edwards death, the Duke sent to him to put him in mind of his Covenant
and Oath; but Harold replied, that this Oath being constrained, did no way
bind. The Duke William landing in Sussex, to cut off all occasion of return,
he fired his own Fleet, and upon the shore erected a fortress, to be if need
were a retiring place for his Soldiers.

Harold and he fighting seven miles from Hastings in Sussex, The Archers of the
Normans send forth their arrows on every side as thick as hail; which kind of
fight, as it was unto the English m^n strange, so it was unto them no less
terrible. Milles.
Harold was slain, and his Army vanquished. His overthrow was a just punishment
of God upon him, for his perjury.

He reigned but nine months, and nine days.

In him was completed the period of the Saxons Empire in Britain, after they
had continued from their first erected Kingdom by Hengis^ in Kent, the space
of six hundred and ten years, without any interruption, saving the small
inter-Raigns of three Danish Kings.

The Normans were a mi^^ people of Norvegians, Walsingham History is called
Hypodigma Neustriae.
Suevians, and Danes. That Province in France was then called Neustria, and now
Normandy, of the name Norman, given unto them, Ayscis.
because they came out of the North parts.

The Normans labored by all means to supplant the English, Haec gen^ a Dacia
oriunda, ferox statim tanto reg^o potita mores optimos, leges sanctissimas
divina humanaque vertere, ac denique genus ipsum A^g^icum perdere conata est.
Polyd. Virg. Aug. hist. Proaem. in l. 9.
and to plant their own language amongst us; and for that purpose, they both
gave us the Laws, and all manner of pastimes, in the French tongue; as he that
will peruse the Laws of the Conqueror, and consider the terms of Hawking,
Hunting, Tenice, Dice-play, and other disports, shall easily perceive. Lamb's
Perambulation of Kent.

CHAP. XI.
WILLIAM the first, surnamed the Conqueror.
RObert Duke of Normandy, the sixth in descent from Rollo, riding through
Falais a Town in Normandy, espied certain young persons dancing near the way.
And as he stayed to view a while the manner of their disport, he fixed his eye
especially upon a certain Damsel named Arlotte; of mean birth, a Skinners
Daughter, who there danced among the rest. The frame and comely carriage of her
body; the natural beauty and graces of her countenance; the simplicity of her
rural both behavior and attire, pleased him so well, that the same night he
procured her to be brought to his lodging, where he begat of her a Son, who
afterward was named William. The English afterward adding an aspiration to her
name, (according to the natural manner of their pronouncing) termed every
unchaste Woman, Harlot.

He seized the Crown of England, Erat sapiens, sed astutus; locuples, sed
cupidus; gloriosas, sed famae deditus; eras humilis, Deo servientibus; durus,
sibi resist^ntibus. Huntington. hist. l 6. Alu^^ non habebat Gallia, qui talis
praelicaretur eques and arma tus. Spectaculum erat delectabile simul ac
terribile, eum cernere fr^ua moderantem, ense decorum, clypeo sulgentem, and
galea teloque minitantem. Gesta Gulielmi Ducis Normannorum a Gulielmo
^^ctaviensi Lexoviorum Archidiacono.
not as conquered, but by pretense of gift or adoption, aided and confirmed by
nearness of blood; and so the Saxon Laws formerly in force, could not but
continue; and such of them as are now abrogated, were not at all abrogated by
his conquest; but either by the Parliaments, or Ordinances of his time, and of
his successors; or else by non-usage, or contrary custom. Mr. Seldens review
of his History of Tithes, c. 8. see more there.

He never made the least pretense, Mr. Pryns seasonable, legal, and
historical vindication of the fundamental Liberties, Rights, Laws of England,
p. 382, 383. See more there.
claim, or title to the Crown and Realm of England, only as an absolute
Conqueror of the Nation; but merely by title, as their true and lawful King,
by designation, adoption, and cognation, seconded with the Nobles, Prelates,
See Sir John Hayward in the life of King William the first, p. ^9, 32, 33, 34,
35, 36* and Master Bacons first part of his historical discourse of the
uniformity of the Government of England, c. 44, 45, 46* 55, 56, and Carpenters
Geog. l. 2. c. 14. p. 238. Versteg^ns Antiquities, c. 6. p. 171, 172.
Clergy, and peoples unanimous election. And although it be true, that this
Duke ejected Harold, and got actual possession of the Throne and Kingdom from
him by the sword; as did Au^elius Ambrosius; and others before; and King Henry
the fourth; Edward the fourth; and Henry the seventh; yet that neither did, nor
could make him a King by conquest only, no more than these other Princes;
seeing the end of this War was not against the whole English Nation, the
greatest part whereof abetted his interest; but only against the unjust usurper
and intruder, King Harold, and his adherents.

Although the Laws of this Kingdom, It was a general custom at that time in
France, that Bastards did succeed, even in dignities of highest condi^ion, no
otherwise than children lawfully begotten. Sir John Hayward in the life of
William the first, p. 4 5. He has seven examples there of Bastards lawful
succession It is probable (says the same Hayward) that this u^e was grounded
upon often experience, that Bastards (as begotten in the highest heat and
strength of affection, have many times been men of excellent proof, both in
courage, and in understanding. ^his was verified in Hercules, Alexander the
great, Romulus, (...), King Arthur; in Homer, Demosthenes, Bartholus, Gratian,
(...) Peter Comestor. See Peacham* complete Gentleman c. 1. p 9. (...) al^cubi
le^^sse, pris^os septentrionales populos etiam spurios (...) in succession^m;
nec ill^us igitur tituli, gloriosum Angliae subactorem (...) Normann^m
pu^^^^sse videtur, qui Epistolam (ut alias plur^s) ad Alanum Brittaniae min^ris
comitem, sic orditur Ego Wilielmus Cog^n^m^nto Bastardus. Henrici Spelmanni
Glossarium.
and of all other Civil States at this day, exclude Bastards (without a
subsequent legitimation) from inheritance; yet by the Laws of Norway, a Princes
Son gotten on a Concubine bond or free, was equally inheritable, as any other
born in wedlock; which was I believe no small reason, why he stood at first so
much for the Laws of Norway to have been generally received in this Kingdom.
And some stories also say, that Arlet, or Arlee, (as she is sometimes written)
was to him a good while vice uxor is. If she were so his Concubine (between
whom and a wife, the old Imperialists make no other difference but honor and
dignity; and by them also some kind of inheritance is allowed to such Bastards,
as are naturales liberi, that is gotten on Concubines) it was much more
reasonable that her son should be reputed as legitimate, than that the son of
every single woman, bond or free, whether Concubine or no, should be so, as
those of Norway allow. Mr. Seldens review of his History of Tithes. Vide Polyd.
Virg. Aug. hist. l. 8.


First landing at Pems^y in Sussex, he fell down, stumbling as he came out of
his Ship. Sir John Hayward in the life of William the first, reports this jest
somewhat otherwise, though he agree in the substance.
O Dux Angliam tenes (said one of his Knights) Rex futurus, (so Matthew Paris)
and espying that he had brought up sand and earth in his hand, added, Yea and
you have taken Livery and Seisin of the Conutrey. Seldens Titles of honor in
4. to p. 34.

When he had landed his Forces, he fortified a piece of ground with strong
trenches, and caused all his Ships to be set on fire, leaving to his Soldiers
no hope to save themselves, but only by victory.

After this he published the causes of his coming in Arms; to challenge the
Kingdom of England, given to him by his Cousin King Edward, the last lawful
possessor at that time thereof. And to revenge the death of his Cousin Alfred,
Brother to the same King Edward, cruelly and deceitfully slain by Earl Goodwin,
and his adherents.

In the Battle between King Harold and him, The arrow was first brought into
this Land by the Normans. Hollinshed and Sir John Hayward in William the first.
at the last Hareld was struck with an arrow through the left eye into his
brains, of which wound he presently died.

He was buried by his Mother at Walsham Cross, within the Monastery which he
had founded.

Ibi Gulielmus perblande ac perbenigne locutus, As long Bows were the weapons
with which this King conquered England; so they were the weapons with which
England under after-Kings conquered France; as if it were not enough for us to
beat them, unless we did beat them with their own weapons. Sir Richard Baker.
Subjectis humilis apparebat and facilis, inexorabilis erat rebellibus. Matthew.
Paris hist. Ang.
simulque magnifica pollicitus, ab omnibus, quanquam non pari alacritate, diem
festum celebrantibus, rex declaratur. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 9.

Where this Battle was fought, the Conqueror after founded Battail-Abbey.

He was crowned at Westminster, by Aldred Archbishop of York, anno Dom. 1066.

His strength was such, Daniels History.
that few men could draw his Bow; and being about fifty of his age, when he
subdued this Kingdom, it seems by his continual actions, he felt not the
weight of years upon him, till his last year.

He enclosed new-Forrest in Hamshire, Vide Henrici Spelmanni Glossarium. p* 287.
for which he dispeopled Villages and Towns, about the space of thirty miles,
to make a desert for Beasts of chase; in which place afterward two of his sons,
Richard and William, ended their lives; Richard by a fall from his Horse; and
William by the stroke of an arrow. The Kings great delight in hunting was made
the pretense of this Forest; but the true end was rather to make a free place
of footing for his Normans, and other friends out of France, in case any great
revolt should be made.

One Herlowin a Nobleman in Normandy, married his Mother Arlotte, and had by
her a son named Hugh Lupus, to whom he gave the Earldome of Chester, to hold of
him as freely by his sword, as himself held England by his Crown; by virtue of
which Cran^, the said Hugh ordained under him four Barons; such an honor, as
no Subject before or since, ever enjoyed the like.

Because conspiracies are commonly contrived in the night, he commanded that in
all Towns and Villages, a Bell should be rung in the evening, at eight of the
Clock, called Curfu-Bell; Curfu, aliter Corerfu, a Gal. Couvrir, tege re; feu
ignis Latin, Ignitagium. Spelmanni Glossartum. Vt ferociam populi ad
otiumper-ducere^, omnibus (...) ademit, statuit que ut quisque pater familias
vesperi* circiter horam octavam, post meridiem, tecto ciueribus igne, dormitum
tret; and ad ad signum vicat^m dari voluit, per campanas, it quot etiam nunc
servatur, and Normannice vulgo dicitur, Coverfu. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist l. 9.
and that in every house they should then put forth their fire and lights, and
go to bed; which custom of ringing a Bell at that hour, in many places is
still observed.

William the first, whom pride, craft, profit swayd, Did England, but his
conscience first invade. Dr. Holiday his Survey of the world. Book 9.

By the counsel of Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury; and of Eglesme Abbot of
St. Augustines, (who at that time were chief governers of Kent) as the King was
riding toward Dover, at Swanescombe, two miles from Graveseud, the Kentish men
came toward him armed; and bearing boughs in there hands, as if it had been a
moving wood, they enclosed him upon the sudden, and with a firm countenance,
but words well tempered with modesty and res^ect, they demanded of him the use
of their ancient Liberties and Laws; that in other matters they would yield
obedience to him; that without this they desired not to live. The King yielded
to them for the present; knowing right well, that the general Customs and
Laws of the residue of the Realm, would in short time overflow these particular
places. So pledges being given on both sides, they conducted him to Rochester,
and yielded the County of Kent, and the Castle of Dover into his power.

He took the review and account of all the Towns and land in England. Lamberts
Archeion. p. 24. Monumentum totius Britranniae, non dico antiquissimum, sed
absque controversia augustissimum, duobus magnis voluminibus, Angliae
descriptionem continens.
This Book was called the Roll of Winton, because it was kept in the City of
Winchester. By the English it was called Doomes-day Book; either by reason of
the generality thereof; or else corruptly instead of Domus Dei Book, because it
was laid in the Church of Winchester, in a place called Domus Dei.

According to this Roll taxations were imposed; Alias Liber judiciarius; alias
censuali^ Angliae; alias Angliae noticia, and lustratio; interdum Rotulus Regis
and (a similitudine antiquioris) Rotulus Wintoniae, and Liber Wintoniae
nuncupatum Spelmanni Glossarium. Vide plura ibid. and (...) praefat. ad Eadmeri
historiam.
sometimes two shillings, and sometimes six shillings upon every Hide of land,
(a Hide containing twenty Acres) besides ordinary provision for his house. Vide
Seldeni Analecta Anglobrit, l. 2. c. 4. and Spelmanni Glossarium, p. 352.

He was too covetous.

Sola est do qua merito culpetur pecuniae cupiditas, quam undecunque captatis
occasionibus, nihil unquam pensi habuit, quin corroderet, faceret, diceret
nonnulla, and pene omnia, tanta majestate indigniora, ubi spes nummi
effulsisset. Malmesb. de Wilielmo primo. l. 3.

He would often swear by Gods resurrection, Sir John Hayward in his life. p.
23. and ^14.
and his brightness.

Talia per resurrectionem, and splendor^^ Dei pronuncians, quod solere^ ex
industria talia sacramenta facere, quae ipso habitu oris terrificum quiddam
auditorum memibus insonarent. Malmesb. de Wilielmo primo.

He bare such reverence to Lanfrancke, Archbishop of Canterbury, that he seemed
to stand at his directions.

Malmesbury l. 4. de Wilielmo secundo, says, Diu dubitavit mundus, quo tandem
vergeret, quo se inclinaret indoles ejus. Inter initia vivente Lanfranco
Archiepiscopo ab omni crimine abhorrebat, ut unicum fore Regum speculum
speraretur. Quo defuncto aliquandiu varium se praestitit aequali lance vitiorum
atque virtutum.

He respected Aldred Archbishop of York, by whom he had been crowned King of
England, as his Father. At a time upon the repulse of a certain suit, the
Archbishop brake forth into coffeehouse, expostulated sharply against the
King, and in a humorous heat offered to depart. Sir John Hayward.
But the King stayed him, fell down at his feet, desired pardon, and promised
satisfaction in the best manner* that he could. The Nobility which were
present, put the Archbishop in mind, that he should cause the King to arise;
nay (answered the Archbishop) let him alone; let him still abide at St. Peter's
feet. So with much ado he was appeased, and entreated to accept his suit.

By reason of sickness he kept his chamber a long time; whereat the French King
scoffing, said, The King of England lies long in Childbed. Cardinal Perron the
learned French man, was a fat corpulent man, and had a great belly. A French
Lady to quip him, said thus to him, Mouasieur qua^d vous vous accoucherez? To
whom he replied, Quand vou^ s^ras sage femme.
Which when it was reported unto King William, he answered, When I am Churched,
there shall be a thousand lights in France, (alluding to the lights that Women
used to bear, when they were Churched) and that he performed within few days
after, wasting the French Frontiers with fire and sword. Malmesb. de Wilielmo
primo. l. 4.

Some of the Earls conspiring against him; he perceiving his estate to be now
brought into no small danger, and loath to put all upon the hazard and fortune
of a Battle, against men so well provided, and with desperation armed, as a
man perplexed, entered into consultation with L^nfrancke, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, what course were now best for him to take, for the appeasing of
these so great and dangerous troubles. By whose advice he came to a parl with
the English Nobility, where after much reasoning and debating of the matter, a
peace was at length concluded and agreed upon; so that the English men laying
down their Arms, the Conqueror in the presence of the Archbishop Lanfrancke,
and others, took a solemn Oath upon the holy Evangelists, and all the relics
of the Churches of St. Albans, from thence forth to observe and keep the good
and ancient Laws of the Realm, which the noble Kings of England his
Predecessors had before made and ordained; but especially those of St. Edwar^,
of all others supposed to be most equal and indifferent, for the gene^all good
of the people.

He courteously received, and honorably maintained Edgar Etheling in his
Court, allowing him a pound weight of silver every day to spend; a rare example
of a victorious Conqueror, showed upon a man so unconstant, Speed.
(who twice had broken his Oath of fidelity) and dangerous to be so near unto
his person, being as he was, a competitor of his Crown.

During all his Reign, Silent l^gos inter arma.
either the sword was not put up into the scabbard; Lambards Ar^^tion*
or if it were, the hand was always upon the hilt, ready to draw it. So
unwilling on the one part were the English men to bear the yoke; and so haughty
on the other part were the Norman Conquerors, that to be called an English man,
was in their eyes a great concumely; insomuch as it made some of the more
light-conceited of the English, to seek to better their esteem, by imitating
the Normans both in apparel and language; which among the graver sort bred
the Proverb, Verstegans Antiq. c. 6. p. 182.
that Jack would be a Gentleman, if he could speak French.

He favored learned men, and drew out of Italy, Lanfrancke, Anselme, Durand,
Trahern, Pueritiam a^^ spem regui literis municbat, subinde patre quoque
audiento jactare Proverbium solitus; Rex illiteratus, Asinus coronatus.
Malmesb. de Henrico primo. l 5.
and diverse others famous at that time, for learning and piety.

It Is better with William Hunter, than with William the Conqueror. It Is better
to have a name in the Book of Martyrs, than in the Book of Chronicles. Mr.
Nortons life of Mr. John Cotton.

Perceiving his own defects in some points for want of learning, he did exhort
his children oftentimes to learning with this saying, An unlearned Prince is a
crowned Ass; which speech took great impression in his son Henry.

This is one special honor attributed unto him, that from him we begin the
Computation of our Kings of England.

From the Normans, bearing of Arms began amongst us.

Ab eo posteriores series Regum inchoavere, perinde acsi de integro ille regnum
ipsum institu^isset, Regesque qui se^uti sunt, usi similiter sunt, ut nunc
utuntur, insignibus Regiis, quae dedisset. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 9.

Nostrates, priusquam in Angliam penetrasset Wilielmus primus, hunc armorum
cultum a Normannis videntur accepisse. Spelmanni Aspilegia. p. 40. Vide etiam
p. 44.

He ended his life upon the ninth day of September, One and twenty years and
one month says Fox. Seventy four says Polyd. Virgil.
full both of honor and of age, when he had reigned twenty years, eight
months, and sixteen days, in the threescore and fourth year of his age.

His dead body was not only abandoned, Qua enim conditio sortis humanae non
moneat ad pictatem, cum auditum su^rit Regem istum qui tantae potentiae in vita
sua extitit, ut in tota Anglia, in tota Normannia, in tota Cinomanensi patria,
ne^o contra imperium ejus manum movere auderet. Mox ut in terram spiritum
exhalaturus, positus est, ab omni homine, sicut accepimus, uno solo duntaxat
serviente excepto, derelictum cadaver ejus sine omni pompa per Sequanam
na^cella delatum, and cum scpeliri deberet, ipsam terram sepulturae illius a
quodam rustico calumniatam, qui eam hereditario jure reclamans, conquestus est
illam sibi jam olim ab codem injuria fuisse ablatam. E^dmeri historia novorum.
Vi^^ Ma^mesb. and Polyd. Virg. de Wilielmo primo.
but left almost naked upon the ground.

Being conveyed from Roan (where he died) to Cane, one Fitz Arthur denied the
King burial in the Abbey-Church, (as ground which was wrongfully taken by the
King from his Father) till he had a hundred pounds paid him for it.

Mr. Ienkyn in his Exposition of the Epistle of Jude, verse. 4. p. 351. says,
Of our twenty five Monarchs since the Conquest, thirteen (taking in three who
are thought to be poisoned) are said to have had violent and untimely deaths.

CHAP. XII.
K. William the second, surnamed Rufus; or the Red.
KIng William the first took to wife Matilde, daughter to Baldwin, Earl of
Flanders, a man for his wisdom and power, both reverenced and feared even of
Kings; but because she was his Cousin-germane, he was for his marriage
excommunicate by his own Uncle Mauger, Archbishop of Roan. Hereupon he sued to
Pope Victor, and obtained of him a dispensation; and afterward so wrought,
that by a provincial Counsel his Uncle Mauger* was deprived of his dignity.

This King had by his Wife four sons, Robert, Richard, William and Henry.

Robert his eldest son, surnamed Courtcuise Or Courthos^, of his short Hose, or
Br^eches. Or Courtois, of his courteous behavior. Sir Iobn Haywards Lives of
the three Norman Kings of England, p. 125. and 222.
, by reason of the shortness of his thighs, succeeded him in the Duchy of
Normandy. He was a man of exceeding honorable courage and spirit, for which
cause he was so esteemed by the Christian Princes, in the great War against
the Saracens, that when they had subdued the City and Territory of Jerusalem,
they offered the Kingdom thereof first unto him.

The King of England to whom the Schola Salernitana was dedicated, See Renasus
Morean in his Prol^gomena to his learned Animadversions, by which he has
illustrated that work.
was this Robert, eldest son of the Duke of Normandy, which begins thus,
Anglorum Regi scribit* Schola tota Salerni; and it seems to be written, when
this Robert returned out of Palestina into Apulia; and by reason of a Fistula
from his poisoned wound, he had consulted with the School of Salerne concerning
it, and preserving his health. Neither does that hinder that this Book is
written to the King of England; Vossius de Philosophia. c. 12.
(but Robert never reigned here) for the Kingdom of right belonged to him,
Joannes de Me^iolano medicus nomine ^oll^gii Scholae Salernitanae conscrip^i
librum cui titulus Schola Salernitana. Id ibid.
which his younger Brother William Rufus possessed in his absence, and for
recovering of that he warred with his Brother, but was overcome by him.

Richard had raised the good expectation of many, as well by his comely
countenance and behavior, as by his lively and generous spirit. But he died
young by misadventure, By a fall from his Horse.
as he was hunting within the New-Forrest, before he had made experiment of his
worth. He was buried at Winchester, with this inscription, Hic jacet Richardus,
filius Wilielmi senioris, Berniae Dux.

To Henry the King gave at the time of his death, five thousand pounds out of
his treasure; but gave him neither dignity nor Lands, foretelling that he
should enjoy the honor of both his Brothers in time, and far excel them both
in dominion and power. He succeeded his Brother William in the Kingdom of
England, and wrested Normandy out of the possession of Robert.

When William the first drew near his end, De^raudaverat Gulielmus pater
Robertum regno Angliae, partim non oblitus ejus in se impietatis and
contumaciae, partim veritus, si ille id obtineret, ne ejus facilitas qua
praeditus erat, ad defectionem paratiores non redderet Anglos, quos ipse
laeserat; quapropter rem tutiore loco fore putavit, si Rufo, cujus jampridem
morum pariter acerbitatem atque immanitatem naturae cognitam habucrat,
committeretur. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 10.
he commended the Kingdom of England to his second son William, with many
blessings, admonitions, and prayers for his prosperous success. He dispatched
him unto England, with Letters under his own Seal, to Lan^rancke then
Archbishop of Canterbury, whose authority was great with the Clergy, and people
of the Realm. Sir John Hayward.
It was conjectured by some, that the King was guided in this choice, no less
by his judgment, then by his affection, because he esteemed the fierce
disposition of his son William, more fit to govern a people not well settled in
subjection, then the flexible and mild nature of his eldest son Robert.

Cambden Brittarnia in Gloucestershire. See more there of him.
says he was berest of the Kingdom of England, because he was born before his
Father was King.

Milles gives two reasons, He seems to have followed the example of Jacob, who
gave to his younger son Joseph the land which he had taken with his Sword and
his Bow. Besides in the rebellion of his son Robert, this son stood firmly for
him, and in his quarrel hazarded his life. Sir Richard Baker.
why the Conqueror preferred his younger son unto the Kingdom, before his
eldest.

Partly for his disloyalty and disobedience; and partly doubting lest through
the facility of his nature, he should give occasion unto the English men, to
take heart unto them, and to rebel against him; whereas William his younger
Brother was a man of more rough and harsh nature, and therefore fitter (as his
Father thought) to bear rule and command over a warlike and new conquered
people.

Sir John Hayward in the life of William the second, discusseth that
controversy, whether Kings may prefer younger sons, and quite disinherit elder
sons of the Kingdom, and resolves it negatively.

The Glossographer upon the Decrees notes, that the son of a King may be
called King during the life of his Father, Robert was then absent in Germany.
as wanting nothing but administration.

A little before his Fathers death William journeyed toward England,
Incomparabilis proculdubio nostro tempore princeps; si non ^um magnitudo patris
obru^re^, nec ejus juventutem fata praecipitassent, ne per (...) maturiorem
aboleret ^rrores ^centia potestatis, and impetus juvenili contractos Malmesb.
de Wilielmo secundo. l. 4.
and quickly arrived at the Port called Whitesand, where he received the first
report of his Fathers death. Hereupon with all speed he posted to Lanfrancke,
delivered his Fathers Letters, and forthwith was declared King; and not long
after was crowned at Westminster.

His hair was deeply yellow; by reason whereof he was called Rufus, say Polyd.
Virgil, and others.

He doubted of some points of Religion then professed, namely, of praying to
Saints, worshipping of relics, and such like.

He endeavored to abate the tumorous greatness of the Clergy at that time, He
is therefore ill spoken of by Clergy men. He claimed the investitute of
Prelates to be his right. He forbad appeals to Rome.
and attributed not so much to the Sea of Rome, as diverse Kings before him had
done.

He restrained his Subjects from going to Rome, and withheld the annual
payment of Peter Pence, and was often heard to say, that they follow not the
trace of St. Peter; they greedily gape after gifts and rewards, they retain not
his power, whose piety* they do not imitate.

Albeit he promised to the English, whilst his first fears and jealousies
continued, that they should enjoy free liberty of hunting; yet did he
afterward so severely restrain it, that the penalty for killing a Deer was
death.

During Lanfranckes life, he so lived, that he might have been a mirror of
Princes; though afterward he gave himself to sensual lust and covetousness.
Matthew Paris condemns him much.

It is reported, that when his Chamberlain upon a certain morning, brought him
a new pair of Hose, the King demanded what they cost; and the Chamberlain
answered, three shillings; hereat the King grew impatient, and said, What heavy
beast? do thou take these to be convenient Hose for a King? Away beggar,
Malmesb.
and bring me other of a better price. Then the Chamberlain departed, and
brought a far worse pair of Hose, (for a better could not at that time be
found) and told the King that they cost a mark. The King not only allowed them
for fine enough, but commended them also as exceeding fit.

He walled the City of London, and built the great Hall at Westminster, which
is two hundred seventy foot in length, Vnum adificium and ipsum per maximum
domum in Londonia i^c^pit, and perfecit, non parcens expensis dummodo
liberalitatis suae magnificentiam exhiberet. Malmesb.
and seventy four foot in breadth.

He set forth a Proclamation, that none should go out of the Realm without his
license, by which he drew much money from many. From thence the custom or Law
of Ne exeas Regno, seems to have taken its beginning.

His usual Oath was by St. Lukes face. Malmesb.

Coming to imbarque at Dartmouth, the Mariners told him the weather was rough,
and there was no passing without imminent danger. Tush, Daniels History.
said he, set forward, I never yet heard of King that was drowned.

Answerable to that of Julius Caesar, Malmesb.
which enforced a poor Pilot in the like case to launch forth, and in the rage
of the storm comforted him with saying, Caesarem and Caesaris fortunam ve^is.

Charles the fifth, in the Battle of Tunis, when he was advised by the
Marquess of Guasto to retire his person, when the great Ordnance began to play,
said, Marquess, thou never heardst that an Emperor was slain with a great shot.

Sir Walter Tyrell aiming at the Deer (where the King was hunting, within the
New-Forrest) with an Arrow; and looseing his Bow, either too carelessly at the
Deer, Veterum plerique traditur transsossum fuisse Regem sagitta, quam in
ferarum vivario, quod novam Forestam dicimus, jactu infoelici collimara^
Gualterus Tyrellus, Gallus, idque est receptissimum. Scd accuratius multo quam
caeteri, singularia omnia, quae miseram Regis caedem and Tyrelli jactum fatalem
attinent, narrat Ordericus Vitalis in hist. Eccles l. 10. p. 783. Seldeni notae
ad Eadmerum. Vide Malmesb, de Wilielmo secundo. l 4.
or too steadily at the king, says Polydore Virgil, struck him therewith full
upon the breast. The King having so received the wound, gave forth a heavy
groan, and presently fell down dead. So much of the Arrow as was without his
body, was found broken, whether with his hand, or by his fall, it is not
certainly known.

He reigned in great variety of opinion with his Subjects, (some applauding his
virtues, others aggravating his vices) twelve years, eleven months, wanting
eight days, and was at his death forty and three years old. Sir John Hayward
in his life. p. 219.

CHAP. XIII.
King Henry the first, surnamed Beauclerke.
HE apprehending the opportunity of Duke Roberts absence, did forthwith seize
upon the treasure of the King, Henricus ob singularem, quae pro regio fuit
nomine, eruditionem Belloclericus dictus. Seldeni Ianu^^ Anglorum. Vide ejus
dissert. ad c. ^. Henricus Rex urbanitate, comitate, affabilitate, lenitate,
justitia, and fortitudine, omnes sui temporis Principes anteire putabatur.
and thereby also upon his State, and so was crowned at Westminster, by Maurice
Bishop of London, because Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury was then in exile.

For his learning he was called Beauclerke, fair Clerk, or fine Scholar,
brought up in the study of the liberal Arts at Cambridge.

He was surnamed Leo justitiae in all Stories; one of the most noble Princes
that ever reigned in this Realm. Sir Thomas Eliots Governor.

Cambden urges this against him, Huc etiam acces sit, quod o^ ni literarum
genere Cantabridgiae, Lutetiaeque instructus a pueritia ita profecit, ^ut
Wilielmus ejus pater eum Episcopali mu^^ri aptum censuerit. Qui doct^nae
praesidio and saluberrim^s multas leges ipse condidit, and Papales technas
saepe offecit, and ca^^e vitavit, ut si^cam opportunitatem, quam Henricus
octavus nactus fuisset, and Papalem jurisdictionem exterminasset, and
praefractum, ac a Papa concitatum in se clerum, in officio tenuisset. Josc^lini
Antiq. Brit. p. 124. Infans cum omnium votis conspirantibus educatus egregie,
qui solus omnium filiorum Wilielmi natus esset regi^, and ^i regnum videretur
competere. Itaque tyrocinium rudimentorum in scholis egi^ liberalibus, and
literarum mella adeo avidus medullis indidit, ut nihil postea bellorum
tumultus, nulli curarum mot^s eas excutere illustri animo possent. Malmesb. de
Henrico primo. l. 5.
as if his* justice was by the common people deemed cruelty. Cambd. Rem.

He was excellent in wit, eloquent in speech, and fortunate in Battle, and for
these three, he had three notable vices; covetousness, cruelty and lechery.
Stowes Chron.

By his example, the young Nobility of the Realm, began to affect a praise for
learning: insomuch as at a certain interview, between the King and Pope
Innocent the second, the sons of Robert Earl of Mellent, maintained open
disputations against diverse Cardinals and Chaplains of the Pope. Sir John
Hayward.

To purchase the favor of the Clergy, he called Anselme out of exile, and
restored him both to the dignity and revenues of the Sea of Canterbury.

He committed Radulph (alias Ranulph) Bishop of Durham to prison, who had been
both author and agent to King William, in most of his distrustful actions
against the Clergy.

To make the Clergy the more assured, the King renounced the right which his
Ancestors used in giving Investitures, and acknowledged the same to appertain
to the Pope.

The Clergy did much favor him, by reason of his liberal leave, either to
erect, or to enlarge, or else to enrich religious buildings. For to these works
the King was so ready to give, not only way, but encouragement and help, that
in no Princes time, they did more within this Realm either flourish or increase.

Sir John Hayward numbers twenty five religious buildings, either done, or
helped forward, or permitted and allowed by the King.

This King being born in England, and the Queen of English bloud-royall, raised
the depressed English Nation again unto honor and credit.

He restored them to the use of fire and candle, Nocturnas faces, quas primus
Gulielmus vetuerat, restituit, quippe cui jam firmato regno minus formida^das.
Seldeni Ianus Anglorum. l 2.
after eight of the Clock at night, which his Father had most straightly
forbidden.

He being a wise Prince, and well knowing that an Empire gotten by force, could
no longer remain, then that force continued, sent into Scotland, and took to
Wife Maud, the daughter of Queen Margaret, sister to Edgar Etheling, None of
our Kings married with Scotland but he.
(who was now dead, and left no issue) whereby this Maud was the heir of the
Saxon line; and in her brought back again to us the ancient English
blood-royall, before it had descended beyond one generation from the
Conqueror, Flemings Stemma sacrum.
in whose line it continues unto this day.

She was adorned with all royal virtues, principally with piety and humility.
These Verses were made in her commendation.

Prospera non laetam fecere, nec aspera tristem, Aspera risus ei, prospera
terror erant.

Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam, Sola potens humilis, sola
pudica decens.

She being married against her will, seeing she must violate the vow of her
virginity, she cursed her offspring, if any came of her; which was not
altogether vain says Polyd. Virgil, in regard they were all afterward drowned.

He reduced Normandy to England.

He built therein many Castles, and planted Garrisons, Habitus est crudelis
praes^r^im propter Robe^tum germanum fratrem, quem in carcero sinem vitae
facere coegit. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 11.
and with no less wisdom assured that State, then with valor he had won it.

He brought with him his Brother Robert into England, and committed him to safe
custody in the Castle of Cardiffe.

He striving to escape, was taken again, committed to close prison, his eyes
put out, and a sure guard set upon him. Thus he remained in desolate darkness,
neither reverenced by any for his former greatness, nor pitied for his present
distress. Thus he continued about twenty seven years, in a life far more
grievous then death, even until the year before the death of King Henry. So
long was he a suitor in wooing of death. So long did the one Brother overlive
his good fortune, the other his good nature and disposition; esteeming it a
fair favor, that the uttermost extremity was not inflicted.

He gave his daughter Maud the Empress, in second marriage to the Earl of
Anjou, and his Sister Elix (as some Chronicles call her) to Steven, Stubb^ his
discovery of a gaping gulf whereinto England is like to be swallowed, by
another French marriage. He shows there also in Henry the second, Richard the
first, King John, Henry the third, Edward the second, Richard the second, the
inconveniences to this Nation, by their marriages with the French. Hinc
cognoscere licet, pri^s Aethiopem posse mutare pellem, uti dicitur, quam qui
terram incolunt Galliam, valde multum diligere Anglos. Polyd. Virg. Ang hist.
l. 23. p. 483.
Earl of Bloys. Thence sprang the loss of this Kingdom to Maud, during her
life, by being so far out of the land in another Country, when she should have
accepted it here. Thereof sprang the perjuries of Steven King of England,
enticed to a Kingdom through the commodity of his near place. And thence came
the Civil miseries to the people, who through the incertainty of a Governor,
were in field and Arms one against another.

His daughter Maud, It was said of Charles Earl of Valois, that he was the son
of a King, brother to a King, uncle to a King, father to a King, and yet no
King.
as well as that Lacedemonian Lady Lampedo, whom Pliny makes mention of, was a
Kings daughter Cambdens Brittannia in Barkshire.
, a Kings wife, and a Kings mother. Daughter of this Henry the first, King of
England; wife of Henry the fourth, Emperor of Germany; and mother to Henry the
second, King of England. Concerning which matter, there is this Distick
engraven on her Tomb.

Magna ortu, majorque viro, sed maxima partu, Hic jacet Henrici filia, sponsa,
parens.

The daughter, wife, the mother eke, of Henry lies here;

Much blessed by birth, by marriage more, but most by issue dear.

He was a great administrer of justice, Mi^ses. Henrico adscribunt nonnulli
legem, quam curtoise d' Angleterre dicunt I. C. ti. Hac vir suscepta prole
co^jugis demortuae baered^s sruitur, in humanis dum ^g^rit. Seldeni Ianus
Anglorum. l. 2.
and the first that ordained that thieves should be hanged.

He ordained that counterfeiters of money, should lose both their eyes, Hayward.
and be deprived of their privy parts,

He took away the deceit which had been occasioned by variety of measures, and
made measure by the length of his own arm, The antiquity of a yard.
which has been commonly used ever since, by the name of a yard.

He is yet alive in his Laws.

See his Laws in Lambard de priscis Anglorum legibus.

His expenses were chiefly in his Wars, and his many and great fortifications
in Normandy. His buildings were the Abbey of Reading, the Castle of Warwick,
of Bristoll, the Manor of Woodstocke, ^anicls Hist^ry, and Hayward.
and the great enclosure of that Park, with a stone Wall seven miles about.

There was a singular and most remarkable example of Gods justice upon his
children. For when the King both by force, crast, and cruelty, Sir Walter
Rawleigh his Preface to his History of the world.
had dispossessed, overreacht, and lastly made blind, and destroyed his elder
Brother, Duke of Normandy, to make his own sons Lords of his Land; God cast
them all, male and female, Nephews and Neeces ( Maud excepted) into the bottom
of the Sea, See Sir John Hayward in the life of King Henry the first p. 267,
2^8, 269, 270.
with above a hundred and fifty others that attended them, whereof a great many
were noble, and of the King dearly beloved.

Evasit unus and ille agrestis, qui tota nocte malo supernatans, mane totius
tragediae actum expressit. Malmesb. de Henrico primo. l. 5. Vide Polyd. Virg.
Ang. hist. l. 11. p. 191.

Nulla unquam navis fuit Angl^ae tantae miseriae, nulla toto orbi tam patulae
famae.

His usual Oath was By our Lords death; and so was Queen Elizabeth's.

He first instituted the form of the High-Court of Parliament, Prudentum
congressus in Anglia vocatur and magna comitia. Mutuato denium a Gallis
Parliamentorum nomine quae ante Henricum perraro scribit Polydorus l. 11.
habita. Seldeni Ianus Anglorum. l. 2.
as now it is in use. The first Parliament was held at Salisbury, upon the
nineteenth day of April, in the sixteenth year of his Reign. See Lamberts
Archeion. p. 240, 241, 242, 243.

When Matilde his daughter was given in marriage, A Hide of land contains 20.
Acres, says Hayward in the life of William the first. p. 99. A 100. Acres
says Lambert.
to Henry the fifth Emperor, he took three shillings of every Hide of land
throughout the Realm: which being followed by succeeding Kings, did grow to a
custom of receiving aid, whenever they gave their daughters in marriage.

About this time the marriage of Priests was forbidden in England; but the King
for money permitted them to retain their wives, and in the end set an
imposition in that respect upon every Church throughout the Realm. It availed
not any man to say, that he had no purpose to keep a wife; he must pay for a
faculty to keep a wife, if he would.

Quymund his Chaplain (observing that unworthy men for the most part were
advanced to the best dignities of the Church) as he celebrated divine service
before him, and was to read these words out of St James 5. 17. ( It rained not
upon the earth three years and six months) he did read it thus, ( It rained
not upon the earth one, one years, and five, one, months.) The King observed
this reading, and afterward rebuked his Chaplain for it. But Quymund answered,
that he did it of purpose, because such readers were soonest preferred by the
King. The King smiled, and in short time after preferred him to the government
of St. Frideswides in Oxford.

He died in the sixty seventh year of his age, when he had reigned thirty five
years, and four months, wanting one day. He was buried at Reading, which he
had founded.

In him ended the line of the Norman Kings, as concerning their heirs males,
after whom came in the French men, by the title of the heirs general.

CHAP. XIV.
King STEPHEN.
VIr solertis ingenii, and militaris artis peritissimus. Polyd. Virg.

He was of a comely stature; of a good complexion; and of body strong; very
skillful in martial affairs, gentle, courteous, and exceeding bountiful; not
noted for any special vice, but that upon an ambitious desire to reign, he
brake his Oath which he had made with Maud the Empress.

He was a most worthy Soldier, and wanted nothing to have made him an
excellent King, but a just title. And therefore he was driven (perforce) to
defend his usurped Authority by the sword, which must needs procure him the
hatred of many.

He was crowned at Westminster upon Saint* Stephens day, in presence of but
three Bishops, few of the Nobility, and not one Abbot, by William Archbishop of
Canterbury, with great solemnity.

Having his sword continually out, Daniels History.
and so many defections and rebellions against him, he never put any great man
to death.

Of Roger Bishop of Salisbury in this Kings Reign, it is reported, that he was
so pressed with the miseries of a long imprisonment, Vt vivere nol^^erit, mori
nesci^rit, That live he would not, die he could not.

In his days flourished diverse famous learned men, but especially
Historiographers, viz. William of Malmesbury, Henry Huntington, Simon of
Durham, Gessrey of Munmouth, and others.

Though his Reign were rough and tempestuous, by reason of his perpetual
debates and contests with Maud the Empress, and her Son, concerning the title;
yet were there more religious Convents erected in his time, then either before
or after.

Although he had continual Wars, yet he required few or no tributes from the
people.

He reigned almost nineteen years, lived forty nine, and was buried in the
Abbey of Feversham in Kent, which he had founded.

The Normans thus expiring, The famous Family of Plantagenets, which stored the
Crown of England well nigh the space of four hundred years; from whence have
issued one Emperor, fifteen Kings, and ten Queens, twelve Princes, twenty four
Dukes, and sixty Earls, took its name of a ^lant. Fern. Glor. Generos.
give way to the Dynasty of the Plantagenets.

Before the division of the Houses of York and Lancaster, there run on evenly
in an unquestionable line, eight Kings in this manner.

1. Henry the second. 2. Richard the first. 3. John. 4. Henry the third. 5.
Edward the first. 6. Edward the second. 7. Edward the third. 8. Richard the
second.
Henry the second.
The first King of this Island, Galfredus Plantaginett^, cujus absque dubio a
Plantagine herba, quemadmodum elim ap^d Romanos multarum nobilssimorum (...) ab
herbis and frugibus deductum ^omen est, Matildam Henrici primi Anglorum regis;
filiam, viduam duxit in uxorem. Henricus secundus in regiam familiam
nobilissimum illud Plantaginettarum cognomen insinuavit. Hoc mirum in modum
postea prolis numerositate incrcvit; a leo ut exea gente quatuordecim reges*
quanquam desultoria quadam successionis lege aliquando, con^inuata tamen seric,
regnum administrarunt. T wini Comment, de rebus Britanuicis.
surnamed Plantagenet, from Plantagenista, so called (as some say) for wearing
a slip or stalk of Broom in his Cap or Hat, toward his latter days, in penance
and contrition for his past sins. He undertook to go to the holy Sepulcher, in
the poor and despised habit of a Broom-man, and to signify himself so, bore a
Broom-stalk in his Cap. Others say it was because he scourged himself with the
stalks of Broom, which grew upon the Plains, where once the holy City stood.
Bucks Preface to his great Plantagenet.

Henry Duke of Anjou by his Father Geffery Plantagenet, Prince dove de
plusicurs vertus vrayement digne, d' un Roy^mais aussi suict a quelques vices
encores plus indignes d' un Prince^ hrestein. Histoire d' Angleterre par Andre
Du Chesne. l. 12.
succeeded Stephen in the Kingdom of England by agreement, whom he preceded by
right, as being son and heir of Maud, sole daughter and heir of King Henry the
first, and was crowned at Westminster, by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury,
and was a greater Prince then any of his Ancestors.

He was surnamed Court-mantle, because he was the first that brought short
Cloaks out of Anjou into England.

He was wise and learned. He never ware Glove, except he bare a Hawk on his
fist; and never sat but at his meat; and delighted in hawking, hunting,
riding, and in all honest exercises.

Our English Chronicles do blame him, Fox. p 228. Col. 2.
for refusing to take the protection and defense of the distressed Christians
in Jerusalem, offered unto him by Heraclins the Patriark; the troubles that
befell him at home, are ascribed to that cause.

In his time there were eleven hundred and fifteen Castles in England.
Hollinsh. in K. Stephen. Cambd. Britannia in Northumberland.


He caused them to be demolished.

He first kept Lions, and made of the Arms of Normandy, viz. the two Leopards;
and of the single Lion Aquitain, one Coat so Arms for England, as it is yet
worn.

He associated his son Henry in the Government; an act without example in this
Kingdom.

The young King showed shortly after, That a Crown was no State to be made over
in trust.

At the Feast of his solemnity, the King to honor his son, would needs carry
up the first dish to his Table. Roger Archbishop of York standing by, and
saying merrily* to the new King, Gaude, optime filio non est enim alter in toto
orb Princeps, qui talem habeat in mensa administrum. What an honor is this to
you, to have such a waiter at your Table! At pater Henricus haec audiens,
ingenti affectus dolor, antistiti submissa voce ait, Paenitets inquam,
paenitet extulisse hominem. Polyd. Virg. Montaigne in his second Book of
Essays* c* 8. commends the Emperor Charles the fifth, for resigning his
means, his greatness, and Kingdom to his son, at what time he found his former
undaunted resolution to decay, and force to conduct his affairs to droop in
himself, together with the glory he had thereby acquired. Robert, son to Hugh
Capet, was crowned King in his fathers life time, of whom it is sajd, He was a
son without frowardness, a companion without jealousy, a King without
ambition. Du Serres History of France.
Why (says he) what great matter is it for him that was but the son of a Duke,
to do service to me, that am the son of a King and Queen? Which the old King
hearing, began to repent him, now it was too late, of that he had done.

He loved women too much, especially one Rosamond, the fair daughter of Walter
Lord Clifford. This his Concubine was a very beautiful young Lady, of
unparalleld wit. He usually termed her the Rose of the world; his Rose.

The true Etymology of her name is Rosemouth, Verstegans Etymology of our Saxon
proper names.
and seems to have been given, in regard of her sweetness or color of the
lips; or it may have been in recommendation of sweetness, and eloquence of
speech.

King Henry had made for her a Labyrinth at Woodstoc^, so that no man or woman
might come to her, but he that was instructed by the King, or such as were
right secret with him. It was commonly said, that at last Queen Elenor came to
her by a Clew of Thread, Poisoned her, as was thought.
or Silk, and so dealt with her, that she lived not long after. But when she
was dead, she was buried at Godstow, in an house of Nuns beside Oxford.

In whose Epitaph, Verstegan ubisupra.
a Latin Poet not understanding the true Etymology of the name, makes Mund*
which here is mouth, to be Mundus, and so calls her the Rose of the world.

Hic jacet in tumba, Rosa mundi, non Rosa munda; Non redolet, sedolet, quae
redolere solet.

Being much incensed against Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, he once
cried out, Me miserum, non possum in meo regno pacem cum uno sacerdote habere?
nec quisquam meorum omnium est, qui me hac molestia liberare velit. Which words
were so interpreted by some, that it occasioned his death.

Stapleton a Jesuit put forth a Book, entitled Tres Thomae; St. Thomas the
Apostle, Thomas of Becket, and Sir Thomas More. He canonizeth the two last, and
writes far more of them, then of the first.

For the death of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury, he was scourged with
rods by the Monks of Canterbury, and had eighty lashes.

Geffery Archbishop of York, and base son to King Henry the second, used
proudly to protest by his faith, Gualterus Mappaeus de nugis Curialium.
and the Royalty of the King his father. To whom one said, You may sometimes,
Sir, as well remember what was the honesty of your mother.

Petrus Blesensis was Archdeacon of Bath under him.

There was a very strange presage of his death, Polyd. Virg. Ang hist. Hollinsh
by a Mere or Pool in Normandy; for all the Fishes therein leapt forth on land
in the night time, and fought together with such a dreadful noise, that men
came in great numbers to behold the wonder, and not one Fish could be found
alive in the Pool.

Other strange accidents are also reported.

When he died, Polyd. Virg.
there were found in his Coffers, nine hundred thousand pounds, besides Plate
and Jewels.

His youngest son was called John Lackland, because he had no land assigned him
in his fathers time.

Titles he lacked none; for his father had made him Earl of Cornwall, Dan hist.
Dorset, Sommerset, Nottingham, Derby, and Lancaster.

He reigned thirty four years, seven months, and five days.

CHAP. XV.
RICHARD the first.
HE was for his valor surnamed Coeur de Lion, Statura corporis fuit justa,
lata and bonesta facie, in qua multum gratiae, gravitatuque incrat; sed quo
pulchrior corpore, hoc animi altitudine praestantior, undo non immerito
cognomen invenit, qui cor Leonis vocatus est. Polyd. Virg. Ang hist l. 14.
Illud innuere videtur Richardum inter Angliae Reges primum usum fuisse Leonino
gestamine, quod ei prae caeteris cognomen inderetur. Cor Leonis a pictura^
clypei (ni vana conjectura) derivatum. Nam e clypeis and armaturis nomina saepe
acceperunt tum antiqui, tum recentiores. Spelman^i Aspilogia. p 46, 47.
or the Lions heart.

Hugh Nevill a Gentleman of noble lineage, one of King Richards special
familiars, is recorded to have slain a Lion in the holy land, Weevers ancient
Funerall-Monuments.
driving first an Arrow into his breast, and then running him through with his
Sword. Whereupon this Hexameter was made.

Viribus Hugonis vires periere Leonis. The strength of Hugh a Lion slew.

Which atchievment belike was transferred from the man to the Master, and the
Story applied to the King, by name of King Richard, Coeur de Lion. But this is
only Weevers opinion.

He was crowned at Westminster, by Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury.

He being at dinner in his Hall of Westminster, hearing the French King
besieged Vernoy^e, he swore that he would never turn his face, till he had
fought with him, if he did abide, and caused the wall to be broken before him,
and so passed to Normandy; and receiving his brother John to mercy, raised the
siege; for the French King fled as soon as he heard of Kings Richards coming.

A Prince of a most haughty mind, and full of resolution, born for the Weal of
Christendom, Cambdens Brittannia in Oxfordshire.
the honor of England, and the terror of Infidels.

With the beams of his victories achieved in Cypres and Syria, Id. ib. in
Barkshire.
he made our Country of England most famous, and renowned through the world.

He had trained up in his Court a Rymer or Minstrell, called Blondell de Neste,
who being so long without the sight of his Lord, his life seemed wearisome to
him. It was known that he came back from the holy land, but none could tell in
what Country he arrived. Whereupon this Blondell resolving to make search for
him in many Countries, Histoire d' Angleterre Par Andre Du Chesne. l. 1^.
but he would hear some news of him; after expense of diverse days in travel,
he came to a Town (by good hap) near to the Castle where his Master King
Richard was kept. Theater of honor. Book 5. c. 1^
Of his Host he demanded to whom the Castle appertained, and the Host told him
it belonged to the Duke of Austria. Then he enquired whether any prisoner was
there detained or no, for always he made such secret questionings, wheresoever
he came; and the Host answered, that there was one only prisoner, but he knew
not what he was, and yet he had been detained there more then the space of a
year. When Blondell heard this, he used such means, that he became acquainted
with them of the Castle, as Minstrels do easily win acquaintance any where; but
see the King he could not, neither understand that it was he. One day he sat
directly before a window of the Castle, where King Richard was kept prisoner,
and began to sing a song in French, which King Richard and Blondell had
sometime composed together. When King Richard heard the song, he knew it was
Blondell that sung it; and when Blondell paused at half of the song, the King
entreated him to sing the rest. Thus Blondell won knowledge of the King his
Master, and returning home into England, made the Barons of the Country
acquainted where the King was.

Whereas before his time, Sheriffs and Majors of London first ordained.
the City of London was governed by Portgraves, he granted them to be governed
by two Sheriffs and a Mayor, as now it is.

John the Kings brother making an incursion up to Beauvois, where the Bishop
being also an Earl of the royal blood, and the eleventh Peer of France,
valiantly fighting, was taken in the skirmish, armed at all points, and bravely
mounted; on whose behalf the Pope (upon the Bishops humble suit, pleading the
Clergies immunity) wrote somewhat earnestly to King Richard, to set his very
dear son, for so he called the Bishop, at liberty. The King in a kind of
pleasant earnestness, Alluding to that Genesis 37. 33.
caused the Habergeon and Curaces of the Bishop, to be presented to the Pope,
with this question, Vide an tunica filii tui sit an non. Whereupon the Pope
replied, Hollinsh. and Speeds Chron.
That he was neither his son, nor the son of the Church; and therefore should
be ransomed at the Kings will, because he was rather judged to be a servitor of
Mars, then a soldier of Christ.

In his time were those famous Outlaws, called Robin-hood and Little John.

He was wounded in the arm, by an Arrow shot at him out of a Cross-bow, by
Peter Bisile, of which wound he died within four days after.

CHAP. XVI.
King John.
WHose Reign had it not fallen in the time of so turbulent a Pope, so ambitious
neighbour-Princes, so disloyal Subjects, Speed.
nor his Story into the hands of exasperated Writers, he had appeared a King of
as great renown, as misfortunes.

His overhasty undertakings brought in those broyls of the Barons Wars.

Before this Kings time we seek in vain for any great Council. He first as may
be gathered (though darkly by the Record) used their Councels and Assents in
the sixth year of his Reign. C^ttoni Posthuma.


He had by his Wife* Isabel a son Henry, who succeeded him in the Kingdom.

In his voyage toward Ireland, Powell on Lhoyds History of Wales. p. 261. out
of Matthew Paris.
as he was in his journey in the borders of Wales, there was one taken and
brought before him, who had killed a Priest. The Officer desired to understand
the Kings pleasure, what he would have done to him. Let him go (says the King)
for he has slain mine enemy.

Seeing one cut up a very fat Stag in his presence, (said he) How easily and
happily has this creature lived, yet he never heard Mass. Hist. d'Angleterre
Par Andre Du Chesne l. 12.


Mr. Acts and Mo. vol. 1.
Fox seems to approve of this speech, as deriding the Mass; though others say
it was an Atheistical speech.

In his Reign the Citizens of London first obtained of the King, to choose
yearly a Mayor. Fox.
In whose time also the Bridge of London was first builded of stone, which
before was of wood.

Most Writers testify, that he was poisoned by a Monk of Swinsted-Abbey in
Lincolnshire, Foxes Acts and Mon vol. 1. There are various reports of his
death. See Hollinsh. Chron.
who to poison him, wittingly and willingly poisoned himself.

Eighteen years, five months, and four days, says Matthew Paris.
He died in the year of his age fifty and one, and after he had reigned
seventeen years, One writes that he was poisoned at Swinsted with a dish of
Pears. Others there in a cup of Wine. Some, that he died at Newarke of the
Flux. A fourth, by the distemperature of Peaches eaten in his fit of an Ague.
Browns Britannias Pastorals.
six months, and twenty seven days.

He lies buried at Worcester-Colledge, in the Quire there.

King HENRY the third.
He was happy in his Uncle, the Earl of Pembroke, the guide of his infancy; and
no less for thirty years, whilst De Burgo the last servant of his Fathers
against the French, both in Normandy and England, with Bigot Earl of Norfolk,
and others of like gravity and experience did manage the affairs. The Author of
the troublesome life and Reign of King Henry the third.

He was of a middle stature.

Robustus viribus, sed praeceps in factis. Matthew Paris.

He was crowned at Gloucester, by Peter Bishop of Winchester, and Iosceline
Bishop of Bath, in the presence of Walo the Popes Legate, October. 28. 1216. And
after peace concluded with the Barons, by Stephen Langton Archbishop of
Canterbury, at Westminster, on Whitsunday an. 1219.

In his Reign the Popes authority in England was at the highest.

He heard three Masses a day.

In a solemn conference between him and St. Lewis, Contigit aliquando S.
Ludovicum Francorum Regem cum eo super hoc conferentem dicere quod non semper
missis, sed frequentius sermonibus audiendis esse vacandum. Cui faceta
urbanitate respondens, ait, se malle amicum suum saepius videre, quam de^^
oquentem, licet bona dicentem aud^re. Matthew. Paris, and Walsingh.
King of France, the only devout Kings of that age* when the French King said
he had rather hear Sermons then Masses; our King replied, that he had rather
see his loving friend, (meaning Christ's real presence in the Sacraments) then
to hear never so much good of him, by others in Sermons.

He had a son by Elenor his wife, whom he named Edward, for the memory of
Edward the Confessor, who reigned a little before that the Normans vanquished
England. At whose birth appeared a Star of great magnitude, for some days
before the Sun rising, which moved swiftly, one while making a show of fire,
another while leaving smoke behind it; by which prodigy (says Polydore Virgil)
the future amplitude of Edward the father, and the smalness and vanity of his
son which he begat afterward, was declared as it were by an Oracle.

He had another son Edmund Crouchbacke, so called, not because he was crooked
or deformed, but because he wore the Cross upon his back, or on his Buckler,
which he wore constantly at his back, to show that he had vowed to go to
Jerusalem, to recover the holy Sepulcher.

In the year 41 of his Reign, the King held a Parliament at Oxford, which was
called Insanum Parliamentum, that is to say, the mad Parliament. For in this
Parliament were made many Acts against the Kings prerogative and pleasure, for
the reformation of the state of the Land, which after turned to the confusion
and hurt of the Land, Gration. Hollinsh.
and the death and destruction of many noble men; so that by occasion thereof,
began that hateful strife, called at this day the Barons War, whereof ensued
much trouble and mischief.

He was pressed by his Nobles, Bishops* and others, Magna Charta.
to pass the great Charter, in the ninth year of his Reign. His son Edward the
first in the twenty fifth of his Reign, confirmed the great Charter.

The great Charter of England passed from this King, for which the English men
had no less striven, than the Trojans for their Helena. Lambards Archeion.
Lambard says, he may call that great Charter of the Liberties of England, the
first Letters of manumission of the people of this Realm, Id. ib.
out of the Norman servitude.

Matthew Paris the learned Monk of Saint: Albans lived in his time, and was
highly esteemed by him. Matthew. Paris. hist. Ang. Hen. 3. p. 945. p. 783.
Et cum esset cum ipso continue in mensa, in palatio, and in thalamo, qui haec
scripsit, direxit scribentis calamum satis diligenter and amicahiliter.

In another place he speaks of his bold reproving the King.

Verstegan says the Sidneys are of a French extraction; that they came over
into England in Henry the thirds days.

Arms as honourary dignities and generous distinctions between family and
family, There will be little reason to be overconfident in matters of Pedigree
and Arms, much beyond 400 years.
and person and person, have been undoubtedly born from his time; since which
there is sufficient proof of them; and though long before that many Families
might be rich, potent and noble, yet some of them either had no Arms, as many
yet in Ireland have not, or else kept no constant Coat, ^d. ibid.
but gave sometimes their paternall, otherwhiles their maternall or aadopted
Coats. Mr. Waterhouse his discourse of Arms and Armory.

He reigned fifty six years and twenty days, Matthew. Paris.
the longest number of years that ever any King of England reigned. Cook 2d
part of Instit. c. 11.


CHAP. XVII.
King EDWARD the first.
HE was absent in the holy Land when his father died. The names of the first
Richard, the first Edward were as terrible to Infidels, as William to the
Saxons, and as much renowned among all Christian Princes. Sir Francis W^rtly
his Characters. Rodericus Toletanus l. 1. breaks forth into this exclamation;
Quid igitur hujus mulieris fide rarius audiri! quid mirabilius esse potest, ut
uxoris lingua fide and dilectione maritali peruncta, vencua a dilecto marito
expulerit quae electo medico trahi non valuerunt: and quod plurima exquistiaque
non effecerunt medicamenta, una uxoris pietas explevit.


At his first coming to the holy Land, he rescued the great City of Acon, from
being surrendered to the Sultan, after which, out of envy to his valor, one
Anzazim a desperate Saracen, who had often been employed to him from their
General, being one time, upon pretense of some secret message, admitted alone
into his chamber, with a poisoned knife gave him three wounds in the body, two
in the arm, and one in the armpit, which had been mortal, if out of
unspeakable love, the Lady Elenor his wife had not sucked out the poison of his
wounds with her mouth, and licked them with her tongue, and thereby effected a
cure, which otherwise had been incurable. So sovereign a medicine (says Speed)
is a woman's tongue anointed with the virtue of loving affection.

Leaving Garrisons in fit places for defense of the Country, he with his wife
Elenor takes his journey homewards, and first passing by Sicilie, was there
most kindly received by Charles King of that Island, where he first heard of
his fathers death; which he took more heavily far, then he had taken the death
of his young son Henry, whereof he had heard a little before; at which when
King Charles marvelled, Iactura filiorum facilis est, cum quotidie
multiplicentur; pareutum vero mors irremediabilis est, quia nequeunt
restaurari. Chronica^ Thomae. Walsingham.
he answered that other sons might be had, but another father could never be
had.

He was protected by the divine hand from his Childhood being young, and
playing one time at Chess with a friend, in the midst of his game, without any
apparent occasion, he removed himself from the place where he sat, when
suddenly there fell from the roof of the house a great stone, which if he had
stayed in the place but never so little, had beaten out his brains.

The like is recorded of Luther, that as he was sitting in a certain place upon
his stool, a great stone there was in the Vault over his head where he sat;
which being stayed miraculously so long as he was sitting, as soon as he was
up, immediately fell upon the place where he sat, able to have crushed him in
pieces. Fox Martyrolog.

Having prepared a great Fleet of Ships for a journey into Flanders, and being
at Winchelsey where the Ships were to meet, it happened that riding about the
Harbor, his Horse frighted with the noise of a Windmill, which the wind drove
violently about, scrambled up and leapt over the mud-wall of the Town, so as
neither the King nor Horse was to be seen, but every one judged the King could
not choose but be thrown and killed; yet such was the divine providence over
him, that the Horse lighted upon his feet, and the King keeping the Saddle
returned safe.

He was crowned at Westminster, together with his wife Queen Elenor, by Robert
Kilwarthy, Archbishop of Canterbury.

He ingeniously surprised the Welsh into subjection, Mr. Fullers good thoughts
in worst times. Occasion. Meditat. 9. See Dr. Pow^is Preface to the History of
Wales, and his Notes on ^hoyds History of Wales, p. 376, 377, and Judge
Dederidges Principality of Wales, p. 4, 5, 6.
proffering them such a Prince as should be

1. The son of a King. 2. Born in their own Country. 3. Whom none could tax
for any fault.
The Welsh accepted the conditions, and the King tendered them his son Edward,
an Infant, newly born in the Castle of Carnarva^.

Wales was united to the Crown of England in the eleventh year of his Reign;
who thereupon established the Government thereof according to the Laws of
England.

A wise, Cambdens Britannia in Yorkshire. ^aletudine usus est satis presp^ra,
animo magno; cui cunque enim rei operam dabat, eam facil^ imbi^^bat, prudentia
summa, religionis studiosissimus, insolentiae sacerdotum inimicus acerrimus,
quam ex opibus cum primis prosicisci putabat^ quam ob^rem legem ad manumortuam
perpetuasse fertur, at ita little luxurie^ coerc^retur. Polyd. V^rg. Ang hist l.
18.
a just, and fortunate Prince, who in regard of his Princely virtues deserves
to be ranged among the principal and best Kings that ever were.

A right noble and worthy Prince, Cambdens Britannia in Cumberland. Fuit
prudens in gerendis negotiis, ab adolescentia armorum ded^us exercitio, quo in
diversts regionibus eam famam militiae acquifierat, qua totius orbis Christiani
sui temporis principes singulariter transcendebat. Elegantis erat formae,
staturae procer^e, qua humero and supra communi populo prae^minebat. Chronica
Thom^^ Walsingham. He was called Edward Long-shank^.
to whom God proportioned a most princely presence and personage, a right
worthy seat to entertain so heroical a mind. For he not only in regard of
fortitude and wisdom, but also for a beautiful and personal presence was in
all points answerable to the height of royal Majesty, whom fortune also in the
very prime and flower of his age, inured to many a War, and exercised in most
dangerous troubles of the State, whilst she framed and fitted him for the
Empire of Britain: which he being once crowned King, managed and governed in
such wise, that having subdued the Welsh and vanquished the Scots, he may
justly be counted the second ornament of Great Britain.

No Realm but did resound first Edwards praise,
No praise was ever won with more deserts.
And no deserts (though great) could counterpoise
Much less out-balance his heroic parts.
Mars taught him Arms, the Muses taught him Arts,
Whereby so great he grew, that might there be
A love on earth, that earthly love was he.
Sir Francis Huberts History of Edward the second.
In the long Wars he had with Robert King of Scotland, having by trial found
how greatly his presence advantaged the success of his affairs, and how he was
ever victorious in any enterprise he undertook in his own person, when he died,
he bound his son by solemn oath, that being dead he should cause his body to be
boiled, until the flesh fell from the bones, which he should cause to be
interred, and carefully keeping the bones, ever carry them about him,
whenever he should happen to have Wars with the Scots, as if destiny had
fatally annexed the victory unto his limbs. Mountaigne his Essays. l. 1. c. 3.

Baliol King of Scotland came to Newcastle upon Tine, where King Edward then
lay; and there with many of his Nobles, swears fealty, and does homage to him,
as his Sovereign Lord.

Afterward there grew a great dissension between him and the King, and the two
Nations, which consumed much Christian blood, and continued almost three
hundred years. King Edward entered Scotland with a great Army, King Baliol was
taken prisoner.

The marble Chair in which the Kings of Scotland used to be crowned, Ne
vestigium majestatis regia^ desid^rii ullum apud populum remaneret, sedem
lap^deam in qua insidentes Reges coronari salebant, ex Scotia deferendam
Londinum curavit, quae eti^am nunc ad Westmonast ^rium servatur. Polyd. Virg.
Ang. hist. l. 1^
was also brought thence to Westminster, and placed there amongst the
Monuments, where it still continues.

Ni fallat fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Invenient lapidem, regnare tenentur ibidem.
Except old sawes do fain,
And Wizards wits be blind,
The Scots in place shall reign,
Where they this stone shall find.
Of his Wars with the Scotch, and his victories over them, see Aysc^ his
History of the Wars, Treaties, Marriages, and other occurrents between
England and Scotland, from King William the Conqueror, until the union of
them both in King James.

In his twelfth year the Justices Itinerants began.

In his time John Baliol King of Scots, builded Baliol-Colledge in Oxford.
Walter Merton Lord Chancellor of England, and after Bishop of Rochester,
founded Merton-Colledge in Oxford.

One made this Epitaph of him.

Dum viguit, Rex, and valuit tua magna potestas
Frau^ latuit, pax magna fuit, regnavit honestas.
He reigned thirty four years, seven months, one and twenty days, and lived
sixty eight years, and twenty days.

EDWARD the second.
He degenerated wholly from his fathers virtues, and esteemed not the good
advertisements and precepts which he gave him before his death.

He granted the Charter to London, to elect yearly one of the City at their own
pleasure to be their Mayor.

He was the first of the King of Englands children which bore the title and
quality of the Prince of Wales. Since whose time, the eldest sons of the Kings
of England were called Princes of Wales, as the eldest sons of the Kings of
Fran^e are called Dolphins, Initio sui principatus, cisi ad lenitatem suapto
natura pr^pensus ^rat, quorundam tamen suorum consiltariorum co^rcitus monitis,
ut bonam indolem ostentaret, gravitatem, probitatem, ^nodestiam praes^ ^crre
caepit: veri^n baud omnino potuit ita coerceri, quin brevi tempore petulantiam
ac vanitatem sensim quidem primo and occulte velut juvenili errore complexus
suerit, etc. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 18.
and of Spain, Infants.

He was called Edward of Carnarvan; for the Welsh men after Leolines death,
were earnest with the King for a Prince of their own Countrymen; the King told
them they should have a Prince there born that could speak no English, which
they being contented with, he named his Infant son; (who was born there) the
Queen being brought to Carnarvan.

He divided Wales incorporated into England, into Shires and Hundreds.

His great affection to Pierce Gaveston, and Spenser his Favorites, was a
means of stirring up the Barons against him.

It is thy sad disaster which I sing Carnarvan* Edward; second of that name,
Thy Minions pride, thy States ill managing, Thy Peers revolt, the sequel of
the same; Thy life, thy death I sing, thy sin, thy shame; And how thou were
deprived of thy Crown, In highest fortunes, cast by fortune down. Sir Francis
Huberts History of Edward the second.

Nine Kings had reigned since the conquest here,
Whom I succeeded in a rightful line,
My father (all domestic tumults clear)
Did war, and win in fruitful Palestine.
This Northern Sun even to the East did shine.
The French were fearful hearing but his name,
French, Scots, and Turks aeternized his fame.
He married Isabel, daughter to King Philip, surnamed le Bean the fair, and
heir to France, all her brothers being dead without issue.

Gourney most barbarously caused the miserable King to sit on a Molehill,
whilst the Barber shaved him, and to take cold water out of a ditch to wash
him withal, which the patient King seeing, Sir. Thomas More.
told them, That in despite of them he would have warm water at his Barbing,
and there withal shed abundance of tears.

Being deposed from his Kingdom through the crafty complotting and practicing
of his wife, Cu^ Isabella R^gina Oxoni^ esset, una cum (...), magno exercitu
stipa^^ Episcopas concionem habuit, in qua themate assumpto Dolet mihi caput,
o^^endere conatus est, caput insanum, nec adhibitis opportunis remediis
convalesce^s corpori dominari non debere. Godw. de praesul. A^g. Vide plura
ibid. Speed.
he was made away in B^rkley-Castle in Glocestershire, by the wicked subtilty
of the Bishop of Hereford, who wrote unto his Keepers these few words without
points between them, Edwardum occidere nolite timere bonum est; that by reason
of the diverse sense and construction, both they might commit the murder, and he
also cleanly excuse himself. Cambdens Britannia in Glocestershire. Vide
Gatakeri Adversaria. miscel, c. 16.

Never was the fallacy of pointings, or ambiguity of phrase more mischievously
used to the destruction of a King, or the defense of the contrivers, then in
this heinous parricide.

To shed King Edwards blood
Refuse to fear I count it good.
Where the Comma or pause being put after nolite, bid them not to make him
away, but after timere insinuates a plain encouragement to the fact.

The Sphinx who is said to be the Author of this ambiguous riddle, Queen
Isabel, being to repass from Zeland into England with an Army, in favor of her
son against her husband, had utterly been cast away, had she come unto the Port
intended, being there expected by her enemies: but fortune, against her will,
brought her to another place, where she safely landed. Montaigne his Essays.
l. 1. c. 33. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 19. p. 382. commends her.
sent by the Lord Mortimer, was Adam de Tarleton, who utterly denied any such
intention, when the murderers for their own justification, produced the writing
it self under Queen Isabels Seal, and the Seals of the other conspirators.

To which effect came Letters from the Court written by Tarleton, at the Queens
command,

In such a cloudy, and ambiguous sort,
That diverse ways, one might them understand
By pointing them; that if they should be scanned,
He and his Letters might be free from blame,
And they Delinquents, that abused the same.
The words were these: ( Kill Edward do not fear
It Is good) which being comma'd diversely
As pleased the Reader, double sense may bear.
O Art! Thou art the earths chief treasury
But being employed to practice villainy,
What monstrous births from thy fair womb do spring,
So Grammar here is made to kill a King.
Sir Francis Huberts History of Edward the second.
There was such a terrible famine in his reign, that horse, dogs, yea men and
children were stolen for food, and (which is horrible to think) the thieves
newly brought into the Gaol, were torn in pieces, and eaten presently half
alive by such as had been longer there.

There was in the Castle of Nottingham, (and at this day is) a certain secret
way or mine cut through a rock, upon which the said Castle is built, an issue
whereof opens toward the River of Trent, which runs under it, and the other
venteth it self far within upon the surface, and is (at this present) called
Mortimers hole; through this the young King Edward the third well armed and
strongly seconded, was conducted with drawn swords, by some of his trusty and
sworn servants up to the Queens chamber, whose door (so fearless is blind
affection) was unshut, and with her was Mortimer (the Kings master as the
rumor spread him) ready to go to bed, whom with the slaughter of a Knight and
one or two that resisted, Speed.
they laid hold upon. This was not reputed a slender enterprise, in regard that
in Mortimers retinue were not fewer (they say) then one hundred and fourscore
Knights, besides Esquires and Gentlemen. He was after hanged at Tyburn.

K. Edward the second favored learning, Hollinsh.
as by the erection of Orial-Colledge in Oxford, and St. Mary's Hall, which
were of his foundation, it may well be gathered.

He was stifled in his bed, and a red hot iron thrust up into his Fundament.
Quo genere moriis Edwardus interierit, non facile constat: fama exit in vulgus,
illum dum ventrem purgaret, fuisse veru transfixum per clu^es. Polyd Virg. Ang
hist l. 18.


He lived forty three years, and reigned nineteen.

EDWARD the third.
He was upon his fathers resignation proclaimed King of England. Fuerat nempe
Rex iste inter ^mnes Reges orbis and Principes gloriosus, benignus, clemens,
and magnificus, Belliger suit insignis and fortunatus, qui de cunctis
congressibus in terr^ and in mari, semper triumphali gloria victoriam
reportavit. Walsingh Hist. Ang. Edwardus tertius regnum saelicissimum and rebus
maximis a se gestis gloriofissimum ad annum secundum supra quinquagesimum
produ^it. Godw. de praesul. Ang. comment p. 119. Huic regi absque caeteris
naturae ornamentis, cum primis formae dignitas suffragabatur, ingenium
providum, perspicax ac mite, nihilporr^ non sapienter, non con^iderate agebat,
and homo permodestus and frugi, illos sum diligebat, honoribusque ornabat ac
amplificabat, qui probitate, modestia, atque vitae innocentia allos
antecederent. Militaris disciplinae apprime sc^ens fuit, ut res ab co gestae
testimonio sunt. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 19.


He was not fifteen years old when he began to reign. Il gaigna deux memorables
batailles en France, prist la ville de Calais, and deux grands Roys
prisonniers, and rendit son nom redoutable a tous ses Voisins, Histoire
d'Angleterre Par du Chesne. Floruere faelicia arma Edovardi tertii Regis, qui
de Iohanne Gallorum Rege capto, speciocissime triumphavit. Ab hoc Edovardo
Garcitenii equestris ordinis ceremoniam institutam ferunt. Pauli Iovii
Britanniae descriptio. Hic est ille Edovardus qui Caletum urbem in continenti
Galliae, plures menses obsessum atque expugnatum, Philipp^ Galliae Regi abhinc
ducentis ser ne annis ademit. Id. ib.


He was of an exceeding comely personage, of a pregnant wit, courteous, gentle,
of great temperance.

If we respect either valor, prowess, length of Reign, acts of Chivalry, or
the multitude of famous Princes his children left behind him, he was one of the
noblest Kings that ever England had. Dolemans Conference touching Succession to
the Crown. part. 1. c. 3.

Cambden in his Britannia in Northumberland calls him our Hector.

He was the greatest scourge to the Nation of Scotland of any King of England
either before or after him. Ayscu.

He says there also, that if this King had a while longer pursued the conquest
of Scotland, he had easily brought the same under his sovereignty; and that he
esteemed (in regard of the difficulty of holding long his possessions within
the French dominions) the Realm of Scotland a more convenient and fit member of
the Crown of England, then the one half of France, how far soever exceeding
the other in wealth and magnificence.

He brought Clothing first into this Island, transporting some families of
Artificers from Gaunt hither.

Upon the grievances of his people pestered with the doublings of Lawyers, he
commanded that Pleas should from thenceforth be made in English, Speed.
not in French.

He placed Richard his Grandchild, and next heir apparent, in his solemn feast
at Christmas, at his Table next unto himself, above all his Uncles, being the
sons of that King, and men much renowned for their prowess and virtue. Judge
D^dridges Epist. Dedicat. to the Principality of Wales. Id. ib.


The Law of Magna Charta was about a dozen several times confirmed by this
King, during the years of his Reign. It was confirmed by thirty Parliaments in
the succession of eight Kings.


In the fiftieth year of Edward the third, all the Lords appeared in Parliament
in person, This was the first Parliament we read of.
and not one by Proxy. At which Parliament, as appears in the Parliament-Roll,
so many excellent things were done, as it was called bonum Parliamentum, Sir
Edward Cooks 4th part of Institutes.
the good Parliament.

He disposed of Ecclesiastical dignities, received homage and fealty from his
Prelates, who writ that so much admired Letter to the Pope, for the Liberties
of the English Church, Cui pro tunc Papa aut Cardinales rationabiliter
respondere nescicbant. Walsing. an. 1343.

The house of Valois triumphantly reigned in France ever since the Reign of
Edward the third, at which time it was then but an Earldome, and descended from
a second brother, was of mere purpose by the French advanced to the throne,
under pretenses of the ^alique Law, made by Pharamond, only to suppress the
immediate right and title of King Edward the third, Stow.
who was descended of the French Kings eldest daughter and heir; He quartered
the Arms of France with England.
whereby he justly claimed the Crown of France, Speed.
though that very Law made King Edwards title the stronger (as himself truly
pleaded) he being the male, Gersey and Gernsey parcels of Normandy, belong to
the King of England.
albeit his right descended by the female.

Rex sum regnorum bina rati^ne duorum,
Anglorum regno sum Rex ego jure paterno,
Matris jure quidem Francorum nuncupor idem,
Hinc est armorum variatio facta meorum.
The date of this title of France was in the year 1337, the which Enlgand holds
to this day, and our Kings the Realm in effect, says John de Serres.

At the great battle of Cressy in France, the Commanders about the Prince sent
to King Edward to come up with his power to aid them, the King asked the
messenger, whether his son were slain or hurt, the messenger answered no, but
he was like to be overlaid: Well then said the King, return, and tell them who
sent you, That so long at my son is alive, Pro^ssards Chron. c. 130. Da^. hist.
they send no more to me whatever happen, for I will that the honor of the day
be his. Speed.
And so at last the English obtained the greatest victory they ever yet had
against the French. John de Serres.


There were there found the dead bodies of eleven great Princes, The King of
Bohemia was there slain, whose plume of Ostridge feathers won then by the black
Prince, has ever since been the cognizance of the ^rinces of Wales. His eldest
son surnamed the Black Prince the mirror of Chivalry, not for his color, but
dreaded in Battles. He at the Battle of C^essy which bare two thirds of 8500
men, fought with little less then 90000, and not many years after, being fewer
by three fourths. The Welsh his enemies, in the Battle of Poicticrs he took
King John of France prisoner, environed by all the Princes and Nobility of that
Kingdom. A young Prince twice a Conqueror, having vanquished his enemy, both
by valor and courtesy. (...) Serres French Hist o^ John King of France.
and of Barons, Knights and men of Arms, above one thousand and five hundred,
of the Commons above thirty thousand.

Not one man of honor or note slain upon the English side.

King Edward after the Battle aftectionately embracing and kissing his
victorious son, said; Fair son, God send you good perseverance to so prosperous
beg innings, you have nobly acquit your self, and are well worthy to have the
governance of a Kingdom entrusted to you for your valor.

Sir Eustace Rihamant in the encounter at Calis-Gate, (between Sir Walter Manny
and the Lord Charney) met with King Edward, (who disguising himself in common
armor, served under the banner of Sir Walter Manny) and fought so stoutly with
him, that he stroke the King twice down on his knees, but in the end the King
took him prisoner, and then he yielded his Sword to the King, but knowing what
he was, said thus, Sir Knight, I yield me as your prisoner: upon which cause,
the King came after supper to him, and with a merry countenance, said thus to
the Knight: (Sir Eustace) you are the Knight in the world that I have seen most
valiant, either in assault of enemies, or defense of himself. I never ^ound
Knight that gave so much ado, body to body, as ye have done this day, whe^efore
I give you the prize above all the Knights of my Court, by right sentence, and
herewithall the King being bareheaded (having a Chaplet of fine pearls that he
ware on his head) took the same Chaplet from off his head, being fair, goodly
and rich, and said to the Knight: I give you this Chaplet for the best doer in
Arms in this journey past, of either party, and I desire you to bear it this
year for the love of me. I know well, you be fresh and amorous, and oftentimes
are among doubty Knights and fair Ladies, yet say wheresoever ye come, that the
King of England did give it you: and I quite your prison and ransom, depart to
morrow if it please you: whereupon the Knight did not only wear the same
Chaplet, in remembrance of so gracious a benevolence of so worthy a Prince, but
also did bear after in his Arms three Chaplets garnished of pearls. Fern his
Glory of Generosity. p. 210, 211.

Mr. Wren in his Monarchy asserted p. 125. says, The successes of the English
in France always followed the person of the Prince: with us Edward the third,
and Henry the fifth wise and valiant Princes gaining, Richard the second and
Henry the sixth weak Princes losing; with them John and Charles the sixth men
of no ability losing, Charles the fifth and Charles the seventh brave Princes
recovering.

Edward the black Prince of Wales (who so long governed our Country of
Guienne, a man whose conditions and fortune were accompanied with many notable
parts of worth and magnanimity) having been grievously offended by the
Limosins, Lho^d in his History of ^^ales calls him the (...) of Chivalry of all
Europe, a Prince (says he) of such excellent demeanor, so valiant, wise and
politic in his doings, that a perfect representation of Knighthood appeared
most live^^ in his person. Se^ more there. p. 384, 385.
though he by main force took and entered their City, could by no means be
appeased, nor by the wailfull outcries of all sorts of people, (as of men,
women, and children) be moved to any pity, they prostrating themselves to the
common slaughter, crying for mercy, and humbly submitting themselves at his
feet, until such time as in triumphant manner passing through their City, he
perceived three French Gentlemen, who alone with an incredible and undaunted
boldness gainstood the enraged violence, and made head against the fury of his
victorious* Army. The consideration and respect of so notable a virtue, did
first abate the dint of his wrath, and from these three began he to relent, and
show mercy to all the other inhabitants of the Town. Michael Lord of Montaigne
his Essays. l. 1. c. 1.

Having had great victories against the French, and other neighboring Nations,
he instituted the Order of the Garter, and consecrated it to St. George. He
appointed a Garter to be the Ensign of this Order, wrought richly with gold and
precious stones which should circle the leg beneath the knee, In the year 1^49.
(...) instituit Garterium ordinem, cui ^auius deinde accessit honor, (...)
maximos quosque Reges non pen^tuc^rit in id ventre Collegium. ^olyd. Vng. hist.
l. 19. Vide plura ibi^ and (...) hist. Belg. (...) 24. p. 285, 286.
and on it to have these words apparently discerned, Honi Soit Qui Mal Y ^ense.
Shame to him which evil thinks.

The number of these Knights, are twenty six, whereof the King himself is the
chief.

These Knights wear the Ensign of Saint George (fighting with a Dragon)
fastened to a rich Chain or Collar which weighed and was worth eighty pounds of
English money. See Montaigne his Essays. l. 2. c. 7. of the words of honor.

About this time the famous Dr. John Wicklef, a man of sharp wit, profound
learning, and of great judgment, did in the University of Oxford publicly
maintain sundry Propositions and dogmaticall points against the Church of Rome.

His followers were in the phrase of those dark days, called Lollards, whereas
in truth they endeavored to extirpate all pernicious weeds which through time,
sloth, and fraud, had crept into the field of Gods Church.

Such was this Kings courtesy and friendly behavior toward the two captive
Kings of France and Scotland, while they remained together in England, as that
hereby he won their love and favor for ever after, as appeared by their repair
hither to visit the King and Queen, and to recreate and solace themselves in
their company. Thus it came to pass, that their captivity here, turned more to
their own advantage, and the peaceable enjoying of their estates after the
same, then if it had never happened unto them.

Mr. Thomas May wrote his victorious Reign in Verse in seven Books.

He reigned almost one and fifty years, and lived about sixty five, who of all
the Kings of the Realm (says Mr. F^x) unto Henry the eight, was the greatest
bridler of the Popes usurped power, whereby John Wicklef was maintained with
aid sufficient.

CHAP. XVIII.
RICHARD the second.
HE descended from four Edwards, of which the first three were succeeding
Kings; the fourth Prince of Wales surnamed the black Prince, who dying before
his father Edward the third, did not attain the Crown. The Civil Wars of
England by Sir* Francis B^ondi an Italian.

He was crowned in the eleventh year of his age, In Richardo fuit form gratia,
animus non vilis, quem consociorum perversitas improbitas, insulsitas,
extiuxit^ fuit item summa infelicitas, qui in talent cal^^itatem in^ cidit ut
in maximi beneficii perten^ accepe^it, abdicare se imperio, pro quo, ^ortaies
soleant (...) omnia pro^icere. Polyd Virg. Ang. hist. l 21.
and sufficiently showed the miserable condition of such States as are governed
by an Infant King.

He was the goodliest personage of all the Kings that had been since the
conquest.

The beautiful picture of a King sighing, crowned in a Chair of Estate, at the
upper end of the Quire in St. Peter's at Westminster, is said to be of him,
which witnesses how goodly a creature he was il^ outward lineaments. Speed.

He had nothing worthy his great fortunes but his great birth.

When he had with full hand bestowed upon Sim^^^ Montford Earl of Leicester,
all the benefits he could, yea and given his own sister i^ marriage, He may be
compared to Lewis the tenth of France, called Hu^^, which signifies mutiny,
because of his ^arbulent disposition.
he raised a most dangerous War, and spoiled shamefully a great part of
England, under pretense of restoring the Commonwealth and maintaining liberty:
neither left he any thing undone, to bring, the King under, to change the State
and of a M^^^rchy to bring in an Oligarchy. But in the (...), after that
fortune had for a good while favorably smiled upon him, this Montford gave the
King (...) Dan. hist. f^l. 172. Cambd. Brit (...) Worcestershire.
he was slain at Evesh^m in Worcestershire, with many other of the Barons his
Accomplices, by the prowess of Prince Edward.

(...)

(...)

Although the Kingdom endured great Crosses in the affairs of State under this
King, yet some have thought, that it found as great a blessing in matters of
Religion, which in those days took so deep root in this our Land by the
preaching of John Wickliffe, that the branches thereof did spread themselves
even over the Seas. Speeds Chronicle.

He was the only Son of that famous Cheiftain, the black Prince of Wales: (a
renowned son of a renowned father) but (as a plant transplanted into a savage
soil) in degree and disposition wholly degenerate, retained a tincture of the
light inconstancy of his Mother, Mr. Bacons Uniform Government of England, part
2. c. 1.
and the luxuriousness of his great Grandfather, Edward the second, and running
his course, came to his end.

He had in his Court a thousand persons in ordinary allowance of diet, three
hundred servitors in his Kitchen, Sir John Arundel had two and fifty new suits
of Apparel of cloth ^ gold or tissue Hollinsh.
above three hundred Ladies Chamberers, and Landerers. His Apparel was
sumptuous, and so was it generally in his time: he had one Coat of gold and
stone valued at thirty thousand Marks. One interview with the French King at
Ards, Chron. in Rich. the second. Daniels third Book of Civil Wars.
when his Wife Isabel was delivered unto him, cost three hundred thousand Mark^.

Queen Anne his Wife, Daughter to the Emperor Charles the fourth, first taught
English women the manner of sitting on horseback, ^ambd. Bri^annia in Sur^ey.
which now is used: whereas before-time, they rode very unseemly astride, like
as men do.

The Civil Wars in England, had their beginning from his bad Government, Bellum
Baroni^um.
Henry the fourth did first commence them, and Henry the fifth suspended them,
but they again brake forth under Henry the sixth.

Wat Tyler the Master of the Kentish Rebels, was slain with a Dagger by William
Walworth Mayor of London, close by the Kings side, in the Kings defense, who
was therefore Knighted, and the City since gives for Arms the Dagger.

He was first deposed, then slain. Men are easily emboldened (says
Guicciardine c. 3. of his History of Italy) against a Prince that is fallen
into contempt.

The most current report at that time went, that he was Princely served every
day at the Table with abundance of costly meats, according to the order
prescribed by Parliament, but was not suffered to taste or touch any one of
them, and so perished of famine.

Mr. Fox says he was at Pamfret Castle famished to death.

Sir Pierce of Extone at last killed him, Haywards life and Reign of Henry the
fourth.
though he with an Axe wrested out of one of their hands, first killed four of
those which came with him to murder him.

At the point of his death he groaned forth these words. My great Grandfather
King Edward the second was in this manner deposed, imprisoned and murdered: by
which means my Grandfather King Edward the third obtained possession of the
Crown; and now is the punishment of that injury powered upon his next successor.
Well this is right for me to suffer, but not for you to do; your King for a
time may joy at my death, and enjoy his desire; but let him qualify his
pleasures with the expectation of the like justice: for God who measures all
our actions by the malice of our minds, will not suffer this violence
unrevenged.

He lived three and thirty years, reigned two and twenty and three months.

Thus far the Plantagenets, have continued in an unquestionable right line; now
follows the division of the houses of Lancaster and York, three of each
succeeding in their order.

Of Lancaster, Henry the fourth surnamed Bulling brook. Henry the fifth of
Monmouth. Henry the sixth of Windsor.
Of York three others succeeded upon a better title.

1. Edward the fourth. 2. Edward the fifth. 3. Richard the third.
HENRY the fourth.
He was son to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, from the loyn^ of whom the
greatest number of the Kings of England, Spain and Portugal, since his time,
as also several other persons of eminent dignity are descended. Mr. Dugdal^s
History of St. Paul's Cathedral.

He was anointed with an oil which a certain religious man gave unto Henry the
first Duke of Lancaster (Grandfather to the King by the mothers side) when he
served in the Wars of King Edward the third, Haywards life and Reign of K.
Henry the fourth.
beyond the seas; together with this Prophecy, that the Kings which should be
anointed therewith, should be the Champions of the Church.

There was a great contest then between the white and red Rose, Inter flores
regia dignitas penes Rosam est. Apud Anglos regia Rosa rubra stirpis
Eboracensis, alba Lancast^ensis. Spelm. Aspilogia.
the houses of York and Lancaster. Speed.
The red Rose prevailed now, he being the first renowned King of the house of
Lancaster.

He first studied a popular party as needing all to support his titles.

There was in his Reign a Parliament held at Coventry, called Parliamentum
indoctorum, the lack-learning Parliament, either for the unlearnedness of the
persons, or for their malice to learned men

During the time of this Kings Reign execution by fire was first put in
practice within this Realm, Trussels life and Reign of Richard the second.
for controversies in points of Religion.

He shed the blood of Gods Saints, and reigned neither long nor h^p^ily.

Mr. Fox ^aith his time was full of trouble, blood and misery. He was the first
of the Kings of England (says he) that put out his hand to the shedding of the
blood of the Saints, since the conquest.

Humphrey his son was by his brother King Henry the fifth created Duke of
Gloucester, Humfridus filius Henrici quarit, s^ater Henrici quinti, patruus
Henrici sexti Regum Angliae, excoluit tum juvenis, tum etiam senex virtutem ut
qui maximo. Hinc clarus domi militiaeque and bonis omnibus gratiss^mus. Amavit
praeter caetera politas literas, quibus etiam impendio invigilavit. Vidi ego
libellum de rebus astronomicis ab eo non infaeliciter scriptum Mecaenas ille
quidem doctorum omnium, quos illis temporibus, vel Anglia, vel Gail^a, vel
Italia protulii. Testes exemplaria antiquissima quidem illa numero 1296, quae
Academiae ad Isidis vi^um* fitae inchoata ibidem long pulcherrim^ operis
Bibliotheca liberaliter contulit. Lel. comment in Cygn. Cant. Vide ejus l. 3.
de vtris illustribus.
he was Protector of the Kingdom of England for twenty five years in the time
of King Henry the sixth. He was a man, who nobly deserved of the Commonwealth
and of learning, as being himself very learned, and a magnificent Patron and
benefactor of the University of Oxford, where he had been educated, and was
generally called the good Duke. Speed.

This Duke Humphrey purchased a wonderful number of Books, in all Sciences,
whereof he freely gave to a Library in Oxford, a hundred and twenty nine fair
Volumes. Bales Conclusion to Leylands New years gift to King Henry the eight.

One says, all the Henry's of the house of Lancaster (even to Henry the
seventh) were most eminent for great virtues. Henry the fourth for his
behavior and courtesy. Henry the fifth for his valor and magnanimity. Henry
the sixth for his justice and piety.

The renowned Prince King Henry the fifth during the life of his father, He
took delight to lie lurking in high ways, to steal from himself: for observing
the times that his Tenants were to bring home his rents, he would set upon
them, yea sometimes to the danger of his life; making them make good in their
accounts as much as had been stolen from them: neither could they defraud him;
for he himself knew best how much they had lost. And if they chanced to hurt or
evil treat him, he liked them the better. Sir Francis Biondi of the Civil
Wars of England.
was noted to be fierce and of wanton courage. One of his servants whom he
favored, was for felony by him committed, arraigned at the Kings Bench,
whereof the Prince being advertised, and incensed by light persons about him,
in furious rage came hastily to the Bar where his servant stood as prisoner,
and commanded him to be ungived and set at liberty. William Gascoigne the chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, exhorted the Prince to be ordered according to the
ancient Laws of the Realm, or if he would have him saved from the rigor of the
Laws, that he should obtain if he might of the King his father his gracious
pardon, whereby no Law or justice should be impeached. With which answer the
Prince being more inflamed, endeavored himself to take away his servant. The
Judge considering the perilous example and inconvenience that might thereby
ensue, The Prince impatient of contradiction, and who was naturally given to
blows, insomuch as he would disguise himself to seek occasion for them, gave
the Judge such a Cuffe on the ear, as would have stunned any one who had been
less resolute then he: but the Judge neither frighted with the blow, nor losing
his former gravity, said unto him, that the injury done unto him sitting on
that seat, was an offense done unto the King, to whom, and to whose Laws, he
the Prince was doubly obliged; as a Subject, and as a son, Sir Francis Biondi
of the Civil Wars of England.
with a valiant courage and spirit commanded the Prince upon his allegiance to
leave the prisoner, and to depart his way: with which commandment the Prince
being set all in a fury, in a terrible manner came up to the place of
judgment, some thinking that he would have slain the Judge, or have done him
some hurt, but the Judge sitting still without moving, declaring the majesty of
the Kings place of judgment, and with an assured bold countenance, spoke thus
to the Prince: Sir remember your self, I keep here the place of the King your
sovereign Lord and Father, to whom you owe double obeisance, wherefore in his
name I charge you desist from your wilfulness and unlawful enterprise, and
from henceforth give good example to those which after shall be your proper
Subjects (...) and now for your contempt and disobedience, go you to the prison
of the Kings Bench, whereto I commit you, and remain you there prisoner,
until the pleasure of the King your Father be further known. With which words
being abashed, and also wondering at the mavelous gravity of that worshipful
Justice, the Prince laying his weapon apart, doing reverence, departed, and
went to the Kings Bench as he was commanded, whereat his servants disdaining,
came and showed to the King all the whole affair. He a while studying, after,
as a man all ravished with gladness, holding his hands and eyes toward heaven
cried out with a loud voice: O merciful God how much am I bound to thy
infinite goodness, ^ff^ecially, for that thou have given me a Judge who fears
not to minister justice, and also a sin, who can suffer semblably; and obey
justice.

Sir Thomas Eliot in his Governor, p. 102, 103.
says, here a man may behold three persons worthy memory:

First a Judge, who being a Subject, feared not to execute justice on the
eldest son of his sovereign Lord, and by order of nature his successor.

Also a Prince, son and heir of the King in the midst of his folly, more
considered his evil example, and the Judges conscience in justice, then his own
estate, and wilful appetito.

Thirdly a noble King, and wise father, who contrary to the custom of parents,
rejoiced to see his son and the heir of his Crown, to be for his disobedience
by his Subject corrected.

The Oath ex officio (it should rather be called in officiosum) was brought
into the Church under him. The Prelates requiring it to discover those which
that age esteemed Heretics, and especially, those which they called Lollards,
which Master Fox in his Acts and Monuments calls a bloody Law.

In his admonition to his son at his death, he said, Of English men, so long as
they have wealth and riches, so long shall thou have obeisance, but when they
be poor, they are always ready to make insurrection at every motion.

All the time of his sickness, his will was to have his Crown set upon his
Bolster by him, and one of his fits being so strong upon him, that all men
thought him directly dead; the Prince coming in, took away the Crown: Sir
Francis Biondi of the Civil Wars of England.
when suddenly the King recovering his senses, missed his Crown; and asking for
it, was told, the Prince had taken it: whereupon the Prince being called, came
back with the Crown, Sir Richard Bakers Chronicle.
and kneeling down, said: Sir to all our judgments, and to all our griefs, you
seemed directly dead, and therefore I took the Crown as being my right: but
seeing to all our comforts you live, I here deliver it much more joyfully then
I took it, and pray God you may long live to wear it your self.

In his time were the two famous Poets Chaucer and Gower.

None of the sons of Henry the fourth did degenerate: a thing not usual in so
large a family. Henry the fifth died gloriously in the pursuit of his
conquests, the Duke of Clarence valiantly fighting, and though of a natural
death and Gloucester of a violent, yet died they not with less fame then did the
others. Biondi his History of the Civil Wars of England, l. 5. in Henry the
sixth.

The Duke of Bedfords death is to be numbered among the chiefest causes of the
loss of France. He was a prudent Prince, of long experience in Arms and
Government, obeyed by his own, feared by his enemies. Id. ibid.

Fourth Henry was by some blind Bard foretold,
That he should never die, till he had seen
Jerusalem: fourth Henry will be old,
Jerusalem for him shall be unseen:
No, he shall see it, when he least does ween.
He swouns at prayers, and by religious men
Is straight conveyed unto Jerusalem.
Sir Francis Huberts History of Edward the second.
The like Prophecy we read of Pope Sylvester the second, to whom being
inquisitive for the time and place where he should die, it was answered that he
should die in Jerusalem, who then saying Mass in a Chapel (called likewise
Jerusalem.) perceived his end there to be near, and died.

In this Kings time Guild Hall in London was built.

Gower being very gracious with him, carried the name of the only Poet in his
time.

He and Chaucer were Knights.

Grasion. Hollinsh.
The King died in Ierusalem-Chamber in minster in the year of his age forty six.

He reigned thirteen years and a half, wanting five days. Fourteen years say
others.

CHAP. XIX.
HENRY the fifth.
HE was just, wise, magnanimous, valiant.

To this noble Prince (by an assent of the Parliament) all the Estates of the
Realm after three days, Quod benevolentiae officium nulli antea priusquam Rex
renunciatus esset, praestitum constat: adeo Henricus ab incu^ta aetate; spem
omnibus optinae indolis fecit. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist.
offered to do fealty before he was crowned, or had solemnized his Oath, well
and justly to govern the Commonweal, which offer before, was never found to be
made to any Prince of England. Stowes Chron.

His young years were spent in literature in the Academy of Oxford, where in
Queens-Colledge he was a Student under the tuition of his Uncle Henry Beauford,
Speed.
Chancellor of that University.

When he came to be King, he made Thomas Rodban a famous Astronomer in those
days, Bishop of St. David's, and John Carpenter a learned Divine, Bishop of
Worcester, having known them both, whilst he lived in the University. The
Civil Wars of England by Sir Francis Biondi.

Presently after his Coronation he called before him all his old companions,
Hic vir, hic fuit, qui a primo docuit honores, ut est in Proverbio, debere
mutare mores, etc. Polyd Virg ib.
who had been disorderly with him, strictly charging them, not to presume to
come within ten miles of his Court, until such time as they had given good
proof of their amendment in manners, and left any of them should pretend want
of maintenance to be any cause of their taking ill courses, he gave to every
one of them a competent means whereby to subsist, and in stead of them he
received the gravest men into his familiarity, in whom he conceived there was
the greatest prudence to take counsel, and faith to give it, that he might be
helped by their counsels, admonitions, and prudence.

He kept his Lent in the Castle of Kenelworth, and whilst he lay there,
messengers came to him from the Dolphin of France named Charles, with a present
of Paris-Balls for him to play withal, but the King wrote to him, that he
should shortly send to him London-Balls, with which he would throw down Paris
Walls. And to make good his promise he raised a great Army, and hastened to
France, and landed at Caen in Normandy. Charles the sixth then King of France
raised also a mighty Army, and sent a King of Arms to defy him. King Henry
desirous to know the numbers of the French, sent forth Captain Game for
discovery; who brought word that there were of them enough to kill, and enough
to take, and enough to run away. The French were so confident of victory, that
they sent to King Henry to know what ransom he would give; but he obtained a
great victory over them.

He was surnamed commonly the Alexander of England, Dolem. Confer, touching
Success. part. 1. c. 3. He was so devout and serviceable to the Pope and his
Chaplains, that he was called of many the Prince of Priests. Fox his Acts and
Monum. v. l. 1.
because as Alexander the Great conquered the most part of Asia in the space of
nine or ten years, so did this Henry conquer France in less then the like time.

The second ornament of the English Nation.

By force of Arms and military prowess maugre the French, he conquered France,
and brought Charles the sixth King of France to that extremity, that after a
sort he surrendered up his Crown unto him. Cambd. Britannia in Monmouthshire.


Fuit statura corporis quae justam excederet, corpore gracili, membris
aequalibus ac validis, facie decora, collo oblongo, artis militaris
peritissimus; ac ejus gloria illustrissimus. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. 22.

Within the term of five or six years, he brought the better part of France
under his obedience.

Avaunt proud Rome and brag not of thy men,
Nor thy aetheriall Caesar's Wars declare:
Cease peerless Plutarch with thy sacred pen,
The worlds arch-Monarchs aptly to compare,
Reason does urge, and this allege I dare,
That Englands Homer pourtrayd has his War,
Which does excel the worthiest Caesar's Star.
William Herberts Prophecy of Cadwallader. He was of mavelous great
strength, and passing swift in running, insomuch that he with two other of his
Lords without Hound, Bow, or other engine, would take a wild Buck or Do in a
large Park.

He ordained the King of Heralds over the English, which is called Garter.

Never lived English King with more true glory, Speed.
nor ever died any in a more unseasonable time, nor more lamented. V. debatur
Deorum hominiemque consensus and conspiratio esse in Anglicam fortnnam: cum
ecce subito in pejus omnia labi, cunctaque retro ferri. Henricus, ille Regum,
flos; illud belli fulmen, and suorum delicium, in medio victoriae cursu, fatis
ostensus tantum, moritur; infant regni bellique haerede relicto. Forstneri
omissorum libe^ ad l. 1. Annal Taciti.


It was said of him, that he had something in him of Caesar, which Alexander
the Great had not, that he would not be drunk, and something of Alexander the
Great, Constantius Chlorus father unto the Emperor Constantine the Great,
having commanded, that all such Christians, as would not ado^^ his Gods, should
depart from his service: did nevertheless is banish all those that denied their
faith, and retained the others in his service and favor; where^^ he gave this
reason, That those who had so little conscience as to be false unto their God,
could not be true to him. Treasury of time^. l 9 c. 6.
which Caesar had not, that he would not be flattered.

The King being certified of his son Henry's birth, gave God thanks, for
sending him a son, which might succeed in his Crown and Scepter. But when he
heard reported the place of his nativity, Hollinsh.
he said unto the Lord Fitz Hugh his trusty Chamberlain these words: My Lord, I
Henry born at Monmouth, shall reign a while, As Henry the fifth prophesies
here of his son Henry, so Henry the sixth, afterward prophesied likewise of his
son Henry. Matthew. Paris hist. Ang Henr. 1. p 62. mentions also a prophecy of
William the Conqueror concerning his son Henry the first. Aequanimis esto
sili, and comfortare in Domino pacifi^e susti^e, ut fratres tui majores te
praecedant, tu autem tempore tuo honorem totum, quem adquisivi, habebis, and
fratribus tuis divitiis and potcstate praec^lles.
and much get, and Henry born at Windsor, shall long reign, and all lose: but
as God will, so be it.

The burden of those Wars lay upon the English men's shoulders, who were at
that time rich and mighty, and had a wise, goodly, and valiant King called
Henry, accompanied with sage, hardy, and expert Captains, viz. the Earl of
Salisbury, Talbot, and others. When God meant to withdraw his goodness from the
English men, this wise King died at Bois de Vincennes, and his son who proved
but a simple man, was crowned King of France and England, and at Paris. Phil.
de Commines.

The Duke of Bedford, Dux Bedfordiae, vir tam pace optimus, quam bello for
tissimus Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l 23. Vide plura ibid.
third son to King, Henry the fourth, Regent for the English in France fourteen
years, having crowned his master Henry the sixth in Paris, died, leaving behind
him an honorable witness, even from his enemies, That he was a brave
Commander, a true Patriot, and a faithful servant to his Lord and brother
Henry the fifth, Bacons uniform Government of England. part. 2. c. 13.
and to his son Henry the sixth.

He was Regent of France, Duke of Bedford, Alanson, and An^^u, Earl of Main,
Richmond, and Kendall, and Constable of England.

King Henry died in France in the ninth year of his Reign 1422. He lived thirry
six years.
He left to succeed him his only child Prince Henry, about as many months old
as his father had reigned years.

HENRY the sixth.
He was proclaimed King when he was about eight months old, his mother brought
him to the Parliament in London in her bosom.

He was crowned on the ninth year of his age.

His infancy was mightily supported, by the notable valor and policy of his
two Uncles, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, and John Duke of Bedford, to the one
was committed the protection of his person and Kingdom, to the other the
managing of the War continued in France.

He was a very simple man, and almost an innocent. Philde Commines. l. 3. c. 7.

He was of a seemly stature, His innocence gave him holiness. Sir Francis Bacon.
of a slender body, and of a beautiful face: in whose best of fortune it was
never to prossess more then the name of a King.

What Prophet could have picked out of Mars and Saturn, the manifold mishaps
which befell that Prince of blessed memory, King Henry the sixth, sometimes
sleeping in a port of honor, sometime floting in the surges of mishap,
sometime possessing foreign Crowns, sometimes spoiled and deprived of his own,
sometime a Prince, sometime a prisoner, sometime in plight to give succor to
the miserable, sometime a fugitive among the desperate? Howards Defensative
against the poison of supposed Prophesies. c. 14.

History shows us not an example of a Prince, Habingtons History of Edw. the
fourth.
who in so many vicissitudes, never met with one fully to his advantage.

He was four times taken prisoner, and in the end despoiled both of his
Kingdom and life. Cambd. Brit. in Yorkshire.


He was crowned King of France in Nostre Biondi.
Dame in Paris, Trussells continuat. of Dan-Hist.
receiving the homage and fealty of all the Nobility of France present, and all
the Citizens and Inhabitants of that City, and the places adjacent.

He was so continent, Erat Henricus vir miti, simplicique ingenio, qui pacem
bello, qui requietem solicitudini, qui honestum utili, (...) curis anteponebat,
and quodemum nihil castius, nibil probius, nihil sanctius: in eo pudor,
modestia, integritas, patientia summa, qui humanos casus, aerum^as omnia id
genus vitae tormenta perinde aequo animo ferebat, ac si ipsius culpa contracta
essent; continebat se, ut facile quibus praecrat contincret, non inhiabat opes,
firtebat honores, at animae tantum saluti studebat, qua sola sapienter quidem
bona, ejusque amissione mala metiebatur ac desiniebat. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist
c. 23 p. 492.
that at Christide having a show of young women presented to him bare breasted,
he immediately departed with these words;

Fie, fie, fie for shame,
Forsooth you be too blame.
He willingly pardoned many great offenses. In weighty matters his affirmation
was forsooth and forsooth.
A Ruffian striking him on the face, he only said, Forsooth you are too blame
to strike me your anointed King.

He was never observed dejected upon the report of any sad accident: but
entertained all afflictions as sent from the Almighty, and absolutely resigned
his will to that of heaven.

He founded Eaton-School and Kings Fuit Henricus animo liberali, qui bonarum
artium studia mirabatur, and e^s diligebat, in quibus eas esse videret: quare
suos ipse quoque juvit, ut doctrina crudirentur: Condidit euim Scholam
magnificam ad Hetonam pagum proximum Vindesoram, in quo collocavit Collegium
sacerdotum pucrorumque magno numero, qui ibi n^^rirentur, docerentque
Grammaticam gratuito. Idem Cantabridgiae author fuit Collegiircgii, quod body
ita disciplinarum eultu floret, ut facile omnium Collegiorum sit^ Princeps.
Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 24. p. 532.
College, the Chapel of which last showed the magnificence that the whole
should have been of, had their sounder reigned to have finished them himself.

At Towton about four miles from York, the Armies of Edward the fourth and
King Henry the sixth met, Daniels eighth Book of Civil Wars.
where was fought the greatest Battle our Stories mention in all these Civil
Wars, where both the Armies consisted of above a hundred thousand men, and all
of our own Nation.

One day when he was washing his hands at a great Feast, His Prophetical
speech.
and cast his eye upon his son Henry, then a young youth, he said, This is the
Lad, that shall possess quietly that we now strive for. Caeterum illud
infortunium apud vulgus predigio creditur esse demonstratum: quandoquidem
ferunt, cum ipse Henricus paulo ante in Senatu ornatus regio habitu consideret,
subito coronam e capite in terram cecidisse. Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 23.
This showed a very prophetical spirit to have been in King Henry, that could
so long before foretell a thing so unlikely to happen. For this was he that was
afterward King Henry the seventh, before whom at that time there were many
lives in being, of both the houses of York and Lancaster; so some: but my Lord
Howard in his Defensative against the poison of supposed Prophesies c. 4. seems
not wholly to ascribe it to that.

King Henry the seventh after labored his Canonization with the Pope; Ob
pictatem vir babitus sanctissimus, ob inertiam tamen inter pessi^nos Reges
numerandus, nam Galliam a patresubactam amisit turpiter, ac postea deinde
Angliae etiam regno excidit. Godw. de Praesul. Angl.
but that succeeded not: for however the world was assured of his Philip the
third King of Spain was wholly addicted to exercises of piety, always
fingering his Beads; he sympathized much in nature with this King, but was not
so unfortunate: for he preserved what his father left him, whereas Henry the
sixth lost France where he had been crowned King in his cradle. Howel his
History of Naples.
piety, there was much question of his Government.

So Habington a Papist in his History of King Edward the fourth.

Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 24. p. 532. says thus, Sed morte post statim
obita, id officium praestare nequivit.

Cambden in his Britannia in Surrey says it was Pope Julius, and that the
reason why this took no effect was the Popes covetousness, who demanded too
great a sum of money for a Kings Canonization, as they term it, so that he
might seem ready to grant those kind of honors not for the Princes holiness
sake, but for gold.

Sir Francis Bacon in his History of Henry the seventh relates it thus, About
this time the King became suitor to Pope Julius the second, to canonize King
Henry the sixth for a Saint; the rather in respect of that his famous
prediction of the Kings own assumption to the Crown. The Pope referred the
matter (as the manner is) to certain Cardinals, to take the verification of his
holy acts and miracles; but it died under the reference. The general opinion
was, that Pope Julius was too dear, and that the King would not come to his
rates. But it is more probable, that the Pope (who was extremely jealous of the
dignity of the Sea of Rome, and of the Acts thereof) knowing that King Henry
the sixth was reputed in the world abroad but for a simple man, was afraid it
would but diminish the estimation of that kind of honor, if there were not a
distance kept between Innocents and Saints.

William Alnwicke Bishop of Lincoln was his Confessor. Gulielmus Alnwick
Episcopus Lincolniensis homo propter doctrinam and morum sanctitatem tant
celebris, ut priscorum Regum sanctissimus Henricus sextus in confessionem cum
sibi asciverit. Godw. de Praes. Ang. Stubbs his discourse against Q Eliz.
French match.


Dr. Litchfield in his Reign preached 3083 Sermons.

Never any came to be King so soon after his birth, nor left to be King so long
before his death; for he came to be King at eight months old, and he left to
be King twelve years before his death.

Holy King Henry, as they call him, was crowned in Paris: yet he lost all on
that side before he was a man, as I remember, or soon after, and before his
unhappy death he lost this land also, which loss of both came by striving for
both.

Richard Duke of Gloucester killed him, that thereby Edward the fourth his
brother might be freed from all hostile fear. So Polyd. Virg. and others.

He successively ruled this Land the space of thirty eight years, six months,
and four days.

EDWARD the fourth.
He came unto the Kingdom, not by power or justice, but by the peoples
inclination. Biondi.

He reigned thirty eight years, six months, and odd days, and after his
redemption of the Crown, Hollinsh.
six months. He lived two and fifty years, having by his wife one only so^,
called Edward, Prince of Wales.

He was the goodliest Gentleman (says Commines l. 4. c. 10.) that ever I set
mine eye on; Fuit Edwardus corpore proce^o, ac eminents, quippe qui inter omnes
ex^ellcret statura, honesta facie, laetis oculis, patenti pectore, ingenio
acri, animo magno, memoria tenacissima. Polyd. Virg.
and l. 3. c. 5. the beautifullest Prince that lived in his time; but after he
grew gross and corpulent, giving himself wholly to pleasures.

He was a fortunate Prince in the field: for he wan at least nine great
Battles, fighting himself on foot in every one of them. Phil. de Com. in his
Hist. Book l. 3. c. 4. and 6. p. 188. says, that King Edward himself told me,
that in all Battles that he wan, so soon as he had obtained victory, he used to
mount on Horseback, and cry to save the people, and kill the Nobles: for of
them few or none escaped. Id. l. 3. c. 5.

In his fourth Book c. 10. he speaks of an interview between King Edward and
Lewis the eleventh King of France; Lib 2. c. 8. he shows that an interview
between two great Princes for treaty of their affairs, hurts more then
profits.
the French King after some discourse, said pleasantly, That he should come to
Paris to solace himself there with the Ladies, and that he would give him the
Cardinal of Bourbon for his Confessor, who would easily assoil him of sin, if
any were committed. The King of England took great pleasure in this talk, and
answered with a merry countenance: for he knew the Cardinal to be a good
fellow.

Never lived Prince whom adversity did more harden to action; and prosperity
more soften to voluptuousness. Habingtons Hist. of Edw. the fourth.
So improvident was his memory, that he forgot the greatest injuries, and
resumed the Archbishop of York into favor, not bearing so much as a watchful
eye over a reconciled enemy.

The so fatal division between the house of York and Lancaster, The title and
claim of the house of Lancaster was but feigned. See Lamberts Perambul. of Kent.
with him in a manner had both their birth and growth.

I sing the Civil Wars, tumultuous broils,
And bloody factions of a mighty Land:
Whose people haughty, proud with foreign spoils,
Upon themselves turn back their conquering hand;
Whilst kin their kin, brother the brother foils,
Like Ensigns all against like Ensigns band;
Bows against Bows, the Crown against the Crown,
Whilst all pretending right, all right's thrown down.
Our English Luean, Daniel of the Civil Wars.
The first fortnight of his Reign was died, I will not say stained, with the
blood of Walter Walker a Grocer, who keeping Shop at the Sign of the Crown in
Cheapside, said, Alexander the Great sailing on a time in Tygris with diverse
Princes, and great Lords, it chanced, his Royal Diadem fell from his head into
the River, where being in danger to be lost, a Sailer that could swim, cast
himself into the water, and notwithstanding the fierceness of that stream,
adventured his life, to save his Sovereigns Diadem: and having recovered it,
and not being able to bring it in his hand, being of necessity to use both
hands to save His life, he held it in his teeth: but being to work* and strive
against the stream, he pu^ it upon his head; and so, with much peril of life,
recovered the Ship, and presented the Emperor with his Diadem. This loyal and
brave adventure of his, was most bountifully and Princely rewarded; and
moreover he had leave, and time given him, to dispose, and bestow his reward to
whom he would; but was judged to forfeir that head upon which he had presumed
to put the Ensign of Majesty. The justice of the sentence is agreeable to the
grounds of true policy, which in no case can admit a Subject to make himself a
sovereign, no not for an hour. Crashams Rates of the Popes Custom House. c. 13.
He would make his son heir to the Crown: a bold jest broke in an evil time:
yet do I not side with them, who tax the King of severity in this execution;
unless I could clear this man from being particularly factious for the house of
Lancaster; or know that those words were uttered in innocent mirth, without any
scorn to King Edwards title.

And however perhaps the extraordinary punishment of such saucy language, was
not then unnecessary to beget authority, and make men cautious to dispute the
descent of Princes, when the question was so nice, and arguments not improbable
on either side. Habingtons History of Edward the fourth.

Speed says his words intended no treason, Mr. Fox says he meant by those
words, his own house.
(the Grocer not once dreaming to touch King Edwards title) yet the time being
when the Crown lay at stake, the Law made them his death.

He hearing of a certain prophecy, that G. should dispossess his children of
the Crown, was consenting to his death; interpreting G. to be George Duke of
Clarence, which fell out to be Gloucester, to whose tyranny he left them by this
ungodly means.

He vanquished in nine Battles, himself being present.

The Scene of his fortune had more changes then any King of England yet, except
his Competitor.

Lust was reputed his bosome-sin; God severely punished him in his sons, who
were both dispossessed of their Kingdom and their lives, by their unnatural
Uncle: there being so much appearance of right by their fathers incontinency;
that even an Act of Parliament was made to bastardize them.

He was the first of our Kings since the Conquest that married his Subject.

His usual Oath was By Gods blessed Lady.

He sat on the Kings Bench in open Court three days together, in Michaelmas
Term, anno (...) of his Reign, to understand how his Laws were executed.

Have we not seen the late King of England, Edward the fourth of that name,
heir of the house of York, utterly destroy the house of Lancaster, under the
which both his father and he had lived many years? Farther, the said King
Edward having done homage to King Henry the sixth, being of the house of
Lancaster, did he not afterward hold him prisoner many years in the Tower of
London, the chief City of the Realm, where in the end he was put to death?
Phil. de Commines. hist. l. 5. c. 18.

He says that their King Lewis the eleventh of France, in wisdom and sense
far surmounted King Edward.

Lib. 6. c. 2. and l. 5. c. 13. he says of Lewis, undoubtedly he was one of
the wisest and subtilest Princes that lived in his time.

That very day wherein an honorable peace was concluded between Edward the
fourth and King Lewis the eleventh, upon subscribed Articles; it chanced a
white Dove, as Commines writes, to repose her self upon King Edwards pavilion,
whereupon though many gathered an argument, yet since she sat not equally
between both the Kings, I like much better of a Gascoines observation, who
having been present at the sight, reported unto Philipde Commines, as himself
records, that the Dove repaired to King Edwards Tent, only to this intent, to
refresh and prune her self after a great rain, because the Sun was warmest
there. Howards Defensative c. 24.

Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick was a man of an undaunted courage, but
wavering and untrusty, the very Tennice-Ball in some sort, of fortune; who
although he were no King, That whip-King, as some termed him.
was above Kings, as who deposed King Henry the sixth, (a most bountiful Price
to him) from his royal dignity, placed Edward the fourth in the royal Throne,
and afterward put him down too; Cambd. Brit. in Warwickeshire.
restored Henry the sixth again to the Kingdom, enwrapped England within the
most woeful and lamentable flames of Civil War, which himself at the length
hardly quenched with his own blood.

In his spirit, birth, marriage and revenue, Habington.
he was mighty: which raised his thoughts above proportion. Yet Henry of
Bullenbrook son to John of Gaunt was more powerful. See Dr. Heylins
Animadversions on the Church-Hist. of Britain. l. 4. p. 78, 79.


The greatest and busiest Subject our later age has brought forth.

That make-King Warwick having the English Crown
Pinned on his sleeve, to place where he thought best,
Who set up Princes, and did pull them down,
How did he toil the Land with his unrest?
How did his Sword rip up his mothers breasts:
Whose greatness, and his popularity,
Wrought both his own, and others tragedy. Sir Francis Huberts History of
Edward the second.

Cecil Duchess of York, Sir Francis Bacons Hist. of K. Henry the 7th.
his mother lived in Henry the sevenths Reign, and died at her Castle of
Barkhamsted, being of extreme years; who had lived to see three Princes of her
body crowned, and four murdered.

He being near his death, told his friends, that if he could as well have
foreseen things, as now to his pain he proved them, he would never have worn
the courtesy of men's knees, with the loss of so many heads.

He reigned two and twenty years, one month, and five days.

EDWARD the fifth.
He was scarce eleven years old when his father died, He is by general consent
numbered amongst the Kings, and named Edward the fifth, although he never wore
the Crown, nor took any Oath, nor exercised any Authority. The Crown is but a
Ceremony, to make the King known to his people.
and succeeded him in the Kingdom, but not in the Crown; for he was proclaimed
King, but never crowned: and indeed it may not so properly be called the Reign
of Edward the fifth, as the tyranny of Richard the third.

He hearing that his Uncle had left the name of Protector, and taken upon him
the title of King, and was with full consenting of the Lords to be crowned
within a few days following, with the same Crown and in the like Estate as had
been provided for his solemnity; the dejected Innocent sighed and said, Alas,
I would my Uncle would let me enjoy my life yet, though I lose both my Kingdom
and Crown.

He and his brother Richard were murdered in the Tower.

T^win brethren in their deaths; what had they done?
O, Richard sees a fault that they were in;
It is not actual, but a mortal one,
They Princes were, 'twas their original sin.
Why should so sweet a pair of Princes lack,
Their Innocents-day in the English Almanac.
Aleyns History of Henry the seventh.
RICHARD the third.
He was king in fact only, but Tyrant both in title and regiment.

He was ill featured of limbs, crook-backed; hard favored of visage,
malicious, wrathful, envious. It is for truth reported, that the Duchess his
mother had so much ado in her travail, that she could not be delivered of him
uncut: and that he came into the world with the feet forward, Sir Thomas Mores
Hist. of K. Richard the third.
and (as the same runs) also not untoothed, whether men of hatred, report
above the truth, or else that nature changed her course in his beginning, which
in the course of his life committed many things unnaturally. Buck (that writes
his Reign) writes favorably of him, but the Chroniclers generally condemn him.

He was brother to King Edward the fourth; and having most wickedly murdered
his Nephews, Cambd. Brit. in Glocestershire.
usurped the Kingdom by the name of King Richard the third: and after two
years lost both it and his life in a pitched field.

He slew with his own hands King Henry the sixth, being prisoner in the Tower,
as men constantly said, and that without commandment or knowledge of King
Edward the fourth, Speed.
who undoubtedly if he had intended his death, would have appointed that
Butcherly office to some other then his own brother.

He slew also that Kings son in the presence of Edward the fourth. Was the
contriver of the death of the Duke of Clarence his brother.

He bare a white Bore for his Cognizance.

The Lord Lovell, Sir Richard Ratcliffe, and Sir William Catesby were chief
rulers under him: of the which persons was made a seditious Rhyme, and fastened
upon the Cross in Cheapside, and other places of the City. It was this,

The Cat, the Rat, and Lovell the Dog,
Rule all England under a Hog.
For which one Colingborne was executed.
A Prince who deserved to be ranked among the worst men, Cambd. Brit. in
Dors^tshire.
and the best Kings.

Yet Sir Francis Bacon in his History of Henry the seventh says, that his good
Laws were but the brocage of an usurper, thereby to win the hearts of the
people, as being conscious to himself that the true obligations of Sovereignty
in him failed.

He put to death Hastings.

A greater judgment of God then this upon Hastings, Sir Walter Rauleighs
Preface to his History of the world. Is u^us fuit ex percussoribus Edovardi
Principis sexti Henrici ^ilii qui demum pari est affectus caede. Ita Hastingius
suo ad extremum periculo didicit, illam naturae legem secundum Evangelicum
verbum, omnia quae vultis, ut vobis faciant homines, sic and vos facite illis,
impune violari non posse Polyd Virg Ang hist. l. 25.
I have never observed in any Story. For the self same day that the Earl
Riners, Gray, and others, were (without trial of Law, or ostence given) by
Hastings advice executed at Ponfret: I say Hastings himself in the same day,
and (as I take it) in the same hour, in the same Lawless manner, had his head
stricken off in the Tower of London.

He had little quiet after the murder of his two Nephews in the Tower of
London. Sir John Beaumont has well described Bosworth-field in Verse.

The night before he was slain, he dreamed that he saw diverse images of Devils,
Verum id credo, non fu^t somnium, sed conscientia scelerum, conscientia,
inquam, co gravior, quo culpa major, etc. Polyd. Virg. Aug. hist. lib. 25. page
562.
which pulled and haled him, not suffering him to take any rest, the which
vision stroke him into such a troubled mind, that he began to doubt what after
came to pass.

Charles the ninth King of France, after the massacre in Paris, and diverse
other Cities, (wherein were slaughtered about thirty thousand) never saw good
day, but his eyes rolled often, uncertainly in the day with fear and suspicion;
and his sleep was usually interrupted in the night with dismal dreams and
apparitions.

He being near his end, John Du Scrres Hist. of France.
vomited out blood pitifully by all the conduits of his body, as a just
judgment for him that barbarously shed it, throughout all the Provinces of the
Realm.

He reigned two years, He and Q. Mary reigned the shortest while of any since
the Conquest. See Psalm. 55. 23.
two months, and one day.

CHAP. XIX.
HENRY the seventh.
THe fourteen Plantagenets thus expiring with Richard the third, five Tudors
take their turns in this manner.

Henry the seventh. Henry the eighth. Edward the sixth. Queen Mary. Queen
Elizabeth.
They are called Tudors, because Henry the fifth his widow being a French
woman, married Owen Tudor, from whom Henry the seventh did lineally descend.

In this Nation, how has the Crown walked, (even since Christ's birth) from
Britains to Saxons, Danes, Normans, Plantagenets, Tudors, Stuarts. Mrs Shawes
Tombstone.

This King pretended a six-fold title to the Crown: By Conquest, Military
election of Soldiers in the fields near Bosworth, by Parliament, by Birth, by
Donation, and Marriage. He did never stand upon his marriage with the right
heir as the foundation of his right unto the Crown; for he knew well enough,
that if that had been his best and only title, though it might make the power
good unto his children, yet while she was living, he must hold the Crown in her
right, not in his own, and if she died before him, it was lost.

Because he was crowned in the field with King Richards Crown, Primus omnium
Angliae Regum stip^tore^ corporis* habere caepit, quod a Francis Principibus
sumpsisse fertur^ Polyd. Virg.
found in an Hawthorn-Bush, he bare the Hawthorn-Bush with the Crown in it.

He was crowned the thirtieth day of October in the year of our Lord 1485, by
Thomas Bourehier Archbishop of Canterbury and Cardinal. The Kings Guard when
first instituted. Sir Franck Bacons Hist. of Henry the 7th.
At which day, he did institute for the better security of his person, a Band
of fifty Archers under a Captain to attend him, by the name of Yeomen of his
Guard; and yet that it might be thought to be rather a matter of dignity, after
the imitation of that he had known abroad, then any matter of diffidence
appropriate to his own case; Speed.
he made it to be understood for an Ordinance not temporary, Hollinsh. Chron.
but to hold in succession for ever after.

Through whose care, vigilance, policy, and forecasting wisdom for times to
come, Vide Polyd. Virg. Ang. hist. l. 26 p. 616.
the State and Commonwealth of England has to this day stood established and
invincible. Camdens Britannia in Surrey.

A politic Prince he was, if ever there were any, Sir Walter Rauleighs Preface
to his History of the world.
who by the engine of his wisdom, beat down and overturned as many strong
oppositions both before and after he wore the Crown, as ever King of England
did.

Whose worthy renown like the Sun in the midst of his sphere, shines, and ever
shall shine in men's remembrance! Sir Thomas Eliots Governor. Henricus noster
septimus, cum omnes regni recte administrandi arts calleret, sic his
ornamentis instructus venit, ut cum pacem exulantem exul, extorremque extorris
concomitatus esset, reducem quoque redux apportaret. Twin. Com. de reb Brit.
What incomparable circumspection was in him always found, that
notwithstanding his long absence out of this Realm, the disturbance of the same
by sundry seditions among the Nobility, Civil Wars and Battles, wherein
infinite people were slain, yet by his most excellent wit, he in few years, not
only brought this Realm in good order and under due obedience, revived the
Laws, advanced justice, refurnished his dominions, and repaired his mannours,
He was a wise man and an excellent King.
but also with such circumspection treated with other Princes and Realms, Sir
Francis Bacons Epist. Dedicat. to his hist. He calls him in his hist this
Solomon of England, not only for his actions, but wisdom.
of leagues, of alliance, and amities, that during the most part of his Reign,
he was little or nothing disquieted with War hostile or martial business. And
yet all other Princes either feared him or had him in fatherly reverence.

He could never endure any mediation in rewarding his servants, Sir Walter
Rauleighs Preface to his hist. The story of England from the uniting of the
Roses to the uniting of the Kingdoms is a space of time, which in my judgment
contains more variety of rare events, then in like number of successions ever
was known in an Hereditary Kingdom. Sir Francis Bacons Advancement of
learning. l. 2. c. 7. See more there. There have died in England in these Civil
Wars, since my remembrance, above fourscore person, of the blood Royal.
Phil. them Comin. l 1. c. 2. p. 22. Quae exsurrexere factiones magnae Romanam
Rempublicam pe^sum dedere. Duae quadraetae P Rempublicam illam ^vertere,
patritia, and plebeia factio. Duae hic turbarunt grandes R. Rosae duae, quae in
unam arctissime mixtae, per ipsam veram mixtionem commixtae sanguinis,
placarunt omnia. Albericus Gentilis de unione Regnorum isput. 2 It happened
that there was fallen in communication of the story of Joseph, how his master
Potiphars wife, would have pulled him to her bed, and he ^led away. Now Master
Mayor quoth the King, you are a tall strong man on the one side, and a cunning
Doctor on the other, what would you have done if you had not been Joseph, but
in Joseph's stead. By my troth (quoth he) and it like your Grace, I cannot tell
what I would have done, but I can tell what I should have done. The King
replied, He answered well. Sir Thomas Mores Dialogue. l. 1.
and therein exceeding wise: for whatsoever himself gave, he himself received
back the thanks and the love; on the contrary, in whatsoever he grieved his
Subjects, he wisely put it off on those, that he found fit ministers for such
actions.

By his happy marriage (being next heir to the house of Lancaster) with
Elizabeth daughter and heir to Edward the fourth of the house of York, the
white and red Roses were conjoined. Sir Francis Bacon says of John Morton
Archbishop of Canterbury, Chancellor of England and Cardinal. He deserves a
most happy memory in that he was the principal means of joining the two Roses.

From the twenty eighth year of Henry the sixth unto the fifteenth of Henry the
seventh, the Civil War between Lancaster and Y^^ke continued, wherein, as they
reckoned, there were thirteen fields fought, three Kings of England, one Prince
of Wales, twelve Dukes, one M^rquesse, eighteen Earls, with one Vicount and
twenty three Barons, besides Knights and Gentlemen lost their lives. Cambd.
Brit. in Warwickeshire.

Sir Francis Bacons Hist of Henry the 7th. Tempore fami geratissimi istius
Arthuri, de quo tam incredibilia narrantur a nostris, ut ^a^sa intermixta,
veris fidem derogantia, meritissima laud defraudarint v^rum hand dubie
insignem and aeterna memoria dignissimum. Godw. de praesul. Ang. Hic est
Arthurus de quo Brittonum nugae bodieque delirant: dignus plane quem non
fallaces som^iarent fabulae, sed veraces praedicarent historiae, quippe qui
labantem patriam diu sustinuerit, infractasque civi^m mentes ad bellum acuerit.
Malme^b. de gestis Regum Anglorum l. 1. c. 1. Regem illum inclitissimum
Arthurum legimus duos ^^racones in suis armis portasse. Pater suus Vter, qui
Pen-dragon vocabatur, habuit magnum corpus and longum, cum capite multum parvo
ad fimilitudinem Draconis, qua de cause Pen-dragon, i. e. caput Draconi^
vocabatur. Et sic dictus Rex Arthur portavit arma paterna, propter habitudinem
corporis patris sui assumpta. Bissaei notae in Upto^um. Vide Twini Comment. de
rebus `Britannicis. p. 124, 125, 161.
The King (in honor of the British race, of which himself was) named his
first son Arthur, according to the name of that ancient worthy King of the
Britains; in whose acts there is truth enough to make him famous, besides that
which is fabulous.

King Arthur fought twelve Battles with the Saxons and overthrew them. Hollinsh.

Arthurus belliger illis temporibus dux militum and Regum Brittanniae contra
Saxones invictissime pugnabat, duodecies dux belli fuit, duodecies victor
bellatorum. Hunting. hist. l. 2.

That Arthur was one of the nine Worthies. There were three Jews, Joshua,
David, Judas Maccabaeus; three Gentiles, Hector of Troy, Alexander the Great,
and Julius Caesar; three Christians, Arthur of Britain, Charlemain of France,
and Godfrey of Bullen.

Arthur ursum significat, quasi ursinum diceres. Burhillus in MS.

The Prince Arthur died before his father, and lies buried in the Quire of the
Cathedral Church at Worcester.

After was born to the King at Greenwich the Lord Henry his second son, which
was created Duke of York, and after Prince of Wales, who succeeded his father
in governance of this Realm, by the name of Henry the eighth.

His time did excel for good Commonwealths Laws; Sir Francis Bacons hist. of
Henry the seventh.
so as he may justly be celebrated for the best Lawgiver to this Nation, after
King Edward the first. For his Laws (who so marks them well) are deep, and not
vulgar: not made upon the Spur of a particular occasion for the present; but
out of providence of the future, to make the estate of his people still more
and more happy; after the manner of the Legislators in ancient and heroical
times.

The Tax (called Benevolence) was devised by Edward the fourth, for which he
sustained much envy. It was abolished by Richard the third by Act of
Parliament, to ingratiate himself with the people; and it was revived by this
King, Id. ib.
but with consent of Parliament, for so it was not in the time of King Edward
the fourth.

It is observed as a rule in Politics, By some Antimonarchicall Writers, whom
I will not undertake to justify.
that Dominium sequitur terram, those that are the greatest proprietaries, have
the chief power, as in Turkey, because none there holds any land but during his
life; therefore the great Turk has such unlimited power, and so the Barons
were able (they say) to ma^e War with their Prince, because the land was most
in their and their Tenants possession. Henry the seventh therefore being raised
by the Nobles, conceiving, that those which exalted him might cast him down,
did abate their power, and made Statutes against Retainers. But Henry the
eighth demolishing the Abbeys, distributed the lands among the people, and so
they again gained great power by that means.

He made a composition with Philip, father to the Emperor Charles the fifth,
being here in England, that he should deliver into his hands, the Duke of
Suffolk, his mortal enemy, who was fled out of England, and saved himself in
the Low Countries, always provided that the King should attempt nothing
against the Dukes life; which promise notwithstanding, being ner his end, he
expressly by will and testament commanded his succeeding son, that immediately
after his decease, he should cause him to be put to death. Montaigne his
Essays. l. 1. c. 7.

There scarce passed any Parliament in this time, without a Law against Riot
and Retainers, the King having an eye to might and multitude.

The King was on a time entertained by the Earl of Oxford (that was his
principal servant, both for war and peace) nobly and sumptuously, at his
Castle at Henninghom. At the Kings going away, the Earls servants stood (in a
seemly manner) in their Livery Coats, with cognizances, ranged on both sides,
and made the King a Lane. The King called the Earl to him, and said; My Lord, I
have heard much of your hospitality, but I see it is greater then the speech.
These handsome Gentlemen and Yeomen, which I see on both sides of me, are sure
your meniall servants. The Earl smiled, and said; It may please your Grace,
that were not for mine ease. They are most of them my Retainers, they are come
to do me service at such time as this, and chiefly to see your Grace. The King
started a little, and said; By my faith (my Lord) I thank you for my good
cheer, but I may not endure to have my Laws broken in my sight. My Attorney
must speak with you. The Earl after compounded for a thousand marks.

His disposition to crush treasure out of his Subjects purses, by forfeitures
upon penal Laws, proved the blot of his time.

When among many Articles exhibited by the Irish against the Earl of Kildare,
the last was: All Ireland cannot rule this Earl. Then (quoth the King) shall
this Earl rule all Ireland; and shortly after he made him Deputy thereof.

James the fourth King of Scotland married with the Lady Margaret, Sir Francis
Bacons hist. of Henry the seventh.
the Kings eldest daughter. During the Treaty, it is reported, that the King
remitted the matter to his Counsel. And that some of the Table in the Freedom
of Counselors (the King being present) did put the case; that if God should
take the Kings two sons without issue, that then the Kingdom of England would
fall to the King of Scotland, which might prejudice the Monarchy of England.
Whereunto the King himself replied; That if that should be, Scotland would be
but an accession to England, and not England to Scotland, for that the greater
would draw the less: and that it was a safer union for England, then that of
France.

This was the ninth time, Nulli Regum antca cum in^ numerato tum in moventibus
rebus major venerat haereditas. Polyd. Vi^g. hist. l. 28. de Hen^ico 8^.
that since the Conquest, the Scottish Kings have married with the English
Nation. Ayscu.

He left at his death most of it in secret places, under his own Key and
keeping, at Richmond, the sum of near eighteen hundred thousand pounds
sterling; a huge mass of money, even for these times.

His son Henry the eight by his pleasures, by unprofitable Wars exhausted all
that treasure in a few of the first years of his Reign.

He died at his Palace at Richmond which himself had built, Anno Dom. 1509.
having lived two and fifty years, and reigned three and twenty years, and
eight months.

He died, and in memorial of his name,
Built that fair Chapel, where he now takes rest;
A rich foundation of a curious frame,
The fairest monument lest unsupprest,
Passing all temples of the gorgeous East:
O strew his Hearse with Roses red and white,
For he both stemmes did in one unite.
Stor^rs Wolseius aspirans.
HENRY the eighth.
Seven is a number fatal from the heavens. But eight King Henry passing all
the sevens. Storers Wolseius aspirans.

Of personage he was tall and mighty, He overthrew Sir William Kingstone both
horse and man before three Queens.
and in his latter years somewhat gross, in wit and memory excellent, such
majesty and humanity as was comely in such a Prince.

Cui natura fortunaque supra Regium nomen, incomparabilis formae Herberts hist.
of Henry the 8th.
and maxim praestantis ingenii accumulata dona contulerunt: nemo enim e tota
Anglica juventute, vel staturae dignitate, vel venustate oris, vel nervorum
firmitate Regem aequavit. Paul. Jov. Britanniae descript.

Huic erat a teneris annis ars bellica cordis
Ut reliquas dotes, condignas principe tanto,
Corporis atque animi non sit memor are necesse.
Quod fortis, clemens, humeris quod and alitor ibat
Omnibus, egregia facie vultuque decoro.
Oclandi Anglorum praelia.
It has been observed by Historians, of Tiberius Emperor of Rome; of Mahomet
the Great, Emperor of the Turks; and of Henry the eight, King of England; that
there was no security in their love, but that such as were highest in their
favor, were nearest to ruin.

He brought unto the block two Queens two noble Ladies, one Cardinal declared;
of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and the sons of Earls, no fewer then twelve; Lords
and Knights eighteen of Abbots and Priors thirteen; Monks, and religious
persons, about seventy seven, and many more of both Religions, to a very great
number. Having a desire to marry within degrees unlawful, he set his learned
men on work to prove it lawful, and again after a while (being cloyed and
desiring change) set them again on work to prove the former marriage unlawful.
He never spared m^n in his anger, nor woman in his lust. Sir Robert Naunton's
Frag. Regal. in Q. E.
Dr. Heylins Ecclesia Restaurata.

That is a tart expression of Sir Walter Rauleigh in his Preface to his History
of the world. If all the pictures and patterns of a merciless Prince were lost
in the world, they might all again be painted to life out of the Story of this
King. How many wives did he cut off, and cast off, as his fancy and affection
changed.

When he was ready to give account to God for the abun^ance of blood already
spilt, and knew he was no longer able to live, he imprisoned the Duke of
Norfolk the father, signed a Warrant for the execution of the Earl of Surrey
his son, within nine days after he himself expired.

Unto a stately great outlandish Dame,
A messenger from our King Henry came
( Henry of famous memory the eight.)
To treat with her in matter of great weight;
As namely, how the King did seek her marriage,
Because of her great virtue and go^d carriage.
She (that had heard the King loved change of pasture)
Replied, I humbly thank the King, your master,
And would, (such love his same in me has bred)
My body venture so, but not my head.
Sir John Harringtons Epigrams.
Maximilian the Emperor was retained by him as his soldier.

He not only wore the Cross of St. George, but received his pay duly, viz. a
hundred Crowns per diem. L. Herbert in Hen. the 8ths life.

Sub Rege Anglorum magnus meret Induperator,
Germanique truces, duro gens strenua bello.
Oclandi Anglorum praelia.
The Reign of this King continued with great nobleness and fame the space of
thirty eight years. During whose time and Reign was great alteration of things,
as well to the Civil State of the Realm, as especially to the State
Ecclesiastical, and matters to the Church appertaining. For by him was exiled
and abolished out of the Realm, the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome,
idolatry and superstition somewhat repressed, images defaced, Abbeys and
Monasteries pulled down, sects of Religion rooted out, Scriptures reduced to
the knowledge of the vulgar tongues, and the state of the Church and Religion
redressed. Fox his Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. p. 63. See B. Bedells Examinat.
of Wadsworths motives c. 10.

He was much addicted to the reading of Thomas Aquinas, Accurate vacabat
literis, vacabat animi gratia musicae, legebat studiose libros divi Thomae
Aquinatis, and hoc agebat hortatu Volsaei, qui totus erat Thomisticus. Polyd.
Virg. Ang. hist. l. 27. Mr. Seldens Titles of honor. part. 1. c. 4.
and was therefore (as some think) called by Luther Thomisticus, acerrimus
ingeniorum aestimator. Had. Jun. Epist. D. Dilso.

He wrote a volume against Luther in defense of Pardons, the Papacy, and the
supposed seven Sacraments. Of this Work the original is yet remaining in the
Vatican at Rome, and with his own hand, thus inscribed;

Anglorum Rex Henricus Leoni 10. mittit hoc opus and fidei testem and amicitiae
Whereupon says Sleidan, Pontifex honorisicum Regi cognomen tribuit, Titulus
iste Cothurnus est, and cuilibet pedi, cuilibet fidei aptari potest, non minus
Papae qui ^edit, quam vestrae. Didoclav. praefat. ad Altar Damascenum.
Defensorem appellans Ecclesiae, which is the same with Defender of the faith.
This title was given him about the twelfth year of his Reign. Vide Polyd. Virg.
Ang. hist. l. 27. p. 664.

His fool coming unto the Court, and finding the King transported with an
unusual joy, boldly asked him the cause thereof, To whom the King answered, It
was because the Pope honored him with a style more eminent then any of his
Ancestors; Good Harry (quoth he) let thou and I defend one another, and let the
faith alone to defend it self.

Fisher was not the Author of King Henry his Book against Luther (as Sanders
Lib. 1. de schismate Anglicano.
and Bellarmine will have it) nor Sir Thomas More (as others say) though I
doubt not but they might both revise it by the Kings favor, My Lord Herberts
life of Henry the 8th
and where it was needful also interpose their judgment.

Many thought that was compiled by Sir Thomas More, some by the Bishop of
Rochester, and others (not without cause) suspected it to be the work of some
other great Scholar. Godwins Annals of England.

The Pope excommunicating him, he fell off from the Pope.

Luther in an Epistle to the King says thus, Verum etiam quod fide dignis
testibue didici, libellum sub majestatis tuae nomine in me editum, non esse
Regis Angliae, ut videri volebant subdoli sophistae, qui majestatis tuae titulo
abusi, non senserunt quantum sibi ipsis periculum in Regia ignominia pararent:
praesertim illud monstrum, and publicum odium Dei and hominum Cardinalis
Eboracensis, pestis illa regni tui. The King in his Answer to this Epistle
affirms it to be his. Iam quantumvi^ te fingas credere, editum a me libellum,
non esse meum, sed meo nomine subornatum a sophistis subdolis, tamen and meum
esse multi majori fide digni, quam sunt tua illi fide digni testes cognoscunt:
and ego quanto tibi minus placet, tanto magis libenter agnosco.

He caused to be put into the Liturgy, Neque Romanam Ecclesiam ab Anglia
expulisset Henricum, nisi prior clemens Henricus a Romana ejecisset Ecclesia.
Barclasi vind. p^o Regibus advers R. Bellarm. Sanderus de schism ate Anglicano
l. 1.
Ab Episcopi Romani tyrannide and detestandis enormitatibius, libera nos
Domine, heroica animi magnitudine imbelles pontificum bullas, and instatas
execrationibus buccas despicatui habuit. Renigerus de Pii quinti and Gregorii
decimi tertii Romanorum pontificum furoribus.

He thrust out the Popes Supremacy, that he might be revenged of the Pope, who
would not allow of his divorce from his first wife, but he continued much of
the Popish Religion, and made six Articles called a whip with six strings, Dii
bo^i! quomodo hic vivunt gentes?
which were the death of many godly men, Lever says he did more then any
Prince in Christendom before him ever did, the Pope being then so great. Lever
in his history of the Defender of the Catholic faith, speaks much of the
suppressing of Abbeys. And Iura Cleric. 3. More.
being persuaded thereto by Bishop Gardener.

There is a story of one, who seeing then both Papists hanged for traitors,
because they opposed the Kings Supremacy, and Protestants burned for heretics,
in regard they denied the six Articles, cried out, What Religion is there here
in England? whereupon one asked him, What Religion he was of; he answered, He
was of the Kings Religion.

Nor was that boisterous King so much to blame in dissolving material Temples
or houses (rather abused then consecrated to superstition) as he was, after
this Reformation (if so it may be called) in destroying so many living Temples
of God, See the Preface to Sir H. Spelmans Book De non temerand^^ Ecclesi^
which sought not the dissolution of his Kingdom, nor any other Reformation of
him and his people, save only the clearing and purifying of their hearts and
breasts, (which had been consecrated unto Gods service) from the infection of
Romish superstition and idolatry. Dr. Iacksons Commentary on the Creed, l. 11.
c. 38.

He was counted the common Umpire of Christendom.

He exceeded all his Progenitors in setting up sumptuous houses.

He confirmed Christ-Church in Oxford, and erected Trinity-Colledge in
Cambridge.

The professors of the Hebrew and Greek tongues were first instituted by him in
both the Universities. Sit Rich. Bakers Chron.

In running at Tilt and such exercises, he overcame the rest.

Cum lectissimi equites Cataphracti in lud^cro spectaculo infestis hastis
concurrerent, tanta art id bellici vigoris munus implebat, ut ei proposita
victoribus pr^mia integra populi judicio, saepissime deferrentur. Paul. Jov.
Brit. descript.

He could not only sing his part, but of himself compose a Service of four five
and six parts. Eras. in farrag. in Epist.

An old Priest ^lwayes read Mumpsimus Demine for Sumpsimus: whereof when he was
admonished, he said, That he had now used Mumpsimus thirty years, and would not
leave his old Mumpsimus for their new Sumpsimus. Pacaeus de fructu qui ex
doctrina percipitur.
Finding fault with the disagreement of Preachers, he would often say, Some are
too stiff in their old Mumpsimus, and others too busy and curious in their
new Sumpsimus.

King Ine out of his devotion to the Sea of Rome, enjoined every one of his
Subjects, that possessed in his house of any one kind of goods to the value of
nineteen penes, Cum ab Iuae tempore ad hanc (inquit Sleidanus Comment. l. 9.)
atatem usque Britannia Romany Episcopis eam pecuniam dependisset, Henricus
(scilicet 8.) omnium primus inhibuit eam amplius persolvi. Seldom. Analect.
Anglo. brit. l. 2. c. 4. Vide Spelman. de Consil. p. 312, 374.
to pay yearly upon Lammas day, one penny to the Pope, which at first was
contributed under the name of the Kings alms, but afterward was paid by the
name of Peter Pence.

The Pope of Rome had out of every Chimney of England, Ireland, and Scotland,
Wales, and Cornwall, a penny a year, for five hundred years together.

Omnis qui habet triginta denariatas vivae pecuniae in domo sua de proprio suo
Anglorum lege dabit denarium sancti Petri. Hoved. Annal. pars posterior. p. 603.

King Henry first forbad this to be paid to the Pope.

There preached one before him whose Sermon the King liked not, as there was
reason; the King willed Sir Thomas More then being Lord Chancellor, to give the
Preacher thanks worthy such a Sermon. He being a man of a pleasant wit, spoke
aloud to the Preacher, that the King might hear, and said, The Kings Majesty
thanketh you for your notable Sermon: which when the King heard, he called Sir
Thomas to him, and said, What mean you my Lord to give such thanks in our name?
If it like you, quoth he, there be some things notable evil.

It is a note worthy to be remembered, that Thursday has been a fatal day to
King Henry the eight, Stowes Chron. in the life and Reign of Q. Eliz.
and all his posterity; for himself died on Thursday the twenty eighth of
January; King Edward on Thursday the sixth of July; Queen Mary on Thursday the
seventeenth of November; and Queen Elizabeth on Thursday the twenty fourth of
March.

After Dr. Collets Sermon preached to him, and long communication with him by
occasion thereof, he dismissed him with these words, Lot every one have his
Doctor as he likes, this shall be my Doctor.

Being necessitous, he was offered by the House of Commons in a Parliament
toward his latter end, all the lands and houses of the two famous Universities,
to be confiscated to his Exchequer, by a most mechanic prostitution of the
learning, the honor, and the piety of the Nation: but he told them not without
a just scorn, that he had too much of a Scholar in him, to destroy two such
Universities as the world had not the like.

His purpose was (if he had lived) to have made a perfect Reformation of
Religion says Mr. Fox in his second Volume of his Acts and Monuments o^ the
Church. p. 647. and he gives there two reasons of his opinion. But the secret
working (says he) of Gods holy providence, which disposes all things after
his own wisdom and purpose, thought it good rather by taking the King away, He
prepared the way to Reformation, as his own power and profit was concerned in
it. He excluded the Popes Authority, and caused himself to be declared supreme
head of the Church of Ireland.
to reserve the accomplishment of this Reformation of his Church to the
peaceable time of his son Edward, and Elizabeth his daughter, whose hands were
yet undefiled with any blood, and life unspotted with any violence or cruelty.

Cardinal Woolsey, and after him Archbishop Cranmer were in great favor with
him, Sir Thomas Moor and the Lord Cromwell were also highly esteemed by him.

Francis King of France after the death of King Henry the eight, was much
disposed to melancholy, whether for that he being some years the younger, was
by his death admonished of the like approaching fate. They were also of so
conspiring a similitude of disposition and nature, Lever in his history of the
defenders of the Catholic Faith, compares him with Frederick Barbarossa the
Emperor of Germany.
that you shall hardly find the like between any two Princes of whatever
different times. He celebrated the Funerals of King Henry in the Cathedral at
Paris, though excommunicated by the Pope.

Many learned men lived in his days, John Collet Dean of Paul's, and founder of
the School there; William Lilly the first Schoolmaster of Paul's School, after
it was erected; Thomas Linacer or rather Linaker, a learned Physician, and well
seen in the tongues; Richard Pace a good Linguist; John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester; Sir Thomas More an excellent Scholar; John Frith and William
Tindall, Robert Barnes Martyrs; Robert Wakefield a good Linguist; Sir Thomas
Eliot; Edward Lee Archbishop of York; John Leland a great Antiquary; William
Grocin very expert in Greek and Latin; Hugh Latimer Bishop and Martyr, who
has put out an elegant Oration in Latin, thus entitled, Hugonis Latimeri
Anglicani pontificis Oration, apud totum Ecclesiasticum Conventum, antequam
consultatio publica iniretur, de Regni statu per Evangelium reformando, Regni
invictissimi Regis Henrici 8^, 6^ anno vigessimo octavo habita; where he speaks
of many things fit then to be reformed; and well concludes, Si nihil est
emendandum in communi, saltem emendemus nos ipsos singuli.

He reigned thirty seven years, and nine months, and died in the six and
fiftieth year of his life, leaving behind him three children, Edward, Mary, and
Elizabeth, all which also reigned after him.

EDWARD the sixth.
Next after the death of King Henry, succeeded King Edward his son, being of
the age of nine years. A Prince although but tender in years, yet for his sage
and mature ripeness in wit and all Princely ornaments, as I see but few to whom
he may not be equal, so again I see not many to whom he may not justly be
preferred. Fox* his Acts and Monuments of the Church. vol. 2. p. 65 2. He fitly
compares him there to good Josias. Favor and love (says he) of Religion was
in him from his childhood; such an Organ given of God to the Church of England
he was, as England had never better. Id. ib.

All King Henry's issue for themselves in their several kinds, Sir Walter
Rauleighs Preface to his hist. of the world.
were Princes of eminent virtue.

As Henry the eighth with Solomon was blameworthy for women, so he left but
one son and two daughters. Solomon had Rehoboam, a fool and unfortunate: his
daughters but obscure, and both of them Subjects. But Henry was more happy in
Edward his son, another Josiah; and his sisters both Sovereigns of an
Imperial Crown. Speed.

Lever compares him to Josiah in several respects.

He was born at Hampton Court, on the twelfth day of October anno 1537, being
the only surviving son of King Henry the eight, by Jane his third wife,
daughter to Sir John Seymer Knight.

It has been commonly reported, and no less generally believed, that Prince
Edward being come unto the birth, and there wanting natural strength to be
delivered, his mothers body was ripped open, to give him a passage into the
world, and that she died of the Incision in a short time after.

Whence this Epitaph was made upon her. Phoenix Jana jacet, He spoke French
perfectly, could declaim in Latin ex tempore and that without any sticking or
stammering; he understood Greek, Spanish, and Italian* a flowing kind of
eloquence he had, yet grave and polite, such as became a Prince, always
measuring his words by the thing he spoke of. Dr. Hackwels Apology of Gods
providence in the government of the world. l. 1. c. 11. Sect. 12. See more
there.
nato Phoenice: dolendum Saecula Phaenices nulla tulisse duos.

Alluding to the Crest of her father, a Phoenix in flames within a Crown.

Yet Dr. Heylin in his Ecclesia restaurata says, there are many reasons to
evince the contrary, that he was not so born.

The other was not more poetically then truly written, he being, considering
his years, an admirable President for all ages, of piety, learning, clemency,
magnanimity, wisdom and care in governing his people.

As Julius Caesar in the midst of his greatest actions, wrote an exact and
curious Commentary of his notable enterprises by Arms: so King Edward during
all the time of his Reign, but most especially toward the end, kept a most
judicious Journall of all the most principal passages of the affairs of his
estate.

Inclytus Edvardus formatus ab ubere matris
Confestim doctis a praeceptoribus arts
Ingenuas omnes didicit, qui Graeca Latinis
Adjungens studio, paucis profecerat annis,
Ut foret inferior nulli quem terra Britanna
Protulerat, claro magnorum ex stemmate Regum.
Nullus adaequari posset, si flexilis ^tas
In puero egresso nondum tria lustra duosque
Annos, ingenii aut praecox spectetur acumen:
Quantum ad doctrinas virtutesque attinet almas
Ille erat Europae Phoenix, quem funere acerbo,
(Ut flos vere novo viridanti carpitur horto)
Sustulit ante diem, mors immatura Britannis,
Invidet haec terris pietatem and jura colentes.
Oclandi Anglorum praelia.
In his childhood, being about to take down something, which seemed to be above
his reach, one of his fellows offered him a bossed plated Bible to stand upon,
and heighten him for taking that which he desired. But he perceiving it to be a
Bible, with holy indignation resused it, and sharply reproved him that made the
offer. A strong assurance of that dear esteem and veneration, in which he held
that sacred Book in his riper years. Dr. Heylins History of Edward the sixth.

He has this observation in his Diary, A piis atque eruditis praeceptoribus D.
Coxo. and Johanne Checo Graecis Latinisque literis institutus, tum sa^a
Religione ad praescriptam divini verbi normam imbutus aetatem long suam
doctrinae virtuteque superavit. Anglicanam Ecclesiam rudem adhuc and informem
tam accurate sincera Religious perpolivit, omnesque faces pontificias
expurgavit, ut a piis omnib^^ alter Josias merito dictus fit. Josc. Antiq.
Brit. Magno miraculo humanarum rerum tanti ingenii and tantae expectationis
p^^r educabatur, etc. Hier Card. de Edv. 6. Rege. Dr. Cox was ^ utor also to Q
Eliz. who recalled him from beyond seas, restored him to many Church-dignities,
and appointed him to preach, that day she went to her first Parliament. Engl.
Eliz.
the original of which is in the hands of Sir Thomas Cotton.

At the sixth year of my age, I was brought up in learning by Dr. Coxe, who was
after my Almner, and John Cheek Master of Arts, two well learned men, who
sought to bring me up in learning of tongues, of the Scripture, of Philosophy,
and all liberal Sciences. Also John Belmain French man, did teach me the
French tongue.

He was anointed King at Westminster, by Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury, being of the age of nine years.

A Prince of great devotion, constancy of mind, Had he lived, he would no doubt
have made a full Reformation of those foul corruptions that remained, and yet
remain to this day, and would have reduced all the Churches in his Dominions,
unto the Primitive and Apostolical Order and Discipline, as Bucer in his Book
De Regno Christi written to him earnestly desired. Whetenhall of the abuse, now
in question in the Church of Christ.
love of the truth, and incredibly studious. Godwins Annals of England.

He knew all the principal Ports in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, and
other Countries not far distant, how they lay, when the tide served, what
vessels of burden they could receive, and what winds served for entrance.

He reformed Religion.

He caused Images and all monuments of Idolatry to be destroyed, and a great
Bible in English to be set up in every Church.

He was in body beautiful, of a sweet aspect, and specially in his eyes, which
seemed to have a starry liveliness and luster in them. He would answer
Ambassadors sometime upon the sudden, either in French or Latin. He could call
all Gentlemen of account through his Kingdom by their names.

When Joan Butcher (a blasphemous Heretic) was to be burned; all the Counsel
could not procure him to set his hand to the Warrant. Wherefore they employed
Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, to deal privily with him for his
subscription. But the King remained firm both in reason and resolution,
affirming, that he would not drive her headlong to the Devil: but because
Heretics for the most part have a strain of madness, Haywards life and Reign
of Edward the sixth.
he thought it best to apply her with some corporal chastisements, which with
respite of time might happily reduce her to good order. The Archbishop was
violent both by persuasions and entreaties, and when with mere importunity he
had prevailed, the King in subscribing his name, said, that he would lay all
the charge thereof upon the Archbishop before God. Of all the Papists in his
Reign, there was not one man lost his life. To the godly there was no danger,
unless it were by wealth and prosperity. Fox his Act. and Mon. A. D. 11^0.
Not many years passed, but this Archbishop also felt the smart of the fire,
and it may be, that by his importunity for blood, he did offend, for a good
thing is not good, if it be immoderately desired.

A Miller who had been busy in rebellion against the King, knowing the danger,
willed his man to take the name of the master, if any enquired after him. Sir
Anthony Kingston Provost Martial came to the Mill, and calling for the master,
the man in his name presented himself, who strait commanded him to the Gallows;
the servant then seeing the danger of death, Speed.
confessed he was not the master, but the man. Well, said the Knight, thou
can never do thy master better service, then to hang for him, and thereupon
trusted him up in the next tree

The Lord Protector in his days marched with a powerful Army into Scotland, to
demand their Queen Mary in marriage to our King, according their promises. The
Scots refusing to do it, were beaten by the English in Musleborough fight. One
demanding of a Scotch Lord taken prisoner, Now Sir, how do you like our Kings
marriage with your Queen? I always (quoth he) did like the marriage, but I do
not like the wooing, that you should fetch a Bride with fire and sword.

The Kings Uncles, Edward-Duke of Somerset, Protector of his person, Realms and
Dominions, and Thomas Lord Seymour Baron of ^udley the younger, high Admiral
of England, were both beheaded. Strife between their wives about place and
precedence, caused the death of their husbands, and the death of the young King
followed speedily after. Vide Humfredum de Nobilitate. l. 2. p. 232, 233.
Sir Thomas Seymour Admiral, and the younger brother, married the Queen
Dowager, whose hap it was of all the rest to survive her husband. She contested
with her sister in law for priority of place: both were privately encouraged;
neither would give way to the other. The one claimed it as she had been once
Queen, the other challenged it as she was the present wife of the Protector.
The wives set their husbands at odds, and their enemies took hold of this
advantage. The Admiral was shortly questioned for treason, by consent of his
brother condemned in Parliament, and lost his head. In the same month was the
Protector committed to the Tower by the Lords of the Counsel, and after
beheaded.

In this Kings days, when Bonner was kept in prison, reverend Ridley having
his Bishopric of London, Fox Martyr. vol. 3. p. 431.
would ^ever go to dinner at Fulham, without the company of Bonners mother and
sister; the former always sitting in a Chair at the upper end of the Table.
These guests were as constant as Bread and Salt to the Board, no meal could be
made without them.

He died in the seventh year of his Princely Government, Ipse Rex ^^orum or
efid o nuditus, aut Sitiosorum immannati ex positus, imma^^re (morbo an veneno
incertum) praeripitur; incredibili ob eximias supra aetatem virtutes desiderio
apud populum relicto. Apparatus ad Cambd^^i Annals.
in the sixth of July, anno 1553. Some write that he was poisoned.

The death of this Prince was lamented of all the godly within Europe, for the
graces given unto him of God, as well of nature, as of erudition and godliness,
passed the measure that accustomably is used to be given to other Princes in
their greatest perfection, and yet exceeded he not sixteen years of age. Knoxe
his Ecclesiastical Hist. of Scotland. l. 1. p. 97. I wonder that Doctor Heylin
in his Epistle before his Ecclesia Restaurata should say therefore, Whose death
I cannot reckon for an infelicity to the Church of England.

Cardan made this Epitaph of him.

Flete nefas magnum sed toto flebitis orb
Mortales; vester corruit omnis honos.
Nam Regum decus and juvenum flos; spesque bonorum
Deliciae saecli, and gloria gentis erat.
Dignus Apollineis lachrymis, etc.
It is to this day a question both how this King died, and where he was ^^ried.

Queen JANE.
The Lady Jane Gray, whom King Edward had declared for his next Successor, was
eldest daughter of Henry Lord Gray, Duke of Suffolk, Her mother was the Lady
France's daughter; and in fine, one of the coheirs of Charles Brandon, the
late Duke of Suffolk, by Mary his wife, Queen Dowager to Lewis the twelfth of
France, and youngest daughter of King Henry the seventh, Grandfather to King
Edward now deceased.

She spoke the Latin and Greek tongues, with as sweet a fluency, as if they had
been natural, and native to her; exactly skilled in the liberal Sciences, and
perfectly well studied both kinds of Philosophy.

She was most zealously affected to the true Protestant Religion, then by Law
established.

She was urged by her near friends to accept of the Crown. Queen Mary caused
^et to be beheaded.


Her Reign was but nine days: her life not twice so many years, as she reigned
days.

Ascham, Ann^ Maria Schurman, Master Fox, and others, speak of her rare
accomplishments.

Queen MARY.
It is a question much agitated, of the rule of women, (...), An licita? Bodius
on Ephesians. 5. 22. dislikes it. Bodin de Republica l. 6. c. 5. and method. Hist.
c. 6. much opposes it. She was married to Philip the second King of Spain, who
was long, but well proportioned. Some of her Coin was called Philip and Mary.
He lames us for suffering Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth to reign, and says,
we violated therein not only the Law of God, but the law of nature and Nations.

knoxe also writes against it.

Danaeus a French man in his Book de H^mine c. 33. says, It is lawful. He
quotes A^^. 8. 27. 1 King. 10. and commends the Reign of Zen^b^ia Queen of the
Arabians, and Elizabeth Queen of England, and Joan Queen of Navarr, as happy
and lasting.

There is a choice Manuscript in Arch. in Oxford Library styled, A dutiful
defense of the lawful regiment of women, written by my Lord Howard.

The Suffolk men first resorted to her, promising her their aid and help, so
that she would not attempt the alteration of Religion established by her
brother, which she agreed unto, but broke her promise, and that Diocese tasted
the sharpest persecution under her Reign.

So well inclined was she of her self, that had not the zeal of her Religion,
and the authority of Church men overswayed her own disposition, Speed.
the flames of their consuming fires had not mounted so high. Non natura sed
pontificiorum art ferox. Id. ib. Lever compares her to the Queen mother of
France, Katherine de Medicis.


She was crowned by Steven Gardener Bishop of Winchester, the Archbishops of
Canterbury and York being then prisoners in the Tower.

Within the compass of less then four years continuance, there died for the
testimonial of their conscience in this case, two hundred seventy and seven
persons, without regard of degree, The suffering in her days did more settle
and enlarge the bounds of the Gospel, then all the preaching did in King Edward
the sixth his Reign. Dr. Ames.
sex, or age. In the heat of whose flames were consumed five Bishops, one and
twenty Divines, eight Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, one hundred
Husbandmen, servants, and laborers, twenty six wives, twenty widows, nine
virgins, two boys, and two Infants.

There being consultation at the Counsel-board what to do with the Lady
Elizabeth, Gardener said, My Lords, we have but all the while been (...)
ripping off the leaves, and now and then lopped a branch; but till such time as
we strike at the root of heresy (meaning the Lady Elizabeth) nothing to,
purpose can be effected. God forbid (replied the Spaniards) that our King and
Master should once conceive a thought to consent unto such a mischief. They
thence solicited the King on her behalf, and he favored her, and set her free
at last.

The worst that can be said of her, is this, Mr. Baco^^ Uniform Government of
England. part. 2 c. 34.
that she was ill principled, and the best, that she acted according to her
principles.

Judge Morgan who in her Reign gave sentence of death against the Lady Jane
Gray, Whose Reign was polluted with the blood of so many Martyrs, unfortunate
by the frequent insurrections, and made inglorious by the loss of Calais.
Nullus toto terrarum orb angulus est, quo non percrebuit admirabilis tua,
praeter invictam animositatem and pictatem cruditio, tam Latin disertae, ut
exterorum Regum legati, docti inprimis homines, velut attoniti obstupescant,
and quasi haerente in faucibus voce obinutes^^nt, re audita Had. Jun. Epist.
Mariae Angliae Reginae.
presently after her death fell mad, and in his ravings continually cried, Take
away the Lady Jane from me, and in that horror shortly ended his life.

She was learned.

Ludovicus Vives A Spaniard was sometimes her Teacher. He came to England with
Queen Kahterine her mother.

She lost Calais, which had been a long time before in the possession of the
Engllish; Two hundred and eleven years.
and said if she were opened, It was lost in less then eight days. It was
(...) won by Edward the third, being the eleventh King from William the
Conque^our, and lost by her the eleventh from Edward.
they would find that next her heart: pray it was that a paltry Town should lie
where Christ should should have lain.

At the loss of Calai when a proud French man tauntingly demanded, Capto summa
celeritate Cal^to, (quem portum Galliae portam a^p^llare consueverant Angliae
Reges: quo quamdiu potirentur, tamdiu g^stare se ^ cingulo claves Galliae
dictitahant) quicquid Gallis creptum ducentos per annos Angli f^li^iter
obtinuer ant incontinenti paucorum dierum spatio, Galliae regno restituere,
atque ad veteres terminos intra occanum se recipere coacti sunt. Stradae de
bello Belgic. Dec. 1. l. 1.
When will ye fetch Calais again? An English Captain gravely answered, Qu^ndo
peccata vestra erunt nostris g^^vior^, When your sins shall weigh down ours.

The Lord Cor^^s Governor of Picardy under the French King said, That he would
be content to lie in Hell seven years, so he might win Calais from the English.
The keeping of it indeed was chargeable to the English, but yet it was very
advantageous to them. While they kept it they had a door open into France upon
all occasions, and therefore it is commonly said, That they carried the keys
of France at their Girdles.

Of all since the Conquest her Reign was the shortest, Though many persecutions
have lasted longer, yet none since Di^^^esians time ^age^ so terribly. Dr.
Heylius Eccles restaur. See more there.
only excepting that of Richard the Tyrant, but much more bloody then was his.

She reigned five years, and four months, wanting two days only.

She lies buried in Westminster without any Monument or remembrance at all.

Queen ELIZABETH.
She was born at Greenwich on the seventh of September 15^3. Her father was
Henry the eighth King of England, her mother Anne Bulloin, whose love to the
pure Religion cost her her life.

Amabat Regina puram veramque Religionem, and haec illi res odium, nox necem
peperit. Adolphi a Dans vita Elizabethae.

The Archbishop Cranmer her Godfather was every where chary and tender over
her, as one that at the Font had took charge upon him to see her educated in
all virtue and piety.

What Prince was ever more sage in her Counsel, or more solemn in her
Government, or more advised in her favors and f^owns? Dr. Gaudens Eccles.
Anglie. Suspiria l. 4. c. 22.

Before the age of seventeen years she was skilled in Latin, French, Italian,
and in the Greek indifferent well. Neither did she neglect music, both singing
and playing on instruments very sweetly and artificially, for so much as became
a Prince. With Roger Ascham who governed her studies, she read over Melancthons
common places, Cicero entire, a great part of Livies History* some select
Orations of Isocrates (whereof two she translated into Latin) Sophocles
Tragedies, Dr Hackwel^ Apol. of Gods providence in the Government of the world.
l. 4. c 11. Sect. 12. Se^ more there* Vide Cambde ni etiam A^arat ad Annals.
and the New Testament in Greek, by which means she both furnished her speech
with elegant language, and her mind with wholesome precepts, referring her
learning rather to practice and conversation, then ostentation and pomp, yet
was she in a manner for learning a miracle among the Princes of her age.

In one and the same day she answered three Ambassadors of great Princes, the
one in Latin, the other in French, and the third in Italian.

I have seen a Book (which is in Sion-Colledge) wherein diverse sentences were
turned out of English into Latin and Italian, and some translated out of
French by Queen Elizabeth, and written with her own hand, in the life time of
her father, and sent to her brother Prince Edward for a new years gift, she
being at that time not above thirteen years of age.

Abraham Hartwell in his Regina literata written in Verse, speaks of Queen
Elizabeth's coming and doings at Cambridge.

She was honorably received in Kings College, where she lay during her
continuance there.

At the breaking up of the Divinity Act there, The Or^tion is in H^k^nsh.
Chron. ^^de Saviii* Orat. corom Reg^na El^z. Oxon. ^habi^a.
she made within St. Mary's Church a notable Oration in Latin, beginning thus,
Etsi faeminilis iste (...) us pudor, etc. See Dr. Heylins Ecclesia restaurata.
p. 163, 164. Vide Hadriani Juni^ Epist. Elizabethae Angliae Reginae inter
Epistolas suas. p. 544.

She was of personage tall, of hair and complexion fair, and therewith well
favored, but high nosed, of limbs and feature neat, and which added to the
luster of those exterior graces, of stately and majestic com^ortment.

She was crowned in St. Peter's Church in Westminster, by Dr. Oglethorp Bishop
of Carlisle, according to the Order of the Roman Pontifical.

There was great speech of a match between her and a French Mounsieur the Duke
of Alencon, of which he had great hopes, being ignorant (as Bernardine Mendoza
wrote from London to the Prince of Parma) Reginam singulis annis sponsam esse,
Stradae de bello Belgic. Decas 2. l. 1. p. 11.
nunquam vero nuptam, That the Queen was every year a Spouse, but never married.

The silencing and ejection of Ministers in her days, Reformation being newly
begun, Vide Parkerum de Politcia Ecclesiast. Christi. l. 2. c. 38.
and the enemies to it many, the friends and those that faithfully engaged few:
was looked upon by the godly prudent of that age, as very unseasonable, because
of the scarcity of preachers at that time. Beams of former Light. c. 7.

She had so great a command over her appetite, that her brother Edward usually
called her by no other name, but his sweet sister Temperance*. There was
between these two Princes ^ concurrence and sympathy in their natures and
affections; together with the celestial bond (conformity in Religion) which
made them one, and friends; for the King ever called her his sweetest and
dearest sister. Sir Robert Nauntons Fragmenta Reg. Cambdens Britannia in
Surrey. C^mb. Brit. in Wil^shire.
She was so far from pressing her Subjects with Impositions, that when the
Parliament once offered her a great sum of money, she refused a great part
thereof, giving them thanks, and adding withal, that the money was as sure in
her Subjects Co^^ers as her own.

A Prince above her sex of a manly courage and high conceit, who lively
resembled as well the royal qualities of her Grandfather, as she did his
princely presence and countenance, the worlds love and joy of Britain. A
Virgin for the space of forty four years so ruled the royal Scepter, as that
her Subjects loved her, enemies feared her, and every one with admiration
honored her.

She was about seventy years old when she died.

A most gracious and excellent Prince, worthy of superlative praise for her
most wise and politic government of the Commonwealth, and for her heroic
virtues far above that sex.

In Queen Elizabeth, besides her sex, there was nothing woman-like or weak.
Sclater. Yet S^nders calls her Lupam Anglicanam; Gainsfords Glory of England.
l. ^. c. 2. (...) Bi^dulphs Travels. p. 25, 26.
Rhiston Leaenam nostram, omnes Athalias, Maachas, Jezabeles, Herodiades
superantem.

The very Heathen and Mahumetans, the Persians and Idolaters, the Aethiopians
and Muscovites do name her with reverence.

Balsac in his second Book of Letters, Her name filed the Christian, Turkish,
Persian, American, Indian parts. Purchase p^^grimage. 1. l. 3. c. 1. Sect. 1.
See ibid. c. 3. Sect. 3.
Letter 1. to my Lord Cecil says, Even he that excommunicated her, spoke of
herwith honor.

Some think my Lord of Essex his death, and the long concealing of the message
he sent to her, when discovered, occasioned a deep melancholy first, and after
her death. Osborn in his Miscellanies says, No act of hers was registered so
contrary to the grain of her own people, as the death of the Earl. Others say,
If she were a Catholic, she might be accounted the mirror of the world, says
a secular Priest. Meteranus Rer. Belg. hist. l. 23. much commends her.
the death of the Queen of Scots.

In her time the pure interest of England was the protection of Protestants,
and War with Spain.

For her merciful returning home certain Italians, which were taken prisoners
in the eighty eight Invasion, she was termed Saint Elizabeth by some at Venice.
One told the Lord Carleton being there Ambassador, That great Elizabeth of
England, nurse of God, Church, God has established her seat with justice and
goodness, has made her the terror of all enemies of Christ, and the beauty of
Europe. ^olynes of the Civil Wars of France.
that although he were a Papist, yet he would never pray to any other Saint,
but the Saint Elizabeth. Mr. Trap on Ezra^c. 1.

My Lord Howard in his Manuscript in Oxford Library (a learned piece worthy to
be published) styled, A dutiful defense of the lawful regiment of women,
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, quotes diverse Papists commending her.

In his Defensative against the poison of supposed Prophesies, c. 16. he says
thus, When diverse (upon greater scrupulosity then cause) went about to dissuade
her Majesty (lying then at Richmond) from looking on the Comet which appeared
last; with a courage answerable to the greatness of her state, she caused the
window to be set open, and cast out this word, Jacta est alea, The Dice are
thrown. Affirming that her steadfast hope and confidence was too firmly planted
in the providence of God, to be blasted, or affirighted with those beams,
which either had a ground in nature whereupon to rise, or at least no warrant
out of Scripture to pretend the mi^haps of Princes.

She equalled the best of her Predecessors, Bacons Uniform Government of
England. part. 2. c. 34.
and in learned endowments excelled them all. A wise man that was an eye
witness of many of her actions, and of those which succeeded her, many times
has said, That a Courtier might make a better meal of one good look from her,
then of a good gift from some other King.

The Parliament having been a month, Queen Elizabeth sent for Mr. Popham, the
Speaker of the House, and asked him, What past since they sat? He answered,
Just twenty eight days.

Much might be said of her prosperity.

1. She was advanced to the Regal Throne, from a private and adverse fortune.

The more happy was her Government, because it ensued upon the stormy times of
Queen Mary. She came as a fresh Spring after a sharp Winter, and brought the
Ship of England from a troublous and tempestuous Sea, to a safe and quiet
harbor.

Though the Author of Jerusalem and Babel says, she professed her self a
Catholic during the Reign of her sister, and speaks of the Duke of Feria's
Letter to King Philip yet to be seen; wherein is certified that the Queen had
given him such assurance of her belief, and in particular concerning the point
of real presence, that for his part he could not believe, she intended any
great alteration in Religion; yet I suppose he wrongs her therein, as he does
Dr. Reynolds likewise, in saying, that he framed that combat which he
published between himself and Mr. Heart, at his own pleasure.

Anti-Sanderus in his second Dialogue says thus, Non solum nobilium
potentissimos, sed and Episcopos omnes, a quorum aliquo juxta priscam Angliae
consuetudinem ungi and coronari debuit, factio Pontificia sic abripuerat, ut
came, quod Lutherano dogmate tingi crederetur, solennitatibus illis usitatis
decorare ad tempus procacissime recusaverint. Vide plura ibid. p. 179. Tot
magnatibus in Anglia tempore Reginae Mariae deficientibus, animose perstitere
Elizabetha postea Regina, and Johanna Graia. Voet. Sell. Theol. Disputat. part.
3.

Her time produced a world of refined wits and excellent spirits, who honored
Poesy with their pens and practice, Edua^d Earl of Oxford, the Lord (...)
H^nry Lord Pa^et, our Phaenix the No le S^ Ph^^^ip Sidney, Mr. Edward Dyer, Mr.
E^m^nd Spenser, Mr. Samuel Daniel, with sundry others. Peach^ms complete
Gentleman. c. 10.

Those were the ablest, and most accomplished, that were tutored by both
fortunes. Such was with us, King Henry the seventh; and with the French, Lewis
the twelfth, She wrote then Tanquam ovis, as a sheep to the slaughter. He was a
bold Preacher who afterward told her, she was now Tanquam indomita juvenca.
This was Mr. De^ring. They presenting to her the Bible in English at the little
Conduit in Cheap^ide, she answered, I thank the City for this gift above all
the rest, it is a Book which I will often and often read over.
the former of which excelled in prudence, the other in justice During the
Reign of her brother, her estate was most prosperous and flourishing; during
the Reign of her sister, very tempestuous and full of hazard.

2. She was indeed the Queen of Hearts, beloved by her Subjects at home, and
honored by foreign Princes. She came to the Crown with the love of her
Subjects, and while she possessed it, they continued their love to her. She was
received very lovingly by the City of London the day before her Coronation, as
appeared by the Assembly, prayers, wishes, welcomings, cries, and all other
signs, which argue a wonderful earnest love of most obedient Subjects toward
their Sovereign.

In her short progresses what flocking would there be of all sorts of people to
see her? She delighted much in the love of her people. What gentle language
would she use to them? What cordial prayers would she make for them?
and what hearty acclamations would they utter to her, God save the Queen
Elizabeth.

It is a sign of a happy Reign, (says John de Serres in Henry the fourth) when
the Subject rejoices to see his King.

She would usually reply, God bless you my people all. Her speech to the
children of Christ's Hospital as she rode through Fleet Street was, We are
Orphans all, Let me enjoy your prayers, and you shall be sure of my assistance.
Engl. Elizab. p. 186.

In her speech to her last Parliament the third of November 1601, she has this
passage.

To be a King, and wear a Crown, is a thing more glorious to them that see it,
then it is pleasant to them that bear it. Though you have had and may have many
mightier and wiser Princes sitting in this Seat, yet you never had nor shall
have any that will love you better. See more there.

She had an extraordinary Majesty of aspect, joined with a sweetness, a most
happy and constant healthfulness of body.

Illud sane non indignum memoratu, quod tota vitae tempore valuit pancratice.
Adolphi a Dans vita Elizabethae.

She was, and was so reputed by strangers of all the Princes of her time,
Speeds Chron.
the most exact observer (both for action and ceremony) of true Regal
deportment and magnificence.

She was pious and constant in Religion. Surely, Surely, a Prince so high in
the favor of God, and so mighty with men, so blessed with days, and
prosperous in her Reign, so beloved at home, and so dread abroad, so absolute
for blessings, and so admired for Government, was never seen in England.
William Leighs Queen Elizabeth paraleld, second Sermon. He paralels he there in
her princely virtues with David, Joshua, and Hezekiah. 1. With David in her
afflictions to build the Church. First Sermon ^. 2. With Joshua in her puis^^nce,
to p^otect the Church. Second Sermon. 3. With Hezekiah in her piety, to reform
the Church. Third Sermon.


She was very frequent in the reading of the Scriptures, and writings of the
Fathers, especially of St. Augustine. She composed certain prayers her self
upon emergent occasions. Whenever she named God, though it were in common
discourse, she would for the most part add the title of Maker, saying, God my
Maker, and compose both her eyes and countenance to a submisness and reverence.

Although she found the Romish Religion confirmed in her sisters days, Her
Motto was Semper eadem
by Act of Parliament, and established by all strong and potent means that
could be devised, It Plutarch were alive to write lives by paralels, it would
trouble him both for virtue and fortune, to find for her a parallel amongst
women. Sir Francis Bacon the Lord Chancellor Elsmere. She was the happy
instrment of God to promote the Protestant Religion in all parts. May his
History of the Parliament of England. l. 1. c. 1. See more there.
and that all those which had any Authority, or bare Office in the State, had
subscribed to it; yet because she saw it was not agreeable to the Word of God,
nor to the Primitive purity, nor to her own conscience, she did with a great
deal of courage, and with the assistance of very few* persons, quite expel,
and abolish it.

Within the compass of one year, she did so establish and settle all matters
belonging to the Church, as she departed not one hairs breadth from them, to
the end of her life.

In the years of her life she went beyond all her predecessors since the
Conquest, and in the length of her Reign, she exceeded all but only two, Henry
the third, and Edward the third.

There was almost no memorable Act in Christendom, for the space of forty
years of her time, wherein she had not some part of Princely deserving. Levers
History of the Defenders of the Catholic faith.

Rare, in all ages, has been the Reign of a woman: more rare the felicity of a
woman, in her Reign: but most rare, a permanency and lasting, joined with that
felicity.

A great French Lady (mother to the Duke of Guise) said, that Elizabeth of
England was the most glorious and happy woman, that ever swayed Scepter.

Her days are not to be passed over slightly, without one touch upon that
string which so many years sounded so sweetly in our ears, without one sigh
breathed forth in her sacred memory.

She was wonderfully preserved from twenty conspiracies at home; and foreign
invasions.

She was happy in the abilities of her servants, Robert Cecil, Robert Dudley
Earl of Leicester, the Lord Howard, Adm^ral^, Walsingham. What famous Captains
were General ^Norris, Captain Williams, Morgan, the noble Earl of Essex, and
others in land af^airs? Who more renowned than Captain Drake, Frobisher,
Hawkins, Candish, with the ^est in Sea travails? Sir Philip Sidney was her
great favorite.
many grave Counselors, and martial Commanders.

The Coin was pure in her days, and Religion was in great purity.

She was admirable in expressing her mind both by speech and writing: and if
collection could be made of her Apophthegmes and extemporall Orations, it would
certainly excel any thing extant in that kind.

King Henry the fourth of France in a Letter to Mounsieur de Rosny, Duke of
Sully, commends her

In imitation of her Father Henry the eight, she did admit none about her for
Pensioners, Privy-Chamber-men, Squires of the body, Carvers, Cup-Bearers,
Sewers, but persons of stature, strength, and birth. Her Guard, Ushers,
Porters, and all attending below stairs, were of no less extraordinary size,
than activity for shooting, Sir Richard Bakers Chron. Bishop Jewel was the
glory of her Reign for learning.
throwing the Bar, weight, wrestling.

Elizabeth was tempered to inherit her Grandsires wisdom, and her fathers
spirit. Dr. Holiday his Survey of the world, Book eighth.

Paulet Marquess of Winchester, and Lord Treasurer, having served then four
Princes in a various and changeable season, that time nor any age has yielded
the like president; this man being noted to grow high in her favor (as his
place and experience required) was questioned by an intimate friend of his, how
he stood up for thirty years together amidst the changes and Raigns of so many
Chancellours, and great Personages? Why (quoth the Marquess) Ortus sum ex
salice, non ex quercu, I was made of the pliable Willow, not of the stubborn
Oak. Sir Robert Nauntons Fragm. Reg.

Her clemency also was singular.

Though she was harshly used by Sir Henry Beningfield, when she was prisoner at
Woodstocke, yet when she came to the possession of the Crown, Grafton in Q.
Mary.
she never proceeded further, then to discharge him of the Court, which many
thought was the thing that pleased him best. Cette vivacite d' esprit, fermete
de jugement, generuse resolution aux baute^ enterprises, esquelles excelloit
vostre Royale and Loyale soeur la brave Elizabeth d' Angleterre. Memoires de
Sully.
At whose departure from her presence, she used only these words, God forgive
you that is past, and we do, and if we have any prisoner whom we will have
hardly handled, and straightly kept, then we will send for you.

Whilst she was in her vigorous years, if at any time she were moved to
declare her Successor, she would make answer, That she would never endure to
see her winding sheet before her eyes.

She behaved her self so warily, as not to come within the danger of the Laws,
for acting any thing in opposition unto that Religion which was then
established. Concerning which there goes a Story, that when a Popish Priest had
urged her very earnestly to declare her judgment touching the presence of
Christ in the blessed Sacrament; she very cautelously resolved the point in
these following Verses:

'Twas God the Word that spoke it,
He took the bread and brake it,
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe and take it.
But all this Caution notwithstanding, her aversness from the Church of Rome,
was known sufficiently not to be altered while she lived. Dr. Heylins History
of Queen Elizabeth.

At her entrance to her Reign, she sent to her Agent in the Court of Spain, to
represent unto King Philip the second, the dear remembrance which she kept of
those many humanities received from him in the time of her troubles.

Yet afterward, some of our own and some foreign W^iters tax her of too much
unkindness toward King Philp, to whom she had been so much obliged.

The ground of his Invasion in eighty eight, was the diverse indignities he
received from Queen Elizabeth, though ever since the death of Queen Mary, he
forbore to do any thing that might displease her. During his abode in England,
Multa Regis Phi^^pi secundi indignationem s^^m (...) adversus (...) Reginam,
tant^ quidem (...) sensu, ^uanto pro benefi^^is proque vi^a i^sa, quam et bis
^^tque dedisse rev Rex affirmab^t, dum conspirationum insimulatam e ^arcere,
capitalique judicio liberaverat pro b^s aliis que prom^ritis alias super alias
accepisse se indesinenter inju^ias agnoscebat. Viderat statim ab initio
Principem Orangium. as Belgarum populos, consilio, pecunia, milite, ad
defectionem ab illa concitato^* I^di^rum provincias a Draco a Conditio, ab
aliis ejus emissarlis v^xatas ac direptas ^ regiam pecuniam interversam* ac
naves in Anglia r^t^^tas: ^lencon^am sp^ruptiarum ia Angliam allectum, atque
inde in Belgium ad capiendam Brabantiae coronam instructum. Stradae de bello
Belgico Decas 2. l. 9.
he had done her such signal and high savours, as to preserve her head from
the Scaffold, to have her allowance enlarged, to divert her Sister from a
design she had to send her beyond Sea to be a (...), and at his departure from
England, he desired not to carry with him but one Ring of a hundred pound price.

He showed no small love also in comprehending the su^rend^y of Calais to the
English, in his Treaty of peace with France.

The Queen assisted Don Antonio the Bastard against him, about the title of
Portugal, fomented his own natural Subjects against him, in the revolt of the
confederate Provinces, so far as to send a Governor of her own amongst them.
She gave Commissions to rob him in the Indies. She intercepted some of his
treasure in her own Seas going to Flanders, and wronged some of the Hans Towns,
who were under his protection. These with sundry incitements more, caused
Philip to prepare this powerful Fleet, to be quit with her at once for all
scores. Howels History of Naples.

But it may be said in her defense, that th^e King of Spain did stir up the
Irish against her, and did also encourage such Traitors, as conspired against
her in England.

Sir Francis Drake (who was Captain of the Judith with Sir John Hawkins, Vide
Cambde^^l Annals.
in the voyage of Guiny 1567) received together with him considerable damage
and injuries from the Spaniard, in the Port of St John D' Vll^a of the West
Indies, contrary to promise and agreement with him, and therefore what he did
against the Spaniards, was to repair himself.

At the beginning of the Netherlanders troubles, she imparted unto the King of
Spain sincere advice, not to hold a heavy hand over that people, which he
rejected and contemned. Her Majesty nevertheless gave not over her honorable
resolution, which was, if it were possible, to reduce and reconcile those
Countries unto the obedience of the King of Spain; if not, yet to preserve them
from alienating themselves to a foreign Lord: and so continued to mediate unto
the King for some just and honorable capitulations of grace and accord. Which
course she held until the death of the Duke of Anjou, at which time the enemy
pressing them, the united Provinces were received into her Majesty's
protection: which was after the King of Spain had discovered himself an
unplacable Lord to them: and also a professed enemy unto her Majesty, having
already actually invaded Ireland, and designed also the invasion and conquest
of England. Gabriel Powell his refutation of an Epistle apologetically written
by a Puritan Papist, to persuade the permission of the promiscuous use and
profession of all sects and heresies. c. 9. p. 98.

Trading was much promoted in her time. See Purchase Pilgrim part 3, 4 c. 9 ^ct.
^. Reginam ^um vixit ut sororem diligentissime observavit. Anglosque pariter
caeteros eximi^ dilexit. Camd. Annal.


By her intercession the Turk gave way to the English trading in Turkey, whence
the Company of Turkish Merchants.

The Great Duke of Russia also much respected her, and the English for her sake.

England was much adorned with building in her time. Plures and nobilium and
privatorum villae, elegantia, laxitate, and cultu conspicuae, jam passim in
Anglia surgere caep^runt, quam alio quovis seculo, magno sane regni ornamento,
verum hospitalis gloriae detrimento. Camd. Annal.

She was very sparing in bestowing Honors, for in twelve years she made but
four Barons.

She made Westminster Abbey (famous for the Coronation and sepulture of our
Kings of England, and for the keeping of the Insignia Regalia) a Collegiate
Church, where there is a Dean, twelve prebends, a Schoolmaster and Usher, forty
Scholars called Kings Scholars, (out of which some are chosen yearly to both
Universities) Servants, Choristers, and twelve Almesmen; as Camden in his
Annals shows.

Being near her end, An uncharitable Jesuit in a scandalous Libell, spread
abroad and published some years after Q. Elizabeth's death, says, that she died
without sense or feeling of Gods mercies, and that she wished she might after
her death hang a while in the air, to see what striving there would be for her
King^dome. Camd. Eliz. transl. Preface.
she declared James King of Scotland to be her Successor, so Camden and Du
Chesne, and Iohnston in his Historia Britannica.

Sir Francis Walsingham her Secretary died poor; he left only one daughter
which married Sir Philip Sidney, and after the Earl of Essex.

When she was near death, Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury came to her, and
spoke much of the redemption of mankind, of the resurrection of the body, and
immortality of the soul; to whom she answered with great tranquillity and
constancy, that she desired to be soon dissolved, and to be with Christ.

She having settled her Dominions in peace, died in the year 1602, the twenty
fourth of March, the sixty ninth of her age, and of her Reign the forty fourth.

CHAP. XX.
JAMES the first King of Great Britain.
THe Tudors breathing out their last in excellent Elizabeth, Stuarts take their
turn by an unquestionable title.

1. James the first of England, but sixth of Scotland.

2. Charles the first of England.

It may seem Ita repugnante n^^ine, Scotiae Rex Angliae possessionem (...),
prim^^sque intra omnem annalium memoriam Britanniae totam Insulam uno imperio
complexus est. Groti hist. Belg.
wonderful, that there was no commotion at all upon the Queens decease, that
he came to the Crown here so peaceably, without any opposition.

He caused himself to be styled King of Great Britain, to prevent difference
between the two Nations, one of which else would have preferred England in his
title, One that writes Ruinorum conspiratio, says, Quinqus Reges ex
honoratissima. S^uartorum familia, etiam eodem omnes praenomine,
continu^^aserie invicem succedentes, in ips^ aetatis ant flore, aut vigore
extinctos acceperant: relictis semper regni haeredibus pueris aut impuneribus,
qui per atatem gerendis rebus non sufficerent.
and the other Scotland. The name of Britain continued to be the name
generally of the whole Island, but more specially of the parts of England and
Wales, ever since before the invasion of the Romans. King Alfred was entitled,
Governor of the Christians of all Britain. King Edgar was styled Monarch of
all Britain; King Henry the second was entitled King of all Britain. King
John had his Coin stamped with this Inscription, Johannes Rex Britonum.

Walter surnamed Banguho (according as his father was) returning into Scotland,
fought valiantly for his King, against the Islands, Rebels, and the Savages of
Scotland. In recompense of his extraordinary virtue, he was made Great Provost
and Treasurer of the household Royal, which the Scots signify by the name of
Stuart or Steward. He so faithfully discharged the trust reposed in him, Favins
Theater of Honor. l. 5. c. ^.
without the least reproach or wasting of the Kings Moneys, that the surname of
Stuart was imposed on him, See Dr. Heylins Geog. of the British Isle.
and given also to his posterity. This was the original of the Illustrious
Family of Stuart. From this Walter descended that Robert Steward, who was after
in right of his wife King of Scotland, See Mr. Wentworths Book before quoted.
since which time there have been successively nine Sovereigns of that name in
Scotand.

Margaret eldest daughter of King Henry the seventh, This Margaret was
Grandmother to King James, by his father and mother.
and Elizabeth his Queen, was twice married in Scotland, first to King James
the fourth, then to Archibald Douglas Earl of Angis; her son by the King was
King James the fifth, our King James his mothers father, her daughter by the
Earl was Margaret Countess of Lennox, our King James his fathers mother.

David Bruise King of Scotland being dead without issue of his body, Robert
Steward his sisters son, by the general consent of all the Estates, was
crowned King of Scotland, in the year of our Lord 1370. This family has ever
since born the Crown of Scotland, even unto this day. Grotii ^ist. Belg.


King James united both the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and testified
this conjunction in the Money that was coined, both silver and gold with these
words, Quae Deus conjuxit, nemo separet, and also, Tueatur unita Deus. The
twenty shillings pieces had this Inscription, Faciam eos in gentem unam; other
golden Coins had these words, Henricus rosas, regna Iacobus.

He was born in the Palace of Edinborough on the nineteenth of July, anno 1566,
and solemnly crowned King of the Scots on the same day of the Month, anno
1567, and joyfully received to the Crown of England on the fourteenth of March
1602.

He had a great dexterity in discovering an imposture, See Osborn^ Miscellanies
of Es^ayes, Paradoxes. p. 6, 7, 8, 9.
and a mavelous sagacity to discuss natural things.

He detected the forgery of Richard Haydock a Physician, pretending to preach
at night in his sleep, who acknowledged his forgery to the King.

It was his custom to discourse during Meals with one or more Divines,
concerning some point of controversy in Philosophy.

There was a Conference or Disputation at Hampton Court before him. Dr.
Reynolds at its first coming out, being showed it, read it over, and bought it,
saying, he was concerned and wronged in it.


Some of our Divines tax Dr. Barlow Dean of Chester, for a partial Penman of
that Conference. See Mr. Ley his Discourse of Disputat. concerning matters of
Religion, c. 4. p. 46.

Besides the relieving by Pensions all the poorer sort, Sir Walter Rauleigh his
Hist. of the World, part. 1. l. 5. c. 6. Sect. 2. See more there.
he has honored more Martial men, than all the Kings of England have done for
this hundred years.

Had his Apothegmes or wise speeches (and also Queen Elizabeth's) been collected
by a skillful hand, I suppose they would have been very useful to the public.

There is one that has written a Book in Latin of Favorites, where I think
my Lord Car the Earl of Somerset, and the Duke of Buckingham are reckoned for
the English Favorites, the later of which was in great favor both with the
Father, and Son, King James, and King Charles. Vossius in his Preface to his
Book de Art Grammatica (if I forget not) much commends King James. Isaac
Causabone that famous Scholar, was much respected and encouraged by him.

He was both a wise and learned Prince of disposition merciful and gracious, a
great seeker of peace, according to that Motto which he ever used, Beati
pacifici.

In the style of the Court he went for Great Britains Solomon; Vide Idaeam
Rosae sive de Jacobi (Regis) virtutibus ^^arrationem.
nor is it any excursion beyond the precincts of verity to say, that neither
Britain nor any other Kingdom whatsoever, could ever since Solomon's days
glory in a King (for recondite learning and abstruse knowledge) so near a match
to Solomon as he, Quis hodie (...) vere amans, non optet ex animo, magnae
Britanniae magnum illuns Regem, ob eximias doctrina^ dotes quibus tanti neminis
Majesta^i sempiternam famam circumfudit, in universals reformatarum Ecclesiarum
Concilio, ad modum magni illius Constantini, Episcopis and Pastoribus, non modo
ad externi ordinio conservationem, ve^um etiam ad controversiarum, quae
hodieagiantur definitionem, aliquando pra^sidere. Gers. Buc. Dissert* de
Gubernat. Eccles. p. 115.
Mr. Rushworths Historical Collections. 23. Iacobi. p. 161.

He was compared to Solomon in several respects, by Bishop Williams in his
Funeral Sermon on 1 King. 11. 41, 42, 43.

Archbishop Spotswood says, he was the Solomon of this age, admired for his
knowledge of all manner of learning. Hist. of Scotland. l. 7.

His Works show his great learning, especially his Liber a Rege ad fillum
conscriptus, in quo optimus Princeps omnibus ^umcris absolutua elegantissime
depingitur. ^acre. ibtle est, quot homi^um animos and studis inde sibi
conciliarit, and quartum sui expectationem cum admiratione apud omnes
concitarit. Camdeni Annal. rerum Anglie part 4. p. 171.
Basilicon Doron, or Kingly gift.

It cannot be said, how well it was accepted in England, and what admiration it
raised in all men's hearts of him, and of his piety and wisdom. Certain it is,
that all the Discourses which came forth that time, for maintaining his right
to the Crown of England, prevailed nothing so much as did that Treatise.
Spotsw. Hist. of the Church of Scotland. l. 6.

Justinians Institutes, Caesar's Commentaries, (...), and (...), are prized for
their Authors, as well as matter.

He had such a promptness in expr^ssing his mind, that his extemporall s^eeches
were little inferior to his premeditated writings.

His invention was as quick as his first thoughts, and his words as ready as
his invention.

IN advouois franchement de n' avoir Iamais veu Prince don't la sincerite, la
prudence and l' equaunimite meritast plus de gloire and de louanges. Que l'
ayant tonsiours troune d' un courage urayement Royal and tout genereux and d'
un esprit plus intelligent, plus vif, plus penetrant and plus judicieux que null
de son Conseil, IN avois aussi tonsiours passionnement desire de terminer and
conclurre avec luy les affairs and non avec eux. Memoires de Mounsier de
Rosny. Duc de Sully. Tom. 2. p. 141.

He was a good Poet.

A very good Horseman.

He had such a fashion in riding, that it could not so properly be said he rid,
as that his Horse carried him, for he made but little use of his bridle, and
would say, a Horse never stumbled, but when he was reined.

He was a great lover of quiet, and much given to hunting, and to his Book, and
wholly fixed in Warring by writings with the Church. Bentivoglio his History of
Flanders part 3. l. 8. See his Relation of the united Provinces of Flanders c.
3.

In his apparel and civil garb, he seemed naturally to affect a majestic
carelessness, in his pecuniary dispensations to his favorites, he was excessive
liberal.

King James being invited in a hunting journey, to dine with Sir Thomas I. of
Barkshire, turning short at the corner of a Common, happened near to a
Countryman, sitting by the heels in the stocks, who cried Hosanna unto his
Majesty, which invited him to ask the reason of his restraint? Sir Thomas said,
It was for stealing a Goose from the Common. The fellow replied, I beseech your
Majesty be judge who is the greater thief, I for stealing Geese from the
Common, or his Worship for robbing the Common from the Geese? By my sale Sir
(said the King to Sir Thomas) I Will not dine to day on your dishes, till you
restore the Common for the poor to feed their flocks. Which was forthwith
granted to them, and the witty fellow set free.

He spoke broad in the Scottish tone and dialect.

Sir Kenelme Digby (in his Discourse touching the cure of wounds by the powder
of Sympathy) says, he had a strange antipathy to a naked sword, of which he
there ascribes the cause.

He alleged this reason to an English Divine, wherefore the Scottish Church
was never troubled with heresy; for if (said he) it sprang up in a Purish,
there was an Eldership ito^ suppress it; if it had escaped them, the Presbytery
was ready to crush it; if the Presbytery should be negligent, than the Synod
would oppose^it; if it had not been by them suppressed, the General Assembly
would take strict order concerning it.

Philip de Mornay Lord of Plessis often complained, S^^vent je l' oioi
plaindre, que S. M. d' Angleterre trop arreste a quelques petites dissensiones
enter les siens, ^' avoitpas asses de soin de la guerison de plus profondes
plays qui sont en l' Eglise. La vie de M. du Plessis l. 2.
that the King of England was too much taken up with some petty differences
amongst his own, but was not careful enough to heal the deep wounds and
breaches which were in the Church. Yet his sending certain select and worthy
Divines to the Synod of Dort, to compose the unhappy differences then in the
Law Countries, and his causing the Bible to be translated into English by
judicious Divines, and set forth more exactly than formerly it had been done,
were noble works.

He had two sons, Prince Henry, and King Charles, and one daughter that lived,
the Lady Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia.

The order of Knight Baronets was instituted by him, they must be Gentlemen of
three descents, and should be worth a thousand pounds per annum, the number to
be installed was not to exceed two hundred.

I may for his learning, and respect to the learned, his eloquence, and his
profound questions at meals, compare him to Charles the Great, of whom
Eginhardus de vita and gestis Caroli Magni. Inter caenandum aut aliquod
acroamia, aut lectorem audiebat. Legebantur ei historiae, and antiquorum Regum
gesta. Delectabatur and libris S. Augustini, pr^cipue iis quos de civitate Dei
inscripsit. Erat eloquentia copiosiu and exuberans, poteratque, quicquid vellet
apertissime exprimere. Arts liberales studio sissime coluit, earumque doctores
plurimum veneratus, magnis afficiebat honoribus. Vide plura ibid.

The Month of November is memorable, The 29 of May is famous for our present
Kings birth and return to London.
for the seventeenth 1558, the initiation of Queen Elizabeth, in which the
purity of the Gospel brake forth; and fifth in King James his Reign, in which
the treachery of the Gospels enemies brake out.

Dr. Heylin in his Historia Quinqu-Articularis c. 22. says, it was an usual
practice with him in the whole course of his Government, to balance one
extreme by the other, countenancing the Papists against the Puritan See Mr.
Gatakers Vindication of the Annotat. of Ier. 10. 20. against Lilly. p. 75.
, and the Puritan sometimes against the Papist, that betwixt both, the true
Religion and professors of it might be kept in safety. But in the Epistle of
his Book to his Son, he shows what he means by Puritan.

He died at Theohalds in the year 1625, Of a Feavor.
the twenty seventh of March, the fifty ninth year of his age, having reigned
over all Great Britain twenty two years complete.

CHARLES the First, the second Monarch of Great Britain.
He was born November the nineteenth, His birth.
anno Dom. 16^0, at Dun-fermling in Scotland.

He was the third son of James the sixth King of the Scots, and of Anne his
wife, daughter of Frederick the second, and sister of Christian the fourth,
Kings of Denmark.

He was comely of person, very active, temperate, chaste, merciful.

He was thought to be the best markman, and the most comely manager of a great
Horse, of any one in all the three Kingdoms.

Of his lawful descent to his Crown and Kingdoms, from all the Kings of this
Nation, See Flemings Royal Progeny.

He was crowned on the second of February at Westminster, Being about the age
of twenty five years. God so loosed his tongue at his trial. that he spoke
without the least stammering or hesitation.
in the year 1626, by Dr. Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury.

He was rather slow than fluent in his words, as well by grace, as a natural
imperfection; yet he was pithy, pathetick, and sententiou in his expressions.

What the Britains lost to the Saxons, they to the Danes, and the Norman got
from both, was his birthright, Sir Franck Wortley his Character
besides the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, and Principality of Wales,
additions to the Normans Conquest.

Shortly after his Coronation he was married to the Lady Henrietta Maria,
younger Daughter to Henry the fourth King of France, by whom he had seven
Children, four Sons, and three Daughters.

He improved himself much by his travels, and was generally liked in Spain.

When he was there, Archee the fool came boldly to King James, as he found him
once in a good humor, and told him that he was come to change Caps with him.
Why, said the King? Marry, says Archee, because thou have sent the Prince into
Spain, from whence he is never like to return. But said the King, What will thou say when thou see him come back again? Marry, says Archee, I will then
take off the fools Cap which I put upon thy head, for sending him thither, and
put it on the King of Spains, for letting him return. At which words, it is
reported, that the King became exceeding pensive, never before so much
apprehending the danger of that adventure, Dr. Gaud^n in his Eccles. Aug.
Suspiria. l. 3. c. 22. says, he was steadfast and able in his judgment against
Popery.
as then and afterward he did.

For his being a Papist, though it be charged by some of his enemies, yet I
suppose there is little ground for it, as his manifesto at the beginning of the
English and Scotch Presbytery shows. Therefore Mr. Baxter in his Key for
Catholics c. 45. has vindicated him from this aspersion.

His own Letters to the Queen taken at Naseby Letter 20. to the Queen, speaking
of Religion, he says, It is no thank to me to trust thee in any thing else but
in this, which is the only thing of difference in opinion betwixt (...).
, and his counsel to the Duke of Gloucester, to obey the Queen his mother in
all, but what related to Religion, sufficiently confute this calumny.

In the year 1618, King James published a Declaration, tolerating sports on the
Lords day. It was so much disliked, as it was soon after called in. It was
after revived and ratified by King Charles. L'estrange says, See M. Gatakers
Apologeticall Discourse aginst Lilly. Harvei excreit. 64. de generat. animal.
there was not any one Royal Edict, during all King Charles his Reign,
resented with equal regret.

It was his custom in his youth, for refreshing his mind, and the confirming
of his health, almost every week to hunt the Hearts and Does. In the three
summer months he hunted the males, being fat and pleasant to eat; in the like
space of time he hunted the females.

There was one Robert Par of Shropshire, aged 152, He as well as the Countess
of Desmond (so much spoken of for her great age) is said to have lived in the
Reign of Edward the fourth.
who lived in the Reign of ten Kings, and being brought up to London by the
procurement of the Earl of Arundell, died here, and lies buried in Westminster
Abbey.

Constat* quot generationes Carolingorum Johannes de Temporibus trisecli-senex
superavit: and ille nuper Anglus sub* Edoardo 4. natus, sub Carolo denatus qui
novem vel december Regibus (...) fuit. Hornii Dissertatio de aetate mundi c. 6.

Never was there in this Isle a Scene of Justice more magnificent reared for
any Subject, than that for the Earl of Strafford. Scaffolds were erected on
either side of Westminster Hall, H. L'estrange.
there the Commons sat uncovered, and in the midst of the lower ascent the
Peers; behind, but raised above them, there was placed a Chair and Cloth of
State for the King, on either side whereof was a close Gallery for the King,
Queen, and Prince to be private, suitable to the ancient mode.

Which trial of his, if we consider all things, the high nature of the Charge
against him, the pompous Circumstances, and stately manner of the trial it
self, the time that it lasted, and lastly, of what moment and consequence the
success of it must prove, I may safely say, that no Subject in England, and
probably in Europe, ever had the like. Mr. May his History of the Parliament of
England l. 1. c. 8. See more there.

Sir Thomas Roe was Chancellor of the most noble Order of the Garter, and of
King Charles his Privy Council, and several years Ambassador to the Great
Mogor, Great Turk, King of Sweden, and lastly, to the Princes of the Protestant
Union in Germany.

John de Montreul a Parisian, was he, that thinking thereby to do some good
office to the King of England, The History of the French Academy p. 220.
negotiated that he might be put into the hands of the Scots. This unfortunate
Prince (of whom he has since given this testimony, that he never saw a man of
greater spirit and more virtue) delighted often to discourse with him, and
expressed a great deal of affection to him.

I learned from a friend of mine, to whom he told it himself, that he made use
of a secret, which the King of England had taught him in the long conferences
which they sometimes had together. Id. ib p. 221.
'Twas a certain powder, very rare, which being cast on the paper, made that
which was beforehand written there with a white liquor, to appear, which
without that, was wholly imperceptible.

His Majesty had a fine stroke with his pen, Boxhornius in his Metamorphosis
Anglorum, has collected Apophthegmata Carolina. 1. Theologica. 2. Moralia. 3.
Politica. The Author of the Character of him mentions his several virtues.
which he practiced at all times of leisure. By which means he became Master of
a pure and elegant style, as both his intercepted Letters, and those to Mr.
Henderson at Newcastle in the point of Episcopacy, and his Book entitled
(...), or the Pourtraiture of his Sacred Majesty in his solitudes and
sufferings, do most clearly evidence. Which Book is put into Latin by Dr Earl.

At King James his Funeral, he attended the Hearse, as the chiefest mourner* an
action laudable, and deserving better interpretation than some make of it.

He showed great patience in his sufferings.

It argued a charitable temper in him, in pardoning his enemies when he died,
and praying for them, and charging the Prince his eldest son to pardon them
also.

He was the hundred and tenth Monarch of that line, that swayed the Scepter of
Scotland successively. Bishop Bramhall his Answer to Militiere his Epistle.

His Works are all in two Volumes, King James his Works are all in one volume
in Folio, both in Latin and English.
Reliquiae Carolinae, and Bibliotheca Carolina.

The Arsenals, Storehouses, and Ship-docks erected by him, are so magnificent
and universally useful, that they are become a principal pillar of the
Nations support, so far as they relate to the Navall defense of it, and affords
variety of employment, by the manufacture of Cordage, Mr. Philpots Kent
surveyed and illustrated.
as also by the car^ening and building of Ships.

The latter end of his life (by reason of the Civil broyls) was troublesome and
painful, as the Book styled Iter Carolinum shows.

Lewis the thirteenth, the last King of France, spoke ofttimes of the troubles
of Great Britain in his sickness, and once he was over heard to say, that it
was a just judgment, because his brother of England would have assisted his
Subjects once against him. Mr. Howels Corollary to the life of Lewis the
thirteenth.

In his March after Essex to the West, it happened that one of his Carriages
brake in a long narrow Lane, which they were to pass, and gave his Majesty a
stop, at a time of a great shower of rain, which fell upon him. Some of his
Courtiers and others which were near about him, offered to hew him out a way
through the hedges with their swords, that he might get shelter in some of the
Villages adjoining, but he resolved not to forsake his Canon upon any occasion:
At which when some about him seemed to admire and marvel at the patience which
he showed in that extremity, his Majesty lifting up his Hat made answer, That
as God had given him affliction to exercise his patience, so he had given him
patience to ^ear his afflictions. Mr. Fords Panegyric on King Charles the
first.

Let his Conference with the Marquess of Worcester, See M. S. ^ords Loyal
^ubjects Indignation for his R^vall S^vera^gn^ D^col (...).
the Papers which passed betwixt his Majesty and Master Henderson, and those
others with the Ministers in the Isle of Weight, testify how great a Master he
was of reason, how well read in the Fathers, the Councels Ecclesiastical
History, and the customs of the Church in all ages. Id. ib.

He made an admirable Anagram of himself, the day before his death, Carolus
Rex; Cras ero lux. Id. ib.

His death (says the Author of the Additions to Bakers Chronicle) was strange
and unparalleld. Primus Reformatus a Reformatis, and a suis subjectis. Salmaqi
ad militorum responsio.
We may read (says he) of many Kings who came to violent ends, but never any
that was so formally and solemnly first tried for his life, and then judicially
executed in public by his own Subjects.

Mr. Love in his Vindication of the London-Ministers, D. Cornelius Burgess
preached against it on Amos 5. 13. Dr. Gauden protested also against it. I have
heard that four French Divines, Bochart, Amyraut, Vincent, and de La^gly, have
written against the Kings death, of which some I have seen.
against Price his Clerico-Classicum, page 36. gives good reasons against
putting the King to death, and says, He was the first Protestant King in the
world, so put to death by his own Subjects. page 55. he says, He could produce
multitudes of Protestant Divines, against the cutting off the Head of our King
in particular, as the Ministers beyond the Seas, the Ministers of Scotland, the
Ministers of Essex and Lancashire, and of many other places of the Kingdom,
besides the London- Ministers, who unanimously declared their abhorrency of
that horrid fact, of taking away the life of the King. page 59. he says, That
there is no president in all the Scripture, The Princess of Tureine, Daille,
Gachens, and Grelin^court, have also written against it.
that the Sanhedrim of the Jews, or Rulers of Israel, did ever judicially
arraign and put to death any of the Kings of Judah, or Israel, though many of
them were most gross Idolaters, and tyrannous Princes, who shed much innocent
blood, and o^pressed the people sundry ways.

This notwithstanding, another Divine of our own has presumed to publish a
Defense of the Sentence passed upon the late King.

He quotes Genesis 9. 6. Exodus 21. 12. Lev. 24. 17. Numb. 35. 30, 31, 33. Prove.
28. 17. and Mat. 26. 52. to prove the lawfulness of it.

That private person which sheddeth man's blood wilfully, by man, that is, by
the Effundi volo ejus sanguinem per Magistratum scilicet volo in cum
animadverti, and eum capito plecti lege talionis. Mercer. Vide Paul. Fag. col.
lat. Translat. in loc.
Magistrate (whose power is here stablished, says Ainsworth, for killing all
wilful murderers) shall his blood be shed.

And this (says Ainsworth there) accords with the Law, Numb. 35. 29, 30. but
private men may not use the sword, Mat. 26. 52. Romans 13. 4.

I have read that place Matthew. 26. 52. strongly urged by some, against Subjects
taking up Arms against their Princes, but never this way before. These
Scriptures (though he think them of so express a tenor, of such a pregnant
import) I conceive make little for the purpose he alleges them.

When I consider with my self how many of note this Divine has written
against, and what paradoxall (if not heterodoxall) tenets he has often
labored to maintain, sometimes against the determinations of a Parliament
rightly so called, I wonder at that passage of his near the conclusion of his
Novice-Presbyter instructed.

The great knower of hearts, and searcher of the reins, in whose presence I
write, knows, that if himself would be pleased to discharge me of the service
of contradicting and opposing men, and dispose of me in a way of retirement,
were it never so private and obscure, where I might only contest with my own
weakness and errors, he should give me one of the firstborn desires of my soul
in the things of this life, into my bosom.

He may do well to weigh those places, Exodus 22. 28. 1 Samuel 26. 9. Prove. 24.
21. Eccles. 10. 20.

The Greek word for King, (...) quasi (...).
notes him that is the stay or foundation of the people.

He is called 1 Pet. 2. 13. the Supreme, or Superior. The Greek word signifies
one that has above others, in matter of Authority and Supremacy.

The Generals Commission, the Covenant, the Parliaments Declarations and
Engagements both to the King and Scots, were for the preservation of the Kings
person.

Even Mr. Goodwin in his Anticavallierism^, and Mr. Buroughs in his Lord of
Hosts, though they justified the War; yet they showed their dislike of any
injury to the Kings person.

I may justly vindicate the Parliament of England, from having any hand in this
abominable action. Nunquam in te peccavit Britannia tua, sed nec in Parentem:
sola colluvies illa de formis nefariorum t^nebrionum haec cuncta execranda
procudit. D. Creyghtoni Dedic^t. hist. Concilii Tridentini.

Some object, that every Monarch has his power from the consent of the whole
body* Vide Grotium de jure belli and pacis l. 1. c. 3, 4. and Cameronem ad Romans
c. 13. v. 3. Imperii sinis unicus populi utilitas. Jun. Brut. vind. contra
Tyranui.
therefore the whole body has a power above the power of the Monarch; and to
this purpose they allege that Maxim, Quod asseverant cum a quo aliquis
constituitur esse superiorem constituto, verum duntaxat est in ea
constitutione, cujus effectus perpetuo pender a voluntate constituentis, non
etiam in e^ quae ab initio est voluntatis, postea vero effectum habet
necessitatis. Grotius de jure belli and pacis l. 1. c. 3. Vide plura ibid.
Quicquid efficit tale est magis tale, (All Government (they say) is for the
good of the governed; and Salus populi suprema lex.) That Maxim even in
natural causes is subject to diverse restrictions, and it holds not in this
particular; The Guardian is for his sake that is under age, yet he has power
over him. Of the right interpretation of the other Maxim, Salus populi suprema
lex, See Dr. Sanderson de Obligat. Consc. Praelect. 9, and 10. Not that Prince
which is most potent over his Subjects, but that Prince which is most potent in
his Subjects, is truly potent, witness that incomparable Princess of happy
memory, Queen Elizabeth. It was also our King Charles his own Golden Maxim,
The peoples Liberty strengthens the Kings Prerogative, and the Kings
Prerogative is to defend the peoples Liberty.

Let us leave the Doctrine of King-killing to Mariana the Jesuit to defend,
and the perpetration of such a horrid act, to Ravilliac, and such monsters of
men. Of Marianas Doctrine, and of the Jesuits opinion of the lawfulness of
deposing Princes that are heretical, See in Dr. Tailors collection of
Polemicall and Moral Discourses, his Sermon preached upon the fifth of
November on Luke 9. 54.

I shall close up all with David's patheticall speech, 2 Samuel 1. 20. Tell it not
in Gath; publish it not in the streets of Askelo^: lest the daughters of the
Philistims rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.

As I have several times in the Parliament, so I thought sit here, to give in
my testimony against that unsound opinion, and abominable practice. Had I been
sooner freed out of the King's Head in the Strand, (where I with many other
worthy Secluded Members, were confined for not going along with the rest of the
House, in their intended evil design,) I had published a Treatise against
King-killing, (which I had formerly composed) before that Fatal stroke. Finis.

Errata.
PAge a line 15. read Hervord. p. 3. l. 22. Ethelbald. p. 4. margin, Histoire
d' Angleterre. p. 9 l. penult. and ult. r. Aidan and p. 10. l. 4. p. 9. l. 9.
r. Oswalstre. p. 16. marg. l. 10. r. nami illi argentei. and l. 11. r.
pontificius quaestor. l. 11, and 12. dele qui public bonas arts
profiterentur, quo multi doctrina clari confluerunt, docendi gratta. p. 20.
marg. dele Vid Asser, etc. p. 29. l. 9. r. sica. p. 28. l. penult. r. upon a.
p. 34. l. e 30. r. this. l 31. r. all. p. 44. marg. l. 20, 21. r. ipse suae. p.
51. l. 4. r. He refused. p. 61. l. 36. r. cotraderet. p. 68. marg. l. 20. dele
non. p. 73. marg. l. 1. r. plerisque. p. 81 l. 15. r. one, one, one, etc. p.
85. l. 29. r. of. p. 90. l. 21. r. Cyrus. p. 95. marg. l. ult. r. loquentem. p.
106. marg. l. 8. r. Episcopus. p. 116. m. l. 11. r. Polyd. p. 111. l. 14. r.
Civilis. p. 129. l. 6. r. Westminster.

An Alphabeticall Table, expressing or pointing to the chief things contained
in this Treatise.
A
ALfred his several Names page 20 The first anointed King of England, ibid.
His Virtues, p. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 Arthur King and Prince, p. 154, 155
B
Bastards many of them famous, p. 56 Benevolence by whom that Tax was devised,
p. 156 Black Prince a valiant person why so called, p. 113, 115 Bush: Why Henry
the 7th bore the Hawthorn-Bush with the Crown in it, p. 151
C
Canutus, p. 42, 43, 44, 45 Magna Charta often confirmed, p. 111 City of London
gives the Dagger for its Arms, and why, p. 100
D
Danes long molested England, p. 37, 38, 47
E
Edgar, p. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 Edward the elder, p. 27 More Kings of England
of that name than of any other name, p. 27 Edward the Confessor, p. 48, 49, 50,
51. Edward the first, p. 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104 Edward the second, p.
104, to 109 Edward the third, p. 109, to 117 Edward the fourth, p. 136, to 146
Edward the fifth, p. 146, 147 Edward the sixth, from p. 170, to 178 Egbert, p.
15, 16 England five times plagued by other Nations, p. 14 Called so first by
Ethelbald, p. 11, and 18 Ethelbert, p. 7, and 18 Ethelred, p. 10, 18, 19
Ethelwolfe, p. 16, 17 Ethelston, p. 28
G
The order of the Garter instituted by King Edward the third, p. 115, 116 The
King of Heralds called Garter, ordained by Henry the fifth, p. 132 Guild Hall
in London in what Kings reign erected, p. 128
H
L. Hastings a special judgment on him, p. 149 Harlos, whence, p. 55 Hengist,
why so called, the first Monarch of the English, p. 4, 5 The Heptarchy of the
Saxons, p. 2, 3 Henry the first, p. 73, to 81 Henry the second, p. 84, to 86
Henry the third, p. 94, to 98 Henry the fourth, p. 122, to 129 Henry the fifth,
p. 129, to 134 Henry the sixth, 134, to 139 Henry the seventh, p. 150, to 160
Henry the eighth, p. 160, to 170 Humble King rare, p. 10 Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester, learned himself and was a great Benefactor to the University of
Oxford, p. 123
I
Queen Jane, p. 178, 179 Jests, witty and merry speeches, p. 21, 29, 35, 81,
92, 158, 163, 165, 166, 167, 175, 176, 185, 188, 207, 211 King John, p. 93, 94
Ironside, why so called, p. 40 A stout Judge, p. 124, 125, 126
K
King's Evil when first cured in England, p. 51 King of Heralds ordained by
whom, p. 132
L
Laws, the best made in the time of Richard the second and Henry the seventh,
p. 148, 155, 956
M
Queen Mary, p. 179, to 183 Murder punished remarkably, p. 149, 150
N
Neote, me of the first Divinity-Readers in Oxford, p. 17 Normans what, p. 53.
We rereceived our Laws and names of sports from them, ib. p. 54
O
Offa first gave the Peter Pence to Rome, p. 12 Offas Church, and Offas Ditch.
ib. Oswald, p. 9 Oswy, ib. p. 9, 10
P
Parliament, the first in the reign of Edward the third, p. 111 Parliamentum
bonum, ib. Parliamentum indoctorum, p. 122. Insanum Parliamentum, p. 96
Plantagenet, whence, p. 84
Q
Virtuous Queens, p. 98, 178, 179, 183, to 200
R
Richard the first, p. 89. 90, 91, 92 Richard the second, p. 117, to 122
Richard the third, p. 146, to 150 Rosamand what it signifies, p. 86, 87 The
comely riding of women when it began in England, p. 120
S
Saxons a warlike people, p. 12. They gave names to many Cities, Towns, Rivers,
Woods, Fields in Engl. ib. Why Saxon Princes had their Name from a Horse, and
gave a Horse for their Escucheon, p. 4, 5 Schola Salernitana, dedicated to
Robert Son to William the Conqueror, p. 67, 68 Stephen, p. 82, 83 Stuart,
whence, p. 200
T
Thong Castle, why so called, p. 4 Tudors why so called, p. 150, 151
V
Great Victory of the English over the French, p 112, 113 University College
in Oxford, founded by King Alfred, p. 22. There are his Arms in the Hall, p.
25
W
Earl of Warwick, a person of great power in Edward the fourths reign. p. 200
Women, whether the Rule of Women be lawful, p 179 William the first, p. 54, to
66 William the second, p. 66, to 73 Wolves how destroyed in England, p. 34.
Wicklef in the Reign of Edw. the third, p. 116
Y
Yeomen of the Guard instituted by Henry the seventh, p. 151
FINIS.

