THE City-Madam, A COMEDY.

As it was acted at the private House in Black Friars with great applause.

Written by Phillip Massinger Gent.

LONDON Printed for Andrew Pennycuicke, one of the Actors, in the year 1659.

The Actors names.
Lord Lacie. Sir John Rich a Merchant Sir John Lacie Son to Lord Lacy. Mr.
Plenty a Country Gentleman. Luke Brother to Sir John Rich. Old Goldwire, Two
Gentlemem. Old Tradewell Young Goldwire their sons, prentices, to Sir John
Rich. Young Tradewell Stargaze an Astrologer. Fortune a decayed Merchant. Hoyst
a decayed gentleman. Penury. Holdfast a Steward. Ramble, Scuffle, two Hectors.
Dingem a Pimpe. Gettall a Box-keeper. Lady Rich. Anne her daughters Mary
Milliscent her woman. Shavem a Wench. Secret a Baud.
Scene London.
To the truly Noble and virtuous Lady Ann, Countess of Oxford.
HONORED LADY!
IN that age when wit and learning were outconquered by injury, and violence;
this Poem was the object of love and Commendations, it being composed by an
infallible pen, and censured by an unerring Auditory. In this Epistle I shall
not need to make an Apology: for Plays in general by exhibiting their
antiquity and utility, in a word they are mirrors or glasses which none but
deformed faces, and fouler consciences fear to look into. The encouragement I
had to prefer this dedication to your powerful protection proceeds from the
universal fame of the deceased Author, who (although he composed many) writ
none amiss, and this may justly be ranked amongst his best. I have redeemed it
from the teeth of time, by committing of it to the press, but in more imploring
your Patronage, I will not slander it with my praises, it is commendations
enough to call it Massingers, if it may gain your allowance and pardon; I am
highly gratified, and desire only to wear the happy title of,

MADAM, Your humblest Servant, Andrew Pennycuicke.

THE City-Madam, A COMEDY.
Actus primus, Scena prima.
Enter Goldwire, and Tradewell.
Goldwire THe Ship is safe in the Pool then?

Tradewell. And makes good,
In her rich fraught, the name she bears, the Speedwell:
My Master will find it, for on my certain knowledge
For every hundred that he ventured in her
She has returned him five.

Goldwire. And it comes timely,
For besides a payment on the nail for a Manor
Late purchased by my Master, his young daughters
Are ripe for marriage.

Tradewell. Who? N^n, and M^^^.

Goldwire. Mistress Anne and Mary, and with some addition,
Or it is more punishable in our house
Then Scandalum magnatum.

Tradewell It Is great pity
Such a Gentleman as my Master for that title
His being a Citizen, cannot take from him,
Has no male heir to inherit his estate,
And keep his name alive.

Goldwire. The want of one
Swells my young Mistresses, and their madam mother
With hopes above their birth, and scale. Their dreams are
Of being made Countesses, and they take state
As they were such already. When you went
To the Indies, there was some shape and proportion
Of a Merchants house in our family, but since
My Master, to gain precedencie for my Mistress
Above some Elder Merchants Wives, was knighted
It Is grown a little Court, in bravery,
Variety of fashions, and those rich ones:
There are few great Ladies going to a Masque
That do outshine ours in their every-day habits.

Tradewell. It Is strange my Master in his wisdom can
Give the reins to such exorbitancie.

Goldwire. He must,
Or there is no peace nor rest for him at home;
I grant his state will bear it, yet he is censured
For his indulgence, and for Sir John Frugall
By some styled Sir John Prodigal.

Tradewell. Is his brother
Mr. Luke Frugal living?

Goldwire. Yes, the more
His misery, poor man.

Tradewell. Still in the Counter?

Goldwire. In a worser place. He was redeemed from the hole,
To live in our house in hell: since his base usage
Considered, it is no better. My proud Lady
Admits him to her Table, marry ever
Beneath the Salt, and there he sits the subject
Of her contempt and scorn; and dinner ended,
His courteous Neeces find emploiment for him
Fitting an under-prentice, or a Footman,
And not an Uncle.

Tradewel. I wonder, being a Scholar well read, and traveled,
The world yielding means for men of such desert,
He should endure it.
Enter Star-gaze, Lady, Anne, Mary, Millescent, in several postures, with
looking-glasses at their girdles.
Goldwire. He does, with a strange patience; and to us
The servants so familiar, nay humble.
I Will tell you, but I am cut off. Look these
Like a Citizens wife and daughters?

Tradewel. In their habits
They appear other things; but what are the motives
Of this strange preparation?

Goldwire. The young wag-tails
Expect their suitors. The first, the Son and Heir
Of the Lord Lady, who needs my Masters money,
As his daughter does his honor. The second Mr. Plenty,
A rough hew'n gentleman, and newly come
To a great estate, and so all aids of Art
In them's excusable.

Lady. You have done your parts here:
To your study, and be curious in the search
Of the Nativities.
Exit Stargaze.
Tradewel. Me thinks the mother,
As if she could renew her youth, in care,
Nay curiosity to appear lovely,
Comes not behind her daughters.

Goldwire. Keeps the first place,
And though the Church-book speak her fifty, they
That say she can write thirty, more offend her,
Then if they taxed her honesty: the other day
A Tenant of hers, instructed in her humor,
But one she never saw, being brought before her,
For saying only, Good young Mistress help me
To the speech of your Lady-mother, so far pleased her,
That he got his Lease renewed for it.

Tradewell. How she bristles:
Prithee observe her.

Millescent. As I hope to see
A Country Knights son and heir walk bare before you
When you are a Countess, as you may be one
When my Master dies, or leaves trading; and I continuing
Your principal woman, take the upper-hand
Of a Squires wife, though a Justice, as I must
By the place you give me, you look now as young
As when you were married.

Lady. I think I bear my years well.

Millescent. Why should you talk of years? Time has not plough'd
One furrow in your face; and were you not known
The mother of my young Ladies, you might pass
For a Virgin of fifteen.

Tradewell. Here Is no gross flattery:
Will she swallow this?

Goldwire. You see she does, and glibly.

Millescent. You never can be old, wear but a Masque
Forty years hence, and you will still seem young
In your other parts: What a waste is here? O Venus?
That I had been born a King! and here a hand
To be kifs'd ever; Pardon my boldness, Madam:
Then, for a leg and foot you will be courter
When a great Grandmother.

Lady. These indeed, Wench, are not
So subject to decayings as the face,
Their Comeliness last's longer.

Milliscent. Ever, ever:
Such a rare Featured, and proportioned Madam
London could never boast of.

Lady. Where are my Shoos.

Milliscent. Those that your Ladyship gave order
Should be made of the Spanish Perfumed Skins.

Lady. The same.

Milliscent. I sent the prison-bird this morning for em,
But he neglects his duty.

Ann. He is grown
Exceeding careless.

Mary. And begins to murmur
At our commands, and sometimes grumbles to us,
He is forsooth our Uncle.

Lady. He is your slave,
And as such use him.

Ann. Willingly, but he is grown
Rebellious Madam.
Enter Luke, with Shoes, Garters and Roses.
Goldwire. Nay like Hen, like Chicken.

Lady. I Will humble him.

Goldwire. Pere he comes sweating all over,
He shows like a walking fripperie.

Lady. Very good Sir,
Were you drunk last night, that you could rise no sooner
With humble diligence to do what my Daughters,
And woman did command you.

Luke. Drunk, an't please you.

Lady. Drunk, I said, Sirrah. Dare thou in a look
Repine, or grumble? thou unthankful wretch,
Did our charity redeem thee out of prison,
Thy Patrimony spent, ragged, and lousy.
When the Sheriffs basket, and his broken meat
Were your Festival exceedings, and is this
So soon forgotten?

Luke. I confess I am
Your Creature Madam.

Lady. And good reason why
You should continue so.

Ann. Who did new cloth you?

Mary. Admitted you to the Dining Room?

Milliscent. Allowed you a fresh bed in the garret?

Lady. Or from whom
Received you spending money?

Luke. I owe all this
To your goodness, Madam: For it you have my prayers,
The beggars satisfaction; all my studies,
(Forgetting what I was, but withal duty
Remembering what I am) are how to please you.
And if in my long stay I have offended,
I ask your pardon. Though you may consider,
Being forced to fetch these from the Old Exchange,
These from the Tower, and these from Westminster,
I could not come much sooner.

Goldwire. Here was a walk
To breath a Footman.

Ann. It Is a curious Fan.

Mary. These Roses will show rare; would it were in fashion
That the Garters might be seen too.

Milliscent. Many Ladies
That know they have good legs, wish the same with you:
Men that way have the advantage.

Luke. I was with the Lady,
And delivered her the Satin
For her Gown, and Velvet for her Petticote,
This night She vows She Will pay you.

Goldwire. How I am bound
To your favor M. Luke.

Milliscent. As I live, you will perfume all rooms you walk in.

Lady. Get your Furr,
You shall pull'em on within.

Goldwire. That servile office
Her pride imposes on him.
Exit Luke. Sr. John within:
Goldwire. Tradewell.

Tradewell. My Master calls. We come Sir.
Exeunt Goldwire, Tradewell. Enter Holdfast with Porters.
Lady. What have you brought there?

Holdfast. The Cream of the market, provision enough
To serve a garrison. I weep to think on it.
When my Master got his wealth, his family fed
On roots, and livers, and necks of beef on Sundays.
But now I fear it will be spent in poultry.
Butchers meat will not go down.

Lady. Why, you Rascal, is it at
Your expense? what Cooks have you provided?

Holdfast. The best of the City. They have wrought at my
Lord Mayors.

Ann. Fie on em, they smell of Fleet-Lane, and Pie-corner.

Mary. And thinks the happiness of man's life consists
In a mighty shoulder of mutton.

Lady. I Will have none
Shall touch what I shall eat, you grumbling Curr,
But Frenchmen and Italians; they wear Satin,
And dish no meat but in Silver.

Holdfast. You may want, though,
A dish or two when the service ends.

Lady. Leave prating,
I Will have my will; do you as I command you.
Exeunt
Actus primus, Scena secunda.
Enter Lacie, and Page.
Lacie. YOu were with Plenty?

Page. Yes Sir.

Lacie. And what answer
Returned the clown?

Page. Clown Sir! he is transformed,
And grown a gallant of the last edition;
More rich then gaudie in his habit, yet
The freedom, and the bluntness of his language
Continues with him. When I told him that
You gave him Caution, as he loved the peace,
And safety of his life, he should forbear
To pass the Merchants threshold, until you
Of his two Daughters had made choice of her
Whom you designed to honor as your wife.
He smiled in scorn.

Lacie. In scorn?

Page. His words confirmed it,
They were few, but to this purpose; Tell your Master,
Though his Lordship in reversion were now his,
It cannot awe me. I was born a Freeman,
And will not yield in the way of affection
Precedence to him. I will vifit em,
Though he sat Porter to deny my entrance.
When I meet him next I Will say more to his face.
Deliver thou this, then gave me a piece
To help my memory, and so we parted.

Lacie. Where got he this spirit.

Page. At the Academie of valor,
Newly erected for the institution
Of elder Brothers. Where they are taught the ways,
Though they refuse to seal for a Duellist,
How to decline a challenge. He himself
Can best resolve you.
Enter Plenty and three Serving-men.
Lacie. You Sir?

Plenty. What with me Sir?
How big you look? I will not loose a hat
To a hairs breadth, move your Bever, I Will move mine,
Or if you desire to prove your sword, mine hangs
As near my right hand, and will as soon out, though I keep
Not a Fencer to breath me, walk into Moor-fields,
I dare look on your Toledo. Do not show
A foolish valor in the streets, to make
Work for shopkeepers, and their clubs, it is scurvie,
And the women will laugh at us.

Lacie. You presume
On the protection of your Hinds.

Plenty. I scorn it:
Though I keep men I fight not with their fingers,
Nor make it my Religion to follow
The gallants fashion, to have my family
Consisting in a Footman, and a Page,
And those two sometimes hungry. I can feed these,
And cloath'em too, my gay Sir.

Lacie. What a fine man
Has your Tailor made you?

Plenty. It Is quite contrary,
I have made my Tailor, for my clothes are pai'd for
As Soon as put on, a sin your man of title
Is seldom guilty of, but Heaven forgive it.
I have other faults too very incident
To a plain Gentleman. I eat my Venison
With my neighbors in the Country, and present not
My phesants, partridges, and growse to the userer,
Nor ever yet paid brokage to his scrivener.
I flatter not my mercers wife, nor feast her
With the first cherries, or pelcods, to prepare me
Credit with her husband, when I com to London.
The wool of my sheep, or a score or two of fat oxen
In Smithfield, give me money for my expenses.
I can make my wife a jointure of such lands too; as are not encombred, no
annuity
Or statue lying on'em. This I can do
And it please your future honor, and why therefore
You should forbid my being a suitor with you
My dullness apprehends not.

Page. This is bitter.

Lacie. I have heard you Sir, and in my patience shown
To much of the stoics. But to parley further,
Or answer your gross jeers would write me coward.
This only thy great grandfather was a Butcher,
And his son a Grasier,
Thy Sire Constable of the hundred, and thou the first of your dunghill,
created gemtleman
Now you may come on Sir, you, and your thrashers.

Plenty. Stir not on your lives.
This for the grasiers, this for the butcher. they fight

Lacie. So Sir.

Page. I Will not stand idle, draw my little rapier
Against your bumb blades. I Will one, by one despatch you.
Then house this instrument of death, and horror.
Enter Sir John, Luke, Goldwire, Tradewell.
Sr. John. Beat down their weapons. My gate ruffians hall:
What insolence is this?

Luke. Noble Sir Maurice,
Worshipful Mr. Plenty.

Sr. John. I blush for you,
Men of your quality expose your same
To every vulgar censure. This at midnight
After a drunken supper in a Tavern,
(No civil man abroad to censure it)
Had shown poor in you, but in the day, and view
Of all that pass by, monstrous

Plenty. Very well Sir;
You look for this defense.

Lacte. It Is thy protection,
But it will deceive thee.

Sr. John. Hold, if you proceed thus
I must make use of the next Justices power,
And leave persuasion. And in plain terms tell you

Enter Lady, Anne, Mary, and Milliscent. Neither your birth, Sir Maurice, nor
your wealth,
Shall privilege this riot. See whom you have drawn
To be spectators of it? can you imagine
It can stand with the credit of my daughters,
To be the argument of your swords? 'ith street too?
Nay e're you do salute, or I give way,
To any private conference, shake hands
In sign of peace. He that drawsiback parts with
My good opinion. This is as it should be.
Make your approaches, and if their affection
Can sympathize with yours, they shall not come
On my credit beggars to you. I will hear
What you reply within.

Laeie. May I have the honor
To support you Lady.

Plenty. I know not what is supporting,
But by this fair hand, glove and all, I love you.
Exeunt omnes preter Luke. To him Enter Hoyst, Penury, Fortune.
Luke. You are come with all advantage. I will help you
To the speech of my Brother.

Fortune. Have you moved him for us?

Luke With the best of my endeavors, and I hope.
You Will find him tractable.

Penury. Heaven grant he prove so.

Hoyst. However I Will speak my mind.
Enter Lord Lacie.
Luke. Do so M. Hoyst.
Go in. I Will pay my duty to this Lord,
And then I am wholly yours. Heaven bless your honor.

Lord. Your hand Mr. Luke, the world's much changed with you
Within these few months; then you were the gallant:
No meeting at the Horse-race, Cocking, Hunting,
Shooting, or Bowling, at which Mr. Luke
Was not a principal gamester, and companion
For the Nobility.

Luke. I have paid dear
For those follies, my good Lord, and it is but justice
That such as soar above their pi^ch, and will not
Be warned by my example, should like me
Share in the miseries that wait upon it.
Your Honor in your charity may do well
Not to upbraid me with those weaknesses
Too late repented.

Lord. I nor do, nor will;
And you shall find I Will lend a helping hand
To raise your fortunes: How deals your brother with you?

Luke. Beyond my merit, I thank his goodness for it.
I am a Freeman, all my debts discharged,
Nor does one Creditor undone by me
Curse my loose riots. I have meat and clothes,
Time to ask heaven remission for what is past;
Cares of the world by me are laid aside,
My present poverty's a blessing to me;
And though I have been long, I dare not say
I ever lived till now.

Lord. You bear it well;
Yet as you wish I should receive for truth
What you deliver, with that truth acquaint me
With your brothers inclination. I have heard
In the acquisition of his wealth, he weighs no:
Whose ruins he builds upon.

Luke. In that report
Wrongs him, my Lord. He is a Citizen,
And would increase his heap, and will not lose
What the Law gives him. Such as are worldly wise
Pursue that tract, or they will never wear skarlet.
But if your Honor please to know his temper,
You are come opportunely. I can bring you
Where you unseen shall see, and hear his carriage
Toward some poor men, whose making or undoing
Depend upon his pleasure.
A Table, Count book, Standish, Chair and stools set out,
Lord. To my wish,
I know no object that could more content me.
Exeunt
Actus primus, Scena tertia.
Enter Sir John, Hoyst, Fortune, Penury, Goldwire.
Sir John. WHat would you have me do? reach me a chair.
When I lent my moneys I appeared an Angel;
But now I would call in mine own, a Devil.

Hoyst. Were you the Divelsdamme, you must stay till I have it.
For as I am a Gentleman,
Enter Luke placing the Lord Lacie,
Luke. There you may hear all.

Hoyst. I pawned you my land for the tenth part of the value,
Now, cause I am a Gamester, and keep Ordinaries,
And a Liverie punk, or so, and trade not with
The money-mongers wives, not one will be bound for me:
It Is a hard case, you must give me longer day
Or I shall grow very angry.

Sir John. Fret, and spare not.
I know no obligation lies upon me
With my honey to feed Drones. But to the purpose,
How much owes Penury?

Goldwire. Two hundred pounds:
His Bond three times since forfeited.

Sir John. Is it su'd?

Goldwire. Yes Sir, and execution out against him

Sir John. For body and goods.

Goldwire. For both, Sir.

Sir John. See it served.

Penury. I am undone; my wife and family.
Must starve for want of bread.

Sir John. More Infidel thou
In not providing better to support'em.
What Is Fortunes debt?

Goldwire. A thousand, Sir.

Sir John. An estate
For a good man. You were the glorious Trader,
Embraced all bargains; the main venturer
In every Ship that launched forth; kept your wife
As a Lady, she had her Coach, her choice
Of Summer-houses, built with other men's moneys
Took up at Interest, the certain road
To Ludgate in a Citizen. Pray you acquaint me
How were my thousand pounds employed?

Fortune. Insult not
On my calamity, though being a debtor,
And a slave to him that lends, I must endure it.
Yet hear me speak thus much in my defense;
Losses at sea, and those Sir, great, and many,
By storms, and tempests, not domestical riots
In soothing my wives humor, or mine own,
Have brought me to this low ebb.

Sir John. Suppose this true;
What is it to me? I must, and will have my money,
Or I Will protest you first, and that done have
The Statute made for Bankrupts served upon you.

Fortune. It Is in your power, but not in mine to shun it.

Luke. Not as a brother, Sir, but with such duty
As I should use unto my Father, since
Your charity is my parent, give me leave
To speak my thoughts.

Sir John. What would you say?

Luke No word, Sir,
I hope shall give offense; nor let it relish
Of flattery, though I proclaim aloud:
I glory in the bravery of your mind,
To which your wealths a servant. Not that riches
Is or should be contemned, it being a blessing
Derived from heaven, and by your industry
Pulled down upon you; but in this dear, Sir,
You have many equals: Such a man's possessions
Extend as far as yours, a second has
His bags as full; a third in credit flies
As high in the popular voice: but the distinction
And noble difference by which you are
Divided from 'em, is, that you are styled
Gentle in your abundance, good in plenty,
And that you feel compassion in your bowels
Of others miseries (I have found it, Sir,
Heaven keep me thankful for it) while they are cursed
As rigid and inexorable.

Sir John. I delight not
To hear this spoke to my face.

Luke. That shall not grieve you,
Your affability, and mildness clothed
In the garments of your debtors breath
Shall every where, though you strive to conceal it
Be seen, and wondered at, and in the act
With a prodigal hand rewarded. Whereas such
As are born only for themselves, and live so,
Though prosperous in wordly understandings,
Are but like beasts of rapine, that by odds
Of strength, usurp, and tyrannize over others
Brought under their subjection.

Lord. A rare fellow!
I am strangely taken with him.

Luke. Can you think Sir,
In your unquestioned wisdom, I beseech you,
The goods of this poor man sold at an out-crie,
His wife turned out of doors, his children forced
To beg their bread: this gentleman's estate
By wrong extorted can advantage you?

Hoyst. If it thrive with him hang me, as it will damn him
If he be not converted.

Luke. You are too violent.
Or that the ruin of this once brave Merchant
(For such he was esteemed though now decayed)
Will raise your reputation with good men.
But you may urge, pray you pardon me, my zeal
Makes me thus bold and vehement, in this
You satisfy your anger, and revenge
For being defeated. Suppose this, it will not
Repair your loss, and there was never yet
But shame, and scandal in a victory
When the rebels unto reasons passions fought it.
Then for revenge by great souls it was ever
Contemned, though offered; entertained by none
But cowards, base, and abject spirits, strangers
To moral honesty, and never yet
Acquainted with religion.

Lord. Our divines
Cannot speak more effectually.

Sir John. Shall I be
Talked out of my money?

Luke. No, Sir, but entreated
To do your self a benefit, and preserve
What you possess entire.

Sir. John. How my good brother?

Luke. By making these your beads-men. When they eat,
Their thanks next heaven, will be paid to your mercy
When your Ships are at Sea, their prayers will swell
The Sails with prosperous winds, and guard'em from
Tempests, and pirates: keep your warehouses
From fire, or quench'em with their tears.

Sir John. No more.

Luke. Write you a good man in the peoples hearts,
Follow you every where.

Sir John. If this could be.

Luke. It must or our devotions are but words,
I see a gentle promise in your eye,
Make it a blessed act, and poor, me rich
In being the instrument.

S. John. You shall prevail.
Give'em longer day. But do you hear, no talk often.
Should this arrive at twelve on the Exchange.
I shall be laughed at for my foolish pity.
Which money men hate deadly. Take your own time
But see you break not. Carrie'em to the Cellar,
Drink a health, and thank your Orator.

Penury. On our knees Sir.

Fortune. Honest M. Luke!

Hoyst. I bless the Counter where
You learned this Retorick.

Luke. No more of that friends.
Exeunt Luke, Hoyst, Fortune, Penury
S. John. My honorable Lord

Lord. I have seen and heard all,
Excuse my manners, and wish heartily
You were all of a piece. Your charity to your debtors
I do commend, but where you should express
Your piety to the height, I must boldly tell you
You show your self an Athiest.

Sir John. Make me know
My error, and for what I am thus censured,
And I will purge my self, or else confess
A guilty cause.

Lord. It is your harsh demeanor
To your poor brother.

S. John. Is that all?

Lord. It Is more
Then can admit defense. You keep him as
A Parasite to your table, subject to
The scorn of your proud wife: an underling
To his own Neeces. And can I with mine honor
Mix my blood with his, that is not sensible
Of his brothers miseries?

S. John. Pray you take me with you,
And let me yield my reasons why I am
No opener handed to him. I was born
His elder brother, yet my fathers fondness
To him the younger robbed me of my birthright:
He had a fair estate, which his loose riots
Soon brought to nothing. Wants grew heavy on him
And when laid up for debt, of all forsaken,
And in his own hopes lost, I did redeem him,

Lord. You could not do less.

S. John. Was I bound to it my Lord?
What I possess, I may with justice call
The harvest of my industry. Would you have me,
Neglecting mine own family, to give up
My estate to his disposure?

Lord. I would have you,
What Is passed forgot, to use him as a brother;
A brother of fair parts, of a clear soul,
Religious, good, and honest.

S. John. Outward gloss
Often deceives, may it not prove so in him,
And yet my long acquaintance with his nature
Renders me doubtful, but that shall not make
A breach between us: Let us in to dinner,
And what trust, or employment you think sit
Shall be conferred upon him: If he prove
True gold in the touch, I Will be no mourner for it.

Lord. If counterfeit, I Will never trust my judgment.
Exeunt.
Actus secundus, Scena prima.
Enter Luke, Holdfast, Goldwire, Tradewell.
Holdfast. The like was never seen.

Luke Why in this rage man?

Holdfast. Men may talk of Country-Christmases, and Courtgluttonie,
Their thirty pound buttered eggs, their Pies of Carps tongues,
Their Pheasants drenched with Ambergreece, the carkases
Of three fat Weathers bruised for gravie to
Make sauce for a single Peacock, yet their feasts
Were fasts compared with the Cities.

Tradewell. What deer dainty
Was it thou murmur'st at?

Holdfast. Did you not observe it?
There were three sucking piggs served up in a dish,
Took from the sow as soon as farrowed,
A fortnight fed with dates, and muskadine,
That stood my Master in twenty marks a piece,
Besides the puddings in their bellies made
Of I know not what. I dare swear the cook that dressed it
Was the Devil, disguised like a Dutchman.

Goldwire. Yet all this
Will not make you fat, fellow. Holdfast.

Holdfast. I am rather
Starved to look on it. But here is the mischief, though
The dishes were raised one upon another
As woodmongers do billets, for the first,
The second, and third course, and most of the shopps
Of the best confectioners in London ransacked
To furnish out a banquet, yet my Lady
Called me penurious rascal, and cried out,
There was nothing worth the eating.

Goldwire. You must have patience,
This is not done often.

Holdfast. It Is not fit it should,
Threesuch dinners more would break an Alderman,
And make him give up his cloak. I am resolved
To have no hand in it. I Will make up my accounts
And since, my Master longs to be undone:
The great Fiend be his Steward, I will pray,
And bless my self from him.
Exit Holdfast.
Goldwire. The wretch shows in this
An honest care.

Luke. Out on him, with the fortune
Of a slave, he has the mind of one. However
She bears me hard, I like my Ladies humor,
And my brothers sufferage to it. They are now
Busy on all hands; one side eager for
Large portions, the other arguing strictly
For jointures, and security; but this
Being above our scale, no way concerns us.
How dull you look? in the mean time how intend you
To spend the hours?

Goldwire. We well know how we would,
But dare not serve our wills.

Tradewell. Being prentices,
We are bound to attendance.

Luke. Have you almost served out
The term of your Indentures, yet make conscience
By starts to use your liberty? Have thou traded
In the other world, exposed unto all dangers,
To make thy Master rich, yet dare not take
Some portion of the profit for thy pleasure?
Or will thou being keeper of the Cash,
Like an Ass that carries dainties, feed on Thistles?
Are you gentlemen born, yet have no gallant tincture
Of gentry in you? You are no Mechanics,
Nor serve some needy shopkeeper, who surveighs
His every-day-takings. You have in your keeping,
A mass of wealth, from which you may take boldly,
And no way be discovered, He Is no rich man
That knows all he possesses, and leaves nothing
For his servants to make prey of. I blush for you,
Blush at your poverty of spirit, you
The brave sparks of the City?

Goldwire. M. Luke,
I wonder, you should urge this, having felt
What misery follows riot.

Tradewell. And the penance
You endured for it in the Counter.

Luke. You are fools,
The case is not the same. I spent mine own money,
And my stock being small, no mervail 'twas soon wasted.
But you without the least doubt or suspicion,
If cautelous, may make bold with your Masters.
As for example; when his Ships come home,
And you take your receipts, as it is the fashion,
For fifty bales of Silk you may write forty,
Or for so many pieces of Cloth of Bodkin,
Tissue, Gold, Silver, Velvets, Sattins, Taffaties,
A piece of each deducted from the gross
Will never be missed, a dash of a pen will do it.

Trad. I, but our fathers bonds that lie in pawn
For our honesties must pay for it.

Luke. A mere bugbear
Invented to fright children. As I live
Were I the master of my brothers fortunes,
I should glory in such servants. Did thou know
What ravishing lechery it is to enter
An Ordinary, ca pa pe, trimmed like a Gallant,
(For which in truncks concealed be ever furnished)
The reverence, respect, the crouches, cringes,
The musical chime of Gold in your crammed pockets,
Commands from the attendants, and poor Porters?

Tradewell. Oh rare!

Luke. Then sitting at the Table with
The braveries of the kingdom, you shall hear
Occurrents from all corners of the world,
The plots, the Counsels, the designs of Princes,
And freely censure'em; the City wits
Cried up, or decri'd, as their passions lead'em;
Judgment having naught to do there.

Tradewell. Admirable!

Luke. My Lord no sooner shall rise out of his chair,
The gameing Lord I mean, but you may boldly
By the privilege of a gamester fill his room,
For in play you are all fellows; have your knife
As Soon in the Pheasant; drink your health as freely,
And striking in a luckie hand or two,
Buy out your time.

Tradewell. This may be: but suppose
We should be known.

Luke. Have money and good clothes
And you may pass invisible. Or if
You love a Madam-punck, and your wide nostrill
Be taken with the sent of cambrick smocks
Wrought, and perfumed.

Goldwire. There, there, M. Luke,
There lies my road of happiness.

Luke. Enjoy it,
And pleasures stolen being sweetest, apprehend
The raptures of being hurried in a Coach
To Brainford, Stanes, or Barnet.

Goldwire. It Is enchanting,
I have proved it.

Luke. Have thou?

Goldwire. Yes in all these places,
I have had my several Pagans billeted
For my own tooth, and after ten pound suppers
The curtains drawn, my Fiddlers playing all night
The shaking of the sheets, which I have danced
Again, and again with my Cockatrice. M. Luke,
You shall be of my counsel, and we two sworn brothers,
And therefore I Will be open. I am out now
Six hundred in the Cash, yet if on a sudden
I should be called to account, I have a trick
How to evade it, and make up the sum.

Tradewell. Is It possible?

Luke. You can entrust your Tutor.
How? how? good Tom.

Goldwire. Why look you. We cash-keepers
Hold correspondence, supply one another
On all occasions. I can borrow for a week
Two hundred pounds of one, as much of a second,
A third lays down the rest, and when they want,
As my Masters moneys come in, I do repay it,
Ka me, ka thee.

Luke. An excellent knot! it is pity
It ^^^e should be unloos'd; for me it shall not,
You are shown the way friend Tradewell, ou may make use on it,
Or freeze in the warehouse, and keep company
With the Cator Holdfast.

Tradewell. No, I am converted.
A Barbican Broker will surnish me with out side,
And then a crash at the Ordinary.

Goldwire. I am for
The Lady you saw this morning, who indeed is
My proper recreation.

Luke. Go to Tom,
What did you make me?

Goldwire. I Will do as much for you,
Employ me when you please:

Luke. If you are enquired for,
I will excuse you both.

Tradewell. Kind M. Luke;

Goldwire. We Will break my Master to make you;
You know.

Luke. I cannot love money, go boys. When time serves
It shall appear, I have another end in it.

Exeunt. Enter Lord, Sir John, Lacie, Plenty, Lady, Ann, Mary, Milliscent. Sir
John. Ten thousand pounds a piece I Will make their portions,
And after my decease it shall be double,
Provided you assure them for their jointures
800l. per annum, and intail
A thousand more upon the heirs male,
Begotten on their bodies.

Lord. Sir, you bind us
To very strict conditions.

Plenty. You my Lord
May do as you please: but to me it seems strange,
We should conclude of portions, and of jointures,
Before our hearts are settled.

Lady. You say right,
A chair set out. There are counsels of more moment, and importance
On the making up of marriages to be
Considered duly, then the portion, or the jointures
In which a mothers care must be exacted,
And I by special privilege may challenge
A casting voice.

Lord. How Is this?

Lady. Even so my Lord,
In these affairs I govern.

Lord. Give you way to it?

S. John. I must my Lord.

Lady. It Is fit he should, and shall:
You may consult of something else, this Province
Is wholly mine.

Lacie. By the City custom Madam?

Lady. Yes my young Sir, and both must look my daughters
Will hold it by my Copy.

Plenty. Brave in faith.

S. John. Give her leave to talk, we have the power to do;
And now touching the business we last talked of,
In private if you please.

Lord. It Is well remembered,
You shall take your own way Madam.
Exeunt Lord and S. John.
Lacie. What strange lecture
Will she read unto us?

Lady. Such as wisdom warrants
From the Superior bodies. Is Stargaze ready
With his several Schemes?

Millis. Yes Madam, and attends
Your pleasure.
Exit Milliscent.
Lacie. Stargaze, Lady: What is he?

Lady. Call him in. You shall first know him, then admire him
For a man of many parts, and those parts rare ones.
He Is every thing indeed, parcel Physician,
And as such prescribes my diet, and foretells
My dreams when I eat Potato's; parcel Poet,
And sings Encomiums to my virtues sweetly;
My Antecedent, or my Gentleman Usher;
And as the stars move, with that due proportion
He walks before me; but an absolute Master
In the Calculation of Nativities;
Guided by that ne're-erring science, called,
Judicial Astrology.

Plenty. Stargaze! sure
I have a penny Almanac about me
Inscribed to you, as to his Patroness,
In his name published.

Lady. Keep it as a jewel.
Some States men that I will not name, are wholly
Governed by his predictions, for they serve
For any latitude in Christendom,
As Well as our own climate.
Enter Milliscent, and Stargaze, with two Schemes.
Lady I believe so.

Plenty. Must we couple by the Almanac?

Lady. Be silent,
And e're we do articulate, much more
Grow to a full conclusion, instruct us
Whether this day and hour, by the planets, promise
Happy success in, marriage.

Stargaze. In omni
Part, and toto.

Plenty. Good learned Sir, in English.
And since it is resolved we must be Coxcombs,
Make us so in our own language.

Stargaze. You are pleasant:
Thus in our vulgar tongue then.

Lady. Pray you observe him.

Stargaze. Venus in the West-angle, the house of marriage the
7th house, in Trine of Mars, in Conjunction of Luna, and Mars
Almuthen, or Lord of the Horoscope.

Plenty. Hoy day

Lady. The Angels language, I am ravished! forward.

Stargaze. Mars as I said Lord of the Horoscope, or geniture, in mutual
reception of each other, she in her Exaltation, and he in his Triplicitie
trine, and face, assure a fortunate combination to Hymen. excellent prosperous
and happy.


Lady. Kneel, and give thanks.
The Women kneel
Lacie. For what we understand not.

Plenty. And have as little faith in'c.

Lady. Be credulous,
To me it is Oracle.

Stargaze. Now for the sovereigntie of my future Ladies, your daughters after
they are married.


Plenty. Wearing the breeches you mean.

Lady. Touch that point home,
It is a principal one, and with London Ladies
Of main consideration.

Stargaze This is infallible: Saturn out of all dignities in his detriment and
fall, combust: and Venus in the South-angle elevated above him, Lady of both
their Nativities; in her essential, and accidental dignities; occidental from
the Sun, oriental from the Angle of the East, in Cazini of the Sun, in her joy,
and free from the malevolent beams of infortunes; in a sign commanding, and
Mars in a constellation obeying, she fortunate, and he dejected, the disposers
of marriage in the Radix of the native in feminine figures, argue foretell, and
declare pre-eminence, rule, preheminen ce and absolute soveraignity in women.


Lacie. Is It possible!

Stargaze. It Is drawn, I assure you, from the Aphorisms of the old Chaldeans;
Zoroastes the first and greatest Magician,
Mercurius Trismegistius, the later Ptolomy, and the everlasting
Prognosticator, old Erra Pater.

Lady. Are you yet satisfied!

Plenty. In what?

Lady. That you
Are bound to obey your Wives, it being so
Determined by the stars, against whose influence
There is no opposition.

Plenty. Since I must
Be married by the Almanac, as I may be,
'Twere requisite the services and duties
Which, as you say, I must pay to my wife,
Were set down in the Calender.

Lacie. With the date
Of my Apprenticeship.

Lady. Make your demands;
I Will sit as Moderatrix, if they press you
With over hard conditions.

Lacie. Mine has the Van,
I stand your charge, sweet.

Stargaze. Silence.

Anne. I require first
(And that since it is in fashion with kind husbands,
In civil manners you must grant) my will
In all things whatsoever, and that will
To be obeyed, not argued.

Lady. And good reason.

Plenty. A gentle Imprimis.

Lacie. This in gross contains all;
But your special Items, Lady.

Anne. When I am one
(And you are honored to be styled my husband)
To urge my having my Page, my Gentleman Usher;
My Woman sworn to my secrets; my Caroch
Drawn by six Flanders Mares; my Coachman, Grooms,
Postilian, and Footmen.

Lacie. Is there ought else
To be demanded?

Anne. Yes Sir, mine own Doctor; French, and Italian Cooks;
Musicians, Songsters,
And a Chaplain that must preach to please my fancy;
A friend at Court to place me at a Mask;
The private Box took up at a new Play
For me, and my retinue; a fresh habit,
(Of a fashton never seen before) to draw
The Gallants eyes that sit on the Stage upon me;
Some decayed Lady for my Parasite,
To flatter me, and rail at other Madams;
And there ends my ambition.

Lacie. Your desires
Are modest, I confess.

Anne. These toies subscribed to,
And you continuing an obedient Husband
Upon all fit occasions, you shall find me
A most indulgent Wife.

Lady. You have said, give place
And hear your younger Sister.

Plenty. If she speak
Her language, may the great Friend booted and spurred,
With a Sith at his girdle, as the Scotchman says,
Ride headlong down her throat.

Lacie. Curse not the Judge
Besore you hear the sentence.

Mary. In some part
My Sister has spoke well for the City pleasures,
But I am for the Countries, and must say
Under correction in her demands
She was too modest.

Lacie. How like you this Exordium?

Plenty. Too modest, with a mischief I

Mary. Yes, too modest:
I know my value, and prize it to the worth;
My youth, my beauty.

Plenty. How your glass deceives you?

Mary. The greatness of the portion I bring with me,
And the Sea of happiness that from me flows to you.

Lacie. She bears up close.

Mary. And can you in your wisdom,
Or rusticall simplicity imagine,
You have met some innocent Country girl, that never
Looked further then her fathers farm, nor knew more
Then the price of corn in the Market; or at what rate
Beef went a stone? that would surveigh your dayrie,
And bring in mutton out of Cheese, and butter?
That could give directions at what time of the Moon
To cut her Cocks, sor (apons against Christmas,
Or when to raise up Goslings?

Plenty. These are arts
Would not mis-become you, though you should put in
Obedience and duty.

Mary. Yes, and patience,
To sit like a fool at home, and eye your thrashers;
Then make provition for your slavering Round,
When you come drunk from an Alehouse after hunting,
With your Clowns and Comrades as if all were yours,
You the Lord Paramount, and I the drudge;
The case Sir, must be otherwise.

Plenty. How, I beseech you?

Mary. Marry thus. I will not like my Sister challenge
What Is useful, or superfluous from my Husband,
That Is base all over. mine shall receive from me,
What I think fit. I Will have the State conveyed
Into my hands; and be put to his pension,
Which the wise virago's of our climate practice,
I will receive your rents.

Plenty. You shall be hanged first.

Mary. Make sale, or purchase. Nay I Will have my neighbors
Instructed, when a passenger shall ask,
Whose house is this? though you stand by to answer,
The Lady Plenties. Or who owes this manner?
The Lady Plenty. Whose sheep are these? whose oxen?
The Lady Plenties.

Plenty. A plentiful Pox upon you

Mary. And when I have children, if it be inquired
By a stranger whose they are, they shall still Echo
My Lady Plenties? the Husband never thought on.

Plenty. In their begetting I think so.

Mary. Since you will marry
In the City for our wealth, in justice, we
Must have the Countries Sovereignty.

Plenty. And we nothing.

Mary. A Nagg of forty shillings, a couple of Spaniels,
With a Spar-Hawk is sufficient, and these too,
As you shall behave your self, during my pleasure,
I will not greatly stand on. I have said Sir,
Now if you like me, so.

Lady. At my entreaty,
The Articles shall be easier.

Plenty. Shall they in faith?
Like Bitch, like Whelps:

Lacie. Use fair words.

Plenty. I cannot;
I have read of a house of pride, and now I have found one:
A whirle wind overturn it.

Lacie. On these terms,
Will your minxship be a Lady?

Plenty. A Lady in a morris,
I Will wedd a Pedlers punck first.

Lacie. Tinkers trull,
A beggar without a smock.

Plenty. Let Mounsieur Almanac,
Since he is so cunning with his Jacob's Staff,
Find you out a Husband in a bowling Ally

Lacie. The general pimp to a Brothel.

Plenty. Though that now,
All the loose desires of man were raked up in me,
And no means but thy Maidenhead left to quench'em,
I would turn Cynders, or the next Sow-gelder,
On my life should libb me, rather then embrace thee.

Ann. Wooing do you call this?

Mary. A Bear-baiting rather.

Plenty. Were you worried, you deserve it, and I hope
I shall live to see it.

Lacie. I Will not rail, nor curse you,
Only this; you are pretty peates, and your great portions
Adds much unto your handsomeness, but as
You would command your Husbands you are beggars,
Deformed, and uglie.

Lady. Hear me.

Plenty. Not a word more.
Exeunt Lacie and Plenty.
Ann. I ever thought 'twould come to this.

Mary. We may
Lead Apes in Hell for Husbands, if you bind us
TO articulate thus with our suitors.
Both speak weeping.
Stargaze. Now the Clowd breaks,
And the Storm will fall on me.

Lady. You rascal, jugler.
She breaks his head, and beats him.
Stargaze. Dear Madam.

Lady. Hold you intelligence with the Stars,
And thus deceive me?

Stargaze. My art cannot err,
If it does s'le burn my Astrolabe. In mine own Starr
I did fore see this broken head, and beating;
And now your Ladyship sees, as I do feel it,
It could not be avoided.

Lady. Did you?

Stargaze. Madam,
Have patience but a week, and if you find not
All my predictions true touching your daughters,
And a change of fortune to your self, a rare one,
Turn me out of doors. These are not the men, the Planets
Appointed for their Husbands, there will come
Gallants of another metal.

Milliscent. Once more trust him.

Ann. and Mary. Do, Lady mother.

Lady. I am vexed, look to it;
Turn over your books, if once again you fool me,
You shall graze elsewhere: Come Girls.
Exeunt
Stargaze. I am glad I escaped thus.

Actus secundus, Scena tertia.
Enter Lord, and Sir John.
Lord. THe plot shows very likely.

Sir John. I repose
My principal trust in your Lordship; 'twill prepare
The physic I intend to minister
To my Wife, and Daughters.

Lord. I will do my parts
To set it off to the life.
Enter Lacie and Plenty.
Sir John. It may produce
A Scene of no vulgar mirth. Here come the Suitors;
When we understand how they relish my Wife's humors,
The rest is feasible.

Lord. Their looks are cloudie.

Sir John. How fits the wind? Are you ready to launch forth.
Into this sea of marriage.

Plenty. Call it rather
A Whirle-pool of afflictions.

Lacie. If you please
To injoin me to it, I will undertake
To find the North-passage to the Indies sooner,
Then plough with your proud Heifer.

Plenty. I will make
A Voyage to Hell first.

Sir John. How, Sir?

Plenty. And court Proserpine
In the fight of Pluto, his three headed Porter
Cerberus standing by, and all the suries,
With their whips to scourge me for it, then say, I Jeffrey
Take your Mary for my Wife.

Lord. Why what is the matter?

Lacie. The matter is, the mother, with your pardon,
I cannot but speak so much, is a most insufferable,
Proud, insolent Lady.

Plenty. And the daughter's worse.
The Damm in years had the advantage to be wicked.
But they were so in her belly.

Lacie. I must tell you,
With reverence to your wealth, I do begin
To think you of the same leaven.

Plenty. Take my counsel;
It Is safer for your credit to prosesse
Your self a Cuckold, and upon record,
Then say they are your Daughters.

Sir John. You go too far Sir.

Lacie. They have so Articl'd with us.

Plenty. And will not take us
For their Husbands, but their slaves, and so aforehand
They do profess they will use us.

Sir John. Leave this heat:
Though they are mine I must tell you, the perverseneess
Of their manners (which they did not take from me,
But from their mother) qualified, they deserve
Your equals.

Lacie. True, but what is bred in the bone
Admits no hope of cure:

Plenty. Though Saints, and Angels
Were their Physicians.

Sir John. You conclude too fast.

Plenty. God bowy you, I Will travail three years, but I Will bury
This shame that lives upon me.

Lacie. With your license,
I Will keep him company.

Lord. who shall furnish you,
For your expenses?

Plenty. He shall not need your help,
My purse is his, we were rivals, but now friends,
And will live and die so.

Lacie. E're we go I Will pay
My duty as a son.

Plenty. And till then leave you.
Ext. Lscei and Plenty.
Lord. They are strangely moved.

Sir John. What Is wealth, accompanied
With disobedience in a wife and children?
My heart will break

Lord. Be comforted, and hope better;
We Will ride abroad, the fresh air and discourse,
May yield us new inventions.

Sir John. You are noble,
And shall in all things, as you please command me.
Exeunt
Actus tertius, Scena prima.
Enter Shaveem and Secret.
Secret. DEad doings, Daughter.

Shave'm Doings! sufferings mother:
Men have forgot what doing is;
And such as have to pay for what they do,
Are impotent, or Eunuchs.

Secret. You have a friend yet,
And a striker too, I take it.
Music come down.
Shaveem. Goldwire is so,
And comes to me by stealth, and as he can steal, maintains me
In clothes, I grant; but alas Dame, what is one friend?
I would have a hundred for every hour, and use
And change of humor I am in a fresh one.
It Is a flock of sheep that makes a lean Wolf fat,
And not a single Lambkin. I am starved,
Starved in my pleasures. I know not what a Coach is,
To hurrie me to the Burse, or old Exchange,
The Neathouse for Musk-mellons, and the Gardens
Where we traffic for Asparagus, are to me
In the other world.

Secret. There are other places Lady.
Where you might find customers.

Shaveem. You would have me fout it
To the Dancing of the Ropes, sit a whole afternoon there
In expectation of Nuts and Pippins;
Gape round about me, and yet not find a Chapamn
That in courtesy will bid a chop of mutton,
Or a pint of Drum-wine for me.

Secret. You are so impatient.
But I can tell you news will comfort you,
And the whole Sister hood.

Shavem. What Is that?

Secret. I am told
Two Ambassadors are come over. A French Monsieur,
And a Venetian, one of the Clarissimi,
A hot rein'd Marmosue. Their followers,
For their Countries honor after a long Vacation,
Will make a full term with us.

Shavem. They indeed are
Our certain and best customers: Who knocks there? Knock within.

Within Ramble. Open the door.

Secret. What are you?

Ramble. Within Ramble.
Scuffle. Within Scuffle.
Within Ramble. Your constant visitants.

Shaven. Let 'em not in.
I know em swaggering, suburbian roarers,
Six-penny truckers

Within Ramble. Down go all your windows,
And your neighbors too shall suffer.

Within Scuffle. Force the doors.

Secret. They are outlaws, mistrisse Shavem, and there is
No remedy against em, what should you fear?
They are but men, lying at your close ward,
You have foiled their betters.

Shavem. Out you Baud. You care not
Upon what desperate service you employ me,
Nor with whom, so you have your fee.

Secret. Sweet ladie-bird
Sing a milder key.
Enter Ramble and Scuffle.
Scuffle. Are you grown proud?

Ramble. I knew you a wastcotier in the garden allies,
And would come to a saylors whistle.

Secret. Good Sir Ramble,
Use her not roughly. She is very tender.

Ramble. Rank and rotten, is she not?
She draws her knife, Ramble his sword.
Shavem. Your spittle rogueships
Shall not make me so.

Secret. As you are a man, Squire Scuffle,
Step in between em. A weapon of that length
Was never drawn in my house.

Shavem. Let him come on,
I Will scour it in your gutt, you dog.

Ramble. You brach,
Are you turned mankind. You forgot I gave you,
When we last joined issue, twenty pound.

Shavem. Over night,
And kick it out of me in the morning. I was then
A novice, but I know to make my game now.
Fetch the Constable.
Enter Goldwire like a Justice of Peace, Dingem like a Constable, the Musicians
like watch men.
Secret. Ah me. Here Is one unsent for,
And a Justice of Peace too.

Shavem. I Will hang you both you rascals,
I can but ride. You for the purse you cut
In Powl's at a sermon. I have smoked you. And you for the bacon
You took on the high way from the poor market woman
As she road from Rumford.

Ramble. Mistress Shavem.

Scuffle. Mistress Secret,
On our knees we beg your pardon.

Scuffle. Set a ransom on us.

Secret. We cannot stand trifling. If you mean to save them,
Shut them out at the backdoor.

Shavem. First for punishment
They shall leave their cloaks behind em, and in sign
I am their sovereign, and they my vassalls,
For homage kiss my Shoo-sole rogues, and vanish.
Exeunt Ramble and Scuffle.
Goldwire. My brave virago. The coasts clear. Strike up.

Shavem. My Goldwire made a Justice.
Goldwire, and the rest discovered.
Secret. And your scout
Turned Constable, and the Musiclans watchmen.

Goldwire. We come not to fright you, but to make you merry.
A light Lavolto.
They dance.
Shavem. I am tired. No more.
This was your device.

Dingem. Wholly his own. He is
No pig sconce Mistress.

Secret. He has an excellent head-peece

Goldwire. Fie no, not I: your jeering gallants say
We Citizens have no wit.

Dingem. He dies that says so.
This was a masterpiece.

Goldwire. A trifling stratagem,
Not worth the talking of.

Shavem. I must kiss thee for it
Again, and again.

Dingem. Make much of her. Did you know
What suitors she had since she saw you.

Goldwire. In The way of marriage.

Dingem. Yes Sir, for marriage, and the other thing too.
The commodity is the same. An Irish Lord offered her.
Five pound a week.

Secret. And a cashiered Captain, half
Of his entertainment.

Dingem. And a new made Courtier.
The next suit he could beg.

Goldwire. And did my sweet one
Refuse all this for me?

Shavem. Weep not for joy,
It Is true. Let others talk of Lords, and Commanders,
And country heirs for their servants; but give me
My gallant prentice. He parts with his money
So civilly, and demurely; keeps no account
Of his expenses, and comes ever furnished.
I know thou have brought money to make up
My gown and petticoat, with th'appurtenances.

Goldwire. I have it here Duck, thou shall want for nothing.

Shavem. Let the chamber be perfumed, and get you Sirrah
His cap, and pantables ready.

Goldwire. There Is for thee,
And thee. That for a banquet.

Secret. And a cawdle
Again you rise.

Goldwire. There.

Shavem. Usher us up in state.

Goldwire. You will be constant.
Exeunt wanton, Music played before'em
Shavem. Thou art the whole world to me.

Actus tertius, Scena secunda.
Enter Luke.
Within Anne. WHere is this Uncle?

Within Lady. Call this Beadsman, brother: he has forgot attendance.

Within Mary. Seek him out: idleness spoils him.

Luke. I deserve much more then their scorn can load me with, and it is but
justice,
That I should live the families drudge, designed
To all the sordid offices their pride
Imposes on me; since if now I sat
A Judge in mine own cause, I should conclude
I am not worth their pity: such as want
Discourse, and judgment, and through weakness fall,
May merit man's compassion; but I
That knew prosusenesse of expense the parent
Of wretched poverty, her fatal daughter,
To riot out mine own, to live upon
The alms of others! steering on a rock
I might have shunned: O heaven! it is not fit
I should look upward, much less hope for mercy.
Enter Lady, Anne, Mary, Stargaze, and Milliscent.
Lady. What are you devising, Sir?

Anne. My Uncle is much given to his devotion.

Mary. And takes time to mumble
A Pater noster to himself.

Lady. Know you where
Your brother is? It better would become you
(Your means of life depending wholly on him)
To give your attendance.

Luke. In my will I do:
But since he rode sorth yesterday with Lord Lacie,
I have not seen him.

Lady. And wh^ went not you
By his stirrup? how do you look? were his eyes closed,
You Would be glad of such imploiment.

Luke. 'Twas his pleasure
I should wait your command, (...) those I am ever
Most ready to receive.

Lady. I know you can speak well,
But say and do.
Enter Lord Lacie with a Will.
Luke. Here comes my Lord.

Lady. Further off:
You are no companion for him, and his business
Aims not at you, as I take it.

Luke Can I live in this base condition? aside

Lady. I h^p'd, my Lord,
You had brought Mr. Frugall with you, for I must ask
An account of him from you.

Lord. I can give it, Lady;
But with the best discretion of a woman,
And a strong fortified patience, I desire you
To give it hearing

Luke. My heart beats.

Lady. My Lord, you much amaze me.

Lord. I shall astonish you. The noble Merchant,
Who living was for his integrity
And upright dealing (a rare miracle.
In a rich Citizen) Londons best honor;
Is -- I am loath to speak it.

Luke. Wondrous strange!

Lady. I do suppose the worst, not dead I hope?

Lord. Your supposition's true, your hopes are false:
He Is dead.

Lady. Ay me.

Anne My Father.

Mary. My kind Father.

Luke. Now they insult not.

Lord. Pray hear me out.
He Is dead. Dead to the world, and you. And now
Lives only to himself.

Luke. What Riddle's this?

Lady. Act not the torturer in my afflictions;
But make me understand the sum of all
That I must undergo.

Lord. In few words take it;
He is retired into a Monastery,
Where he resolves to end his days.

Luke. More strange.

Lord. I saw him take post for Dover, and the wind
Sitting so fair, by this he is safe at Calice,
And ere long will be at Lovain.

Lady. Could I guess
What were the motives that induced him to it,
'Twere some allay to my sorrows.

Lord. I 'le instruct you,
And chide you into that knowledge: 'twas your pride
Above your rank, and stubborn disobedience
Of these your daughters, in their milk sucked from you:
At home the harshnesse of his entertainment,
You wilfully forgetting that your all
Was borrowed from him; and to hear abroad
The imputations dispersed upon you,
And justly too, I fear, that drew him to
This strict retirement: And thus much said for him;
I am my self to accuse you.

Lady. I confess
A guilty cause to him, but in a thought,
My Lord, I ne'rc wronged you.

Lord. In fact you have;
The insolent disgrace you put upon
My only Son, and Mr. Plenty; men, that loved
Your daughters in a noble way, to wash off
The scandal, put a resolution in 'em
For three years travel.

Lady. I am much grieved for it.

Lord. One thing I had forgot; your rigor to
His decayed brother, in which your flatteries,
Or sorcevies, made him a coagent with you,
Wrought not the least impression.

Luke. Humph! this sounds well.

Lady. It Is now past help: after these storms, my Lord,
A little calm, if you please.

Lord. If what I have told you
Showed like a storm, what now I must deliver
Will prove a raging tempest. His whole estate
In lands and leases, debts and present moneys,
With all the movables he stood possessed of,
With the best advice which he could get for gold
From his learned counsel, by this formal Will
Is passed over to his brother. With it take
The key of his counting house. Not a groat left you,
Which you can call your own.

Lady. Undone for ever.

Ann. Marie. What will become of us?

Luke. Humph!

Lord. The Scenes changed,
And he that was your slave, by fate appointed
Your governor, you kneel to me in vain,
I cannot help you, I discharge the trust
Imposed upon me. This humility
From him may gain remission, and perhaps
Forgetfulness of your barbarous usage to him.

Lady. Am I come to this.

Lord. Enjoy your own, good Sir,
But use it with due reverence. I once heard you
Speak most divinely in the opposition
Of a revengefull humor, to these show it;
And such who then depended on the mercy
Of your brother wholly now at your devotion,
And make good the opinion I held of you;
Of which I am most confident.

Luke. Pray you rise,
And rise with this assurance, I am still,
As I was of late, your creature; and if raised
In any thing, it is in my power to serve you,
My will is still the same. O my Lord!
This heap of wealth which you possess me of.
Which to a worldly man had been a blessing,
And to the messenger might with justice challenge
A kind of adoration, is to me
A curse, I cannot thank you for; and much less
Rejoice in that tranquillity of mind,
My brothers vows must purchase. I have made
A dear exchange with him. He now enjoyes
My peace, and poverty, the trouble of
His wealth conferred on me, and that a burden
Too heavy for my weak shouldiers.

Lord. Honest soul,
With what feeling he receivs it.

Lady. You shall have
My best assistance, if you please to use it
To help you to suport it.

Luke. By no means,
The weight shall rather sinck me, then you part
With one short minute from those lawful pleasures
Which you were born to in your care to aid me,
You shall have all abundance. In my nature
I was ever liberal, my Lord you know it.
Kind, affable. And now me thinks I see
Before my face the Jubilee of joy,
When it is assured, my brother lives in me,
His debtors in full cups crowned to my health,
With Paeans to my praise will celabrate.
For they well know it is far from me to take
The forfeiture of a Bond. Nay I shall blush,
The interest never paid after three years,
When I demand my principal. And his servants
Who from a slavish fear pai'd her obedience
By him exacted; now when they are mine
Will grow familiar friends, and as such use me,
Being certain of the mildness of my temper,
Which my change of fortune, frequent in most men
Has not the power to alter.

Lord. Yet take heed Sir
You ruin it not with too much lenity,
What his fit severity raised.

Lady. And we fall from
That height we have maintained.

Luke. Fle build it higher,
To admiration higher. With disdain
I look upon these habits, no way suiting
The wife, and daughters of a knighted Citizen
Blessed with abundance.

Lord. There Sir, I join with you;
A fit decorum must be kept, the Court
Distinguished from the City.

Luke. With your favor
I know what you would say, but give me leave
In this to be your advocate. You are wide,
Wide the whole region in what I purpose.
Since all the titles, honors, long descents
Borrow their gloss from wealth, the rich with reason
May challenge their perogatives. And it shall be
My glory, nay a triumph to revive
In the pomp that these shall shine, the memory
Of the Roman matrons, who kep't captive Queens
To be their handmaids. And when you appear
Like Juno in full majesty, and my Neeces
Like Iris, Hebe, or what deities else
Old Poets fancy; your crammed ward-robes richer
Then various natures, and draw down the envy
of our western world upon you, only hold me
your vigilant Hermes with aeriall wings,
My Caduceus my strong zeal to serve you,
Pressed to fecth in all ra^ities may delight you,
And am made immortal.

Lord. A strange frenzy.

Luke. Off with these rags, and then to bed. There dream
Of future greatness, which when you awake
I Will make a certain truth: but I must be
A doer, not a promiser. The performance
Requiring host, I kiss your hands, and leave you.
Exit Luke.
Lord. Are we all turned statues: have his strange words charmed us?
What muse you on Lady?

Lady. Do not trouble me.

Lord. Sleep you too, young ones?

Anne. Swift winged time till now
Was never tedious to me. Would 'twere night.

Mary. Nay morning rather.

Lord. Can you grouud your faith
On such impossibilities? have you so soon
Forgot your good Husband?

Lady. He was a vanity
I must no more remember.

Lord. Excellent!
You your kind Father?

Anne. Such an Uncle never
Was read of in Story!

Lord. Not one word in answer
Of my demands?

Mary. You are but a Lord, and know
My thoughts soar higher.

Lord. Admirable! I will leave you
To your Castles in the Air, when I relate this
It will exceed belief, but he must know it.
Exit Lord.
Stargaze. Now I may boldly speak: May it please you Madam,
To look upon your Vassal; I foresaw this,
The Stars assured it.

Lady. I begin to feel
My self another woman.

Stargaze. Now you shall find
All my predictions true, and nobler matches
Prepared for my young Ladies.

Milliscent. Princely Husbands.

Anne. I Will go no less.

Mary. Not a word more,
Provide my night-rayl.

Millisc. What shall we be to morrow.
Exeunt
Actus tertius, Scena tertia.
Enter Luke with a key.
Luke. It Was no fantastic object, but a truth
A real truth. Nor dream I did not slumber,
And could wake ever with a brooding eye
To gaze upon it! It did endure the touch,
I saw, and felt it. Yet what I beheld
And handled often, did so transcend beleese
(My wonder, and astonishment passed ore)
I faintly could give credit to my senses.
Thou dumb magician that without a charm
Did make my entrance easy, to possess
What wise men wish, and toil for. Hermes Moly;
Sybilla's golden bough; the great Elixar,
Imagined only by the Alchymist
Compared with thee are shadows, thou the substance.
And guardian of felicity. No marvail,
My brother made thy place of rest his bosom,
Thou being the keeper of his heart, a mistress
To be hugged ever. In by corners of
This sacred room, silver in bags heaped up
Like billets sawed, and ready for the fire,
Unworthy to hold fellowship with bright gold
That flowed about the room, concealed it self.
There needs no artificial light, the splendour
Makes a perpetual day there, night and darkness
By that still burning lamp for ever banished.
But when guided by that, my eyes had made
Discovery of the caskets, and they opened,
Each sparkling diamond from it self shot forth
A pyram'd of flames, and in the roof
Fix it a glorious Star, and made the place
Heavens abstract, or Epitome. Rubies, Saphires, and ropes of Orient pearl;
these seen I could not
But look on with contempt, And yet I found
What weak credulity could have no faith in
A treasure far exceeding these, Here lay
A manor bound fast in a skin of parchment,
The wax continuing hard, the acres melting.
Here a sure deed of gift for a market town,
If not redeemed this day, which is not in
The unthrists power. There being scarce one shire
In Wales or Englands where my moneys are not
Lent out at usurie, the certain hook
To draw in more. I am sublimed! gross earth
Supports me not. I walk on air! who is there
Theivs, raise the street, thievs!
Enter Lord, Sir John, Lacie, and Plenty, as Indians.
Lord. What strange passion's this?
Have you your eyes? do you know me?

Luke. You, my Lord!
I do: but this retinue, in these shapes too,
May well excuse my fears. When it is your pleasure
That I should wait upon you, give me leave
To do it at your own house, for I must tell you,
Things as they now are with me, well considered,
I do not like such visitants.

Lord. Yesterday
When you had nothing, praise your poverty for it,
You could have sung secure before a thief;
But now you are growu rich, doubts and suspicions,
And needless fears possess you. Thank a good brother,
But let not this exalt you.

Luke. A good brother:
Good in his conscience, I confess, and wise,
In giving over the world. But his estate
Which your Lordship may conceive great, no way answers
The general opinion. Alas,
With a great charge, I am left a poor man by him.

Lord. A poor man, say you?

Luke. Poor, compared with what
It Is thought I do possess. Some little land,
Fair household furniture; a few good debts,
But empty bags I find: yet I will be
A faithful Steward to his wife and daughters,
And to the utmost of my power obey
His will in all things

Lord. I Will not argue with you
Of his estate, but bind you to performance
Of his last request, which is for testimony
Of his religious charity, that you would
Receive these Indians, lately sent him from
Virginia, into your house; and labor
At any rate with the best of your endeavors,
Assisted by the aids of our Divines,
To make 'm Christians.

Luke. Call you this, my Lord,
Religious charity? to send Infidelle,
Like hungry Locusts, to devour the bread
Should feed his family. I neither can,
Nor will consent to it.

Lord. Do not slight it, it is
With him a business of such consequence,
That should he only hear it is not embraced,
And cheerfully, in this his conscience aiming
At the saving of three souls, 'twill draw him over
To see it himself accomplished.

Luke. Heaven forbid
I should divert him from his holy purpose
To worldly cares again. I rather will
Sustain the burden, and with the converted
Feast the converters, who I know will prove
The greater feeders.

Sir John. Oh, ha, enewah Chrish bully leika.

Plenty. Enaula.

Lacy. Harrico botikia bonnery.

Luke. Ha! In this heathen language,
How is it possible our Doctors should
Hold conference with 'em? or I use the means
For their conversion?

Lord. That shall be no hinderance
To your good purposes. They have lived long
In the English Colonie, and speak our language
As their own Dialect; the business does concern you:
Mine own designs command me hence. Continue,
As in your poverty you were, a pious
And honest man
Exit.
Luke. That is, interpreted,
A slave, and beggar.

Sir John. You conceive it right,
There being no religion, nor virtue
But in abundance, and no vice but want.
All deities serve Plutus.

Luke. Oracle.

Sir John. Temples raised to our selves in the increase
Of wealth, and reputation, speak a wiseman;
But sacrifice to an imagined power,
Of which we have no sense, but in belief,
A superstitious fool.

Luke. True worldly wisdom.

Sir John. All knowledge else is folly.

Laoie. Now we are yours,
Be confident your better Angel is
Entered your house.

Plenty. There being nothing in
The compass of your wishes, but shall end
In their fruition to the full.

Sir John. As yet,
You do not know us, but when you understand
The wonders we can do, and what the ends were
That brought us hither, you will entertain us
With more respect.

Luke. There Is something whispers to me,
These are no common men; my house is yours,
Enjoy it freely: only grant me this,
Not to be seen abroad till I have heard
More of your sacred principles, pray enter.
You are learned Europians, and we worse
Then ignorant Americans.

Sir John. You shall find it.
Exeunt
Actus quartus, Scena prima.
Enter Dingem, Gettall, and Holdfast.
Dingem. NOt speak with him? with fear survey me better;
Thou figure of famine.

Gettal. Coming, as we do,
From his quondam patrons, his dear Ingles now,
The brave spark Tradewell.

Dingem. And the man of men
In the service of a woman, gallant Goldwire.
Enter Luke.
Holdfast. I know'em for his prentices without
These flourishes. Here are rude fellows Sir.

Dingem. Not yours, you rascal?

Holdfast. No, Don pimp: you may seek'em
In Bridewell, or the hole, here are none of your comrogues.

Luke. One of 'em looks as he would cut my throat:
Your business, friends?

Holdfast. I Will fetch a constable,
Let him answer him in the Stocks.

Dingem. Stir and thou dat'st.
Fright me with Bridewell and the Stocks? they are flea-bitings
I am familiar with

Luke. Pray you put up.
And sirrah hold your peace.

Dingem. Thy words a law,
And I obey. Live scrape-shoo, and be thankful.
Thou man of muck, and money, for as such
Know salute thee. The Suburbian gamsters
Have heard thy fortunes, and I am in person sent to congratulate.

Gettal. The news has reached
The ordinaries, and all the gamsters are
Ambitious to shake the golden golls
Of worshipful Mr. Luke. I come from Tradewell
Your fine facetious factor

Dingem. I from Goldwire.
He and his Hellen have prepared a banquet
With the appurtenances to entertain thee,
For I must whisper in thine ear, thou art
To be her Paris, but bring money with thee
To quit old scores.

Gettall. Blind chance has frowned upon
Brave Tradewell. He Is blown up, but not without
Hope of recovery, so you supply him
With a good round sum. In my house I can assure you
There Is half a million stirring.

Luke. What has he lost?

Gettal. Three hundred.

Luke. A trifle.

Gettall. Make it up a thousand,
And I will fit him with such tools as shall
Bring in a miriad.

Luke. They know me well,
Nor need you use such circumstances for'em.
What Is mine is theirs. They are my friends, not servants;
But in their care to enrich me, and these courses
The spetding means. Your name, I pray you?

Get. Gettall;
I have been many years an Ordinary-keeper,
My Box my poor Revenue.

Luke. Your name suits well
With your profession. Bid him bear up, he shall not
Sit 'ong on pennilesse-bench.

Gettall. There spoke an Angel.

Luke. You know Mistress Shave'm?

Gettall. The Pontifical Punk.

Luke. The same. Let him meet me there some two hours hence,
And tell Tom Goldwire I will then be with him,
Furnished beyond his hopes, and let your Mistress
Appear in her best trim.

Dinge'm. She will make thee young,
Old AEson. She is ever furnished with
Medaeas Drugs, Restoratives. I fly
To keep 'em sober till thy worship come,
They will be drunk with joy else.

Gettall. I Will run with you.
Exeunt Ding'em and Gettall.
Holdfast. You will not do as you say, I hope.

Luke. Inquire not,
I shall do what becoms me -- to the door. Knocking.
New Visitants: What are they?

Holdfast. A whole batch, Sir,
Almost of the same leaven: your needy Debtors,
Penury, Fortune, Hoyst.

Luke. They come to gratulate
The fortune fallen upon me.

Holdfast. Rather, Sir,
Like the others, to prey on you.

Luke. I am simple,
They know my good nature. But let 'em in however.

Holdf. All will come to ruin, I see beggary
Already knocking at the door. You may enter --
But use a conscience, and do not work upon
A tenderhearted Gentleman too much,
'Twill show like charity in you.
Enter Fortune, Penury and Hoyst.
Luke. Welcome Friends:
I know your hearts, and wishes; you are glad
You have changed your Creditor.

Penury. I weep for joy
To look upon his Worships face.

Fortune. His Worships?
I see Lord Major written on his forehead;
The ^^ap of Maintenance, and City Sword
Born up in state before him.

Hoyst. Hospitals,
And a third Burse erected by his Honor.

Penury. The City Po^^ on the Pageant-day
Preferring him before Gresham.

Hoyst. All the Conduits
Spouting Canary Sack.

Fortune. Not a prisoner left,
Under ten pounds.

Penury. We his poor Beads-men feasting
Our neighbors on his bounty.

Luke. May I make good
Your prophecies, gentle friends, as I Will endeavor
To the utmost of my power.

Holdf. Yes, for one year,
And break the next.

Luke. You are ever prating, Sirrah:
Your present business, friends?

Fortune. Were your brother present,
Mine had been of some consequence; but now
The power lies in your Worships hand, it is little,
And will I know, as soon as asked, be granted.

Luke. 'I is very probable.

Fortune. The kind forbearance
Of my great debt, by your means, heaven praised for it,
Has raised my sunk estate. I have two Ships,
Which I long since gave lost, above my hopes
Returned from Barbary, and richly fraighted.

Luke. Where are they?

Fortune. Near Gravesend.

Luke. I am truly glad often.

Fortune. I find your worships charity, and dare swear so.
Now may I have your license, as I know
With willingness I shall, to make the best
Of the commodities, though you have execution,
And after judgment against all that is mine,
As my poor body, I shall be enabled
To make payment of my debts to all the world,
And leave my self a competence.

Luke. You much wrong me,
If you only doubt it. Yours Mr. Hoyst.

Hoyst It Is the surrendering back the morgage of
My lands, and on good terms, but three days patience;
By an Uncles death I have means lest to redeem it,
And cancel all the forfeited Bonds I sealed too
In my ^i^^ts to the Merchant, for I am
Resolved to leave off play, and turn good husband.

Luke. A good intent, and to be cherished in you.
Yours Penury.

Penury. My state stands as it did, Sir:
What I owed I ow, but can pay nothing to you.
Yet if you please to trust me with ten pounds more,
I can buy a commodity of a Sayler
Will make me a freeman. There Sir is his name;
And the parcels I am to deal for. Gives him a paper.

Luke. You are all so reasonable
In your demands, that I must freely grant 'em.
Some three hours hence meet me on the Exchange,
You shall be amply satisfied.

Penury. Heaven preserve you.

Fortune. Happy were London if within her walls
She had many such rich men.
Exeunt Fortune, Hoyst. and Penury.
Luke. No more, now leave me;
I am full of various thoughts. Be careful Holdfast
I have much to do.

Holdfast. And I something to say
Would you give me hearing.

Luke. At my better leisure
'Till my return, look well unto the Indians.
In the mean time do you as this directs you.
Exeunt
Actus quartus, Scena secunda.
Enter Goldwire, Tradewell. Shavem, Secret, Gettal, and Dingem.
Goldwire. ALl that is mine is theirs. Those were his words

Dingem. I am authentical.

Tradewell. And that I should not
Sit long on pennilesse bench.

Gettall. But suddenly start up
A gamster at the height, and cry at all.

Shavem. And did he seem to have an inclination
To toy with me?

Dingem. He wished you would put on
Your best habiliments, for he resolved
To make a joviall day on it.

Goldwire. Hug him close wench,
And thou may'it eat gold, and amber. I well know him
For a most insatiate drabber. He has given,
Before he spent his own estate, which was
Nothing to the huge massehee's now possessed of,
A hundred pound a leap.

Shavem. Hell take my Doctor,
He should have brought me some fresh oil of Talk,
These Ceruses are common.

Secret. Troth sweet Lady,
The colors are well laid on.

Goldwire. And thick enough,
find that on my lips.

Shavem. Do you so, Jack sauce.
I Will keep'em further of.

Goldwire. But be assured first
Of a new mainteiner e're you cashire the old one.
But bind him fast by thy forceries, and thou shall
Be my revenue; the whole college study,
The reparation of thy ruined sace;
Thou shall have thy proper and bald-headed Coachman:
Thy Tailor, and Embroiderer shall kneel
To thee their Idol. Cheap Side and the Exchange shall court thy custom, and
thou shall forget
There ever was a Saint Martins. Thy procurer
Shall be sheathed in Velvet, and a reverend Vail
Pass her for a grave Marton. Have an cie to the door,
And let loud music when this Monarch enters
Proclaim his entertainment.

Dinge'm. That Is my office.
The Consort's ready.
Cornets flor.
Enter Luke.
Tradewell. And the god of pleasure
Mr. Luke our Comus enters.

Goldwire. Set your face in order,
I will prepare him. Live I to see this day,
And to acknowledge you my royal master?

Tradewell. Let the iron Chests fly open, and the gold
Rusty for want of use appear again.

Gettall. Make my ordinary flourish.

Shave'm. Welcome, Sir,
To your own Palace.
Music.
Goldwire. Kiss your Cleopatra,
And show your self in your magnificent bounties
A second Anthony.

Dinge'm. All the Nine Worthies.

Secret. Variety of pleasures wait on you.
And a strong back.

Luke. Give me leave to breath, I pray you.
I am astonished! all this preparation
For me? and this choice modest beauty wrought
To feed my appetite.

All. We are all your creatures.

Luke. A house well furnished.

Goldwire. At your own cost, Sir.
Glad I the Instrument. I prophesied
You should possess what now you do, and therefore
Prepared it for your pleasure. There Is no ragg
This Venus wears, but on my knowledge was
Derived from your brothers Cash. The Lease of the house
And Furniture, cost near a thousand, Sir.

Shave'm. But now you are master both of it and me.
I hope you will build elsewhere.

Luke. And see you placed
Fair one to your desert. As I live, friend Tradewell,
I hardly knew you, your clothes so well become you.
What is your loss; speak truth?

Tradewell. 300, Sir.

Gettall. But on a new supply he shall recover
The sum told twenty times over.

Shav'm. There is a banquet,
And after that a soft Couch that attends you.

Luke. I couple not in the daylight. Expectation
Heightens the pleasure of the night, my sweet one
Your musick's harsh, discharge it: I have provided
A better Confort, and you shall frollick it
In another place.
Cease music.
Goldw. But have you brought gold, and store Sir?

Tradew. I long to wear the Caster.

Goldw. I to appear
In a fresh habit.

Shave'm. My Mercer and my Silkman
Waited me two hours since.

Luke. I am no Porter
To carry so much gold as will supply
Your vaste desires, but I have taken order for you,
Enter Sheriff, Marshall, and Officers. You shall have what is fitting, and
they come here will see it performed. Do your offices: You have
My Lord Chief Justices Warrant for'c.

Sheriff. Seize em all.

Shave'm. The Citie-Marshal!

Goldwire. And the Sheriff. I know him.

Secret. We are betrayed.

Dinge'm. Undone.

Gettall. Dear M. Luke.

Goldwire. You cannot be so cruel: your persuasion
Chid us into these courses, often repeating,
Show your selves City-sparks, and hang up money.

Luke. True, when it was my brothers I contemned it,
But now it is mine own, the case is altered.

Tradewel. Will you prove your self a devil? tempt us to mischief,
And then discover it.

Luke. Argue that hereafter.
In the mean time, M. Goldwire, you that made
Your ten pound suppers; kep't your puncks at livery
In Brainford, Stanes, and Barnet; and this in London.
Held correspondence with your fellow-cashers,
Ka me, ka thee; And knew in your accompis
To cheat my brother, if you can evade me,
If there be law in London your fathers Bonds
Shall answer for what you are out.

Goldwire. You often told us
It was a bugbear.

Luke. Such a one as shall fright'em
Out of their estates to make me satisfaction,
To the utmost scruple. And for you Madam,
My Cleopatra, by your own confession
Your house, and all your movables are mine;
Nor shall you, nor your Matron need to trouble
Your Mercer, or your Silkman; a blew gown,
And a whip to boot, as I will handle it
Will serve the turnu in Bridewell, and these soft hands,
When they are inut'd to beating hemp, be scoured
In your penitent tears, and quite forget
Powders, and bitter almonds.

Shavem, Secret, Dingem. Will you show no mercy?

Luke. I am inexorable.

Gettall. I Will make bold
To take my leave, the gamsters stay my coming.

Luke. We must not part so, gentle M. Gettal.
Your box, your certain in-com, must pay back
Three hundred as I take it, or you lie by it.
There Is half a million stirring in your house,
This a poor trifle, Mr. Shriefe, and M. Marshall
On your perils do your offices.

Goldwire. Do thou cry now
Like a maudlin gamster after loss? I Will suffer
Like a Boman, and now in my misery,
In scorn of all thy wealth, to thy teeth tell thee
Thou were my pander.

Luke. Shall I hear this from
My prentice?

Marshall. Stop his mouth.

Sheriff. Away with them. Exeunt Sheriff, Marshal, and the rest

Luke. A prosperous omen in my entrance to
My altered nature. These house-thievs removed,
And what was lost, beyond my hopes recovered,
Will add unto my heap. Increase of wealth
Is the rich man's ambition, and mine
Shall know no bounds. The valiant Macedon
Having in his conceit subdued one world,
Lamented that there were no more to conquer: in my way he shall be my great
example.
And when my private house in crammed abundance
Shall prove the chamber of the City poor,
And Genoways banquers shall look pale with envy
When I am mentioned, I shall grieve there is
No more to be exhausted in one Kingdom.
Religion, conscience, charity, farewell.
To me you are words only, and no more,
All humane happiness consists in store.
Exit.
Actus quartus, Scena tertia.
Enter Sergeants, Fortune, Hoyst, Penury.
Fortune. A T M. Lukes suite? the action twenty thousand?

1 Sergeant. With two or three executions, which shall grind
You to powder when we have you in the Counter.

Fortune. Thou do belie him varlet. He, good gentleman,
Will weep when he hears how we are used.

^ Sergeant. Yes milstones.

Penury. He promised to lend me ten pound for a bargain,
He will not do it this way.

2 Sergeant. I have warrant
For what I have done. You are a poor fellow,
And there being little to be got by you,
In charity, as I am an officer,
I would not have seen you, but upon compulsion,
And for mine own security.

3 Sergeant. You are a gallant,
And I do you a courtesy; provided
That you have money. For a piece an hour
I Will keep you in the house, till you send for bail.

2 Sergeant. In the mean time yeoman run to the other Counter,
And search if there be ought else out against him.

3 Serjant. That Done, haste to his creditors. He Is a prize,
And as we are City pirates by our oaths,
We must make the best on it.

Hoyst. Do your worst, I care not.
I Will be removed to the Fleet, and drink and drabbe there
In spite of your teeth. I now repent I ever
Intended to be honest
Enter Luke.
3 Sergeant. Here he comes
You had best tell so.

Fortune. Worshipful Sir,
You come in time to free us from these ban-dogs.
I know you gave no way to it.

Penury. Or if you did,
'T was but to try our patience.

Hoyst. I must tell you
I do not like such trialls.

Luke. Are you Sergeants
Acquainted with the danger of a rescue,
Yet stand here prating in the street. The Counter
Is a safer place to parley in.

Fortune. Are you in earnest?

Luke. Y s faith, I will be satsfi'd to a token,
Or build upon it you rott there.

Fortune. Can a gentleman,
Of your soft and silken temper, speak such language?

Penury. So honest, so religious.

Hoyst. That preached
So much of charity for us to your brother?

Luke. Yes when I was in poverty it showed well,
But I inherit with his state, his mind,
And rougher nature. I grant, then I talked
For some ends to my self concealed, of pity,
The poor man's orisons; and such like nothing.
But what I thought you all shall feel, and with rigor.
Kind M. Luke says it. who paies for your attendance?
Do you wait gratis?

Fortune. Hear us speak.

Luke. While I,
Like the Adder stop mine ears. Or did I listen,
Though you spoke with the tongues of Angels to me
I am not to be altered.

Fortune. Let me make the best
Of my ships, and their freight.

Penury. Lend me the ten pounds you promised.

Hoyst. A day or two's patience to redeem my morgage,
And you shall be satisfied.

Fortune. To the utmost farthing.

Luke. I Will show some mercy; which is, that I will not
Torture you with false hopes, but make you know
What you shall trust to. Your Ships to my use
Are seized on. I have got into my hands
Your bargains from the Sailor, 'twas a good one
For such a petty sum. I will likewise take
The extremity of your Morgage, and the forfeit:
Of your several Bonds, the use, and principle
Shall not serve. Think of the basket, wretches,
And a Coal-sack for a winding sheet.

Fortune. Broker.

Hoyst. Jew.

Fortune. Imposer.

Hoyst. Cutthroat.

Fortune. Hypocrite.

Luke. Do, rail on.
Move mountains with your breath, it shakes not me,

Penury. On my knees I beg compassion my wife and children
Shall hourly pray for your worship.

Fortune. Mine betake thee
To the Devil thy tutor.

Penury. Look upon my tears.

Hoyst. My rage.

Fortune. My wrongs.

Luke. They are all a like to me.
Entreats, curses, prayers, or imprecations.
Do your duties Serjants, I am else where looked for.
Exit Luke.
3. Serjant. This your kind creditor?

2. Serjant. A vast villan rather.

Penury. See, see, the Sergeants pity us. Yet he is marble.

Hoist. Buried alive!

Fortune. There Is no means to avoid it.
Exeunt
Actus quartus, Scena quarta.
Enter Holdfast, Stargaze, and Milliscent.
Stargaze. NOt wait upon my Lady?

Holafast. Nor come at her,
You find it not in your Alminack.

Milliscent. Nor I have license
To bring her breakfast.

Holdfast. My new master has
Decreed this for a fasting day. She has feasted long
And after a carnivale Lent ever follows.

Milliscent. Give me the key of her wardrobe. You Will repent this:
I must know what Gown she will wear;

Holdfast. You are mistaken,
Dame president of the sweet meats. she and her daughters
Are turned Philosophers, and must carry all.
Their wealth about em. They have clothes laid in their chamber,
If they please to put em on, and without help too,
Or they may walk naked. You look M. Stargaze
As you had seen a strange comet, and had now foretold,
The end of the world, and on what day. And you,
As the wasps had broke into the galley-pots,
And eaten up your Apricocks.

Within Lady. Stargazer. Milliscent.

Milliscent. My Ladies voice.

Holdfast. Stir not, you are confined here.
Your Ladyship may approach them if you please,
But they are bound in this circle.

Within Lady. Mine own bees
Rebel against me. When my kind brother knows this
I will be so revenged.

Holdfast. The world's well alterd.
He Is your kind brother now. but yesterday
Your slave and jesting-stock.

Enter Lady, Anne, Mary, in course habit weeping.
Milliscent. What witch has transformed you?

Starg. Is this the glorious shape your cheating brother
Premised you should appear in?

Milliscent. My young Ladies
In buffin gowns, and green aprons! tear'em off,
Rather show all then be seen thus.

Holdfast. It Is more comely
I wis then their other whim-whams.

Millis. A french hood too;
Now it is out of fashion, a fools cap would show better

Lady. We are fooled indeed, by whose command are we used thus?
Enter Luke.
Holdf. Here he comes that can best resolve you.

Lady. O good brother!
Do you thus preserve your protestation to me?
Can Queens envy this habit? or did Juno
E're feast in such a shape?

Anne. You talked of Hebe,
Of Iris, and I know not what; but were they
Dres'd as we are; They were sure some Chandlers daughters
Bleaching linen in Moor-fields.

Mary. Or Exchange-wenches,
Coming from eating pudding-pies on a Sunday
At Pemlico, or Islington.

Luke. Save you Sister.
I now dare style you so: you were before
Too glorious to be looked on; now you appear
Like a City Matron, and my pretty Neeces
Such things as were born, and bred there. Why should you ape
The fashions of Court-Ladies? whose high titles
And pedegrees of long descen, give warrant
For their superfluous braverie? 'twas monstrous:
Till now you never looked lovely.

Lady. Is this spoken
In scorn?

Luke. Fie, no, with judgment. I make good
My promise, and now show you like your selves,
In your own natural shapes, and stand resolved
You shall continue so.

Lady. It is confessed Sir.

Luke. Sir! Sirrah. Use your old phrase, I can bear it.

Lady. That if you please forgotten. We acknowledge
We have deserved ill from you, yet despair not;
Though we are at your disposure, you will maintain us
Like your brothers wife, and daughters.

Luke. It Is my purpose.

Lady. And not make us ridiculous.

Luke. Admired rather,
As fair examples for our proud City dames,
And their proud brood to imitate: do not frown
If you do, I laugh, and glory that I have
The power in you to scourge a general vice,
And rise up a new Satyrist: but hear gently,
And in a gentle phrase I Will reprehend
Your late disguised deformity, and cry up
This decency, and neatness, with the advantage
You shall receive by 't.

Lady. We are bound to hear you.

Luke. With a soul inclined to learn. Your father was
An honest Country farmer. Good Man Humble,
By his neighbors never called master. Did your pride
Descend from him? but let that pass: your fortune,
Or rather your husbands industry, advanced you
To the rank of a Merchants wife. He made a Knight,
And your sweet mistris-ship, Ladyfi'd; you wore
Satin on solemn days, a chain of gold,
A Velvet hood, rich borders, and sometimes
A dainty Miniver cap, a silver pin
Headed with a pearl worth threepence, and thus far
You were priviledg'd, and no man envied it,
It being for the Cities honor, that
There should be a distinction between
The Wife of a Patritian, and Plebean.

Millis. Pray you leave preaching, or chcose some other text;
Your Rhetoric is too moving, for it makes
Your auditory weep.

Luke. Peace, chattering Mag-pie,
I Will treat of you anon: but when the height
And dignity of Londons blessings grew
Contemptible, and the name Lady Maioress
Became a byword, and you scorned the means
By which you were raised, my brothers fond indulgence
Giving the reigns to it; and no object pleased you
But the glittering pomp, and bravery of the Court.
What a strange, nay monstrous Metamorphosis followed!
No English workman then could please your fancy;
The French, and Tuscan dress your whole discourse;
This Baud to prodigality entertained
To buz into your ears, what shape this Countess
Appeared in the last mask; and how it drew
The young Lords eyes upon her; and this usher
Succeeded in the eldest prentices place
To walk before you.

Lady. Pray you end.

Holdfast. Proceed Sir,
I could fast almost a prentiship to hear you.
You touch'em so to the quick.

Luke. Then as I said,
The reverend hood cast off, your borrowed hair
Powdered, and curled, was by your dressers art
Formed like a Coronet, hanged with diamonds,
And the richest Orient pearl: Your Carkanets
That did adorn your neck of equal value:
Your Hungerland bands, and Spanish quellio russes:
Great Lords and Ladies feasted to survey
Embroidered petticoats: and ficknesse feigned
That your night rayls of forty pounds a piece
Might be seen with envy of the visitants;
Rich pantables in ostentation shown,
And roses worth a family; you were served in plate;
Stirred not a foot without your Coach. And going
To Church not for devotion, but to show
Your pomp, you were tickled when the beggars cried
Heaven save your honor, this idolatric
Paid to a painted room.

Holdfast. Nay, you have reason
To blubber all of you

Luke. And when you lay
In child bed, at the Christning of this minx,
I well remember it, as you had been
An absolute princess, since they have no more,
Three several chambers hung. The first with Arras,
And that for waiters; the second Grimson Satin
For the meaner sort of guests; the third of Skarlet,
Of the rich Tirian die; a Canopie
To cover the brats cradle: you in state
Like Pompie's Julia.

Lady. No more I pray you.

Luke. Of this be sure you shall not. I Will cut off
What ever is exorbitant in you,
Or in your Daughters, and reduce you to
Your natural forms, and habits: not in revenge
Of your base usage of me, but to fright
Others by your example: It Is decreed
You shall serve one another, for I will
Allow no waiter to you. Out of doors
With these uselest drones,
Whilst the Act Plays, the Footstep, little Table, and Arras hung up for the
Musicians.
Holdfast. Will you pack?

Milliscent. Not till I have
My truncks along with me.

Luke. Not a rag, you came
Hither without a box.

Stargaze. You Will show to me
I hope Sir more compassion.

Holdfast. 'Troth I Will be
Thus far a suitor for him. He has printed
An Almanac for this year at his own charge,
Let him have the impression with him to set up with.

Luke. For once I Will be entreated: let it be
Thrown to him out of the window.

Stargaze. O cursed Stars
That reigned at my nativity! how have you cheated
Your poor observer.

Anne. Must we part in tears?

Mary. Farewell, good Milliscent.

Lady. I am sick, and meet with
A rough Physician. O my pride! and scorn!
How justly am I punished!

Mary. Now we suffer
For our stubbornness and disobedience
To our good father.

Anne. And the base conditions,
We imposed upon our Suitors.

Luke. Get you in,
And Catterwall in a corner.
Lady, Anne, Mary, go off at one door; Stargaze and Millisc. at the other.
Lady. There Is no contending.

Luke. How like thou my carriage, Holdfast?

Holdfast. Well in some part,
But it rellishes I know not how, a little
Of too much tyranny.

Luke. Thou art a fool:
He Is cruel to himself, that dares not be
Severe to those that used him cruelly.
Exeunt?
Actus quintus, Scena prima.
Enter Luke, Sir John, Lacie and Plenty.
Luke. YOu care not then, as it seems, to be converted
To our religion.

Sir John. We know no such word,
Nor power but the Devil, and him we serve for fear,
Not love.

Luke. I am glad that charge is saved.

Sir John. We put
That trick upon your brother, to have means
To come to the City. Now to you we will discover
The close design that brought us, with assurance
If you lend your aids to furnish us with that
Which in the Colonie was not to be purchased,
No merchant ever made such a return
For his most precious venture, as you shall
Receive from us; far, far, above your hopes,
Or fancy to imagine.
Musicians come down to make ready for the song at Aras.
Luke. It must be
Some strange commodity, and of a dear value,
(Such an opinion is planted in me,
You will deal fairly) that I would not hazard.
Give me the name often.

Lacie. I fear you will make
Some scruple in your conscience to grant it.

Luke. Conscience! No, no; so it may be done with safety,
And without danger of the Law.

Plenty. For that
You shall sleep securely. Nor shall it diminish,
But add unto your heap such an increase,
As what you now possess shall appear an Atome
To the mountain it brings with it.

Luke. Do not rack me
With expectation.

Sir John. Thus then in a word:
The Devil. Why start you at his name? if you
Desire to wallow in wealth and worldly honors,
You must make haste to be familiar with him.
This Devil, whose Priest I am, and by him made
A deep Magician (for I can do wonders)
Appeared to me in Virginia, and commanded
With many stripes (for that is his cruel custom)
I should provide on pain of his fierce wrath
Against the next great sacrifice, at which
We grovelling on our faces, fall before him,
Two Christian Virgins, that with their pure blood
Might die his horrid Altars, and a third
(In his hate to such embraces as are lawful)
Married, and with your cerimonious rites
As an oblation unto Hecate,
And wanton Lust her favorite.

Luke. A divellish custom:
And yet why should it startle me? there are
Enough of the Sex fit fort his use: but Virgins,
And such a Matron as you speak of, hardly to be wrought to it.

Plenty. A Mine of Gold for a fee
Waits him that undertakes it, and performs it.

Lacie. Know you no distressed Widow, or poor
Maids, whose want of dower, though well born,
Makes'em weary of their own Country?

Sir John. Such as had rather be
Miserable in another world, then where
They have surfeited in felicity?

Luke. Give me leave,
I would not loose this purchase. A grave Matron!
And two pure virgins. Umph! I think my Sister
Though proud was ever honest; and my Neeces
Untainted yet. Why should not they be shipped
For this employment? they are burden some to me,
And eat too much. And if they stay in London,
They will find friends that to my loss will force me
To composition. 'Twere a Masterpiece
If this could be effected. They were ever
Ambitious of title. Should I urge
Matching with these they shall live Indian Queens,
It may do much. But what shall I feel here,
Knowing to what they are designed? They absent,
The thought of them will leave me. It shall be so.
I Will furnish you, and to indear the service
In mine own family, and my blood too.

Sir John. Make this good, and your house shall not
Contain the gold we will send you.

Luke. You have seen my Sister, and my two Neeces?

Sir John. Yes Sir.

Luke. These persuaded
How happily they shall live, and in what pomp
When they are in your kingdoms, for you must
Work'em a belief that you are Kings.

Plenty. We are so.

Luke. I Will put it in practice instantly. Study you
For moving language. Sister, Neeces. How
Enter Lady, Ann, Mary. Still mourning? dry your eyes, and clear these clouds
That do obscure your beauties. Did you believe
My personated reprehension; though
It showed like a rough anger, could be serious?
Forget the fright I put you in. My ends
In humbling you was, to set off the height
Of honor, principle honor, which my studies
When you least expect it shall confer upon you.
Still you seem doubtful: be not wanting to
Your selves, nor let the strangeness of the means,
With the shadow of some danger, render you
Incredulous.

Lady. Our usage has been such,
As we can faintly hope that your intents,
And language are the same.

Luke. I Will change those hopes
To certainties.

Sir John. With what art he winds about them!

Luke. What will you say? or what thanks shall I look for?
If now I raise you to such eminence, as
The wife, and daughters of a Citizen
Never arrived at. Many for their wealth (I grant)
Have written Ladies of honor, and some few
Have higher titles, and that is the farthest rise
You can in England hope for. What think you
If I should mark you out a way to live
Queens in another climate?
The Banques ready. One Chair, and Wine.
Ann. We desire
A competence.

Mary. And prefer our Countries smoke
Before outlandish fire.

Lady. But should we listen
To such impossibilities, it is not in
The power of man to make it good.

Luke. I Will do it.
Nor is this seat of majesty far removed.
It is but to Virginia.

Lady. How, Virginia!
High Heaven forbid. Remember Sir, I beseech you,
What creatures are shipped thither.

Ann. Condemned wretches,
Forfeited to the law.

Mary. Strumpets and Bauds,
For the abomination of their life,
Spewed out of their own Country.

Luke. Your false fears
Abuse my noble purposes. Such indeed
Are sent as slaves to labor there, but you
To absolute sovereignty. Observe these men,
With reverence observe them. They are Kings,
Kings of such spacious territories, and dominions:
As our great Brtitain measured, will appear
A garden to it.

Lacie. You shall be adored there
As Goddesses.

Sir John. Your litters made of gold
Supported by your vassalls, proud to bear
The burden on their shoulders.

Plenty. Pomp, and ease,
With delicates that Europe never knew,
Like Pages shall wait on you.

Luke. If you have minds
To entertain the greatness offered to you,
With outstretched arms, and willing hands embrace it.
But this refused, imagine what can make you
Most miserable here, and rest assured,
In storms it falls upon you: take em in,
And use your best persuasion. If that fail.
I Will send em aboard in a dry fat.

Sir John. Be not moved Sir.
We Will work'em to your will: yet e're we part,
Your worldly cares deferred, a little mirth
Would not misbecome us.
Exeunt Lacie. Plenty, Lady, Ann, Mary.
Luke. You say well. And now
It coms into my memory, this is my birthday,
Which with solemity I would observe,
But that it would ask cost.

Sir John. That shall not grieve you.
By my art I will prepare you such a feast,
As Persia in her height of pomp, and riot
Did never equal: and ravishing Music
As the Italian Princes seldom heard
At their greatest entertainments. Name your guests.

Luke. I must have none.

Sir John. Not the City Senate?

Luke. No.
Nor yet poor neighbors. The first would argue me
Of foolish oftentation, The latter
Of too much hospitality, and a virtue
Grown obsolete, and useless. I will sit
Alone, and surfeit in my store, while others
With envy pine at it. My Genius pampered
With the thought of what I am, and what they suffer
I have marked out to misery.

Sir John. You shall;
And something I will add, you yet conceive not,
Nor will I be flow-pac'd.

Luke. I have one business,
And that dispatched I am free.

Sir John. About it Sir,
Leave the rest to me.

Luke. Till now I never loved magic.
Exeunt.
Actus quintus, Scena secunda.
Enter Lord, Old Goldwire, and Old Tradewell.
Lord. BElieve me, gentlemen! I never was
So cozened in a fellow. He disguised
Hypocrisy in such a cunning shape
Of real goodness, that I would have sworn
This devil a Saint. M. Goldwire, and M. Tradewell,
What do you mean to do? put on.

Old Goldwire. With your Lordships favor.

Lord. I Will have it so.

Old Tradew. Your will, my Lord, excuses
The rudeness of our manners.

Lord. You have received
Penitent letters from your sons I doubt not?

Old Tradew. They are our only sons.

Old Goldw. And as we are fathers,
Remembering the errous of our youth,
We would pardon slips in them.

Old Tradewell. and pay for'em
In a moderate way.

Old Goldw. In which we hope your Lordship
Will be our mediator.

Lrrd. All my power,
Enter Luke. You freely shall command. It Is he! you are well met.
And to my wish. And wondrous brave,
Your habit speaks you a Merchant royal.

Luke. What I wear, I take not upon trust.

Lord. Your betters may, and blush not for it.

Luke. If you have naught else with me
But to argue that, I will make bold to leave you.

Lord. You are very peremptory, pray you stay.
I once held you an upright honest man.

Luke. I am honesten now
By a hundred thousand pound, I thank my stars for it,
Upon the Exchange, and if your late opinion
Be altered, who can help it? good my Lord
To the point. I have other business then to talk
Of honesty, and opinions.

Lord. Yet you may
Do well, if you please, to show the one, and merit
The other from good men, in a case that now
Is offered to you.

Luke. What is it? I am troubled.

Lord. Here are two gentlemen, the fathers of
Your brothers prentices.

Luke. Mine, my Lord, I take it.

Lord. Mr. Goldwire, and Mr. Tradewell.

Luke. They are welcome, if
They come prepared to satisfy the damage
I have sustained by their sons.

Old Goldw. We are, so you please
To use a conscience.

Old Tradew. Which we hope you will do,
For your own worships sake.

Luke. Conscience, my friends,
And wealth are not always neighbors. Should I part
With what the law gives me, I should suffer mainly
In my reputation. For it would convince me
Of indiscretion. Nor will you I hope move me
To do my self such prejudice.

Lord. No moderation.

Luke. They cannot look for it, and preserve in
Me a thriving Citizens credit. Your bonds lie
For your sons truth, and they shall answer all
They have run out. The masters never prosper'd
Since gentlemen's sons grew prentices. When we look
To have our business done at home, they are
Abroad in the Tenis-court, or in partridge-alley,
In Lambeth Marsh, or a cheating Ordinary
Where I found your sons. I have your Bonds, look to it.
A thousand pounds a piece, and that will hardly
Repair my losses.

Lord Thou dare not show thy self
Such a devil.

Luke. Good words.

Lord. Such a cutthroat. I have heard of
The usage of your brothers wife, and daughters.
You shall find you are not lawless, and that your
Moneys cannot justify your villainies.

Luke. I endure this.
And good my Lord, now you talk in time of moneys,
Pay in what you owe me. And give me leav to wonder
Your wisdom should have leisure to consider
The business of these gentlemen, or my carriage
To my Sister, or my Neeces, being your self
So much in my danger.

Lord. In thy danger?

Luke. mine.
I find in my counting house a Manor pawned,
Pawned, my good Lord, Lacie-Mannour, and that Manor
From which you have the title of a Lord,
And it please your good Lordship. You are a noble man
Pray you pay in my moneys. The interest
Plenty ready to speak within Will eat saster in it, then Aqua fortis in iron.
Now though you bear me hard, I love your Lordship.
I grant your person to be priviledg'd
From all arrests. Yet there lives a foolish creature
Called an Under-sheriffe, who being well paid, will serve
Au extent on I ords, or Lowns land. Pay it in,
I would be loath your name should sink. Or that
Your hopeful son, when he returns from travel,
Should find you my lord without land. You are angry
For my good counsel. Look you to your Bonds: had I known
Of your coming, believe it I would have had Sergeants ready:
Lord how you fret! but that a Tavern's near
You should taste a cup of Muscadine in my house,
To wash down sorrow, but there it will do better,
I know you will drink a health to me.
Exit Luke.
Lord. To thy damnation.
Was there ever such a villain! Heaven forgive me
For speaking so unchristianly, though he deserves it.

Old Goldm. We are undone.

Old Tradem. Our families quite ruined.

Lord. Take courage gentlemen. Comfort may appear.
And punishment overtake him, when he least expects it.
Exeunt
Actus quintus, Scena ultima.
Enter Sir John and Holdfast.
Sir John. BE silent on your life.

Holdfast. I am or'ejoy'd.

Sir John. Are the pictures placed as I directed?

Holdfast. Yes Sir.

Sir John. And the musicians ready?

Holdfast. All is done
As you commanded.
at the door.
Sir John. Make haste, and be careful,
You know your cue, and postures.

Plenty within. We are perfect.

Sir John. It Is well: the rest are come too?

Holdfast. And disposed of
To your own wish.

Sir John. Set forth the table. So.
Enter Servants with a rich Banquet. A persit Banquet. At the upper end,
A table, and rich Banquet. His chair in state, he shall feast like a Prince.

Holdfast. And rise like a Dutch hangman.
Enter Luke.
Sir John. Not a word more.
How like you the preparation? fill your room,
And taste the cates, then in your thought consider
A rich man, that lives wisely to himself,
In his full height of glory.

Luke. I can brook
No rival in this happiness. How sweetly
These dainties, when unpay'd for, please my palate!
Some wine. Joves Nectar. Brightness to the star
That governed at my birth Shoot down thy influence,
And with a perpetuity of being
Continue this selicity, not gained
By vows to Saints above, and much less purchased
By the thriving industry; nor fallen upon me
As a reward to piety, and religion,
Or service for my Country. I owe all this
To dissimulation, and the shape
I wore of goodness. Let my brother number
His beads devoutly, and believe his alms
To beggars, his compassion to his debtors,
Will wing his better part, disrobed of flesh,
To sore above the firmament. I am well,
And so I surfeit here in all abundance;
Though styled a cormorant, a cutthroat, Jew,
And prosecuted with the fatal curses
Of widows, undone Orphans, and what else
Such as malign my state can load me with,
I will not envy it. You promised music?

Sir John. And you shall hear the strength and power
Of it, the spirit of Orpheus raised to make it good,
And in those ravishing strains with which he moved
Charon and Cerberus to give him way
To fetch from hell his lost Euridice,
Appear fwifter then thought.
Music. At one door Cerberus, at the other, Charon, Orpheus, Chorus.
Luke. It Is wondrous strange.

Sir John. Does not the object and the accent take you?

Luke. A pretty fable. But that music should
Plenty and Lacie ready behind. Alter in friends their nature, is to me
Impossible. Since in my self I find
What I have once decreed, shall know no change.

Sir John. You are constant to your purposes, yet I think
That I could stagger you.

Luke. How?

Sir John. Should I present
Your servants, debtors, and the rest that suffer
By your fit severity, I presume the sight
Would move you to compassion.

Luke. Not a mote.
The music that your Orpheus made, was harsh
To the delight I should receive in hearing
Their cries, and groans, If it be in your power
I would now see'em.

Sir John. Spirits in their shapes
Shall show them as they are. But if it should move you?

Luke. If it do. May I never find pity.

Sir John. Be your own judge.
Appear as I commanded.
Sad music. Enter Goldwire, and Tradewell as from prison. Fortune, Hoyst,
Penury following after them. Shavem in a blew gown, Secret, Dingem, Old
Tradewel, and Old Goldwire with Sergeants. As erected they all kneel to Luke,
heaving up their hands for mercy. Stargaze with a pack of Alminacks,
Milliscent.
Luke. Ha, ha, ha!
This move me to compassion? or raise
One sign of seeming pity in my face?
You are deceived: it rather renders me more flinty, and obdurate. A South wind
Shall sooner soften marble, and the rain
That slides down gently from his flaggy wings
Overflow the Alps: then knees, or tears, or groans
Shall wrest compunction from me. It Is my glory
That they are wretched, and by me made so,
It sets my happiness off. I could not triumph
If these were not my captives. Ha! my tarriers
As it appears have seized on these old foxes,
As I gave order. New addition to
My Scene of mirth. Ha, ha! They now grow tedioue
Let Them be removed, some other object. If
Your art can show it.

Sir John. You shall perceive it is boundless.
Yet one thing real if you please?

Luke. What is it?

S. Jo. Your Neeces er'e they put to Sea, crave humbly
Though ausent in their bodies, they may take leave
Of their late suitors statues.
Enter Lady, Anne, and Mary.
Luke. There they hang,
In things different I am tractable.

Sir John. There pay your vows you have liberty.

Ann. O sweet figure
Of my abused Lacie! when removed
Into another world; I Will daily pay
A sacrifice of sight, to thy remembrance;
And with a shower of tears strive to wash of
The stain of that contempt, my foolish pride,
And insolence threw upon thee.

Marie. I had been
Too happy, if I had enjoyed the substance,
But far unworthy of it, now I shall
Thus prostrate to thy statue.

Lady. My kind husband,
Blessed in my misery, from the monastery
To which my disobedience confined thee,
With thy souls eye, which distance cannot hinder,
Look on my penitence. O that I could
Call back time past, thy holy vow dispensed,
With what humility would I observe
My long neglected duty.

Sir John. Does not this move you?

Luke. Yes as they do the statues, and her sorrow
My absent brother. If by your magic art
You can give life to these, or bring him hither
To witness her repentance, I may have
Perchance some feeling of it.

Sir John. For your sport
You shall see a Masterpiece. Here Is nothing but
A superficies, colors, and no substance.
Sit still, and to your wonder, and amazement
I Will give these Organs. This the sacrifice
To make the great work perfect.
Enter Lacie and Plenty.
Luke. Prodigious.

S. John. Nay they have life, and motion. Descend.
And for your absent brother. This washed off
Against your will you shall know him.
Enter Lord and the rest.
Luke. I am lost.
Guilt strikes me dumb.

Sir John. You have seen my Lord the pageant.

Lord. I have, and am ravished with it.

S. John. What think you now
Of this clear soul? this honest pious man?
Have I stripped him bare. Or will your Lordship have
A farther trial of him? it is not in a wolf to change his natute.

Lord. I long since confessed my errors

S. John. Look up, I forgive you,
And seal your pardons thus.

Lady. I am too full
Of joy to speak it.

Ann. I am another creature,
Not what I was.

Mary. I vow to show my self
When I am married, an humble wife,
Not a commanding mistress.

Plenty. On those terms
I gladly thus embrace you.

Lacte. Welcome to
My bosom. As the one half of my self,
I Will love you, and cherish you.

Goldwire. Mercv.

Tradewell and the rest. Good Sir mercy.

Sir John. This day is sacred to it. All shall find me
As far as lawful pity can give way to it,
Indulgent to your wishes, though with loss
Unto my self. My kind, and honest brother,
Looking into your self, have you seen the Gorgon?
What a golden dream you have had in the possession
Of my estate? but here is a revocation
That wakes you out of it. Monster in nature
Revengefull, avaritious Atheist,
Transcending all example. But I shall be
A sharer in thy crimes, should I repeat 'em.
What will thou do? Turn hypocrite again,
With hope dissimulation can aid thee?
Or that one eye will shed a tear in sign
Of sorrow for thee? I have warrant to
Make bold with mine own, pray you uncase. This key too
I must make bold with. Hide thy self in some desert,
Where good men never may find thee: or in justice
Pack to Virginia, and repent. Not for
Those horrid ends to which thou did design these.

Luke. I care not where I go, what is done with words
Cannot be undone.
Exit Luke.
Lady. Yet Sir, show some mercy;
Because his cruelty to me, and mine,
Did good upon us.

Sir John. Of that at better leisure,
As his penitencie shall work me. Make you good
Your promised reformation, and mistrust
Our City dames, whom wealth makes proud, to move
In their own spheres, and willingly to confess
In their habits, manners, and their highest port,
A distance 'twixt the City, and the Court.
Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.

