SEVERAL LAWS AND ORDERS Made at the GENERAL COURT Held at Boston, the 23d of
May, 1666. And on the 11th of October following.
PRinted and Published by Order of the General Court, the said 11th of October,
1666.
By EDWARD RAWSON Secr.
WHereas this Court has already provided for the well Ordering and settling the
Militia of this Commonwealth, as in the Law tit. Military, yet, forasmuch as
many Complaints are presented to this Court, Major General and Majors power to
see that all the Arms of the Country be readily fixed.
that the said Orders are not so attended as is to be desired, considering the
present Juncture of affairs between our English Nation and foreign Enemies,
who are now engaged in a bloody war, which calls for a prudential endeavrur
of our own safety, against any foreign Invasion or sudden Surprizal; This
Court does therefore Order, and Enact, that the said Military Laws be by all
persons therein mentioned, forthwith attended in all respects, and for the
better effecting the same, Penalty for defects of Inferior Officers.
the Major General is required forthwith by warrant under his hand to the
Majors of the several Regiments, require them to make diligent inquiry into the
state of the several Companies under their charge, and to be certified under
the hands of the Commission Officers, or Chief Officers where no Commission
Officers are, of each Company, of all defects of Arms, Ammunition, or otherwise
in every respect, and the said Majors respectively are required, to give speedy
advice to the Major General what posture their said Regiments are in, and
wherein the said Majors cannot of themselves forthwith make redress of any
defects in the said Companies the said Majors with the advice of the Major
General have hereby power to use all lawful means to effect the same. And all
inferior Officers are hereby required to yield ready obedience to all such
warrants sent to them by the said Majors respectively, or Major General, upon
the penalty of five pounds for every defect, All the fines to go to procure a
stock of Powder for the company where the defects arise.
to be levied by distress by such person as the said Major General and Majors
of the Regiments shall depute, which said fines shall be for a stock of Powder
for the said Company where the defects arise from time to time.

And whereas several Towns in this Jurisdiction, are not under the Command of
any Sergeant Major, as Dover, Portsmouth, etc, as also the Towns of the County
of Hampshire; The several Towns that are not under Majors of Regiments to be
Regulated and Ordered by the Major General.
It is Ordered that the Major General take care for regulating of the Military
affairs of such Towns, till they are brought under a Major as in other
Counties: and all Military Officers of such places are required Obedience to
the Orders of the Major General from time to time, upon the penalty above
mentioned, for every defect.

Order to prevent Drunkenness in Indians.
WHereas the sin of Drunkenness amongst the Indians does much increase,
notwithstanding the Laws provided against that crying sin; This Court does
therefore Order, Their strong Liquors. etc. to be seized by any person.
that any person or persons that shall see, know or find, any Indian with any
strong Liquors, Wine, or strong Drink, that such Indians have any way gotten
without order, as the Law directs; shall have power to seize the same, On
refusal to confess etc. to be committed to Prison.
and to deliver the said strong drink to the Constables of the Town or Place
where such Indians are found, with their persons to be conveyed before some
Magistrate, or Commissioner, who have power to deal in such cases, and such
Indians as are found drunk, Their accusation against persons to be evidence
unless ye party cear himself on Oath, etc.
being apprehended, and will not confess how, or where they had the said Wine,
Liquors or strong Drink, shall be secured or imprisoned, until they make a just
acknowledgement where they had their Drink aforesaid, or committed to the house
of Correction, and there labor to discharge the charge of their provision.

And if any such Indian do accuse any person for selling or delivering strong
drink unto them, If Drunk to pay ten shillings or be whipped with ten stripes,
etc.
such Indian accusation shall be accounted valid, against any such persons
accused, except such persons shall clear themselves by taking their Oath to the
contrary, any Law, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is also further Ordered that whatsoever Indian shall hereafter be taken
Drunk, shall pay the sum of ten shillings or else be whipped, by laying on ten
stripes, according to the discretion of the Judge, whether Magistrate or
Commissioner, who shall have cognizance of the case: and in all Towns where no
Magistrate or Commissioners are, such cases shall be judged by the select men
or major part of them.

WHereas the Law tit. Military, Sect. 7. Requires every Pikeman to be
completely furnished (amongst other weapons with a sufficient Corslet) This
Court considering that Corslets are wanting to many Soldiers in several
Companies and that supplies therein are not easily to be attained; Pikemen to
provide Buffe Coats or Quilted coats in stead.
It is therefore now Ordered, and by the Authority of this Court Enacted, that
every Pikeman within this Jurisdiction, shall be completely furnished, either
with a sufficient Corslet, Buffe Coat, or Quilted Coat, such as shall be
allowed by the Chief Officer, under whose command they from time to time shall
serve, upon the penalty in the recited Law already expressed, any Law, Custom
or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.

AS an Addition and explanation of the Law tit. This Court finding that several
inconveniences and troubles do arise about Strayes, Addition to the Law of
Strayes.
Cattle and Horses etc. and that the temp^ation may be too great on some
persons in remote Towns and Farms, to tak^ up cattle, etc. and make Stray^s of
them, To be cried in the Town on which they have the Brand mark.
the whole benefit redounding to themselves; This Court does Order for the time
to come, that all Strayes shall be first cried in that Town of which they have
the Brand-mark, and that all such Strayes and other lost Goods contained in the
said Law, To be entered with the Recorder of the County.
shall be entered with the County Recorder in each County, and by him
transferred to the Country Treasurer within one Month, and in case the said
Goods and Strayes are not owned within one year, as is therein expressed, Half
to the Country and the other half to the finder.
then the one half, or the value of one half shall be to the use of the
Country, and the other half to the finder, the charges being first paid out
of the whole.

WHereas this Court has encouraged and authorized some Persons to make
Gunpowder and have promised to enable them thereunto, Order impouring the
Select men to make Orders with penalty to propagate salt Peeter. etc.
by such public and necessary Orders as may conduce to the effecting the same,
The consideration whereof has moved the Court hereby to Order and Enact, that
the Select men of every Town (where the Powder makers Authorized, by this Court
shall desire it) be Authorized and required hereby, to make and execute such
Orders in their respective Towns, as they shall judge meet (with the advice of
skillful persons) for increasing and procuring of Salt Peeter, and to impose
such penalties as the Select men shall see meet not exceeding ten shillings for
one offense, upon all persons that shall neglect or refuse to perform such
Order or Orders, for the propagating and increasing of Salt Peeter, in their
respective Towns: and moreover the said select men are further empowered to
choose and appoint an Officer or Officers, and to allow him a convenient
stipend annually, for his pains out of the fines, or otherwise to look to the
executing such Orders as they shall make in that behalf.

And it is further Ordered that such Select men who shall neglect or refuse to
make and effectually execute such necessary Orders, as shall conduce to the
ends aforesaid, they shall be presented at the Court of that County, and there
be fined for their neglect at the discretion of the Court, not exceeding five
pounds for one offense, and this Law to be put in execution forthwith after the
publication thereof, and this to continue during the Courts pleasure.

FINIS.

