NEWS FROM TVRKIE, OR, A true Relation of the passages of the Right honorable
Sir Tho. Bendish, Baronet, Lord Ambassador with the Grand Signieur at
Constantinople, his entertainment and reception there. ALSO, A true discourse
of the unjust proceedings of Sir Sackvile Crow, former Ambassador there,
against the English Merchants, his contest with the present Lord Ambassador,
and Sir Sackviles imprisonment, and in his return, his wretched betraying the
Captain of the ship, and some English Merchants at Alicant in Spain, to the
Inquisition; Lastly his Commitment to the Tower of London, where now he is.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Blunden, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cornhill, next to the Castle Tavern, 1648.

To the Reader.
SIR Sackvile Crow a quondam servant, and favorite, to George Duke of
Buckingham, was of late years sent over by his Majesty as Ambassador to the
Great Turk, for transacting the affairs of our English Merchants in his
Dominions residing. Of his good or evil Deportment before our Domestique
quarrels began, we have no will to inquire, but shall begin our discourse from
that time when our Merchants were most sensible of his injurious oppressions of
them, and of his Deviation from that especial trust which was reposed in him
by the King his Master for their protection and advantage.

At first Sir Sackvile began to burden their goods with heavy and unaccustomed
impositions, which they not resenting, he, to aggravate a more full mischief
upon them, imprisons their persons, threatens their lives, etc. But well
knowing (these tyrannical actions) would be questioned by his Majesty the King
of England, and that the Merchants being men of active spirits and able
performances would seek redress and complain, He most abusively pretends a
new Letter from his Majesty to the great Turk, dated Newcastle 24. September.
1646. to assist the said Sir Sackvile in his further unjust proceeding against
our Merchants. But neither did his Majesty send any such new Letter unto the
Grand Signieur, or give unto the said Sir Sackvile Crow under his Royal
Signature any other Commission so to abuse and undo his loyal subjects.

For His Majesty most graciously upon Complaint from the Merchants of Sir
Sackviles misdemeanors, revoked the Credentiall Letters formerly given unto
him, and newly elected* and admitted as his Ambassador unto the Grand
Signieur, a person of fortune and honor, by name Sir Thomas Bendish, Baronet;
The many disturbances which this worthy Gentleman encountered with at his first
Arrival in Constantinople, by means of Sir Sackvile his disobedience to his
Majesty's Letter of revocation, and his scandalous aspersions upon the Actions
and person of the Lord Ambassador, were I say enough to have disheartened even
an assured resolution, and enforced a Recesse from so hazardous an employment
among such rigid and harsh people as the Turks are: but his Lordship being of
an invincible spirit, and maturely considering how far his Majesty's, and the
Nations honor, and welfare of the London Merchants were concerned herein, by
admirable resolution at last obtained the person of Sir Sackvile Crow, and then
shipped him for London, where at present he stands committed to the Tower.

His Lordship since his happy investure lives amongst the Turks, in great
estimation and honor, equal if not superior to any former Ambassador,
continually as occasion is offered, assisting the industrious Merchants,
betwixt whom and his Lordship, there is a very amiable Compliance. I might
justly by way of aggravation unfold the great incivility of Sir Sackvile Crow,
in inciting his Lady at Alicant in Spain, as they returned for England, there
to complain unto the Inquisition that she and her husband were Catholics,
and enforced against their wills to become Protestants; whereupon the honest
Captain and his Mate, who civilly went ashore with her, were detained
Prisoners, and so also many of our English Merchants, not yet released; But the
discourse will best manifest the truth thereof, attested by the hands of those
Merchants now suffering.

W. L.

A true Relation of the Carriage of the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Bendish,
Bar. Lord Ambassador with the Grand Signieur at Constantinople, together with
his Letters and Arres he sent abroad to several of his Opposers in his
Embassy.

TWo days before his Lordship came to Brushia, (for he came from Smyrna
overland) Mr. Lancelot the Agent sent him a Letter, that he Vizeere was cut
off, withal, telling him, that he had sent to this new one, to congratulate
him in his place, and did intend (by his leave) to visit him within three or
four days, and Distill our Case into him, with the best Oratorie he had,
withal telling him, that he was a Rugged harsh man, and not likely to favor
our Cause. Hereupon my Lord (considering how little need the Company had of
this unnecessarie charge) did forthwith dispatch a Post to him, with a few
lines to this purpose; That he would not have him upon any terms to make a
Visit, nor act in any business further, for it was not fitting, nor would be
expected, his Lordship being so near the Port; he told him that the distilling
the Case into his head, was cross to his Lordships design, who came
peremptorily to demand justice, and cared not whether the Vizeere were good,
bad, or indifferent. But before this Messenger could arive him* he had not only
visited him with a good present but (to my Lords great vexation and future
trouble) had delivered in the Hattecherife, which cost us not less then 40000
l. to entangle Sir Sac. Crow; for the words of the Hattecherife under the Grand
Signieurs hand, (which is as the Law of the Medes and Persians) were these,
(let the Ambassador have no more to do with the English Nation) while this
was in our hands, he could never stir against us, nor durst public ministers
suffer him, but just now (without, if not contrary to advice) against my Lord
should set foot on this shore, our chained enemy is let loose upon him; and
indeed but that my Lord could not find any design he had in it, but mere want
of resolution and judgment, the world could never have persuaded him, but that
the Agent had done it on purpose: for Sir Sack. Crow straightwayes provides a
very great present, and with full attendance goes to the Vizeere, the day
before my Lord arrived, with confidence he should be yested (which had been
re-establishment) but was deceived. The next day being the 16. September, my
Lord early in the morning (having come all night by Sea in a Boat) arrived
here, and after he had reposed himself some hours, went together with the
Agent in his Coach, attended by his Retinue, and us, to that house the Agent
had provided for him; The next day my Lord calls a Court, and resolved there to
send Mr. Agent to the Vizeere to demand Audience for him of the Grand Signieur,
and to tell him he could not expect justice from him, who had broke open the
Merchats houses but three days bofore his coming, and had taken out goods to
the value of 40000. pounds. This Message was so in pieces delivered, as the
Vizeere though he did, yet he would not understand it but asked if he had
Letters for him, yes said the Agent, let me see them said he, that I may know
what to do, and you shall have Audience with the Grand Signieur. Upon this
answer my Lord resolves to visit him next himself.

Now you must know, that when my Lord came first to Smyrna, a Letter wat
conveyed into his sons hands to give him, this came from Sir Sack. Crow, and
was verbatim as follows.

SIR,
BY Report from his Majesty's Rebell-subjects under my Charge, your coming
into these parts has been long Voted, and said that you were to come with
Commission from his Majesty to succeed me in this Embassy to this State, to
which when I shall understand his Royal pleasure, in such form as (agreeable
to Custom in Cases of like nature) is usual, and I am to expect as well for
my warrant as discharge, you may be assured of a hearty welcome from me, with
that obedience I owe his Majesty's commands, and all faithful endeavors for
his service, and this as well in my care for your introduction, as your
accommodation in what I may else be capable to serve you; in the mean time, to
this day, having neither order from his Majesty, nor the least intimation from
any of his Secretaries to any such effect, you cannot blame me if hither unto I
have not credited it, nor (yet) otherwise take notice thereof, upon due
consideration rather conclude as accustomed, and assured me by the Vote of all
public Ministers, that I had reason (finding any subject of his Majesty's, of
what quality soever, negotiating ought of like, or what nature soever, within
my Charge, without me (during my Commission in force) to protest against him,
and give him such contradiction, as I have been occasioned to give Mr. Venron,
whose over confidence, want of civilitie, or instructions (I know not which, or
whether by the ignorance of his Patrones that sent him) merrited to have been
made an example; being confident to affirm that there was never president of
the like irregular proceedings before; for supposing those Letters as pretended
(which they may, or may not be, for ought I know) or that I had been the
veriest Traitor in the world (which his Majesty hitherto declares me not) and
that his Majesty for such cause had disclaimed, or recalled me* until some
signification of his opinion, or pleasure, either under his own Royal hand (as
ever accustomed) or at least Copyes thereof authentic under the hand of one of
his Secretaries, I dare not give way, no not to the Prince himself, nor do
otherwise then oppose him. Wherefore, and as well for my own better discharge
(though hereunto neither obliged by any Ordinance, or former usuance) as in
civility toward your Person, and for the avoiding of all misunderstandings,
further scandal, or prejudice to his Majesty's service, (upon apprehension
only, and the consideration of his Majesty's present estate, that his Majesty
may have condescended to the request of the Levant Company) I send these at
Rosigoe to attend your arivall at Smyrna (in case his Majesty should send you
as reported) to assure you of a contradiction in most of what you may have
heard by the way, and of my readiness to serve you, (coming warranted as I
presume you will if you expect acceptance hereof) and that so by a timely good
intelligence began (at least Offers of it on my part) all misunderstandings and
prejudicate opinions may be prevented, and that endeavored on either side,
which may best sort with his Majesty's Commands, and intrests of his faithful
subjects, which the worthy report I have of your civilitie, moderation,
wisdom, and constant good Offices to all his Majesty's well wishers, and
Loyal people, assure me of your agreeing to and give me confidence (though
unknown to you) to write my self, (as in such case you may be assured to find
me.)

Pera of Compll. the 25. May 1647. Sir, Your ready friend, and most humble
servant, Sackvile Crow.
Excuse me if in your style, until otherwise advised, I spare to give you
other title then you are usually known by. If you have occasion to send me any
advises, or Copies for my better government as expected, you may please for
their more security to send them by the hand of this noble Gentleman, whose
Person I recommend to your favor.




To which my Lord returned this answer following.

SIR,
I Shall not lessen my self in your opinion, by not giving you that due
respect you by your courteous Letters merit. I acknowledge what therein is
expressed touching the honor of the King my Master, with all love and honor
to your self for it, and that respect you bear me as his Ambassador, with
much thankfulness; assuring you upon mine honor, and by the word of a
Gentleman, that I come not within your Verge with less power, and Authority,
from the King of England, my Master, then that by which you first assumed the
place, (notwithstanding any neglects of his ministers of State toward you)
which I shall make appear upon my arrival at Pera, letting you know in the
mean time, that I do not, nor shall trust so far to the reports of any, as
to make me prejudicate, or mistake any action past, or to come, especially
where Civility and love plays their parts, no not of those Gentlemen the
Merchants (your present, and my future charge, God blessing me) whom you do,
but I dare not call Rebels, since my Master the King terms them (no otherwise
in his Letters then) his Subjects and Merchants. As for the misdemeanour of my
servant Varny, whom I sent with Letters from his Majesty, to justify the truth
of them, to whom they are directed, what he has said in the justification of
them (if by any opposed) I must maintain, as being from me so Commanded; what
other misbeseeming carriage or speech he has expressed against your person, I
do not only dislike, but shall upon hearing punish him according to merit, for
I so far honor the very shadow of my Master, where ever I find it, that I am
resolved no unworthy act, dishonor, or disgrace shall light upon it, which can
be prevented by,

My Lord, Your most humble servant Thomas Bendish.
Smyrna August 18. 1647. I suppose by the ancient date of your Letters, you
want no informations now both of my coming, and power I bring, therefore no
need to send you Particulars or Copies.




It was delivered by Master Ayloffe, who received this answer by word of mouth,
that he was very sorry Sir Tho Bendish did give so little credit to his
Letters, and was so discourteous in the long deferring his answer, and gave him
so little satisfaction in the strength or virtue of his coming, and if he did
not give him that honor he pretended he had, it was his fault that would not
send him a Copy of the Letter; The next day therefore after my Lord arived,
when he sent the Agent to the Vizeere, he sent a Copy of the Letter of
revocation from the King, enclosed in this, by two of his servants, reserving
the Letter it self for his own delivery.

SIR,
OTherwise then intended, I understand by my servant, you have not received any
satisfaction, but discontent rather, by my Letters in answer to yours, wherein
I aver the truth of my Employment hither from his Majesty, with the greatest
pawn I had, or ever shall, which (had I been such in your thoughts as your
Letters expressed) might have borne (as in my case with you it should) sway
sufficient; Wherefore Sir, being commanded by the King my Master to deliver you
his Letters of revocation my self, I detained them, to fulfill his Command,
and the Copy of them, being confident if that engagement could not gain
Credence from you, the Copy could not; and although I am not bound to deliver
neither the one nor the other, but in what time I shall think most convenient,
yet I shall not be so reserved, but do here enclosed send a Copy of the Kings
Letters to you, the original whereof I came hither resolved immediately to
deliver with my own hand, had not your jealousy of me (together with your
daily actions, and high expressions) taught me to be cautious of you and your
proceedings, and to reserve it for another place and time. I (as I hear you
report) you have any Letter from his Majesty to me of Revocation, I shall take
a Copy thereof kindly, and returun you my thought thereof, which favor from
you will much oblige,

My Lord, Your friend to serve you, T.B.
Pera. Constantinople 17. September, 1647.

WHen they remembered my Lord Ambassadors love to him, he told them they were
welcome as from Thomas Bendish, but not as Ambassador; he opened and read
them, and said that the Copy he read, he could not believe to be the Copy of
the Kings Letter; that in the very first line or two, there was a double
contradiction, and that the whole frame, style, matter and language was so
unlike those of his Majesty's, that if the Original was not better then the
Copy, he should not care a rush for it, and that he could not believe Sir
Thomas Bendish had any such Letter from the King of England, and therefore
could not receive him as Ambassador; that he would further consider of the
Letter, and if he thought convenient would send him answer by some of his own
poelpe within a day or two, which he did, but that being so Tedious, containing
nothing but false surmises, and daring expressions, from the business, so that
as my Lord thought it not worthy his answering, so we conceive it not
convenient to trouble your patience with it in this place. Now the next thing
that my Lord aims at, is for a fair and sitting Audience with the Vizeere,
who offered him to come when he pleased; but my Lord was privately informed he
intended an affront by not Vesting him. My Lord at a Court then holden, desires
six of us might be chosen to meet constantly to advise with him; When it was
agreed that the best way was privately by two or three of the Merchants to
found Aronomone the Vizeers Jew; after much debate with him for the space of
four hours, telling him, except my Lord were sure of his dues, he would come
without a present, at last he promised that he should be Vested with his son,
and at least one or two more; Hereupon he sent to the Vizeere, that he would
visit him upon Thursday the 23. September, having been just a week in town, and
in the mean time had neither been sent to by the Emperors Agent, the French
Ambassador, nor the Lord Bayliffe (only the Dutch Merchants did, whose Agent
is not yet conformed, but will see what success we have) for Sir Sackvile
Crow has wrought all those firm to him. Now was the Town full of expectation,
nothing talked of but our business. On Thursday about twelve a clock, with all
the Merchants, and my Lords retinue, my Lord went to the Vizeere, who being set
before he came, stirred not from his seat, neither did my Lord mind him until
he was set as well as the Vizeere; Then he spoke to him to this effect, that
the King of England saluted him, and wished him health and happiness, and had
sent him his Ambassador to keep his Merchants and subjects from doing, and
suffering wrong, and commanded him to endeavor to keep and uphold the Peace
between the Nations, and also to give thanks for the Justice the Vizeere
showed to the Merchants, when the Ambassador would have ruined them, and also
to desire him to send the said Ambassador home, that the King his Master,
hearing their Difference, might judge him according to merit; and while he was
saying this, he presented the Kings Letters to him, which he read before us;
to this the Vizeere replied, that the old Ambassador had Letters, and did
pretend to be Ambassador as well as his Lordship, and he knew not how to
decide the business, but must hear them both together; to which my Lord
answered, My Lord, you mistake me, I come not hither to be judged, neither is
it for my honor to appear here with that man, which your own Laws have
judged unworthy, neither may I countenance him without the just displeasure of
the Grand Signieur; the French Ambassador also (said the Vizeere) could say
something in the Cause; The French Ambassador (said my Lord) has nothing to
do with our State; have you a Letter to the old Ambassador (said the Vizeere)
from the King of England, I have, said my Lord, which I desired to deliver him
before witness, therefore he asked him for two Chouses, you shall have it
(said the Vizeere) but give me the Letters and I will deliver them my self;
My Lord told him he could not, for the King his Master commanded him to
deliver them with his own hand; then said he, I will send for him hither, if
you do so (said my Lord) I will have no Contract with him, I hope those
Letters will witness the truth of my Embassy; Yes, said he, I believe you are
the true Ambassador, but I would hear him what he can say, and see the
delivery of the Letters, and I will soon end the business; do so if you will
(said my Lord) and I will stay here till he come; so he was immediately sent
for, but he excused, saying he had taken physic that day, but to morrow he
would come at one a clock; when my Lord heard that, he said, My Lord, do not
you by these Letters acknowledge me to be the true Ambassador? yes, said he,
then what need you trouble your self further with him said my Lord; upon this
he knew not what to say, but rose up on a sudden to be gone, saying he must
speak with Sir Sackvile Crow. When my Lord perceived he would not Vest him, he
desired him to speak one word more; then he sat down again, and my Lord spoke;
My Lord, you seem to be unsatisfied in this business, Look behind, I have all
the Merchants my witnesses, and all the Merchants of Aleppo Alexandria and all
the Coasts of Turkey; I have ships at Smyrna Laden for this Port, and diverse
more ready to come out; Let Sir Sackvile Crow show me two Merchants, and half
a ship, and I will yield him the place. The Vizeere rises to be gone, but my
Lord spoke on, I hope my Lord, if I be an Ambassador, as you say, and having
brought you a Present as befits you, you will not deny me the Honor due to me
in Vesting me? With this he turned away, and answered not a word, in an
uncivil clownish way, which when my Lord saw, he was moved with passion, and
with a great stamp upon the ground, said, Never Ambassador was so basely used
as I am, which the great men sitting by observing his anger, were something
amazed, and inquired what he said, which was told them. This was his first
entertainment, which as we are certainly informed since, was procured by five
bags of money given him by the Venetians that day to hinder his Lordships
Vesting. When he came away, he commanded all his Drugermen that none should
attend any more his Court, for he had one with him. The next day about 9. of
the clock came two Chouzes to my Lord, to tell him from the Vizeere, that the
Ambassador Crow would be there, and he would have my Lord meet him* no
(replied my Lord) tell your Lord I will not meet him, nor come at his house any
more, he has used me unworthily and basely, and so tell him from me. What
(replied the Chouzes) will you not come no more at his house? let not my Lord
say so; the Vizeere is a great man, Vicegerent to the Grand Signeur and we
dare not carry him such a sleighting Message. A great man? And so am I a great
man too, said my Lord; If he be Vicegerent to the Grand Signeur, tell him that
I am Ambassador to the King of England. Then they desired my Lord, that some
of his own men might carry that Message, for they would not, it is no matter said
my Lord. I will make his usage of me ring all Constantinople over before 24.
hours come about; and indeed my Lord had provided Arres to send about, to
declare his usage of him. Now was Sir Sackvile Crow with the Vizeere expecting
to be vested (as he had bragged the day before) but how or what part of this
message they delivered I know not, but Sir Sackvile Crow after he had rayled
upon my Lord before the Vizeere and called him furfant, came home no wiser then
he went, and the next morning the Vizeere sent three Chouzes (one a man of
great quality, and had been four times Ambassador with foreign Princes)
remembered his kind love to my Lord, and sent him word that he had sent him a
man of honor, that should go with him to Sir Sackvile Crow, and see him
deliver his Letters, and he would soon make an end of the business. This
civil respectfull Messenger, and Message* pleased my Lord again so that he
accepted this as a favor, and the rather it pleased him, because he should
cross Sir Sackvile Crows humor, for not above an hour before they came he
sent to him, to tell him he would come to him (if he were at home) to deliver
him Letters from the King* at first he lovingly sent my Lord word, that his
doors were as well open to his foes as to his friends, but presently sends word
again upon better consideration, that if my Lord would come privately he might,
but as a public minister he would not receive him, but afront him; those
Chouzes he sent to deliver the Message to Sir Sackvile Crow, from the Vizeere*
and withal that he was ready; Sir Sackvile Crow said he would not receive him,
but shut the doors against him, (such a horror did this Letter of revocation
strike into him) but they returning with that passage to the Vizeere, he
seemed so incensed, that he commanded them to take three more to them, and to
command him to let my Lord deliver his Letters, and bring him word what his
answer was; then his stout heart was fain to stoop, and my Lord having such
warning, because he would he sure not to go privately, got us and all his
attendance after him, who when they came into the room after him, they that
knew him formerly, said that he was much daunted; then my Lord saluted him by
the name of my Lord; he replied, Sir, you are welcome: The King my Master (said
my Lord) commanded me to deliver you this Letter; then they both sat down,
and Sir Sackvile Crow looking upon the Company, said, you have a great many
witnesses here, my Lord told him yes, the better for him if his Cause were good
he did not love to do things in corners; then he took the Letter and smiled,
and sometimes winked upon his own people, when presently he called the French
Ambassadors Secretary to bear witness what passed; what have we to do
(said my Lord) with the French Ambassadors Secretary? yes said he, the French
Ambassador has to do in this business; how (said my Lord) has any to do
with the English here besides you and I? that will be seen hereafter: then he
pawsed a while, and straight asked my Lord, if the King delivered this Letter
to him with his own hand? my Lord told him no; mark this said he to the
Frenchman; Sir, said my Lord, my words are true, I said his Majesty commanded
me by a Letter of his, to deliver you this; What logic make you of this now?
then he asked my Lord when he saw the King, but my Lord desired he would excuse
him, saying Excuse me Sir, I am not bound to give you an answer: then he asked
him where his Commission was, he told him it was at his house; he demanded to
see it, my Lord told him it concerned himself only, and not him, and if I act
contrary (said my Lord) to my Commission, I must answer it, and not you; here
is my Commission, says he, and I charge you in the Kings name to show me
yours: your Co^mmission said my Lord has no power to examine mine, I have
Commission to give you this Letter, not my Commission. Here was some pawse of
speech, which when the Chouzes saw, and that he would not open his Letter, they
stood up, and required him to open it, then he did, and told them he would
answer the Letter to the King, and send his mind in writing to the Vizeere,
which he did the next day, and this it was (as the Vizeere sent my Lord word
by his Druggerman) That those Merchants were Rebels, and that my Lord was the
head of them, and other words, as if the King were forced to write those
letters. His Lordship having delivered his Letters according to the Kings
command, took his leave very fairly of him, and he of my Lord, but came no
further with him then the middle of the room, where at first my Lord found
him. Now the next work my Lord endeavored was to get to be Vested by the
Vizeere, and obtain Audience with the Grand Signeur, to this purpose he sent
his Druggerman to hasten it; the Vizeere always after this sent him good
words, as that all things should be done to his mind, and wished him not to
be troubled with any thing, and so protracted time from day to day. All this
time my Lord Crow is not idle, although he keeps his house yet he employes the
French Agent, and the Venetians, whose Druggerman Gryllo is always attending
upon the Vizeere, and feeds him with moneys and presents to work us out, the
French Ambassador talks with the Vizeere privately, and but that my Lord Crow
and the Vizeere told my Lord he had to do in the business, my Lord would
scarce have taken him for his enemy, yet one day he was heard to tell the
Vizeere, my Lord had offered my Lord Crow 30000 l. to be gone out of the
Country, by which (said he) you may judge the truth of his Message, and withal
told him that the King of France his Master would be much troubled, if he
should change this old Ambassador, for the new, and this report that my Lord
would give the Lord Crow money to depart hence, was not only sent to him by the
Vizeeres Jew, but by the Kogag, which my Lord to vindicate himself, and make
appear to the world how much he detested such by-ways, he was forced to
write this Warrant in Italian, and send it down to Gallatta by two Janisaries
and a Druggerman pro forma; and fix one upon the Treasurers house, the other
upon Mr. Pearls house, that all Jews and Merchants might take notice of it.

FOrasmuch as we are Credibly informed, that there are diverse false, lying and
scandalous Reports cast upon us, that we should by our self, or some other
person, offer to treat with the man-sold Ambassador for a certain sum of
money to send him out of this Country, withal saying, that we had rather give
money to him then to Turks; We do hereby declare, that we do so far
abhor all such sinister and dishonorable proceedings and speeches, that we
affirm them liars that report it, and do hereby Command and Require, that no
person under our charge make any Treaty with any man in our behalf, letting
them know, that if we shall find that any such Treaty, or Contract, directly,
or indirectly be made with any person whatsoever, for the worth of one a' to
establish us Ambassador in this place, we are resolved and do publish, that we
will forthwith not only severely punish, but send them off this place, for if
by that power that sent us hither, we cannot be established, we are resolved
rather to return from whence we came, then by such dishonorable terms both
to the King of England my Master, and our self, to purchase it. Given at Pera
d' Constantinople this.

2. October 1647. Thomas Bendish.


And because the French Ambassador was so busy, sent him this Letter.

SIR,
I Cannot see how it is consistent with the League between the two Crowns of
England and France, that you a French Ambassador should intermeddle with, much
less oppose the actions of the King of England, my Master. Your opposing me in
my Embassy, and countenancing the man-sold Ambassadors proceedings against my
Authority, I hope you do it not without Commission, yet me thinks if it dare
look upon the Sun, (as all which comes from Kings dare) it becomes you not
so secretly and privately to act. Know that I am ready to meet you before any
Minister of State here, both to hear, and as occasion serves, to answer what
you can object against me, but be confident, while I am in this place, I must
know as befits me, that power which dares oppose my Master, to whom a strict
account must be rendered by him, who is as far as with honor he may,

My Lord, Your friend to serve you, T.


THe Venetian Baliffe being guilty of his neglects toward my Lord, and
perceiving he understood of his Merchants actions, and his Druggermans
diligence sent by my Lords Druggerman this private Message, That he hoped my
Lord took no distaste at him, who is confined to his house, and had no notice
of his coming, and that he heard my Lord took distaste at his Merchants as
actors against him, if my Lord pleased to let him know who they were, he would
make them, or would himself, give my Lord satisfaction. My Lord sent him this
answer, That for his own person, as he was a Prisoner, he could not expect his
Visit, yet if he had born respect to our King, or love to our Nation, he would
have sent a salute to him before this time, having been a fortnight in this
Port. As for his Merchants that should oppose him, he wished him to look to
them himself, for if he found them faulty, as he believed he should, he would
take his time to make them repent it. But for all his threats to them, he knew
not how lies might work with the Vizeere, wherefore he sent to him this Arres,
and to diverse great men about the Town, that if possible, it might reach the
Grand Signieurs ears.

MY Lord, I cannot out of my well-wishes to you and the good of this State, but
give you this timely information, that the Venetians and the French do
endeavor both by moneys and all encouragements to maintain the Man-sold
Ambassador against me, and that Regal power which sent me hither, thereby to
make a breach between this and the English Nation and so to advance their own
design, which either by Peace or War will prove very prejudicial to this
Emperie, besides the Consideration of the great Trade our Nation brings to
supply the Emperie. Whether you had rather have it by the hands of Enemies or
Friends (if they could maintain it) I leave your wise consideration, none
obstanding that the said former Ambassador being proved to be an oppressor,
the Grand Signieur deprived him from the Charge of the Embassy with his
Hattesherife, for which his Majesty of England with his Letters, now sent by
me his Ambassador, does give him many thanks therefore.

From the Venetians he never heard word since, nor from the French Ambassador,
although he told my Lords servants he would answer him in writing, but we
hear he is so troubled in mind, the truth being so apparent, that he cannot
deny it, and what title to give my Lord he cannot resolve, if he acknowledges
him Lord Ambassador, he has said the contrary to the Vizeere, and so gives
himself the lie, if no Lord, and he should be Confirmed, he makes my Lord his
enemy for ever. But to our business, whilst my Lord is thus deluded, and fed
with fair words, all attempts are made, and Traps laid, how to get my Lord to
compound himself by moneys into his rights and dues, the Vizeeres Jew has
tempted us, the Merchants, the Kogag has spoke to my Lords Drugerman many
times, that if he would not come off, his business would never be done; My
Lords Druggerman told him always, that my Lord would sooner lose his life,
then come in upon such dishonorable terms; My Lords Drudgerman being sick,
on Sunday the third of October, he sent Master Juate and another Merchant to
tell the Vizeere so, and that he sent them to receive his Message; he gave them
no answer but this, Bid the Druggerman come to me on Tuesday. This vexed my
Lord, but he was resolved to try another day; on Tuesday the Druggerman went to
him, and then he told him plainly that he could not decide the Controversy
between the two Ambassadors, but must send a Chouze for England: as soon as my
Lord perceived he had delayed him all this time for this, he presently wrote
him this Letter, or Arrs, and sent him the next morning.

My Lord,
I Am the first Ambassador from England that ever presented Letters from the
King, and a present to a Vizeere, that were returned with such dishonor as my
self from you. It becomes not me, neither came I hither to plead my own
rights, having Letters from so great and powerful a King, as the King of
England, and thousands of witnesses besides, all the Merchants in these parts,
and hundreds of ships to maintain the Truth of this Embassy especially against
such a man whom the Grand Signieur has mansould with his Hattesherife, and the
Mufte declared, that by your own Laws you cannot restablish him Ambassador.
And his Majesty has discharged and you cannot believe any thing for truth he
speaks, Your fair promises have of late overcome my patience, I must not now
be longer delayed, the honor of my King, and therein my own life and
Reputation lie at stake, wherefore if you will not honor me your self, excuse
me if I desire, nay, require your assistance for my speedy Audience with the
Grand Signieur, for to his justice do I appeal, if you refuse me this, then
blame me not if I work out my own addresses to the Grand Signieur my self,
although by such means as may be displeasing to your Lordship. I desire your
absolute answer, for I shall trouble you no more with Messages, neither need
you trouble your self to send into England, for if I shall not find that
reception here which becomes the Honor of the King my Master. I have ships
enough attend me, which shall convey me back to Report my Entertainment.

As he read this he nodded several times, and when he had done, called the
Druggerman to him, and said, Did I ever deny your Lord to be a true
Ambassador? I am not his enemy but must do him courtesies to the Grand
Signieur, and if I do him courtesies, what shall I have for my pains. The
Druggerman told him that he knew my Lord would sooner lose his life* then be
admitted upon dishonorable terms. Well said he, Go tell your Lord what I
say, and remember my kind love to him, and bring me his answer to morrow, with
a particular of the Grand Signieurs Present, against which time my Lord had
fitted this Arres for him.


My Lord,
THe Present you had from me was as large as ever was given to any of your
Predecessors; it was never known that a true Ambassador made a Contract for
other gifts to purchase his reception, I may not, I dare not Transgress the
accustomed Rules, nor points of honor, if I should your self might justly
condemn me for a deceiver, all the Princes in Christendom would scorn me,
and then how my Master would Resent it you may judge. You are set in the place
of Justice, I require no more of you then Common justice, which if I find, I
shall not be ungrateful. Pardon me if in particular (as unusual) I do not
tell you the Grand Signieurs Present, in the General it consists of fine Cloth
Velvet, Sattins, Gold and Silver, Stuffes, etc. being not inferior to any that
has been presented formerly.


Upon this he said (looking upon the Letter) what? here is nothing, and would
have had some body gone with the Drugerman to treat with my Lord, until the
Druggerman told him 'twas in vain; well then (said he) tell your Lord, if he
will come to morrow, I will vest him, and to morrow morning will send a Chouze
to know who he will have Vested, and indeed was as good as his word; and when
my Lord came to him, he was very pleasant, and did Vest his Lordship and seven
more, the usual custom being but five, with so much cheerfulness, as all
admired at it and presently told him that the Grand Signieur would be impatient
until he were with him, and asked him if he were Ready. My Lord told him 't
was impossible without three or four days warning, he pitched on Monday, and
after some Debate, as the urgency of the Affairs of the State, the necessity
of the ships speedy coming in, etc. My Lord consented to it, but withal made
him promise him, that according to the honor, and dues of Ambassadors he
should be entertained, and feasted at the public Druanine, which he did very
willingly agree unto.

Monday morning being come, The Vizeere sent Hyssan Aga, one of the principal
Chouzes, with two Chouzes more, to attend My Lord, who conducted him to the
water side, and upon his landing on Constantinople side, the Chouze Basha, with
forty two Chouzes more on horseback, conducted him thence to the Vizeeres
house, where he stayed in his Yegays Chamber, till the Vizeere sent to the
Grand Signieur, to tell him his Lordship was ready for Audience: his Majesty
sent word he would receive him at the Keske, (being a kind of a
Banqueting House, or for Repose, very stately) by the water side in his
Seraglio, whether the Vizeere went before him, and his Lordship followed with
the Chouse-Bassa, and forty two Chouzes attending him (besides all the
Merchants, and all his own Gent. and attendance, no Ambassador heretofore ever
having the like) he came to a gate which opened into the Garden where the Keske
stood there my Lord with 18. more were Vested, but none suffered to go in but
only my Lord, who was led by the Chouze-Bassa on his right hand, and the
Bustange Bassa on the left; Signieur Dominico his Secretary, who carried the
Letter in a gold and silver bag, led by two Chouses more, and Master Vernon his
Druggerman led by two other Chouzes. When my Lord came within sight of the
Grand Signieur, they suffered him not to go forwards, but side-waies until he
came just against him (he being set upon an Ivorie and mother of Pearl Couch,
the seats being lined with Lusin Furs) and then brought him forwards until
he came within the space of 20. paces, where my Lord made a low obedience to
him, and the Grand Signieur (which was never seen before) bowed very much, and
saluted my Lord, at which my Lord bowed very low again. After Dominico had read
in Turkish my Lords Speech, with a laudable voice, the Grand Signieur by his
actions seemed much pleased at it, and having done, replied (which was never
known to any Ambassador before) That if the King of England would hold that
Amity and Friendship with him, which his Majesty's Predecessors did with the
Grand Signieur before, and his Merchants did come with that duty and respect as
they ought, he would protect and defend them strongly (for his hand he said
was strong) from all their Enemies, and they should freely Trade in his
Dominions. Signieur Dominico replied from my Lord, that it was his intentions
to increase the Trade, so as the ships and Merchants may have the Freedom and
liberty of their goods and persons, according to the Capitulations; he replied
again, tell him, his Ships shall be Free to go out, and come in, when they
please, and the Merchants should have their Liberties, and their goods, and he
would confirm the Capitulations, and no body should meddle with them throughout
his whole Dominions, and he would protect them, but said, let them see they did
their duty, else his hand would reach them where ever they were, so now he may
go. When he took the Letter, he asked if the Translate was in it, they told
him yes, Said he (pointing to his eyes) I will read it every word, every word.
Now into that bag with the Letter, my Lord caused certain grievences to be
put, as also his own Speech being translated into Turkish, that when the Grand
Signieur looks upon the one he might also read the other, both which are as
follows.

My Lords Speech.
MOst High and Mighty Emperor, and most Excellent Prince, the King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, wishes you all the health, glory, and
happiness which this world can give you, and Commanded me to give your Majesty
thanks for that Justice you lately showed in the protection of his Merchants
in their Differences with their Ambassador, whom (by these Letters) his
Majesty Desires, and Commanded me by word of mouth to crave, you would order,
and Command his speedy dispatch into England, there to be judged according to
his merit. The King my Master also desires that that ancient love, peace, and
correspondence which has ever been betwixt your Majesty, and your
Predecessors, may continue and remain unviolable between you, to which
purpose he has sent me to take care that none of his subjects give any
distaste to this State and Empire, withal desiring that your Majesty will be
pleased to let all injuries done in several places of the Empire, contrary to
the Imperial Capitulations be Redressed, and to afford his subjects, and
Merchants, such Freedoms as have been formerly granted, that the Capitulations
also may be Renewed under your Majesty's own hand, and such new additions made
as may be most commodious for the good and benefit of both States.

The Grievances.
1. THat whereas by the Capitulations, the Merchants ships should pass in,
and out of any of the Ports in Turkey freely, and may take for their money, any
Provision for their necessary food, in what Port they come, and that if any
Fleet of the Grand Signieur should meet any of the English ships, that they
shall not stay, demand, pretend, or take any thing from them.

Now contrary to the Capitulations, those ships which should pass out, and
into this port, are detained at the Castells, until they shall buy their
passage with a sum of money, and being here, are often detained by the
Customer, and Messetareages, upon any small pretense, during their pleasure,
neither are they suffered to buy their necessary provisions for their
maintenance in their voyage, and the Captain Bassa meeting any ship or ships of
ours, suffers them not to pass without a large sum of money. And also where
he hears of any ships lying in any Ports abroad sends to them for a present,
which as due he requires to take of them.

2. And whereas by the Capitulations the Merchants ought to have the free power
and disposal of all such goods which are brought to them, and that they should
have liberty to lade or unlade them at their pleasures, and that no Custom
should be above one time paid, in case they shall carry them by Land, or
Reship them for any other place.

Now Contrary to the said Capitulations, the goods brought into this Port are
seized upon, not only aboard the ships, where also the Captain and Mariners
are abused, but also in the Custom House where they take away what they
please, of the best, and chiefest of the goods, without giving either price or
satisfaction for them, neither are the remainder of those secure in their own
houses, which have been forced open, their servants abused, and their goods
taken away, by which means there is due to several of the Nation from the
late Vizeere ( Sala Bassa's) Jew 60000. l. and upwards, for one piece of Amber,
taken by the Vizeere himself, there remains due 4500. l. And for one other
piece more taken by Omeraga, worth 4100 l. and moreover, our goods landed at
one scale, and paying Custom, are not permitted to be sent to another place
without paying it over again.

3. That whereas by the Capitulations no Customs ought to be put upon
Merchandise brought into the Grand Signieurs Dominions, nor carried out; and
also that no Customs, nor any other Charge shall be imposed upon the English
Nation more then 3. per cent.

Now contrary to the said Capitulations, especially in Alleppo, a Custom upon
money is exacted, and extraordinary charges or tax laid upon Silk, and almost
double Custom required on all goods brought from Scanderone to the Town of
Alleppo, notwithstanding there has been a Hattesherife lately obtained from
the Grand Signeur to the contrary, yet a Jew being Customer there, by name
Cacham, together with his Agents, disobeys, and slights not only the
Capitulations, but the Hattesherife also, thereby giving such discontents to
the Merchants, that if remedy be not very speedily applied, that scale will
very suddenly be ruined, and in this Port as well as in others, goods are so
overvalued, that in stead of paying 3. per cent. they exact 6. per cent. or
thereabouts on some goods, and to increase the charge higher upon the
Merchants, the Customer employing Officers both aboard the ship, and about the
Custom House in his own service, takes the goods to pay them.

I humbly crave your Majesty will take these Grievances into your wise
consideration, and so confirm the Capitulations under your gracious hand, that
none hereafter may dare to violate them, and that your Majesty would propose
some redress and satisfaction for the abuses past, by your Commandment sent
to every Port, that the Merchants under my charge may be encouraged to go on
in their Trade, which if they fail in, the Comerce and Amity between your
gracious Majesty and the King my Master, will not only be impaired, but your
Majesty will lose by our absence the faithfullest known friends, and greatest
Custom, that by forraigners are brought into the Empire.

These Grievances, and my Lords Speech, were all read over after the Kings
Letter, by the Grand Signieur himself, and as my Lord was told by some of the
great men, he liked them, and was very much pleased at them, and gave strict
Command they should be redressed.

My Lord having done with the Grand Signieur, he went through the Seraglio
Garden with all his attendance to the gate, where his horse stood, and by the
Chouze Bassa, and his 42. Chouzes was attended back again to the water side,
and by Hassen Aga, and his two Chouzes was attended home to his house.

After my Lord had been received with such honor, and had gotten such firm
footing, he suffered not the Vizeere to rest, but the next morning sent his
Druggerman to him, to thank him for his real performance of his promise, and
as he had begun, so he would proceed, and in the first place that he would
grant his Majesty's desires, in sending home the Lord Crow; secondly, in
confirming the Capitulations, and let other abuses be redressed according to
the Grand Signieurs promise; hereupon the Vizeere made a stop, and called the
Druggerman close up to him, and said, Have not I been as good as my word? have
I not done your Lord the honor befits him, yet see nothing? Go tell my Lord,
except I see what I shall have, I will not stir one foot further. Whereupon
my Lord sent his Druggerman to him again, to persuade him to trust to my Lords
bounty, but could by no means be drawn to do more without some assurance,
wherefore after two or three days was spent, and nothing could be done, my
Lord sent him this Letter.

My Lord,
I Pray tell me the Cause why a week is nere past, and no redress of our
Grievances, if you intend that Justice should be done us, which the Grand
Signieur has promised, why is it delayed? when it shall be required why the
ships come not in? what shall I reply? where shall I lay the fault? I can have
Justice done me, but had rather by your hand then another: I pray let not your
delays make me jealous of the future performance, but give accomplishment to
the business. To this after he had well perused it, he said, If you hang me,
I will not stir a foot further. After which my Lord let his Druggerman tell
him, that if he performed these Conditions following, He heard him say, he
would give him in way of Gratuity 20000 l.

1. That the Man-sold Ambassador be immediately sent away in a Bark or Gally
to Smyrna, and there put aboard an English ship, to be carried according to the
King of Englands command into England.

2. Secondly, that the new Ambassador now established be brought to the
public Divan, and there feasted according to the usual honor of Ambassadors.

3. That the Capitulations be immediately confirmed by the Grand Signieurs
Hattesherife.

4. That satisfaction be speedily made to the English Merchants in this Port,
for all those goods which were contrary to Capitulations taken from them, and
also that a messenger be sent to Alleppo for the Jew Customer, Cachans;
together with his Kinsman David, for to answer for contemning the Grand
Signieurs Hattesherife, and make satisfaction for the injury done the Merchants
there.

5. Fifthly, That some course may be taken, that all such grievances may be
forthwith redressed which are mentioned in the Lord Ambassadors Complaint to
the Grand Signieur.


These Articles the Vizeere liked, and agreed they should be performed, and
he would not have an Asper until all was done; but said he, I will have two
Merchants bound to me, that my Lord shall give me the money when all is done.
For this purpose two of us went, having the Papers ready, but being late that
night could not do it, but promised the next morning so soon as they could
come it should be done, and so questionless it had, but now see a most
unfortunate accident, that we must act our own destruction, for when the Market
was so starved, that all the Jews, Turks, and even the Grand Signieur
himself, cried out for the English ships to come in, which my Lord would not
suffer until his Conditions were granted, the Council of Smyrna being scared
with a protest which D. Edwards made, to have goods out of the ships, consigned
to Jews at Constantinople, suffered, 19. Cases of Silk, and seven packs of
Clothes to be landed, and carried up to Constantinople, which at this very time
so supplied the market, and stopped their mouths, that the next day when the
Merchants came to seal, he told them, Except they would make an absolute bond,
without Conditions, that they owed him 20000. l. he would not meddle with the
business, but bid them do what they could. This unexpected mischief when my
Lord had wrought all his ends into so fine a condition to be on a sudden so
dashed in pieces, was too great a trouble to my Lord, and us all, for the Jews
and all people laughed at us, and told the Vizeere, that if he would be
patient, the ships would unlade themselves, whether my Lord would or not; so
that the evil report which this bred, was worse then the supply of the Market,
for all believed it. Now what to do, and which way to begin to act, was no
small trouble to my Lord; at last my Lord resolved to try him with another
Letter or Arrs, as follows;

My Lord,
I Beseech you tell me what you think of me, whether I have so little regard
of my Kings honor, and my own reputation, that I can remain in the Port
where a man-sold Ambassador is maintained and backed, to affront, and scorn
me, and that authority which the Grand Signieur, and your self have approved
as just. What is it to be vested, graciously accepted by the Grand Signieur,
and promised redress of injuries, if nothing be performed, if you believe I
have truth, or honor in me, upon my faith do me that Justice you ought, or I
shall appeal to the Grand Signieur, if there I find no relief, I must with my
Merchants leave the Port and Nation.


So this the Vizeere said, well, let your Lord be patient a little while, and
his business shall be done. In this smooth delatory answer, was more cunning
expressed then before, for delays ruin us, which he knew well enough, and his
kind Reply took us from complaining against him. All this while the ships lay
at great charges for demereage, the goods in them like to rot or receive much
Damage, and if they stayed out past the little Bycam, the cloth would not sell
this year; besides, the Merchants at a Gaze, and all Trade stopped; all these
inconveniences being considered, we valued every day delayed at 1000. l.
wherefore my Lord being much troubled, because he knew not how to help us, for
delays must not be admitted besides, my Lord Crow swelled with conceit to see
us in this extremity, who being summoned by my Lord (according to the Kings
Command) to depart for England, In stead of obeying the summons, sent him an
unworthy and unbeseeming answer. An Overture at this present was afforded to
us, by Arononcone the Vizeeres Jew, that he would undertake that all the
forenamed Propositions should be granted, and for the sending my Lord Crow to
Smyrna, he required but seven days time, but for the completing hereof (till
which time he would not receive an asper) do what the Merchants could, he
would 35000. pounds. And indeed considering the vast expenses delays would
bring upon the Company, and to settle the Trade in a more secure way then ever,
out our enemy, and recover our own Debts, it was ajudged by my Lord, and us
all, a very good bargain, yet my Lord must not take knowledge of it, but as
made between us and the Jew privately, only his gratuity to the Vizeere must
seem to do the business. This Bargain concluded, the Jew so wrought the
business, that within the space of six days he got by means of the Vizeere a
Hattesherife to send my Lord Crow out of Turkey, which was presently put in
execution, and two Chouzes sent to take him out of his house, and put him into
a Boat for Smyrna, he made no resistance at all, but went presently with him;
upon Wednesday morning the three Druggermen railing upon my Lord, and calling
him Devil, wished the Devil to take him, and us all. My Lady and the rest of
the Family stayed behind to pack up their household stuff till Saturday
following; in the mean time she made much moan, that she had not an asper in
the house left her, besides wages of Nurses, and diverse other servants came to
500. l. and upwards, which were unpaid. This good Lady (only worthy of pity)
being by the evil disposition of her husband brought to this misery, was
thought no ways accessory to his bad designs; Wherefore my Lord moved us in
way of pity to consider her condition; upon which we sent her 1000. l. which
she kindly accepted, although her Husband was offered by some of us not long
before 20000. l. to be quiet, and depart the place in peace. Strange were the
Plots and designs this man had to ruin us; besides the seizing of our
estates, lending away our ships, and imprisoning our perpersons, and some in
chains; at one time he pretended that we owed him 100000. l. of which to be
established, he offered the Grand Signieur 50000 l. and to the Vizeere the
other 50000 l. when the Estate would not give him credit in this, he works
upon the Venetians to supply him, and they hoping (and not without ground) by
this means to make a breach between the Turks and us, or to undo the
Merchants (which might be very beneficial both to their Wars, and Trade) do
furnish him both with money, and presents; the French Ambassador he had made
sure to him, and it is verily believed by money, and therefore he is commonly
called Sir Sackvile Crows Broker; this man swears, and says any thing, Sir
Sackvile Crow would have him; but being of a wretched and miserable condition,
and of so poor and hen-hearted a spirit, was able to get no Credence in this
Court. Sir Sackvile Crow was to us a roaring Lion, threatens nothing but Ruin
and destruction, and since my Lord came, told some of us, that he would be as
Sampson, if they forced him hence, he would pull the house upon them, and for
my Lord that dared to come against him, to send him, and his Followers home in
Chains, he thought to light a punishment, but had decreed him a perpetual
prisoner in Rhodes or Ciprus. Oh how poor, miserable, and weak are the
imaginations, and fancies of man, when God leaves him! that this man that
overnight despised the authority of his King, bid defiance to his Ambassador,
and scorned all men in respect of himself, was the next day by two Chouzes
without further help led into a Boat, and carried whither he never intended.
Here ends his story in Turkey, God send him more honesty in England, whither we
wish him a good voyage.

A translate of the Imperial Commandment, directed to the Vizeere-Bassa of
Egypt, and to the Cadee of Egypt, to the Beghs of the scales of Egypt,
Alexandria, and Damiate, to the Cadees of Alexandria, Damiate, and Dossetto.
AT the arrival of our Imperial Signature you all take notice, That the
honored amongst the Lords of the Messia Christians, the Ambassador of England
Resident at our Imperial Port, have sent a memorial of his, to the most
glorious, our Gatte, saying, That whereas the King of England is in perfect
Amity with our most happy Port; And that from England does continually come
into our Imperial Dominions several kind of necessary, and profitable
Commodities; And that in the Country of England does not grow any Rice, of
which Commodity they have great need, In respect of their said good
friendship, for the sole service of the King, the said Ambassador having
requested that they might have with an Imperial Command, License to buy with
their money yearly in these Scales 500. Erdepps of Rice. To the end they may
have the said quantity of Rice without the molestation or hindrance of any
body; This present our Imperial Command is granted unto them, And hereby do
Command that at the arrival hereof, all you shall observe accordingly, viz.
that in consideration of the good and profitable Commodities, which the English
Nation does bring into our Imperial Dominions, and in respect of the said
Kings friendship, for his own service only yearly, they buying with their
money in these Scales 500. Erdipps of Rice, none of you all pretending that
Rice is a prohibited Commodity shall give them any let or hinderance, neither
shall you permit any our Officers, Farmers, or other commanders, to take from
them one Asper for the Custom, Reft, Reeme, or Bag of them, neither any,
what man or officer soever, shall molest or disturb them, nor consent that any
body do any Action contrary to the tenor of this our Imperial Command, and
do take notice accordingly. And after you shall read this our Command, you
shall Render it back again into the English men's hands, giving always full
faith to our most happy Signature.

Written in the latter part of the Moon Regeb. Anno 1050. which is anno Domini
1640. Given in the preserved City of Constantinople.
To the most Powerful, Invincible, and Just, Great Emperor of the Ottoman
Empire, Sultan Ibrachim Han, unto whose Imperial presence, Charles, by the
Grace and Mercy of God, King of England, and of the Kingdoms thereunto
subjected, sends health and prosperity, Beseeching the Almighty God for the
preservation, Glory, Honor, and Prosperity of your Imperial State.
IN the time of the Glorious Memory of Sultan Murad. Han. We having occasion
to Revoke from the Imperial Port, where was Residing Our former Ambassador,
nevertheless intending always that our Ancient Friendship, Confederation, and
Correspondencie with the Ottoman Port, should remain in its first and former
state, vigor and perfection, in stead of him, We then have sent Sir Sackvile
Crow, one of the Prime in Honor and esteem of Our Royal Court, and Our
beloved and well deserved Servant, of whose long faithfulness, service, and
sincerity, being most assured We have consigned into his hand the Ancient
Imperial Capitulations, and gave him full Authority of what may concern for
the continuance of the Peace, and League between the two States, As also for
the advancement of the Commerce, and our good Correspondencie, viz. Power to
alter the Articles in the said Capitulations, to increase and confirm them, And
likewise given him full power upon the Consuls, who for the preservation and
Advancement of the Trade are established in diverse Scales of the Imperial
Dominions, to deprive and confirm them, according as he should find
convenient, To Rule and Govern in all these parts Our subjects according to our
Laws, Statutes and Orders, to punish and chastise the delinquents as he shall
find requisite, To take and receive into his Power, all which has been allowed
from us unto him, with all those Emoluments, and Benefices depending and
appertaining to our Kingly Prerogative; As also to take and receive all the
Consoladge as is specified in the Imperial Capitulations, to the end that he
should maintain himself in the Charge and dignity upon him reposed, with all
honor and reputes; And likewise to employ all his Industry for the
strengthening of Our good Peace, and Confederation, and to do and work all
which may tend to the good Government of our Subjects, and to fulfill all these
orders which for that end we have committed unto him; And for his assurance
and strength therein, We have granted unto him under Our hand and Seal, to be
our Ambassador upon this quality and Conditions, during all his Residencie
and abode in Your happy Port, as it does appear in our Instructions given him,
and with our Kingly Letter then sent to Your Imperial Port, and more at large
in our Commission given him, which is sealed with the great Seal of England
does appear. All which now again We confirm and ratify unto him; And
whereas that the said Sir Sackvile Crow, he being with the said our Kingly
Letters, Commissions and Instructions, together with the said Our former
Ambassador, both been presented in the Royal presence of the Imperial
Majesty of glorious Memory your Brother, in condition and quality above
specified, And from his said Majesty then well accepted, and gratefully
received, and from that time until now, has always been there well and
respectfully used* of which your Imperial Majesty also afterward has with
your Imperial Letters and Ambassador sent unto us, advised and given us
notice thereof, and then also according to Our former desire have Confirmed and
rendered him the Imperial Capitulations in the same manner and form that were
before, and have accepted that ample Authority, which we have given to the
said Our Ambassador: The which we have also seen inserted in the Copies of
the said your renewed Capitulations, in which your Majesty was pleased for the
better Our satisfaction, to promise that the Confederation of Accord in the
Capitulations, with all the Chapters and Articles in it should be inviolable
maintained and observed, We have understood of late the contrary thereof,
which is, that the Authority of the said Our Ambassador, whilst he was
endeavoring and willing to perform, and to do what was due, and ought to be
done concerning his charge, that his Authority was suspected by the false
Information given unto your Majesty by some of Our Rebelled subjects, by whose
false information, We know that he has been much wronged, for whilst the
Authority which we conferred upon him, by virtue of Our Royal Commission
does continue upon him, and until this present time, We do maintain him for
Our Ambassador, and being that we have made no other Declaration to the
contrary, rather because he endeavored to fulfill Our will and order; And
although there was no necessity there should be sent unto him, any other
Confirmation from us, Yet for his great instance and request of his unto us,
and for his own satisfaction and contentment, and for the approving of all what
he has done herein already in these parts, as more particularly we have
expressed unto your Majesty, by these Letters sent unto you formerly, which
your Majesty doubtless has seen, and well apprehended, and to the end that
between us there might not be any more doubtfulnesse, then what has been
already, And that there may be no more inconveniences happen, and to the end
your Majesty may be clear of all suspicion, and that in the future, the said
our Ambassador may have, be, and remain as before, in the same his first
Authority, With these Presents Our Letters, We do again Confirm the same
to your Majesty, and as above mentioned and expressed in the said our former
Letters, and in these new, we say, That your Majesty be pleased to Command,
that so may be observed and in Conformity to the Tenor of your Imperial
Capitulations, that the said Our Ambassador be accepted, received, and
credited as before, in all his Treaties, occasions and affairs as well in the
Public as for State, belonging to us, and in the like manner be always so
esteemed, for otherwise he will never be able to serve in the occasion of
business which may and will happen between us and your Majesty; And these of
Our Subjects have opposed Our Royal will, and are become Our Rebels, by whose
false Information, Our good Correspondence is thus scandalized and disturbed,
All of them be Consigned in the hand of the said Our Ambassador, and in
Conformity or Ancient Custom, he may place and displace the English Consul,
and according to the Tenor of the Imperial Capitulations, he may direct, give
expedition to all the Businesses and affairs of Our subjects in those parts
and under his charge, and to govern and punish them as he shall think fit and
requisite. And if in the future the said Our subjects do find themselves
oppressed and agreeved from the said Our Ambassador, when they shall make
their complaint unto us, according to the merit of their case, Justice shall be
made unto them, And in this particular our desire is, that your Majesty be
pleased not to do otherwise, and those of our Subjects who shall refuse to
give all obedience to the said Our Ambassador to the end that they may be
reduced to due obedience, that you will grant him your Imperial Command* and
to protect and defend him in all his occasions, for if your Majesty does not
Protect and defend him powerfully, We being of great distance from him, it is
almost impossible for him to bring these Rebels under his obedience; Therefore
we hope that your Majesty has already given him all favor and countenance,
and your Imperial commandment, of which he has need of in this his occasion,
and that you have given him also all these helps and assistances necessary, for
the gathering and receiving his rights and consolage given to him according to
the Tenor of the Imperial Capitulations, and orders and directions by us
granted him; as also for the recovering all other rights and duties belonging
to his charge, and what else that our Subjects are bound unto him, and is to
receive from them and this to the end that he may maintain himself in his
Charge of Our Ambassador with that Honor, that it does behoove and befit to
Our Ambassador; so that as before is mentioned the said Ambassador being
graciously accepted by your Majesty* and by virtue of Our Letters Sealed and
affirmed by Us as heretofore has been always acknowledged for Our
Ambassador; Now again in Confirmation thereof, with these our Presents. We
do Confirm and Ratify him, and according to the Tenor of Our Imperial
Capitulations. We give him credit to treat and inform your Majesty in Our
name touching our Confederacy with you, upon which you may be pleased to give
him full faith, who also is to Reside there for our Legier Ambassador, with
full Power and Authoriry to receive the duties of Consoladge, and all other
Rights concerning to his Place, and this until We shall revoke him from
thence, and call him before Us, and in his place send another new Ambassador
with our Letters, Sealed with our Royal Seal, and affirmed with Our hand, and
until then We beseech you do not give any credit to any other Person, and
rather we desire your Majesty, that receiving this Our Letter, to be pleased
to send for him before your presence, and there to invest him again in his
Charge, and to preserve and continue your Favor as you wonted to do formerly,
We assuring your Majesty with our Kingly word, and this our Royal Letters,
That all these particulars are true and just, and according to our Desire; Our
will being also, that whilst Our Ambassador shall Reside at your Imperial
Port, whatsoever he shall Declare unto you in Our name, Your Majesty be pleased
to give him full Credit, as also what Business he shall propound you in Our
name, to accept the same, and to affect it, And as we said before, be pleased
to give him Credit for all these Propositions that he shall advise, for we
will ratify and Confirm all, And your Majesty may be sure of his integrity
and faithfulness. Written at New Castle the 24th of September 1646.

Your most Sincere and faithful Friend, CAROLUS REX.


My Lord,
YOu cannot say but with great patience I have attended your performance of the
King of Englands command, expressed in his Letter of Revocation to you ( viz.)
to deliver up his Seal to me, together with all such Instructions,
informations, and such other things behovefull for the good of his Subjects
which are in your power, or keeping, and to Resign and depart from the place,
and authority of his Ambassador, and no further to meddle either with the
Merchants, their affairs or goods, to none of all which I can discern you
have yielded any obedience or performance. And whereas his Majesty has
commanded me, and given me Authority to require from you in his Majesty's name
the aforesaid Seal, Instructions, or informations, or ought else remaining in
your custody, behovefull for the good of his Merchants, and also commanded me
to press your speedy return to him; By virtue of the said Authority, and in
order to his Majesty's commands, I do require you to deliver up the said
Seal, together with all those writings, and books which belongs to, and are
the proper goods of the Merchants in the Cancellaria, into the hands of the
bearers hereof, and that henceforth you do not pretend to any authority of
Ambassador in this place; and also that you do prepare your self, for your
speedy departure to the King of England. If through your disobedience to his
Majesty's commands, in the denying of them, and the retarding your departing
hence, you run your self upon more inconveniences then I desire, you must
blame your self, not me, who have made your self incapable of receiving that
honor from me which was ever intended by

Pera 18. October. 1647. Your friend to serve you, Tho. Bendish.
Vera Copia Examinatur and concordat cum original. per nos. Jo: Williams, Ant.
Isaacson.

October the 19. in the morning we delivered the original hereof to Sir
Sackvile Crow, who after he had received it, retired into a private room, a
little space, and then coming to us, said as follows; Tell your Master, I
wonder that he has so little manners, or discretion, to send me such a Letter
as this, I thought my answer to him at the delivery of his last, would have
been sufficient, to have taught him more discretion, but as God judge me, if he
will not learn better manners, tell him I Will teach him some, and that I have
given the King an account of the business already, and this shall be your
answer, and then thrust us out of the chamber, and told us, that we were
servants, and if we had affront put upon us, we might thank our selves for
bringing such a Message.

Jo. Williams, Ant. Isaacson.




To his Sacred Majesty, our most Gracious Sovereign. The humble Petition of
your Majesty's Loyal and obedient Subjects, the Merchants and Factors Resident
in Galiata of Constantinople
Humbly shows.
THat whereas for the Protection of those negotiating in these parts, it has
been the Royal pleasure of your Sacred Majesty to appoint Sir Sackvile Crow
your Ambassador with the Grand Signieur these late years, whose violent and
grievous proceedings against your Petitioners, by Imprisoning their persons,
some in chains, he intending to seize upon the Estate here at Constantinople
(as he had done that at Smirna) in his own name, forcing us to subscribe for
payment of great sums of money to him, your Petitioners were notwithstanding
compelled to spend forty thousand pounds sterling to free our persons and
estates from his power, whom he had designed to Ruin and destruction,

Do humbly implore, that no misrepresented Action of your Petitioners may so
far prevail upon your apprehension, as to think us guilty of the least
disrespect toward him, as your Majesty's Ambassador, but forced out of a
necessity to save our selves and fortunes, now Redeemed and established to us
in your Majesty's Royal choice of his successor, one of such apparent trust,
for which your Princely care and clemency, we are to praise God, and (as by our
duty and allegiance bound) for your Majesty's increase of greatness and
happiness,

Shall ever Pray,

Jonathan Dawes, Richard Strode, William Petre, John Dodington, Francis Dryver,
William Gifford, William Gibbes, John Ridley, John Erisey, William Galt,
Marmadake Picket, Maurice Evans, William Osborne, William Gough, Thomas
Berkeley, William Chapel, John Tie, Roger Fowke, William Pearl, James
Modyford, Robert Frampton, John South, Giles Davis, Nic. Bell.



Mr. Zachary Brown. In Alicant the 21. of March, 1648.
THese are to acquaint you how this evening we were all taken by the Officers
of the Inquisition, and remain prisoners, wherefore we know not, nor the cause
of your fathers detension; But find the Commissaries and other Officers to
pretend the ruin of us all. We are not suffered to plead our cause, nor is
that Tribunal to expect replies; your father advises you in what condition
himself is, and the business is not to be remedied otherwise then by my Lords
coming on shore speedily, whereupon your father and us shall be freed, and you
may be confident your father and his Mate and us will be freed without dispute,
and rest

Your loving friends to serve you, Richard Capell, William Trevill, Anthony
Basset, Nicholas Ieffery, Thomas Iackson, William Paullin, Edward Landen, Io.
Hibbins, Hen. Callamore, Richard Hownsell.



This coming to Mr. Zachary Brown aboard the Ship Margaret, he demanded of
my Lord Crow, wherefore he had caused his father Captain Brown, and his mate
to be detained, and imprisoned on shore, who presently took a Bible, and
laying his hand thereon, took a voluntary oath, that he for his part knew
nothing of it, and that if his wise had done any thing, she did it out of her
love to her husband, and his liberty, but not by his direction; yet about two
days after he confessed to the same Master Brown, (charging him again with
the evil usage of his father on shore) that he did indeed give his wife order
to go to the Governor, and to desire him to send for the Captain on shore,
and know of him by what Authority he kept him, his Lady, and family in his
ship, and whether he had any command from the King of England so to do? but
it is conceived he had forgotten his former oath.

Letters from Alicant of the 22. of March inform that the Margaret ariving
there, which ship brought Sir Sackvile Crow, his Lady, and family from Smirna,
the Lady Crow pretending to Master George Brown (commander of the said ship)
that she was with child and ^o near her time, that she durst not venture to
go to England but would stay and ly in at Alicant, he caused her to be set on
sh^re, and himself went to accompany her; when she was in the Town, she
presently went to the Governor, and told him she was a Roman Catholic, and
that the Master of the ship had not only detained her by force, but had also
denied her liberty of her religion; whereupon the Governor sent for the Master
and his chief Mate, and put both them and all the English Nation there into
prison, and sent to the ship to demand Sir Sackvile Crow; but the Masters
son, Master Zachary Brown, considering the danger the ship was in, and what
a trick Sir Sackvile Crow had put upon his father, denied to deliver him, but
presently wayed Anchor and came away; but before his coming, this Letter was
sent him from the Colonel and Merchants.

FJNJS.

