LEYCESTERS GHOST.

Printed in the year, 1641.

LEYCESTERS GHOST.
I That sometimes shind like the Orient Sun,
Though Fortunes subject, yet a puisant Lord,
Am now an object to be gazed upon;
An abject rather fit to be deplored,
Dejected now, that whilom was adored;
Affected once, suspected since of many,
Rejected now, respected scarce of any.
My Spirit hovering in the foggy air,
Since that did pass the frozen stigian flood,
Unto great Britains Empire did repair,
Where of Elizas death I understand,
And that the Heavens, careful of Englands good*
Raised up a King, who crowned with loves peace
Brought in new joys, and made old griefs to cease.
Thus from the concave vault of starles night,
Where neither Sun nor Moon vouchsast to shine*
My wretched Ghost at length is come to light
By Charters granted from the powers divine,
Snake-eating envy, o do not repine
At Honors shadow, do not bite the dead,
My pride is past, my pomp from the earth is fled.
My Princely birth, my high enobled state,
My sometime dreadful frowns, now none regard,
My great good turns, to many done of late,
With gratfull hearts now none or few reward,
My Fame is plotted out, my Honor seared,
My Monuments defast, my Relics torn,
Yea vassailes do my excellency skorne,
Ah silly peasants, as each Grecian boy,
Would brave stout Hector being dead and cold,
That whilome was the pillar of old Troy,
Whose presence living they durst scarce behold,
Now since you see me dead you grow so bold,
As to control my acts, whose looks did daunt
The proudest Peers that lived in Troynovante.
A time there was, when stately Bears could clime,
And in that time, was I a stately Bear;
Who clim'd so fast and in a little time,
That my high mounting other beasts did fear
My fortunes, by their downefals I did rear:
I now rejoice, whilst others I made mourn,
And served the time to make time serve my turn.
I was the offspring of a Princely Sire
He too well knew by his clime-falling pride
Like Dedalus he taught me to aspire;
We both did fly, he fell, I did but slide;
Like in attempts, yet unlike chance we tried:
He by a Queen did die, and as that chanced,
I by a Queen did live, and was advanced.
For Lady Jane by him a Queen proclaimed
Was soon suppressed, Queen Mary got the Crown*
Which as her proper right she boldly claimed,
My Father strived in vain to keep her down,
And for that lost his life, I my renown,
Till sacred Cynthia to the Kingdom came,
That gave new life to my late dying fame.
That Peerles Queen of happy memory
That late like Debora the Kingdom swaid,
Now triumphs in the Jasper coulered sky
With star embrodered vesture rich arrayed;
She, she restored my honors then decay*st
When treason did attaint my Fathers blood,
And drowned our Princely race in Lethes flood.
Then Jupiter was in my Horoscope,
And Cynthia blessed me with her fair aspect,
What might not then my youth and courage hope,
When me my sovereigns favor did protect?
O what may not a Princess grace effect,
When Majesty on hopeless men do smile,
Whose joys did seem to perish in exile.
Even when Queen Mary's tragic reign did end,
My comic fortunes in their prime begun
That time when Cynthias brightness did extend
To lighten this dark Land, whose splendant Sun
Was in Eclips, and sorrows stream did run;
I like the glorious day star did appear,
With fair uprise to grace this Hemispeare.
Since Brute first swayed all this united land,
No subject firmer held his sovereigns grace,
My will Imperial for a Law did stand,
Such was my Princes pleasure, such my place,
As Momus durst not offer me disgrace,
What man did smile, when Leysters brow did frown,
Whose wit could guide, though never get the Crown.
Whilst in this glorious Ocean I did swim
To high preferment diverse men I brought,
Which since have sought my honors lamp to dim,
Yea such as I before advanced of naught
Against my person treacheries have wrought,
Thus honors do oft-times good manners change
And men grown rich to ancient friends grow strange.
I grieve to think, I did such men advance,
And raise their base lines to a stately pitch
Under the shadow of my countenance,
The substance of the earth did make them rich,
What fury did their senses thus bewitch,
Or was it some ill Spirit that possessed them?
To seek my ruin, whose large bounty blessed them.
Thus they in vain my downfall did conspire;
Like dogs that at the Moon do fondly bark,
And did but burn themselves like Aetnas fire,
Or like grimme Owls did wander in the dark,
Contemned of me, that mounted like the lark:
Or that rare bird that builds his nest on high,
In Cedar trees, whose tops affronts the sky.
When I commanded, who durst countermand,
Were not mean Subjects subject to my beck?
What man of worth my pleasure did withstand?
What single swains could do, I did not wreck?
I gave the Mate to those that gave me check.
By the Queens help, and by my threatening looks,
I ruld the Pawnes, the Bishops, Knights, and Rookes.
Thus did I play at Chesse and won the game,
Having the Queen my pusiance to support,
The Bishops for ambition did me blame,
The Pawnes affirm I won by much extort,
The Rookes and Knights found draughts to mar my sport;
Had not some stopped me with their timely checks.
I might have given them Checks without their necks.
My brain had wit, my tongue had eloquence
Fit to discourse and tell a courtely tale;
My presence portely, brave, magnificent,
My words imperious, stout, substantial,
My jestures loving, kind, Heroycall,
My thoughts ambitions, proud and full ofire,
My deeds were good or bad as time required.
Some of my foes that bare me deadly hate,
That had to them chief offices assigned,
And were my sellowes, Consuls in the State,
Emulous still of my aspiring mind,
Gave me this praise, though otherwise unkind:
That I was wondrous politic and wise,
A Statesman that knew how to temporise,
Some others took me for a zealous man,
Because good Preachers I did patronize*
And many thought me a Precisian,
But God does know, I never was precise,
I seemed devout in godly exercise,
And by religious show confirmed my might,
But who durst say, I was an Hypocrite.
As Numa, when he first did seek to draw
The Roman people underneath his yoke,
Touching Religion he ordained a law
And feigned, he with nymph Aegerin spoke,
That him to his good motions did provoke;
Whereby, as if it were with Heavens consent,
He brought these men to civil government.
So when I came in high affairs to deal,
Of sound Religion I did make a show,
And by pretense of that and fervent zeal,
In wealth and faction, I more strong did grow,
For this by practice I did plainly know,
That men are apt to yield to any motion
Made by a man that is of pure devotion.
Yet could I strain my conscience for a meed,
For though I seemed an earnest Protestant,
For gain I favored Papist; so indeed,
Some held me for a Newte^, and I grant,
To serve my torn, I would turn Puri^ant;
Thus by Religion honor some did win,
And this fair cloak often covers filthy sin.
Like as the ayre-sucking Camelion
Can him transform to any hue save white,
So man can turn to any fashion,
Save to that form which is sincere and right,
For though he may delude the peoples sight;
It is in vain before God to dissemble,
Whose power the Devils know, and knowing tremble.
Was I the only man that has offended
In making holiness a cloak for sin?
The Frenchmen for religions sake pretended
Their civil wars of late time did begin,
But yet ambition chiefly drew them in,
Yea mad ambition and desire of gain
Makes endless broiles betwixt the State and Spain.
Of promises I was so prodigail,
So kind, well spoken; and so liberal,
That to some great divine as that might fall,
Perhaps I promised a Bishopric,
But in performance I was nothing quick;
Thus with fair words men's honors often I fed,
Whilst hope this while a good opinion bred.
To learned Scholars, I was something franck
Not for the love that I to learning bore,
But either to get praise or pick a thank
Of such as could the Muses aid implore,
For he is blessed, that so be-friended dies,
Whose praise the Muses will immortalize.
You mortals that would have your fame survie,
When you within your grave entombed shall lie,
Cherish those sacred sisters while you live,
For they be daughters of Dame mem^ry,
And of the thundering Monarch of the sky,
They have the gift to register with pen
The Eternal fame or infamy of men.
The Students of the University,
Oxford whereof I was the Chancellor,
That Nurce of Science and Philosophy
Knowing the greatness of my wit and power,
Did honor me as the fair springing flower
That in the Princess favor highly grew,
Whom she with showers of gold did often bedew.
At my command both Dee and Allen tended,
By magic art my pleasure to fulfill;
These to my service their best studies bended,
And why they durst not dis-obey my will,
Yea whatsoever was of secret skill
In Oxford or in Cambridge to be sold,
I bought for love, for fear, or else for gold.
Doubtless the most renowned Philosophers,
As Plato and Pythagoras have sought
To learn the Hiraglised characters,
And secrets which by magique skill is wrought,
Such as the Egyptians, Jews, and Caldaeans taught;
The Arts not ill, if men do not abuse it,
No fault so bad, but some man will excuse it.
Lopus and Iulio were my chiese Physicians,
Men that were cunning in the art to kill;
Good Scholars, but of passing ill conditions;
Such as could rid men's lives yet no blood spill,
Yea, and with such extremity and skill
Could give a dram of poison that would slay,
At the end of the year, the month, the week, the day.
I never did these wicked men employ
To wrong my Prince, or my true loving friend,
But false deceiptfull wretches to destroy,
And bring them to an unexpected end,
Let them look to it that did most offend,
Whose names are registered in Plutos scrowles,
For I will never answer for their souls.
Knights and Esquires the best in every shire
Did wait on me in England up and down,
And some among them, did my livery wear,
My smiles did seem to promise them renown,
But dismal hopes ensued when I did frown:
As when the starro Aretarus did appear
Of raging tempest, Seamen stand in fear.
As for the soldiers and the men of war
At home in service, some I did retain,
Others I sent abroad not very far,
At my commandment to return again;
These I with costs did secretly maintain,
That if ought chanced otherwise then well,
I might have sent my foes to Heaven or Hell.
Likewise I brought the Lawyers in someaw,
The worthy Students of the Innes of Court,
That there applied them to the Common Law
Did yield to me in matters of import,
Although sometimes I did the law extort;
And whether right or wrong my cause on'st hard
To plead against me, made great Lords afeard.
So the Lord Barckley lost his good lands by me,
Whereof at first perhaps, he did not dream,
"Might many times does overcome the right,
"It is in vain to strive against the stream;
Where he, that is chief subject of the Realm,
Upon his Sovereigns favor rests him bold,
He cannot, or he will not be contrould.
Thus by the Queen my puisance was upheld,
And for my foes I ever was too strong,
The grace I had from her, all fear expelled
I might wrong others, but not suffer wrong;
So many men did unto me belong,
Which on my favor chiefly did depend,
And for my sake both lands and goods would spend,
The best esteemed noble of the land,
On whose support the public State reli'd
Were linkt with me in friendships faithful band*
Or else in kindred nearly were allied,
Their perfect loves and constant hearts I tried;
The Inferior sort, at our devotion stood*
Ready to execute what we thought good.
The Earl of Warwick my own loving Brother;
My Sisters husband The Earl of Huntington,
The bounteous Earl of Bedford was another:
Of my best friends beloved of every one,
Sir Henry Sidneis power in Wales well known,
And there The Earl of Pembrooke chief of all,
Of kin my friend what ever chance might fall.
In Berwick, my wifes Uncle had chief power,
The Lord of Hlunsden my assured friend,
In Ireland the Lord Gray was Governor*
Gernsey and Iersey likewise did depend
Upon such men as did my will attend;
Hampton my man, Lieutenant of the Tower,
Prompt to do my service at an hour.
Sir Edward Horsey in the Isle of wight,
And Noble Sir George Ceraw, next bore sway,
Men of great courage and no little might
To take my part in any doubtful fray,
In London the Recorder Fleetwood lay,
That often usde good words that might incense
The Citizens to stand in my defense.
The Prentises did often take my part,
As I in private quarrels often have tried,
So that I had the very head and heart,
The Court and City leaning on my side,
With flattery some, others which gifts I plide;
And some with threats, stern looks and angry words,
I win to my defense with clubbes and swords.
Thus I by wisdom and fine policy
Maintained the reputation of my life
Drawing to me, the flowers of chivalry
To surrour me at need in time of strife,
Men that loved change in every place were rife;
And all the Realm was with my power possessed,
Think what this might have wrought, but judge the best.
Like Claudius Marcellus drawn through Rome
In his fair Chariot with youths Trophies decked,
Crowned with garlands by the Sonats doom,
Whom they five times their Consul did elect,
That from their foes he might their lives protect;
When he with conquest did his Country greet,
Loads of rich spoils lay prostrate at his feet:
So did I triumph ride through all those towns,
As if I had been Viceroy of this land;
My face well grast with smiles, my purse with Crowns,
Houlding the raines of honor in my hand,
I managed all the State, I did command:
My looks with humble Majesty repleat;
Made some men wish me a Kings royal seat.
Thus waxt I popular to purchase fame,
To me the Common-peoples knees did bow,
I could my humor still so fittely frame
To entertain all men to outward show,
For few with inward love my heart did know,
And that I might not seem puffed up with pride,
Bare-headed often through Cities I did ride.
While some cried out, God save you gracious Lord,
Lord how they did my fame h'iperobolize,
My words and gesture did so well accord
As with their hearts I seemed to simpathize,
I charmed their cares, and did enchant their eyes,
Thus was I reckoned their chief Potentate,
No poller but a pillar of the State.
Then I was called the life, and o the Court!
And some, I wot, wished I had been the head;
I had so great a train and such a port,
As did the pomp of Mortimer exceed;
Whom (as in the English Cronicles we read,
When second Edward lost his Kingly rights)
Was waited on at onst with nine score Knights.
The Earl of March, Sir Robert Mortimer,
Ruld the young King, Queen mother, and the Peers,
I Robert Dudley Earl of Leycester,
Did sway in Court, and all the English Shires;
His rule was short, mine florisht many years.
He did his life with Ignominy loose;
I lived and triumphed ore my proudest foes.
As the Image of great Alexander dead,
Made King Cassander tremble at his sight
Spying the figure of his Royal head,
Whose presence sometime did the World affright;
Or like as Caesar monarchizing spright,
Persude false Brutus at Phillippos field,
Till he that slew his liege himself was killed.
So view ye petty Lords my Princely Ghost,
I speak to you whose heart is full of gall,
I whilst I lived was honored of the most,
And either feared for love, of great and small,
Or loved for fear of such as wished my fall;
Behold my shadow representing State,
Whose person sometime did your pride abate.
Weigh what I was, Knights, Gentlemen, and Peers,
When my death threatening frowns did make you quake,
As yet there was not passed not many years,
Since I you plumes plucked, lofty crests did shake,
Then tell me Sirs for old acquaintance sake,
Wax ye not pale to hear of Leysters name,
Or to bakebite me, blush ye not for shame.
You say, in dealings that I was unjust
As if true Justice balance ye could guide,
Had I dealt justly, I had turned to dust,
Long before this, your corpse swollen up with pride,
Which now surviving do my acts deride:
My fame yet lives, though death abridg'd my days,
Some of you died that over lived your praise.
Are there not some among you Parasites,
Time-servers and observers of no measure,
Damned Machevillians given to lust and pleasure,
Church robbers* beggars of the Princes treasure,
Prince-smothers, people pleasure, Hippocrites,
Truce Breakers, Pirates, Atheists, Sycophants,
Can equity dwell here, where conscience wants.
And yet, you think none justly deals but you,
Divine Astrea up to Heaven is fled;
And turn to Libra there look up to v^iew,
Her balance in the zodiac figured,
Just Aristldes onst was banished,
Where lives his match whom envy did pursue,
Because men thought he was too just and true.
Ye say ambition harbored in my brain,
I say ambition is no heinous sin,
To men of state do stately thoughts pertain
By basebred thoughts never can any win,
Who ever did a great exploite begin,
Before ambition moved him to the deed,
And hope of honor urged him to proceed.
Themistocles had never put to flight,
Xerxes hughe host; nor tamed the Persian pride,
Nor had King Pyrrus got by marshall sight;
The Romans spoils with conquest on his fight,
If first ambition had not been the guide;
Had not this humor, their stout hearts allured
To high attempts, their fame had been obscured.
The Eagle does disdain to catch small flies,
The Lion with the Ape does scorn to play,
The Dolphin does the Whirle-pooles love despice;
Thus if Beasts, Birds, and Fishes bear such sway,
Much more should man (whom reason does adorn)
Be noble minded and base fortune scorn.
Admit I could dissemble wittily,
This is no grievious sin in men of State,
Dissembling is a point of policy,
Plain dealing now grows stale, and out of date,
Wherefore I often conceald my privy hate,
Till I might find fit time, though long I stayed,
To wreake the wrath, that in my heart I laid.
The old proverb says, plain dealing is a Juell,
But he that uses it a beggar dies;
The World is now a days become so cruel
That Courtiers do plain Countrymen despice:
Quick wits and cunning heads do quickly rise,
And to be plain, ye shall plainly deal,
That office seeks in Court or Commonwealth.
Now Aristippus is in more request
That knew the way to please a Monarch's mind
Then that Cinique swad that used to jest,
At every idle Knave that he could find,
To unkind friends you must not be too kind,
This is a maxim which to you I give,
Men must dissemble or they cannot live.
Ye say I was a cowerd in the field,
I say that fits not such a Noble wight,
To whom his Country does the title yield
of Lord Lieutenant, with full power and might
To venture his own person in the fight;
Let others die which as our vassailes serve,
Whilst heaven for better haps our hopes preserve.
How soon did Englands joy in France diminish,
When the Earl of Salisbury at Orl^^n^e
By gunshot struck, his honors life did finish:
When Talbot that did often time advance,
The English Enfines in despite of France
Was at the da^t Environed and slain,
Whose name the French-mens terror does remain.
And what a fatal wound did Rome recieve
By Crassus death whom faithless Parthians slew,
How did the Senate for Flaminius grieve;
And for Aemilius death and his stout crew,
Whom Hannibal at Cannes did subdue;
Cut off an arm, yet life the heart may cherish,
Cut off the head, and every part will perish.
Iphicrates the Athenian usde to say,
Vaunt Currours are like hands to battle pressed,
The men of arms are feet whereon to stay,
The Foote-men as the stomach and the breast,
The Captains as the head above the rest;
The head onst crased troubles all the parts,
The General slain does kill ten thousand hearts.
Therefore a Lord Lieutenant should take care,
That he in safety do himself repose,
And should not hazard life at every dare,
But watch and ward; so Fabius tired his foes.
When rash Minutius did the conquest loose,
If such in open danger will intrude,
It is fond rashness and not fortitude.
You say I was lascivious in my love,
And that I tempted many a gallant Dame,
Not so content, but I did also prove
To win, their handmaids if I like the game*
Why Sirs, you know love kindles such a flame,
As if we may believe what Poets pen,
It does inchant the hearts of Gods and men.
Jove loved the Daughter of a jealous Sire,
D^nae a maid immured within a Tower,
Yet to accomplish the end of his desire,
He metamorphos'd to a goulden shower
Fell in the lap of his fair p^ramour,
And being termed a God did not disdain,
To turned to man, to beast, to shower of rain.
Dear Lord, when Cupid throws his fiery darts,
Does none of them your tender bodies hit,
Does Cytherea never charm your hearts,
Nor beauty try your quintessentiall wit,
Perhaps you will say, no, fie it is unfit:
Now by my Garter and my George to boot,
The blind boy surely hits, if he does shoot.
Whereas you do object by magic charms,
I sought to win fair Dames to my desire*
It Is better so then strive by force of arms
"For forced love will quickly back retire;
If fair means cannot win what we require*
Some secret tricks and slights must be devised
That love may even from hell be exercised.
To you dull wits it seems impossible,
By drinks or charms this work to pass to bring,
Know then that Giges went invisible
By turning of the sigill of his Ring
Toward his palm, and thereby slew the King,
Lay with his wife of any man unseene,
Lastely did reign by marrying with the Queen.
King Solomon for magic natural
Was held a cunning man by some divines,
He wrote a book of Science natural,
To bind ill Spirits in their dark confines,
He had great store of wifes and concubines;
Yet was he a sacred King, this I infer,
"The wisest man that now does live may eric.
Also ye said that when I waxed old,
When age and misspent time had made me dry,
For ancient held in carnal lust is cold,
Natures defect with art I did supply,
That so to help this imbecility*
I used strange drinks and ointments of great price,
Whole taste or touch might make dead flesh arise.
To this I answer, that this fine extraction
Drammes and electuaries rarely made,
Served not so much to help* veneriall action,
As for to comfort nature that is decayed,
Which being with indifferent judgment way'd;
In Noble men may be allowed I trust,
As lending to their healths, and not their justs.
What if I drunk nothing but liquid gold,
Lactrina, Crystal, Pearl dissolved in wine,
Such as the Egyptians full cups of did hold,
When Cleopatra with her Lord did dine,
A trifle, care not, for the cost was mine;
What if I gave Hypomiu^s in drink
To some fair Dames, at small faults ye must wink.
Ye say I was a Traitor to the Queen,
And that when Monsieur was in greatest grace,
I being out of favor, moved with spleen,
To see a Frenchman frolique in the place:
Forth toward Berwick then did post a pace,
Minding to raise a rebellious rout,
To take my part in what I went about.
That I was then a Traitor I deny,
But I confess that I was Monsieurs so,
And sought to break the league of amity,
Which then betwixt my Prince and him did grow:
Doubting Religion might be changed so;
Or that our laws and customs were in danger,
To be corrupt and altered by a stranger.
Therefore I did a faction strong maintain
Against the Earl of Suffex, a stout Lord
On Monsieurs side, and then Lord Chamberlain,
Who sought to make that nuptial accord,
Which none may break, witness the sacred word;
But thus it chanced that he strived in vain
To knit the Knolt which Heavens did not ordain.
Thus did ye mis-enterpret my conceits,
That for disloyalty my deeds did blame,
Yet many men have laid their secret baits,
To entrape me in such snares to work my shame,
Whom I in time sufficiently did tame;
And by my Sovereigns favor bore them down,
Proving my self true Liegeman to the Crown.
Think ye I could forget my Sovereign Lady
That was to me so gracious and so kind,
How many triumphs for her glory made I,
O I could never blot out of my mind;
What Characters of grace in her still shined,
But some of you which were by her preferred,
Have with her bones almost her name interred.
When she was gone which of you all did weep,
What mournful song did Phylomela sing*
Alas when she in cold deaths bed did sleep,
Which of you all her doleful knell did ring,
How long will ye now love your crowned King*
If ye forget so soon you old Queen dead,
Which four and forty years has governed,
Ye say I fought by Muither to aspire,
And by strong poison many men to ^lay,
Which as ye thought might erosse my high desire,
And cloud my long expected golden day,
Perhaps I laid some blocks out of my way,
Which hindered me from coming to the bower,
Where Cynthia shined like lamps in Pharohs Tower.
Alas I come not of a Tigers kind,
My hands with blood, I hated to defile;
But when by good experience I did find
How some with fained love did me beguile,
Perchance all pity then I did exile,
And as it were against my will was pressed,
To ^^^ke their deaths that did my life detest.
Lo then, attend to hear a doleful tale,
Of those whose deaths you do suppose I wrought,
Yet wish I that the World believe not all,
That has of me by envious men been wrote;
But when I for a Kingly fortune sought,
O pardon me, my self I might forget,
And cast down some my state aloft to set.
My first wife fell down from a pair of stairs,
And brake her neck and so at Cromner died,
Whilst her true servants led with small affairs,
Unto a fair at Abbington did ride,
This dismal hap unto my wife betide:
Whether ye call it chance or destiny,
Too true it is she did untimely die.
O had I now a shower of tears to shed,
Locked in the empty Circles of mine eyes,
Or could I shed in mourning for the dead,
That lost a spouse so young, so fair, so wife,
So fair a corpse, so foul a corse now lies;
My hope to have married with a famous Queen,
Drove pity back, and kept my tears unseene.
What man so fond that would not loose a Pearl
To find a Diamand, leave brass for gold?
Or who would not for sake a gallant girl,
To win a Queen, great men in awe to hold?
To rule the State of none to be controld;
"O but the steps that lead unto a throne,
"Are dangerous for men to tread upon.
The Cardinal Chatillian was my foe,
Whose death peradventure I did compact,
Because he let Queen Elizabeth to know*
My false report given of a former act,
How I with her had made a precontract,
And the great Princes hope I hard thereby,
That sought to marry with her Majesty.
The Prelate had been better hold his tongue
And kissed his Fathers holy feet in Rome,
A Mass the sooner, for his soul was song,
But he might thank me had he stayed at home,
Or late or never he to Heaven had come;
Therefore I sent him nimbly from the coasts,
Perhaps to supper with the Lord of hoasts.
When death by hap my first wifes neck had cracked,
And that my suite unto the Queen ill sped,
It chanced that I made a post-contract,
And did in sort the Lady Sheifield wed,
Of whom I had two goodly Children bred,
For the Lord Sheifeild died, as I was sure
Of a Catarchy, which Physicians could not cure.
Some think, the Rhume was artificial*
Which this good Lord before his end did take,
Tush, what I gave to him was natural*
My plighted troth* yet some amends did make,
Though her at length, unkind, I did forsake;
She must not blame me for a higher reach,
Made my sure promise find a sudden breach.
The valiant Earl whom absent I did wrong,
In breaking Hymeneons i holy band,
In Ireland did protract the time too long,
Whilst some in England ^ugled under hand,
And at his coming homewards to this land,
He died with poison as they say infected,
Not without cause, for vengance I suspected.
Because this fact notorious scandal bred,
And for I did his gallant wife abuse,
To salve this sore when this brave Lord was dead,
I for my self did this fair Lady choose,
And flesh is frail, dear Lady me excuse,
It was pure love which made me undertake*
This hapless recontract with thee to make.
Now In Jove's Pallas that good Lord does sup,
And drink full bowls of Nectar in the sky,
H^mnos his page* that tasted of that cup,
Did only loose his hair and did not die;
True noble Earl, thy fame to Heaven did fly,
He does repent his fault, and pardon crave,
That marred thy bed, and too soon made thy grave.
Thou did behind thee leave a matchless son;
A peerless pattern for all Princely Peers,
Whose sparks of glory in my time begun,
Kindled with hope, flamed highly in few years,
But death him struck and maimed this land with fears,
His son does live, true Image of him dead,
To glad this soil where showers of reares were shed.
They were too blame that said the Queen should marry
With me, her Horse-keeper, for so they told me,
But thou Throgmorton, which this tale did carry
From France to England have more sharply g^ld me,
Since my good Queen in office high extolled me;
For I was Master of her highness Horse,
I scorned thy words, which did my hate enforce.
But tell me then, how did thou like thy fare
When I to supper last did thee invite,
If I did rid thee of a World of care
By giving thee a sallet, gentle Knight,
With gastely looks do not my soul affright;
Leycester I am whom England on'st did dread,
But now I am like thee Throgmorton dead.
My Lord of Sussex was too collerick,
That called me Traitor, and a Traitors son,
But I served him a fine Italian trick,
Had I not done so I had been undone,
Now mark the end what conquest he has won;
A little scruple that to him I sent,
Did purge his choler till his life was spent.
He was a gallant Noble man indeed*
O but his life did still my life decrease,
Therefore I sent him with convenient speed,
To rest amongst his Ancestors in peace*
My rage was passifide at his decease;
And now I come to embrace his love too late,
Whom dead I loved, and living I did hate.
I came to visit as I chan'st to walk
My Lady Lenox whom I found not well,
I took her by the hand had private talk,
And so departed a short tale to tell,
When I was gone unto a flux she fell,
That never coast her company to keep,
Till it had brought her to a senseless sleep.
I dreamt she had not many days to live,
And this my dream did shortly fall out true,
So as her Ghostly father, I did give
Some comfort to her soul, for well I knew,
That she would shortly bid the World adue;
Some say I gave such physic as did spill her,
But I suppose that mere conceit did kill her.
Some will object perhaps I did pretend
To meet the Earl of Ormond on a day,
In single fight our quarrel for to end,
But did command my servant Kyllagray,
To lie in ambush that stout Lord to slay,
But Heaven did not consent to work his spoil,
Which was the glory of the Irish soil.
Perhaps I doubted that I was too weak,
And loath I was, he should the conquest win,
If in this cause I did my promise break,
I hope men will not count it for (...),
Is it not good to sleep in a whole (...)*
When Hanibal could not prevail with blows*
He used (...) to (...).
If I the death of Mounsieur Sim^rs sought,
When he from France Ambassador was sent,
I had good cause to seek it, as I thought,
For toward meehee bore no good intent
Had he fled by times, perhaps I meant
To have sent him in Embasse for my pleasure
To the black Fiend that keeps Avernus treasure.
For when no men about the Coasts durst speak,
That I the Lady Lettice married,
This prattling French man first the Ice did break,
And to the Queen the fact discovered,
Which (not without just cause) the anger bred;
Thus th'ape did play his part, contrould of none,
When he espied the Bear from home was gone.
One Salvadore an Italian borne,
Having on'st watched with me till midst of night,
Was found slain in his bed the next day morn,
Alas poor man, I rue his woeful plight,
That did in nothing but in sin delight:
Had he to honest actions bent his wit,
He might have longer lived and escaped his fit.
But what reward should such a man expect,
Whom gold to any Lewdnes could entire,
Ons turn, on'st served, why should we not reject
So vile an instrument of damned vice,
What if he were dispatched in a trice,
Was it not better this man's blood to spill,
Then let him live the World with sin to fill.
I doubted least, that Doughtie would be wray
My Council, and with other party take,
Wherefore the sooner him to rid away,
I sent him forth to Sea with Captain Drake,
Who knew how t entertains him for my sake,
Before he went his let by me was cast,
His death was plotted and performed in have.
He hoped well, but I did so dispose,
That he at Port-Saint- Gillian lost his head,
Having no time permitted to disclose
The inward griefs that in his heart were bred;
We need not fear the biting of the dead,
Now let him go transported to the Seas,
And tell my secrets to the Antipodes.
My servant Gates did speed as ill or worse,
To whom I did my close intents impart,
And at his need with money stuffed his purse,
And willed him still take courage at his heart,
Yet in the end, he felt the deadly smart;
He was inveiglde by some subtle witted,
To rob, so he was taken and committed.
Of pardons, I did put him still in hope,
When he of felony was guilty found,
And so condemned, till his last friend, the rope
Did him uphold from falling to the ground,
"What hope of grace, where vice does so abound:
He was beguiled like birds that use to gape,
At Zeuxes table for a painted grape.
Yet did I to the man no injury,
I gave him time and leisure to repent,
And well he knew he had deserved too die,
Therefore all future mischief to prevent,
I let him slip away with my consent;
For his reprivall, (like a crasty Fox,)
I sent no pardon, but an empty Box.
Else as unfaithful Banister betrayed
The Duke of Buckingham, his Master dear,
When he of Richards tyranny afraid,
Fled to his servants house for succor there,
So might my man for gain, or forced for fear,
Have brought my corpse, with shame unto my grave,
By too much trusting to a prattling knave.
It seems at me great Norfolk Duke does frown,
Because he thinks I did his death contrive,
Persuading some he aimed at the Crown;
And that by Royal match he meant to strive,
A Kingdom to his Lordship to revive.
Alas good Duke he was too weak and mild,
And I too faithless, that his trust beguild.
For that I found his favor first was bent,
To take the Scots captived Queen to wife,
I egged him on to follow his intent,
That by this means I might abridge his life,
And she a crowned Queen to stint all strife;
First finding Scotland lost, to England fled,
Where she in hope of succor lost her head.
O blessed Spirits live ye evermore,
In Heavenly Syon where your Maker reigns,
And give me leave my fortunes to deplore,
That am fast fetterd with sins iron chains;
"Man's most sweet joys are mixed with some sour pains,
And none does live in high or low degree,
That can in life or death, from Woe be free.
And now my tongue grows weary to recite,
Such Massacres as have been here expressed,
Whose sad remembrance does affright my sprit,
Me thinks I see Legions of souls to rest
In Abraham's bosom* and my self oppest:
The burden of my sins do weigh me down,
At me the Feinds do laugh, and Angels frown.
My crimes I grant were great and manifold,
Yet not so heinous as men make report,
But flattering Parasites are grown so bold,
That they of Princes matters make a sport,
To please the humor of the vulgar sort,
And that poor peevish giddy-headed crew,
Are prone to credit any tale untrue.
Let those that live, endeavor to live well,
Least after death, like mine, their guilt remain,
Let no man think there is no Heaven nor Hell;
Or like the impious Saduces maintain,
That after death no flesh shall rise again:
Let no man trust to fortunes fickle wheel,
The guerdon due for sin I partly feel.
Know that the Prince of Heavenly Seraphines,
When he against his Creator did rebel,
Was tumbled down for his presumptuous sin;
Satan, that onst was blessed, like lightening fell,
From the highest Heaven to the deepest Hell;
And all those Angels that his part did take,
Have now their portions in the burning lake.
Of mighty heaps of treasure I could vaunt,
For I reapt profit out of every thing,
I could the Prince and peoples hearts inchant
With my fair words and smoth faced flattering;
Yea out of dross pure gould I often did wring,
For though the means to win be often unmeet,
The smell of lucre ever smells sweet.
So I sometime had very much good hap,
Great suites of my dread Sovereign to obtain,
Prodigal fortune powered down from her lap:
Angels in gold as thick as drops in rain,
Such was my luck to find the golden vain;
Likewise with me it seemed nothing strange,
Both rent and lands often with my Prince t'exchange.
I had another way to enrich my self*
By getting Licenses for me alone,
For wine, oil, velvet, cloth, and such like pelf,
Also by Licenses of Alienation,
By raising rents and by oppression,
By claiming forests, pastures, commons, woods,
And forfeiture of lands, of life, and goods.
By this strange course I also greatly thrived
In falling out with my dear Sovereign,
For I the plot so cunningly contrived,
That reconsilement soon was made again,
And by this means great gifts I did obtain,
For that I might my purse the better fill,
I begged great suites as pledge of new good will*
Besides, sometimes I did enerease my store,
By benefits that I from Oxford took,
Electing heads of houses heretofore;
I loved their money, and they loved there book,
Some poorer, though more learned, I forsook;
For in those days; charity waxed cold,
Little was done for love, but much for gold*
Doubtless my Father was a worthy Peer
In Edward the sixth days, when he was sent
Agrainst Rebels that did rise in Norfolk shire,
And after that, when he to Scotland went
Under the Lord Protectours regiment,
By notable exploit against the Scot,
Eternal glory to himself he got.
Truly ambition was his greatest fault,
Which commonly in noble hearts is bred,
He thought, he never could his State exalt,
Till the good Duke of Somerset was dead,
Who by my Fathers means did loose his head*
So ill the race of Dudleis could endure,
The Seymoures lives which did their fame obscure.
When onst King Edward at the butte had shot,
My Father said, your grace shootes near the mark,
The King replied but not so near I wot,
As when you shot my Uncles head off quite;
The Duke my Father knew the King said right,
And that he meant this matter to debate
If ere he lived to come to man's estate.
It seems my Father in times past, had been
A skillful Archer, though no learned clearke,
So strange a chance as this is seldom seen,
I do suppose, he shot not in the dark,
That could so quickly hite so fair a mark,
Nor have I mist my aim, nor worse have sped,
When I shot off the Duke off Norfolkes head.
Now when the Duke of Somerset was dead,
My Father to the French did Bulloigne sell,
As pleased him the King he governed,
And from the privy Counsel did depell,
The Earls of Southampton and of Arundell,
Thus while he ruled and controuled all,
The wise young King extremely sick did fall.
Who having languisht long, of life deprived,
Not without poison as it was suspected,
The Counsel through my Fathers means contrived
That Suffolkes Daughter should be Queen elected,
The sisters of King Edward were rejected;
My brother Gilford to Jane Gray was wedded,
Too high preferred, that was so soon beheaded.
This Lady Jane that onst was termed a Queen,
Greater in fame then fortune was put down,
Had not King Henry's Daughters living been,
Might for her virtues have deserved a Crown,
Fortune on her at onst did smile and srowne;
Her wedding garment for a Princes meet,
Was quickly changed for a winding sheet.
For I was jumpe of Julius Caesar's mind,
That could no one superior Lord endure,
Nay, I to rule my Sovereign was inclined,
And bring the Common People to my lure,
Accompting that my fortunes was obscure,
And that I lived in a woeful plight,
If any one Ecclipst my graces light.
The love to reign makes many men respect,
Neither their friend, their kindred, nor their vow,
The love to reign makes many men neglect,
The duty which to God and man they owe,
From out this fountain many mischiefs grow,
Hereof examples many may be read,
In Chronicles of the English Princes dead.
This humor made King Harrold break his oath,
Made unto William Duke of Normandy,
This made King Ruffus and young Beaucl^arke b^t
Their elder brother Robert to defy,
And Stephen to forget his loyalty,
To Maude the empress, and to hold in scorn,
The faithful oath which he to her had sworn.
This made young Henry crowned by his Sire
Against his Father warrefarre to maintain,
This made King John the Kingdom to aspire,
Which to his nephue Arthur did pertain,
And him in prison hardely to retain;
And this made Bullingbrooke usurp the Crown
Putting his lawful Sovereign Richard down.
This made Edward the fourth at his return,
To break the oath which he had lately sworn
When he from Burgondy to York was come,
And rule the Realm in good King Henry's room;
This made the Tyrant Richard eake to doom,
His nephues death and rid away his wife,
And so in blood to end his wretched life.
A pretty plot in practice I did put,
Either to take a Queen without delay,
Or when the cards were shuffled and well cut,
To choose the King and cast the Knaves away,
He should be cunning, that great game would play;
Ill luck has he, that no good game can make,
Where Princes play and crowns lie at the stake.
First I assayed Queen El'zabeth to wed,
Whom diverse Princes courted but in vain,
When in this course unluckly I sped,
I sought the Scots Queen marriage to obtain,
But when I reapt no profit for my pain,
I sought to match Denbigh my tender chil'd
To Dame Arbella, but I was beguiled.
Even as Octavus with Mark Anthony,
And Lepidus the Roman Empire shard,
That of the World then held the Sovereignty,
So I a new Triumverate prepared,
If cruel death young Denbighs life had spared,
The Grandame, Uncle, and the Father in law,
Might thus have brought all England under aw.
In the Low Countries did my fame sore high,
When I was sent Lieutenant general,
The Queens proud foes I stoutly did defy,
And made them too some composition fall,
There I maintained a port Majesticall;
In pomp and triumph many days I spent,
From noble then, my name grew excellent.
Then was my heart in height of her desire,
My mind puffed up with sarquery and pride,
The vulgar sort my glory did admire,
Even as the Romans, Ave Caesar cried
When the Emperor to the Senate house did ride;
So did the Flemings with due reverence,
Like thunder say God save your excellence.
Few subjects before me obtained this style,
Unless they were as viceroyes of this land,
The name of Lordship seemed to base and vile
To me that governed such a Royal band,
And had a Princes absolute command,
Who did not of my pussiance stand in aw?
That might put him to death by Martial law*
Lo what a Title has my honor got,
An Excellency added to my name,
Can this injurious World so quickly blot
A name so great out of records of fame,
Covering my glory with a veil of shame;
Or will it now contemn me being dead,
Whom living, even with fear it honored.
The Town of Denborough I did besiege,
Which did on composition shortly yield,
I did good service to my gracious liege,
Till by ill Councillors I was beguiled;
For such as were my Captains in the field,
To whom I did at length chiese charge commit,
Seduced me to do many things unfit.
When Sir John Norris counsel I refused,
Whose perfect skill in Arms I well knew,
By Rowland Yorkes devise I was abused,
Whereof some loss soon after did ensue,
Deventer Town and Zutphen Sconse I rue;
By York and Stanley without many bloes,
Where rendered up to mercy of the foes.
And that which to my heart might more grief strike,
Happened the death of that renowned Knight,
My nephew Sidney near Coleston Dike,
Received his deadly wound through fortunes spite,
I sent no fresh supply to him out right,
I was not far off with a mighty host,
So with his loss of life some fame I lost.
The Court of him lost a brave Courteour,
The Country lost a Guide their faults to mend,
The camp did loose an expert Soldier,
The City lost an honorable friend,
The Schools a Patron their rights to defend,
The Court, the Country, and the Schools and City,
For Sydne is death do sing a mournful ditty.
Now while my Princely glory did abound,
Like rich Lucullus I great feasts did make,
And was for hospitality renowned,
The use of Arms I quickly did forsake;
An easier task I meant to undertake,
I took no joys in wounds and broken pates,
But to carrouse and banquet with the States.
Not Heliogabilus whose dainty fare
Did all the Roman Emperoars feasts exceed,
In cost and rarenes might with mine compare,
Though he on brains of O stretches did feed,
And Phinicepteries, and that instead
Of Oil, housed his lamps with Balm to fill,
Such was the pleasure of the Tyrants will.
To me Count Egmonts Daughter did resort,
And such brave Dames as Flanders still did yield,
That it did rather seem, I came to court
A gallant Lady, then to pitch a field,
For I did lay aside the sword and shield,
At cards and dice I spent the vacant days,
And made great feasts instead of Martial frayes.
But whilst in games and love my time I spent,
Seeming secure as though I cared for naught,
My Messengers abroad I daily sent,
As instruments of my still working thought,
Whereby my purpose often to pass I brought,
And compast what before I did devise
At such a time as no man will surmise.
Thus great attempts I ost did enterprise,
Like a Magitian that with some fine wile,
Dazels the sight of the Spectatours eyes,
And with illusions does their sense beguile,
Such polices my cunning did compile,
That I before men's eyes did cast a mist,
While I performed such matters as I list.
Ye that like apes do imitate my deeds,
Hoping thereby like favor to obtain,
Know that so high a Spirit never breds,
In a blunt Pesant, or unnurtur'd swain;
But in my heart imperious thoughts did reign:
No flegmatique dull milke-sop can aspire,
But one compact of the Element of fire.
He daily must devise some stratageme,
He must be rich, stout, liberal, and wise,
The humors of base men he must contemn,
He must be gracious in the peoples eyes,
He should be furnished with rare qualities;
With learning, judgment, policy and wit,
And such like parts as for the times are fit.
For every froward fellow is not borne,
To be a Scipio or a Maximus,
Unless that wisdom does his state adorn,
Or valor make his life more glorious,
Though he be base of birth as Marius,
Yet he by virtues aid aloft may come,
Like him that was seven times Consul in Rome.
Ventillius name at first was mean and base,
Till he the Parthians host had overthrown,
And Cicero came not of Noble race,
Borne at Arpinum a poor Country Town,
Yet he made Arms give place unto the gown:
And Rome by his great wisdom freed from spoil,
Called him the Father of their native soil.
Perchance young Courtiers learn sometime to sing,
To skip or dance before their Mistres face,
To touch like Orpheus some enchanting string,
To run at Tylt, to jet with stately pace,
Or by some fine discourse to purchase grace,
But cannot manage the affairs of state,
Which best belongs to rich great Potentate.
Listen to me ye lusty Soldiers,
That in such favor of high attempts do grow*
Experience bred in me these many years
Has taught me cunning which you do not know,
Some precepts here I do intend to show;
And if my Sirens song please not great Peers,
Then may they with Ulysses stop their ears.
Trust not a friend that is new reconsil'd,
In loves fair show he may hide foul deceit,
By him ye unawares may be beguiled,
Reveal to none your matters of great weight,
If any chance to know your lewd conceit,
Suspected to bewray your bad intent,
He ought to suffer death or banishment.
Caligula the scourge of famous Rome,
Wished all the Romans had one only head,
That when he list to give their fatal doom,
He might with one great blow strick all them dead*
So should he never need their hate to dread;
Even such a mischief I wished to my foes,
That many men might perish with few blows*
But unto those that do your favor seek,
And by your help, hope their low state to raise,
You must be courteous, bountefull and meek;
Caesar by clemency won greatest praise,
And was esteemed the mirror of his days:
For it belongs to men of great estate,
To spare the poor, and rich men's pride abate.
It is ill to be a Rub upon that ground,
Whereas the Prince the Alley means to sweep,
There own estate (...) fondly do confound,
That into high attempts do bouldly creep,
And with their shallow pates do wade so deep,
To hinder what their Sovereign does intend,
Or to control what they cannot amend.
Calisthines much torment did sustain,
Because great Alexanders pride he checked,
Grave Scaenecae choosing his death was slain,
By Neros doom, whose faults he did correct,
Use not too sharp rebuke, but have respect
Unto the Persons: when great men do evil,
The vengance leave to God, or to the Devil.
Be not too haughty, pride procures hate,
And mean men's hate may turn to your disgrace,
Nor too familiar in thy high estate,
For that will breed contempt among the base;
Observe a mean which wins man great fame,
Speak fair to all, truth none, use well your foes,
For this may purchase love where hatred grows.
And if that you do fear your friend should chance,
To mount too highly in the Princes grace,
His praise to Heaven then stick not to advance,
Say that the charge he bears is too base,
And that his worth deserves far better place;
So may ye by this praise rid him away,
And so supply the place another day.
Say he will prove a terror in the fiel'd,
This private life does muchobscure his fame,
More fit to bear great Ajax seven fold shield,
Then like Sardanapalus Court a Dame,
He idly lives at home, it is a shame;
His very presence may his foes apale,
Let him be sent Lieutenant General.
Now if he chance to perish in some fight,
It was not your work, but the chance of wars,
Or thus you may excuse your sel^^^^ slight
Blaming the influence of the angry stars,
That thus by death his future fortune bars:
And sighing, we are sorry, ye may say,
That this brave man would cast himself away.
But if in feats of Arms he have no skill,
If he be learned grave and eloquent,
By praising him thus may you have your will,
Procure him in Ambassadge to be sent,
Far off least he return incontinent,
As to the mighty Cham, or Prester John,
And triumph in his room when he is gone.
Let no man think I exercised the Ghost
Of this great Peer that sleeps in the dust,
Or conjured up his Spirit to his cost
To press with dispraise or praise unjust,
I am not partial but give him his due,
And to his soul I wish eternal health,
Ne do I think all written tales are true,
That are inserted in his Commonwealth;
What others wrote before I do survive,
But am not like to them incenst with hate,
And as I plainly write, so do I strive
To write the truth, not wronging his estate.
Of whom it may be said and censured well,
He both in vice and virtue did excel.
FINIS.

