THREE NEW PLAYS; VIZ. The Bashful Lover, The Guardian, The Very Woman.

As they have been often Acted at the Private-House in Blackfriars, by His
late MAJESTY'S Servants, with great Applause.

WRITTEN BY PHILIP MASSENGER, Gent.

Never Printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1655

Vera ac Viva Effigies PHILIPPI MASSINGER. Gen


THE BASHFUL LOVER.

A TRAGI-COMEDY.

As it has been often Acted at the Private-House in Blackfriars, by His late
MAJESTY'S Servants, with great Applause.

WRITTEN By PHILIP MASSENGER, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

PROLOGUE.
This from our Author, far from all offense,
To abler writers, or the Audience
Met here to judge his Poem. He by me
Presents his service, with such modesty
As well becomes his weakness. It Is no crime
He hopes as we do in this curious time,
To be a little diffident, when we are
To please so many with one Bill of Fare.
Let others, building on their merit, say
You Are in the wrong, if you move not that way
Which they prescribe you, as you were bound to learn
Their maxims, but incapable to discern
'Twixt truth and falsehood Ours had rather be
Censured by some, for too much obsequy,
Then taxed of self-opinion: If he hear
That his endeavors thrived, and did appear
Worthy your view though made so by your grace,
With some desert) he in another place
Will thankfully report, one Leaf of Bays
Truly conferred upon this work, will raise
More pleasure in him, you the givers free,
Then Garland ravished from the Virgin-Tree.
Dramatis Personae.
Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua Lorrenzo, Duke of Tuscany uberti, Prince of Parma
Farneze, Cousin to Gonzaga Alonso, Cousin to Lorrenzo Manfroy, a Lord of Mantua
Octavio, General once to Gonzaga, now exiled Gothrio, his Servant Galeazzo, a
Nobleman disguised Julio, his Man Pisano, a Tuscan Lord Martinio, a Captain Two
Captains more Ambassadors Soldiers
Matilda, Daughter to Gonzaga Beatrice, her waiting Gentlewoman Two Women
THE Bashful Lover.
Act. I. Scaen. I.
Enter Gateazzo and Julio.
Jul. I Dare not cross you sir, but I would gladly
(Provided you allow it) render you
My personal attendance.

Gal. You shall better
Discharge the duty of an honest servant,
In following my instructions which you have
Received already, then in questioning
What my intents are, or upon what motives
My stay's resolved in Mantua: Believe me,
That servant overdoes, that is too officious;
And in presuming to direct your master,
You argue him of weakness, and your self
Of arrogance and impertinence.

Jul. I have done sir; but what my ends are

Gal. Honest ones, I know it:
I have my bills of exchange, and all provisions
Entrusted to you; you have shown your self
Just and discreet, what would you more? and yet
To satisfy in some part your curious care,
Hear this, and leave me: I desire to be
Obscured; and as I have demeaned my self
These six months past in Mantua, I Will continue
Unnoted and unknown, and at the best
Appear no more then a Gentleman, and a stranger,
That travails for his pleasure:

Jul. With your pardon,
This hardly will hold weight, though I should swear it,
With your noble friends and brother.

Gal. You may tell'em,
Since you will be my Tutor, there is a rumor
(Almost cried up into a certainty)
Of wars with Florence, and that I am determined
To see the service: Whatere I went forth,
(Heaven prospering my intents) I would come home
A Soldier, and a good one.

Jul. Should you get
A Captains place, nay Colonels, 'twould add little
To what you are; few of your rank will follow
That dangerous profession

Gal. It Is the noblest, and Monarchs honored in it:
But no more on my displeasure.

Jul. Saints and Angels guard you.
Exit.
Gal. A war indeed is threatened, nay expected
From Florence; but it is against me already
Proclaimed in Mantua: I find it here,
No foreign, but intestine war: I have
Defied my self, in giving up my reason
A slave to passion, and am led captive
Before the battel's fought; I fainted when
I only saw mine enemy, and yielded
Before that I was charged: And though defeated,
I dare not sue for mercy; like Ixion
I look on Juno, feel my heart turn cinders
With an invisible fire: And yet should she
Daign to appear clothed in a various cloud,
The majesty of the substance is so facred,
I durst not clasp the shadow: I behold her
With adoration, feast my eye, while all
My other senses starve; and often frequenting
The place which she makes happy with her presence,
I never yet had power with tongue or pen
To move her to compassion, or make known
What it is I languish for; yet I must gaze still,
Though it increase my flame: however I
Much more then fear I am observed and censured
For bold intrusion. Walks sadly

Enter Beatrix and Ascanio.
Bea. Know you, boy, that Gentleman?

Asc. Who, Monsieur Melancholy? has not your
Honor Marked him before?

Bea. I have seen him often wait
About the Princess lodgings, but never ghess'd
What his designs were.

Asc. No? what a sigh he breathed now!
Many such will blow up the roof; on my small credit
There Is gunpowder in 'em.

Bea. How Crack! gunpowder?
He Is flesh and blood, and devils only carry
Such roaring stuff about 'em: you cannot prove
He is or Spirit or Conjurer.

Asc. That I grant; but he is a Lover, and that is as bad; their sighs
Are like petards, and blow all up:

Bea. A Lover! I have been in love my self, but never found yet
That it could work such strange effects.

Asc. True, Madam,
In women it cannot; for when they miss th'enjoying
Of their full wishes, all their sighs and heigh-hoes
At the worst breed timpanies, and these are cured too
With a kiss or two of their Saint, when he appears
Between a pair of sheets: but with us men
The case is otherwise.

Bea. You will be breech'd, boy,
For your physical maxims: But how are you assured
He is a Lover?

Asc. Who, I? I know with whom too,
But that is to be whispered. Whispers

Bea. How? the Princess! th'unparallel'd Matilda!
Some proof of it; I Will pay for my intelligence.
Gives him gold.
Asc. Let me kiss
Your Honors hand; 'twas ever fair, but now
Beyond comparison.

Bea. I ghess the reason;
A giving hand is still fair to the receiver.

Asc. Your Ladiship's in the right: but to the purpose,
He is my Client, and pays his fees as duly
As ever Usurer did in a bad cause
To his man of law; and yet I get, and take 'em
Both easily and honestly: All the service
I do him, is to give him notice when
And where the Princess will appear; and that
I hope's no treason: If you miss him when
She goes to the Vesper or the Mattins, hang me;
Or when she takes the air, be sure to find him
Near her coach; at her going forth, or coming back:
But if she walk, he is ravished; I have seen him smell out
Her footing like a Lime-hound, and knows it
From all the rest of her train.

Bea. Yet I never saw him present her a petition,

Asc. Nore'r shall: He only sees her, sighs, and sacrifices
A tear or two; then vanishes.

Bea. It Is most strange:
What a sad aspect he wears! but I Will make use often.
The Princess is much troubled with the threats
That come from Florence; I will bring her to him,
The novelty may afford her sport, and help
To purge deep melancholy. Boy, can you stay
Your Client here for the third part of an hour?
I have some ends in it.

Asc. Stay him, Madam; fear not:
The present receipt of a round sum of crowns,
And that will draw most Gallants from their prayers,
Cannot drag him from me.

Bea. See you do.

Asc. Never doubt me,
I Will put him out of his dream. Good morrow Signior.

Gal. My little friend, good morrow: Has the Princess
Slept well to night?

Asc. I hear not from her women
One murmur to the contrary.

Gal. Heaven be praised for it:
Does she go to Church this morning?

Asc. Troth I know not; I keep no key of her devotion, Signior.

Gal. Goes she abroad? pray tell me.

Asc. It Is thought rather
She is resolved to keep her chamber.

Gal. Ay me!

Asca. Why do you sigh? If that you have a business
To be dispatched in Court, show ready money,
You shall find those that will prefer it for you.

Gal. Business! can any man have business, but
To see her, then admire her, and pray for her,
She being composed of goodness? For my self,
I find it a degree of happiness
But to be near her; and I think I pay
A strict religious vow, when I behold her,
And that is all my ambition.

Asca. I believe you:
Yet she being absent, you may spend some hours
With profit and delight too. After dinner
The Duke gives audience to a rough Ambassador,
Whom yet I never saw, nor heard his title,
Employed from Florence: I Will help you to a place
Where you shall see and hear all.

Gal. It Is not worth my observation.

Asca. What think you of
An excellent Comedy to be presented
For his entertainment? He that penned it, is
The Poet of the time; and all the Ladies
(I mean the amorous and learned ones)
Except the Princess, will be there to grace it.

Gal. What Is that to me? without her all is nothing,
The light that shines in Court, Cimerian darkness:
I will to bed again, and there contemplate
On her perfections.
Enter Matilda, Beatrix, and two Women.
Asca. Stay sir! see the Princess,
Beyond our hopes.

Gal. Take that, as Moors salute
The rising Sun with joyful superstition:
I could fall down and worship. O my heart! aside
Like Phoebe breaking through an envious cloud,
Or something which no simile can express,
She shows to me; a reverend fear, but blended
With wonder and amazement, does possess me;
Now glut thy self, my famished eye.

Bea. That Is he, an't please your Excellence.

1 Woe. Observe his posture,
But with a quarter-look.

2 Woe. Your eye fixed on him, will breed astonishment.

Matil. A comely Gentleman! I would not question your relation, Lady,
Yet faintly can believe it: How he eyes me!
Will he not speak?

Bea. Your Excellence has deprived him
Of speech and motion.

Mat. It Is most strange.

Asc. These fits are usual with him.

Mat. Is it not, Ascanio,
A personated folly? or he a statue?
If it be, it is a masterpiece; for man
I cannot think him.

Bea. For your sport vouchsafe him a little conference.

Mat. In compassion rather:
For should he love me as you say (though hopeless)
It should not be returned with scorn; that were
An inhumanity, which my birth nor honor
Could privilege, were they greater. Now I perceive
He has life and motion in him; to whom, Lady,
Pays he that duty? Galeaz. bowing, offers to go off.

Bea. Sans doubt to your self.

Mat. And whither goes he now?

Asc. To his private lodging,
But to what end I know not; this is all
I ever noted in him.

Mat. Call him back: In pity I stand bound to counsel him,
Howe'r I am denied, though I were willing
To ease his sufferings.

Asc. Signior, the Princess commands you to attend her.

Gal. How? the Princess! am I betrayed?

Asc. What a lump of flesh is this?
You are betrayed, sir, to a better fortune
Then you durst ever hope for: What a Tantalus
Do you make your self? the flying fruit stays for you,
And the water that you longed for, rising up
Above your lip, do you refuse to taste it?
Move faster, sluggish Camel, or I will thrust
This goad in your breech: Had I such a promising beard,
I should need the reins, not spurs.

Mat. You may come nearer;
Why do you shake, sir? If I flatter not
My self, there is no deformity about me,
Nor any part so monstrous to beget
An ague in you.

Gal. It proceeds not, Madam, from guilt, but reverence.

Mat. I believe you sir; have you a suit to me?

Gal. Your Excellence is wondrous fair.

Mat. I thank your good opinion.

Gal. And I beseech you that I may have license To kneel to you.

Mat. A suit I cannot cross.

Gal. I humbly thank your Excellence.

Mat. But what,
As you are prostrate on your knee before me,
Is your petition?

Gal. I have none, great Princess,

Mat. Do you kneel for nothing?

Gal. Yes, I have a suit;
But such a one, as if denied, will kill me.

Mat. Take comfort; it must be of some strange nature,
Unfitting you to ask, or me to grant,
If I refuse it.

Gal. It is, Madam, --

Mat. Out with it.

Gal. That I may not offend you, this is all,
When I presume to look on you.

Asc. A flat Eunuch! to look on her? I should desire my self.
To move a little further.

Mat. Only that?

Gal. And I beseech you, Madam, to believe
I never did yet with a wanton eye
Or cherish one lascivious wish beyond it.

Bea. You Will never make good Courtier, or be
In grace with Ladies.

1 Woman. Or us Waiting-Women, if that be your
Nil ultra.

2 Woman. He Is no Gentleman, on my virginity it is apparent:
My Tailor has more boldness, nay my shoo-maker
Will fumble a little further, he could not have
The length of my foot else.

Mat. Only to look on me? ends your ambition there?

Gal. It does, great Lady,
And that confined too, and at fitting distance:
The Fly that plays too near the flame, burns in it.
As I behold the sun, the stars, the Temples,
I look upon you, and wish'twere no sin,
Should I adore you.

Mat. Come, there is something more in it;
And since that you will make a Goddess of me,
As such a one, I Will tell you, I desire not
The meanest Altar raised up to mine honor
To be pulled down; I can accept from you
(Be your condition nere so far beneath me)
One grain of incense with devotion offered,
Beyond all perfumes or Sabean spices
By one that proudly thinks he merits in it:
I know you love me.

Gal. Next to heaven, Madam,
And with as pure a zeal. That we behold
With the eyes of contemplation, but can
Arrive no nearer to it in this life;
But when that is divorced, my soul shall serve yours,
And witness my affection.

Mat. Pray you rise, but wait my further pleasure.
Enter Farneze and Uberti.
Far. I Will present you,
And give you proof I am your friend, a true one;
And in my pleading for you, teach the age
That calls erroniously Friendship but a name,
It is a substance. Madam, I am bold
To trench so far upon your privacie,
As to desire my friend (Let not that wrong him,
For he is a worthy one) may have the honor
To kiss your hand.

Mat. His own worth challenges a greater favor.

Far. Your acknowledgment
Confirms it, Madam: If you look on him
As he is built up a man, without addition
Of fortunes liberal favors, wealth or titles,
He does deserve no usual entertainment.
But as he is a Prince, and for your service
Has left fair Parma (that acknowledges
No other Lord) and uncompell'd exposes
His person to the dangers of war,
Ready to break in storms upon our heads;
In noble thankfulness you may vouchsafe him
Nearer respect, and such grace as may nourish,
Not kill his amorous hopes.

Mat. Cozen, you know I am not the disposer of my self,
The Duke my father challenges that power:
Yet thus much I dare promise; Prince Uberti
Shall find the seed of service that he sows
Falls not on barren ground.

Uber. For this high favor
I am your creature, and profess I owe you
Whatever I call mine. They walk

Gal. This great Lord is
A Suitor to the Princess.

Asca. True, he is so:

Ga. Fame gives him out too for a brave Comander

Asca. And in it does him but deserved right;
The Duke has made him General of his horse
On that assurance.

Gal. And the Lord Farneze pleads for him, as it seems.

Asca. It Is too apparent:
And this considered, give me leave to ask
What hope have you sir?

Gal. I may still look on her,
Howe'r he wear the garland.

Asca. A thin diet, and will not feed you fat, sir.

Uber. I rejoice, rare Princess, that you are not to be won
By Carpet-courtship, but the sword: with this
Steel-pen I Will write on Florence helm, how much
I can, and dare do for you.

Mat. It Is not questioned,
Some private business of mine own disposed of,
I Will meet you in the presence.

Vber. Ever your servant.
Ex. Vber. Farne.
Mat. Now sir to you: You have observed, I doubt not,
(For Lovers are sharp. sighted) to what purpose
This Prince sollicites me; and yet I am not
So taken with his worth, but that I can
Vouchsafe you further parle. The first command
That I Will impose upon you, is to hear
And follow my good council: I am not
Offended that you love me: persist in it,
But love me virtuously, such love may spur you
To noble undertakings, which achieved,
Will raise you into name, preferment, honor:
For all which, though you never enjoy my person,
(For that is impossible) you are indebted
To your high aims; visit me when you please,
I do allow it, nor will blush to own you,
(So you confine your self to what you promise)
As my virtuous servant.

Bea. Farewell sir, you have
An unexpected Cordial.

Asc. May it work well.
Exeunt. manet Gal.
Gal. Your love, yes, so she said, may spur you to
Brave undertakings: Adding this, You may
Visit me when you please. Is this allowed me,
And any act within the power of man
Impossible to be effected? no,
I will break through all oppositions that
May stop me in my full carier to honor;
And borrowing strength to do, from her high favor,
Add something to Alcides greatest labor.
Exit.
Enter Gonzaga, Vberti, Farneze, Manfroy, Attendants.
Gone. This is your place, and were it in our power,
You should have greater honor, Prince of Parma:
The rest know theirs; let some attend with care
On the Ambassador, and let my Daughter
Be present at his audience. Reach a chair,
We'll do all fit respects; and pray you put on
Your milder looks; you are in a place where frowns
Are no prevailing agents.

Enter (at one door) Alonzo and Attendants: Matilda, Beatrix, Ascanio, Galeazo,
and Waiting-women (at the other.)
Asc: I have seen
More then a wolf, a Gorgon: [Swouns]

Gone. What Is the matter?

Mat. A Page of mine is fallen into a swoun,
Look to him carefully.

Gone. Now when you please, the cause that brought you hither?

Alon. The protraction
Of my dispatch forgotten, from Lorenzo
The Tuscan Duke, thus much to you Gonzaga
The Duke of Mantua: By me his nephew
He does salute you fairly, and entreats
(A word not suitable to his power and greatness)
You would consent to tender that, which he
Unwillingly must force, if contradicted.
Ambition, in a private man a vice,
Is in a Prince the virtue.

Gonza. To the purpose; these ambages are impertinent.

Alon. He demands
The fair Matilda (for I dare not take
From her perfections) in a noble way;
And in creating her the comfort of
His royal bed, to raise her to a height
Her flattering hopes could not aspire, where she
With wonder shall be gazed upon, and live
The envy of her sex.

Gonza. Suppose this granted.

Uber. Or if denied, what follows?

Alon. Present war, with all extremities the Conqueror can
Inflict upon the vanquished.

Uber. Grant me license
To answer this defiance: What intelligence
Holds your proud Master with the will of Heaven,
That ere the uncertain Dye of War be thrown,
He dares assure himself the victory?
Are his unjust invading Arms of fire?
Or those we put on in defense of right,
Like chaff to be consumed in the encounter?
I look on your dimensions, and find not
Mine own of lesser size; the blood that fills
My veins, as hot as yours; my sword as sharp,
My nerves of equal strength, my heart as good,
And confident we have the better cause,
Why should we fear the trial?

Far. You presume you are superior in numbers; we
Lay hold upon the surest anchor, virtue;
Which when the tempest of the war roars loudest,
Must prove a strong protection.

Gonza. Two main reasons (seconding those you have already heard)
Gives us encouragement: The duty that
I owe my mother Country, and the love
Descending to my daughter. For the first,
Should I betray her liberty, I deserved
To have my name with infamy razed from
The catalogue of good Princes: And I should
Unnaturally forget I am a father,
If like a Tartar, or for fear or profit,
I should consign her as a bondwoman
To be disposed of at another pleasure,
Her own consent or favor never su'd for,
And mine by force exacted. No, Alonzo,
She is my only child, my heir; and if
A fathers eyes deceive me not, the hand
Of prodigal nature has given so much to her,
As in the former ages Kings would rise up
In her defense, and makes her cause their quarrel:
Nor can she, if that any spark remain
To kindle a desire to be possessed
Of such a beauty, in our time want swords
To guard it safe from violence.

Gal. I must speak, or I shall burst; now to be silent, were
A kind of blasphemy. If such purity,
Such innocence, an abstract of perfection,
The soul of beauty, virtue, in a word,
A Temple of things sacred, should groan under
The burden of opprestion, we might
Accuse the Saints, and tax the Powers above us
Of negligence or injustice. Pardon, sir,
A strangers boldness, and in your mercy call it
True zeal, not rudeness: In a cause like this,
The Husbandman would change his ploughing-irons
To weapons of defense, and leave the earth
Untilled, although a general dearth should follow:
The Student would forswear his book; the Lawyer
Put off his thriving gown, and without pay
Conclude this case is to be fought, not pleaded:
The women will turn Amazons, as their sex
In her were wronged; and boys write down their names
In The muster-book for soldiers.

Gonza. Take my hand;
Whatev'r you are, I thank you: how are you called?

Gal. Hortensio, a Millanoise.

Gonza. I wish Mantua had many such. My Lord
Ambassador,
Some privacie if you please: Manfroy, you may
Partake it, and advise us. They go aside.

Uber. Do you know, friend,
What this man is, or of what country?

Far. Neither.

Uber. I Will question him my self; what are you sir?

Gal. A Gentleman.

Uber. But if there be gradation
In Gentry, as the Heralds say, you have
Been overbold in the presence of your betters.

Gal. My betters, sir?

Uber. Your betters! as I take it, you are no Prince.

Gal. It Is fortunes gift you were born one:
I have not heard that glorious title crowns you
As a reward of virtue; it may be
The first of your house deserved it, yet his merits
You can but faintly call your own.

Mat. Well answered.

Uber. You come up to me.

Gal. I would not turn my back
If you were the Duke of Florence, though you charged me
In The head of our troops.

Uber. Tell me in gentler language,
(Your passionate speech induces me to think so)
Do you love the Princess?

Gal. Were you mine enemy,
Your foot upon my breast, sword at my throat,
Even then I would profess it. The ascent
To th'height of honor, is by arts or arms:
And if such an unequalled prize might fall
On him that did deserve best in defense
Of this rare Princess, in the day of battle
I should lead you a way would make your Greatness
Sweat drops of blood to follow.

Uber. Can your Excellence
Hear this without rebuke from one unknown?
Is he a Rival for a Prince?

Mat. My Lord, you take that liberty I never gave you:
In justice you should give encouragement
To him or any man that freely offers
His life to do me service, not deter him;
I give no suffrage to it: Grant he loves me,
As he professes, how are you wronged in it?
Would you have all men hate me but your self?
No more of this I pray you: If this Gentleman
Fight for my freedom, in a fit proportion
To his desert and quality, I can
And will reward him, yet give you no cause
Of jealousy or envy.

Gal. Heavenly Lady!

Gonz. No peace, but on such poor and base conditions?
We will not buy it at that rate: Return
This answer to your Master: Though we wished
To hold fair quarter with him, on such terms
As honor would give way to, we are not
So thunderstruck with the loud voice of war,
As to acknowledge him our Lord before
His sword has made us Vassals: we long since
Have had intelligence of the unjust gripe
He purposed to lay on us; neither are we
So unprovided as you think, my Lord,
He shall not need to seek us, we will meet him
And prove the fortune of a day, perhaps
Sooner then he expects.

Alon. And find repentance when it is too late.
Farewell.
[Exit with Farneze.]
Gonza. No, my Matilda,
We must not part so: Beasts and birds of prey
To their last gasp defend their brood; and Florence
Over thy fathers breast shall march up to thee,
Before he force affection: The arms
That thou must put on for us and thy self,
Are prayers and pure devotion, which will
Be heard, Matilda. Mansroy, to your trust
We do give up the City, and my daughter;
On both keep a strong guard: No tears, they are ominous.
O my Octavio, my tried Octavio
In all my dangers! now I want thy service,
In passion recompensed with banishment.
Error of Princes, who hate virtue when
She Is present with us, and in vain admire her
When she is absent! It Is too late to think on it:
The wished for time is come, Princely Uberti,
To show your valor; Friends being to do, not talk.
All rhetoric is fruitless, only this,
Fate cannot rob you of deserved applause,
Whether you win or lose in such a cause.
Exeunt.
Act. 2. Scaen. 1.
Enter Matilda, Beatrix, and two Women.
NO matter for the Ring I asked you for:
The Boy not to be found?
Bea. Nor heard of, Madam:

1 Woe. He has been sought and searched for, house by house,
Nay, every nook of the City, but to no purpose.

2 Woe. And how he should escape hence, the Lord Manfroy
Being so vigilant ore the guards, appears
A thing impossible.

Mat. I never saw him
Since he swouned in the presence, when my Father
Gave audience to the Ambassador: but I feel
A sad miss of him; on any slight occasion
He would find out such pretty arguments
To make me sport, and with such witty sweetness
Deliver his opinion, that I must
Ingeniously confess his harmless mirth,
When I was most oppressed with care, wrought more
In the removing of it, then music on me.

Bea. An't please your Excellence, I have observed him
Waggishly witty; yet sometimes on the sudden
He would be very pensive, and then talk
So feelingly of love, as if he had
Tasted the bitter sweets often.

1 Woe. He would tell too a pretty tale of a sister that had been
Deceived by her Sweetheart; and then weeping swear
He wondered how men could be false

2 Woe. And that when he was a Knight, he would be the Ladies Champion,
And travel ore the world to kill such Lovers
As durst play false with their Mistresses:

Mat. I am sure I want his company
Enter Manfroy (with a Letter.) There are Letters, Madam,
In post come from the Duke; but I am charged
By the careful bringer, not to open them
But in your presence.

Mat. Heaven preserve my Father!
Good news, an't be thy will!

Manf. Patience must arm you against what is ill.

Mat. I Will hear 'em in my Cabinet:
Exeunt. Enter Galeazo and Ascanio (with a Ring.)
Gal Why have you left the safety of the City
And service of the Princess, to partake
The dangers of the Camp? and at a time too
When the Armies are in view, and every minute
The dreadful charge expected.

Asc. You appear so far beyond your self, as you are now
Armed like a soldier, (though I grant your presence
Was ever gracious) that I grow enamored
Of the profession, in the horror of it
There is a kind of majesty.

Gal. But too heavy to sit on thy soft shoulders, Youth; retire
To the Dukes tent that is guarded.

Asc. Sir, I come
To serve you: Knights adventurers are allowed
Their Pages; and I bring a will that shall
Supply my want of power.

Gal. To serve me, boy! I wish (believe it) that 'twere in my nerves
To do thee any service; and thou shall
If I survive the fortune of this day,
Be satisfied I am serious.

Asc. I am not
To be put off so, sir: since you do neglect
My offered duty, I must use the power
I bring along with me, that may command you:
You have seen this Ring.

Gal. Made rich by being worn upon the Princess finger.

Asc. It Is a favor
To you, by me sent from her: view it better;
But why coy to receive it?

Gal. I am unworthy
Of such a blessing, I have done nothing yet
That may deserve it; no Commanders blood
Of th'adverse party has yet died my sword
Drawn out in her defense. I must not take it.
This were a triumph for me when I had
Made Florence Duke my prisoner, and compelled him
To kneel for mercy at her feet.

Asc. 'Twas sent, sir,
To put you in mind whose cause it is you fight for;
And as I am her creature, to revenge
A wrong to me done.

Gal. By what man?

Asc. Alonzo.

Gal. Th'Ambassador?

Asc. The same:

Gal. Let it suffice, I know him by his armor and his horse;
And if we meet -- I am cut off, the Alarm
Commands me hence: sweet Youth, fall off.

Asc. I must not; you are too noble to receive a wound
Upon your back; and following close behind you,
I am secure, though I could wish my bosom
Were your defense.

Gal. Thy kindness will undo thee.
Exeunt
Enter Lorenzo, Alonzo, Pisano, Martino.
Lor. We'll charge the main Battalia, fall you
Upon the Van, preserve your Troops entire
To force the Rear: he dies that breaks his ranks,
Till all be ours and sure.

Pisa. It Is so proclaimed.
Exeunt. Enter Galeazzo, Ascanio, and Alonzo.
Gal. It Is he, Ascanio: Stand!

Alon. I never shunned
A single opposition; but tell me
Why in the battle, of all men, thou have
Made choice of me?

Gal. Look on this Youth; his cause
Sits on my sword

Alon. I know him not.

Gal. I Will help your memory. Fight

Asc. What have I done? I am doubtful
To whom to wish the victory; for still
My resolution wavering, I so love
The enemy that wronged me, that I cannot
Without repentance wish success to him
That seeks to do me right. -- Alas he is fallen.
Alonzo falls.
As you are gentle, hold sir! or if I want
Power to persuade so far, I conjure you
By her loved name I am sent from.

Gal. It Is a charm
Too strong to be resisted: He is yours.
Yet why should you make suit to save that life
Which you so late desired should be cut off
For injuries received, begets my wonder.

Asc. Alas, we foolish spleenful boys would have
We know not what: I have some private reasons,
But now not to be told.

Gal. Shall I take him prisoner?

Asc. By no means, sir; I will not save his life
To rob him of his honor: when you give,
Give not by halves: One short word, and I follow.
Exit Galeazo. My Lord Alonzo, if you have received
A benefit, and would know to whom you owe it,
Remember what your entertainment was
At old Octavio's house, one you called friend,
And how you did return it.
Exit.
Alon. I remember I did not well; but it is now no time
To think upon it; my wounded honor calls
For reparation, I must quench my fury
For this disgrace in blood, and some shall smart for it.
Exit. Enter Vberti, Farneze(wounded.)
Far. O Prince Vberti, valor cannot save us;
The body of our Army's pierced and broken,
The wings are routed, and our scattered Troops
Not to be rallied up.

Vber It Is yet some comfort,
The enemy must say we were not wanting
In courage or direction; and we may
Accuse the powers above us partial, when
A good cause, well defended too, must suffer
For want of fortune.

Far. All is lost; the Duke
Too far engaged, I fear, to be brought off:
Three times I did attempt his rescue, but
With odds was beaten back: Only the stranger
(I speak it to my shame) still followed him,
Cutting his way; but it is beyond my hopes
That either should return.

Uber. That noble stranger,
Whom I in my proud vanity of greatness
As one unknown contemned, when I was thrown
Out of my saddle by the great Dukes lance,
Horsed me again in spite of all that made
Resistance; and then whispered in mine ear,
Fight bravely Prince Uberti, there is no way else
To the fair Matilda's favor.

Far. 'Twas done nobly.

Uber. In you, my bosom friend; I had called it noble:
But such a courtesy from a Rival, merits
The highest attribute.
Enter Galeazo and Gonzaga.
Far. Stand on your guard, we are pursued.

Uber. Preserved! wonder on wonder.

Far. The Duke in safety?

Gone. Pay your thanks, Farneze,
To this brave man, if I may call him so,
Whose acts were more then humane: if thou art
My better Angel, from my infancy
Designed to guard me, like thy self appear,
For sure thou art more then mortal.

Gal. No, great sir,
A weak and sinful man, though I have done you
Some prosperous service, that has found your favor,
I am lost to my self; but lose not you
The offered opportunity to delude
The hot pursuing enemy: these woods
Nor the dark vail of night cannot conceal you,
If you dwell long here: You may rise again,
But I am fallen for ever.

Far. Rather borne up
To the supreme sphere of honor.

Uber. I confess my life your gift.

Gone. My liberty: You have snatched
The wreath of conquest from the Victors head,
And do alone in scorn of Lorenzo's fortune
Though we are slav'd, by true heroic valor
Deserve a triumph.

Uber. From whence then proceeds this poor dejection?

Gal: In one suit I Will tell you,
Which I beseech you grant: -- I loved your daughter,
But how? as beggars in their wounded fancy
Hope to be Monarchs:
I long languish'd for her,
But did receive no Cordial, but what
Despair my rough Physician prescribed me.
At length her goodness and compassion found it.
And whereas I expected, and with reason,
The distance and disparity considered
Between her birth and mine, she would contemn me,
The Princess gave me comfort.

Gone. In what measure?

Gal. She did admit me for her Knight and servant,
And spurred me to do something in this battle
Fought for her liberty, that might not blemish
So fair a favor.

Gonza. This you hrve performed to th'height of admiration.

Uber. I subscribe to it, that am your Rival.

Gal. You are charitable:
But how short of my hopes, nay the assurance
Of those achievements which my love and youth
Already held accomplisn'd, this days fortune
Must sadly answer. What I did, she gave me
The strength to do; her piety preserved
Her Father; and her gratitude for the dangers
You threw your self into for her defense,
Protected you by me her instrument:
But when I came to strike in mine own cause,
And to do something so remarkable,
That should at my return command her thanks
And gracious entertainment, then alas
I fainted like a coward; I made a vow too
(And it is registered) never to presume
To come into her presence, if I brought not
Her fears and dangers bound in fetters to her,
Which now is impossible. -- Hark, the enemy
Makes his approaches: save your selves, this only
Deliver to her Sweetness; I have done
My poor endeavors, and pray her not repent
Her goodness to me: May you live to serve her,
This loss recovered, with a happier fate,
And make use of this sword: Arms I abjure,
And conversation of men; I Will seek out
Some unfrequented cave, and die Loves martyr.
Exit
Gonza. Follow him.

Uber. It Is in vain; his nimble feet
Have born him from my sight.

Gonza. I suffer for him:

Far. We share in it, but must not sir forget
Your means of safety.

Uber. In the war I have served you,
And to the death will follow you.

Gonz. It Is not fit,
We must divide our selves.
My daughter, if I retain yet
A Sovereigns power ore thee, or friends with you,
Do, and dispute not; by my example change
Your habits: As I thus put off my purple,
Ambition dies; this garment of a shepherd
Left here by chance will serve; in lieu of it
I leave this to the owner. Raise new forces,
And meet me at S. Leo's Fort; my daughter,
As I commanded Manfroy, there will meet us.
The City cannot hold out, we must part,
Farewell, thy hand --

Far. You still shall have my heart.
Exeunt. Enter Lorenzo, Alonzo, Pisano, Martino, Captains, Soldiers.
Loren. The day is ours, though it cost dear; yet it is not
Enough to get a victory, if we lose
The true use of it. We have hitherto
Held back your forward swords, and in our fear
Of ambushes, deferred the wished reward
Due to your bloody toil: But now give freedom,
Nay, license to your fury and revenge;
Now glut your selves with prey, let not the night
Nor these thick woods give sanctuary to
The fear-struck Hares our Enemies: fire these trees,
And force the wretches to forsake their holes,
And offer their scorched bodies to your swords,
Or burn'em as a sacrifice to your angers.
Who brings Gonzaga's head, or takes him prisoner,
(Which I incline to rather) that he may
Be sensible of those tortures, which I vow
T'inflict upon him, for denial of
His daughter to our bed) shall have a Blank
With our hand and signet made authentical,
In which he may write down himself, what wealth
Or honors he desires

Alon. The great Dukes will shall be obeyed

Pisa. Put it in execution.

Mar. Begirt the wood, and fire it.

Sold. Follow, follow.
Exeunt. Enter Farneze (with a Florentine soldiers coat.) Uberti, Prince
Uberti! O my friend
Dearer then life! I have lost thee. Cruel fortune,
Unsatisfied with our sufferings! We no sooner
Were parted from the Duke, and even then ready
To make a mutual farewell, when a troop
Of the enemies horse fell on us: we were forced
To take the woods again, but in our flight
Their hot pursuit divided us: we had been happy
If we had died together; to survive him
To me is worse then death, and therefore should not
Embrace the means of my escape, though offered.
When nature gave us life, she gave a burden,
But at our pleasure not to be cast off,
Though weary of it; and my reason prompts me,
This habit of a Florentine which I took
From a dying soldier, may keep me unknown
Till opportunity mark me out a way
For flight, and with security.
Enter Uberti. Was there ever such a night of horror?

Far. My friends voice! I now
In part forgive thee, fortune.

Uber. The wood flames,
The bloody sword devours all that it meets,
And death in several shapes rides here in triumph.
I am like a Stag closed in a toil; my life
As soon as found, the cruel Huntsmans prey:
Why fliest thou then what is inevitable?
Better to fall with manly wounds before
Thy cruel Enemy, then survive thine honor:
And yet to charge him, and die unrevenged,
Mere desperation.

Far. Heroic spirit!

Uber. Mine own life I contemn, and would not save it
But for the future service of the Duke
And safety of his daughter; having means,
If I escape, to raise a second Army,
And what is nearest to me, to enjoy
My friend Farneze.

Far. I am still his care:

Uber. What shall I do? If I call loud, the foe
That has begirt the wood, will hear the sound.
Shall I return by the same path? I cannot,
The darkness of the night conceals it from me:
Something I must resolve.

Far. Let friendship rouse
Thy sleeping soul, Farneze: will thou suffer
Thy friend, a Prince, nay one that may set free
Thy captived Country, perish, when it is in
Thy power with this disguise to save his life?
Thou have lived too long, therefore resolve to die;
Thou have seen thy Country ruined, and thy Master
Compelled to shameful flight, the fields and woods
Straw'd ore with carcasses of thy fellow soldiers:
The miseries thou art fallen in, and before
Thy eyes the horror of this place, and thousand
Calamities to come; and after all these
Can any hope remain? shake off delays,
Do thou doubt yet? To save a Citizen,
The conquering Roman in a General
Esteemed the highest honor; can it be then
Inglorious to preserve a Prince? thy friend?
Uberti, Prince Uberti, use this means
Of thy escape; concealed in this thou may
Pass through the enemies guards: the time denies
Longer discourse; thou have a noble end,
Live therefore mindful of thy dyng friend:
Exit.
Uber. Farneze, stay thy hasty steps: Farneze!
Thy friend Uberti calls thee: it is in vain,
He Is gone to death an Innocent, and makes life
The benefit he confers on me, my guilt.
Thou art too covetous of another safety,
Too prodigal, and careless of thine own:
It Is a deceit in friendship to enjoin me
To put this garment on, and live, that he
May have alone the honor to die nobly.
O cruel piety, in our equal danger
To rob thy self of that thou give thy friend!
It must not be, I will restore his gift
And die before him. How? where shall I find him?
Thou art overcome in friendship; yield Uberti
To the extremity of the time, and live:
A heavy ransom, but it must be paid.
I will put on this habit: pitying Heaven
As it loves goodness, may protect my friend,
And give me means to satisfy the debt
I stand engaged for; if not, pale despair
I dare thy worst, thou can but bid me die,
And so much I Will force from an enemy.
Exit. Enter Alonzo, Pisano, Farneze (bound) Soldiers (with torches) Farneze's
sword in one of the Soldiers hands.
Alon. I know him, he is a man of ransom.

Pisa. True, but if he live it is to be paid to me:

Alon. I forced him to the woods.

Pisa. But my art found him,
Nor will I brook a partner in the prey
My fortune gave me.

Alon. Render him, or expect the point of this.

Pisa. Were lightning, I would meet it
Rather then be outbrav'd.

Alon. I thus decide the difference.

Pisa. My sword shall plead my title. They fight
Enter Lorenzo, Martino, two Captains.
Lor. Ha! where learned you this discipline? my
Commanders
Opposed against one another? what blind fury
Brings forth this brawl? Alonzo and Pisano
At bloody difference! hold, or I tilt
At both as enemies. Now speak, how grew
This strange division?

Pisa. Against all right;
By force Alonzo strives to reap the harvest
Sown by my labor.

Alon. Sir, this is my prisoner,
The purchase of my sword, which proud Pisano
That has no interest in him, would take from me.

Pisa. Did not the presence of the Duke forbid me,
I would say --

Alon. What?

Pisa. It Is false.

Lor. Before my face!
Keep 'em asunder. And was this the cause
Of such a mortal quarrel? this the base
To raise your fury on? the ties of blood,
Of fellowship in arms, respect, obedience
To me your Prince and General, no more
Prevailing on you? this a price for which
You would betray our victory, or wound
Your reputation with mutinies?
Forgetful of your selves, allegiance, honor?
This is a course to throw us headlong down
From that proud height of empire, upon which
We were securely seared: shall division
Oreturn what concord built? If you desire
To bath your swords in blood, the enemy
Still flies before you: Would you have spoil? the Country
Lies open to you. O unheard of madness!
What greater mischief could Gonzaga wish us,
Then you pluck on our heads? no, my brave Leaders,
Let unity dwell in our tents, and discord
Be banished to our enemies

Alon. Take the prisoner, I do give up my title.

Pisa. I desire your friendship, and will buy it:
He is yours. [They embrace.]

Alon. No man's a faithful Judge in his own cause;
Let the Duke determine of him, we are friends sir.

Lor. Show it in emulation to oretake
The flying foe; this cursed wretch disposed of,
With our whole strength we'll follow.
Exe. Alonz. and Pisa, embracing.
Far. Death at length
Will set a period to calamity.
I see it in this Tyrants frowns haste to me.
Enter Uberti like a soldier, and shuffles in among 'em.
Lor. Thou machine of this mischief, look to feel
Whatever the wrath of an incensed Prince
Can pour upon thee: With thy blood I Will quench
(But drawn forth slowly) the invisible flames
Of discord, -- by thy charms first fetched from Hell,
Then forced into the breasts of my Commanders.
-- Bring forth the tortures.

Vber. Hear, victorious Duke,
The story of my miserable fortune,
Of which this Villain (by your sacred tongue
Condemned to die) was the immediate cause:
And if my humble suit have justice in it,
Vouchsafe to grant it.

Lor. Soldier be brief; our anger can brook no long delay.

Vber. I am the last
Of three sons, by one father got, and trained up
With his best care for service in your wars:
My father dyed under his fatal hand,
And two of my poor brothers. Now I hear
Or fancy wounded by my grief, deludes me,
Their pale and mangled ghosts, crying for vengeance
On perjury and murder.
Thus the case stood. --
My father (on whose face he he durst not look
In equal mart) by his fraud circumvented,
Became his Captive: we his sons lamenting
Our old sires hard condition, freely offered
Our utmost for his ransom. That refused,
The subtle Tyrant for his cruel ends,
(Conceiving that our piety might ensnare us)
Proposed my Fathers head to be redeemed,
If two of us would yield our selves his slaves.
We upon any terms resolved to save him,
Though with the loss of life which he gave to us;
With an undaunted constancy drew lots
(For each of us contented to be one)
Who should preserve our Father: I was exempted,
But to my more affliction; my brothers
Delivered up; the perjured Homicide
Laughing in scorn, and by his hoary locks
Pulling my wretched Father on his knees,
Said thus, Receive the Father you have ransomed;
And instantly struck off his head.

Lor. Most barbarous!

Far. I never saw this man.

Lor. One murmur more,
I Will have thy tongue pulled out. Proceed.

Uber. Conceive, sir,
How thunderstruck we stood, being made spectators
Of such an unexpected tragedy:
Yet this was a beginning, not an end
To his intended cruelty; for pursuing
Such a revenge, as no Hircanian tigress
Robbed of her whelps durst aim at, in a moment
Treading upon my Fathers trunk, he cut off
My pious Brothers heads, and threw'em at me.
Oh what a spectacle was this! what mountain
Of sorrow overwhelmed me! My poor heartstrings
As tenter'd by his tyranny, cracked; my knees
Beating against one another, groans and tears
Blended together followed; not one passion
Calamity ever yet expressed, forgotten.
Now mighty sir, (bathing your feet with tears)
Your suppliants suit is, that he may have leave
With any cruelty revenge can fancy,
To sacrifice this Monster, to appease
My Fathers ghost and Brothers.

Lor. Thou have obtained it; choose any torture; let the memory
Of what thy Father and thy Brothers suffered
Make thee ingenious in it, such a one
As Phalaris would wish to be called his.
Martino, guarded with your soldiers, see
The execution done; but bring his head
On forfeiture of your own, to us: Our presence
Long since was elsewhere looked for.
Ex. cum suit.
Mar. Soldier to work; take any way thou wills for thy revenge,
Provided that he die: his body's thine,
But I must have his head.

Uber. I have already
Concluded of the manner: O just heaven,
The instrument I wished for offered me!

Mar. Why art thou rapp'd thus?

Uber: In this soldiers hand
I see the murderers own sword, I know it,
Yes, this is it by which my Father and
My brothers were beheaded: Noble Captain
Command it to my hand. Stand forth and tremble;
This weapon of late drunk with innocent blood
Shall now carouse thine own. Pray, if thou can;
For though the world shall not redeem thy body,
I would not kill thy soul.

Far. Can thou believe
There is a heaven, or hell, or soul? thou have none.
In death to rob me of my fame, my honor,
With such a forged lie? tell me thou hangman,
Where did I ever see thy face? or when
Murdered thy sire or brothers? look on me
And make it good: thou dare not.

Uber. Yes I will [Unbinds his arms]
In one short whisper, and that told thou art dead.
I am Uberti; take thy sword, fight bravely,
We'll live or die together.

Mar. We are betrayed.

Far. And have I leave once more, brave Prince, to ease Mar. struck down, the
soldiers run away.
My head on thy true bosom?

Uber. I glory more
To be thy friend, then in the name of Prince
Or any higher title.

Far. My preserver!

Uber. The life you gave to me, I but return;
And pardon, dearest friend, the bitter language
Necessity made me use.

Far. O sir, I am
Outdone in all; but comforted, that none
But you can wear the laurel,

Uber. Here Is no place
Or time to argue this; let us fly hence.

Far. I follow.
Exeunt.
Mar. A thousand Furies keep you company!
I was at the gate of -- but now I feel
My wounds not mortal; I was but astonished,
And coming to my self, I find I am
Reserved for the gallows: there is no looking on
The Enraged Duke, excuses will not serve,
I must do something that may get my pardon:
If not, I know the worst, a halter ends all.
Exit.
Act. 3. Scaen. 1.
Enter Octavio, (a Book in's hand.)
Oct. It Is true, by proof I find it, humane reason
Views with such dim eyes what is good or ill,
That if the great Disposer of our being
Should offer to our choice all worldly blessings,
We knew not what to take. --
When I was young,
Ambition of Court-preferment fired me;
And as there were no happiness beyond it,
I labored for it and got it; no man stood
In greater favor with his Prince, I had
Honors and offices, wealth flowed in to me,
And for my service both in peace and war
The general voice gave out I did deserve 'em.
But oh vain confidence in subordinate greatness!
When I was most secure, it was not in
The power of fortune to remove me from
The flat I firmly stood on: in a moment
My virtues were made crimes, and popular favor
(To new-raised men still fatal) bred suspicion
That I was dangerous: which no sooner entered
Gonzago's breast, but straight my ruin followed:
My offices were took from me, my state seized on;
And had I not prevented it by flight,
The jealousy of the Duke had been removed
With the forfeiture of my head.
[Within Galeaz] Or show compassion, or I will force it.

Oct. Ha! is not poverty safe?
I thought proud war that aimed at kingdoms ruins,
The sack of palaces and cities, scorned
To look on a poor cottage.
Enter Galeazo (with Ascanio in's arms) Gothrio following.
Goth. What would you have?
The devil sleeps in my pocket, I have no cross
To drive him from it. Be you or thief, or soldier,
Or such a beggar as will not be denied,
My scrip, my tar-box, hook and coat will prove
But a thin purchase; if you turn my inside
Outward, you will find it true.
Searches his scrip.

Gal. Not any food?

Goth. Alas sir,
I am no glutton, but an under-shepherd,
The very picture of famine; judge by my cheeks else:
I have my pittance by ounces, and starve my self;
When I pay a pensioner, I have an ancient mouse,
A crum a meal. [Takes the bottle.]

Gal. No drop left?
Drunkard, have thou swill'd up all?

Goth. How? Drunkard, sir! I am a poor man, you mistake me sir:
Drunkard's a title for the rich, my betters;
A calling in repute, some sell their lands for it,
And rore wines better then money. Our poor beveridg
Of buttermilk or whey allaid with water,
Never raise our thoughts so high. Drunk! I had never
The credit to be so yet.

Gal. Ascanio, look up dear youth: Ascanio, did thy sweetness
Command the greedy enemy to forbear
To prey upon it? and I thank my fortune
For suffering me to live, that in some part
I might return thy courtesies: And now
To heighten my afflictions, must I be
Enforced, no pitying Angel near to help us,
Heaven deaf to my complaints too, to behold thee
Die in my arms for hunger? no means left
To lengthen life a little? I will open
A vein, and pour my blood, not yet corrupted
With any sinful act, but pure as he is,
Into his famished mouth.

Octa. Young man forbear
Thy savage pity; I have better means
To call back flying life.

Goth. You may believe him,
They apply themselves to Ascanio.
It is his sucking-bottle, and confirms
An old man's twice a child; his nurses milk
Was never so chargeable: should you put in too
For soap and candles, though he sell his flock for it,
The baby must have this dug: he swears it is ill
For my complexion, but wondrous comfortable
For an old man that would never die

Oct. Hope well sir,
A temperate heat begins to thaw his numness,
The blood too by degrees takes fresh possession
On his pale cheeks, his pulse beats high; stand off,
Give him more air, he stirs: [Goth. steals the bottle.]

Goth. And have I got thee, thou bottle of immortality?

Asca. Where am I?
What cruel hand has forced back wretched life?
Is rest in death denied me?

Goth. O sweet liquor!
Were here enough to make me drunk, I might
Write my self Gentleman, and never buy
A coat of the Heralds.

Oct. How now slave?

Goth. I was fainting,
A clownlike qualm seized on me, but I am
Recovered, thanks to your bottle, and begin
To feel new stirrings, gallant thoughts; one draught more
Will make me a perfect Signior:

Oct. A tough cudgel
Will take this gentle itch off: Home to my cottage,
See all things handsome.

Goth. Good sir, let me have
The bottle along to smell to: O rare perfume!
Ex:
Gal. Speak once more, dear Ascanio! How he eyes you,
Then turns away his face! Look up sweet youth,
The object cannot hurt you; this good man
Next heaven is your preserver.

Asc. Would I had perished
Without relief, rather then live to break
His good old heart with sorrow. O my shame!
My shame, my never dying shame!

Oct. I have been
Acquainted with this voice, and know the face too:
It Is she, it is too apparent; O my daugbter!
I mourned long for thy loss; but thus to find thee,
Is more to be lamented.

Gal. How? your daughter!

Oct. My only child: I murmured against heaven
Because I had no more; but now I find
This one too many. Is Alonzo glutted [Asc weeps]
With thy embraces?

Gal. At his name a shower
Of tears falls from her eyes: she faints again.
Grave sir, overrule your passion, and defer
The story of your fortune: On my life
She is a worthy one, her innocence
Might be abused, but mischiefs self wants power
To make her guilty. Show your self a Father
In her recovery; then as a Judge,
When she has strength to speak in her own cause,
You may determine of her.

Oct. I much thank you
For your wise counsel: you direct me sir
As one indebted more to years, and I
As a pupil will obey you. Not far hence
I have a homely dwelling; if you please there
To make some short repose, your entertainment
Though course, shall relish of a gratitude,
And that is all I can pay you. Look up Girl,
Thou art in thy Fathers arms.

Gal. She Is weak and faint still:
O spare your age! I am young and strong, and this way
To serve her is a pleasure, not a burden:
Pray you lead the way.

Oct. The Saints reward your goodness.
Exeunt.
Enter Manfroy, and Matilda (disguised.)
Mat. No hope of safety left?

Manf. We are descried.

Mat. I thought, that covered in this poor disguise
I might have passed unknown:

Manf. A diamond, though set in horn, is still a diamond,
And sparkles as in purest gold. We are followed:
Out of the troops that scoured the plains, I saw
Two gallant horsemen break forth, (who by their
Brave furniture and habiliments for the war
Seemed to command the rest) spurring hard toward us;
See with what winged speed they climb the hill
Like Falcons on the stretch to seize the prey;
Now they dismount, and on their hands and knees
Overcome the deep ascent that guards us from him.
Your beauty has betrayed you; for it can
No more be night when bright Apollo shines
In our Meridian, then that be concealed.

Mat. It is my curse, not blessing; fatal to
My Country, Father, and my self: why did you
Forsake the City?

Manf. 'Twas the Dukes command,
No time to argue that; we must descend:
If undiscovered your soft feet (unused
To such rough travail) can but carry you
Half a league hence, I know a cave which will.
Yield us protection.

Mat. I wish I could lend you
Part of my speed; for me, I can outstrip
Daphne or Atalanta.

Manf. Some good Angel
Defend us, and strike blind our hot pursuers.
Exeunt. Enter Alonzo and Pisano.
Alon. She cannot be far off; how gloriously
She showed to us in the valley!

Pisa. In my thought
Like to a blazing Comet:

Alon. Brighter far:
Her beams of beauty made the hill all fire;
From whence removed, it is covered with thick clouds.
But we lose time; I Will take that way.

Pisa. I this.
Exeunt. Enter Galeazo. It Is a degree of comfort in my sorrow.
I have done one good work in reconciling
Maria, long hid in Ascanio's habit,
To grieved Octavio: what a sympathy
I found in their affections! she with tears
Making a free confession of her weakness
In yielding up her honor to Alonzo,
Upon his vows to marry her: Octavio
Prepared to credit her excuses, nay
T'extenuate her guilt; she the Delinquent,
And Judge, as 'twere, agreeing. But to me
The most forlorn of men, no beam of comfort
Daigns to appear; nor can I in my fancy
Fashion a means to get it: To my Country
I am lost for ever, and 'twere impudence
To think of a return; yet this I could
Endure with patience: But to be divorced
From all my joy on earth, the happiness
To look upon the excellence of nature,
That is perfection in heself, and needs not
Addition or epithet, Rare Matilda,
Would make a Saint blaspheme. Here Galeazo
In this obscure abode it is fit thou should
Consume thy youth, and grow old in lamenting
Thy star crossed fortune, in this shepherds habit;
This hook thy best defenc, since thou could use
(When thou did fight in such a Princess cause)
Thy sword no better. [Lies down]
Enter Alonzo, Pisano, Matilda.
Mat. Are you men, or monsters?
Whither will you drag me? can the open ear
Of heaven be deaf, when an unspotted Maid
Cries out for succor!

Pisa. It Is in vain; cast lots who shall enjoy her first.

Alon. Flames rage within me,
And such a spring of Nectar near to quench 'em!
My appetite shall be cloyed first: here I stand
Thy friend, or enemy; let me have precedence,
I write a friends name in my heart; deny it,
As an enemy I defy thee.

Pisa. Friend or foe
In this alike I value, I disdain
To yield priority; draw thy sword.

Alon. To sheath it in thy ambitious heart.

Mat. O curb this fury,
And hear a wretched Maid first speak!

Gal. I am marble:

Mat. Where shall I seek out words, or how restrain
My Enemies rage, or Lovers? oh the latter
Is far more odious: did not your lust
Provoke you, for that is its proper name,
My chastity were safe;
And yet I tremble more
To think what dire effects lust may bring forth,
Then what as enemies you can inflict,
And less I fear it. Be friends to your selves,
And enemies to me: Better I fall
A sacrifice to your atonement, then
Or one, or both should perish. I am the cause
Of your division; remove it, Lords,
And concord will spring up: poison this face
That has bewitched you; this grove cannot want
Aspicks or Toads, creatures though justly called
For their deformity the scorn of nature,
More happy then my self with this false beauty
(The seed and fruit of mischief) you admire so.
I thus embrace your knees, and yours a suppliant,
If Tigres did not nurse you, or you suck
The milk of a fierce Lioness, show compassion
Unto your selves in being reconciled,
And pity to poor me, my honor safe,
In taking loathed life from me.

Pisa. What shall we do?
Or end our difference in killing her,
Or fight it out?

Alon. To the last gasp. I feel
The moist tears on my cheeks, and blush to find
A Virgins plaints can move so.

Pisa. To prevent
Her flight while we contend, let us bind her fast
To this Cipress-tree.

Alon. Agreed.

Mat. It does presage my funeral rites.

Gal. I shall turn Atheist,
If heaven see and suffer this: why did I
Abandon my good sword? with unarmed hands
I cannot rescue her. Some Angel pluck me
From the apostasy I am falling to,
And by a miracle lend me a weapon
To underprop falling honor.

Pisa. She is fast, resume your arms.

Alon. Honor, revenge, the Maid too
Lie at the stake.

Pisa. Which thus I draw -- They fight, Pisano falls.

Alon. All Is mine,
But bought with some blood of mine own: Pisano,
Thou were a noble Enemy; wear that laurel
In death to comfort thee; for the reward,
It Is mine now without Rival. Galeazo snatches up Pisano's sword.

Gal. Thou art deceived;
Men will grow up like to the Dragons teeth
From Cadmus helm sown in the field of Mars,
To guard pure Chastity from lust and rape.
Libidinous monster, Satyr, Fawn, or what
Does better speak thee slave to appetite
And sensual baseness; if thy profane hand
But touch this virgin-temple, thou art dead.

Mat. I see the aid of Heaven, though slow, is sure.

Alon. A rustic swain dare to retard my pleasure?

Gal. No swain, Alonzo, but her knight and servant
To whom the world should owe and pay obedience;
One that thou have encountered, and shrunk under
His arm, that spared thy life in the late battle
At th'intercession of the Princess page; look on me better.

Mat. It Is my virtuous Lover,
Under his guard 'twere sin to doubt my safety.

Alon. I know thee, and with courage will redeem
What fortune then took from me.

Gal. Rather keep [Fight. Alon. falls.]
Thy Compeer company in death -- lie by him
A prey for Crows and Vulturs; these fair arms He unbinds Matilda.
Unfit for bonds, should have been chains to make
A Bridegroom happy, though a Prince, and proud
Of such captivity: whatsoever you are,
I glory in the service I have done you;
But I entreat you pay your vows and prayers
For preservation of your life and honor,
To the most virtuous Princess, chaste Matilda:
I am her creature, and what good I do
You truly may call hers; what is ill, mine own.

Mat. You never did do ill, my virtuous servant,
Nor is it in the power of poor Matilda
To cancel such an obligation as
With humble willingness she must subscribe to.

Gal. The Prencess? ha!

Mat. Give me a fitter name,
Your manumissed Bondwoman, but even now
In the possession of lust, from which
Your more then brave heroic valor bought me;
And can I then for freedom unexpected
But kneel to you my Patron?

Gal. Kneel to me!
For heavens sake rise; I kiss the ground you tread on,
My eyes fixed on the earth; for I confess
I am a thing not worthy to look on you,
Till you have signed my pardon.

Mat. Do you interpret
The much good you have done me, an offense?

Gal. The not performing your injunctions to me,
Is more then capital: Your allowance of
My love and service to you, with admission
To each place you made paradise with your presence,
Should have enabled me to bring home Conquest.
Then, as a sacrifice to offer it
At the altar of your favor, had my love
Answered your bounty or my hopes, an Army
Had been as dust before me; whereas I
Like a coward turned my back, and durst not stand
The sury of the Enemy.

Mat. Had you done nothing
In the battle, this last act deserves more
Then I, the Duke my father joining with me,
Can ever recompense. But take your pleasure,
Suppose you have offended in not grasping
Your boundless hopes; I thus seal on your lips
A full remission.

Gal. Let mine touch your foot, your hand's too high a favor.

Mat. Will you force me to ravish a kiss from you?

Gal. I am intranc'd.

Mat. So much Desert, and Bashfulness, should not march
In the same file: Take comfort, when you have brought me
To some place of security, you shall find
You have a seat here, a heart that has
Already studied, and vowed to be thankful.

Gal. Heaven make me so! oh I am overwhelmed
With an excess of joy! Be not too prodigal,
Divinest Lady, of your grace and bounties
At once, if you are pleased I shall enjoy 'em,
Not taste 'em and expire.

Mat. I Will be more sparing:
Exeunt.
Enter Octavio, Gothrio, and Maria.
Oct. What noise of clashing swords, like armor fashioned
Upon an anvile, pierced mine ears? the echo
Redoubling the loud sound through all the valleys,
This way the wind assures me that it came.

Goth. Then with your pardon I Will take this.

Oct. Why sir?

Goth. Because, sir, I will trust my heels before
All winds that blow in the sky: We are wiser far
Then our Grandsires were, and in this I Will prove it;
They said, Haste to the beginning of a Feast,
(There I am with 'em) but to the end of a Fray,
That is apocryphal, it is more canonical
Not to come there at all; after a strom
There are still some drops behind.

Asc. Pure fear has made the Fool a Philosopher.

Oct. See Maria, see!
I did not err; here lie two brave men weltring
In their own gore.

Asc. A pitiful object.

Goth. I am in a swoun to look on it.

Oct. They are stiff already.

Goth. But are you sure they are dead?

Oct. Too sure, I fear.

Goth But are they stark dead?

Oct. Leave prating.

Goth. Then I am valiant, and dare come nearer to 'em,
This fellow without a sword shall be my Patient.

Oct. Whate'r they are, humanity commands us
To do our best endeavor: Run Maria
To the neighbor Spring for water; you will find there
A wooden dish, the beggars plate, to bring it.
Exit Maria. Why do not, dull drone, bend his body, and feel
If any life remain?

Goth. By your leave he shall die first, and then
I Will be his Surgeon.

Oct. Tear open his doublet,
And prove if his wounds be mortal,

Goth. Fear not me sir;
Here Is large wound, how it is swollen and impostum'd! His pocket
This must be cunningly drawn out; should it break, Pulls out his purse.
'Twould strangle him: what a deal of foul matter's here! His little pocket.
This has been long a gathering: Here Is a gash too
On the reme of his belly, it may have matter in it.
He was a cholerique man sure: what comes from him Gold
Is yellow as gold: How troubled with the Stone too! A Diamond-Ring
I Will cut you for this.

Pisa. Oh, oh! Starts up and quakes

Goth. He roars before I touch him.

Pisa. Robbed of my life?

Goth. No sir, nor of your money
Nor jewel, I keep 'em for you; if I had been
A perfect Mountebank, he had not lived
To call for his fees again.

Oct. Give me leave, there is hope of his recovery.

Goth. I had rather bury him quick
Then part with my purchase; let his ghost walk, I care not.
Enter Maria (with a dish of water.)
Oct. Well done Maria, lend thy helping hand;
He has a deep wound in his head, wash off
The clotted blood: He comes to himself.

Alon. My lust!
The fruit that grows upon the tree of lust!
With horror now I taste it.

Oct. Do you not know him?

Asc. Too soon, Alonzo! oh me! though disloyal,
Still dear to thy Maria.

Goth. So they know not
My Patient, all is cock-sure: I do not like
The Romanish restitution.

Oct. Rise and leave him, applaud heavens justice.

Asc. 'Twill become me better
T'implore its saving mercy.

Oct. Have thou no gall? no feeling of thy wrongs?

Asc. Turtles have none; nor can there be such poison in her breast
That truly loves, and lawfully.

Oct. True, if that love
Be placed on a worthy subject. What he is,
In thy disgrace is published; Heaven has marked him
For punishment, and 'twere rebellious madness
In thee t'attempt to alter it: Revenge,
A sovereign balm for injuries, is more proper
To thy robbed honor. Join with me, and thou
Shall be thy self the Goddess of revenge,
This wretch the vassal of thy wrath: I Will make him
While yet he lives, partake those torments which
For perjured Lovers are prepared in hell,
Before his cursed ghost enter it. This oil
Extracted and sublimed from all the simples
The earth when swollen with venom ever brought forth,
Poured in his wounds, shall force such anguish as
The Furies whips but imitate; and when
Extremity of pain shall hasten death,
Here is another that shall keep in life,
And make him feel a perpetuity of lingering tortures.

Goth. Knock'em both on the head, I say,
And it be but for their skins; they are embroidered,
And will sell well in the market:

Asc. Ill-look'd Devil,
Tie up thy bloody tongue. O sir! I was slow
In beating down those propositions which
You urge for my revenge; my reasons being
So many, and so forcible, that make
Against yours, that until I had collected
My scattered powers, I waver'd in my choice
Which I should first deliver. Fate has brought
My Enemy (I can faintly call him so)
Prostrate before my feet: shall I abuse
The bounty of my fate, by trampling on him?
He alone ruined me, nor can any hand
But his rebuild my late demolished honor.
If you deny me means of reparation
To satisfy your spleen, you are more cruel
Then ever yet Alonzo was; you stamp
The name of Strumpet on my forehead, which
Heavens mercy would take off; you fan the fire
Even ready to go out; forgetting that
It Is truly noble, having power to punish,
Nay King-like to forbear it. I would purchase
My husband by such benefits, as should make him
Confess himfelf my equal, and disclaim superiority.

Oct. My blessing on thee!
What I urged, was a trial; and my grant
To thy desires shall now appear, if art
Or long experience can do him service,
Nor shall my charity to this be wanting,
Howe'r unknown: Help me Maria; You sir,
Do your best to raise him. -- So.

Goth. He Is wondrous heavy;
But the Porter's paid, there is the comfort.

Oct. It Is but a trance, and 'twill forsake both.

Asc. If he live, I fear not
He will redeem all, and in thankfulness
Confirm he ows you for a second life,
And pays the debt in making me his wife.
Excunt.
Act. 4. Scaen. 1.
Enter Lorenzo, Captains.
Lor. MAntua is ours; place a strong garrison in it
To keep it so; and as a due reward
To your brave service, be our Governor in it.

1 Capt: I humbly thank your Excellence.
Exit.
Lor. Gonzaga is yet out of our gripe; but his strong Fort
St. Leo, which he holds impregnable
By the aids of art, as nature, shall not long
Retard our absolute conquest. The escape
Of fair Matilda, my supposed Mistress,
(For whole desired possession 'twas given out
I made this war) I value not; alas
Cupid's too feeble-ey'd to hit my heart,
Or could he see, his arrows are too blunt
To pierce it; his imagined torch is quenched
With a more glorious fire of my ambition
T'enlarge my Empire: soft and silken amors,
With Carpet-Courtship, which weak Princes style
The happy issue of a flourishing peace,
My toughness scorns: Were there an abstract made
Of all the eminent and canonized Beauties
By truth recorded, or by Poets feigned,
I could unmoved behold it, as a Picture
Commend the workmanship, and think no more on it;
I have more noble ends. Have you not heard yet
Of Alonzo, or Pisano?

2 Cap My Lord, of neither.

Lor. Two turbulent spirits unfit for discipline,
Much less command in war; if they were lost,
I shall not pine with mourning.
Enter Martino, Matilda, Galeazo, and Guard.
Mart. Bring 'em forward;
This will make my peace, though I had killed his father,
Besides the reward that follows.

Lor. Ha! Martino?
Where is Farneze's head? do thou stare? and where
The soldier that desired the torture of him?

Mart: An't please your Excellence --

Lor. It does not please us; are our commands obeyed?

Mart. Farneze's head, sir,
Is a thing not worth your thought, the soldiers less sir:
I have brought your Highness such a head, a head
So well set on too, a fine head.

Lor. Take that Strikes him
For thy impertinence: what head, ye Rascal?

Mart. My Lord, if they that bring such presents to you
Are thus rewarded, there are few will strive
To be near your Graces pleasures: but I know
You will repent your choler. Here Is the head,
And now I draw the curtain, it has a face too,
And such a face.

Lor. Ha!

Mart. View her all over, my Lord;
My company on it, she is sound of wind and limb,
And will do her labor tightly, a Bona Roba:
And for her face, as I said, there are five hundred
City-dub'd Madams in the Dukedom, that would part with
Their Jointures to have such another: Hold up your head, Maid.

Lor. Of what age is the day?

Mart. Sir, since Sunrising about two hours:

Lor. Thou lie: the Sun of Beauty
In modest blushes on her cheeks, but now
Appeared to me, and in her tears breaks forth
As through a shower in April, every drop
An orient pearl, which as it falls, congealed,
Were Earrings for the Catholic King,
Worn on his birthday.

Mart. Here Is a sudden change.

Lor. Incensed Cupid, whom even now I scorned,
Has took his stand, and by reflection shines
(As if he had two bodies, or indeed
A brother-twin, whom sight cannot distinguish)
In her fair eyes; see how they head their arrows
With her bright beams, now frown, as if my heart
Rebellious to their edicts, were unworthy,
Should I rip up my bosom, to receive
A wound from such divine artillery.

Mart. I am made for ever:

Mat. We are lost, dear servant.

Gal. Virtue's but a word; Fortune rules all.

Mat. We are her Tennis-balls.

Lor. Allow her fair, her symetrie and features
So well proportioned, as the heavenly object
With admiration would strike Ovid dumb,
Nay force him to forget his faculty
In verse, and celebrate her praise in prose:
What Is this to me? I that have passed my youth
Unscorch'd with wanton fires, my sole delight
In glittering arms, my conquering sword my mistress;
Neighing of barbed horfe, the cries and groans
Of vanquished foes suing for life, my music:
And shall I in the Autumn of my age,
Now when I wear the livery of time
Upon my head and beard, suffer my self
To be transformed, and like a puling Lover
With arms thus folded up, echo Ay me's!
And write my self a Bondsman to my Vassal?
It must not, nay it shall not be: Remove
The object, and the effect dies. Nearer, Martino:

Mart. I shall have a Regiment, Colonel Martino,
I cannot go less.

Lor. What thing is this thou have brought me?

Mart. What thing? Heaven bless me, are you a Florentine?
Nay, the Great Duke of Florentines, and having had her
So long in your power, do you now ask what she is?
Take her aside and learn; I have brought you that
I look to be dearly paid for.

Lor. I am a Soldier; and use of women will, Martino, rob
My nerves of strength.

Mart. All armor, and no smock?
Abominable! A little of the one with the other
Is excellent: I never knew General yet,
Nor Prince that did deserve to be a Worthy,
But he desired to have his sweat washed off
By a juicie Bedfellow.

Lor. But say she be unwilling to do that office?

Mart. Wrestle with her, I will wager
Ten to one on your Graces side.

Lor. Slave, have thou brought me
Temptation in a Beauty not to be
With prayers resisted; and in place of council
To master my affections, and to guard
My honor now besieged by lust, with the arms
Of sober temperance, mark me out a way
To be a ravisher? Would thou had shown me
Some monster, though in a more ugly form
Then Nile or Africa ever bred. The Basilisk
(Whose envious eye yet never brook'd a neighbor)
Kills but the body; Her more potent eye
Buries alive mine honor: shall I yield thus?
And all brave thoughts of victory and triumphs,
The spoils of Nations, the loud applauses
Of happy subjects made so by my conquests;
And what is the crown of all, a glorious name
Insculp'd on Pyramids to posterity,
Be drenched in Lethe, and no object take me
But a weak Woman, rich in colors only,
Too delicate a touch, and some rare features
Which age or sudden sickness will take from her,
And where is then the reward of all my service?
Love-soothing passions, nay idolatry
I must pay to her. Hence, and with thee take
This second, but more dangerous Pandora,
Whose fatal box, if opened, will pour on me
All mischiefs that mankind is subject to.
To the deserts with this Circe, this Calipso,
This fair Inchantress; let her spells and charms
Work upon beasts and thee, then whom wise nature
Never made a viler creature.

Mat. Happy exile!

Gal. Some spark of hope remains yet.

Mart. Come, you are mine now;
I will remove her where your Highness shall not
Or see or hear more of her: what a sum
Will she yield for the Turks Serraglio?

Lor. Stay, I feel
A sudden alteration.

Mart. Here are fine whimsies.

Lor. Why should I part with her? can any foulness
Inhabit such a clean and gorgeous palace?
The fish, the fowl, the beasts may safer leave
The elements they were nourished in, and live,
Then I endure her absence; yet her presence
Is a torment to me: Why do I call it so?
My sire enjoyed a woman, I had not been else;
He was a complete Prince, and shall I blush
To follow his example? Oh but my choice,
Though she gave suffrage to it, is beneath me:
But even now in my proud thoughts I scorned
A Princess, fair Matilda; and is it decreed
For punishment, I straight must dote on one
What, or from whence I know not? Grant she be
Obscure, without a Coat or family,
Those I can give; and yet if she were noble,
My fondness were more pardonable. Martino,
Do thou know thy prisoner?

Mart. Do I know my self?
I kept that for the Lenvoy; it is the daughter
Of your enemy, Duke Gonzaga.

Lor. Fair Matilda! I now call to my memory her picture,
And find this is the substance; but her Painter
Did her much wrong, I see it:

Mart. I am sure
I tugged hard for her, here are wounds can witness,
Before I could call her mine.

Lor. No matter how:
Make thine own ransom, I will pay it for her.

Mart. I knew it would come at last.

Mat. We are lost again.

Gal. Variety of afflictions!

Lor. That his knee that never yet bowed to mortality, Kneels
Kisses the earth, happy to bear your weight,
I know begets your wonder. Hear the reason,
And cast it off, Your beauty does command it:
Till now I never saw you; same has been
Too sparing in report of your perfections,
Which now with admiration I gaze on.
Be not afraid, fair Virgin; had you been
Employed to mediate your Fathers cause,
My drum had been unbrac'd, my trumpet hung up,
Nor had the terror of the war ere frighted
His peaceful confines; your demands had been
As soon as spoke, agreed to. But you will answer,
And may with reason; Words make no satisfaction
For what is in fact committed. Yet take comfort,
Something my pious love commands me do,
Which may call down your pardon.

Mat. This expression
Of reverence to your person, better suits
Takes him up, and kneels.
With my low fortune. That you daign to love me,
My weakness would persuade me to believe
(Though conscious of mine own unworthiness)
You being as the liberal eye of heaven
Which may shine where it pleases: Let your beams
Of favor warm and comfort me, not consume me;
For should your love grow to excess, I dare not
Deliver what I fear.

Lor. Dry your fair eyes;
I apprehend your doubts, and could be angry
If humble love could warrant it, you should
Nourish such base thoughts of me: Heaven bear witness,
And if I break my vow, dart thunder at me,
You are and shall be in my tent as free
From fear of violence, as a cloistered Nun
Kneeling before the Altar. What I purpose
Is yet an Embrion; but grown into form,
I Will give you power to be the sweet disposer
Of blessings unexpected; that your Father,
Your Country, people, children yet unborn too,
In holy hymns on Festivals shall sing
The triumph of your beauty. On your hand
Once more I swear it: O imperious Love!
Look down, and as I truly do repent,
Prosper the good ends of thy Penitent.
Exeunt. Enter Octavio and Maria.
Oct. You must not be too sudden, my Maria,
In being known: I am in this Friars habit
As yet concealed; though his recovery
Be almost certain, I must work him to
Repentance by degrees. When I would have you
Appear in your true shape of sorrow to
Move his compassion, I will stamp thus, then
You know to act your part.

Asc. I shall be careful.

Oct. If I can cure the ulcers of his mind,
As I despair not of his bodies wounds,
Felicity crowns my labor. Gothrio!

Goth. Here sir.
[Ent Gothrio]
Oct. Desire my Patients to leave their chamber,
And take fresh air here: how have they slept?

Goth. Very well sir,
I would we were so rid of 'em.

Oct. Why?

Goth. I fear one has the art of memory, and will
Remember his gold and jewels: could you not minister
A potion of forgetfulness? what would Gallants
That are in debt, give me for such a receipt
To pour in their Creditors drink?

Oct. You shall restore all,
Believed you shall: will you please to walk?

Goth. Will you please to put off
Your holy habit, and spic'd conscience? One
I think infects the other.
Exit.
Oct. I have observed
Compunction in Alonzo: he speaks little,
But full of retired thoughts: The other is
Jocund and merry, no doubt, because he has
The less account to make here.
Enter Alonzo:
Alon. Reverend sir,
I come to wait your pleasure; but my friend
(Your creature I should say, being so my self)
Willing to take farther repose, entreats
Your patience a few minutes.

Oct. At his pleasure; pray you sit down, you are faint still.

Alon. Growing to strength,
I thank your goodness: but my mind is troubled,
Very much troubled, sir; and I desire,
Your pious habit giving me assurance (please
Of your skill and power that way, that you would)
To be my my Minds physician.

Oct. Sir, to that
My order binds me, if you please to unload
The burden of your conscience, I will minister
Such heavenly cordials as I can, and set you
In a path that leads to comfort.

Alon. I will open
My bosoms secrets to you; that I am
A man of blood, being brought up in the wars,
And cruel executions, my profession
Admits not to be questioned: but in that
Being a subject, and bound to obey
Whate'r my Prince commanded, I have left
Some shadow of excuse: with other crimes
As pride, lust, gluttony, it must be told
I am besmeared all over.

Oct. On repentance mercy will wash it off.

Alon. O sir, I grant
These sins are deadly ones; yet their frequencie
With wicked men, make them less dreadful to us.
But I am conscious of one crime, with which
All ills I have committed from my youth
Put in the scale weigh nothing: such a crime,
So odious to heaven and man, and to
My seared up conscience so full of horror,
As penance cannot expiate.

Oct. Despair not,
It Is impious in man to prescribe limits
To the divine compassion; out with it.

Alonz. Hear then, good man; and when that I have given you
The character of it, and confessed my self
The wretch that acted it, you must repent
The charity you have extended toward me.
Not long before these wars began, I had
Acquaintance ('it is not fit I style it Friendship,
That being a virtue, and not to be blended
With vicious breach of faith) with the Lord Octavio,
The Minion of his Prince and Court, set off
With all the pomp and circumstance of greatness:
To this then happy man I offered service,
And with infinuation wrought my self
Into his knowledge, grew familiar with him,
Ever a welcome guest. This noble Gentleman
Was blessed with one fair daughter, (so he thought
And boldly might believe so, for she was
In all things excellent without a Rival)
Till I (her Fathers mass of wealth before
My greedy eyes, but hoodwinked to mine honor)
With far more subtle arts then perjured Paris
Ere practiced on poor credulous Oenone,
Besieged her Virgin-fort, in a word took it,
No vows or imprecation forgotten
With speed to marry her.

Oct. Perhaps she gave you just cause to break those vows.

Alon. She cause! alas
Her innocence knew no guilt, but too much favor
To me unworthy of it: 'twas my baseness,
My foul ingratitude, what shall I say more?
The good Octavio no sooner fell
In the displeasure of his Prince, his state
Confiscated, and he forced to leave the Court,
And she exposed to want; but all my oaths
And protestation of service to her,
Like seeming flames raised by enchantment, vanished;
This, this sits heavy here.

Oct. He speaks as if
He were acquainted with my plot: You have reason
To feel compunction, for 'twas most inhumane
So to betray a Maid.

Alon. Most barbarous.

Oct. But does your sorrow for the fact beget
An aptness in you to make satisfaction
For the wrong you did her?

Alon. Gracious heaven! an aptness!
It is my only study; since I tasted
Of your compassion, these eyes never were closed,
But fearful dreams cut off my little sleep,
And being awake in my imagination,
Her apparition haunted me.

Oct. 'Twas mere fancy: He stamps

Alon. 'Twas more, grave sir, nay it is,
Now it appears.
[Ent. Maria]
Oct. Where?

Alon. Do you not see there the gliding shadow
Of a fair Virgin? that is she, and wears
The very garments that adorned her when
She yielded to my Crocodile tears: A cloud
Of fears and diffidence then so chased away
Her purer white and red, as it foretold
That I should be disloyal. Blessed shadow!
For 'twere a sin, far, far exceeding all
I have committed, to hope only that
Thou art a substance: look on my true sorrow,
Nay, souls contrition; hear again those vows
My perjury cancelled, stamped in brass, and never
To be worn out.
[Ent. Gothrio]
Asc. I can endure no more;
Action, not oaths must make me reparation:
I am Maria.

Alon. Can this be?

Oct. It is, and I Octavio.

Alon. Wonder on wonder!
How shall I look on you? or with what forehead
Desire your pardon?

Asc. You truly shall deserve it
In being constant:

Oct. If you fall not off,
But look on her in poverty with those eyes
As when she was my heir in expectation
You thought her beautiful.

Alon. She Is in herself both Indies to me.

Goth. Stay, she shall not come
A beggar to you, my sweet young Mistress! no,
She shall not want a dower: here is white and red
Will ask a jointure; but how you should make her
Being a Captain, would beget some doubt,
If you should deal with a Lawyer.

Alon. I have seen this purse:

Goth. How the worl'ds given, I dare not say to lying,
Because you are a Soldier; you may say as well
This gold is marked too: you being to receive it,
Should never ask how I got it. I Will run for a Priest
To dispatch the matter; you shall not want a Ring,
I have one for the purpose. Now sir, I think I am honest.
Exit.
Alon. This Ring was Pisano's.

Oct. I Will dissolve this riddle at better leisure:
The wound given to my daughter, which in your honor
You are bound to cure, exacts our present care.

Alon. I am all yours sir.
Exeunt. Enter Gonzaga, Uberti, Manfroy.
Gonz. Thou have told too much to give assurance that
Her honor was too far engaged to be
By humane help redeemed: If thou had given
Thy sad narration this full period,
She Is dead; I had been happy.

Uber. Sir, these tears
Do well become a father; and my eyes
Would keep you company as a forlorn Lover,
But that the burning fire of my revenge
Dries up those drops of sorrow. We once more,
Our broken forces rallied up, and with
Full numbers strengthened, stand prepared to endure
A second trial; nor let it dismay us
That we are once again to affront the fury
Of a victorious Army; their abuse
Of Conquest has disarmed themselves, and called down
The powers above to aid us. I have read
Some piece of story, yet never found but that
The General that gave way to cruelty,
The profanation of things sacred, rapes
Of virgins, butchery of infants, and
The massacre in cold blood of reverend age,
Against the discipline and law of Arms,
Did feel the hand of heaven lie heavy on him,
When most secure: We have had a late example,
And let us not despair but that in Lorenzo
It will be seconded.

Gonz. You argue well,
And 'twere a sin in me to contradict you:
Yet we must not neglect the means that is lent us
To be the Ministers of Justice.

Uber. No, sir: One day given to refresh our wearied Troops
Tired with a tedious march, we'll be no longer
Cooped up, but charge the Enemy in his trenches,
And force him to a battle: [Shouts within]

Gonz. Ha! how is this?
In such a general time of mourning, shouts
And acclamations of joy?
Long live the Princess! long live Matilda! Within they cry

Uber. Matilda! the Princess name,
Matilda, often re-eccho'd.
Enter Farneze.
Gonz. What speaks thy haste?

Far. More joy and happiness
Then weak words can deliver, or strong faith
Almost give credit to: The Princess lives,
I saw her, kissed her hand.

Gonz. By whom delivered?

Far. That is not to be stall'd by my report,
This only must be told: As I rode forth
With some choice troops to make discovery
Where the Enemy lay, and how entrenched; a Leader
Of th'adverse party, but unarmed, and in
His hand an Olive Branch, encountered me;
He showed the great Dukes seal that gave him power
To parley with me: his desires were, that
Assurance for his safety might be granted
To his royal Master, who came as a friend
(And not as an enemy) to offer to you
Conditions of peace. I yielded to it.
This being returned, the Dukes Pretorum opened;
When suddenly in a triumphant Chariot
Drawn by such soldiers of his own as were
For insolence after victory condemned
Unto this slavish office, the fair Princess
Appeared, a wreath of Laurel on her head,
Her robes majestical, their richness far
Above all value, as the present age
Contended that a woman's pomp should dim
The glittering triumphs of the Roman Caesar's.
I am cut off; no Canons throat now thunders,
Nor Fife nor Drum beat up a charge; choice Music
Ushers the parent of security, long absent Peace.

Manf. I know not what to think on it.

Uber. May it poise the expectation!
Enter Soldiers (unarmed, with olive-branches) Captains; Lorenzo, Galeazo,
Martino, Matilda (a wreath of laurel on her head, in her chariot drawn through
them.)
Gonz. Thus to meet you
Great Duke of Tuscany, throws amazement on me:
But to behold my daughter, long since mourned for,
And lost even to my hopes, thus honored by you,
With an excess of comfort overwhelms me:
And yet I cannot truly call my self
Happy in this solemnity, till your Highness
Vouchsafe to make me understand the motives
That in this peaceful way has brought you to us.

Lor. I must crave license first; for know, Gonzaga,
I am subject to another will, and can
Nor speak nor do without permission from her:
My curled forehead, of late terrible
To those that did acknowledge me their Lord, While Lor. speaks, Uberti and the
rest present themselves to Matilda.
Is now as smooth as rivers when no wind stirs:
My frowns or smiles, that killed or saved, have lost
Their potent awe, and sweetness: I am transformed
(But do not scorn the Metamorphosis)
From that fierce thing men held me; I am captived,
And by the unresistable force of beauty
Led hither as a prisoner. Is It your pleasure that
I shall deliver those injunctions which
Your absolute command imposed upon me,
Or daign your self to speak 'em?

Mat. Sir, I am
Your property, you may use me as you please;
But what is in your power and breast to do,
No Orator can dilate so well.

Lor. I obey you. That I came hither as an enemy
With hostile arms, to the utter ruin of
Your Country, what I have done, makes apparent:
That fortune seconded my will, the late
Defeature will make good: That I resolved
To force the scepter from your hand, and make
Your Dukedom tributary, my surprizal
Of Mantua your Metropolis can well witness:
And that I cannot fear the change of fate,
My Army fleshed in blood, spoil, glory, conquest
Stand ready to maintain: Yet I must tell you
By whom I am subdued, and what is the ransom
I am commanded to lay down.

Gonz. My Lord, you humble your self too much, it is fitter
You should propose, and we consent.

Lor. Forbear,
The articles are here subscribed and signed
By my obedient hand: All prisoners
Without a ransom set at liberty,
Mantua to be delivered up; the Rampires
Ruined in the assault, to be repaired;
The loss the husbandman received, his crop
Burnt up by wanton license of the soldier
To be made good; with whatsoever else
You could impose on me, if you had been
The Conqueror, I your Captive.

Gonz, Such a change wants an example: I must owe this favor
To the clemency of the old Heroique valor,
That spared when it had power to kill; a virtue
Buried long since, but raised out of the grave
By you to grace this latter age.

Lor. Mistake not
The cause that did produce this good effect,
If as such you receive it: 'twas her beauty
Wrought first on my rough nature; but the vertnes
Of her fair soul, dilated in her converse,
That did confirm it.

Mat. Mighty sir, no more:
You honor her too much, that is not worthy
To be vour servant.

Lor. I have done, and now
Would gladly understand that you allow of
The art cles propounded.

Gonz. Do not wrong
Your benefits with such a doubt; they are
So great and high, and with such reverence
To be received, that if I should profess
I hold my Dukedom from you as your vassal,
Or offered up my daughter as you please
To be disposed of, in the point of honor
And a becoming gratitude, 'twould not cancel
The bond I stand engaged for: but accept
Of that which I can pay, my all is yours sir,
Nor is there any here (though I must grant
Some have deserved much from me) for so far
I dare presume, but will surrender up
Their interest to that your Highness shall
Daign to pretend a title.

Uber. I subscribe not to this condition

Far. The services
This Prince has done your Grace in your most danger,
Are not to be so slighted.

Gal. It Is far from me
To urge my merits, yet I must maintain
Howe'r my power is less, my love is more;
Nor will the gracious Princess scorn to acknowledge
I have been her humble servant.

Lor. Smooth your brows,
I Will not incroach upon your right, for that were
Once more to force affection (a crime
With which should I the second time be tainted,
I did deserve no favor) neither will I
Make use of what is offered by the Duke,
Howe'r I thank his goodness: I Will lay by
My power; and though I should not brook a Rival,
(What we are, well considered) I Will descend
To be a third Competitor; he that can
With love and service best deserve the garland,
With your consent let him wear it; I despair not
The trial of my fortune.

Gonz. Bravely offered, and like your self, great Prince.

Uber. I must profess
I am so taken with it, that I know not
Which way to express my service.

Gal. Did I not build
Upon the Princess grace, I could sit down,
And hold it no dishonor.

Mat. How I feel
My soul divided! all have deserved so well,
I know not where to fix my choice.

Gone. You have
Time to consider: will you please to take
Possession of the Fort? then having tasted
The fruits of peace, you may at leisure prove
Whose plea will ptosper in the Court of Love.
Exeunt.
Act. 5. Scaen. 1.
Enter Alonzo, Octavio, Pisano, Maria (with a purse) Gothrio.
Alon. YOu need not doubt sir, were not peace proclaimed
And celebrated with a general joy,
The high displeasure of the Mantuan Duke,
Raised on just grounds, not jealous suppositions.
The saving of our lives (which next to heaven
To you alone is proper) would force mercy
For an offense though capital.

Pisa. When the Conqueror
Uses Entreaties, they are armed Commands
The vanquished must not check at.

Asc. My piety pay the forfeit,
If danger come but near you. I have heard
My gracious Mistress often mention you,
(When I served her as a Page) and feelingly
Relate how much the Duke her sire repented
His hasty doom of banishment, in his rage
Pronounced against you.

Oct. In a private difference,
I grant that Innocence is a wall of brass,
And scorns the hottest battery: but when
The cause depends between the Prince and Subject,
It Is an unequal competition; Justice
Must lay her balance by, and use her sword
For his ends that protects it. I was banished,
And till revoked from exile, to tread on
My Sovereigns territories with forbidden feet,
The severe letter of the Law calls death,
Which I am subject to in coming so near
His Court and person. But my only Child
Being provided for, her honor salv'd too,
I thank your noble change, I shall endure
Whate'r can fall with patience.

Alonz. You have used that medicine too long; prepare your self
For honor in your age, and rest secure often.

Asc. Of what is your wisdom musing?

Goth. I am gazing on
This gorgeous House, our Cote's a dishclout to it;
It has no sign, what do you called?

Asc. The Court; I have lived in it a Page.

Goth. Page! very pretty:
May I not be a Page? I am old enough,
Well timber'd too, and I have a beard to carry it:
Pray you let me be your Page, I can swear already
Upon your pantable.

Asc. What?

Goth. That I Will be true unto your smock.

Asc. How, Rascal?

Oct. Hence, and pimp
To your Rams and Ews; such foul pollution is
To be whipped from Court: I have now no more use of you,
Return to your trough.

Goth. Must I feed on husks, before I have played the prodigal?

Oct. No, I Will reward
Your service; live in your own element
Like an honest man; all that is mine in the cottage
I freely give you.

Goth. Your Bottles too, that I carry for your own tooth?

Oct. Full as they are.

Asc. And gold, that will replenish 'em.

Goth. I am made for ever, this was done in the nick.

Oct. Why in the nick?

Goth. O sir, 'twas well for me that you did reward my service
Before you entered the Court; for it is reported
There is a drink of Forgetfulness, which once tasted,
Few masters think of their servants, who grown old,
Are turned off like lame hounds and hunting-horses,
To starve on the Commons.

Alonz. Bitter Knave! there is craft in the clouted shoo. Captain!

Enter Martino.
Mart. I am glad to kiss
Your valiant hand, and yours: but pray you take notice
My title's changed, I am a Colonel.

Pisa. A Colonel! where is your Regiment?

Mart. Not raised yet;
All the old ones are cashiered, and we are now
To have a new Militia. All is peace here,
Yet I hold my title still, as many do
That never saw an Enemy.

Alonz. You are pleasant,
And it becomes you. Is the Duke stirring?

Mar. Long since,
Four hours at least, but yet not ready.

Pisa. How?

Mart. Even so; you make a wonder often, but leave it:
Alas, he is not now (sir) in the Camp,
To be up and armed upon the least alarm;
There Is something else to be thought on.
Here he comes, with his Officers, new rigged.

Enter Lorenzo, Doctor, Gent. Page (employed about him as from his chamber.)
Alon. A looking-glass!
Upon my head he saw not his own face
These seven years past, but by reflection
From a bright armor.

Mart. Be silent, and observe.

Lor. So, have you done yet?
Is your building perfect?

Doct. If your Highness please, here is a water.

Lor. To what use? my Barber
Has washed my face already.

Doct. But this water
Has a strange virtue in it, beyond his art;
It is a sacred Relic, part of that
Most powerful Juice, which with Medea made
Old AEson young.

Lor. A fable; but suppose
I should give credit to it, will it work
The same effect on me?

Doct. I Will undertake
This will restore the honored hair that grows
Upon your Highness head and chin, a little
Inclining unto gray.

Lor. Inclining! Doctor:

Doct. Pardon me, mighty sir, I went too far,
Not gray at all; I dare not flatter you,
It Is something changed, but this applied will help it
To the first amber-colour, every hair
As fresh as when, your manhood in the prime,
Your Grace arrived at thirty.

Lor. Very well.

Doct. Then here is a precious oil (to which the maker
Has not yet given a name) will soon fill up
These dimples in your face and front. I grant
They are terrible to your enemies, and set off
Your frowns with majesty: but you may please
To know (as sure you do) a smooth aspect,
Softness and sweetness, in the Court of Love,
Though dumb, are the prevailing Orators.

Lor. Will he new create me?

Doct: If you daign to taste too
Of this Confection.

Lor. I am in health, and need no physic.

Doct. Physic sir! an Empress
(If that an Empress lungs, sir, may be tainted
With putrefaction) would taste of it
That night on which she were to print a kiss
Upon the lips of her long absent Lord,
Returning home with conquest.

Lor. It is predominant
Over a stinking breath, is it not Doctor?

Doct. Clothe the infirmity with sweeter language,
It Is a preservative that way.

Lor. You are then admitted to the Cabinets of great Ladies,
And have the government of the borrowed beauties,
Of such as write near forty?

Doct. True, my good Lord, and my attempts have prosper'd.

Lor. Did you never minister to the Princess?

Doct. Sir, not yet;
She Is in the April of her youth, and needs not
The aids of art, my gracious Lord: but in
The Autumn of her age I may be useful,
And sworn her Highness Doctor, and your Grace partake
Of the delight.

Lor. Slave! Witch! Impostor! [Kicks him]
Mountebank! Cheater! Traitor to great Nature,
In thy presumption to repair what she
In her immutable decrees designed
For some few years to grow up, and then wither
Or is it not crime enough thus to betray
The secrets of the weaker sex, thy patients,
But thou must make the honor of this age
And envy of the time to come, Matilda,
(Whose sacred name I bow to) guilty of
A future sin in thy ill-boding thoughts,
Which for a perpetuity of youth
And pleasure she disdains to act, such is
Her purity and innocencce?
His foot on the Doctors breast.

Alonz. Long since I looked for this Lenvoy.

Mart. Would I were well off!
He Is dangerous in these humors.

Oct. Stand concealed.

Doct. O sir, have mercy! in my thought I never
Offended you.

Lor. Me? most of all, thou monster:
What a Mock-man property in thy intent
Would thou have made me? a mere Pathick to
Thy devilish art, had I given suffrage to it.
Are my gray hairs, the ornament of age,
And held a blessing by the wiseft men,
And for such warranted by holy Writ,
To be concealed, as if they were my shame?
Or plaster up these furrows in my face,
As if I were a painted Bawd or Whore?
By such base means if that I could ascend
To the height of all my hopes, their full fruition
Would not wipe off the scandal. No, thou wretch,
Thy cozening Water and adulterate Oil
I thus pour in thine eyes, and tread to dust
Thy loathed Confection, with thy trumperies:
Vanish for ever.

Mart. You have your fee, as I take it,
Dear Domine Doctor! I Will be no sharer with you.
Exit Doctor.
Lor. I Will court her like my self; these rich adornments
And Jewels, worn by me an absolute Prince,
My Order too, of which I am the Sovereign,
Can meet no ill construction: yet it is far
From my imagination to believe
She can be taken with sublimed clay,
The Silkworms spoils, or rich Embroderies;
Nor must I borrow helps from power or greatness,
But as a loyal Lover plead my cause,
If I can feelingly express my ardor,
And make her sensible of the much I suffer
In hopes and fears, and she vouchsafe to take
Compassion on me, -- Ha! compassion?
The word sticks in my throat: what is here that tells me
I do descend too low? rebellious spirit,
I conjure thee to leave me: there is now
No contradiction or declining left,
I must and will go on.

Mart. The tempest's laid; you may present your selves:

Alon. My gracious Lord!

Pisa. Your humble Vassal.

Lor. Ha! both living?

Alon. Sir, we owe our lives to this good Lord, and make it
Our humble suit --

Lor. Plead for your selves: we stand
Yet unresolved whether your knees or prayers
Can save the forfeiture of your own heads:
Though we have put our armor off, your pardon
For leaving the Camp without our license
Is not yet signed. At some more fit time wait us.
Ex. Lor. and Attendants.
Alon. How Is this?

Mart. It Is well it is no worse; I met with
A rougher entertainment, yet I had
Good cards to show: He Is parcel mad, you will find him
Every hour in a several mood, this foolish Love
Is such a shuttlecock; but all will be well
When a better fit comes on him, never doubt it:
Exeunt.
Enter Gonzaga, Uberti, Farneze, Manfroy.
Gonz. How do you find her?

Uber. Thankful for my service,
And yet she gives me little hope; my Rival
Is too great for me.

Gonz. The great Duke you mean.

Uber. Who else? the Millanois (although he be
A complete Gentleman) I am sure despairs more then my self.

Far. A high estate, with women,
Takes place of all desert.

Uber. I must stand my fortune.

Enter Lorenzo and Attendants.
Manf. The Duke of Florence! sir.

Gonz. Your Highness presence
Answers my wish. Your private ear: -- I have used
My best persuasion with a Fathers power
To work my daughter to your ends; yet she
Like a small Bark on a tempestuous sea
Tossed here and there by opposite winds, resolves not
At which port to put in, this Prince's merits,
Your grace and favor; nor is she unmindful
Of the brave acts (under your pardon sir
I needs must call them so) Hortensio
Has done to gain her good opinion of him:
All these together tumbling in her fancy,
Do much distract her; I have spies upon her,
And am assured this instant hour she gives
Hortensio private audience; I will bring you
Where we will see and hear all.

Lor. You oblige me.

Uber. I do not like this whispering.

Gonz. Fear no foul play.
Exeunt.
Enter Galeazo, and two Waiting-women.
1 Woe. The Princess, sir, long since expected you;
And would I beg a thanks, I could tell you that
I have often moved her for you.

Gal. I am your servant.

Enter Matilda.
Beat. She Is come; there are others I must place to hear
The conference.
Exit.
1 Woe. Is It your Excellencies pleasure that we attend you?

Mat. No, wait me in the gallery.

1 Woe. Would each of us, Wench, had a Sweetheart too!
To pass away the time:

2 Woe. There I join with you.
Ex. Waiting-women.
Mat. I fear this is the last time we shall meet.

Gal. Heaven forbid!

Enter (above) Beatrix, Lorenzo, Gonzaga, Uberti, Farneze.
Mat. O my Hortensio!
In me behold the misery of Greatness,
And that which you call Beauty: had I been
Of a more low condition, I might
Have called my will and faculties mine own,
Not seeing that which was to be beloved
With others eyes: But now, ay me, most wretched
And miserable Princess! in my fortune
To be too much engaged for service done me,
It being impossible to make satisfaction
To my so many Creditors, (all deserving)
I can keep touch with none.

Lor. A sad Exordiam.

Mat. You loved me long, and without hope, (alas,
I die to think on it!) Parma's Prince invited
With a too partial report of what
I was, and might be to him, left his Country
To fight in my defense. Your brave achievements
In The war, and what you did for me, unspoken,
(Because I would not force the sweetness of
Your modesty to a blush) are written here.
And that there might be nothing wanting to
Sum up my numerous engagements (never
In my hopes to be cancelled) the great Duke
Our mortal enemy, when my Fathers Country
Lay open to his fury, and the spoil
Of the victorious Army, and I brought
Into his power, has shown himself so
Noble, so full of honor, temperance,
And all virtues that can set off a Prince,
That though I cannot render him that respect
I would, I am bound in thankfulness to admire him.

Gal. It Is acknowledged, and on your part to be returned.

Mat. How can I,
Without the brand of foul ingratitude
To you, and Prince Uberti?

Gal. Hear me, Madam,
And what your servant shall with zeal deliver,
As a Dedalean clew may guide you out of
This labyrinth of distraction. He that loves
His Mistress truly, should prefer her honor
And peace of mind, above the glutting of
His ravenous appetite: He should affect from her,
But with a fit restraint, and not take her
To give himself: He should make it the height
Of his ambition, if it lie in
His stretched out nerves to effect it, though she fly in
An eminent place, to add strength to her wings,
And mount her higher, though he fall himself
Into the bottomless Abyss; or else
The services he offers are not real,
But counterfeit.

Mat. What can Hortensio infer from this?

Gal. That I stand bound in duty
(Though in the act I take my last farewell
Of comfort in this life) to sit down willingly,
And move my suit no further. I confess,
While you were in danger, and Heavens mercy made me
Its instrument to preserve you, (which your goodness
Prized far above the merit) I was bold
To feed my starved affection with false hopes
I might be worthy of you: For know, Madam,
How mean soever I appeared in Mantua,
I had in expectation a fortune,
Though not possessed often, that encouraged me
With confidence to prefer my suit, and not
To fear the Prince Uberti as my Rival.

Gonz: I ever thought him more then what he seemed.

Lor. Pray you forbear.

Gal. But when the Duke of Florence
Put in his plea, in my consideration
Weighing well what he is, as you must grant him,
A Mars of men in Arms; and those put off,
The great example for a Kingly Courtier
To imitate: Annex to these his wealth,
Of such a large extent, as other Monarchs
Call him the King of Coin; and what is above all.
His lawful love, with all the happiness
This life can fancy, from him flowing to you;
The true affection which I have ever borne you,
Does not alone command me to desist,
But as a faithful Councellor to advise you
To meet and welcome that felicity
Which hastes to crown your virtues.

Mat. We must break off this parley.
Something I have to say.
[Exe: above]
Mat. In tears I thank
Your care of my advancement; but I dare not
Follow your council: Shall such piety
Pass unrewarded? such a pure affection,
For any ends of mine, be undervalu'd?
Avert it Heaven! I will be thy Matilda,
Or cease to be; No other heat but what
Glows from thy purest flames, shall warm this bosom;
Nor Florence, nor all Monarchs of the earth
Shall keep thee from me.

Enter Lorenzo, Gonzaga, Uberti, Farneze, Manfroy, two Waiting-women.
Gal. I fear, gracious Lady,
Our conference has been oreheard.

Mat. The better:
Your part is acted; give me leave at distance
To zanie it, sir, on my knees thus prostrate
Before your feet.

Lor. This must not be, I shall
Both wrong my self and you in suffering it.

Mat. I will grow here, and weeping thus turn marble,
Unless you hear and grant the first petition
A virgin, and a Princess ever tendered:
Nor does the suit concern poor me alone,
It has a strong reference to you
And to your honor; and if you deny it,
Both ways you suffer. Remember, sir, you were not
Born only for your self; Heavens liberal hand
Designed you to command a potent Nation,
Gave you heroic valor, which you have
Abused in making unjust war upon
A neighbor Prince, a Christian; while the Turk,
Whose scourge and terror you should be, securely
Wastes the Italian Confines: it is in you
To force him to pull in his horned Crescents,
And it is expected from you.

Lor. I have been in a dream, and now begin to wake.

Mat. And will you forbear to reap the harvest of such glories,
Now ripe and at full growth, for the embraces
Of a flight woman? or exchange your triumphs
For chamber-pleasures? melt your able nerves
(That should with your victorious sword make way
Through the Armies of your Enemies) in loose
And wanton dalliance? Be your self, great sir,
The thunderbolt of war, and scorn to sever
Two hearts long since united: your example
May teach the Prince Uberti to subscribe
To that which you allow of.

Lor. The same tongue
That charmed my sword out of my hand, and threw
A frozen numness on my active spirit,
Has dis-enchanted me. Rise, fairest Princess!
And that it may appear I do receive
Your council as inspired from heaven, I will
Obey and follow it: I am your debtor,
And must confess you have lent my weakened reason
New strengths once more to hold a full command
Over my passions. Here to the world
I freely do profess that I disclaim
All interest in you, and give up my title
Such as it is, to you sir: and as far
As I have power, thus join your hands.

Gonz. To yours I add my full consent.

Uber. I am lost, Farneze.

Far: Nearer to the port then you suppose:
In me our laws speak, and forbid this contract.

Mat. Ay me! new stops!

Gat. Shall we be ever crossed thus?

Far. There is an Act upon record, confirmed
By your wise predecessors, that no Heir
Of Mantua (as questionless the Princess
Is the undoubted one) must be joined in marriage,
But where the match may strengthen the estate
And safety of the Dukedom. Now this Gentleman,
However I must style him honorable,
And of a high desert, having no power
To make this good in his alliance, stands
Excluded by our laws: whereas this Prince
Of equal merit, brings to Mantua
The power and Principality of Parma:
And therefore since the great Duke has let fall
His plea, there lives no Prince that justlier can
Challenge the Princess favor.

Lor. Is this true, sir?

Gonz. I cannot contradict it.

Enter Manfroy.
Manf. There Is an Ambassador
From Milain, that desires a present audience;
His business is of highest consequence,
As he affirms: I know him for a man
Of the best rank and quality.

Gal. From Milain?

Gonz. Admit him. -- How? so low!
Enter Ambassador, and Julio with a Letter, which he presents on his knee to
Galeazo.
Amb. I am sorry, sir, to be the bringer of this heavy news:
But since it must be known --

Gal. Peace rest with him,
I shall find fitter time to mourn his loss.
My faithful servant too, Julio!

Jul. I am orejoy'd to see your Highness safe.

Gal. Pray you peruse this,
And there you will find that the objection
The Lord Farneze made, is fully answered.

Gonz. The great John Galeas dead?

Lor. And this his brother, the absolute Lord of Milain.

Mat. I am revived.

Uber. There Is no contending against destiny,
I wish both happiness.

Enter Alonzo, Maria, Octavio, Pisano, Martino.
Lor: Married, Alonzo? I will salute your Lady, she is a fair one,
And seal your pardon on her lips.

Gonz. Octavio, welcome even to my heart! Rise, I should kneel
To thee for mercy.

Oct: The poor remainder of
My age shall truly serve you.

Mat. You resemble a Page I had, Ascanio.

Asc. I am your Highness servant still.

Lor. All stand amazed
At this unlooked for meeting: But defer
Your several stories. Fortune here has shown
Her various power; but Virtue in the end
Is crowned with laurel: Love has done his parts too;
And mutual friendship after bloody jars,
Will cure the wounds received in our wars.
Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
PRay you Gentlemen keep your seats; something I would
Deliver to gain favor, if I could,
To us, and the still doubtful Author. He,
When I desired an Epilogue, answered me,
'Twas to no purpose: He must stand his fate,
Since all entreaties now would come too late;
You being long since resolved what you would say
Of him, or us, as ye rise, or of the Play.
A strange old Fellow! yet this sullen mood
Would quickly leave him, might it be understood
You part not hence displeased. I am designed
To give him certain notice: If you find
Things worth your liking, show it. Hope and Fear,
Though different passions, have the self-same ear.
THE GUARDIAN, A COMICAL-HISTORY.

As it has been often acted at the Private-House in Black-Friars, by his late
MAJESTY'S Servants, with great Applause.

Written by PHILIP MASSENGER, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

PROLOGUE.
AFter twice putting forth to Sea, his Fame
Shipwrack'd in either, and his once known Name
In two years silence buried, perhaps lost
In The general opinion; at our cost
(A zealous sacrifice to Neptune made
For good success in his uncertain trade)
Our Author weighs up anchors, and once more
Forsaking the security of the shore,
Resolves to prove his fortune: What 'twill be,
Is not in him, or us to prophecy;
You only can assure us. Yet he prayed
This little in his absence might be said,
Designing me his Orator. He submits
To the grave censure of those abler Wits
His weakness; nor dares he profess that when
The Critiques laugh, he will laugh at them again.
(Strange self-love in a writer!) He would know
His errors as you find 'em, and bestow
His future, studies to reform from this
What in another might be judged amiss.
And yet despair not, Gentlemen; though he fear
His strengths to please, we hope that you shall hear
Some things so writ, as you may truly say
He has not quite forgot to make a Play,
As it is with malice rumored: His intents
Are fair; and though he want the complements
Of wide-mouthed Promisers, who still engage
(Before their Works are brought upon the Stage)
Their parasites to proclaim 'em: This last birth
Delivered without noise, may yield such mirth,
As balanced equally, will cry down the boast
Of arrogance, and regain his credit lost.
Dramatis Personae.
ALphonso, King of Naples. General of Milain. Severino, a Nobleman banished.
Monteclaro, his Brother in law, disguised. Durazzo, the Guardian. Caldoro, his
Ward, in love with Caliste. Adorio, Beloved by Caliste. Camillo Neapolitan
Gentlemen. Lentulo Donato Cario, Servant to Adorio. Claudio, Servant to
Severino. Captains. Servants. Bandetti.
Jolantre, Wife to Severino. Caliste, her Daughter. Mirtilla, Caliste's Maid.
Calipso, the Confident of Jolantre.
THE GUARDIAN.
Act. I. Sceen. I.
Enter Durazzo, Camillo, Lentulo, and Donato; two Servants.
Dur. TEll me of his expenses? Which of you
Stands bound for a gazet? he spends his own;
And you impertinent Fools, or Knaves, make choice
Of either title, which your Signiorships please,
To meddle in it.

Came. Your age gives privilege to this harsh language.

Dur. My age! do not use
That word again; if you do, I shall grow young,
And swinge you soundly: I would have you know,
Though I write fifty odd, I do not carry
An Almanac in my bones to predeclare
What weather we shall have; nor do I kneel
In adoration at the Spring and Fall
Before my Doctor, for a dose or two
Of his Restoratives, which are things I take it
You are familiar with.

Came. This is from the purpose.

Dur. I cannot cut a caper, or groan like vou
When I have done, nor run away so nimbly
Out of the field. But bring me to a Fence-school,
And crack a blade or two for exercise,
Ride a barb'd horse, or take a leap after me
Following my hounds or hawks, (and by your leave
At a gamesom Mistress) and you shall confess
I am in the May of my abilities,
And you in your December.

Lent. We are glad you bear your years so well.

Dur. My years! No more of years; if you do, at your peril.

Came. We desire not
To prove your valor.

Dur. It Is your safest course.

Came. But as friends to your fame and reputation,
Come to instruct you: Your too much indulgence
To the exorbitant waste of young Caldoro
Your Nephew and your Ward, has rendered you
But a bad report among wise men in Naples.

Dur. Wise men? in your opinion; but to me
That understand my self and them, they are
Hide-bounded mony-mongers: they would have me
Train up my Ward a hopeful youth, to keep
A Merchants book, or at the plough, and clothe him
In Canvas or course Cotton; while I fell
His Woods, grant Leases, which he must make good
When he comes to age, or be compelled to marry
With a cast whore and three bastards: Let him know
No more then how to cipher well, or do
His tricks by the square root; grant him no pleasure
But Coyts and Nine-pins; suffer him to converse
With none but Clowns and Cobblers, as the Turk says:
Poverty, old age, and aches of all seasons
Light on such heathenish Guardians:

Don. You do worse
To the ruin of his state, under your favor,
In feeding his loose riots.

Dur. Riots! what riots?
He wears rich clothes, I do so; keeps horses, games, and wenches;
It Is not amiss, so it be done with decorum:
In an Heir it is ten times more excusable
Then to be over-thrifty. Is there ought else
That you can charge him with?

Came. With what we grieve for,
And you will not approve.

Dur. Out with it, man:

Came. His rash endeavor, without your consent,
To match himself into a Family
Not gracious with the times.

Dur. It Is still the better;
By this means he shall escape Court-visitants,
And not be eaten out of house and home
In a Summer-progress. But does he mean to marry?

Came. Yes sir, to marry.

Dur. In a beardless chin
It Is ten times worse then wenching. Family! whose family?

Came. Signior Severnio's.

Dur. How? not he that killed
The brother of his wife (as it is rumored)
Then fled upon it; since proscribed, and chosen
Captain of the Banditi; the Kings pardon
On no suit to be granted?

Lent. The same, sir.

Dur. This touches near: How is his love returned
By the Saint he worships?

Don. She affects him not, but dotes upon another.

Dur. Worse and worse.

Came. You know him, young Adorio.

Dur. A brave Gentleman! what proof of this?

Lent. I dogged him to the Church;
Where he, not for devotion, as I ghess,
But to make his approaches to his Mistress,
Is often seen.

Came: And would you stand concealed
Among these trees, for he must pass this green,
The Mattins ended, as she returns home,
You may observe the passages.

Dur. I thank you; this torrent must be stopped.

Enter Adorio, Caliste, Mirtilla, Caldoro (muffel'd.)
Don. They come.

Came. Stand close.

Call. I know I wrong my modesty.

Ador. And wrong me,
In being so importunate for that
I neither can nor must grant.

Call. A hard sentence! and to increase my misery, by you
Whom fond affection has made my Judge,
Pronounced without compassion. Alas sir,
Did I approach you with unchaste desires,
A sullid reputation; were deformed,
As it may be I am, though many affirm
I am something more then handsome.

Dur. I dare swear it.

Calist. Or if I were no Gentlewoman, but bred coursely,
You might with some pretense of reason slight
What you should sue for.

Dur. Were he not an Eunuch,
He would, and sue again; I am sure I should.
Pray look in my collar, a flea troubles me:
Hey-day! there are a legion of young Cupids
At barley-break in my breeches.

Calist. Hear me sir; though you continue, nay increase your scorn,
Only vouchsafe to let me understand
What my defects are; of which once convinced,
I will hereafter silence my harsh plea;
And spare your further trouble.

Ador. I Will tell you, and bluntly, as my usual manner is,
Though I were a Woman-hater, which I am not,
But love the sex, for my ends; take me with you:
If in my thought I found one taint or blemish
In the whole fabric of your outward features,
I would give my self the lie. You are a Virgin
Possessed of all your mother could wish in you:
Your father Severino's dire disaster
In killing of your Uncle, which I grieve for,
In no part taking from you. I repeat it;
A noble Virgin, for whose grace and favors
The Italian Princes might contend as Rivals;
Yet unto me a thing far, far beneath you.
A noted Libertine I profess my self:
In your mind there does appear one fault so gross,
Nay, I might say unpardonable at your years,
If justly you consider it, that I cannot
As you desire, affect you.

Calist. Make me know it, I Will soon reform it.

Ador. Would you would keep your word.

Call. Put me to the test.

Ador. I will. You are too honest,
And like your mother, too strict and religious,
And talk too soon of marriage: I shall break,
If at that rate I purchase you. Can I part with
My uncurb'd liberty, and on my neck
Wear such a heavy yoke? hazard my fortunes,
With all the expected joys my life can yield me,
For one commodity before I prove it?
Venus forbid on both sides; let crook'd hams,
Bald heads, declining shoulders, furrowed cheeks
Be awed by ceremonies: If you love me
In The way young people should, I Will fly to meet it,
And we'll meet merrily.

Call. It Is strange such a man can use such language.

Ador. In my tongue my heart
Speaks freely, fair one! Think upon it, a close friend
Or private Mistress, is Court-rhetorick;
A Wife, mere rustic Solecism. So good morrow.

Came. How like you this?
Adorio offers to go, is staid by Caldoro.
Dur. A well-bred Gentleman!
I am now thinking if ere in the dark,
Or drunk I met his mother? He must have
Some drops of my blood in him; for at his years
I was much of his religion.

Came. Out upon you!

Don. The Colts tooth still in your mouth?

Dur. What means this whispering?

Ador. You may perceive I seek not to displant you,
Where you desire to grow: For further thanks,
It Is needless complement.

Call. There are some natures
Which blush to owe a benefit, if not
Received in corners; holding it an impairing
To their own worth, should they acknowledge it.
I am made of other clay, and therefore must
Trench so far on your leisure, as to win you
To lend a patient ear, while I profess
Before my glory, though your scorn, Calist'e,
How much I am your servant.

Ador. My designs are not so urgent, but they can dispense
With so much time.

Came. Pray you now observe your Nephew.

Dur. How he looks! like a Schoolboy that had played the Truant,
And went to be breech'd.

Called. Madam!

Calist. A new affliction:
Your suit offends as much as his repulse,
It being not to be granted.

Mirt. Hear him Madam,
His sorrow is not personated; he deserves
Your pity, not contempt.

Dur. He has made the Maid his;
And as the Master of the Art of Love
Wisely affirms, it is a kind of passage
To the Mistress favor.

Called. I come not to urge
My merit to deserve you, since you are,
Weighed truly to your worth, above all value:
Much less to argue you of want of judgment
For following one that with winged feet flies from you;
While I, at all parts (without boast) his equal,
In vain pursue you; bringing those flames with me,
Those lawful flames, (for Madam know, with other
I never shall approach you) which Adorio
In scorn of Hymen and religious rites
With atheistical impudence contemns,
And in his loose attempt to undermine
The fortress of your honor, seeks to ruin
All holy Altars by clear minds erected
To Virgin-honor.

Dur. My Nephew is an ass,
What a devil has he to do with Virgin-honor,
Altars, or lawful flames? when he should tell her
They are superstitious nothings, and speak to the purpose,
Of the delight to meet in the old dance
Between a pair of sheets; my Grandame called it
The peopling of the world.

Calist. How, gentle sir? to vindicate my honor, that is needless;
I dare not fear the worst aspersion malice
Can throw upon it.

Called. Your sweet patience, Lady, and more then
Dove-like innocence renders you
Insensible of an injury, for which
I deeply suffer. Can you undergo
The scorn of being refused? I must confess
It makes for my ends; for had he embraced
Your gracious offers tendered him, I had been
In my own hopes forsaken; and if yet
There can breathe any air of comfort in me,
To his contempt I owe it: but his ill
No more shall make way for my good intents,
Then virtue powerful in her self, can need
The aids of vice.

Ador. You take that license, sir, which yet I never granted.

Called. I Will force more, nor will I for mine own ends undertake it,
As I will make apparent) but to do
A justice to your sex, with mine own wrong
And irrecoverable loss. To thee I turn,
Thou goatish Ribaud, in whom lust is grown
Defensible, the last descent to hell,
Which gapes wide for thee: Look upon this Lady,
And on her fame, (if it were possible
Fairer then she is) and if base desires
And beastly appetite will give thee leave,
Consider how she sought thee, how this Lady
In a noble way desired thee: Was she fashioned
In an inimitable mould, (which nature broke,
The great work perfected) to be made a slave
To thy libidinous twines, and when commanded
To be used as physic after drunken surfets?
Mankind should rise against thee: What even now
I heard with horror, showed like blasphemy,
And as such I will punish it.
He strikes Adorio, the rest make in, they all draw.

Calist. Murder!

Mir. Help!

Dur. After a whining Prologue, who would have looked for
Such a rough Catastophre? Nay, come on, fear nothing:
Never till now my Nephew. And do you hear sir,
(And yet I love thee too) if you take the wench now
I Will have it posted first, then chronicled,
Thou were beaten to it.

Ador. You think you have shown
A memorable masterpiece of valor
In doing this in public; and it may
Perhaps deserve her shoo-string for a favor:
Wear it without my envy; but expect
For this affront, when time serves, I shall call you
To a strict account.
Exeunt.
Dur. Hook on, follow him Harpies,
You may feed upon this business for a month,
If you manage it handsomely: when two heirs quarrel,
The swordmen of the City shortly after
Appear in Plush, for their grave consultations
In taking up the difference;
Some I know make a set living on it. Nay, let him go,
Thou art master of the field; enjoy thy fortune
With moderation: For a flying foe,
Discreet and provident Conquerors build up
A bridge of gold. To thy mistress, boy! if I were
I'thy shirt, how I could nick it!

Called. You stand, Madam, as you were rooted, and I more then fear
My passion has offended: I perceive
The roses frighted from your cheeks, and paleness
T'usurp their room; yet you may please to ascribe it
To my excess of love, and boundless ardor
To do you right; for my self I have done nothing.
I will not curse my stars, howere assured
To me you are lost for ever: For suppose
Adorio slain, and by my hand, my life
Is forfeited to the law; which I contemn,
So with a tear or two you would remember
I was your martyr, and died in your service.

Calist. Alas, you weep! and in my just compassion
Of what you suffer, I were more then marble,
Should I not keep you company: You have sought
My favors nobly, and I am justly punished
In wild Adorio's contempt and scorn
For my ingratitude, it is no better,
To your deservings: Yet such is my fate,
Though I would, I cannot help it. O Caldoro!
In our misplaced affection I prove
Too soon, and with dear bought experience, Cupid
Is blind indeed, and has mistook his arrows.
If it be possible, learn to forget:
And yet that punishment is too light; to hate
A thankless Virgin, practice it; and may
Your due consideration that I am so,
In your imagination disperse
Lothsom deformity upon this face
That has bewitched you. More I cannot say,
But that I truly pity you, and wish you
A better choice, which in my prayers (Caldoro)
I ever will remember.
Ex. Caliste, Mirtilla.
Dur. It Is a sweet rogue: why how now? thunderstruck?

Called. I am not so happy: Oh that I were but master of my self,
You soon should see me nothing.

Dur. What would you do?

Called. With one stab give a fatal period
To my woes and life together.

Dur. For a Woman! better the kind were lost, and generation maintained a new
way.

Called. Pray you sir forbear this profane language.

Dur. Pray you be you a man,
And whimper not like a girl: All shall be well,
As I live it shall; this is no Hectique fever,
But a Lovesick ague easy to be cured,
And I Will be your Physician, so you subscribe
To my directions. First you must change
This City whorish air, for'tis infected,
And my potions will not work here, I must have you
To my Country-villa: Rise before the sun,
Then make a breakfast of the morning-dew
Served up by nature on some grassie hill;
You Will find it Nectar, and far more cordial
Then Cullises, Cock-broth, or your distillations
Of a hundred crowns a quart.

Called. You talk of nothing.

Dur. This taken as a preparative to strengthen
Your queasie stomach, vault into your saddle;
With all this flesh I can do it without a stirrup:
My hounds uncoupled, and my huntsmen ready,
You shall hear such music from their tunable mouths
That you will say the Viol, Harp, Theorbo,
Nere made such ravishing harmony, from the groves
And neighboring Woods, with frequent iterations,
Enamored of the cry, a thousand eccho's
Repeating it.

Called. What Is this to me?

Dur. It shall be, and you give thanks for it. In the afternoon
(For we will have variety of delights)
We'll to the field again, no game shall rise
But we'll be ready for it; if a Hare, my Greyhounds
Shall make a course; for the Pie or Jay, a Sparhawk
Flies from the Fist; the Crow so near pursued,
Shall be compelled to seek protection under
Our Horses bellies; a Hearn put from her siege,
And a Pistol shot off in her breech, shall mount
So high, that to your view she will seem to soar
Above the middle Region of the Air.
A cast of Haggard Falcons, by me manned,
Eying the prey at first, appear as if
They did turn tail, but with their laboring wings
Getting above her, with a thought their pinions
Cleaving the purer Element, make in,
And by turns bind with her; the frighted Fowl,
Lying at her defense upon her back,
With her dreadful Beak, a while defers her death,
But by degrees forced down, we part the fray
And feast upon her.

Called. This cannot be, I grant, but pretty pastime,

Dur. Pretty pastime, Nephew!
It Is royal sport, then for an Evening flight
A Tercel gentle, which I call my Masters,
As he were sent a Messenger to the Moon,
In such a place flies, as he seems to say,
See me, or see me not, the Partridge sprung,
He makes his stoop; but wanting breath, is forced
To cancellior, then with such speed, as if
He carried Lightning in his Wings, he strikes
The trembling Bird; who even in death appears
Proud to be made his quarry.

Called. Yet all this, is nothing to Caliste.

Dur. Thou shall find twenty Calistes there, for every night
A fresh, and lusty one; I Will give thee a Ticket,
In which my name, Durazzo's name subscribed,
My Tenants Nutbrown daughters, wholesome Girls,
At midnight shall contend to do thee service.
I have bred them up to it; should their Fathers murmr,
Their Leases are void; for that is a main point
In my Indentures: And when we make our progress
There is no entertainment perfect, if
This last dish be not offered.

Called. You make me smile.

Dur. I Will make thee laugh outright. My horses, knaves!
It Is but six short hours riding: yet ere night
Thou shall be an altered man.

Called. I wish I may, sir.
Exeunt:
Enter Jolante, Caliste, Calypso, Mirtilla.
Jol. I had spies upon you Minion; the relation
Of your behavionr was at home before you:
My daughter to hold parley, from the Church too,
With noted Libertines? her fame and favors
The quarrel of their swords?

Calist. 'Twas not in me to help it, Madam.

Jol. No? how have I lived?
My neighbor knows my manners have been such,
That I presume I may affirm, and boldly,
In no particular action of my life
I can be justly censured.

Calyp. Censured, Madam? what Lord or Lady lives, worthy to sit
A competent Judge on you?

Calist. Yet black detraction will find faults where they are not.

Calyp. Her foul mouth
Is stopped, you being the object: Give me leave
To speak my thoughts, yet still under correction;
And if my young Lady and her woman here,
With reverence they may be edifi'd.
You are my gracious Patroness and supportress,
And I your poor observer, nay your creature
Fed by your bounties; and but that I know
Your Honor detests flattery, I might say
(And with an emphasis) You are the Lady
Admired and envied at, far, far above
All imitation of the best of women
That are or ever shall be. This is truth:
I dare not be obsequious; and 'twould ill
Become my gravity, and wisdom gleaned
From your oraculous Ladyship, to act
The part of a she-parasite

Jol. If you do, I never shall acknowledge you

Calist. Admirable! this is no flattery.

Mirt. 'Do not interrupt her:
It Is such a pleasing itch to your Lady-mother,
That she may peradventure forget us,
To feed on her own praises.

Jol. I am not so far in debt to age, but if I would
Listen to men's bewitching sorceries,
I could be courted.

Calyp. Rest secure of that; all the Braveries of the City run mad for you,
And yet your virtue's such, not one attempts you.

Jol. I keep no mankind servant in my house,
In fear my chastity may be suspected:
How is that voic'd in Naples?

Calyp. With loud applause, I assure your Honor.

Jol. It confirms I can command my sensual appetites.

Calyp. As vassals to your more then masculine reason that commands 'em:
Your palace styled a Nunnery of pureness,
In which not one lascivious thought dares enter,
Your clear soul standing Sentinel.

Mirt. Well said, Echo.

Jol. Yet I have tasted those delights which women
So greedily long for, know their titillations;
And when with danger of his head thy father
Comes to give comfort to my widowed sheets,
As soon as his desires are satisfied,
I can with ease forget 'em.

Calyp. Observe that,
It being indeed remarkable: it is nothing
For a simple Maid that never had her hand
In the hony-pot of pleasure, to forbear it;
But such as have licked there, and licked there often,
And felt the sweetness often. --

Mirt. How her mouth runs over with rank imagination!

Calyp. If such can,
As I urged before, the kickshaw being offered
Refuse to take it, like my matchless Madam,
They may be Sainted.

Jol. I Will lose no more breath
In fruitless reprehension; look to it,
I Will have thee wear this habit of my mind,
As of my body.

Calyp. Seek no other president:
In all the books of Amadis de Gaul,
The Palmerins, and that true Spanish story
The Mirror of Knighthood, which I have read often,
Read feelingly, nay more, I do believe in it
My Lady has no parallel.

Jol. Do not provoke me.
If from this minute, thou ere stir abroad,
Write Letter or receive one, or presume
To look upon a man, though from a Window,
I Will chain thee like a slave in some dark corner;
Proscribe thy daily labor: Which omitted,
Expect the usage of a Fury from me,
Not an indulgent Mothers, Come Calypso.

Calyp. Your Ladyships injunctions are so easy,
That I dare pawn my credit, my young Lady
And her woman shall obey'em.
Exeunt Jol. Calyp.
Mirtil. You shall fry first
For a rotten piece of dry Touchwood, and give fire
To the great Fiends Nostrils, when he smokes Tobacco.
Note the injustice Madam; they would have us
Being young and hungry, keep a perpetual Lent,
And the whole year to them a Carnivale.
Easy injunctions, with a mischief to you:
Suffer this, and suffer all.

Caliste. Not stir abroad!
The use and pleasure of our eyes denied us?

Mirt. Insufferable.

Call. Nor write, nor yet receive an amorous Letter!

Mirt: Not to be endured.

Call. Nor look upon a man out of a Windore.

Mirt. Flat tyranny, insupportable tyranny
To a Lady of your Blood.

Call. She is my Mother, and how I should decline it?

Mirt. Run away from't, take any course,

Call. But without means Mirtilla, how shall we live?

Mirt. What a question's that; as if
A bucksom Lady could want maintenance
In any place in the World, where there are Men,
Wine, Meat, or Money stirring.

Call. Be you more modest,
Or seek some other Mistress: Rather then
In a thought or dream, I will consent to ought
That may take from my honor, I Will endure
More then my Mother can impose upon me.

Mirt. I grant your honor is a specious dressing,
But without conversation of men,
A kind of nothing; I will not persuade you
To disobedience: Yet my Confessor told me
(And he you know is held a learned Clerk)
When Parents do enjoin unnatural things,
Wise Children may evade 'em. She may as well
Command when you are hungry, not to eat,
Or drink, or sleep; and yet all these are easy
Compared with the not seeing of a man,
As I persuade no farther, but to you
There is no such necessity; you have means
To shun your Mothers rigor.

Call. Lawful means?

Mirt. Lawful, and pleasing too, I will not urge
Caldoro's loyal love, you being averse to it,
Make trial of Adorio.

Call. And give up my honor to his lust.

Mirt. There Is no such thing
Intended, Madam; in few words write to him
What slavish hours you spend under your Mother,
That you desire not present marriage from him,
But as a noble Gentleman to redeem you
From the tyranny you suffer. With your Letter
Present him some rich Jewel; you have one,
In which the Rape of Proserpine, in little
Is to the life expressed. I Will be the Messenger
With any hazard, and at my return,
Yield you a good account often.

Galist. It Is a business to be considered of.

Mirt. Consideration, when the converse of your
Lover is in question,
Is of no moment: If she would allow you
A Dancer in the morning to well breathe you,
A Songster in the afternoon, a Servant
To air you in the evening; give you leave
To see the Theater twice a week, to mark
How the old Actors decay, the young sprout up,
A fitting observation, you might bear it;
But not to see, or talk, or touch a man,
Abominable!

Galist. Do not my blushes speak
How willingly I would assent?

Mirt: Sweet Lady,
Do something to deserve 'em, and blush after.
Exeunt.
Act. 2. Scaen. 1.
Enter Jolante, Calypso.
Jol. ANd are these Frenchmen, as you say, such Gallants?

Calyp. Gallant and active; their free breeding knows not
The Spanish and Italian preciseness
Practiced among us. What we call immodest,
With them is styled bold Courtship: they dare fight
Under a Veivet-Ensign at fourteen.

Jol. A Petticoat you mean.

Calyp. You are in the right;
Let a Mistress wear it under an armor of proof,
They are not to be beaten off.

Jol. You are merry Neighbor.

Calyp. I fool to make you so, pray you observe 'em.
They are the forwardest Monsieurs; born Physicians
For the malady of young Wenches, and never miss,
I ow my life to one of 'em, when I was
A raw young thing, not worth the ground I trod on;
And longed to dip my Bread in Tar, my Lips
As blue as Salt Water, he came up roundly to me,
And cured me in an instant, Venus be praised for it.

Enter Alphonso, General, Monteclaro, Attendants, and Captain.
Jol. They come, leave prating.

Col. I am dumb, an'c like your honor.

Alph. We will not break the league confirmed between us,
And your great Master; the passage of his Army
Through all our Territories, lies open to him;
Only we grieve that your design for Rome
Commands such haste, as it denies us means
To entertain you, as your worth deserves,
And we would gladly tender.

Genesis Royal Alphonso, the King my Master, your confederate,
Will pay the debt he ows, in Fact, which I
Want words t'express; I must remove to night,
And yet, that your intended favors may not
Be lost, I leave this Gentleman behind me,
To whom you may vouchsafe 'em; I dare say
Without Repentance. I for bear to give
Your Majesty his character; in France
He was a President for Arts and Arms
Alphonso receives Monteclaro
Without a rival, and may prove in Naples
Worthy thy imitation,

Calyp. Is he not Madam
A Monsieur in print? What a garb was there? O rare!
Then how he wears his clothes, and the fashion of 'em.
A main assurance that he is within
All excellent: By this, wise Ladies ever
Make their conjectures.

Jol. Peace, I have observed him
From head to foot.

Calyp. Eye him again, all over.

Monte. It cannot royal Sir, but argue me
Of much presumption, if not impudence,
To be a suitor to your Majesty,
Before I have deserved a gracious grant,
By some employment prosperously archiev'd.
But pardon gracious Sir: when I left France
I made a vow to a bosom Friend of mine
(Which my Lord General, if he please, can witness)
With such humility, as well becomes
A poor Petitioner to desire a Boon He delivers a Petition.
From your magnificence.

Calyp. With what punctual form he does deliver it.

Jol. I have eyes; no more.

Alph. For Severino's pardon, you must excuse me,
I dare not pardon murder:

Monte. His fact Sir, ever submitting to your abler judgment,
Merits a fairer name: He was provoked,
As by unanswerable proofs it is confirmed,
By Monteclaro's rashness; who repining
That Severino, without his consent,
Had married Jolante his sole sister
(It being concleal'd almost for thirteen years)
Though the Gentleman, at all parts, was his equal,
First challenged him, and that declined, he gave him
A blow in public.

Genesis Not to be endured, but by a slave.

Monte. This, great Sir, justly weighed,
You may a little, if you please, take from
The rigor of your Justice, and express
An act of mercy.

Jol. I can hear no more,
This opens an old wound, and makes a new one.
Would it were cicatriz'd, wait me.

Calyp. As your shadow.
Exeunt Jol. Calyp.
Alph. We grant you these are glorious pretenses,
Revenge appearing in the shape of valor,
Which wise Kings must distinguish. The defense
Of Reputation, now made a Bawd
To murder; every trifle falsely styled
An injury, and not to be determined
But by a bloody Duel; though this vice
Has taken root and growth beyond the Mountains
(As France, and in strange fashions her Ape
England can deerly witness, with the loss
Of more brave spirits, then would have stood the shock
Of the Turks army) while Alphonso lives
It shall not here be planted: Move me no further
In this. In what else suiting you to ask,
And me to give, expect a gracious answer,
How ever welcome to our Court, Lord General,
I Will bring you out of the Ports, and then betake you
To your good fortune.

Gen Your Grace overwhelms me.
Exeunt.
Enter Calypso, and Jolante (with a Purse and a Jewel)
Calyp. You are bound to favor him: Mark you how he pleaded
For my Lords pardon.

Jol. That Is indeed a tie; but I have a stronger on me.

Calyp. Say you love
His person, be not ashamed often, he is a man;
For whose embraces though Endimion
Lay sleeping by, Cinthia would leave her orb,
And exchange kisses with him.

Jol. Do not Fan
A fire that burns already to hot in me,
I am in my honor sick, sick to the death,
Never to be recovered.

Calyp. What a coyl's here
For loving a man? It is no Africa wonder,
If like Pasiphae you doted on a Bull,
Indeed't were monstrous: but in this you have
A thousand thousand presidents to excuse you.
A Sea-mans wife may ask relief of her Neighbor
When her husbands bound to the Indies, and not blamed for it;
And many more besides of higher calling,
Though I forbear to name'em: You have a husband,
But as the case stands with my Lord, he is
A kind of no husband; and your Ladyship
As free as a widow can be. I confess
If Ladies should seek change, that have their husbands
At Board and Bed, to pay their marriage duties,
The surest bond of concord, 'twere a fault,
Indeed it were: But for your honor that
Do lie alone so often, Body of me,
I am zealous in your cause; let me take breath

Jol. I apprehend what thou would say: I want all
As means to quench the spurious fire that burns here.

Calyp. Want means while I your Creature live?
I dare not
Be so unthankful.

Jol. Will thou undertake it,
And as an earnest of much more to come
Receive this Jewel, and Purse cramn'd full of Crowns,
How dearly I am forced to buy dishonor.

Calyp. I would do it gratis, but 'twould ill become
My breeding to refuse your honors bounty,
Nay, say no more, all Rhetoric in this
Is comprehended; let me alone to work him,
He shall be yours; that is poor, he is already
At your devotion I will not boast
My faculties this way, but suppose he were
Coy as Adonis, or Hippolitus,
And your desires more hot then Citherea's,
Or wanton Phedras, I will bring him chained
To your embraces, glorying in his Fetters. I have said it.

Jol. Go and prosper, and imagine a salary beyond thy hopes.

Calyp. Sleep you
Secure on either ear, the burdens yours
To entertain him, mine to bring him hither.
Exeunt.
Enter Adorio, Camillo, Lentulo, Donato.
Don. Your wrong's beyond a challenge, and you deal
To fairly with him, if you take that way
To right your self.

Lent. The least that you can do
In The terms of honor is, when next you neet him
To give him the bastinado.

Came. And that done,
Draw out his Sword to cut your own throat. No,
Be ruled by me, show your self an Italian,
And having received one injury, do not put off
Your Hat for a second; there are fellows that
For a few crowns will make him sure, and so
With your revenge, you prevent future misthief.

Ador. I thank you Gentlemen for your studied care
In what concerns my honor; but in that
I Will steer mine own course, yet that you may know
You are still my Cabinet Counselors, my bosom
Lies open to you. I begin to feel
A weariness, nay, satiety of looseness,
And something tells me here, I should repent
My harshneis to Caliste.

Enter Cario (in haste.)
Came. When you please, you may remove that scruple.

Ador. I shall think on it.

Car. Sir, Sir, are you ready?

Ador. To do what? I am sure it is not yet dinner time.

Car. True; but I usher
Such an unexpected dainty bit for breakfast,
As yet I never cooked? it is not Potargo,
Fride Frogs, Potato's Marrow'd, Cavear,
Carps Tongues, the Pith of an English Chine of Beef,
Nor our Italian delicate Oiled Mushrooms,
And yet a drawer on too; and if you show not
An appetite, and a strong one; I Will not say
To eat it, but devour it, without grace too,
For it will not stay a Preface. I am shamed,
And all my past provocatives will be jeered at.

Ador. Art thou in thy wits? what new found rarity
Have thou discovered?

Car. No such matter Sir; it grows in our own
Country.

Don. Serve it up,
I feel a kind of stomach.

Came. I could feed too.

Car. Not a bit upon a march; there is other Lettice
For your course Lips; this is peculiar only
For my Masters palate, I would give my whole years wages
With all my vails, and fees due to the Kitchen,
But to be his Carver.

Ador. Leave your fooling Sirrah, and bring in your dainty.

Car. I will bring in it self,
It has life and spirit in it, and for proof,
Behold: Now fall to boldly, my life on it
It comes to be tasted.

Enter Mirtilla (with Letter and Jewel.)
Came. Ha! Calistes Woman.

Lent. A handsome one by Venus.

Ador. Pray you for bear,
You are welcome fair one.

Don. How that blush becomes her.

Ador. Aim your designs at me?

Mirt: I'em trusted Sir
With a business of near consequence, which I would
To your private ear deliver:

Car. I told you so.
Give her audience on your Couch, it is fit state
To a she Ambassador.

Ador. Pray you Gentlemen
For a while dispose of your selves, I Will strait attend you.
Exit.
Car. Dispatch her first for your honor, the quickly doing,
You know what follows.

Ador. Will you please to vanish
Exit Cario. Now pretty one, your pleasure; you shall find me
Ready to serve you, if you will put me to
My Oath, I Will take it on this Book.

Mirt. O Sir, the favor is too great, and far above
My poor ambition, I must kiss your hand
In sign of humble thankfulness.

Ador. So mo dest.

Mirt. It well becomes a Maid, Sir, spare those blessings
For my noble Mistress, upon whom with Justice,
And with your good allowance, I might add
With a due gratitude: you may confer 'em,
But this will better speak her chaste desires Delivers the Letter.
Then I can fancy what they are, much less
With moving language to their fair deserts
Aptly express 'em. Pray you read, but with
Compassion, I beseech you: if you find
The Paper blur'd with tears fallen from her eyes,
While she endeavored to set down that truth
Her Soul did dictate to her, it must challenge
A gracious answer.

Ador. O the powerful charms!
By that fair hand writ down here; not like those
Which dreadfully pronounced by Circe, changed
Ulysses followers into Beasts; these have
An opposite working, I already feel
But reading 'em, their saving operations,
And all those sensual, loose, and base desires
Which have too long usurped, and tyrannized
Over my Reason, of themselves fall of
Most happy Metamorphosis! in which
The film of Error that did blind my Judgment
And seduced Understanding, is removed:
What Sacrifice of Thanks can I return
Her pious Charity, that not alone
Redeems me from the worst of slavery,
The tyranny of my beastly appetites;
To which, I long obsequiously have bowed,
But adds a marchless favor to receive
A benefit from me, nay, puts her Goodness
In my protection.

Mirt. Transformed? it is Aside.
A blessed Metamorphosis, and works
I know not how on me:

Ador. My joys are boundless,
Curbed with no limits; for her sake, Mirtilla,
Instruct me how I presently may seal
To those strong bonds of loyal love, and service
Which never shall be cancelled.

Mirt. She Will become your debtor Sir, if you vouchsafe to answer
Her pure affection.

Ador. Answer it Mirtilla; with more then adoration I kneel to it.
Tell her I Will rather die a thousand deaths,
Then fail with punctuality to perform
All her commands.

Mirt. I am lost on this assurance,
(Which if 'twere made to me, I should have faith in it, Aside.
As in an Oracle. Ah me) she presents you
This Jewel, her dead Grandsirs gift, in which,
As by a true Egyptian Herogliphick,
(For so I think she called it) you may be
Instructed what her suit is, you should do,
And she with joy will suffer.

Ador. Heaven be pleased to qualify this excess of happiness
With some disafter, or I shall expire
With a surfeit of Felicity, with what art
The cunning Lapidary has here expressed
The rape of Proserpine, I apprehend
Her purpose, and obey it, yet not as
A helping Friend, but a Husband, I will meet
Her chaste desires with lawful heat, and warm
Our Hymenaeal sheets with such delights
As leave no sting behind 'em.

Mirt. I despair then. Aside.

Ador. At the time appointed, say wench, I Will attend her,
And guard her from the fury of her Mother,
And all that dare disturb her.

Mirt. You speak well, and I believe you.

Ador. Would you ought else.

Mirt. I would carry some love sign to her; and now I think on it,
The kind salute you offered at my entrance,
Hold it not impudence that I desire it,
I Will faithfully deliver it.

Ador. O a kiss, you must excuse me, I was then mine own,
Now wholly hers: The touch of other Lips
I do abjure for ever; but there is Gold
To bind thee still my advocate.
Exit.
Mirt Not a kiss? I was coy when it was offered, and now justly
When I beg one am denied, what scortching fires
My loose hopes kindle in me? Shall I be
False to my Ladies trust? and from a servant
Rise up her rival? His words have bewitched me,
And something I must do, but what? it is yet
An embrion, and how to give it form
Alas I know not, pardon me, Caliste,
I am nearest to my self, and time will teach me
To perfect that which yet is undetermined.
Exit.
Enter Claudio and Severino.
Claud. You are Master of your self, yet if I may
As a tried Friend in my love and affection,
And a servant in my duty speak my thoughts,
Without offense? in the way of counsel to you,
I could allege, and truly that your purpose
For Naples covered with a thin disguise
Is full of danger.

Sever. Danger Claudio?
It Is here, and every where our forced companion,
The rising and the setting Sun, beholds us
Environed with it; our whole life a journey
Ending in certain ruin.

Claud. Yet we should not, howev'r besieged, deliver up our Fort
Of life, till it be forced.

Sever. It Is so indeed by wisest men concluded, which we should
Obey as Christians; but when I consider
How different the progress of our actions
Are from Religion, nay, Morality,
I cannot find in Reason, why we should
Be scrupulous that way only, or like Meteors
Blaze forth prodigious terrors, till our stuff
Be utterly consumed, which once put out,
Would bring security unto our selves,
And safety unto those we prey upon.
O Claudio: since by this fatal hand
The brother of my wife, bold Monteclaro,
Was left dead in the field, and I proscribed
After my flight, by the justice of the King,
My being has been but a living death
With a continued torture.

Claud. Yet in that you do delude their bloody violence
That do pursue your life.

Sever. While I by rapines live terrible to others as my self,
What one hour can we challenge as our own
(Unhappy as we are) yielding a beam
Of comfort to us? Quiet night that brings
Rest to the labourer, is the Outlaws day,
In which he rises early to do wrong,
And when his work is ended, dares not sleep:
Our time is spent in watches to entrap
Such as would shun us, and to hide our selves
From the Ministers of Justice, that would brihg us
To the correction of the Law. O Claudio,
Is this a life to be preserved? and at
So dear a rate? But why hold I discourse
On this sad subject? since it is a burden
We are marked to bear, and not to be shook off
But with our humane frailty. In the change
Of dangers there is some delight, and therefore
I am resolved for Naples.

Claud. May you meet there
All comforts that so fair and chaste a wife
(As fame proclaims her without parallel)
Can yield to ease your sorrows.

Sever. I much thank you;
Yet you may spare those wishes, which with joy
I have proved certainties, and from their want
Her excellencies take luster.

Claud. Ere you go yet,
Some charge unto your Squires not to fly out
Beyond their bounds, were not impertinent:
For though that with a look you can command 'em,
In your absence they will be headstrong

Sever. It Is well thought on,
I Will touch my horn, they know my call, Blows his horn.

Claud. And will, as soon as heard, make in to it from all quarters,
As the flock to the shepherds whistle.
Enter six Banditi. 1: What Is your will? 2. Hail Sovereign of these Woods. 3.
We lay our lives at your Highness feet. 4. And will confess no King,

Nor Laws, but what come from your mouth; and those
We gladly will subscribe to:

Sever. Make this good
In my absence to my substitute, to whom
Pay all obedience as to my self:
The breach of this in one particular
I will severely punish; on your lives
Remember upon whom with our allowance
You may securely prey, with such as are
Exempted from your fury.

Claud. 'Twere not amiss,
If you please, to help their memory; besides,
Here are some newly initiated.

Sever. To these read you the Articles: I must be gone;
Claudio, farewell,

Claud. May your return be speedy.
Ex. Sever 1. Silence; out with your Table-books. 2. And observe.


Claud. The Cormorant that lives in expectation
Of a long wished for dearth, and smiling grindes
The faces of the poor, you may make spoil of;
Even theft to such is Justice.
3. He Is in my Tables.


Claud. The grand Incloser of the Commons, for
His private profit, or delight, withal
His Herds that graze upon it are lawful prize,
4. And we will bring'em in, although the devil

Stood roaring by, to guard'em.

Claud. If a Usurer,
Greedy at his own price, to make a purchase,
Taking advantage upon Bond, or Morgage,
From a Prodigal, pass through our Territories,
In The way of custom, or of tribute to us,
You may ease him of his burden.
2. Wholesome doctrine.

Claud Builders of Iron Mills, that grub up Forests,
With Timber Trees for shipping.
1. May we not have a touch at Lawyers:


Claud. By no means; they may
To soon have a gripe at us; they are angry Hornets,
Not to be jested with.
3. This is not so well:


Claud. The owners of dark shops that vent their wares
With Perjuries; cheating Vintners not contented
With half in half in their reckonings, yet cry out
When they find their ghests want coin, it is late, and Bedtime;
These ransack at your pleasures.
3. How shall we know'em.


Claud. If they walk on foot by their Rat-colour'd stockings,
And shining shoes. If Horsemen by short Boots,
And riding furniture of several Counties.
2. Not one of the List escapes us.


Claud. But for Scholars,
Whose wealth lies in their heads, and not their pockets,
Soldiers that have bled in their Countries service,
The Rent-rack'd Farmer, needy Market folks,
The sweaty Laborer; Carriers that transport
The goods of other men, are priviledg'd;
But above all, let none presume to offer
Violence to women, for our King has sworn,
Who that way's a Delinquent; without mercy
Hangs for it by Marshal law.

Omnes. Long live Severino.
And perish all such cullions as repine at his new Monarchy.

Claud. About your business,
That he may find at his return good cause
To praise your care and discipline.

Omnes. We'll not fail Sir.
Exeunt.
Enter Monteclaro and Calypso.
Mont. Thou art sure mistaken, it is not possible
That I can be the man thou art employed too.

Calyp. Not you the man? you are the man of men,
And such another in my Ladies eye,
Never to be discovered.

Mont. A mere stranger newly arrived?

Calyp. Still the more probable,
Since Ladies, as you know, affect strange dainties,
And brought far to 'em. This is not an age
In which Saints live; but women, knowing women,
That understand their Summum bonum, is
Variety of pleasures in the touch,
Derived from several Nations; and if men
Would be wise by their example.

Mont. As most are. It Is a coupling age!

Calyp. Why sir, do Gallants travel?
Answer that question; but at their return
With wonder to the hearers, to discourse of
The garb and difference in foreign Females.
As the lusty Girl of France, the sober German,
The plump Dutch Fro, the stately Dame of Spain,
The Roman Libertine, and spriteful Tuscan,
The merry Greek, Venetian Courtesan,
The English fair Companion, that learns something
From every Nation, and will fly at all.
I say again the difference betwixt these
And their own Country Gamesters.

Mont. Aptly urged.
Some make that their main end; but may I ask
Without offense to your gravity, By what title
Your Lady that invites me to her favors,
Is known in the City.

Galyp. If you were a true born Monsieur,
You would do the business first, and ask that after.
If you only truck with her title, I shall hardly
Deserve thanks for my travel; she is Sir
No single Duccat trader, nor a Beldam
So frozen up, that a Fever cannot thaw her.
No Lioness by her breath.

Mont. Leave these impertinencies, and come to the matter.

Calyp. Would you wooed be as forward
When you draw for the upshot, she is Sir a Lady,
A rich, fair, well-complexioned, and what is
Not frequent among Venus Votaries,
Upon my credit, which good men have trusted;
A sound and wholedom Lady, and her name is
Madona Jolante.

Mont. Jolante. I have heard of her, for chastity, and beauty;
The wonder of the age.

Calyp. Pray you not too much,
Of chastity, fair, and free I do subscribe too,
And so you will find her.

Mont. Come you are a base Creature,
And covering your foul ends with her fair name,
Give me just reason, to suspect you have
A plot upon my life.

Calyp. A plot! Very fine!
Nay, it is a dangerous one, pray you beware often,
It Is cunningly contrived, I plot to bring you
A foot with the travel of some forty paces,
To those delights, which a man not made of Snow,
Would ride a thousand miles for. You shall be
Received at a Postern door, if you be not cautious,
By one whose touch would make old Nestor young,
And cure his Hernia? A terrible plot!
A kiss then ravished from you by such Lips
As flow with Nectar, a Juicy-palm more precious
Then the famed Sibilla's Bough to guide you safe
Through Mists of perfumes to a glorious room,
Where Jove might feast his Juno, a dire plot,
A Banquet I Will not mention, that is common;
But I must not forget to make the plot
More horrid to you. The retiring bower
So furnished, as might force the Persians envy,
The Silver bathing Tub, the Cambrick rubbers,
Th'embroider'd Quilt, a Bed of Gossamire,
And Damask Roses, a mere Powder plot
To blow you up; and last, a Bedfellow,
To whose rare entertainment all these are
But foils, and settings off.

Mont. No more, her breath would warm an
Euenuch.

Calyp. I knew I should heat you; now he begins to glow.

Mont. I am flesh and blood,
And I were not man, if I should not run the hazard,
Had I no other ends in it, I have considered
Your motion, Matron.

Calyp. My Plot Sir on your life,
For which, I am deservedly suspected
For a base and dangerous woman. Fare you well Sir,
I Will be bold to take my leave.

Mont: I will along too.
Come pardon my suspicion, I confess
My Error; and eying you better, I perceive
There Is nothing that is ill that can flow from you.
I am serious, and for proof of it I Will purchase
Your good opinion.

Calyp. I am gently natured,
And can forget a greater wrong upon
Such terms of satisfaction.

Mont. What Is the hour.

Calyp. Twelve.

Mont. I Will not miss a minute.

Calyp. I shall find you at your lodging?

Mont. Certainly, return my service,
And for me kiss your Ladies hands.

Calyp. At twelve, I Will be your convoy.

Mont. I desire no better.
Exeunt.
Act. 3. Scaen. 1.
Enter Durazzo, Caldoro, Servant.
Dur. WAlk the Horses down the Hill, I have a little
To speak in private.

Called. Good Sir, no more anger.

Duraz. Love do you call it? Madness, wilful Madness;
And since I cannot cure it, I would have you
Exactly mad. You are a lover already,
Be a drunkard too, and after turn small Poet,
And then you are mad Katexikene, the Madman.

Called. Such as are safe on shore, may smile at tempests,
But I that am embarked, and every minute
Expect a shipwreck, relish not your mirthe;
To me it is unseasonable.

Duraz Pleasing Viands, are made sharp by sick palats. I affect
A handsome Mistress in my gray Beard, as well
As any Boy of you all; and on good terms
Will venture as far in the fire, so she be willing
To entertain me; but ere I would dote
As you do, where there is no flattering hope
Ever to enjoy her, I would forswear Wine,
And kill this letcherous Itch with drinking Water,
Or live like a Carthusian on Poor-John,
Then bathe my self, night by night, in marble dew,
And use no Soap but Camphir-Balls.

Called. You may (and I must suffer it) like a rough Surgeon,
Apply these burning costicks to my wounds
Already gangreen'd, when soft unguents would
Better express an Uncle, with some feeling
Of his Nephews torments.

Duraz. I shall melt, and cannot
Hold out if he whimper. O that this young fellow,
Who on my knowledge is able to beat a man,
Should be baffel'd by this blind imagin'd-Boy,
Or fear his Bird-bolts.

Called. You Have put your self already
To too much trouble in bringing me thus far:
Now if you please, with your good wishes leave me
To my hard fortunes.

Dur. I Will forsake my self first.
Leave thee? I cannot, will not; thou shall have
No cause to be weary of my company,
For I Will be useful, and ere I see thee perish,
Dispensing with my dignity and candor,
I will do something for thee, though it savor
Of the old Squire of Troy. As we ride, we will
Consult of the means: Bear up.

Call. I cannot sink,
Having your noble aids to buoy me up;
There was never such such a Guardian.

Dur. How Is this? stale complements to me? when my work's done,
Commend th'artificer, and then be thankful.
Exeunt.
Enter Caliste (richly habited) and Mirtilla (in her first gown.) Call. How
do thou like my gown?

Mirt. It Is rich and Courtlike.

Call. The dressings too are suitable?

Mir. I must say so, or you might blame my want of care.

Call. My mother
Little dreams of my intended flight, or that
These are my nuptial ornaments.

Mir. I hope so.

Call. How dully thou reply! thou do not envy
Adorio's noble change, or the good fortune
That it brings to me?

Mir. My endeavors that way can answer for me.

Call True, you have discharged
A faithful Servants duty, and it is
By me rewarded like a liberal Mistress:
I speak it not to upbraid you with my bounties,
Though they deserve more thanks and ceremony
Then you have yet expressed.

Mir. The miseries which from your happiness I am sure to suffer,
Restrain my forward tongue; and gentle Madam,
Excuse my weakness, though I do appear
A little daunted with the heavy burden
I am to undergo: when you are safe,
My dangers like to roaring torrents will
Gush in upon me; yet I would endure
Your mothers cruelty; but how to bear
Your absence, in the very thought confounds me:
Since we were children, I have loved and served you;
I willingly learned to obey, as you
Grew up to knowledge, that you might command me;
And now to be divorced from all my comforts,
Can this be borne with patience?

Call. The necessity of my strange fate commands it; but I vow
By my Adorio's love, I pity thee.

Call. Pity me, Madam! a cold charity;
You must do more, and help me.

Call. Ha! what said you?
I must? is this fit language for a servant?

Mir. For one that would continue your poor servant,
And cannot live that day in which she is
Denied to be so: Can Mirtilla sit
Mourning alone, imagining those pleasures
Which you this blessed Hymeneal night
Enjoy in the embraces of your Lord,
And my Lord too in being yours, (already
As such I love and honor him) shall a stranger
Sew you in a sheet to guard that maidenhead
You must pretend to keep, (and 'twill become you.)
Shall another do those bridal offices
Which time will not permit me to remember,
And I pine here with envy? Pardon me,
I must and will be pardoned, for my passions
Are in extremes, and use some speedy means
That I may go along with you, and share
In those delights, but with becoming distance;
Or by his life, which as a Saint you swear by,
I will discover all.

Calist. Thou can not be
So treacherous and cruel, in destroying
The building thou have raised,

Mirt. Pray you do not tempt me, for it is resolved.

Calist. I know not what to think often.
In the discovery of my secrets to her,
I have made my slave my Mistress, I must sooth her,
There Is no evasion else. Prithee Mirtilla,
Be not so violent, I am strangely taken
With thy affection to me, 'twas my purpose
To have thee sent for.

Mirt. When?

Calist. This very night, and I vow deeply I shall be no sooner
In the desired possession of my Lord;
But by some of his servants I will have thee
Conveyed unto us.

Mirt. Should you break?

Calist. I dare not:
Come, clear thy looks, for instantly we'll prepare
For our departure.

Mirt. Pray you forgive my boldness,
Growing from my excess of zeal to serve you.

Calist. I thank thee for it.

Mirt. You Will keep your word.

Calist. Still doubtful?

Mirt. 'Twas this I aimed at, and leave the rest to Fortune.
Exeunt.
Enter Adorio, Camillo, Lentulo, Donato, Cario, Servants.
Ador. Haste you unto my Villa, and take all
Provision along with you; and for use,
And ornament, the shortness of the time
Can furnish you; let my best Plate be set out,
And costliest Hangings, and if it be possible
With a merry dance to entertain the Bride,
Provide an Epithaiamium.

Car. Trust me for belly timber, and for a song I have
A Paper blurrer; who on all occasions,
For all times, and all seasons, has such trinckets
Ready in the deck. It is but altering
The names, and they will serve for any Bride,
Or Bridegroom in the Kingdom.

Ador. But for the dance?

Car. I will make one my self, and foot it finely,
And summoning your Tenants at my Dresser,
Which is indeed my Drum. Make a rare choice
Of th'able youth, such as shall sweat sufficiently,
And smell too, but not of Amber, which you know is
The grace of the Country-hall.

Ador. About it Cario, and look you be careful.

Car. For mine own credit Sir.
Exit.
Ador. Now noble friends confirm your loves, and think not
Of the penalty of the Law, that does forbid
The stealing away an Heir. I will secure you,
And pay the breach often.

Came. Tell us what we shall do, we'll talk of that hereafter.

Ador. Pray you be careful
To keep the West-gate of the City open,
That our passage may be free, and bribe the Watch
With any sum; this is all.

Don. A dangerous business.

Came. I Will make the Constable, Watch, and Porter drunk, Under a Crown.

Lent. And then you may pass while they snore.
Though you had done a murder.

Came. Get but your Mistress,
And leave the rest to us.

Ador. You much engage me,
But I forget my self:

Came. Pray you in what, Sir?

Ador. Yielding too much to my affection,
Though lawful now; my wounded reputation
And honor suffer: The disgrace in taking
A blow in public from Caldoro, branded
With the infamous mark of Coward, in delaying
To right my self, upon my cheek grows fresher,
That Is first to be considered

Came. If you dare
Trust my opinion, (yet I have had
Some practice and experience in duels)
You are too tender that way: Can you answer
The debt you owe your honor, till you meet
Your Enemy from whom you may exact it?
Has he not left the City, and in fear
Concealed himself, for ought I can imagine?
What would you more?

Ador. I should do.

Came. Never think on'
Till fitter time and place invite you to it.
I have read Caranza, and find not in his Grammar
Of Quarrels, that the injured man is bound
To seek for reparation at an hour;
But may, and without loss, till he has settled
More serious occasions that import him,
For a day or two defer it.

Ador. You Will subscribe
Your hand to this?

Came. And justifie't with my life,
Presume upon it.

Ador. On then, you shall overrule me.
Exeunt.
Enter Jolante and Calypso.
Jol I Will give thee a golden tongue, and have it hung up
Ore thy tomb for a monument.

Call. I am not prepared yet
To leave the world; there are many good pranks
I must dispatch in this kind before I die:
And I had rather, if your Honor please,
Have the crowns in my purse.

Jol. Take that.

Call. Magnificent Lady!
May you live long, and every Moon love change,
That I may have fresh employment, You know what
Remains to be done.

Jol. Yes, yes, I will command
My daughter and Mirtilla to their chamber:

Call. And lock'em up: Such liquorish Kitlings are not
To be trusted with our cream. Ere I go, I Will help you
To set forth the banquet, and place the candid Eringo's
Where he may be sure to taste 'em. Then undress you,
For these things are cumbersom, when you should be active:
A thine night mantle to hide part of your Smock,
With your Pearl embroidered Pantophles on your Feet,
And then you are armed for service; nay, no trifling,
We are alone, and you know it is a point of folly
To be coy to eat, when meat is set before you.
Exeunt:
Enter Adorio, and Servant.
Ador. It Is eleveu by my Watch, the hour appointed.
Listen at the door; hears't thou any stirring?

Serve. No Sir, all is silent here.

Ador. Some cursed business keeps
Her mother up. I Will walk a little circle,
And show where you shall wait us with the horses,
And then return. This short delay afflicts me,
And I presume, to her it is not pleasing.
Exeunt.
Enter Durazzo, Caldoro.
Dur. What Is now to be done? prithee let us to Bed, I am sleep.
And here is my hand on it without more ado,
By fair or foul play, we'll have her to morrow
In thy possession.

Called. Good Sir give me leave
To taste a little comfort in beholding
The place by her sweet presence sanctified.
She may perhaps to take air, open the Casement,
And looking out, a new Star to be gazed on
By me with adoration, bless these eyes.
Never happy but when she is made the Object.

Dur. Is not here fine fooling.

Caldo. Thou great Queen of Love,
Or real or imagined, be propitious
To me thy faithful Votary; and I vow
T'erect a statue to thee, equal to
Thy picture by Apelles skilful hand
Left as the great example of his art;
And on thy thigh I Will hang a golden Cupid,
His torches flaming, and his quiver full,
For further honor.

Dur. End this waking dream, and let us away
Mirtilla!

Enter Caliste and Mirtilla.
Called. It Is her voice.

Call. You heard the horses footing.

Mirt. Certainly.

Call. Speak low, my Lord Adorio:

Called. I am dumb.

Dur. The darkness friend us too, most honored
Madam,
Adorio your servant.

Call. As you are so, I do command your silence till we are
Further removed; and let this kiss assure you,
(I thank the sable night that hides my blushes)
I am wholly yours.

Dur. Forward you micher.

Mirt. Madam, think on Mirtilla. [Goes in]

Dur. I Will not now enquire
The mystery of this, but bless kind Fortune
Favoring us beyond our hopes: yet now I think on it,
I had ever a lucky hand in such smock night-work.
Exeunt.
Enter Adorio and Servant.
Ador. This slowness does amaze me; she is not altered
In her late resolution.
[Within jolant.] Get you to bed,
And stir not on your life, till I command you.

Ador. Her mothers voice! listen.

Serve. Here comes the daughter.

Enter Mirtilla.
Mirt. Whither shall I fly for succor?

Ador. To these arms, your castle of defense, impregnable,
And not to be blown up. How your heart beats!
Take comfort, dear Caliste, you are now
In his protection that will nere forsake you,

Adorio: Your changed Adorio swears
By your best self, an oath he dares not break,
He loves you, loves you in a noble way,
His constancy firm as the poles of heaven.
I will urge no reply, silence becomes you,
And I Will defer the music of your voice
Till we are in a place of safety.

Mirt. O blessed error!
Exeunt. Enter Severino. It Is midnight: how my fears of certain death
Being surprised, combat with my strong hopes
Raised on my chaste wifes goodness! I am grown
A stranger in this City, and no wonder,
I have too long been so unto my self:
Grant me a little truce, my troubled soul,
I hear some footing, ha?

Enter Monteclaro and Calypso.
Calyp. That is the house,
And there is the key; you will find my Lady ready
To entertain you: it is not fit I should
Stand gaping by while you bill: I have brought you on,
Charge home, and come off with honor.
Exit.
Sever. It makes this way.

Mont. I am much troubled, and know not what to think
Of this design.

Sever. It still comes on.

Mont. The Watch! I am betrayed.

Sever. Should I now appear fearful,
It would discover me; there is no retiring,
My confidence must protect me, I Will appear
As if I walked the round. Stand.

Mont. I: am lost.

Sever. The word?

Mont. Pray you forbear; I am a stranger,
And missing this dark stormy night my way
To my lodging, you shall do a courteous office
To guide me to it.

Sever Do you think I stand here for a page or a porter?

Mont. Good sir grow not so high,
I can justify my being abroad; I am
No pilfering vagabond, and what you are
Stands yet in supposition; and I charge you
If you are an Officer, bring me before your Captain;
For if you do assault me, though not in fear
Of what you can do alone, I will cry murder
And raise the streets.

Sever. Before my Captain, ha?
And bring my head to the block. Would we were parted,
I have greater cause to fear the Watch then he.

Mont. Will you do your duty?

Sever. I must close with him:
Truth sir, whatere you are, (yet by your language
I ghess you a Gentleman) I Will not use the rigor
Of my place upon you; only quit this street,
For your stay here will be dangerous, and good night.

Mont. The like to you sir; I Will grope out my way
As well as I can. O damned Bawd! fare you well sir.
Exit Monteclaro.
Sever. I am glad he is gone; there is a secret passage
Unknown to my wife, through which this key will guide me
To her desired embraces, which must be,
My presence being beyond her hopes, most welcome.
Exit.
Enter Jolante (with a rich banquet, and tapers) (in a chair, behind a
curtain.) Jol. I am full of perplexed thoughts: Imperious Blood,
Thou only art a tyrant; Judgment, Reason,
To whatsoever thy Edicts proclaim,
With vassal fear subscribe against themselves,
I am yet safe in the port, and see before me,
If I put off, a rough tempestuous sea,
The raging winds of infamy from all quarters
Assuring my destruction; yet my lust
Swelling the wanton sails, (my understanding
(Stowed under hatches) like a desperate Pilot
Commands me to urge on: My pride, my pride,
Self-love, and overvalue of my self
Are justly punished: I that did deny
My daughters youth allowed and lawful pleasures,
And would not suffer in her those desires
She sucked in with my milk, now in my waning
Am scorcht and burnt up with libidinous fire
That must consume my fame; yet still I throw
More fuel on it.
Enter Severino.
Sever. It Is her voice, poor Turtle;
She Is now at her devotions praying for
Her banished Mate: alas, that for my guilt
Her innocence should suffer! But I do
Commit a second sin in my deferring
The ecstasy of joy that will transport her
Beyond herself, when she flies to my lips,
And seals my welcome. Jolante!

Jol. Ha? good Angels guard me.

Sever. What do I behold?
Some sudden flash of lightning strike me blind,
Or cleave the center of the earth, that I
May living find a sepulcher to swallow
Me and my shame together.

Jol. Guilt and horror
Confound me in one instant; thus surprised,
The subtlety of all Wantons, though abstracted,
Can show no seeming color of excuse
To plead in my defense.

Sever. Is this her mourning?
O killing object! the imprisoned vapors
Of rage and sorrow make an earthquake in me;
This little world, like to a tottering tower,
Not to be underpropp'd; yet in my fall
I Will crush thee with my ruins.
Draws a poniard, she kneels.
Jol. Good sir, hold:
For, my defense unheard, you wrong your justice,
If you proceed to execution,
And will too late repent it.

Sever. Thy defense? To move it, adds (could it receive addition)
Ugliness to the loathsome leprosy
That in thy being a Strumpet has already
Infected every vein, and spreads it self
Over this carrion, which would poison
Vulturs and dogs, should they devour it. Yet to stamp
The seal of Reprobation on thy soul,
I Will hear thy impudent lies borrowed from hell
And prompted by the Devil thy tutor, Whore,
Then send thee to him. Speak.

Jol. Your Gorgon looks
Turn me to stone, and a dead palsy seises
My silenced tongue.

Sever. O fate, that the disease
Were general in women; what a calm
Should wretched men enjoy! Speak, and be brief,
Or thou shall suddenly feel me.

Jol. Be appeased sir,
Until I have delivered reasons for
This solemn preparation.

Sever. On, I hear thee.

Jol. With patience ask your memory; 'twill instruct you,
This very day of the month 17 years since
You married me.

Sever. Grant it, what can thou urge from this?

Jol. That day since your proscription sir,
In the rembrance of it annually,
The garments of my sorrow laid aside,
I have with pomp observed.

Sever. Alone!

Jol. The thoughts of my felicity then, my misery now,
Were the invited guests; Imagination
Teaching me to believe that you were present
And a partner in it.

Sever. Rare! this real banquet
To feast your fancy: Fiend, could Fancy drink off
These flagons to my health? or th'idol Thought
Like Baal devour-these delicates? the room
Perfumed to take his nostrils? this loose habit
Which Messalina would not wear, put on
To fire his lustful eyes? Wretch, am I grown
So weak in thy opinion, that it can
Flatter credulity that these gross tricks
May be foisted on me? Where Is my daughter? where
The Bawd your woman? answer me, Caliste,
Mirtilla! they are disposed of, if not murdered,
To make all sure; and yet methinks your neighbor,
Your whistle, agent, parasite Calypso,
Should be within: Call when you hem to usher in
The close Adulterer.

Jol. What will you do?

Sever. Not kill thee, do not hope it, I am not
So near to reconcilement. Ha! this scarf
Th'intended favor to your Stallion, now
Is useful: do not strive; thus bound expect
All studied tortures, my assurance, not
My jealousy thou art false, can pour upon thee.
In darkness howl thy mischiefs; and if rankness
Of thy imagination can conjure
The Ribaud, glut thy self with him:
I will cry aim, and in another room
Determine of my vengeance. Oh my heart strings!
Exit (with tapers.)
Jol. Most miserable woman! and yet sitting
A Judge in mine own cause upon my self,
I could not mitigate the heavy doom
My incensed husband must pronounce upon me.
In my intents I am guilty, and for them
Must suffer the same punishment, as if
I had in fact offended.
[Calypso speaks at the door.] Bore my eyes out
If you prove me faulty: I Will but tell my Lady
What caused your stay, and instantly present you.
How Is this? no lights? what new device? will she play
At Blindman buff Madam?

Jol. Upon thy life speak in a lower key:

Calyp. The mystery
Of this sweet Lady; where are you?

Jol. Here fast bound.

Calyp. By whom?

Jol. I Will whisper that into thine ear, and then farewell for ever.

Calyp. How? my Lord,
I am in a fever: Horns upon horns grow on him.
Could he pick no hour but this to break a bargain
Almost made up?

Jol. What shall we do?

Calyp. Betray him: I Will instantly raise the Watch.

Jol. And so make me for ever infamous.

Calyp. The Gentleman, the rarest Gentleman is at the door,
Shall he lose his labor? since that you must perish,
'T will show a woman's spleen in you to fall
Deservedly: give him his answer, Madam.
I have on the sudden in my head a strange whimsie,
But I will first unbind you.

Jol. Now what follows?

Call. I will supply your place; and bound, give me
Your mantle, take my nightgown, send away
The Gentleman satisfied. I know my Lord
Wants power to hurt you: I perhaps may get
A kiss by the bargain, and all this may prove
But some neat love-trick: If he should grow furious
And question me, I am resolved to put on
An obstinate silence. Pray you dispatch the Gent.
His courage may cool.

Jol. I Will speak with him; but if
To any base or lustful end, may mercy
At my last gasp forsake me.
Exit.
Calyp. I was too rash,
And have done what I wish undone: say he should kill me.
I have run my head in a fine nooze, and I smell
The pickle I am in: alas how I shudder
Still more and more! would I were a she Priapus.
Stuck up in a garden to fright away the Crows,
So I were out of the house; she is at her pleasure
Whatere she said, and I must endure the torture.
He comes; I cannot pray, my fear will kill me.

Enter Severino (throwing open the doors violently) having a knife.
Sev. It is a deed of darkness, and I need
No light to guide me: there is something tells me
I am too slow paced in my wreak, and trifle
In my revenge. All hushed? no sigh nor groan
To witness her compunction? can guilt sleep,
And innocence be open-ey'd? Even now
Perhaps she dreams of the Adulterer,
And in her fancy hugs him: Wake thou strumpet,
And instantly give up unto my vengeance
The villain that defiles my bed; discover
Both what and where he is, and suddenly
That I may bind you face to face, then sew you
Into one sack, and from some steep rock hurl you
Into the sea together: Do not play with
The lightning of my rage; break stubborn silence.
And answer my demands, will it not be?
I Will talk no longer; thus I mark thee for
A common strumpet.

Calyp. Oh!

Sever. Thus stab these arms
That have stretched out themselves to grasp a stranger.

Calyp. Oh!

Sever. This is but an induction; I Will draw
The curtains of the Tragedy hereafter:
Howl on, it is music to me.
Exit Severino.
Calyp. He is gone,
A kiss and love-tricks; he has villainous teeth,
May sublimed Mercury draw 'em. If all dealers
In my profession were paid thus, there would be
A dearth of Cuckolds. Oh my nose! I had one,
My arms, my arms! I dare not cry for fear:
Cursed desire of gold, how art thou punished?

Enter Jolante.
Jol. Till now I never truly knew my self,
Nor by all principles and lectures read
In Chastities cold school was so instructed
As by her contrary. How base and deformed
Loose appetite is! as in a few short minutes
This stranger has, and feelingly, delivered.
Oh that I could recall my bad intentions,
And be as I was yesterday untainted
In my desires, as I am still in fact
(I thank his temperance) I could look undanted
Upon my husbands rage, and smile at it;
So strong the guards, and sure defenses are
Of armed Innocence; but I will endure
The penance of my sin, the only means,
Is left to purge it. The day breaks, Calypso.

Calyp. Here Madam, here:

Jol. Has my Lord visited thee?

Calyp. Hell take such visits; these stabbed arms, and loss
Of my nose, you left fast on, may give you a relish
What a night I have had often, and what you had suffered,
Had I not supplied your place.

Jol. I truly grieve for it; did not my husband speak to thee?

Calyp. Yes, I heard him
And felt him ecce signum, with a mischief.
But he knew not me; like a true bred Spartan Fox
With silence I endured it, he could not get
One syllable from me.

Jol. Something may be fashioned
From this invention: Help me, I must be sudden,
Thou art free, exchange, quick, quick, now bind me sure,
And leave me to my fortune.

Calyp. Pray you consider,
The loss of my nose; had I been but carted for you,
Though washed with Mire and Chamber-ly, I had
Examples to excuse me; but my nose, my nose dear
Lady.
Exit.
Jol. Get off, I Will send to thee.
If so, it may take; if it fail, I must
Suffer what ever follows.

Enter Severino (with a Taper.)
Sever. I have searched
In every corner of the house, yet find not
My daughter, nor her Maid, nor any print
Of a man's footing, which this wet night would
Be easily discerned, the ground being soft,
At his coming in or going out.

Jol. It Is he, and I am within hearing; Heaven forgive this feigning,
I being forced to it to preserve my life,
To be better spent hereafter.

Sever. I begin to stagger, and my love if it knew how,
Her piety heretofore, and same remembered,
Would plead in her excuse.

Jol. You blessed Guardians
Of matrimonial faith, and just revengers
Of such as do in fact offend against
Your sacred rites and ceremonies; by all titles
And holy attributes you do vouchsafe
To be invoked, look down with saving pity
Upon my matchless sufferings.

Sever. At her devotions, affliction makes her repent.

Jol. Look down upon a wretched woman; and as I
Have kept the knot of wedlock, in the Temple
By the Priest fastened firm, (though in loose wishes
I yield I have offended) to strike blind
The eyes of Jealousy that see a crime
I never yet committed, and to free me
From the unjust suspicion of my Lord,
Restore my martyred face and wounded arms
To their late strength and beauty.

Sever. Does she hope to be cured by miracle?

Jol. This minute I
Perceive with joy my orisons heard and granted:
You ministers of mercy, who unseen,
And by a supernatural means have done
This work of heavenly charity, be ever canonized for it.

Sever. I did not dream, I heard her,
And I have eyes too, they cannot deceive me.
If I have no belief in their assurance,
I must turn sceptick. Ha? this is the hand?
And this the fatal instrument? these drops
Of blood, that gushed forth from her face and arms,
Still fresh upon the floor: This is something more
Then wonder or amazement, I profess I am astonished:

Jol. Be incredulous still,
And go on in your barbarous rage, led to it
By your false guide Suspicion, have no faith
In my so long tried loyalty, nor believe
That which you see; and for your satisfaction,
My doubted innocence cleared by miracle,
Proceed, these Veins have now new blood, if you
Resolve to let it out.

Sever. I would not be fooled
With easiness of belief, and faintly give Aside.
Credit to this strange wonder? it is now thought on
In a fitter place and time, I Will sound this further. Unties her.
How can I expect my sin? or hope,
Though now I write my self thy slave, the service
Of my whole life can win thee to pronounce
Despaired of pardon? shall I kneel? that is poor,
Thy mercy must urge more in my defense,
Then I can fancy; will it thou have revenge?
My heart lies open to thee.

Jol. This is needless to me, who in the duty of a wife,
Know I must suffer.

Sever. Thou art made up of goodness,
And from my confidence that I am alone,
The object of thy pleasures, until death
Divorce us, we will know no separation
Without inquiring why (as sure thou will not,
Such is thy meek obedience) thy Jewels
And choicest ornaments packed up, thou shall
Along with me; and as a Queen be honored.
By such a style me Sovereign, already
My banishment is repealed, thou being present:
The Neapolitan Court a place of exile
When thou art absent; my stay here is mortal
Of which thou art to sensible, I perceive it.
Come dearest Jolante, with this breath
All jealousy is blown away:

Jol. Be constant.
Exeunt.
Act. 4. Scaen. 1.
A noise within, as the fall of a Horse, -- then Enter Durazzo, Caldoro,
Caliste, Servant.
Duraz. HEll take the stumbling Jade.

Called. Heaven help the Lady.

Serve. The Horse has broke his neck.

Duraz. Would thine were cracked too
So the Lady had no harm. Give her fresh air,
It Is but a swoun.

Called. It Is more, she is dead:

Duraz. Examine
Her limbs if they be whole: not too high, not too high
You Ferrit, this is no Cunniborough for you.
How do you find her?

Called No breath of comfort sir, too cruel fate!
Had I still pined away, and lingered under
The modesty of just and honest hopes
After a long consumption, sleep and death,
To me had been the same, but now as 'twere
Possessed of all my wishes, in a moment
To have 'em ravished from me? suffer shipwreck
In view of the Port? and like a half starved beggar,
No sooner in compassion clothed, but coffined?
Malevolent destinies, too cunning in
Wretched Caldoro's tortures. O Caliste,
If thy immortal part has not already
Left this fair palace, let a beam of light
Dawn from thine eye, in this Cimmerian darkness,
To guide my shaking hand to touch the anchor
Of hope in thy recovery.

Caliste. Oh.

Duraz. She lives, disturb her not, she is no right bred woman
If she die with one fall; some of my acquaintance
Have took a thousand merrily, and are still
Excellent wrestlers at the close hug.

Called. Good Sir.

Duraz. Prithee be not angry, I should speak thus if
My Mother were in her place.

Called. But had you heard
The music of the language which she used
To me, believed Adorio, as she rode
Behind me; little thinking that she did
Embrace Caldoro.

Caliste. Ah Adorio!

Duraz. Leave talking, I conceive it.

Caliste. Are you safe?

Called. And raised like you from death to life to hear you.

Calist. Hear my defense then, ere I take my vail off.
A simple maids defense, which looking on you,
I faintly could deliver; willingly
I am become your prize, and therefore use
Your victory nobly; Heavens bright eye, the Sun,
Draws up the grossest vapors, and I hope
I never shall prove an envious cloud to darken
The splendour of your merits. I could urge
With what disdain, nay scorn, I have declined
The shadows of insinuating pleasures
Tendered by all men else, you only being
The object of my hopes: That cruel Prince
To whom the Olive branch of Peace is offered,
Is not a conqueror, but a bloody tyrant,
If he refuse it; nor should you wish a triumph,
Because Caliste's humble; I have said
And now expect your sentence.

Duraz. What a throng
Of Clients would be in the Court of Love,
Were there many such she Advocates: Art thou dumb?
Can thou say nothing for thy self.

Called. Dear Lady open your eyes, and look upon the man,
The man you have elected for your Judge,
Kneeling to you for mercy.

Call. I should know this voice, and something more then fear I am
Deceived, but now I look upon his face,
I am assured I am wretched.

Duraz. Why good Lady?
Hold her up, she will fall again, before her time else,
The youth's a well timbred youth, look on his making;
His Hair curled naturally, he is whole chested too,
And will do his work as well, and go through stitch with it,
As any Adorio in the world; my slate on it,
A Chicken of the right kind; and if he prove not
A Cock of the Game, cuckold him first, and after
Make a Capon of him.

Caliste. I Will cry out a Rape,
If thou unhand me not; would I had died
In my late trance, and never lived to know
I am betrayed.

Duraz. To a young and active husband,
Call you that treachery; there are a shole of
Young wenches in the City, would vow a pilgrimage
Beyond Jerusalem, to be so cheated.
To her again you milk-sop, violent storms
Are soon blown over.

Caliste. How could thou Caldoro
With such a frontless impudence, arm thy hopes
So far, as to believe I might consent
To this lewd practice? have I not often told thee
How, ere I pitied thy misplaced affection,
I could not answer it? and that there was
A strong antipathy between our Passions,
Not to be reconciled.

Called. Vouchsafe to hear me
With an impartial ear, and it will take from
The rigor of your censure. Man was marked
A friend in his Creation to himself,
And may with fit ambition conceive
The greatest blessings, and the highest honors
Appointed for him, if he can atchieve'em
The right and noble way: I grant you were
The end of my design, but still pursued
With a becoming modesty, Heaven at length
Being pleased, and not my arts to further it.

Duraz. Now he comes to her: On boy.

Called. I have served you
With a religious zeal, and borne the burden
Of your neglect (if I may call it so)
Beyond the patience of a man, to prove this.
I have seen those eyes with pleasant glances play
Upon Adorio's, like Phoebe's shine
Guilding a Crystal River, and your Lip
Rise up in civil courtship to meet his,
While I bit mine with envy: Yet these favors
(How ere my passions raged) could not provoke me
To one act of rebellion against
My loyalty to you; the sovereign
To whom I ow obedience.

Calist. My blushes confefs this for a truth.

Duraz. A flag of truce is
Hung out in this acknowledgment.

Called. I could add,
But that you may interpret what I speak,
The malice of a rival, rather then
My due respect to your deserts. How faintly
Adorio has returned thanks to the bounty
Of your affection, ascribing it
As a tribute to his worth, and not in you
An act of mercy: Could he else invited
(As by your words I understood) to take you
To his protection, grossly neglect
So gracious an offer? or give power
To fate it self to cross him? O dear Madam,
We are all the Balls of time, tossed to and fro,
From the Plough unto the Throne, and back again,
Under the swinge of destiny mankind suffers;
And it appears by an unchanged decree
You were appointed mine; wise nature always
Aiming at due proportion, and if so,
I may believe with confidence, Heaven in pity
Of my sincere affection, and long patience,
Directed you by a most blessed error
To your vowed servants bosom.

Duraz. By my holidame Tickling-Philosophy.

Calist. I am Sir, too weak
To argue with you; but my Stars have better
(I hope) provided for me.

Called. If there be
Disparity between us, it is in your
Compassion to level it.

Duraz. Give fire to the Mine, and blow her up.

Caliste. I am sensible
Of what you have endured, but on the sudden,
With my unusual travel, and late bruise,
I am exceeding weary; in you grove,
While I repose my self, be you my guard:
My spirits with some little rest revived,
We will consider further: For my part
You shall receive modest and gentle answers
To your demands, though short perhaps to make you
Full satisfaction.

Called. I am exalted in the employment, sleep secure, I Will be
Your vigilant Sentinel.

Calist. But I command you,
And as you hope for future grace obey me,
Presume not with one stolen kiss to disturb
The quiet of my slumbers; let your temperance
And not your lust, watch over me.

Called. My desires
Are frozen, till your pity shall dissolve'em.

Duraz. Frozen! think not of Frost fool in the Dog Days,
Remember the old adage, and make use often,
Occasion's bald behind.

Calist. Is this your Uncle?

Called. And Guardian, Madam; at your better leisure,
When I have deserved it, you may give him thanks
For his many favors to me.

Calist. He appears a pleasant Gentleman.
Ex. Caldoro and Caliste.
Dur. You should find me so,
But that I do hate incest. I grow heavy,
Sir provide fresh horses; I Will seek out
Some hollow tree, and dream till you return,
Which I charge you to hasten.

Serve. With all care sir.
Exeunt.
Enter Cario and Countrymen, (for the Dance and Song.)
Car. Let your eyes be rivetted to my heels, and miss not
A hairs breadth of my footing; our Dance has
A most melodious note, and I command you
To have ears like hares this night for my Lords honor,
And something for my Worship: your reward is
To be drunk blind like Moles in the Wine-cellar,
And though you never see after, it is the better,
You were born for this nights service: And do you hear,
Wire-string and Cats-guts men, and strong-breath'd Hoboys,
For the credit of your calling, have not your Instruments
To tune, when you should strike up; but twang sit perfectly,
As you would read your Neckverse; and you Warbler
Keep your Windpipe moist, that you may not spit and hem,
When you should make division. How I sweat!
Authority is troublesome. -- They are come,
I know it by the Cornet that I placed
On the hill to give me notice: Marshal your selves
In The Rear, the Van is yours. Now chant it spritely.

Enter Adorio, Mirtilla, Camillo, Lentulo, Donato
Ador. A well-penn'd Ditty. [Song]

Came. Not ill sung.

Ador. What follows?

Car. Use your eyes; if ever, now your masterpiece [Dance]

Ador. It Is well performed, take that, but not from me,
It Is your new Ladies bounty, thank her for it,
All that I have is hers.

Car. I must have three shares
For my pains and properties, the rest shall be
Divided equally.
Ex. Cario and Rastici.
Mirt. My real fears
Begin, and soon my painted comforts vanish
In my discovery.

Ador. Welcome to your own:
You have (a wonder in a woman) kept
Three long hours silence; and the greater, holding
Your own choice in your arms, a blessing for which
I will be thankful to you, nay unmask
And let mine eye and ears together feast,
Too long by you kept empty: Oh you want
Your woman's help, I Will do her office for you.
Pulls off her mask. Mirtilla!

Came. It is she, and wears the habit
In which Caliste three days since appeared
As she came from the Temple.

Lent. All this trouble for a poor Waiting-maid?

Don. We are grossly gulled.

Ador. Thou child of impudence, answer me, and truly,
Or though the tongues of Angels pleaded mercy,
Tortures shall force it from thee.

Mirt. Innocence is free and open. breasted; of what crime
Stand I accused, my Lord?

Ador. What crime? no language
Can speak it to the height, I shall become
Discourse for fools, and drunkards. How was this
Contrived? who helped thee in the plot? discover.
Were not Caliste's aids in it?

Mirt. No on my life; nor am I faulty.

Ador. No: what may games this.
Did thou treat with me for thy Mistress favors,
To make sale of thine own?

Mirt. With her and you
I have dealt faithfully: you had her Letter
With the Jewel I presented; she received
Your courteous answer, and prepared herself
To be removed by you: And howsoever
You take delight to hear what you have done,
From my simplicity, and make my weakness
The subject of your mirth, as it suits well
With my condition, I know you have her
In your possession.

Ador. How! has she left her mothers house?

Mirt. You drive this nail too far;
Indeed she deeply vowed at her departure
To send some of your Lordships servants for me,
(Though you were pleased to take the pains your self)
That I might still be near her, as a shadow
To follow her the substance.

Ador. She is gone then?

Mirt. This is too much; but good my Lord forgive me,
I come a Virgin hither to attend
My noble Mistress, though I must confess
I look with sore eyes upon her good fortune,
And wish it were mine own:

Ador. Then as it seems you do yourself affect me?

Mirt. Should she hear me,
And in her sudden fury kill me for it,
I durst not, Sir, deny it; since you are
A man so formed, that not poor I alone,
But all our sex like me I think stand bound
To be enamored of you.

Ador. O my fate! how justly am I punished? in thee punished
For my defended wantonness? I that scorned
The Mistress when she sought me, now I would
Upon my knees receive her, am become
A prey unto her Bondwoman,
My honor too neglected for this purchase.
Art thou one of those
Ambitious Serving-women, who contemning
Th'embraces of their Equals, aim to be
The wrong way Ladifi'd by a Lord? was there
No sorward Page or Footman in the City
To do the feat, that in thy lust I am chosen
To be the executioner? dare thou hope
I can descend so low?

Mirt. Great Lords sometimes
For change leave calvert Sammon, and eat Sprats,
In modesty I dare speak no more.

Came. If 'twere a Fish-day, though you like it not,
I could say
I have a stomach, and would content my self
With this pretty Whiting-mop.

Ador. Discover yet how thou came to my hands.

Mirt. My Lady gone,
Fear of her mothers rage, she being found absent,
Moved me to fly; and quitting of the house,
You were pleased unasked to comfort me, I used
No sorceries to bewitch you; then vouchsafed
(Thanks ever to the darkness of the night)
To hug me in your arms, and I had wronged
My breeding near the Court, had I refused it.

Ador. This is still more bitter; can thou ghess to whom
Thy Lady did commit herself?

Mirt. They were horsemen, as you are.

Ador. In the name of wonder,
How could they pass the Port, where you expected
My coming?

Came. Now I think upon it, there came
Three mounted by, and behind one a woman
Embracing fast the man that rode before her.

Lent. I knew the men, but she was veiled.

Ador. What were they?

Lent. The first the Lord Durazzo, and the second
Your rival young Caldoro; it was he
That carried the wench behind him.

Donat. The last a servant that spurred fast after 'em

Ador. Worse and worse! 'twas she!
Too much assurance of her love undid me;
Why did you not stay 'em?

Donat. We had no such commission.

Camil. Or say we had? who durst lay fingers on
The angry old Russian.

Lent. For my part I had rather
Take a baited Bull by the Horns.

Ador. You are sure friends for a man to build on.

Camil. They are not far off,
Their horses appeared spent too; lets take fresh ones
And coast the Country, ten to one we find 'em.

Ador. I will not eat nor sleep, until I have 'em.
Moppet you shall along too.

Mirt. So you please, I may keep my place behind you;
I Will sit fast, and ride with you all the world over.

Camil. A good Girl.
Exeunt:
Enter Monteclaro and Calypso.
Mont. Her husband Severino?

Calyp. You may see
His handiwork by my flat face; no bridge
Left to support my Organ. If I had one,
The comfort is I am now secure from the Grincomes,
I can loose nothing that way.

Monte. Do thou not know what became of the
Lady?

Calyp. A nose was enough to part with
I think, in the service; I durst stay no longer,
But I am full assured the house is empty,
Neither poor Lady, daughter, servant left there:
I only ghess he has fore'd 'em to go with him
To the dangerous Forest where he lives like a King
Among the Banditi, and how there he has used them,
Is more then to be feared.

Mont. I have played the fool,
And kept my self too long concealed, sans question
With the danger of her life. Leave me --
The King!

Enter Alphonso and Captain.
Call. The Surgeon must be paid.

Mont. Take that.

Call. I thank you,
I have got enough by my trade, and I will build
An Hospital only for noseless Bawds,
'Twill speak my charity, and be my self
The Governess of the Sisterhood.
Exit.
Alph. I may forget this in your vigilance hereafter;
But as I am a King, if you provoke me
The second time with negligence of this kind,
You shall deeply smart for it.

Mont. The King's moved.

Alph. To suffer a murderer by us proscribed, at his pleasure
To pass and repass through our guards?

Capt. Your pardon
For this, my gracious Lord, binds me to be
More circumspect hereafter.

Alph. Look you be so:
Monsieur Laval, you were a suitor to me
For Severino's pardon.

Mont. I was so, my good Lord.

Alph. You might have met him here to have thanked
You for it, as now I understand.

Mont. So it is rumored;
And hearing in the City of his boldness,
(I would not say contempt of your Decrees)
As then I pleaded mercy, (under pardon)
I now as much admire the slowness of
Your justice (though it force you to some trouble)
In fetching him in.

Alph. I have considered it.

Mont. He has of late, as it is suspected, done
An outrage on his wife forgetting nature
To his own daughter, in whom sir I have
Some nearer interest then I stand bound to
In my humanity, which I gladly would
Make known unto your Highness.

Alph. Go along, you shall have opportunity as we walk:
See you what I committed to your charge,
In readiness, and without noise.

Capt. I shall sir.
Exeunt.
Act. 5. Scaen. 1.
Enter Claudio, and all the Banditi (making a guard) Severino and Jolante (with
Oaken leaved garlands) and Singers.
Sever. HEre, as a Queen, share in my sovereignty:
The iron toils pitched by the Law to take
The forfeiture of my life, I have broke through,
And secure in the guards of these few subjects
Smile at Alphonsus fury, though I grieve for
The fatal cause in your good brothers loss
That does compel me to his course.

Jol. Revive not
A sorrow long since dead, and so diminish
The full fruition of those joys, which now
I stand possessed of: Womanish fear of danger
That may pursue us, I shake off, and with
A masculine spirit.

Sev. It Is well said.

Jol. In you sir I live; and when, or by the course of nature,
Or violence you must fall, the end of my
Devotions is, that one and the same hour
May make us fit for heaven.

Sev. I join with you
In my votes that way: But how, Jolante,
You that have spent your past days slembring in
The down of quiet, can endure the hardness
And rough condition of our present being,
Does much disturb me.

Jol. These woods, Severino,
Shall more then seem to me a populous City;
You being present, here are no allurements
To tempt my frailty, nor the conversation
Of such, whose choice behavior or discourse
May nourish jealous thoughts.

Sev. True, Jolante,
Nor shall suspected chastity stand in need here
To be cleared by miracle.

Jol. Still on that string? it yields harsh discord.

Sev. I had forgot my self,
And wish I might no more remember it.
The day wears, sirs, without one prize brought in
As tribute to your Queen. Claudio, divide
Our Squadron in small parties, let 'em watch
All passages, that none escape without
The payment of our Customs

Claud. Shall we bring in the persons with the pillage?

Sev. By all means,
Without reply about it, we'll retire Ex. Claudio and the rest.
Into my Cave, and there at large discourse
Our fortunes past, and study some apt means
To find our daughter; since she well disposed of,
Our happiness were perfect.

Jol. We must wait with patience Heavens pleasure.

Sev. It Is my purpose.
Exeunt.
Enter Lentulo and Camillo.
Lent. Let the horses graze, they are spent,
I am sure I am sleepy,
And nodded as I rode: here was a jaunt
In The dark through thick and thin, and all to no purpose:
What a dullness grows upon me.

[They sit down] Lent. I can hardly
Hold open mine eyes to say so. How did we lose Adorio?

Came. He, Donato, and the Wench
That cleaves to him like bird-lime, took the right hand,
But this place is our rendevouz.

Lent. No matter, we'll talk of that anon, -- heigh ho.
[Sleeps]
Came He Is fast already, Lentuio; I Will take a nap too.

[Sleeps] Enter Adorio, Mirtilla, Donato.
Ador. Was ever man so crossed?

1 Wom. So blessed. This is the finest Wild-goose chase.

Ador. What Is that you mutter?

Mirt. A short prayer, that you may find
Your wished for love, though I am lost for ever.

Don. Pretty fool, who have we here?

Ador. This is Camillo.

Mirt. This Signior Lentulo

Ador. Wake 'em.

Don. They Will not stir,
Their eyelids are glu'd, and mine too; by your favor,
I Will follow their example.

[Lies down] Ador. Are you not weary?

Mirt. I know not what the word means, while I travel
To do you service.

Ador. Y ue ect to reap
The harvest of your flattery; but your hopes
Will be blasted, I assure you.

Mirt. So you give leave
To sow it as in me a sign of duty,
Though you deny your beams of gracious favor
To ripen it with patience I shall suffer.

Ador. No more; my resolution to find
Caliste, by what accident lost, I know not,
Binds me not to deny my self what nature
Exacteth from me. To walk alone a foot
(For my Horse is tired) were madness, I must sleep;
You could lie down too.

Mirt. Willingly; so you please to use me.

Ador. Use thee?

Mirt. As your pillow Sir,
I dare presume no fareuer, noble Sir.
Do not too much condemn me; generous feet,
Spurn not a fawning Spaniel.

Ador. Well! sit down.

Mirt. I am ready Sir.

Ador. So nimble?

Mirt. Love is active;
Nor would I be a slow thing: Rest secure Sir
On my maidenhead, I Will not ravish you.

Ador. For once, so far I Will trust you.
Lies down on her Lap.
Mirt. All the joys of rest
Dwell on your eyelids; let no dream disturb
Your soft and gentle slumbers I cannot sing,
But I Will talk you asleep: And I beseech you
Be not offended, though I glory in
My being thus employed; a happiness
That stands for more then ample satisfaction
For all I have, or can endure. He snores,
And does not hear me; would his sense of feeling
Were bound up too: I should -- I am all fire.
Such heaps of treasure offered as a prey,
Would tempt a modest thief; I can no longer
Forbear. I Will gently touch his Lips, and leave
Kisses him.
No print of mine. Ah! I have heard of Nectar;
But till now never tasted it: These Rubies
Are not clouded by my breath. If once again
I steal, from such a full Exchequer, trifles
Kisses again.
Will not be missed, I am entranced: our fancy
Some say in sleep works stronger, I will prove
How far my -- Sleeps.

Enter Durazzo.
Dur. My bones ache, I am exceeding cold too, I must seek out
A more convenient Truckle-bed. Ha! Do I dream?
No, no, I wake, Camillo, Lentulo,
Donato this; and as I live, Adorio
In a handsome wenches lap, a whoreson; you are
The best accommodated, I will call
My Nephew, and his Mistress to this Pageant.
The object may perhaps do more upon her,
Then all Caldoro's rhetoric. With what
Security they sleep! sure Mercury
Has traveled this way with his charming rod.
Nephew, Caliste. Madam.

Enter Caldoro and Caliste.
Called. Here Sir, is your man returned with
Horses.

Dur. No Boy, no; but here are some you thought not of.

Calist. Adorio.

Dur. The Idol that you worshipped.

Calist. This Mirtilla? I am made a stale:

Dur. I knew 'twould take.

Calist. False man;
But much more treacherous woman, it is apparent,
They jointly did conspire against my weakness,
And credulous simplicity, and have
Prevailed against it.

Called. I Will not kill 'em sleeping;
But if you please, I Will wake 'em first, and after
Offer them as a fatal sacrifice, to your just anger.

Dur. You are a fool, reserve your blood for better uses.

Calist. My fond love, is changed to an extremity of hate,
His very sight is odious.

Dur. I have thought of
A pretty punishment for him, and his Comrades,
Then leave him to his harlotry: If she prove not
Torture enough, hold me an Ass Their horses
Are not far off, I Will cut the Girts and Bridles,
Then turn 'em into the Wood; if they can run
Let 'em follow us as footmen. Will thou fight
For what is thine own already?

Calist. In his Hat
He wears a Jewel, which this faithless Strumpet
As a salary of her Lust, deceived me of,
He shall not keep't to my disgrace, nor will I
Stir till I have it.

Dur. I am not good at niming;
And yet that shall not hinder us, by your leave Sir,
It Is restitution, pray you all bear witness
I do not steal it; here it is.

Calist. Take it not
As a Mistress favor, but a strong assurance
I am your wife.

Called O Heaven.

Duraz. Pray in the Church.
Let us away, Nephew a word: have you not
Been billing in the brakes? Ha, and so deserved
This unexpected favor.

Called. You are pleasant.
Exeunt Durazzo, Caldoro, Caliste.
Ador. As thou art a Gentleman, kill me not basely,
Starts up; the rest wake.
Give me leave to draw my Sword.

Camil. Ha? what is the matter?

Lent. He talked of's Sword.

Donat. I see no enemy near us,
That threatens danger.

Mirt. Sure 'twas but a dream.

Ador. A fearful one. Me thought Caldoro's sword
Was at my throat, Caliste frowning by,
Commanding him, as he desired her favor,
To strike my head off.

Camil. Mere imagination of a disturbed fancy:

Mirt. Here Is your Hat Sir.

Ador. But where my Jewel?

Camil. By all likelihood lost, this troublesome night.

Donat. I saw it when we came unto this place.

Mirt. I looked upon it my self, when you reposed.

Ador. What is become of it?
Restore it, for thou have it, do not put me
To the trouble to search you.

Mirt. Search me?

Ador. You have been
Before your Lady gave you entertainment,
A night-walker in the streets.

Mirt. How, my good Lord?

Ador. Traded in picking pockets, when tame gulls
Charmed with your prostituted flatteries,
Dain'd to embrace you.

Mirt. Love give place to anger.
Charge me with theft, and prostituted baseness?
Were you a Judge, nay more, the King; thus urged,
To your teeth I would say, It Is false.

Ador. This will not do.

Camil. Deliver it in private.

Mirt. You shall be
In public hanged first, and the whole gang of you.
I steal what I presented.

Lent. Do not strive.

Ador. Though thou have swallowed it, I Will rip thy entrail,
But I Will recover it.

Mirt. Help, help.

Ador. A new plot.

Enter Claudio, and two Banditi, (presenting their Pistols.) Claud. Forbear,
libidinous Monsters; if you offer
The least resistance, you are dead: if one
But lay his hand upon his sword, shoot all.

Ador. Let us fight for what we have, and if you can
Win it, enjoy it.

Claud We come not to try
Your valor, but for your money; throw down your sword,
Or I Will begin with you: So if you will
Walk quietly without bonds, you may, if not
We'll force you; thou shall have no wrong,
But justice against these.

1. Bandit. We'll teach your Sir
To meddle with wenches in our walks.

2. Bandit. It being against our Canons.

Camil. Whether will you lead us?

Claud. You shall know that hereafter: Guard 'em sure.
Exeunt:
Enter Alphonso, Monteclaro, Captain.
Alpho. Are all the passages stopped?

Gap And strongly manned,
They must use wings, and fly, if they escape us.

Monte. But why, great Sir, you should expose your person
To such apparent danger, when you may
Have'em brought bound before you; is beyond
My apprehension.

Alpho. I am better armed
Then you suppose: besides it is confirmed
By all that have been robbed, since Severino
Commanded these Banditi; though it be
Unusual in Italy, imitating
The courteous English Thieves, for so they call 'em,
They have not done one murder: I must add too,
That from a strange relation I have heard
Of Severino's Justice, in disposing
The preys brought in, I would be an eyewitness
Of what I take up now but on report:
And therefore it is my pleasure that we should
As soon as they encounter us, without
A show of opposition yield.

Mont. Your will is not to be disputed.

Alph. You have placed
Your ambush so, that if there be occasion
They suddenly may break in.

Capt. My life upon it.

Alph. We cannot travail far, but we shall meet
With some of these good fellows; and be sure
You do as I command you.

Mont. Without fear, sir.
Exeunt.
Enter Severino and Jolante.
Sev. It Is true, I did command Caliste should not
Without my knowledge and consent, assisted
By your advice, be married: but your
Restraint, as you deliver it, denying
A grown up Maid the modest conversation
Of Men, and warrantable pleasures, relished
Of too much rigor, which no doubt has driven her
To take some desperate course:

Jol. What then I did, was in my care thought best.

Sev. I so conceive it;
But where was your discretion to forbid
Access and fit approaches, when you knew
Her Suitors noble, either of which I would
Have wished my son in law? Adorio,
However wild, a young man of good parts,
But better fortunes: his Competitor
Caldoro, for his sweetness of behavior,
Staidness and temperance, holding the first place
Among the Gallants most observed in Naples;
His own revenues of a large extent,
But in the expectation of his Uncles
And Guardians entrata's, by the course
Of nature to descend on him, a Match
For the best Subjects blood, I except none
Of eminence in Italy.

Jol. Your wishes,
Howe'r a while delaid, are not I hope
Impossibilities.

Sev. Though it prove so,
Yet it is not good to give a check to Fortune
When she comes smiling to us. -- [Cornet within]
Hark, this Cornet
Assures us of a prize; there sit in state,
It Is thy first tribute.

Jol. Would we might enjoy our own as Subjects:

Sev. What Is got by the sword,
Is better then inheritance: All those Kingdoms
Subdued by Alexander, were by force extorted,
Though gilded ore with glorious styles of conquest;
His victories but royal robberies,
And his true definition a Thief;
When circled with huge Navies to the terror
Of such as plough'd the Ocean, as the Pirate
Who from a narrow Creek puts off for prey
In a small Pinace, from a second place
New spoil brought in, -- from a third party, brave!
This shall be registered a day of triumph
Designed by fate to honor thee. --
-- Welcome Claudio;
Good booty, ha?

Enter Claudio, Banditi, Adorio, Lentulo, Donato, Camillo, Mirtilla, (at one
door) Banditi, Durazo, Caldoro, Caliste, (at another;) Alphonso, Monteclaro,
Captain, and Banditi.
Clau. Their outsides promise so,
But yet they have not made discovery
Of what they stand possessed of.

Sev. Welcome all
Good boys; you have done bravely, if no blood
Be shed in the service.

1 Band. On our lives no drop sir.

Sev. It Is to my wish.

Jol My Lord!

Sev. No more, I know 'em:

Jol. My daughter and her woman too!

Sev. Conceal your joys.

Dur. Fallen in the Devils mouth.

Call. My father,
And mother! to what fate am I reserved?

Called. Continue masqu'd; or grant that you be known,
From whom can you expect a gentle sentence,
If you despair a Fathers?

Ador. Now I perceive which way I lost my Jewel.

Mirt. I rejoice
I am cleared from theft; you have done me wrong,
But I unasked forgive you.

Dur. It Is some comfort yet
The rivals, men and women, friends and foes, are
Together in one toil.

Sev. You all look pale,
And by your private whisperings and soft murmurs
Express a general fear: pray you shake it off;
For understand you are not fallen into
The hands of a Busiris or a Cacus,
Delighted more in blood then spoil; but given up
To the power of an unfortunate Gentleman,
Not born to these low courses, howsoere
My fate, and just displeasure of the King
Designed me to it: you need not to doubt
A sad captivity here, and much less fear
For profit to be sold for slaves, then shipped
Into another Country; in a word,
You know the proscribed Severino, he
Not unacquainted, but familiar with
The most of you: Want in my self I know not,
But for the pay of these my Squires, who eat
Their bread with danger purchased, and must be
With others fleeces clothed, or live exposed
To the summers scorching heat and winters cold;
To these before you be compelled, (a word
I speak with much unwillingness) deliver
Such coin as you are furnished with.

Duraz. A fine method!
This is neither begging, borrowing, nor robbery,
Yet it has a twang of all of them. But one word Sir.

Sever. Your pleasure.

Duzar. When we have thrown down our Muck, what follows?

Sever. Liberty, with a safe convoy, to any place you choose.

Duraz. By this hand you are
A fair fraternity; for once I Will be
The first example to relieve your Covent.
There Is a thousand crowns, my Vintage, Harvest, Profits
Arising from my Herds, bound in one Bag,
Share it among you.

Sever. You are still the jovial, and good Durazzo.

Duraz. To the Offering, nay,
No hanging an arse, this is their wedding day.
What you must do spite of your hearts, do freely
For your own sakes.

Camil. There Is mine.
They all throw down their purses.
Lent. Mine.

Donat. All that I have.

Called. This to preserve my Jewel.

Ador. Which I challenge;
Let me have justice, for my coin I care not;

Mont. I will not weep for mine.

Capt. Would it were more.

Sev. Nay you are priviledg'd; but why old father
Art thou so slow? thou have one foot in the grave;
And if desire of gold do not increase
With thy expiring lease of life, thou should
Be forwardest.

Alph. In what concerns my self,
I do acknowledge it, and I should lie,
(A vice I have detested from my youth)
If I denied my present store, since what
I have about me now, weighs down in value
Almost a hundred sold, what ever these
Have laid before you, see I do groan under
Throws down three bags.
The burden of my treasure; nay it is Gold,
And if your hunger of it be not sated
With what already I have shown unto you,
Here Is that shall glut it. In this Casket are
Inestimable Jewels, Diamonds
Of such a piercing luster, as struck blind
The Amazed Lapidary, while he labored
To honor his own art in setting 'em.
Opens the Casket.
Some orient Pearls too, which the Queen of Spain
Might wear as Earings, in remembrance of
The day that she was crowned.

Sever. The spoils I think of both the Indies.

Duraz. The great Sultans poor,
If paralleled with this Craessus.

Sever. Why do thou weep?

Alpho. From a most fit consideration of
My poverty, this though restored, will not
Serve my occasions.

Sever. Impossible.

Duraz. May be he would buy his pasport up to Heaven,
And then this too little, though in the journey
It were a good Viaticum.

Alpho. I would make it
A means to help me thither; not to wrong you
With tedious expectation, I Will discover
What my wants are, and yield my reasons for 'em:
I have two sons, twins, the true images
Of what I was at their years; never father
Had fairer, or more promising hopes in his
Posterity: But alas, these sons ambitious
Of glittering honor, and an after-name
Achieved by glorious, and yet pious actions,
(For such were their intentions) put to sea:
They had a well rigged Bottom, fully manned,
An old experienced Master, lusty Sailers,
Stout Land-men, and what is something more then rare,
They did agree, had one design, and that was
In charity to redeem the Christian slaves
Chained to the Turkish servitude.

Sev. A brave aim.

Dur. A most heroique enterprise; I languish
To hear how they succeeded.

Alph. Prosperously
At first, and to their wishes: diverse Galleys
They boarded, and some strong Forts near the shore
They suddenly surpised, a thousand Captives
Redeemed from th'oar, paid their glad vows and prayrs
For their deliverance, their ends acquired;
And making homeward in triumphant manner,
(For sure the cause deserved it.)

Dur. Pray you end here,
The best I fear is told, and that which follows
Must conclude ill.

Alph. Your fears are true, and yet
I must with grief relate it; prodigal fame
In every place with her loud trump proclaiming
The greatness of the action; the Pirates
Of Tunis and Argiers laid wait for 'em
At their return: To tell you what resistance
They made, and how my poor sons fought, would but
Increase my sorrow, and perhaps grieve you
To hear it passionately described unto you
In brief they were taken, and for the great loss
The enemy did sustain their victory,
Being with much blood bought, they do endure
The heaviest captivity, wretched men
Did ever suffer, O my sons? my sons?
To me for ever lost, lost, lost for ever.

Sever. Will not these heaps of Gold added to thine,
Suffice for ransom?

Alpho. For my sons it would,
But they refuse their liberty, if all
That were engaged with them, have not their Irons
With theirs struck off, and set at liberty with them,
Which these heaps cannot purchase.

Sever. Ha? the toughness
Of my heart melts? be comforted old Father
I have some hidden treasure, and if all,
I and my Squires, these three years have laid up,
Can make the sum up, freely take it.

Duraz. I Will sell my self to my shirt, lands, movables, and thou
Shall part with thine too Nephew, rather then
Such brave men shall live slaves.

2. Bandit. We will not yield to it:

3. Bandit. Nor loose our parts.

Sever. How Is this?

2: Bandit. You are fitter far
To be a Churchman, then to have command over good-fellows.

[Strikes 'em down.] Sever. Thus I ever use
Such saucy Rascals, second me Claudio.
Rebellious? do you grumble? I Will not leave
One rouge of 'em alive.

[He discovers himself.] Alpho. Hold, give the sign

All. The King.

Sever. Then I am lost.

Claud. The Woods are full of armed men.

Alpho. No hope of your escape
Can flatter you.

Sever. Mercy dread Sir.

Alpho. Thy carriage in this unlawful course appears so noble,
Especially in this last trial, which
I put upon you, that I wish the mercy
You kneel in vain for, might fall gently on you.
But when the holy Oil was poured upon
My head, and I anointed King, I swore
Never to pardon murder, I could wink at
Your robberies, though our Laws call 'em death;
But to dispense with Monteclaro's blood
Would ill become a King, in him I lost
A worthy subject, and must take from you
A strict account often; it is in vain to move,
My doom's irrevocable.

Monte. Not dread Sir, if Monteclaro live.

Alpho. If? good Laval.

Monte. He lives in him Sir, that you though
Laval.
Three years have not so altered me, but you may
Remember Monteclaro.

Dur. How.

Jol. My Brother.

Calist. Uncle.

Monte. Give me leave, I was
Left dead in the field, but by the Duke Montpensier,
Now General at Millain, taken up,
And with much care recovered.

Alpho. Why lived you so long concealed?

Monte. Confounded with the wrong
I did my Brother, in provoking him
To fight. I spent the time in France that I
Was absent from the Court, making my exise
The punishment imposed upon my self
For my offense.

Jol. Now Sir, I dare confess all
This was the ghest invited to the Banquet,
That drew on your suspicion.

Sever. Your intent,
Though it was ill in you, I do forgive,
The rest I Will hear at leisure, Sir, your sentence.

Alpho. It is a general pardon unto all
Upon my hopes, in your fair lives hereafter
You will deserve it.

Sever. Claud. etc. Long live great Alphonso.

Dur. Your mercy shown in this, now if you please
Decide these lovers difference

Alpho. That is easy.
I Will put it to the women's choice, the men
Consenting to it.

Calist. Here I fix them, never to be removed.

Called. It Is my nil ultra Sir.

Mirt. O that I had the happiness to say
So much to you, I dare maintain my love
Is equal to my Ladies.

Ador. But my mind
A pitch above yours. Marry with a servant
Of no descent or fortune:

Sever. You are deceived,
How ere she has been trained up as a servant,
She is the daughter of a noble Captain,
Who in his voyage to the Persian Gulf,
Perished by shipwreck, one I dearly loved.
He to my care entrusted her, having taken
My word, if he returned not like himself,
I never should discover what she was,
But it being for her good, I will dispense with it.
So much Sir for her blood, now for her portion.
So dear I hold the memory of my friend,
It shall rank with my daughters:

Ador. This made good
I will not be perverse.

Duraz. With a kiss confirm it.

Ador. I sign all concord here, but must to you
Sir
For reparation of my wounded honor,
The justice of the King consenting to it,
Denounce a lawful war.

Alpho. This in our presence:

Ador. The cause dread Sir commands it, though your Edicts
Call private Combats, Murders, rather then
Sit down with a disgrace, arising from
A blow; the Bonds of my obedience shook of,
Ill right my self.

Called. I do confess the wrong,
Forgetting the occasion, and desire
Remission from you, and upon such terms
As by his sacred Majesty shall be judged
Equal on both parts.

Ador. I desire no more.

Alpho. All then are pleased, it is the glory of
A King to make, and keep his subjects happy;
For us we do approve the Roman Maxim,
To save one Citizen is a greater prize,
Then to have killed in War ten Enemies.
Exeunt.
I. SONG.
Between Juno and Hymen.
Juno to the Bride.
ENter a Maid, but made a Bride:
Be bold, and freely taste.
The Marriage Banquet never denied
To such as sit down chaste.
Though he unloose thy Virgin Zone,
Presumed against thy will:
Those joys reserved to him alone,
Thou art a Virgin still.
Hymen to the Bridegroom.
Hail Bridegroom, hail, thy choice thus made.
As thou would have her true
Thou must give o'r thy wanton trade,
And bid loose fires adieu:
That Husband who would have his Wife
To him continue chaste,
In her embraces spends his life,
And makes abroad no waste.
Hymen and Juno.
Sport then like Turtels, and bring forth
Such pledges as may be
Assurance of the Fathers worth,
And Mothers purity.
Juno does bless the Nuptial Bed,
Thus Hymen's Torches burn.
Live long, and may, when both are dead,
Your Ashes fill one Vrn.
II. SONG.
Enteratinment of the Forests Queen.
WElcome, thrice welcome to this shady Green,
Our long wished Cinthia, the Forests Queen,
The Trees begin to bud the glad Birds sing,
In Winter changed by her into the Spring.
We know no night,
Perpetual light
Dawns from your eye.
You being near,
We cannot fear,
Though death stood by.
From you our Swords take edge, our Hearts grow bold.
From you in Fee, their lives your Liegemen hold.
These Groves your Kingdom, and our Law your will;
Smile, and we spare; but if you frown, we kill.
Bless then the hour
That gives the power
In which you may,
At Bed and Board
Embrace your Lord
Both night and day.
Welcome, thrice welcome to this shady Green,
Our long wished Cinthia, the Forests Queen.
EPILOGUE.
IAm left to enquire, then to relate
To the still doubtful Author, at what rate
His merchandise are valued. If they prove
Staple Commodities in your Grace and love,
To this last birth of his Minerva, he
Vows, and we do believe him seriously,
Sloth cast of, and all pleasures else declined,
He Will search with his best care, until he find
New ways, and make good in some labored Song,
Though he grow old, Apollo still is young.
Cherish his good intentions, and declare
By any sign of favor, that you are
Well pleased, and with a general consent,
And he desires no more encouragement.
FINIS
A Very Woman, Or the PRINCE of TARENT.

A TRAGI-COMEDY.

As it has been often acted at the Private-House in Black-Friars, by his late
MAJESTY'S Servants, with great Applause.

Written by PHILIP MASSENGER, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

PROLOGUE.
To such (and some there are, no question here,)
Who happy in their memories do bear
This Subject long since acted, and can say
Truly, we have seen something like this Play.
Our Author with becoming Modesty
(For in this kind he never was bold) by me,
In his defense, thus answers, By command
He undertook this task, nor could it stand
With his love Fortune to refuse to do;
What by his Patron he was called unto.
For whose delight and yours, we hope, with care
He has reviewed it; and with him we dare
Maintain to any man, that did allow
'T was good before, it is much bettered now;
Nor is it sure against the Proclamation,
To raise new Piles upon an old Foundation,
So much to them delivered; to the rest,
To whom each scene is fresh, he does protest,
Should his Muse fail now a fair flight to make,
He cannot fancy what will please, or take.
VIceroy of Sicily Pedro his Son Duke of Messina Don Martinto Cardenes his Son
Don John Antonlo, Prince of Tarent Doctor Paulo, A Physician Cuculo, A Sicilian
Apothecary Citizen Master Man Captain Page Servants Slaves Moors Pirates Guard.
Almira, The Viceroys Daughter Leonora, Duke of Messina's Niece Borachia, Wife
to Cuculo Two Women.
The Scene SICILY.
A Very Woman.
Act. I. Scaen. I.
Enter Pedro and Leonora:
Ped. MY worthiest Mistress! this day cannot end
But prosperous to Pedro, that begins
With this so wished encounter.

Leo. Only, Servant,
To give you thanks in your own Courtly language,
Would argue me more ceremonious
Then heartily affected; and you are
Too well assured, or I am miserable,
Our equal loves have kept one rank too long
To stand at distance now.

Ped. You make me happy
In this so wise reproof, which I receive
As a chaste favor from you, and will ever
Hold such a strong command over my desires,
That though my Blood turn Rebel to my Reason,
I never shall presume to seek ought from you,
But what (your honor safe) you well may grant me,
And Virtue sign the Warrant.

Leo. Your love to me
So limited, will still preserve your Mistress
Worthy her servant, and in your restraint
Of loose affections, bind me faster to you:
But there will be a time when we may welcome
Those wished for pleasures, as Heavens greatest blessings;
When that the Viceroy your most noble father,
And the Duke my uncle, and to that, my Guardian,
Shall by their free consent confirm them lawful.

Ped. You ever shall direct, and I obey you:
Is my sister stirring yet?

Leo. Long since.

Ped. Some business
With her, joined to my service to your felf,
Has brought me hither; pray you vouchsafe the favor
T'acquaint her with so much.

Leo. I am prevented.

Enter Almira and two women.
Alm. Do the rest here; my Cabinet is too hot,
This room is cooler. Brother!

Ped. Morrow sister,
Do I not come unseasonably?

Al. Why good brother?

Ped. Because you are not yet fully made up,
Nor fit for visitation. There are Ladies
And great ones, that will hardly grant access
On any terms to their own Fathers, as
They are themselves, nor willingly be seen
Before they have asked council of their Doctor,
How the Cervize will appear, newly laid on
When they ask blessing.

Al. Such indeed there are
That would be still young, in despite of time,
That in the wrinkled winter of their age
Would force a seeming April of fresh beauty,
As if it were within the power of art
To frame a second nature: But for me,
And for your Mistress, I dare say as much;
The faces, and the teeth you see, we slept with.

Ped. Which is not frequent, sister, with some
Ladies.

Al. You spy no sign of any night, --
Mask here,
(Tie on my Carkanet) nor does your nosthril
Take in the scent of strong perfumes, to stifle
The sourness of our breaths as we are fasting:
You are in a Ladies chamber, gentle Brother,
And not in your Apothecaries shop.
We use the women, you perceive, that serve us,
Like servants, not like such as do create us:
'Faith search our pockets, and if you find there
Comfits of Ambergris to help our kisses,
Conclude us faulty.

Ped. You are pleasant, sister,
And I am glad to find you so disposed,
You will the better hear me.

Al. What you please, Sir.

Ped. I am entreated by the Prince of Tarent
Don John Antonio.

Al. Would you would choose
Some other subject.

Ped. Pray you give me leave,
For his desires are fit for you to hear,
As for me to prefer. This Prince of Tarent
(Let it not wrong him, that I call him friend)
Finding your choice of Don Cardenes liked of
By both your fathers, and his hopes cut off,
Resolves to leave Palermo.

Al. He does well,
That I hear gladly.

Ped. How this Prince came hither,
How bravely furnished, how attended on,
How he has borne himself here, with what charge
He has continued; his magnificence
In costly Banquets, curious Masks, rare Presents,
And of all sorts, you cannot but remember.

Al. Give me my Gloves.

Ped. Now, for reward of all
His cost, his travel, and his dutious service,
He does entreat that you will please he may
Take his leave of you, and receive the favor
Of kissing of your hands.

Al. You are his friend,
And shall discharge the part of one to tell him
That he may spare the trouble; I desire not
To see, or hear more of him.

Ped. Yet grant this,
Which a mere stranger in the way of Courtship
Might challenge from you.

Al. And obtain it sooner.

Ped. One reason for this would do well.

Al. My will
Shall now stand for a thousand; shall I lose
The privilege of my sex, which is my Will,
To yield a Reason like a man? or you
Deny your Sister that which all true women
Claim as their first prerogative, which Nature
Gave to them for a law? and should I break it,
I were no more a woman.

Ped. Sure a good one
You cannot be, if you put off that virtue
Which best adorns a good one, Courtesy
And affable behavior. Do not flatter
Yourself with the opinion that your birth,
Your beauty, or whatever false ground else
You raise your pride upon, will stand against
The censure of just men.

Al. Why let it fall then,
I still shall be unmoved.

Leo. And pray you be you so.

Al. What Jewel's that?

Woe. That which the Prince of Tarent --

Al. Left here, and you received without my knowledge;
I have use often now. Does the Page wait without,
My Lord Cardenes sent t'enquire my health?

Woe. Yes Madam.

Al. Give it him, and with it pray him
To return my service to his Lord, and mine.

Ped. Will you so undervalue one that has
So truly loved you, to bestow the pledge
Of his affection (being a Prince) upon
The servant of his Rival?

Leo. It Is not well,
'Faith, were it Lady? send gold to the Boy.
'Twill please him better.

Al. Do as I command you,
I will keep nothing that may put me in mind
Don John Antonio ever loved, or was,
Being wholly now Cardenes.

Ped. In another
This were mere barbarism, sister, and in you
(For I Will not sooth you) at the best it is rudeness.

Al. Rudeness?

Ped. Yes rudeness, and what is worse, the want
Of civil manners, nay ingratitude
Unto the many and so fair deservings
Of Don Antonio: does this express
Your breeding in the Court, or that you call
The Viceroy father? A poor peasants daughter
That never had conversation but with beasts
(Or men bred like them) would not so far shame
Her education.

Al. Pray you leave my chamber;
I know you for a Brother, not a Tutor.

Leo: You are too violent, Madam.

Al. Were my Father
Here to command me, (as you take upon you
Almost to play his part) I would refuse it.
Where I love, I profess it; where I hate,
In every circumstance I dare proclaim it:
Of all that wear the shapes of men, I loath
That Prince you plead for; no antipathie
Between things most averse in nature, hold
A stronger enmity then his with mine:
With which rest satisfied; if not, your anger
May wrong your self, not me.

Leo. My Lord Cardenes!

Ped. Go; in soft terms,
If you persist thus,
You will be one.

Al. What one? pray you out with it:

Ped. Why, one that I shall wish a stranger to me,
That I might curse you: but --

Enter Martino.
Mar. Whence grows this heat?

Ped. Be yet advised, and entertain him fairly,
For I will send him to you, or no more
Know me a Brother.

Al. As you please.

Ped. Good morrow.
Exit.
Mar. Good morrow, and part thus? you seem moved too:
What desperate sool durst raise a tempest here
To sink himself?

Al Good sir, have patience;
The cause (though I confess I am not pleased)
No way deserves your anger:

Mar. Not mine, Madam?
As if the least offense could point at you,
And I not feel it: 'As you have vouchsafed me
The promise of your heart, conceal it not,
Whomsoever it concerns.

Al. It is not worth
So serious an enquiry: My kind Brother
Had a desire to learn me some new Courtship
Which I distasted, that was all.

Mar. Your Brother,
In being yours, with more security
He might provoke you; yet if he has past
A Brothers bounds --

Leo. What then, my Lord?

Mar. Believe it,
I Will call him to account for it.

Leo. Tell him so.

Al. No more.

Leo. Yes, thus much; though my modesty
Be called in question for it, in his absence
I will defend him: He has said nor done
But what Don Pedro well might say or do.
Mark me, Don Pedro! in which understand
As worthy, and as well as can be hoped for
Of those that love him best, from Don Gardenes.

Mar. This to me Cousin?

Al. You forget your self.

Leo. No, nor the cause, in (which you did so Lady)
Which is so just, that it needs no concealing
On Pedro's part.

Al. What mean you.

Leo. I dare speak it,
If you dare hear it, Sir: He did persuade
Almira, your Almira, to vouchsafe
Some little conference with the Prince of Tarent
Before he left the Court; and that the world
Might take some notice, thou^gh he prosper'd not
In his so loved design, he was not scorned,
He did desire the kissing of her hand,
And then to leave her; this was much:

Mar. 'Twas more
Then should have been urged by him, well denied
On your part, Madam, and I thank you for it.
Antonio had his answer, I your grant:
And why your Brother should prepare for him
An after enterview, or private favor,
I can find little reason.

Leo. None at all.
Why you should be displeased with it.

Mar His respect
To me, as things now are, should have weighed down
His former friendship, 'twas done indiscreetly,
I would be loath to say maliciously,
To build up the demolished hopes of him
That was my Rival: What had he to do
(If he view not my happiness in your favor,
With wounded eyes) to take upon himself
An office so distasteful?

Leo. You may ask
As well, what, any Gentleman has to do
With civil courtesy

Al. Or you with that,
Which at no part concerns you: Good my Lord
Rest satisfied, that I saw him not, nor will.
And that, nor Father, Brother, nor the world
Can work me unto any thing, but what
You give allowance too; in which assurance
With this, I leave you.

Leo. Nay take me along,
You are not angry too?

Al. Presume on that.
Exeunt:
Mar: Am I assured of her, and shall again
Be tortured with suspicion to loose her,
Before I have enjoyed her? the next Sun
Shall see her mine; why should I doubt then? yet
To doubt is safer, then to be secure
But one short day: Great Empires in less time
Have suffered change; she is constant, but a woman,
And what a lovers vows, persuasions, tears,
May in a minute work upon such frailty.
There are too many, and too sad examples.
The Prince of Tarent gone, all were in safety;
Or not admitted to solicit her,
My fears would quit me; it is my fault, if I
Give way to that, and let him never desire
To own what is hard, that dares not guard it.
Who waits there?

Enter Servants and Page.
Serve. Would your Lordship might?

Mar. It Is well
You are so near.

Enter Don John, and Servant.
John. Take care all things be ready
For my remove.

Serve. They are.

Mar. We meet like Friends,
No more like Rivals now: my emulation
Puts on the shape of love and service to you.

John. It is returned:

Mar. 'Twas rumor'd in the Court
You were to leave the City, and that wan me
To find you out: Your Excellence may wonder
That I that never saw you till this hour,
But that I wished you dead, so willingly
Should come to wait upon you to the Ports,
And there, with hope you never will look back,
Take my last farewell of you.

John. Never look back?

Mar. I said so, neither is it fit you should;
And may I prevail with you as a friend,
You never shall, nor while you live hereafter
Think of the Viceroy's Court, or of Palermo,
But as a grave, in which the Prince of Tarent
Buried his honor.

John. You speak in a language
I do not understand.

Mar. No? I Will be plainer.
What madman, that came hither with that pomp
Don John Antonio did, that exact Courtier
Don John Antonio, with whose brave fame only
Great Princesses have fallen in love, and died;
That came with such assurance as young Paris
Did to fetch Helen, being sent back, contemned,
Disgraced and scorned, his large expense laughed at,
His bravery scoffed, the Lady that he courted
Left quietly in possession of another
(Not to be named that day a Courtier
Where he was mentioned, the scarce known Cardenes,
And he to bear her from him) that would ever
Be seen again (having got fairly off)
By such as will live ready witnesses
Of his repulse, and scandal?

John. The grief of it,
Believe me, will not kill me. All man's honor
Depends not on the most uncertain favor
Of a fair Mistress.

Mar. Troth, you bear it well.
You should have seen some that were sensible
Of a disgrace, that would have raged, and sought
To cure their honor, with some strange revenge:
But you are better tempered; and they wrong
The Neapolitans in their report,
That say they are fiery spirits, incapable
Of the least injury, dangerous to be talked with
After a loss, where nothing can move you.
But, like a Stoic, with a constancy,
Words nor affronts, can shake, you still go on
And smile when men abuse you.

John. If they wrong
Themselves, I can: yet I would have you know,
I dare be angry.

Mar. It Is not possible.
A taste often would do well: And I Would make trial
What may be done. Come hither Boy, you have seen
This Jewel, as I take it.

John. Yes, it is that
I gave Almira.

Mar. And in what esteem
She held it, coming from your worthy self,
You may perceive, that freely has bestowed it
Upon my Page.

John. When I presented it,
I did not indent with her, to what use
She should employ it.
See the kindness of
A loving soul; who, after this neglect,
Nay gross contempt, will look again upon her,
And not be frighted from it.

John. No indeed Sir,
Nor give way longer: Give way, do you mark,
To your loose wit, to run the Wilde-goose chase,
Six syllables further: I will see the Lady,
That Lady, that dotes on you, from whose hate
My love increases, though you stand elected
Her Porter, to deny me.

Mar. Sure you will not.

John. Yes, instantly: Your prosperous success
Has made you insolent; and for her sake
I have thus long forborne you; and can yet
Forget it, and forgive it, ever provided,
That you end here, and for what is past recalling,
That she make intercession for your pardon,
Which at her suit, I Will grant.

Mar. I am much unwilling
To move her for a triffle; bear that too,
And then she shall speak to you.

John. Men and Angels,
Take witness for me, that I have endured
More then a man: -- O do not fall so soon,
Stand up; take my hand, so: When I have printed
For ever contumelious word, a wound here,
Then sink for ever.

Mar. O! I suffer justly.

Serve. Murder, murder, murder. Exe. Servants.

2. Serve. Apprehend him.

3. Serve. We'll all join with you.

John. I do wish you more,
My fury will be lost else, if it meet not
Matter to work on; one life is too little
For so much injury.

Enter Almira, Leonora, Servants.
Al. O my Cardenes,
Thou dead, still my Cardenes: Villains, cowards,
What do ye check at? can one arm, and that
A murderers, so long guard the cursed Master,
Against so many swords, made sharp with Justice?

1. Serve. Sure he will kill us all; he is a devil.

2. Serve. He is invulnerable.

Al. Your base fears
Beget such fancies in you: Give me a sword,
This my weak arm, made strong in my revenge,
Shall force a way to it.

John. Would it were deeper Madam,
The thrust; which I would not put by, being yours
Of greater force, to have pierced through that heart
Which still retains your figure: Weep still Lady,
For every tear that flows from those grieved eyes,
Some part of that which maintains life, goes from me.
And so to die, were in a gentle slumber
To pass to Paradise; but you envy me
So quiet a departure from my world,
My world of miseries; therefore take my sword,
And having killed me with it, cure the wounds
It gave Cardenes.

Enter Pedro.
Ped. It Is too true: Was ever
Valor so ill employed?

John. Why stay you Lady?
Let not soft pity work on your hard nature:
You cannot do a better office to
The dead Cardenes, and I willingly
Shall fall a ready sacrifice, to appease him,
Your fair hand offering it.

Al. Thou could ask nothing
But this, which I would grant:

Lev. Flint-hearted Lady!

Ped. Are you a woman, Sister?

Al. Thou art not
A Brother, I renounce that title to thee:
Thy hand is in this bloody act; 'twas this
For which that savage homicide was sent hither.
Thou equal Judge of all things, if that blood,
And innocent blood --

Al. Oh Cardenes,
How is my soul rent between rage and sorrow,
That it can be, that such an upright Cedar
Should violently be torn up by the roots,
Without an earthquake in that very moment
To swallow them that did it.

John. The hurt's nothing,
But the deep wound is in my conscience, friend,
Which sorrow in death only can recover.

Ped. Have better hopes.

Enter Viceroy, Messina, Captain, Guard, and Servants.
Mess. My son, is this the marriage
I came to celebrate? false hopes of man,
I come to find a grave here.

Al. I have wasted
My stock of Tears, and now just Anger help me
To pay in my Revenge the other part
Of duty which I owe thee. O great Sir,
Not as a Daughter now, but a poor Widow,
Made so before she was a Bride, I fly
To your impartial justice; the offense
Is death, and death in his most horrid form:
Let not then title, or a Princes name
(Since a great crime is in a great man greater)
Secure the Offender.

Mess. Give me life for life,
As thou will answer it to the great King
Whose Deputy thou art here.

Al. And speedy Justice.

Mess. Put the damned wretch to torture.

Al. Force him to
Reveal his cursed Confederates, which spare not,
Although you find a Son among them.

Vice. How?

Mess. Why bring you not the Rack forth?

Al. Wherefore stands the Murderer unbound?

Vice. Shall I have hearing?

Mess. Excellent Lady, in this you express
Your true love to the dead.

Al. All love to mankind from me, ends with him.

Vice. Will you hear me yet?
And first to you; you do confess the fact
With which you stand charged?

John. I will not make worse
What is already ill, with vain denial.

Vice. Then understand, though you are Prince of Tarent,
Yet being a Subject to the King of Spain,
No privilege of Sicily can free you
Being convict by a just form of Law,
From the municipal Statutes of that Kingdom,
But as a common man, being found guilty,
Must suffer for it.

John. I prize not my life
So much, as to appeal from any thing
You shall determine of me.

Vice. Yet despair not
To have an equal hearing; the exclaims
Of this g iev'd Father, nor my Daughters tears
Shall sway me from my self; and where they urge
To have you tortured, or led bound to prison,
I must not grant it.

Mess. No?

Vice. I cannot sir;
For men of his rank are to be distinguished
From other men, before they are condemned,
From which (his cause not heard) he yet stands free:
So take him to your charge, and as your life
See he be safe.

Capt. Let me die for him else.
Exe. Ped. John, Cap. and guard.
Mess. The guard of him should have been given to me.

Al. Or unto me.

Mess. Bribes may corrupt the Captain.

Al. And our just wreak, by force or cunning practice,
With scorn prevented

Mar. Oh!

Al. What groan is that?

Vice. They Are apparent signs of life yet in him.

Al. Oh that there were! that I could pour my blood
Into his veins!

Mar. Oh, oh!

Vice. Take him up gently.

Mess. Run for Physicians.

Al. Surgeons.

Mess. All helps else.

Vice. This care of his recovery, timely practiced,
Would have expressed more of a Father in you,
Then your impetuous clamors for revenge.
But I shall find fit time to urge that further
Hereafter to you; it is not fit for me
To add weight to oppressed calamity.
Exeunt.
Act. 2. Scaen. 1.
Enter Pedro, Don John, Captain.
John. WHy should your love to me, having already
So often endured the test, be put unto
A needless trial? have you not long since
In every circumstance and rite of friendship
Outgone all presidents the Ancients boast of,
And will you yet move further?

Ped. Hitherto
I have done nothing (howsoe'r you value
My weak endeavors) that may justly claim
A title to your friendship, and much less
Laid down the debt, which as a tribute due
To your deservings, not I, but mankind
Stands bound to tender.

John. Do not make an Idol
Of him that should, and without superstition,
To you build up an Altar. O my Pedro,
When I am to expire, to call you mine
Assures a future happiness: Give me leave
To argue with you, and the fondness of
Affection struck blind, with justice hear me.
Why should you, being innocent, fling your life
Into the furnace of your fathers anger
For my offense? Or take it granted, (yet
It Is more then supposition) you prefer
My safety before your own, (so prodigally
You waste your favors) wherefore should this Captain
His blood and sweat rewarded in the favor
Of his great Master, falsify the trust
Which from true judgment he reposes in him,
For me a stranger?

Ped. Let him answer that,
He needs no prompter: Speak your thoughts, and freely.

Capt. I ever loved to do so, and it shames not
The bluntness of my breeding; from my youth
I was trained up a Soldier, one of those
That in their natures love the dangers more
Then the rewards of danger. I could add,
My life, when forfeited, the Viceroy pardoned,
But by his intercession; and therefore
It being lent by him, I were ungrateful
(Which I will never be) if I refused
To pay that debt at any time demanded.

Ped. I hope, friend, this will satisfy you.

John. No, it raises
More doubts within me. Shall I from the school
Of gratitude, in which this Captain reads
The text so plainly, learn to be unthankful?
Or viewing in your actions the Idea
Of perfect Friendship, when it does point to me
How brave a thing it is to be a Friend,
Turn from the object? Had I never loved
The fair Almira for her outward features,
Nay, were the beauties of her mind suspected,
And her contempt and scorn painted before me,
The being your Sister would anew inflame me
With much more impotence to dote upon her:
No, dear friend, let me in my death confirm
(Though you in all things else have the precedence)
I Will die ten times, ere one of Pedro's hairs
Shall suffer in my cause.

Ped. If you so love me,
In love to that part of my soul dwells in you,
(For though two bodies, friends have but one soul.)
Loose not both life and me.

Enter a Servant.
1. Serve. The Prince is dead.
Exit.
John. If so, shall I leave Pedro here to answer
For my escape? As thus I clasp thee, let
The Viceroys sentence find me.

Ped. Fly for Heavens sake,
Consider the necessity; though now
We part Anthonio we, may meet again;
But death's division is for ever, friend.

Enter another Servant.
2. Serve. The rumor spread Sir, of Martino's death,
Is checked, there is hope of his recovery.

John. Why should I fly then? when I may enjoy
With mine own life, my friend.

Ped. That Is still uncertain,
He may have a relapse; for once be ruled friend.
He Is a good debtor that pays when it is due;
A prodigal, that before it is required,
Makes tender of it.

Enter three or four Sailors.
1. Sail. The Bark, Sir, is ready.

2. Sail. The wind sits fair.
Whistles within.
3. Sail. Heaven favors your escape.

Cap. Hark how the Boatswain whistles you aboard.
Will nothing move you?

John. Can I leave my friend?

Pedro. I must delay no longer, force him home.

Capt. I Will run the hazard of my fortunes with you,

John. What violence is this? hear but my Reasons.

Pedro. Poor friendship that is cooled with Arguments.
Away, away.

Capt. For Malta.

Pedro. You shall hear
All our events.

John. I may sail round the world,
But never meet thy like. Pedro.

Pedro. Anthonio.

John. I breathe my soul back to thee.

Pedro. In exchange
Bear mine along with thee.

Gapt. Cheerly my hearts.
Exeunt.
Ped. He Is gone. May pittying-Heaven his Pilot be,
And then I weigh not what becomes of me.
Exit.
Enter Viceroy, Messina, and Attendants.
Vice. I tell you right Sir.

Mes. Yes, like a rough Surgeon,
Without a feeling in your self, you search
My wounds unto the quick, then pray declare
The tediousness, and danger of the cure,
Never remembering what the Patient suffers.
But you preach this Philosophy to a man
That does partake of passion, and not
To a dull Stoic.

Vice. I confess you have
Just cause to mourn your Son; and yet if reason
Cannot yield comfort, let example cure.
I am a Father too, my only daughter
As dear in my esteem, perhaps as worthy
As your Martino, in her love to him
As desperately ill, either's loss equal,
And yet I bear it with a better temper.

Enter Pedro.
Pedro. Which if you please to imitate 'twill not wrong
Your piety, nor your judgment.

Mes. We were fashioned in different moulds,
I weep with mine own eyes Sir, pursue my ends too,
Pity to you's a Cordial,
Revenge to me, and that I must, and will have
If my Martino die.

Pedro. Your must, and will,
Shall in your full sailed confidence deceive you.

Lord Hear's Doctor Paulo Sir.

Enter Doctor Paulo, two Surgeons.
Mes. My hand? you rather
Deserve my knee, and it shall bend as to
A second Father, if your saving aids
Restore my son.

Vice. 'Rise thou bright star of knowledge,
The honor of thy art, thou help of nature,
Thou glory of our Academies.

Doct. If I blush Sir
To hear these attributes ill placed on me,
It is excusable, I am no God Sir,
Nor holy Saint that can do miracles,
But a weak sinful man: Yet that I may
In some proportion deserve these favors,
Your excellencies please to grace me with,
I promise all the skill I have acquired
In simples, or the careful observation
Of the superior Bodies, with my judgment
Derived from long experience, stand ready
To do you service.

Mes. Modestly replied.

Vice How is it with you princely Patient?

Mes. Speak,
But speak some comfort Sir.

Doct. I must speak truth,
His wounds, though many, Heaven so guided yet
Anthonio's sword, it pierced no part was mortal.
These Gentlemen who worthily deserve
The names of surgeons have done their duties.
The means they practiced, not ridiculous charms
To stop the blood; no Oils, nor Balsoms bought
Of cheating Quack-salvers, or Montebanks,
By them applied: The rules by Chiron taught,
And AEsculapius, which drew upon him,
The thunderers envy, they with care pursued,
Heaven prospering their endeavors.

Mes. There is hope then
Of his recovery?

Doct. But no assurance;
I must not flatter you. That little air
Of comfort that breathes toward us (for I dare not
Rob these t'inrich my self) you ow their care;
For yet I have done nothing.

Mes. Still more modest,
I will begin with them, to either give
Three thousand crowns.

Vice. I Will double your reward;
See 'em paid presently.

1. Surg. This magnificence
With equity, cannot be conferred on us;
It Is due unto the Doctor.

2. Surg True; we were
But his subordinate ministers, and did only
Follow your grave directions.

Doct. It Is your own,
I challenge no part in it.

Vice Brave on both sides.

Doct. Deserve this, with the honor that will follow
In your attendance.

2. Surg. If both sleep at once,
It Is justice both should die.
Exeunt Surgeons:
Mes For you grave Doctor,
We will not in such petty sums consider
Your high deserts. Our treasury lies open,
Command it as your own.

Vice Choose any Castle,
Nay City, in our Government, and be Lord often.

Doct. Of neither Sir, I am not so ambitious;
Nor would I have your Highnesses secure.
We have but faintly yet begun our journey,
A thousand difficulties and dangers must be
Encountered, ere we end it. Though his hurts,
I mean his outward ones, do promise fair,
There is a deeper one, and in his mind
Must be with care provided for. Melancholy,
And at the height, too near of kin to madness,
Possesses him; his senses are distracted,
Not one, but all; and if I can collect 'em
With all the various ways, invention,
Or industry ever practiced, I shall write it
My masterpiece.

Mes. You more and more engage me.

Vice. May we not visit him?

Doct. By no means Sir,
As he is now, such courtesies come untimely,
I Will yield you reason for it. Should he look on you,
It will renew the memory of that
Which I would have forgotten. Your good prayers
(And those I do presume, shall not be wanting
To my endeavors) are the utmost aids
I yet desire your Excellencies should grant me.
So with my humblest service.

Mes. Go and prosper.
Exit Doctor.
Vice. Observe his piety I have heard, how true
I know not, most Physicians as they grow
Greater in skill, grow less in their Religion.
Attributing so much to natural causes,
That they have little faith in that they cannot
Deliver Reason for: This Doctor steers
Another course; but let this pass, if you please.
Your company to my Daughter.

Mes. I wait on you.
Exeunt.
Enter Leonora, and two Women. Leon. Took she no rest to night?

1. Wom. Not any Madam,
I am sure she slept not. If she slumbred strait,
As if some dreadful vision had appeared,
She started up, her hair unbound, and with
Distracted looks, staring about the Chamber,
She asks aloud; where is Martino? where
Have you concealed him? sometimes names Anthonio,
Trembling in every joint, her brows contracted:
Her fair face as 'twere changed into a curse,
Her hands held up thus, and as if her words
Were too big to find passage through her mouth.
She groans, then throws her self upon her Bed,
Beating her Breast.

Leon. It Is wondrous strange.

2. Wom. Nay more,
She that of late vouchsafed not to be seen,
But so adorned, as if she were to rival
Nero's Poppea, or the Egyptian Queen,
Now careless of her beauties; when we offer
Our service, she contemns it.

Leon. Does she not
Sometimes forsake her Chamber?

2. Wom. Much about
This hour, then with a strange unsettled gate
She measures twice, or thrice the Gallery,
Silent, and frowning (we dare not speak to her)
And then returns. She Is come, pray you now observe her.

Enter Almira in black, carelessly habited.
Al. Why are my eyes fixed on the ground, and not
Bent upwards? Ha! that which was mortal of
My dear Martino, as a debt to nature,
I know this mother Earth has sepulchred:
But his diviner part, his Soul, o'r which
The tyrant death, nor yet the fatal sword
Of cursed Anthonio, his Instrument,
Had the least power, borne upon Angels wings,
Appointed to that office, mounted far
Above the Firmament.

Leon. Strange imagination!
Dear Cousin your Martino lives.

Al. I know you,
And that in this you flatter me. He Is dead,
As much as could die of him: But look yonder
Amongst a million of glorious lights
That deck the heavenly Canopy; I have
Discerned his soul transformed into a star.
Do you not see it?

Leon. Lady.

Al. Look with my eyes.
What splendour circles it! the heavenly Archer
Not far off distant, appears dim with envy,
Viewing himself out-shin'd. Bright Constellation
Dart down thy beams of pity on Almira;
And since thou findst such grace where now thou art,
As I did truly love thee on the Earth,
Like a kind Harbinger, prepare my lodging,
And place me near thee.

Leon. I much more then fear,
She Will grow into a frenzy.

Al. How! what is this?
A dismal sound! Come nerer Cousin, lay
Your ear close to the ground, closer I pray you.
Do you howl? are you there Anthonio?

Leon. Where sweet Lady?

Al. In The Vault, in Hell, on the infernal rack,
Where murderers are tormented: Yirk him soundly.
'T was Rhadamanths sentence; Do your office Furies.
How he rores! what plead to me to mediate for you?
I am deaf, I cannot hear you.

Leon. It Is but fancy,
Collect your self.

Al. Leave babbling; it is rare Music.
Rhamnusia plays on a pair of tongs
Red hot; and Proserpine dances to the confort;
Pluto sits laughing by too. So, enough,
I do begin to pity him.

Leon I wish, Madam,
You would show it to your self.

2. Wom. Her fit begins
To leave her.

Al. O my brains! are you there Cousin?

Leon. Now she speaks temperately. I am ever ready
To do you service: How do you?

Al. Very much troubled.
I have had the strangest waking dream of Hell
And Heaven, I know not what.

Leon. My Lord your Father
Is come to visit you. As ye would not grieve him
That is so tender of you, entertain him
With a becoming duty.

Enter Viceroy, Messinae, Pedro, Attendants:
Vice. Still forlorn?
No comfort my Almira?

Mes. In your sorrow,
For my Martino, Madam, you have expressed
All possible love and tenderness. Too much of it
Will wrong your self, and him. He may live Lady
(For we are not past hope) with his future service,
In some part to deserve it.

Al. If Heaven please
To be so gracious to me, I Will serve him
With such obedience, love, and humbleness,
That I will rise up an example for
Good wives to follow: But until I have
Assurance what fate will determine of me,
Thus like a desolate Widow, give me leave
To weep for him; for should he die, I have vowed
Not to outlive him; and my humble suit is,
One Monument may cover us, and Anthonio
In justice you must grant me that be offered
A Sacrifice to our Ashes.

Vice. Prithee put off
These sad thoughts, both shall live (I doubt it not)
A happy pair.

Enter Viceroy, Cuculo, and Borachia,
Cuc. O Sir, the foulest treason
That ever was discovered.

Vice. Speak it, that
We may prevent it.

Cuc. Nay it is past prevention,
Though you allow me wise (in modesty,
I will not say oraculous) I cannot help it.
I am a Statesman, and some say a wise one,
But I could never conjure, nor divine
Of things to come.

Vice. Leave fooling; to the point,
What treason?

Cuc. The false Prince Don John Anthonio
Is fled.

Vice. It is not possible.

Ped. Peace, Scriech-owl.

Cuc. I must speak, and it shall out, sir; the Captain
You trusted with the Fort, is run away too.

Alm. O miserable woman, I defy
All comfort, cheated too of my revenge!
As you are my Father sir, and you my Brother,
I will not curse you; but I dare, and will say
You are unjust and treacherous. If there be
A way to death, I Will find it.
Exeunt Almira, Leonora, women.
Vice. Follow her,
She Will do some violent act upon herself:
Till she be better tempered, bind her hands,
And fetch the Doctor to her. Had not you
A hand in this?

Ped. I sir, I never knew
Such disobedience.

Vice. My honor's touched in it:
Let Galleys be manned forth in his pursuit,
Search every Port and Harbor; if I live,
He shall not 'scape thus.

Mess. Fine hypocrisy!
Away dissemblers, it is confederacy
Betwixt thy son and self, and the false Captain,
He could not thus have vanished else. Ye have murdered
My Son amongst you, and now murder Justice.
You know it most impossible he should live,
Howe'r the Doctor for your ends dissembled,
And you have shifted hence Anthonio.

Vice: Messina, thou art a crazed and grieved old man,
And being in my Court protected by
The law of hospitality, or I should
Give you a sharper answer: May I perish,
If I knew of his flight.

Mess. Fire then the Castle,
Hang up the Captains wife and children.

Vice. Fie sir.

Ped. My Lord, you are uncharitable; capital treasons
Exact not so much.

Mess. Thanks most noble Signior,
We ever had your good word and your love

Cuc. Sir, I dare pass my word, my Lords are clear
Of any imputation in this case
You seem to load. 'em with.

Mess. Impertinent fool;
No, no, the loving faces you put on
Have been but grinning vizors: you have juggled me
Out of my son, and out of justice too.
But Spain shall do me right; believe me Viceroy,
There I will force it from thee by the King,
He shall nor eat nor sleep in peace for me
Till I am righted for this treachery.

Vice Thy worse Messina, since no reason can
Qualify thy intemperance, the corruption
Of my subordinate Ministers cannot wrong
My true integrity, let privy searches
Examine all the Land.

Ped. Fair fall Anthonio.
Ex. Viceroy, Ped. Attend.
Cuc. This is my wife, my Lord; troth speak your conscience,
Is It not a goodly Dame?

Mess. She is no less Sir,
I will make use of these; may I entreat you
To call my Niece.

Bor. With speed sir.
Ex. Borachia!
Cuc. You may my Lord
Suspect me as an Agent in these State conveyances.
Let Signior Cuculo then be never more,
For all his place, wit, and authority,
Held a most worthy honeit Gentleman.

Enter Borachia with Leonora.
Mes. I do acquit you Signior. Niece you see
To what extremes I am driven, the cunning Viceroy
And his son Pedro, having expressed too plainly
Their cold affections to my son Martino;
And therefore I conjure thee Leonora,
By all thy hopes from me, which is my Dukedom,
If my son fail, however all thy fortunes,
Though heretofore some love has past betwixt
Don Pedro, and thy self, Abjure him now.
And as thou keep'st Almira company,
In this her desolation, so in hate
To this young Pedro for thy Cousins love,
Be her associate; or assure thy self,
I cast thee like a stranger from my blood.
If I do ever hear, thou see, or send'st
Token, or receive message by you Heaven,
I never more will own thee.

Leon. O dear Uncle,
You have put a tyrannous yoke upon my heart,
And it will break it.
Exit Leonard.
Mes. Gravest Lady; you
May be a great assister in my ends.
I buy your diligence thus: Divide this couple,
Hinder their enterviews; fain it is her will
To give him no admittance, if he crave it,
And thy rewards shalll be thine own desires.
Whereto good Sir, but add your friendly aids,
And use me to my uttermost.

Cuculo. My Lord,
If my wife please, I dare not contradict.
Borachia, what do you say?

Bor I say, my Lord,
I know my place, and be assured I will
Keep fire and toe a sunder.

Mes. You in this
Shall much deserve me.
Exit Messina.
Cuc. We have took upon us
A heavy charge. I hope you will now forbear
Th'excess of Wine.

Bor. I will do what I please.
This day the markets kept for slaves, go you
And buy me a fine timber'd one to assist me.
I must be better waited on.

Cuc. Any thing.

Ped. So you will leave Wine.

Bor. Still prating?

Cuc. I am gone Duck.
Exit Cuculo.
Bor. Pedro! so hot upon the scent, I Will fit him.

Enter Pedro.
Ped. Donna Borachia, you most happily
Are met to pleasure me.

Bor. It may be so,
I use to pleasure many. Here lies my way,
I do beseech you Sir, keep on your voyage.

Ped. Be not so short, sweet Lady, I must with you.

Bor. With me Sir, I beseech you Sir; why, what Sir
See you in me?

Ped. Do not mistake me Lady,
Nothing but honesty.

Bor. Hang honesty;
Trump me not up with honesty. Do you mark Sir,
I have a charge Sir, and a special charge Sir;
And it is not honesty can win on me Sir.

Ped. Prithee conceive me rightly.

Bor. I conceive ye?

Ped. But understand.

Bor. I will not understand sir,
I cannot, nor I do not understand sir.

Ped. Prethree Borachia, let me see my Mistress;
But look upon her, stand you by.

Bor. How Is this?
Shall I stand by? what do you think of me.
Now by the virtue of the place I hold,
You are a Paltry Lord to tempt my trust thus.
I am no Hellen, nor no Heccuba,
To be deflowred of my loyalty
With your fair language.

Ped. Thou mistak'st me still.

Bor. It may be so; my place will bear me out in it;
And will mistake you still, make you your best on it,

Ped. A Pox upon thee, let me but behold her.

Bor. A Plague upon you, you shall never see her:

Ped. This is a croan in grain! Thou art so testie,
Prithee take breath, and know thy friends.

Bor. I will not,
I have no friends, nor I will have none this way.
And now I think on it better, why will you see her?

Ped. Because she loves me dearly, I her equally.

Bor. She hates you damnably, most wickedly,
(Build that upon my word) most wickedly;
And swears her eyes are sick when they behold ye.
How fearfully have I heard her rail upon ye,
And cast, and rail again, and cast again;
Call for hot Waters, and then rail again.

Ped. How? it is not possible.

Bor. I have heard her swear
(How justly, you best know, and where the cause lies)
That ye are (I shame to tell it) but it must out.
Fie, fie, why, how have you deserved it?

Ped. I am what?

Bor. The beastliest man; why what a grief must this be,
Sir-reverence of the company, a rank whoremaster:
Ten livery whores, she assured me on her credit,
With weeping eyes she spoke it, and seven Citizens,
Beside all voluntaries that serve under ye,
And of all Countries.

Ped. This must needs be a lie.

Bor. Besides ye are so careless of your body,
Which is a foul fault in ye.

Ped. Leave your fooling,
For this shall be a fable. Happily
My Sisters anger may grow strong against me,
Which thou mistak'st.

Bor. She hates you very well too,
But your Mistress hates you heartily; look upon ye?
Upon my conscience, she would see the devil first,
With eyes as big as sawcers. When I but named ye,
She has leapt back thirty foot: If once she smell ye,
For certainly ye are rank, she says extreme rank,
And the wind stand with ye too, she is gone for ever.

Pedro. For all this I would see her.

Bor. That Is all one.
Have you new eyes when those are scratched out? or a nose
To clap on warm? Have you proof against a Pisspot;
Which if they bid me, I must fling upon you?

Ped. I shall not see her, then you say?

Bor. It seems so.

Ped. Prethree be thus far friend, then good Borachia,
To give her but this Letter, and this Ring,
And leave thy pleasant lying, which I pardon;
But leave it in her pocket, there is no harm in it.
I Will take thee up a Petticoat, will that please thee?

Bor. Take up my Petticoat? I scorn the motion,
I scorn it with my heels; take up my Petticoat?

Ped. And why thus hot?

Bor. Sir, you shall find me hotter
If you take up my Petticoat.

Ped. I Will give thee a new Petticoat:

Bor. I scorn the gift: Take up my Petticoat?
Alas my Lord, you are to young, my Lord;
To young my Lord to circumcise me that way.
Take up my Petticoat? I am a woman,
A woman of another way, my Lord;
A Gentlewoman. He that takes up my Petticoat,
Shall have enough to do, I warrant him.
I would fain see the proudest of you all so lusty:

Ped. Thou art disposed still to mistake me.

Bor. Petticoat.
You show now what you are, but do your worst, Sir.

Ped. A wildfire take thee.

Bor. I ask no favor of ye,
And so I leave ye; and withal I charge ye
In my own name, for sir I would have ye know it,
In this place I present your fathers person:
Upon your life, not dare to follow me;
For if you do
Exit Borachia.
Ped. Go, and the Pox go with thee,
If thou have so much moisture to receive 'em.
For thou will have 'em, though a Horse bestow 'em,
I must devise a way, for I must see her,
And very suddenly; and Madam Petticoat,
If all the wit I have, and this can do,
I Will make you break your charge, and your hope too.
Exit.
Act. 3. Scaen. 1.
Enter Master, Man, Don John, Captain, with diverse Slaves. Mast. COme rank your
selves, and stand out handsomely.
Now ring the Bell, that they may know my Market.
Stand you two here, you are personable men,
And apt to yield good sums, if women cheapen:
Put me that Pig-complexion'd fellow behind,
He will spoil my sale else, the slave looks like famine:
Sure he was got in a Cheese-press, the whay runs out on's Nose yet.
He will not yield above a peck of Oysters,
If I can get a quart of wine in too, ye are gone Sir:
Why sure, thou had no father.

Slave. Sure I know not.

Mast: No certainly, a March Frog kept thy mother;
Thou art but a monster Paddock. Look who comes, Sirrah.
Exit Man. And next prepare the Song, and do it lively.
Your tricks too Sirrah; they are ways to catch the buyer,
And if you do 'em well, they will prove good Dowries,
How now?

Enter Man. Man. They come Sir, with their bags full laden.

Mast. Reach me my stool. O! here they come:

Enter Doctor, Apothecary, Cuculo, and Citizens. Cuc. That Is he.
He never fails monthly to sell his slaves here,
He buys 'em presently upon their taking,
And so disperses 'em to every Market.

Mast. Begin the song, and chaunt it merrily --
Well done.

Doct. Good morrow.

Mast. Morrow to you Signiors:

Doct. We come to look upon your slaves, and buy too,
If we can like the persons, and the prices.

Cuc. They show fine active fellows.

Mast. They are no less Sir,
And people of strong labors.

Doct. That Is in the proof Sir.

Apo. Pray what is the price of this Red-bearded fellow?
If his Call be good, I have certain uses for him.

Mast. My Sorrel slaves are of a lower price,
Because the colors faint. Fifty Chekeens Sir.

Apo. What be his virtues?

Mast. He will poison Rats,
Make him but angry, and his eyes kill Spiders;
Let him but fasting, spit upon a Tode,
And presently it bursts, and dies; his dreams kill;
He Will run you in a wheel, and draw up water;
But if his Nose drop in it, 'twill kill an army.
When ye have worn him to the Bones with uses,
Thrust him into an Oven, luted well,
Dry him, and beat him, flesh and bone to powder;
And that kills Scabs and Aches of all clymates.

Apo. Pray at what distance may I talk to him?

Mast. Give him but Sage and Butter in a morning,
And there is no fear: But keep him from all women,
For there his poison swells most.

Apo. I will have him.
Cannot he breed a plague too?

Mast. Yes, yes, yes.
Feed him with Fogs probatum. Now to you Sir,
Do you like this slave?

Cuc. Yes, if I like his price well.

Mast. The price is full an hundred, nothing bated.
Sirrah, sell the Moors there; feel, he is high and lusty,
And of a gamesom nature; bold, and secret,
Apt to win favor of the man that owns him,
By diligence, and duty: Look upon him.

Doct. Do ye hear Sir?

Mast. I Will be with you presently.
Mark but his limbs, that slave will cost ye fourscore.
An easy price, turn him about, and view him.
For these two Sir? why they are the finest children,
Twins on my credit sir. Do you see this Boy, sir,
He will run as far from ye in an hour.

Cit. Will he so sir?

Mast. Conceive me rightly, if upon an errand,
As any horse you have.

Cit. What will this Girl do?

Mast. Sure no harm at all sir,
For she sleeps most an end.

Cit. An excellent house-wife.
Of what Religion are they?

Mast. What you will sir,
So there be meat, and drink in it; they will do little
That shall offend ye; for their chief desire
Is to do nothing at all sir.

Cuc. A hundred is too much.

Mast. Not a doit bated,
He Is a brave slave; his eye shows activeness,
Fire, and the mettle of a man, dwells in him.
Here Is one you shall have.

Cuc. For what?

Mast. For nothing,
And thank ye too.

Doct. What can he do?

Mast. Why, any thing that is ill,
And never blush at it: He Is so true a thief,
That he will steal from himself, and think he has got by it.
He stole out of his Mothers belly, being an Infant,
And from a lousie Nurse he stole his nature;
From a Dog his look, and from an Ape his nimbleness;
He will look in your face, and pick your pockets,
Rob ye the most wise Rat of a Cheese-paring;
There where a Cat will go in, he will follow,
His body has no backbone. In to my company
He stole, for I never bought him, and will steal in to yours,
And ye stay a little longer. Now if any of ye
Be given to the excellent art of lying,
Behold, before ye here the masterpiece;
He will out-lie him that taught him, Monsieur Devil,
Offer to swear he has eaten nothing in a twelve month,
When his mouth's full of Meat.

Cuc. Pray keep him, he is Jewel,
And here is your money for this fellow.

Mast. He Is yours sir?

Cuc. Come follow me.
Exit with Don John.
Cit. Twenty Chekeens for these two.

Mast. For five and twenty take 'em.

Cit. There Is your money;
I Will have 'em, if it be to sing in Cages.

Mast. Give 'em hard Eggs, you never had such Black birds.

Cit. Is she a Maid, do think?

Mast. I dare not swear Sir,
She is nine year old, at ten you shall find few here:

Cit. A merry fellow, thou say true. Come children.
Exit with the Moors.
Doct. Here tell your money; if his life but answer.
His ontward promises, I have bought him cheap Sir.

Mast. Too cheap a conscience, he is a pregnant Knave.
Full of fine thoughts, I warrant him.

Doct. He Is but weak timber'd.

Mast It Is the better,
He will turn Gentleman a great deal sooner.

Doct. Very weak Legs.

Mast. Strong as the time allows Sir.

Doct. What Is that fellow?

Mast. Who this? The finest thing in all the world Sir,
The punctuallest, and the perfitest, an English mettle,
But coined in France; your servants servant Sir,
Do you understand that? or your shadows servant.
Will you buy him to carry in a Box! Kiss your hand sirrah;
Let fall your cloak on one shoulder; face to your left hand;
Fether your Hat; slope your Hat; now charge your honor.
What think you of this fellow?

Doct. Indeed I know not,
I never saw such an Ape before. But hark you,
Are these things serious in his nature?

Mast. Yes, yes;
Part of his Creed: come do some more devices.
Quarrel a little, and take him for your enemy,
Do it in dumb show. Now observe him nearly.

Doct. This fellow's mad, stark mad.

Mast. Believe they are all so.
I have sold a hundred of them.

Doct. A strange Nation:
What may the women be?

Mast. As mad as they;
And as I have heard for truth, a great deal madder.
Yet you may find some civil things amongst 'em;
But they are not respected. Nay never wonder,
They have a City Sir, I have been in it,
And therefore dare affirm it; where, if you saw
With what a load of vanity it is fraughted,
How like an everlasting Morris-dance it looks;
Nothing but Hobbyhorse, and Maid-marrian;
You would start indeed:

Doct. They are handsome men.

Mast. Yes: If they would thank their Maker,
And seek no further; but they have new Creators
God Tailor, and God Mercer, a kind of Jews Sir,
But fallen into Idolatry, for they worship
Nothing with so much service, as the Cow-calfs.

Doct. What do mean you by Cow-calfs?

Mast. Why their women.
Will you see him do any more tricks?

Doct. It Is enough, I thank ye;
But yet I'fl buy him, for the rareness of him,
He may make my princely patient mirth, and that done,
I Will claim him in my study, that at void hours
I may run o'r the story of his Country.

Mast. His price is forty.

Doct. Hold, I Will once be foolish,
And buy a lump of levity to laugh at.

Apo. Will your worship walk?

Doct. How now Apothecary,
Have you been buying too?

Apo A little Sir;
A dose or two of mischief.

Doct. Fare ye well Sir,
As these prove, we shall look the next wind for ye.

Mast. I shall be with ye Sir.

Doct. Who bought this fellow?

2. Cit. Not I.

Apo. Nor I.

Doct. Why does he follow us then?

Mast. Did not I tell ye he would steal to ye?

2. Cit. Sirrah.
You moldy chops, know you crib, I would wish you
And get from whence you came.

Slave. I came from no place.

Doct. Will thou be my fool, for fools they say, will tell truth.

Sla. Yes, if you will give me leave Sir to abuse you,
For I can do that naturally.

Doct. And I can beat ye.

Slave. I should be sorry else, Sir.

Mast. He looks for that, as duly as his victuals,
And will be extreme sick when he is not beaten.
He will be as wanton, when he has a bone broken,
As a Cat in a bowl on the water.

Doct. You will part with him?

Mast. To such a friend as you Sir.

Doct. And without money?

Mast. Not a penny Signior;
And would he were better for ye.

Doct. Follow me then,
The Knave may teach me something.

Slave. Something, that
You dearly may repent, howe'r you scorn me,
The slave may prove your Master.

Doct. Farewell once more.

Mast. Farewell, and when the wind serves next, expect me.
Exeunt.
Enter Cuculo, and Don John.
Cuc. Come Sir, you are mine, Sir, now; you serve a man Sir,
That when you know more, you will find.

John. I hope so

Cuc. What do thou hope?

John. To find ye a kind master.

Cuc. Find you your self a diligent true servant,
And take the precept of the wise before ye,
And then you may hope Sirrah. Uuderstand:
You serve me. What is me? a man of credit.

John. Yes Sir.

Cuc. Of special credit, special office.
Hear first, and understand again, of special office.
A man that nods upon the thing he meets,
And that thing bows.

John. It Is fit it should be so Sir.

Cuc. It shall do so. A man near all importance.
Do thou digest this truly?

John. I hope I shall Sir.

Cuc. Besides, thou art to serve a noble Mistress,
Of equal place and trust. Serve usefully,
Serve all with diligence, but her delights,
There make your stop. She is a woman sirrah;
And though a culled out virtue, yet a woman
Thou art not troubled with the strength of blood,
And stirring faculties, for she will show a fair one?

John. As I am a man, I may; but as I am your man,
Your trusty, useful man, those thoughts shall perish.

Cuc: It Is apt, and well distinguished. The next precept,
And then observe me, you have all your duty:
Keep as thou would keep thine eyesight, all Wine from her,
All talk of Wine.

John. Wine is a comfort, Sir.

Cuc. A Devil, Sir; let her not dream of Wine,
Make her believe there neither is, nor was Wine,
Swear it.

John. Will you have me lie?

Cuc. To my end, Sir;
For if one drop of Wine but creep into her,
She is the wisest woman in the world straight,
And all the women in the world together
Are but a whisper to her; a thousand Iron-mills
Can be heard no further then a pair of Nut-crackers:
Keep her from Wine, Wine makes her dangerous.
Fall back; my Lord Don Pedro!

Enter Pedro.
Ped. Now Mr. Office:
What is the reason that your vigilant greatness,
And your wives wonderful wiseness have locked up from me
The way to see my Mistress? whose Dog's dead now,
That you observe these Vigils?

Cuc. Very well, my Lord;
Belike we observe no law then, nor no order,
Nor feel no power, nor will of him that made 'em,
When State-commands thus slightly are disputed:

Ped. What State-command? do thou think any State
Would give thee any thing but Eggs to keep,
Or trust thee with a secret above lousing?

Cuc. No, no, my Lord I am not passionate,
You cannot work me that way to betray me.
A point there is in it, that you must not see sir,
A secret and a serious point of State too;
And do not urge it further, do not Lord,
It will not take; you deal with them that wink not:
You tried my wife, alas you thought she was foolish,
Won with an empty word; you have not found it.

Ped. I have found a pair of Coxcombs, that I am sure on.

Cuc. Your Lordship may say three; I am not passionate.

Ped. How Is that?

Cuc. Your Lordship found a faithful Gentlewoman,
Strong, and inscrutable as the Viceroy's heart,
A woman of another making, Lord:
And lest she might partake with woman's weakness,
I have purchased her a rib to make her perfect,
A rib that will not shrink, nor break in the bending:
This trouble we are put to, to prevent things,
Which your good Lordship holds but necessary.

Ped A fellow of a handsome and free promise,
And much methinks I am taken with his countenance.
Do you serve this Yeoman, Porter?

Cuc. Not a word
Basta, your Lordship may discourse your freedom;
He is a slave of State sir, so of silence.

Ped. You are very punctual State-cut; fare ye well,
I shall find time to fit you too, I fear not.
Exit Pedro.
Cuc. And I shall fit you Lord; you would be billing;
You are too hot, sweet Lord, too hot: Go you home,
And there observe these lessons I first taught you,
Look to your charge abundantly; be wary,
Trusty and wary: much weight hangs upon me,
Watchful and wary too! this Lord is dangerous,
Take courage and resist; for other uses
Your Mistress will inform ye. Go, be faithful,
And do ye hear? no wine.

John. I shall observe Sir.
Exeunt.
Enter Doctor and Surgeons:
Doct. He must take air.

1 Sur. Sir, under your correction,
The violence of motion may make
His wounds bleed fresh.

2 Sur. And he has lost already
Too much blood, in my judgment.

Doct. I allow that;
But to choke up his spirits in a dark room,
Is far more dangerous. He comes; no questions.

Enter Martino.
Mar: Certain we have no reason, nor that soul
Created of that pureness books persuade us:
We understand not sure; nor feel that sweetness
That men call Virtues chain to link our actions.
Our imperfections form, and flatter us;
A will to rash and rude things; is our reason,
And that we glory in, that makes us guilty.
Why did I wrong this man, unmanly wrong him,
Unmannerly? He gave me no occasion;
In all my heat how noble was his temper?
And when I had forgot both man and manhood,
With what a gentle bravery did he chide me?
And say he had killed me, whither had I traveled?
Killed me in all my rage, oh how it shakes me!
Why did thou do this, fool? a woman taught me,
The Devil and his Angel woman bid me.
I am a beast, the wildest of all beasts,
And like a beast I make my blood my master:
Farewell, farewell for ever name of Mistress,
Out of my heart I cross thee; love and women
Out of my thoughts.

Doct. I, now you show your manhood.

Mar: Doctor believe me, I have bought my knowledge,
And dearly, Doctor; they are dangerous creatures,
They sting at both ends, Doctor; worthless creatures,
And all their loves and favors end in ruins.

Doct. To man indeed.

Mar. Why now thou take me rightly:
What can they show, or be? what act deserve us
While we have virtue, and pursue her beauties?

Doct. And yet I have heard
Of many virtuous women.

Mar. Not many, Doctor, there your reading fails you:
Would there were more, and in their loves less dangers.

Doct. Love is a noble thing without all doubt sir.

Mar Yes, and an excellent to cure the itch.
Ex.
1 Sur. Strange melancholy!

Doct. By degrees 'twill lessen,
Provide your things.

2 Sur. Our care shall not be wanting.
Exeunt.
Enter Leonora and Almira.
Leon. Good Madam, for your healths sake clear those clouds up,
That feed upon your beauties like diseases:
Times hand will turn again, and what he ruins
Gently restore, and wipe off all your sorrows
Believe ye are to blame, much to blame Lady;
You tempt his loving care whose eye has numbered
All our afflictions, and the time to cure 'em:
You rather with this torrent choke his mercies
Then gently slide in to his providence.
Sorrows are well allowed, and sweeten Nature,
Where they express no more then drops on lillies;
But when they fall in storms, they bruise our hopes,
Make us unable (though our comforts meet us)
To hold our heads up: Come, you shall take comfort;
This is a sullen grief becomes condemned men,
That feel a weight of sorrow through their souls:
Do but look up: Why so? is not this better
Then hanging down your head still like a Violet,
And dropping out those sweet eyes for a wager?
Pray ye speak a little.

Al Pray ye desire no more,
And if ye love me, say no more.

Leon. How fain
(If I would be as wilful, and partake in it)
Would you destroy your self? how often, Lady,
Even of the same disease have you curd me,
And shook me out on it; chid me, tumbled me,
And forced my hands thus?

Al. By these tears no more.

Leo. You are too prodigal of 'em. Well, I will not,
For though my love bids me transgress your will,
I have a service to your sorrows still.
Exeunt.
Enter Pedro and Don John.
John. Indeed my Lord, my place is not so near;
I wait below stairs, and there sit, and wait
Who comes to seek accesses; nor is it fit Sir
My rudeness should intrude so near their lodgings.

Ped. Thou may invent a way, it is but a trial;
But carrying up this Letter, and this token,
And giving 'em discreetly to my Mistress,
The Lady Leonora; there is my Purse,
Or any thing thou will ask me: if thou knew'st me,
And what I may be to thee for this courtesy.

John. Your Lordship speaks so honestly, and freely,
That by my troth I Will venture.

Ped. I deerly thank thee.

John. And it shall cost me hard; nay, keep your purse Sir:
For though my bodies bought, my mind was never.
Though I am bound, my courtesies are no slaves.

Ped. Thou should be truly gentle.

John. If I were so,
The state I am in, bids you not believe it.
But to the purpose Sir, Give me your Letter,
And next your counsel, for I serve a crafty Mistress.

Ped. And she must be removed, thou will else never do it.

John. I, there is the plague. Think, and I Will think a while too.

Ped. Her husbands suddenly fallen sick.

John. She cares not
If he were dead, indeed it would do better:

Ped. Would he were hanged.

John. Then she would run for joy, Sir.

Ped. Some Lady crying out.

John. She has two already.

Ped. Her house is a fire.

John. Let the fool, my husband, quench it.
This will be her answer: This may take, it will sure!
Your Lordship must go presently, and send me
Two or three bottles of your best Greek Wine;
The strongest, and sweetest.

Ped. Instantly;
But will that do?
Exit Pedro.
John. Let me alone to work it;
Wine I was charged to keep by all means from her,
All secret locks it opens, and all counsels,
That I am sure, and gives men all accesses.
Pray Heaven she be not loving, when she is drunk now;
For drunk she shall be, though my pate pay for it;
She Will turn my stomach then abominably,
She has a most wicked face, and that lewd face,
Being a drunken face, what face will there be?
She cannot ravish me. Now if my Master
Should take her so, and know I minister'd,
What will his wisdom do? I hope be drunk too,
And then all is right. Well Lord, to do the service,
Above these Puppit-plays, I keep a life yet.
Here come the executioners: You are welcome,
Give me your load, and tell my Lord, I am at it:

Enter Servant with Bottles.
Serve. I will sir, speed you sir.
Exit
John. Good speed on all sides.
It Is mon-strong, strong Wine: O the yauns that she will make!
Look to your stern deer Mistress, and steer right,
Here Is that will work, as high as the Bay of Portugal:
Stay, let me see; I Will try her by the Nose first,
For if she be a right Sow, sure she will find it.

Enter Borachia.
She is yonder by her self, the Lady's from her.
Now to begin my sacrifice, she stirs, and vents it.
O how she holds her nose up like a Jennet
In The wind of a Grass-mare! She has it full now,
And now she comes. I Will stand aside a while.
Bor: It Is wine; I sure it is wine! excellent strong wine!
In The must I take it: Very wine: this way too.

John. How true she hunts? I Will make the train a little longer.

Bor. Stronger, and stronger still! still blessed wine!

John. Now she hunts hot.

Bor. All that I can make for this wine,
This way it went sure.

John. Now she is at a cold scent.
Make out your doubles Mistress. O well hunted,
That Is she, that is she.

Bor. O, if I could but see it!
O what a precious scent it has! but handle it!

John. Now I Will untappice.

Bor. What Is that? still it is stronger.
Why how now sirrah? what is that? answer quickly,
And to the point.

John. It Is wine forsooth, good wine,
Excellent Candi-wine.

Bor. It Is well forsooth:
Is this a drink for slaves? Why saucy sirrah,
Excellent Candi-wine; draw nearer to me,
Reach in me bottle, Why thou most debauched slave,

John. Pray be not angry Mistress, for with all my service
And pains, I purchased this for you, I dare not drink it;
For you a present, only for your pleasure,
To show in little, what a thanks I owe
The hourly courtesies, your goodness gives me.

Bor. And I will give thee more; there kiss my hand on it.

John. I thank you deerly for your durty favor,
How rank it smells!

Bor. By thy leave sweet Bottle,
And Sugar-candi-wine, I now come to thee;
Hold your hand under.

John. How does your Worship like it?

Bor. Under again, again; and now come kiss me,
I Will be a mother to thee, Come, drink to me.

John. I do beseech your pardon.

Bor. Here Is to thee then,
I am easily entreated for thy good,
It Is naught for thee indeed, 'twill make thee break out;
Thou have a pure complexion: now for me
It Is excellent, it is excellent for me.
Son slave I have a cold stomach, and the wind.

John. Blows out a cry at your both ends.

Bor. Kiss again,
Cherish thy Lips, for thou shall kiss fair Ladies:
Son slave I have them for thee; I Will show thee all.

John. Heaven bless mine eyes!

Bor. Even all the secrets, Son slave,
In my dominion.

John. Oh here come the Ladies,
Now to my business.

Enter Almira and Leonora.
Leon. This air will much refresh you:

Al: I must sit down.

Leon. Do, and take freer thoughts;
The place invites you, and I walk by, like your Sentinel.

Bor. And thou shall be my Heir, I Will leave thee all,
Heaven knows to what 'twill mount to; but abundance:
I Will leave thee two young Ladies, what think you of that Boy?
Where is the Bottle? Two delicate young Ladies:
But first you shall commit with me. Do you mark son,
And show your self a Gentleman, that is the truth son:

John. Excellent Lady, kissing your fair hand,
And humbly craving pardon for intruding
This Letter, and this Ring.

Leon. From whom, I pray you sir?

John. From the most noble, loving Lord, Don Pedro,
The servant of your Virtues.

Bor. And prithee, good son slave, be wise and circumspect,
And take heed of being overtaken with too much drink;
For it is a lamentable sin, and spoils all:
Why it is the damnablest thing to be drunk son,
Heaven cannot endure it. And hark you, one thing I would have done:
Knock my husband on the head, as soon as may be,
For he is an arrant Puppy, and cannot perform --
Why, where the devil is this foolish Bottle?

Leon. I much thank you, and this sir for your pains.

John. No, gentle Lady,
That I can do him service; is my merit,
My faith, my full reward.

Leon. Once more I thank you.
Since I have met so true a friend to goodness,
I dare deliver to your charge, my answer:
Pray you tell him Sir, this night I do invite him
To meet me in the Garden. Means he may find,
For love, they say, wants no abilities.

John. Nor shall he, Madam, if my help may prosper.
So everlasting Love, and Sweetness, bless ye.
She Is at it still, I dare not now appear to her.

Al. What fellows that?

Leon. Indeed I know not, Madam,
It seems of some strange Country by his habit;
Nor can I show you by what mystery
He wrought himself into this place, prohibited.

Al. A handsome man.

Leon. But of a mind more handsome.

Al. Was his business to you?

Leon. Yes, from a friend you woot of.

Al. A very handsome fellow,
And well demeaned.

Leon. Exceeding well, and speaks well.

Al. And speaks well too?

Leon. I passing well, and freely,
And as he promises of a most clear nature,
Brought up sure far above his show:

Al. It seems so:
I would I had heard him, friend. Comes he again?

Leon. Indeed I know not if he do.

Al. It Is no matter.
Come let us walk in.

Leon. I am glad you have found your tongue yet.
Borachia sings. Enter Cuculo.
Cuc. My wife is very merry; sure 'twas her voice,
Pray Heaven there be no drink in it, then I allow it.

John. It Is sure my Master, now the game begins;
Here will be spitting of fire a both sides presently,
Send me but safe delivered.

Cuc. O my heart aks!
My head aks too: Mercy, O me she is perished!
She has gotten wine! she is gone for ever.

Bor. Come hither Ladies, carry your bodies swimming;
Do your three duties then, then fall behind me.

Cuc. O thou pernicious Raschal! What have thou done?

John. I done alas Sir, I have done nothing.

Cuc. Sirrah,
How came she by this wine?

John. Alas, I know not.

Bor. Who Is that, that talks of wine there?

John. Forsooth, my Master?

Bor. Bring him before me, son slave.

Cuc. I will know it.
This Bottle? how this Bottle?

Bor. Do not stir it;
For if you do, by this good wine, I Will knock ye,
I Will beat ye damnable, yea, and nay, I Will beat you;
And when I have broke it 'bout your head, do you mark me?
Then will I tie it to your Worship's tail,
And all the dogs in the Town shall follow you.
No question I would avise you how I came by it.
I will have none of these points handled now.

Cuc. She Will never be well again, while the world stands.

John. I hope so.

Cuc. How do thou Lamb?

Bor. Well, God-a-mercy Bell-wether, how do thou?
Stand out: Son slave, sit you here, and before this Worshipful Audience
Propound a doubtful question: See who is drunk now:

Cuc. Now, now, it works, the devil now dwells in her.

Bor. Whether the Heaven, or the Earth, be nearer the Moon?
Or what is the natural Reason, why a woman longs
To make her husband Cuckold? Bring me your Cousin
The Curate now, that great Philosopher;
He that found out a Pudding had two ends;
That learned Clerk, that notable Gymnosophist,
And let him with his Jacobs-Staff discover
What is the third part of Three farthings, three
Half pence, being the half, and I am satisfied.

Cuc. You see she has Learning enough, if she could dispose it.

Bor. Too much for thee, thou Logger-head, thou Bull-head.

Cuc. Nay good Borachia

Bor. Thou a sufficient Statesman?
A Gentleman of Learning, hang thee Dog-whelp;
Thou shadow of a man of action;
Thou scab of the Court, go sleep you drunken Rascal;
Ye debauched Puppy, get you home, and sleep sirrah,
And so will I son slave, thou shall sleep with me.

Cuc. Prithee look to her tenderly.

Bor No words sirrah
Of any wine, or any thing like wine,
Or any thing concerning wine, or by wine,
Or from, or with wine: Come lead me like a Countess.

Cuc. Thus must we bear, poor men! There is a trick in it,
But when she is well again, I Will trick her for it.
Exeunt.
Act. 4. Scaen. 1.
Enter Pedro:
Ped. NOw if this honest fellow do but prosper,
I hope I shall make fair return. I wonder
I hear not from the Prince of Tarent, yet
I hope he is landed well, and to his safety,
The winds have stood most gently to his purpose.
My honest friend!

Enter Don John.
John. Your Lordships poorest servant.

Ped. How have thou sped?

John. My Lord, as well as wishes,
My way has reached your Mistress, and delivered
Your Letter-love, and Token, who with all joy,
And virtuous constancy, desires to see you,
Commands you this night, by her loving power,
To meet her in the Garden,

Ped. Thou have made me,
Redeemed me, man, again from all my sorrows;
Done above wonder for me. Is it so?

John. I should be now too old to learn to lie sir,
And as I live, I never was good flatterer.

Ped. I do see some thing in this fellows face still,
That ties my heart fast to him: Let me love thee,
Nay, let me honor thee for this fair service,
And if I ere forget it.

John. Good my Lord,
The only knowledge of me, is too much bounty.
My service, and my life sir.

Ped. I shall think on it;
But how for me to get access?

John. It Is easy,
I Will be your guide sir, all my care shall lead you;
My credits better then you think.

Ped. I thank ye,
And soon I Will wait your promise.

John. With all my duty.
Exeunt.
Enter Viceroy, Messina, Doctor, and Cuculo.
Doct. All Is as I tell you Princes, you shall here
Be witness to his fancies, melancholy,
And strong imagination of the wrongs.
His inhumanity to Don Anthonio
Has rent his mind into so many pieces
Of various imaginations, that
Like the Celestial Bow, this color now
The object, then another, till all vanish.
He says a man might watch to death, or fast,
Or think his spirit out; to all which humors,
I do apply my self, checking the bad,
And cherishing the good. For these, I have
Prepared my Instruments, fitting his Chamber
With trap-doors, and descents; sometimes presenting
Good spirits of the air, bad of the earth,
To pull down, or advance his fair intentions.
He Is of a noble nature, yet sometimes
Thinks that which by confederacy I do,
Is by some skill in Magic. Here he comes.
A bed drawn forth, Martino upon it, a book in's hand.
Unsent I do beseech you. What do you read Sir?

Mar. A strange position which does much perplex me:
That every Soul's alike, a musical Instrument,
The Faculties in all men equal Strings,
Well, or ill handled; and those sweet, or harsh.
Exit Doct. How like a Fiddler I have played on mine then!
Declined the high pitch of my birth and breeding,
Like the most barbarous Peasant; read my pride
Upon Anthonio's meek humility,
Wherein he was far valianter then I.
Meekness, thou wait'st upon courageous spirits,
Enabling sufferance past inflictions:
In patience Tarent overcame me more
Then in my wounds. Live then no more to men,
Shut daylight from thine eyes, here cast thee down,
And with a sullen sigh breath forth thy soul.
What art? an Apparition, or a Man?
Enter Doctor like a Friar.
Doct. A man, and sent to counsel thee.

Mar. Despair
Has stopped mine ears; thou seem a holy Friar?

Doct. I am, by Doctor Paulo sent to tell thee:
Thou art too cruel to thy self in seeking
To lend compassion and aid to others.
My Order bids me comfort thee: I have heard all
Thy various, troubled passions. Hear but my story.
In way of youth I did enjoy one friend,
As good and perfect as Heaven e're made man:
This friend was plighted to a beauteous woman,
(Nature proud of her workmanship) mutual love
Possessed 'em both; her heart in his breast lodged,
And his in hers.

Mar. No more of love, good father;
It was my surfeit, and I loath it now,
As men in Fevers meat they fell sick on.

Doct. However it is worth your hearing. This betrothed Lady
(The ties and duties of a friend forgotten)
Spurred on by lust, I treacherously pursued:
Contemned by her, and by my friend reproved,
Despised by honest men, my consclence seared up,
Love I converted into frantic rage;
And by that false guide led, I summoned him
In this bad cause, his sword against mine to prove,
If he or I might claim most right in love.
But fortune (that does seld' or never give
Success to right and virtue) made him fall
Under my sword. Blood, blood, a friends dear blood,
A virtuous friends shed by a Villain, me,
In such a monstrous and unequal cause,
Lies on my conscience.

Mar. And durst thou live
After this to be so old? it is an illusion
Raised up by my charms: A man would not have lived;
Art quiet in thy bosom?

Doct. As the sleep
Of Infants.

Mar. My fault did not equal this;
Yet I have emptied my heart of joy,
Only to store sighs up. What were the arts
That made thee live so long in rest?

Doct. Repentance
Hearty, that cleans'd me; Reason then confirmed me
I was forgiven, and took me to my Beads.
Exit Doctor:
Mar. I am in the wrong path; tender conscience
Makes me forget mine honor: I have done
No evil like this, yet I pine, whilst he,
A few tears of his true contrition tendered,
Securely sleeps. Ha, where keeps peace of conscience,
That I may buy her? No where, not in life.
It Is feigned that Jupiter two Vessels placed,
The one with honey filled, the other gall,
At th'entry of Olympus: Destiny
There brewing these together, suffers not
One man to pass before he drinks this mixture.
Hence is it we have not an hour of life
In which our pleasures relish not some pain,
Our sowrs some sweetness. Love does taste of both.
Revenge, that thirsty Dropsy of our souls,
Which makes us covet that which hurts us most,
Is not alone sweet, but partakes of tartness:

Mess. Is It not a strange effect?

Vice. Past president.

Cuc. His Brain-pan's perished with his wounds: Go to,
I knew 'twould come to this.

Vice. Peace, man of wisdom.

Mar. Pleasure's the hook of evil, ease of care,
And so the general object of the Court:
Yet some delights are lawful. Honor is
Virtue's allowed ascent: Honor that clasps
All perfect Justice in her arms; that craves
No more respect then what she gives; that does
Nothing but what she will suffer. This distracts me,
But I have found the right. Had Don Anthonio
Done that to me, I did to him, I should have killed him;
The injury so foul, and done in public,
My Footman would not bear it. Then in honor
Wronging him so, I Will right him on my self:
There Is honor, justice, and full satisfaction
Equally tendered; it is resolved, I Will do it.

Enter Doctor (like a Soldier) and the English Slave (like a Courtier:)
Slave. They take all weapons from me

Mess. Bless my son.

Vice The careful Doctor's come again.

Mess. Rare man!
How shall I pay this debt?

Cuc. He that is with him,
Is one of the slaves he lately bought, he said
T'accommodate his cure. He Is English born,
But French in his behavior; a delicate slave.

Vice. The slave is very fine.

Cuc. Your English slaves
Are ever so; I have seen an English slave
Far finer then his master. There Is a State-point
Worthy your observation.

Doct. On thy life
Be perfect in thy lesson. Fewer legs, slave.

Mar. My thoughts are searched and answered; for I did
Desire a Soldier and a Courtier
To yield me satisfaction in some doubts
Not yet concluded of.

Doct. Your Doctor did
Admit us Sir.

En. Slave. And we are at your service; whate'r it be, command it.

Mar. You appear
A Courtier in the race of Love; how far
In honor are you bound to run?

E. Sl. I Will tell you,
You must not spare expense, but wear gay clothes,
And you may be too prodigal of oaths
To win a Mistress favor; not afraid
To pass unto her through her Chambermaid,
You may present her gifts, and of all sorts,
Feast, dance, and revel; they are lawful sports:
The choice of Suitors you must not deny her,
Nor quarrel though you find a Rival by her:
Build on your own deserts, and ever be
A stranger to Loves enemy, Jealousy,
For that draws on --

Mar. No more; this points at me,
I never observed these rules. Now speak old Soldier,
The height of honor?
[Ex. Slave]
Doct. No man to offend,
Never to reveal the secrets of a friend;
Rather to suffer, then to do a wrong;
To make the heart no stranger to the tongue;
Provoked, not to betray an Enemy,
Nor eat his meat I choke with flattery;
Blushless to tell wherefore I wear my scars,
Or for my conscience, or my Countries wars;
To aim at just things; if we have wildly run
Into offenses, wish 'em all undone.
It Is poor in grief for a wrong done to die,
Honor to dare to live, and satisfy.

Vice. Mark how he winds him.

Mess. Excellent man.

Doct. Who fights
With passions, and orecomes 'em, is indu'd
With the best virtue, passive fortitude
Ex. Doctor.
Mar. Thou have touched me Soldier; oh this Honor bears
The right stamp; would all Soldiers did profess
Thy good religion. he discords of my soul
Are tuned, and make a heavenly harmony: Music
What sweet peace feel I now? I am ravished with it.

Vice. How still he sits!

Cuc. Hark, Music.

Mess. How divinely
This Artist gathers scattered sense; with cunning
Composing the fair Jewel of his mind,
Broken in pieces, and nigh lost before.

Enter Doctor, like a Philosopher: A good, an ill Genius presented. Their Song.
While it is singing, the Doctor goes off, and returns in his own shape.
Vice. See Protean Paulo in another shape.

Doct. Away I Will bring him shortly perfect, doubt not.

Mess. Master of thy great Art!

Vice. As such we'll hold thee.

Mess. And study honors for him.

Cuc. I Will be sick
On purpose to take physic of this Doctor.
Exeunt.
Mar. Doctor, thou have perfected a Bodies cure
T'amaze the world; and almost cured a Mind
Near frenzy. With delight I now perceive
You for my recreation have invented
The several Objects, which my Melancholy
Sometimes did think you conjured, otherwhiles
Imagined 'em Chimera's. You have been
My Friar, Soldier, my Philosopher,
My Poet, Architect, my Physician;
Labored for me more then your slaves for you
In their assistance: In your moral Song
Of my good Genius, and my bad, you have won me
A cheerful heart, and banished discontent;
There being nothing wanting to my wishes,
But once more, were it possible, to behold
Don John Anthonio.

Doct. There shall be Letters sent
Into all parts of Christendom, to inform him
Of your recovery, which now Sir I doubt not.

Mar. What honors, what rewards can I heap on you?

Doct. That my endeavors have so well succeeded,
Is a sufficient recompense. Pray you retire Sir,
Not too much air so soon.

Mar. I am obedient.
Exeunt.
Enter Almira and Leonota.
Leon. How strangely this Fellow runs in her mind!

Al. Do you hear Cousin?

Leon. Her sadness clean forsaken:

Al. A poor slave
Bought for my Governess, say you?

Leon. I fear so.

Al. And do you think a Turk?

Leon. His habit shows it,
At least bought for a Turk.

Al. I, that may be so.

Leon. What if he were one naturally?

Al. Nay it is nothing,
Nothing to the purpose; and yet methinks it is strange
Such handsomness of mind and civil outside
Should spring from those rude Countries.

Leon. If it be no more,
I Will call our Governess, and she can show you.

Al. Why do you think it is?

Leon. I do not think so.

Al. Fie! no, no, by no means; and to tell thee truth Wench,
I am truly glad he is here, be what he will;
Let him be still the same he makes a show of,
For now we shall see something to delight us,

Leon. And Heaven knows, we have need on it.

Al. Heigh ho! my heart aks.
Prithee call in our Governess. Pox of this fellow --
Exit Leonora. Why do I think so much of him? how the devil
Creep'd he in to my head? and yet beshrew me,
Me thinks I have not seen, I lie, I have seen
A thousand handsomer, a thousand sweeter.
But say this fellow were adorned as they are,
Set-off to show, and glory. What Is that to me?
Fie, what a fool am I? what idle fancies
Buz in my brains?

Enter Borachia, and Leonora.
Bor. And how does my sweet Lady?

Leon. She wants your company to make her merry.

Bor. And how does Master Bug, I pray you Madam?

Leon. Do you mean her little dog?

Bor. I mean his Worship.

Leon. Troubled with Fleas a little.

Bor. Alas poor Chicken:

Leon. She is here, and drunk, very fine drunk, I take it,
I found her with a Bottle for her Boulster,
Lying along, and making love.

Al. Borachia,
Why, where have thou been Wench? she looks not well, friend.
Art not not with child?

Bor. I promise ye, I know not,
I am sure my Bellies full, and that is a shrewd sign:
Besides I am shrewdly troubled with a Tiego
Here in my head, Madam; often with this Tiego,
It takes me very often

Leon. I believe thee.

Al. You must drink wine.

Bor. A little would do no harm sure.

Al. It Is a raw humor blows into your head;
Which good, strong wine will temper.

Bor. I thank your Highness,
I will be ruled, though much against my nature:
For wine, I ever hated from my Cradle,
Yet for my good.

Leon. I for your good, by all means.

Al. Borachia, what new fellows that thou have gotten?
(Now she will sure be free) that handsome stranger?

Bor. How much wine must I drink, an't please your Ladyship?

Al. She Is finely greaz'd. Why two or three round draughts Wench.

Bor. Fasting.

Al. At any time.

Bor. I shall hardly do it:
But, yet I Will try good Madam.

Leon. Do 'twill work well.

Al. But prithee answer me, what is this fellow?

Bor. I Will tell you two: But let it go no further.

Leon. No, no, by no means.

Bor. May I not drink before bed too?

Leon. At any hour.

Bor. And say in the night it take me?

Al. Drink then. But what this man?

Bor. I Will tell ye Madam,
But pray ye be secret. He Is the great Turks son, for certain,
And a fine Christian; my husband bought him for me.
He Is circumsing'd,

Leon. He Is circumcised, thou would say.

Al. How do thou know?

Bor: I had an eye upon him;
But even as sweet a Turk, an't like your Ladyship,
And speaks ye as pure Pagan. I Will assure ye,
My husband had a notable peni-worth of him.
And found me but the Turks own son, his own son
By father and mother, Madam.

Leon. She Is mad drunk.

Al. Prithee Borachia call him, I would see him,
And tell thee how I like him.

Bor. As fine a Turk, Madam,
For that which appertains to a true Turk:

Al. Prithee call him.

Bor. He waits here at the stairs; son slave come hither.
Enter Don John. Pray ye give me leave a little to instruct him,
He Is raw yet in the way of entertainment,
Son slave, where is the other bottle?

John. In the bed-straw,
I hid it there.

Bor. Go up and make your honors.
Madam, the Tiego takes me now, now Madam,
I must needs be unmannerly.

Al. Pray ye be so

Leon. You know your cure.

Bor. In The bed-straw?

John. There you will find it.
Exit Borachia.
Al. Come hither sir: How long have you served here?

John. A poor time, Madam, yet, to show my service.

Al. I see thou art diligent:

John. I would be, Madam,
It Is all the portion left me, that and truth.

Al. Thou art but young?

John. Had Fortune meant me so,
Excellent Lady, Time had not much wronged me.

Al. Will thou serve me?

John. In all my prayers, Madam,
Else such a misery as mine but blasts ye.

Al. Beshrew my heart he speaks well, wondrous honestly. Aside.

John. Madam, your loving Lord stays for ye.

Leon. I thank ye.
Your pardon for an hour deer friend.

Al. Your pleasure.

Leon. I deerly thank ye sir.
Exit Leonora.
John. My humblest service.
She views me narrowly, yet sure she knows me not:
I dare not trust the time yet, nor I must not.

Al. Ye are not as your habit shows?

John. No Madam.
His hand, that for my sins lies heavy on me,
I hope will keep me from being a slave to the devil.

Al. A brave clear mind he has, and nobly seasoned.
What Country are ye of?

John. A Biscan, Lady.

Al. No doubt, a Gentleman.

John. My father thought so.

Alm. I, and I warrant thee a right fair woman
Thy mother was; he blushes, that confirms it.
Upon my soul, I have not seen such sweetness,
I prithee blush again.

John. It Is a weakness, Madam,
I am easily this way wooed too.

Al. I thank ye;
Of all that ere I saw, thou art the perfittest. Aside.
Now you must tell me sir, for now I long for it.

John: What would she have?

Al. The story of your fortune;
The hard, and cruel fortune brought you hither.

John. That makes me stagger; yet I hope I am hid still, Aside.
That I came hither, Madam, was the fairest.

Al. But how this misery ye bear, fell on ye?

John. Infandum regina jubes renovare dolorem.

Al. Come, I will have it; I command ye tell it,
For such a speaker I would hear for ever.

John. Sure, Madam, 'twil but make you sad and heavy.
Because I know your goodness full of pity,
And it is so poor a subject too, and to your ears,
That are acquainted with things, sweet and easy,
So harsh a harmony.

Al. I prithee speak it.

John. I ever knew Obedience the best Sacrifice,
Honor of Ladies, then first passing over
Some few years of my youth, that are impertinent;
Let me begin the sadness of my story,
Where I began to loose my self, to love first.

Al. It Is well, go forward. Some rare piece I look for.

John. Not far from, where my Father lives, a Lady,
A neighbor by, blessed with as great a beauty,
As nature durst bestow without undoing;
Dwelt, and most happily, as I thought then,
And blessed the house a thousand times she dwelt in.
This beauty in the blossom of my youth,
When my first fire knew no adulterate Incense,
Nor I no way to flatter, but my fondness.
In all the bravery, my friends could show me,
In all the faith my innocence could give me,
In the best language my true Tongue could tell me,
And all the broken sighs my sick heart lend me,
I su'd, and served. Long did I love this Lady,
Long was my travel, long my trade to win her,
With all the duty of my Soul, I served her.

Al. How feelingly he speaks! and she loved you too;
It must be so.

John. I would it had deer Lady,
This story had been needless, and this place
I think unknown to me,

Al. Were your bloods equal?

John Yes, and I thought our hearts too.

Al. Then she must love.

John. She did, but never me, she could not love me,
She would not love, she hated, more she scorned me,
And in so poor, and base a way abused me;
For all my services, for all my bounties,
So bold neglects flung on me.

Al. An ill woman!
Be-like you found some Rival in your love then?

John. Aside. How perfectly she points me to my story.
Madam, I did, and one whose pride, and anger,
Ill manners, and worse man she doted on;
Doted to my undoing, and my ruin.
And but for honor to your sacred beauty,
And reverence to the noble Sex, though she fall,
As she must fall, that durst be so unnoble,
I should say something unbeseeming me.
What out of love, and worthy love, I gave her
(Shame to her most unworthy mind) to fools,
To girls, and fiddlers, to her boys she flung,
And in disdain of me.

Al. Pray ye take me with ye.
Of what complexion was she?

John. But that I dare not
Commit so great a sacrilege against virtue,
She looked not much unlikely though far, far short.
Some thing I see appears, your pardon, Madam,
Her eyes would smile so, but her eyes would cousin,
And so she would look sad, but yours is pity,
A noble Chorus to my wretched story,
Hers was disdain and cruelty.

Al. Pray Heaven
Mine be no worse: he has told me, a strange story, Aside.
And said 'twould make me sad! he is no lier.
But where begins this poor state? I will have all,
For it concerns me truly.

John. Last to blot me
From all remembrance, what I have been to her,
And how, how honestly, how nobly served her,
'Twas thought she set her gallant to dispatch me.
It Is true, he quarreled, without place, or reason.
We fought, I killed him, Heavens strong hand was with me;
For which I lost my Country, Friends, acquaintance,
And put my self to Sea, where a Pirate took me,
Forcing this habit of a Turk upon me,
And sold me here.

Al. Stop there a while, but stay still.
In this man's story, how I look? how monstrous?
How poor and naked? now I show what Don John
In all the virtue of his life, but aimed at
This thing has conquered with a tale, and carried.
Forgive me thou that guid'st me! Never Conscience
Touched me till now, nor true love: Let me keep it.

Leon. She is there, speak to her, you will find her altered.

Enter Pedro and Leonora.
Ped. Sister, I am glad to see you, but far gladder,
To see you entertain your health so well.

Al. I am glad to see you too sir, and shall be gladder
Shortly to see you all.

Ped. Now she speaks heartily,
What do ye want?

Al. Only an hour of privateness,
I have a few thoughts.

Ped. Take your full contentment,
We'll walk aside again; but first to you friend,
Or I shall much forget my self. My best friend,
Command me ever, ever, you have won it;

John. Your Lordship overflows me.

Leon. It Is but due sir.
Exeunt.
Al. He Is there still. Come sir, to your last part now,
Which only is your name, and I dismiss you.
Why, whether go ye?

John. Give me leave, good Madam,
Or I must be so seeming rude to take it.

Al. You shall not go, I swear, you shall not go:
I ask ye nothing but your name, ye have one,
And why should that thus fright you?

John. Gentle Madam,
I cannot speak; pray pardon me, a sickness
That takes me often, ties my tongue: Go from me,
My fit's infectious, Lady.

Alm. Were it death
In all his horrors, I must ask, and know it.
Your sickness is unwillingness. Hard heart,
To let a Lady of my youth and place
Beg thus long for a trifle.

John. Worthiest Lady,
Be wise and let me go: you will bless me for it,
Beg not that poison from me that will kill ye.

Alm. I only beg your name sir.

John. That will choke you,
I do beseech you pardon me.

Alm. I will not.

John. You Will curse me when you hear it.

Alm. Rather kiss thee,
Why should thou think so?

John. Why, I bear that name,
And most unluckily, as now it happens,
(Though I be innocent of all occasion)
That since my coming hither people tell me
You hate beyond forgiveness. Now heaven knows,
So much respect, (although I am a stranger)
Duty, and humble zeal I bear your sweetness,
That for the world I would not grieve your goodness:
I Will change my name, dear Madam.

Alm. People lie, and wrong thy name; thy name may save all others,
And make that holy to me, that I hated:
Prithee what is it?

John. Don John Anthonio.
What will this woman do? what thousand changes
Run through her heart and hands? no fixed thought in her;
She loves for certain now, but now I dare not,
Heaven guide me right.

Alm. I am not angry, Sir,
With you, nor with your name; I love it rather,
And shall respect ye, ye deserve. For this time
I license you to go; be not far from me,
I shall call for you often.

John. I shall wait, Madam.
Exit John.
Enter Cuculo.
Alm. Now what is the news with you?

Cuc. My Lord your father
Sent me to tell your Honor, Prince Martino
Is well recovered, and in strength.

Alm. Why let him,
The stories and the names so well agreeing. Aside:
And both so noble Gentlemen.

Cuc. And more, an't please you.

Alm. It does not please me neither more nor less on it.

Cuc They Will come to visit you.

Alm. They shall break through the doors then.
Ex. Almira:
Cuc. Here Is a new trick of State; this shows foul weather;
But let her make it when she please, I Will gain by it.
Exit:
Act. 5. Scaen. 1.
Enter Sea-Firate, one Slave, and Sailors.
Pirate. SOld for a slave, say thou?

Slave. It Was not so well:
Though I am bad enough, I personated
Such base behavior, barbarism of manners,
With other pranks, that might deter the buyer;
That the market yielded not one man that would
Vouchsafe to own me.

Pir. What was thy end in it?

Slav. To be given away for nothing, as I was
To the Viceroys Doctor; with him I have continued
In such contempt, a slave unto his slaves;
His horse, and dog of more esteem, and from
That villainous carriage of my self, as if
I had been a lump of flesh, without a soul;
I drew such scorn upon me, that I passed,
And pride in every place without observance.
For which, if you desire to be made men,
And by one undertaking, and that easy,
Ye are bound to Sacrifice unto my sufferings.
The seed I sowed, and from which you shall reap
A plentiful harvest.

Pir. To the point, I like not
These castles built in the air.

Slav. I Will make 'em real,
And you the Neptunes of the Sea, you shall
No more be Sea-rats.

Pir. Art not mad?

Slav. Ye have seen
The star of Sicilie, the fair Almira,
The Viceroys daughter, and the beauteous Ward
Of the Duke of Messina?

Pir. Madam Leonora.

Slav. What will you say, if both these Princesses
This very night, for I will not delay you,
Be put in your possession?

Pir. Now I dare swear
Thou have Magots in thy brains, thou would not else
Talk of impossibilities.

Slav. Be still
Incredulous.

Pir. Why can thou think we are able
To force the Court?

Slav. Are we able to force two women,
And a poor Turkish slave, where lies your Pinnace?

Pir. In a Creek not half a league hence.

Slav. Can you fetch Ladders
To mount a Garden wall?

1. Sail. They shall be ready:

Slav. No more words then, but follow me, and if
I do not make this good, let my throat pay for it.

Pir. What heaps of Gold, these beauties would bring to us
From the great Turk. if it were possible
That this could be effected.

Slav. If it be not
I know the price on it.

Pir. And be sure to pay it.
Exeunt.
Enter Don John with a Letter in his hand.
John. Her fair hand threw this from the window to me,
And as I took it up, she said, Peruse it,
And entertain a fortune offered to thee.
What may the inside speak -- for satisfaction.
Breaks it open, and reads. If the contempt I showed Don John Anthonio,
Whose name thou bear, and, in that dearer to me,
I do profess I love thee. How! it is so,
I love thee, this night wait me in the Garden,
There thou shall know more, subscribed
Thy Almira --
Can it be possible such levitie
Should wait on her perfections? when I was
My self, set off withal the grace of greatness,
Pomp, bravery, circumstance, she hated me,
And did profess it openly; yet now
Being a slave, a thing she should in reason
Disdain to look upon. In this base shape,
And since I wore it, never did her service,
To dote thus fondly? And yet I should glory:
In her revolt from constancy, not accuse it,
Since it makes for me. But ere I go further,
Or make discovery of my self, I Will put her
To the utmost trial, in the Garden: Well,
There I shall learn more. Women! Giddy women,
In her the blemish of your sex, you prove
There is no reason for your hate or love.
Exit.
Enter Almira, Leonora, and two Women.
Leon. At this unseasonable time to be thus brave,
No visitants expected? you amaze me.

Al. Are these Jewels set forth to the best advantage
To take the eye?

1. Wom. With our best care.

2. Wom. We never
Better discharge our duties.

Al. In my sorrows,
A Princess name (I could perceive it) struck
A kind of reverence in him, and my beauty
As then neglected, forced him to look on me
With some sparks of affection; but now
When I would fan them to a glorious flame,
I cannot be too curious, I wonder
He stays so long.

Leon. These are strange fancies.

Al. Go
Entreat, I do forget my self, command
My Governess, Gentleman, her Slave, I should say,
To wait me instantly; and yet already
He Is here. His figure graven on my heart,
Never to be razed out.
[Ex. Wom.
Enter Slave, Pirate, and Sailors.
Slav. There is the prize,
Is it so rich, that you dare not seize upon it?
Here I begin:

Al. Help Villain:

Pir. You are mine.

Sail. Though somewhat course, you will serve after a storm,
To bid fair wether welcome.

Leon. Ravisher,
Defend me Heaven.

Al: No aid near?

Wom. Help.

Slav. Dispatch.
No glory, nor handkercher to stop their mouths?
Their cries will reach the guard, and then we are lost.

Enter Don John and Woman.
John. What shrieks are these? from whence? O blessed Saints!
What sacrilege to beauty? Do I talk,
When it is almost too late to do. Take that. Forces a sword.

Slave. All set upon him.

Pyrate. Kill him.

John. You shall buy
My life at a dear rate, you Rogues.

Enter Pedro, Cuculo, Borachia, and Guard.
Cuc. Down with 'em.

Ped. Unheard of treason.

Bor. Make in Loggerhead;
My son Slave fights like a dragon: Take my bottle,
Drink courage out on it.

John. Madam, you are free.

Ped. Take comfort, dearest Mistress.

Cuc. O you Micher,
Have you a hand in this?

Slave. My aims were high,
Fortune's my enemy: To dy's the worst,
And that I look for.

Pyr. Vengeance on your plots.

Ped. The rack at better leisure shall force from 'em
A full discovery: Away with 'em.

Cuc. Load 'em with irons.

Bor. Let 'em have no wine
To comfort their cold heart.
The Guard take the Pyrate and the rest.
Ped. Thou man of men.

Leon. A second Hercules.

Al. An Angel thus disguised.

Ped. What thanks?

Leon. What service?

Bor. He shall serve me by your leave, no service else.

John. I have done nothing but my duty, Madam;
And if the little you have seen exceed it,
The thank due for it pay my watchful Master,
And this my sober Mistress.

Bor. He speaks truth, Madam,
I am very sober.

Ped. Far beyond thy hopes
Expect reward.

Al. We'll straight to Court, and there
It is resolved what I will say and do.
I am faint, support me.

Ped. This strange accident
Will be heard with astonishment. Come friend,
You have made your self a fortune, and deserve it.
Exeunt.
Enter Viceroy, Messina, Doctor.
Mess. Perfectly cured?

Doct. As such I will present him,
The thanks be given to Heaven.

Mess. Thrice reverend man,
What thanks but will come short of thy desert?
Or bounty, though all we possess were given thee,
Can pay thy merit? I will have thy Statue
Set up in Brass.

Vice. Thy name made the sweet subject
Of our best Poems; thy unequalled Cures
Recorded to posterity.

Doct. Such false glories
(Though the desire of fame be the last weakness
Wise men put off) are not the marks I shoot at:
But if I have done any thing that may challenge
Your favors (mighty Princes) my request is,
That for the good of such as shall succeed me,
A College for Physicians may be
With care and cost erected, in which no man
May be admitted to a Fellowship,
But such as by their vigilant studies shall
Deserve a place there; this magnificence,
Posterity shall thank you for.

Vice. Rest assured
In this, or any boon you please to ask,
You shall have no repulse:

Doct. My humblest service
Shall never be wanting. Now if you so please,
I Will fetch my Princely Patient, and present him.
Exit Doctor.
Mess. Do, and imagine in what I may serve you,
And by my honor with a willing hand
I will subscribe to it.

Enter Pedro, Almira, Leonora, Don John, Cuculo, Borachia.
Cuc. Make way there:

Vice. My daughter!
How Is this? a Slave crowned with a Civick garland!
The mystery of this?

Ped. It will deserve
Your hearing and attention. Such a truth
Needs not rhetorical flourishes, and therefore
With all the brevity and plainness that
I can, I will deliver it. If the old Romans,
When of most power and wisdom, did decree
A Wreath like this to any common Soldier
That saved a Citizens life, the bravery
And valor of this man may justly challenge
Triumphant Laurel. This last night a crew
Of Pirates brake in Signior Cuculo's house,
With violent rudeness, ceasing on my sister,
And my fair Mistress, both were in their power,
And ready to be forced hence; when this man
Unarmed, came to their rescue, but his courage
Soon furnished him with weapons: In a word,
The lives and liberties of these sweet Ladies,
You ow him, for the Rovers are in hold,
And ready when you please, for punishment.

Vice. As an induction of more to come,
Receive this favor.

Mes With my self, my son
Shall pay his real thanks. He comes, observe now
Their amorous meeting.

Enter Doctor, and Martina.
Mart. I am glad you are well Lady:

Al. I grieve not your recovery.

Vice. So coldly.

Mes. Why fall you off?

Mart. To shun captivity sir
I was too long a slave, I Will now be free.

Al. It Is my desire you should. Sir my affection
To him was but a trifle, which I played with
In The childhood of my love; which now grown elder,
I cannot like of.

Vice. Strange inconstancy!

Mart. It Is judgment sir in me, or a true debt
Tendered to Justice rather. My first life
Laden with all the follies of a man,
Or what could take addition from a woman,
Was by my head strong passions (which o'errul'd
My understanding (forteited to death:
But this new being, this my second life,
Begun in serious contemplation of
What best becomes a perfect man, shall never
Sink under such weak frailties.

Mess. Most unlooked for.

Doct. It does transcend all wonders.

Mar. It Is a blessing
I owe your wisdom, which I Will not abuse:
But if you envy your own gift, and will
Make me that wretched creature which I was,
You then again shall see me passionate,
A lover of poor trifles, confident
In man's deceiving strength, or falser fortune;
Jealous, revengeful, in unjust things daring,
Injurious, quarrelsom, stored with all diseases
The beastly part of man infects his soul with;
And to remember what is the worst, once more,
To love a woman, but till that time never.
Exit.
Vice. Stand you affected so to men, Almira?

Al. No Sir; if so, I could not well discharge
What I stand bound to pay you, and to nature.
Though Prince Martino does profess a hate
To womankind, 'twere a poor world for women
Were there no other choice, or all should follow
The example of this new Hippolitus:
There are men, Sir, that can love, and have loved truly;
Nor am I desperate but I may deserve
One that both can and will so.

Vice. My allowance
Shall rank with your good liking, still provided
Your choice be worthy.

Alm. In it I have used
The judgment of my mind, and that made clearer
With calling often to heaven it might be so.
I have not sought a living comfort from
The reverend ashes of old Ancestors;
Nor given my self to the mere name and titles
Of such a man, that being himself nothing,
Derives his substance from his Grandsires tomb:
For wealth, it is beneath my birth to think on it,
Since that must wait upon me, being your daughter,
No Sir, the man I love, though he wants all
The setting forth of fortune, gloss, and greatness,
Has in himself such true and real goodness,
His parts so far above his low condition,
That he will prove an ornament, not a blemish,
Both to your name and family.

Ped. What strange creature
Has she found out?

Leon. I dare not ghess.

Alm. To hold you
No longer in suspense, this matchless man
That saved my life and honor, is my husband,
Whom I will serve with duty.

Bor: My son Slave!

Vice. Have you your wits?

Bor. I Will not part with him so.

Cuc. This I foresaw too.

Vice. Do not jest thy self
Into the danger of a Fathers anger.

Alm. Jest, Sir? by all my hope of comfort in him
I am most serious. Good Sir look upon him,
But let it be with my eyes, and the care
You should owe to your daughters life and safety,
Of which without him she is incapable,
And you will approve him worthy.

Vice. O thou shame
Of women! thy sad Fathers curse, and scandal:
With what an impious violence thou take from him
His few short hours of breathing!

Doct. Do not add, Sir,
Weight to your sorrow in the will bearing of it.

Vice. From whom, degenerate Monster, flow these low
And base affections in thee? what strange philters
Have thou received? what Witch with damned spells
Deprived thee of thy reason? Look on me,
(Since thou art lost unto thy self) and learn
From what I suffer for thee, what strange tortures
Thou do prepare thy self.

Mess. Good Sir, take comfort;
The council you bestowed on me, make use of.

Doct. This Villain, (for such practices in that Nation
Are very frequent) it may be has forced
By cunning potions and by sorcerous charms
This frenzy in her.

Vice. Sever 'em.

Alm. I grow to him.

Vice. Carry the Slave to torture, and wrest from him
By the most cruel means, a free confession
Of his impostures.

Alm. I will follow him,
And with him take the Rack.

Bor. No, hear me speak,
I can speak wisely: Hurt not my son slave,
But rack or hang my husband, and I care not;
For I Will be bound body to body with him:
He Is very honest, that is his fault.

Vice. Take hence
This drunken beast.

Bor. Drunk! am I drunk? Bear witness.

Cuc. She is indeed distempered.

Vice. Hang 'em both,
If ere more they come near the Court.

Cuc. Good sir,
You can recover dead men; can you cure
A living drunkenness?

Doct. It Is the harder task;
Go home with her, I Will send you something that
Shall once again bring her to better temper,
Or make her sleep for ever.

Cuc. Which you please, sir.
Exeunt Cuc. Bor.
Vice. Why linger you? rack him first, and after break him
Upon the wheel.

Ped. Sir, this is more then justice.

John. Is It death in Sicily, to be loved
Of a fair Lady?

Leon. Though he be a slave,
Remember yet he is a man.

Vice. I am deaf
To all persuasions: Drag him hence. The Guard take Don John off.

Alm. Do Tyrant,
No more a Father; feast thy cruelty
Upon thy Daughter: but Hell's plagues fall on me,
If I inflict not on my self whatever
He can endure for me.

Vice Will none restrain her.

Alm. Death has a thousand doors to let out life,
I shall find one. If Portia's burning coals,
The Knife of Lucrece, Cleopatra's Aspicks,
Famine, deep waters have the power to free me
From a loathed life, I Will not an hour outlive him.

Ped. Sister.

Leon. Dear Cousin.
Ex. Alm. Ped. Leon.
Vice. Let her perish.

Doct. Hear me;
Th effects of violent love are desperate:
And therefore in the execution of
The Slave be not too sudden. I was present
When he was bought, and at that time my self
Made purchase of another. He that sold'em
Said that they were companions of one Country.
Something may rise from this to ease your sorrows:
By circumstance I Will learn what is his condition,
In The mean time use all fair and gentle means
To pacify the Lady.

Vice. I Will endeavor
As far as grief and anger will give leave,
To do as you direct me.

Mess. I Will assist you.
Exeunt.
Enter Pedro and Keeper.
Ped. Has he been visited already?

Keeper. Yes sir,
Like one of better fortune; and to increase
My wonder of it, such as repair to him,
In their behavior rather appear
Servants, then friends to comfort him.

Ped. Go fetch him.
Exit Keeper. I am bound in gratitude to do more then wish
The life and safety of a man that has
So well deserved me.

Enter Keeper, Don John, Servant.
Keeper. Here he is, my Lord.

Ped. Who Is here? thou art no Conjurer to raise
A spirit in the best shape man ere appeared in.
My friend, the Prince of Tarent! doubts forsake me,
I must and will embrace him.

John: Pedro holds
One that loves life for nothing, but to live
To do him service.

Ped. You are he most certain,
Heaven ever make me thankful for this bounty:
Run to the Viceroy, let him know this rarity. Ex K.
But how you came here thus? yet since I have you,
Is It not enough I bless the prosperous means
That brought you hither?

John. Dear friend, you shall know all;
And though in thankfulness I should begin
Where you delivered me --

Ped. Pray you pass that over,
That Is not worth the relation.

John. You confirm
True friends love, to do courtesies, not to hear'em.
But I Will obey you. In our tedious passage
Toward Malta, I may call it so, for hardly
We had lost the ken of Sicily, but we were
Becalmed, and hull'd so up and down twelve hours,
When to our more misfortune we descri'd
Eight well manned Galleys making amain for us,
Of which th'Arch Turkish Pyrate cruel Dragnt
Was Admiral. I Will not speak what I did
In our defense; but never man did more
Then the brave Captain that you sent forth with me,
All would not do; Courage oppressed with number,
We were boarded, pillaged to the skin, and after
Twice sold for slaves; by the Pyrate first, and after
By a Maltese to Signior Cuculo:
Which I repent not, since there 'twas my fortune
To be to you my best friend some ways useful.
I thought to cheer you up with this short story,
But you grow sad on it.

Ped. Have I not just cause,
When I consider I could be so stupid
As not to see a friend through all disguises;
Or he so far to question my true love,
To keep himself concealed?

John. 'Twas fit to do so,
And not to grieve you with the knowledge of
What then I was; where now I appear to you,
Your sister loving me, and Martino safe,
Like to myself and birth.

Ped. May you live long so.
How do thou honest friend? your trustiest servant.
Give me thy hand. I now can ghess by whom
You are thus furnished.

John. Troth he met with me
As I was sent to prison, and there brought me
Such things as I had use of.

Ped. Let Us to Court,
My father never saw a man so welcome,
As you will be to him.

John. May it prove so friend.
Exeunt:
Enter Viceroy, Messtna, Martino, Doctor, Captain, Almira, Leonora, Waiting
Women, Attendants.
Vice. The slave changed to the Prince of Tarent, says he?

Capt. Yes sir, and I the Captain of the Fort,
Worthy of your displeasure, and the effect of t,
For my deceiving of that trust your Excellency
Reposed in me.

Doct. Yet since all has fallen out
Beyond your hopes, let me become a suitor,
And a prevailing one to get his pardon.

Al. O dearest Leonora, with what forehead
Dare I look on him now? Too powerful love,
The best strength of thy unconfined Empire
Lies in weak women's hearts Thou art feigned blind,
And yet we borrow our best sight from thee.
Could it be else, the person still the same
Affection over me, such power should have
To make me scorn a Prince, and love a slave.

Mart. But art thou sure'tis he?

Capt. Most certain sir.

Mart. Is he in health, strong, vigorous, and as able
As when he left me dead?

Capt. Your own eyes sir
Shall make good my report.

Mart. I am glad of it,
And take you comfort in it sir, there is hope,
Fair hope left for me, to repair mine honor.

Mes. What Is that?

Mart. I will do something that shall speak me
Messina's son.

Mes. I like not this one word sir.

Vice. We'll prevent it.
Nay, look up my Almira, now I approve
Thy happy choice. I have forgot my anger,
I freely do forgive thee.

Al. May I find
Such easiness in the wronged Prince of Tarent,
I then were happy.

Leon. Rest assured you shall.

Enter Don John, Pedro, Servant.
Vice. We all with open arms have to embrace you.

Mes. Welcome, most welcome.

Mart. Stay.

Mes. 'T was this I feared.

Mart. Sir, it is best known to you, on what strict terms
The reputation of men's fame, and honors
Depend in this so punctual age, in which,
A word that may receive a harsh construction,
Is answered, and defended by the sword.
And you that know so much, will I presume,
Be sensibly tender of another credit,
As you would guard your own.

John. I were unjust else.

Mart. I have received from your hands, wounds; and deep ones,
My honor in the general report
Tainted and soiled, for which I will demand
This satisfaction, That you would forgive
My contumelious words, and blow, my rash
And unadvised wildness first threw on you.
Thus I would teach the world a better way,
For the recovery of a wounded honor,
Then with a savage fury, not true courage,
Still to run headlong on.

John. Can this be serious?

Mart. I Will add this, He that does wrong, not alone,
Draws, but makes sharp his enemies sword against
His own life, and his honor. I have paid for it,
And wish that they, who dare most, would learn from me,
Not to maintain a wrong, but to repent it.

Doct. Why this is like your self.

Mart. For farther proof,
Here sir, with all my interest, I give up
This Lady to you.

Vice. Which I make more strong;
With my free grant.

Al. I bring mine own consent,
Which will not weaken it.

All. All joy confirm it.

John. Your unexpected courtesies amaze me,
Which I will study with all love and service
To appear worthy of.

Doct. Pray you understand Sir,
There are a pair of Suitors more, that gladly
Would hear from you as much, as the pleased Viceroy
Has said unto the Prince of Tarent.

Mes. Take her,
Her dowry shall be answerable to
Her birth, and your desert.

Ped. You make both happy.

John. One only suit remains, That you would please
To take again into your Highness favor
This honest Captain: Let him have your grace.
What Is due to his much merit, shall from me
Meet liberal rewards.

Vice. Have your desire.

John. Now may all here that love, as they are friends
To our good fortunes, find like prosperous ends.
Exeunt.
EPILOGUE.
CUstom, and that a Law we must obey
In The way of Epilogue, bids me something say.
Howe'r to little purpose, since we know,
If you are pleased, unbeg'd, you will bestow
A gentle censure: On the other side,
If that this Play deserve to be decri'd
In your opinions, all that I can say,
Will never turn the stream the other way.
Your gracious smiles, will render us secure.
Your frowns without despair, we must endure.
FINIS

