THE Excellent Comedy, called THE OLD LAW: OR A new way to please you. Py Phil.
Massinger. Tho. Middleton. William R^wley.

Acted before the King and Queen at Salisbury House, and at several other
places, with great Applause. Together with an exact and perfect Catalogue of
all the Plays, with the Authors Names, and what are Comedies, Tragedies,
Histories, Pastoralls, Masks, Interludes, more exactly Printed then ever before.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Archer, at the sign of the Adam and Eve, in Little
Britain. 1656.

Persons of the Play.
DUke of Epire. Creon, Father to Simonides and Cleanthes. 2. Courtiers
Simonides Cleanthes.
Lisander Husband to Eugenia and Uncle to Cleanthes. Leonides an old man.
Antigona, Mother to Simonides and Cleanthes. Hippolita, Wife to Cleanthes.
Eugenia, Wife to Lisander and Mother to Parthenia. Parthenia, Daughter to
Eugenia. Cou^tie^s. L^^yers. Clown. Executioner. Butler. Bailiff. Tailor.
Cook. D^a^er. Clerk. Coachmen. Footmen. Guard. Clowns Wife. Wench.
The Scene EPIRE. THE OLD LAW.
Act. I. Scen. I.
Enter Simonides, and two Lawyers. Sim. IS the Law firm Sir?

1. Law. The Law, what more firm Sir,
More powerful, forcible, or more permanent?

Sim. By my troth Sir,
I partly do b^leeve it; conceive Sir
Y^u have indirectly answered my question.
I did not doubt the fundamental grounds
Of Law in general, for the most solid,
But this particular Law that me concerns
Now at the present, if that be firm and strong,
And powe^full, and forcible, and permanent.
I am ^ young man that has an old father.

2 Law. Nothing more strong Sir,
It is Secundum statutum Principis
Confirmatum cum voce senatum,
Et voce republicae, nay consummatum
Et exemplificatum, is it not in force
When diverse have already tasted it
And paid their lives for penalty?

Sim. It Is true.
My father must be next, this day compleats
Full fourscore years upon him.

2. Law. He Is here then
Sub poena statuti, hence I can tell him.
T^uer then all the Physicians in the world,
He cannot live out to morrow; this is
The most certain Climactericall year,
It Is past all danger, for there is no scaping it:
What age is your mother Sir?

Sim. Faith near her days to,
Wants some two of thre^score.

1. Law So, sh^el drop away
One of th^se day^s to; hee^s a good age now
For those that h^ve old p^rents, and rich inheritance.

Sim. And Sir it is profitable for others too:
Are there not fellows tha^ lie bedridden in their offices
That younger men would wa^k lustily in:
Churchmen, that ev^n ^he second infancy
Has silenced, yet has spun out their lives so long
That many pregnant and ingenious spirits
Have langu^shd in their hoped r^versio^s,
And died upon the thought, and by your leave Sir,
Have you not pl^ces filled up in the L^w
By some grave Senators, that you imagine
Have held them long enough, and such sp^r^ts as you.
Were they removed, w^u^d leap into the^^ d^gniti^^?

1. Law. Dic q^ bus in terris and eri^ mihi magnus Apollo.

Sim. Bu^ tell me faith y^u f^ir opinion:
Is It not a sound and n^cessa^y Law
This (by the Duke) enact^d ^

1. Law. Nev^^ d^d Gr^^ce
(Our (...) of brav^ P^il^sophers)
Among all her N^m^ the^^ and Lawgiv^rs,
No^ when she flou^ish^d in her seven fold sages,
(Whose living m^mory can ^^v^r die)
Produce a Law more grave and necessary.

Sim. I Am of that mind to.

2^ Law I w^ll maintain Sir,
Draco's Oliga^chy^ that the government
Of Comm^nity reduced into few
Framed a fair state; Solons Crecopedi
That cut off poor men's debts to their rich creditors
Was good and charitable (but not full allowd.)
His Sisaith^e did refo^m that error,
His honorable Senate of Are^pagitae,
Licurgus was more loose, and gave too free
And licentious reyns unto his discipline,
As that a young woman in her husbands weakness
Might choose her able friend to propogate;
That so the Commonwealth might be supplide,
With hope of lusty spirits, Plato did err,
And so did Aristotle, allowing
Lewd and lu^u^ious limits to their Laws;
But now our Epir^, our Epires Evander,
Our noble and wi^e Princ^ has hit the Law
That all our predecessive students
Have mist unto their shame. Enter Cleanthes,

Sim. Forbear the praise Sir.
It Is in it self most pleasing, Cleanthes
Oh lad heers a spring for young plants to flourish,
The old trees must down kept the sun from us,
We shall rise now boy.

Clean. Whether Sir I pray?
To the ble^k air of storms, among those trees,
Which w^ had shelter from.

Sim. Yes from our growth,
Our sap and livelihood and from our fruit,
W^^t it is not Jubilee with thee yet, I think,
Thou lookst so sad o^t, how old's thy father?

Clean. Jubilee, no indeed, it is a bad year with me.

Sim. Prithee how old's thy father, then I can tell thee?

Clean. I know not how to answer you Simonides,
He Is is too old being now exposed
Unto the rigor of a cruel Edict,
And yet not old enough by many years,
Cause I Would not see him go an howr before me.

Sim. These ve^^ p^ssions I speak to my father,
Come, come, heers none but friends here, we may speak
Our insides freely, these are Lawyers man,
And shall be Counselors shortly.

Cle. They shall be now Sir,
And shall have la^ge fees if thei'le undertake
To help a good cause (for it wants assistance)
Bad ones (I know) they can insist upon.

1. Law. Oh Sir. we must undertake of both parts,
But the good we have most good in.

Cle. Pray you say,
How do you allow of this strange Edict?

1. Law. Secundum Iustitiam, by my faith Sir,
The happiest Edict that ever was in Epire.

Cle. What^ to kill innocents Sir, it cannot be,
It is no rule in justice there to punish.

1. Law. Oh Sir,
You unde^stand a conscience, but not law.

Cle. Why sir, is there so main a differenc^?

1. Law. You Will never be good Law^er if you und^rstand not that.

Cle. I think then it is the b^st to be a bad one.

1. Law. Why sir, the very letter and the sense both
Do both orethrow you in this statute,
Which that speaks, that every man living to
Fourscore years, and women to threescore, shall then
Be cut off as fruitless to the Republike,
And Law shall finish what nature lingerd at.

Cle. And this suit shall soon be dispatched in Law.

1. Law. It is so plain it can have no Demur,
The Church-Booke overthrows it.

Cle. And so it does
The Church Book overthrowes it if you read it well.

1. Law. Still you run from the Law into error:
You say it takes the lives of Innocents,
I say no, and so says common reason:
What man lives to fourscore and women to three
That can die innocent?

Cle. A fine lawful evasion:
Good sir rehearse the full statute to me^

Sim. Fie that's too tedious, you have already
The full sum in the breef relation.

Cle. Sir, among many words may be found contradictions,
And these men dare sue and wrangle with a Statute,
If they can pick a quarrel with some error:

2. Law. Listen sir, i will gather it as brief as I can for you, Anno Primo
Evandri, be it (for the care and good of the Common wealth for diverse
necessary reasons that we shall urge) thus peremptorily enacted^


Cle. A fair pretense if the reasons foul it not.


2. Law. That all men living in our Dominions of Epire in their decayed nature,
to the age of four score, or women to the age of three score, shall on the
same day be instantly put to death, by those means and instruments that a
former Proclamation had (to this purpose) through our said territories
dispersed.


Cle. There was no women in this Senate certain.


1. Law. That these men being past their bearing Arms, to aid and defend
their Country, past their manhood and livelihood, to propogate any further
issue to their posterity, and as well past their counsels (which overgrown
gravity is now run into dotage) to assist their Country, to whom in common
reason, nothing should be so wearisome as their own lives, as it may be
supposed is tedious to their successive heirs, whose times are spent in the
good of their Country, yet wanting the means to maintain it; and are like to
grow old before their inheritance (borne to them) come to their necessary use,
for the which are the women, for that they never were defense to their
Country, never by Counsel admitted to the assist of government of their
Country, only necessary to the propagation of posterity, and now at the age
of threescore to be past that good, and all their goodness: it is thought f^t
then a quarter abated from the more worthy member to be put to death as is
before recited: provided that for the just and impartial execution of this our
Statute the example shall first begin in and about our Court, which our self
will see carefully performed, and not for a full Month following extend any
further into our Dominions: Dated the sixth of the second month at our
Pallace^Royall in Epire.


Cle. A fine edict, and very fairly gilded
And is there no scruple in all these words,
To demurr the Law upon occasion?

Sim. Pox it is an unnecessary inquisition,
Prithee set him not about it.

2. Law. Troth none sir,
It is so evident and plain a case
There is no succor for the Defendant.

Cle. Possible, can nothing help in a good case?

1. Law. Faith sir I do think there may be a hole
Which would protract delay if not remedy.

Cle. Why there is some comfort in that good sir? speak it^

1. Law. Nay you must pardon me for that sir.

Sim. Prithee do not,
It may open a wound to many Sonns and Heirs
That may die after it.

Cle. Come sir, I know how to make you speak, will this doo^?

1. Law. I will afford you my opinion sir.

Cle. Pray you repeat the literal words expressly
The time of Death.

Sim. It Is an unnecessary question, prithee let it alone.

2. Law. Hear his opinion, twill be fruitless sir.
That man at the age of four ^core, and women at threescore
Shall the same day be pu^ to death.

1. Law. Thus I help the man to twenty one years more,

Cle. That were a fair addition.

1. Law Mark it, sir we s^y man is not at age
Till he be one and twenty before his infancy
And adole^censie, nor by that addition,
Fou^score he cannot be till a hundred and one.

Sim. Oh poor evasion!
He Is fourscore years old sir,

1. Law. That help^ more sir
He begins to be old at fifty, so at fourscore,
He Is but thirty years old, so believe it sir,
He may be twenty years in declination
And so long may a man linger and live bit

Sim. The worst hope of safety that ere I heard,
G^v^ him his fee again, it is not worth two de^eers.

1. Law T^eres no L^w for rest^^u^ion of ^ees sir. Enter Creon and Antigona.

Cle N^ no sir, I meant it lost when it was given.

Sim No more good sir
Here are ears unnecessary for your doctrine.

1. Law. I have spo^^ out my fee and I have done sir.

Sim Oh my dear father!

Creon. Tush meet me not in exclaimes
I understand the worst and hope no better:
A fine L^w, if this hold, white heads will be cheap
And many watch men's places will be vacant
Forty of em I know my seniors,
That did due deeds of darkness to their Country,
H^s watchd em a good turn fort, and taken em
N^pping now, the fewer Hospitalls will serve to,
Many may be usd for stews and brothells
And those people will never trouble em to fourscore.

Anti. Can you play and sport with sorrow sir?

Creon. Sorrow, for what Antigona? for my life,
My sorrows I have kept it so long well
With bringing it up unto so ill an end:
I might have gently lost it in my Cradle,
Before my Nerves and Ligaments grew strong
To ^inde it faster to me.

Sim. For mine own sake
I should have be^ne sorry ^or that.

Creon. In my ^outh
I was a Son d^^r^ no Coward in my age,
I never ^u^nd my back upon my foe,
I ^av^ felt n^tu^^s win^^^s sickn^sses,
Yet ^v^r k^pt a ^iv^ly s^p in me
To greet the ch^er^ful^ sp^ing of health again:
D^ngers on Ho^s^back, on Foot by W^ter,
I have scapd to this day, and yet this day
Without all help of casual acc^dents
Is only deadly to me, c^^se it numbers
Fou^score years to me, wher^s the ^au^t now?
I cannot blame Time, Nature, nor my Stars
Nor ought but Tyranny, ev^n Kings thems^lv^s
Have some times tasted an even f^te with me,
He that has been a Soldier all his day^s
And stood in pe^sonall opposition, against D^rts and Arrows, the Extremes o^
heat,
And pinch^ng cold^ has treacherously at home
In his secur^d quiet by a vi^lain^s hand
Am basely lost in my star^s ignorance
And so must I die by a Tyrants sword.

1. Law. Oh say not ^o sir, it is by the Law!

Cre. And what is that sir ^ut the sword of ^yranny
When it is brandished against inno^ent lives?
I Am now upon my death bed sir, and it is ^i^
I should unbosome my free conscience
And show the faith I die in, I do believe
It Is tyranny that ta^^es my life.

Sim. Would it were gone
By one means or other, what a long day
Will this be ere night?

Cre. Simonides.

Sim Here sit -- w^eping.

Cre. Wherefore do ^hou (...)?

Clean. Cause you make no more haste to your end.

Sim. How can you qu^stion nature so unjustly?
I had a grandfather, and then had not you
True fili^ll tears for him?

Clean. Hypocrite^
A disease of drought dry up all pity from him
That c^n diss^mble pity with w^t eyes

Cre Be good unto your mother Simonides,
She must be now your care.

Anti. To what end sir?
The bell of this sharp edict towls for me
As it rings out for you, I Will be as ready
With one hours stay to go along with you.

Cre. Thou must not wom^n, there are years behind
Before thou can set forward in this voyage,
And nature sure will now, be kind to all:
She has a quarrel int, a cruel Law
Seeks to prevent her, she will therefore fight int
And draw out life even to her longest thread
Thou art scarce fifty five.

Anti. So many morrowes,
Those five remaining years i will turn to days
To hours or minutes for thy company,
It Is fit that you and I being man and wife
Should walk together arm in arm.

Sim. I hope they will go together, I would they would i faith,
Then would her thirds be saved to, the day goes away sir.

Cre. Why would thou have me gone Simonides?

Sim. O my heart, would you have me gone before you sir?
You give me such a de^dly wound.

Clean. fine rascal.

Sym. Blemish my duty so with such a qu^stion,
Sir I would have me to the Duke for mercy,
He that's above the Law may mitigate
The rigor of the Law^ how a good meaning
May be corrupted by misconstruction?

Cre. Thou cor^upt'st mine, I did not think thou meanest so.

Clean. You were in the more error.

Sym. The words wounded me.

Clean. It Was pity thou diedst not ont.

Sym. I have been ransaking the helps of Law
Conferring with these learned advocates,
If any scruple cause or wrested sense
Could have been found out to preserve your life,
It had been bought though with your full estate,
Your life's so precious to me, but there is none.

1. Law. Sir we have c^nva^'d it from top to toe,
Turned it upside down, thr^w her on her side
Nay opend and dissected all her in^ ^oyles
Yet can find none, there is nothing to be hopd
But the Dukes mercy.

Sym. I know the hope of that,
He did not make the Law for that purpose.

Cre. Then to his hopeless mercy la^t I go,
I have so many presidents before me.
I must c^ll it hopeless Antigona,
See me d^liverd up unto my deaths man
And then weell p^^t five years hence i will look for thee.

Sim. I hope she will not stay so long behind you.

Cre. Do not bate him an hour by grief and sor^ow
Since there is a day prefixed, haste it not,
Suppose me sick Antigona, dying now
Any Disease thou (...) may be my end
Or when D^ath^ slow to come, say Tyrants send Exeunt^

Sim. Cleanthes if you want money, to morrow use me,
I Will trust you while your fathers dead. Exeunt.

Clean. Why here is a villain,
Able to corrupt a thousand by example,
Do^s the kind root bleed out his livelihood
In parent distribution to his branches,
Adorning (...) with ^ll his glorious fruits,
Proud that his pride is s^^n when he is unseen,
And must not gratitude dis^end again
To comfort his old limbs in fruitless winter
Improvident, at le^st partial nature
Weak woman in this kind, who in thy last
Te^ming still forgets ^he former, ever m^king
The burden of thy last throws the dear^st
D^rling; oh yet in noble man reform it,
And make us better then those v^get ves,
Whose souls die within (...); nature as thou art old,
If love and justice be not dead in thee,
Make some the pattern of thy piety,
Lest all do turn unn^turally against thee,
And thou be blamed for our oblivions Enter Leonides and Hippolit^.
And bru^sh ^eluctations; I^ heers the ground
Whereon my filial faculti^s mu^^ build
A^ edifice of honor or of ^hame
To all mankind.

Hip. You must avoid it sir:
If there be any love within your self,
This is far more then fate of a ^ost game
That another venture may r^store ^gen;
It is your life which you should not subject
To any cruelty if you can preserve it.

Clean. O dearest woman, thou have now doubled
A thousand times thy nuptial dowry to me;
Why she whose love is but derived from me
Is go^ before me in my d^bted ^uty.

Hip. Are you thinking such a resolution sir?

Cle. Sweetest Hippolita what love taught ^hee
To be so forward in so good a cause?

Hip. Mine own pity sir, did first inst^uct me
And then your love and power did both command me.

Cle. They were all blessed angels to direct thee,
And take their counsel; how do you fare sir?

Leon. Never better Cleanthes, I have conceived
Such a new joy within this old bosom,
As I did never think would there have entered.

Cle. Joy call you it, alas it is sorrow sir,
The worst of sorrows, sorrow unto death.

Leon. Death, what is that Cleanthes, I thought not ont?
I was in contemplation of this woman.
It Is all thy comfort son, thou have in her
A treasure unvaluable, keep her safe;
When I die, sure twilbe a gentle death;
For I will die with wonder of her virtues,
Nothing else shall disso^ve me.

Clean. 'Twere much better sir,
Could you prevent their malice.

Leon. I Will prevent ^m,
And die the way I told thee, in the wonder
Of this good woman. I tell thee there few men
Have such a child (I must thank thee for her)
That the stronger tie of wedlock should do more
Then nature in her nearest ligaments
Of blood and prop^gation, I should near
Have begot such a daughter of my own:
A daughter in law, law were above nature
Were there more such children.

Cle. This admiration
Helps nothing to yeur safety, think of that sir.

Leon. Had you heard her Cleanthes but l^bour
In the search of means to save my forfe^ life,
And knew the wise and sound preservation^
That she found out, you would redouble all
My wonder in your love to her.

Cle. The thought,
The very thought claims all that from m^,
And she is now possessed of it, but good sir,
If you have ought r^ceiv'd from her advice,
Lets follow it, or else lets better think,
And take the surest course.

Leon. I Will tell thee one,
She counsels me to fly my severe Country,
Turn all into treasure, and there build up
My decaying fortunes in a safer soil,
Where Epires law cannot claim (...)

Cle. And sir, I apprehend it as safest course
And may be easily accomplished;
Let us be all most expeditious
Every Country where we breath will be our own,
O^ better soil; heaven is the roof of ^ll,
And now as Epires situ^te by this law,
There is twixt us and heaven a dark eclipse.

Hip. Oh then avoid it sir, these s^d events
Follow those black predictions.

Leon. I prithee peace,
I do allow thy love Hippolita,
But m^st not follow it as counsel, child;
I must not shame my Country for the law:
Th^s Country here has bred me, brought me up,
And shall I now refuse a grave in her?
I'^e in my second infancy^ and children
Nere sleep so sweetly in their nurses c^adle.
As in their natural mothers.

Hip, I but sir,
She is unnatural, then the stepmother
Is to be preferred before her.

Leon. Tush, she shall
Allow it me dispite of her intrailes;
W^y do you think how far from judgment it is
That I should travel forth to seek a grave
That is already digd for me at home,
Nay perhaps find it in my way to seek it?
How have I then sought a repentant sorrow?
For your dear loves how have I banishd you
From your Country ever with my base attempt
How have I beggerd you in wasting that
Which only for you^ sakes I b^^d together,
Buried my name in Epire which I built
Upon this frame to live for ever in.
What a base coward shall I be to fly
From that enemy which every minute meets me?
And thousand odds he had not long vanquishd me
Before this howr of battle, sly my death
I will not be so false unto your stat^s,
Nor fainting to the man that's yet in me,
I Will meet him b^avely, I cannot (this knowing) fear
That when I am gone hence I shall be there,
Come, I have d^yes of preparation left.

Cle. Good sir, hear me^
I have a Genius that has prompted me,
And I have almost formed it into words,
It Is done, pray you observe em, I can conceal you
And yet not leave your Country.

Leon. Tush, it cannot be
Without a certain peril ons all.

Clean. D^nger must be hazarded rather then accept
A sure destruction^ you have a Lodge sir,
So far remote from way of passengers,
That seldo^e any mortal eye does greet with it,
And yes so sweetly situate with thickets
Built with such cunning L^borinths within,
As if the provident heavens foreseeing cruelty
Had bid you frame it to this purpose only.

Leon. Fie, fie, it is dangerous, and treason to,
To abuse the law,

Hip. It Is holy care sir,
Of your dear life, which is your own to keep,
But not your own to lose, either in will
O^ negligence.

Cle. Call you it treason sir,
I had been then a traitor unto you,
Had I forgot this, beseech you accept of it,
It is secu^e^ and a duty to your self.

Leon. What a co^^rd will you make me?

Cle. You mist^ke^
It Is noble courage, now you fight with death,
And yield not to him till you stoop under him.

Leon. This must needs open to d^scovery,
And then what tortor follows?

Cle. By what means sir?
Why there is but one body in all this ^ounsell,
Which cannot betray it self, we two are one,
One soul, one body, one heart, that think all one though^,
And yet we two are not completely one,
But as have derived my self from you,
Who shall betray us where there is no second?

Hip. You must not mistrust my faith though my sex^
Plead weak and frailty for me.

Leon. Oh I dare not!
But where is the means that must make answer for me
I cannot be lost without a full account,
And what must pay that reckoning?

Cle. Oh sir, we will
Keep solemn obits for your funeral;
Weell seem to weep, and seem to joy withal
That death so gently has prevented you
The L^wes sharp rigor, and this no mortal ear
Shall participate the knowledge of.

Leon. Ha, ha, ha,
This will be a sportive fine Demur^
If the Error be not found.

Cle. Pray doubt of none
Your company and best provision
Must be no further furnished then by us,
And in the interim your solitude
May converse with heaven, and fairly prepare
Which was too violent and raging
Th^own headlong on you.

Leo. Still there are some doubts
Of the discovery, yet I do allow't.

Hip. Will you not mention now the cost and charge
Which will be in your keeping?

Leon. That will be somewhat
Which you might save to.

Cle. With his will against him;
What foe is more to man then m^n hims^lf^?
Are you resolved sir?

Leon. I am Cleanth^s:
If by this means I do get a repriev^
And cozen death a while, when he shall come
Armed in his own power to give the blow,
I Will smile upon him ^hen, and laughing go. Exeunt.

Fin^^ Actus Primi.
Act. II. Scen. I.
Enter Duke ^3. Courtiers and Executioner. Duke. EXecutioner.

Exe. My Lord.

Duke. How did old Diocles take his death?

Exe. As weeping Brides receive their joys at night my Lord,
With trembling yet with patience.

Duke. Why it was well.

1. Cour. Nay I knew my Father would d^e well my Lord.
When ere ^e came to die, i would that opinion of him.
Which made me the more willing to part from him;
He was not fit to live ^'th world indeed any time these
Ten years my Lord.
But I would not say so much.

Duke. No, you did not well in^,
For he that's all spent is ripe for death at all houers,
And does but trifle time out,

1. Cour. Troath my Lord,
I would I had known your mind nine years ago,

Duke, O^r Law is fourscore years, because we judge
Do^age complete then, as unfruitfullnesse
In Women at threescore, marry if the son
Can within compass bring good sollid proofs
Of his own fath^rs weakness and unfitnes
To live or sway the living though he want five
Or ten years of his number, that's not it,
His defect makes him fourscore, and it is fit
He dies when he deserves, for every ^ct
Is in ^ff^ct then when the cause is ripe.

2. Court. An admirable Prince how rarely he talks?
Oh that w'eed known th^s Ladds, what a time did we endure
In two penny Com^ons? and in boots twice vamp'd.

1. Cour. Now we h^ve ^wo p^ire a week, and yet not thankful,
Twill be a fine world for them sirs that come after as.

2. Cour. I and they knewt. 2. Cou. Pe^ce let them never knowt.


3. Cour. A Pox the^e be young heirs will soon smelt out.


2. Court. Twill come to em by instinct man, may your grace
N^v^r be old, you stand so well for youth.

Duke. Why now me thinks our Court looks like a Spring,
Sweet, fresh, and fashionable, now ^he old weeds are gone.

1. Cour. It Is as a Court should be: Gloss and good Clothes,

My Lord no matter for merit and herein your Law p^ooves a provid^nt act my
Lord, when men pass not the palsy of their Tongues, no^ co^our in their
Cheeks.


Duke. But women by that Law should live long,
For they are ne^r past it.

1. Cour. It will have heates though when they see the painting
Go an inch deep ith wrincle, and take up
A box more then their Gossips, but for men my Lord
That should be the sole bravery of a Palace,
To walk with hollow eyes and long white beards,
(As if a P^irce dwelt in a Land of Goats)
With Clo^hes as if they sat upon their backs on purpose
To arraigne a fashion and condemn't to exile
Their pockets in their sleeves, as if they laid
Their ear to avarice, and heard the Devil whisper;
Now ours lie downward here close to the flanck,
Right spending pockets as a sons should be
That lives i^h fashion, where our diseased fathers
Would with the Sciatica and Aches
B^ought up your p^ind hose first, which Ladies laughed at,
Giving no reverence to the place, (lies ^uind,)
They love a doublet that's three hours a buttoning,
And sits so close makes a man groan again,
And his Soul m^tter half a day; yet these are those
That carry sway and worth, prickd up in Clothes,
Why should we fear our rising?

Duk^ You but wrong
Our kindness, and your own deserts to doubt ont,
Has no^ our Law made you rich before your time?
Our countenance then c^n make you honorable.

1. Court. Weel spare for no cost sir to appear worthy.

Duk. Why you are in the noble way then, for the most
Are but appearers, worth it self it is lost
And bravery st^nds fort. Enter Creon, Antigona and Simonides.

1. Court. Look, look, who comes here
I smell Death and another Courtier,
Simonides.

2. Cour. Sim.

Sim. Push, I Am not for you yet,
You^ companies too costly, after the old man's
D^spatch'd I shall have time to talk with you,
I shall come into the fashion ye shall see too
After a day or two, in the mean time
I am not for your company.

Duke Old Cr^on you have been expected long.
Sure you are above fourscore.

Sim. Upon my life
Not four and twenty hours my Lord, I searched
The Church Book yesterdaie, does your Grace think
I Would let my Father wrong the Law my Lord?
Twere pity a'my life then, no your Act
Shall not receive a minutes wrong by him
While I live sir, and he is so just himself too
I know he would no offer't, here he stands.

Creon. It Is just I die indeed my Lord, for I confess
I Am troublesome to life now, and the State
Can hope for nothing worthy from me now,
Either in force or counsel, I Have alate
Employed my self quite from the World, and he that once
Begins to serve his maker faithfully
Can never serve a worldly Prince well after,
It Is clean another way.

Anti. Oh give not confidence
To all he speaks my Lord in his own injury!
His preparation only for the next world
Makes him talk wildly to his wrong of this,
He is not lo^t in judgment.

Sim. She spo^ls all again.

Anti. Des^rving any way for st^te imploiment.

Sim. Mother.


Anti His v^ry household laws presc^ib'd at home by him
A^e able to confo^m 7. Christian kingdoms,
They are so wise and vertu^us.

Sim. Mother, I say.

Anti. I know your laws extend not to desert sir,
But to unn^cessary years, and my Lord
His are no^ such, though they show white, they are worthy,
Jud^t^^us, able, and religious.

Sim. I Will help you to a Courtier of nineteen, Moth^r.

Anti. Awa^ unnatural.


Sim. Then I am no fool I Am sure,
For t^ be natural at such a time
Were a fool ^s part ind^ed.

Anti. You^ G^aces pity sir,
An t^s but fit and just.

Creon. ^h^ law m^ Lord,
And that's the j^st^st way.

Sim. W^^l said ^ather ^faith.
Thou were ever juster then my mother still.

Duke. Come hither sir.


Sim My Lord.

Du. What are those orders?


Antig. Worth obse^vation sir,
So please you hear them read.

Sim. The woman speaks she knows not what my Lord:
He make a L^w, poor man he bought a Table indeed,
Only to learn to d^e by it; there is ^he business now
W^erein there ^re some precepts for a son to,
How he should l^arn to live, but I near looked upont:
For when he is dead I shall live well enough,
And keep a better Table then that I trow^

Du And is that a^l sir?

Sim. All I vow my Lord,
Save a few ^unning admonitions
Upon Cheese Trenchers, as Take heed of whoring, shun it;
It Is like a cheese too strong of the Runn^t,
And such calves maws of wit and admonition
Good to catch mice with, but not sons and heirs,
They Are not so easily caught.

Du. Agent for death.

Exe. Your will my Lord.

Du. Take hence that pile of years
Before surfeit with unprofitable age
And with the rest from the high promontory,
Cast him into the sea.

Creon. It Is noble justice.

Anti. It Is cursed tyranny.

Sim. Peace, take heed mother, you have but a short time to be cast down your
self, and let a young Courtier do it, and you be wise, in the mean time.


Anti Hence sl^ve.

Sim. Well seven and fif^y,
Yave but three years to sco'd, then comes your payment,

1. Court. Simonides.

Sim. Push, I am not b^ave enough to hold you talk yet,
Give a m^n time. I have a su^t a m^king. Recorders.

2. Cour. We love thy form first, brave cloths will come man.

Sim. I Will make em come else with a mischief to em^
As other gallants do, that have less left em.

Du. Hark whence those sounds, what is that?


1. Cou. Some funeral Recorders. Enter Cleanthes and Hipolita with a hears
It seems my Lord, and young Cleanthes follows.

Du. Cleanthes.

2. Cour. It Is my Lord, and i^ the place
Of a chi^fe mourner to, but strangely habited.

Du. Yet su^table to his b^haviour, mark it,
He comes all the way smiling, do you observ't?
I ^ever saw ^ Co^rse so joyfully followe^,
L^ght co^ou^s and light cheeks, who should this be?
It Is ^ thing worth resolving.

Sim. One belike that does participate
In this our present joy.

Du. Cleanthes,

Clean. Oh my Lord.


Du. He laughed outright now,
Was ever such a contrariety seen
In natural courses yet, nay professed openly?

1. Cour. I ha known a widow laugh closely my Lord
Under her handkercher, when the other part of her old face has w^^
Lik^ rain in sunshine, but all the face to laugh apparently
Was never seen yet.

Sim. Yes mine did once.


Clean. It Is of a heavy time the joyfullst day
That ever son was born to.

Du. How can that be^

Cl^an. I joy to make it plain, my father's dead.

Du. Dead!

2. Cour. Old L^onides.

Clean. In his last month dead,
He beguiled cruel L^w the sweetliest
Tha^ ever age was blessed to,
It g^ieves me that a tear should fall upont,
Being a thing so joyful; but his memory
Will work it out I see; when his poor heart b^oke
I did not so much but leapt for joy,
So mountingly I touchd the stars me thought,
I would not hear of blacks I was so light^
But chose a color Orient, like my mind,
For bla^ks are often such dissembling mourners,
There is no credit given toot, it has lost
All reput^tion by false sons and widows;
Now I would have m^n know what I resemble,
A truth indeed, it is joy clad like a joy,
Which is more honest then a cunning grief
Th^t's only faced with s^bles for a show,
But gaudy hearted; when I saw death come
So ready to deceive you, sir forgive me,
I could not choose but be entirely merry,
And yet to see now of a sudden
Naming but Death, I show my self a mortal,
That's never constant to one passion long;
I wonder whence that tear came when I smild,
In the production on it, sorrows a thief,
That can when joy looks on steal forth a grief,
But gracious leave my Lord, when I have performd
My last poor duty to my fathers bon^s,
I shall return your servant.

Du. Well perform it,
The Law is satisfied, they can but die,
And by his death Cleanthes you gain well,
A rich and fair revenew. Flourish

Sim. I would I had even another father, condition he did the like


Clean. I have past it bravely, now how blessed was I
To have the dim sight, now it is confirmd
Past fear or doubts confirmd, on on I say,
He that brought me to man I bring to clay.

Sim. I Am wrapped now in a contemplation,
Even at the very sight of yonder Hearse,
I do but think what a fine thing it is now
To live and follow some seven unkles thus,
As many Cozen Germans, and such people
That will leave Legacies, a pox I Would see em hanged else ere I Would follow
One of them, and they could find the way now Ive enough to begin to be
horrible covetous.

Enter Butler, Tailor, Bailey, Cook, Coachman, and Footman. But. We come to know
your Worships pleasure sir,
Having long served your father, how your good will
Stands toward our entertainment.

Sim. Not a jot i faith:
My father wore cheap garments, he might doot, I shall have all my Clothes come
home to morrow, they will eat up all you, and there were more of you sirs; to
keep you six at Livery and still munching.


Tay. Why I Am a Tailor, you have most need of me sir.

Sim. Thou mad^st my fathers clothes that I confess,

But what son and heir will have his fathers Tailor

Unless he have a mind to be well laughed at? Thast been so used to wide long
side things, that when I come to trusse I shall have the waste of my Dublet lie
upon my buttocks, a sweet sight.


But. I a Butler.

Sim. There Is Jest need of thee fellow, I shall nere drink at Home, I shall
be so drunk abroad.


But. But a cup of small beer will do well next morning sir


Sim. I grant you, but what need I keep so big a knave for a Cup of sm^ll
Beer?


Cook. Butler you have your answer, marry sir a Cook,
I know your mastership cannot be without.

Sim. The more ass art thou to think so, for what should I do With a
Mountebancke, no drink in my house, the banishing the Butler might have been
a warning for thee, unless thou meanst to Choke me.


Cook. Ith mean time you have choked me, me thinks.

Bay. These are superfluous vanities indeed,
And so accounted of in these days sir,
But then your B^yliff to receive your rents.

Sim. I prithee hold thy tongue fellow, I shall take a course to sp^nd em
faster then thou can reckon em, it is not the rents must se^ve my turn,
unless I mean to be laughed at, if a man should be seen out of slash me, let
him nere look to be a right gallant: But ^irrah with whom is your business?


Coach Your good mastership.

Sim. You have stood silent all this while, like men
That know their strengths i'these days, none of you
Can want employment, you can win me wagers
Footman in running races.

Foot I dare boast it sir.

Sim. And when my bets are all come in and store
Then Coachman you can hurry me to my whore.

Coach. I Will ^i^ke em into foame else.

Sim. Speaks brave matter,
And i will firk some to, or't shall cost hot water.

Cook Why hears an age to make a Cook a Ruffin, and scald the D^vell indeed,
do strange mad things, make mutton pasties of Dogs flesh, back Snal^es for
Lamprie Pies, and Cats for Cunnies:


But. Come will you be ruld by a Butlers advice once? for we must m^ke up our
fortunes some where now as the case stands, le^s ^en therefore go seek out
widows of nine and fifty and we can, that's within a year of their deaths,
and so we shall be sure to be quickly ridd of em, for ^ years enough of
conscience to be troubled with a wife for any man living.


Cook. Oracle Butler, Oracle Butler, he puts down all the Doctors a'th name.
Exeunt.


Enter Eugenia, and Parthenia. Eug. Parthenia.

Par. Mother.

Eug. I shall be troubled
This six months with an old Clogg, would the Law
Had been cut one year shorter.

Par. Did you call forsooth.

Eug. Yes, you m^st make some spoone meat for your father,
And warm three night capps for him, out apont
The mere conceit turns a young woman's stomach,
His slippers must be warmd in August too,
And his gown girt to him in the very dogdaies
When every Mastiffe lo^s ou^s tongue for heat,
Would not this vex a beauty of 19. now?
Alas I shall be tumbling in cold Bathes now
Under each arm pit a fi^e bean flower bag
To screw out whiteness when I list,
And some seven of the proprest men ith Dukedom,
M^king a B^nquet ready ith next room for me,
Where he that gets the first kiss is envied
And stands upon his guard a fortnight after;
This is a life for nineteen, but it is ju^^ice
For old men, whose great acts stand in their minds
And nothing in their bodies, do nere think
A woman young enough for their desire,
And we young wenches that have mother wits
And love to marry muck first, and man after,
Do never ^hinke old men are old enough
That we may soon be rid on em there is ou^ quittance;
I have wasted for the happy hour this two year
And if D^a^h be so unkind st^ll to let him live
All that time I am lost. Enter Courtiers.

1. Cour. Young Lady.

2. Cour. O ^weet p^^cious bu^ of beauty!
Troth she smells over all the house me thinks.

1. Court. The Sweet Briers but a counterfeit to her^
It does exceed you only in the prickle,
But that it shall not long if you will be ruled Lady^

Eug. What means this sudden visitation Gentlemen?
So passing well performed too, whose your Milliner?

1. Cour. Love and thy Beauty Widow.

Eug. Widow sir.

1. Court. It Is sure and that's as good, in troath we are suitors
We come a wooing wench, plain dealings best.

Eug. A wooing, what before my Husbands dead?

2. Cour. Lets lose no time, 6. months will have an end you know,
I know it by all the Bonds that ere I made yet.

Eug. That's a sure knowledge, but it holds not here sir.

1. Cour. Do not you know the craft of your young Tumblers? That you wed an old
man, you think upon another husband as yo^ are marrying of him, we knowing
your thoughts made bold to see you. Enter Simonides, Coachman.


Eug. How wondrous right he speaks 'twas my thought indeed.

Sim. By your leave sweet Widow, do you lack any gallants?

Eug. Widow again, it is a comfort to be called so.

1. Cour. Whose this Simonides.

2. Cour. Brave Sim I faith.

Sim. Coachman.

Coach. Sir.

Sim. Have an especial care of my new mares,
They say sweet Widow he that loves a horse well
Must needs love a Widow well, when dies thy Husband?
Is It not July next.

^ug. Oh you are to hot sir!
Pray cool your self and take September with you.

Sim. September oh I was but two Bows wide.

1. Cour. Mr. Simonides.

Sim. I can entreat you gallants, I Am in fashion too. Ent. Lisander.

Lisan. Ha, whence this heard of folly, what are you?

Sim. Well willers to your wife, pray tend your book sir,
We have nothing to say to you, you may go die,
For here be those in place that can supply.

Lisan. What Is thy wild business here?

Sim. Old man, i will tell thee,
I come ^o beg the reversion of thy Wife,
I think these gallants be of my mind too, but thou art but ^ dead
Man, therefore what should a man do talking with thee,
Come Widow stand to your t^ckling.

Lisan. Impious blood hounds.

Sim. Let the Ghost talk, nere mind him.

Lisan. Shames of nature.

Sim. Alas poor Ghost, consider what the man is.

Lisan. Monsters unnatural, you that have been covetous
Of your own fathers deaths, gape ye for mine now?
Cannot a poor old man that now can reckon
Even all the hours he has to live, live quiet
For such wild beasts as these, that neither hold
A certainty of good within themselves,
But scatter others comforts that are ripened
For holy uses? is hot youth so hasty
It will not give an old man leave to die?
And leave a Widow first, but will make one
The Husband looking on, may your destructions
Come all in hasty figures to your Souls,
Your wealth depart in have, to overtake
Your honesties, that died when you were infants.
May your male seed be hasty spend thrifts too?
Your daughters hasty sinners and diseased
Ere they be thought at years to welcome misery,
And may you never know what leisure is
But at repentance: I am too uncharitable
Too foul, I must go cleanse my self with prayers;
These are the Plagues of fondness to old men
Wee'r punished home with what we dote upon. Exit.

Sim So so, the Ghost is vanished now, your answer Lady.

Eug. Exc^se me gentlemen, 'twere as much impudence
In me to give you a kind answer yet.
As madness to produce a churlish one.
I could say now, come a month hence sweet gentlemen,
Or two or three, or when you will indeed,
But I say no such thing. I set no time
Nor is it mannerly to deny any,
I Will car^y an even hand to all the world,
Let other women m^ke what have they w^ll,
What Is that to me, but I profess unfainedly^
I Will have my husband dead before I marry,
Ner^ look for other answer at my hands Gentlemen.

Sim. Would he were hanged for my part look for other.

Eug. I Am at a word

Sim. And I Am at a blow then,
I Will lay you o'th lips and leave you.

1. Cour. Well struck Sim.

Sim. He that dares say heell m^nd it, I Will strike him.

1. Cour. He would betray himself to be a brother
That goes about to m^nd it.

Eug. Gentlemen, you know my mind, I bar you not my house,
But if you choose out hours more seasonably
You may have entertainment.

Enter Parthenia. Sim. What will she do hereafter when sh is a widow,
Keeps open house already? Exeunt.

Eug. How now Girl?

Parth. Those featherd fools that hither took their flight,
Have grieved my father much.

Eug. Speak well of youth Wench
While th^^st a day to live; it is youth must make thee,
And when youth fails, wise women will make it;
But always take age first to make thee rich:
That was my counsel ever, and then youth
Will make thee sport enough all thy life after.
It Is Times policy Wench^ wh^t is it to bide
A little hardness for a pair of years or so,
A man whose only strength lies in his breath,
Weakness in all parts else, thy bedfellow
A cough oath Lungs, or say a wheening matter,
Then shake off chains, and dance all thy life after.

Parth. Every ^n^ to their liking^ but I say
An honest man's worth all, be he young or gray,
Yonder Is my Coz^n.

Enter Hippolita. Eug A^t I must use thee now,
Dissembling is the b^st help for a virtue
That ever woman had, it saves their credit often.

Hip. How now Cozen,
What weeping?

Eug. Can you blame me when the time
Of my dear Love and Husband now draws on;
I study funeral rears against the day
I must be a sad widow.

Hip. In troth Eugenia I have cause to weep to,
But when I visit, I come comfortably,
And look to be so quited, yet more sobbing.

Eug. Oh the greatest part of your affliction's past,
The worst of mine is to come, I have one to die,
Your husbands father is dead, and fixed
In his eternal pe^ce, past the sharp tyrannous blow.

Hip. You must use patience Coze.

Eug. Tell me of patience.

Hip. You have example fort in me and many.

Eug. Yours was a father in law, but mine a husband^
On for a woman that could love and live
Wi^h an old man, mine is a jewel Cozen,
So quietly he lies by one, so still.

Hip. Alas! I have a secret lodged within me
Which now will out, in pity I cannot hold.

Eugen. One that will not disturb me in my sleep
After a whole month together, less it be
With those diseases age is subject to,
As aches, coughes, and pains, and these heaven knows
Against his will too, he is the quietest man,
Especially in bed.

Hip. Be comforted.

Eug How can I Lady?
None knows the terror of an husbands losse^
But they that fear to lose him.

Hip. Fain would I keep it in, but twill not be,
She is my kinswoman, and i am pitiful,
I must impart a good if I knowt once,
To them that stand in need ont, I Am like one
L^v^s not to banquet with a joy alone,
My friends must partake too, prithee cease Cozen
If your love be so boundless, which is rare
^n a young woman in these days, I tell you,
To one so much past service as your husband,
There is a way to beguile law, and help you,
My husband ^ound it out first.

Eug. Oh sweet Cozen!

Hip. You may conceal him, and give out his death
Within the time, order his funeral too;
We had it so for ours, I praise heaven fort,
And he is alive and safe.

Eug. O blessed Coze,
How thou reviv'st me?

Hip We daily see
The good old man, and fe^d him twice a day,
Me thinks it is the sweetest joy to cherish him,
That ever life yet showed me.

Eug. So should I think
A dainty thing to nurse an old man well.

Hip. And then we have his prayers and daily blessing.
And we two live so lovingly upont,
His son and I, and so contentedly,
You cannot think unless you tasted ont.

Eug. No I warrant you, Oh loving Cozen,
What a great sorrow have thou eased me of?
A thousand thanks go with thee.

Hip. I have a suite to you, I must not have you weep when I am gone. Exit.

Eug. No, if I do near trust me: Easy fool,
Thou have put thy self into my power for ever:
Take heed of angring of me; I conceal,
I fain a Funeral, I keep my husband,
Less I have been thinking any time these two years
I have kept him too long already.
I Will go count ore my Suitors, that's my business,
And prick the man down, I ha six months to doot,
But could d^spatch him in one, were I p^t toot. Exit.

Finis Actus Secundi.
Act. III. Scen. I.
Enter the Clown and Clark. Clo. YOu have searched o^e the Parish Chronicle^ sir?

Clar. Yes sir, I have found out the true age and date of the party you wot on.


Clo. Pray you be covered sir.

Clar. When you have showed me the way sir.

Clo. Oh sir remember your self, you are a Clark.

Clar. A small Clark sir.

Clo. Likely to be the wiser man si^, for your greatest Clarks are not always
so, as it is reported.


Clar. You are a great man in the Parish sir.

Clo. I understand my self so much the better ^ir, for all the best in the
Parish pay duties to the Clark, and I would ow you none sir.


Clar. Since you will have it so, i will be the first to hide my head.

Clo. Mine is a capcass now to our business in your hand, good luck I hope, I
long to be resolved.


Clar. Look you sir, this is that cannot deceive you.
This is the Dial that goes ever true;
You may say Ipse dixit upon this witness,
And it is good in Law too.

Clo. Pray you lets bear what it speaks.

Clar. Mark sir, Agatha the daughter of ^ollux, this is your Wives name, and
the name of her father, born.


Clo. Whose daughter s^y you.

Clar. The daughter of Poll^x

Clo. I take it his name was Bollux.

Clar. Pollux the Orthography I assure you sir, the word is cor^upted els^.

Clo. Well on sir of Pollux, now come on ^^stor.

Clar. Born in an. 1540. and now it is 99. by (...) i^^^llib^e record sir (let me
see) she is now just 59. and (...) but on.


Clo. I am sorry (...).

Clar. Why sir? alas it is nothing, it is but so many months, so many weeks, so
many --


Clo. Do not deduct it to dayes^ twill be the more tediou^, and to measure it
by hour glasses were intolerable.


Clar. Do not think on it sir, half the time goes away in sleep, it is half
the year in nights.


Clo. Oh you mistake me neighbor, I am loath to leave the good old woman. if
she were gone now it would not grieve me, for what is a year alas but a
lingering torment? and were it not better she were out of her pain, t^must
needs be a grief to us both.


Clar. I would I knew how to ease you neighbor?


Clo. You speak kindly truly, and if you say but Amen to it, (which is a word
that I know you are perfect in) it might be don, Cla^ks are the most
ind^fferent honest men, for to the marriage of your enemy, or the burial of
your friend, the Curses or the Blessings ^o you are all one, you say Amen to
all.


Clar. With a better will to the one then the other neighbor, but I shall be
glad to say Amen to any thing might do you a pleasure.


Clo. There is first something above your duty, now I would have you set forward
the Clock a little, in to help the old woman out of her pain.


Clar. I will speak to the Sexton for that, but the day will go nere the
faster for that.


Clo. Oh neighbor you d^e not conceit me, not the Jack of the Clock-house the
hand of the Dial I mean, come, I know you being a great Clark, cannot choose
but have the art to cast a figure.


Clar. Never indeed neighbor, I never had the judgment to c^st a figure.


Clo. I Will show you on the back side of your book, look you, what figures
this.


Clar. Four with a Cipher that's forty.


Clo. So forty, what is this now?


Clar. The Cipher is turned into 9. by adding the tail which m^k^s forty nine.


Clo. Very well understood, what is it now?


Clar. The 4. is turned into 3. it is now thirty nine.


Clo. Very well understood, and can you do this again?


Clar. Oh easily sir.


Clo. A wager of that, let me see the place of my wives age again.


Clar. Look you sir it is here 1540.


Clo. Forty drachmaes, you do^ not turn that forty into thirty nine.


Clar. A match with you.


Clo. Done, and you shall keep stakes your self there they are.


Clar. A firm match, but stay sir now I consider it, I shall add a year to
your wives age, let me see Scirophon the 17. and now it is H^catomcaon the 11.
if I alter this your wife will have but a month to live by the Law.


Clo. That's all one sir, either do it or pay me my wager.


Clar. Will you lose your wife before you lose your wager?


Clo. A man may get two wives before half so much money by em, will you doot?


Clar. I hope you will conceal me for it is flat corruption.


Clo. Nay sir I would have you keep counsel, for I lose my money by it and
should be laughed at for my labor, if it should be known.


Clar. Well sir, there it is done, is perfect 39. as can be f^und in black and
white but mum sir, there is danger in this figure casting.


Clo. I sir, I know that better men then you have been thrown over the bar
for as little, the best is, you can be but thrown out of the Belfrie.


Enter the Cook, the Tailor, Bayliffe, and Butler. Clar. Lock close here comes
company, Asses have ears as well as Pitchers.


Cook. Oh Gnoth^s, how is it? here is a tri^k of discarded Cards of us, we were
ranked with Coats as long as our old master lived.


Clo. And is this then the end of Serving men?


Cook. Yes faith, this is the end of serving men, a wise man were better serve
one God then all the men in the world.


Clo. It Was well! spak of a Cook, and are all fallen into fasting days and ember
we^ks, that Cooks are out of use?


Tay. And all Tailors will be cut into L^sts and Shreds, if this world hold,
we shall grow both out of requ^st.


But. And why not Butler^ as well as Tailors, if they can go naked, let em
neither eat nor drink.


Cla. That's strange me thinks, a Lord should turn away h^s Tailor of all men,
and how do thou Tailor?


Tay. I do so so, but indeed all our wants are long of this Publican my Lords
Bailiff, ^or had he been rent gatherer still, our places had held together
still, that are now seame rent, nay cracked in the whole piece.


B^l. Sir, if my Lord had not sold his Lands that claim hi^ Rents, I should
still have been the rent gatherer.


Cook. The truth is, except the Co^thman, and the Footman, all ^erving men are
out of requ^st.


Clo. Nay say not so, for you were never in more request then now; for
requ^sting is but a kind of a begging, for when you say I b^seech your Worships
Charity, it is all one if you say I requ^st i^^ and in that kind of r^questing, I
am sure serving men were never in more req^est.


Cook. Troath he says true, well let that pass, we are upon a better
a^venture. I see Gnothos you have been before us, we came to deal with this
Merchant for some commodities.


Clar. With me sir any thing that I can.


But. Nay we have looked out our Wives already, marry to you we come to know
the prices, that is to know their ages for so much reverence we bear to age,
that the more aged, they shall be the more dear to us.


Tay. The truth is every man has laid by his Widow, so they be lame enough,
blind enough, and old, it is good enough.


Clar. I ke^pe the town stock, if you can but name em, I can tell their ages
today.


Om. We can tell their fortunes to an hour then.


Clar. Only you must pay for turning of the leaves.


Cook. Oh bountifully, come mine first!


But. The Butler before the Cook while you live, there is few tha^ eat before
they drink in a morning.


Tay. Nay then the Tailor puts in his needle of priority, for m^n do cloth
themselves before they either drink or eat.


Bay. I will strive for no place, the longer ere I ma^ry my wife, the older
she will be, and nearer her end and my ends.


Clar. I will serve you all gentlemen if you will h^ve patience.


Clo. I commend your modesty sir, you are a Bailiff whose place is to come
behind other men, as it were in the bumm of all the rest.


Bay. So sir, and you were about this business too, seeking out for a Widow.


Clo. Alack no sir, I am a married man, and have those cares upon me that you
would feign runn into.


Bay. What an old rich wife, any man in this age desires such a care.


Clo. Troath sir I Will put a venture with you if you will, I have a lusty old
qu^ane to my wife, sound of wind and limb, yet I Will give out to take three for
one^ at the marriage of my second wife.


Bay. I sir, but how near is she to the Law?


Clo. Take that at hazard sir, there must be time you know to get a new:
Unsigh^, unseen, I take 3. to one.


Bay. Two to one I Will give if she have but two teeth in her head.


Clo. A ma^ch, there is five drachmes for ten at my next wife.


Bay. A match.


Cook. I shall be fitted bravely, fifty eight and upwards, it is but a year and
a half, and I may chance make friends, and beg a year of the Duke.


But. Hey boys I am made sir Butler, my wife that shall be wants but two
months of her time, it shall be one ere I marry her, and then ^h^ next will be
a hunny moon.


Tay. I out st^ip you all, I shall have but six weeks of Lent, if I get my
Widow, and then comes eating tide plump and gorgious.


Clo. This Tailor will be a man if ever there were any.


B^y Now comes my turn, I hope goodman Finis, you that are still at the end of
all with a so be it, well now sirs, do you venture there as I have done? and
i will venture hereafter you, good luck I beseech thee.


Clar. Amen sir.


Bay. That deserves a fee already, there it is, please me and have a better.


Clar. Amen sir.


Cook. How two for one at your next wife, is the old one living?


Clo. You have a fair Match, I offer you no foul one, if Death make not have
to call her, she will make none to go to him.


But. I know her, she is a lusty woman, I Will take the venture.


Clo. There Is five drachm^es for ten at my next wife.


But. A bargain.


Cook. Nay then weel be all Merchants give me.


Tay. And me.


But. What has the Bailiff sped?


Bay. I am con^ent, but n^ne of you shall know my happiness.


Clar. As well as any of you all believe it sir.


Bay. Oh Clarke you are to speak last always.


Clar. I Will remember't h^reafter sir^ you have done with me Gentlemen? Enter
Wife.


Om. For this time honest Register.


Clar. Fare you well then, if you do, I Will cry Amen toot. Exit.


Cook. Look you sir is not this your Wife?


C^o. My first wife sir.


B^t. Nay then we have made a good match ont, if she have no froward Disease,
the Woman may live this dozen years by her age.


Tay. I Am afraid she is broken winded, she holds silence so long.


Cook. We^l now leave our venture to the ev^nt, I must a wooing.


But. I Will but buy me a new dagger, and overtake you.


Bay. So we must all, for he that goes a wooing to a Widow without a weapon
will never get her. Exeunt.


Clo. Oh Wife, Wife!


Wife. What ^yle you man you speak so passionatly.


Clo. It Is for thy sake sweet wife, who would think so lusty an old ^oman, with
reasonable good teeth, and her tongue in as perfect use as ever it was, should
be so near her time, but the Fates will have it so?


Wife. What Is the matter man, you do amaze me?


Clo. Thou art not sick neither I warrant thee.


Wife. Not that I know of sure.


Clo. What pity it is a woman should be so near her end, and yet not sick^


Wife. Near her end man, tush I can guess at that,
I have years good yet of life in the remainder,
I want two yet at least of the full number,
Then the Law I know craves impotent and useless
And not the ^ble women.

Clo. I alas I see thou have been repairing time ^s well as thou could, the
old wrinckles are well filled up, but the Vermilion is seen too thick, too
thick, and I read what is written in thy forehead, it agrees with the Church
Book.


Wife. Have you sought my age man, and I preethee how is it?


Clo. I shall but discomfort thee.


Wife. Not at all man, when there is no remedy, I will go though unwillingly.


Clo. 1539. Just it agrees with the Book, you have about a year to prepare
your self.


Wife. Out al^s, I hope there is more then so, but do you not think a repreeve
might be gotten for half a score, and twere but five year, I wo^ld not care,
an able woman (me thinks) ^ere to be pitied.


Clo. I to be pitied, but not helped, no hope of that, for indeed women have
so blemishd their own reputations now a days, that it is thought the L^w will
meet them at fifty very shortly.


Wife. Marry the H^avens forbid.


Clo. There Is so many of you that when you are old become Witches, some profess
Physic, and kill good subjects faster then a bu^ning Feavour; and then
Schoolemistresses of the sweet sin, which commonly we call Bawds innumerable
of that sort: for these and such causes it is thought they shall not live above
fifty.


Wife. I man but this hurts not the good old women.


Clo. I faith you are so like one another, that a man cannot distinguish 'em
now; were I an old woman I would desire to go before my time, and ^ff^r my
self willingly, 2. or 3. years before; oh those are brave women and worthy to
be commended of all men in the world that when their Husbands die they run to
be burnt to death with em, there is honor and credit, give me half a dozen
such wives.


Wife. I if her Husband were dead before, 'twere a reasonable requ^st, if you
were dead I could be content to be so.


Clo. Fie, that's not likely, for thou had two husbands before me.


Wife. Thou would not have me die, would thou husband?


Clo. No I do not speak to that purpose, but I say what credit it were for me
and thee, if thou would, then thou should never be suspected for a Witch,
a Physician, a Bawd, or any of those things, and then how daintily should I
mourn for thee, how bravely should I see thee buried, when alas if he goes
before it cannot choose but be a great grief to him to think he has not
seen his wife well buried, there be such virtuous women in the world, but too
few, too few who desire to die 7. years before their time with all their
hearts.


Wife. I have not the heart to be of that mind, but indeed Husband I think you
would have me gone.


Clo. No alas I speak but for your good and your credit, for when a woman may
die quickly, why should she go to Law for her Death, al^^k I need not wish
thee gone, for thou have but a short time to stay with me, you do not know how
near it is, it must out, you have but a month to live by the Law.


Wife. Out alas.


Clo. Nay scarce so much.


Wife. Oh, oh, oh, my heart! Swouns.


Clo. I so, if thou would go away quietly twere sweetly done, and like a kind
wife, lie but a little longer and the bell shall towle for thee.


Wife. Oh my heart, but a month to live.


Clo. Alas why would thou come back again for a month, i will throw her down
again, oh woman it is not three weeks, I think a fortnigh^ is the most.


Wife. Nay then I am gone already. Swouns.


Clo. I would make have to the Sexton now, but I Am afraid the towling of the
Bell will wake her again; if she be so wise as to go now, she stirs again,
there is two lives of the nine gone.


Wife. Oh would not thou help to recover me husband?


Clo. Alas, I could not find in my heart to hold thee by thy nose, or box thy
cheeks, it goes against my conscience.


Wife. I will not be thus frighted to my Death,
I Will search the Church Record a fortnight
It Is too little of conscience, I cannot be so near,
Oh time if thou bee^t kind lend me but a year. Exit.

Clo. What a spites this, that a man cannot persuade his wife to dye in any
time with her good will, I have another bespoke already, though a piece of old
beef will serve to breakfast, yet a man would be glad of a Chicken to supp^r;
the Clarke I hope understands no Hebrew, and cannot write backward that he
has writ forward already, and then I am well enough: it is but a month at most,
if that were gone My venture comes in with her two for one, It Is use enough a
con^c^e^ce for a brother if he had a consc^e^ce. E^it.


Enter Eugenia as one Door, Simonides, Courtiers at the other. Eug. Gentlemen
Courtiers.


1. Cour. All your s^rvants vowed Lady.
Oh I shall kill my self with infinite laughter!
Will no body take my part?

Sim. An't be a laughing business
Put it to me, ^^me one of the best in Europe.
My father died last (...), I h^ve the most cause.

Eug^ Y^u ha pickd ou^ such a time sweet Gentlemen
To m^ke y^u^ spleen a ba^q^et.

Sim. Oh the jest Lady!
I have a jaw stands ready fort, ^l'e gape,
Half way and m^et it.

Eug. My old Husband
That cannot s^y his pra^ers out for Jealosie
And madn^sse, at your coming first to woe me.

Sim Well s^yd.


1 Cour. Go on.

2. Cour. On, on.

E^g. Takes Counsel with the secrets of all art
To make himself youthful ^gen.

Sim How you^hfull, ha, ha, ha.

Eug. A man of forty five he would feign seem to be
O^ scarce so much if he might have his will indeed.

Sim. I but his white hairs theyl betray his hoarin^sse.

Eug Why there you ^re wide, he is not the man you take him for,
N^y will y^u know h^^ when you see him again,
There will be five to one laid upon that.

1. Cour. How?

Eug^ Nay you did well to laugh faintly there,
I pro^ise you I think he^l out live me now,
And deceive Law and all.

Sim. M^rry gowt fo^bid.

Eug. You little think he was at Fencing School
At four a Clock this Morning.

Sim. How at Fenc^ng School^?

Eug. Else give no trust to woman.

Sim. By this light
I do not like him then, he is like to live
Longer then I, for he may kill me first now.

Eug. His dancer now came in as I met you.

1. Cour. His dancer too.

Eug. They observe turns and hours with him^
The great French rider will be here at ten
With his Curvetting Horse.

2. Cour. These notwithstanding.
His hair and wrincles will betray his age.

Eug. I Am sure his Head and B^ard as he has orderd it
Looks not p^st fif^y now heel bringt to forty
Within these four days for 9 times an hour at least
He takes ^ Black Lead Comb and kembs it over^
Three q^arters of his Beard is under fifty,
There Is but a little tuft of fourscore left Enter Lisander.
All of one side which will be black by Monday,
And to approve my truth ^^e where he coms?
Laugh softly gentlemen, and look upon him.

Sim. Now by this hand he is almost black ith mouth indeed.

1. Cour. He should die shortly then.

Sim. Marry me thinks he dies too fast already,
For he was all white but a week ago.

1. Cour. Oh this same cunny white takes an excellent black,
Too soon a mischief ont.

2. Cour. He will beguild us all
If that little tuft Northward turn black too.

Eug. Nay sir I wonder it is so long a turning.

Sim. May be some Fairies child held forth at midnight
Has pist upon that side.

1. Cour. Is this the Beard?

Lis Ah sirrah my young boys I shall be for you,
This little m^ngle tuft takes up more time
Then all the Beard beside, come you a wooing
And I alive and lusty? you shall find
An alteration, Jack boys I have a Spirit yet,
And I could match my hair to it, there is the fault,
And c^n do offices of youth yet lightly.
At least I will do though it pain me a little
Shall not a man for a little foolish age
Enjoy his Wife to himself, must young Court ti^s
Play tomboyes tricks with her, and he live, ha?
I have blood that will not beart, yet I confess
I should be at my prayers, but where is the Dancer there. Ent. Dan

Dan. Here sir.

Lis. Come, come, come, one trick a day,
And I shall soon recover all again.

Eug. Slight and you laugh too loud, we are all discoverd Gentlemen

Sim. And I have a scurvy ginny laugh a mine own.
Will spoil all i am afraid.

Eug. Marry take heed sir.

Sim. Nay and I should be hanged I cannot leave it, pup. there it is.

Eug Peace oh peace!

Lis. Come I am ready sir.
I hear the Church Books lost where I was borne to,
And that shall set me back one and twenty years
There is no little comfort left in that,
And my three Court Codlings that look parboyld,
As ^if they come from Cupids scalding house.

Sim He means me specially I hold my life.

Danc. What trick will your old Worship learn this morning sir?

Lis. Marry a trick if thou could teach a man
To keep his Wife to himself, i would feign learn that.

Danc. That's a hard trick for an old man specially
The Horse trick comes the nearest.

Lis. Thou say true, I faith
They must be horst indeed, else there is no keeping on em
And horse play at fourscore is not so ready.

Danc. Look you heers your Worships horse trick sir.

Lis. Nay say not so,
It Is none of mine I fall down horse and man,
If I but off^r at it.

Danc. My life for yours sir.

Lis. Say thou me so.

Danc. Well offered by my Violl sir.

Lis. A Pox of this horse trick, t'as played the jade with me
And given me a wrinch ith back.

Danc. Now heeres your i^turne, and your trick above ground.

Lis. P^ithee no more, unless thou have a mind
^o lay me underground, one of these tricks
enough in a morning.

Danc. For your G^lli^rd sir
^^u are comple^t enough, I and may ch^llenge
^^e proudest Coxcombe of em all, i will stand too^.

Lis. Faith and I Have other weapons for the rest too,
^^ve p^ep^rd for em, if ere I take
(...) Gregory's here again.

Sim. Oh I shall burst, I can hold out no longer.

Eug. He spoils all.

Lis. The Devil and his grinners are you come.
Bring forth the weapons we shall find you play,
All feats of youth to Jack Boys, feats of youth.
And these the w^pons, drinking, fencing, dancing,
Your own road ways you Glisterpipes, I Am old you say
Yes parlo^s old Kidds and you mark me well,
This Beard cannot get Children, yon lank ^u^^ eggs,
Unless such Weezels come from Court to help us
We will get our own bratts, you lecherous dogbolts Enter wi^^ Glasses.
W^l said down with 'em now we shall see your spirits
What dwindle you already?

2. Cour. I have no quallity.

Sim. Nor I, unless drinking may be reckned
For one.

1. Cour. Why Sim it shall.

Lis. Come dare you chus^ your weapon now.

1. Cour. I dancing sir and you will be so h^sty.

Lis. We Are for you sir.

^. Cour. Fencing I.

Lis. Weel answer you to.

Sim. I Am for drinking your wet weapon there.

Lis. That wet one has cost many a p^incox life
And I will send it through you with a powder.

Sim. Let come with a Pox^ I care no^ so't be drink.
I hope my gu^s will hold, and ^hat's ^een all
A Gentleman can look for of such trillibubs.

Lis. P^^y the first weap^n, come strike, strike I say
Yes, yes, you shall be first, I Will observe Court Rules A Ga^^ard L^mini^rd
Always the worst goes foremost, so twill prove I hope
So sir, you have spit your poison, now come I,
Now forty years ago backward and assist me
Fall from me half my age but for three minutes,
That I may feel no crick, I will put fair fort
Although I hazard twenty Sciaticaes
So I have hit you.

1. Cour. You Have done well I faith sir,

Lis. If you confess it well it is excellent
And I have hit you soundly, I am warm now,
The second weapon instantly.

2. Cour. What so quick sir, will you not allow your self a breathing time?

Lis. Ive breath enough at all times, Lucifers Musk cod^
To give your perfumd worship 3. Vennies,
A sound old man puts his thrust better home
Then a spic'd young man, there I.

2. Cour. Then have at you fourscore.

Lis. You l^e twenty I hope, and you shall find it.

Sim. I Am glad I mist this weapon, I had an eye
Popd out ere this time, or my two butter teeth
Thrust down my throat instead of a flap draggon.

Lis. There Is two, peptwizle.

Danc. Excellently touched sir.

2. Cour. Had ever man such luck, speak your opinion gentlemen^

Sim. Me thinks your lucks good that your eyes are in still,
Mine would have dropped out like a pigs half toasted.

Lis. There wants a third and there it is again.

2. Cour. The Devil has steeld him.

Eug. What a strong fiend is Jelousie?

Lis. Your disp^tchd bear whelp.

Sim. Now comes my weapon in.

Lis. Here toad stool, here.
It Is with you and I must play these 3. wet Vennies.

Sim. Vennis in Venice Glasses, let em come
Theyl bruise no flesh I Am sure, nor break no bones.

2. Cour. Yet you may drink your eyes out sir.

Sim. I but th^ts nothing then they go voluntarily, I do not
Love to have em thrust out whether they will or ^^^

Lis. Heeres your first weapon du^k^ meat.

Sim. How, a dutch what you call em.
St^^d of a German falchion, a shrewd weapon^
And of all things, hard to be taken down,
Yet down it must, I have a nose goes in toot
I shall drink double I think.

1. Cour. The sooner off Sim.

Lis. I Will pay you speedily -- with a trick.
I learnt once amongst drunkards, heeres half pike.

Sim. Half pike comes well after Dutch what you c^ll em,
They Would never be a sunder by their good will.

1. Cour. Well pulled of an old fellow.

Lis. Oh but your fellows
Pull better at a rope.

1 Cour. There Is a hair Sim.
In that Glass.

Sim. Ant be as long as a halter down it goe^
No hair shall cross me.

Lis. I make you stink worse then your Pol^cats do.
^eeres long sword your last weapon.

Sim. No more weapons.

1. Cour. Why how now Sim bear up, thou ^hamst us all else.

Sim. Light I shall shame you worse and I stay longer.
I ha got the Scotony in my head already^
The whimzy, you all turn round, do no^ you dance gallants.

2. Cour. Pish what is all this? why Sim look the last Venny

Sim. No more Vennies goes down here, for these 2. are coming up again.

2. Cour. Out The disgrace of drinkers.

Sim. Yes twill out,
Do you smell nothing yet?

1. Cour. Smell.

Sim. Farewell quickly then it will do if I stay. Exit.

1. Co^r. A Foil go with thee.

Lis^. What shall we put down youth at her own virtues?
Beat folly in her own ground wondrous much
Why may not we be held as full sufficient
To love o^r own wives, then get our own children
And live in free peace till we be dissolved?
For such spring Butterflies that ^^e gawdie wingd,
But no more substance then th^se Shamble ^lies
Which Butchers boys snap between sleep and waking,
Come but to crush you once you are all but maggot^,
For all your beamy out sides. Enter Cleanthe^

Eug. Heeres Cleanthes,
He comes to chide let him alone a little,
Our cause will be revenged, look, look his face
Is set for stormy weather, do but mark
How the Clouds gather in it, 'twil power down straight.

Clean. Me thinks I partly know you, that's my grief
Could you not all be lost that had been handsome,
But to be known at all it is more then shameful,
Why was not yeur name wont to be Lisand^r?

Lis. It Is so still coze.

Clean. Judgment d^fer thy coming, else this man's miserable.

Eug. I told you there would be a shower anon.

2. Cour. Weel in and hide our noddles. Exeunt Courtiers and Eugenia.

Clean. What Devil brought this color to your mind.
Which since your childhood I near saw you weare^
You were ever of an innocent gloss
Since I was ripe for knowledge, and would you lose it
And change the Liv^ry of Saints and Angels
For this mixed monstrousnes, to force a ground
That has been so long hallowed like a Temple,
To bring forth fruits of earth now, and turn black
To the wild cries of lust, and the complexion
Of Sin in act, lost and long since repented;
Would you begin a work nere yet attempted;
To pull time ba^kward?
See what your wife will do, are your wits perfect?

Lis. My wits.

Clean. I like it ten times worse for t'ad been safer
Now to be mad, and more excusable.
I hear you dan^e ^gen and do strange follie^.

Lis. I must confess I have been put to some co^^^

Clean. And yet you are not mad, pray say not so
Give me that comfort of you that you are mad
That I may think you are at worst, for if
You are not m^d, I then must guess you have
The first of some D^sease wa^ never heard ^f,
Which may be worse then madness, and more fearful,
Youd weep to see your self els^, and your care
To pray would quickly turn you white again.
I had a father had he livd his month out
B^t to h^ seen this most prodigious folly,
There n^eded not the Law to have cut him off:
The sight of this had proved his executioner, and broke his heart,
He would have held it equal
Done to a S^nct^ary, for what is age
B^t the holy place of life, Chapel of ease
For all men's wearied miseries, and to rob^
That of her Ornament, it is accu^st,
As from a Priest to steal a holy Vestment,
^ and convert it to a sinful covering. Exit Lis^nder.
I s^e ta's done him good, blessi^g go with it, Enter E^^e^ia.
Such as may make him pure again.

Eug. It Was bravely touched I faith sir.

Clean. O^ you are welcome.

Eug. Exc^edingly well handled.

Clean. It Is to you I come, he fell but i'my way.

Eug. You m^^kd his beard Cosen.

Clean. M^^k me.

Eug. Did you ^ver see a hair so changd?

Clean. I must be forcd to wake her lowdly to,
The Devil has rocked her so fast asleep, S^^umpet.

Eug. D^ you call sir?

Clean. Whore.

Eug. H^w do you sir?

Clean. Be I nere so well
I must be sick of thee, thou art a Disease
That stickest t'oth heart, as all such women are.

Eug. What ailes our kindred?

Clean. Bless me she sleeps still, what a dead modesty is i'this wom^n?
Will never blush again, look on thy work,
But with a Christian eye, 'twou'd turn thy heart
Into a shower of blood to be the cause
Of that old m^ns destruction, think upont
Ruin eternally, for through thy loose follies
Heaven has found him a faint servant lately,
His goodness has gone backward, and engendered
With his old sins again, has lost his prayers
And all the tears that were companions with em
And like a blind fold man, giddy and blinded
Thinking he goes right on still, swerves but one foot
And turns to the same place where he set out^
So he that took his farewell of the world
And c^st the joys behind him out of sight,
Sum'd up his hours, made even with time and men
Is now in heart arrived at youth again;
All by thy wildness thy too hasty lust
Has driven him to this strong apostasy,
Immodesty like thine was never equ^ld
Ive heard of women, (shall I call em so)
Have welcomd suitors ere the Co^ps were cold,
But thou thy Husband living, thou art too bold.

Eug. Well have you done now si^?

Clean. Look, look she smiles yet.

Eug. All this is nothing to a mind resolvd,
Ask any woman that, sh^^l ^^ll you so much
You have only shown a pretty saucy wit,
Which I shall not forget nor to r^quite it,
You shall hear from me shortly:

Clean. Shameless woman,
I take my counsel from thee it is too honest
And leave thee wholly to thy stronger master,
B^esse the sex of thee from thee, that's my Prayer
Were al like thee so impudently common,
No man would be found to wed a woman. Exit.

Eug. I Will fit you gloriously he that attempts to take away my pleasure,
I Will take away his joy, and I can sure
His conceald father pays ^ort, i will even tell.
Him that I mean to make my husband next Enter Simonides
And he shall t^l the Duke, -- Mass here he comes.

Sim. H^s had about with me too.

Eug. What no? since sir.

Sim. A ^lurt, a little flurt, he called me strange names
But I near minded him.

Eug. You shall quit him sir when he as little mind^ you.

Sim. I like that well.
I love to b^ rev^ng'd when no one thinks of me.
There Is little danger that way,

Eug. This is it then
H^ you shall strike your ^troke shall be profound.
And yet your foe not gu^sle who gave the wound.

Sim. A my troath I love to giv^ such wounds. Ex^u^^.

Finis Actus Tertii.
Act. IV. Scen. I.
Enter Clown, Burler, Bailiff, Tailor, Cook, Drawer, Wench. Draw. VVE^come
G^ntlmen, will you not draw ^ere, will you drink at Do^e Gentlem^n?


But. O^ the Summer Airs b^st!


Draw. What Wine will ple^s^ you drink Gentlemen?


But. Declare sirrah.


Clo What you are all sped already bullies?


Cook. My W^d lowes a^h spitt and half ready lad, a turn or too more and I
have done with her.


Clo. Then Cook I hope you have basted her before this time.


Cook. And stuck her with Rosem^ry too, to sw^eten h^, she was t^i^^ed ^er^ she
came to my h^nds what an old pe^ce of flesh of fifty nine eleaven mooths and
upwards, she must needs be fl^^blown.


Clo. Put her off put her off, tho you lose by her^ the weathers hot.


Cook. Why D^aw^r? Enter Drawer.


Draw. By and by, h^e^e gentlemen, heeres the quintessence of Greece, the Sages
never drunck better Grape.


Cook. Sir the mad Greeks of this age ^a^ taste their Palermo as well as the
sage Greeks did before em, fill lick splggot.


Draw. Ad imum sir.


Clo. My friends I must doubly invite you all the fifth of the next month, to
the funeral of my first wife, and to the marriage of my second. my two to one
this is she.


Cook. I hope some of us will be ready for the funeral of our Wives by that
time, to go with thee, but shall they be both of a day?


Clo. Oh best of al sir, where sorrow and joy meet together, one will help away
with another the better^ besides ther^ will be cha^ges s^v'd too^ the same
Rosemary that serves for the Funeral, will serve for the Wedding.


But. How long do you make account to be a Widdower sir?


Clo. Some half an hour, long enough a conscience.
Come, come, lets have some agillity, is there no Music in the house?

Draw. Yes sir, ^eere are sweet wire drawers in the house.


Cook. Oh tha^ makes them and you seldom part, you are wine drawers, and they
wire drawers.


Tay. And both govern by the peg^ too.


Clo. And ^ou h^ve pip^s in your consort too.


Draw. And S^ck-b^ts too sir.


But. But the Heads of your Instruments diff^r, yours are Hogs-heads their
Cittern and Gittern Heads.


Bay. All wooden heads there they meet again.


Cook. Bid em strike up, weel have a Dance, Gnothoes come ^hou shall fool it
too.


Clo. No dancing with me, we have Siren here.


Cook. Siren, it was Hiren the fair Greek man.


Clo. Five Drachmes of that, I say Siren the fair Greek, and so are all fair
Greeks.


Cook. A match, five Drachmes her name was Hiren.


Clo. Sirens name was Siren for 5. Drachmaes.


Cook. It Is done.


Tay. Take heed what you do Gnoth^es.


Clo. Do not I know our own Country women Siren and Nell of Greece, two of the
fairest greeks that ever were.


Cook. That Nel was Hellen of Greece too.


Clo. As long as she tarried with her Husband she was Ellen, but after she
came to Troy she was Nel of Troy, or Bonny Nell Whether you will or no.


Tay. Why did she grow shorer when she came to Troy?


Clo. S^e gr^w longer if you mark the story, when sh^e grew to be an ell sh^^
was de^p^^ then any yard of Troy could reach by a quarter: there was Cressid
was Troy waigh^, and N^ll was haberdepoyse, she held more by four ounces then
Cresida.


Bay. They say she c^usd many wounds to be given in Troy^


Clo True, she was wounded there her self, and cured again by Pl^aster of
Paris, and ^ver since that has been usd to stop holes with. Enter Drawer.


Draw Gentlemen if you be disposed to be merry, the Music is ready to strike
up, and heeres a con^ort of mad Greeks, I know not ^hether they be men or
women, or between both, they have wh^t y^u call em vizards on their faces.


Cook. Vizards goodman licksp^^got.


But. If they be wise women they ^^y be wizards too.


Draw. They desire to enter amongst any merry company of Gentlemen good
fel'owes for a ^traine or too. Old women.


Cook. Weel strain our s^lves with em say, let em come Gnothoes: now for the
honor of Epire. Dance.


She dancing with me, we have Siren here. The Dance of old women mas^t, then
offer to take the men^ they agree all but Gnothoes: he fits with his Wench
after they whisper. Cook. I so kind t^en every one his W^^ch to his seve^all
room^ Gn^thoes we are all provided now as you are Exeunt each with his w^f^
manet Gnothoes wife unmaskt.


Clo. I shall have two it seems away I have Siren here already


Wife. What a Mermaid?


Clo. No but a maid horse face, oh o'd wom^n is it you?


Wife. Yes it is I, all the rest h^ve gu^d themselves, and taken their own w^v^s,
and shall know that they have done more then they c^n well answer, but I pray
you, Husb^n^ what are yo^ doing?


Clo. Faith thus should I do if thou weart dead^ old Ag. and thou have not long
to live ^me sure, we have Siren 'heere.


Wife. Art ^hou so shameless whilst I am living to keep one under my nose.


Clo. Noe Ag I do prize her far above thy nose, if tho^ would lay me both
^hine eyes in my hand to boot, i will not l^ave her, ar^ not ashamd to be seen
in a Tavern, and have scarce a fortnight to live, oh old woman what art thou,
must thou find no time to think of thy end?


Wife. Oh unkind villain.


Clo. And then sweet heart thou shall have two new gowns, and the best of this
old old woman's shall make thee rayments for the working ^ay^s.


Wife. Oh rascal do thou quarter my clothes already too.


Clo. Her ^usfs will serve thee for nothing but to wash dishes, for thou shall
have nine of the new fashion.


Wife. Impudent villain, shameless harlot.


Clo. You may hear she never wore any but railes al herlife time


Wife. Let me come i will tear the strumpet from him.


Clo. Dare thou call my wife strumpet, thou preterpluperfect tence of a woman,
i will make thee do penance in the sheet thou shall be buried in, abuse my
choice, my two to one.


Wife. No unkind villain i will deceave thee yet,
I have a repreeve for five years of life,
I am with child.

Wench. Cud so Gnothoes^ i will not tarry so long, five years, I may bury two
husbands by that time.


Clo. Alas give the poor woman leave to talk, she with child, I with a puppy,
as long as I have thee by me, she shall not be with child I warrant thee.


Wife. The Law and thou and all shall find I am with child.


Clo. i will take my corporal oath I begat it not, and then thou die for
adultery.


Wife. No matter that will ask some time in the proof.


Clo. Oh you would be stond to death would you, all old women would die a that
fashion with all their hearts, but the Law shall overthrow you, the the other way
first.


Wench. Indeed if it be so, I will not linger so long Gnotho^^.


Clo. Away, away, some botcher has got it, it is but a chushion I warrant thee,
the old woman is loath to depart, she never sung other tune in her life.


Wench. We will not have our noses board with a chushion if it be so.


Clo. Go, go thy ways thou old Almanac, at the 28. day of December even almost
out of date, down on thy knees, and make th^e rea^ (...) ^e of thy clothes to
buy thee a Deaths head, and p^^ upon thy m^ddle finger, your least considering
Bawds do so much; be not thou worse though thou art an old woman as she is, I
am cloyd with oli stock fish, heers a young perch is sweeter meat by half,
prithee die before thy day if thou can, that thou may not be counted a
witch.


Wife. No, thou art a witch and i will prove it, I said I was with child, thou
knewst no other but by sorcery, thou said it was a cushion and so it is, thou
art a witch fort, i will be sworn to it.


Clo. Ha, ha, ha, I told thee it was a chushion, go get thy sheet ready, we will
see thee buried as we go to Church to be married. Ex.


Wi^e. Nay i will follow thee, and show my self a wife, i will plague thee as long
as I live with thee, and i will bury some money before I die that my ghost may
hant thee afterward. Exit.


Enter Cleanthes. Clean. What Is that? oh nothing but the whispering wind,
Breaths through you churlish hathorne that grew rude
As if it chid the gentle breath that kissed it,
I cannot be too circumspect, too careful
For in these woods lies hid all my lives treasure,
Which is too much ever to fear to lose.

Hip. Though it be never lost, and if our watchfulness
Ought to be wise and serious against a thief
That comes to steal our goods, things all without us,
That proves v^x^tion often more then comfort,
How mighty ought our providence to be
To prevent those? if any such there were
That come to rob our bosom of our joys,
That only makes poor man delight to live:
^sh^, i am too fearful fie, fie, who can hurt me?
^ut it is a general cowardice that shakes,
^he nerves of confidence, he that hides treasure
^magins every one thinks of that place
^hen it is a thing le^st minded, nay let him change
^he place continually where ere it keeps,
There will the fear keep still, yonder is the store house Enter Hippolita.
Of all my comfort now, and see it sends forth
A dear one, to me, pre^ious chief of women,
How does the good old soul, has he fed we^?

Hip. Be ^^rew me sir he made the heartiest meal to day
Much good may^ do ^i^ health.

Cl^an. A blessing on the^,
Both for thy n^wes and wish.

Eip. His stomach sir
Is betterd wondrously since his concealment.

Clean. Heaven has a blessed work int, come wee'r safe here
I preethee c^ll him forth, the airs much wholesomer.

Hip. Father,
How sweetly sounds the voice of a good woman? Ent. Leonides.
It is so seldom heard that when it speaks
It ravishes all fences.

Clean. Lifts of honor,
Iv^ a joy weeps to see you, it is so full
So fairly fruitful,
I hope to see you often and returne^
Laden with blessings, st^ll to power on some^
I find em all in my contented peace,
And lose not one in thousands, they are dispersed
So gloriously I know not which are brightest^
I find em as Angels are found by legions;
First in the love and honesty of a wife,
Which is the first and chiefest of all temporal blessings,
Next in your self, which is the hope and joy
Of all any actions, my aff^ires, my wishes,
And lastly which crowns all, I find my soul
Crowned with the peace of em, the eternal riches
Man's only portion, for his heavenly marriage.

Leo. Rise thou art all obedience, love and goodness,
I dare say that which thousand fathers cannot.
And that's my precious comfort, never son
Was in the way more of celestial rising,
Thou art so made of such ascending virtue
That all the powrs of hell cannot sink thee. A Horn^.

Clean. Ha.

Leo. What wast disturbd my joy?
Clean Did you not hear,
As a far off?

Leo. What my excellent consort. Clean. Nor you.

^^p I heard a -- A Horn.

Clean. Hark again.

Leo. Bless my joy^
What a^les it on a sudden?

Clea^. Now since lately.

Leo. It Is nothing but a symptom of thy care man.

Clean. Alas you do not hear well.

Leo. What wast daughter?

Hip. I heard a sound twice. A Horn.

Clean. Hark, louder and nearer:
In for the precious good of virtue, qu^ck sir.
Louder and nearer yet, at hand at hand;
A hunting here it is strange, I never
Knew game followed in these woods before.

Enter Duke, Simonides, Courtiers, and Executioner. Hip. Now let em come and
spare not.

Clean. Ha, it is, is it not the Duke, look sparingly?

Hip. It Is he^ but what of that, alas take heed sir,
You^ care will over^hrow us.

Clean. Come. it shall not,
Lets set a pleasant f^ce upon our fears,
Though our he^r^s shake with horror, ha, ha, ha.

Duke. Hark.

Clean. P^ithee proceed,
I Am taken with these light things infinitely,
Si^ce the old man's decea^e; ha so they parted, ha, ha. ha.

Duk. Wh^ ^ow should I believe this, look, he is merrry
As if h^ had no such ch^rge? one with that care
Could never be so still, he holds his temper,
And it is the same still with no difference
He brought his fathers Corpse to'^h grave with,
He laughed thus then you know.

1. Cour. I, he may laugh my Lord;
That s^ower but how he glories in his cunning,
And perhaps done more to advance his wit,
Then to express affection to his father,
That only he h^s over reached the Law.

Sim. He tells you right, my Lord, his own Cosen germen
R^veald it first to me, a free tongued woman,
And very excellent at telling secrets.

Duk. If a contempt can be so neatly carried,
It gives me cause of wonder.

Sim. Troath my Lord,
Twill prove a delicat cosoning, I believe:
I Would have no Scrivener offer to come near it.

Duk. Cleanthes.

Clean. My loved Lord.

Duk. Not moved a whit,
Constant to lightning still, it is strange to meet you
Upon a ground so unfrequented sir:
This do^s not fit your p^ssion, your for mirth
Or I m^st^k you much.

Clean. But finding it
Grow to a noted imperfection in me,
For any thing too much is vicious;
I come to these disconsolate walks, of purpose
Only to dull and take away the edge ont.
I ever had a greater z^ale to sadness,
A natural proportion, I co^f^ffe my Lord
Before that cheerful accident fell out^
If I may call a fathers funeral cheerful
Without wrong done to duty or my love.

Du. (...) seems then you take pleasure ^'these walks sir.

Clean. Contemplative content I do my Lord
They bring into my mind often meditations
^o sweetly precious, that in the parting
^ find^ shower of grace upon my cheeks,
They take their leave so feelingly.

Duk. So sir.

Clean. Which is a kind of grave delight my Lord.

Duk. And ^'ve small cause Cleauthes t'afford you ^he least delight that has ^
name.


Clean. My Lord.

Sim. Now it begins to fadge.

1. Cour. Peace thou art so greedy Sim.


Duk. In your excess of joy you have expressed
^our rancor and contempt against my Law:
^our smiles deserve fining, you have professed
Derision openly even to my face,
Which might be death a little more incensd
You do not come for any freedom here
But ^or a project of your own,
But ^ll th^t^ known to be contentfull to thee,
Shall in the use prove deadly, you^ li^es min^
If ever thy presumption do but le^d thee
Into the^e walks again, ^or that wom^n^
I Will have em watchd a purpose.

1. Cour. Now now, his color ebbs and flowe^.

Sim. Mark hers too.

Hip. Oh who shall bring food to the poor old man now,
Speak somewhat good sir or wee'r lost for ever?

Clean. Oh you did wondro^s ill to call me agen^
There are not words to help us if I entreat
It Is found, that will betray us worse then silence
Prithee let Heaven alone, and le^s say nothing.

1. Cour. Y'av^ struck em dumb my Lord.

Sim. Look how guilt looks.
I would not have that fear upon my flesh
To save ten fathers.

Clean. He is safe still, is he not?

Hip. Oh you do ill to doubt it.

Clean. Thou'art all goodness.

Sim. Now does your grace believe?

Duke. It Is too apparent
Search, make a speedy search, for the impos^ure
Cannot be far off by the fear it sends.

Clean. Ha.

Sim. H^s the Lapwings cunning, i am afraid my Lord
That cries most when she is farthest from the nest.

Clean. Oh wee'r betrayed.

Hip. Betrayed sir.

Sim. See my Lord,
It comes out more and more still. Exeunt Courtiers (...) Si^.

Clean. Bloody thief,
Come from that pla^e, it is sacred-homicide,
It Is not for thy adulterate hands to touch it.

Hip. Oh miserable virtue, what distress art thou in at this minute?

Clean. Help me thunder
(...) my powers lost, Angels shoot plagues and help me:
Why are these men in health and I so hear^ sick?
Or why should nature have that power in me
To leavy up a thousand bleeding sorrows
And not one comfort, only makes me lie
Like the poor mockery of an Earthquake here?
Panting with horror, and have not so much force in all my vengeance.
To shake a villain off a me.

Enter Courtiers Simonides, Leonides. Hip. Use him gen^ly and Heaven will love
you fort.

Clean. Father, oh Father now I see thee full
In thy affection, you are a man of sorrow
Bu^ rever^ntly becomst it, that'^ my comfort.
Extremity was never better graced
Then with that look of thine, oh let me look still
For I shall lose it, all my joy and strength
Is even Eclipsed together, I transgrest
Your Law my Lord, let me receive the sting on^
Be once just sir, and let the off^nder die
He Is innocent in all, and I am guilty.

Leo. Your grace knows when affection only spe^ks
Truth is not always there, his love would dr^w
An undeservd misery on his youth,
And wrong a peace resolved, on both parts sinful;
It Is, I am guilty of my own concealment
And like a worldly coward injurd heaven
Wi^h fea^e to go toot, now I see my fault,
And am prepared with joy to suffer fort.

Duke. Go give him q^ick dispatch, let him see death
And your presumption sir shall come to judgment. Exeunt with Leonides.

Hip. He Is going, oh he is gone sir.

Clean. Let me rise.

Hip. Why do you not then, and follow?

Clean. I strive fort
Is their no hand of pity that will ease me
And take this vill^ine from my heart a while?

Hip. Alas he is gone.

Clean. A worse supplies his place then,
^ weight more pondrous, I cannot follow.

Hip. Oh misery of afflic^ion.

Clean. They will stay
Till I can come, they must be so good ever
Though they be nere so cruel,
My l^st le^v^ must (...) taken think a that,
And this l^st blessing given, I will not lose
That for a tho^sand consorts.

Hip. That hopes wretched.

Clean. The inutterable stings of fortune,
All greefs are to be borne, save this alone;
This like a headlong torrent over turns the frame of nature,
For he that gives us life first, as a father,
Locks all his natural sufferings in our blood, to
The sorrows that he feels, are our heads,
They are incorporate to us.

Hip. Noble sir.

Clea^. Let me behold him well.

Hip. Sir.

Clean. Thou should be good,
Or tho'urt a dangerous substance to be lodgd
So near the heart of man.

Hip. What means this, dear sir?

Clean. To thy trust only was this blessed secret
Kindly committed, it is d^stroy'd, thou see
What follows to be thought ont.

Hip. M^serable;
Why heers th'unhappinesse of woman still,
That having forfeited in old times their trust Enter Eugenia.
Now makes their faiths susp^cted that are just.

Clean. What shall I say to all my sorrows then,
That look for satisfaction?

Eug. Ha, ha, ha, Cozen

Clean. How ill do thou become this time?

Eug. Ha. ha, ha.
Why that's but your opinion, a young wench
Becomes the time at all times.

Eug. Now coze wee'r even, and you be remembered
You left a Strumpet and a whore at home with me,
And such fine field bed words, which could not cost you
Less then a f^ther.

Clean. Is it come that way?

Eug. Had you an Uncle
He should go the same way too.

Clean. Oh eternity
What monster is this feind in labor with?

Eug. An ass Coult with two heads, that's she and you:
I will not lose so glorious a revenge.
Not to be understood int: I betray him,
And now wee'r even, y'ad best keep you so.

Clean. Is there not poison yet enough to kill me?

Hip. Oh sir, forgive me, it was I betrayed him.

Clean. How?

Hip. I.

Clean. The fellow of my heart twill speed me then.

Hip. Her tears that never wept, and mine own pity
Even cozend me together; and stole from me
This secret, which fierce death should not have purchased.

Clean. Nay then wee'r at an end, all we are false ones,
And ought to suffer, I was false to wisdom
In trusting woman, thou were false to faith
In uttering of the secret, and thou false
To goodness in deceaving such a pity:
We are all tainted some way but thou worst,
And for thy infectious spots ought to die first.

Eug. Pray turn your weapon sir upon your Mistress,
I come not so ill friended; rescue servants.

Enter Simonides, and Courtiers. Clean. Are you so whorishly provided?

Sim. Yes sir she has more weapons at command then one.

Eug. Put forward man, thou art most sure to have me.

Sim. I shall be surer if I keep behind though.

Eug. Now servants show your loves.

Sim. I Will show my love too a far off.

Eug. I love to be so courted, woe me there.

Sim. I love to keep good weapons though nere fought^
I Am sharper set within then I am without.

Hip. Oh Gentlemen Cleanthes.

Eug. Fight, upon him.

Hip. Thy thirst of blood proclaims thee now a Strumpet.

Eug. It Is dainty, next to procreation fiting,
^de either be d^stroying men or getting. Enter Officers

1. Officer. Forbear on your allegiance gentlemen
He Is the Dukes Prisoner, and we ceise upon him
To answer this contempt against the Law.

Clean. I obey Fate in ^ll things.

Hip. Happy rescue.

Sim. I would y'ad seized upon him a minute sooner, ^tad saved me a cut finger,
I wonder how I came bi't, for I never put my hand forth i am sure, I think my
own sword did cut it if truth were known; may be the wier in the handle, I
have lived these five and twenty years and never knew what color my blood
was before I n^v^r durst eat Oysters, nor cut peck lo^ves.


Eug. You have shown your spirits gentlemen, but you
Have cut your finger.

Sim. I the wedding finger too, ^ pox ont.

1. Cour. You Will prove a bawdy bachelor Sim, to have a cut upon your finger,
before you are married.


Sim. I Will never draw sword again to have such
A jest put upon me. Exeunt

Finis Actus Quarti.
Act. V. Scen. I.
Sword and Mace carried before them. Enter Simonides, and the Courtier^. Sim.
BE ready with your Prisoner, weel ^^t ^nst^ntly ^n rise before leaven, or when
we pl^^se: Shall we not ^o low ^udges?


Cour. It Is committed
All to our power, censure and pleasure, now
The Duk^ has made us cheef Lords of this Sessions,
And we may speak by fits, or sleep by turns.

Sim. Leave that to us, but what so ^re we do
The Prisoner shall be sure to be condemnd,
Sleeping or waking we are resolvd on that
Before we set upon him. Eugenia.

2. Cour. Make you question
If not Cleanthes and one enemy
N^y a concealor of his father too.
A vild example in these days of youth.

Sim. If they were given to follow such examples
But sure I think they are not, how so ere
'Twas wickedly attempted, tha^s my judgement^
And it shall pass whilst I am in power to sit,
Never by Prince were such young judges m^de,
But now the cause r^q^ires it, if you mark it
He must make young or none^ for all the old ones
Her father he has sent a fishing, and my fathers one^
I humbly thank his Highness. Enter Eugenia

1. Cour. Widows?

Eug. You almost hit my name, no Gentlemen
You come so wondrous near it I admire you
For your Judgment.

Sim. My wife that must be she.

Eug. My husband goes upon his last hour now.

1. Cour. On his last legs I am sure.

Eug. September the seventeenth
I will not bate an hour ont, and to morrow
His latest hours expired.

2. Cour. Bring him to judgment,
The juries panneld and the verdict given
Ever he appears we have taken course for that.

Sim. And Officers to attach the gray young man,
The yo^th of fourscore be of comfort (...):
We shall no longer bosom January:
For that I will take order, and provide
For you a lusty April. Lisander and Guardian.

Eug. The month that ought indeed
To go before May.

1. Cour. Do as we have said,
Take a strong guard and bring him into Court,
L^dy Eugenia see this charge performed
That having his life forfeit^d by the Law
He may relieve his soul.

Eug. Willingly
From shaven chinns never came better Justice
Then these new tucht by r^ason.

Sim. What you do
Do suddenly we charge you, for we purpose to make but a short
S^ssions, a new business Enter Hippoli^a.

1. Cour. The fair Hippoli^a, now what is your suits?

Hip. Alas I know not how to style you yet,
To call you judges does not suit your years
Nor heads and brains show more antiquity,
Yet sway your selves with ^quity and truth
And i will p^ocl^ime you r^verent, and repeat
Once in my life ^ime I have seen gr^ve heads
Placed upon young men's shoulders.

2. Cour. Hark she sl^u^s us,
And thinks to make us monstrous.

Hip Prove not so,
For yet me thinks you bear the shapes of men.
Though nothing more then merely beautifeaus
To make you appear Angels, but if Crimson
Your name and power with blood and cru^lty,
Supp^ess fair virtue and enlarge of old vice,
Both against Heaven and Nature, draw your sword
M^ke either will or humor turn the soul
Of your created greatn^sse, and in that
Oppose all goodness. I must tell you there
Y'^re more then monstrous, in the very act,
You change your self to D^vils.

1. Cour. Shee^ a witch
Ha^ke she begins to conjure^

Sim. Time you see
Is short much business now on foot, shall I
Give her her answer?

2. Cour. None upon the Bench
More learnedly can do it.

Sim. He, he, hem, then list
I wonder at thine impudence young huswife
That thou da^st plead for such a base offender,
Conceal a father past his time to die:
What son and heir would have done this but he?

1. Cour. I vow not I.

Hip. Because ye are paricides
And how can comfort be derived from such
That pity not their fathe^s?

2. Cour. You are fresh and fair, practice young women's ends when husbands are
distressed provide them friends.


Sim. I Will s^t him forward fee thee
Some wives would pay for such a courtesy. without fee.

Hip. Times of am^zement what duty goodness dwell,
I soaught for charity but knock at Hell. Exit.

Enter Eugenia, with Lisander Prisoner, a Gu^rd. Simonides. Eugenia com^.
Command a second guard
To bring Cleanthes in weel not sit long.
My stomach strives to dinner.

Eug. Now servants may a Lady be so bold
To call your power so low?

Sim. A M^striss^ may,
She can make all things low, then in that langu^ge
There can be no off^nce.

Eug. The times now come
Of manumissions take him into bonds,
And I am then at freedom.

2. Cour. This the m^n,
He^ has left of l^te to feed on snakes,
His be^rds turned white again

1. Court. Is It possible these gowty legs danced lately,
And shatterd in a G^lliard?

Eug. Jealousy,
And fear of death can work strange prodigies.

2. Cour. The nimble Fencer this that made me tear
And traverse bout the Chamber.

Sim. I and gave me
Those elbow H^alths the hangman take him fort:
They had almost fetched my heart out, the Dutch Veny
I swallowed pretty well, but the half pike
Had almost prepared me but had I took
Being swollen I had cast my Lungs out. Flourish.

Duk. A flemish Enter the Duke.

2. Cour. Peace the Duke.
Nay ba^^e your seats, whose that?

Duk. May't ple^se your Highness^

Sim. It Is old Lisander.

Duk. And brought in by his wife a worthy president
Of one that no way would offend the Law.
And should not pass away without remark,
You h^v^ been looked for long.

Lis. But never fit
To die till now my Lord, my sins and I
H^ve been but newly parted, much a do
I had to get them leave me, or be taught
That difficult lesson how to learn to die.
I never thought there had been such an act
And it is the only discipline we are borne for
All studdies as are, are but as circular lines
And death the center where they must all meet.
I now can look upon thee erring woman
And not be vexed with jealousy, on young men,
And no way envy their delicious heal^h,
^leasure and strength, all which were once mine own
And mine must be theirs one day.

Duk. You have tamd him

Sim. And know how to dispose him that my Liege
Has been before det^rmined, you confess
Your self of full age.

Lis. Yes and prepared to inhe^it

Hip. Your place above -- Duke -- away to death with him

Sim. Of which the hangmans strength Cleanthes Guard.
Shall put him in possession, it is still guard
To take me willing and in mind to die.
And such are when the earth grows weary of them
Most fit for heaven, the Court shall make his Mittimus
And send him thither presently ith mean time.
Enter a Guard with Cleanthes, Hippollita weeping after him. So see another
person brought to the Bar.

1. Cour. The arch Malefactor.

2. Cour. The grand offenders the most refractory
To call good orders, it is Cleanthes,
He.

Sim^ That would have sons grave fathers ere their fathers
Be sent unto their graves.

Duk. There will be expectation
In your severe pooceedings against him;
His act being so Capital.

Sim. Fearful and bloody,
Therefore we charge these women leave the Court
Lest they should stand to hear it.

Eug. I in expectation
Of a most happy freedom. Exit.

Hip. I with the apprehension
Of a most sad and desolate widow hood. Exit.

1. Cour. We bring him to the Bar.

2. Cour. Hold up your hand sir.

Clean. More reverence to the place then to the person^
To the one I off^r up a palm
Of duty and obedience showd us to heaven,
Imploring justice which was never wanting
Upon that Bench whilst their own fathers sat:
But unto you, my hands contracted thus,
As threatening vengeance against murderers,
For they that kill in thought shed innocent blood
With pardon to your highness too much passion
Made me forget your presence and the place,
I now am called too^

Duk. All one Majesty
And Power we have to pardon or condemn
Is now conferd on them.

Sim. And these weel use
Little to thine advantage.

Clean. I expect it
And as to these I look no mercy from
And much less shown to entreat it, I thus now
Submit me the Emblemes of your power I mean
The Sword and Bench but my most reverend judges
Ere you proceed to sentence, for I know
You have given me lost, will you resolve me one thing?

1. Cour. So it be breefly questioned.

2. Cour. Show ^our honor,
D^y spends it self a pace.

Clean. My Lords it shall
Resolv^ me then where are your filliall tears
Your m^u^ning habits and sad he^rts become.
That should ^ttend your fathers funeral
Though the st^ick L^w which I will not accuse
Because a su^j^ct snatched away their lives
It does not ba^r them to lament their deaths
O^ if you cannot sp^re one s^d suspire
It does not bid you laugh them to their graves
L^y subtle trains to antidate their years,
To be the sooner ceased of their estates.
Oh time of age where is that Eneas now
Who letting all his Jewels to the fl^mes.
Forgetting country kindred treasure friends
Fo^tunes and all things save the name of son
Which you so much forget, go like Eneas
Who took his bedrid father on his back
And with that sacred load (to him no bu^den)
Hewd out his way through blood, through fire, through
Even all the armed streets of bright burning Troy,
Only to sa^e a father.

Sim. We have no leisure now
To hear lessons read from Virgill, we are past school,
And all this time thy judges.

2. Cour. It Is fit,
That we proceed to sentence.

1. Cour. You a^e the mouth
And now it is fit to open.

Sim. Justice indeed
Should ever be close eared, and open mouthd
That is to hear him little, and speak much
Low then Cleanthes there is none can be
A good son and a bad subject, for if Princes
Be called the peoples fathers then the subjects
Are all his sons, and he that flouts the Prince
Does disobey his father, there year gone.

1. Cour. And not to be recovered.

Sim. And again.

2. Cour. If he be gone once call him not again.

Sim. I say again this act of thine expr^s^es
A double disobedience, as our Princes
Are fathers, so they are our sovereigns too,
And he that does rebel against soveraignety
Does commit treason in the height of degree
And now thou art quite gone.

1. Cour. Our brother in comm^ssion
Has spoke his mind both learnedly and neatly,
And I can add but little, howsoever
It shall send him packing.
He that begins a f^ult that wants example
Ought to be made example for the fault.

Clean. A faul^ no longer can I hold my self
To hear vice upheld and virtue thrown downe^
A f^ult judge then, I desire where it lies
In those that are my judges or in me
Heaven st^nd on my side pity love and duty.

Sim. Where are they sir who ^ees them but your self.

Clean. Not you, and I am ^ure,
You never had ^he gracious eyes to see them,
You think you arraigne me, but I h^pe
To sentence you at the Bar.

2. Cour. That would show brave.

Clean. This were the judgment seat, we now
The heavi^st crimes that ever made up
U^na^urallness in humanity,
You are found foul and guilty by a Jury
M^de of your fathers curses, which have brought
Vengeance impending on you, and I now
Am forced to pronounce judgment on my judges.
The common Laws of reason and of nature
Condemn you ipso facto, you are paricides,
And if you marry will beget the liar
Who when you are grown to full maturity
Will hurry you their fathers to their graves;
Like Traitors you take counsel from the living
Of upright judgment, you would rob the Bench:
Experience and di^cretion snatched away
From the earth^ face, turn all into disorder,
Imprison virtue, and infranchice vice,
And put the Sword of justice into the hands of
Boys and mad men.

Sim. Well, well have you done sir?

Clean. I have spoke my ^houghts.

Sim. Then ^'le begin and end.

Duk. It Is time I now begin,
Where your commissi^n ^nds,
Cleant^es you come from the B^r
B^ca^se I know you are sev^rally disposd;
I here invite you to an obj^ct will no doubt Recorders. Old men.
Work in you contra^y ^ff^cts.
Music.

Music, Sons and the old men appear. Clean. Pray Heaven I dream not, sure he
moves, talks comfortably, as joy can wish a man, if he be changd
F^r above from me, he is not ill intreated^
His face does promise fullness of content
And glory has a par^int.

Leo. Oh my son.


Duk. You tha^ can claim acqu^intance with these lads
Talk freely.

Sim. I can see none there that's worth one hand to you from me.


Duk. These are thy judges and by their grave Law
I find thee clear^, but th^se Delinquents guilty:
You must change plac^s for it is so decre^d
Such just pre-eminence has thy goodness gaind
Thou art the ju^ge now, they the men arraignd.

1. Cour. H^ers fine dancing Gentlemen.

2. Cour. Is ^hy father amongst them?

Clean. Oh a Pox I saw him the first thing I looked on
A live again, fl^ght I believe now a father
H^th as many lives as a mother.

Sim. It Is full as blessed as it is wonderful
Oh bring me back to the same law again
I am fowler then all these, cease on me Officers
And b^ing me to new sentence.

Clean. What Is all this?
A fault not to be pardoned
Unnaturallness is but suns shadow to it.

Sim. I am glad of that, I hope the case may alter
And I turn judge again.

Duk. N^me your off^nce.


Clean. That I should be so vild
As once to think you cruel.

Duk Is that all?
'Twas p^rdond ere confessed, you that have sons
If they be worthy hear my challenge then.

Cle. I should h^ve one amongst them had he had grace
To have retaind that name.

Sim I pray you Father. Kneeles.

Cle. That name I know
H^th been long since forgot.

Sim. I find but small comfort in remembering it now.

Duk. Cleanthes take your places with these grave father
And read what in that table is inscribed
N^w set these at the B^r.
And read Cl^anthes to the dread and terror
Of disobedience and unnatural blood.

Cle^n. It is decreed by the grave and learned
Counsel of Epire, that no son and heir
Shall be held c^p^ble of his inheritance
A^ ^h^ age of one and twenty, unless he be at that time
As nature in obedience, manners and goodness.

Sim. Sure I shall never be at full age then,
though I l^ve to an hundred years, and that's nearer by twenty,
^hen the la^t Statute allowd.

1. Cour. A terrible act.
Moreover is en^cted that all sons aforesaid, whom either this Law ^or their
o^ne grace, whom it shall reduce into the true method of ^uty, vertue^ and
affection; and relate their trial and approbation from Cleant^es the Son of
Leonides -- from m^ my Lord.


Duk. F^^m none but you as fullest, proceed sir.


Clean. Whom for his manifest virtues, we m^ke such judge and censure of youth
and the absolute reff^renc^ of life and manners.


Sim. This is a brave world, when a man should be
Selling Land he must be learning manners,
Is It not my M^sters? Eugenia.

Enter E^genia. E^g. Wh^ts here to do, my suitors at the B^rr
The old baud shines again, oh miserable! She sounds.

Duk. Read the Law over to her twill awake her
It Is one dese^ves sm^ll pity.

Clean. L^stly it is ord^ined that all such wives now wh^tsoever that shall
design the husbands death to be soon rid of them and entertain suitors in
their husbands life time.


Sim. You had best read that a little louder.
For if any thing that will bring her to her self again, and find her tongue.

Clean. Shall not presume on the penalty of our heavy displeasure to m^^ry
within ten years after.


Eug. Tha^ L^wes too long by nine years and a half.
I Will take m^ death upont, so shall m^st wom^n.

Clean. And those i^cont^nent women so ^ff^nding
To be judge and censured by Hippolita,
Wife to Cleanthes. Hippolita.

Eug. Of all the rest i will not be judge by her. Enter Hip.


Clean. Ah here she comes, let me prevent thy joys, prevent them but in
part and hide the rest, thou have not strength enough to bear them else.


Hip. Leonides. She faints.


Clean. I feared it all this while.
I knew ^^was past thy power Hi^polita,
What contrariety is in women's blood?
One faints for spleen and anger, she for grace.

Duk. Of Sons and Wives we see the worst and b^st,
My future ages yield Hippolitas
Many, but few like thee Eugenia.
Let no Simonides henceforth have a fame
But all bl^st sons live in Cleant^es name Music.
Ha what strange kind of melody was that?
Yet give it entrance whatsoere it be. Music
This day is all de^out to liberty.

Clo. etc. Enter Music one carrying a Bride^ak^, the Clew^e, the rest wi^h
t^^m ol^ Wom^n. Enter Clown, and W^nch, the r^st wi^h the old women, the
Clownes wife, M^sick, and a B^ide Cake ^ the wedding. Clo. Fiddlers crowd on,
crowd on, let no man lay a block in your way, crowd on I say.


Duk. Stay the crowd a while, lets know the ^eason
Of this jollity.

Clean. Sirrah do you know where you ar^?


Clo^ Yes sir, I am here, now h^ere, and now here again sir.


Ais. Your hats too high crowned the Duke in pres^nce.


Clo. The Duke (as he is my Sovereign) I do give him two Crowns for it, and
that's ^quall change all the wo^ld over, (...) am Lord of the day (being my
marriage day the second) I do advance-bonnet crowd on a fore.


Leon. Good sir a few words if you will vouchsafe em
Or will ^ou be forced?

Clo^ Forced, I w^ul^ the Duke himself would say so.


Duk. I think he dares sir, and does, if you stay not
You shall be forced.

Clo. I think so my Lord, and good reason too, shall not I stay when your
grace says I shall, I were unworthy to be a Bridegroom in any part of your
Highness Dominions then, will it please you to taste of ^he wedlock courtesy?


Duke. Oh by no m^anes sir, you shall not deface
So fair an o^nament for me.

Clo. If your grace please to be cac^ted say so.


Clo. And which might be your fair Bride sir?


Clo. This is m^ two for one that must be uxor uxoris,
The remedy doloris, and the very syceum Amoris.

Duk. And have ^hou any else?


Clo. I have ^n older my Lord for other uses.


Cle. My Lord I do observe a strange decorum here
These that do lead this day of jollity
Do march wi^h Music and most mirthfull cheeks
Those that do follow sad, and woefully
Nearer the havior of a funeral
Then a wedding.

Duk. It Is tr^e, pray expound that sir.


Clo As the d^stiny of the day falls out my Lord, one goes out to wedding^
another goes to hanging; and your Grace, in the due consideration shall find
em much alike, the one has the ring upon her finger, the other a halter about
her neck.

I take thee Beatrice says the Bridegroom, I take thee Agatha says the
hangman, and both say together to have and to hold till death do p^rt us.


Duk. ^his is not yet plain enough to my understanding.


Clo. If further your Grace examine it, you shall find I show my self a
dutiful subject and obedient ^o the L^w, my self (with these my good friends,
and your good subjects) our old wives whose days are ripe, and their lives
forfeit to the Law only my self more forward then the rest, am already
provided of my second choice.


Duk. Oh take heed sir, you will run your self into danger,
If the Law ^inds yo^ with two wives at once
T^eres a sh^ewd premun^re.

Clo. I have taken leave of the ol^ my Lo^d. I have nothing to s^y to her,
she^s going to S^^, you^ Grace knows whether better th^n I do, she h^s a
strong wind with her, it stands full in her poope when you please let her
disemboge.


Cook. And the r^st of her neighbors with her whom we present to the
satisfaction of your Highness Law.


Clo. And so w^e take our leaves and leave them to your Highness, crowd on.


Duk. Stay. stay, you are too forward, will you marry?
And your wife ye^ l^ving.

Clo. Alas She^l be dead before we can get to Church, if your Grace would set
her in the way, I would dispatch her, I have a v^nter on^, which wou^d return
me, if your Highness would m^ke a little mo^e h^st two for one.


Duk. Com^ my Lo^ds we must sit again, heers a Case
C^ves a mos^ s^rious censu^e.

Cook. N^w t^^y shall be dispatched out of the way.


Clo. ^ would they were gone once, the time goes away.


Duk. Which is the wife unto the forward B^idegroome?


Wife. I am and it please your grace.


Duk. T^ust me a lusty woman, able bodied
And well blooded cheeks.

Clo. Oh she paints my Lord, she was a Chamber Maid once, and learnt it of he^
Lady.


Duk. Sure I think she cannot be so old.


Wife. Truly I think so too, and please your grace.


Clo. Two to one with your grace of that, she is threescore by the Book.


L^o. Peace sir you are to loud.


Cook. Take heed Gn^^hoes if you moove the Dukes patience, it is an edge tool
but a word and a blow, he cut^ off your head.


Clo. Cu^ ^ff my head, away ignorant, he knows it cost more in the hair, he
does not use to cut off many such heads as mine, I will talk to him to, it he
cut off my head, ^le give him my ears, I say my wife is at full age for the
Law, the Clark shall take his oath and the Church Book shall be sworn too.


Duk. My Lords, I leave this s^nsu^e to y^u


Leo. Then first this fellow does deserve punishment
For off^ring up a lusty able woman
Which may do s^rv^ce to the commonwealth,
Where the Law craves one impot^nt and useless.

Creon, Therefore to be severely punished
For thus attempting a second marriage
His wife yet livinge.

Lis^ Nay to have it trebled
That even the day and instant when he should mourn
As a kind husband to her funeral,
He le^ds a triumph to the scorn of it
Which unseasonable joy ought to be punished
With all s^verity.

But. The fiddles will be in a foul case too by and by.


Leo. Nay further it se^mes he has a venture
Of two for one at his second marriage
Which cannot be but a conspiracy
Against the former.

Clo. A mess of wise old men.


Lis. Sirrah what can you answer to all these?


Clo. Ye'are good old men and talk as age will give you leave; I would speak
with the youthful Duke himself, he and I may speak of things that shall be
30 or 40 years after you are dead and rotten, a^as you a^e here to day and
gone to S^a to morrow.


Du^. Introath sir then I must be p^aine with you
The Law tha^ should take away your old wife from you
The which I do^ p^^ceive wa^ your desire,
Is void and frust^ate^ so for the r^st,
There ^as been since another ^arliament
Has cut it off.

Clo. I see your grace is disposd to be pl^asant.


Duk. Yes you might perceive that, I had not else
Thus dallied with your follies.

Clo. I Will talk further with your grace when I come
Bacl^ from Church, in the mean time you know what to do
With the old wom^n.

Duk. S^ay sir unless in the m^an time you mean
I c^use a ^^bber to be set up in your way
^^d h^ng y^u at your re^urn.

Wise. Oh g^atious P^i^ce.


Duk Your old wives cannot die to d^y by any
^^w of mine, for ought I can say too em
^^^y may by a new edict bu^y you,
and then perhaps you pay a new fine too.

Clo. This is fine indeed.


Wife. Oh G^acious ^rince may he live a hundred years more.


Cook Your v^ntu^e i^ not like to come in to day Gnot^oes.


Cl^. G^v^ me the princip^ll back.


Cook, Nay by my ^roath weel venture still, and i am sure we have as ill a
venture of it as you, for we have taken old wives of pu^pos^, where that we had
th^ught to have put away at this market, (...) now we cannot utter a pen^yworth.


Duke. W^ll sirrah you were b^st to discharge
Your new change and take you^ o^d one to you.

Clo. Oh Mu^ick, no music, but prove most doleful Trumpets,
Oh Bride no Bride, but thou m^st prove a Strumpet,
Oh venture, no venture, I have for one now none,
Oh wife, thy life is s^v'd when I hope t'had been gone,
Case up your fruitl^ss strings. no p^nny no wedding,
Case up thy Maiden head, no Priest no bedding,
Avaunt my venture it can nere be restord,
Till Agg my old wife be thrown over board,
Then come again old Agg since it must be so,
Let Bride, and venture with woeful Music go.

Cook. What for the Bride cake Gnothoes?


Clo. Let it be moldy now it is out of season,
Let it grow out of date current and reason,
Let it be chip'd and chopped and given to chickens^
No more is got by that, then William Di^kins
Got by his wooden dishes.
Put up your plums as fiddlers put up pipes,
The Wedding dashed the Bridegroom
Weeps and wipes.
Fiddlers farewell and now without perhaps,
Put up your Fiddles as you put up scraps.

Lis. This passion has given some satisfaction yet,
My Lord I think you will pardon him n^w,
Withal the r^st so they live honestly
With the wives they have.

Duke. Oh m^st freely, free pardon to all.


Cook. I we have deserved our pardons if we can live hon^stly with such
reverent wives that have no motion in em but their tongues.


Wife. Heaven bless your Grace, you are a just Prince.


Clo. All hopes dashed, the Clarks duties lost, Venture gone, my second wife
divorced, and which is worst the old one come back again.

Such Voyages are made now adays, I will weep too salt
Of our nose, besides these two fountains of fresh water,
Your grace had been more kind to your young subjects.
Heaven bl^sse, and mend your L^wes, that they do
Not gull your poor Country men: fashion, but I am not
The first by forty that h^s been undone by ^he L^w,
It Is but a folly to stand upon Terms,
I take my leave of your Grace, as well as mine eyes will give me l^ave, I
would they had been a sleep in their beds when they opend em to see this day:
come Agg, come Agg.


Creon Were not you all my servants?


Cook. D^ring your life as we thought sir, but our young Master turned us ^way.


Creon. How headlong villain were thou in thy ruin?


Sim. I followed the fashion sir as other young men did,
If you have as we thought you had been
We should nere have come for this I warrant you,
We did not feed after the old fashion on Beef
And Mutton and such like.

Creon. Well what damage or charge you have run
Your selves into by marriage, I cannot help
Nor deliver you from your w^ves, them you must keep
Your selves shall again retain to me.

Om. We thank your Lordship for your love, and must thank our selves for our
bad bargains.


Duk. Cleanthes You delay the power of Law,
To be inslicted on these misgovernd men,
That filial duty have so far transgrest.

Clean My Lord I see a satisfaction
Meeting the sentence, even preventing it
Beating my words back in their utterance
See sir there is salt sorrow bringing forth fresh
And new dutles (as the sea prop^gat^)
The Eleph^nts have found their joints too, why
H^res humility able to bind up
The pu^ishing hands of the severest masters
Much more the gentle fathers.

Sim. I had nere thought to have been brought so low as my knees again, but
since there is no remedy, fathers, reverent fathers, as you ever hope to have good
sons and ^eirs, a handful of pity we confess we have deservd more then we
are willing to receive at your hands, though sons can never deserve too much
of their fathers as shall appear afterward.


Creon And what way can you decline your feeding now?
You cannot retire to Beeves and Muttons sure.

Sim. Alas sir you see a good pattern for that, now we have laid by our high
and lusty meats, and are down to our ma^y bones already.


Creon. Well sir rise to virtues weel bound you now,
You that were too weak your selves to govern,
By others shall be governd.

Lis. Cleanth^^,
I meet your Justice with reconcilement
If there be tears of faith in woman's breast
I have receivd a mirriade which confirms me
To find a happy renovation.

Clean. Heers Virtues Throne
Which i will imbellish with my dearest Jewels
Of Love and Faith, Peace and Affection,
This is the Altar of my Sacrifice,
Where daily my devoted knees shall bend
Age honored shrine, time still so love you,
That I so long may have you in mine eye
Until my m^mory lose your beginning.
For you great Prince, long may your fame survive,
Your justice and your wisdom never die,
Crown of your Crown, the blessing of your Land
Which you reach to her from your regents hand.

Leon. Oh Cleanthes had you with us tasted
The entertainment of our retirement
Feared and exclaimd on in your ignorance,
You might have sooner died upon the wonder
Then any rage or passion for our loss.
A place at hand we were all strangers in
So sphea^d about with Musik, such delights
Viands and attendance, and once a day
So cheared with a royal visitant
That often times (waking) our unsteady fantasies
Would question whether we yet livd or no
Or had possession of that Paradise
Where Ange^ls be the guard.

Duk. Enough Leonides
You go beyond the pra^se, we have our end
And all is ended well, we have now seen
The flowers and weeds that grew about our Court.

Sim. If these be weeds i am afraid I shall wear none so good again as long as
my father lives.


Duke. Only this Gentleman we did abuse
With our ow^e bosome^ we seemd a Tyrant
And he our instrument^ look it is Cratilus. Discover the Ex^cutioner.
The man that you supposed had now been traveld,
Which we gave leave to learn to sp^ak
And bring us foreign langu^ges to Greece
Alls joyed I see, let Music be the ^ro^^ne,
And set it high, the good needs fear no Law,
It is his safety, and the bad man's aw.

FINIS.
An Exact and perfect CATALOGUE of all the PLAYS that were ever printed;
together, with all the Authors names; and what are Comedies, Histories,
Interludes, Masks, Pastorels, Tragedies: And all these Plays you may either
have at the Sign of the Adam and Eve, in Little Britain; or, at the Ben
Johnson's Head in Thredneedle-street, over against the Exchange.
A
Alarm for London T Alchymist C Ben. Johnson All Fools C Geo. Chapman
Alphonsus King of T Arragon T Angry woman of Abingdon T Henry Porter Appius and
Virginia T John Webster Atheist T Cyril Tourner Albumazar C Alexandriae --
Campasnae T John Lilly Alexandrian -- T Sir William Alexander All for money C
Tho. Lupton Amends for Ladies C Nath. Field Antonia and Melida T John Marston
Arraignment of Paris T Will^ Shakespeare Arden of Feversham I Rich. Bernard
Andrea in Terence C Rich. Bernard Aristippus T Tho. Randalph All Is lost by Lust
C Will. Rowly As you like it C Will. Shakespeare All Is well that ends well I
Will. Shakespeare Abraham's sacrifice T Theod. Beza Agamemnon C Apollo's
shroving C Adrasta C John Jones Arviragus and Philesia's 1.2. part T Lodowick
Carlisle Agrippina T Thomas May Arcadia C James Shirly Antipodes C Rich. Brom
A^ealus and Parthenia C Hen. Glaptborn Albowine King of Lombards T Will.
Davenant Albertus Walenstein T Amorous War T Jasper Main Antonio and Cleopatra
T W^ll. Shakespeare Antigone T Tho. May Aglaura C John Suckling Amin^as, or the
impossible dowry C Tho. Randolph Antiquary C Shakerly Mermion Alaham T Lord
Brook Acteon and Diana C Ale, Beer, Tobacco C Aminta T Tarquato Tasso Antonia's
Revenge T John Marston Alphonsus Emp. of Germany T George Chapman Adelphes in
Terence I Rich. Bernard Andrian woman C Tho. Newman Albion I

B
Brazen Age C Tho. Haiwood Bondsman T Phil. Massinger Byrons Conspiracy T
George Chapman -- Tragedy T George Chapman Broken heart C John Foard Bird in a
Cage C James Shirley Bartholmew-fair C Ben. Johnson -- Fairing C Ball C George
Chapmau ^eggers bush. T John Fletcher Bonduca T J^hn Fletcher Brothers C James
Shirly Blind Beggar of Alexandria^ T George Chapman. Blurt Mr. Constable T
Bussey D Am boys T George Chapman. -- Revenge T George Chapman. Battle of
Alcazar T Bloody banquet T Thomas Barker. -- Brother T John Fletcher. Bride C
Thomas Nabbs. Band ruff and cuffe C Battle of Affliction T Brennerault T John
Suckling. Bastard T Cosmo Manuc^e. Bashful lovers C P^ilip Massinger. Bagg^
Seneca T

C
Cambises King of Persia T Thomas Preston. Case is altered C Ben. Johnson.
Catalines conspiracy T Ben. Johnson Caesar's revenge T Caesar and Pompey T
George Chapman. Chaste maid of Chepside C Thomas Middleton. Christian turned
Turk C Robert Daborne. Cynthius Revels T Ben Johnson. Conflict of consci^nce I
Sam Wood. Craesus T William Alexander. Cruel brother T Cupids revenge T
Cleopatra T Samuel Daniel Comedy of errors C William Shakespeare Cymbelona T
Coriolanus T William Shakespeare. Courageous Turk T Thomas Goffe. Challenge for
beauty C Tohmas Heywood. Cid 1^ 2, parts C Joseph Rutter Changes, or love in a
maze C James Shirly Contention for honor and riches M Iam^s Shirly Chabut
Admiral T James Shirly Covent Garden C Thomas Nabbs Coronation C James Shirley
Captain T John Fletcher Country Captain T Will. E. of Newcaste^^ Chances C Will
Shakespeare Coxcombe C John Fletcher Custom of the country C Cardinal C James
Shierly Court secret C City match C Jasper Main Court beggar C Richard Broom
Cavalier Dick boys C Caesar T William Alexander Cynthia's revenge T Champions
of Christendom T Thomas Kelligren Coroniae Minervae M Coolayes fury T Country
Girl C Thomas Brewer Claracilla T Thomas Keligrew Conspiracy T Henry
kellingrew Costly whore C Changling C Cupids whirlygigg C Cruel debtor T
Cromwells history H William Shakespere Common conditions C Cornelius T Thomas
Loyd Cobblers prophesi^s C Robert Wilson Choice^ a good wife from a bad C
Comm^t^ie-man cured C Cyrus K. of Persia T City wit C Richs Benne Constant
maid C James Shirley Combat of love C Rob^. Meade Cunning lovers C Chla^idiae
T Coelum Britannicum M Characters M Careless shepherd C Cupid and Death M James
Shirly. Cleopatra T Tho. May Cleopatra C Samuel Daniel Caesar and Pompey T
Combat of Caps M John Mason

D
David and Beersheba T George Pele Daraia T William Alexander Disobedient
child C D^vel^ law-case C John Webster Dutch curtisan C John Marston Duchess
of Malfy T ^ohn Webster -- of Suffolk T Tho. Ha^wood Duke of Milain T Phil.
Massinger Devil is an ass C Ben. Johnson Dukes mistress M James Shirly
Discontented Colonel C John Suckling Double marriage C John Fletcher Distracted
state T John Tatham Damoiselle C Richard Broom Dido Queen of Carthage T
Christ. Ma^low Devils charter C Barnaby Barnes Damon and Pithias T Darus story
H Doctor dodipoll C Dumb Knight C Lewis Mache^ Dick Scorner C Duke of Florence
T Doubtful heir C James Shirly Destruction of Jerusalem M Thomas Leg Doctor
Faustus H

E
Eastward ho C George Chapman. Endimion, or the man in the moon C John Lilly
Every man in his humor C Ben Johnson. -- out of his humor C Ben. Johnson.
English traveller C Tohmas Heywood. Emperor of the East C Philip Massinger.
Elder brother C John Fletcher Example C James Shirley Edward first, Long-shanks
T -- Second T -- Third T -- Fourth, 2 parts T Every woman in her humor C Ben.
Johnson Interlude of youth I Eunuchus in Terence C Rich. Bernard Enough as good
as a feast C English Arcadia C Electra sophoples T Elisabeth 1. 2. part T
Extravagant shepherd C Thomas Goffe. Eunuch in Terence C Tho. Newman

F
Fancies C Floating Island C Ferex and Porex C Fortunate Isles C -- Isles M
Fortune by land and sea C Fair quarrel C Thomas Midelton Fair maid of the West
C Thomas Haywood -- of the Inn C John ^le^cher Faithful Shepherd C Richard
F^nshaw -- Shepherdess C John Dymmocke Fan C John Marston Fleire C Edward
Sharpham Fox C Ben. Johnson Friar bacon H Four London prentises T Thomas
Haywood Fine Companion C Shakerly Mermyon Fatal Dowery C Philip Massenger --
Contract C False one C John Fletcher Four plays in one C John Fletcher
Favorite C Lodowick Carlisle Family of love C Thomas Middlton Fair maid of
Bristow C -- Exchange C Fortunatus C Thomas Barker Free will C Henry Cheek
Fidele and Fortunata C Four pees ^ Fulgius and Lucrell C Fatal union C Fair
Em. C

G
Galatea C John Lilly Golden age C Thomas Haywood Grateful servant C James
Shirly Greens ^u quoque C John Cook Gobline C John Sucklinge Gamester C James
Shirly Guise C John Webster Guardian C Abraham Cowly Ghost C Gentleman Usher C
Georg Chapman Gorbodne C Gammer Gurtons needle C Gentle-craft C Glass of
government I Georg Gascoyne Gyles Goose-cap C Game at chesse C Thomas Middleton
Guardian C Phil. Massinger Gentleman of Venice H James Shirley George a Green C
Gentleman of Verona C William Shakespeare

H
Histriomastix C Hoffman T William Shakespeare Hymeniae M Hey for Honesty C
Tho. Randolph Hector of Germany C Hectors C Horatius T Will. Lower Hog has lost
his pearl C Robt. Tailor Humerous days mirth C Gorge Chapman -- Courtier C
James Shirly Hamblet prince of den T Will. Shakespeare Henry Fourth, both parts
H Will. Shakespeare -- Fifth H Will. Shakespeare -- Sixth 3 parts H Will.
Shakespeare -- Eight H Will. Shakespeare Heir C Tho. May Honest, both parts C
Tho. Decker Hanniball and Scipio C Tho. Nabbs Holands Leaguer H Shakerly
Marmion Hollander C Henry Glapthorn Hide Park C James Shirly Humerous
Lieutenant C J^hn Fletcher Honest man's fortune C Herod Antipater C George
Markham Henry the Fifth, with the battle C -- of Agincourt Honest Lawyer C
Humor out of breath C John Doy Hy^ens Triumph M Samuel Daniel Hercules furious
I -- Orteus I Hippolitus Seneca T Edmund Prestwich Hieronimo, both parts H
Will. Shakespeare Hanns bear pot C

I
Just Italian ^ Will. Davenant Jew of Malta H Christ. Marlow Insatiate Countess
C John Marston John K. of England H Julius Caesar T Will. Shakespeare Iron age,
both parts C The. Decker Jealous lovers C Tho. Randolph Island princess C John
Fletcher Just general T Cosmo Manuche. Jovial crew C Rich. Brom Imposter C
James Shirly Jack drums entertainment Joseph T Hugo Grot^us Jack Strawes life
and death H If this be not a good play the devils in it C The. Decker Jacob and
Esau I Jack jugler C Isle of gall H Pow. Day Iorasta H K. John and Matilda T
John K. of England, both parts Will. Shakespeare Joseph's afflictions I John
Evangelist I Impatient Grissell C -- Poverty C Imperial T Ignoramus C

K
King and no King C John Fletcher Knight of pestell^ C John Fletcher -- of
malta H John Fletcher Knack to know an honest man C -- a knave C Knight golden
(...) C Knave in Grain C King and Qu^en I^ter^^ M

L
London prodigal C Will Shakespeare Loves labor lost C Will. Shakespeare --
Melancholy C John Foard -- Sacrifice C John Ford Mistress M Thomas Haywood
Loves cruelty C F. B. J^. F. -- progress C F. B. Jo. F. -- Cruelty or the
Martials maid C F. B. Jo. F. Lady of pleasure C Henry Glapthorn Ladies
privilege C James Shirly Little French-lawyer C F. B. J^. F. Loial subject C F.
B. Jo. F. Laws of Candy C F. B. John Fletcher. Lancaster witches C Love and
honor C Will. Davenant Lady errant C William Cartwright Loial lovers C Cosmo
Manuche Love in its ecstasy C Ladies trial C John Ford Lost lady C F. B. Jo.
Fl. Lusty juventus C Loves riddle P Abraham Cowly Love and fortune C Ladies of
London C Lords of London C Locrinus C Loves metamorphosis C John Lilly.
Liberality and prodigality C Lingua C Law-tricks C Looking-glass for London
C Laws of nature C Like for like C Look about you C Loves dominion P Langartha
C Leveller levelled C Loves loadstone C -- triumph M Lovesick King C Thomas
Bernard Lancaster and York H Loves labor lost C Will. Sampson Lovers, a mask M
Loves pilgrim C E. B. Jo. F^.

M
Muses looking-glass C Tho. Randalph^ Male content C John M^rston Myd^s T John
Lilly Massacre of Paris T Christopher Ma^low Martyr T Will Lower Mother Rumming
C Martyred soldier C Henry Shirly Mounsieur Thomas T John Fletcher Maids
revenge T James Shirly M^ss^lina T Nath. Richards Mounsier de Oliva T
Michaelma, term C Thomas Middleton Mask at at Gr^^es-Inn M Magnetic Lady C
Mad couple C Richard Broo^e Mad world my masters C Thomas Middleton Marius and
Scilla T Tho. Lodge Mariame T Lady Eliz. Carew Manhood and wisdom C Mary
Magdalen^s. Repentance I Maids of Moreclack C Robert Armion Maids metamorphosis
C John Lilly Menechrims T Merry devil of Edmond. C William Shakespeare Merry
milk-maids C Millers daughter of Manchester C Mucidorus C Will. Shakespeare
Masquard D ciel ^ Mercya T Robert Barron Massanello T Metamorphosied Gypsy M
Mortimers fall H May day, C Gorge Chapman Merchant of Venice C William
Shakespeare Marriage of Arts C Ma^ch me in London C Thomas Barker Maids Tragedy
T F. B. Jo. Fl. Merry wives of windsor C William Shakespeare. Midsommer nights
dream C William Shakespeare Maid in the mil C Will. Rouly Misery of marriage C
G^org Wilkins Mother Bomby C John Lilly. Much a d^^ about nothing C Will^
Shakespeare Muliasses ^he Turk T John Mason Mustap^us T Measa^c f^r me^sure, C
Will. Shakespeare Magbe^h T Will Shakespeer Maidenhead well lost C Thomas
Haywood Mad lover C John Fletcher. Medea, Seneca T Microc^smu^ M Tho^ N^^bs
Maid of honor C Phil. Massinger Match at midnight C Will. Rouly

N
New way to pay old debts C Phil. Massinger New Inn C F. B. Jo. F. Northern
less C Rich. Brom Night walker C F. B. Jo. F. Noble gentleman C F. B. Jo. F.
Nice valor C F. B. John Fletcher. Novella C Richard Broom Nero's life and
death H Noble Soldier T Sam. Rowly 2 -- Kinsman C -- Stranger C Lewis Mach^n
Never new written C New trick to cheat the devil C Neptunes triumph M Niniveehs
repentance I Northward ho C Nice wanton C No body, and some body C New custom C

O
Old Law C Philip Massinger. Ordinary C Orlando furioso T Old wives tale H
Ortenus C Ortenas T AEdipus T Orestes T Thomas Goffe. Othello T Will.
Shakespeare Oberon M Oldcastles life H Opportunity C James Shirly Octavia T
Tho. Newman Octavlas T Th^mas Brandon Owl C

P
Parliament of Bees C John Day Pharmia in Terence T Rich. Bernard Patient
Grissel, old C -- Grissel, new C Pastor fido P Richard Fanshaw Pinner of
VVakefild C Prisoners T Thomas Killigrew Play of the weather C Promise of God
manifested ^ Promus and ^assandra both parts P Philotas T Samuel Daniel Phoenix
C Pedlers prophesies C Palsgrave T Puritan widow C Will. Shakespeare Player
whipped C Pallanthus and Eudora T Henry Killegre^ Pilgrim C John Fletcher
Prophetess P John Fletcher Platonic lovers T VVil. Davenant Pity she is a
whore C John Foard Perkin VVarbeck T John Foard Philotas Scotch C Picture C
Phil. Massinger Poetaster T Ben Johnson. Phylaster T John Fletcher Phoenix in
her flames T Will. Lower Pyrocles prince of Tire C Will. Shakespeare Poor man's
comfort M Robert Davborne Pleasure reconciled P Paria Pol^us and Thetis M
Politician C James Shirly Patrick for Ireland C James Shirley Passionate
lovers, both parts C Lodowick Loyd

Q
Queen of Arragon T Samuel Daniell Queens Arcadia T John Fletcher. Queen T --
of Corinth T -- of her sex T

R
Ram-Ally C Philip Massenger Roman Actor William Shakespere Romeo and Juliet T
William Shakespeare Roial King T Thomas Haywood Roial slave T William Cartwright
Rebellion T Thomas Rawlins Roial master C James Shirly Rollo Duke of Normandy
T John Fletcher Rape of Lucrecia C Tho. Ha^wood Renegado T Philip Massinger.
Richard 2d. T Will. Shakespeare -- Third T Will. Shakespeare Robin Hood, both
parts C Robin Conscience C Rival friends C Peter Hanstead Raging Turk T Thomas
Goffe. Rhodon and Iris P Ralph Knevet Revenger T Tournour Roaring Girl C
Thomas Middleton Return from Parnassus C Robert E. of Huntingtons downfall H --
death H Robin Hood P Rule a wife and have a wife C John Fletcher

S
Spanish Tragedy T Tho. Kyte -- Curate C F. B. Jo. Fl. -- Bawd C Stukelyes
life and death H Sad shepherd C Scots politic Presbyter I Sci^io and Phillis P
Sisters C Sicily and N^ples T Sophister T Silver-age C Thomas Haywood Sophao
and Phao T John Lilly Scornful lady C John Fletcher S^janus fall C Ben.
Johnson Silent woman C Ben. Johnson Sophonisba H John Marston School of
complement^ C James Shirly Sophy T Thomas De^ha^ Staple of news C Ben. Johnson
Springs glory M Tho. Nabbs Strange discovery C Shepherds holyday C Jopeph
Rutter Sea-voiage C F. B. Jo. Fl. Sparagus Garden C R b^. Broom. Swaggering
Damsel C Robert Chamberlyne Scots figaries C John Tatham Siege, or loves
convert C William Cartwright Solomon and Persida T Summers last will C Solynus
T Thomus Gof^e. Scotch history H See me, or see me not C Supposes I George
Gascoynd Susanna's tears I Swetman the woman-hater arraigned C Secillides T
Shoemaker a gentleman C -- holyday C

T
Troilus and Cressida T Temple of love M Twinns C VVil. Rider. Ta^qua^^ Ta^so P
T^il^^^ Cicero T Tame^lain b^th parts H T^n^^ed and Gismond T Two Trag^dies in
one T Roger Yernton Two wi^emen C Three English heroes C Trial of ^h^valry C --
of treasure C Tide ^arri^th for no man C Twelf^h^ night C William Shakespere
The boys, Sen^ca C Thirstes, an Interlude True Trojans T Thertes T Jasper
Haiwood T^oas T To^enham Court C Thomas Nabbs Tom tyler C Tempest C Will.
Shakespeare The longer thou live, the more fool thou art C Triumph of beauty
M Tale of a tub C Ben Johnson. Traitor T James Shirly Timon of Athens ^ Two
noble kinsmen C Will Shakespeare Triumph of peace M James Shirly Titus
Andronicus T Will. Shakespeare Taming of a shrew C Will. Shakespeare Trick to
catch the old one C Will. Shakespeare Thiery and Theodoret T E. B. Jo. Fl.

V
Untrussing the humerous poet C Tho. Decker Unnatural combat C Philip
Massenger Vow breaker C Will. Sampson Unfortunate mother C Thomas Nabs --
lovers C Will. Davenant Valentinian C John Fletcher Virgin widow C Francis
Quarls -- mar^^r C Phillip Massengen Valiant Welshman C Valiant Sco^^ C
V^rieties C Very woman C W^ll. E. of Newcast Virtuous Octavia T Phil^ip
Massenger Vision of delight M Virgils Ec^ogs T

W
Widows tears C George Chapman Woman-hater C F, B. Jo. Fl. Woman killed with
kindness C Thomas ^aywood Woman is a weathercock C James Shirley Wedding C
Nath. Field What you will C John Mirston When you see me, you will know me C
Sam. Rowly White devil C John Webster Whore of Babylon C Tho. Darker Winters
tale C Will. Shakespeare Witty fair one C James Shirley Woman never vexed C VVil.
Rouly Wits C VVil. Dovenant Wonder of a kingdom C Tho. Decker Wise woman of
Hogsdon C Thomas Haywood Wit without money ^ F. B. Jo, Fl. Wit in a Constable
C Hen. Glapthorn VVomans prize C F. B. Jo. Fletcher Woman pleased C F. B. Jo.
Fletcher Wit at several weapons C F. B. Jo. Fletcher VVidow C Thomas
Middleton. VVild-goose chase C F. B. Jo Flet. Wine, Beer, Ale, Tobacco C
World tossed at tennis C Thomas Midelton Woman have her will C Wit in a woman
C VVylie beguiled C VViats history H Tho. Decker VVestward ho C John We^ster
Weakest goes to the wall C Wealth and health C Warning for fair women C
Woman in the moon C John Lilly Wife for a month C F. B. Jo. Fletcher

Y
Young Admiral C James Shirley Yorkshi^e Tragedy T Will. Shakespeare Your fine
gallants. C Thomas Midleton

FINIS.

