LEICESTORS Commonwealth fully Epitomized.

Conceived, spoken, and published with most earnest protestation of all
dutiful good will, and affection toward this Realm, for whose good only* It
is made common to many.

Contracted in a most breife, exact, and compendious way with the full Sense
and whole meaning of the former Book, every fragment of sense being interposed.

With a pleasant description of the first Original of the controversies
betwixt the two Houses of York, and Lancaster.

Printed in the year, 1641.

Leycesters Commonwealth Epitomized.
A Scholar, Lawyer, and Gentleman being conveened together in Christmas time,
retired themselves after dinner into a large Gallery, for their recreation: The
Lawyer having in his hand a little Book, then newly put forth, containing. A
defense of the public Justice done of late in England upon diverse. Priests,
and other Papists for Treason: which Book the Lawyer having read before, the
Gentleman asked his Judgment thereon. Lawyer. It is not evil penned in my
opinion, to show the guiltiness of some persons therein named in particular:
yet not so far forth (I believe) and in so deepee a degree of Treason, as in
this Book generally is enforced without indifferency.


Gent. For my part I protest, that I bear the honest Papist (if there be any)
no malice for his deceived consience; but since you grant the Papist both in
general abroad, and at home: and in particular such as are condemned,
executed, and named in this book to be guilty: how can you insinuate (as you
do) that there is more enforced upon them by this Book, then there is just
cause so to do?


Lawyer. Good Sir, I stand not here to examine the doings of superiors, or to
defend the guilty, but wish heartily rather their punishment that deserves the
same. But not only those, whom you call Busy Papists in England, but also
those, whom we call hot Puritanes among you, may be as well called Traitors in
my opinion: For that every one of these in deed does labor indirectly (if not
more) against the State, seeing each one endeavoreth to increase his part or
faction, that desires a Governor of his own Religion. And in this case are
the Protestants in France, and Flanders under Catholic Princes: the
Calvinists under the Duke of Saxony, the Lutherans under Casinere, the
Graecians, and other Christians under the Emperor of Constantinople, under the
Sophy, and Chame of Tartary, and under other Princes, that are not with them in
Religion. All which subjects do wish (no doubt) in their hearts, that they had
a Prince and State of their own Religion, in stead of that which now governs
them; and consequently in this sense, they may be all called Traitors: And so
to apply this to my purpose; I think Sir, in good sooth, that in the first
kind of Treason, as well the zealous Papist, as also the Puritan in England,
may well be called, and proved Traitors.


Gent. I grant your distinction of Treasons to be true: but your application
thereof to the Papists and Puritans (as you call them) be rather diverse
degrees, then diverse kinds. And the one is but a step to the other, not
differing in nature, but in time, ability, or opportunity. For if the
Graecians under the Turk, and other Christians under other Princes of a
different Religion, as also the Papists, and Puritans in England, have such
alienation of mind from the present regiment and do covet so much a Governor
and State of their own Religion: then no doubt but they are also resolved to
employ their forces, for accomplishing, and bringing to pass their desires, if
they had opportunity: and so being now in the first degree or kind of Treason,
do want but occasion or ability to break into the second.


Lawyer. True sir, if there be no other cause or circumstance that may withhold
them.


Gent. And what cause or circumstance may stay them, when they shall have
ability, or opportunity to do a thing which they so much desire?


Lawyer. Diverse causes, but especially the fear of servitude under foreign
Nations may restrain them from such attempts: As in Germany both Catholics
and Protestants joined together against strangers, that offered danger to their
liberties. So that by this example you see that fear of external subjection
may stay men in all states, and consequently both Papists and Puritans in the
state of England from passing to the second degree of Treason, albeit they were
never so deep in the first, and had both ability, time, will and opportunity
for the other.


Schol. It seems to me most clear, and now I understand what the Lawyer meant
before, when he affirmed, that albeit the most part of Papists in general
might be said to deal against England in regard of their religion, and so
incur some kind of Treason, yet not so far forth as in this book is
enforced; though for my part I do not see that the book inforceth all Papists
in general to be properly traitors, but such as only in particular are therein
named, or that are by law attained or condemned, or executed, and what will you
say to those in particular?


Lawyer. That some here named in this book are openly known to have been in
the second degree of Treason: as Westmerland, Norton, Sanders, etc. But diverse
others, (namely the Priests and Seminaries) I conceive, that to the wise of our
State, who had the doing of this business, the first degree of Treason was
sufficient to dispatch them, especially in such suspicious times as these are:
to the end that being hanged for the first, they should never be in danger to
fall into the second: nor yet to draw other men to the same; which perhaps was
most of all misdoubted.


Gent. It appertains not to us to Judge, what the State pleases to do: for
it must as well prevent inconveniences, as remedy the same, when they are
happened. But (my good friends) I must tell you plain, that I could wish with
all my heart, that either these differences were not amongst us at all, or else
that they were so temperately on all parts persued: as the common State of our
Country, the blessed reign of her Majesty, and the common cause of true
Religion were not endangered thereby.


Lawyer. But many participate the Black-Moores humor, that dwell in Guinea,
whose exercise at home is (as some write) the one to hunt, catch, and sell the
other, and always the stronger to make money of the weaker. But now if in
England we should live in peace and unity, as they do in Germany, and one
should not prey upon the other: then should the great Faucons for the field (I
mean the favorites of the time) fail on their great prey.


Gentle. Truly sir, I think you rove nearer the mark then you weeen: for if
I be not deceived, the very ground of these broils, are but a very prey, in
the greedy immaginations of him, who tyrannizeth the state: and being himself
of no Religion, feeds not yet upon our differences in Religion, to the
fatting of himself, and ruin of the Realm: for whereas by the common
distinction there are three notable differences of Religion in this Land: The
two extreme, whereof are the Papist, and Puritan: and the Religious Protestant
obtaining the mean: This fellow being of neither, makes his gain of all, and
as he seeks a kingdom by the one extreme, and spoil by the other: and so
he uses the authority of the third, to compass the first two, and to
countermine of each one, to the overthrow of all there.


Schol. In good sooth, I see now sir where you are: you are fallen into the
common place of all our ordinary talk and conference in the university, for I
know you mean my Lord of Leicester, who is the subject of all pleasant
discourse at this day throughout this Realm.


Gent. Not so pleasant, as pitiful, if all matters and circumstances were
well considered, except any man take pleasure to jest at our own miseries:
which are like to be the greater by his iniquity (if God avert it not) then
by all the wickedness of England besides: He being the man by all
probability, that is like to be the bane, and fatal destiny of our state,
with the evertion of true Religion, whereof by indirect means, he is the
greatest enemy that the land does nourish: A man of so base a spirit as is
known to be, of so extreme ambition, pride, falsehood and treachery: so
borne, so bread up, no nusled in Treason from his infancy descended of a Tribe
of Traitors, and fleshed in conspiracy against the Royal blood of King Henry's
children in his tender years, and exercised in drifts ever since against the
same, by the blood and ruin of diverse others: and finally a man so well known
to bear secret malice against her Majesty for causes irreconcilable.
Wherefore I do assure my self it would be most pleasant to the Realm, and
profitable to her Majesty, to wit, that this man's Actions might be called
publicly to trial, and liberty given to good subjects, to say what they know
against the same: as it was permitted in the first year of King Henry the 8.
against his Grandfather, and in the first of Queen Mary against his Father:
And then I would not doubt, but if these two his Ancestors were found worthy to
loose their heads for Treason: this man would not be found unworthy to make
the third in kindred, whose treacheries do far surpass them both.


Law. My Masters, have you not heard of the Proviso made in the last Parliament
for punishment of all those, who speak so broad of such men as my Lord of
Leicester is?


Genesis Yes, I have heard that my L. of Leicester being ashamed of his Actions,
desired a restraint, that he might lie the more securely in harbor from the
tempest of men's tongues, which tatled busily at that time, of diverse of his
Lordships deeds, which he would not have divulged. As of his preparation to
Rebellion upon Mounsieurs commission into the Land: of his disgrace and checks
received at Court: of the fresh death of the Noble Earl of Essex, and of his
hasty snatching up of his widow, whom he sent up and down the Country by
privy ways, thereby to avoid the fight and knowledge of the Queens Majesty.
And albeit he had not only satisfied his own lust on her, but also married,
and remarried her contentation of her friends: yet denied he the same by
solemn oaths to her Majesty, and received the Communion thereupon (so good a
conscience he has) No marvile therefore if he not desiring to have these and
other Actions known public, was so diligent a procurer of that Law for
silence.


Schol. It is very probable that his Lord-ship was in great distress about
that time, when Monsieurs matters were in hand, whereof he desired less speech
among the people. But when my Lord of Warwick said openly at his Table in
Greenewich, that the marriage was not to be suffered, he caused an
insurrection against the Queens own Majesty. And when her Royal Majesty
should have married to the Brother and Heir apparent of France, being judged
by the best, wisest, and faithfullest Protestants of the Realm to be both
convenient, profitable and honorable: This Tyrant for his own private lucre
endeavored to allieanate for ever, and make this great Prince our mortal
enemy, who sought the love of her Majesty with so much honor and confidence,
as never Prince did.


Gent. For the present I must advertise you in this case, that you may not take
hold so exactly of all my Lords doings, for they are too many to be recited:
especial in women's affairs, in touching their marriages, and their husbands.
For first his Lordship has a special fortune, that when he desires any
woman's favor, then what person soever stands in his way, has the luck to
die quickly for the finishing of his desire. As for example, when his Lordship
was in full hope to marry her Majesty, and his own wife stood in his way, as
he supposed, she was slain to make way for him.

Long after this, he fell in love with the Lady Sheffeild, and then had he also
the same fortune to have her husband to die quickly by an artificial Catarre,
that stopped his breath. The like good chance had he in the death of my Lord of
Essex, and that at a time most fortunate for his purpose.

He poisoned also one Mistress Ales Draykot, a goodly Gentlewoman, whom he
affected much himself, and hearing that she was dead lamented her case
greatly, and said in the presence of his servants, Ah, poor Ales, the cup was
not prepared for thee, albeit it was thy hard destiny to taste of it.

Also Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, whom my Lord of Leicester invited to a supper
at his house in London, was their poisoned with a Salat by an incurable vomit.

The late Lady Lenox also (who came of the Royal blood by Scotland) being
sick, Leycester (who never could affect her) took the pains to visit her
with extraordinary kindness, but after some private discourse with her, at his
departure she fell into an extraordinary Flux; which many did avouch to come
by his means.

But this is not all touching his Marriage and contracts with Women, changing
wives and Minions, by killing the one, denying the other, using the third for a
time, and fawning on the forth. Wherefore he had terms and pretenses of
contracts, precontracts, postcontracts, protracts and retracts: as for example,
after he had killed his wife, and so broken that contract, then forsooth would
he needs make himself Husband to the Queens Majesty, and so defeat all
other Princes by virtue of his Precontract. And after this his lust compelling
him to another place, he would needs make a post contract with the Lady
Sheffeild. But yet after his concupiscence changing again, he resolved to make
a Retract of this protract, and to make a certain new protract (which is a
continuation for using her for a time) with the widow of Essex.


Schol. I have read much in my time of the carnality and licentiousness of
many outrageous persons in this kind, but I never read nor heard the like of
him in my life, whose concupisence and violence run jointly together; neither
holds he any rule in his lust, besides only the motion and suggestion of
his own sensuality: for there are not (by report) two Noble Gentlemen about
her Majesty (I speak upon some account of them that know much) whom he has
not solicited by potent ways. And seeking pasture among the waiting
Gentlewomen of her Majesty's Chamber, he has offered three hundred pounds for
a Night, and if that would not make up the sum, he would otherwise: having
reported himself (so little shame he has) that he offered to another of
higher place a hundred pound lands a year, with many more Jewels to do the
Act.


Gent. Nay he is so Libinous, that he has given to procure love in others, by
coniuring, sorcery and other such means. But I am ashamed to make any more
mention of his filthiness.


Schol. To draw you from the further stirring of this unsavory puddle, and
foul dunghill, I will recompt a pretty story concerning his daughter borne of
the Lady Sheffeild in Dudley Castle, I was acquainted three months past with a
certain Minister (that now is dead) living at Dudley Castle, for complement of
some sacred Ceremonies at the birth of my Lord of Leicesters daughter in that
place: and the matter was so ordered by the wily wit of him that had sowed the
seed, that for the better covering of the Harvest, and secret delivery of the
Lady Sheffeild, the good wife of the Castle also (whereby Leycesters appointed
Gossips might without suspicion have access to the place) should feign her
self to be with child, and after long and sore travel (God wot) to be
delivered of a cushion (as she was indeed) and a little after a fair Coffin
was buried with a bundle of clouts in show of a child: and the minister caused
to use all accustomed prayers and ceremonies for the solemnizing thereof: For
which thing afterward the Minister before his death and great grief and
remorse of conscience, with no small detestation of the most irreligious devise
of my Lord of Leicester in such a case.


Gent. This was a most Atheistical designement, and with all so unworthy, that
it did alone, deserve a correspondent punishment and no doubt but that God (who
has an impartial eye in veiwing such voluntary iniquities) will on day render
unto him, according to his demerits; to whose supreme Justice I leave him: yet
(Gentlemen if you please) I will relate most apparently unto you his intended
murder against the Earl of Ormand: Leycester did offer five hundred pounds to
have him privately murdered: but when that devise took no effect, he
appointed the field with him, but secretly suborning his servant William
Killegre to lie in the way where Ormand should pass, and so massacre him with
a Calliver before he came to the place appointed. Which matter though it took
no effect (for that the matter was taken up, before the day of meeting) yet was
Killegre placed afterward in her Majesty's privy Chamber by Leicester for
showing his ready mind, to do for his Master so faithful a service.


Schol. So faithful a service indeed? in my opinion, it was but an unfit
preferment, for so facinorous a fact. Yet I hear withal that he is a man of
great impatience, fury, rage, and ire, and whatsoever thing it be that he
conceives, either justly, or unjustly, he prosecuteth the same, with such
implacable cruelty, that there is noe abiding his fury.

His Treacheries toward the Noble Earl of Sussex, in their many breachies is
notorious to all England, As also the bloody practices against diverse others.

But among many, none were more odious, and misliked of all men: then those
against Monsieur Simiers, a stranger, and Ambassador: whom first he practiced
to have poisoned, but when that devise took no place, then he would have slain
him at the Blackfriars, at Green-wich as he went forth at the garden gate: but
missing of that purpose too, he dealt with certain Flushiners, and other
Pirates, to sincke him at Sea, with the English Gentlemen his favorers, that
accompanied him at his return into France.


Lawyer. Now verily (Sir) you paint unto me a strange pattern of a Perfect
potentate in the Court: for the common speech of many wants not reason I
perceive, which call him the heart, and life of the Court.


Gent. They which call him the heart, upon a little occasion more would call him
the head; and then I marveile, what would be left for her Majesty, when they
take from her both life, heart, and headship in her own Realm.


Lawyer. Yet durst no Subject presume to contradict his Hellish opinions, but
rather gave their assertion unto, for fear of the damage of their lives.


Schol. But he has munition, to what intent I know not, for in Killingworth
Castle, he has ready armor to furnish ten thousand Soldiers, of all things
necessary, both for horse and man: besides the great abundance of ready coin
there laid up sufficient, for any great exploit to be done within the Realm.


Gent. He has many lands, possessions, Seigniories, and rich offices of his
own: favor and authority with his Prince: the part and portion in all suites;
that pass by grace, or are ended by law: he does chop, and change what lands
he lists with her Majesty: possesses many licenses to himself, as of Wine,
Oils, Currants, Cloth, Velvets with his new office of alienation, which might
enrich Towns, Corporations, Countries, and Commonwealths; He disposes at his
will Ecclesiastical livings of the Realm, in making Bishops etc. of whom he
pleases: he sweepeth away the glebe from many Benefices throughout this land:
he scoureth the University, and Colleges, where he is Chancellor, and sells
both head-ships, and Scholler-places, and all other offices, and dignities,
that by art and violence may yield money. He drives the Parties out of their
possessions, and makes title to what land he pleases; He takes in whole
Forests, Commons, Woods and pastures to himself; these, and in all these he
does insult, notwithstanding his former impiety.

He released Callis to the French most Trayteriously, as his Father before him
sold Bulloigne to the French, by like Treachery.

What should I speak of his other actions, whereof there would be no end? As
of his dealing with Master Robinson of Staffordshire, with false arraignement,
with Master Richard Lee, for his Manor of Hockenorton, with Master Ludwicke
Grivell, by seeking to bereave him of all his living at once, if 'the drift had
taken place; with George Witney, in the behalf of Sir Henry Leigh, for
enforcing him to forgo the Controller-ship of Woodstocke, which he holded by
pattent from King H. the 7. With my Lord Barkeley, whom he enforced to yield up
his lands to his brother Warwick, which his Ancesters had held quietly before
200 years. What shall I speak of his intolerable Tyranny upon Sir John
Throgmarton, whom he brought to his grave, by perpetual vexations: and upon
all the line of King Henry against this man's Father, in King Edward and Queen
Mary's days? upon diverse, of the Lanes, for one man's sake of that name before
mentioned, that offered to take Killingworth Castle? Upon some of the Giffords,
and others for Throgmartons sake? in his endless persecuting Sir Drew Drewry,
and many other Courtiers both men, and women; But especially Leycester was
supposed to use this practice, for bringing the Scepter finally to his own
head: and that he would not only employ himself to defeat Scotland, and
Arbeda to defeat Huntington: but also would use the marriage of the Queen
imprisoned, to defeat them both if he could. Which marriage he being
frustrated of, was not ashamed to threaten a treacherous vindication against
her Majesty's Royal Person. But I hope her Majesty will set out a fair
Proclamation, with a bundle of Halters for all such Traitors.


Lawy. I applaud your well wishings to the State: yet I do observe much by
reading over our Countries affairs, and among other things, I do abhor the
memory of that time, and do dread all occasion, that may lead us to the like
in time to come: seeing that in my judgment, neither the civil wars of
Marius and Silla, or of Pompey and Caesar among the Romans, nor yet the
Guelphians and Gibilines among the Italians, did ever work so much woe; as
this did to our poor Country: wherein by the contention of York and Lancaster
were fought fifteen or sixteen pitched fields, in less then an hundred
years. That is, from the 11. or 12. year of King Richard the second his
reign, unto the 13. year of King Henry the seventh. At what time by cutting
of the chief titler of Huntingtons house, to wit, young Edward Plantaginet
Earl of Warwick, son and heir to George, Duke of Clarence: the contention
was most happily quenched and ended, wherein so many fields were fought
between Brethren and Inhabitants of our own Nation. And therein about the
same quarrel were slain, murdered, and made away about nine or ten Kings,
and Kings Sons, besides above forty Earls, Marquesses and Dukes of name; But
many more Lords, Knights, great Gentlemen and Captains, and of the common
people without number, and by particular conjecture very near too hundred
thousand. For that in one Battle fought by King Edward the fourth, there are
recorded to be slain on both parts, five and thirty thousand 700. and a 11.
persons, besides other wounded persons, to be put to death afterward at the
pleasure of the Conqueror: at diverse battles after, 10000. slain at a battle.
As in those of Barnet and Turkesbury fought in one year.


Schol I pray Sir open unto me the ground of these controversies between York
and Lancaster, I have heard a large relation thereof, but no original.


Lawy. The controversy between the Houses of York and Lancaster took his
actual beginning in the issue of King Edward 3. and Edmond Earl of Lancaster,
whose inheritance fell upon a Daughter named Blanch, who was married to the 4.
son of King Edward the third named John of Gaunt, borne in the city of Gaunt,
in Flanders, and so by his wife became Duke of Lancaster, and heir of that
house. And for that his son Henry of Bolingbrooke, pretended among other
things that Edmond Crookebacke was the elder Son of King Henry the third,
and injustly put by the inheritance of the Crown, for that he was crook-backt
and deformed: He took by force the Kingdom from Richard the second, Nephew
to King Edward the third by his first son, and placed the same in the house
of Lancaster, where it remained for three whole descents, until afterward
Edward Duke of York descended of John of Gaunts younger Brother, making claim
to the Crown by title of his Gradmother, that was heir to Lionell Duke of
Clarence, John of Gaunts Elder Brother, took the same from Henry the sixth by
force, out of the House of Lancaster, and brought it back again to the House
of York. This therefore was the original of all those discords between them.


Gent. But let us not digress from our former discourse concerning Leycesters
treacherous actions. I have a friend yet living that was toward the old Earl
of Arundell, in good credit, and by that means had occasion to deal with the
late Duke of Norfolk in his chiefest affairs before his troubles: who did
often report strange things from the Dukes own mouth, of my Lord of Leycesters
most treacherous dealing toward him, for gaining of his blood, as after
appeared true. This Leycester have also deceived her Majesty diverse times in
forging of Letters as if they came from some Prince, when they were his own
forgerie: He had likewise a hellish devise to entrap his well deserving Friend
Sir Chrystopher Hatton in matter of Hall his Priest, whom he would have had
Sir Chrystopher to hide, and send away; being touched and detected in the ease
of Ardent, thereby to have drawn in Sir Chrystopher himself, and made him
accessory to this Plot. What means all these pernicious late dealings against
the Earl of Shrewsbury, a man of the most ancient and worthiest Nobility of
our Realm. It is only Leycesters ambitious mind, that causes all this.

But it is very strange to see, what a contemner of the Prerogatives of England
he is, and how little account he makes of all the ancient Nobility of our
Realm, how he contemns, derideth, and debaseth them: Which is the fashion of
all such, as mean to usurp, to the end, that they may have none, who shall
not acknowledge their first beginning and advancement from themselves.

His base and abject behavior in his last disgrace about his marrage, well
declared what he would do, in a matter of more importance, by deceiving of Sir
Chrystopher Hatton: and by abusing my Lord Treasurer in a letter, for which Her
Highness did much rebuke him.

It was affirmed by many that all the broils, troubles, dangers, and
disturbance in Scotland, did proceed from his complot, and conspiracy.

His unworthy scandal which he cast on the Earl of Shrewsbury was perfidious:
Wherefore in regard of these innumerable Treacheries, for prevention of
succeding calamities, to tell you plainly my opinion, and therewith to draw to
an end of this our conference I should think it the most necessary point of
all, for her Majesty to call his Lordship to an account among other, and to see
what other men could say against him, at length, after so many years of his
sole accusing, and pursuing of others. I know and am very well assured, that
noe Act, which her Majesty has done, since the coming to the Crown, nor any
that lightly her Majesty may do hereafter, can be of more utility to her self,
and to the Realm, or more grateful unto her faithful and zealous Subjects,
then this Noble Act of Justice will be, for trial of this man's deserts toward
his Country.

And so like wise now to speak in our particular case, if there be any grudge
or grief at this day, any mislike, repining, complaint, or murmr against her
Majesty's government, in the hearts of her true and faithful Subjects, who
with amendment of that, which is amiss, and not the overthrow of that which is
well, I dare avouch upon conscience, that either all; or the greatest part
thereof proceeds from this man. And if her highness do permit, and command
the laws daily to pass upon theives, and Murderers without exceptition, and
that for one fact only, as by experience we see: how then can it be denied in
this man, who in both kinds have committed more enormous Acts, then may be
well recounted.

As in the first of Theft, not only by spoiling, and oppressing almost
infinite private men: but also whole Towns, Villages, Corporations, and
Countries, by robbing the Realm with inordinate licenses, by deceiving the
Crown, with racking, changing and imbezeling the Lands, by abusing his Prince,
and Sovereign, in selling his favor, both at home, and abroad, with taking
bribes for matter of Justice, grace, request, supplication, or whatsoever suite
else may depend upon the Court, or of the Princes authority. In which sort of
traffic, he commits more theft oftentimes in one day: then all the
way-keepers, Cut-purses, Cosenners, Pirates, Burglares or other of that art in
a whole year within this Realm.

As for the second which is Murder, you have heard before somewhat said and
proved: but yet nothing to that, which is thought to have been in secret
committed upon diverse occasiones, at diverse times: in sundry persons of
different calling in both sexes, by most variable means of killing, poisoning,
charming, enchanting, conjuring, and the like: according to the diversity of
men, places, opportunities, and instruments for the same. By all which means I
think, he has more blood lying upon his head at this Day, crying vengeance
against him at Gods hands and her Majesty, then ever had private man in our
Country before, were he never so wicked.

Whereto if we add all his intolerable licentiousness in all filthy kind,
and manner of carnality, with all his sorts of wives, friends and kinswomen. If
we add his injuries, and dishonours done hereby (...) if we (...) the Crown,
his (...) his rap^s, and most (...) poor, his (...) of the Parliament, (...)
with the Nobility and whole (...) his open injuries, which he (...) ^^^^sters
thereof, by turning all to his own ganes (if I say) (...) lay together all
those inormities before (...), and thousand (...) more in particular, which
might and would be gathered, if his day of trial were but in hope to be
granted: I do not see in (...) and reason, ^ow her highness sitting in (...),
and at the (...) Steine, as she does, could deny her Subjects this most
lawful request: considering that every one of these (...), requires Justice
of his own Nature: and much more altogether ought to obtain the (...), at the
hand of any good and godly Majesti^^^ in the world.


Before this discourse was fully ended the night came on apace, and it being
Supper (...) the Mistress came to call them down to Supper, wherefore there
further speech was intercepted. FINIS.

