A Philologicall COMMENTARY: OR, An Illustration of the most Obvious and Useful
words in the LAW.

With their Distinctions and diverse Acceptations, as they are found as well in
Reports Ancient and Modern, as in Records, and Memorials never Printed: Useful
for all Young Students of the Law.

Arist. 3. Metaph. Cap 4. (...). The second Edition Reviewed and Enlarged.

By Edward Leigh Gentleman, sometimes of the Middle Temple.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Charles Adams, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Talbot near St Dustans Church in Fleetstreet. 1658.

To the right Honorable and his Honored Kinsman JOHN LISLE Esquire One of the
Lords Comissioners of the Great Seal of England.
My LORD,
IF Consanguinity and long acquaintance, and Converse together in three famous
Societies, may be a sufficient ground for the Dedication of a Book to one; I
hope, it will neither seem incongruous to others, nor be judged presumption by
you, that I make choice of a Lawyer, and among them, of your self (one of such
eminent place in reference to the Laws of the Land) to Patronize a Treatise of
our Municipall Laws. I wish the Work were as well worthy of your acceptance,
as the application of my self to you is proper. Lex humana (says Aquinas) est
quoddam dictamen 1. 2. Q. 97. Act. 1.
rationis, quo diriguntur humani actus. A humane Law is a certain dictate of
reason by which humane acts are directed. The Law of this Land is held to be
the best every way for this Nation, it being the Birthright (as one of the
great Sages of the Law says) and the most ancient and best Inheritance Cooks
preface to the 5 Rep. and on Lit.
that the Subjects of this Realm have; for by it they enjoy not only their
Inheritance and Goods, in peace and quietness, but their Life and their most
dear Country in safety* Among other principles of the Law are diverse general
and particular Customs, Cum enim aliquid multoties fit (says Aqu^nas loco
prius ^itato Act. 3.
the Schoolman) videtur ex deliberato judicio provenire, and secundum hoc
consuetudo and habet vim legis, and legem abolet, and est legum interpretatrix.
For when any thing is done very often, it seems to proceed from deliberate
Judgment, and according to this Custom both has the force of a Law, and
abolisheth a Law, and is the interpreter of Laws, Your Office is to moderate
the rigor of the Law, to weigh what is generally meet, and for the person.
Your Court is a Court of Equity or Conscience, as some call it. Let Conscience
bear sway in all your public and private Determinations: It is a Study well
becoming a Christian Magistrate; to labor in all things to approve his ways
to God, Acts 24. 1^. Heb. 13* 18. Lay out your self and your Abilities for him,
before whose Bar the highest Judge on Earth must one day stand, and the
higher our standing here is, the greater will the account be at the general
Audit. The consideration of which, I hope, will have an influence upon all your
Sentences and Actions; If you shall make it your Work to exalt God, he will
pour his Blessings abundantly both upon your self, and whole Family, which
shall be the desire of

My Lord, Your Affectionate Kinsman and Servant, Edward Leigh.

To the Candid READER.
Reader,
THere are three chief faculties, Law, Physic, and Divinity; the one respects
the estate, the other the body, the third the soul. Every Englishman should
labor for a competency of knowledge in all three; First of the Laws of the
Land, that he may not (through the ignorance thereof) prejudice his estate;
Secondly, of Physic, as the Proverb says, Every man is a fool or a Physician;
that is, either knows what is good or hurtful for his own body, or else is not
so wise as he should be; Thirdly, of Divinity; a man may be a bad Christian
notwithstanding this knowledge; but he cannot be a good Christian without it.

The study of the Law is multorum annorum opus, and it must needs be the more
difficult to attain unto perfection in it, since, though there be Inns of Court
(Colleges as it were for Students in that Profession) yet the Law it self is
not so well methodized (as other Sciences) nor are there Tutors or public
Teachers of the same, as of other Arts; but Qui sibimet discipulus est, stultum
habet pro magistro.
every Student is to acquire knowledge in it by his own industry: most of the
Cases which he reads, are to be committed to memory.

Of all that have written systematically as it were by way of Institutes,
Littleton is most extolled, he being the Cooks preface to the 10 Report, and
Tookers case 2 Rep. Littleton is the true and surest Register of the fundaments
and principles of our Law. Ployd. Comment. Wimbesh against Talbois.
Ornament of the Common Law, and (as some say) the most perfect and absolute
Work that ever was written in any humane Science; I have collected my Materials
out of him and Sir Edward Cook upon him, and his Reports, Perkins, Fitzherb.
Not. Brevium, Ployden, L. Dyer, Brooks Abridgment, Dr. and Student, Terms of
Law, Cowels Interpreter, and many others, some of which I quote in the Margin
almost for every thing.

And I hope that this little Treatise being in English, and digested into an
Alphabeticall order, will be useful for young Students in the Law, Justices of
Peace, and other Country Gentlemen, whose benefit I especially intend in the
publication of it. But least any should object (as perhaps some may) that I
have nothing here but what is already in the Terms of Law, and Cowels
Interpreter; I shall entreat the Judicious, to compare what I have of the word
Accessory, Actions, Appeal, in the letter A. with what is in them, and so
likewise in any other Letter; (to instance in no more) and I doubt not but he
will acknowledge, that there is difference enough between this and the others,
though I do make use of them, as I do of diverse other Authors.

This may suffice by way of Preface, I shall no longer detain thee from the
Book, but wishing thee much good by these my labors, I rest,

Thy hearty well-wisher, Edward Leigh*

Ab interpretatione ad nomen ipsum derivatum sicuti a genere ad speciem
desumpta argumentatio est inanis, quod etymologia latius puteat quam nomen
ipsum, certe in his Reciprocatio obscura and incerta est, maxim lege
vernacula) sed a derivato ad derivationem argui long melius potest, ut Tutor,
ergo tueri debet, etc.

A Philologicall COMMENTARY.
ABATE.
ABATE is both an English and French word, and signifies in his proper sense,
to diminish, or take away; as one that abateth in Lands or Tenements, by his
entry diminishes and takes away the Freehold in Law descended Cook on Lit. l.
3. c. 8. sect. 475.
to the Heir; and so it is said to abate an account, signifying Substraction or
withdrawing; and to abate the courage of a man. In another sense it signifies
to prostrate, beat down, or overthrow; as to abate Castle^, Houses, and the
like; and to abate a Writ, is to destroy it, by pleading for them that makes it
actious or not proper, and hereof comes a word of Art, Abatamentum, which is
an entry by interposition, after the death of the Ancestor and before the entry
of the Heir.

ABBOT.
Abbot, in Latin Abbas, in French Abbe, is by skillful Linguists said to come
from the Syriack Cowels Interp.
word Abba Pater, and in our common Law is used for him that in the Covent or
fellowship of Canons, has the rule and prehemmence, he is called the head of
the House, he is chosen from amongst the Monks and is one, as to all purposes
as but in relation to the Corporation.

ABEIANCE.
Abeiance, it seems to be derived from the French In Abeiance i. e. in
expectation, of the French word bayer to expect, Cook on Lit. in potentia as
the L^gi^ians t^rm ^t, in expectation or consideration of Law in nubibus, in
the Cl^uds. C^^k on ^i^. l. 3* c. 11. sect. ^46.
( Abayer) i. e. al^a^ra^e, to bark at, as Dogs do against a strang^r, or
Spaniels at a Feasant, put to the perks. So Children are said, Bayer a la
ma^^r^, when seeing the dug, they struggle and make means toward it. Our
Ancient Law^^rs would sig^i^^e hereby a kind of hope or lo^ging expectance, be
cause that there things that be in ab^iance, though for the present they b^ in
no man, yet they are in hope and exp^c^ation belonging to him that i^ next to
enjoy them.

When a Parson of a Church dies, we say tha^ the Freehold is in Abeiance,
because a Successor is in expectation to take it. It a Tenam ^or term o^
another life dy^th, the Freehold is said to be in Abeiance, un^ill the
occupant ent^reth. If a ^^^ make a Lease for life, the rem^inder to the right
Heirs of I. S. the Fee-simple is in Abeiance, until I. S. dies; because as
long I. S. lives, his Hei^^ are in himself, and he has no Heirs to take by
that name and purchase, and therefore during the li^^ o^ I. S. this remainder
is in the preservation of the Law, in nubibus, the Clouds or Lap of the Law.

ACCESSARIE.
1. Before the offense or fact, is he that commands or procures another to
do Felony, and is not there present when the other does it; but i^ ^e be
present, then he is also a principal. 2. ^^^r the ^^^^nce* is he that
receives, favors, ^id^rh, a ^^^^eth, or comfort any man that has done
any murder, or felony* where o^ he has knowledge.
He which counsels or commands any evil thing, shall be judged accessory
to all that follows o^ this evil act, but not o^ another distinct thing* as I
command one to beat another, and he beat him so, that the other di^ of it; I
shall be ^^^^ssary to this murder, for it is a sequel of my c^^^andement. But
if I command one to steal a white Horse, and he s^eals a black one; or to bu^^
such a house, which he w^ll knows* and he b^^n the house o^ another: I shall
^ot be accessory (...). So if I command one to rob such a G(...)o^ his pla^e in
such a place, as he is goi(...)g F^i^, and he br^ak his house in (...)sid^, and
th(...) away hi^ Pla^e; I shall Plo. C^m* Sanders case.
(...)essar^ to this ba(...), for this i^ (...)ny: ^ut i^ I command one to kill
(...)in the ^^ld, an^ he kill him in the City or Church; or I command him to
kill him at such a day and he kill him a^ another day; I shall be accessory*
for the killing is the substance, an^ the day, place, or weapon, is but
circumstance. ^ut if I command one to kill John a S. and before he has killed
him, I come and say, that I am peni^ent for my mali^e, and charge him no^ to
kill him* and yet he kill him; I shall not be acc^ssary. Where the p^incipall
is pardoned, or ha^h his Clergy, th(...)ary cannot be arraigned; ^or the
Maximm^ o(...)aw is, Vbi* non(...)or C^ok ^. R^p. Cases of appeals and indict
Sie^s 42. B.
it does nor appear by the judgm^nt of the Law, that he was principal; but if
the principal after attainder be pardoned, or has his Clergy allowed him,
there the acce^^ary shall be ar^a^gned, because it appears ^udicially that he
was principal. Some have holden, that neither f^r ^elony nor m^im, the
Accessory shall be ar^aigned, till the attainder of the principals.

In the lowest and highest offenses, there are no accessaries, but all are
principals, as in Ryot^, Routs, forcible Entries, and other Transgressions, ^i
Cook on Lat. l. 1. c. 8. sect. 7^*
and armis, which are the lowest offenses; and so in the highest offense, which
is Crimen ^oesae majestatis, there be no accessaries, but in Felony there In
alta proditione nullus p^test esse accessorius, sed principalis solummodo.
Fulb. praeparat. 5. c. p. 43.
are both before and after.

In the third of Queen Mary a maidservant conspired with a bad fellow to rob
her Mistress, and in the night she opened the door, and brought the fellow to
the bed of her Mistress, who did kill the Mistress, the maid holding the candle,
but saying nothing; she was not a Principal, (thoug^ she was present at the
act, and did concur with the murderer from the beginning to the end) but
accessory, because opening of the door, and holding of the candle was not
parcel of the consummation o^ the act. Q^aere i^ this be petty treason in the
Maidservant, since it is but murder in the other, although she was present when
her Mistress was murdered. Yet she cannot, as I take it, be a ^^aytor else, the
principal being but a murderer.

ACQUITTANCE.
Acquittance is a discharge in writing of a Sum of Money, or other duty which
ought to be paid or done. This word di^fereth from those which in the civil Law
be called acceptilatio, or Apocha, Terms of Law.
for the first of these may be by word, without writing, and is nothing but a
feigned payment and discharge though payment be not had. Apocha is a writing
witnessing the payment or delivery of Money, which discharges not unless the
Money be paid.

ACQUITER.
Acquiter is compounded of ad and the old Verb quietare, and signifies in Law
to discharge or keep in quiet, and to see that the Tenant Cook on Lit. lib. 2.
sect. 142.
be safely kept from any Entries or molestation, for any manner of service
issuing out of the Land to any Lord that is above the Mesne, hereof comes
acquital and quietus est, i. e. he is discharged; and he that is discharged of
a selony by judgment, is said to be acquitted of the selony a(...)atus de
^el-nia, and if it be drawn in question again, he may plead auter sois acquit.

And acquitall is either in deed or in Law; acquitall Cook. 2 Instit. 385.
in deed is either by verdict, or by battle, by verdict when by a Jury he is
found not guilty o^ the offense whereof he is charged: by battle, as when in
an appeal the plaintiff yields himself crea^t or vanquished in the field, the
^udgment shall be that the appelee shall go quit, and that he shall recover ^^^
damages.

Acquital in Law is where two are indicted, the one as principal, the other as
accessory, if the principal be acquitted indeed, the ^ther shall not be tried,
but shall be called to be acquitted in Law of course, but i^ the principal be
discharged for the insufficiency of the indictment against him or have his
Clergy the accessory i^ not acquitted.

ACRE.
Acre, is a certain parcel o^ Land that contains Acra ^lim incerta nune ve^o
certa per Statut. 31. Ed. 1.
in length 4^ perches, and in breadth four perches, it comes from the Germane
word ( Acker) id est, ager.

ACTION.
Action, an action is a right of prosecuting in judgment of a thing which is
due unto any one. Actio est jus prosequendi in judicio, quod alicui debetur.


It may well be called an Action, quia agitur de injuria, for it is a complaint
of an injury received.

ACTIONS are
1. Personal, whereby a man claims Debt or other Goods and Chattels, or
Damage for them, or Damages for wrong done to his Ratione objecti circa quod
ver. satur.
person, it is properly that which in Civil Law is called actio in personam. 2.
Beall, whereby the Demandant claims title to have a Freehold in any Lands, or
Tenements, Rents or Commons in Free-simple, (...)tail, or for term of life. 3.
Mixed, whereby something in the reallity i^ recovered* and damages also, as in
(...).
Actio personalis m^^^itur cum p^rs^na. This rule is not generally to be
admitted, but only in 41. Ass. pl. 15. (...). ex. 74. C^^. 9. fol. 8(...) Fulb.
para^* second pa^* second dial. and alii.
such Cases where the wrong did p^inc^pall^ and (...) rest upon a man person,
as if one scandalize or bea^ another, if either pa^ty ^y the ^^tion is gone,
b^t an E^^^^ut^ may have a W^i^ of Covenant, which is a thing merely personal,
or any Action upon the Case, as the Case is.

An Action upon the Case (called by the Civilion^, A^ti^ in^^^iarum) is so
termed in the Common Law, because every man's Case must be in the Action,
specially, and at large set down; for Fulb. par^^^* second part second ^^al.
Cook 5. Rep.
in that Action, the writ ought to comprehend the special matter, as well as
the Declaration.

If a man deliver a horse to one to keep him safely, the Defendant equum illum
tam negligenligenter custodivit, ut ob defect^m b^nae cust^diae in^eriit. So I
trust my Shepherd with my sheep, and they perish through his negligence, an
Action of the Case lies here.

An Action upon the Case does not ly at the Cook 4. Rep. actions upon slander.
5. Rep. Sep. cot^ Case. Brooks Abri. fol. 4. Brook ubi supra. Fitz. Herbert. in
Natura Brev. has the same, and gives this ^eason, because it is the duty of
every Arti^icer to do his Art duly ^^^ truly as he ^^ght.
Common Law for calling a man here^ick, or adulterer, but in the Spiritual Law,
for those of the Common Law cannot discuss what is H^resie or Adultery, but
for calling one Traitor or ^elor an Action lies at the common Law.

If a Smith prick my Horse with a nail, I shall have an Action of the Case, and
so likewise if he warrant to cure my Horse and does not; but if he do what he
can, and not warrant the curing of him, it will not lie.

If one change another that he has forsworn Cook ^. Rep. Actions (...)
slander. H^b Rep. ^^l. 126.
himself, this is not actionable, because he may be ^or^worn in usual
communication, quia benigni^r (...) in verbis genera^^bus seu du^^iis est
praeser^nda 2. It is a^^ usual word of passion and cho^er to say that another
has forsworn himself, as if one say to another, that he is a villain, rogue,
or va^let, vel s^^i ia, these will not bear an action, for ^^ni judicit est
^^^es d^^imere, but if one say to another that he is preju^ced, or that he has
forsw^rn himself in such an action, in such a Court, for such words an Action
may be maintainable, for here it appears that he has forsworn himself in a
j^dicial proceeding. So if a man say, that another is main sworn, a word in the
North for perjured, or in Welsh call a man an Idoner, which is to the same
purpose, an Action will lie.

In every Action upon the Case for ^landerous words, two things are required.
1. That the person which is scandalized be certain. If one say one of the
servants of John a S. is a notorious thief, he having diverse, these words will
not bear an Action Cook ubi supra.
for their uncertainty. 2. That the scandal be apparent by the words
themselves; and therefore if the Defendant say to the Plaintiff, that he is
full of the Pox, it shall be taken to be the Small Pox, though the Plaintiff
declares with an innuendo, the French Pox, for words shall be taken in miltore
sensu, where they may be applied two ways.

If one say to I. S. Thou art a Traitor, here constat Cook 4. Rep. actiones de
scandalis.
de persona, and the Action lies; or if one scandalize a man in his Profession
or Trade, by which he gets his living: as Skinner a Merchant, said of Manwood
chief Baron, That he was a corrupt Judge, and it was adjudged that these words
were actionable. Popham says, If one say of a woman that keeps an Inn, that
she has a great infectious disease, by which she loses her guests, she shall
have an action upon the Case.

If one say of a Merchant, that he is a Bankrupt knave, an action lies, or that
he will be a Bankrupt in two days, which imports only an inclination; yet an
action lies. If one call another thief or traitor generally the action will
lie, but if one say, Thou art a thief, for thou have robbed my Orchard; or, for
thou have robbed my Hop-ground; these words are not actionable, for the last
words prove it to be no Felony, and so qualify the proper sense of this word
Thief.

If the Jailer of malice fore thought, lay so many irons on the prisoner, as to
lame him, he shall have his Action on the Ca^e. If a man play with others at
Dice, and he has ^alse Dice, with which Friz. Herb. Not. brev. Action upon the
Case. Cook 8 fol. 32. Calyes Case. Id. ib.
he plays and wins the others money; he which has lost his money, may
have his action on the Case for this deceit. An action or trespass upon the
case lies against the keeper of a common Inn, if goods be imbe^eled in^r^h
^^spitu^^. If a man sell a Horse to another, and war^ant him to be good, and
the Horse has some secret disease in his body which he knows of; the other
shall have a writ of trespass on the Case against him. So if one sell Wine, and
warrant it to be good, and it is naught, an action of the Case will lie.

If a man's servant be beaten, the Master shall not The Master has n^ da^^g^ by
p^^s^nall battery of his servant.
not have an action for this Battery, unless it be so great, that by reason
thereof, he loses the service of his servant; but the servant himself shall
have an action for every petty battery, Cook ^. Rep. Morys Case.

ADIOUENMENT.
Ad^ournment, is when any Court is put off, and a^ligned to be kept again at
another place or time.

ADMISSION.
Admission, is when one that has right to present to a Church being void, does
pre^^nt him to the Bishop of the Diocese in which the Church i^, who upon
examination finding him idoneus pers^na that is capable and able, does consent
that he shall be Parson, and says admitt^ ^^ habi^^m.

ADMINISTRATOR.
Administrator, is he to whom the ordinary ( id est) the Bishop does commit or
give power to dispose and administer the goods, and Chattels within his Diocese
belonging to any person that is dead, without Executor for the benefit of Cook
5. fol. 2^. Piggots case.
such persons, or if the Party make a Will and Executor and they all refuse, or
the Executor be within the age of 17 years.

Administrator durante min^re aetate, cannot sell Cook 5. Rep Princes Case.
any of the goods of the dead, unless it be of necessity for the payment of
debts, or b^na (...), for he has his office of administration (...)d^ of the
Infant, and not for his prejudice. The words of such Letters are,
Administ^ati^n^m ^mnium and singalorum bonorum ad ^p^^^, ^^min dum, and
utilitatem exe^utri^. durante sua mia^^e aetate and non aliter, nec alio modo
commit^imus; such administration cease at the age of seventeen of the Infant.
Where one has goods only in an inferior Diocese, yet the Metropolitan of the
same Province, pretending that he had bona notabilia in diverse Diocesses,
commits administration* this administration is not vo^^, but voidable by
sentence, because the Metropolitan has jurisdiction over all the Diocesses
within his Province, but if an Ordinary of a Diocese commit administration of
goods, when the Party has (...) in diverse Diocesses, such administration is
merely void, both for the goods in his Diocese, and elsewhere, because that by
^^ means he can have jurisdiction of the Cause.

ADVOWSON.
Advowson of a Church is the right of Presentation Cook on Lit. l. 2. sect. 18^.
or Collation to the Church, Adv^catio, so called, because the righ^ of
presenting to the Church was first gained (...)uch i^ were Founders,
Benefactors or Maintainers of the Church, viz. 1. ration^ fundationis, a^ where
the Ancestor was Founder of the Church, or 2 ratione (...)nis, where he endowed
the Church, or 3. (...) sundi, as where he gave the soil whereupon the Church
was built, and therefore they were called advocati, and thereupon the advowson
is called jus patronatus.

In an Advowson or Rectorship, there are three distinct Rights, viz.

1. Ius presentationis, which does belong to the Patron. 2. Ius Ordinationis to
the ordinary. 3. Ius possessionis, to the Parson imparsonee.
If a man seized of an Advowson in Fee, by his Cook on Littelton l. 3. c. 13.
sect. 722.
Deed grants the next Presentation to A. and before the Church becomes void,
by another Deed grant the next Presentation of the same Church to B. the second
grant is void; for A. had the same granted to him before, and the Grantee shall
not have the second avoidance by constructio^* This has been resolved by the
Justices.

AFFEERORS.
It comes of an old French word esscu^er. i. e. to tax or sine Minsh.
Affeerors are such as are appointed in Courtleets, to mulct such as have
committed any fault, which is arbitrably punishable, and for which no express
penalty is prescribed by Statute.

The (...)ament is the act of the Court, and the (...)meant the act of the Jury,
Cook lib. 8. ^^^il^^ case sol. 40. B.

AFFRAY.
(...) is derived of the French Affray^^, which (...)ine. It may be without
word or ^^w ^iv^n, as if a man i^ ^^^ show himself ^^^(...) with Armor ^^
Weapon which is no usual w(...) it will strike a fear into (...)er that be 4
II. 6. 10. 8. Ed. 4. 5.
not (...), a^ he is: for which reason i^ i^ a common wrong and inquirable in a
Lect. which makes it di^^^r from assault, which is alwa^s a particular injury.

AGE.
There are diversity of Ages, which the Law takes notice of.

A Woman has seven Ages for several purposes Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 4. ^^ct.
1^2. Lit. Ten. tit. D^^^er and l. 2. c. 4. p. 22.
appointed to her by Law, as seven years for the Lord to have aid pour file
marier, nine years to deserve dower, twelve years to coment to ma^^iage, until
fourteen years to be in ward, 14 years to be out of ward, if she attained
thereunto in the life of her Ancestor, sixteen years to tender her marriage, if
she were under the age of fourteen at Cook on Lit. ubi supra. Fitz. Herb. Not.
Brev. in brevi de rationabili auxilio. Lit. Ten.
the death of her Ancestor, and twenty one years to a ^enate her Lands, Goods,
and Chattels.

A man also b^ the Law for several purposes has diverse Ages a^^igne^ unto him;
viz. twelve years to take the Oath of Allegiance in the Leet, 14 years to
consent to marriage, and for the Heir in ^o^^ age to choose his Guardian, and
fourteen years is also accounted his Age of discretion, fifteen years for the
Lord to have aid pour sai^e fit^ Chivaler, under 21 to be in ward to the Lord
by Knights service, under 14 to be in ward to a Guardian in soccage, and 21 to
be out of ward of a Guardian in Chivalry, and to alien his Lands, Cook on Lit.
l. 3. c. 1. sect. 259. ^^t. Ten. l. 2. c. 4. p. 22 and l. 4. c. 1. p. 5^, 57.
Goods and Chattels. Before the age of twenty one years, a Man or a Woman is
called an Infant. Full age regularly is twenty one years for man or woman to
enable them to seal any Bond or any Deed whatsoever; a man cannot lawfully be
impannelled in a Jury before that age, and at 17 years he may administer as
Executor.

AGREEMENT.
Agreement (says Pl^^d^^) is a word compounded Plowden Term. Pa^^. a^^o 4. E.
6. Reniger against (...).
of two words, aggregatio and mentium, i. e. agreement of minds, it is a
consent of mind, in something done or to be done, ab aggredi^^d^ dicitur,
says Spelman.

If I sell all my Corn for Twelve pence every Bushel, notwithstanding the
uncertainty of the quantity of the Co^^, and of the sum for it, yet this is a
good agreement.

So where one le^^ a Close, rendering Twelve Plowden ib.
pence of Rent for every Acre, notwithstanding the uncertainty of the Rent, yet
it is a good agreement, for it may be reduced to a certainty, by measuring of
the Corn or ground.

ALIEN.
Alien, is derived from the Latin word alienus*, Alienae gentis or alienae
ligeantiae. Cook on Lit.
and according to the Etymology of the word, it signifies one born in a strange
country, under the obedience of a strange Prince.

Such an one is not capable of inheritance within England.

1. Because the Secrets of the Realm may thus be discovered. 2. The Revenues of
the Realm (which are the sinews of War, and ornament of Peace) shall be
taken, and enjoyed by strangers born. 3. This will tend to the destruction of
the Cook ^. ^. Rep. (...)v. C^^^.
Realm.
He cannot have any real or personal ^ction concerning Land, unless he be an
alien Merchant friend, and then he may have a Lease for years, of Houses,
Warehouses, and Conveniences for habitation and Merchandising, and if he be
disturbed in the possession of them, he may maintain actions of trespass. And
if he be naturalized by Act of Parliament* then he is not accounted in Law
alienig^^a, but ^^^g na, as a natural born Subject, and may purchase and
maintain actions as Englishmen.

ALMS.
Alms, and relief of poor people, being a work Cook on Lit.
of charity, is accounted in Law Divine Service, for what herein is done to the
poor for Gods sake, is done to God himself. Iura naturalia ^ur^ (...)vili
di^imi non possunt. (...)nd Student.


If it were ordained that no Alms should be given for no necessity, this Custom
and Statute were void, because no general Custom of Statute must be directly
against the Law of God. Nevertheless, the Statute in the 24 year of King Ed. 3.
whereby it is ordained. That no man under pain of imprisonment, shall give any
alms to any vagrant beggars that may well labor, that they may so be compelled
to labor for their living, is a good Statute, for it observes the intent of
the Law of God.

AMERCIAMENT.
Amerciament in Latin is called misericordia, Cook on Lit* lib. 2. c. 11. p.
194.
because it ought to be assessed mercifully, and this ought to be moderated by
affeerement of his equals, or else a Writ de moderata misericordia does lie, or
because the party which offends Term. of Law. Cook* ^^* Rep.
puts himself on the mercy of the KING.

A fine is always imposed and assessed by the Court, but Amerciament by the
Country.

ANCESTOR.
Ancestor is derived of the Latin word (...)sor, and in law there is a
difference between antecessor Cook on Lit. ^. 2. c. 4. sect. 1^3.
and predecessor, for antecessor is applied to a natural person, as I. S. and
antecess^^^s ^ui; but predecessor is applied to a body Politic, or Corporate,
as Epis. Land. and predecessores. S^^ Re^^^r de D. and predecessores sui.

AN, IOUR.
An, iour, The law in many cases has limited a year and a day to be a legal
^and convenient time for many purposes* The Wife or Heir has a year and a day,
to bring an appeal of death. If a man Cook on Lit l. 3. c. ^. sect. 422.
be wounded or poisoned, and dies thereof within the year and the day, it is
Felony. A protection shall be allowed but for a year and a day, and no longer:
a year and a day to remain in ^^ti^^t ^emes^e to enfranchise a Villain.

An(...), and waste, is a forfeiture when a man has committed petty treason or
felony, and has ^^nds which he holds of some common person* the King in
detestation of the crime, might by the Prerogative cause the trees to be dug
up, the houses to be ^ased and pulled down, and the pastures and meadows to be
plowed up: but the land* so desaced were to escheate to the Lord, and the King
had no other benefit then before, ^i^ ^o^ the good of the Commonwealth it was
provided by Magna Charta, Chap. 22. that instead of such Cook* 2 Institut. 37.
spoil, the King should have the lands of such ^^lon for a year and a day, and
afterward the Lord to have it without such spoil. This Statute of Prerogativa
Regis, made in the 47 year of E. 2. is thought by Stamford and others to be in
force as to this point, and has made them conceive erroneously, but that
Statute being repealed by an Act in ^^ E. 3 cap. 1. the Act of Magna Charta, as
to this is still in force. The King shall not have a^^^^^ diem, and vas^am of
lands holden in Gavel* kind, where the Father is hanged: but if he be outlawed
and ab^ured for felony, he shall. Some hold that the custom of Kent, The Father
to the Bow, the Son to the P^^^^, must be taken strictly; for if he be
attainted and die in prison, his lands shall es^hea^. If one be I^ ^^*
arrested for selony, and breaks the arrest; so that in pursuit of him he is
killed, because he would not otherwise be taken; the King in this case shall
have the year, day, and waste.

ANNATES.
Annates, seems to be all one with first fruits, because the rate of the
first fruits paid of spiritual things is after one years profit.

ANNUITY.
Annuity, is a yearly payment of a certain sum of Cook on Lit. 144.
money granted to another in see for life or years, charging the person of the
grantor only.

For it, no action lies, but only a Writ of Annuity F^^^. Herb. Na^. brev. p.
152.
against the grantor or his heirs, if the grantor grant for him and his heirs.

If one grant to another an annuity pro consilio impendendo; if he will not
give counsel, the other may stay the annuity, because he cannot have the
Ployd. an. 6. ^resp. by Browning against Best^r.
thing, for which he grants the annuity; It is a conditional grant, though
there be not any word of a condition.

If one grant to one learned in the Law, or in Physic, an annuity for term of
the life of the Grantee pro consilio impendendo to the Grantor; and the Grantor
dies, the annuity shall not cease by this, but the Grantee shall hold for ^erm
of his Plowd. Comment. p. 458.
life, and yet it was granted, and was executorie for the Counsel, but no
Counsel may be given to the Grantor when he is dead, so that by the act of
God, the Grantee is discharged of giving Counsel.

If an Annuity be granted pro consili^ impenso and impendendo, and the Grantee
commit Treason whereby he is imprisoned, so that the Grantor cannot have access
unto him for his Counsel, yet 6. H. 8. Die.
nevertheless the annuity is not determined by this non feasance, yet it was
the Grantees act and default to commit the Treason, whereby the imprisonment
grew, but the Law excuses him; because the not giving counsel was compulsory,
and not voluntary in regard of the imprisonment.

If I grant to I. S. an annuity of ten pounds a a year pro consilio impenso and
impendendo; If I. S. be Bacons Collection.
a Physician, it shall be understood of his counsel in Physic, if a Lawyer of
his counsel in Law. An annuity is granted pro consilio impenso, and impendendo
to one Pl^mer Attorney, there is contention between the Grantor and a stranger,
and the Attorney dat consilium adversario concess^ris, sed non est requisitus
ad dandum consilium per concessorem sibi in illa materia, whether this were
against the effect and intention of the former grant, and it was held no, but
the Annuity shall continue.

APPEAL.
Appeal comes of the French word Appeller, Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect.
180. Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 8. sect. 500.
that signifies to accuse or appeach, it is an accusation, or of appeller to
call, because appellans vocat reum in judicium, He calls the Defendant into
judgment.

There are three sorts of Appeals.

1. Of wrong to his Ancestor, whose Heir male he is, and that is only of death.
2. Of wrong to the Husband, and is by the wife Cook ubi supra.
only of the death of her Husband to be prosecuted whilst she is a widow. 3.
Of Wrongs done to the appellants themselves, as robbery, rape, and mayhem.
The Law prohibireth not counsel in an appeal, An Appeal is called but a suit
of revenge, ergo not much sav ured. 11 H. 4. 1^. Dr. and Student. c. 48.
as it does in an Indictment, became there is no appeal brought, but that of
common presumption, the appellant has great malice against the Appell^e. As
when the Appeal is brought by the wife of the death of her Husband, or by the
Son of the death of his father, or that an appeal of robbery is brought for
stealing of goods: but when that man is indicted at the Kings suit, the King
intends nothing but justice with favor.

If he that is attainted of Treason or Felony be slain by one that has no
authority, in this Case his eldest son can have no appeal, for he must bring
his appeal as Heir; which being ex provisiene hominis, he loses ^* by the
attainder of his father, but his wife shall have an appeal, because she is to
have her appeal as wife, which she remains, notwithstanding the attainder,
because maris and faeminae conjunctio est de jure naturae, and therefore ^s
indissoluble. The reason why a woman has appeal de morte viri, is because by
his death she is thought less able to live and maintain her self; if she marry
again, her appeal is Woman's Lawyer. 8 H. 4. 18. Ter^tes of Law.
determined, though the new married Husband be dead within a year and day after
his death that was slain. The appeal must be within the year and a day after
the Deed, Cook 4 Rep. Cases of Ap. and Indict. It shall be brought within a
year after the stroke, and not the death, Stamford. T. of Law. T. of Law.


An appeal of Mayhem is in manner but a trespass, for he shall recover but
damages, yet the indictment shall say quod felonete mahemavit.

APPENDANT.
Appendant is any inheritance belonging to another Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. s.
148. Cook 4 Rep. Tyrring. Case.
that is superior or more worthy.

The thing Appendant ought to agree with the nature and quality of the thing
unto which it is appendant, a Leet cannot be appendant to a Church or Chapel,
for they are of several natures*

A thing corporate cannot be appendant to a thing corporate, nor a thing
incorporate, to a Id ib.
thing incorporate, but a thing incorporate as an advowson, to a thing
corporate as a Manor, or a thing corporate, as Land, to a thing incorporate,
as an Office.

APPRENTICE.
Apprentices, quasi apprehensores, apprendre to learn, are such persons who do
serve a certain time, (for the most part seven years) by pact for the learning
of any Art, it is from the French word Apprendre, which signifies to learn in
any Art, thence they have apprentisage, and we apprentiship, Mr* Seldens notes
on Fortescue. page 3.
as also apprentisage, davocas plaidans* for the apprentiship of the Lawyers,
and thence with us some are called apprentices to the Law, and sometime
apprentices to the Bar, who are those who are permitted salutare cancellos fori
vel barr^^ there publicly to plead, in the time of H. 6. Fortescue says,
there were in the Ins of Court and Chancery, at the least 2000 of them, which
prodigious number may be admired, since in the Parliament Rolls, 20 Ed. 1. Rot.
5. in dorso: it is there ordained in his verbis, De Attornatis and
apprenticii^, D. Rex injunxit I. de Metingham, and sociis suis, quod ipsi per
eorum discretionem provideant and ordinent certum numerum de quolibet Comitatu
de melioribus and legalioribus, and libentius addiscentibus, secundum quod
intellexerunt quod Curiae suae and populo de regno melius valere poterit, and
majus commodum fuerit. Et quod ipsi quos ad hoc eligerent Curiam sequantur, and
se de negotiis in eadem Curia intromittant, and alii non. Et videtur Regi and
ejus Concilio, quod septies viginti sufficere poterint, apponant tamen praesati
Iusticiarii plures si viderint esse faciendum, vel numerum anticipent, and de
aliis remanentibus fiat per discretionem eorundem Iusticiariorum, etc.

These Apprentices of Law were prohibited to come to the Parliament at Coventry
by Henry the fourth, in the sixth year of his Reign, as appears by a Writ
directed to a Sheriff thus, Nolumus autem, quod tu seu aliquis alius vicecomes
Regni nostri praedicti, aut apprenticius, five aliquis alius homo ad Legem
aliqualiter sit elect, etc. therefore this Parliment was called Parliamentum
indoctum and had in its design nothing more then the ruin of the Church and
Laws.

APPORTION.
Apportion, This word comes of the word portio, which signifies a part of the
whole, and apportion Cook on Lit* l. 2. c. 12. sect. ^2^.
signifies a division or partition of a Rent or Common, and is either,

1. Voluntary, 2. Or by constraint of Law.
APPURTENANT.
Appurtenant and Appendant are things that by time of prescription have
belonged, appertained, and are joined to another principal thing, by which they
pass and go as accessory to the same special thing by virtue of these words
pertinentiis, as Lands, Advowsons, Commons, Ways, Courts to a Manor house,
or Office. Appendants are ever Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11.
by prescription, appurtenants may be created in some Cases, at this day.

ARBITRAMENT.
Arbitrament, it is so called, because the Judges elected therein may determine
the controversy not according to the Law, but ex boni^ viri arbitrio, or else
because the parties to the controversy have submitted themselves to the
judgment of the arbitrators, not by compulsory means, but ex libero arbitrio,
out of their own accord. It is a power given by the parties litigant to some to
hear and determine some matter in Suit between them, to whose judgment they
bind themselves to stand.

There is a diversity between it and concord, L. Dyer, term. mich. Anno sexto
Ed. 6. 75.
that an arbitrament may be pleaded, although the time of performance of it be
not yet come, but a concord ought to be executed, and satisfied before the
action brought, or it is no good plea.

Five things are incident to an Arbitrament.

1. Matter of controversy. Dyer 21^ Pl. ^^.
2. Submission. 3. Parties to the Submission. 4. Arbitrators. 5. Rendering the
award, which may be either 1. By word or, 2. By writing.

ARRAIGN.
Arraign, A prisoner is said to be arraigned, when Y. of Law.
he is indicted, and put to his trial.

One arraigned upon an an indictment of selony Dr. and Student. ^^^. ^.
or murder shall have no counsel, but the Judges shall so instruct him in all
things that pertain to the order of pleading, that he shall run in no danger by
his mispleading, to arraign an Assise to prosecute by such a Writ.

ARREST.
Arrest, is derived as some think of the French Doderidge.
word arrester to stay, or from the Greek word (...), a Decree or Sentence of
the Court.

Arrest is when one is taken and restrained from his Liberty by power or color
of a lawful warrant. Arrest signifies properly, a decree of a Court, be
virtue of which a man is arrested, etc.

If a man be struck, and it is doubtful whether he will die, a man may arrest
him which struck him, until it be known whether he will die or no. Brook.
abri. fol. 182. B.


The person of a B^ron which is a Peer of the Parliament, shall not be arrested
in Debt or Trespass for his body, for none o^ the Nobility Cook 6. Rep Countess
of Ratlands Case.
which is Lord of the Parliament, and by the Law ought to betryed by his Peers,
shall be arrested by is body.

The Law intends that they a^hst the King with their counsel for the
Commonwealth, and keep the Realm in safety by their prowess and valor. And
they are intended to have sufficient in Lands whereby they may be distrained,
this Privilege extends also to women that are Countesses by birth or marriage,
if those by marriage loose not that dignity by intermarriage with one under the
degree of Nobility. They shall not therefore be put Cook 9 Rep Earl of Salops
Case.
in Juries, although it be the service of the Country.

An arrest in the night is lawful, for the Officer ought to arrest a man when
he can be found, for otherwise peradventure he shall never arrest him, quia qui
male agit odit lucem, and if the Officer do not arrest him when he finds him
and may Cook 9 Rep. Mackallies Case.
arrest him, the Plaintiff shall have an action upon the Case, and recover all
his loss in damages. No man shall be arrested upon the Sabbath day by a new
act, etc.

ASSAULT.
Assault, is from the Latin word Assultus, which denotes a leaping or flying
upon a man, so that it cannot be performed without the offer of some hurtful
blow, or atleast some fearful speech, and therefore to rebuke a Collector with
foul words, so that he departed for fear without doing his Office, was taken
for an assault. To strike at a man 27 Ass. Pl. 11.
though he were neither hurt nor hit with the blow, was adjudged ^n assault 22
lib. Ass. Plea. 60. Assault does not always imply necessarily a hitting and
therefore in trespass, for assault and battery, a man may be found guilty of
the assault, and yet excused of the battery. 40 Ed. 3, 4. and 25 Ed. 3. 24.

ASSEMBLY.
Assembly, unlawful, is where above the number of two do assemble to do some
unlawful act. T. of Law.


ASSISE.
Assise says Littleton, est nomen aequivocum, sometimes it is taken for a
Jury, for in the record of an Assise, the word is Assisa venit recognitura,
etc* is the same as Iurata venit recognitura, and in a Writ of right the Tenant
putting himself on God, and the great Assise is the same as upon God and his
Country, viz. the Jury, but most properly it is taken for a Writ or Action,
and it lies where any man is put out of his Lands, Tenements or any profit to
be taken in a certain place, and so disseised of his Freehold. At the common
Law assise was remedi^m maxim festinum, for in this the Defendant shall not
pray the aid of any but the King, also maxim beneficiale, for in no action at
the Common Law a man shall recover Land it self, and damages, but only in an
Assise against the disseisor.

There be four Assizes in an Assise of Novell disseism, of Mort dancester, of
darreine presentment, and of Utrum.

Assise comes of the Latin word Assideo, which is ^o associate or sit together.

ASSUMPSIT.
Assumpsit, (of the Lat. assumptio) is a voluntary Term. of Law.
promise made by word, by which a man assumeth and takes upon him to perform
or pay any thing to another.

It holds good in Law, when there is something laid down in consideration: For
a promise without consideration will not bind in Law to performance, but is
called nudum pactum ex quo non oritur actio.

ATTACHMENT.
Attachment, signifies a taking hold, or apprehending by commandment of Writ,
from the French word attacher.

It differs from an arrest or Capias, for that proceeds out of the inferior
Courts by precept and Attachment out of the Superior Courts. By Precept or
Writ, an arrest is only upon the body Terms of Law. Minish.
of a man, an Attachment is more general, and extends to the taking of goods.
Kitchen says a man may attach a Cow.

ATTAINDER.
Attainder, is when a man has committed Treason or Felony, and after
conviction judgment has passed upon him, he is then said to be attainted, and
such attainder has these effects, that his blood is so stained and corrupted
thereby, that he is said to be convicted when the Jury has found him guilty,
but not attainted till judgment. If a man does adhere to the Kings enemies, and
die, or be slain before a tainder, he shall forfeit nothing, nor shall his
blood be corrupt. This was the case of Jack Cade, who being slain in open
Rebellion could no way be punished, or forfeit any thing, and therefore in the
29th year of H. 6. cap. 1. was attainted by Parliament; before that time it was
rare to attaint a man after his death, but since frequent.

1. His Children cannot be Heirs to him, nor any Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 13.
sect. 745.
other Ancestor. 2. If he were noble and gentle before, he and all his Children
and Posterity are by his attainder made base and ignoble in respect of any
Nobility or Gen^ry which they had by their birth. 3. This corruption of blood
is so high, that regularly it cannot be possibly salved but by Authority of
Parliament. The Kings Letters Patents will not do it.
ATTAINT.
Attaint, is a Writ that lies where a false verdict is given in Court of
Record upon an issue joined by the parties and of ancient Writers it is called
breve de convictione, and is derived of the participle tinctus, or attinctus,
because if the p^rty Jury be attainted of a false Oath, they are stained with
perjury, and become infamous Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 8. sect. 5. 14.
for ever, for the judgment of the Common Law in the attaint importeh eight
great and grievous punishments.

1. Quod amittat liberam Legem in perpetuum, he shall never be received to be a
witness, or of any Jury, nor can he be Champion in a Writ of Right. 2. Quod
fo^is faciat omnia* bona and catalla sua. 3. Quod terrae and tenementa in manus
Domint Regis capiantur. 4. Quod u^^res and liberi extra domus suas ejicerentur.
S^ odious is perjury in the eye of the Common Law. Cows Institut. Minsh.
5. Quod domus suae prost^entur. 6. Quod arbores suae extirpentur. 7. Quod
p^ata sua arentur. 8. Quod ^o^^^ra sua carceri mancipentur.
It is a Substantive made (say some) of the French verb atteindre, id est, ass
qui or attingere, because he is catched and overtaken, rather of the French
teindre, in Latin ^in^ere to stain, dye, color, unde Gal. Teint Latin tinctus,
as we say, he is attainted, or tainted of Treason, i. e. stained.

ATTORNEY.
Attorney, is an ancient English word, and signifies one that is set in the
turn, stead, or place of another. Of these some be private and some be public,
Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. ^. l. 1. sect. 59.
as Attorneys at Law, whose Warrant from his ^laster is, ponet ^^^o su^ talem
Attornatum suum, which sets in his turn or place, such a man to be his
Attorney. Those that be private are sometimes by writing, sometimes by word, to
make or take Livery or Possession, to make claim to Lands, to enter to sue,
etc. And it is a Rule, that where the Attorney does less then the Authority
Perk. 187. 109.
and commandment, all that he does is void, but where he does that which he is
authorized to do, and more, it is good, for so much as is warranted, and void
for the rest. If a man be disseised of black Acre, and white Acre, and a
Warrant of Attorney is made to enter into both, and make Livery, and the
Attorney enters only into one and makes Livery, it is void for all. So if a
Letter of Attorney be made to deliver seisin upon a condition, and he does it
without a condition, it is void, because he did less then his Authority. But if
one have Authority to deliver seisin to I. S* and he do it to I. S. and I. N.
that is good as to I. S. because more then his Authority.

ATTOURNEMENT.
Attournement, is an agreement of the Tenant Of the French tourner to turn:
therefore they say to turn Tenant Minsh. Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 10. sect. 551.
to the grant of the Seignory or of a Rent, or of the Donee in tail, or Tenant
for life or years, to a grant of a reversion, or remainder made to another. It
is an ancient word of Art, and in the Common Law signifies a torning or
attorning from one to another, we use also attornamentum as a Latin word, and
attornare to attorn. A grant to the King, or by the King to another, is good
without attornment by his Prerogative. Also where one does grant a Rent,
Reversion, Remainder, Service, or Seignory to another by way of devise, by a
last Will and Testament. So when the thing granted does pass by way of use, as
where one l^vieth a Fine, bargaineth and sells, has Inrolement or Covenants
to stand seized of a reversion, etc. to the use of another there needs no
attornment* Conusee of a fine, of a seigniory, rent, reversion, etc. before
attornment, cannot maintain an Action of Wast, nor a Writ of Entry ad Communem
Legem, or in Casu promis^ae, or in consimili Casu, upon the alienation of the
Tenant escheate upon the dying of the Tenant without heir, or ward upon his
dying his Heir within age therefore by force the ingrosment of the fine, if it
be of a Seigniory, he may compel the Tenant to attorn by a Writ called a Per
que servitia, if of a rent, by a Writ called a Quem redditum reddit, and if of
a reversion, or remainder of a Tenement for life, then by a Writ called a Quid
Iuris clamat.

AWARD.
Award of the French word agarder, which is to decide or judge.

Which is either

1. Interloqu^tory. 2. Or Definitive.
AVOWRY.
Avowry, is a manifestation or maintenance of a thing formerly done, and comes
of a French word Advouer, and it is used in our Law when one has taken a
distress for Rent or other things, and he who is distrained sueth a Replevin,
and he that took the distress does justify.

Auxilium ad filium militem faciendum, and ad Regist. Orig fol. 87. Glanvil. l.
9. cap. 8.
filium maritandum, is a Writ directed to the Sheriff of every County where the
King or other Lord has any Tenants to levy of them reasonable aid toward the
Knighting of his Son at 15 years or the marriage of his daughter at 7, at the
Common Law it was not limited, yet ought to have been West. 1. 3. Ed. 1. 25.
Ed. 3. 11.
rationabile auxilium, but now it is limited to 20 s. for a Knights Fee, and so
for 20 l. per annum in soccagio.

AID.
Aid, is where a particular ^^^^rietor is impleaded and not being able to
defend the thing for which he is impleaded, he prays ay^e of some better
able, and it is two ways.

1. In a Plea real teners ^^tit auxilium de A S. sine quo respond ^e n^^
^otest 4. H. 30.
2. In a Plea (...)all, and then the Defendant pet^ auxilium ad manulerendum
exititium.
B.
BAIL.
BAil or ballium is safe keeping or protection, and Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 10.
sect. 79. What kinds of offenders may be bailed, See Cook 2 part of Instit. c.
15. Terms of Law. Dalton.
thereupon we say, when a man upon surety is delievered out of prison, trad^tu^
in ballium, he is delivered into bail, i. e. into their ^^^^ keeping, or
protection from prison, it is derived from the French word baille^, and that
also comes of the Greek (...), they both signify to deliver into hand, for he
that is bailed, is taken out of prison, and delivered into the hands of his
friends.

BAILEMENT.
Bailement, is a delivery of things, writings, goods, or stuff to another.

The Intendment of Law in Cases of Bailement is that it rests indifferent,
whether he be guilty or not until trial.

BAILIFF
Bailiff, This word Baille (as some say) comes of the French word Bailiff in
Latin Bailivus, but Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 10. sect. 79. Id. l. 3. c. 1. sect.
248.
in truth, Bailie is an old Saxon word, and sigfieth a safe Keeper or
Protector, the Sheriff that has custodiam comitatus, is called balivus, and
the County baliva sua, when he cannot find the Desendant, he returned, non est
inventus in bali^^ mea.

BANK.
Bank, is a Saxon word, and signifies a bench, or high seat or a Tribunal, and
is properly applied to the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, because the
Justices of that Court sit there ^ook on Lit. l. 2. c. 3. sect. 96.
in a certain place, and legal Records term them Iusticiarii de ban^^. Another
Court there is called the Kings Bench, both because the Records of that Court
are styled coram Rege, and because Kings in former times have often personally
sat there.

BARGAIN.
Bargain, and sale is when a recompense is given by both the parties to the
bargain. By it Terms of Law.
Lands may pass without livery of S^isin, if the bargain and sale be by deed
indented, sealed and in^olled.

A warranty made upon the concluding of a bargan and sale does bind, but not if
the warranty be made after the bargain concluded. If a man sell unto one
certain cloth, and warrant it to be of such a length, and it is not of that
length, he which buys the cloth, may have an action of deceit against him, but
if the warranty be made at some other time after the bargain, he may not have
such Fitz. Not. brev. 98. K.
a Writ, unless the warranty be in writing.

The Grant or bargain and sale of the profits of Land is the Grant of the Land
it self, for the profits of the Land, and the Land it self are one and the self
same thing in substance, but one may lease his Park, excepting the wood and
underwood, 1 H. 7. 9. 6 E. 6. 71. Die. 14 H. 8. 1. 33 H. 8. Br. Reservant. 39.
and his Manor, reserving the Warren, but the soil of the wood and Warren
shall go to the L^ssee. If I lease a farm, excepting the wood, or for so much
of this farm as is woodland, and may by the name of a wood be demanded in a
precipe the soil it self is excepted, but otherwise it is of pasture or arrable
ground, which has wood growing upon it. Cook l. 5. Iors Case, and l. 11.
Laifords Case.

BAR.
Bar, is a word common as well to the English as to the French, of which
comes the Noun Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 13. sect. 708.
a Bar Barra. It signifies legally destruction for ever, or taking away for
a time of the action of him that has right, it is called a Plea in Bar when
such a Bar is pleaded.

BARRETOR.
Barretor, is a common mover and exciter or The word is derived of Barret which
signifies a quarrel, a barretroubler, or barre-ste^der. Cook on Lit. l. 3. c.
13* sect. 701.
maintainer of suits, quarrels or parts either in Courts or else where in the
Country. In Courts of Record or others, as in the County, Hundred, or other
inferior Courts. In the County in three manners. 1. In disturbance of the
Peace, in taking or keeping of Possessions, or Lands in controversy, not only
by force, but also by subtilty. 2. And most commonly in suppression of truth
and right. 3. By false inventions and sowing of cal^mniations, rumors* and
reports, whereby discord and disq^iet may grow between neighbors.

A common Barretor, or Bar offender, is a common quareller, mover, or
maintainer of quarrels, either in the Court or Country. Some derive it of the
French word Barrateur which signifies Cook 8. Rep. Barrets Case. p. 37. He
causes men to be troubled at the Bar, Minsh.
a deceiver, others of the Latin word Baratro, which signifies a vile knave or
unthrift, some of two legal words Barra, which signifies the Bar in Courts,
where causes are debated, and rettum, which signifies a crime or offense. He
is seminator litium, and pacis Domini Regis perturbatur.

BASTARD.
Bastard, is he that is born of any woman not ma^^ied, so that his father is
not known by the Vitilitigator quasi vitiose litigator.
order of the Law, and therefore by the Law he is sometimes called filius
nullius, the son of no man, sometimes filius populi the son of every man. Cui
Pater est populus, Pater est sibi nullus and omnis. Either from the French
Bastard, as Cowelin instit. or from (...) Meretrix quia procreatur ex mretrice.
Cook on Lit. Cook 8 Rep. Letchfords Case. Stat. 20. H. 3. 9. Cook preface to
his 4 Rep.


Cui Pater est populus, non habet ille patrem.

The civil Law does legitimate the Child born before matrimony, as well as that
which is born after: and gives unto it succession in the Parents inheritance.
But to the Child born out of matrimony, the Law of England allows no
succession The Civilians say, Matrimonium subsequens tollit peccatum prius;
matrimonium subsequens legitimos sacit quoad sacerdotium; (because they are
legitimate by the Canon Law) non quoad successionem, propter consuetudinem
regni, quae se habet in contrarium.

The Bishops were instant with the Lords, that they would consent, That all
such as were born asore matrimony should be legitimate, as well as they that be
born within matrimony, as to the succession of imheritance; because the Church
accepts such for legitimate. Et omnes Comites and Barons una voce
responderunt, Nolumus leges Angliae mutare, quae huc usque usitatae sunt and
approbatae: And all the Earls and Barons with one voice answered, That they
would not change the Laws of the Realm, which hitherto had been used and
approved.

If a man take a wise, which is great with child Smiths Commonwealth of
England. Terms of Law.
by another, which was not her husband; and after the child is born within the
Espousals, then it shall be said the child of her husband, though it were but
one day after the Espousals solemnized, according to that, Pater est quem
nuptiae demonstrant, for whose the Cow is (as it is commonly said) his is the
Calf also.

There was an Act made ann. 21. Iacobi Regis, to prevent the destroying and
murdering of Bastard children, and it was continued. 3. Caroli c. 4. If any
women be delivered of any issue, which To the end of the first Session of next
Parliament.
by the Laws of this Realm should have been a Bastard, and shall endeavor by
drowning, or secret burying, or any other way by her self or others to conceal
the death thereof, whether it were born alive or not, the Mother so offending
shall suffer death as in case of murder, except ^he can prove by one witness at
least, that the same child was born dead.

A Bastard kills his Mother, this seems p^^^y Dalton.
treason, for the Mother is certainly known, but a Bastard shall not be bound,
though the Father were a bondslave, for the Law does not acknowledge any Father
in this case.

A Bastard having gotten a name by reputation, Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
may purchase by his reputed or known name to him and his heirs, although he
can have no heir, unless it be the issue of his body.

A man makes a Lease to B. for life, remainder to the eldest issue male of B.
and the h^i^^ males of his body, B. has issue a Bastard son, he shall Id. ib.
not take the remainder, because in the Law he is not his issue, for qui ex
damnato ^^i^^ nascuntur int^r liberos non comput^ntur. The ^ust^ces of Septimo
Jacobi c. 4. and for the second offense to be committed to the house of
Correction, till, etc.
Peace shall commit ^ewd women which have Bastards to the house of Correction,
there to be punished and set on work, during the term of one whole year, there
to remain till she can put in good Sureties for her good behavior not to
offend so again.

BATTERY.
Battery, is the wrongful beating of one; But if a man will take away my
goods, I may lay my hands upon him and disturb him, and if he will not leave, I
may beat him, rather then he shall carry them away, for that is no wrongful
beating Menacing begins the breach of peace, Daltons Just. of P.
assaulting increases it, and battery accomplisheth it.

BUGGERY.
Buggery, committed with manking or beast is There are two Statutes for it, 25
H. 8. revived, 3 Eliz. 17. Fitz. Not. brev. 269. ^. Dalton.
selon^ without benefit of Clergy, it being a sin against God, Nature, and the
Law, and in ancient times such offenders were to be burned by the Common Law.

One describes this offense to be carnalis c^upula cont^a (...), and haec vel
per confusionem sp^ci^^um, sc. a man or a woman with a bru^t beast, vel (...),
sc. a man with a man, a woman with a woman, See Levit. 18. 22, 23.

BURGAGE.
Burgage, in Latin Burgagium, is derived of Burgus Cook on L^^. l. 2. c. 10.
sect. 16.
a Town, and it is called a Burgh or Borough because it sends Burgesses to
Parliament. The termination of this word burgagium signifies the service,
whereby the Burgh is holden.

BURGLARY.
Burglary, is usually desined the night-breaking It is derived of burgh a
house, and ^aron a thief. Cook 4 Rep. as if one break down a window to book out
any thing. Cooks Case of Appeal and Indictments. 4th Rep.
of a house, with an intent to steal or kill, though none be killed, nor any
thing stolen, and so it is of a Stable, pa^cell of a house, but not of breaking
ones Close to kill him, nor ones House, if it be but to beat him, nor though it
may be to kill him, if it be in the day time. It may be Burglary if one enter
into a house and break it not, as if he come in at the chimney, or by a false
key, and if he break the house, though he enter not.

Richard Vaux brings an appeal of Burglary, against Thomas Bro^k, and declares
that the Defendant domum mansionalem praedictam Richardi Vaux felonice and
burgaliter fregi^, the Declaration was found insufficient because of this word
burgaliter, but it ought to be burgulariter, or burguraliter, and the offense
is called Burglary or burgulary, and not Burgale, burglariter est vox artis, as
sel^nice, m^r^ravit, rapuit ex ambium, wa^rantizare, and diverse others, which
cannot be expressed by any Periphra^i* or circumlocution.

If a man have a mansion house, and he and all his family upon some accident
are forth of the house part of the night, and at the same time, one come and
breaks the house to commit (...), this is Burglary, although no man be there,
for this is domus mansionalis.

So if a man have two house^, and inhabit sometimes Id. ubi supra.
in one, and sometimes in another, and ha^h sevants in both, and in the night
when his servants are forth, the house is broke by Thieves, this is burglary.

All Indictments of burglary are quod (...) Stamford.
fregit, and the night to this purpose begins at Sun setting, and continues to
the Sun rising. Dalton. 18 Eli. c. 6.


Burglar shall not have his Clergy.

BURGH ENGLISH.
Burgh English, or Borough English, is a custom Lit. Te^. l. 2. c. 1^. So
called, because this custom was first (as some hold) in England. Cook on Lit.
p. 11^. B. Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 10, sect. 165.
in some ancient Borough, that if a man have issue diverse Sons, the youngest
Son shall inherit, and have all the Lands and Tenements that were his Fathers
within the Borough: The reason of this (as Littleton says) is because the
youngest is presumed in Law to be least able to shift for himself.

If the Lands of the nature of Borough English be let to a man and his Heirs
during the life of I. S. and the Lessee dies, the youngest Son shall enjoy
it.

A man seized in see of Lands in Burgh English, after the Stature of 27. ^ 8.
makes a feofment to diverse persons in fee, to the use of himself and the He^rs
males of his body begotten, Secundum cursum communis legis, and after dies
seized L. Die. term. Pasch. in 2. Reg. Eliz.
according, ha^ing issue two Sons, the eldest enters and holds out the younger;
yet the youngest shall have it by descent, notwithstanding the words before.

Of Land in Borough English, or Gavel*kind, Cook 6 Rep. Gorges case
the Son cannot endow his wife ex assensu Patris, because by possibility, he
shall not continue Heir: the Father shall not have the Ward of his Son and H^ir
apparent of such Lands holden by Knights service, because by possibility he
shall not continue Heir.

C.
CAPITE.
CApite, is a Tenure that holds immediately of the King, as of his Crown or
Person, that is, as he is King. A man may hold of the King, and yet not in
Capite, by means of some honor, Cook on L^^. l. 2. c. 9. sect. 159.
Castle or Manor belonging to the Crown, whereof he holds his Land.

Tenure in chief is so called, per excellentiam, because as the head is the
principal part of the body, so this is the highest and most honorable service
in the Law, because it is done to the chief Head of the Realm, and takes its
original creation by the King himself.

The Tenures in chief began in ancient time, upon the grants of Kings to defend
their persons, and their Crown and Regality, against Enemies and L. Dyer ^, 44.
A.
Rebels.

The King at this day may make a Tenure of him in chief; if he reserve this to
his person, and as a Tenure in gross; but if he reserve the Tenure as of L.
Dyer p. 144. B.
his Manor, or Honor, or Castle, and not about the person of the King, then
it is not ^e^^re ^^ Capite.

CASTLE.
Castle, no subject can build a Castle or House o^ strength imbattelled, or
other fo^tress d^^e^^ible* without the l^cense of the King, for the dange^
which might ensue, if every man at his plea^u^e Cook on Lit. p. 5.
might do it.

CHALLENGE.
Challenge, is a word common as well to the English as to the French, and
sometimes signifies to claim, sometimes in respect of revenge, to challenge
into the field: sometimes in respect of partiality or insufficiency to
challenge in a Court persons Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 234.
returned on a Jury. Challenge made to the Jurors, is either made to the Array
or to the Poll* Challenge to the Array, is where exception is taken to the
whole number, as impa^nelled partially; challenge to or by the Poll, is where
exception is taken to one or more, as not indifferent.

By the Common Law, the prisoner upon an Indictment or appeal might challenge
peremptorily In savorem vitae.
thirty (...)* which was under the number of three Juries: (...) now by the
Statute of 22 H. 8. the number is reduced to twenty in petty Treason, Murder
and Felony. But by the Statute of 1 and 2 Ph(...) and M(...)ry, the Common Law
is revived; for a(...)reason, the prisoner shall have his challenge to the
number of 35. But if he be a Lord of Parliament, and a Peer of the Realm, and
is to be ^^ied by his Peers; he shall not challenge any of his Peers at all,
for they are not sworn as other Jurors be, but find the party guilty, or not
guilty; upon their Faith and Allegiance to the King, and th(...)e Judges of the
fact, and every of them (...)atly give his judgment beginning at the low^^t.
But a subject under the degree of Nobili^y, Magna Charta says per judicium
Parium suorum.
may in case of Treason or Felony challenge (...) as many he can, if he can
allege ca(...) or malice.

Principal challenges to the Poll may be reduced to four Heads.

1. Propter honoris respectum, as any Peer of the ^^alm o^ Lord of Parliament,
for these in respect of honor and nobility, are not to be sworn on Juries; and
if neither party will challenge Cook ub^ supra*
him, he may challenge himself, for by Magna Charta it is provided, quod nec
super cum ibi^^^s, nec super cum mittemus, nisi per legale judi^^um pa^ium
suorum, aut per legem terrae. A Peer of the Realm shall not be impannelled,
where any of the Commons is to have a trial. 2. Propter defectum, for want or
default, 1. Patriae, as alieus born. 2. Libertatis, as Villains or Bondmen. 3.
A^nui census, i. e. liberi tenementi; as if any of the Jury impannelled cannot
dispend 40 s. by the year of his own Freehold. 4* Hundredorum, vicini vicinorum
facta praesumuntur s^ire.
3. Propter affectum, for affection or partiality, as if the Juror be
consanguineus of blood or kindred to either party, this is a principal
challenge; for the Law presumes, that one kinsman does favor another before a
stranger. If either party labor the Iuror, and give him any thing to give his
verdict, this is a principal challenge; but if either party labor the Jury to
appear, and to do his conscience; this is no challenge at all, but lawful for
him to do it. 4. Propter delictum, for crime, it being a maxim in the Law
Repellitur a sacramento infamis.
CHAMPERTY.
Champerty, Campi par. It is a bargain with the Cook 2 part of Instit. c. 3.
Demandant or Tenant, Plaintiff or defendant, to have part of the thing in
suit, i^ he prevail therein for maintenance of ^im in that suit. Every
Champerty is maintenance, but every maintenance not Champerty, for Champerty is
but a species of maintenance, which is the genus.

CHAMPERTERS.
Champerters vel cambi participes, sunt qui per Cook on Lit. lib. 3. c. 8.
sect. 500. Lamberts Just. of P. It comes of two French words, that is, ^apsus
and mes^er, id est, miscere.
se, vel per alios placita movem, vel movere faciunt, and ea suis sumptibus
prose ^uuntur, ad cam^i partem, vel pro part lucri habenda, stat. anno 33. Ed.
1.

CHANCE-MEDLEY.
Chance-medly, or homicide per in^o^tunium, is when one is slain casually, and
by misadventure. without the will of him that does the act, of this no Appeal
does lie.

It is fitly so called, for in it men are meddled (or committed) together by
mere chance, and upon some unlooked for occasion, without any former Cowells
Interpr. Stamford Pr^erog. c. 16 But so shall not h(...) that kills one that
would r^b him in his house, or the Officer which killed one that will not be
arrested.
malice.

It is corrupted from Chaudmelle, which signieth hot or ^suddain debate, rixa
in the Civil Law, whence in Scotland Chaudmelle is opposed against ^orethought
felony, as manslaughter with us against murder, Seldens notes upon Hengham.

If a man casts a stone, or shoots an arrow and another that passes that
way is killed* this manner of killing is manslaughter, by misadventure or
chance-medly, for which he which kills shall have his pardon of course, as
appears by the Statute of 6. Ed. 1. c. 9. and he shall forfeit his goods in
such manner, as he that shall kill a man in his own defense: for the life of a
man is a thing precious, and favored in the Law, so that a man which kills
another in his own defense, or per infortuntum, without any intent, this is not
felony, and yet in such cases he shall forfeit his good* and c^a^tels, for the
great regard that the Law has to the li^e of a man. Cook 5 Rep. Cases of
execution.

But if he that commits this manslaughter, was doing an unlawful act, as
casting stones in an highway where men usually pass, or shoo^ing Arrows in a
Market-p^ace, or such like, whereby a man is killed, it is fel^ny at least.

CHANGE.
Change, If two Parsons of several Churches change their Benefices, and resign
them into the Perkins tit. eschanges. p. 58.
hands of the Ordinary to that intent, and the Patrons make Presentations
accordingly, and one of them is admitted, instituted and inducted accordingly,
and the other is admitted and instituted, but dies before Induction, the other
Parson shall not retain the Benefice in which he was inducted, for the change
is not perfected, being not executed.

CHARGE.
Charge, is where a man grants a Rent issuing Terms of Law.
out of his ground, and if the Rent be behind, it shall be lawful for him,
his Heirs and Assigns to distrain, till the Rent be paid, this is called a
Rentcharge. It is called a Rentcharge, because the land for payment thereof
is charged with a distress. Cook on Lit.

CHARTER.
Charter, or Deed, is so called from the Latin Charta, qua scribi solebant. It
is called Magna Charta, not for the length or larger e^s of it, (^or it is but
short in respect of the Charters granted ^ook on Lit. ^. 2. c. 4. sect. 108.
and epist. 8 Rep. and Proeme to his 2 part of Instit.
of private things to private persons) but it is called the great Charter, in
respect of the great weightiness, and weighty greatness of the matter contained
in it, in ^ew words, being the ^ountain of all the fundamental Laws of this
Realm, and therefore it may be said of it, that it is Magnum in parvo.

The Nobles and great Officers were to be sworn to the Observation of it.

Magna fuit qu^ndam Magnae reverentia Chartae. It is the quintessence of the
whole bulk of the politics of our Nation, the Charter of the peoples right,
the hedge of their property, the strength of their security.

It has been confirmed above thirty times, and Judge Doderidge. Cook on Lit.
ubi supra.
commanded to be put in execution, and was bought with the blood of our
Nobility, and English Ancestors in those troublesome times of King John and
Henry his son. It is in our Books called Charta libertatum, and communis
libertas Angliae or libertates Anglis, Charta de libertatibus, magna Charta.

Charters of Lands are Writings, Deeds, Evidences and Instruments, made from
one man to another, upon some estate conveyed or passed between them of Lands,
or Tenements, showing the Names, Place, and quantity of the Land, the estate,
Terms of Law.
time and manner of the doing thereof, the parties to the estate delivered and
taken, the wi^^^^^es p^^^ent at the same, with other circumstances.

Charters are called muniments a muniendo, quia Cook on 9 Rep. Anna
Bedingfields Case. Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. s. 1. Lord Buckhursts Case. 1 Rep.
1.
muniunt, ^ defendunt haereditatem.

The Purchaser of Land shall have all the Charters, Deeds and Evidences, as
incident to the Lands, and ratione terrae, that he may the better defend the
Land himself, having no warranty to recover in value, for the Evidence of i^
are as it were the smews of the Land, and the Feoffor being not bound to
warranty, has no use of them. Also he shall have all Deeds and Evidences,
which are materials for the maintenance of the Title of the Land.

CHATTELS.
Chattels, is a French word, and signifies goods, Cowells interp. verb.
Cattalls. Kitchen fo. 32. verb. Catalla.
which by a word of art we call catalla, it signifies all goods moveable, and
unmovable, except such as be of the nature of freehold, or parcel thereof.

Some hold that ready money is neither goods nor Chattels, nor Hawks and
Hounds, because they be ^erae naturae, Dr. Cowell (in his interpreter) gives
this witty reason, why Money is not to be accounted goods or chartels, because,
says he, money of it self is not a thing of worth, but by the consen^ Cook on
Lit. lib. 2. c. 11. sect. 177. Bona includes all Chattels, as well real, as
personal. Id ib.
of men, and so for their easier traffic or permutation ^t things necessary
for their life.

Goods or Chattels are either,

1. Personal, as Horse, and other Beasts, housholdstuffs, b^^ws, weapons, etc.
called personal, because for the most part they belong to the person of a man,
or because they are to be recovered by personal actions. 2. Real, because they
concern the reality, a^ terms for years o^ Lands or Tenements, wardships.
The word goods in the Common Law comprehends such things as be either with, or
with out life, as a Horse or B^^. (...).

Bona dividu^tur ^^ (...) and immobilia, mobilia Cook on Lit. ubi supra.
rursum divid^^tur ^^ ^^ qu^ s^ movent, ^^ quae ab aliis moventia, but by the
Common Law no estate of Inheritance or Freehold is comprehended under these
words, b^^a and catalla.

The Civil Law sometimes puts a difference between moventia and mobilia,
understanding by moventia Dr. Cowels interp. Kitchen.
such goods a^ actively and by their own accord do move themselves, is horses,
oxen, sheep, and cattle, and by mobilia such goods as pas^ively are moveable,
or removeable from one place to another, as apparel, pots and pans, yet
regularly and for the most part, by movables are indifferently understood
goods both actively, and pas^ively moveable. Immoveables are those goods which
otherwise be termed chattels real; for that they do not immediately belong to
the person, but to some other thing by way of dependancy, as Trees growing on
the ground, or fruit growing on the Trees, or a Lease or Rent for term of
years, but not Lands, Tenements, or frank-tenement.

CHEVAGE.
Chevage, is a sum of money paid by villains to their Lords in acknowledgment
of their bondage for their several heads, whence it is called Chevagium.
Chevage of the French word Chief, as if it were the service of the head, of
which Bracton ^aith, Chivagium dicitur recognitio in signum subjectionis and
Domini de Capite suo, Lambert writes it chivage, but it is more properly
written chief-age.

CLERGY.
Clergy, is defined to be an ancient liberty of the Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11.
sect. 209. T. of Law.
Church confirmed in diverse Parliaments. It is when a man is arraigned of
selony, and such like before a temporal Judge, and the Prisoner prays his
Clergy, that is, to have his book, then the Judge shall command the Ordinary to
try if he can read as a Clerk in such a book and place, as the Judge shall
appoint, and if the Ordinary certine the Judge that he can, then the prisoner
shall not have judgment to lose his life. The Book was Bacons use of the Law.
p. 22.
allowed to the Clergy, for the scarcity of them to be disposed of in religious
houses; it was allowable in ancient times for all offenses whatsoever they
were, except treason and robbing of Churches of their goods and ornaments. But
by many Statutes made since, the Clergy is taken away, for murder, burglary,
robbery, purse-cutting Horse or mare-stea^ers shall not have their Clergy,
because horses are for public service and commerce. 2. The thief by them is
armed to do mischief. Stamford pl. of Cr. l. 2. c. 43. Id. C. ^4. Stamford ib.
c. 45.
horsestealing

If the indictment be only murdravit, without adding ex malitia praecogitata,
the offender shall have his Clergy. If he will read as a Clerk, he ought to
read all the verse, but although he do not read at the beginning, but first
spell, and after read, yet he shall have allowance as a Clerk. in savorem vitae.

Fortescue says, that if a selon ^ail to read, for which he is judged to be
hanged, yet in savorem ^i^ae, if he demand a Book afterward under the Gallows,
and read, he shall have the benefit of his Clergy. And yet it is to be
supposed, he had no Ordinary at that time to demand whether he could read, but
this Case ought to be specially taken, viz. where the selon is judged before
the Justices of the Kings Bench, for if he be judged before the Justices o^ the
Goal delivery it is otherwise, because the^r Com(...)on ^^^^ with the^r Session.

Clergy was allowed to an accessory to the Dyer term. Pasch. ann. Mariae p. 99
L. Dyer term. Michael. Annis 3. and 4 Reg. Eliz.
stealing of Horses and (...), because the Sta^ute shall be taken most (...),
which speak^ expressly but of the princi^^ll.

Although he has been i^stru^^ed and taught in the Goal to know his Letters,
and to read, this shall serve him for hi(...), but the Jailer shall be punished
for this.

Clergy is grantable but once, to one person, except Frust^ a Legi* au^ilium
implo^at, qui commi^tit in legem.
he be within holy orders, for such a man may have it often. 4. H. 7. c. 13.
and 1 Ed. ^. 12 Lord Stamford.

COLLEGIUM.
Collegium est societas plurium corporum inter se distantium, and dicitur
Collegium proprie cum simul habitant, quoniam.

1. Simul colleguntur, and Collegium constituitur in Ecclesia, vel per
privilegium concessum a superiori ^^st ^undatam Ecclesiam. 2. Vel sc. a
principio ^uit ordinatum quod Ecclesia esse^ collegiata. 3. Vel sc. longo
tempore vi^cerint collegialiter, and simul quasi possessione ^^ll^gii.
Item Ecclesia potest ^ieri Collegiata cum consensu Episccpi (...) Patroni 10
Eliz. 13. Dyer.

Color of Office, is always taken in the worst part, and signifies an evil
done by pretense and countenance Ployd. Com. Dive against Manyngh. f 64. A 68.
A.
of an Office. But virtute officii or ratione officii, by reason of the office,
and by virtue of the office, are taken always in the best part, and imply that
the office is the just cause of the thing; and the thing is pursuing the office.

If an Officer will take more for his fees then he ought, this is done ^^lo^e
^^^^^i sui; but yet it is not part of his Office: and i^ i^ called extortion,
which is worse then robbery; because that is apparent, and has the vi^ o^ o^
vice: but this appears under the v^^age of virtue* and so is more hard to be
avoided, and therefore the more detellable.

CONDITION.
Condition, is a rest ^int o^ bridle, annexed to a thing, so that by the not*
performance thereof the Terms of Law.
party to the condition shall receive pre^udice and loss, and by doing of the
same, commodity and advantage.

If a man give Lands to another, and to the Heirs Cook ^n lat. l. 3. c. 5.
sect. 352.
males of his body, on condition that if he die without He^r female of his
body; that then the Donor shall re-enter; this condition is utterly void, for
he cannot have an Heir female, so long as he has an Heir male.

If a man morgage his land to W. upon condition, that if the morgagor and f. S.
pay 2^. ^. at such a day to the morgagee, that then he shall re-enter; the
morgagor dies before the day, I. S. pays Cook on Littlet^n l. 3. c. 5. sect.
352.
the money to the morgagee; this is a good performance of the condition, and
yet the Letter of the condition is not performed: but if the morgagor had been
alive at that day, and he would not pay the money, but refused to pay the same;
and I. S. alone had tendered the money, the morgagee might have refused it.

If Feofment in see be made upon such a condition, that the feoffee shall not
alien his Land to any, this condition is void, because when a man is so
in^^offed of Lands or Tenements, he has power Lit. l. 3. c. 5.
to alien them to any person by the Law. For if such a condition should be
good, then it should deprive him of all the power which the Law gives him,
which is against reason: and therefore this condition is void. But if the
condition be such, that the ^eo ^ee shall not alien to such a one, naming his
name, or any of his heirs, or the issue of such a one, or the like, such
conditions are good: yet the King may give land in see upon condition not to
alien. Cook l. 5. Knights Case. and 21. H. 7. 7.

CONFIRMATION.
Confirmation, comet^ of the verb confirmare quod est firmum facere; and
therefore it is said, that confirmatio omnes supplet defectus, licet id qu^d
actum est, ab initio non valuit. It is a conveyance Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 9.
sect. 515.
of an estate or right in esse, whereby a voidable estate is made sure and
unavoidable, or whereby a particular estate is increased.

It is a strengthening of an estate formerly had, and yet voidable, though not
presently void.

Qu^libet confirmatio aut est perficiens, ^rese^ns, aut diminuens. Fit. N. bre.
s. 169.


1. Per^i^iens, as if feoffee upon condition make feo^^ment over, and the
feoffer confirm the estate of the second feoffee; so if disseisee confirm the
estate of the disseisor or his feoffee. 2. Crescens, does enlarge the state of
a Tenant, as Tenant a^ will to hold for years, or Tenant Cook l. 9. of Rep.
Beaumonts Case. 142.
for years, to hold for life. 3. Diminuens, as where the Lord of whom the land
is holden, confirms the estate of his Tenant to hold by a less rent.
CONFISCATE.
Confis^ate, this word ^ometh from the Latin Confiscare i. e. confer in
fiscum. Fiscus proprie principis est, aera^ium rei publicae. T^it^s ille Pli^ii
l^^us ad ^^^^anum and fortasse eadem severitate ^^^^um qua aerarium ^^^i^es.
Cook 5. Rep. Foxleys Case. S^am. Pl. ^^ ^r. l. 3. c. ^4.
word fiscus, which (as (...) says) originally signified an hamper; but
metonymically the Emperors treasure, because it was anciently kept in hampers;
and such good^ as were forfeited to the Emperors Treasure, or any offense,
were b^na (...), and so do we ca^l those goods that are forfeited to the Kings
Exchequer.

^an Appeal of ^^bbery be brought, and the P^aintifi leaves out some of his
goods, he shall not be received to enlarge his Appeal; and because there is
none to have his good so left out, the King shall have them as confi^cate,
according to the old rule. Quod non capit Christus, capit ^iscus.

CONSPIRACY.
Conspiracy, The purpose or intent of a man without the act is not punishable
by the Law; and although that for conspiracy a man may be punished in the
Star Chamber; yet this is by the absolute power of the Court, and not by the
Ordinary course of the Law.

CONSTABLE.
Constable, comes of two old Saxon word, Kinning, which signifies King, and
Stable, stability; as the stability of the King and Kingdom.

The Common Law requires that every Constable I. Doderig.
be Idoneus homo, i. ^. apt and fit for exercise of the said Office; and he is
said in Law to be Idoneus, which has three things, Honesty, Science, and
ability:

1. Honesty, to execute his Office truly without malice, affection, or
partiality. 2. Science to know what he ought to do duly. 3. Ability as well in
substance or estate, as in body Cook 8 Rep. Grieslies. Case.
to execute his Office, when need is, diligenly, and not through impotency o^
indi^ence to neglect it; for if poor men which live by the labor of their
hands, be ele(...) to Dalt. Just. of P.
this Office; they will rather per^^it Felons and other Malefactors to escape,
and neglect the execu^ion of their Office in other points, then intermit their
labor, by which their w^^e and children live.
The Office and authority of high and petty Constables remains,
nowithstanding the death of the King, for their authority is by the common Law
and not by commission; so also of Mayor^, ^^^liffs in Towns corporate, etc.

CONTRACT.
Contract, (called by the Civilians acceptilati) is an agreement between
parties concerning goods or land^ for money or other recompense: It is called a
contract because by covenanting diversae v^luntates in unum contrahuntur. It is
a bargain Contractus est quasi actus contra actum. Cook.
or covenant between two parties, where one thing is given for another, which
is called Quid pr^ Q^, as if you sell my horse for twenty Shillings, you may
keep the horse till the other have paid the money. The want of recompense
causes it to be but nudum pactum, unde non oritur ^^^^^. For if a man make
promise to me, that I shall have twenty shillings, and after I ask it, and he
will not deliver it; yet you shall never have any action to recover it, because
this promise was no contract, but a bare promise; but if any thing were given
for the twenty shillings, though it were but to the value of a penny, then it
had been a good contract.

If he to whom the promise is made, have a charge by reason of the promise,
which he has also performed, then in that case he shall have an Action for the
thing that was promised, though he that made the promise have no worldly profit
by it. As if a man say to another, Heal such a poor man of his d^sease, or make
an Highway, and I shall give thee thus much; and D. and Student* cap. 4.
if he do it, I think an Action lies at the Common Law.

This word ( pro) makes a contract conditional; as if I Covenant to make an
estate pro maritagio habendo; if the marriage take not effect, I shall be
discharged of this Covenant. So if an Annuity be granted, pro consilio
impendendo, stop the Counsel giving, and stop the Annuity; L. Dyer termin.
Michael Anno 6 E. 6. P. 76
also if a man grant a way over his Land, and pro chimino illo habendo, he
grants to him a rentcharge: if one be stopped, the other is stopped; so it
is in contracts; As for a Hawk to be delivered me at such a day, you shall have
my horse at Christmas; if the Hawk be not delivered at the day, you shall not
have an Action for the horse.

The Infants contract for his meat, apparel, and necessaries is good, if he be
of the age of fourteen years.

COPYHOLD The Tenants thereof do hold per copiam rotulorum Domini.

Copyhold, is a Tenure, for which the Tenant has nothing to show, but the
Copies of the Rolls, made by the Steward of his Lords Court. This Tenure is
called a base Tenure, because it holds at the will of the Lord; it was wont
to be called Tenure in villenage.

The doing of fealty by a Copyholder, proves Cook on Lit. p. 63.
that a Copyholder so long as he observes the custom of the Manor, and pays
his services, has a fixed estate.

Although in the judgment of the Law, he has but estate for will; yet custom
has so established and fixed his estate, that by the custom of the Manor, it
is descendible to him and his Heirs; and therefore his estate is not merely ad
voluntatem It is an estate of inheritance, secundum quid. Cook 4 Rep. Copyhold
case.
Domini, but ad voluntatem Domini secundum consuetudinem manerii; and by
keeping the custom he shall inherit the Land, as well as he that has
Frank-tenement at Common Law, for consuetudo est altera Lex.

The style of a Copyholder imports three things.

1. N^men, his Name. 2. Originem, his Beginning. 3. Titulum, his Assurance.
1. His Name is, Tenant by Copy of Court Roll. 2. His Beginning is, ad
voluntatem Domini, for at the beginning he was but Tenant at the will of the
Lord. 3 His Title or Assurance, secundum consuetudinem manerii; for the custom
of the Manor Cook 9 Rep. Combs case.
has fixed his Estate, and assured the Land to him as long as he does his
service and duties, and performs the custom of the Manor.
If a Copyholder be a popish Recusant, his Copyhold is forfeit, for his life
to the Lord of the 35 Eliz. c. 1.
Manor, if the Lord be not Re^usant, and if the Lord be, then to the King.

CORONER.
Coroner, is an ancient Officer of trust, and of His Name is derived a Corona,
because he is an Officer of the Crown, and has ^^nusance of some Pleas, which
are called Placita Coronae. Cooks 2 part of Instit. c. 17. See more there. He
is s^ called, because he deals principally with Pleas of the Crown, o^ matters
concerning the Crown. Cooks 4 part of Instit. c. 59. T. of Law.
great authority, ordained to be a principal confer vator or keeper of the
peace, to bear record of the Pleas of the Crown. Although by the Law, the
Coroner cannot enquire of any felony; but the death of a man; yet it has been
said, that in N^^than^^erland they enquire of all felonies; but this authority
they maintain by prescription. If a man be killed or drowned in the arms or
creeks of the Sea, where a man may see Land from the one part to the other, the
Coroner shall enquire thereof, and not the Admiral, because the Country
thereof may well have knowledge.

The empannelling of the inquest, and the view of the body, and the giving of
the Verdict, is Smiths Commonwealth of England* c. 24
commonly in the street in an open place, and in corona populi, but this name
rather comes, because the death of every subject by violence is accounted to
touch the Crown of the Prince, and to be a detriment unto it. The Prince
accounting that his strength, power, and Crown does consist in the force of his
people, and the maintenance of them in security and peace.

If a Coroner be minus idoneus ad officium illud exequendum, this is a good
cause to remove him, for he ought to be the Coroner qui melius scia^ and possit
officium illud intendere.

He must have two Properties, viz. sufficient Knowledge* Ability and diligence
in execution of his Office.

Sir Edward Cook in his second part of his Instit. c. 10. says he should have
five Q^a^^ics.

^1. He should be Probus homo. 2. Legalis homo. 3. Of sufficient understanding
and knowledge. 4. Of good ability and power to execute his Office according to
his knowledge. 5. Diligent in the execution of his Office, See more there.
Coroners remain conservators of the Peace* within the County where they are
Coroners, notwithstanding the Kings death, for they are made by the Kings writ,
and not by Commission, as Justices are, whose authority is determined by the
death of the King, for by the Commission he Daltons Just. of P.
makes them Iusticiarios suos, so that he being once dead, they are no more
his Justices.

The Statute gives the Coroner thirteen Shillings and four pence for taking
inquisition super visum corporis.

CORPORATION.
Corporation, is a permanent thing that may have succession. It is an assembly
and joining together T. of Law.
of many into one fellowship, Brotherhood and mind, whereof one is head and
chief the rest are the body.

No Corporations can be made but by the King, yet his Highness may depute this
authority to another, Fulb. Law of Nature. 8. c.
for so it comes originally from the King.

COVENANT.
Covenant, is an agreement made by Deed in writing, and sealed between two
persons.

An Insant (by the Common Law) is not of age to bind it self by Covenant, ante
annos nubiles, which is twelve years in a woman, and fourteen Daltons Just. of
P.
years in a man-child.

COVINE.
Covine, comes of the French word convine, and Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 12. sect.
678. Plowd. fol. 54. b.
is a secret assent determined in the hearts of two or more, to the defrauding
and prejudice of another.

As if Tenant for life will secretly conspire with another, that the other
shall recover in prejudice of him in reversion, for by this his reversion is
taken away. For this conspiracy may very well be said to be covine, since all
the parts are therein contained, for it is an unity in the hearts of two, and
it is secretly done in respect of a third who is thereby damni^ied, for if it
be secret quoad him who is concerned, it is secret within the description.

COUNT.
Count, comes of the French word conte which in Latin is narratio, and is
vulgarly called a declaration. The original Writ is according to his Name
Breve, brief and short, but the Count which Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 10.
the Plaintiff or Demandant makes, is more narrative and spacious, and certain
both in matter and circumstance of time and place, that the Defendant may be
compelled to make a more direct answer, so as the Writ may be compared to
Logic, and the Count to Rhetoric.

COUNTY.
County, signifies as much as Shire, both containing Cook on Li^* l. 2. c. 10.
sect. 124.
a compass or portion of the Realm, into the which all the land is divided for
the better government thereof, so as there is no Land, but it is within some
County: there be in England 41 Counties, and in Wales 12.

COURT.
Court, is diversely taken, sometimes for the house ^ comes of he Latin uria
which ^so is etched from cura (as Valla writes) whereby it is notified that
heed and care ought to be taken in the deciding of controversies.
where the King remains with his ordinary retinue, and also the place where
Justice is judicially ministered. In times past the Courts and Benches followed
the King, and his Court wheresoever he went, which thing especially shortly
after the conquest being found very cumbersome, painful, and chargeable to the
people, it was agreed by Parliament, that there should be a standing place
where judgment should be given, and it has long time been used in
Westminster Hall, which King William Rufus builded for the Hall of his own
house. In that Hall are ordinarily seen three Tribunals, or Judges ^ea^s. At
the entry on the right hand the Common Pleas. Where Civil matters are to be
pleaded, specially such as touch Lands or contracts. At the upper end of the
Hall on the right hand, the Kings Bench, where Pleas of the Crown have their
place, and where Kings Wherein are holden all common Pleas between Subject and
Subject of all matters of common Law so called, for that it serves for the
exact and precise administration of the common Law, Smiths commonwealth of
England.
in former times have often personally sat. And on the left hand sits the
Chancellor accompanied with the Master of the Rolls, who in Latin may be
called Custos Archiv^rum Regis, and certain men learned in the Civil Law,
called Masters of the Chancery, in Latin they may be called Asses^^^es.

There is also another Court of special note Smiths Commonwealth of England,
camera stellata, or of the Latin word stellio, a starry Beast, whence c^senage
is called by the Civilians crim^n stellionatus, because that sin is punished
in this Court, Lamb. Iur. of Cour.
called the Star Chamber, either because it is full of windows, or because at
the first all the roof thereof was decked and garnished with gilded stars.

The Judges of this Court are the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, all the
Kings Majesty's counsel, the Barons of this Land; and many other Courts there
are, of which some may fine and not imprison, as the Court Leet, some cannot
fine or imprison, but amerce, as the Court-county, Hundred, Baron, for no Court
may fine or imprison which is not a Court of Record: some may imprison and not
fine, as the Constables at the petty Cook 11 Rep. Godferys case.
Sessions for any affray made in disturbance of the Court may imprison but not
fine: some Courts can neither imprison, fine, nor a merce, as ecclesiastical
Courts held before the Ordinary, Archdeacon or other Commissaries, all which
proceed according to canon or civil Law; and some may imprison, fine, and
amerce, as the case shall require, as the Courts of Record at Westminster, and
else where.

Courts of Record are the Kings Courts, as he is King, those have that credit,
that no ameroement can be taken against any thing there entered or done.

CURSITER.
Cursiter, they are called cursitors, because they Judge Doderidge.
make brevia de cursu, Writs of course so called, because they have a settled
form prescribed in an ancient Book, therefore called the Register of Writs.

COURTESY OF ENGLAND.
Courtesy of England, is where a man takes a It is called courtesy of
England, because it is not used in any other Realm, some say he shall not be
Tenant by the courtesy, unless the Child which he has by his Wife be heard
cry, for by the cry it is proved that the child was born alive, Lit. Nam dicunt
E vel A quotquot nascuntur ab Eva.
Wife seized in Fee simple or Fee tail general, or seized as Heir of the Tail
special, and has issue by the Wife, Male or Female, b^ the issue dead or in
life, if the Wife die, the Husband shall hold the Land during his life by the
Law of England. If it be born alive it is sufficient, though it be not heard
cry, for peradventure it may be born dumb, and this is resolved clearly in
Pains Case 8 Rep. with whom agree Fitzherbert and Perkins 9. 47. for the
pleading is that during the marriage he had issue by his Wife, and upon the
evidence it must be proved that the issue was alive, for mortuus exitus non est
exitus, Cook on Lit. l. 1. cap. 4.

CURTILAGIUM.
Curtilagium, is a soil or Garden spot belonging to a Message, quasi curta
pecia terrae. Fairfax. 21 Ed. 4. fol. 52.

If the Wife be delivered of a monster, which Cook ib. and Pains case.
has not the shape of mankind, this is no issue in the Law, but although the
issue has some deformity in any part of his body, yet if he has humane shape,
this suffices.

If the issue be born deaf or dumb or both, or be born an idiot, yet it is a
lawful issue to make the Husband Tenant by the courtesy, and to inherit the
Wifes Lands of such Inheritances whereof actual seisin cannot be gained until
a certain time (as of Rent in fee, in right of the Wi^e, until the day Perkins
fol. 90. b. and 91. a.
of payment, nor of advowson in gross until the incumbent die) of such
Inheritances the Husband shall be Tenant by the courtesy, although he be not
actually thereof seized during the Coverture.

CONSUETUDO.
This word Consuetudo, has in Law diverse significations. Cooks 2 part of the
Institutes c. 30.


1. It is taken for the Common Law, as cons^etudo Angliae. 2. For Statute Law,
as contra consuetudinem communi concilio regni edit. 3. For particular customs,
as Gavel kind, Borough, English, and the like. 4. For Rents, Services, due to
the Lord, as consuetudines and servitia. 5. For Customs, Tributes, or
Impositions, as de novis consuetudinibus levatis in regno, sive in terra sive
in aqua. 6. Subsidies, or Customs granted by common consent, that is, by
authority of Parliament, pro bono publico, these be, Antiquae and rectae
consuetadines.
CUSTOM.
Custom, is one of the main Triangles of the Laws Cook on Lit. lib. 2. ^. 10.
sect. 165.
of England, these Laws being divided into.

1. Common Law. 2. Statute Law. 3. Custom.
Custom is a reasonable act iterated, multiplied Sir John Davis his Reports.
Cook ubi supra.
and continued by the people time out of mind. Of every custom there be two
essential parts, time and usage, time out of mind, and continual and peaceable
usage without interruption.

Some say there are three essential qualities of a good Custom.

1. Certainty. 2. Reasonablen^ss. 3. Use or continuance.
Others say, a good Custom ought to have four inseparable Properties.

1. A reasonable commencement (for every The commencement of a custom must be
upon a reasonable ground and cause. Consuetudo contra rationem introducta
po^ius usurpatio quam consue^udo appellari ^^^er. Sir John Davis Rep. Case ^f
^anistry. Davis ubi supra.
Custom has a commencement, although that the memory of man extend not to
this, as the River Nilus has a fountain, although the Geographers cannot find
it) whence these maxims in Law* Obtemperandum est consu^tudini rationabili
tanquam legi. In consu^tudini^us n^^ diuturnit^ temporis, sed soliditas
rati^nis est consideranda. For if the custom be unreasonable in the original,
no use or continuance can make this good. Quod ab initio non valuit, tractu
temporis non convalescit. A thing that is void ab initio, (...) prescription of
time can make this good. Every custom is not unreasonable which is against the
particular rule or maxim* of the posi^ive Law, as the custom of Gavel-^ind and
Borough English are against the maxim and descent of inheritance, and the
custom of ^^^^, the ^ather to the bough, the s^n to the plow, i^ against the
maxim of eschea^es, for consuetudo ex certa causa rationabili ^sitata private
communem legem. Besides a custom may be prejuciall to the interest of a
particular person, and yet reasonable; where it is for the benefit of the
commonwealth in general: Salus populi suprema (...) est^, as custom to make
bulwarks upon the land of another for defense of the Kingdom, 36 H^n. 8. Dyer
60. B, and to raze houses in publico incendi^, 29 H. 8. Dyer 36. B. A custom
which is prejudicial and injurious to the Commonwealth, and begins only by
oppression and extortion of Lords, has no lawful commencement, but is void:
So by See him.
Littleton fol. 46. Custom that the Lord shall have fine of his Frank-tenant
for marriage of his Daughter is held void; and custom that the Lord of Malus
usus abolendus est.
the Manor shall detain distress taken upon his demeans until a fine be made
to him for damage at his will, is also void, 3 Eliz. Dyer 199. B.

2. Custom ought to be certain, and not ambiguous, for incerta pro malis
hahentur, an uncertain thing may not be continued time out of mind without
Davis ib.
interruption.

3. Custom ought to have continuance without interruption, time out of mind,
for if it be dis^on Consuetudo is nothing else but communis assuetudo.
inued within memory, the custom is gone: consuetudo ^emel reprobata non p^^^si
amplius indu^^; for as continuance makes custom, so discontinuance destroys
it. Nihil ^am conveniens natural^ aequita^i, quam unum quodque dissol^^ ^o
ligamine qu^ ligatum est.

4. It ought to be submitted to the Pr^rogative of the King, and not exalt it
self against it; for prescription of time makes a custom, but nullum tempus
o^^urrit Regi. If a man has Toll or Wreck, or Stray by prescription, this
extends not to the goods of the King: So prescription to have sanctuary for
treason; or to have ca^a^la selonum, is void against the King; because that
such a privilege exaltat se in praerogativam Regis, 1 Hen. 7. 236.

Custom is either,

1. General, which is current through England. The particular and approved
custom of every Nation is the most usual binding and assured Law. Cook pref. to
5 Rep. Dr. and Student. c. 6.
That which is used per totam Angliam, is Common Law, and quod habetur
consutend^ per totam Angliam, is not a good manner, to allege a Custom, Cook 9
Rep. Combs Case.

If any general Custom were directly against the Law of God, or if any Statute
were made directly against it, as if it were ordained, that no Alms should be
given for no necessity, the custom and statute were void.

2. Particular, is that which belongs to this or that County, as Borough
English in many places, Gavel-kind to Kent, for all the Heirs Males to inherit
alike; Countries have their Customs according to the constitution of the
place: as in Kent North Wales; because those Counties have been most subject to
foreign invasions, that every man there may be of power for resistance; the
inheritances for the most part descend in Gavel-kind, viz. to every brother
alike. There are particular Customs also to this or that Lordship, City, or
Town. The Custom of the County of Buckingham is, and has been time our of
mind, that every Swan which has her cou^^e in any water that rans to the
Thames within the said County; if the Swan come upon the Land of any man, and
make her nest, and has Cignets upon the same, he that has the property of the
Swan, shall have two of the Cignets, and he whose land it is, shall have the
Cook 7 Rep. case of Swans.
third Cignet which shall be of least value: this was held a good custom,
because the owner of the land suffered them to breed there, whereas he might
have chased them out.

In London, 1. If the Debtor be a Fugitive, the Cook 8 Rep. case of the City of
London.
Creditor before the day of payment may arrest him to find better surety.

2. They may there enter a man's house with the Constable or Beadle upon
suspicion of Bawdery.

3. They may remove an Action before the Major, depending the Plea before the
Sheriffs.

These Customs in London though against the rule of Common Law, are allowed eo
potius, because they have not only the force of a Custom, but also are
supported and fortified by authority of Parliament. Consuetudo loci est
observanda. Camb. Brit. in Glocestershire.


In some places within the County of Gloucester, the goods and lands of
condemned persons fall into the Kings hands for a year only and a day, and
after that term expired (contrary to the Custom of all England besides) return
to the next heirs.

Baldwin le Pettour, held certain Lands in Hemingston in Suffolk by Serjeanty,
for which on Christmass-day every year before the King of England Cambden in
Suffolk.
he should perform one Saltus (that is, he should dance) one suffletus (puff up
his checks, making there with a sound) and one bumbulus (let a crack downward.)

In some Country an Infant when he is of the age of fifteen years may make a
feoffement, and D. and Student c. 10
the feoffement is good; and in some Country when he can mete an Eell of Cloth.

In some places the Widow shall have the whole or half, dum s^la and castra
vixerit. Sir George Farmour claimed by Custom in his Manor of Torcester in
Northamptonshire, to have a Common Bake-house, and that none others should
bake to sell there; and it was adjudged a good Custom Cook 8 Report. Case of
the City of London. See more there concerning particular Customs.

Custom differs from prescription, because

1. Custom is common to many, and prescription particular to this or that man.
2. Prescription may be for a shorter time then Custom, sc. for five years, or
one year or Terms of Law.
less: As if a fine be duly levied of Lands or Tenements, and be not gainsaid
within five years, this is a bar to all claim for ever.
Custom is nothing else but (...) Suidas.
as indeed Law is no other thing then (...).

D.
DAMAGE.
Damage, in the Common Law, has a special signification, for the recompense
that is given by the Jury, to the Plaintiff or Defendant, for the wrong done
unto him. Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 431. Damnum dicitur a demende, cum
diminutione ves deterior fit, Cook lib. 1 ^. Rep. So costs of suit are damages
to the Plaintiff, for by them his substance is diminished.

DAMAGE FEASANT.
Damage Feasant, is when a strangers Beasts are in another man's ground,
without lawful authority or license of the Tenant of the ground, and there do
feed, tread and otherwise spoil the Corn, Grass, Woods, or such like. In which
case, the Tenant, whom they hurt, may therefore take, distrain, and impound
them, as well in the night as in the day; but for rent and services none may
distrain in the night season.

He that has the hurt may take the Beasts as a distress, and put them in a
Pound overt, so it be within the same shire, and there let them remain D. and
Student.
till the owner will make him amends for the hurt: but by the Stature of Queen
Mary, the Beasts must not be driven above three miles out of the hundred.

DEAN.
Dean, is derived of the Greek word (...), that signifies ten, because he was
anciently over ten Prebands or Canons at the least in a Cathedral Cook on Lit
Church, and is head of his Chapter.

DEBT.
Debt, debts due by Obligation, shall be paid by Cook 9 Rep. Pin^hons case.
Executors before debts by simple contract, and debts by simple contract before
Legacies.

If a man take a woman which is i debted to other persons, the Husband and Wife
shall be sued for this debt, the Wife living. But if she die, the Husband shall
not be charged for this debt after her death; unless the Creditour of the
Husband and Wife recover the debt during the Coverture, then, although the Wife
die, yet the Husband shall Fitzh. Na. Br^tu. Det.
be charged for to pay this debt, after the death of the Wife by this recovery.

If a man lease land for term of life to a woman rendering rent, and she takes
a Husband, and after the rent is behind, and the woman die, the Husband Id. Ib.
shall be charged by a Writ of Debt for this rent behind, because that he takes
the profit of Qui sentir commodum sentire debet and onus.
the land by reason of his Wife.

By Law of the Realm Debt only arises upon some contract or penalty imposed,
upon some Statute, and not by other offenses, as in the Civil Law, debitum ex
delicto.

If a Tailor make a garment for me, if we be not Cook lib. 8. Rep. p. 147.
agreed before what I shall pay for the making, he cannot have an Action of
debt, otherwise it is for Victuals and Wine. But the Tailor may detain the
garment until he be paid, as an Innekeeper may his guests horse for meat, or
he may have an action upon the Case, upon an assum fit to pay him so much as he
deserves.

DECIES TANTUM.
Decies tantum, is a Writ, and lies where a Juror in any enquest, takes money
of the one part or other to give his verdict, then he shall pay ten times as
much as he has received.

DECEIT.
Deceit. the Common Law gives a double remedy against such as endammage others
by deceit, viz. either a Writ of deceit or an Action upon the Case.

DEED.
Deed, This word in the understanding of the Factum un fait it is called of the
Civilians literarum obligatio. Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 5. sect. 40.
Common Law is an Instrument written in Parchmen or Paper, whereunto ten things
are necessarily incident.

1. Writing. 2. In Parchment or Paper. 3. A person able to contract. 4. By a
sufficient name. 5. A person able to be contracted with. 6. By a sufficient
name. 7. A thing to be contracted for. 8. Apt words required by Law. 9.
Sealing. 10. Delivery.
In another place on Lit. ( viz. l. 3. c. 1. sect. 259.) Sir Edward Cook says,
a Deed is an Instrument consisting of three things, viz. Writing, Sealing, and
Delivery, comprehending a bargain or contract between Party and Party, man or
woman. Also in Goddards Case 2 Rep. he says Traditio loqui facit Chartam.
there are three things of the essence and substance of a Deed, viz. Writing in
Paper or Parchment, Sealing, and Delivery, and if it have these three, In Deeds
the Delivery is to be proved.
although it want, in cujus rei testimonium sigillum suum apposuit, yet the
Deed is sufficient; for the delivery is as necessary to the essence of a Deed,
as putting of the Seal to it, and yet it is not necessary to express it in the
Deed, that it was delivered. The date of the deed is not of the substance of
it, for if it want date, or if it be a false or impossible date, as the 30 day
of February, yet the Deed is good, for it takes er^^^i by the delivery, and not
the day o^ the date. The Order of making a Deed is,

1. To write it. Cook 2 Rep. Goddards Case.
Then to seal to it.

And after to deliver it: And therefore it is not necessary, that the sealing
o^ delivery be mentioned Cook 5 Rep. Wyndams Case.
within the writing, because they are to be done after.

Every Deed shall be taken most strongly against the Grant^r, and most
beneficially for the Grantee, Which division grows from the form or fashion
of them. West. part 1. Symb.
and is most strong against the Lessor, and most beneficial for the Lessee.

Of Deeds some be,

1. Indented, so called, because they are cut to the fashion of the teeth in
the top or side, which are either,

Bipartite, when there be two parts and Parties to the Deed.

Tripartite, when there are three parts and Parties.

Quadripartite.

Quinquepartite.

2. Polls which are plain without any indenting Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 5. sect.
3 ^0.
so called, because they are cut even or polled, every deed that is pleaded,
shall be intended to be a deed poll unless it be alleged to be indenced.

If a deed begins, Haec Indentura, and the parchment or paper is not
indented, this is no Indenture, because words cannot make it indented. Cook ubi
supra. And Cook 5 Rep. Styles case.
And although there are no words of Indenture in the Deed, yet if it be
indented, it is an Indenture in Law, for it may be an Indenture without words,
but not by words without indenting.

DEFEISANCE.
Defeisance, is fetched from the French word desaire, that is, de^eat or undo,
infectum redd^^ Cook on Lit.
quod factum est.

DEFAULT.
Default, is a French word, and defalta is legally Cook on Lit. l. 3. cap. 7.
sect. 438.
taken for nonappearance in Court. There ^^ diverse causes allowed by Law for
saving men default, as

1. By Imprisonment. 2. Inundation of Waters. 3. A Tempest. 4. Minority, but
sickness is no cause of saving a default, because it may be so artificially
counterfeited, that it cannot be known. C^^atus ad locum non tutum, non
arctatur compare^ is a rule in the Civil Law, as if the Plague to there.
SE DEFENDENDO
Se defendendo, is not matter of justification, because the Law intends it has
a commencement upon an unlawful Case. For quarrels are not presumed to grow
without some wrongs either in words or deeds; therefore the Law puts him
Bacons Collections of the Law.
to sue out his pardon of course, and punishes him by forfeiture of goods.

If a man kill another in his own defense, he shall not lose his life nor his
Lands, but he must Id. use of the Law.
lose his goods, except the party slain did first ussault him, to kill, rob, or
trouble him by the Highway side, or in his own house, and then he shall lose
nothing*

DEFORCE.
Deforce, deforciare is a word of Art, and cannot be expressed by any other
word, for it signifies to withhold Lands or Tenements from the right owner, a
de^oriom dissereth from a disseisor.

1. A man may dis^cise another without force, which Act is called simple
Diss^isin. 2. A man may desorce another that never was in possession.
DEMAUNDANT.
Demaundant, is he which is Actor in a real Action, because he demands
Lands. And Plaintiff, que^ens in Actions personal and mixed quia queritur de
injuria, I'enant, I'erens, in real Actions, and defendant desenden^ in Actions
personal and mixed.

DEMAINES.
Demaines, according to the common speech, are the Lords chief Mannor-place,
which he and his Ancestors have from time out of mind kept in their own hands,
and have occupied the same together with all buildings and houses whatsoever.
Dominicum de maire of the hand i. e. manured by the hand, or received by the
hand, Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 10.

DEMURRER.
Demurrer, comes of the French word demeurer Lat. demorari to abide, and
therefore he which demurreth in Law, abides in Law, moratur or demoratur in
lege. Minshew. Cook on Lit. lib. 2. cap. 3 sect. 96.

DENIZEN.
Denizen, quasi deins nee born within the Kings Cook on Lit. cap. 11. sect. 198.
ligeance, and thereupon in Latin called Iudigena, or from donaison donatio,
because his freedom is given unto him by the King.

DENIZATION.
Denization is threefold.

1. Absolute, as the common denizations be to them, and their heirs without any
limitation or restraint. 2. Limited, as when the King does grant Letters Cook
Calvin's Case.
of his denization to an alien, and to the heirs males of his body, or to an
alien for term of his life, for ^ujus ^st ^are, ejus est disponere, and this
denization of an alien may be effected three manner of ways, by Parliament,
Letters Patents, and conquest, as if a King and his Subjects should conquer
another Kingdom as well ante nati as p^st nati, as well they which sought in
the field, as they which remained at home, are all Denizens of the Kingdom
conquered.
DEODAND.
Deodand, is when any man by misfortune is Quasi Deo dandum, i. e. in
eleemosynas erogandum.
slain by a Horse or by a Cart* or by another thing that moves to further the
death, then the thing that is cause of his death, and which at the time of his
misfortune did move, shall be forfeit to the King, and that is called Deodand,
and pertains to the Kings Almoner, for to dispose in Alms Where a man kills
another with the sword of ^. at style, the sword shall be forfeit as a Deodand
D. and Student. c. 51.
and Deeds of Charity.

If a man kills another with my Sword, it shall be forfeit as a Deodand, for
it shall be adjudged my ^ault, that I did not keep my weapon from him, Dr. and
Student. Omnia quae moven^ ad mortem, sunt Deo danda. Cook l. 5. Foxleys Case.

This Law concerning Deodands, is grounded upon the Law of God, Exo. 2. 28.

DERAIGNE.
Deraigne, comes of the French word derayer, Cook on ^i^. l. 2. c. 11. sect.
2^2. Dicitur a detinendo because detinet is the principal word in the W^^t.
or deraigner, i. e. to displace, or to turn out of his order, and hereof
comes deraignment, a displacing, or turning out of his order. So when a monk
is deraigned, he is degraded and turned out of his order of Religion, and
become a Lay man.

DETINUE.
Detinue, is a W^it that lies against him who having goods and cha^tels
delivered to him to keep, refuses to deliver them again.

Upon general acceptance of goods to keep or to Cook on Lit. Cook 4 Rep.
S^uth^^tes Case.
keep safely, if the goods be stolen or otherwise perish, the ^a^li. For he
that accepts them shall answer for them. ^therwise it is, if he take them upon
special accep^an^e, to keep them as his own goods.

DEVISE.
Devise, comes from the French word diviser, Minishew.
id est disperti^i, because those Lands or Goods which appertain to the
Divisee, are distributed into many parts, wherefore it is better written divise
then devise, or else it may be derived from the Cook on Lat. l. 2. c. 10.
French word devise^, i. e. sermo^ina^i, consabulari, so as deviser person
testament, is to speak by his testament what his mind is to have done after his
decease. Lit. Ten. l. 3. c. 10. p. 123. Sect. 55^.
If lands be devised to a man to have to him in perpetuum or to him and his
a^ligns for ever; in these two cases the devisee shall have a Fee-simple:
Perkins holds he has only an Estate for the term of his life, for these words
(for ever) says he, can extend to none other then the devisee, because no more
persons be named in the devise, and the life of man in this respect is said to
be for ever with him. But Sir Edward Cook determines i^, that Cook on Lit. l.
1. c. 1. sect. 1.
a Fee-simple does pass by the intent of the Devisor, but if the devise be to a
man, and his Assigns without saying (for ever) the Devisee has but an estate
for life.

If a man devise I and to one ^ sanguini s^^, that is a Fee-simple, but if it
be semin^ su^, it is an estate ^ail.

If a man devise an house furnished, the household Fulbecks prepar. Id. ib.
stuff passes, but not the wine that is within the house, because by common
intendment a house is not furnished by Wine.

By the Common Law, if a man devise the third part of his g^^ds to his Wife, it
shall be Fulbecks parallel.
so rated as they were at the time or the dea^^ of the Testator, though a man
may not gran^ ^r give Lands to his Wife during the cove^^^re, because they are
but one person in Law; yet he may devise his Lands to his Wife, to have in
Fee-simple, Lit. l. 2. c. 10.
or otherwise, because such device takes no effect till the death of the
Devisor, and then they are not one person.

The intent of the Devisor shall be observed for he shall be accounted in^ps
consilii, because Ployden p. 413.
that wills are most often made when men l(...) extremity and want counsel. If
a man make diverse wills and Testaments, yet the last Device and Will made by
him shall stand, and the other are void.

If a man of sound memory make two Testaments, Exceptio.
viz. one Testament in the sixth year of our Lord the King which now is, and
the other Testament in the eighth year of the same King, and after the Testator
languishing in his bed, and being dumb, one man in the presence of his other
Perkins ^^^. of testam. p. 92. ^*
neighbors delivers him both the Testaments, and ^e takes them in his hand,
and the other says unto him, Re-deliver unto us that Testament which now you
will shall stand, and be your last Will* and he delivers the Testament with the
former date, and retains the other with him, now the Testament which is
delivered shall stand, notwithstanding it has the former date, and was written
before the other.

If one devise to an Infant in his Mothers belly it is a good device, otherwise
it is by feossement, Terms of Law.
g^ant or gift, for in these Cases there ought to be one of ability to take
presently, or other wise it is void*

If a man devise Land in certainty, as the manor of Dase or white A^re, and
he has no interest nor p^ssession in them at the time of the making the Will,
and after the Devisor does purchase it, in such Case it shall pass to the
Devisee, for then it shall be taken that his intent was to purchase it, as it
is said, ^^ H. ^. 1^.

The Device of Tenant for term of life or Tenant in dower o^ corn growing at
the time of their death is good.

If a man be seized of a house, and possessed of Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 3. sect.
287.
diverse heirlooms, that by Custom have gone with the house from Heir to Heir,
and by his Will devises away the heirlooms, this device is void, for the Will
takes effect after his death, and by his death the heirlooms by ancient custom
are vested in the Heir, and the Law prefers the custom before the Device.

So if the Lord ought to have a Herriot when his Tenant dies, and the Tenant
devises away all his good, yet the Lord shall have his Herriot for the reason
aforesaid.

DEVIT.
Devit, in Latin Ius, in English Right, it is found in the Law six manner of
ways, viz.

1. Ius recuperandi. 2. Ius Intrandi. 3. Ius habendi. 4. Ius retinendi. 5. Ius
recipiendi. 6. Ius possidendi.
All these several sort^ of Rights following the relations of their objects
are the effects of Civil Law.

DISCRETION.
Discretion, is a knowledge or understanding to discern between fal^hood and
truth, right and wrong, shadows and substance, equity and colorable Cooks 5
Rep Rooks case.
pretenses, and not to do according to their wills and private affections, for
as one ^aith, Valu discretio discretionem confundit.

DISCONTINUANCE.
Discontinuance, is a word compounded of de Cook on Lit. l. 3. cap. 11. sect.
592.
and continuo, for continuare is to continue without intermission. Now by
addition of de ( Eup^^^i^ gratie dis to it) which is privative, it signifies
an intermission.

DISPARAGEMENT.
Disparagement, is a shame, disgrace, or villainy done by the Guardian in
Chivalry, to his ward in Chivalry, being within age by reason of his marriage.
Of such disparagements there be four Terms of Law.
kinds.

The first, Propter vitium animi, as an idiot non composmentis, a Lunatic:

The second, Propter vitium sanguinis, as

1. A Vill^^. 2. Burg^nsis, a man of trade, as an Haberdasher, or Draper, this
agrees with the Civil Law, Patricii cum Plebe matrim^nia ne contrahant. 3. The
Son or Daughter of a person attainted of Cook on Lit l. 2. c. 4. sect. 188.
treason, or felony, albeit pardoned, for the blood is corrupted. 4. An alien
or child of an alien.
The third, Propter vitium corporis, as

1. De membris, having but one hand, one eye. 2. Desormity, as to look a
squint, a c^ipple, halt, lame, dec^epit, crooked. 3. Privation, as blind, deaf,
dumb. 4. A horrible disease, as leprosy, pal^^e, dropsy. 5. Great and
continual infirmities, as a consumption. 6. Impotency to have a child in
respect of age, tender years, or for natural disability. 7. De^owred.
The fourth kind of disparagement was propter ^a^^^ram privilegii, a^ ^o marry
the heir to a widow, whereby he should by reason of the bigamy have lost the
benefit of his Clergy whereby he might save his life, but now this is taken
away by the Sta^u^e, it must be competens maritagium abs^ue disparagatione.

DISSEISIN.
Disseisin, is a wrongful putting out of him that Cook on Lit. lib. 3. c. 8.
sect. 475. Cooks case of execuors. 5 Rep.
is actually seized of a Freehold. All lawful acts which a disseisor or abator
does is good, and therefore i^a disseisor or abator in low a ^^^^^ which has
title of Dower, this is good and shall bind the disseisee.

DISTRESS.
Distress, is a French word, in Latin it is caled districtio, sive angustia,
because the cattle distreined Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 6. sect. 136.
are put into a straight which we call a Pound. It is a maxim in the Law, that
no distress can be taken for any services that are not put into certainty, as a
man may hold of his Lord to shear all the Sheep depasturing within the Lords
Manor, and this is certain enough, albeit the Lord has sometime^ a greater
number, and sometimes a lesser number there, and yet this incertainty being
referred to the Manor which is retained, the Lord may distrein for this
uncertainty.

One may distrein any where intra ^^^^um, so that it be not in the Highway nor
Churchyard. Of what things a didress may be taken.


A distress must be,

1. Of a thing, whereof a valuable property is in some body, and therefore
Dogs, Bucks, Conie^, and the like that are ferae naturae cannot be distreined.
2. Although it be of valuable property as a Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 7. (...). 5^.
horse, (yet when a man or woman is riding on him) or an Ax in a man's hand
cutting of wood and the like, they are for that time privileged, and cannot be
distreined. 3. Valuable things shall not be distreined for Rent, for benefit
and maintenance of Trades* which by consequent are for the Commonwealth and
are thereby Authority of Law, as a horse in a Smiths Shop shall not be
distreined for the rent ^^^ing out of the shop, nor the horse in the Hos^ry nor
the materials in a Weavers Shop for making of cloth, nor cloth or Garments in a
Tailors Shop, nor sacks of Corn or Meal in a Mill, nor in a market, nor any
thing distreined for damage feasant, for it is in the custody of the Law. 4.
Nothing shall be distreined for rent that cannot be rendered again in as good
plight, as it was at the time of the distress taken, as Sheaves or Shocks of
Corn cannot be distreined for rent, but for damage feasant they may. But Carts
with Corn may be distreined for rent, for they may be safely restored. 5.
Beasts belonging to the Plow averia carucae shall not be distreined, for no man
shall be distreined by the Instruments of his Trade or profession, as the Ax of
a Carpenter, or the Books of a Scholar, but goods or animalia ^^iosa may be
(...). If the distress be of utensils of household or such like dead goods,
which may take harm by wet or weather, or be stolen away, th^^e he must (...)
them in a house or other Pound covert (...) in the same (...)* ^* Furnaces,
Cauldrons or the like fi^^ed to the Freehold, or the doors or windows of a
house, or the like, cannot be distreined. ^. Beasts that escape may be
distreined for rent, though they have not been l^vant and cou^^^^nt, he that
d^streins any thing that has life must impound them in a lawful pound within
three miles in the same County.
The Common Law is, men cannot distrein for Cook 7 Rep. cases upon the Statute
and ^ Rep. ^^^^allyes Case, and ^n l^^. l. 2. c. 1^.
rent or service in the night, as is adjudged in the 12 of ^. ^. ^^^. distress,
but for damage seasant he may distrein in the night for necessity of the Case,
for otherwise peradventure he shall not distrein (...), for before the day they
may be taken or s^ay out of his Land.

A grand distress is that which is made of all the goods and Chattels which the
Party has within the County.

DIVORCE.
Divorce, is so called either a diversa ^ ^^ mentium of the diversity of minds
of those that are married, Ridly of the Civil Law. Cook on Lit.
because such as are divorced, go one a diverse way from the other, or from the
verb divert which signifies to return back because after the Divorce between
the Husband and the Wife, he returns her again to her Father or other
Friends, or to the place from whence he had her.

There are di^ers causes for which the Husband and the Wife may be divorced.

1. Causa praecontractus, therefore if a man marry wish a woman precon^^a^te^
and has issue b^ her, Buries case 5 Rep.
this issue in Law, and in truth bears the surname of his Father: but i^ after
the Husband and the Wife be divorced for the pre-contra^t, there the issue has
lost his surname, and it become a Bastard and nullius fi^u^s. 2. Causa
frigiditatis, therefore if a man be married to a woman, and after the^ are
divorced causa frigiditatis, and then the m^n ta^^^^ another Wife, and has
issue by her, ye^ his (...) lawful, because that a man may be habi^^^ and
(...) diversis temporibus. S^mp^^ p^esu^nt^r p^^^le* (...)tione ^ili^rum and
^iliatio n^^^ ^^st (...). 3. Causa impubert^^^s, or m(...)s statis, and ^^ this
ca^e if two be married (...), and after the full age divorce is had between
them th^s dissolves the marriage.
Divorce is twofold.

1. A vinculo matrim^nti, causa praecontract^^, causa metus, causa imp^t^mi^
seu frig^ditatis, Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 5. sect. 38^. and ^ Rep. Kennes case.
causa a^finitatis seu consanguin^tatis: all which are causes of divorce
preceding the marriage. 2. A mensa and th^r^, as causa adulterii, which
dissolves not the ma^riage a vincul^ matrimonii, nor bars the Wise of dower,
for it is subsequent to the* marriage.
DOMINICUM.
Dominicum, is a word sorensale of many significations, amongst the French is
called Domaniam, amongst the Italians demanium, and here with us demaine, which
some erroneously call demean or demesne, as if it came of the French word
demesne, i. e. sui ipsius proprium, and not of the Latin word Dominicum.

Dominicum, says Bracton, accipitur multiplicit^^. Est autem dominicum quod
quis habet ad Brac. l. 4. tract. 3. c. 9. n. 5.
^inensam: and proprie sunt Boardlands Anglice i. e. dominicum ad men^am, and
are such lands which are properly cultivated for the maintenance of the Family,
as the demaines of a Manor, etc. and it is of the like signification amongst
the French, as appears by ^^^ppinus lib. 1. ^it. 1. ^. ^. ^^^^manio regis.
Prim^^ (inquit) S^eptris ad^ictum ^uerit in necessarios Regiae mensa aulaeque
^^mptus.

Dominicum is sometime^ taken pro terris in vill^^^^ium con^essis as Bracton
ibidem, item dicitur vill^^^^^ium, quod ^ra^itur ^^llanis, quod quis temp^stive
and intempesti^e resumere possit pro voluntate sua and (...).

Dominicum is sometime^ taken pro libero tenemento, and this accptation, as
says Bracton, is threefold, viz.

1. Cum quis habet liberum tenementum, and alius usum fructum. 2. Cum quis
habet liberum tenementum, and alius custodiam. 3. Cum quis habet liberum
tenementum, and alius curam.
Dominicum generally (as says Bracton) is when a man has Lands in see to him
and his heirs or to him and his successors.

In Dominico sei^i^us is when a man has Lands or tenements for life at the
least, Ita quod Assisum novae deseismae habere possit si ejectus fuerit.

Dominicum Bannum is a proclamation or edict by the King.

DOOMES-DAY. I ambert in his perambulation of Kent.

Doomes-day, Book is so called, because (as Matthew Paris says) it spared no
man, but judged all men indifferently, as the Lord in th^^ ^^^^ d^ will do*

Liber ^u (...), quem librum librum (...)lem, Camb. Brit.
Anglis ^^^ti^m, Angliae (...)* c^^^^ales, act^ publica and Angliae ^ust^um
(...)nare Liber Dome* Dei vary app^llatur, viz. Censuali^ Angliae, Ro^ulus
Win^oni^, (...): Angli^ notitia and Liber Judiciarius, (...) in Anglici enim
^^^^^ Archi^is augustissimum and (...)a i^^d^^ Crinelia monumentum prostat
(...) R^^ni anti^ua p^litia antiquarum legum and v(...) ^^nsu^tudinum verae
Origines and solidissima fundamen^^ (...) sunt continentur iste ingens duobus
Tomis sive (...) thesaurus, and in ips^s s^accarii magni Angliae fisci^^a^ibus
s^^^ma cum vigilantia and cautela reponitur Dominus Simonds ^eus in Epist^la
manuscripti istius praefixa.
placet.

DOWER.
Dowe^, in the Common Law, is taken for the Cook on Lit. li. 1. cap. 5. sect.
3^.
portion of Lands or Tenements, which the W^^ has for term of her life of the
Lands or Tenemen^^ of her Husbands after his decease, for the sustenan^^ of her
self, and the nurture and education of her Children.

Dower is of five sorts or kinds, vix.

1. Dower per legem communem. 2. Dower per consuetudinem. 3. Dower, ex assensu
patris. 4. Dower ad ostium Ecclesiae. 5. Dower de la plus bail.
To the consummation of Dower three things a^^ necessary, viz. marriage seisin,
and the death (...) her Husband. Id. ib. and Binghams Case 2 R^^ U^i nullum
matrimonium, nulla dos. D^s is derived ex donatione, and es^ quasi donarium,
because the Law it self gives it to her.


Of a Castle that is maintained for the necessary de^e^^e of the Realm, a woman
shall not be endowed, because it ought not to be divided, and the public shall
be pre^^^^ed before the private* ^^^^ o^ a Castle that is only maintained for
the pri^^^e use and habitation o^ the owner, a woman shall be endowed.

A woman may be endowed of the third part of (...) of a Dove house, of the
third part of a pi^^a^y* viz. te^^^^ piscem, ^el jactum retis ^ertium. The
^^^est endowment of Tithes, is of the thi^d Shea^, for what Land shall be sown
is uncertain.

If the Wife be past the age of nine years at the death of her Husband, she
shall be endowed of what age soever her Husband be, albeit he were but four
years old, for consensus, non concubitus facit matrimonium, and a Woman cannot
consent before twelve, nor a man before fourteen, yet this inchoate, and
imperfect marriage (from the which either of the Parties at the age of consent
may disagree) after the death of the Husband shall give dower to the Wife, and
therefore it is accounted in Law after the death of the Husband, legitimum
matrimonium a lawful marriage, quoad d^tem. If a man takes a Wife of the age
of seven years, and after alien his Land, and after alienation the Wife
attaineth to the age of nine years, and after the Husband dies, the Wife shall
be endowed, for albeit she was not absolutely dowable at the time of the
marriage, yet she was conditionally dowable, vir. she a^tained to the age of 9
years, before the death of the Husband^ for by his death, the possibility of
dower is consummate. So it is if the Husband alien his Land, and then the Wife
is attainted of Felony, now is she disabled, but if she be pardoned before the
death of the Husband, she shall be endowed.

By the Custom of Gavel-kind, the Wife shall be endowed of the moity, so long
as Id. sect. 53.
she keep her self sole and without Child, which she cannot wave, and take her
thi^ds for her life. For, in that case consuetudo tollit communent legem.

And as Custom may enlarge, so may Custom abridge dower, and restram it to a
fourth part.

Albeit the Wife be an 100 years, and the Husband at his death was but 4 or 7
years old, so as she had no possibil^ty to have issue by him, v^t Id sect. 35.
seeing the Law says, that if the Wife be above the age of 9 years at the
death of her Husband, she shall be endowed, and that women in ancient times
have had Children at that age, whereunto no woman does now attain, the Law
cannot judge that impossible, which by nature was possible. And in my time, a
woman about threescore years old has had ^ Child, and ideo non definit us in
jure, and the Husband at such tender years, has habitum, though not potentiam;
therefore his Wife shall be endowed.

Dower is favored in respect of the Widowhood and desolateness of the woman
whose Husband is deceased.

It is commonly said, Three things are savoured Cook on Lit. Fulbecks p^epar.
in Law, Life, Liberty, Dower. With the Civilians, Dower may be in goods, and
not in Lands yet herein England it must be in Lands and not in goods.

If a woman go away from her Husband with an Adulterer, and will not be
reconciled, she loses her Dower by the Statute of Westminster 2. C. 34.

Sponte virum mulier fugiens, and adultera sacta.
Dote sua careat, nisi sponso sponte retracta.
DRUNKENNESS.
Drunkenness, For being drunk a man shall forfeit An. 4. Iac. 5. c. made
perpetual by 21. Iac. 7. 6.
5 s. or sit six hours in the Stocks, for tippling 3 s. 4d. or sit four hours in
the Stocks, the Constable for not executing it forfeits ten Shillings, proof of
one witness is sufficient. Any one Justice of Peace has power to convince an
Offender of drunkenness.

DURESSE.
Duresse, is where one is kept in Prison or restrained Ex duritia of straight
imprisonment or hard entreaty. Doderidge.
from his liberty contrary to the order of the Law. It is also an exception in
pleading to avoid the Deed, which a man was enforced to seal to ransom himself
from an unlawful captivity. Vide new B. of Put Verbo duresse.

E.
ECCLESIA.
ECclesia, this word in the Common Law, is Fitz. Not. Brev. 32. c.
most commonly used for a place wherein Baptism, and the Scpulture of men's
bodies is celebrated, and Fitzherbert says, by this word Ecclesia is meant
only a parsonage, and therefore if a presentment be made to a Chapel, as* to a
Church, by the name of the word Ecclesia, this does change and metamorphize the
nature of it, and makes it presently a Church.

Ecclesiastical persons are,

1. Regular, so called, because they live under certain rules, and have vowed
three things, true Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 6. sect. 133.
obedience, perpetual chastity, and wilful poverty, when a man is professed
in any of the orders of Religion, he is said to be a man of Religion, or
religious, of this sort are Abbots, Priors and the like. 2. Secular, which
because they live not under certain rules of some of the said orders, nor are
voluntaries, they are for distinction sake called secular, as Bishops, Deans
and Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebends, Parsons, Vicars, etc.
ELECTION.
Election, is when a man is left to his own free will, to take or to do one
thing or another, which Terms of ^^^.
he pleases.

Election may be of

1. Things, as i a man should pay a sum of Money, or else a Hor^e o^ a Hawk.
2. Of persons, as if he should pay it to I. S. Fulbeeks prepar.
or I. N. 3. Of places, as if he should pay it at Lond^n or at Lincoln. 4. Of
the time, as the first day of April, or the second day of May.
In case an Election be given of two several things, always he which is the
^^^^^ agent, and which ought to do the first act, shall have the Election. As
if a man grants a Rent of (...)* or a robe to one and to his heirs, the
G^antor shall have the election, for he is the first agent by payment of the
one or delivery of the other. So if a man makes a Lease rend^ing a ^^^t or a
Robe, the Leslee shall have the election causa qua supra. Cook on Lit. l. 2. c.
12. sect. 319.
Bu^ if I give unto you one of my Ho^^es in my Stable, there you shall have the
election, for you shall be the first agent by taking or seizure of one o^ them.
And if one grant to another twenty loads of Hazill, or twenty loads of Maple to
be taken in his wood of D. there the Grantee shall have election, for he ought
to do the first act, sc. to sell and take the same.

When the thing granted is of things annual, and are to have continuance,
there the election remains to the Grantor as well after the day as before,
otherwise it is when the things are to be performed vnied vice. And therefore
If I grant to another for life an annuity or robe at the feall of Easter, and
both are behind, the Grantee ought to bring his Writ of annuity in the
disjunctive, for if he bring his Writ of annuity for the one only and recover,
this judgment shall determine his election for ever, but if I contract with you
to pay unto you 20s. or a robe at the seast of Easter, after the feast you may
bring an Action of Debt, for the one or the other.

If a Wife be endowed ex assensu patris, and the Husband dies, the Wife has
election either to have her dower at the Common Law, or ex assensu patris, if
she bring a Writ of Dower at the Common Law and count, albeit she recover not,
yet shall she never after claim her dower ex assensu, etc.

A. covenanteth to pay B a pound of Pepper Dyer fol. 18. 104.
or Saffron before Whitsuntide, which of them he will pay, but if he pays it
not before the same feast, then afterward it is at the election of B to have
his action for which he pleases, either of the Pepper, or of the Saffron.

So if a man gives to another his Horse or Cow, the Donee may take the one or
the other 21 H. 7. 19.
at his election, but if it was that he will give it in the future tense, there
the Donee cannot take the one nor the other, for then the Election is in the
Donor.

If a Justice of Peace directs his Warrant to a Constable, to bring the party
apprehended before him or another Justice, it is in the Election Cook l. 5.
Rep. fol. 59
of the Constable to go to what Justice he pleases.

ELEGIT.
Elegit, est nomen Brevis, sic dictum ab hoc verb^ Cowel Instit.
(Elegit) in eodem comprehenso.

EMPARLANCE.
Emparlance, comes of the French word ( parler) Cowels Interpreter.
and signifies a desire or petition in Court, of a day to pause what is best
to do.

ENDICTMENT.
Endictment, signifies in Law an accusation Some derive it from the word (...)
to accuse.
sound by an enquest, of twelve or more upon their oath, and the accusation is
called endictamentum, and as the appeal is ever at the suit of the party, so
the endictment is always at the suit of the King, and his Declaration.

To make a good endictment it is necessary to put If it be uncertain, it is not
good. Stamford pl. of Cr. l. 2. c. 30.
in the day, year, and place, when and where the felony is done.

It ought to be certain also in the matter, as appears. P. 8. E. 4 f. 3. where
a Bailiff was endicted, because he took one for suspicion of felony, and after
eum feloni^e, and voluntary ad largum ire permisit, and did not show in
certain for what suspicion of felony, so when one is endicted that he made an
hundred shillings of Alchymy ad instar pecuniae Domini Regis, and alleged not
what money it was, groats or pennies: but in case a man be slain, and he is so
mangled in the visage that one cannot know him, but the party which killed him
is well known, there is no reason he should Stam. ubi supra.
escape punishment, therefore although no appeal lie against him in this case,
yet and Endictment lies, and he shall be endicted, quod interfecit quondam igno
tum, the same Law is if one be endicted that he stole the goods eujusdam
ignoti, or bona cujusdam personae, the reason is, because the Endictment is not
his which was the owner of the goods, but is the suit of the King, which is to
have the goods, is none claim them.

An Endictment ought to express in certain, as well in what part the mortal
wound is, as the profundity and latitude of it, and therefore it was moved that
such an Endictment, quod unam plagam mortalem dedit circiter pectus, was
insufficient, Brooks abr. 4 Rep. cases of Appeals and Indict.
because altogether uncertain, for it might be in the neck or belly, but it was
good Law, says Sir Edward Cook, in Youngs Case, l. 4. circiter pectus is
uncertain and insufficient amongst the Cases of appeals and Indictments.

Endictments of treason and of all other things Cook 7 Rep. Calv. Case.
are most curiously and certainly penned.

That Endictment is not good which ought to have an argument or implication to
make it good, therefore that i^ no^ a good Endictment, if it be qu^d furatus
est unum e^uum, and says not felonice, and yet it is employed in this word,
furatus est, so if for Rape the Endictment be quod eam carnaliter cognovit,
without saying rapuit, this is not good; if one be endicted super visum
corporis, before the Major of London, without adding this word Coroner, this is
not good, and yet he which is Major of London is always Coroner; and therefore
Stamford pl. of Cr.
it is employed. If one be endicted quod feloni^e abduxit unum equum: this is
not good without saying coepit and abduxit, for it may be, that it was
delivered to him, and so he leads him, in which Case it is not felony.

In the Endictment it shall be supposed, that a man such a day and place with
force and arms, Vi and armis must ^e in all Endictmen^^ ^^ treason, murder,
selony* (...) else it is not good. D. and Student. c. 5. 4.
that is, with st^ves, swords and knives feloniously stole the Horse, against
the Kings peace, and that form must be kept in every Endictment, though the
felon had neither sword nor other weapon ^i^h him yet this is no untruth in the
jury, ^or the form of an Endictment is, in ^^iratur ^^^ D^mino Rege, si a tali
die and anno apud talem l^cum vi and armis, viz. gladiis, etc. tal^m e^uum
^alis hominis ^aepit. The twelve men are only charged with the effect of the
Bill, that is, whether he be guilty of the selony or nor, and not with the
form, and when they say billa vera, they say true, as they take the effect of
the Bill to be, for though there be false Latin in the Bill, and the Jury says
billa vera, yet their verdict is true.

An Endictment of murder found in this sort that Eliz. fuit in pace quousque A.
vir. 5. Praesat. Eliz. de Pin. com. S. yeoman did kill her, is good; for the
addition yeoman must of necessity re^er to the Husband, because a woman cannot
be a yeoman, but an Endictment quousque Alicia S. de Pin. in com. S. uxor J. S.
Spinster is not good against Alice S. for there Spinster, being an indifferent
addition, Ad proximum antecedens fiat relatio.
both for man and woman, must refer to I. S. which is the next antecedent, and
so the woman has no addition. So is an endictment against I. S. serviens I. P.
de D. in com. Mid. Butcher. This is not good, for servant is no addition, and
Butcher re^erreth to the Master, which is the next antecedent.

If a man take a Coat Armor which hangs over a dead man's Tomb in a Church, the
Endictment must be bona executorum of the dead man, but if a Lambert.
Eirenarch. 494, 495.
Gravestone be taken away, the Endictment must be bona Ecclesiae.

ENFRANCHISEMENT.
Enfranchisement, is when a man is incorporated into any society or body
politic.

It is a more general word then manumission, for it is more properly applied
to a Villain, and therefore every manumission is an enfranchisement, Cook on
Lit. p. 137.
but every enfranchisement is not a manumission.

ENTRUDER.
Entruder, An abator is he that enters into Land void by the death of a Tenant
in Fee, and an entruder is he that enters into Lands void by the death of a
Tenant for term of life or years.

EQUITY.
Equity, is the correction of a Law generally made in that part wherein it
fails; when an act of Parliament is made, that whosoever does such a thing,
shall be a felond, and shall suffer death, yet Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt
jura adaptantur.
if a mad man or an infant of young years that has no discretion do the same,
they shall be no felons, nor suffer death therefore.

There is a general prohibition in the Laws of England, that it shall not be
lawful for any man to enter into the Freehold of another without authority of
the owner, or the Law, but yet it is excepted from the said prohibition by the
Law of reason, that if a man drive beasts by the highway, and the beasts happen
to escape into the corn of his neighbor, and he to bring out his beasts that
they should do no hurt, goes into the ground and fetches out the beasts,
there he shall justify the entry into the ground by Law. Also notwithstanding
the Statute of Edw. 3. made the 14 year of his reign, whereby it is ordained
that no man upon pain of imprisonment should give any alms to any valiant
beggar, that is well able to labor. Yet if a man meet with a valiant beggar in
so cold weather, and so light apparel, that if he D. and Student. c. 16. If he
be committed for felony. Plowden term. Hill. in quarto. Ed. 6. Renig. against
Fogassa.
have no clothes he is likely to die, and he gives him apparel to save his
ife, he shall be excused.

Breaking of prison is felony in the prisoner himself by the Statute de
frangentibus prisonam, yet if the prison be burnt, and they which are therein
shall break prison for the salvation of their lives, this shall be excused by
the Law of reason, so to save my life I may kill another which assaults me.

There was a Law amongst the Romans, that every one that scaled the walls in
the night should be condemned to death, and one in the night scaled the walls
in times of war to descry the enemies to the Romans, and he by the judgment
of the Senate was not only discharged of death, but had a great reward for it,
and yet he had broken the words of the Law, but not the intent, as the Sage
Fathers of the Senate judged.

ESCAPE.
Escape, is where one that is arrested comes to his liberty before that he is
delivered by award of any Justices, or by order of Law. If the arrest of him
that escaped were for felony, then that shall be felony in him that did
voluntarily suffer the escape, and if for treason, then it shall be treason in
him, and if for trespass, then trespass. If murder be made in the day, and the
murderer be Stamford* pl. of Cr.
not taken, then it is an escape, for the which the town where the murder was
done shall be amerced.

If a man be robbed in the day, and the thief Id. pl. of Cr. l. 1. c. 33.
escape, and be not taken within half a year after the robbery, the Town or
hundred shall answer it to the party robbed, if he have made hue and cry. L.
Dyer. Term. Hill. an. 4. Reg. Eliz.


The Township shall be amerced for an escape, if it was tempore diurno,
although the murder was committed in the Town-field, or in a Lane, but it
seems reasonable, that complaint be made to the Justices.

Although the prisoner which escapes be out of the view, yet if fresh suit be
made, and he be reprised in recenti insecutione, he shall be in execution, Cook
Rigewayes Case. 3 Rep.
for otherwise at the turning of a corner, or by an entry of an house, or by
any other such means the prisoner may be out of view.

If a Sheriff or Baiiiff of a Franchise assent, that one which is in execution,
and under their custody shall go out of Gaol for a while, and then return,
although that he return in the time, yet this is an escape, for the Sheriff or
Baiiiff Cook Boytons Case. 3 Rep.
ought to guard him in salva and ar^ta custodia, and the Statute of Westminster
c. 11. says quod carceri mancipentur in ferris. So that the Sheriff may keep
them which are in execution in iron and fetters, till they have satisfied their
Creditors.

Where the Sheriff dies, and one in execution breaks the Gaol, and goes at
large, this is no escape, for when a Sheriff dies, all the Prisoners are in
the custody of the Law, until a new Sheriff be made.

If a woman be Warden of the Fleet, and a prisoner in the Fleet marries her,
this shall be judged Plowd. Commen. Plato's Case.
an escape in the woman, and the Law judges the prisoner to be at large.

ESCHEAT.
Escheat, Escheats happen two manner of ways Aut per defectum sanguinis, as if
the Tenant dies Cook on Lit. p. 31 and 492.
without issue, aut per delictum tenentis, that is for felony, escheta is
derived of the French word eschier accidere, for an escheat is a casual profit
quod accidit Domino ex eventu and ex insperato Escheats by Civilians are called
caduca.
which happens to the Lord by chance, and unlooked for, in which Case we say
the Fee is escheated.

Those which are hanged by martial Law, in furore belli, forfeit no Lands, for
etcheat for felony is three manner of ways.

1. Aut quia suspensus per collum. 2. Aut quia abiuravit regnum. 3. Aut quia ut
legatus est.
The Father is seized of Lands in Fee holden of I. S. the Son is attainted of
high Treason the Father dies, the Land shall escheat to I. S. pr^pter defectum
sanguinis, because the Father dies Cook on Lit. l. 1. sect. 4.
without heir, and the King cannot have the Land, because the Son never had
any thing to forfeit, but the King shall have the escheat of all the Lands
whereof the person attainted of high Treason was seized, of whomsoever they
were holden.

ESCHEATOR.
Escheator, comes from this word Escheat, he Id. l. 2. c. 5. sect. 130.
is so called because his Office is to enquire of all casual profits, and to
seize them into the Kings hands, that they may be answered to the King.

ESTATE
Estate, is the title or interest that a man has in Status dicitur a stando
because it is fixed and permanent. Cook on Lit.
Lands or Tenements.

In the Law any Estate for life being an Estate for Freehold is a higher and
greater Estate then a lease for years, though it be for a thousand or more,
which never are without suspicion of fr^^d, Cook on Lit. p. 46.

ESSOIN.
Essoin, Essonium, and sometimes exonium, and sometimes without x or s is a
word forensall and comes of an obsolete French word essonier, or exonier, to
excuse and free from care, from the word soingnire. It is an excuse made for
the Tenant or defendant who would not appear, and be admitted in real actions,
or to Suitors in Court baron for five causes.

1. De malo viae sive veniendi, where the Tenant See Cooks 2 part of Instit. c.
12.
would not come in respect of some impossibility, or durst not in regard of
some eminent danger, and this is called es^onium commune. 2. De malo lecti,
where some disease hinders, which according to its nature gives longer or
shorter day, Glan cap. 19. 3. Tenus mare, which is cast on the behalf of the
Tenant when he is beyond the Seas, and this is for forty days at least,
Glanvillus cap. 25. 4. Servitium Regis, when the Tenant is in the Kings
service, and then the plea rests without day until he retur, Glanvillus cap.
27. 5. De terra sancta, where the Tenant or Defendant was in pilgrimage to the
holy Land, or as voluntier against the Saracens, and then a year and a day at
the least was allowed by the Essoin.
Essoin is sometimes taken for any excuse of Assize in Clarendon tempore. H. 2.
Forenden. p. 549. Nulli liceat hospitari aliquem extraneum ultra unam noctem in
domo sua, nisi hospitatus ille essonium rationabile habuerit.

ESTOPPEL.
Estoppell is when one is concluded and forbidden in Law to speak against his
own act or deed, yea Cook 2 Rep. Goddards Case.
though it be to say the truth, and therefore Jurors cannot be estopped,
because they are sworn to say the truth.

Estoppels are three ways effected,

1. By matter of Record. 2. By ba^e writing. 3. By Fact, in paiis.
ESTOUERS.
Estouers, are nourishment or maintenance, it a Gallico estouer, id est fovere
ma^eriam exhibere.

See Cooks 2 part of Instit. c. 7. Vide vossium de vitiis Sermonis. l. 2. c. 7.

Bracton l. 3. c. 18.

Animalia vagrantia Bracton or vacantia as others call them, quia Domino vacare
debent.


is also used for certain allowances of wood to be taken out of another man's
wood, whence the English call household goods or furniture, and the matter of
which other things are made stuff Spelman Glossar.

It is the allowance to a selon in prison out of his own goods, in vitae
sustentationem.

ESTRAY.
Estray, is where any beast or cattle is in any Lordship, and none knows the
owner thereof, then it be shall sei^ed to the use of the King, or of the Lord
that has such estray by the Kings grant, or by prescription. And if the owner
come and make claim thereto within a year and a day, then he shall have it
again, or else after the year, the property thereof shall be to the Lord, so
that the Lord make proclamation thereof according to the Law.

Goods waived, the Civilians call d^relicta, and Bracton says quod olim
fuerint Inventoris de Iure naturali, and jam efficiuntur Principis de Iure
gentium. But now Kings have granted this Prerogative unto their Subjects within
their liberties, so that waives and estrayes are the Lords of the Franchise
where they are found, but they must first by him be caused to be cried in
Markets near about The Common Law extends derelictum both to that which is
voluntarily forsaken, and to that which is waived and left by necessity.
him, or else the year and day runs not to the prejudice of him that lost them.

ESTREATS.
Estreats, are so called from the word extract^ because they be short notes or
memorials extracted or drawn out of the Records by the Clerk of the peace, and
by him indented and delivered sunderly to the Sheriff, and to the Barons of the
Exchequer, bearing this or the like Title, Extracta finium amerciamentorum
foris factorum ad generalem Sessionem pacis, etc. coram, etc. for the form of
the making hereof, thence is full direction given to the Clerk of Estreats by
the Stat. 7 H. 4 S.

EXCHANGE.
Exchange, is where a man is seized of certain Land, and another man is seized
of another Land, if they by a deed indented, or without deed (the Lands being
in one County) exchange their Lands, so that each of them shall have the others
Lands to him so exchanged in fee, fee tail or for term of life, that is called
an exchange, and is good without livery and ^^^in.

It behooves always, that this word exchange be in the deed, or else nothing
passes by the deed, except that he have livery and seisin, for the word,
excambium only makes an Echange, as the words liberum maritagium only do make
frank marriage. Every exchange ought to be made by this word excambium, or by
another word of the same effect, as permutatio Perkins.

Both the things exchanged ought to be in esse at the time of the Exchange, and
therefore an exchange of Land for Rent granted de novo is not good, but an
exchange betwixt a Rent and a Common which are in esse at the time or the
exchange is good, and so it is of Land and Rent.

If two Parsons of several Churches change their Benefices, and resign them
into the hands of the ordinary to the same intent, and the Patrons make their
presentations accordingly, and the one of the Parsons is admitted, instituted
and inducted, and the other parson is admitted and instituted, but dies before
induction, the other Parson shall not retain the benefice in which he is
inducted, for the exchange is not perfected, because it is not executed.

EXECUTION.
Execution, Execution for debt is fourfold,

1. Of goods only by Fieri facias, or of the moity of Lands by Elegit, or upon
the reconusance of a Statute; or of the Body by capias ad satisfaciendum.

EXECUTOR.
Executor, is when a man makes his Testament An Executor of a last Will and
Testament executing and performing the Will of the dead Judge Doderidge.
and last Will, and therein names the person that shall execute his Testament,
then he that is so named is his Executor, and is as much in the Civil Law, as
haeres designatus, or testamentarius, as to debts, goods and chattels of the
Testator.

An Executor is after three sorts.

1. Executor testamentarius a testatore constitutus. 2. Executor legalis, That
is the Ordinary. 3. Dativus the Administrator, Cook 8 Rep. Sir John Nedhams
Case.
An Executor or Administrator ought to execute Debts due by obligation, shall
be paid by Executors before debts by single contract, and they before Legacies
Cook 9 Rep. Duchons Case. Cook 8 Rep. Tamors Case. Cook on Lit. p. 55. Cook 8
Rep. Nedhams Case.
his Office, and Administer the goods of the dead lawfully, truly and
diligently.

1. Lawfully in paying all the duties, debts and legacies, in such precedence
and order, as they ought to be paid by the Law. 2. Truly, to convert nothing to
his own use, for an Executor or Administrator has not goods of the dead to his
own use, but in another right, and to others uses, and he ought not to
practice or devise any thing to hinder the Creditor of his debt, but truly to
execute his Office according to the trust reposed in him. 3. Diligently, quia
negligentia semper habet comitem in fortunium.
If Tenant for life sows the ground and dies, his Executors shall have the
Corn, because his estate was uncertain, and determined by the Act of God.

De bonis defuncti trina debet esse dispositio.

1. Necessitatis, ut funeralia. 2. Utilitatis, that every one shall be paid in
such precedence as ought to to be. 3. Voluntatis, as Legacies.
Executor de son tort, is he that takes upon him the Office of an Executor by
intrusion, not being so constituted by the Testator or deceased, nor (for
Smiths Commonwealth of England. Quod non est debitum vel quod est ultra detum,
vel ante tempus quod est debitum.
want of such constitution) constituted by the ordinary to administer how farro
we shall become liable to Creditors vide 43 Eliz. cap. 8. Dyer 166. 105. 6.
Dyer 166. Belknap. 50. Ed. 3. 9. 13, 14. Eliz. Dyer 305, 306.

EXIGENT.
Exigent, by which one is outlawed, not rendering himself, as ye would say
exactus or actus in exilium

EXTORTION.
Extortion, is the unlawful taking by any Officer, by color of his Office,
any money or valuable thing of or from any man, either that is not due, or more
then is due, or before it be due. It is largely taken for any oppression, by
power, or by color, or pretense of right, from the verb, extorqueo.

EVIDENCE.
Evidence, This word in legal understanding, does not contain matters of
Record, as Letters Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 8. sect. 485.
Patents, Fines, Recoveries, Inrolements, and the like, and Writings under Seal
as Charters and Deeds, and other Writings without Seal, as Court Rols, Accounts
and the like, instrumenta, but in a large sense it contains also Testimonia
the testimony of Witnesses, and other proofs to be produced and given to a
Jury, for the finding of any issue joined between the Parties, and it is called
Evidence, because thereby the point in issue is to be made evident to the Jury,
Probationes debent esse evidentes, id est, perspicuae and faciles.

A man seized of Lands in see has diverse charters Deeds and Evidences, and
makes a feosment in see either without warranty, or with warranty only against
him and his heirs, the Purchaser shall have the Charters, Deeds and Evidences
as incident to the Lands and ratione terrae, that he may the better defend the
Land himself, having no Warranty to recover in value, for the Evidences are as
it were the sinews of the Land, and the feoffer being not ^ound to Warranty,
has not use of them, but if Cook on Lit. lib. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
the feoffer be bound to warranty, then he shall have all Deeds and Evidences,
which are material, for the maintenance of the Title of the Land, but others
which concern the possession the feoffec shall have.

F
FARM
FArm, (in Latin firma) comes from the Sa(...) word Feormian to feed or
relieve, for in a(...) time, upon Leases were reserved Corn, Cattel^ Victuals,
etc. which was called Feorme: so that although Pl. Com. 169.
now by agreement such Rent is turned into Money, yet it retains the name
still, and as well the Land so leased as the Rent is called Farm, and the
occupyers of such Land Farmers. A Farm in Lancashire is called a Fermeholt, in
the North parts a Tacke, and in Essex a Wike, and was anciently Br. Grant. 155.
called sundus. By the grant of Farms will pass Leases for years, as also
Houses* Lands, etc.

FEALTY.
Fealty, it is the most general service in the Common In the civil Law is
called fidelitas. Cook l* 4. Berits case, and on Lit. l. 2. c. 2. sect. 91.
Law, for it is incident to every Tenure, unless it be a Tenure in
Frankalmoigne, it is also the most sacred, because it is done upon oath, and
the reason wherefore the Tenant is not sworn, in doing his homage to his Lord,
is because no subject is sworn-to another subject, to become his man of life
and member, but to the King only, and that is called the oath of allegiance,
homagium ligeum, and those words for that purpose are omitted out of fealty,
which is to be done upon oath.

FEE-SIMPLE.
Fee-simple, Fee comes of the French Fief, that Littleton and Cook n Lit.
is praedium beneficiarum, and legally signifies Inheritance.

FEUDUM.
Feudum, is a barbarous word, but had his original (a^ I^idore says) from
foeaus, and is to be Ridleys view of the Civil Law.
interpreted tanquam foeaum, that is, a thing covenanted between two, others
deduce it from the word ^ides as it were in Latin Fideum and by a Nec Gothicam
Feudi vocem abhorream; Ed significatur genus clientelae, quo vel praedium, cui
quam datur, ut and auctorem agnoscant caput, honorem, at vel dignitas, vel
vectigal ipsi, and posteri, beneficii pro patrono, ejusque fortunas defendant,
Vossius De vitiu Sermo^nis l. 1. c. 7.
more pleasant pronuntiation Feudum, whereupon such as u^e Feudataries to
others, are called in Latin Fideles, because they owe says an allegiance to
such whose Feudataries they are.

It is called Fee-simple, because it is descendible to his heirs generally that
is simply without restraint Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1.
to the heirs of his body.

A man may have a Fee-simple in 3 kinds of hereditaments, viz. Real, personal
and mixed, real as Lands and Tenements.

2. Personal, as if an annuity be granted to a man and his heirs.

3. Mixed hereditaments, as when the King creates an Earl of such a County, to
have the dignity to him and his heirs, this dignity is personal, and also
concerns Lands and Tenements.

Every man that has a Fee-simple, has it either by right or by wrong, if by
right, then he has it either by purchase or descent. If by wrong, Id. ubi
supr^.
then either by disseisin, intrusion, abatement, or usurpation.

FEE.
Fee or Inheritance is either,

1. Corporeal, as Lands and Tenements which lie in livery, these may pass by
livery by Deed or Haereditas corporata.
without Deed. 2. Incorporeall, which lies in grant, and cannot pass by
livery, but by Deed, as advowsons, Haereditas incorporata.
Commons.
FEES.
Fees, there are diverse Opinions about Knights A plow or hide of land which is
all one, is as much as one may plow in one year.
sees. Some say that a hide or a plow of Land contains 10 Acres, and that 80
hides or 800 Acres of Land, make a Knights Fee, and others hold that 680 Acres
of Land make this, but a Knights Fee is properly to be esteemed according to
the quality and not the quantity. In ancient time men thought 20 l. of Lands
was sufficient to maintain the degree of a Knight, also every Plow of Land was
anciently worth four Nobles per annum, and this the life of a yeoman, and ex
duode^in Cook 9 Rep. Lowes case.
carucatis constabat unum foedum imlitare, which amounts to 20 l. per annum.

FEOFFEMENT.
Feoffement, is the ancient and most necessary It is derived of foedum quia est
donatio foedi. Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
conveyance, because it is solemn and public, and also because it clears all
disseisms, abatements, intrusions, and other deseasible estates, where the
entry of the Feoffer is lawful, which neither fi^e recovery, nor bargain and
sale by Deed indented and enrolled does, Ephron infeoffed Abraham Genesis 23.

If a contract of Matrimony be between a man and a woman, yet one of them may
infeoff the other, for yet they are not one person in the Law, insomuch as if
the woman die before the espousal Perkins tit. Fe^ffments.
celebrated between them, the man to whom she was contracted shall not have her
goods as her Husband, but the woman may well make her Testament without his
consent. It has been held if a man be contracted to a woman, and postea
cognotit Id. Ib.
eam carnaliter, and after he infeof her of a plow of Land, and put her in
seism, and after marry her in facie Ecclesie, that this feoffment was void,
because it was done post fidem datam, and carnalem copulam, and sic tan^uam
inter virum and u^^rem, insomuch as marriage followed, but at this day it such
a feoffment be made, it is good enough.

FELONY.
Felony, is so called either of the Latin word Terms of Law. Ideo dicta est
felonia, quia fieri debet felleo animo. Cooks 4 R. Bedlies Case. Cook on Lit.
3. p. 392. Cooks 7 R. Cases of Swans.
f^^, which is in English gall, or of the ancient English word fell or fierce,
because it is intended to be done with a cruel, bitter, fell, fierce or
mischievous mind. Significat quod libet capitale crimen felleo animo
perpetratum, in which sense murder is said to be done prr fel^niam, and in
ancient times this word ( felonice) was of so large an extent, as it included
high treason, and by pardon of all felonies, high treason was pardoned.

A man may have property of some things which are of so base nature, that no
felony can be committed of them, and no man shall lose for them life or member,
as a Blood-hound and a Mastiff.

To steal fruit that hangs on a Tree, to cut down and carry away the Tree it
self, is not felony, But a trespass.
but these things be part of the Freehold till they be severed, and cannot be
reputed for any chat^els. But if I gather mine Apples or cut down a Tree of
mine own, then may another become a felon by taking away either of them.

Felony cannot be committed by the taking of beasts that be savage, if they be
savage and untamed at the time of taking, nor for taking of Doves Stamford pl.
of Cr. p. 1. c. 1.
being out of a Dove-coat, not for taking of fishes being at large in a River,
for such taking is not contrectatio rei alienae, sed quae est nullius in bonis,
but the stealing of a Do which is tame and domestical is felony, but as Mr
Stamford well notes, it seems that he that steals it should have certain
knowledge that it is tame; but if the Do be killed, and then stolen, this is
certainly felony, says he. So if one break a Dove-coat, and take out the young
Pigeons Id. Ib. Quam varia sunt feloniarum genera, Henricus Spelmannus, eques
Auratus in eruditissimo suo Glossari^ ostendit. Vossius De vitiis Sermonis. l.
2. c. 6.
which cannot go nor ily, this is felony, or steal Fish out of a pond or trunk,
or young goshawks ingendered in my Park, which cannot go nor ily.

The punishment of a felon is grievous.

1. He loses his life, his judgment is to hung by the neck until he be dead.
Quod suspendatur per collum.
2. He loses it in an odious manner, by hanging between Heaven and earth, as
unworthy o^ both. 3. His blood is corrupted and stained that his Children
cannot inherit to him nor any other Ancestors. Cook 4 Rep. Beverlies case, and
on Lit. By the Statute, de donis conditionalibus, lands int^^iled are not
forfeited for felony, but for the life of Tenant in Ta^ the Inheritance is
preserved to the issues.
4. He shall forfeit all his Lands and Tenements which he has in Fee, and in
tail, and for Tenor of his life. 5. All his goods and chattels. 6. His Wife
shall lose her dower, thus severe it wa^ at the Common Law, that men should
fear to commit felony, ut poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat.
An act Anno 21 Iacobi Regis, concerning women convicted of small felonies,
continued tertio Caroli cap. 4. to the end of the first Sessions of the next
Parliament.

Whereas women having not the benefit of Clergy, do suffer death for small
causes, be it enacted that a woman lawfully convict of felonious taking of any
goods above twelve pence, and under ten Shillings value, or as accessory to
such offense, the same being not burglary, nor robbery, nor privy stealing from
the person (but only such an offense for which a man shall have Clergy) she
shall for the first time be branded upon the brawn of the left thumb with a hot
iron having a Roman T by the Ga^ler in open Court, and further punished This
Statute to continue until the first Session of the next Farliament Portescue.
de laud. leg Ang.
by imprisonment, whipping, stocking, house of correction, and for so long time
not exceeding a year, as the ludge shall think meet

The Civil Laws do judge open theft to be satisfied by the recompense of
fourfold, and private theft, by the recompense of double. But the Laws of
England suffer neither of these offenses to be more favorably punished then
with the offenders death, if the value of the thing stolen be above twelve
pence.

If a man be adjudged to be hanged, and the Sheriff Stamf. l. 1. pl. of Cr. c.
4.
be commanded that it be executed, and he be head him, this is felony in the
Sheriff, because the order of Law is not observed.

FELO DE SE.
If a man of non sanae memoriae give to himself a mortal wound, and before he
dies he become of sound memory, and after dies of the same wound, in this
Case, although he die of sound memory, by Cook 1 Rep. Shellies case.
reason of his proper stroke, yet because the original cause was committed,
being not of sound memory, he shall not be felo de se, because the death has
relation to the original act.

By the common Law if a man kill himself he is called felo de se, and he does
only forfeit hi^ goods and chattels, but not his Lands, neither dot^ this work
corruption of Blood, no^ the Wife lose her Dower, because it is no attainder in
deed.

He that is felo de se shall not have Christian burial, and all his goods and
chattels are forfeited to the King, and by his Almner are to be distributed to
pious uses (heretofore) in salutem animoe.

FINE.
Fine, This word ( Finis) has diverse significations Cook 8 Rep. Keechers Case.
in the Law, quia aliquando significat pretium aliquando poenam, aliquando
pacem.

For 1. The price or sum which is the cause of obtaining a benefit, is called
a fine: as a fine for alienation for admission to a Copyhold for obtaining of
Leases.

2. What the offender gives in satisfaction of his offenses, is called a fine
also, and in this sense dicitur poena.

3. The assurance which makes men to enjoy their Lands and Inheritance, is
called finis quia ^inem litibus imponit.

They are all so called, because they are the ends or causes of the ends of all
such business.

Of fines taken of Copyholders,

Some be certain by custom,

And some be uncertain.

But that fine though it be incertus, yet it must be rationabilis, and that
reasonableness shall be discussed by the Justices upon the true circumstances
Cook on Lit. lib. 1. cap. 9. sect. 74.
of the Case appearing unto them, and if the Court where the cause depends,
adjudgeth the fine exacted unreasonable, then is not the Copyholder compellable
to pay it.

FLIGHT.
Flight, one shall forfeit his chattels upon a sugam fecit, notwithstanding
that he be acquitted of the same felony, and he shall forfeit them, Stamsord
pl. o^ Cr. l. 3. cap. 2. Stam^. of prero. c. 16.
although he have his Charter of pardon for the same felony. One may fly for
felony, and yet he shall forfeit nothing, as where one is arrested for
suspicion of Felony and escapes, yet for this he shall not forfeit his goods,
if he were not taken with the manner, or at the suit of the party, or endicted
of the same.

When a true man is pursued as a felon, and he ^lieth and waveth his own goods,
these are forfeited, 29 E. 3. 29. 37 H. 8. Stam^. fol. 186. 4.
as if they had been goods st^llen. Fatetur facinus, qui judicium fugit. Those
that ^ly for fear of the offense (we call it a sugam fecit) forfeit their
chattels.

FLOATSOM.
Floatsom, is when a Ship is drowned, or otherwise perished, and the goods
^loat upon the Sea, Cook l. 5. Sir Henry Constables Case.
and they are given to the Lord Admiral by his Letters Pattents.

FORCE.
Force, prohibited by the Statutes, must be either manu f^rti, with sorce or
strong hand, or multitudine, Ubi sactum nullum ibi ^ortia nulla There is a
difference in the Common Law betwixt public and open force.
with multitude of people.

The Counselors and Committers of ^orce are alike punished.

FORGING.
Forging of Deeds, To forge is metaphorically taken from the Smith, who bears
upon his Anvill, and forgeth what fashion or* shape he will.

FORMEDON.
Formedon, is so called, because the W^it does comprehend the form of the gift.
There be three kinds of Writs Formed^n, ^i^.

The first in the descender, to be brought by issue in tail, which claim by
descent per formam Cook onl it. l. 3. c. 11. sect. 595.
doni.

The second is in the Reverter, which lies for him in the reversion, or his
Hel^^ or Assigns, after the State tail is spent.

The third is, the remainder which the Law gives to him in the remainder, his
Heirs or Assigns after the determination of the estate tail.

FOUNDATION.
Foundation, the foundation of a College or Hospital is called, fundati^,
^uasi fundi datio, vel Cook l. 10. Rep.
fundamenti locatio.

FRANCHISE.
Franchise, is a privilege from ordinary jurisdiction, and it is called a
Franchise Royal in some An. 15. Rich. 2. c. 4. An. 8. Hen. 5.
Statutes, where the Kings Writ runs not, as when the King grants to one
and his Heirs, that they shall be quit of toll.

FRANKALMOIGNE.
Frankalmoigne, in Latin, libera eleemosyna, in English free Alms, is when a
man in ancient time before the Statute of quia emptores terrarum, had infeoffed
an Ecclesiastical person whether regular, as Abbo^s, Priors, etc. or secular,
as Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebends, Parsons, Vicars, etc.
to have and hold to them and their succes^ors, to hold of the feoffe^, and his
Heirs in frankalmoigne.

There is an Officer in the Kings house called Eleemosynarius, the Kings Almn^r*

FRANK-TENEMENT.
Frank-Tenement, Free-h^ld, is an estate that a man has in Lands or Tenements,
for term of his own life, or of another li^e, in dower or by the co^^tesie of
England, and under that there is no freehold, for he that has estate for
years, or holds at will, has no freehold, but they are called cha^tels.

A Tenement cannot be said to be freehold, except it touch the earth, and
therefore a Chamber built upon a Hall or Parlor, cannot be said to be
freehold, because it cannot be perpetual, for the foundation may perish, and
therefore it cannot be demanded by plain^ or Writ.

Tenant in ^ee, tenant in tail and for life, are said to have a frank-tenement,
a freehold so called, because Cook on ^^^.
it does distinguish it from terms of years, chattels upon uncertain
interests, Lands in villenage, cus^omary or copyhold Lands. Cook 8 Rep. Case
of the City of London.


Freeman. A man may be liber homo a freeman in London three ways.

1. By service, as he who has served his Apprentiship. 2 By Birthright, as he
which is the Son of a Freeman of London. 3. By Redemption, that is, allowance
of the Court of the Major and Aldermen.
FRESH-SUIT.
Fresh*Suit, (...)ner which escapes be out of vi^w, (...) be made, and he be
(...) (...) ins^cuti^e, he shall be in Cook 3 Rep. Rigewayes Case.
execution, (...)her wife at the turning of a corner or by (...) a house, or by
other means, the the prisone^ may be out of view.

G.
GAVELKIND.
GAvelkind, is a Custom annexed* with Lands in Kent, by which all the Brethren
shall inherit together, as Sisters at the Common Versteganus de ^nt.
Law. It is called Gavelkind, either of give all kin, that is, to all the
kindred in one line, according as it is used among the Germans, from Lamberts
perambul, of Kent Verstegan.
whom we Englishmen, and chiefly of Kent come, or of give all ^ind, that is, to
all the Male-children, for ^ind in Dutch signifies a Male-child. But now by
the Star^te 31 H. 8 A great part of Kent is ^^^e desceadible to the Eldest
Son according to the course of the Common Law, because by that Custom, d^vers
ancient and great Families after a few descents come to very little or Cook on
Lit.
nothing.

In (...)ties riv^s deducitur amnis.
^^^ minor, ac^unda deficiente perit.
After that William Duke of Normandy had invaded and conquered all England,
Kent only ^amd. Brit. and Lamb. perambul. of Kent.
excepted, atlast also the Kenti^h men yielded, but upon condition that they
might enjoy their ancient customs of Gavelkind, which was granted unto them,
and since has continued.

In Gavelkind, though the Father be hanged, D. and Student. ^. 10.
the Son shall inherit, for their Custom is, The Father to the bough, and the
Son to the plow.

The Wise shall have the moi^y of the Lands of her Husband, so long as she
lives unmarried, and Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 10. sect. 105.
of Lands in Gavelkind, a man shall be Tenant by the courtesy, without having
of any issue.

If a man make a gift intail of Lands in Gavelkind, to a man and his Heirs,
Males of his body Cook ^ Rep. Shelleys Case.
lawfully begotten, and has issue Sons, in this case all the Sons shall
inherit, but if a Lea^e for life be made of Lands in Gavel-kind, the remainder
to the right Heirs of I. S. and I. S. die having issue 4 Sons, in this case the
eldest Son only shall have the remainder, he only can be a right Heir in case
of purchase.

GENERAL
General, If one speak grossly, it shall be understood Cook 9 Rep. Gregs case.
secundum excellentiam, as of the Feast of ^ichael, it shall be understood of
the Archangel, as the more worthy and notorious.

GRAND SERIEANTY.
Grand Serjeanty, is where a man holds of the So called because it is the
most honorable and worthy service that a Tenant may d^.
King certain Lands, by the service of carrying of his Banner or Lance, or to
lead his Host, or to be his Carver, or Butler at his Coronation.

The Demockes hold a Manor of Scrivel, by service of Grand Serjeanty, viz.
That whenever any King of England is to be crowned, then the Lord of this
Manor, for the time being, or some one in his Name (if himself be unable)
shall come well armed for the War, mounted upon a Camd. in Lincolnshire.
good horse of service, in the presence of the Sovereign Lord the King upon
his Coronation day, and cause proclamation to be made, that if any man will
avouch that the said Sovereign Lord the King, has not right to his Kingdom and
Crown, he will be pressed and ready to defend the right of the King of his
Kingdom, of his Crown and dignity, with his body against him and all others
whatsoever.

GRANGE.
Grange, in legal Latin Grangea is a House or Edifice not only where Corn is
stored up like as in Barnes, but necessary places for Husbandry also, as
Stables for Hay and Horses, and Styes for other Cattle, and by the grant of a
Grange, which is often in Conveyances, will pass such places as aforesaid.

GRANT.
Grant. It is a maxim in Law that every man's Quaelibet concessio fortissime
contra donatorem interpretanda est.
Grant shall be taken by construction of Law most forcible against himself,
which is so to be understood, that no wrong be thereby done, for it is another
maxim in Law, quod legis constructio non facit injuriam. And therefore if a
Tenant for life makes a lease generally, this shall be taken by construction
of Law, an estate for his own lite that made the Lease, for if it should be a
Lease for Cook on Lit. lib. 3. c. 3. sect. 283.
the life of the Lessee, it should be a wrong to him in the reversion. So if
Tenant in tail make a Lease generally, the Law shall suppose this to be such a
Lease as he may lawfully make, and that is for term of his own life, for if it
should be for life of the Lessee, it should be a discontinuance, and
consequently the state which should pass by construction of Law should make a
wrong.

Where the grant is impossible to take effect, according Id. ib.
to the Letter, there the Law shall make such a construction, as the gift by
possibility may take effect. Ben^g^e faciendae sunt interpretationes chartarum
propter simplicitatem Laicorum, ut res magis valeat quam pereat, that the thing
may Cook 6 Re.
rather be strengthened then void, for if Writs be not formally made, they
shall abate, which is no greater prejudice, then the purchasing of a new Writ,
but if the Grant be void, the patty has no remedy.

If two Tenants in common be, and they grant a Rent of 20 ^. per annum out of
their Land, the Grantee shall have two Rents of 20 Shillings, because every
man's grant shall be taken most strongly against himself, and therefore they be
several grants in Law. But if they two make a gift in tail, or Lease for life,
reserving 20 s. Cook on Lit. l. 3. ^. 0. sect. 314.
Rent to them and their Heirs, they shall have but one twenty Shillings, for
they shall have no more then themselves reserved, and the Donee or Lessee shall
pay but 20 s. according to their own express reservation.

If a man have five horses ^in his Stable, and he Perk of Grants.
give to me one of his Horses in his Stable, now I shall take which Horse I
will.

If a man grant an annuity out of certain Land, and he has no Land at the time
of the grant, yet the grant shall charge his person.

The Law says that benefits from the Crown are strictae, nay strictissimae
interpretationis, because in such grants so much is taken away from the public
(which is chiefly to be tendered) as is imparted to the private.

If a man has Mines hidden within his ground, Cook 6 Rep. Sanders Case.
and lets ^is ground and all the Mines with it, the Lessee may dig for them,
for quando aliquis aliquid concedit, con^edere videtur and id sine quo res ipsa
esse Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
non p^test.

The Queen is an exempt person from the King by the Common Law, and is of
ability and capacity to purchase and grant without the King.

If a man grant certain Land to one cum communia Fitz. Not. brev. tit. Common
L. 180. B.
in omnibus terris suis, and express not any certain place, he shall have
common in all his Lands, which he had at the time of the grant.

A man grants all his Trees and wood upon B. acre, that may reasonably be
spared, this is a void 1 Mar. Die. 91.
grant, unless it be referred to a third persons judgment, what may be spared.

If the King grant to me that I shall not be Sheriff without showing of what
County, this is void Cook 9 Rep-Earl of Salops Case. Cook 4 Rep. Bozouns Case.
for the uncertainty, quia concessi^ per regem oportet fieri de certitudine,
but if the grant was quod non erit vicecomes alicujus comitatus, there such a
grant is good, when the words of a grant are not sufficient ex vi termini to
pass the thing granted, but the grant is utterly void, there a non obstante
connot make the grant good.

The Lord Chancellor of England, the Justices of the Kings Bench or Common
Pleas, and Barons of the Exchequer, cannot grant their Offices over to other
persons, nor occupy them by Deputy. If an annuity be granted to Perkins tit.
Grants.
me pro consilio in posterum impendendo, I cannot grant this, unless it be
granted to me and my Assigns.

A Parson may grant to another the moity of his Tithes for years, whether it be
Lamb, Wool or Corn, and yet he has no possession of them, because 38 Ed. 3. 6.
they are not yet in esse. But yet he has an interest in them, and may grant
the moity of them, as well as one may grant to another that it shall be lawful
for him to take every year a Deer or a Hare, or a Cony within his soil, this is
a good grant.

H
HARRIOT.
HArriot, in the Saxon tongue is called Hergeat, Cook on Lit. l. 3. cap. 3.
sect. 287.
that is, the Lords Beast, for Here is Lord, and geat is best.

Harriot is in two sorts.

1. Harriot Custom, where Harriots have been paid time out of mind by custom,
and this may be after the death of the Tenant for life. Harriot is the best
Beast (whether it be Horse, Ox, or Cow) that the Tenant had at the time of his
death. 2. Harriot service, when one holds by such service to pay Harriot at the
time of his death, this is payable after the death of the Tenant in Feesimple.
For Herriot service the Lord shall distrain, and for Herriot custom, he shall
seize, and not distrain. D. and Student. c. 9


If the Lord purchase part of the Tenancy, herriot service is extinguished, but
it is not so in herriot Cooks 8 Re. Talbots Case.
custom

In 34 Ed. 3. it is holden that if any Tenant which holds of me by a herriot,
alien parcel of Land to another, every one is chargeable to me of a herriot,
because it is entire, and if the Tenant purchase the Land again, I shall have
of him for every portion a herriot.

If the Lord ought to have an Herriot when his Cook on Lit. l. 3 c. 3. p. 185.
B.
Tenant dies, and the Tenant devises away all his goods, yet the Lord shall
have his Herriot, for the Law prefers the Custom before the devise.

HEIR.
Heir, in the legal understanding of the Common Cook on Lit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
sect. 1.
Law implies that he is ex justis nuptiis procreatus, for haeres legitimus est
quem nuptiae de monstrant, and is he to whom Lands, Tenements, or
hereditaments, by the Act of God, and Haeres dicitur ab haerendo, quia qui
haeres est haeret, id est, proximus est sanguine, illi cujus est haeres.
right of blood do descend, of some Estate of Inheritance.

Every Heir is either a Male or a Female, or an Hermophrodite, that is both
Male and Female. And an Hermophrodite (which is also called Andr^gynus) shall
be Heir, either as Male or Female according to that kind of the sex which does
prevail.

Hermaphrodita, tam masculo quam foeminae comparatur, Id. Ib.
secundum proeva 'escentiam serus incalescentis, and accordingly it ought to be
baptized.

Haeres est quintuplex.

1. Iure proprietatis, so the eldest Son shall inherit only before all his
Brethren. 2. Iure repraesentationis, as where the eldest Son dies, his issue
shall inherit before the younger Son, he represents the person of his Father.
3. Iure propinquitatis, as propinquus excludit rem^tum, Cook ^ Rep. R^t^liff^s
Case.
and remotus remotiorem. 4. Iure sanguinis, so the daughter of the first
vent(...) shall inherit before the Son of the second. 5. Ratione doni, so the
half blood shall inherit, as if a gift be made to one and the Heirs of his
body, and he has issue a son, and a daughter by one venture, and a son by
another venture, the Father dies, and the eldest son enters and dies, the young
son shall inherit per formam doni, for he claims as heir of the body of the
Donee, and not generally as heir of his Brother: otherwise where Land comes by
descent, the rule is possessio fratris de foedo simplici facit sororem esse
haeredem, Soror est haeres facta, therefore some act must be done to make her
Heir, and the younger Brother is haeres natus, if no Act be done to the
contrary.
but the Brother ought to be in actual possession of the Fee, and
frank-tenement, either by his own possession, or the possession of another to
make his sister heir, and the reason is, because of all haereditaments in
possession, he which claims as Heir, ought to make himself Heir by him that
was last actually seized. Id. Ib.
But if the King by his Letters Patents make a Cook ubi supra, and on Lit. l.
1. c. 1. sect. 8. Possessio quasi pedis posi^io. Cook l. 7. of R^p. Ca^v. case.
and on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 8.
Baron to him and his Heirs, possession in the elder brother of this Dignity
cannot make his sister heir, but the brother of the half blood shall inherit,
because no possession can be gained of this dignity ^er ped is p^sitionem.

In case of the descent of the Crown, the half blood shall mi^erit. So after
the decease of King Edward the sixth, the Crown sell to Queen Mary, and from
her to Queen Elizabeth, both which were of the half blood, and vet inheri^ed
not only the Lands which King Edward, ^r Queen Mary purchased, but the ancient
Lands parcel of the Crown also.

A man that is King by descent of the part of his Mother, purchases Land^ to
him and his hens, and dies without issue, this land shall descend to the heir
of the part of the Mother, but in case of a Subject, the heir of the part of a
father shall have them.

HEREDITAMENT.
Hereditament, is a word much used in Conveyances, Cook Lit. 6. 16.
and in grants will pass whatsoever may be inherited, be it corporeal or
incorporeall, real, personal or mixed, and by the grant of hereditament Isles,
Charters, Signioryes, Mannours, Houses and Lands of all sorts, Rents, Services,
Advowsons, and Commons.

HAERES.
Haeres est pars antecessoris; Therefore if land Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 2. Cook
on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
be given to a man and his Heirs, all his Heirs are so totally in him, as he
may give the Lands to whom he will; one cannot be heir till the death of his
Ancestor; he is called Haeres apparens Heir apparent.

Every Heir having Land, is bound by the binding Solus Deus facit haeredes.
acts of his Ancestors, i^ he be named, qui se^ti^ commodum sentire debet and
incomm^dum sive ^nus. Cook on Lit. l. c. 1. sect. 1.

A man by the Common Law cannot be Heir to goods or chattels; for haeres
dicitur ab haereditate. If a man buy diverse Fishes, as Ca^ps, Bream^* Tenches,
and put them into his Pond and dies; in this case the Heir shall have them,
and not the Executors; but they shall go with the Inheritance* because they
were at liberty and could not be gotten without industry, as by ne^s an: other
Engines* Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
and otherwise it is if they were in a Trunk. Likewise Deer in a Park, Conies
in a Warren, and Doves in a Dove-house, young and old shall go to the Heir.

HOTCHPOT.
Hotchpot, is a meddling or mixing together, and a partition of Lands given in
frank-marriage, with other Lands in fee-simple descended.

It is an old Saxon word, and signifies a pudding; Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 12.
sect. 267.
and the French use Hotch-pot for a commixtion of diverse things together. It
signifies here metaphorically in partem positio; in English we use to say
Hodge-podge, in Latin farrago or miscellaneum.

HOMAGE.
Homage is,

1. The most honorable service. 2. The most humble service.
1. On part of the Tenant. Homage, is derived of homo, and is called homage,
because when he does this service, he says, I become your man, and in English
homage is called manhood; as the manhood of his Tenant, and the homage of his
Tenant is all one. Cook on Little(...)n ibidem.
1. The Tenant when he does his homage is dis^inctus, disarmed, because he must
never be armed against his Lord. 2. Nudo capite, bare headed. 3. Ad pe^^^
Domini super genua projectus. 4. Amb^s ma^us junctas, inter manus Domini
porrigit, which betokens reverence and subjection. 5. Per verba omni supplici
veneratione plena, he says, I become your man.
2. On part of the Lord for three causes. 1. The Lord does sit. 2. He uncloseth
his Tenants hands between his own, which betokens protection, and defense. 3.
The Lord sitting kisseth the Tenant. Cook on Lit. lib. 2. cap. 1. sect. 85.

Glanvill says women shall not do homage, but Cook ubi supra.
Littleton says, that a woman shall do homage, but shall not say, I become
your woman, but I do to you homage, and so is Glanvill to be understood, she
shall not do complete homage.

HOMICIDE.
Homicide, is when ^ne is slain with a man's Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 8.
will, but not with malice prepensed: most properly it is hominis occisi^ ab
homine facta.

Bracton says, it is homicide if one strike a woman great with child, so that
she miscarry; Si puer perium animatum fuerit, and this agrees with the Canon
and Civil Law, but the contrary is now Law amongst us.

To make it Homicide, it is requisite

1. That the party killed be in esse, viz. in rerum natura, for if a man kill
an Infant in his Mothers Stamf. pl. of Cr. l. 1. and Pulton de pace Regis.
Womb, this is no felony, neither shall he forfeit any thing for it, for two
Causes.

1. Because the thing had no Name of Baptism. 2. Because it is hard to judge
whether the Insant dyed of the Battery or not, or upon some other cause.
Fitzherbert puts a stronger case, viz. If a man strike another woman great
Brooks abr. f. 177. and Stamf.
with child with two Infants, so that presently after one of them die, and the
other was born and baptized, and two days after, for the hurt that he had
received dies, and yet it was no felony.
But if a woman being delivered of a Child does presently kill it before it be
baptized, this is felony in her, though the Child had no Name of Baptism;
because the Child was in rerum natura before it was killed, and it is known by
Stamford and Pulton*
whom, and by what means that Child came to his death.

Anno primo Iacobi Regis, c. 8. An Act to restrain sudden killing and stabbing
of men done in time of drunkenness, rage, and hidden displeasure. Be it enacted
that if any shall siab or thrust any that has not a weapon drawn, nor has
first stricken, and the party dies thereof within six months, the offender
being thereof convicted by verdict of twelve men, confession or otherwise,
shall suffer death, as in case of wilful murder, without benefit of Clergy.
This Statute shall not extend to killing, se defendendo, by misfortune or in
other manner, then as aforesaid, nor to manslaughter done in keeping of the
Peace, so as it be not wittingly under color of keeping the Peace, nor to any
which in correcting Child or Servant shall beside their intent commit
manslaughter, this Statute to continue until the end of the first Session of
the next Parliament, continued 21 Iacobi, cap. 28. and tertio Caroli cap. 4. to
the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

The offender in this case shall have his Clergy, but shall forfeit his goods.

There is Homicide,

1. Of malicious purpose, which we call murder. 2. Upon the sudden, in a heat
and fury of mind, Delinquens per iram provocatus puriri debet mitius. The chief
reason why seipsum ^esen^lendo is not matter of justification, is because Law
supposes it has a commencement upon an unlawful cause.
which we term manslaughter. 3. Which we call se defendendo. 4. Per
infortunium, homicide of a man's self, whereby the offender is called Felo de
se.
Manslaughter se defendendo, is where two fight together upon a sudden, and
before the mortal wound on either party, the one flies unto the wall or some
other place, beyond which he cannot pass, for the safeguard of his life, and
the other pursues him, and he which flies kills him that pursues, this is
manslaughter in his own defense, and the offender in this case shall forfeit
his goods.

Quod quis ob tutelam corporis sui ecerit, jure id fecisse videtur.

HOUSE.
House in a house four things are necessary.

1. Habitatio homini^. 2. Delectatio inhabitantis. 3. Necessitas luminis. 4.
Salubritas aeris.
For hurt made to three of these an Action lies.

1. Of the habitation of a man, for this is the principal end of a house. 2.
For hinderance of his light, for the ancient form of an action upon the Case
was significant, quod messuagium horrida tenebritate obscuratum suit. It is
said, Vescitur aura aetherea, and the words horrida tenebritate imply the
benefit of light, but for a prospect which is a matter only of delight, and not
of necessity, no action lies for stopping of this, and yet it is a great
commendation of an house, if it have a fair prospect. Unde dicitur,
Laudaturque domus longos qui prospicit argos.
3. And if stopping of wholesome air be actionable a fortiori, an action lies
for corrupting and infecting the air, a lime kill is good and profitable, but
if this be erected so near a house that none can inhabit there, for the entering
of the smoke an action will lie, prohibetur ne quis faciat in suo quod nocere
possit alien^.
The house of every one is to him as his Castle and Fortress, as well for his
defense against injury and violence, as for his repose, and although that the
life of a man be a thing precious and favored in the Law, so that when a man
kills another in his own defense, or per infortunium without any intent, yet
this is felony, and in such Cases he shall forfeit his goods and chattels for
the great respect that the Law has to the life of a man. But i^ Thieves come
to ones house to rob or murder him, and the owner or his servants kill any of
the Thieves in defense of him and his house, this is not felony, nor shall he
lose any thing. Domus sua cuique est tutissimum refugium. Cook 5 (...). of Rep.
S^mains Case.


2. When any house is recovered by any real action or by an Ejectione firmae,
the Sheriff may break the house, and deliver seisin or possession to the
Demandant or Plaintiff, for the words of the Writ are, Habere facias seisinam,
or possessionem, and after Judgment this is not the house in right, and
judgment of the Law, of the Tenant or Defendant.

3. In all Cases where the King is party, the Sheriff (if no door be open) may
break the house of the party, either to take him or to do other execution of
the process of the King, if otherwise he cannot enter in it, but before he
break it, he ought to signify the cause of his coming, and to request him to
open the door. For in such Case if he break the house when he may enter without
breaking it (that is upon request made, or if he may open the door without
breaking it) he is a trespasser.

The pre-eminence and privilege that the Law gives to houses which are for
habitation of men is great.

1. A house ought to have the precedence in a praecipe quod reddat, before
Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, for ones House is his Castle. 2. The House of
a man has a privilege to Cook 11. Rep. Bowls Case.
protect him against an arrest, by force of a process of the Law, at the suit
of the Subject. 3. It was resolved that those that dig for saltpeter shall not
dig in the mansion house of any Subject, without his assent, for then he nor
his wife, nor his Children, cannot be in safety in the night, nor his goods in
his House preserved from Thieves. 4. He that kills one which will rob and spoil
him in the house shall forfeit nothing.
If a man (hearing that another will fetch him out of his house and beat him)
do assemble company Lambert.
with force, it will be no unlawful assembly, for his house is his hold and
Castle.

The Kings Officer may break an house for Felony, or suspicion of felony.

1. For the Commonwealth, for it is for the public good to take Felons. 2. In
every Flony the King has an interest, and where he has an interest, the Writ
is, Non omittas propter aliquam libertatem, the privilege of the house will
not hold against him. Cook 5 Rep. Cases of executions.
For the good of the Commonwealth, an house shall be pulled down, if the next
be fired. Judge Doderidge.

HUE.
Hue and Cry is derived of two French words, Cowel Instit.
Huyer and Crier.

In legal understanding Hue and Cry is all one: See Cook's 3 part of
Institutes c. 52.
In ancient Records they are called Hutesium and clamor.

This Hue and Cry may be by Horn and by Voice. He that goes not at the
Commandment of the Sheriff or Constable upon Hue and Cry, shall be grievously
fined and imprisoned. Cooks 2 part of his Instit. c. 9.

HUNDRED. Smiths Commonwealth of England.

Hundred, is so called, either because they were at the first an hundred Towns
and Villages in each Hundred, or because they did find the King to his Wars an
hundred able men.

Between Milborne and the Inhabitants of the Hundred of Dumnow in Essex, it was
adjudged, for a robbery done in the morning ante lucem, the Hundred shall not
be charged, because this robbery was done in the night, for there can be no
negligence in them for not keeping the Country Cook 7 Re. Cases on the Statute.
Hundredum saepe legas in Anglicorum Regum diplomatibus, and ejus gentis
scriptoribus. Significat vero partem comitatus, in qua habitarent centum Regij
fide jussores. Explicati us plen^ de eo Spelmannus. Vossius. De vitijs Sermonis
l. 2. c. 9.
in the night, neither can they make pursuit after the Offenders. But if one
kill one in a Town in the day, viz. as long as it is full day light, and he
which kills him escape the Town where the Felony was, the Town shall be amerced
for it, but not if such a Felony or Murder had been done in the night.

In Towns or Cities which are enclosed, the Gates ought to be shut from
sunsetting to sunrising, and if in any such Town or City any murder or
manslaughter be done in the day or in the night, and the Offender escape, such
a City or Town shall be amerced.

I.
IDIOT.
Idiot, the words of the Statute be, Rex habebit custodiam ter^^rum fatuorum
naturalium, by Stamf. prae. r^g. Reg. ^. 9
which it appears that he must be a fool natural, that is a fool a
nativitate, for if he were once wise, and became a fool by chance or
misfortune, the King shall not have the custody of him.

The King is Protector of all his Subjects, and of all their goods, Lands and
Tenements, and therefore such as cannot govern themselves, nor order Fitz. N.
b. fol. 232.
their Lands and Tenements, his Grace (as a father) must take upon him to
provide for them, that they themselves, and their things may be preserved.

Idiot, is a Greek word, and properly signifies a private man, which has not
any public Office. Cook 4 Rep. Beverlies Case. Fitz. Herb. H ^. brev. p. 233.
Amongst the Latins it is taken for illitera^us, imperitus, amongst our
Lawyers, for non compos mentis, in our common English speech, called a natural
fool. Fatuus a fando, quia inepta loquitur. If one have so much understanding,
as he can measure a yard of cloth, number twenty pence or rightly name the
days in the week, or T^^m. of Law.
beget a child, son or daughter, he that can do so, shall not be accounted an
Idiot or natural fool by the Law^ of the Realm. Stamf. Prae. r^g. Reg. c. 9
Cook 4 Rep. Beverlies Case.


An Idiot natural in an Action brought against him, shall appear in his proper
person, but he who is become non compos mentis, shall appear by his Guardian,
if he be of full age.

IETSAM.
Ietsam, is when a Ship is in pe^ill to be drowned, and to disburden the Ship,
the Mariners cast the goods into the Sea; In comes of the French word Ietter,
to cast ou^; and sometimes signifies the Admirals prescription* and sometimes
the thing cast out of the Ship, and prescribed in.

IGNORANCE.
Ignorance, There is a difference in the Law between Plowd. Cominent. p. anu.
E. 6. Reniger against Fogassa.
ignorantia and ignoranter. Such an Act is properly said to be done ex
ignorantia, where involuntary ignorance is the cause of it, as if a child or
mad man kill a man, but if a drunkard kill a man, this act is said to be done
ignoranter, but he is the cause of his own ignorance.

IMPRISONMENT.
Imprisonment, is the putting of any person from his own liberty, into the
custody of the Law, to answer to that which is objected; and therefore Lamb.
Just* of Peace.
to break the prison is to fly from the trial of the Law, and is adjudged a
public Felony, if he were imprisoned for felony, otherwise not, as the stat.
de frangent. prisonam. Out of this one fact, there grows sometime a treble
offense and selony, viz. Id. ib.
1. In the prisoner himself, which is most properly called the breaking of
prison. 2. Another in him that helps the prisoner to get away, which is
commonly termed Rescuss. 3. A third, in the Officer or party whatsoever, by
whose wilful default he is suffered to go; and that is termed an escape.

A man imprisoned by process of Law, ought to be kept in salva and arcta
custodia, and by the Law ought not to go out though it be with a Keeper, and
with the leave and sufferance of the Jailer; Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 438.
but yet imprisonment must be custodia non poena, for carcer ad homines
custodiendos, non ad puniendos dari debet.

He which is imprisoned by Judgment of the Law, ought to be kept in salva and
arcta custodia, salva because he ought to be in a prison Cook. Lechfords Case.
8 Rep.
so strong, that he cannot escape, and arcta in respect that he ought to be
kept close without conference with others, or intelligence of things at large.

INCIDENT.
Incident, is a thing appertaining to or following another, as a more worthier
principal: The incident shall pass by the grant of the principal, but not the
principal by grant of the incident. Accessorium non ducit, sed sequitur suum
principale. Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 12.


Incidents are,

1. Separable, as rents incident to reversions, which may be severed. 2.
Inseparable, as fealty to a reversion or Tenure Id. l. 2. c. 5.

INCUMBENT.
Incumbent, comes of the verb incumbo, that is to be diligently resident, and
when it is written Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 180.
encumbent, it is falsely written, for it ought to be incumbent, and therefore
the Law does intend him to be resident on his Benefice.

INDUCTION.
Induction, The Archdeacon is to put in the Minister in possession by
delivering the Ring of the Church-door unto him, and ringing of Bel^, which is
called an Induction, and that being done, the party becomes an incumbent.

A man having a Benefice with Cure, at the value of ten pounds or more,
receives another Benefice with Cure, and is inducted into this new; the first
is void, ac si esset per mortem and resignationem, by Statute 21 Hen. 8. L.
Dyer. The Statute is of the yearly value of eight pound.

INDENTED.
Indented, It cannot be a Deed indented, unless it be actually indented; for
albeit the words of the Deed be haec indentura; yet if it be not indented,
indeed it is no Indenture; but if the Deed be indented, albeit the words of the
Deed be not haec Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 217. and l. 3. c. 5. sect. 370.
indentura, yet it is an Indenture.

Deeds indented are called by several Names, as Scriptum indentatum, charta
indentata, indentura, literae indentatae. An Indenture is a Writing containing
a Conveyance, Bargain, Contract, Covenants or Argreements between two or more;
and is indented in the top or side answerable to another Cowels Instit. Iur.
Angl.
that comprehends the self-same matter. It is called an Indenture, because
each part in the top or side, Similiter scinditur in morem dentium, ut pares
esse cognoscantur.

INFANT.
Infant, An Infant of eight years age or above, may commit Homicide, and shall
be hanged for it, viz. If it may appear (by hining of the ^person slain, by
excusing, or by any other act) that he had knowledge of good and evil, and of
the danger of the offense; for here malitia supplebit aetatem. Yet Cook upon
Littleton sect. 405. says, That an Infant shall not be punished until the age
of fourteen, viz. the age of discretion.

Before the age of one and twenty years a man Cook on Lit. lib. 1. c. 21. and
l. 2. c. 28.
or woman is called an Infant in the Law.

INHERITANCE.
Inheritance, A man may have an Inheritance in title of Nobility and Dignity
three manner of ways; that is, 1. by creation, 2. by descent, 3. and by
prescription: by creation two manner of ordinary ways, 1. by Writ, 2. and
Letters Patents. Creation by Writ is the antienter way; yet that by Letters
Patents is the surer. If he be generally called Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect.
9.
by Writ to the Parliament, he has a Fee-simple in the Barony without words of
Inheritance. But if he be created by Letters Patents, the state of Inheritance
must be limited by apt words, or else the Grant is void: But a man must not
only have the Writ delivered to him, but sit in Parliament, to make him noble
that way; and thereupon a Baron is called a Peer of Parliament: Therefore a
Duke, Earl, etc. of another Kingdom are not to be sued by these Names here, for
they are not Peers of our Parliament.

Some have an Inheritance, and have it neither by descent, nor properly by
purchase, but by creation; as when the King does create any man a Duke, a
Marquess, Earl, Viscount, or Baron Id. ib.
to him and his Heirs, or to the Heirs Males of his body, he has an
Inheritance therein by creation.

INN.
Inn, Common Inns are instituted for passengers and wayfaring men, for the
Latin word for an Inn is diversorium, because he that lodges there est quasi
divertens se a via, and therefore if a neighbor which is not a traveller, as a
friend at the request of the Inkeeper lodge there, and his goods are stolen, he
shall not have an Action, for the Writ is, ad hospitandos homines per parts,
Cook 8 Rep. Calyes Case.
ubi hujusmodi hospitia existunt, transeuntes, and in isdem hospitantes. The
Innekeeper shall answer for not^ing, which is out of his Inn, but only for
those things which are infra hospitium, the words are eorum bona, and catalla
infra hospitia ida existentia, and therefore the Horse which at the request of
the owner is put to pasture, being not infra hospitium, the Innekeeper is not
bound by the Law, to answer for him, if he be stolen, but if the owner require
not this, but the Innekeeper of his own head puts the Horse of his Guest to the
pasture, he shall answer for him if he be stolen, Hospes est, quasi hospitium
petens. The host shall not be charged except there be some default in him or
his servants. The words are ita quod per desectum hospitatorum, seu servientium
s^orum, hospitibus hujusmodi damni non eveniat, and although the guest deliver
not the goods to the Host to keep, nor acquaint him with them, yet if they be
stolen, the Host shall be charged, but if the servant of the guest, or he
which comes with him, or he which desires to be lodged with him, steal his
goods, the Host shall not be charged, for it was the fault of the guest to have
such a companion or servant, but if the Host appoint one to lodge with another,
he shall answer for him, as appears.

The Hostler requires his guest to put his goods in such a chamber, under lock
and key, and then he will warrant them, otherwise not, the guest suffers Cook
ubi supra.
them to be in outward Court, where they were ^tolen, the Host shall not be
charged for the fault that is in the guest.

If one bring a bag or chest of Evidences or Ob(...)gations into an Inn, and
they be stolen through (...)e default of the Host, the Innekeeper shall an^wer
for them.

If a man lodge with any (which is not an Innekeeper, upon request, and he be
robbed in his house, by his servants, which lodges him or any other, he shall
not answer for it, for the words of the Writ are hospitatores qui communia
hospitia Tenent.

Anno 21 Iacobi, Any person whatsoever found Proof of one witness sufficient.
See the Statute primo Car^li c. 4.
tippling in any Inn or Alehouse, to be adjudged within the compass of the
Statutes against drunkenness.

An Alehouse-keeper convict of offense against the Statute, to be disabled to
keep an Alehouse for three years after.

INSTITUTION.
Institution, is when the Bishop says, Institu^ Cook on Lit.
te rectorem talis Ecclesiae, cum cura animarum, and accipe curam tuam and meam.

Every Rectory consists of a spiritualty, and temporalty, and as for the
spiritualty, viz. cura Cook 4 Rep. Digbies case.
animarum, he is a complete Parson by Insti^ution, but as for the temporalties,
as the glebe land, he has no Frank-tenement in them, till Induction.

INTRUSION.
Intrusion, properly is when the Ancestor died of any estate of Inheritance
expectant upon an Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 8. sect. 475.
estate for life, and then Tenant for life dies, and between the death and
entry of the heir, a stranger does interpose himself, and intrude.

IOINTTENANTS.
Iiont-tenants, are so called, because Lands or Tenements are conveyed to them
jointly, conjuncti(...) feossati, or qui conjunctim tenent, and are
distinguished from sole or several Tenants, from Parceners, and from Tenants
in common, and anciently Cook on Lit. l. 3 c. 3. sect. 277.
they were called participes, and non haeredes. And these joynt-tenants must
jointly implead, and jointly be impleaded by others, which property is common
between them and coparceners, but joynt-tenants have a sole quality of
survivorship, which coparceners have not. Survivourship is not proper to them
quarto modo, for there may be joynt-tenants, though there be not Id. ib. sect.
280.
equal benefit of survivour on both sides. As if a man lets Lands to A and
B. during the life of A. If B. dies, A. shall have all by the Survivour, but
if A. dies, B. shall have nothing.

If one joynt-tenant should have more profit then another, the society should
be Leonina, rather the devouring of Lions, then the dividing of men, or
according to the Proverb, a man should divide honey with a Bear.

IOINTURE.
Iointure, it is so called, either because it is granted ratione juncturae in
matrimonio, or because Cook l. 3. Rep. Marquess of Winchesters Case.
the Land in Frank-marriage is given jointly to the Husband and Wife, and after
to the heirs of their bodies, whereby the Husband and the Wise be made
joynt-tenants during the Coverture.

JUDGES.
Judges, All their Commissions are bounded with this express limitation,
Facturi quod ad justitiam pertinet secundum legem and consuetudinem Angliae.

The Judge at his creation takes an Oath, that he shall indifferently minister
justice to all men, Fortescue ^ de laudibus legum Angliae.
as well foes as friends, that shall have any suit or plea before him, and this
shall he not forbear to do, though the King by his Letters, or by express word
of mouth should command the contrary. He shall also swear that from that time
forward, he shall not receive or take any Fee or pension, of any man but of the
King only, nor any gift, reward, or bribe of any man having suit or plea before
him, saving meat and drink, which shall be of no great value.

It is a Maxim in the Law, Aliquis non debet esse jadex in propria causa.

Henry the fourth of that name, when his eldest Son the Prince was by the Lord
Chief Justice, for some great misdemeanors, commanded and committed to prison,
he thanked God that he had both a Son of that obedience, and a Judge so
unpartiall, and of such undaunted courage.

Fortescue speaks of a Judge complaining of a judgment given against a
Gentlewoman of Salisbury, De laudibus leg. Ang. 53. c.
who being accused by her own man, without any other proof, for murdering her
Husband was thereupon condemned and burnt to ashes: the man who accused her
being within a year after convict for the same offense, confessed that his
Mistress was altogether innocent of that cruel fact, whose terrible death he
then (though over late) grievously lamented: but this Judge (says the same
Author) saepius mihi fassus est, quod nunquam in vita sua animum ejus de hoc
facto purgaret. He himself often consessed unto me, that he should never during
his life be able to clear his conscience of that fact.

Septimo Hen. 4. the King demands of Gascoin Justice if he see one in his
presence kill I. S. and another (which was not culpable) was indicted of this
before him, and found guilty of the same fact, what he will do in this case,
who answered that he ought to respite the judgment against See the like Case
determined by King James in disputations at Oxford.

R^x. Plath p. 1 ^^. 113. 114. 115. Pl^yden. Partridge against St^ange. fol.
83. B.


him, because he knew the contrary, and to relate the matter ^ully to the King,
to procure him a pardon; for there he cannot acquit him, and give judgment of
his private knowledge, for the Judges have a private and judicial knowledge, of
their p^ivate knowledge they cannot judge, but may use their discretion. But
where they have a judicial knowledge, there they may and ought to give judgment
according to that. As it one be arraigned upon an Indictment for any offense
which is pardoned by Parliament, there they ought not to proceed in this, nor
to give judgment if he be sound guilty, because it appears to them by their
judicial knowledge, that they ought not to arr^ign them, and they ought to
take knowledge of Statutes, although they be not pleaded.

JUDGMENT.
Judgment, The censure of the Judges is called Iudicium, quasi juris dictum,
the sinall saying, Cook.
judgment and doom of the Law.

Every Judge ought in giving his judgment, to avoid two things.

1. Precipitationem, quia ad poenitentiam properat, cito qui judicat. 2.
Morosam cunctationem, viz. either when the Cook Downams Case. ^ Rep.
Law is determined, or to make a question in the Law where there is none, to
cause delay to the party, which is in effect a denying of justice.
IURATA.
Iurata, A Jury vox est fori nostri, and signifies a company of honest and
lawful men, lawfully sworn, to enquire and relare the truth concerning such
things as are enjoined them by a Judge Iurata, Iuratores, and Jury are so
called a jurando, they are called in legibus antiquis, Sacramentales a
Sacramento praestando, there are diverse sorts of Jurors, according to the
variety of ancient matters, and the nature of the Courts, of which there are
two sorts more especially eminent, viz.

1. Iurata delatoria, is which inquires out offenders against Law, and presents
their names together with their offenses to the Judge, ut in examen vocati
juris subeant sententiam, sive ad condemnationem, sive ad deliberationem, and
this is called an Inquest, and is two-sold. 1. Major, cui totius Comitatus
lustratio, ut in Assisis and Sessionibus pacis, nec non in curia Regii
tribunalis demandatur, and is called the Grand Jury, or grand Inquest. 2.
Minor, cui minor jurisdictio, ut unius Hundredi in Sessionibus pacis creditur.
2. Iurata judiciaria, is that Jury which determines de summa litis, or the
matter of fact in issue before the Judge, does punire de jure, and this Iurata,
or Jury is also twofold. 1. Civilis, which takes cognizance of civil Actions
between Subject and Subject. 2. Criminalis, which takes cognizance o^ Actions
Criminal de vita and membri^ and is always betwixt the King, and the Subject,
commonly called the Jur^ of life and death.

The determination of the Jury is called some times duodecim virorum judicium,
for that t^^ number of men to make up a Jury are for the most part but twelve,
which custom for the trial of matter of fact, is very ancient, and was used
amongst the Saxons, ut e L. L. ^theldredi in frequ^nti Senateu apud Panatingum
editis cap. 4. resert Lambertus, in singulis (inquit) Centuriis Comitia sunto,
atq^e liberae c^nditionis viri du^deni aetate superi^res una cum pr^p^sito
sacra tenentes j^rento se adeo virum ali ^uem innocentem, haud damnaturos,
so^temve absolutur^s, The like to which memorial is, in consulto de monti^ul^s
Walliae sub aev^ ejusdem Etheldredi cap. ^. de pignore ablat^ viri du^de^im
jure consulti (seu legales) Anglis and Wallis jus dicunt^ sc. Angli s^x Walli
t^^idem, which we call medietas linguae which i^ a privilege or courtesy
afforded by the Law to strangers, aliens whose King is in league with us, in
s^its about things personal, namely that the Jury shall consist of six
English, and six of the aliens own Contrymen, if so many can be found, if
not aliens of any other Country, who by league are capable.

The Office of the Jury is to sind veritatem facti, and of the Judge to declare
veritatem juris.

It is a Maxim in the Law, quod ibi semper fieri Cook 4 Rep. Cases of Appeals
and indict
debet triatio, ubi juratores meliorem possunt habere notitiam.

Their finding is called veredictum, quasi dictum veritatis.

By the Law of England a Jury after their evidence given upon the issue, ought
to be kept in some convenient place, without meat or drink, fire or candle,
which some Books call an imprisonment, Cook on Lit. l 2. c. 5. sect. 366.
and without speech with any unless it be the Bailiff, and with him only if
they be agreed.

After they be agreed, they may in causes between party and party give a
verdict before any of the Judges of the Court, and then they may eat and drink,
and the next morning in open Court, they may either affirm or alter their privy
verdict, and that which is given in Court shall stand.

If the Jury after their evidence given unto them at the Bar, do at their own
charges eat or drink either before or after they be agreed on their verdict, it
is unable, but it shall not avoid the Verdict, but if before they be agreed
upon their Verdict, they eat or drink at the charge of the Plaintiff, if the
verdict be given for him, it shall avoid the Verdict, but if it be given for
the Defendant, it shall not avoid it, and sic e converso. But if after they be
agreed on their verdict, they eat and drink at the charge of him for whom they
do pass, it shall not avoid the verdict.

If A. be appealed or indicted of murder, viz. that he of malice prepensed,
kills I. A. pleads Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 8. sect. 484.
that he is not guilty modo and forma, yet the Jury may find the defendant
guilty of manslaughter without malice prepensed, because the killing of I. is
the matter, and malice prepensed is but a circumstance.

Quod vero Polydorus Virgilius scribit Guilielmum illum victorem duodecim
virorum judicium primum induxisse, nihil a vero alienius. Multis enim ante
annis in usu fuisse certissimum est ex legibus Ethelredi, nec est our terrible
judicium vocaret, e populo enim duodecim viri liberi and legales e vicinia rite
evo^antur, hi jurejurando obligantur vere de facto sententiam dicere, advocatos
coram testes tribunali ut^inque differentes, and audiunt; inde acceptis Cambden
in Britan.
utrius^; partis instrumentis concl^^u^tur, sine ci^^^, p^tu, and igne
detinentur (ni sort periculum sit ne ex iilis quispiam moriatur) donec coram
judice pronun^iaverint, ille de jure sententiam prose^t. Hanc enim rationem
prudentissimi majores nostri, optimam esse ad veritatem eliciendam, ad
corruptelas evitandas, and affectus intercludendos existimarunt.

JUSTICES.
Justices, They are called Justices per metonom^am subjecti, because they do or
should do Law Cook on Lit.
and Justice.

All the Commissions of the Justices of the Assize are bounded with this
express limitation, Factum quod ad justitiam pertinet secundum legem and
consuetudinem Argliae.

K.
KING.
KING, The King by his dignity royal, is the principal Conservator of Peace
within his Dominions, and is capitalis Iustitiarius Angliae. The Kings of
England themselves heretofore often ^^^ in Court in the Kings Bench, the King
of Denmark sits open^^ in Justice thrice in the Week, and has doors kept
open for the nonce. D. and Student c. 7. Fortescue de laudibus legum Angliae,
and* ali^.


The Kings of England at their Coronation take a solemn oath to came all the
Customs of their Realm faithfully to be observed, they promise to all their
Subjects, ^^^d ^^^^ (...), nulli n^^abunt, aut different justitiam vel (...).

The King cannot take or part from any thing but by matter of Record, and that
is for the dignity and Maie^^^ of his person.

Rex precipit, and lex precipit, are all one, for the King must command by
matter of Record, according to the Law. Cooks 2 part of I^stit. cap. 15.

All Lands are holden of him either immediately, Bracton.
or mediately, no Action lies against him.

It is a Maxim in the Law, That the King can Cook 7 Rep. Calv. case. in genere
he dies not but in hoc individuo, Henry and Edward the King.
do no wrong, because it presumes he will do no wrong.

The King has two capacities in him.

One a natural body, being descended of the blood Royal of the Realm, and this
body is of the creation of the Almighty God, and is subject to death, infirmity.

2. A politic body or capacity, so called because it is framed by the policy
of men, and in this capacity, it is said, the King never dies.

Although it be a Rule in the Law, that the King is not bound by the general
words of an Cook 5 Rep. Cases of Ecclesiastical persons.
Act of Parliament, where he is not named, yet in these cases the King shall be
bound by the general words of an Act, though he be not named, viz. if the
Statute be to supress wrong, to take away fraud, or to prevent decay of
Religion, for Religion, Justice and truth are the Supporters of Crowns and
Diadems.

KNIGHT.
Knight, is a Saxon word, and by them written Cnit^, ^hivaler takes his Name
from the Horse, because they always served in Wars on hors-back. The Latins
call them equites, the Spaniards Cavalleroes, the Frenchmen, Cook on Lit. l.
2. c. 4. sect. 112.
Chivaliers, the Italians Cavallieri, and the Germans Reiters, all from the
Horse.

KNIGHTS-FEE.
A Knights-Fee consists of twenty pound Foedum militis. Cook on Lit. l. 2. c.
4. sect. 112.
Land, and he pays for his relief, for a whole Knights Fee, the fourth part
of his Fee, viz. five pound and so according to the rate.

KNIGHTS-SERVICE.
Knights-Service, is commonly called servitium militare, or servitium militis.
Regularly there are six incidents to Knights service, viz. two of Cook on Lit.
l. 2. c. 4. sect. 103.
honor and submission, as Homage and Fealty, and four of profit, Escuage,
wardship of the Lands, marriage and relief.

It was called servitium militare, the service of a Soldier, and the title of
Knighthood came first by doing some military service, and miles signifies
both a Soldier and a Knight.

L.
LAND.
LAnd, The Land of every man is in the Law enclosed from other, though it lie
in the open field, and therefore if a man do trespass Dr. and Stucap. ^.
therein, the W^i^ shall be, Quare clausu^ fregit.

Terra, Land in his general and legal signification, Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 2.
sect. 14.
includes not only kind of grounds, as Meadow, Pasture, wood, but House^, and
all Edifices whatsoever: i^ a more restrained sense it is taken for arable
ground.

Twenty pound of Land was held anciently sufficient to m^^^t in the degree of a
Knight, 400 C^o^s ^ Re. A^th^^y Howescase.
marks of Land per annum, was a competent living (...) or a Baron, and 400 l.
per annum, ad sustinendum nomen and ^us of an Earl 8^^ marks per annum, the
Revenue of a Marquels, and 800 l. of a Duke.

Qui capit u^orem, capit lites, and qui habet terras, ha^er (...). A Wise
brings Wars, and wealth brings Wars, Quarrels, Suits and Controversies at
Law.

All Lands are holden of the Crown either immediately F^r ^rigina^^ all lands
were derived f^^^ the Crown.
or mediately by meine Tenants, the Conqueror by righ^ o^ Conquest got all the
Lands of the Realm into his own hands, and as he gave it, he still reserved
Rents, and services, which reservation is that which is called the Tenure of
Lands.

Terra Land, in the legal signification comprehends any ground, soil, or
earth whatsoever, as Medows, Pastures, Woods, Moors, Waters, Ma^ishes, Furses
and Heath, Terra est n^men generalissimum, and comprehendit omnes species
terrae, Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
but properly terra dicitur a terendo, quia vomere teritur, and anciently it
was written with a single ^, and in that sense it includes whatsoever may be
ploughed, and is all one with arvum ab arando. It legally includes also all
Castles, Houses and other buildings: For Castles and Houses consist upon two
things, viz. Lands or Ground, as the foundation and structure thereupon; ^o as
passing the Land or Ground, the structure or building passes therewith.

The earth has in Law a great extent upwards, Cooks Rep. A^u^eds case.
for cujus est solum, ejus est usque ad caelum.

If a man seized of Lands in see, by his Deed grants to another the profits
of those Lands, to have and to hold to him and to his Heirs, and makes livery
secundum formam chartae, the whole Land it self does pass, for what is the
Land, but the profits thereof? for thereby pasture, herbage, trees, mines, and
all whatsoever parcel of the Land does pass.

LARCENIE.
Larcenie, is so called from the Latin, Latrocinium; Terms of Law, the
Indictment must be also coepit and asportavit, or coepit and abduxit. One shall
forfeit his goods and be whipped for petty Larceny.
it is defined to be the taking away of some personal Chattel in the absence
of the owner. In respect of the thing taken away, it is said to be either great
or little. Petty Larceny is, where the thing stolen does not exceed the value
of 12 d. and that (say some) is Felony: For the Indictment (say they) must be
felonice coepit, and a man may justify the calling of one theif for such an
offense, and he shall forfeit all his goods and chattels for such a felony.

If one shall steal goods to the value of 4. d. at one time, and 6 d. at
another, and of 3. d. at another time, which do exceed the value of 12 d. and
the^e several goods be all stolen from one and the same person, then may they
be put together in one Indictment; and the offender being thereupon arraigned,
and sound guilty, shall have judgment of Death.

LATIN.
Latin. Falls Latin shall not quash an Indictment, False Latin will abate a
writ, not a Grant, Malagrammatica non vitiat concessionem sal^a Orthographia
non vitiat ^noce^^onem. Cook 5 Rep. Longs case.
nor abate any Declaration; for although the Original Writ shall abate for
sal^e Latin, yet judicial Writs, or a Fine, shall not be impeached for false
Latin.

The same Law is of an Indictment, as if in an Indictment it be proefato
reginae, whereas it should be praefatae reginae, or praefatae Regi, for
praefato Regi; the word being Latin, and significant; although it be not
congruous Latin, the Indictment for such incongruity shall not be quashed.

But if the word be not Latin, nor a word allowed by the Law, as vocabulum
artis, (for every Art and Science have their propria vacabula Artis) but i^
insensible; and if it be in a material point, this makes the Indictment
insufficient, as burglaritur, murarum, selonice, and similia sunt vocabula
Artis known to the Law; and therefore if these words, or the like, be mistaken
in an Indictment, so that in a material place there is an insensible word
which is not Latin, nor any word known in the Law, this makes the Indictment
vicious and insufficient, as murdredum for murdrum, or burgariter for
burgulariter; feloniter for felonice.

LAW.
Law, is an Art of well-ordering a Civil Society. Bracton ^aith, that Lex est
sanctio justa, jubens honesta, and prohibens contraria: so as every Law must
have three qualities. 1. It must be justa, 2. Jubens honesta, 3. Prohibens
contraria.


Our Common Laws are aptly and properly called Leges Angliae the Laws of
England, because they are appropriated to this Kingdom of England as most apt
and sit for the Government thereof, and have no dependence upon any foreign Law
whatsoever, no not upon the Civil or Canon Law other then in Cases allowed by
the Laws of England. Cook's 2 part of Instit. c. ^.

The Common Law of England is a Law used time out of mind, or by prescription
throughout the Realm.

The Law of nature is that which God at the time of creation of the nature of
man, infused into his heart for his perservation and direction, and this is lex
aeterna; this was 2000 years before Neminem oportet esse sapientiorem legibus,
ubi lex non distinguit, nec nos distinguere debemus. Lex plus laudatur quando
ratione probatur.
any Law written, and before any Judicial or Municipall Laws. Iura naturalia
sunt immutabilia this Law is indelibilis and immutabilis, Cook Calvin's Case.

The Law of England is grounded upon six principal Points:

1. The Law of Reason. 2. The Law of God. 3. On diverse general Customs of
this Realm. 4. On diverse Principles and Maxims. 5. On diverse particular
Customs. 6. On diverse Statutes made in Parliaments.
The Ancient and excellent Laws of Aengland Cook preface to the 6 Rep. and on
Lit. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 213.
are the Birthright, and the most ancient and best inheritance that the
Subjects of this Realm have, for by them he enjoys not only his Inheritance
and goods in peace and quietness, but his life, and his most dear Country in
safety: sometime it is called Right; sometime Common Right, and sometime
Communis Iustitia.

Our Laws are the same which the Norman Conqueror found in this Realm of
England. The Laws that William the Conqueror swear to Cook preface to the 8 Rep.
observe, were, Bonae and approbatae antiquae regni leges.

The Law of England respects the effects and substance of the matter, and not
the very niceity of form and circumstance, Qui haeret in litera, heret Cook on
L^^tieton.
in cortice, apices juris non sunt jura: Nihil quod est cortra rationem, est
licitum: For Reason is the life of the Law, nay, the Common Law it self is
nothing else but Reason, which is to be understood of an artificial perfection
of reason gotten by long study, observation, and experience, and not of every
man's natural reason: For nemo nas^itur Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 9. sect. 138.
artifex. This legal reason is summa ratio. And therefore, if all the reason
that is dispersed into so many several heads were united into one, yet could
he not make such a Law as the Law of England is, because by many successions of
Ages it has been fined and refined, by an infinite number of grave and learned
men, and by long experience grown to such a perfection for the Government of
this Realm, as the old Rule may justly be verified of it, Neminem oportet esse
sapientiorem legibus. No man (out of his own private reason) ought to be wiser
then the Law, which is the perfection of Reason.

Quaeritur, ut crescunt tot magna volumin^ legis?
In promptu causa est, crescit in orb dolus.
All Books written in the Law are either Historical, See in Fulbecks
parallels, 3 chap. a censure of the Writers of the Law.
as the Year-Books of the Common Law, or explanatory, as Mr Stamford his
Treatise of the Prerogative, or Miscellan^all, as the Abridgements of the
Common Law, or Monologicall, being of one certain subject, as Mr Stamford his
Book entitled the Pleas of the Crown, Lamberds Justice of Peace. One of the
Books of the Law is called Fleta, because the Author wrote it in the Fleet,
and the Fleet took the name of the River running by it, called the Fleet.
Cook's Preface to 10 Rep. See Mr Seld. ad Fled. Dissect.

LEGACY.
Legacy (otherwise termed by our Common Lawyers a devise) is a Gift left by the
deceased to be paid or performed by the Executor, or Administrator.

LEASES.
Leases. There be three kinds of persons, Lease from the French laisser,
linquere, relinquere, omittere.
that at this day may make Leases for three Lives, which could not do so when
Littleton wrote.

1. Any person seized of an Estate tail in his own right. 2. Any person seized
of an Estate in Fee-simple in Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 58.
the right of his Church. 3. Any Husband and Wife seized of any Estate of
Inheritance in Fee-simple, or Fee-tail in the right of his Wife, or jointly
with his Wife before the coverture, or after.
If one make a Lease for so many years as he Id. ib.
shall live, this is void in praesenti, for the incertainty.

In the eye of the Law, any estate for life being an estate for freehold,
against whom a praecipe Id. ubi supra.
does lie, is an higher and greater estate then a Lease for years, though it be
for a thousand, or more, which are never without suspicion of fraud.

Touching the time of the beginning of a Lease for years; it is to be observed,
that is a Lease be made by indenture, bearing date 26 May, to have and to hold
for twenty one years, from the date, or from the day of the date, it shall
begin on the twenty seventh day of May, if the Lease Cook 5 Rep. Claytons case.
bear date the twenty sixth day of May, etc. to have and to hold from the
making thereof, or from henceforth, it shall begin on the day in which it is
delivered; for the words of the Indenture are not of any effect till the
delivery, and thereby from the making or henceforth take their first effect.
But if it be a die confectionis, then it shall begin Id. ib.
on the next day after the delivery, if the habe^dum be for the term of twenty
one years without mentioning when it shall begin, it shall begin from the
delivery, for there the words take effect. If an Indenture or Lease bear date
which is void, or impossible, as the 30 day of February, or 40 of March, if in
this case the term be limited to begin from the date, it shall begin from the
delivery, as if there had been no date at all.

It is true, that every Lease at will must be at the Cook on Lit. u^i supra.
sect. 68.
will of both parties, and therefore when the Lease is made to have and to hold
at the will of the Lessor, the Law implies it to be at the will of the Lessee
also; for it cannot be at the will of the Lessor, but it must be at the will of
the Lessee.

If the Wife of I. S. be great with Child with a Son, and a Lease be made
until the issue in the Womb of his Mother come to full age, this is not a
Lease for years; for at the time when the Lease is to take effect, it is
uncertain when the Son shall be born; and by consequence the beginning,
continuance, and end of this is uncertain. And when a Lease for years shall be
made good by reference, the reference ought to be to a thing which has
expressed certainty at the time of the Lease made, and not to a possible or
causuall certainty. Therefore, if I have rent of 20 s. per annum in fee issuing
out of Black Acre, payable Cook 6 Rep. Bishop of Bathes case
continually at the Feast of Easter, and I grant the same Rent to you until ye
shall have received of the same Rent 21 l. in this case you shall have this
Rent for 21 years; for this has reference to the express certainty, viz. the
annual Rent, which is twenty Shillings per annum, until twenty one pounds be
levied of the issues and profits, this is but a Lease at will without livery,
for it is not certain, that the Land shall be every year of an annual value.

If a man has Mines hidden within his Land, Cook 5 Rep. Cases of Leases.
and leaseth his land, and all the Mines within it, there the Lessee may dig
for them, for Quando aliquis aliquid concedit, concedere videtur and id sine
quo ^es ipsa esse non potest.

There must not be a double Lease in being at one time, as if a Lease for years
be made according to the Statute, he in reversion cannot put but the Lessee,
and make a Lease for life, or lives, according to the Statute, nor e converso;
for the Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 58.
words of the Statute be to make a Lease for three lives, or one and twenty
years, so as one or the other may be made, and not both.

A Lease of Lands is as good without deed as with deed. But in a Lease for term
of life, it behooves to give livery and seism upon the land, or else nothing
shall pass by the grant, because they are called Free-holds.

LIBELL.
Libell. Every Libell (which is called samo^us libellus seu infamatoria
scriptura) is made either against a private man, or against a Magistrate, or
public person; the first deserves a severe punishment; for although the
Libell be made against one, yet this incites all the same Family, kindred, or
socie^y to revenge; the second is a greater offense, for it concerns not only
the breach of Peace, but the scandal of Government.

2. Although the private man or Magistrate be dead at the time of making the
Libell, yet this is punishable: for in one case this incites others of the same
Family, Blood, or Society, to break the Peace; and in the other the Libeller
traduceth an^ slandereth the State and Government, which dies not.

3. A Libeller was to be punished either by indictment at the Common Law, or by
Bill, if he Cook* 5* Rep. de libellis famosis.
deny this, or ore t^enus, upon consession in the Star Chamber, and according
to the quality of his offense, he was to be punished by sine or imprisonment,
and if the case be exorbitant, by pillo^y and loss o^ his ears.

4. Non refert, it skills not, whether the Libeil be true, or the party against
whom this is done, be of good or evil same.

Every infamous Libell, aut est in scriptis aut sine scriptis:

1. In scriptis, when an Epigram, or other writing is composed, or published to
another disgrace, and it may be published Verbis aut ^antilenis, as where this
is maliciously repeated or sung in the presence of others. 2. Traditione, when
the Libell, or any Copy of it is delivered over to scandalize the party.
Famosus Cook 5 Rep. de libellis famosis.
libellus sine scriptis may be 1. Picturis, as to paint the party in a
shameful and ignominious manner. 2. Signis, as to fix a Gallows, or other
reproachful and ignominious signs at the door of the party, or elsewhere.
And it was resolved, M^^h. 43. and 44 Elizab. in the Star Chamber in Hallywoods
case, that if any find a Libell, and will p^eserv* himself out of danger, if
this be composed against a private man, the finder either may burn this, or
presently show it to the Magistra^e: But if it concern a Magistrate, or other
public person, the finder ought presently to deliver this to a Magistrate, to
the intent, that by examination and industry the Author may be found and
punished. Tria sequuntur defamatorem samosum.

1. Pravitatis incrementum, increase of lewdness. 2. Bursae decrementum,
evacuation of purse and beggary. 3. Conscientiae detrimentum, shipwreck of
Conscience.
If one read a Libell, or hear it read, this is no publication of it; for
before he read, or hear it read, he cannot know it to be a Libell; or if he
hear, or read it, and laugh at it, this is no publication of it: But if after
that he has read, or heard it, he repear this, or any part of it in the
hearing of others; or after that he knows it to be a Libell, reads it to
others, this is an unlawful publication of it; or if he write a copy of it,
and do not publish it to others, this is not a publication of the Libell: for
every one which shall be Cook 9 Rep. Io. Lambs case.
convicted, ought to be a contriver, procurer, or publisher of it, knowing it
to be a Libell. But it is a great evidence that he publishes it, when he
knowing it to be a Libell writes a copy of it* unless he can after prove that
he delivered this to a Magistrate to examine it, for then the subsequent act
explains his precedent intention.

LIBERTY.
Liberty. This word Liberty notes a privilege Bracton, l. 2. c. 2.
held by grant or prescription, whereby a man enjoyes some favor beyond an
ordinary Subject.

Liberty from the Law is the delivering us from that hand or power of the Law,
by which we were formerly held.

LIGEANCE.
Ligeance, is so called a ligando, being the greatest and highest obligation of
duty and obedience that can be. It is, the true and faithful obedience Cook on
Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 198. Ligeantia est vinculum fidei ligeantia est legis
essentia.
of a Liege-man, or Subject to his Liege-Lord or Sovereign.

Ligeantia Domino Regi debita est Lex.

1. Perpetua. 1. Originaria, sive naturalis sive nata, and this is always
absolute, and due by birthright* and is called Alta ligeantia; and he that
owes this, is called Subditus natus. 2. Data, aut per denizationem aut per
naturalizationem. Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 198. and 7 Rep. Calv. case.

2. Temporaria, aut 1. Localis, wrought by the Law when an Alien^ that is in
amity, comes into England, for then he is within the Kings protection, and
owes a local obedience or ligeance. 2. Limitata, as when one is made denizen
for life, of in tail.

As the ligatures or strings do knit together the Cook 7 Rep. Calvin's case.
joints of all the parts of the body, so does ligeance join together the
Sovereign and all his Subjects, quasi uno ligamine.

Between the Sovereign and the Subject, there is duplex and reciprocum ligamen;
quia sicut subditus Regi tenetur ad obedientiam, ita Rex subdito tenetur ad
protectionem. There is praesidium due on the Kings side, subsidium on the
Subjects part. In the Acts of Parliament, Subjects are called Liege-people, and
the King the natural Liege-Lord of his Subjects; therefore protectio trahit
subjectionem, and subjectio protectionem. He should maintain and defend them,
and they are bound to obey and serve him. Ligeance is due only to the King, to
his natural body, therefore the indictment in Treason concludes, Contra
ligeantiae suae debitum.

LIMITATION.
Limitation. If a man give lands to a man, to Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 13. sect.
719. ^
have and to hold to him, and to the heirs males of his body, and to him and
the heirs females of his body; the estate to the heirs females is in remainder,
and the daughters shall not inherit any part so long as there is issue male;
for the estate to the heirs males is first limited, and shall be first served,
and it is as much to say, and after to the heirs females, and males in
construction of Law are to be preferred.

LIVERY.
Livery of seisin, is a solemnity that the Law requires for the passing of a
Freehold, or Lands or Tenements, by delivery of sesin thereof. There be two
kinds of livery of seisin, viz. a livery in Deed, and a livery in Law. A livery
in Deed, is when the Feoffor takes the ring of the door, or turf, or twig of
the Land, and delivers the same upon the Land to the Feoffee, in the name of
seisin of the Land. A livery in Deed may be two manner Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 7.
sect. 59.
of ways by a solemn act and words, as by delivery of the ring, or hasp of the
door, or by a branch or twig of a tree, or by a turf of the Land; and with
these, or the like words, the Feoffor, and Feoffee, both holding the deed of
the feoffment, and the ring of the door, hasp, branch, twig, or turf; and the
Feoffor saying, Here I deliver you seisin and possession of this house, in the
name of seisin, and possession of all the Lands contained in this Deed; or
enter you into this house or land, and have and enjoy it according to the Deed;
or enter into the house or land, and God give you joy; or I am content you
shall enjoy this Land, according to the Deed, or the like. A livery in Law is
when the Feoffor says to the Feoffee, being in Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 7. sect.
59. and 5 Rep. Sharpscase.
view of the house or Land (I give to you yonder land, to you, and your Heirs,
and therefore enter into the same, and take possession thereof accordingly) and
the Feoffee does accordingly in the life of the Feoffor enter; this is a good
feoffment for signatio pro traditione habetur. But if either Feoffor or the
Feoffee die before the entry, the livery is void. And delivery within the view
is good, where there is no deed of feoffment: And such a livery is good, albeit
the Land lie in another Country.

There is a diversity between the livery of seisin of land, and the delivery of
a Deed; for if a man deliver a Deed without saying of any thing, i^ is a good
delivery; but to a livery of leism of land words are necessary; as taking in
his hand the deed, and the ring of the door (if it be an house) or a turf or
twig (if it be of land) and the Feoffee laying his hand on it, the Feoffor say
to the Feoffee, Here I deliver to you seisin of this house, or of this land, in
the name of all the land contained in this Deed, according to the form and
effect of the Deed, and if it be without Deed, then the words may be, Here, I
deliver you seisin of this house or land, to have and to hold to you for li^e,
or to you, and the heirs of your body, or to you, and your heirs for ever. When
Ephron infeoffed Abraham of the field of Machpela, he said to him, Agrum trado
tibi, I deliver the field to thee. When one makes livery of sesin, this livery
shall be taken most strong against him.

And therefore if one give land to a man and haeredibus, this shall be a
Fee-simple to him, although Plowden ^o^thrist against Beinshin.
suis be left out, and yet he gives not Fee-simple expressly, but because every
livery shall be taken most strongly against him that makes it.

M.
MAGISTRATE.
MAgistrate, he is custos utriusque tabulae the keeper or preserver of both
Tables of the Law.

If any Magistrate or Minister of Justice in execution of their Office, or in
keeping of the peace, according to the duty of their office, be slain, this is
murder, for their contempt and disobedience to the King and the Law; for it is
contra potestatem Regis and Legis. If the Sheriff, a Justice of Peace, the
chief Constable, Watchmen, or any which come in their aid, be killed in doing
of their Office, this is murder. For when any of the Kings Cook 9 Rep.
Mackallies c^se.
Officers by process of Law (be it erroneous or not) arresteth another in the
Kings Name, or require the disturbers of peace to keep peace in the Kings Name,
and they disobey tho Kings Command and kill him, reason requires that this
killing should be an offense of the highest degree in this nature, and that is
murder of malice prepensed.

MAIME.
Maime, ( membri mutilatio or obtruncatio) is a Cook on Lit.
corporal hurt, whereby one loses a member, by reason whereof, he is less
able to fight, as by putting out his eye, beating out his foreteeth.

This offense of maim, is under all felonies deserving death, and above all
other inferior offenses, Cook ubi supra.
so as it may be truly said of it, that it is inter crimina majora minimum, and
inter minora maximum. Vita and membra sunt in potestate Regis. The li^e and
members of every subject are under the protection of the King.

In my Circuit (says Sir Edward Cook) in anno Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect.
194.
11. Iacobi Regis, in the County of Leicester, one Wright, a young, strong, and
lusty Rogue, to make himself impotent, thereby to have the more color to beg,
or to be relieved without putting himself to any labor, caused his companion
to strike off his left hand, and both of them were indicted, fined and ransomed
therefore.

The cutting of an ear or nose, or breaking of the hinder teeth is no maim, but
rather a deformity of body, than diminution of strength; by a maim a member is
hurt, or taken away, and the party thereby so hurt is made unperfect to fight.

The party shall recover only damages in Lit. tit. Vil. lenage.
maim.

MAINPRISE.
Mainprise, manucaptio is compounded of two French words, main, id est, manus a
hand, and Minshew.
prins, id est, captus taken, as it were taken into their hands. It signifies
in our common Law, the taking or receiving a man into friendly custody, that
otherwise is or might be committed to prison, See Bailement.
upon securtiy given for his forthcoming at a day assigned.

Such are called Mainpernours, because they do receive him into their hands.

MANOR.
Manor, manerium est nomen collectivum and generale, it comprehends Houses,
Lands, Gardens, L. Dyer.
Trees, Rents and Services: Manerium quasi manurium, because it is labored
with handy work by the Lord himself; or it may come from the French word
manoir, id est, mansions; because the Lord Cowels Interpret. and Innstitut.
remains there, and has his house which is called, the principal house of
the Manor. It cannot be a Manor unless there be a Court Baron belonging to
it, and be time out of mind: it consists of demeans and services, if they be
severed, the Manor is destroyed.

MAINTENANCE.
Maintenance, manuten^ntia is derived of the verb manutenere, and signifies in
Law a taking in hand, Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 13. sect. 701. Maintenance is most
usually done by the hand, either by delivery of Money, or other reward, or by
^riting on the behalf of one of the parties in a suit depending. Cook's 2 part
of Instit. c. 28.
bearing up or upholding of Quarrels, and sides, to the disturbance or
hinderance of common right, culpa est rei se immiscere ad se non pertinenti.

When one labors the Jury, if it be put to appear, or if he instruct them or
put them in fear, or the like; he is a maintainer, and an action of maintenance
lies against him.

Manutenentia est duplex, 1. Curialis, in Courts of Cook's 2 part of Instit. c.
28.
Justice, pendonte placito.

2. Ruralis, to stir up and maintain complaints, suits, and parts in the
County other then their own, though the same depend not in plea.

MANUMISSION.
Manumission, manumitter, which signifies to make free, is properly to send
one out of his hand, because so long as a slave continues in his servitude, he
is in the hand of his Master.

MARRIAGE.
Marriage, A feme covert is not sui juris, but only sub po^estate viri, when a
Baroness marries one under the degree of a Baron, by such marriage her dignity
is determined; for the rule Cook 4 Rep. Actons ^ase and on ^it. l. 1. p. 16.
and 6 Rep. Countess of Rutlands case.
is, quando mulier nobilis nupserit ign^bili desinit esse nobilis. But this
rule is to be intended of a woman which attains Nobility by Marriage; as by
marriage of a Duke, Earl, or Baron: For in such case, if after she marry under
the degree of Nobility, by such marriage with one which is ignoble, she loses
her dignity, which she had attained by marriage with one of the Nobility. For
Eodem modo quo quid constituitur, dissolvitur.

But if a woman be Noble, as a Duchess, Countess, Baroness, by descent,
although she marry with one under the degree of the Nobility; yet her
birthright remains: for this is annexed to the blood, and is Character
indelebilis.

But if a Duchess by marriage marry a Baron of the Realm, she remains a
Duchess, and loses no her name, because her Husband is Noble.

Yet by the Courtesy of England, if women get to any degree of Estate, they
never lose it, by marrying after more meanly; bu^ do still Dalton.
take place according to the estate of their first Husband.

The Law tenders the speedy advancement of women, quia maturiora sunt vota
mulierum quam ^i^orum.

MAXIM.
A Maxim, is a proposition to be of all men confessed, Cook on Lit. Principia
probant, non probantur.
and granted without a proof, argument or discourse, contra negantem principia,
non est disputandum, ancient principles of the Law ought not to be disputed.

It is better (says the Law) to suffer a mischief that is particular to one,
then an inconvenience, that Cook on Lit. p. 7. 7.
may prejudice many, Lex citius tolerare vult privatum damnum quam publi cum
malum. Summa ratio est, quae pro religione facit. A Statute directly against
the Dr. and Student. Cook 5 Rep.
Law of God is void.

The Rule of the Law is, Nemo debet bis puniri pro uno delicto, and the Divine
says, Nemo bis agit in id ipsum. Interest Reipublicae ne quis re sua male
utatur.

Beneficium transit cum onere, qui sentit commodum sentire debet and omis.

Benignior sententia in verbis generalibus seu dubiis est praeferenda.

Interest Reipublicae, ne malificia maneant impunita, and impunitas semper ad
deteriora invitat.

Nihil tam conveniens est naturali aequitati, unumquodque dissolvi eo ligamine
quo ligatum est.

As no estate can be vested in the King without Cook 1 Rep. Cholmleys case.
matter of Record, so none can be divested out of him without matter of Record.
Things are dissolved, as they are contracted.

An Obligation or other matter in writing, cannot be discharged by an Agreement
by word.

In praesentia majoris cessat potentia minoris.

The Book Cases are best proofs what the Law is.

Argumentum ab authoritate, fortissimum est in Cook on Lit. p. 141.
Lege.

Repellitur a Sacramento insamis.

Quod ab initio non valet, in ^ractu temporis non convalejcet, Cook.
and quae mala sunt in^h^ata a principio, vix est ut bono per agantur exitu.

MISPRISION.
Misprision, is when one knows that another has committed treason, or
felony, and will not Est quaedam neglectio supina rei cujusquam, a Gallico
Mesp^iser Cowels Inst.
discover him to the King, or to any Magistrate, but does conceal the same.

In all Cases of Misprision of Treason, the party offender shall forfeit his
goods for ever, and the profits of his Land for term of his life, and his body
to prison at the Kings pleasure.

MONEY.
Money, the King by absolute prerogative may Cook 5 Rep. Wades case
make any foreign coin lawful money of England at his pleasure by his
proclamation.

If a man be bound to pay four hundred pounds Id. ib. The party that is to
receive it, is to pull it out and tell it.
at such a day, if he tender it in bags it is sufficient, for it cannot be
counted in a day.

Lawful Money of England, either gold or silver, is of two sorts.

Viz. 1. The English Money coined by the Kings Authority.

2. And foreign Coin by proclamation made current within the Realm. Cook on
Lit.


Coin, cuna dicitur a cudendo, of coining, in French coin signifies a corner,
because in ancient time Money was square with corners, as it is in some
Countries at this day. Some say it is so called (...), quia communis, moneta a
monendo, because Cook on Lit. p. 207. B.
it shows the author and value. Every piece of Money ought to have a certain
form of impression which shall be cognoscibilis, and discernibilis, for as Wax
is not a Seal without print, so metal is not Money, without impression.

MONOPOLY.
Monopoly, It is an allowance by the King by his Grant, Commission or
otherwise, to any person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, of or for
the sole buying, selling, making, working, or using of any thing, whereby any
person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, are sought to be restrained
of any Freedom or Liberty that they had before, or hindered in their lawful
Trade. Cook's 3 part of his Institutes c. 85.

All Grants of Monopolies are against the Ancient and Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom. Id ibid.

All Monopolies are against the great Charter, because they are against the
Freedom of the Subject, and against the Law of the Land. Cook's 2 part of
Instit. c. 29.

MONSTER.
A Monster born within lawful matrimony, that Monstrum dicitnr a monstrando,
Varr^. S^aliger. Cook on Lit. l. 3 b. and 7. b
has not humane shape, cannot purchase, much less retain any thing, yet if he
have humane shape, he may be heir, though he have some desormity in any part of
his body.

MORTGAGE.
Mortagage, is derived of two French words, viz. mort, id est, mortuum, and
Gage, id est vadium, or pignus. And it is called in Latin mortuum vadium or
Morgagium, to distinguish it from that which is called vivum vadium. As if a
man borrow an hundred pounds of another, and makes an estate of Lands unto
him, until he has received the said sum of the issues and profits of the
Lands, so Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 5. sect. 332.
as in this Case neither Money nor Land dies or is lost, and therefore it is
called vivum vadium.

MORTMAIN.
Mortmain, Some have said, that it is called manus mortua, quia possessio eorum
est immortali^, manus pro possessione, and mortua pro immortali. Others say, it
is called manus mo^tua per antiphrasin, because bodies politic and co porate
never die. Others say, that it is called Mortmain by resemblance to the holding
of a man's hand that is ready to die, for that he then holds, he lets not
to go, till he be dead. These and such others are framed out of wit and
invention, but the true cause of the name, and the meaning thereof was taken
from the effects, as it is expressed in the S^atute it self, per quod quae
servitia ex hujusmodi Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
foedis debentur, and quae ad defensionem reg^i ab initio provisa fuerunt
indebite subtrahuntur, and capitales domini eschaetas suas amittant, (...) as
the Lands were said to come to dead hands, as to the Lords, because by
alienation in Mortmain, they lost wholly their Escheats, and in effect their
Knights services for the desence of the Realm, Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, and
the like, and therefore it was called a dead hand, for that dead hand
(...)ieldeth no service.

Notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain, a(...)y one at this day may give
Lands for finding a (...)reacher maintenance, or a School, for the Sta(...)te
was made to restrain men from giving to su^rstitious Cook 1 Rep. Porters case
uses, and not to good and charitable (...)es.

MULIER.
Mulier, has three significations. Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 6. sect 299. and 8
Rep. Sir Rich. Lechfords case.


1. Sub nomine mulieris continetur quoelibet foemina. 2. Propri^ subnomine
mulieris continetur mulier, quae virgo non est. 3. Appellatione mulieris in
legibus Angilae continetur uxor, and sic filius natus, vel filia nata ex justa
uxore appellatur in legibus Angliae filius mulieratus, seu filia mulierata, a
son mulier, or a daughter mulier.
If the Bastard dies, seized without issue, and the Lord by escheat enters,
this dying seized shall not bar the mulier, because there is no descent.

If the Bastard enter, and the mulier dies, his Wife privement enseint with a
Son, the Bastard has issue and dies seized, the Son is born, his right is
bound for ever, but if the Bastard dies seized, his Wife enseint with a Son,
the mulier enter, the Son is born, the issue of the Bastard is barred.

A young Son which is born during the espousals Cook 8 Rep. Lechfords case.
of a lawful Wife, is called mulier or filius mulieratus, for in our Laws
mulier is taken for uxor.

It is taken in our Law for one that is lawfully begotten and born, and is
always used in comparison with a Bastard, only to show a difference between them
and always you shall find this addition to T. of Law.
Bastard eldest, and mulier youngest, when they be compared together.

MURDER.
Murder, is a wilful killing of a man upon malice prepensed or forethought,
and seems to come of the Saxon word Mordren which so signifies.

If upon an affray made, the Constable and others in his assistance come to
suppress the fray, and to Cook 4 Rep. cases of appeals and indictinents fol.
10. ^.
preserve the Peace, and in doing their office, the Constable or any of his
assistants is slain, this is murder in the Law, although the murderer knew not
the party which was killed, and although the affray was sudden, because the
Constable and his a^sistants came by authority of the Law to keep the peace,
and to prevent the danger which may ensue by breaking of it, and for this the
Law adjudgeth it murder, and that the murderer had malice prepensed, because he
opposes himself againt the Justice of the Realm, so if the Sheriff, or any The
like is in 9 Rep. Mackallies case, and this reason given, for this is contra
potestatem Regis, and Legis.
of his Bailiffs or other Officers be slain in the execution of the process of
the Law, or in doing their Office, or if a Watchman be killed in doing his
Office, this is murder.

If a thief, which offers to rob a true man, kill Cook 9 Rep. Mackallies case.
him in resisting the thief, this is murder of malice prepensed; or if one kill
another without any provocation, the Law implies malice.

The Statute 1 Iac. Reg. c. 8 has well provided, that that party that
stabbeth, or thrusts any person (not having a weapon drawn, or that has not
first stricken him) so as he die thereof within six months after, shall suffer
death as a wilful murderer.

A. has wounded B. in fight, and after they meet suddenly, and fight again,
and B. kills A. this seems murder, and malice shall be intended in B. upon
the former hurt; but now if A. had killed B. this seems but manslaughter in
A. for his former malice shall be thought to be appeased by the hurt he first
did to B.

If two fall out upon a sudden occasion, and agree to fight in such a field,
and each of them go and fetch their weapon, and go into the field, and there in
fight, the one kills the other: here is no malice prepensed, for the fetching
of the weapon and going into the field, is but a continuance of the sudden
falling out, and the blood was never cooled: But it they appoint to fight the
next day, that is malice prepensed. Sir Edward Cook's 3 part of Institutes c. 1.

If A. put poison in a pot of Wine, to the intent to poison B. and lay it in a
place where he supposes B. will come and drink of it, and by accident one C.
(to whom A. has no ma^ice) come, and of his own head take the pot, and drink
of this; of which poison he dies, this is murder in A. for Cook 9 R. p. Agnes
Gores case.
he coupleth the event with the intention, and the end with the cause But if
one prepare Bats-bane to kill Rats and Mice, or other Vermin, and leave this
in some place to this purpose, and with no ill intent; and one finding this,
eat of it, this is not f^lony, because he which prepared the poison, had no
evil or felonious intent.

John Sanders had a purpose to kill his Wife, to the intent he might marry
another whom he better affected, and opens his intent to Alexander Archer, and
prays his aid and counsel how he may effect it; he counsels him to poison
her. And to this purpose the said Alexander buys the poison, viz. Arsenick and
Rose-acre, and gives this Plowdens Comment. Sanders case.
to Sanders to minister to his Wife. Afterward he gives his Wife this in a
roasted Apple, and the Wi^e eats a little part of it, and gives the remnant to
her young child about three years old, and the said John Sanders seeing this,
reprehends his Wife, and says that Apples were not good for such Here Sanders
was adjudged a principal, and hanged; but whether Archer was accessory here,
was a great doubt; for his offense was in counselling, and procuring him to
kill his Wife, and no other, for no mention was made of the Daughter.
children, and she says it was better for the child then for her; and the
child eats the impoisoned Apple, which the Father permits, to avoid suspicion;
afterward the woman recovers, and the child dies of the said poison. This was
murder in Sanders, though he bore no malice to his child, because he had an
intent to kill a person: so if one lie in wait in a place to kill one, and
another comes to the place, and he which lies in wai^ mistakes him, and kills
him; this is murder, being founded upon prepen^ed malice.

It was a Custom in old time, if one were found Pulton de place Regis and Regni.
g^ilty in any appeal of murder, that his Wife, and all the nearest of his kin
which was murdered, should draw the felon, who committed the murder, by a long
rope to the place of execution.

If a Peer of the Realm be arraigned at the suit of the King upon an Indictment
of Murder he Cook 9 Rep Et probos and legales homines juratos.
shall be tried by his Peers, that is Nobles; but if he be appealed of murder
by a Subject, his trial shall be an ordinary Jury of twelve Freeholders, as
appears 10 Edw. 4, 6. 33 Hen. 8.

The Town-ship shall be amerced for the escape of a murderer tempore diurno,
although the murder was committed in the town-field, or lane, L. Dyer p. 210. B.

If a man be attainted of murder, he shall suffer pain of death, and shall
forfeit lands, goods and cha^tels.

MUTE.
A Prisoner may stand Mute two manner of ways;

1. When he stands mute without speaking of any thing; and then it shall be
enquired, whether he stood mute of malice, or by the Act of God, and if it be
found that it was by the Act of God, then the Judge of the Court ex officio,
ought to inquire whether he be the same person, and of all other Pleas which he
might have pleaded, if he had not stood mute. 2. When he pleads not guilty, or
does not directly answer, or will not put himself upon the enquest, to be tried
by God and the Country. Cook's 2 part of Instit. c. 12.
If a man stand mute in an Indictment he shall be put to his penance, if in an
appeal he shall be hanged, if in a case of Treason, he shall be drawn and
hanged.

N
NAME.
NAme, If a grant be made to a Bastard, by Cook 6 Rep. Sir Moyle ^ Finches case.
the name of him which begot him, as is supposed; this is good, if he be known
by such a Name.

The penalty or forfeiture of Players, profanely using the Name of God, is ten
pounds, the one moity to the King, the other to him that will sue the Statute,
3 Iac. 21.

NIEFE.
Niefe, some have holden, that if a Freeman take a niefe, by this marriage the
Wife shall be Cook on Lit l. 2. c. 11. sect. 202.
free for ever; but the better opinion of our Book^ is, that she shall be
privileged during the cover(...) ture only, unless the Lord himself marries
hi(...) neife, and then some hold that she shall be free fo(...) ^itzh natura
Brev. tit. de liberate probanda.
ever.

If a Freeman marry a Wife which is a neife t(...) another, she shall be free
for ever, although the Husband die and she survive, this is in favorem
libertatis.

NISI PRIUS.
Nisi prius, is a judicial Writ, and so called because Smiths Commonw. of
Engl. c. 25.
that word is in the Writ.

NON COMPOS MENTIS.
Non compos mentis, is a man of no sound memory, many times the Latin word
explaineth the true sense, and calls him Amens, demens, furiosus, lunaticus,
Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 6.
fatuus, stultus, or the like: but non compos mentis is most sure and legal.

Non compos mentis is of four sorts. Ideota which from his nativity by a
perpetual infirmity is non compos mentis. 2. He that by sickness, grief, Cook
on Lit. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 405. and 4 Rep. Beverlies case.
or other accident wholly loses his memory and understanding. 3. A lunatique,
that has some time his understanding and sometime not aliquando gaudet lucidis
intervallis: and therefore he is called non compos mentis so long as he has
not understanding. Lastly, He that by his own vicious act for a time depriveth
himself of his memory and understanding as he that is drunken, but that kind of
non compos mentis shall give no privilege or benefit to him or his heirs; and
a descent shall take away the entry of an Idiot, albeit the want of
understanding was perpetual. So likewise if a man that becomes non compos
mentis by accident be disseised and suffer a descent, albeit he recover his
memory and understanding again, yet he shall never avoid the descent, and so it
is a fortiori of one that has lucida Id. ib.
intervalla. If an Idiot make a scoffment in fee, he shall in pleading never
avoid it, saying that He was an Idiot at the time of his scoffment, and so had
been from his nativity. But upon an Office found for the King, the King shall
avoid the seossment for the benefit of the Idiot, whose custody the Law gives
to the King: So it is of a non compos mentis, and so it is of him qui gaudet
lucidis intervallis, of an estate made during his lunacy; for albeit the
parties themselves cannot be deceived to disable themselves, yet twelve men
upon this Office may find the truth of the matter. But if any of them alien by
fine or recovery, this shall not only bind himself, but his heirs also.

Non compos mentis cannot commit Felony, because he cannot have a selonious
intent. Furiosus (says Bracton) non intelligit quid agit, and animo and
ratione caret, and non multum distat a brutis. Cooks 4th Rep. Beverlies case
Neither can he commit Petty Treason, as if a woman non compos mentis kill her
Husband; but in some cases non compos mentis may comm^t high treason, as if he
kill, or offer to kill the King, for He is Caput and salus reipublicae, and a
capite bona valetudo transit in omnes: and for this cause their persons are
privileged, that none ought to offer volence to them, but he is reus criminis
laesae majestatis, and pereat unus ne pereant omnes.

Of* an Idiot which is so a nativitate the King Id. ib.
has custodiam, of non compos mentis He has only provision, that is, of a
natural Idiot, the King has his Lands to his own use; but of non compos
mentis, He has not to his own use, but shall with the profits of the Land
maintain him, his Wife, Children and Household.

NOBILITY.
Nobility. In ancient time the Senators of Rome Cook on Lit. and 4th Rep.
Nevils case
were elected a censu of their Revenues, so here in ancient time, in conferring
of Nobility respect was had to their Revenues, by which their dignity and
nobility might be supported and maintained.

Gentry and Arms is of the nature of Gavelkind, for they descend to all the
Sons, every Son being a Gentleman alike, which Gentry do not descend to all
the Gentry alone, but to all their posterity. But yet jure primogeniturae the
eldest Cook on Lit
shall bear a badge of his birthright, his Fathers Arms without any
difference, for he (as Littleton says) is more worthy of blood; but all the
younger Brethren shall give several differences, and additio probat
minoritatem.

The Common Law calls none noble under the Lamberts Justice of P. c. 13.
degree of a Baron, and not as men of foreign Countries, with whom every man
of gentle birth is accounted noble; for we daily see that both Gentlemen and
Knights do serve in Parliament as Members of Commonalty; The Law has conceived
such an opinion of the peaceable Pultons Justice of peace.
disposition of Noblemen, that is has been thought enough to take one of
their promises upon his honor, that He would not break the peace against a
man. The person of a Baron (who is a Peer of Parliament) shall not be arrested
Id ib.
by his body, 1. In respect of their dignity* 2. Because the Law presumes that
they have sufficient Lands and Tenements wherein they may be distrained; yet in
case of contempt they may be arrested by a Capias or attachment. Cooks Preface
to the 2d part of his Reports Cooks 6th Rep. Countess of Rutlands case.


About 200 Gentlemen have got honor in their Famalies by the study of our
Common Law.

Every Baron of the Parliament ought to have a Knight returned of his Jury,
every Earl or Baron shall be amerced a 100 li. The eldest Sons of Earls or
Vicounts are not Barons in Law, but in reputation. Those which of ancient time
were created Earls were of the blood Royal, and to this day the King in all his
appellations styles them per nomen charissimi consanguinei nostri, and Cooks
9th Rep. the Countee of Salops case, the King calls them Companions and Cosens,
Comites and consanguineos.
therefore their bodies shall not be arrested for debt, trespass, and they
shall not be put in Juries.

Those which were Earls were created for two purposes: 1. Ad consulendum regem
and patriam tempore pacis. 2. Ad defendendum regem and patriam tempore ^e^l^:
and therefore antiquity has given them two ensigns to resemble these two
duties.

1. Their head is adorned with a Cap of honor, Cooks 7th R^p. Nevils case.
and a Coroner; and their body with a Robe in resemblance of Counsel. 2. They
are girt with a Sword, to show that they should be faithful, and loyal to
defend their Prince and Country.
NUSANS.
Nusans. A man shall not have an action upon the Case for a Nusans done in the
highway, for it is a common Nusans; and then it is not reason Nocumentum, it
comes of the French nuire, id est, nocere Cooks 5th Rep. Williams case.
that a particular person should have an Action. For by the same reason that
one person should have an Action for this, every one may have an Action for it,
and then he shall be punished a 100 times for one and the same cause. But if
any particular person after the Nusans made has a more particular damage then
any other, for this particular injury he shall have a particular Action upon
the Case.

O.
OATH.
AN Oath is an affirmation or denial by any Christian of any thing lawful and
honest, be ore one or more, that have authority to give the same for
advancement of truth and right, call^ng Almighty God to witness that his
testimony is true. It is called a corporal Oath, because he touches with his
hand some part of the Holy Scripture. Cook's 3 part of Instit. c. 74.

The Law esteems it the best means to search out See more in Cook's 3 part of
Institutes c. 74.
the truth, by the Oaths of honest lawful and indifferent persons, as God
shall help him, that is, as he will expect the blessing of God in this life,
and eternal salvation in the life to come: therefore an Oath is aptly termed
Sacramentum, an holy band, or sacred tie, or godly vow: some do call it
Firmamentum Pulton de pace Regis and regni.
veritatis, the foundation and ground of truth: and some vinculum pacis, and if
it be taken and sound by a whole Jury, consisting upon twelve persons or above,
it is called Veredictum, viz. a presentment of truth.

OBLIGATION.
Obligation, is a word of his own nature of large extent, but it is commonly
taken in the Common Law, for a Bond containing a penalty with Condition Cook on
Lit. l. 3. c. 1. sect. 259.
for payment of Money, or to do, or suffer any act or thing, and a Bill is most
commonly taken for a single Bond without Condition.

If a man be bound i^ an Obligation with Condition, that if the Obligor do go
from the Cook on Lit. l 3. c. 5.
Church of St. Pet. in We^tmi^ster, to the Church of St. Pet. in Rome within
three hours, that th^n that Obligation shall be void: the Condition is void,
and im^o^^ble. If a man be bound to pay 20 pound a^ any time at a place
certain, the O^ligo Cook on Lit. l. ^. c. 5. sest. 34^.
cannot tender the Money at the place when he will, ^^^ then the Obligee should
be bound to perpetual a^^^^ ^ince, and therefore the Obligor in ^e^p^^^ o^ the
(...) of the time must give the Ob^ige^^^ ^^^^ that on such a day at the place
limited he will pay the Money, and then the Obligee must attend there to
receive it; for if the Obligor pay the money. He shall save the penalty of the
Bond ^^^ ^ve^.

Wher^^^ a man is bound to pay 1^ li. at such a day and place, i^ the Obligee
accept a le^s sum at the same day and place, this appears to the Court to be
no (...) of the great, but acceptance Cooks 5th Rep Pinness cas^.
of the les^ at a day before it is d^e, or at another place, or of some other
thing (as of an horse) may be a s^^^sfaction

When any act to be done by condition, is to be done by the sole act, or
labor, or industry of a stranger, which act in no manner concerns the Obligo^,
Obligee, or any other person, and no time is limited when this shall be done,
it suffices the Obligor, if the act be done in the life of him which ought to
do this, as if I am obliged Cooks 6th Rep. Both^es case,
to you on condition, that I. S. shall go to Rome or Jerusalem, or that such a
Student in Divinity at the University shall preach at Paul's, or in the Law,
shall argue the matter in Law in Westminster Ha^l, in these cases no time being
limited, they have time to do it during their lives.

OCCUPATION.
Occupation, is a word of Art, and signifies a putting out of a man's Freehold
in time of war, Cook on Lit. ^. 3. c. ^. ^^^^. 41^.
and it is all one with a disseinsin in time of peace, saving that it is not so
dangerous.

OFFICE. Cooks 11th Rep. Curles case.

Office. If an Office be granted to two protermino vitarum suarum, by the death
of one of them the grant shall be void; for being an O^^^ce of trust there
shall be no survivour of it. ^^^ i^ it be expressly granted to two, and di^tius
^^^um ^i^enti, the survivour shall have it.

Officia Iudicialia non c^nceda^tur a^te ^am ^^cent: Id. ib.
Judicial Offices cannot be granted in reversion, but ministerial may.

By the Law of England it is provided that no Anno 12. R. 2. c 2.
Officer or minister of the King shall be ordained or made for any gift or
brocage, favor or affection; nor that any which pursues by him, or any other
Cook on ^it. l. 3. c. 5. sect. 3^^.
privily or openly to be in any manner of Office, shall be put in the same
Office or in any other, but that all such Officers shall be made of the best,
and most lawful men, and (...). A Law worthy to be written in Letters of gold,
but more worthy to be put in due execution.

An Office of skill and diligence, or annuity pro concilio impendendo, cannot
be forfeited by attainder of treason. The King grants an Office to one at
will, and 10 li. ^ee during li^e pro officio illo: now if the King put him from
this Office, the ^ee shall cease.

The Officer or Minister of Law in the execution Cook 9th Rep. Mackallyes case.
of his Office, if he be resisted or assaulted, is not bound to fly to the wall
(as other Subjects are) for Legis minister non tenetur in execution^ officii
fugere seu retrocedere.

If a Justice of the Common Place be made Justice of the Kings Bench, though it
be but hac vice, it Cook on Lit.
determines his Patent of the Common Place; for if he should be Judge of both
Benches together, he should control his own judgment: for if the common place
err, it shall be reformed in the Kings Bench. But a man may be Justice of the
Common Pleas, and Chief Baron of the Exchequer simul and se^el.

These words color officii are always taken in malam partem, and vary from
these words virtute officii, or ratione officii, which are always taken in
bonam ^a^tem, and imply that the Office is the just cause of the thing and the
thing is pursuing the Office: but the other words signify an act ill done
Ploydens Commentaries and Manninghams case.
by pretense and countenance o^ the Office, and it carries the counterseit
show of duty, and the act it self has a proper name, and is called Extortion.
As if an Officer will take more for his fees then he ought, this is done col^re
officii sui, but yet it is not part of his Office, and it is called Extortion,
which is no other then robbery; nay more hateful, in as much as the other is
apparent, and has the visor o^ vice* but this appears under the visage of
virtue, and so is more hard to be avoided, and by so much the more detestable.

OXGAUGE.
Oxgauge, or oxgate, Bo^a^a ter^ae, a word much Plo. Com. 168.
used in our old Books, and is as much land as an Ox can till, by the grant of
an Oxgauge of land may pass Meadow and Pasture.

ORDINARY.
Ordinary, is he that has Ordinary jurisdiction in causes Ecclesiastical,
immediate to the King and Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 11. sect. 641.
his Courts of Common Law for the better execution of Justice; as the Bishop or
any other that has exempt and immediate jurisdiction in causes Ecclesiastical.

It is derived ab ordine, to put him in mind of the duty of his place, and o^
that order and Office that he is called unto. Cook's 2 part of Institutes c.
19. See more there.

ORDAEL ORDALIUM.
Ordael ordalium, in the Saxon language ordael, Ordalium Sax^nibus and Anglis,
dicebatur probatio per aquam gelidam vel ^ervidam, aut candens ferrum.
^andentium vomerum judicium subjit summa matter Regis Edvardi Confessoris.
Vossius De vitijs Sermonis l. 12. c. 14.
which is as much to say, as Expers criminis, for or in that language is
privative, and del is part, that is, not party, or not guilty Cook l. 9. de
Strata Marcella.
.

Or signifies right. deal part (say some) whereof they had these kinds: or
deal by fire which was for the better sort, and by water for the interior.
That of fire was to go blind^old over certain plough-shares made red hot, and
laid an uneven distance one from another* that of water was either of hot, or
cold, in the one to put their arms to the elbow, in the other to be cast
headlong.

OUTLAWRIE.
Outlawrie, is the loss or deprivation of the benefit belonging to a Subject,
that is of the Kings protection and the Realm. Heretofore none could Dictus
Utlagatus quasi extra legem positus.
be outlawed but for felony, the punishment whereof was death, but now the Law
is changed. An outlawed man had then caput lupin^m, because he might be put to
death by any man, as a Wol^ that hateful heast might.

P.
PAIN FORT ET DURE.
Pain f^^t and dure is a special punishment for such as being arraigned for
selony, refuse to put themselves upon the common trial of God and the
Country, and thereby are m^^e. Such a one shall be sent back to the prison
whence he came, and be laid in some low Stamford pl. Cor. l. 2. c. 1.
dark house where he shall lie naked upon the earth, without any litter or
other clothing, and without any raiment, save only to cover his p^ivy Members,
and he shall lie upon his back, with his head covered and his feet. And one arm
shall be drawn to one quarter of the house with a co^d, and the other arm to
another quarter, and ^ro^ or stone shall be laid on his body so much as he can
bear; and the next day following he shall have three morsels of barley Bread
Without drink and puddle water next unto the prison door, which pain may be
called fort, in that it is so ponderous and grievous that he cannot bear or
sustain it; and dure because he shall not Id. Ib.
have release of it during his life, but shall die in it.

PANNELL.
Pannell, is an English word, and signifies a little part, for a pane is a
part, and a pannell a little part (as a pannell of wainscot, a pannell of a
saddle, and a pannell of parchment, wherein Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 2. sect. 234.
the Jurors Names be written, and annexed to the Writ; And a Jury is said to be
impannelled) when the Sheriff has entered their Names into the pannell, or
little piece of pa^chment in pannell^ Assisae.

PARAVAILE.
Paravaile. He is called Tenant paravaile, because Cook 9th Rep. Cony's case.
the Law presumes that he has benefit and avail over the services which he
pays to the Lord.

PARCENERS.
Parceners. If a partition be made between two Coparceners of one and the self
same land, Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
that the one shall have the land from Easter until Lammas, and to her heirs;
or the one shall have it the first year, and the other the second year alternis
vicibus, there it ^s one self same land wherein two persons have several
Inheritances at several times. So it is if two Coparceners have two several
Manors by descent, and they make partition, that the one shall have one Manor
for a year, and the other the other Manor for the same year, and after that
year, then she that had the one Manor shall have the other, and sic alternis
vicibus for ever.

If an Earl that has his dignity to him, and his heirs dies, having issue one
daughter, the dignity shall descend to the daughter, for there Cook on Lit, l.
3. c. 1. sect. 241.
is no incertainty, but only one daughter, the dignity shall descend unto her
and her posterity, as well as any other Inheritance: but where there be more
daughters then one, the eldest shall not have the dignity and power of the
Earl, that is to be a Countess, but the King who is the Sovereign of Honor and
Dignity, may for the incertainty confer the dignity upon which of the
daughters he pleases. But there is a difference between a dignity or name of
nobility, and an Office of Honor. For if a man hold a Manor of the King to be
high Constable of England, and die having issue two Id. ib.
daughters, the eldest daughter takes Husband, he shall execute the Office
solely, and before marriage it shall be executed by some sufficient Deputy. But
the dignity of the Crown of England is without all question descendible to the
eldest daughter alone and her posterity, and so it has been declared by Act of
Parliament: for Regnum non est divisibile.

They are called Parceners, because by the Writ which is called De partitione
facienda, the Law will compel them to make partition of the Land. There is an
Action in the Civil Law very like to this, called Actio familiae here scundae.

PATRON.
Patron. Pollard 12. H 8. does well distinguish the interest of the Parson,
Patron and Ordinary, the Parson (says he) has a spiritual possession in the
Church, the Ordinary has charge of the Church to see the cure served, the
Patron jus praesentandi to the Church.

PARSON.
Parson. Persona in the legal signification is taken for the Rector of a
Church parochial, and is called Persona Ecclesiae, because he assumeth Cook on
Lit. l. 3. c. 9. sect. 528.
and takes upon him the Parson of the Church, and is said to be feised in jure
Ecclesiae, and the Law had an excellent end herein, viz. that in his person the
Church might sue for and defend her right; and also be sued by any that had an
elder and better right: and when the Church is full, it is said to be plena and
consulta of such a one Parson thereof, that is, full and provided of a Parson
that may vicem seu personam ejus gerere, Id. ib.
persona impersonata: Parson Impersonee is the Rector that is in possession of
the Church parochial, be it presentative or impropriate, that may vicem seu
personam ejus gerere. If a Parson of a Church waste the Inheritance of his
Church to his private use in cutting down the Trees, the Cook 9th R^p. Lifords
case.
Patron may have a Prohibition against him, for he is seized in right of his
Church, and his glebe is the dower of his Church.

PARLIAMENT.
Parliament, is the highest, and most honorable, Si vetustatem spectes est
antiquissima, si dignitatem est honoratissima, si jurisdictionem est
capacissima. Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 10. sect. 164.
and absolute Court of Justice of England, consisting hereto^ore of the King,
the Lords of Parliament and the Commons. And again, the Lords, viz. Spiritual
and Temporal. And Commons are divided into three parts, viz. into Knights of
Shires or Counties, Citizens out of Cities, and Burgesses out of Buroughs. All
which have voices and suffrages in Parliament. Of the Members of the Court,
some were by descent, as ancient Noblemen; some by creation, as Nobles newly
created; some by succession, as Bishops; some by election, as Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses.

In the Lords House, the Lords give their voices from the paisne Lord seriatum
by the word of (Content) or (not Content.) The Commons give their voices upon
the question, by Yea or No, and if it be doubtful, and neither party yield,
two are appointed to number them, one for the Yea, another for the No: the Yea
going out, and the No sitting: and thereof report is made to the House. Cook's
4 part of Instit. c. 1.

It is called Parliament, because every Member of the Court should sincerely
and discreetly parler la meant for the general good of the Commonwealth. Id.
ib. and Preface to the 9th Rep.
This Court the French calls ^es estats, or l^ assemblee des estats: in
Germany it is called a Diet. It is legally called in Writs and judicial
proceedings, C^m^une con^ilium Regni Angliae.

The jurisdiction of this Court is so transcendent, that it makes, inlargeth,
diminishes, abrogateth, repealeth, and reviveth Laws, Statutes, Acts and
Ordinances concerning matters Ecclesiastical, capital, criminal, common,
civil, martial, maritime, and the rest.

The efficient causes of an Act of Parliament were the assent of the Estates,
viz. 1. Of the Judge Doderidge. An Ordinance in Parliament differs from an Act
that is ordained by one or two of them. Cook's Instit. 4th part c. 1. Cook l.
8. of Rex. case, de Prin. 20 b. 11. H. 7 27 7. H. 4
King. 2. Of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. And, 3. Of the Commons: and
each without the other cannot perfect this work; and yet until the royal
assent, it was but embrio in ventre matris, and by the royal assent coming last
it took life and vigor. The Assembly of the three Estates, viz. the King,
Nobility and Commons, which make the body of the Realm, was called a
Parliament. For without all three (as if it be done by the King and Lords, but
nothing spoken of the Commons) it was no Act of Parliament. And although the
Lords and Commons agree to it, yet it was not an Act until the King had
assented also, and his assent always comes after their assent, and commonly
this is the last day of Parliament* from this day forward it was an Act, and
not before, for before the Kings assent, it was an issue in the Mothers womb,
which is not perfect until it be born, for the Statute was not full and
perfect until his assent given to it. But it shall be counted Ployden
Partridge against Strat. s^l. 79. ^.
an Act from the first day of the Parliament, unless the certain time be
specified when the Act shall first take effect. But if the Parliament have
diverse prorogations, and in the second o^ third Session an Act is made, this
shall not have relation to the day of the beginning of the Parliament, viz. to
the first day of the first Session, but only to the first day of the same
Session, in which it is made.

Of Acts of Parliament some are introductory of a new Law, and some are
declaratory of the ancient Law, and some are of both kinds by addition of
greater penalties or the like. Cook's 4th part of Instit c. 1.

One of the principal ends of ca^ling of Parliaments is for the redress of the
^mischiefs and grievances that daily happen. Cook's 4th part of Instit. c. 1.

PARQUE.
Parque, is a French word, and signifies that which we vulgarly call a Park,
of the French verb, parquer to enclose, it is called in Domesday Parcal, in Law
it signifies a great quantity of ground enclosed, privileged for Cook on Let.
l. 3. c. 5. sect. 378. 9 timo Iacobi.
wild Beasts of chase by prescription, or by the Kings Grant; The forfeiture
for hunting or killing of Deer in a Park, is 10 ll. or else treble damages.

PEACE.
Peace, The Law of our Land uses the word Peace diversely: Sometimes it is
taken for protection Lamberts Justice of Peace.
or defense, so Bracton calls the Writs of protection Brevia de pace.
Sometimes it is taken for Rrights, Privileges, and Liberties, as in the Oath
of the King at his Coronation: He swears servare ecclesiae Dei, cleri and
populi pacem ex integro, that he will maintain each degree, and estate of his
Subjects, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. according to their several
Customs, Laws and Privileges, sometimes for an abstinence from injurious
force and violence, so it is commonly Lamberts Justice of peace. Pulton.
taken, menacing begins the breach of the Peace, assaulting increases it,
and battery accomplisheth it.

PERJURY.
Perjury, if a man swear to one that he will pay to him twenty pound which he
owes him at a certain day, and at the day fails of the payment, he may not
be sued in the spiritual Court for the perjury, because an Action of debt
lies at the Common Law for for the principal. But 34 H. 6. it is said, that
if a man buy an Horse for five pound, solvendum, such a day, and swears to
make payment at the day, but when the day is come, fails of payment, an
Action of debt lies at the Common Law, and another at the Spiritual Law, pro
laesione fidei.

If a man calls another perjured man, he may have his Action upon his Case,
because it must be intended contrary to his oath in a judicial proceeding: but
for calling him a forsworn man, no Action does lie, because the forswearing may
be extra judicial. Cook's 3 part of his Instit. c. 74.

PILLORY.
Pillory, comes of the French pilorie, which proceeds from (...) janua, and
(...) video, because Collistrigium Cowell.
one standing on the Pillory, puts his head through a kind of door.

PIPOWDERS. Curia pedis pulverizati. Judge Doderidge, Cowels Instit.

Pipowders, is a Court belonging to Markets and Fairs, to yield Justice to the
buyers and sellers coming thither, which because they are most frequented in
Summer, the word was given of the dusty feet of the comers, from two French
words, pies pouldrez, id est, pedes pulvere inquinatos.

PLEAS.
Pleas. All pursuits and actions (we call them in our English tongue Pleas) and
in barbarous, (but now usual Latin) placita, taking the name abusive, of the
definitive sentence, which may well be called placitum, or* (...). The Smiths
Commonw. of England c. 9.
French call it arest, in which word after their custom, they do not found
the^^. But we call placitum the action, not the sentence: and placitare
barbarously for to plead in English agere, or litigare.

Pleas are divided into Pleas of the Crown, and into Common or Civil Pleas.
Pleas of the Crown are Treason and Felony, and misprison of Treason and Felony;
They are Communia placita, not in respect of the persons, but in respect of the
quality of the Pleas. Cook's 4th part of Instit. c. 10.

All those Pleas which touch the life or mutilation Id. c. 4.
of man, are called Pleas of the Crown, and cannot be done in the name of any
inferior person, then He or She that holds the Crown of England. And
likewise no man could give pardon thereof, but the Prince only.

POSSESSION.
Possession. Possessio est quasi pedis positio.

In aequali jure melior est conditio possidentis, He that has possession of
Land, though it be by disseism, has right against all men, but against Dr. and
Stud. c. 9.
him that has right.

Possession is either 1. Actual ( possessio in facto) when a man enters in
deed into Lands or Tenements to him descended: 2. Or possession in Law
possessio Civilis, when Lands or Tenements are descended to a man, and he has
not as yet actually, and indeed entered into them. Cook on Lit*


Possession must have three qualities, it must be 1. Long, 2. Continual, and 3.
Peaceable.

POUND.
Pound, is either overt and open, so called because Either a Pinfold made for
such purposes in his own Close, or another with his consent.
the owner may give his Cattle meat and drink without trespass to any other,
and there the Cattle must be sustained at the peril of the owner, or covert
and close, as if one impound the Cattle in some part of his house, and then
the Cattle are to be sustained with meat and drink at the peril of him that
distreineth, and he shall not have any satisfaction therefore.

If a man distrain Cattle for damage Feasant, and put them in the pound, and
the owner that had common there make fresh suit, and find the door unlocked, he
may justify the taking away Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 58.
of his Chattell in the Writ of a Parco sracto. If the owner break the Pound,
and take away his goods the party distreining may have his Action de par^o
fracto, and he may also take his goods that were distreined wheresoever he find
them, and impound them again.

PRAEMUNIRE.
Praemunire, is to be adjudged out of the Kings Cook on Lit. and Preface to the
7th Rep.
protection, to lose all their Lands and Goods, and to suffer perpetual
imprisonment.

Some hold an opinion, that the Writ is so called a praemunire, because it does
fortify jurisdictionem jurium regionum Coronae suae, the Kingly Laws of the
Crown against foreign jurisdiction, and against the usurpers upon them, as by
diverse Acts of Parliamentt appear. But in truth it is so called of a word in
the Writ, for the words of the Writ are, praemunire facias prefatum Cook on
Lit. l. 2 c. 11. sect. 199.
A. B. quod tum sit coram nobis, where praemunire is used for praemonere, and
so do diverse Interpreters of the Civil and Canon Law use it, for they are
raemuniti that are praemoniti, so odious was this Offense of praemunire, that a
man that was attainted of the same, might have been sla^n by any man without
danger of Law, because it was provided by Law, that a man might do to him as to
the Kings enemy, and any man may lawfully kill an enemy. But Queen Elizabeth,
and her Parliament 5 of Eliz. c. 1.
liking not the extreme and inhumane rigor of the Law in that point, did
provide that it should not be lawful for any person to slay any person in any
manner attainted, upon any praemunire.

If a man kill one which is attainted by a praemunire, this is not felony, for
he is out of the Kings Brooks abridg. fol. 181. B.
protection, but it is contrary if one kill another, that is attainted of
felony, and judged to die, but now by the Statute of Eliz. it is felony to kill
one attainted by a praemunire.

Prebenda a praebendo auxilium, and consilium Episcopo. Cook.


PREROGATIVE.
Prerogative, Littleton speaks of the Kings Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 5. sect.
125.
prerogative but twice in all his Books, viz. sect. 126. and 178. and in both*
places as part of the Laws of England, prerogativa is derived of prae, id est,
ante and rogare, that is, to a^k or demand Prerogativa is a privilege or
pre-eminence that any person has before an other, which as it is tolerable in
same, so it is most to be permitted and allowed in a Prince. Stamford. Camdens
Brit.
before hand, whereof comes prerogativa, and is denominated of the most
excellent part, because though an Act has passed both the Houses of the Lords
and Commons in Parliament, yet before it be a Law, the Royal assent must be
asked, or demanded, and obtained, and this is the proper sense of the would. But
legally it extends to all powers, preheminences, and privileges, which the Law
gives to the Crown, Bracton l. 1. in one place calls it libertatem, in
another privilegium Regis. The King has many rights of Majesty peculiar to
himself (the learned Lawyers term them sacra sacrorum, that is, sacred, and
individua, inseparable, because they cannot be severed, and the common sort
r^yall Prerogatives, which they term the flowers of his Crown, in which respect
they affirm, that the regal material Cown is adorned with flowers.

His person shall be subject to no man's suit, his possessions cannot be taken
from him by any violence, Stamfods prerogative.
or wrongful disseism, his goods and chattels are under no tribute, toll, nor
Custom, nor otherwise distreinable.

The peoples liberty strengthens the Kings Prerogative, and the Kings
Prerogative is to defend the peoples liberties, King Charles his speech, in the
3d of his Reign.

The King may license things forbidden by Statutes; As to coin money which is
made felony by the Statute, and was before lawful, for that is but malum
prohibitum, but malum in se, as to leavy a nuisance in the Highway, he cannot
license to do, but when it is done he may pardon it. All white Swannes not
marked, which have Cooks 7th Rep.
gained their natural Liberty, and are swimming in an open and common River,
may be seized to the use of the King by his Prerogative, the Swanne is a royal
Bird, and so the Whale, and Sturgeon are royal Fishes, and belong to the King
by his Prerogative. All those things, the property of which is not known,
belong to the King by his Prerogative.

A grant to the King, or by the King to another, Cook on Littleton.
is good without atonement by his prerogative.

PRESCRIPTION.
Prescription, is three-sold, viz.

1. Personal, as the Inhabitants of a Town may prescribe for a way, etc. 2.
Real, as incident to an estate, as for a man to prescribe that he and they
whose estate he has had common, etc. 3. Local, as where a man does prescribe
that within such a Manor, etc.
Prescription, is a title taking his substance of use, Prescriptio est titulus
ex usu and tempore substantiam capiens. Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 10.
and time allowed by the Law, as I. S. seized of the Manor of D. in see,
prescribes thus, that I. S. his Ancestors, and all those whose estate he has
in the said Manor, have time out of mind of man had, and used to have Common
of pasture in such a place, being the Land of some other, as pertaining to the
said Manor. This properly we call a prescription. Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 10.
sect. 170.

Prescription shall hold sometime against the King, in such things as a man may
prescribe in, Stamf. of the prerog. c. 8.
as one shall prescribe for wayse and straise against the King. The King may
also outstay his time, if it be found the Tenant for term of life, has
forfeited his estate to the King, whereby the King ought to cease, if his grace
sease not, but tarry till he be dead, so that he in the reversion enters, he
cannot then cease, so that maxim is not universally true, Nullum tempus
occurrit Regi.

The Statute de praerogativa Regis, quod nullum tempus occurrit Regi, is to be
understood when the King has an Estate or Interest certain and permanent,
Cooks 7th Rep. Baske^viles Case.
and not when his interest is specially limited; for the time is the substance
of his title, and in such case ocurrit Regi.

PRESENTMENT.
Presentment, co^es of the French word presenter to set before one: and in the
understanding of the Law is a mere denuncia^ion of the Jurors themselves, or of
some other Officer, as Justice, Constables, Surveyors, etc. most commonly de
proprio visu without the in^ormation or the prosecution of a third party of any
offense inquirable in the Court whereunto it is presented. Lamb. Eirenarch. pa.
467.

PRESUMPTION.
Presumption. There be three sorts of presumptions: 1. Violent, which is many
times plena probatio; Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
as if one be run through the body with a sword in an house, whereof he
instantly dies, and a man is seen in the house to come out with a bloody
sword, and no other man was at that time in the house. 2. Probable which moves
little* 3. Levis seu temeraria, which moves not at all. So in a case of a
Charter of seossment, if all the Witnesses to the Deed be dead, then violent
presumption which stands for a proof is continual and quiet possession.

Presumptio stat in dubio: it is doubted of, and yet it is accounted veritatis
comes quatenus in contrarium nulla est probatio ut regula se habet, stabitur
presumptioni donec probetur in contrarium.

PRISON.
Prison. Every suffering of a Prisoner to escape is a See Imprisonment.
breach of prison. If a man arrest one for felony, and after let him go at
large whether he will, if he be arrested for felony, it is Felony; if for
Treason, it is Stam. l. 1. cap 26.
Treason; if for a trespess, it is a trespass, and sic de singulis.

PRIVITIE.
Privitie, is a word common as well to the English as to the French, and in the
understanding of the Common Law is four-sold: 1. Privies in estate as between
the Donor and Donee, Lessor and Lessee, Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 8. sect. 461. and
Beverlies case non compos mentis.
which privitie is ever immediate. 2. Privies in Blood, as the Heir to the
Ancestor, or between Coparceners. 3. Privies in representation, as Executors to
the Testator. And 4thly, Privities in tenure, as the Lord and Tenant which may
be reduced to two general Heads, Privies in Deed, and Privies in Law.

PRIVILEGE.
Privilege, privilegium is ius singular, whereby a private man, or a
particular Corporation is exempted from the vigor of the Common Law, for that
which is now called proprium, has been called of old Writers privum.

PROCESS.
Process, it is called process, because it proceeds (or goes out) upon former
matter, either original or judicial.

This word process has two significations, it is largely taken for all
proceeding in all real and personal actions, and in all criminal and common
Pleas, and processus derivatur a procedendo usque ad finem. 2. More safe for
the proceeding after the originals is but of the plea before judgment.

The difference between process and the precept or warrant of the Justices. The
precept Cooks 8th Rep. Blackmores case.
or Warrant is only to attach and convent the party before any Indictment or
conviction, and may be made either in the name of the King or of the Justice.
Process is always in the name of the King, and usually after an Indictment
^ound or other conviction; and because the King is a party, it must also be
with a non omittas propter aliquam libertatem.

PROOF.
Proof. Bracton says there is probatio duplex, viz. viva, as by Witnesses,
viva voce, and mortua; as by Deeds, Writings, Instruments. A Wife cannot be
produced either against or for her Husband, quia duae sunt animae in carne una,
and it might be a cause of implacable discord between the Husband Cook on Lit.
l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
and the Wife, and a mean of great inconvenience; but in some cases Women are
by Law wholly excluded to bear testimony, as to prove a man to be a villein;
Mulieres ad probationem status hominis admitti non debent.

PROPERTY.
Property, if Plate be stolen, and sold openly in a Scriveners Shop, on the
Market day, as every day is Market day in London, saving Sunday, this sale
shall not change the property, but the party shall have restitution: for a
Scriveners Shop is not a Market overt for Plate, for none will search there for
such a thing, but if the sale had been openly in a Goldsmiths Shop in London,
so that every one which passed by the Shop might have seen it, this would have
altered the property; But if the sale be in a Goldsmiths Shop, either behind a
hanging or cupboard, so that one passing by Cooks 5th Rep. case. of Market
overt.
the Shop cannot see it, this shall not change the property, so if the sale be
not in the Shop, but in a Warehouse, or other place of the House, this shall
not change the property, for it is not in a Market overt, and none will search
there for his Goods.

There can be no property of Birds, Fowls, Wild Beasts, in any person, unless
they be Dr. and Stu* c. 5.
tame, nevertheless, the Hawks, or Herons that build in the ground of any
person, be adjudged to belong to him that owes the Ground.

Some things there are, the property whereof the Law cannot vest in any, and
therefore it leaves them to the occupant, that is, to him that can seize them
as things which are by nature ferae naturae, as Beasts, Birds, or Fishes, being
in their own liberty, and such things are no longer any man's, then when they
are in his possession or custody, for when they have escaped and recovered
their natural liberty, then they cease to be his. The nature of Bees is wild,
and therefore when a swarm of Justinian l. 1. Inst^t.
them lights upon thy tree, they are no more thine before they be covered
with thy Hive, then Hawks which have made their nests in some of thy trees, or
Doves in thy Dove-house, for though the young birds be thine, whereof thou
may bring an Action of trespass, quare vi and armis pullas esperuiorum suorum
in bosco nidificantium, or Columbas Columbaris sui caepit. Here he shall not
use this word suos in his Writ, for that implies a contradiction. The nature
of Doves is wild, neither is it material that by custom they are wont avolare
and revolare, to fly from home, and return home, and in such things which are
tame, and by custom are wont to depart, and yet to return, this rule is
allowed, that so long they may be said to be thine, as they have animum
revertendi.

Felony cannot be committed in taking of Beasts that be savage, and untamed at
the time of taking, nor for taking of Doves being at large in the River, for
such taking is not contr^ctatio rei alienae, sed quae est nullius in bonis. But
when such things are made tame by any labor, and cost, the property of them is
changed, and the nature altered, and then if a man take them out of my
possession, a man may have an Action. It is felony to take young Pigeons, or
young Hawks out of their Nests before that they can fly, so to take Fishes kept
in a Trunk. To take tame Deer is selony, i^ the taker Stams. l. 1. c. 16.
know it to be tame. But the nature of Hens and Geese is not savage, and
therefore if they shall fly away, though they be past thine eyesight,
notwithstanding in what place soever they be, they cease not to be thine, and
whosoever detaineth them, is punishable by way of action.

There be three manner of rights of property.

1. Absolute, this property a man cannot have in any thing which is ferae
naturae, but only in such things as are domitae naturae. 2. Qualified. 3.
Possessory, these properties a man may have in things ferae naturae, and he may
attain to them.
1. By industry, either by taking them only, and yet such things are his no
longer, then they be in his possession or custedy, or by making them mansueta,
id est, manui assueta, or domestica, id est, domui assueta: But in these past,
a man has but a qualified property, so long as they remain tame, and so long
felony may be committed by taking them away, but if they attain to their
natural liberty, and have not animum revertendi, then the property of them is
lost. 2. Ratione imp^tentiae and loci, as where a man has young Goshawks,
Herons, or the like, which are ferae naturae, and do breed (or air) in his
ground, he has a Possessory property in them, so as if one take them when they
cannot sly, the owner of the soil may have an action of trespass, and to take
these away is selony. But when a man has Beasts, or Fowls that be savage, and
in their wildness ratione privilegii Scil. by reason of a Park, or Warrein,
(as Deer, Hares, Conies,) Phesants, or Partridges, he has no property in them,
therefore in an Action quare parcum, Cook 7th Rep. case of Swans.
or Warrenam, regit and intravit and tresodamas, lepores, cuniculos, phasianos,
perdices, etc. ib idem invenit, cepit, and asportavit, he shall not say suos,
for that he has no property in them, but they belong unto him, ratione
privilegii, (for his gain and pleasure, so long as they remain in the place
privileged. And if the owner of the Park die, his Heir shall have them, and
not his Executor, or Administrators, for that without them the Park (which is
an Inheritance) is not complete, neither can Felony be committed by taking
them.
If a man find an Hawk that was lost, and he do not sorthwith bring it to the
Sheriff to be proclaimed, but do steal and carry it away, this is felony.

If a man make Cony-burrows in his own land, which increase to so great number,
that they destroy the Land of his neighbor next adjoining, his neighbor
cannot have an Action upon the Case against him, which makes the said
Cony-borrows, for now as the Conies come upon his Neighbors Land, he may kill
them, for they are ferae naturae, and he which makes the Conyburrows has no
property in them, and he shall not be punished for the damages which the
Conies made, in which he has no property, and which another may lawfully kill,
and it was resolved in this case that none may erect a Dovecoat, Cooks 9th R^p.
P^ul. stons case.
but the Lord of the Manor, and if any do, that he may be punished in the
Leet, but no Action of the Case lies by any particular man, for the
infiniteness of the Actions which may be brought.

PROTECTION.
Protection, there be three things whereby every Subject is protected, viz.
Rex, Lex, and rescripta Regis, the King, the Law, and the Kings Writs. The Law
is the rule, but it is mute, the King Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 199.
judges by his Judges, and they are Lex loquens. The process and the execution
which is the life of the Law, consists in the Kings Writs, so that he that is
out of the protection of the King, cannot be aided or protected by the Kings
Law, or the Kings Writs, Rex tuetur legem and lex tuetur jus.

PROVISO. Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 220.

Proviso, this word has diverse operations sometimes it works a qualification
or limitation, sometime a condition, and sometime a covenant.

PUBLIC.
Public, necessity priviledgeth only quoad jura privata, for in all cases if
the act that should deliver a man out of necessity to be against the
Commonwealth, necessity excuses not for privilegium non valet contra
rempublicam, as another says, necessitas publica major est quam privata. If in
danger of tempest those that are in the Ship throw over other men's goods, they
are not answerable: but if a man be commanded to bring Ordinance or ammunition
to relieve any of the Kings Towns that are distressed, then he cannot for any
danger of tempest justify the throwing of them overboard. If Husband, and Wife
join in committing treason, the necessity of obedience does not excuse the
assence as it does in selony, because it is against the Commonwealth.

PURCHASE.
Purchase, is when one comes to Lands by con veyance, or title.

An Infant, or minor, (that is any that is under the age of twenty one years)
has without consent of any other capacity to purchase, for it is intended for
his benefit, and at his full age he Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 1.
may agree thereunto, and perfect it, or waive and disagree to the purchase,
and so may his Heirs after him, if he agreed not thereunto at his full age. A
man of non sane memory may without the consent of any other purchase Lands, but
he himself cannot waive it, but if he die in his madness, or after his memory
recovered without agreement thereunto, his heir may waive and disagree to the
state, without any cause showed. An Hermophradite may purchase according to the
Sex which prevails.

A Wife ( Uxor) is a good name of purchase, without a Christian Name, and so it
is if a Christian Name be added, and mistaken, as Em for Emelin, for utile per
in utile non vitiatur. But the Id. ib.
Queen the consort of the King of England is an exempt person from the King by
the common Law, and is of ability and capacity to purchase, and grant without
the King, Purchases are good in many cases by a known name, or by a certain
description of the person, without either surname, or name of Baptism, as Uxori
I. S. or primo genito filio, or filio natu minimo, I. S. or omnibus filiis, and
fil^^^ us. A Bastard having gotten a name by reputation may purchase by his
reputed or known name, to him and his Heirs, although he can have no beir.
Persons desormed having humane shape, Idiots, mad men, Leapers, Bastards, deaf,
dumb, and blind minors, and all other reasonable Cratures, have power to
purchase, and retain Lands or Tenements. A monster born within lawful
matrimony, that has not humane shape, cannot purchase, much less retain any
thing. The same Law is, de professis and mortuis seculo, for they are civiliter
mortui. If the Tenant holds by ^ealty, and a bushel of Wheat, or a pound of
Common, or of Pepper or such like, and the Lord purchases a parcel of the
Land, there shall be an apportionment, as Co^k on Lit. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 222.
well as if the rent were in money: and yet if the rent were in one grain of
Wheat, or one seed of Common, or one Pepper-corn, by the purchase of past, the
whole should be extinct, because when that thing which is extracted out of the
Land comes to the Land again, it shall be naturally extinguished, for that is
revolutio ad materiam primam.

But if an entire service be pro b^no publico, as Knights service, Cas^le guard,
cornage pro defensione Cooks Rep. Bruertons and Calbots case.
Regni, for the defense of the Realm, or to repair a Bridge or a way, to keep a
Beacon, or to keep the Kings Records, or for advancement of Justice and peace,
as to aid the Sheriff, or to be Constable of England, though the Lord purchase
part, the service remains, so it is if the Tenure be pro opere dev^tionis sive
pietatis, as to find a Preacher, or to provide the Ornaments of such a Church,
or pro opere charitatis, as to marry a poor Virgin, or to bind a Boy
Apprentice, or to feed a poor man.

Q.
QUARRELS.
QUarrels, *Querela a querendo. This properly Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 8. sect.
511. Litis nomen actionem significat sive in rem sive in personam.
concerns personal actions, or mixed at the highest, for the Plaintiff in
them is called Querens, and in most of the Writs it is said Queritur. And yet
if a man release all quarrels (a man's deed being taken most strongly against
himself) it is as beneficial as all actions, for by it all Actions real and
personal are released.

R.
RANSOM.
RAns^me, signifies properly a sum of money, paid for the redemption of a
Captive, and is compounded of re and emo, that is to redeem, or buy again.
There is a manifest Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sent. 194.
difference between a ransom and an amerciament. For ransom is ever when the
Law infflicteth a corporal punishment by imprisonment, but otherwise it is of
an amerciament.

RAPE.
Rape. Raptus is when a man has carnal Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 190.
The offender is called Raptor. Cook ib. Stamford.
knowledge of a woman by force, and against her will. But if the woman conceive
that is no rape, for she cannot conceive unless she consent.

This word Rape is so appropriated by Law to this case, as without the word (
^^apuit) it cannot be expressed by any periphrasis or circumlocution; for
carnaliter cognovit eam, or the like will not serve.

One W. D. was arraigned in the Kings Bench upon an Indictment of Rape of a
Girl of 7 years L. Dye^ term. Mich. Annis 13. and 14 Reg. Eliz. p. 304
old, and not above, viz. quod ipsam felonic^ rapuit and carnaliter cognovit.
He pleaded that he was a Sc^t known and prays for his trial per medietatem
linguae, and he could not have it; because a Scot is not accounted here for an
Alien, but rather a Subject, and the Scottish Language is mere English. By good
evidence of diverse grave Women he was found guilty, but the Court doubts of the
Rape in so tender years: but if she had Woman's Laws.
been nine and over it would have been otherwise. In Bracto^s time Ravishers
were thus punished, they lost their eyes and stones, for they calorem stupri
induxerunt.

REBOUTER.
Rebouter, is a French word, and is in Latin repellere, to repel or bar; that
is in the understanding Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 12.
of the Common Law, the Action of the Heir by the warranty of his Ancestor, and
this is called to rebut, or repel.

RECORD.
Record, is derived of recorder to remember, as the Poet says, si rite audita
recorder, if a Record once say the word, no man shall be received to averr or
speak against it, or impugn the same, no, though such record contain a
manifest or known falsehood, tending to the mischief, and overthrow of any
person.

The Records are vetustatis and veritatis vestigia, Cook pret. to 8th Rep.
the lively representations of time and truth, and reputed the Treasures of the
Kingdom.

The Kings excellency is so high in the Dr. and Stu. c. S.
Law, that no Frce-hold may be given to the King, nor derived from him but by
matter of Record.

A Record or sufficient matter in writing are Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 10. sect.
170.
good memorials, for litera scripta manet. And therefore it is said when we
will by a^y Record or Writing commit the memory of any thing to posterity, it
is said tradare memoriae. And this is the reason that regularly a man cannot
prescribe or allege a custom against a Statute, because that is matter of
Record.

Record is a memorial or remembrance in Rolls of Parchment, of the Proceedings
and Acts of a Court of Justice, which has power to hold plea according to the
course of the Common Law, of real or m^xt actions, or of actions quare vi and
armis, or of such personal actions, whereof the debt or damage amounts to
forty shillings or above, which we call Courts of Record, and are created by
Parliament, Letters Patents, or prescription, legally Records are rostrained to
Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 7. s^^t. 431. and l. 2. c. 1 ^^ sect. 175.
the Rolls of such only as are Courts of Record, and not Rolls of inferior,
nor of any other Courts which proceed not secundum legem and consuetudinem
angliae, and the Rolls being the Records or memorials of the Judges of the
Courts of Record,) import in them such incontrolable credit and verity, as they
admit no averment, plea or proof to the contrary. And if such a record be
alleged, and it is pleaded that there is no such record, it shall be tried
only by it self, and not by witness or Jury.

REGISTER.
Register, is the name of a most ancient Book, Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 3. sect.
101. etc. 12.
and of great authority in Law, containing all the original Writs of the
Common Law: It is twofold, viz. Registrum brevium originalium, and registrum
brevium Iudicalium, it is a French word and signifies a memorial of Writs.

RELATION.
Relation, is a species of fictions in Law, making a thing done at one time to
be accepted, reverted, and as it were repuld, or to have its operation as is it
had been done at another time, past verbi gratia. A. does bargain, and sell
Lands to B. in August by Indenture, which is not enrolled until Oct.
following, yet this has such relation to the date of the Indenture, that if A.
offer that, and before the inrolment become bound in a statute or grant a Rents
charge, or make a Lease for years, or take a Wise, or committed felony, yet
shall none of these be of any force to charge or prejudice the state of B. for
that the Law judges him now owner by relation, as from the time of the date,
yet if a servant depart in August, for some great breach with his Master, do
kill his Master in October, this is in Law petty treason, as if he had
continued servant when he did the fact, because it relates to the malice
concerned, when he was his servant.

RELEASE.
Release, is the giving or discharging of the right Cooks 10 Rep. Hampets case.
or action which any has or claims against another, or his Land, Laxare is
properly to put Prisoners in setters at liberty, and relaxare is to do this
often, and metaphorice relaxare is to put at liberty settered estates and
interests, and to make them absolute.

RELIEF.
Relief, as in ancient time the Senators of Rome Relevium is derived from the
Latin word relevari, quia haereditas quae jacens fuit per ante cessoris
decessum relevatur in manus haeredum. Cook on Lit. and Minshew in Domesday it
is called relevamentum and relevatio. Cooks 7th Rep. Nevils case, and on Li^.
Relevium ut Ho^omanus describit, est honorarium, quod novus vassallus patrono
largitur introitus caussa, nomen ex eo, quia morte vassalli, ut vassallus
cecidit, siccum eo cecidit seudum, and propterea denuo oporteat relevari, hoc
est, attolli. Itaque non relevium modo sed and relevatio vocatur. Vossius De
vitiis Sermonis lib. 3. cap. 42.
were elected a censu of their Revenues, so here in ancient time, in conserring
of Nobility respect was had to their Revenues, by which their Dignity and
Nobility may be supported and maintained, and so a Knight ought to have 20 li.
per annum, a Baron 13 Knights Fees, and a quarter, an Earls 20 Knights Fees,
and always the fourth part of such Revenue which is requisite, by the Law to
the Dignity shall be paid to the King for Relief, as the relief of a Knight is
5 ll. which is the 4th part of 20 ll. the revenue of a Knight, and the relief
of a Baron is at 100 Marks which is the 4th part of his revenue, viz. 400
Marks, and includes 13 Knights fees; and a quarter; and the relief of an Earl
is a 100 ll. which is the 4th part of 400 of ll. his revenue: the Relief of a
Marquess 200 Marks, his revenue being 800 Marks: the relief of a Duke shall
amount to 200 ll. and by consequent his revenue ought to be 800 ll. per annum;
for every one of the Nobility is presumed in the Law to have sufficient
Frank-tenement ad sustinendum nomen and onus.

REMAINDER.
Remainder, is a remnant of the estate of the Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 7. sect.
60. and l. 4. c. 12. sect. 215.
Grantor, or a residue of an estate in Lands depending upon a particular
estate, and created together with the same; and in Law Latin it is called
remanere.

There is a diversity between a Remainder limited by particular name, and by a
general name. For a Remainder limited by general name Cooks first Rep. Hugh
Cholmleys case.
may be good, although the person be not in esse at the time of the remainder
limited; as if a Lease for life be made the Remainder to the right Heirs of I.
and S. which is alive, this Remainder may be good, and yet he has no Heir at
the time of the Remainder limited, the same Law is of a Remainder primo genito
filio, but a Remainder limited in particular, by name of Baptism and surname is
not good if the person be not in esse.

If the person that is to take the Remainder be not in rerum natura, as if a
Lease for life be made the Remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. I. S. being
then alive, it suffices that the Inheritance Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 13. sect.
721.
passes presently out of the Lessor, but cannot rest in the Heir of I. a St.
For that living his Father he is not in reram natura, for non est haeres
viventis: so as the Remainder is good upon the contingent, viz. if I. S. die
during the life of the Lessee.

Remainder is a residue of the estate at the same time appointed over:
Reversion is a residue of the estate not at the same time appointed over:
reversion is ad Dominum aut ejus haeredes unde jus primo derivatur Remainder ad
tertium aliquem qui neque Dominus neque tenens in praesente est.

REMITTES.
Remitter, a French word, it signifies to restore, Doderidge.
and imports a restitution of Possession unto a man ancient right. It is
derived of the Latin verb reomittere, which has two significations, Cook on
Lit. l. 3. c. 12.
either to restore, and set up again, or to cease.

RENTS.
Rents, Rent paid yearly for Land, or other Cooks Rep. l. 10. and on Lit. l. 2.
c. 12. Doderidge.
things, is called in Latin Reditus a reddendo, because it is yearly yielded or
restored for the Lands, rather a redeundo quia retr^ it: because it does return
to the Lessor or Donor, for the issues and profits of the Land, and in English
it is called a Rent, the French word rentor, to rate or assess a price. Tenure
by Rents is called vivi reditus, Cook on Lit.
because the Lords and the owners thereof do live by them.

A feme sole Lessee for life rendering Rent, takes a Husband, the Rent arere,
the Wife dies though here be no recovery in the Wives life time, yet because
Wom. Law.
the Baron took the profit, he is still chargeable in a Writ of debt for the
Rent, for qui sentit commodum sentire debet and onus.

For Rent payable at a day, the party has all the day till night to pay it,
but i^ it be a great sum Cooks 5th Rep. Wades case.
as five hundred, or a 1000 ll. He must be ready as long before the Sunset, as
the money may be told: for the other is not bound to tell it in the night.

REPLEVIN.
Replevin, is derived of replegiare, to redeliver Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 12*
Lambert.
to the owner upon pledges or surety: It had its original of the word pledges,
which denotes them that undertake for the party, that he shall abide to be
justified by the Law.

Goods may be replevied two manner of ways, viz. by Writ, and that is by the
Common Law, Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 219. Replegiare est reposcere bona
mobilia dato apud praefectum vade sive fide jussore. Sane and Anglis breve, per
quod bona ea reposcerent to replevin, quasi replegium dicitur sunt vero
replegium and replegiare a plegius, vel plegium. Plegius vas, sive fidei
jussor. Vossius De Vitiis Sermonis. l. 2. c. 25.
or by the pleinte, and that is by the Statutes for the more speedy having a
gain of their Cattle, and Goods. Replegiare is compounded of re and plegiare,
that is to redeliver upon pledge or Sureties.

RESCEIT.
Resceit, is in the Civil Law called Admissio tertiae person pro interesse, in
our Law when one is sued whose estate is so weak that he cannot defend full
Suit, then is another who is better able admitted up payer; sometimes Receipt i^
sur Receipt, this is against rule) as, A Wife being Tenant for life is received
upon the default of her Husband, and after makes default he in reversion 2 p.
of Instit. fol. 345
shall be received; so if baron and feme be received, and after baron make
default the feme shall be received.

RESCOUS.
Rescous. It is an ancient French word, coming from rescourrer, that is,
recuperare to take from, to Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 12. sect. 237.
rescue, or recover Rescous is a taking away, and setting ^at liberty against
Law, a distress taken, or a Parson arrested by the process or course of the
Law. There is a Rescous indeed, and a Rescous in Law: of the first has been
spoken. A Rescous in Law is when a man has taken in distress, and the Cattle
distreined, as he is driving of them to the Pound, to go into the house of the
owner, if he that took the distress demand them of the owner, and he deliver
them not, this is a Rescous in Law.

RESERVATION.
Reservation, comes of the Latin reservo, that is to provide for store. As
when a man departs with his land, he reserveth or provideth for himself a
Rent for his own livelihood. And sometime it has the force of saving or
excepting; so as sometime it serves to reserve a new thing, viz. a rent, and
sometime to except part of the thing in esse, that is granted.

RETRAXIT.
Retraxit, is so called, because that word is the effectual word in the entry.
The difference between a nonsuit and a retraxit, is ever when the Demandant or
Plaintiff is present in Court. A nonsuit is ever upon a demand made, when the
Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 288.
Demandant* or Plaintiff should appear, and he makes default. A retraxit is a
bar of all other actions, of like or inferior nature. Q^^ semel actionem
renunciavit amplius repetere non potest. But regularly nonsuit is not so, but
that he may commence an action of like nature again. For it may be that he has
mistaken somewhat in that action, or was not provided of his proofs, or mistook
the day, or like.

REVERSION.
Reversion, it has a double acception in our Law, the one is, jus revertendi
cum status possessionis defecerit: and this is but an interest in the It comes
of the Latin word revertor, and signifies a returning again, therefore
reversio terrae est tanquam terra revertens in possessione donatori sive
h^redibus suis post donum finitum. Cook on Lit.
Land when the occupation and possession of it shall fall, and so it is
commonly taken. 2. When the possession and estate which was parted for a time
cease, and is determined in the persons of the aliens, assignees, grantees,
or their Heirs, and shall effectually return to the Donor, his heirs or
assignees whence it was derived. This is the most apt and proper signification
of the word, which is nomen verbale, and derived of the verb revertor, and apt
dici non potest reversio; antequam revertatur in facto.

A reversion is where the residue of the estate always does continue in him
that made the particular estate, or where the particular estate is derived out
of his estate. Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 2. sect. 19.

RIGHT.
Right. Ius or right in general signification includes not only a ^ight for
the which a writ Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 8. sect 445.
of Right does lie, but also any title or claim either by force of a condition,
Mo^^^ain or the like, for the which no Action is given by Law, but only an
entry.

There is Ius proprietatis a right of ownership: Ius p^ssessionis, a ^ight of
seis^ or possession: and Ius proprietatis and possessionis; a right both of
property and possession; and this is anciently called Ius duplicatum. For
example, if a man be disseised of an Acre of Land, the Disseisee has Id. ib.
sect. 447.
Ius proprietatis, the Disseisor has Ius possessionis, and if the Disseisee
release to the Disseisor, he has Ius proprietatis, and possessionis dormit
aliquando Ius, moritur nunquam: for of such an high estimation Id. ib. sect.
478.
is right in the eye of the Law, as the Law preserves it from death and
destruction, trodden down it may be, but never trodden out.

Ius sive Rectum, signifies properly and specially in Writs and in Pleas when
an Estate is turned to a right, as by a discontinuance, dissesin, where it
shall be said, quod Ius descendit and non terra. But Right (also) does include
the Estate in esse in conveyances; and therefore if Id. ib. c. 11. sect. 650.
the Tenant in Fee-simple make a Lease for years, and release all his right in
the Land to the Lessee and his Heirs, the whole estate in Fee-simple passes.

Ius est sextuplex: 1. Ius recuperandi: 2. Intandi: Cook l. 8. Rep. Edw.
Althams case. Cook on Lit. l. 3. sect. 50.
3. Habendi: 4. Retinendi: 5. Percipiendi: 6. Possidendi.

RIOT.
Riot, is where three (at the least) or more do some unlawful Act, it comes
from the French word riottor, id est, rixari, scold or brawle.

ROBBERY.
Robbery, is so called, because Goods are taken Either because they bereaved
the true man of some of his robes or garments, or because his money or goods
were taken ^ut of some part of his garment, or robe about his person. Sir
Edward Cook's 3d parto^ Instit. Chapter 16.
as it were de la robe, from the robe, that is from the person. It is when a
man takes any thing from the person, or out of the possession of another
seloniously.

A Robbery was done in January after the Sunsetting, during twilight, and it
was adjudged that the Hundred should answer for it, because it was convenient
time for men to travel, or be about their works or businesses, and with this
accords Cook 7th Rep. Ashpooles case.
the Book in 3. Edw. 3. tit coronne 293. that if one kill another at the hour
of the Evening and escape, by the Common Law the Town shall be amerced, for
this is counted in the Law part* of the day.

A man in time of Divine service upon the Sabbath Day was robbed, Mountague
Chief Justice was of opinion that the Hundred should not be charged, but
Doderidge, Sir John Crook, and Hawtain Justices, were of contrary opinion, that
the Hundred should be charged, and so it was adjudged termino Michaelis.

Although the thing so taken be not to the value but of a penny, yet it is
felony for which the offender shall suffer death, and shall not have the
Stamford Dr. and Stu.
benefit of his Clergy, not so much for the value of the goods taken, as for
terrifying the party robbed, a putting him in dread and fear of his life.

He that robs any dwelling house, or outhouse 39 Eliz. 15. c.
belonging to it in the day time, of the value of 5 s. whether it be money,
goods or ca^tels shall not have his Clergy.

If a Bailiff of a Manor, or a receiver, or a Factor of a Merchant, or the
like accountant be robbed, he shall be discharged thereof upon his Cook 4th
Rep. Southcots case. 83. B. and on Lit. l. 2. c. 5. sect. 123.
account. But otherwise it is of a Carrier, for he has his Hire, and thereby
implicitly undertaketh the safe delivery of the goods delivered to him, and
therefore he shall answer the value of them if he be robbed of them. So if
goods be delivered to a man to be safely kept, and after those goods are
stolen from him, this shall not excuse him, because by the acceptance he
undertook to keep them safely, and therefore he must keep them at his peril.
So it is if goods be delivered to one to be kept; for to be kept and to be
safely kept is all one in Law: but if goods be delivered to him to be kept as
he would keep his own, there if they be stolen from him without Id. ib.
his default or negligence, he shall be discharged. So if goods be delivered to
one as a gage or pledge, and they be stolen he shall be discharged, because he
has a property in them, and therefore he ought to keep them no otherwise then
his own: but if he that gaged them tendered the money before the stealing, and
the other refused to deliver them, then for this default in him he shall be
charged. If A. leave a Chest locked with B. to be kept, and takes away the Key
with him, and acquainteth not B. what is in the Chest, and the Chest together
with the goods of B. are stolen away, B. shall not be charged therewith,
because A. did not trust B. with them as th^s case is.

ROGUE.
Rogue. This word is but a late guest in our Law, for the Elder Statutes call
such a one a vu^an^ strong or sturdy Beggar and Vag^bond, and it seems to be
se^ched from the Latin R^galor, an asker or Beggar, or the French, Rogue (...)d
est arrogans.

ROUT.
Rout, is so called, because they do move and From the French word ^ou^e id
est, turma.
proceed in routs and numbers. The difference ^etwixt an unlawful assembly, a
rout and riot, ^s this, when three or more do meet to do an un^awfull act, this
is an unlawful Assembly, when they move being weaponed from the place of their
meeting, toward the place where they purpose to do an unlawful act, (though
they do it not) this is a Rout. When with unlawful weapons, they do an
unlawful act, this is a Riot. An unlawful Assembly may well be called an
Introduction, a Rout, a Persecution, and a Riot, an Execution.

S.
SEISIN.
SEisin or Seison, is common as well to the English Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 12.
sect. 233.
as French, and signifies in the common possession. whereof Seisina a Latin
word is made, and Seisire a verb.

SEISINA.
Seisina is derived of a sedendo, for until he have Cooks 6th Rep. Bredimans
case.
seisin, all is labor and grief, but when he has seisin, he may sedere and
acquiescere.

SERGEANTS.
Sergeants are so called a serviendo, and a servando, or conservando, for they
are conservators of the Law and Justice, and may be styled as well Servantes
leges, as servientes ad legem.

SHERIFF.
Sheriff or Shireve, is derived of two Saxon words, viz. Shire comitatus, which
comes of Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 1. sect. 248.
the Saxon verb, Shiram id est partiri, because the whole Realm is parted, and
divided into Shires* and Reve praefectus, or praepositus, so as Sheriff is
^raefectus provinciae, or Comitatus, Keeper of the Shire or County, the words
of his Patent be commissimus vobis custodiam comitatus nostri. And he has
triplicem custodiam, a threefold custody, viz.

1. Vitae Iustitiae, for no suit begins, and no process is served but by the
Sheriff. 2. Vitae Legis, he is after long Suits, and chargeable to make
execution, which is the l^^e and fruit of the Law. 3. Vitae Reipublicae, he is
Principalis conservator Vita reipublicae pax. Vicem gerens seu vicarius
comitis. Cook preface to 3d Rep.
pacis, within the County, which is the life of the Commonwealth. He is called
in Lain vice comes, id est, vice comitis, that is instead of the Earl of the
County, who in ancient time had the Regiment of the County under the King,
Sheriffs were great Officers, and Ministers of Justice long before the
Conquest, and Justices of Peace had not their being until almost 300 years
after, viz. in the first year of Edward the 3d.
When the King makes a Sheriff, durante beneplacito, although he may determine
his Office at Cook 4th Rep. Mittons case.
his pleasure, yet he cannot determine this in part, nor abridge the Sheriff of
any thing incident or appurtenant to his Office, for the Office is entire, and
it ought to continue so without any fraction or diminution, unless it be by Act
of Parliament.

SOCAGE.
Socage, the legal termination of ( agium) in composition signifies service
or duty, as homagium Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 5. sect. 117.
the service of the man, escuagium servitium scuti socagium servitium socae
h^^agium: the duty to be paid for a hide or plough-land, and so of cornagium,
burgagium, villenagium.

When the Lord infeoffes another of arable land to hold of him in Socage, that
is, per servitium socae, as every such tenure at the beginning was, as
Littleton says: the Feoffee ad manutenendum servitium socae, shall have common
in the wastes of the Lord for his necessary beasts which dung his Land.

1. Because it was tacitly employed in the feoffment, for the feoffee cannot
dung his land without beasts, and they cannot be sustained Cook ^th Rep.
Cirringhams case.
without pasture, and per consequens the Feoffee shall have (as a thing
necessary and incident) Common in the wastes and lands of the Lord. 2. For the
maintenance* and advancement of tillage which is much regarded and favored in
the Law.
SERIEANTY.
Serjeanty, comes of the French word Sergeant, that is Satelles, and it is the
same with service. Cook on Lit. l 2. c. 8. sect. 153.
It is called Magna serjeantia, or magnum servitium; great service as well in
respect of the excellency and greatness of the person to whom it is to be done
(for it is to be done to the King only) as of the honor of the service it
self: and Littleton says, it is greater and more worthy then Knights service.

This Tenure has 7 special Properties.

1. To be holden of the King only. 2. It must be done when the Tenant is able
in proper person. 3. This service is certain and particular. 4. The Relief due
in respect of this tenure differs from Knights service. 5. It is to be done
within the Realm. 6. It is Subject to neither aid pour fair fitz chivalier. or
file marrier. 7. It pays no escuage.
STATUTE.
Statute, comes of the Latin word statatum, Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11. sect.
193.
which is taken for an Act of Parliament made by the King, the Lords, and
Commons.

STATUTES.
Statutes. Anno gtio. Caroli Regis. C. 1. No Carrier with any Horse or Horses
Wagon, men with wagons, Waynemen with Waynes, nor Drovers with Cattle shall
travel upon the Lords Day, twenty Shillings forfeit for every offense, every
Dutcher that kills or sells Victuals on that day, shall forfeit for every
offense 6 s. 8 d. The offenses being done in view of any Justice of Peace,
Mayor, etc. or proved upon Oath by two Witnesses, or by confession of the
offender.

All such forfeits shall be leavied by any Constable, or Churchwarden, by
warrant from any Justice, Mayor, and by distress, sale of goods, or recovered
by any person that will sue for the same by Bill, Plaint, or information in any
of the Kings Courts of Record in any City or Town corporate, to the use of the
poor of the Parish, saving that the Justice, Mayor, may reward the Informer
according to their discretions: So that such reward exceed not the third part
of the for-^eitures, to continue to the end of the first Se^^^on of the next
Parliament.

Anno 1. Caroli Regis, C. 1.

No meetings of people out of their own Parishes on the Lord's Day within this
Realm, or the Dominions thereof, for any pastime whatsoever. Nor any
Bear-baitings. Bull-baitings, Common Plays, or other unlawful exercises used
by any within their own Parishes, every person o^^ending, to forfeit for every
offense 3 ^. 4 d. to the poor of the Parish. One Justice of Peace of the
County, or the chief Officer or Officers of any City or Borough, upon view or
confession of the parties, or proof of one or more Witnesses on Oath, shall
give warrant under hand, and seal to the Constables or Churchwardens of the
Parish, to leavy the said penalty by distress and sale. And in default of
distress, the offender to be set in the stocks three hours.

None shall be impeached by this Act, unless he be questioned within the
month, to continue till the first session of the next Parliament.

Tertio Caroli capite 4to continued until first session of the next Parliament.

Anno 21 Iac. Regis. An Act to prevent and reform profane swearing and cursing.

None shall hereafter swear or curse, if any offend herein in the hearing of
any Justice of Peace of the County, or of any Major, Justice of Peace, Bailiff,
or Head-Officer of any City or Town Corporate, or shall be thereof convicted by
the Oaths of two Witnesses, or confession of the party. They shall forfeit to
the poor of the Parish for every time they so offend 12. d. And the Constable,
Churchwarden, and Overseers of the poor of that Parish, by Warrant from such
Justice or Head-Officer, shall leavy the same by distress and sale of the
offenders goods, rendering the overplus. And in defect of distress, if he or she
be above twelve years, shall by Warrant from such Justice of Peace, or
Head-Officer be set in the Stocks three whole hours. And if the offender be
under 12 years of age, and do not forthwith pay the forfeit, then he or she by
Warrant of such Justice, or Head-Officer, shall be whipped by the Constable, or
by the Parent, or master in his presence. This Statute shall be read by the
Minister of every Parish twice in the year, upon the Sunday after Evening
Prayer.

The forfeiture for not repairing to the Church weekly is 12 d.

10. Iacobi. Who be adjudged Rogues by the Stat. of 39 Eliz. 4.

All persons calling themselves Scholars, going about begging, all
Sea-fa^ing-men pretending loss of their Ships or goods on the Sea, going about
the Country begging, all idle persons, Fortune Tellers, all Fencers,
Bear-wards, common Players of Enterludes, and Minstrels wandering abroad.

STEALING.
Stealing. Theft is the fraudulent taking away of another man's goods, with an
intent to steal them against (or without) *the will of him, whose goods they be.

The Civil Laws do judge open theft to be satisfied by the recompense of
fourfold, and privy theft, by the recompense double, but the Fortescue de
laudibus legum Augliae.
Laws of England suffer neither of those offenses, to be more favorably
punished, then with the offenders death, so that the value of the thing stolen
be above 12 d.

He that steals the Eggs of Swans out of their Nests, shall be imprisoned for
a year and a day, and fined according to the Kings pleasure, Cooks 7th Rep.
Cases of Swans.
one moity to the King, and the other to the owner of the Land where the Eggs
were so taken, and it was a Custom in ancient time, that he which stole a
Swanne in an open and common River lawfully marked, the same Swanne (if it may
be) or another Swanne shall be hanged in a House by the beak, and he which
stole him in recompense thereof compelled to give the owner as much Corn as may
cover all the Swan, by putting and turning the Corn upon the head of the
Swanne, until the head of the Swanne be covered with the Corn.

STEWARD.
Steward. This word is derived of two old words, Stead and ward, and it is as
much to say, as a man appointed in my steed or place. And Seneschallus in Latin
has the signification: the Undersheriff Subvicomes, in ancient times was
Cooks Rep. The Countess of Salops case, Seneschall is derived of sein, a house
or place, and schal an Officer ^r Governor; some say that sen is an ancient
word for Justice, so as Seneschall should signisie Officiarius Justitiae Cook
on Lit. l. 1. c. 9. sect. 78.
called Seneschallus vicecomitis, because he exercises the place of the
Sheriff himself, and therefore a great Officer of this Realm is called the
great Steward, because the King appoints him in diverse cases to exercise his
place. By the Law, without special words, a Steward cannot make a Deputy,
because his Office requires sciency, fidelity, and discretion.

Security of peace, Securitas de pace. Surety of the word Securitas, because
the party that was in fear, is thereby secure and quiet. Lambert.

It is an acknowledgment of a Bond to the King, taken by a compent Judge of
Record, for the keeping of the peace, Securitas de bono gestu suo, Surety of
the good abearing, differs from surety of the peace in this, that whereas the
peace is not broken without an affray, or battery, or such like; this surety,
De bono gestu, may be broken by the number of a man's company, or by his or
their weapons, or harness.

Surrender, quia sursum redditio, and it is of two French words, Suise and
render, a yielding up of an estate again to his Lessee, or his assignee.

SVSPENCE.
Suspense, comes of suspendeo; and in legal understanding is taken when a
Seignory, Rent, profit, apprender, by reason of unity of possession Cook on
Lit. l. 3. c. 10. sect. 559.
of the Seignory, Rent, etc. and of the Land out of which they issue, are not
in esse, for a time, and tune dormiunt, but may be revived, or awaked. And they
are said to be extinguished, when they are gone for ever. Et tune moriuntur,
and can never be revived, that is, when one man has as high, and p^rdurable an
estate as another.

SUIT.
Suit. A Wife is disabled to sue without her Cook on Lat. l. 2. c 11. sect. 200.
Husband, as much as a Monk is without his Sovereign. But by the Common Law the
Wife of the King of England is an exempt person from the King, and is capable
of Lands or Tenements of the gift of the King, as no other Feme covert is, and
may sue, and be sued without the King, as a Feme sole by the Common Law, but
Cook ib. fol. 132, 133.
where the Husband is banished, the Wife may sue, and be sued.

T.
TAIL.
Tail. An estate Tail, it comes of the French word Tailler, to cut, Lit. l.
1. At the Common Law, before the Statute, De Cook Rep. l. 7. Nevils case, fol.
33. B.
donis conditionalibus, the Donor and Donee had possibility, the Donor of
reverter, if the Donee dyed without issue male, and the Donee to have power to
alien, if he had issue male* potestatem alienandi post prolem suscitatam. Then
he had full and absolute fee-simple to three purposes:

1. To alien. 2. To forfeit by attainder of Felony. 3. To charge with rent
common, etc. a woman being Tenant imspecial tail to her, and her first Husband,
after issue had by her first, she had full feesimple Cook Rep. l. 8. Pains
case. p. 35. B. Cook 7 Rep. Nevils case p. 33, 34, 35
to make the same Land descend to any of her issues by any other Husband.
An annuity at this day is not within the Statute De donis conditionalibus,
because it is nec terre, nec tenement, nor exercisable within Land Tenement,
nor concerning land, but only a mere personal hereditament.

To estate tail, it is requisite, that the Heirs be Cook 7 Rep. Beresfords case.
limited to be procreate of some body in certain, either by express words, or
by words equivalent; for the precise words, D^ corpore, are not always
necessary to the creation of an estate tail.

If Land be given by Deed to I. S. Et si contingat Perkins tit. Faits, f. 36. A
ipsum abire sine hae^ede de corpore suo, quod tune revertatur, to the Donor
and his Heirs, and livery of seism is made according to the Deed; in this case
the Donee has estate, notwithstanding it be not given to him, and his heirs.
For the Stature of Westminster the second, c. 1. will quod voluntas donatoris
secundum formam in charta doni sui manifest expressam, de caetero observetur.

If Land be given to a man, and to his heirs Littleton Cook Rep. l. 8. Princes
case, f. 22. A
males, and he has issue male, he has fee-simple, but when Lands be given to
a man, and to his Heirs males of his body begotten, then he has fee-tail.

A devise made to one and his Heirs males, makes an estate tail, it being
supposed that the Testator was inops conci^ii, in making his Will, and
therefore his intent shall be taken.

The King conveyes Land to a man and his heirs Cook Lovels case.
males, his estate is void because the King is deceived.

If Lands be given to a man, and to his heirs Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 2. sect. 15.
which he shall beget of his Wife, or to a man, Et haeredibus de carne sua, or
to a man, Et haeredibus de se, this is an estate tail.

This word may in many cases be omitted, or expressed Id. ib.
by the like, and yet the state in tail is good, as Haeredibus de carne,
haeredibus de se haeredibus quos sibi contigerit, etc. if the word be
procreandis, or quos procreaverit, the estate in tail is good; and as
procreatis shall extend to the issue; begotten before, so procreandis shall
extend to the issues begotten afterward.

If Lands be given to a man and a woman unmarried, and the heris of their two
bodies, for the apparent possibility to marry, they have an estate Id. sect. 16.
tail in them presently.

TAIL.
Tail after possibility. To hold in the tail after Cook on Lit. l. 3. c. 3.
sect. 32. and 11. Rep. Lewis Bowls case.
possibility of issue extinct, is where land is given to a man, and to his
Wife, and to the heirs of their two bodies engendered, and one of them
overliveth the other without issue between them begotten, he shall hold the
Land for term of his own life, as Tenant in tail after possibility of issue
extinct.

This Tenant has seven qualities and privileges which Tenant in tail himself
has, and which Lessee for life has not. As

1. He is not punishable for wast. 2. He shall not be compelled to attor^. 3.
He shall not have aid of him in the reversion. 4. Upon his alienation, no Writ
of entry in consimili casu lies. 5. After his death, no Writ of Intrusion does
lie. 6. In a praecipe brought by him, he shall not name himself Tenant for
life. 7. In a praecipe brought against him, he shall not be named barely Tenant
for life.
And yet he has other qualities which are not agreeable to an estate in tail,
but to a bare Lessee for life.

1. If he make a feoffment in fee, this is a forfeiture of his estate. 2. If an
estate in fee, or in fee tail, in reversion or remainder descend, or come to
this Tenant, his estate is drowned, and the fee, or fee-tail executed. 3. He in
the Reversion or remainder shall be received upon his default, as well as bare
Tenant for life. 4. An exchange between a bare Tenant for life and him is good,
for their estates in respect of Id. on Li^* ib.
the quantity are equal, so as the difference stands in the quality and not
in the quantity of the estate, And as the estate tail was originally carved out
of a Free-simple, so is the estate of his Tenant out of an estate in special
tail; and he is called Tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct,
because by no possibility he can have any issue inheritable to the same estate
tail. But if a man gives Land to a man and his Wife, and to the heirs of their
two bodies, and they live till each of them be an hundred years old, and have
no issue, yet do they continue Tenants in tail, for the Law sees no
impossibility of having children.
TALLAGE.
Tallage. Tallagium, or Talagium comes of the French word Tailer, to share or
cut out a part, and metaphorically is taken when the King or any other has a
share or part of the value of a man's goods or Chattels, or a share or part of
the annual revenue of his Lands, or puts any charge or burden upon another.

It is a general word, and does include all Subsidies, Taxes, Tenths,
Fifteens, Impositions or other charge put or set upon any man. Cook's ad part
of Insti^.

TENEMENT.
Tenement, is the same with us that praedium ur^anum is with the Civilians, it
includes not only Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 2. sect. 14.
all corporate Inheritances, which are or may be holden, but also all
Inheritance issuing out of any of those Inheritances, or concerning or annexed
to, or exercisable within the same, though they lie not in tenure*, therefore
all these without question may be intailed, as Rents, Estoures, Commons, or
other profits whatsoever granted out of the Land.

TENURE.
Tenure, there is a Tenure in England, where See before tit.
the Tenant makes proffer of a Present to the Landlord, but delivers it not,
that the chief Lord may say unto him, I thank you for nothing.

TESTAMENT.
Testament, The making of a Testament has three parts.

1. Inception, which is the writing of the Testament. 2. Progression, which is
the publication of it. 3. And consummation, which is the death of the party.
Testamentum est duplex.

1. In scriptis, written, which at the time of making, Cook on Lit. l. 2. c.
10. sect. 167. Voluntas testatoris ambulatoria usque ad mortem, testamentum
morte consummatum est. Ultima voluntas, a last Will is the disposition or
bestowing of a man's own goods and lands taking effect after his death.
is put in writing. 2. Nuncupativum, seu sine scriptis, when the Testator does
by word only declare his will before witnesses. And in some Cities, or
Boroughs, Lands may pass, as Chattels by will, nuncupative or paroll, without
writing, but in Law most commonly ultima voluntas in scriptis is used where
Lands or Tenements are devised, and Testamentum, where it concerns cha^tels.
Testamentum is testatio mentis, and is favorably to be expounded, according
to the meaning of the Testator.

The first Grant and the last Will is of greatest force. Cook on Littleton
ibidem, sect. 168.

A Testament is defined voluntatis nostrae justa sententia de eo quod quis post
mortem suam fieri velit, cum executoris institutione, a declaration of our mind
concerning that which we would have done after our deaths, with the ordaining
of an executor thereof. Wests Presidents.

Every Testament is a last Will, but every last Will is not a Testament, a
Testament is one kind of last Will, wherein the Executor is named, who is
called haeres in the Civil Law.

Testaments ought to be proved before the Ordinary, unless it be in special
Cases, where the Lords have probate of the Testaments of their Perkins tit. of
testam.
Tenants, before the Stewards, or themselves in their temporal Courts.

A Testament proved before the Bishop himself of the same Diocese where the
party dies is good, if he have not goods and chat^els to the value of forty
Shillings in any other Diocese, for then it ought to be proved in the
Prerogative Court, where one has Goods only in an inferior Diocese, but the
Metropolitan of the same Province pretending that he had bona notabilia in
diverse Diocesses, commits administration, this administration is not void, but
voidable by sentence, Perk. ib. Cook 5 Rep. Veres case in the latter end of
Princes.
because the Metropolitan has jurisdiction over all Diocesses within his
Province, but if an Ordinary of a Diocese commit administration of goods, when
the party has bona notabilia in diverse Diocesses, such administration is
merely void, as well for the goods within his own Diocese, as elsewhere,
because that by no means he may have jurisdiction of the cause. What is meant
by noble goods, diverse Authors have been of diverse opinions. Some have been of
this opinion, that Fitzh. abri. administrat.
if the Testato. ^ie possessed of goods or chat^els to the value of sorry
Shillings in two several Diocesses, then he ought to be deemed to have notable
goods, others have been of this mind, that the testator is deemed to have
notable goods, Perk. tit. test. f. 94.
though at the time of his death he had but one penny in another Diocese.
Others are of this judgment, that he is said to have notable goods, which has
goods to the value of ten pounds of current Money of England, dispersed in
diverse Diocesses or jurisdictions, this opinion seems best to some.

When the Testator does in the former part of his will devise his Lands in such
a place to one in Plowd. in case inter Paramor and Iurdley fol. 541.
Fee, and after in the latter part of the same will to another person in Fee,
it seems by the Laws of the Realm, that the latter part does overthrow the
former.

It is not sufficient by the Law, that the Testator be of memory, when he
makes his will, to answer to familiar and useful questions, but he Cook 6
Rep. Marquess of Winchesters case.
ought to have a disposing memory, so that he be able to make a disposition of
his Lands with understanding and reason, which memory the Law calls a sound and
per^ect memory.

If the Writer being skillful in the Law, do only take notes from the mouth o^
the deceased, of his last will for the devi^e o^ L^n^s, tenements and
hereditaments, and after wards write the same, but before it be showed to the
T(...), he depart this life, yet this is sufficient ^or a will in w^iting for
the conveyance of Land, tenements, and hereditaments, whereof such notes were
taken.

It is called nuncupative a nun^^^and^, id est

^rninando, because a man must name his Executor, and declare his own mind
before witnesses. It is of as great force and efficacy (except for lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments) as a written Lands holden in burgage and
gavelkind are devisable by will.
Testament. This kind of Testament is commonly made when the testator is now
very sick, weak, and past all hope of recovery.

These persons following cannot make a testament, or dispose of their goods and
chattels.

1. Such as want discretion, as children, mad fokls, and idiots. 2. Such as
lack freedom and full liberty, as bondslaves and villains, captives and women
covert. 3. Such as lack some of their principal senses, viz. such as be dumb,
deaf, and blind. 4. Such as have committed some heinous crimes, as traitors,
felons, heretics, apostates.
Wills or Testaments made of any Mannours, Lands, or Tenements, or other
hereditaments, by any person within the age of twenty one years, are Stat. H.
8. anno 34 c. 5. Dr. and Student. l. 1 cap. 21. Perk. tit. d^ devise.
not good or effectual in Law, for until that time by the Common Laws of this
Realm they be accounted Infants, howbeit a boy after the age of fourteen years,
and a wench after the age of twelve may make a Testament, and dispose of their
goods and ^hattels.

If mad persons make their Testaments when they have clear or calm
intermissions, it is good. See Cooks 6 Rep. in Pawlets case.

By the opinion of diverse Justices of this Realm, Fitz. abrid* exec. 108*
and Doctors of the Canon and Civil Law, the goods of this Realm, that is, of
the ancient Crown and Jewels cannot be disposed by will.

TILLAGE.
Tillage. Agriculture or tillage is of great account in Law, as very profitable
for the Commonwealth, the Common Law gives arable Land Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 5.
the pre-eminence and precedence before Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Mines, and
all other ground whatsoever. By laying of Lands used in tillage to Pasture, six
main inconveniences do daily increase.

1. Idleness, which is the ground and beginning of all mischief. 2.
Depopulation and decay of Towns, for where in some Towns two hundred persons
were occupied and lived in their lawful labors, by converting of tillage into
Pasture, only two or three Herdmen are maintained. 3. Husbandry is decayed. 4.
Churches are destroyed, and the service of God neglected by diminution of
Church Livings. 5. Injury and wrong done to Patrons and Gods Ministers. 6. The
defense of the Land against foreign enemies, enseebled and empaired, the
bodies of Husbandmen being more strong and able, and patient of cold, heat, and
hunger, then of any other.
TITLE.
Title, properly (as some say) is when a man has a lawful cause of entry into
Lands whereof another is seized, for the which he can have no action, as title
of condition, title of Mortmain* But legally this word (Title) includes a
right also, and title is the more general word, for every right is a title,
but every title is not such a right for which an action lies, and therefore
titulus est justa causa possidendi, q^od nostrum est, and signifies the means
whereby a man comes to Land, as his title is by fine, or by scoffment, and
dicitur titulus a tuendo, because by it he holds, and defends his Land, and
as by a release of a right a title is released, so by release of a title, a
right is released also but title in a proper and Cook 4 Rep. Edward Althams
Case.
strict significati^n, is taken for a right of Entry, where a man can have no
action, as to enter for condition broken, or alienation in Mortmain.

TOLT.
Tolt, It is so called because it does tollere Cook 3 Rep. preface to the
Reader Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 10. sest. 171. Villa quasi vehilla quod in eam
convehantur fructus vicus because it is prope viam. Transgressio dicitur a
transgrediendo, because it passes that which is right. Cook on Li^. P. 57.
^^quelam from the Court Baron to the County Court.

TOWN.
Town, If a Town be decayed, so as no honses ^emain, yet it is a Town in Law.
It cannot be a Town in Law, unless it has, or in times past had ^ Church, and
celebration of Divine Service, Sa^raments and Burials.

It appears by Littleton, that a Town is a ^^nus, and a Borough is the-
species, for he says, that every Borough is a Town, but every Town is ^ot a
Borough. There be in England and Wales, ^ight thousand, eight hun^red and three
Towns, (...) thereabouts.

TRESPASS.
Trespass. The Law adjudgeth every tres^ass to be done with force and arms,
therefore ^e Plaintiff, that says the Defendant took his ^orse with force and
arms, (though he came without weapon) says truly that he took him with
(...)rce, as the Law means force. Dr. and Stu^ent cap. 14.

If vi and armis be not in the Writ, it shall abate, (...)itz. not. brev.

The Law accounts all to be vis, which is contrary to Ius. If I do but hawk
or walk for my pastime or recreation over another man's ground, he may have his
action of trespass against me, quare vi and armis, for though I meant no harm
to him or his, yet I might not pass upon his grouad without License.

The form of a Writ for living things, as Horses, Fitz. Herb. N. Brev. tit.
Tre^p.
is coeperunt and abduxerunt, for a dead thing, coeperunt and asportaverunt.

TRAVERSE.
Traverse, It took the name of the French d^ traverse, which is no other then
de traverse in Latin signifying, on the other side, because as the indictment
on the one side charge the party, so he on the other side comes in to
discharge himself.

Traversing of an Endictment is to take issue upon the chief matter thereof,
which is to make contradiction, or to deny the point of the indictmen^

TREASON.
Treason, is derived from ( trahir) which i^ treacherously to betray, Trahison,
per contracti^nem; Treason, if a man be arraigned for high treason, and stands
mute, or will not directly answe^ L. Dyer.
to the crime, judgment shall be given upon him a^ upon a traitor convict.
Fatetur facinus qui judicium fugit.

If a servant has an intent to kill his Master and before execution of his
intent depart out o^ service, and being out of service, executes his intent,
and kills him which was his Master: the is petty-treason, for the execution
respects the original Cook. 1 Rep. ^^ellies case
cause, which was malice conceived, wh^^ he was servant.

In Treason concealment is as capital as the practice. Here are no
accessaries, all are in a like predicament of offense and danger of Law, in
majori proditione omnes sunt principales.

It is either High, or Petty-Treason: It is called Alta proditio, and prodit to
parva. Proditorie must necessarily be used in every Indictment of Treason.
High in respect of the King which is the highest person; Petty in regard of
the inferiority of the persons against whom it is committed. Voluntas non
reputabitur pro facto nisi in causa proditio^is. To intend, or imagine the
death of the King or Queen, though it be not effected, yet if this be declared
by an open act, or uttered by words, or Letters, it is Treason.

A man that is a traitor convicted and attainted, has his Judgment to be drawn
upon a Hurdle from his Prison to the place of Execution, as being Stams pl. of
C. l. 3. c. 19. with Dr. Boys his gloss. The Romans called high treason laesam
Majestatem.
unworthy to tread any more upon Mother Earth, and that backward, with his Head
down-ward, for that he has been retrograde to natural courses; after hanged
up by the neck between Heaven and Earth, as deemed unworthy of both; his Privy
parts are cut off, as being unprofitably begotten, and unfit to leave any
generation after him; his Bowels and Intrals burned, which inwardly had
conceived and concealed such horrible Treason; then his Head cut off, that
imagined the mischief.

Petty Treason is a killing of any to whom pri^ate Stamf. pl. of Cr. l. 1. c. 44
obedience is due; as for a servant to kill his Master or Mistress, a Wife her
Husband, a Child her Father or Mother; a Clerk his Ordinary, to whom he owes
Canonical obedi^nce.

If a Servant procure another to kill his Master, and he kill him in his
Servants presence, this is Pet^y Treason in the Servant, and murder in the
^ther; but if it be in his absence, the Servant is only accessory to the
murder, because the principal is not a Traitor, and the accessory shall not b^
in worse condition then the principal.

A maid conspired with a stranger to rob her Mistress, and in the night time
lethim in at the door, L. Dyer. ter. Hill. an. 2. and 3 P. and M
and led him to her Mistress bed with a Candle, and the stranger killed her,
the servant saying, or doing nothing, but holding the Candle, this was petty
Treason in her.

TREASURE.
Treasure, the Kings Treasure is the sinews of Cook on Lit.
War, and the Honor and safety of the King in time of Peace, Firmamentum belli
and ornamentum pacis.

If any Mine or Metal be found in any ground, that always pertains to the
Lord of the soil, except Brook abri. fol. 181.
it be a Mine of Gold or Silver, which shall be always to the King, in whose
ground soever they be found.

Our Law says, Quod thesaurus competit Domi^^ Fitz. coron. 281. 436. Ployden.
Regi, and non domino libertatis, si non sit per ver^^ specialia, ut per
praescriptionem.

Oars of Gold and Silver belong to the King by his Prerogative, but not
Treasure found, for they It is called in the common Law treasure trove, that
is, treasure found.
are called Thesauri in terra, and not de terra Treasures hid in the Earth; as
when any Money Gold, Silver, Plate, bullion is found in any place, and no man
knows in whom the property is, the Law bestows it upon the King, and it
becomes re fiscalis, parcel of the Treasure Royal.

TRIAL.
Trial. If the trial be of an alien born (for selon^ or murder committed by
him) the Jury shall b^ de medi^tate linguae, that is, half of one Natio, an^
half of Strangers, except it be in the case of a Lambert.
Scot, whose Jury shall be altogether English, be cause both he speaks our
language, and is reputed a Subject.

In January 38. H. 8. Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, Son and Heir apparent to
Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, was attainted of High Treason, for joining the Arms
of England to his own, and he was tried by Knights and Gentlemen, and not per
Dominos ^ec per pares Regni, because he was not Earl by creation, but by
nativity, as Heir apparent to the Duke, which is not a dignity in the Law; for
if he had had the dignity by creation, and had been Lord of Parliament, he
should have been tried by his Peers.

In such a Trial per pares, the Lords shall not be sworn, and every one shall
give his Verdict by himself, and if the greater number agree, it is sufficient.
A Lord which is a Peer of the Realm See Cook's 2d part of Instit. c. 29.
shall not be tried per pares suos, in an appeal, but in an Indictment at the
suit of the King.

It is a maxim in the Law, Quod ibi semper fieri debet triatio, ubi juratores
meliorem possunt habere notitiam.

TALLAGIUM.
Tallagium, or Tailagium, comes of the French word ( Tailor) to share or cut
in pieces, and per metaphoram is taken, when the King, or any other has a
share or part of the value of a man's goods or chattells; or a share or part of
the annual revenue of his Land, or puts any charge or burden upon another; so
as Tallagium is de genere inclusive, of Subsidies, Taxes, Tenths, Fifteenths,
Impositions, and other burdens put, or set upon any man; and so it is
expounded in our Year-Books, what shall be said to be Tallag* put upon the
Subject by the King unjustly. Vide 2 part of Cook's Instit. 533.

V.
VAGABOND.
VAgabond, is one that wandereth about, rogue and vagabond are all one,
whosoever wandreth about idly and loyteringly is a rogue or vagabond, although
he beggeth not.

VERDICT.
Verdict, quasi vere dictum, as the saying of truth.

VILLENAGE.
Villenage. A villain signifies as much as servus among the Civilians. A man
of servile or base degree, villain from the French villein, a villa, from a
Country Farm, whereunto they were Judge Doderidge English Lawyer.
deputed to do service, as our villains regardant to Manors, were glebae
ascriptitii, tied to the turf, or rather of the word vilis, of his vile and
base condition.

Villenage is then the service of a Bondsman, and yet a freeman may do the
service of him that is bound, therefore Tenure in villenage is twofold.

One where the person of the Tenant is bound, and the Tenure servile, and the
other where the person is free, and the Tenure servile. Cook on Lit.


It is agreed by all men, that there were never any bondmen or villains, as the
Law calls them Lambert perambul. of Kent.
in Kent.

Villenage is where a man holds of his Lord, either by doing unto him some
particular base service, and such an one is called a Tenant by villenage, or by
doing generally whatsoever base service his Lord will command, and impose upon
Lit. lib. 2. cap. 10. sect. 12.
him, and such a Tenant is termed in our Law a villain.

VOID.
Void, A Church Representative may become void five manner of ways.

1. By death. Cook on Lit. p. 120.
2. By creation. 3. By resignation. 4. By deprivation. 5. By cession, as by
taking a Benefice incompatible
VOUCHER.
Voucher, in Latin vocatio, or ad vocatio, is a word of art made of the verb
voco, and is in the understanding of the Common Law.

When the common tenant calls another into the Court that is bound to him to
warranty, that is either to defend the right against the demandant, or to yield
him other Land.

USURY.
Usury, Usura dicitur ab usu and aere, quasi usu era, Cook 5 Rep. Claytons
Case.
id est, usus aeris, and usura est commodum certum, quod propter usum rei
mutuatae accipitur.

The Statute now in force enacted, Eliz. 13. c. 8.

1. It allows not usury but punishes the excess The Statute 21 of K. James,
c. 17. forbids taking above 8 in the, 100 that of Queen Eliz. above 10.
2. The title of the act is an act against usury, how then is it for it? 3. It
calls usury a detestable fin, how then can it secure the conscience of any?
The Statute of II. the 8. punished all usury above ten in the hundred, with
the forfeiture of treble value. See that of Ed. 6th.

UTLARY.
Utlary, The Bishops of Durham have had their Royalties and Princely rights, so
that the goods of outlawed and attainted persons out of Cambden of Durham.
the Kings Protection, fall into their hands, and not into the Kings.

Utlagatus, est quasi extra legem positus, and Bracton says, that caput gerit
lupinum, Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 11.
because he might be pu^ to death by any man, as a Wol^ that harefull beast
might be. But in the beginning of the reign of King Edward the third, it was
resolved by the Judges, for the avoiding of inhumanity, and of effusion of
Christian blood, that it should not be lawful for any man, but the Sheriff
only (having a lawful Warrant Id. ib.
therefore) to put to death any man outlawed though it were for felony, and if
he did, he should undergo such punishments, and pains of death, as if he had
killed any other man, and so from thenceforth the Law continued until this day.

VV.
WAGE.
WAge, is the giving security for the performing Vadiare comes of the French
gager, id est dare pignus, pignore certare, to put in a surety. Minshew.
of any thing, as to wage Law, and to wage deliverance.

Contra instrumentum, sive specialitatem (ut nostri loquuntur) legis vadiatio
locum non habet. Dyer fol. 23.

WAIF.
Waif, The Civilians call it derelictum, this belonged in times past to the
finder, by the Law of nature, and now to the Prince by the Law of Nations, or
to the Lord of the Fee which has his Books tit Estray and waif.
liberty granted him by the King, if the owner shall challenge it within a year
and a day, it shall be restored him.

A thing pro derelicto habita, waived and forsaken, A thing pro derelicto,
habita, waived and forsaken, is nullius in bonis. 29 E. 3. 29 E 4, 5, 12.
is nullius in bonis, as when a man for fear of a tempest casts his things
into the Sea, or some danger being emminent, leaves them upon the land, or
else of his own free will, leaves that which is his own sine spe reh. thendi.

I^ a thing be fallen out of a chariot or Wagon, it may be said to be lost or
waived.

Felony is not committed in the taking of treasury ^ound wreck of the Sea, waif
and stray, and such like, unless they have been before seized and the reason
is, quia Dominus rerum non apparet, ideo cujus sunt incertum est, and therefore
12 E. 3. Brief. 678.
punishment in such cases, is by ^^ne, and not by the taking away of life and
member.

Waif, is properly when a thief being pursued and having stolen goods about
him, does leave or Cook 5 Rep. Foxleys case.
forsake them, that he may fly away.

WAIVE.
Waive, is a woman that is outlawed, and she is called waive, as left out or
forsaken of the Law, and not an outlaw, as a man is, for women are Cook on Lit.
l. 2. c. 11. sect. 186.
not sworn in Leets to the King as men are, which be of the age of twelve years
or more.

WAPENTAKE.
Wapentake. When any on a certain day and place took upon him the Government of
the Hundred, the free Suitors met him with Lances, and he descending from his
Horse, all rose up to him, and he holding his Lance upright, all the rest, in
sign of obedience, with their Lances touched his Lance or Weapon; for the
Saxon word ^ apen is weapon, and tact, tactus, touching, whence wapentake or
touching a weapon. Cook's 2d part of Instit. c. 10.

It came of the Danes, or Saxons, for that so Wapentakia a Wapen. hoc est,
armis: quae quoties novus esset hundredi dominus, ei in subjectionis signum
reddebant. Vossius De vitiis Sermonis l. 2. c. 9. Smiths Common wealth of
England. c. 19.
many Towns came by their order then to one place, where was taken a muster of
their armor and weapons, in which place from them that could not find
sufficient pledges for their good abearing, their weapons were taken away.
Weapon, or wapon in old English do signify all arms offensive, as Sword,
Dagger, Spear, Lance, Bill, Bows, Arrows.

The Northern English beyond Trent, called a Hundred so.

WARDSHIP.
Wardship, The final cause why it was ordained was this, ut qui per aetatem
scipsos defendere nequeant, ab aliis defendatur.

Of Guardianships there be two kinds in respect of the manner of their
constitution, viz.

1. By the Common Law. 2. By Statute.
At the Common Law there are four manner of Guardians.

1. Guardian in Chivaliy. 2. Guardian in Soccage. 3. Guardian by nature. 4.
Guardian pur cause de nurture.
For Guardianship by the Statute, 1. and 2 Phil. and Mar.

All which several sorts of Guardianships the Law has defended by diverse
Statutes providing for the Guardians respective remedies, in case their rights
are violated, vid. Hub. Rep. Dr. Husseys case, West. 2. c. 35. explained for
that purpose in a Writ of Ravishment. 32 Ed. Fitzh. guard. 32. and Fitzh. N. B.
91. and 143. and Register 98. and 99. 12 H. 4. 16.

WARRANTY.
Warranty, is a Covenant whereby the Bargainer Warrantum est se, curitas a
venditore praestita emptori, quo tranquille aliquid possideat. Eaque a
significatione warrantizare dicitur warrantus sive venditor, quando se empto
obligat per acta curiae aut chartam, aut contractus instrumentum* Vossius De
vitiis Sermonis. l. 2. c. 20.
is bound to warrant the thing sold to the Bargainee, and is either,

1. Real, or 2. Personal. 1. Real, when it is annexed to Lands or Tenements
granted for life, etc. and it is either, 1. In deed, as by the word warrantizo
expressly. 2. Or in Law as by the word dedi or some other amplification.
2. Or personal which either respects the 1. Property, of the thing sold or 2.
The quality of it.


Real warranty in respect of the estate is either

1. Lineall. 2. Collateral, or 3. Commencing by deseisen.
WARREN.
Warren, The King grants a Warren to me in It comes from the French word
garein, id est, vivarium, Dr. Cowell Instit. Cook on Lit. p. 5.
mine own Lands for Pheasants and Partridges only, so by this grant no man may
there chase them without my License, and so of Hares, but not of Conies, for
their property is to destroy the fruits of the earth, and to eat Corn, Crompton
Iurisd. fol. 148.

By the grant of it, or a Forest or Park, not only the privilege, but the Land
it self passes, for they are compound.

WASTE.
Waste. Brook holds that the Executors shall have Brooks abr. tit. Chattels p.
135. B. Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 67.
glass, for the house (says he) is perfect without it. Yet it was adjudged in
the Common Pleas, that a waste may be committed in glass, annexed to the
Windows, for it is parcel of the house, and shall descend as parcel of the
Inheritance to the Heir, and Executors shall not have it, and although that the
Lessee himself at his own costs put the glass in the Windows, yet this being
own parcel of the house, he cannot take away this or waste it, but shall be
punished in waste. Glass annexed to the Windows by nails, or after other manner
by And Rep. Harle^anders case. fol. 63, 64
the Lessor or Lessee, cannot be removed by the Lessee, for without glass it is
no perfect house, and by a Lease or grant of a house this shall pass as parcel
of it, and the Heir shall have i^, and not the Executors, and peradventure a
great part of the costs of a house consists of glass, and if they be open in a
tempest and rain, waste of the timber of the house will follow. Also it was
resolved, that if wainscot be annexed to a house by the Lessor or Lessee, it is
part of the house, and there is no difference in the Law whether it be fastened
with great or little nails, or by screws or irons put through posts or walls.
But if it be any of these ways, or any other fixed to the posts or walls of
the house, the Lessee cannot remove this, but he is punishable in an action of
waste; for this is part of the House, and by Lease, or grant of the house shall
pass as parcel. Fitzh. Not. Brev. 58 H.


By an Action of waste at our Law, the Plaintiff, if it be ^ound for him, shall
recover treble damages. Cook l. 5. Rep. Countes de Salop. fol. 13.


For permissive waste no Action lies against Tenant at will, but for voluntary
waste a general Action of Trespass lies.

There are two kinds of waste, viz. voluntary, At the Common Law no remedy did
lie for waste, either voluntary or permissive, against Lessee for life, or for
years, because the Lessee had no interest in the Land, by the Act of the
Lessor, and it was the Lessor his folly not to restrain the Lessee by covenant
or condition, Cook's 5 Rep.
or actual and permissive, waste may be done in Houses, by pulling or
prostrating them down, or by suffering the same to be uncovered, whereby the
spa^rs or ra^ters, or other timber of the house are rotten. But if the house be
uncovered, when the Tenant comes in, it is no waste in the Tenant to suffer
the same to fall down. But though the house be ruinous at the Tenants coming
in; yet i^ he pull it down, it is waste, unless he re-edifie it again.

Though there be no timber growing upon the ground, yet the Tenant at his
peril Cook on Lit. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 67.
must keep the houses from wasting. If the Tenant do, or suffer waste to be
done in houses, yet if he repair them before any action brought, there lies no
action of waste against him; but he cannot plead quod non fecit vastum, but the
special matter.

A wall uncovered when the Tenant comes in, is no waste, if it be suffered to
decay. If the Tenant Id. Ib.
cut down, or destroy any fruit tree, growing in the Garden or Orchard, it is
no waste. If the Tenant build a new house it is waste, and if he suffer it to
be wasted, it is a new waste. Waste properly is in Houses, Gardens, in Timber
trees, viz. Oak, Ash, and Elm; either by cutting of them down, or topping of
them, or doing any Act whereby the timber may decay.

If a house be ruinons at the time of the Lease made, if the Lessee suffer the
house to fall down, he is not punishable, for he is not bound by Law Id. ib.
to repair a house in that case: And if he cut down Timber upon the ground so
letten, and repair it, he may well justify it; and the reason is, because the
Law does favor the supportation and maintenance of Houses of habitation for
mankind.

WIFE.
Wife. After Marriage, all the will of the Wife, Cook 4 Rep. Forse and
Hemblings case.
in judgment of the Law is subject to the will of the Husband; and it is
commonly said, a seem covert has no will.

If she have any Tenure at all, she holds in Capite, and she has no title but
by her Husband, the maxim of the Lawyers is ^^^r fulget radiis marit^, the Wife
shines with her Husbands beams.

Where Baron and Feme commit selony, the Feme can neither be principal, nor
accessory, because the Law intends her to have no will, in regard of her
subjection and obedience she owes to her Husband. 45 Edw 3. Fitz. Coven 18. 1
H. 5. 12. 6. Perk. cap. de Grant. Not. Brev. fol. 120. Not. Brev. fol. 188. 11.


Our Law says, that every gift, grant, or disposition of goods, lands, or
other thing whatsoever, made by a woman covert, and all, and every obligation
and seoffment made by her, and recovery suffered, if they be done without her
Husbands consent, are void.

Yea, if she do wrong to another, she has not any thing to make satisfaction
during coverture, either her Husband must do it, or by imprisonment of her
person must it be done.

And though she have inheritance of her own, yet can she not grant any annuity
of it during her coverture without her Husband; if any Deed be Perk. fol. 2. A
made to that purpose without his consent, or in her name alone, it is void in
Law. Yea, if there be debate between the Husband and his Wife, whereby certain
Lands of the Husbands be assigned Perk. fol. 2. B
to the Wife with his consent, if out of such Lands she grant an annuity to a
stranger, the grant is void.

And if he covenant to give her yearly such and such apparel, she cannot
dispose it as she list 27 H. 8. 27. p. 12.
without his consent, but only me and wear it her self.

Neither can she lease her own Land for years, for life; if the do, it is void,
and the Lessee entering Perk. f. 3, 4
by so^ce thereof, is a dissesor to the Husband and trespassor.

If she sell any thing, the sale is void, except she 21 H. 7. 18 p. 29. Not.
Brev. f. 12.
be a Merchant, where by the custom she is enabled to Merchandise.

Finally, she cannot make executors without the consent of her Husband, nor a
devise or will* Cook 4 Rep. Ognels case Plowd. Comment. 344 a Bret. and Rigdons
case.


If she make a Will, and thereby devise her own Inheritance; and her Husband
die, and she after die without any new publication of it, it is of no force,
but it was void at first.

Suppose a woman at the time of her marriage have a lease for years, or the
wardship of the Dr. and Stud. f. 13. Plowd. Comment. fol. 418. 8.
body and Lands of an Infant, or have it by gift or purchase, after marriage
she cannot give it away whatsoever the extremity be, but her Husband may at any
time during coverture dispose of it, and such his disposition shall cut off the
wives interest.

By the Common Law Marriage is a gift of all 12 H. 7. 22. Cook 5 Rep. fol. 36.
H. 8. Dyer fol. 6. Dr. and Stu. fol. 13. Plowd. Comment. fol. 36.
the Goods and Chattels personal of the Wife to her Husband; so that no kind
of property in the same remains in her.

And all personal Goods and Chattels during Marriage given to the Wife, are
presently ipso facto transferred (as to the property of them) to the Husband.

By our Law her necessary apparel is not hers in property. While she remains
a Wife, she is (to use the Law phrase) under covert Baron: she 4 H. 6. 31.
can neither let, set, al^en, give, nor otherwise of right make any thing away.

WITHERNAM.
Withernam comes from two old and out-worn Saxon words, Wither al terum and nam
pignus quasi Doderidge. See Smiths Commonwealth of England. l. 3. c. 10.
altera pignoris oblatio: Some derive it of the German Wider, i. e. Rursus
again, and nam that is, captio, a taking, vetitum nanium, in Latin, a forbidden
taking, though it be a taking again, but because the first taking in distress
was unlawful, and so in Law forbidden.

WRECK.
Wreck, the Civilians call it Naufragium, nothing Cook 5 Rep. Sir Henry
Constables case. Id. ib.
shall be wreccum maris but such goods only which are cast, or lest upon the
Land by the Sea, for wreccum maris significat illa bona quae naufragio ad
terram appellantur. It is an estray upon the Sea coming to Land; as an estray
of Beasts is upon the Land coming within any priviledg'd place.

The King, by the old custom of the Realm, as Dr. and Stud.
Lord of the narrow Sea, is bound to scour the Sea of Pirates. And because that
cannot be done without great charges, it is not unreasonable if he have such
goods as be wrecked upon the Sea toward the charge.

WRIT.
Writ, A Writ is a formal Letter, or Epistle of the King of the Liberties,
etc. in a Parchment sealed with a Seal, directed to some Judge, Officer,
Minister, or other subject, at their suit, or the suit or plaint of a subject,
commanding or authorizing some thing contained in the same Letter to be done
for the cause briefly (and therefore called un brief) in that Letter expressed,
which is to be discussed in some Court according to Law.

Writs are of three sorts, See Cook's 2d part of Instit. c. 24. Of the several
sorts of Writs, and of the difference between a Writ and an Action.


1. Original, which are most commonly of course, and therefore are of a set
form. 2. Judicial, which are for the Execution of the Judgment. 3.
Magisteriall, which vary in form according to the matter emergent.
WRONG.
Wrong, or Injury is in French aptly called Tort, Cook on Lit. l. 2. c. 1.
because injury and wrong is wrested or crooked, being contrary to that which
is right and straight. Injury is derived of in and Ius, because it is contrary
to right.

Queen Elizabeth's continual charge to her Justices agreeable with her ancient
Laws was, that for no Commandment under the Great, or Privy Seal, Writs, or
Letters, common right might Cook preface to second Rep.
be disturbed or delayed, according to the ancient Law declared by the great
Charter, Nulli v^ndemus aut negabimus aut differemus justitiam vel rectum.

Y.
YARD-LAND.
YArd-land, or Virgata terrae, the Saxons called Cook L. 5
it Girdland, is a proportion of Land, in some Countries it is ten Acres, in
some twenty, some twenty sour, and some thirty Acres of Land.

A TABLE.
A
ABate what it signifies, page 1 whence Abatamentum ib. Abbot, whence it comes,
and what it signifies p. 1 Abciance, whence derived, and what it signifies p.
1, 2 Accessory, before and after the fact, who p. 2. 3. cases about Accessaries
ib. Acquittance, what it is, how it differs from some words in the Civil Law p.
4. Acquiter, whence derived, and what it signifies ibid. Acre, what it is, and
whence it comes p. 5 Action, what it is, and whence derived, p. 5. several
sorts of Actions, ibid. how an Action of the case will lie p. 6, 7, 8.
Adjournment, what p. 9 Admission, what ib. Administrator, who p. ib. Advowson,
what, and whence so called p. 10 Affeerors, what, and whence p. ib. how
affeerment, and amerciament differ ibid. Affray, what, and whence p. 10. how it
differs from assault ib. Age, the Law takes notice of diverse ages p. 11
Agreement, whence p. ib. cases about it 12 Alien, whence derived, and what it
signifies p. ib. Alms, accounted in Law Divine service, p. 13. cases about it
ib. Amerciament, why called misericordia, p. ib. how it differs from a fine ib.
Ancestor, whence, and how in the Law distinguished from predecessor p. 14 An,
Jour, a convenient time for many purposes ib. An, Jour, and waste, what ib.
Annates what 15 Annuity what ib. cases about it ib. Appeal, whence it comes,
the several sorts of Appeals, and cases about it p. 16, 17 Appendant, what 18
Apprentices, unde, and what ib. Apportion, unde 19 Appurtenant, what, and how
distinguished from Appendant ib. Arbitrament, what, and how it differs from
Concord 20 Arraign, what ib. Arrest, what and whence, p. 21. who may not be
arrested, ib. it is lawful in the right ib. Assault, whence p. 22 Assembly,
when unlawful ib. Assise, what ib. Assumpsit, what, 23. when good in the Law
ib. Attachment, what and whence, ib. how it differs from an arrest ib.
Attainder, what and whence ib. Attaint, what and whence 24 8 punishments follow
it ib. Attorney, what p. 25 Attornment, what and whence p. 26 Award, whence,
the several kinds of it 27 Avowry, what ib. Aid, what ib.
B
Bail, what p 2^ Bailment, what ib. Bailiff, whence p. 25 Bank, what p. 25, 26
Bargain, and Sale, what p 29 Bar, what p. ib. Barretor, what, and whence, 3^
Bastard, what, and whence, p. ib. cases about it, 31 and ib. a good Statute
against Bastards ib. 32 Battery, what p. 32 Buggery, what it is p 33 Burgage,
what it is ib. Burglary, what it is, and whence ibid. cases about it p. 34
Burgh English, what p. ib. cases about it ib.
C
Capite, what tenure it is, and why so called p. 35 Castle p. 36 Challenge,
what it signifies, and who may challenge, and be challenged ib. 37 Champerty 38
Champerters, who, and whence ib. Chance-medly, what and whence ib. Change, what
p. 39 Change, what ib. Charter, whence, and what p. 40. why it is called Magna
Charta ibid. Chattels, what, and whence several sorts p. 41 Chevage, what p.
42 Clergy, when a man shall have his Clergy p. 43 Collegium, what p. 44 Color
of Office, always taken in the worst part ibid. Condition, what, cases about
it p 45 Confirmation, what it is, the several kinds of it p. 46 Confiscate,
whence 47 Conspi^acy, what p. ib. Constable, whence, and what required in him p
ib. Contract, why so called, cases about it p. 48 Copyhold, what, cases about
it p 49, 50 Coroner, what, and whence p. 51 Corporation, what p. 52 Covenant,
what, ibid. who may covenant ib. Covine, whence and what 53 Count, whence and
what ib. County, what ibid. Court, what it is, the several Courts p. 54
Cu^s^er, whence p. 55 Courtesy of England, what ib. Curtilagium, what p 56
Consuetudo 57 Custom, what, the properties of it, and several kinds of it p.
58, 59, 60, 61
D
Damage, what p. 62 Damage ^easant ib. Dean ib. Debt, what 63 Decies tantum,
what ibid. Deceit 64 Deed, what, the things necessary to it ib. the kinds of
Deeds 65 Defeisance, what p. 66 Default, what ibid. Se defendendo ib Deforce,
what ib. Demandant ^7 De^ains ib. De^urrer ib. Deni^en ib. De^i^^^ion ^8
De^dand ib. Deraign p. 69 De^i^^e ib. Devise, Cases about it ib. ^^, 71 Devit,
what it is, it is sound in the Law si^ ways ib. Discretion, what 72
Discontinuance, whence derived ibid. Disparagement, what ibid. Several kinds
of Disparagement p. 73 Diss^ism, what it is ibid. Distres^, whence, and of what
things it must be ib. ^4, 75 Divorce, whence, the several causes of it, p. 76.
it is twofold ibid. Domin cum, what, its several acceptions. p. 77 Doomes-day
Book, why so called ib. Dower, what, the several kinds of it, and cases about
it ib. 78, 79, 80 Drunkenness, the sorfe^ture for it 81 Duresse, what, and
whence ibid.
E
Ecclesia, what it signifies in the (...) Law, what Eccelesiasticall persons
are p. 82 Election, what, in the Law, it is of several things, and cases about
it p. 83, 84 Elegit, what ib. Emparlance, what ibid. Endictment, what, and
whence p. 85, 86, 87 Ensranchisement ib. Entruder 88 Equity ib. Escape 89
Escheat 90 Escheator 91 Estate ib. Estoin ib. Estople 92 Estouers 93 Estray ib.
Estreats 94 Exchange ib. Execution 95 Executor ib. Exigent 96 Extortion ib.
Evidence 97
F
Farm 98 Fealty ib. Fee-simple ib. Feudum 99 Fee 100 Fees ib. Feossment ib.
Felony, the punishment of a felo is grievous p. 101, 102, 103 Felo de se, who,
and how punished ibid. Fine, its several significations 104 Flight, what, p.
105 Floatsom, what ib. Force, what ib. Forging 106. Formedon, why so called,
and its several kinds ib. Foundation, what, and whence ib. Franchise, what
ibid. Frankalmoigne, what ibid. Franktenement, what. p. 107 Freeman, who, and
how many ways. ib. Fresh-suit, what 108.
G
Gavelkind, what, and whence p. 1^8 General p. 1^9 Grand-Serjeanty, what p.
ib. Grange 11^ Grant, what cases about it p. 110, 111, 112
H
Harriot, what, and how many kinds there be of them, p. 113 Heir, what p. 114.
the several kinds of Heirs p. 115 Hereditament 116 Haeres ib. Hotchpot, what
p. 117 Homage, whence it is, the most honorable and humble service ib.
Homicide, what, and what is required to it p. 118, 119 Horse, several cases
about it 120, 121, 122 Hue and Cry, what ib. Hundred p. 123
I
Idiot, who, cases about it p. 124 Jersam, what p. 125 Ignoran^e ibid.
Imprisonment ibid. Incident 126 Incumbent ibid. Induction ibid. Indented, when
a Deed is indented, and how called p. 127 Infant ibid. Inheritance p. 128 Inn
ib. Institution p. 130 Intrusion ibid. Joyntenants ib. Jointure p. 131 Judges
ib. 131, 132 Judgment p. 133 Jurata, what, and whence the several kin^s p.
133, 134, 135, 13^ Justices, whence p. 137
K
King p* 138 Knight, whence ibid. Knights-Fee, what 139 Knights Service, what
ib.
L
Land p* 140 Larceny, whence, and what p* 141 Latin p. 142 Law, what, the Law
of Nature and of England p. 143, 144 Legacy, what p* 145 Leases, whence, what
persons may make them, and diverse cases, ib. 146, 147 Libell, what, its
several kinds, cases about it p. 148, 149 Liberty p. 150 Ligeance, what, cases
about it ib Limitation 151 Livery, what p. 152, 153
M
Magistrate p. 154 Mai^, what ib. Main-p^i^^ p. 155 Manor ib. Maintenance 156
Manumission ibid. Marriage, cases about it p. 157 Maxim, what, several maxims
of the Law p. 158 Misprision, what p. 159 Money, whence, cases about it ib.
Monopoly 160 Monster p. ib. Mortgage, whence ibid. Mortmain, whence p. 161
Mulier, what ib. Murder, what, the several kinds of it p. 162, 163, 164, 165
Mute, what ib.
N
Name p. 166 Nief ib. Nisi Prius 167 Non Compos mentis ib. Nobility 168, 169
Nuisance, what p. 170
O
Oath 171 Obligation p. 171, 172 Occupation p. 173 Office ib. Oxguage 174
Ordinary ib. Order 175 Outlawry ib.
P
Pain-Fort, and Dure p. 176 Pannell, what ib. Paravail p. 177 Parceners ib.
Patron p. 172 Parson 173 Parliament p. 173, 174 Parque 175 Peace ibid. Perjury
182 Pillory ib. Pipowders ibid. Pleas 183 Possession ib. Pound 184 Praemuniry
ib. Prerogative 185, 186 Prescription 187 Presentment 188 Presumption ib.
Prison ib. Privity 189 Privilege ib. Process ib. Proof 190 Property ib. 191,
192, 193 Protection 194 Proviso ib. Public ib. Purchase 195, 196
Q
Quarrels 197
R
Ransom 197 Rape 198 Rebouter ib. Record 199 Register p. 200 Relation ib.
Release p. 201 Relief, whence, and what ibid. Remainder, what p. 202 Remitter
p. 203 Rents ibid. Replevin, whence 204 Resceit ib. Rescous 205 Reservation ib.
Retraxit ib. Reversion p. 206 Right, several sorts of Right ib. Riot, whence
p. 207 Robbery, whence, cases about it ib 208, 209 Rogue ibid. Ro^e, whence
ibid.
S
Seisin, what p. 210 Seisina ibid. Sergeants, whence ibid. Sheri^f, whence his
power ibid. Soccage p. 211 Ser^eanty 212 Surety ibid. Statute, whence p* 213
Statutes ibid. Stealing p. 214. 215 Stare 216 Suspense 217 Suit ibid.
T
Tail 218, 219 Tail 220 Tallage 221 Tenement ib. Tenure 222 Testament 223,
224, 225 Tillage 226 Title ib. Tolt 227 Town ib* Trespass ib. Travers^ 228
Treason ib. 229, 230 Treasure 230 Trial ib. Tallagium. 231
V
Vagabond p. 232 Verdict ibid. Villenage ibid. Void 233 Voucher ibid. Usury ib.
Utlary. 234*
W
Wage p. 235 Waif ib. Waive 236 Wapentake ibid. Wardship 237 Warranty ib.
Warren 238 Waste ib. 239 Wise 241, 242 Withernam p. 243 Wreck ib. Writ ibid.
Wrong p. 244
Y
Yard-land 245
FINIS.
Reader, these Books following, are Printed for Charles Adams, and are to be
sold at his Shop at the Talbot in Fleet-strest.
A Treatise of Religion and Learning* and of Religious and Learned men; in
Alphabetical order, a (...)k seasonable for these ^^mes wherein Religion and
Learning have so many enemies: by Edward, Leigh Esquire Master of Arts of Magdalen
^^ all in Oxford. In so to.

Reports of that Learned and judicious Clerk, John G(...) ^rough Esquire sometime
one of the Protono^a^^^^ of the Court of the Common Pleas, being his collection
of C^^ice Cases, taken in the latter years of Queen Elizabeth* with the Judges
Resolutions hereupon: Pubshed by William Style of the Inner Temple Esquire In 4.

The French Cook, prescribing the way of making ready all sorts of Meats, Fish,
and Flesh; wih their pr^^^^ S^^ces; together with a Treatise of Conserves, and
the whole s^ill of Past^y-Work: Englished by I. D. Gent. In ^^.

The Innocent Lord, or the Divine* Providence, being the Incomparable History
of Joseph; Englished by Sir Wi^^^n Lower In 8.

Grati Falicii Cyneg^ti^on, or a Po^^^ of Hunting, by Grat^us, the Falisci^n,
Englished and ^llustrated by Christ^^^^ Wase Gen In ^^.

Moral Discourses and Essays upon several se^ect Subjects, by Thomas Culpeper
Esquire ^2

A Learned Discourse of Ceremonies, by the righ^ Reverend ^ather in God,
Lanc^lo^ Andre^^, late Bishop of Winchester. In 1^.

An Answer to two Love is* the one of a Papist, the other of a Presbyterian, by
Tho. Swadli^g, Dr. in Divinity. In ^.

New Errors made palpable by an Old Ligh^, or a cheap and easy way to cure the
Dissenti^ns of the times, by Anthoni^ Norwood Esquire In 12.

A short and plain Catechism, instructing a Learner of Christian Religion, what
he i^ to believe and what to practice.

The Practical Re^ister, being Rules, Order^, and Observations, concerning the
general practice of the Law* but more especially the way of practice in the
Court of the Upper-Bench, by William S^yle of the Inner Temple Esquire In large 8.

Two Sermons: the first, The L^adstone of Man's Love: the second, The Regene^^te
Man's Bliss, by Edward Larkin Minister of the Gospel at Lime* field in Su^^ie.
In 12.

A Philologicall Commentary, or an Illustration of the most Obvious and useful
words in the Law, by Edward Leigh Esquire the second Edition Corrected and Enlarged.


