Microcosmography: OR SPECVLVM MVNDI BEING A GLASS FOR WORLDLINGS.

A SERMON Preached at the funeral of the Right Worshipful SPENCER LUCY Esquire at
Charlecote, August 11. 1649.

By Christopher Massey Master of Arts of Gonv. and Caius College Cambridge.

LONDON Printed by RICHARD COTES Anno Dom. 1650.

To the Right Worshipful Robert Lucy Esquire my most honored PATRON.
I Am very sensible of the unfledgednesse of this Lapwing that runs about so
confidently. Be pleased therefore instead of its shell, to let it have the
shadow of such a wing, the glory of such a name as yours is, affixt to it; but
let it go as a Decoy to bring in souls. For truly some have been pleased to
esteem these pieces of Glass which I broke at your Royal seat Charlcote, at
an higher rate than to be only thrown out to choke Hens, or patcht together
only to catch Larks. But whether it be custom or the importunity of some that
heard it, that has got it from me, it will now undeceive those that heard it
not. It Is a Sea but so calm and clear, that he that can stoop with the
Country wench to see his foul face in fair water, may find in himself, both
what to wash off, and what (with Narcissus) to fall in Love withal.

Sir I am weary of catching shadows and embracing clouds and will now entirely
devote my self to prayer for you and your noble family, that that great God
whose Throne is indeed a Mercie-seat to all that sincerely address themselves
to it in the name of the Mediator, will preserve to you your inheritance in
Canaan and Heaven; and so I humbly subscribe to be ever

Your obliged Servant and faithful Chaplain Christopher Massey.

Microcosmography: OR, SPECVLVMMVNDI: Being a Glass for Wordlings.
A SERMON preached at the Funeral of the Right Worshipful SPENCER LUCY, Esquire
REV. 4.6. Before the throne was a sea of Glass like Crystal.


IF I did intend to word it only (as the use is now a days, the use and
principal, even in Doctrines and Uses) I might easily style the seven Bishops
and Churches in the three precedent Chapters, St John's Reformed Churches, his
Heptarchy, his Patriarchy: this the rather, for though in his two latter
Epistles he is an Elder; yet in his first a father; and, lest he should be
mistaken for a Lay-Elder, in this Apocalypse, a Divine. So like his emblem the
soaring Eagle (though perhaps not so clearly from ver. 7.) he not only gazes on
the worlds light himself, but bears his Eaglets on his wings, to teach them
with undazeled eye to fix on Alpha and Omega, an ever rising, never setting
sun.

But now in this fourth Chapter, he begins to discover in aenigmaticall Idea's
of Gods decrees, the future militant Churches mournings to the worlds end.

Verse. 2, 3. A throne, not empty, but the Jasper, Sardine, Emerald stone, the
Eternal Trinity on it. verse. 4. Four and twenty Elders enthroned, i. e. the
triumphant Church, Jewish, Gentile, in their lawful Representative twice
twelve Founders, Patriarchs, Apostles. verse. 5. God writes contra gentes,
lightnings, thundrings, etc. black lines. verse. 6. A sea, i. e. the world, in
which his militant Church is tossed, that I say not shipwrackt. Rejoice ye
faithful, for though verse. 6. your pressures great, yet ver. 3. the great God
is your judge, and your avenger, (...), you are before his throne.

I intended no other division for my discourse before this honorable presence,
but that of soul and body; but the Scripture is so brief in this matter,
speaking but one word or two of the greatest persons Funeral, that I am forced
to present you with these particulars.

1. A show, a spectacle, the world. 2. A Spectator, God: both their actings
under three several disguises.

The world. 1. A sea tumultuous. Yet 2. it is glass, quickly broken. Yet 3.
like crystal, shining clear. But again although, 1. Like crystal, bright. Yet
2. it is glass, brittle. 3. A Sea brinish.

God, as on a throne, intimating in respect of himself, 1. His judgment. 2.
Majesty. 3. Eternal rest. In respect of the world, 1. His power. 2. Presence.
3. Essence.

See the pretty knack, the thing they call the world. It Is 1. a sea, Why do we
immerse our selves in it? Air is man's element. 2. Glass, Why build on it?
Earth is man's pavement. 3. Crystal, its congealed Atoms, yield nothing but
coldnesses, hardnesses; Fire (love) is a Christians element. Else,

See 1. the power of God in judgment to condemn thee. Or 2. the Majesty of
his presence to shame thee. Or 3. the eternal rest and happiness of his
essence to allure thee. (...).

They that go down to the sea in ships, Psalm. 107.23. they behold the great
Gods works and wonders: we are shipped for an hour, and though it be dangerous
traveling at sea, yet the right spirit of our righteous Savior with his
gentle breathings, his effectual gales will harbor us in quiet; for lambs may
wade here, where elephants drowned. The comfort is ver. 1. the door (which the
lambs well know) is open. Sweet Jesu, we know no door but thee: How shall man's
beetle-cy'd body, nay eaglecy'd soul pierce into heaven, but through thee?
Lord open, before it be too late for fools to enter.

First, the world is the sea (...); so Ribera, Bullinger, Pererius, Paraeus
here; so Scripture (the best Expositor) Mat. 13.47. Christ's Kingdom is like a
net cast into the sea: where the Ship is the Church, the Sea the World, the Net
the Word, the Fishermen Ministers, Fish the Men of the world: 'Twas good
fishing when mutus ut piscis was in date, our fish will catch the fishermen. So
the Church of England (the Catholic Churches best Expositor) in her form of
Baptism -- may so pass the waves of this troublesome world. And he that rests
not in her judgment, sink or swim at his own peril be it.

(...) the world's a sea; and then needs must it be dangerous, where the
Prince of the Air throws down his blustering storms, those shortened days,
Mat. 24.22. will ere long leave him to his eternal night; where sin in stead
of sand to ballast us, is quicksands to bury us; Honor bubbles, Passion froth,
Company waves crowding on one another, Misery the ebb, Successes the tide, a
stream (however Trowts bear up against it) against which no striving. Our
tears, as soon as borne prognosticate its brinishnesse. Our life being tears
for misery, at the best for sin.

It Is a sea, see this 1. in its rage, Psalm. 93. and 98. the floods have voices
and hands, so like the wicked world, cry down with it, and put forth
sacrilegious hands to pull in the poor ship the Church; or under pretense of
having it to the dock, pare it, and patch it, till it have as little of the
ancient ship in it as that of the Athenians. Christiani tollantur has been the
voague of all ages, decimentur, let them be tith'd; nay what is worse, let no
tithes be paid. These worldly ones are properly the sea, Esaias 57.20. a boiling
sea, their heart casts forth mire, dirt, scum: Murders, thefts, etc. Mat.
15.19. Oh how it troubles David, Psalm. 73. to see how the fish of this sea rant
it, these prosper. They are not cursed, that dwell in the sea, only the Earth,
Air, Genesis 3. nor are they sufferers in that great drowning time, Genesis 7. these
tyrannical winds and waves make for them. I may in a word decide those (...).
1. That there be Men-fish, Tritons, Nereides, Syrenes. 2. That the earth and
sea (joy and sorrow, good and bad) make up one globe. Yet 3. that there is more
sea than land. And 4. that the sea is higher than the dry land. If you see,

2. Depth, for here you see Gods footsteps are not known, Psalm. 77.19. no tract
of God: his discipline in the Church. His faithful must take notice of sin,
and of the punishment of sin, and fear to sin. His Israel must make bricks,
whilst their Nimrods, Pharaohs perpetuate, their names in Babels, Pyramids.
St. John himself like an hoary apple, having escaped the locust, the wind and
storm, the pluckers hand, hung near an hundred years old on the tree of life,
yet then unseasonably enough, must be coddled in a caldron of oil because
Christians derive their pedigree from Christ, and Christ his from, his
spiritual chrism. O when thou comst to Heaven, thou shall know how Domitians
brazen Sea hurt him not, only proved a Bath to renew him: then thou shall
clearly see, why Adam falls, why Cain kills Abel, Apryes seremy, Esaias sawn
asunder by Manasses. Then thou shall plainly read what the four Beasts be. What
and whose that mazing knot of figures, (...) 666. What God and Magog, what
Harmageddon. Be not rash in judging. St. Paul made but a glance as it were at
that future light, but had he not borrowed a thorn from his Saviors Crown,
much Revelation had made him mad. (...) it is deep.

3. Inconstant; wavering ebbs flows, now calm, now storm, so inconsistent the
great World. So its compendium, Job 14. never continues in one stay, for 2 Samuel
14.14. all spill and glide away like water, in continual have to fall into
this Sea; No Planet more hastens Westward then this wandering Tabernacle of
Dust, this sod of earth to its center, this rivolet to its Ocean. He finds a
fall and a spring tide in his veins, till as Psalm. 2.14. he is powered out
clearly like water, not a jot sticks to the vessel: alas, What advantage has
that water that is exalted above the Heavens? but to see his greater ruin from
an higher place. Thus in this world, Psalm. 107.26. Mounts up to heaven, then
suddenly drops down to hell, (the Poet owes perchance to the Prophet, Iamjam
tacturus, etc.) now all is serene and we mistake it for heaven; then Wars,
Famines, Plagues, in a necessary chain, nay the Plague of all plagues, civil
Wars, muddy us, and hell seems not more sooty, more black, more divellish; thus
in States. Now repent, then justified, then sanctified, in a necessary
concatenation too; then in heaven, but that a great billow, some sinful
stumble, slip, fall rebounds us to our earth, glues our souls to the pavement;
then in hell. Thus in Church, temporal, spiritual state in this world is
(...), mutable.

Yet though 1. Never so variable, so long as we six not our Ark any where but
on Ararat, so long as we sit not down with our Tabernacle till we come to
Shiloh; so long as with those celestial bodies we sail on fixed poles, only
making the great God, not this little earth our center, we shall be blessed at
least in our Haven. Our castles on earth may sink in their ruins, our castles
on the Sea in their seditious waves, our castles in the air in our giddy fancies,
we have a castle higher than Earth, Sea, Fancy: the Lord is our Castle, Psalm.
31.4.

2. Though the Sea in Dogdayes, (such days as these) is thicker and darker, no
wind to hinder the Suns-salting-power, yet is it safer swimming in these deeps
than in shallows, in salt waters than in sweet. Nay Israel is safer in the red
Sea than on land: nor are fishes salt because in the Sea, Abraham, Lot not
tainted in the dead Sea, Gods children make all waters sweet. So as Elias, 2
King. 2.20, 21. by throwing in salt: a salt to which I may truly apply Homers
Epither (...) and which they having within themselves Mark. 9.5. (faith) relish
all things, be they never so bitter and distasteful to humane sense; and also
give the right seasoning and Hogoo of Gods palate and man's: and hence is that,
they say, there are sweet Fountains in the deepest saltest Seas. Nay;

3. Though never so raging and boistrous, there is no Sea, but, he that had
sounded all of them says, 1 Cor. 10.13. is navigable, nay profitable, for Gods
Halcyons can breed here. Only as they that travel through those Tides of Sand
in the Arabian deserts do shelter themselves in Arks, or Castles on Camels
backs, make thee an Ark according to Gods command, and thou shall sail in
safety in a deluge; nay thy child with Moses in the Ark of Gods covenant thou
shall find in safety. Oh if like a fly thou cabin thy self in some little
crevice of this great ship thou will come to the Haven in Peace. Be the red Sea
nere so cold, be the Furnace never so hot, both stand up like a wall to Israel.
Ever since Christ the true Halcyon was born, here was peace, and (...) was but
(...).

Secondly, This Sea is Glassie, every fall, every knock, every clash breaks it.
Whether it be that microco^me, man, witness those unperceived needles from the
Italian bow, yet where they are not cunning enough to enter, grief, envy,
malice, more subtle engines will dash him to pieces: or whether those great
worlds, the world of pleasure, the world of profit, the world of honor, such
they are. Ice not more slippery, Glass not more brittle.

1. Such in respect of their chief matter, sand, ashes: their parts as
impossibly coherent into ropes, and yields the foolish soul a foundation, Mat.
7.27. as inconsistent.

2. In their effects as dangerous to their intrails. So taken inwardly do their
hard angles grate and pierce the inward man. Here swelling it with pride, there
inflaming it with those dropsy desires of having and in a word spoiling the
bowels of mercy. Yet;

3. Such in respect of the continuity of their parts; so that a heart made up
of these worlds, is indeed become glassie, yielding to nothing without
breaking, but the Diamonds points, the quicksilver to which I compare the Word
and Spirit of God) that bores through metalls, gold, silver, etc. or stone;
enters not a worldly heart. All the dews of Gods graces spend themselves like
Hony-falls on the Dead Sea, as little fruit as notice of them. The beams of his
Spirit, fall as on a Sea of glass rebounded in his face: and like glass only
ductile in the fire; the Lord can do no good on this world till he bring it
into the fire. The water that he manifested his anger in to the old world, or
the water that he shows his mercy in, to the present, Baptism, or the Baptism
of tears no good. Nay not culinary, ordinary fires, he must drop down the
Element, or Mat. 24.27. come like lightning so swift, so sudden, so consuming,
yet though never so hard, it is but b^^tle.

It Is a sad truth, what many melancholy people have fancyed, that we are
glass: not that Christian Religion is only a fit of fancy or melancholy, O
there are such transcendent enjoyings in God, such joyings in the exercise of
the habits of grace and virtue beyond the dreamed music of Aristotle's eleaven
moral Crystal spheres which make the proudest, calmest smiles this world
affords madness; but because this great treasure, this soul presevre is in
gallipots or course green glasses, (...), 2 Cor. 4.7. earthen shells. Alas that
we so admire the shell, that we feed not on the meat. Alas that weso gaze on
the glass that we regard not the face that it represents. Alas that with the
filly Indians, we so are taken up with this glass, that the Merchant Rev.
3.18. that sells gold (grace) has no custom: though the price of his gold, be
only to take it while he offers it, and put it to use. This Sea is a false
glass; like those false glasses that are contrived, so, as to represent all
faces, much unlike the natural. Such was that mirror of Smyrna which showed
such mutability in the face, that a fair one might show ugly; and an uggly one
fair. Think now what a poor portion thou leavest thy child, though never so
fair an estate, a cupboard of glasses, a shelfe of gallipots; All worldly
estates and conditions are glassie. How glassie that Sea of Rome, that once was
marble? How brittle Jacobs stone, though it will prove marble? Glassie even the
keys of our Church, though one should have esteemed them more durable then
Iron. Glassie our Bishop Seas, though pure Venice break ere hold poison, (...).

Oh then let us go down to the Glassemans house as Ier. 18. you shall not only
see man's spirit imprisoned in a glass, but says St. Paul 1 Cor. 13.12. and 2
Cor. 3. ult. if you will see God in this dark time of our earthly pilgrimage,
you must see him in a glass; not that you should believe the eternal Spirit
is imprisoned in a glass too, (as some black Artists, or rather cheating
Hocuspocusses, seem to promise you) but twice he calls you, to see him in a
glass, that you might not only as men see him in the creature, but as
Christian men, in the Word: as for his creatures, the more clear they are, the
more lively they represent him; yet see again, the more clear they are, the
more glassie and brittle they are: so that as it is no wonder to see man, the
nobler piece of Gods creature, broken, much less need we strange to see the
noblest of men, make such have to their unripe fall, (...).

Yet stay, the world's not the worse for being so glassie; if so slippery, so
brittle, 'twill teach us not to stand on it, not to rely on it; Nor is the
little world the worse; Oh it will make us very careful, that we do not fall
into sin with preparation: into the grave unprepared. Nay, nay, ever since I
knew Psalm. 51. that, Gods Gospel-Sacrifice was a broken heart, I cannot think
but that we are the better for being so easily broken. Rome only can show the
man, (however Tiberius is reported to have put him to death) that makes glass
flexile, or an heart that is only attrite, by the turn of a key, contrite. Lord
give us breaking hearts: Which though 1. in their nature, they be not feysable
with good, though 2. in their effects they be dangerous, not being well broken:
Yet 3. by the power of thy Word and Spirit they may become malleable, and
consequently an acceptable reasonable sacrifice to thee.

Thirdly, this Sea is like Crystal, (...). Where if I may beg leave to speak
with the Vulgar (as the use is, with those that interpret Genesis 1.16. and such
like places of Scripture) I shall not need to quearee after its lapidificall
principle, but say with Scaliger it is a white pellucid stone concreted of ice,
or with the Etymologer, it is (...), water hardened by extreme cold. And so here
again discovers.

1. The worlds and worldings temper; cold and congealed by nature, and so
buried in earth, that heaven cannot thaw it. Pharaohs temper, a crystallized
heart. The furnace that melts glass finds this a Salamander. Yea,

2. Appears white, clear and clean; you shall see his inside so clear, his
outside so clean, that you will find it a very hard province to write slut in a
Pharisees cup, very hard by the eye to discern his sour leaven, from the
Saints lump, but you may easily smell him out: for Matthew. 23.27. they are but
whited Sepulchers. And,

3. There Is the mischief on it, they are transparent to Gods eyes, thence their
stinking rottenness within, though they can gull and cheat man's eyes, yet
(...), they are pellucid, as clear as Crystal to the all searching eyes of the
great God. Oh then,

1. Do not brag thy Crystall-eyes; but Leahs eyes, tender, still dropping,
still running with crystal tears. Brag not the ranting, the crystallized
heart: no cross, no loss mollify it; no Balm, no anointings of Gods Spirit
supple it. Consider this ye that have forgotten God, Psalm. 50.22. Alas,
remember God is a Lion as well as a Lamb, lest he tear you to pieces, and all
your forces cannot deliver you: if he cannot hew his passage through your
mountains with entreating tears, he will do it with vinegar. Pray that he will
change this stone-heart, for a flesh-heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. that he would send
forth his crystal (as the Lxx. read Psalm. 147.17) like morsels, all in pieces.

2. Boast not thy clearness of knowledge: such a light as Lucians men in the
Moon have, and a thing they call the Spirit, which they ever hold forth as the
only Gorgon to stun reason withal: Alas, how dim sighted, how dark in this
world we are! glad the quickest to use spectacles; 1 Cor. 13.12. and then see
but riddles too, even then when thou come face to face, thou wilt hide thine
eyes with the highest Seraphims, Esa. 6.2. and for all that so much talked of
glass of the creatures, or matutine knowledge of Angels, thou will find thy
self unable to fashion Gods depths, to comprehend an incomprehensible essence,
God as in himself; though thou do certainly find inconceivable happiness in
him, as he is toward thee. Sprirituall pride, is medicorum pudor, the
spiritual Physicians Gout. The Kings Evil, none but the King of Heaven can
cure it. Silly animals, what do they do but spoil their wings, the fly that
so giddily flaps the flame, or the bird that so securely built her nest in the
circle of the Sun. But so unsatisfied is the eye with seeing, or the ears with
hearing: whilst all true light, all true revelation, throws us down with
Paul, Act. 9.4. humbles us, blindes us, makes us in appearance not seeing, a
while here, that we may see and live for ever.

Boast not the whiteness, cleernesse; lest, seeing thou art but crystal, thou
have, not that white stone, Rev. 2.17. Gods merciful acquittance of thy woeful
sin; for although thou think thou can travel toward heaven, with all thy
earthly bunches as fast as the Indian camels, can toward Canaan, yet the
needles eye requires (...). Luke 13.24. wrestle to enter in, 'twill be worth
your best endeavors. Though now thou appear to thy self and others as clear as
crystal, yet at that clear light of that great fire, thou will find many
strawes, many cobwebs, much foulness; and plainly read what secretly thou
writst with a Lemmon, what counterfeitingly thou writst with an Onion. These
Temples of Egypt will show their Crocodiles, Rats, Onions, at our Saviors
second coming, more than at his first. For,

3. They are all crystal, most transparent to Gods eyes: their-windows are in
their tops; glass toward heaven; the all-seeing God discovers those leeches,
envy, malice, crawling up and down in their glasses. (...). So then we must
fall on to the second General,

God the Spectator, before whose throne the world acts; only you must not
conceive him to be an idle careless Spectator. You see his Throne placed on
these three particulars, so much as concerns the Spectacle the world. 1. His
Power. 2. His Presence. 3. Essence. That is, he sits over all the world, 1. as
an omnipotent Judge; 2. as an omniscient King; 3. as an omniprovident cause.

1. His power, he makes scorpions, rabbets, frogs, (...), locusts, bees,
pismires, lice, devour sinful nations. The Sun that great giant, that had not
sinned, swounded at Christ's death to see his Creator in that despised humility,
oh how will he darken and die at that general Sizes, when he shall see him in
that glory of his power! David, Psalm. 14.17. for lack a little of the presence
and countenance of his gracious comforter, feels his bones within him jumble
together like arrows all in a Quiver. So Hezekiah, Esaias 38.13. and that for a
little check: What, think you, would these Kings have done, if the omnipotent
God should have mated them? His arm is not shortened, it is as able to help in
these hopeless days. The Gentiles Atlas may faint, the Jews Samson may fail,
but the Christians Jesus, the truly victorious Samson will never fail. No
snipping his golden locks, the beams of his free Spirit: What bands will you
get to chain him up with, that rents rocks as well as vailes? What engine to
bore out his eyes, flames of fire, that dazzle the Seraphim as well as the sun?
(...).

2. His presence, all things are naked, present to him, darkness as well as
light, the things that are past, and the things that are to come to pass, to
him they are alike visible. He needs not others eyes to see withal, nor the
help of glasses to strengthen his sight withal; it may befit Nero to behold
his fencers at their exercises, through an emerald; weariness, dimnesse like
cobwebs, will quickly hang in our windows, and darken us, but God sees through
crystal: What, shall not he that made the eye, see? He needs no Jacobs staff,
not Galilaeus his telescopium; sees all: Shall not he that made the care hear?
he needs no whispering places; hears all: Shall not he that made man's soul
understand? needs not discourse knows all intuitively. It Is true indeed,
occaecatur, at prae amore, he sees not sometimes, but it is his love that hides
us; he seems deaf sometimes, but it is prae ira, because he is offended with
us; he seems ignorant sometimes, but it is prae justitia, because he knows
not sin, how to sin, or sinners. Go, go shade thy Arbor, so that the lynx
cannot dart a beam through its leaves: make thy closet so close, that the day
light cannot peep in: dig thy vault so under ground, that it will damp a flash
of lightning: yet there where the quickest sight is baffled, where the light is
bolted out a doors, where the lightning stands at a dare, even there the
all-searching eyes of the Lord are. Such, just such an arbor, had Adam seeking
shelter under his fig leaves, Jonas under his gourd, Nathaniel under his
fig tree; so, so close did Saul think himself under the stuff, Achan his
wedge under ground, Jonas in the ship; so deep was Darius his den, in which
they buried Daniel, Malchiahs dungeon, in which Jeremy, Joseph's sepulcher in
which Jesus, or such a vault was in Absolons heart, when he would steal the
peoples heart, in Saul's religion to spare the rich, in Judas his bag, when he
would spare for the poor: all are crystalline, (...).

3. Of his essence: giving all things, being, well being, all having support
from this throne. Independents excluded from this throne. The whole creation,
being linkt to it by a chain of causes in an harmonious subordination, hang on
it, as in esse, so in conservari; he concreates and conserves even the souls of
the sons of men; rules all, does all, causally, cardinally, totally. What is
nature but Gods will? What is fate but his word? What is that so much adored
Fortune, but his wheel to wrack us, to confess the mutability of mortal man?
His wisdom (...) in this great music school, the heavens about him dancing
and singing Te Deum; the glassy world of men like the harp in his hand, where
the (...) the string that gives the highest sound, is the quire of blessed
spirits, inhabitants of heaven; the (...) the string that gives the lowest
sound, is the earth and its inhabitants, where if he winds some strings
higher, or slackens others, it is surely to make music to his own glory. But
what talk I of music or music school? we are not come to Platoes Creed yet,
that God is the worlds waggoner, his wagon running on the four elements, as on
four wheels. Alas! the professors of Christianity are turned infidels. O see,
it is Christ's Creed, Mat. 4.4. man lives not by bread alone, but by his word
that sanctifies it: Shall Grasshoppers live by dew, and shall not I by the word
of the Lord? See, it is the Angels Creed, Luke 37. (...), every word, that is,
every thing is possible with the Lord. Nay, see it is the Devils Creed, Mat.
43. (...), speak, i.e. make these stones, etc. because he does what he speaks,
as easily as we speak what we would do, and without him nothing comes to pass,
all things by his providence, (...).

The throne is mentioned no less than 28. times in this book, oh sure it is
to put us in mind still to have an eye to it, as encouraged by his power, as
awed by his presence, as guided by his providence. This world, the sea, the
glass, the crystal, vanishes away. But the Spectator, God, is ever; the
Father is an Ocean of mercy, the Son a true Glass reflecting, representing
such a Father, the Holy Spirit the true Crystal, through which we see most
clearly both the Father, and the Son.

So that though 1. here be a sea of misery, yet know the sea of mercy loves us,
cares for us. Though 2. our nature be very glassy, yet the Son makes it strong
by uniting it to him. Though 3. we are full of blindnesses, yet the spirit of
Christ is the true Crystal, showing us all things. Wherefore as I have heard
spoken, what the sea washes from the Low Countries, it leaves in our Eastern
parts, so may I say here, what we have have lost in the first part, we may find
in the second part, God restores supplies one way or other, what ever the world
robs us of. His Power, Presence, Providence is for us. 1. Crystal sees us as a
potent Pilot to steer us to a safe harbor. 2. Glassy, yet strengthened by his
comfortable presence. So that 3. though the sea rage against us; yet there is
not a wave dashes on us, without his Providence, he is not a sleepy Spectator.
(...).

Have you heard how it is a sea of Glass? of Glass, because he has set all its
roares their bounds, which they cannot pass. Hence our Savior, Mat. 26.39. not
only intimates to us in what kind these brinish waters are sprinkled on us;
that is, in kindness, they come from God, i. e. our father; but also the
measure, but a cup, a glass of tears, they are proportioned to us; it is but
thy cup, it is but my cup, drink it off; make not a fire, not a god of thy
Cross, but carry it patiently to thy Golgatha, and make it a cup of salvation.
For here is matter of true consolation, the Devil cannot tempt the first or
the second Adam, but in Gods word, and he that holds fast that word of truth
cannot be deceived. He cannot make one (...) without our God, Exodus 8. nor hurt
an Ox or an Ass till empowered, Job. 1. not drown that unclean beast of the
more unclean Gergesens, Mat. 8. not pluck a bristle from the Hogs back, as the
learned Father expresses it, without our God.

Yet lest we go too fast, I must beg you to take this along with you; that as
there is not a sparrow falls to ground without him, Mat. 10.29. so not an idle
word, Mat. 12.36. Does God, think you, take such care of hogs, of sparrowes?
sure he rather intimates what care he has of us, whose providence reaches to
sensitive creatures: Oh how can thou be so swinish, to bemire thy reasonable
soul in those stinking sinks, which even beasts do loath? How can thou hope
an hair from thine head should not perish, when thy sins are more than the
hairs of thine head for number, and for fashion sake less cut off.

O do but view thy self a little in this glass, and dress thy self accordingly
(...). How dare thou sin, when as the Lord has a glass, a thing which that
most eloquent Orator wished for) in every man's breast, trying, searching,
judging, hearts and reins? O rather since thou art glass, be like that in
these windows, fight against the storms of passions; fight them all, all the
strong holds of sin, of satan, of thine own reason; but let in light, true
lights, faith, love, etc. And like those Harpers, Rev. 15.2. stand on this sea
of glass, despise what is below your high birth, Gods offspring, trample all
the things of this world under foot, that as St. Paul, Romans 8.38. we may in all
things be more then conquerors, even in this life; more! How can that be? yes,
because we shall never be ashamed of our victory through him that loved us, we
shall parta tueri, no man shall pluck us out of his hand. Yet know that to
conquer is not to keep one commandment (as the use is now a days) cry up the
fourth commandment, and it is no matter what becomes of the fifth, sixth,
seventh, eight, etc. O let not sin break in at one commandment! if once you
give it but a little leake, and take no care to stop it, you call your ship in
question. For sin is more dangerous then a Remora, it not only stays your
progress in grace (though it be but small) as an external agent, but weakens
grace, as an enemy within, as a Torpedo, benums the soul, and senselesly sinkes
it.

Me thinks I see a soul at the general Resurrection, going to assay its new
clothes, with what squeamish horror it beholds its former dust. Is this that
sea that was so flourishing, so green in mine eyes, that I forsook the ocean
of mercy that ran softly, for? Is this that brittle and weak glass that I had
thought Gods free spirit had been coopt up in? Is this that glass that I looked
into more then the perfect law of liberty? Is this that Crystal that I
preferred before the true loadstone that pulled me so kindly, so strongly
toward him? How dark now is this shel that made such a glittering show in the
dark? How were mine eyes deceived with that which seemed its proper color? How
perishable was my fancied immortality?

Alas! when death, pale chilly death comes crawling down thy snowy Alps,
drilling down thy hoary hill, when thou beginnest to feel him at thy gates
besieging thee, pulls up now thy pallisado, now is in thy outward works, nay now
in thy suburbs, has taken thy senses, thy eyes dim, hearing dull, tasting
done, nay is taking a limb of thee, thy feet cold; How will thy heart beat up a
march into another world? How will thou shrug, groan? How will thou hope that
this last minute shall be accepted, who have not spent one day truly in Gods
service all thy life long? What is now left thee, but those unutterable prayers
of the spirit, sighs, groans, if then acceptable? For there is a time when
God is stone, as you have seen from ver. 3. Thou think him a father, and he
is Jasper; thou think to find him a brother, and he is Sardin; thou doubtst
not to find him a comforter, but he proves an Emerald. Yet pray, thou art in
the glass house before the throne. Nay pray, Heb. 4.16. with all liberty of
speaking, for he will be bread to his children, Luke 11.11. and not stone, he
will be found by such as seek him in the acceptable opportunities: and though,
Rev. 20.11. his throne be a great one, to show his power, majesty, providence;
yet it is a white one, to show his meekness, mercy: and that this throne is a
mercy seat, was revealed, although but veiled, Exodus 25.22. standing upon the
arc, trampling as it were the law under feet. After some silence of his, after
some trial of us, after much rage of the world, and the worlds prince, comes
Tace, obmutesce; so that though he lets sorrow flow in full tides ore-night,
yet it ebbs in the morning. However, I believe he can make iron, swim. I
believe, it he throw me into the sea with Jonas, he will provide me a fishes
belly, for my ship or coffin. He that counts of his body, but as of his souls
prison, may easily rejoice when the Lord shall be pleased to snap this frail
glass a pieces, to rench open these prison doors, and give us footing in a
more lasting world.

That bad spirit, Mat. 4.8. was but the goods spirits Ape, who also lifts us
aloft to see this glassy worlds glory. Only the Devil draws a curtain before
its glassinesse, its fadingness. But see here, as plainly as in Archimedes his
sphere of glass, how sleepily, how dully, the earth and its adherents be fixed;
whilst the heavens and heavenly things are weariless, restless in declaring
Gods glory: see plainly man's life (which is like a thread spun from the true
distaffe of Gods decrees, though with many turnings and windings) as the
Scripture elsewhere compares it, like to a visage in a glass. O since this
world is so brittle that we cannot carry it up to heaven, it must be crumbled
to pieces, let us bring down heaven on earth, and take it by force. To do this
we must not only have our head (by faith in Christ) in another world, but with
that great Mathematitian our footing too (our conversation.)

To this purpose I hope it may be, if I present you with another world, though
a Microcosm, a little one, disgus'd now under those blacks, and he, 1. a sea, a
man of sorrows, or a sea of troubles. 2. Yet glassy, a mortal man, there is an
end of all perturbations. Yet 3. Crystal, he was a Christian, an immortal
man. For though 1. like a sea he had his ebbs, his flows, yet he had his
immensities, his depths too. Though 2. he was glassy, being made up of such a
sandy, dusty principle, yet 3. he was Crystal; ennobled with so clear
knowledges, so perspicuous excellencies.

Yet for variety sake, be pleased to take with me another method, another way
to the same City. And 1. the same great God, creator and preserver of all
things (and more especially of man) being placed in his throne of power,
presence, essence: Let us 2. view this narrow sea, this little world brought on
the stage, in his several actings. Many very eminent men in the Church of God,
have compared the life of man to a Play. So does St. Paul's (...) 1 Cor. 4.9.
his (...), Heb. 10.33. seem to allow it, and allude to it. Expositors find such
drames, such interlocutors, such chores in the Canticles, and even in this
Apocalypse.

I am sure, here are some in this honorable presence do very well remember the
time when he spoke his Prologue (as all do at their entrance) in tears, which
though not divine, yet divining the future brinishness of this troublesome sea.

His (...) -- but here I must be silent, lest I revive that ocean of tears,
that near nine years since seemed to drowned his country as well as his family,
or those last years torrents which heaven and earth seemed to weep, to carry on
the celebration of his most honorable parents funerals.

The sun is again entered Cancer, and we mourning. It is Gods harvest time, and
he has taken the tithe, whether we will or no.

His (...), he acted a while under Artists at home, which could both give him
the sunny side of the garden, and with fine reflecting glasses ripen him; and
we well know, that his vast memory, sudden apprehension, fine expression,
refined judgment, etc. must needs place him in the first Classis of Gentlemen.
But lest our coal or turfe smoke, should be thought equally sweet, with the
cried up frankincense of other countries, he passes that neck of sea that cuts
the head of England, from the body of Europe; where his tongue so quaintly
relishes the honyed language of the French, that it makes me think, that
though our Bees make honey the same way, yet theirs have more flowers of
Rhetoric.

His (...) may show you his returned state, when his natural Father leaving
him, he finds quickly a political to adhere to, and with that Vestall zeal,
that resolved constancy, that all other ties, nay his houses and lands, nay his
life must a while stand under sequestration. Merciful heart, thy stables and
studies, thy horses and houses plundered, whilst many of thine enemies owe
their houses, their lives to thee! Few Gentlemen in Oxford gave more groats
then he shillings, and that to his foes sometimes as well as his friends,
knowing that when their sins were greater, Calice would be won again. It was
here that he made choice of his Virtuous and choice Lady, where all that censure
him say; his aim was rather to join man and wife than house to house. His (...)
began at his sad coming hither last year. And since his late King died, he
lived only as headless bodies do, in some strugles of forma corporeitat is:
and now you plainly see, that the King was indeed the breath of his mother; or
like to that of Psalm. 131.2. My soul is even as a weaned child. Blessed Lord,
thou have given me fair and full breasts to live on, yet so much wormwood
withal makes me nauseat the nibble. The Cross of Christ, like the
Mathematicians point, begins and ends the line of our learning and life.

It was just two months before that Sabbath (on which I hope he began his
eternal Sabbath in heaven) when after a week spent in continual prayers and
preparation, he incorporates himself into the body of Christ in that sacred
Ceremony (so much slighted) of his own institution, after the form of the
Church of England, yea notwithstanding much bodily indisposition in the sacred
place. Pious soul, I feared, that the cold assembling, the clownish behavior,
the nonsense devotion used there, had quite frighted thee away from thence
long since: so that as we see in heavy bodies, the nearer they approach to
their center, the more speedily they have to it, so pensive souls, the
neererthey draw to God the faster they go to God: so that though ever before he
did converse with the Lord in prayer twice or thrice daily, yet now as aiming
at the Apostles (...), he has been observed to have trebled that thrice and
more, nay least (...) devotion should be dried up or not grow, he used to water
it with clouds of tears, surely of tears from Heaven: and now how is it
possible, for malice not to give way for me to speak, what was said of
once-wicked St. Augustine, A son of so many tears cannot perish.

Yet because our love to man is the Index of our love to God, often, often did he
beg of the Lord that he might live to do that good which either he had hitherto
omitted; or his estate not permitted: Weep Charlcote, weep you sister towns;
weep Hampton, thy annual commings in, must have gone only to make thy poors
goings out, and comings in to bless the Lord for him. Weep Highcleere, thy
barren hill knows what it is to have him to water thee. How often did he send
secretly to enquire what poor were at his gates? And then how often send meat
and money secretly, whereby the hungry soul might be satisfied?

And now Elias-like he cries, take away my'life; yet flies the Iezebel, that
would have taken it; because he would not that death should take it till the
Lord that gave it, was willing to receive it, insomuch that when he went to
Bath, he said plainly he went to Bath to dye: so he bathes himself in those
mineral waters and dies. So having bathed himself in the blood of Christ, he
lives; and to say all, Had not the malignancy of conjunctions above and
divisions below, had not the goodness of God and the wickedness of man, in all
this stage been predominant, that lending his clock wheels, and this weights,
his days had not been so short, his hour so soon.

This is the grassiness, this the glassiness of all humane things. On this
ground it was that Ptolomee raised that glassie tomb to Great Alexander: yet
me thinks I may complain with St. August. Sivitrei essemus, etc. If we were
glass, we should not be so easily broken. A glass may be kept from breaking
some hundreds ^ears, but at threescore and ten begins man's fall. Alas! he has
made a (...) and must die, he has a dying principle within him, a spark of
natural heat, which being outed, we are but ashes. Oh when we only dress our
selves by our own glass, and not by the Gospel, Iam. 1.23, 25. consider only
how green, how spacious our Sea is, and not how deep, how dangerous: how
shining our Crystal, and not how transparent, how hard our glass is, and not
how brittle, our Sun knows no Eclipse, no set. But when in the free Law of
Christ we take our dimensions, our Sea is Glass, our Glass is ashes, our
Crystal is Ice. In earth we are dust, in the Water a buble, in the Air a
vapor, in the Fire smoke, in the Light a shadow. Well, since we are no better,
but a shadow, Psalm. 102.11. Oh then follow you the gre at Sun of Heaven, the
truth, for though; all men are said to be liars, yet men of high degree, Psalm.
62.9. are in the Abstract, a lie. And such a vial of blood, such a weak glass
of nature is this, which it has pleased God should at last come thus broken
home.

Most honored Sir, pardon me, and give me leave to speak one word to you, you
succenturiate him. I see many mourners followers of this Hearse with tears that
are not here. 1. Poor hungry bowels, they are the Lord treasury: cast in
thither your mites, at least your superfluities, they are Christian Sacrifices.
He that slights Bullocks and Rams, accepts a piece of bread, he that slights
rivers of Oil, disdains not a cup of cold water. 2. Orphans, widows, those hope
to have you a Father to them, these an husband, they are the test of your
Religion, Iam. 1. ult. despise not the sighings of these poor, destitute, and
helpless, that sit alone on the house tops. 3. Virtues divine, moral, all
mourners, as the times go, and beg some countenance from you and from this
honorable presence. So he that can raise bodies will raise your Estate, he that
can curse and ravell and crumble an estate, will bless, will increase yours.

And then here needs no tears to embalm this Corpse, no sheet to shroud him; we
shall all wind him up in a white clean memory; and for his humane frailties,
let this black coffin, and that dark vault lock them up for ever. Nay, then
weep not Charlcote, let not Charlcote be made an Hadadrimmon. Weep not his
country, he has added to it a loyal name. Let it bewail her Absalons that die
in Paricide, etc. when she shall see those tame ridden mules leave them
dangling (like those harpes Psalm. 137.2.) in the trees; it need not lament her
innocent dead children. But I have been too long I fear conversing in this
lower world, let us now address our selves to the upper.

Mereifull Lord, we now come to dip our buckets in thee the only boundless,
only bottomless Ocean of Mercy: Oh let every one according to the several
measure and capacity of the vessels we bring, draw life (grace, glory) out of
thee. Though in Adam thou have made us all mortal, yet in Christ, through the
death of Christ have revived us; and when thou drankest that cup of trembling
for us, did swallow down death and all, and brokest open the prison gates of
the grave, so that we are all prisoners of hope, raise us here from sin to
grace, that thou may hereafter raise us from the grave to glory, that here
and ever all glory, power, majesty, may be ascribed to thee the only true God,
etc.

FINIS.

