THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS the GREAT, TILL THE General Peace, Concluded
at RESWICK, In the YEAR, 1697.

By Mr. LE GENDRE.

Made English from the third Edition of the French.

LONDON: Printed for D. Brown, at the Black Swan without Temple Bar; Th. Leigh
and D. Midwinter, at the Rose and Crown, and Robert Knaplock at the Angel and
Crown, both in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIX.

THE PREFACE.
TWO Great Men being at this time Employed in Writing the History of our King;
it is for their most Excellent Pieces the Public ought to reserve their
Admiration, mine being, in comparison of theirs, but an Essay. It is from their
most Skilful Pen, the Curious must expect to be enlightened in Matters of the
greatest Moment, I being ready to submit the whole to their Judgment. It is to
them I appeal, as to the true Judges of History; and what Difficulties are to
be surmounted, to merit the Name of a good Historian. His Style ought to be
lively and natural, and to have an equal mixture of Sweetness and Purity; He
ought to have an equal Share of Wit and Judgment, to represent Matters with the
utmost Fidelity, and an undaunted Courage, to unmask Vice, and give due Praise
to virtuous Actions. These great Talents requisite in an Historian, made me
tremble at the very Thougts of this Undertaking, till a certain Friend of mine,
a Person of extraordinary Merits and Parts, did in some measure recover me from
the Fear that seized me, representing to me, that such a Combination of
Perfections must be considered and numbered among those imaginary
Accomplishments, which are made use of in Sciences, to encourage us to such
great Undertakings, as are sought after by many, but attained to by few. But if
it be so great a Task to write a general History, how much more difficult is it
to write the History of our Time, to give it a true Relish, that agreeable
Variety, and other Embellishments, by which the ancient Historians have rendered
their Names so Famous to Posterity. They had frequent Opportunities to give
most ample Demonstrations of their Eloquence, in these magnificent Harangues,
which are to be met with in their Works, under the Names of their Great
Captains, who before they Engaged in Battle, used to Animate their Troops, by
representing to them the Justice of their Cause, and to Encourage them with
certain hopes of Victory. Our Princes and Generals have laid aside this Way of
Addressing themselves to their Soldiers, which takes away from our Modern
Historians the Advantage of Embellishing their Historical Relations with these
agreeable Diversions and Events, which surprise the Reader, and which are of no
small Moment to take away the Tediousness of the Relations of the many Sieges
and Battles, which happen in a long War, without any other mixture of pleasing
Varieties. When the ancient Historians represent to us a Great Minister of
State in the Cabinet of his Prince; or an Assembly of Wise Senators
deliberating in Council concerning some Affairs of the greatest Moment, they
lay hold of this Opportunity to unfold the whole Mystery of the Matrer, and to
lay it open to the view of the Reader, and by their different Advice, to
discover all the Craft and Intrigues of the most refined Politicians. These
pretended Discoveries have a secret Charm which is infinitely pleasing to many,
who measure the Ability of an Historian by his Insight into Matters of State,
and by his diving into the Events of Things, from far fetched Causes. A
Prejudice common to the greatest Part of Mankind, who imagine that Princes
never act according to their Inclinations, but are only guided by some more
secret Motives; just as if Great Men by being placed in a high Station, were
divested of these Passions incident to the rest of Mankind. But howsoever it
be, it is unquestionable, that he who intends to give us a History of our Time,
cannot in any wise pretend to give entire Satisfaction to these conceited
Politicians. For how is it possible to imagine, that a private Person should be
able to discover the Secrets of the Cabinets of Princes, which Time only can
bring to light? And supposing some of them were by chance come to his
Knowledge, with what face could he publish them to the World? From whence it is
evident, that all what is to be expected from an Historian, who writes the
History of our Time, is to give us as faithful Relation as possible can be, of
the Events of Things, and to represent them to the Reader in their due order
and places, and to insert their Causes as far as they came to his Knowledge.
This is the whole Design of this Treatise, to wit, to represent to the Reader a
true Idea of the Reign of our King, which may serve them as a Guide to their
own Judgment, what Rank this Great Monarch deserves to be placed in among those
Great Men, whom God has raised up from time to time, for the Felicity of the
People, and the Glory of the Commonwealth. For these thirty Years last past,
our King has been the Admiration of all Europe, even his Enemies not refusing
to pay due Praises to His Great Actions; and these Powerful and unsuccessful
Leagues against France, are the most Glorious and undeniable Instances not only
of his Strength, but also of his Merits and Great Qualifications.

THE CONTENS.
A.
ABbeville a Physician of this City Cures the King. Page 14 Academies of
Sciencies, of Painting, Sculptures, Architecture and Music, Established by the
King. p. 53 Agousta taken. p. 137. Near the Port of this Place, Admiral Ruiter
was killed in a Sea Engagement. p. 137 Alexander VII. Pope of Rome, his
Character before his Exhaltation. p. 43 He Sollicits Spain for Succors. p. 42
He orders the Subscription of the Formular, against the five Propositions of
Jansenius. p. 75
Algier Bombarded three several times; demands Peace. p. 172 Alliance betwixt
England, Sweden and Holland, called, the Tripple-Alliance. p. 67 Alost opens
its Gates. p. 65 Alsace, the Viscount Turenne forces the Germans to a retreat
from thence, is granted to the King. p. 165 173 Ambassadors, and other foreign
Ministers, to the number of thirty are present at the Solemn Audience, given by
the King to the Marquis de la Fuente. p. 37 Ambassadors of Muscovy and Guinea.
p. 79 Ambrun surrendered after a Siege of six days. p. 242 Anjou, Philip of
France, Duke of Anjou. p. 285 Appeal to the next General Council. p. 202
Arnheim surrendered after one days opening of the Trenches. p. 92 Arts, the King
encourages all manner of Arts and Sciences. p. 53 Asfeld (Baron of) defends
Bonn with great Bravery. p. 218 Aeth taken. p. 65 p. 293 Avaux, Anthony de
Mesme, Count de Avaux, French Ambassador at the Treaty of Nimhegen. p. 166
Aubusson (George d') demands and obtains Satisfaction from the King of Spain,
about the Enterprise of the Baron of Batteville. p. 35 Aubusson (Francis d')
Duke of Fevillade, Marshal of France. p. 162 Aumont (Anthony d') Marshal of
France, takes Courtray, Dixmuyden, Furnes and Armentiers. p. 65 Ausburgh;
League made against France here. p. 193 Austria ( Ann of) Queen of France, the
King's Mother, and Queen Regent, after the Death of Lewis XIII. p. 2 Chooses the
Cardinal Mazarine, her Chief Minister. p. 3 She is very desirous to marry the
King with the Infanta of Spain. p. 15 She presses the Spaniards to give
Satisfaction to the King about the Just Pretensions of the Queen. p. 64 Her
Death. p. ib.
Austria ( Maria Theresia of) Queen of France, Spouse to LEWIS the Great. p. 20
Makes her public Entry in Paris. p. 21 Her Just Pretensions upon some of the
Provinces of the Low Countries. p. 61 Nullity of her Resignation to the
Succession of Spain. p. 62, 63 Her Death. p. 170

B.
Baden, Prince Lewis of Baden, Commands upon the Rhine. Entrenches himself at
the approach of the Dauphin. p. 246 Had obtained two great Victories against
the Turks. p. ibid. Was one of the Candidates for the Crown of Poland. p. 296
Barcelona besieged, and defended with the utmost Bravery. p. 305 Battles of
Roeroy, Rotheleiler, Friburgh, Nortlingen and Lintz. p. 3 Of St. Anthony. p. 5
Of St. Godard. p. 57 Of Senef. p. 117 Of Sintzheim. p. 123 Of Entsheim. p. 125
Of Turkheim. p. 128 Of Cassel. p. 146 Near Epoville. p. 151 Of Flerus. p. 219
Of St. Denis. p. 163 Near the Boyne. p. 224 Of Steenkirk. p. 239 Of Neerwinden.
p. 248 Of Marsaglia. p. 250 Near the River Ter. p. 258
Batteville, Ambassador of Spain; his Enterprise against the Count Estrades,
the French Ambassador. p. 33 Bavaria; Maria Victoria of Bavaria, married to
Lewis, Dauphin of France. p. 171 She has three Sons. Her Death. p. 285
Bavaria; Charlott Elizabeth of Bavaria, Duchess of Orleance, her Pretensions
to the Succession of the Elector Palatine, her Brother. p. 194 Bavaria;
Maximilian II. Elector and Duke of Bavaria, declares in favor of the Allies.
p. 207 He Assists with his Troops at the Siege of Mayence. p. 216 Is present at
the Great Council, held at the Hague. p. 226 Is made Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands, during Life. p. 235 Commands the Spanish Troops at the Battle of
Steenkirk, p. 239 And at Neerwinden. And all the following Campaigns. p. 248,
p. ibid.
Bavaria (Prince Clement of) Brother to the Elector, is elected Archbishop of
Cologne, when he was seventeen years old. p. 201 Beauvilliers; Paul, Duke of
Beauvilliers, Governor of the Children of France. p. 285 Beaumont, taken by
the Allies. p. 228 Bellefonds, Bernhard de Gigaut, Marshal of France. p. 66
Berry; Charles of France, Duke of Berry. p. 285 Besanson Besieged, and taken by
the King. p. 116 Brisseleau (Francis) defends Limerick in Ireland. p. 225
Bombardment of Tripoli, and Algiers. p. 171, 172 Of Genoa. p. 172 Of Pignerol.
p. 250 Of St. Malo. p. 252 p. 267 Of Diepe. p. 261 Of Havre. de Grace. p. 262
Of Calais. p. 262, 268 Of Dunkirk p. 261, 260 Of Brussels. p. 273 Bonn, taken
by the Allies. p. 218
Bossuet (Jacobus Benignus) Bishop of Meaux, Preceptor of the Dauphine. p. 170
Bouchern taken by the Duke of Orleance. p. 134 Bouflers, Lewis Francis. Duke of
Bouflers, Marshal of France, defends Namur. p. 271 Commands one of the great
Armies in Flanders. p. 279
Bourbon; Lewis, Duke of Bourbon, Son to Julius, Prince of Conde, signalizes
himself at the Battle of Steenkirk. p. 239 And of Neerwinden. p. 248
Bournaville (Prince of) General of the Imperialists, put to flight by the
Viscount of Turenne. p. 124 Brahe (Count of) Swedish Ambassador in England;
what happened at his public Entry. p. 33 Brandenburgh ( Frederick William,
Elector of) go's into the Campaign to assist the Hollanders. p. 99 Repasses the
Weser, upon the approach of the French Army. p. 100 Makes Peace. p. 101 Takes
up Arms a second time. p. 102, 126 His success against the Swedes. p. 159 Is
obliged to restore what he had Conquered from the Swedes. p. 160, 161
Brandenburgh ( Frederick II.) takes Keyserswert. p. 215 Born. p. 218
Reinforces the Army of the Allies, after the Battle of Fleurus. p. 220
Brisac, A Chamber established at Brisac. p. 274 Bulls refused by Pope Innocent
XI. to those Bishops that had assisted at the Assembly of Clergy, in the Year
1682. p. 187 Burgundy; Lewis, Duke of Burgundy, Eldest Son of Lewis, Dauphin of
France. p. 285 Burgundy; The King obliges the King of Spain, not to make use
for the future of that Title. p. 177 Burick Surrendered. p. 87
C.
Cadees; Establishment of the Academies of Cadees. p. 168 Calais; The King
falls dangerously ill in this Place. p. 13 Bombarded; See Bombardment of the
French.
Callieres ( Francis Lord of) Negotiates at the Hague. p. 291 Plenipotentiary
at the Treaty of Reswick. p. ibid.
Calvinism; its first Origin, Progress, and Suppression in France. p. 75, 187
Calvo ( Francis Count of) defends Mastricht. p. 135 Cambray; The City and
Citadel taken by the King. p. 135 Campaigns of 1667. p. 65 Seq. of 1672. p. 85
Of 1673. p. 101 Seq. Of 1674. p. 113 Of 1675. p. 128 Of 1676. p. 134. Seq.
Camp. of 1677. p. 139 Of 1678. p. 153 Of 1688. p. 203 Of 1689. p. 213 Of 1690.
p. 218 Of 1691. p. 225 Of 1692. p. 231 Of 1693. p. 244 Of 1694. p. 253 Of 1695.
p. 262 Of 1696. p. 276 Of 1697. p. 292
Campredon taken by the Marshal of Noailles. p. 214 Caprara (Count of) General
of the Imperialists. p. 123, 242 Carmagnole Surrendered. p. 230 Carthagena taken
and plundered by the French. p. 307 Casal possessed by the French. p. 174 Is
besieged by the Allies, and d^molish'd. p. 265, 266
Castle Follet. p. 264 Castile; that Kingdom from before the Year 1017, only an
Earldom. p. 32 Catinat (Nicolas de) Marshal of France; His Exploits in Savoy
and Piedmont. p. 223, 230, 250 Takes Aeth in Flanders. p. 293
Cardaigne (the Country of) Conquered by the Duke of Noailles. p. 229 Chenailly
(Marquess of) defends Grave with great Bravery. p. 120, 121 Charles II. King of
Spain; His Sickness. p. 286 Charles II. King of England, sells Dunkirk to the
French King. p. 47, 48 Engages in a War against the Dutch. p. 58 Enters with
them into an Alliance. p. 67 Declares War against them a second time. p. 95
Makes Peace with them. p. 110 Makes a new Alliance with Holland against France.
p. 153 Is acknowledged Mediator at the Peace of Nimhegen. p. 157
Charles IV. Duke of Lorrain, his Character, Conduct in respect to the
Spaniards. p. 79, 80 Defeats the Marshal of Crequy, and takes him Prisoner in
Treves. p. 133, 134
Charles V. Duke of Lorrain, forced to repass the Rhine. p. 151 Refuses the
Alteration offered him by the King at the Treaty of Nimhegen. p. 166
Charles Leopold, his eldest Son, is put in Possession of that Duchy. p. 309
Charleroy. p. 265, 100, 149 Chartres ( Philip, Duke of) only Son of Philip of
France, Duke of Orleance, is wounded at Steenkirk. p. 239 Signalizes himself at
Neerwinden. p. 248
Chigi (Cardinal Legate) sent into France, to disown the Affront put upon the
French Ambassador at Rome, and to give Satisfaction for the same. p. 45 Cheo,
p. 171 Choiseul ( Claudius, Count de) Marshal of France. p. 280 Christine,
Queen of Sweden, comes into France, to see the King. p. 10, 11 Circles of
Germany declar, against the King. p. 207 Clergy; The Assembly of the French
Clergy. in the Year, 1682. p. 184 Constine ( Armond du Cambout, Duke de) Peer
of France, wounded at che Passage of the Rhine. p. 91 Colbert (John Baptist)
Minister and Secretary of State, his Character. p. 28, 29 Colbert (Charles)
Marquis de Croissi, French Plenipotentiary at Nimhegen. p. 166 Cologne; Affairs
of Cologne. p. 199 Compte; French Compte Conquered. p. 68 Restored. p. ib.
Conquered a second time. p. 114
Conde ( Lewis of Bourbou II. Prince of) his Victories and Character. p. 5
Commands the French Army in Holland. p. 86 Beats the Allies near Senef. p. 117
Forces them to raise the Siege of Hagenau. p. 132
Conde ( Henry Julius, Prince of) besieges, and takes Limburgh. p. 128 Coni,
the Siege raised. p. 230 Conti ( Lewis Francis, Prince of) signalizes himself
at Steenkirk and Neerwinden. p. 239, 248 Is Elected King of Poland. p. 299
Corsairs; of Africa chastised. p. 171 Crequy (Duke of) is insulted at Rome by
the Pope's Guards. p. 39, 40 Crequy (Francis de) Marshal of France, Commands a
flying Body. p. 65 Defeats Marlin. p. 66 Is routed by the Dukes of Zell and
Lorrain. p. 133 Forces Prince Charles of Lorrain to repass the Rhine. p. 151
Takes Friburgh. p. ibid.

D.
Darmstadt (Landgrave of) signalizes himself in the defense of Barcelona. p.
301 Dauphin; Lewis Dauphin of France, only Son to LEWIS the Great; His Birth,
and Education. p. 170, 171 Besieges, and takes Philipsburgh. p. 203 Commands in
Germany. p, 224 Commands in Flanders. p. 255 Prevents the Enemy from forcing
the French Lines. p. 256
Dauphin; Invasion of the Allies of that Province. p. 241 Deinse opens its
Gate. p. 270 Denmark delares against France. p. 111 Conquers many places from
the Swedes. p. 159 Obliged to restore them. p. 166 Makes a defensive League
with Holland. p. 288
Descent made by the English in Cameret-Bay. p. 261 By the Dutch in a small
Island. p. 122
Diepe, see Bombardment. Diet of Ratisbonne. p. 175, 176 Differences betwixt
France and Spain about the Precedence. p. 33 Betwixt the Duke of Crequy and the
Nephews of Alexander VII. p. 41 Betwixt two Religious Orders about the Doctrine
of Grace. p. 70 Betwixt the Empire and France, concerning the Limits. p. 175,
176 Betwixt France and Spain, about the Limits in Flanders. p. 178 About the
Succession in the Palatinate. p. 194 About the Franchises of the Ambassador's
Quarters at Rome. p. 196
Dinant taken by the Marshal de Crequy. p. 128 Dixmuyden surrendered. p. 178, 56
Doesburgh surrendered. p. 92 Dole besieged and taken by the King. p. 97 Doway
taken, after a Siege of two days. p. 116 Duells severely chastised. p. 65
Dunkirk taken. p. 13 Delivered up to the English. p. 47, 48 Bought by the King.
p. ibid. Bombarded, see Bombardment.
Duquesne, Lieutenant General of the King's Marine Forces; his Offspring. p.
137 Defeats Admiral Ruiter. ib. Burns eight Tripolin Vessels in the Port of
Chio. p. 171

E.
Edicts of Nantes and Nismes. p. 190, 191 Emperor, see Leopold. Electors of
the Empire declare unanimously against France. p. 207 England subject to great
Revolutions. p. 210 Entrance of the King and Queen in Paris. p. 20 Estrades
(Count d') afterward Marshal of France, his Difference with the Spanish
Ambassador, Batteville in London. p. 33 Plenipotentiary and French Ambassador
at Nimhegen. p. 166
Estrees ( Francis Hannibal II. Duke d') Peer of France, Ambassador at Rome;
the Pope does not abolish the Franchises of Quarters, till after his Death. p.
196 Estree ( John, Count d') Marshal, and Vice Admiral of France. p. 171 Estree
( Caesar, Cardinal d') sent to Rome, to endeavor an Accommodation with Pope
Innocent XI. p. 184
F.
Fariau defends Mastrick. p. 103 Fenelon; Francis de Polignac; Fenelon,
Preceptor of the Children of France. p. 285 Fleets, see Sea Fights. Formular,
against the five Propositions of Jansenius, subscribed. p. 77 Fortifications;
above 220 are Erected by the King's Order, since 1660. p. 168 France, its
Pre-eminency. p. 30, 31 Its Fertitility. p. 253, 254
Franchises of the Ambassadour's Quarters, abolished by Innocent XI. p. 196
Frankendahl taken. p. 204 Friburgh taken. p. 151 Granted to the King by the
Peace of Nimhegen. p. 160
Fuente (Marquis of) Spanish Ambassador, declares, that the Ministers of
Spain, shall not dispute about the Precedence with those of France. p. 37, 38
Furnes taken. p. 244 Furstenbergh (William Eugene) is seized at Cologne, and
carried to Viena. p. 112 Chosen Co-adjutor of Cologne; Innocent XI. refuses to
confirm it. p. 201, 202

G.
Gap abandoned. p. 242 Genneses disoblige the King. p. 172 Genoa bombarded, see
Bombardment. They send their Doge, with four Senators, to make their Submission
to the King. p 173
Ghnet besiged, and taken by the King. p. 154, 156 Gigery taken, abandoned. p.
56 Guesne (Archbishop of) Primate of Poland, calls together a Diet, for the
Election of a King of Poland. p. ib. Proclaims the Prince of Conty, King of
Poland. p. 299
Grave besieged, and surrendered to the Prince of Orange. p. 120, 121, 122 Gray
taken. p. 114 Gregory VII. the first who pretended to depose an Emperor. p.
186 Groll, a strong Place, taken. p. 93 Guillestre in Dauphine. p. 242 Gustavus
Adolphus, King of Sweden. p. 10
H.
Hageneu besieged by Count Montecuculi, raises the Siege. p. 132 Harlay
(Nicolas Augustus, de) Count of Celi, French Plenipotentiary at the Conferences
of Frankfurt. p. 175 And at the General Peace. p. 291
Haw (Don Lewis de) Premier Minister of Spain. p. 18 Havre de Grace, see
Bombardment. Heidelbergh, the Capital of the Palatinate, taken by the Marshal
de Lorge. p. 246 Hesse (Landgrave of) raises the Siege of Eberenburgh. p. 243
Holland (the Commonwealth of) its Origin, Progress, Reputation, Varity. p. 82,
83 Loses above forty Places in one Campaign. p. 84
Hollanders assisted by the King against the Bishop of Munster, and the King of
England. p. 58, 59 The Chief Promoters of all the Alliances against France; see
Leagues.
Humiers (Marshal d') takes Air. p. 135 Is repulsed at Walecourt. p. 214
Huy taken by the French. p. 128 Retaken by the Allies. p. 258

I.
JAMES II. King of England, retires into France. p. 211, 212 Passes over into
Ireland. p. 214 Returns to France, after the Battle of the Boyne. p. 225 Goes
to the Seaside, in hopes of making a Descent in England. p. 231
Jansenisme; its Origin, Progress, and Condemnation. p. 70, 71, 72 Janson
(Toussain, Cardinal d') Bishop of Beauvais. p. 294 Imperial Cardinal, Governor
of Rome, comes into France to justify himself. p. 45, 46 Innocent XI. the
Pope, his Character; writes three Briefs to the King about the Regale. p. 182
Annuls the Acts of the Assembly of the French Clergy. p. 185 Refuses his Bulls
to the Bishops of that Assembly. p. 187 Is made Arbitrator by the King, of the
Succession in the Palatinate. p. 195 Abolishes the Franchises of Quarters. p.
190 Gives his Dispensation to Prince Clement of Bavaria, p. 201
Interview of the French and Spanish Court. p. 18 Invalides, the Royal
Hospital, built near Paris. p. 169 Ipres taken by the King. p. 156 Ireland, the
King sends Succors into that Kingdom. p. 214 L'Isle besieged by, and
surrendered to the King. p. 66
K.
Kayserswert taken by the Elector of Brandenburgh. p. 215 Knock Fort; the
Allies lose above two thousand Men before it. p. 269
L.
Ladeburgh; the Imperialists defeated by Tu^rene near this Place p. 124 Lagos,
about eighty Vessels were taken and burnt, betwixt this place and Cadiz. p.
245, 246 Lavardin (Marquess of) French Ambassador at Rome. p. 197 The Pope
refuses him Audience. p. 198
League against France betwixt the Emperor, Spain, and Denmark, Holland, and
all the Princes of Germany, except the Dukes of Bavaria and Hannover. p. 107,
111 League betwixt England and Holland against France. p. 153 League of
Ausburgh. p. 193 League betwixt the Empire, Spain, England* Holland and Savoy,
against France. p. 207 p. 209 Leopold Ignatius, Emperor of Germany, desires
Succors from the King. p. 57 Enters in a League against France. p. 107 Makes
Peace with France. p. 165 Makes a Truce with the King. p. 177 Enters in another
Alliance against him. p. 193 Declares for the Election of Prince Clement of
Bavaria. p. 200 Makes Peace with France. p. 308
Leuze, Engagement near Leuze. 229 Lewis XIII. seises Lorrain. p. 80 His War
with the Hugonots. p. 188
Lewis XIV. surnamed the Great, his Birth. p. 1 Troubles under his Minority. p.
2 Is present at the Battle of St. Anthony. p. 5 Falls dangerously ill at
Calais. p. 13 Marries the Infanta of Portugal. p. 17 Enters Paris in Triumph.
p. 20
Lewis the Great, his Divertisements. p. 25 Obliges Spain to allow him the
Precedence. p. 37 Receives Satisfaction for the Affront put upon his
Ambassador at the Court of Rome. p. 45 Causes a new Codex or Lambock to be
compiled. p. 52 Restores the decayed Commerce. p. 56 Sends Succors to the
Emperor. p. 57 And to the Dutch. p. 58
Lewis the Great besieges, and takes Listle. p. 66 Conquers the French Comte in
eight days. p. 68 Suppresles Jansinism. p. 69 Builds Versailles. p. 77 And
takes Possession of Lorrain. p. 81
LEWIS the Great declares War against Holland. p. 85 His first Conquests. p.
87, seq. New Conquests. p. 92 Draws the King of England from his Alliance with
the Dutch. p. 95 Besieges, and takes Mastrick. p. 103, seq. Besieges, and takes
Besanson. p. 114 Makes himself Master of the whole French Comte in one Months
time. p. 117
LEWIS the Great takes Conde. p. 134 Sends Succors to Messina. p. 136 Takes
Valenciennes. p. 142 The Town and Citadel of Cambray. p. 148 Ghent. p. 156
Ipres. p. ibid. Restores Peace to Europe. p. 162 Erects the Academies for the
Cadees. p. 168 Builds the Hospital of the Invalides. p. 169 Founds the
Community of St. Cyr. p. ib.
LEWIS the Great Chastises the Corsairs of Barbary. p. 171, 172 Genoeses. p.
ibid. Summons all his Vassals in Alsace, to do him Homage. p. 174 Goes to
Strasburgh, to receive in Person the Oath of Fidelity. p. 175 Makes a Truce
with the Emperor for twenty years. p. 177
LEWIS the Great obliges the King of Spain, to resign the Title of Duke of
Burgundy p. 177 Causes Luxenburgh to be blocked up. p. 178 Covers the Siege of
Luxenburgh. p. 179 Makes a Truce with Spain, for twenty Years. p. 180
Differences betwixt him and the Court of Rome. p. ibid. He suppresses Calvinism
in France. p. 187 The whole Kingdom makes Vows for his Recovery. p. 192 The
Motives that obliged him to have recourse to Arms. p. 202 Takes Philipsburgh,
and the whole Palatinate. p. 203, 204
LEWIS the Great receives the King and Queen of England, with an unparalleled
Generosity. p. 213 Sends Succors into Ireland. p. ib. Besieges, and takes
Mons. p. 228 The City and Citadel of Namur. p. 233 Being troubled with the
Gout, is carried in a Chair, to all Places, where his Presence was most
necessary. p. 236 The Prince of Conty Elected King of Poland, by his
Encouragement and Protection. p. 299 Restores Peace to Europe. p. 307
Limburgh taken by Henry Julius, Prince of Conde. p. 128 Limerick in Ireland,
bravely defended by the French. p. 225 The English obliged to raise the Siege.
ibid.
Limits, see Differences. Lines, what they are. p. 249 New Lines drawn from the
Shield to the Lis, and from Courtray, to the Seaside. p. 268
Longueville (Duke of) killed. p. 98 Long Alphonse, de Durasford, Duke de
Lorges, Marshal of France, makes good his Retreat against the Imperialists,
after the Death of Turenne. p. 132 Takes Heidelbergh. p. 246
Louvois, see Tellier. Luxenburgh blocked up. p. 178 Besieged. p. 179 Taken. p.
ib.
Luxenburgh, Francis Henry de Montmorancy, Duke de Pency Luxenburgh, Peer and
Marshal of France, takes Groll, Deventer, and all the Places in the Province of
Over-Yssle. p. 93 Obliges the Prince of Orange to raise the Siege of Voerden.
p. 97 Repulses the Dutch at St. Denis. p. 163 Beats the Allies at Flerus. p.
219 Leuze. p. 229 Steenkirk. p. 239 At Neerwinden. p. 248 His Death. p. 270

M.
Machin, or Engine made use of by the English against St. Malo. p. 252 Maine,
Lewis Augustus, Duke de Maine, Commands the French Cavalry at the Battle of
Steenkirk. p. 239 Signalizes himself at Neerwinden. p. 248
St. Malo, see Bombardment. Manheim, a strong Place in the Palatinate. p. 204
Marcin (Count de Marcin.) General of the Spanish Forces, marches to the Relief
of L' Isle. p. 66 Is Routed. p. ibid.
Mardick, a Fort. p. 13 Maria Theresia, Queen of France, see Austria. Maria
Adelhida, Duchess of Burgundy, see Savoy. Marsal granted to the King. p. 80
Mastrick besieged by the King. p. 103 Taken. p. 106 Besieged by the Prince of
Orange. p. 135
Mayence besieged. p. 215 Taken. p. 217
Mazarine Julius, Cardinal Premier Minister under the Regency of the Queen
Mother. p. 2 His Conference with Don Lewis de Haro. p. 18 His Death. p. 22
Mehaigne, a small River near Namur. p. 235 Messina shakes off the Spanish
Yoke. p. 136 Metz, Chamber of Reunion established at Metz. p. 174 Mirc-Court,
the ordinary Place of Residence. of Charles IV. Duke of Lorrain. p. 81
Missionaries preach among the Calvinists. p. 189 Mons besieged and taken by the
King. p. 228 Montausier ( Charles Duke of) Peer of France, Governor to Lewis
Dauphine. p. 170 Montmelian taken. p. 231 Montecuculi (Count of) his Character.
p. 129 Munster ( Bernhard-van Galen, Bishop of) invades Holland. p. 58 Joins
his Troops with the French in the Dutch War. p. 93 Declares against France. p.
111

N.
Namur besieged by the King, and taken p. 233. Besieged by the Allies. p. 271
Nancy fortified by the King. p. 107 Naerden, a small Place in Holland. p. 92
Noailles ( Philip de Montaut, Duke de Noailles) Marshal of France. p. 149
Newburgh (Duke of) his Character. p. 193 Cabals against France. p. ibid.
Presses the Emperor to conclude a Peace with the Turks. p. 194 Endeavors to
make one of his Sons Coadjutor of Cologne. p. 199
Neutrality proposed for the French, Comte. p. 113 For Catalonia. p. 289
Refused by the Allies, but accepted for Italy. p. 283
Nice taken. p. 230 Nimhegen taken. p. 94 Chosen for the Place of Treaty of
Peace. p. 157
Noailles ( Ann Julius, Duke of) Peer and Marshal of France, Commands in
Catalonia, takes Campredon. p. 214 Roses. p. 245 Palamos. p. 259 Gironne. p.
269 Gains the Battle of Ter. p. 258
Noailles (James) Lieutenant General of the French Galleys, signalizes himself
at the Siege of Barcelona. p. 302 Orange ( William III. Prince of) Entrenches
himself near the Issel. p. 88 Besieges Voerden. p. 97 Charleroy twice. p. 101,
149 Oudernard. p. 120 Mastrick. p. 135 His overthrow near Voerden. p. 97 Near
Senef. p. 117 And near Cassel. p. 146
Orange (Prince of) his Exploits, takes Naerden. p. 108 Bonn. p. ibid. Grave.
p. 120

O.
Orange (Prince of) makes a Descent in England, and is received with great
Acclamation. p. 211 Is Crowned, and acknowledged lawful King, by the Emperor,
King of Spain, and the rest of the Roman Catholic Confederate Princes, and in
general by all the Protestant Princes. p. 212
Orleance ( Philip of France, Duke of) takes Orsoy. p. 87 Besieges St. Omer. p.
147 Takes it. p. ibid. Defeats the Prince of Orange near Cassel. p. 146
Oudernard, the Siege of Oudernard raised. p. 120 Oudewater, a small Place in
Holland. p. 92
P.
Peace, see Treaty. Palamos taken. p. 259 Palatinate Conquered by the Dauphin.
p. 204 Palatine, see Newburgh. Palermo, see Sea Fight. Pamiers (Bishop of)
makes his Complaint to Pope Innocent XI. concerning the Regale. p. 182 Philip
IV. King of Spain, conducts in Person the Infanta his Daughter, to St. John de
Luz. p. 18 Resigns the Precedence to our King. p. 37
Philipsburgh taken by the Enemy. p. 139 Retaken by the Dauphin. p. 203
Piedmont, Conquest in Piedmont. p. 230, 231 Pignerol bombarded by the Allies.
p. 250 Pimentel (Don Antonio d') employed to conclude the Marriage betwixt the
Infanta of Spain and the King. p. 18 Pisa, see Treaty. Plate, the King's Plate
employed to the use of the War. p. 78 Plenipotentiaries assembled at Nimhegen.
p. 157 Frankfurt. p. 175, 176 At Reswick. p. 291
Ponty (the Sieur d') takes Carthagena in America. p. 307 Poland, the Diet for
the choosing a King of Poland. p. 295 Polignac (Melchior d') French Ambassador
in Poland. p. 299 Precedence disputed to France by Spain. p. 33 Propositions,
the five Propositions of Janson, condemned by Innocent X. and Alexander VII. p.
72, 73
R.
Ratisbonne, see Diet. Ravensberg ravaged. p. 101 Regale, in what it consists;
the King's Declaration about it. p. 180, 181 Renunciation; Nullity of the
Queens Renunciation to the Succession of Spain. p. 62, p. 63 Re-Unions of the
Dependencies in Alsace, and the three Bishoprics, by the Chambers of Brisac
and Metz. p. 174 Revolution in England. p. 210 Rhineberg surrendered. p. 87
Rhine; an account of the passing the Rhine. p. 88 Richelieu (Cardinal of.) p. 3
Reswick, Situate betwixt Delft and the Hague, the Place of Conference for the
General Peace. p. 288 Rome; Affairs of Rome. p. 180, seq. Roses taken. p. 245
Ruiter, Admiral of Holland, miscarries at Martinico. p. 122 Defeated by
Duquesne. p. 137 Mortally wounded. p. ibid.

S.
Salines taken. p. 116 Saluzze opens its Gates. p. 224 St. Andrew (Fort of.) p.
92 St. Ann (Fortress of.) p. 116 St. Brigit (Fort of.) p. 250 St. Cyr, a
Community of three hundred young Ladies. p. 169 St. Guillaine taken. p. 152 St.
Jean de Luz. p. 18 St. Malo, see Bombardment. St. Omer besieged by the Duke of
Orleance. p. 147 Surrendered p. ibid.
Saverne besieged in vain by the Enemy. p. 132 Savoy ( Victor Amadeus II. Duke
of) joins with the Allies. p. 209 His Defeat, see Battles. Enters Dauphine. p.
242 Enters Casal. p. 265 Makes Peace with France. p. 283 Besieges Valenza in
the Milaneze. p. ibid.
Savoy ( Maria Adelaida, Princess of) Duchess of Burgundy, is conducted into
Erance, in order to her Marriage. p. 284 Savoy (Dukedom of) Conquered by the
King. p. 224 Saxony, Frederick Augustus, Elector of Saxony, proclaimed King of
Poland, by the Bishop of Cujavia. p. 300 Saxony (Duke of Saxe Eusenach)
Commander in Chief of some German Troops, saves himself in one of the Islands
of the Rhine. p. 150 Desires a Passport for a safe Retreat. ibid.
Schomberg (Marshal, Duke of) his Exploits. p. 122 Relieves Mastrick. p. 135 Is
killed at the Battle of the Boyne. p. 225
Sea Fights. p. 3, 60, p. 95, 110, p. 222, 137, p. 220, Seq. p. 232, seq.
Shel-stadt. p. 107 Shenkenshantz (Fort of.) p. 92 Sobieski ( John III.) his
Elevation to the Crown of Poland; Relieves Vienna. p. 295 Sobieski (Prince
James) one of the Candidates for the Crown of Poland. p. 296 Spain, its
Grandeur under Philip II. p. 31 Resigns the Precedence to France. p. 137
Refuses to give Satisfaction about the just Pretensions of the Queen. p. 65
Enters into all the Confederacy's made against France. p. 107
Spires. p. 204 Strasburgh submits to the King. p. 107 Sweden's Mediation of
the Peace. p. 112 Has all the Places restored. p. 159
Swiss refuse to enter into the Confederacy. p. 208
T.
Tellier (Michael) Chancellor of France. p. 50 Tellier (Michael Francis)
Marquess of Louvois, Minister, and Secretary of State, his Character. p. 51
Thoulouse, Lewis Alexander, Count de Thoulouse, wounded near the King, at the
Siege of Namur. p. 236 Tournay surrended. p. 65 Tourville ( Ann Hilarion de
Constantine, Count of) Vice Admiral, and Marshal of France, engages, and beats
the Confederate Fleets of England and Holland; is worsted by them, see
Sea Fights. Takes and Burns eighty Merchantmen of the Enemies. p. 245, 246
Treaties; the Pyrenean Treaty. p. 18 Of Pisa. p. 45 Of Breda. p. 60 At Cleves.
p. 59 At Aixe la Chapelle. p. 68 Of Nimhegen. p. 162 Of Peace with Savoy. p.
283 Of Reswick. p. 308
Treves seized upon by the King. p. 107 Taken by the Allies. p. 133 Taken by
the French. p. 204
Tripoli, see Bombardment. Tromp Admiral of Holland. p. 122 Truce of twenty
years. p. 177 Turks routed by the French, near St. Godard. p. 57 Turenne (
Henry de la Tour de Auvergne, Viscount de) gains the Battle of St. Anthony; See
Battles. Commands under the King in the year 1667, His Victories in Germany;
See Campaigns. Is killed by a Cannon Shot. Is magnificently buried at the
King's Charge. p. 131

V.
Valence (Siege of.) p. 283 Valenciennes taken by Assault. p. 142 Vaudemont
(Prince of) his Retreat p. 270 Vendosme ( Lewis Joseph, Duke de) signalizes
himself at Steenkirk. p. 239 Commands in Catalonia, his Exploits. p. 280
Defeats the Viceroy of Catalonia. p. 303 Besieges and takes Barcelona. p. 305
Varjus, Count de Crecy, see Plenipotentiaries. Versailles. p. 77 Vessels,
fifteen of the King's Vessels burnt. p. 232 Villa Franca taken. p. 230 Villeroy
Commands the Grand Army in Flanders, see Campaign of 1695. Bombards Brussels,
see Bombardment.
Vironne ( Lewis Victor de Rochechovard, Duke of) Peer and Marshal of France,
beats the Confederate Fleet. p. 136 Relieves Messina. ibid.
Vxelles (Marquess de) defends Mayence with great Bravery. p. 215, 216, 217
W.
Walecourt, the French repulsed near that place. p. 214 Waldeck (Count of)
General of the Confederate Army. p. 219 Routed near Flerus, see Battles.
War, Civil War, and its Origin. p. 3, p. 4, 5 Wesel surrendered. p. 87 William
III. King of Great Britain, worsted at Steenkirk. p. 239 At Neerwinden. p. 248
At St. Denis. p. 163 Takes Namur. p. 272 Gains the Battle near the Boyne. p.
225 Is present at the Great General Council at the Hague. p. 226 His Courage
and Resolution. p, 278 Is one of the first that Signs the Peace. p. 308 Is
acknowledged by France, lawful King of England, Scotland, and Ireland. p. 310
Wirtenbergh (Duchy of.) p. 215 Wirtenbergh (Duke of) made Prisoner by the
Marshal de Lorge. p. 243
Z.
Zell (Duke of) routs the Marshal de Crequy. p. 133 Takes Treves. p. 134
Zutphen p. 94 Zwell. p. 93
Books Printed and Sold by D. Midwinter, and T. Leigh, at the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard.
THE Education of Young Gentlewomen, written originally in French, and from
thence made English, and improved for a Lady of Quality. Twelves. 1699.

Advice to Young Gentlemen in their several Conditions of Life; by way of
Address from a Father to his Children, by the Abbot Goussalt: with his
Sentiments and Maxims upon what passes in a Civil Society. Printed at Paris,
1697, and Translated into English. Octav.

A complete Doctrine of the Bones, according to the newest and most resined
Notions of Anatomy, showing their Nature and Substance, etc. By Robert Baker,
Surgeon. Octav. 1699.

Plain and full Instructions to raise all sorts of Fruit Trees that prosper in
England, etc. the Second Edition; with the Addition of two entire Chapters, of
Greens and Green-houses, by the Author, T. Laugford, Gent. Oct. 1699.

The Lives and Characters of the English Drammatick Poets; also an Account of
all the Plays that were ever yet Printed in the English Tongue, etc. first
begun by Mr. Langbain; improved and continued down to this time by a Careful
Hand. Octavo.

A Voyage to the East Indies, giving an Account of the Isles of Madagascar, and
Mascarene of Surat, the Coast of Malabar, etc. Written originally in Fr. by Mr.
Dellon, M. D. Octav.

The Mystery of Phanaticism, or the Artifices of Dissenters to support their
Schism; together with the Evil and Danger of them, set forth in several
Letters, etc. By a Divine of the Church of England. The 2d Edit. Octav.

The Life of our Blessed Savior, an Heroic Poem, etc. with above 60 Cuts. The
2d Edit. Fol.

Resolves, Moral, Divine, and Political. By Owen Feltham, Esquire Fol.

Bishop Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England. In Two
Vol. Fol.

Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. In two Vol. Fol.

Bishop Tillotson's Posthumous Sermons. In Five Vol. Octav.

Books sold by Rob. Knaplock, at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MR. Hole's Letters concerning the Gift and Forms of Prayer. The Mystery of
Fanaticism. The Government of a Wife. Mr. De la Salle's Discoveries in North
America. Drydon's Virgil. -- Juvenal. Pufendorf's Introduction to History. A.
Bishop Tillotson's Works. Fol. Sir Roger L'strange's Tully. -- Seneca. M.
Antonini Imp. Medit. cum Notis G. Gattakeri. Graec. and Lat. Gibson 's Anatomy.
Salmon's Dispensatory. -- Surgery. -- Synopsis Medicinae.
THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS the GREAT. LIB. I.
LEWIS the XIIIth. had for a considerable time after his Marriage no Issue by
Ann of Austria his spouse, till in the Year 1638, on the 5th day of December at
eleven of the Clock, 22 Minutes before Noon, His Birth.
she was happily delivered of a Son.

The Imperialists vanquished near Rhinefels, and the Spaniards at Sea.
With what an universal satisfaction this welcome News was received all over
the Kingdom is easier to be imagined than expressed. The rejoycings made upon
this occasion, did in a great measure obliterate the glory of famous Victories,
obtained about the same time by the French over their Enemies, the people of
France looking upon them all at that juncture as scarce worth taking notice of,
and of little consequence, in comparison of the advantages they promised
themselves from the happy birth of a Dauphin.

The barrenness of the Queen, and the ill state of the King's health had given
occasion to several Cabals and Factions; and no sooner was one head of this
pernicious Hydra cut off, but another appeared in its stead, the divisions of
the Great ones being risen to that pitch, as to threaten the ruin of the whole
Kingdom, if, by the auspicious Birth of this Prince, these dreadful Clouds had
not been dispersed.

Troubles during his Minority.
But the Death of Lewis the XIIIth which happened when the young Prince was but
four Years and nine Months old, occasioned no small apprehensions of future
troubles in the State; great discontents reigned among the Nobility; the
Parliaments were exasperated by many provocations, and the People exhausted by
heavy Impositions; all which, it was feared, would have broke out into an open
Rebellion, during the young King's Minority.

Cardinal Julius Mazarin.
The Queen Regent being absolutely satisfied in the ability of the Cardinal
Mazarin, had made him Chief Minister of State, to the great dissatisfaction of
such of the Great ones, as proposed to themselves to fish in troubled Waters,
and to find their account in fomenting Divisions in the Kingdom; They alleged
that the Cardinal being a Foreigner, they did not question but that he would
tread the footsteps of Cardinal Richlieu, and in this high station revived the
same haughty Maxims his Predecessor had made use of during his Ministry.

But this great Minister of State managed matters with so much dexterity, that
by bestowing ample favors, and larger promises upon those of the discontented
Party, he brought many of them over to his side, so that beyond all
expectation, his Ministry was very quiet for the first five years, and the
present condition of the Kingdom appeared to be more flourishing at that time,
Victories near Rocroy, near Rotewil, Friburg, Nortlingen, and Leantz. N^ar
Cartagena, and Castellamara.
than it had been for many Years before. The French gained 5 Victories by Land,
and 2 at Sea; and besides, they made themselves Masters of 10 or 12 places of
no small Importance.

But this prosperity was of no long continuance. The excessive Ambition and
Covetousness, the Envy and Jealousies which reigned among the Nobility; the
pretended Zeal of some of the French Parliaments, encouraged by the Favor and
Acclamations of the common People, which being inveigled with the hopes of an
abatement of the heavy Taxes they groaned under, followed blindfold the
inclinations of their Leaders. Add to this the want of Courage in the Chief
Minister, which induced him to lay hold of that most destructive Maxim of
State; To prefer only such as he dreaded most; This fatal concourse of
different Interests and Passions, proved the source of such divisions and
intestine Commotions, as shook the very foundation of the French Monarchy.

Whilst the Kingdom was involved in these Troubles, the King's Education was in
a manner neglected by those to who is Tuition it was committed, who made it
their chiefest care to carry the young King from one Province to another, to
show him to his People, in hopes to restore, by this last effort, the decayed
and languishing Authority of the Government, and by his Royal Prefence to keep
them in Obedience.

Notwithstanding all these Obstacles, Happy presages of his Youth.
the King began to give most evident proofs of his great and generous
Inclinations; for when he was scarce twelve years of Age, such was his happy
Genius, that there appeared a discretion and reservedness in all his Actions,
much above what could be expected from so tender an Age, showing not the least
inclination to those things which are the ordinary diversions of Children, but
an uncommon eagerness to be instructed in all manner of Exercises, and a
singular delight in hearing the relations of great and memorable Exploits.
These were the chief Entertainments of his Youth; and it was always observed,
that if any thing happened to be related to him, that was either above the
common rate in its undertaking, or surprising in its event, there appeared such
a sprightliness in his Eves and whole Countenance, as sufficiently testified
his desire of signalizing himself by some memorable Action.

Is a Spectator of the Battle of St. Anthony, July 2, 1652.
Full of this Noble Idea he waited with impatience for the time which might
furnish him with an opportunity of giving real demonstrations of his great
Inclinations; and he was not quite 14 years of Age, when knowing that his Army
was ready to engage the Prince of Conde, he entreated and pressed them so
earnestly, that to satisfy his most glorious desire, they were obliged to
place him on a certain Eminence where he could be a Spectator, at least of a
great part of the Engagement.

Lewis of Bourbon, II Prince of Conde.
The Prince of Conde had for the last six years past been the Hero and chief
Supporter of the Royal Party; It was he that had gained the Battles of Rocroy,
Fribourg, Nortlingen, and Lentz; And it was also the same Prince of Conde, who
at the beginning of the intestine commotions was so fortunate, or rather
dextrous, as to block up the City of Paris with 7 or 8000 Men. 1649.


There was something great and sublime above the rest of Mankind in this
Prince: He was endowed with a Courage undaunted in the midst of all Dangers;
His skill in Martial affairs was beyond what can be imagined or expressed. On
the day of Battle nothing was comparable to his Conduct, either in choosing the
advantage of the Ground, or ordering and disposing his Troops in order of
Battle, or retiring and sustaining them with fresh Forces; no body beyond him
in pushing on an Attack with the utmost Vigor, and in the heat of the
Engagement to possess himself of an advantageous Post, and to change the
disposition of his Troops according to the various accidents and revolutions of
the Battle; a happy conjunction of many extraordinary Qualities, if those great
Souls, elevated above the common Sphere, were also capable of moderation. His
aspiring Genius nourished by evil Counsels, prompted him to take up Arms
against the King, and having assembled a Body of Troops, after several marches
and counter-marches, he at last posted himself near St. Cloue, trusting to the
nearness of the Bridge, which might serve him for a safe retreat, to avoid an
engagement, in case he should be attacked by his Enemies, who were superior in
number to him.

The two Marshals, de Turenne, and de la Ferte commanded two separate Bodies,
who, to make sure work, intended to enclose him betwixt their two Armies, which
the Prince having soon taken notice of, he broke up from St. Cloue with an
intention to march to Charenton, and to entrench himself near that Bridge,
where, by the nearness of the two Rivers Seyne and Marne, it would be
impossible to force his Camp. The shortest way was to march through Paris, but
fearing least his Army should be considerably diminished by desertion in his
march through the City, or that the Citizens might deny him a Passage, he changed
his resolution, and ordered his Troops to march round about as near the Suburbs
as possibly could be. He marched with all possible speed and precaution,
notwithstanding which, Henry de la Tour d'Auvergne, Vicount of en ne.
the Viscount of Turenne having got timely notice of it, followed him so
closely, that after some hours march, he attacked him in the Rear, and obliged
him to come to an Engagement. It was a happy chance for the Prince to meet with
some old Retrenchments formerly cast up at the entrance of the Suburbs of St.
Anthony, behind which he posted his Troops to make head against the approaching
Enemy. He had scarce had leifure to put them in order of Battle, when the
King's Army, animated by his Royal Presence, attacked his Entrenchments with
incredible bravery. As the King was at that time not much above 13 years of
Age, those that were about him could not sufficiently admire with what
greatness of Courage, and without showing the least symptoms of fear he was an
Eyewitness of the Engagement. It was the greatest pleasure in the World to
observe the various changes in his Countenance, the effects of the different
transports and motions of his Soul, sometimes leaping for joy when he saw his
Victorious Troops beat back those of the Prince, sometimes blushing, not so
much for indignation as shame, when the Prince forced the Royalists to retreat.
As in Civil Wars both parties are most incensed with mutual animosities, so the
bravest of both the Armies signalized themselves by some remarkable Action or
other, every one being prodigal of his Life to purchase Honor in this first
encounter, and to snatch the Victory out of his Enemy's Hands, which thus
remained uncertain for some time, till after a bloody Combat of two hours
fortune declared for the King, whose Troops having made themselves Masters of
the Entrenchments, marched in good Order through the great Street of the Suburbs
without any opposition from the Prince. But scarce had they advanced half way
toward the City, when on a sudden they saw the Prince again appear at the head
of his bravest Volunteers, and other chosen Troops, who charged them so
vigorously, that they forced them to retreat, and to seek for shelter in the
same Retrenchments from whence they had so lately forced their Enemies. This
varions chance of Fortune changed the whole face of the Battle, and it was very
difficult to judge on which side Victory would incline, both parties fighting
with an equal animosity and bravery, till the Viscount of Turenne being
reinforced with some fresh Troops who had forced their way through some other
Streets into the Suburbs, enclosed the Prince on all sides, who must have been
Sacrificed, with his whole Army to the fury of his Enemies, if the City of
Paris had not opened its Gates for his Reception, and by the help of the great
Artillery from the Bastile, forced the King's Troops out of the Suburbs.

The Prince of Conde had upon many other occasions given most signal proofs of
his Valor and Conduct, but according to the judgment of the most expert
Masters of the Art of War, this day was accounted the most remarkable and most
glorious of his Life, if it may be allowed that true Glory is to be acquired in
bearing Arms against his Sovereign; it being unquestionable, that he appeared
and encountered his Enemies in all places where the danger was most pressing,
and that he showed as much Prudence and Conduct in his Command, as Vigor in
the execution of them. The Victorious Viscount of Turenne himself seemed to be
envious of the extraordinary Conduct and Courage of his vanquished Enemies; and
the King having received an exact relation of what had passed, could not
forbear to speak highly in praise of the Prince, and for 2 or 3 days after, his
Valor was the only subject of his discourse, an evident sign that from his
infancy he had a most passionate inclination for Glory, and a most fervent
desire of making himself remarkable by generous Actions.

He goes to the Camp.
This noble Fire daily increasing in his Soul, it was in vain for his Friends
to represent to him, on one side, the fatigues which attend the Camp, and on
the other side, the absolute necessity there was to manage a health so precious
as his, to the best advantage; all these arguments were not prevailing enough
to keep him at home, but maugre all their persuasions to the contrary, he
appeared every Year in the Campaign at the head of his Armies, and there was
scarce any memorable Siege in Flanders till the Pyrenean Peace, where he did
not encourage his Troops by his Presence.

It was observable, that whilst he was in the Camp, he showed more gaiety in
his Countenance and all his Actions, than he did in any other place. He used to
rise very early every Morning, exposing himself to the injuries of all Seasons.
His Soldiers found him always in action, sometimes in taking an account of the
number and condition of his Soldiery, as well as of the posture of the Enemy;
to be short, he took upon him the same care and trouble which might have been
expected from the most watchful General, being never satisfied, unless he
received a most exact account of every thing of moment, that belonged to the
Camp. His presence wrought mavelous effects among the French Soldiers, who
being before in great disorder for want of good Discipline, now encouraged by
the good Example and Vigilance of their Prince, began to improve every day, to
the great satisfaction of the King; A convincing instance that when Subjects
Love and Honor their Prince, his Example has more influence over them, than
the most severe Laws and Chastisements.

These extraordinary Actions having acquired him the Esteem and Admiration of
all Europe, She was twice in France, in 1656, and 1657, and returned in 1658.
Queen Christina of Sueden, who was at that time at the Court of Rome,
undertook a journey into France, to be an Eyewitness whether Fame had not
flattered this young Prince in those matters that had been related concerning
him abroad, so much to his advantage.

This Heroine, Her Father died in 1632, but she did not Reign above 7 or 8
Years.
the only Daughter of Gustavus Adolphus the Famous King of Sueden, who, in two
Years time Conquered above 200 Leagues, and made himself by his Victorious
Arms, the terror of his Enemies, as by his great Genius he purchased the
esteem, and was accounted the darling of his Friends. This Princess, I say, had
swayed the Scepter for 7 or 8 Years with an extraordinary success, being
endowed with all the noble Qualities which are requisite to make a Great Queen;
she had a most piercing Wit, a Soul elevated above the common Rank, and a great
share of Courage. As she was a great Patroness of Learning and all manner of
Sciences, so she had made her self Mistress of most Languages used in Europe,
to that perfection, as to be able to entertain each Foreigner in his Native
Tongue with a great deal of Eloquence. These advantages joined to the great
ability of her Ministers of State, The Chancellor Oxenstirn, and Count Magnes
de la Guard.
gave her all imaginable hopes of being always beloved by her People, of being
feared by her Enemies, and esteemed by all the World; so that she seemed not to
stand in need of any thing that could complete her satisfaction;
notwithstanding all these advantages, she chose rather to maintain an eminent
rank among the Learned of our Age, than among the greatest Kings of Europe. It
is the rarest thing in the World, and perhaps without parallel in History, to
meet in a Person of her Sex so many excellencies, which the greatest Princes
have always been ambitious of, to render themselves famous to Posterity. Weary
of Commanding, she had quitted the Crown, not out of a fickle or froward
humor, as it has been spread abroad by her Enemies, or because the Swedish
Senate would have obliged her to Marry a Prince for whom she had no
inclination; but because she preferred her own liberty before the toils of a
Crown, and that she might not want the opportunity of taking a view of Europe,
to receive the tribute of Praises and Admiration, which, as she had all the
reason in the World to believe, the more polite sort of mankind would be ready
to pay to such extraordinary merits.

After her Abdication she traveled out of Sueden into Flanders, She comes into
France to give the King a Visit.
from thence into Germany, and so to Rome, from whence the great reputation of
our young King had brought her into France, where she was received with all the
imaginable demonstrations of Respect, the King thinking no Honor too great for
so excellent a Princess. There was nothing to be seen at Court but Balls and
Feasting, every one striving to outvie the other in magnificence, in which, as
well as in his Person, the King surpassed all the rest.

He was then betwixt nineteen and twenty Years of Age, large of Stature, his
Mien and Physiognomy carrying along with it something extraordinary and great,
with all the true marks of Honor and Virtue, there appearing in his
Countenance a most agreeable mixture of Majesty and Sweetness. The first time
the Queen of Sueden came in his Presence she had her Eyes fixed upon him during
the whole Interview; and she had so extraordinary an esteem ever after for his
Person, that even after her return to Rome, she could not forbear to speak
highly in his praise, and to declare to all that came to see her, that she
thought her self amply rewarded for the trouble of her journey into France, by
the sight of that Prince, and that his merits infinitely surpassed the
reputation he had acquired abroad.

These loud acclamations from far distant Countries, were received in France
with the more satisfaction, the more the King was beloved by the People, who
looked upon these his noble Qualities, as so many pledges and happy Presages of
the future prosperity of his Reign. But as the hopes of the whole Kingdom
seemed to be centered in his Person, so all was filled with confusion when soon
after he fell so dangerously ill, He falls sick at Calais, July 1, 1658. June
25th 1658.
as to be given over by his Physicians.

After the taking of Dunkirk, which he entered in Triumph, he stayed 5 or 6
days in the Fort of Mardick, which being a small place, and at that time so
full of Soldiers, that they wanted both convenient Lodgings and other
Necessaries, most of them were sick, which having caused an Infection, it was
represented to the King, to what danger he exposed his Person in thus tarrying
so long in a place where he was surrounded on all sides with sick Soldiers; but
notwithstanding all these Remonstrances, he would not retire from thence till
he had given the necessary Orders, according to his first intention. From
thence he went to Calais, where he had scarce been a few Hours, but he began to
feel the direful effects of the contagious Air, which, as it was believed, he
had taken at Mardick.

To be short, he was seized with a most dangerous Fever, which he striving to
conceal the first two days, he was on the fourth day judged to be past remedy.
It is impossible to find Words suitable to the Grief that appeared not only in
the whole Court, but in the Countenance of the People; neither ought the Tears
which were shed so plentifully upon this occasion, to be looked upon as the
effects of a feigned Zeal, as it often happens on such like occasions in some
Countries, where the Subjects are forced to appear far different from what they
are, and hide their satisfaction under the mask of a pretended grief; no, these
were the true Interpreters of their Hearts, every one being in fear of losing
so good a King and Master. The Queen Mother who loved him most tenderly, and
who saw her self in danger of losing her main support, did not stir from his
Bed side day or night. In the height of his illness he would several times
endeavor to comfort her, but this tenderness of the Son only served to make
more lively impressions of sorrow in the Mother.

Some at Court having heard much discourse of a certain famous Physician then
living at Abbeville, he was sent for. After he had examined the King's
Distemper, he told them, that in the condition he was at present, nothing but
an Emetick could save his Life. The Word Emetick made them all tremble for
fear, this Remedy in those days being looked upon as new and not well approved
of, and consequently considered as extremely dangerous, which made it to be
debated for a considerable time, whether it was fit to be given to the King or
not, especially since his Physicians, jealous of him that had prescribed the
Remedy, opposed it with all their might. But the King having absolutely
resigned himself to the disposal of God Almighty, expected with an
extraordinary composure of mind the issue of his Distemper, without the least
signs of being dissatisfied with his destiny, which was likely to snatch him
away in the very flower of his Age. Before he took the Vomit he ordered all the
chief Men of his Court to be admitted into his Bedchamber, where having with a
composed and undaunted Countenance taking his last farewell of them, he asked
for the Glass which contained the Emetick, and took off the whole Dose at one
Draught. After two Hours the Emetick. began to work so successfully, and to
evacuate such a quantity of the Morbifick matter, that there began to be some
hopes of his recovery. And the King having taken another Dose which performed
its Operation with better success than before, he was judged to be past danger,
to the infinite satisfaction of the whole Kingdom; the rejoycings made upon
this occasion, being in all Respects answerable to the Affliction caused by his
illness; for, besides that the French have naturally a most profound veneration
for their Kings, the generality of his Subjects had conceived such an
extraordinary esteem of his noble Qualities, that it is impossible to express
the Affection they bore to his Person.

After his recovery it was judged advisable to choose a Consort; hitherto the
Queen Mother for some particular Reasons would never consent to his Marriage;
but the whole Court having taken the Alarm at his late illness, it was resolved
on as a thing absolutely necessary for the prosperity of the Realm.

The Queen, who was altogether in the Interest of her Family, had a great
desire that the King should marry her Niece the Infanta of Spain, in hopes that
a good Correspondene and firm Union might be re-established betwixt these two
Crowns. The match was proposed to Don Antonio de Pimentel, who passed through
Paris as he was going to Madrid, after his return from his Embassy in Sueden;
but this proposition met with much more difficulty on the Spaniard's side, than
had been foreseen by the Queen. For the Infanta being an Heiress, the Spaniards
feared not without Reason, that if her Father should happen to die without Male
issue, their Monarchy would be swallowed up in the French, and that all those
Kingdoms which compose the Spanish Empire, might, by this Marriage, in time,
become Provinces of France. The rest of Europe being possessed with the same
fear, lest by the Union of these two most Potent Empires, they should scarce be
able to withstand their joint Forces; all the other Princes, by improving the
jealousy of the Spaniards, secretly employed all their Interest to thwart this
Marriage.

The Queen, to remove all Obstables, offered that the King should Solemnly
renounce the Succession to Spain, but the Spaniards could not swallow the bait,
being well satisfied, that it was in his power to Absolve himself whenever he
thought fit, of so unjust and forced a Renunciation; besides that it was not in
his power to dispose of the Inheritance of such Children as should be begotten
betwixt them; And lastly, considering that Princes generally measure the
Justice of their Pretentions by the length of the Sword, they looked upon this
precaution as frivolous and of no effect. These considerations made the Success
of this Marriage very dubious, which hung thus in suspense for two Years, till
at last it began to be discoursed at Court, that the King was to Marry the
Princess of Savoy, whose Picture being presented to him, he took such liking to
it; that he resolved to take a journey to Lions, to see her in Person.

The Queen was overjoyed at this Journey, in hopes that her Brother would once
more consider of the matter, and when he found himself in danger of missing
this opportunity, to show henceforward as much inclination for the match as he
had been opposite to it before. Neither did she find her self frustrated in her
hopes, her wish being accomplished when she expected it least.

The Spaniards had during this War, which lasted four and twenty Years,
sustained great losses, they had been vanquished in six Field Fights, and three
Sea Engagements; besides, that they had lost above fifty places of note, and
the whole Kingdom of Portugal; not to mention our Conquests in Germany, and
those of our Allies, together with the many Encounters, in most of which they
had been miserably beaten. By these so terrible and frequent misfortunes, the
Spanish Monarchy was reduced to so low an ebb, that to recover its strength, it
stood in absolute need of a Peace; and the People of Spain being quite
exhausted, cried aloud for it, and in terms so pressing, that the Council of
Spain being cured of its former Repugnancy, He Marries the Infanta Maria
Theresia, Eldest Daughter, to Philip IV. King of Spain.
thought it most advisable to send an Ambassador to offer the Infanta in
Marriage to the King.

It must be confessed, that none of these Obstacles which had hitherto retarded
the Marriage, were removed; but, it seems, the present Exigency was judged more
urgent than the danger that was to come; or perhaps, the Spaniards had raised
these difficulties, only with an Intention to try, whether thereby they might
obtain the better conditions of Peace. The Queen was so desirous of this Match,
that it was easy to read the satisfaction she received by the Arrival of the
Spanish Ambassador Pimentel with the Propositions, in her Face; the Articles
were very near the same which had been proposed by our Court, and every thing
being thus agreed, to the mutual satisfaction of both Parties, it was judged
convenient, that the Cardinal, and Don Lewis de Haro, the Chief Ministers of
State of both Crowns, should have an interview upon the Frontiers, to put the
finishing stroke to this great Work.

The Treaties being signed on both sides, Interview of the French and Spanish
Courts.
the French Court took a Progress to St. John de Luz, to meet the Infanta. The
King her Father had conducted her thither in Person, partly to pay the more
respect to our King, and partly to take this opportunity to see the Queen his
Sister. Nothing can be imagined more magnificent than this interview. Wherever
you turned your Eyes, June 6, 1660.
there was nothing to be seen but the Pomp and Luster of Precious Stones, Gold,
and Silver; every one there present striving to outdo the other in richness
and magnificent Apparel, with this remarkable difference, however, that the
behavior of the Spaniards appeared far short from what was to be observed in
our Court.

The Politicians, who are not so soon dazzled with the outward Luster of Things,
which are only invented to blind the Eyes of the Common People, made certain
Remarks at that time, upon the appearance of these two Courts, from whence they
drew certain Presages, and erected the Horoscope of both the Empires. Our King
was then about one and twenty years of Age, of a vigorous Constitution, Active,
Vigilant, all his Designs tending to Glorious Actions, whose principal care
was, to be always engaged in Affairs of State; his Court was composed of Men of
the first Rank, not inferior to any in Europe, either at the head of an Army,
or to manage the secrets of the Cabinet; besides which; there was among all
these Princes and other Persons of Quality not one, but what made it his chief
Ambition to serve him to the utmost of his Power, and to sacrifice his Life for
the Glory of his King, and the welfare of his Country. This Noble Emulation was
the happy forerunner of all the brave Actions, performed afterward under the
Conduct of so great a King, the more because France being a Kingdom abounding
in Riches and all other Things: Two Years Peace seemed to be sufficient to
repair its losses, and to make it more flourishing than before.

On the contrary, in the Spanish Court, there was not the same appearance of
Prosperity, but only the slender remainders of a State, that once, when in its
Splendor, had made so great a noise in the World. Their King was advanced in
Years, minding nothing so much as his rest. Most of the Grandees had scarce
been without the compass of the City of Madrid, and were so fond of their own
Interests, as to look with a very indifferent Eye upon that of the Public. His
Treasury was exhausted, and the Kingdom destitute both of good Troops, and
expert Generals; at least they had very few who had acquired any great
Reputation abroad, since the Prince of Conde, who by his Valor and Conduct,
had, for seven or eight Years upheld the tottering Fortune of that Crown, was
returned to his Duty, and came into France with all those brave French
Volunteers of his Party. Without calling to aid the assistance of the Stars, it
was no very difficult task to foretell, in making a due comparison betwixt these
two Crowns, that one in all likelihood, would lay the foundation of her
greatness upon the ruins of the other.

After the Marriage of the King with the Infanta, At St. John de Luz, June 9th,
1660.
every thing was prepairing for our return to Paris. All along the Road she was
received by the King's Order with all the demonstrations of Honor and Respect;
but the Triumphs in the Provinces through which they passed, were only the
forerunners of what they were to see in the City of Paris, where every thing
was prepared with an incredible Magnificence, for the reception of their new
Queen, thereby to raise in her, at the beginning of her Reign, a high esteem of
the Power and Riches of a Kingdom, which a Foreign War of thirty Years, and the
Intestine broils of six Years, had not been able to drain of its Wealth. The
King and Queen make their Entry in Paris Aug. 26, 1660.
Since the first beginning of this Monarchy there never appeared a more
glorious day in France. The Streets through which they passed were covered with
rich Tapestries, the Gates adorned with Greens and Flowers, the Windows and
Balconies on both sides with the finest Carpets; in the Squares and
Marketplaces were erected Triumphal Arches beautified, with Statues and
Paintings, not inferior to what the old Rome could have produced, when at the
highest pitch of its Glory. Besides this, there was an incredible number of
people flocked hither from all parts of Europe, ranged on both sides of the
Streets, upon the Scaffolds that were built for that purpose before the Houses,
all which together made up so glorious a Show, as is easier to be imagined than
described: All the Princes and other persons of Quality had spared no cost, not
only in their own Apparel, but also in their Equipages and Servants, to the
highest degree of profusion.

The Queen appeared in a Chariot, the King with all the Lords of his Court on
Horseback, in an Equipage so magnificent, that nothing was ever seen or heard
of which bore the least comparison to this glorious Cavalcade. It was computed
that the Charges bestowed on this occasion by particular Persons, amounted to
ten Millions of Livres, every one striving to raise his Fortune, by giving the
King the most ample Proofs of their Zeal for his Honor and Service. They were
at a great distance met by the Acclamations of the People, who wished the King
a long and prosperous Reign. As they passed through the Streets, the Eyes of all
the Spectators were fixed upon him, so that it might be truly said, they had no
Eyes but for him; and scarce had he passed by in one place, but the People run
round about to meet him again, and to see him as often as possibly they could.
Others may boast what they will of Honors, these Superficial Ceremonies cannot
come in the least in competition with those hearty wishes and vows which the
People sent after him as he passed through the City; it being certain, that every
one had so a real esteem and affection for his Person, being prepossessed with
this opinion, That one day he would be one of the greatest Princes that ever
mounted the French Throne. Neither was it long before they were sufficiently
convinced, that they had not been unfortunate in their guess, when the King
began to take the Reins of the Government into his own Hands, and to manage the
State Affairs by his own Conduct, after the Death of Cardinal Mazarin, who did
not survive the conclusion of the Peace longer than ten Months.

This great Minister of State died when he was risen to the Pinnacle of his
Glory; Cardinal Mazarin died March 9, 1661.
happy in that he had Triumphed both over his own, and the Enemies of the
State; and more happy still, in that he had forced the first to acknowledge his
great Deserts, and the others to restore Peace to the Kingdom, in a manner as
glorious to himself, as it was beneficial to the State.

AN ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS the GREAT. LIB. II.
BY the Death of the Cardinal Things were left in such confusion, that, The
King takes the Administration of the Government into his own Hands.
notwithstanding the extraordinary Idea the people had conceived of the King's
great Ability, they could scarce imagine, that a Prince then hardly two and
twenty years old, would venture to take upon himself so heavy a burden, or if
he did, it would scarce be possible for him to bear it; but they were soon
convinced of their mistake; for the King, in four or five Years time settled the
Government upon so firm a Basis, that for above these thirty Years past, he has
governed the Kingdom in great Tranquillity, without the assistance of a Chief
Minister, has been Victorious over his Enemies, and restored Prosperity to the
Kingdom; a convincing instance, that a Man may sometimes be Master of his own
Fortune; at least, thus much is certain, that Fortune will not be of long
continuance, if not upheld and managed by a dextrous Hand.

The first thing he did was to regulate his time, and to prescribe himself
certain Rules and Maxims of State, gathered partly from the most famous Princes
in former Ages, partly from the Advice of the most quick-sighted of his
Council. He was so far from being checked in his Glorious designs, by the
fatigues that must needs attend the management of public Affairs, that on the
contrary, these served only for a better relish of the Enjoyment of his
Pleasures: There was never a day but he employed five or six Hours with his
Ministers, who were to give him an exact account of every particular
transaction that passed in the Government. He gave constantly once or twice a
Week Audience to every Body, was present at all the Councils, and if any thing
of great moment was to be debated there, he would retire into his Closet, to
ruminate so long upon the matter, till he had chosen what he judged most
advisable to be done.

But notwithstanding his constant application to business, it is not to be
imagined, His Divertisements.
that he renounced the enjoyment of his pleasures: The heavier the burden of
public Affairs laid upon his Shoulders, the more requisite it was, to be
relieved by some pleasant intervals. The strength both of our Spirit and Body
is not inexhaustible, but limited within certain bounds, which if
transgressed, leave us destitute and void of Vigor. At the beginning of his
Reign there were always Rejoycings, Feastings, Balls, Carousels, and Running at
the Ring at Court; this young Prince taking an extraordinary delight to pass
his spare time in such noble Exercises and Divertisements, as have been always
accounted to belong to Princes, to dazzle the Eyes of the People who are
extremely taken with these Things, and commonly judge of the Power of the
Prince, by these outward appearances of Grandeur. Never any Prince understood
better how to manage this point to his own Advantage, and how to make the Lusre
of the Throne appear more Glorious in the Eyes of the People.

It must be confessed, that his Court has always been the public School of
Politeness and Magnificence, notwithstanding which, as his chief delight has
been all his life time, in managing his glorious Designs, in order to bring
them to a happy issue, so his Divertisements were never enticeing enough to
him, to make him neglect the management of Public Affairs: And, as young as he
was, when he took the Administration of the Government into his own Hands, he
showed as much Eagerness and Assiduity, in Reforming the Disorders that were
crept into the Government, as he did for his Pleasures. Happy Prince! who
remains Master of his Pleasures, who is not so intoxicated with his Diversions,
but that he can make use of, and leave them, whenever he pleases! He who makes
himself a Slave to his Pleasures, in lieu of enjoying those honorable
Recreations which were invented for the Relaxation of our Minds and Bodies,
finds himself insensibly entangl'd by a Charm sufficient to corrupt all his
generous Inclinations.

Among other Abuses that were crept into the Government, He re-establishes good
Order in the Treasury.
the Mis-management of the King's Revenues, as it was most likely to draw after
it very fatal Consequences, so it wanted a speedy Redress; these being the
Nerves of the State, which, if defective in their Function, the whole Body
remains without Motion, and Vigor. There had been, for fifteen or sixteen
Years last past, prodigious Sums raised in the Kingdom; notwithstanding which,
the Government was over-charg'd with Debts, the People exhausted with Taxes,
the King's Revenues anticipated, there being but a slender Share left for his
present Use: Besides, that he owed to the Bankers above Thirty Millions of
Livres.

It must be confessed, that besides the ordinary Charges, there had been an
absolute Necessity of keeping five Armies on foot at a time; and the Civil War
required more than ordinary Charges, to satisfy the greediness of the Great
ones, who for the greatest part put their Services and Interests to sale to
those that bid most. This was nevertheless not the Principal cause of these
Disorders; the true source of this evil was to be looked for among the Managers
and Farmers of the King's Revenues, who, keeping the rest from the knowledge of
the true value of them, Farmed them at half or a fourth part of what they were
worth; besides that, if they were to advance any Money before it was due, to
supply the present Exigency of the State, they were sure to make their own
Market, at so dear a Rate, that it has been computed, that sometimes out of a
Million of Livres of the King's ordinary Revenue, there was not brought above
two or three hundred thousand into the Exchequer.

These Extortions had been constantly practiced against the King during his
Minority, partly by the connivence of those who had the management of it, and
consequently a share in the Booty, partly by the pressing necessity of the
State, at a time, when standing daily in need of the assistance of Monied Men,
it was not judged seasonable to dive too far into this Mystery of iniquity,
till after the Peace, when there might be sufficient opportunity to remedy
these abuses. But the Sur Intendant, or Overseer-General of the King's Revenues
was more mindful of his own pleasures than this trust. Yet was not this the
only cause of those Disasters which befell him afterward; there were several
other matters of complaint, of the greatest consequence, exhibited against him,
which deserved severe Punishment, for he had caused a Seat beloning to him to
be Fortified, without having demanded or obtained leave for so doing; and by
the profusion of great Sums, made himself Friends, and entered into Cabals to
avoid punishment. But the King being resolved to strike at the root of the
Evil, caused him to be taken up and examined concerning such matters as were
alleged against him, whereof he was found guilty by his Judges. This bold
stroke managed with so much Prudence, kept all the rest in awe; the Cabal
vanished insensibly, and notwithstanding the vast sums the Sur Intendant had
bestowed among the Great ones, there was not one that durst appear in his
behalf. A convincing instance, that a Confederacy founded barely upon interest,
is soon dissolved, when the Wheel of Fortune changes, and takes away the
prospect of future Advantages.

The King having restored Tranquillity to the Kingdom, and being resolved to
introduce an absolute Reformation in the Treasury, chose for the management of
his Revenues, a Person well versed in business of this nature, of an active
Genius, John Baptist Colbert Secretary of State, Controuller-General of the
Exchequer, Chief Surveyor of the King's Buildings, and Manufacturies.
exact in his Accounts, and a Man of an unshaken Resolution, to do Juftice
without Partiality, and immovable to any thing that might in the least turn to
the disadvantage of the State. The Person I speak of, was John Baptist Colbert,
afterward Minister and Secretary of State, a Man of an extraordinary
Headpiece, and who had such an insight into the management of public Affairs,
that he gave innumerable Proofs of his great Capacity, whilst he sat at the
Helm.

For, by the Conduct and indefatigable Care of this Minister, Matters soon
appeared with quite another Face in the King's Treasury: The Revenues of the
Crown were Let to Farm, according to their true Value, without any respect to
Favor or Interest: The Salaries of the Officers were settled at a certain Rate:
Instead of those Officers, who, during the late Troublesome Times, had abused
their Commissions; and, under the pretext of their Titles, pillaged the
Country, and enriched themselves with the Spoils of the People, certain
Commissioners were appointed, to manage all Affairs of moment. A Change so
sudden, and unexpected, appeared like an Enchantment to the People, who were
afraid that many Years could not redress an Evil which had taken so firm Root
among the Courtiers; so that, by making due Reflections upon the Times past,
and comparing them with the present State of Affairs, they fansy'd themselves
to be transplanted into another Kingdom.

The King's Treasury was, at once, stored with Money; and a just Account being
made of the Extorsions and Frauds committed by the Managers of the Revenue, it
was found, that, instead of the King's being indebted to the Bankers and
Receivers, they owed him vast Sums. Their prodigious Riches, and most
magnificent Palaces, which they had built in all Parts of France; the Richness
of their Furnitures; the Extravagancy and Profuseness which were daily to be
seen in their Houses, and at their Tables; not to speak of many other Things,
which being so many Monuments of their Pride and Luxury, appeared as so many
Witnesses against them, were, without question, more than sufficient to convict
these People (born, for the most part, to no Fortune) of Extorsions and
Depredations. But the King being resolved to proceed against them in a Legal
Way, In December, 1661.
a Court of Justice was established by his Order, composed of certain Judges
chosen out of the several Parliaments of France, who were to take Cognizance of
all the Abuses committed in the Management of the King's Revenues; and to
punish the Guilty, according to the Heinousness of their Crimes.

Whilst they were busy in putting their Commission in Execution, there
happened an unforeseen Accident, which had been likely to have proved the
Source of a most cruel War; the Matter in question being, not about the
Possession of some Towns or Provinces, but how to defend the most ancient
Prerogative of the French Crown, attacked by the Spaniards, Precedence of the
French Crown.
in its most sensible Part. The finest Flower belonging to the French Crown,
is, the Precedence it enjoys above all the others: There is no Kingdom which
surpasses it in Riches, Power, and Number of People; and, in making a due
Comparison, it is evident, that the great Actions of all the other Kingdoms,
joined together, can scarce come in Competition with the glorious Exploits of
the French. For these Thirteen Ages last past, since the first Foundation of
this glorious Monarchy, the Scepter has never been devolved or surrendered into
the Hands of any Stranger: And such have been the Exploits performed by the
French Nation, in behalf of the True Religion, and maintaining the Liberty of
Europe, that Time will never be able to blot out the Memory of such glorious
Actions, nor the Praise and Acknowledgment due to such important Services. Who
knows, but that all Europe might, at this Day, have groaned under the Yoke of
the Califfs and Mahometans, if the Bravery of the French had not set Bounds to
their Conquering Arms, and put a Stop to the Moors and Mahometans, who, like a
violent Torrent, were overrunning the best part of Europe, when Charles Martel
put them to an entire Rout.

France has, at all Times, been the Sanctuary, and Place of Refuge for
distressed Princes; but especially for the Popes, who are beholden to the
Liberality of Pepin, and Charles the Great, for all those vast Possessions, of
which they are Sovereigns, in Italy. Charles the Great and Francis I. revived
Learning in Europe.
It is to France that all the Western Parts stand indebted, in respect of the
most useful Arts and Sciences; which being buried under the Ruins of Old Rome,
were revived by their Industry and Care.

These, The Croisades, and Conquest of Constantinople.
as well as many other glorious Actions, which have rendered this Kingdom one
of the most famous in the World, were the true Motives which, Time out of Mind,
had put this Crown in possession of that glorious Prerogative of Precedence
among other Kingdoms; which it enjoyed, without the least Opposition, for many
Ages; The first Dispute began in Venice, 1558.
there never appearing a Rival bold enough to dispute the Rank with it, till,
in the last Age, Philip II. then King of Spain, pretended to be its Competitor
in this Prerogative.

Spain was, at that time, risen to the very Pinnacle of its Glory; The Spaniards
were in possession of One Third Part of Europe, besides the Immense Riches of
the New World. It cannot be denied, Before 1017. Castile was only an Earldom.
The French made Henry, instead of his Brother Pieter the Cruel, a King; from
whom was descended that Princess who brought the Scepter into the Austrian
Family. At Venice, 1558. At Rome, 1564. In Poland, 1573.
but that their Power appeared most formidable, in those Days, to all Europe;
notwithstanding which, their Pretensions were looked upon as unjust, and
illgrounded, in most Christian Courts; considering that Spain could not, in the
least, come in Competition with France; both in respect of its Antiquity, or
Dignity; and, that Spain had such vast Obligations to France, that it could not
be otherwise than the highest piece of Ingratitude in the First, to pretend to
incroach upon the Rights and Prerogatives of the Last. These Considerations
were so prevailing, that Philip lost his Cause at Venice, at Rome, and in
Poland: And wherever the Spanish Ambassadors pretended to dispute the
Precedence, it always turned to their own Disadvantage, and our Satisfaction
and Glory. Notwithstanding they had met with so many Rubs upon this Account,
they never let slip any Opportunity to renew their Pretensions; till, at last,
our King obliged the King of Spain to make an express Renunciation of these
Pretensions, occasioned by a certain Rencounter which happened betwixt the
Count d' Estrades, and the Baron de Batteville, Ambassadors of the Crowns of
France and Spain, at the Public Entry of the Count de Brahe, the Suedish
Ambassador, in London.

The Count de Brahe was no sooner arrived in England, but the Spanish
Ambassador, The Precedence disputed by the Spaniards.
but the Spanish Ambassador, Batteville, caused it to be spread abroad, that,
to show all imaginable Respect to the Suedish Ambassador, he intended to send
his Coaches and Domestics, to attend him at his Public Entry. The Count d'
Estrades had got timely notice of the Matter; but considering that the
Predecessor of the Count de Batteville, Alfonso de Cardenas, a Person of
extraordinary Merits and Understanding, had never made the least Motion of this
kind, during his Residence at the English Court, he looked upon it only as a
flying Rumor, or, at the most, as some Rhodomontado of the Domestics of the
Count de Batteville; not imagining, in the least, that it had been contrived on
purpose, by the Ambassador, to be a Forerunner of his intended Design: For
which Reason, he sent his Coaches and Attendants to meet the Ambassador,
without any other Guard than his own Domestics, and without taking the least
Pre-caution against any Assault.

But no sooner did the Coaches of the French Ambassador appear at the Public
Entry, October. 10. 1661.
but they were surrounded by many Soldiers, and others, to the Number of 2000,
headed by the Domestics of the Spanish Ambassador, who furiously fell upon the
Count d' Estrades his Attendants: These defended themselves as well as they
could, for some Time; but being overpowered by the Spanish Party, were forced
to leave the Ambassador's Coaches to the Mercy of their Enemies; who, having
killed some of the Horses, and, consequently, prevented the Coaches from going
farther, Triumphantly, and with their Swords in Hand, accompanied the Suedish
Ambassador home. It was the most ridiculous Thing in the World, to see the
Spaniards, as they passed along the Streets, to make so many Huzzah's; there
being scarce a Man of good Sense there present, that could forbear laughing at
the Vanity of these Imaginary Bravo's, who, by their extravagant Cries, and
other Expressions of Joy, would have made the World believe, that they had
triumphed over France, and all its Forces; and had wrested out of the Hands of
the French the so long disputed Precedence, by killing two or three Horses, and
as many of the Domestics of the Count d' Estrades.

But, as all the World stood amazed at the Vanity of this Enterprise, so the
French stood in Expectation to see how this Action of the Count Batteville
would be taken at the Spanish Court; He had been everal imes Ambassador, and
Governor of St. Sebastian.
easily imagining that this Bravado was not an Invention of his own, as being a
Man of better Understanding, and too well versed in Affairs of this nature,
than to signalize himself, without express Orders from Court, by a Zeal so
indiscreet, as must needs expose the King, his Master, to this Nonplus, either
to take a gross Affront, in disowning what his Minister had done, and to
declare him to have been in the wrong, to contest with the French Ambassador,
for the Precedence; or else, to see himself again entangl'd in a War, which, in
all likelihood, must prove fatal to him, at a Time, when he knew himself to be
in a worse Condition than ever to sustain it. On the other hand, the King of
Spain's Health, as well as the present State of the Kingdom, being in a
declining Condition, exhausted of Money, and destitute of good Forces, there
seemed to be no likelihood, that Spain, after the late conclusion of a Peace,
so much desired on their side, and so dearly bought, should be so forward to
break it, on the account of a punctilio of Precedence; especially, since
hitherto, By Policy in Poland, 1573. By threats at Rome, 1564.
the Spaniards had rather been inclined to surprise the French in this point,
by some State-trick or other, or to try whether they could hector them out of
their Right by threats; but never were come to such extremities, even when
engaged with one another in War, and when that Monarchy was arrived at the
highest pitch of its greatness.

But howsoever it be, this seemed to be the last effort the Spaniards intended
to make toward their pretended Precedence; This Enterprise of the Count of
Batteville having given sufficient opportunity for all the World to be
convinced, that as this undertaking of the Spaniards savored very much of
Vanity, so the French had all the reason in the World on their side to maintain
a just prerogative they enjoyed for so many Ages.

The King of France had no sooner received Intelligence of what had happened
upon this occasion in London, George de Aubusson Archbishop of Ambrun, and
Bishop of Metz.
but he sent immediate Orders to the Archbishop of Ambrun, then his Ambassador
in Madrid, to demand satisfaction for what was past, and in case of refusal, to
leave that Court and to return into France. It is a customary thing with the
Council of Spain, to conclude upon nothing, even of the least moment, without
many tergiversations and delays; whether it it be, that they look upon it as a
Maxim of State, whereby to tire out those that make their Applications to them,
and consequently to make them more pliable; or whether it be only a Custom,
proceeding more from their Natural Inclination, than any Mystery of State, I
will not pretend to determine: Thus much is certain, that as soon as the
Archbishop of Ambrun demanded satisfaction in the King his Master's Name, the
King of Spain promised to make due reparation to the King of France, his
Son-in-Law, and that he would recall the Count de Batteville, his Ambassador,
out of England. This was a fair step toward the demanded satisfaction, but not
altogether sufficient to repair the affront given upon so extraordinary an
occasion; the Chastisement intended against the Spanish Ambassador, might give
some satisfaction for what was passed, but did not remove the main Obstacle; it
being more than probable that the same quarrel might be soon revived, if the
Catholic King persisted in his Pretensions concerning the Precedence.

Most of the other Princes of Europe did underhand edge on the Spanish Court
not to part with their pretended Prerogative, it being natural for Princes to
be jealous of one another in so nice a point as this, which the French Kings
had enjoyed time out of mind; or, because they were not without apprehensions,
that, if a King so Young, Valiant, and Potent, should gain a point of so vast a
consequence without opposition, it might in all likelihood be a sufficient
encouragement for him, to make farther Encroachments upon other Princes
bordering upon France. It was for this reason that two or three Months were
elapsed, before the Council of Spain would take a final resolution in the
matter, there being not a few of them, who were of opinion, rather to hazard
all, than to part with this Prerogative. But the difficulty was, by what means
it was to be maintained against the King, without exposing the Kingdom of Spain
to utter destruction, so that at last it was found expedient for the King of
Spain to engage his Word, that the Marquis de la Fuenta, nominated to go
Ambassador from that Court to France, should, in his first Audience, give
absolute satisfaction to his most Christian Majesty, both in respect of what
was passed, and for the time to come.

To add to the Solemnity of this Audience, The King of Spain Renounces the
Precedence, March 24, 1662.
and to have a considerable number of Illustrious Witnesses present, who might
testify to the World, what they had heard the Spanish Ambassador say upon
this occasion, the King had invited all the Foreign Ministers, who all
appeared, to the number of thirty; they were placed on the right side of the
Royal Throne, as were on the left the Princes of the Blood, the Ministers of
State, and other Officers of the Court. In the presence of this August and
Noble Assembly, the Spanish Ambassador told the King, That the King of Spain
his Master, had been extremely dissatisfied at what had happened in London on
the 10th of October, 1661. That so soon as he had notice of it he recalled the
Baron de Batteville, with express Orders to return forthwith into Spain, where
he intended to give him such severe Proofs of his displeasure, as so
extravagant an undertaking did deserve: That he had sent Orders to all his
Ambassadors abroad, not to appear in any public Ceremonies, where there might
be the least likelihood of contest on the account of this Precedence, and not
to stand in competition for the future upon that score, with the Ambassadors
and other Ministers of his most Christian Majesty.

The four French Secretaries of State there present, ordered an Instrument in
Writing to be drawn up, containing the same Words of this Declaration, to serve
in time to come, as a lasting Monument to Posterity, of the Glorious success of
so memorable a Transaction, which, for some time, had kept all Europe in
suspense, and for these hundred Years last past had made so much noise in the
World, between the two most Potent Houses of Europe, who being like the Primum
Mobile of all the rest, put an end to that famous Contest, which a most
glorious Emulation had raised betwixt them.

Scarce was this difference composed, August 20, 1662.
but there arose another betwixt the Pope and the King, occasioned by an
Assault made upon the Duke de Croqui, his Majesty's Ambassador at the Court of
Rome. The Affront put upon the Ambassador was so gross, that the like has
scarce ever been heard of among civilized Nations, but it must also be
confessed, that the History of all former Ages scarce can furnish us with an
Example, where the Law of Nations has been more gloriously vindicated than upon
this occasion, and where those who had impudence enough to violate it, have
been more severely chastised.

Two or three unknown Persons being pursued by ten Soldiers of the Pope's
Guard, Alexander VII.
had sought for shelter in the Stables belonging to the Palace of Farnese where
the said French Ambassador resided at that time. Some of his Domestics being
come out at the noise and clashing of the Swords, had driven the Soldiers
back, who being reinforced with some of their Comerades, in their turn beat the
Ambassadour's Attendance, whom they pursued, and forced to retreat within the
very Gates of the Palace-The Duke, in the mean while was come home through
another Gate, having understood the occasion of the tumult, ordered his
Servants immediately to desist, and to withdraw within the Palace. This
precaution, which he supposed might be a fit means to appease the Insolence of
the Soldiers, served only to augment it; for, in a little while after, he saw
them marching with Drums beating, and their Officers at the head of them
toward the Palace, which they invested on all sides, putting Corpse de Guards
on all the Avenues leading to it; and not contented with this, they committed
other most enormous outrages, discharging their Fusees charged with Ball, for
an Hour together, at the Gates and Windows of the Palace, not sparing even the
Ambassadour's Person, who came out into a Balcony, to see what passed among
them. He was no sooner obliged to retire from thence, but they attacked the
Ambassadrice, who being ignorant of what had passed near her Palace, was
returning home in her Coach. She was in no small danger of having been
assassinated by several Musket Bullets that passed near her, but she had the
good Fortune to escape without any other hurt than what was occasioned by the
fright; one of her Pages being killed just by her Coach side, and one of the
Footmen sorely wounded. At the same time the Shirri's, who never make use of
Fire-Armes, followed closely the Footsteeps of the Soldiers, knocking down all
the French Men they met with in the Streets of Rome; and in all likelihood this
Tragedy would have ended in a General Massacre of the French, if the People of
Rome had not testified their aversion to such barbarous Actions, and made loud
exclamations against the Author, as well as the Executioners of this bloody
Tragedy.

If the Government had not been concerned in this Action of the Soldiery, it
had been but a piece both of Justice and Prudence to have given some public
and real Demonstrations of their dislike, by inflicting a prompt and most
rigorous punishment upon these Insolent Offenders; but so far were they from
calling them to a severe acceunt, that they gave opportunity to the
Ringleaders, and such others as were known to have been most concerned in the
slaughter of the French, to slip away, eight or nine days being passed before
they made an enquiry after those Assassins. To heap injuries upon injuries, the
Cardinal Imperiale, Governor of Rome, some time after blocked up a fresh the
Palace of Farnese, under pretext, that it had been taken notice of, that the
Ambassador, ever since the last affront was offered, did appear abroad with a
more numorous Attendance than he had been used to do before; so that the Duke
seeing himself treated with so much Indignity, left Rome, and retired to a
place belonging to the Great Duke of Tuscany.

The News of a thing so exterordinary being communicated to most Courts of
Europe, there were very few who could persuade themselves, that the Court of
Rome could be so much overseen, as to come to those extremities, without great
provocation given on the Ambassadour's side. But all what could be laid to his
Charge, amounted to no more, than that he had delayed for some days to pay the
first Visit to some of the Pope's Kindred, who were not of the Ecclesiastical
Order, the Duke being willing to receive first the King's Instructions,
concerning a Punctilio which hitherto remained undecided. For the rest, they
pretended to have great cause of complaint against the Duke, who, as they
alleged, peing of a haughty temper, had dissuaded the King from allowing
yearly pensions to these new Princes: And this being questionless the main
cause of their hatred, was also the true occasion of the quarrel; for, it was
easy to be perceived, that upon all occasions, they showed much Indifferency
not only to the Ambassador, but also to the French Nation in general, which at
last broke out into an open Enmity. For considerable time there had scarce
passed a day, but some sparks of that devouring Fire, which lay couched under
the Ashes, did appear, which at last, broke out in a Flame, with the more noise
and violence. The Offense, (if any had been given) was scarce worth taking
notice of; but supposing it had been much greater, the Revenge appeared so
Cruel in the Eyes of all the World, that notwithstanding all the endeavors
used by the Pope to engage the Crown of Spain in the quarrel, neither that
King, nor any other Prince, showed the least Inclination to espouse it, unless
it were to dispose the Pope to give absolute satisfaction to the King.

Spain had indeed no reason to assist the Pope's Kindred, it was rather for the
Interest of that Crown to clip a little their Wings, and to make them show more
respect to their more Potent Neighbors; besides, it concerned them very
nearly, to avoid all occasions of drawing the French Arms into Italy. Another
advantage which that Crown proposed to its self, by abandoning the Pope's
Interest at this time, and consequently to put him under a necessity of giving
due satisfaction to the King, was, that they did not question thereby to kindle
an irreconcilable hatred betwixt them, which being continued in the Family of
the Chigi's, would, in all probability prove as mischievous to the French
Interest, as it would be profitable to them in the next Conclave. It is true,
they could not but look with a jealous Eye upon the Glory which the King was
likely to reap from the said satisfaction; but considering on the other Hand,
that this augmentation of his Power would also serve for fuel to kindle
jealousy in the rest of the Princes of Europe; the Council of Spain judged it
most for their Interest to stand Neuter, and to endeavor, by all means, to
persuade the Pope to put an end to the difference, without coming to an open
rupture.

But Pope Alexander VII was Deaf to their Counsels. Before his Elevation to the
Papal Dignity he had led a very Austere Life, showing not the least inclination
for his Kindred, or any other Worldly Pleasures, for which reason he used
always to have a Coffin set in his Bedchamber, to put him in mind of
Mortality; but being by his Elevation arrived to the highest pitch of his
hopes, he appeared quite different from what he had been before; he affected an
extraordinary magnificence of his Apparel, his Furnitures and Equipages were
very sumptuous, no body more nice and delicate in his Table than himself; and
he showed so much tenderness for his Kindred, that he heaped upon them
prodigious Riches. So true it is, that when those who have led an Austere Life,
are once made sensible of the Pleasures and Vanities of the World, they are
sure to make themselves amends for what they have lost before.

The false Idea the Pope had conceived of his own Power and Strength, the
strong Inclination he had for his Family, and the Antipathy he bore to France,
made him resolve at last, either to refuse the demanded satisfaction to France,
or at least, to put it off by various delays, as long as possible could be
done, in hopes that by some favorable juncture or other, the Face of Affairs
might be changed in Europe.

It is unquestionable, that the King had all the reason in the World to be
dissatisfied with the Pope, and that he did not want means to do himself
justice for the injuries received at his Hands; but being willing to show a
more than Filial respect to the Holy See, he suspended his just resentment for
a whole twelve Month. For, if on one side, the consideration of so gross an
affront provoked him to Revenge; on the other Hand, the miseries and
inconveniences which attend a War to be waged in a far distant Country,
against the common Father of the Faithful, kept his resolution in suspense. It
is not to be denied, but that without reproach to himself, he could scarce
delay his Vengeance, especially, since it might be done without the least
danger to his Affairs; but it was also to be considered that as the danger was
inconsiderable, so there was but little Honor to be gotten by the Victory. But
being at last fuly convinced, that the Court of Rome took advantage from these
delays to abuse his patience, he ordered his Troops to march to wards Italy,
and having seized uyon Avignon, every thing was put in a readiness to pass the
Alps.

It was then that the Pope thought it high time to open his Eyes, and that it
was for his Interest to make a Virtue of Necessity, and to prefer an Inglorious
Peace, before a War, which, in all human appearance, must prove very successful
to him. His Kindred themselves persuaded him to take the surest measures, as
judging it more for their Intrest, to turn the Money raised by the Pope for the
use of the War, their own use, than to render themselves Obnoxious, by making
themselves instrumental in troubling the Peace of Italy, and to betray their
Vanity to the World, in being so presumptuous, as to measure their Power with
the greatest King of Christendom. A Treaty therefore being agreed upon to be
set on Foot at Pisa, (the King refusing to accept of Rome for the place of
Treaty) it was concluded soon after, upon the following Articles.

That the Pope should be obliged to send the Cardinal Patroon, The Cardinal
Chigi.
in Quality of his Legate into France, to disown the whole Action of the Corsick
Guards.

That the Legate himself should make his Protestation before the King, that
neither he, The Pope obliged to give satisfaction for the Affrone put upon the
French Ambassador.
nor any of his Family had had the least Hand, in that attempt, and that for
the time to come, they would be ready to give ample demonstrations of their
Real Submission, and Fidelity to the King.

That his Holiness's Brother should be obliged to make the same protestation in
Writing, and to leave Rome, till such time that the Legate had given the
promised satisfaction to the King.

That the Cardinal Imperiale should likewise come in Person into France, to
justify himself, and to submit his Cause, if required, to the decision of the
King.

That the whole Corsick Nation should for the future be declared incapable of
serving in the Ecclesiastical State; and to brand with everlasting Infamy an
Action so Insolent, a Pyramid should be erected, just opposite to the Corpse de
Guard, in which should be Engraven the reason of their Banishment.

By Virtue of the same Treaty, the Dukes of Parma and Modena, besides several
other Roman Lords that were in the French Interest, obtained considerable
advantages, all which was to be attributed to the protection of the most Potent
King in Christendom, who thus obliged the Pope to give him the most ample
satisfaction that could be for the Affront put upon his Minister.

The Treaty was executed accordingly: July 3, 1664.
The Legate came into France; the Pyramid was Erected, and remained standing for
five Years after; 1667.
when by the intercession of Clement IX, the Successor of Pope Alexander VII,
the King was graciously pleased to order it to be broken down.

What could be more glorious at the very beginning of our King's Reign, than to
come off Triumphantly upon two so extraordinary occasions, without as much as
drawing a Sword? These were the mavelous effects of the King's growing
Reputation, which increasing more and more every day, had acquired a new
Luster, the Year before the conclusion of the Treaty of Pisa, by the possession
of Dunkirk, which was bought with much less charge than in all probability it
could have been taken.

After the taking of this place, we were, by Virtue of a Treaty concluded with
Oliver Cromwell, obliged to surrender it into his Hands. It was a very
unfortunate thing for us, to be forced to deliver the Key of our Kingdom into
the Hands of such Strangers, as we were sensible would not fail to lay hold of
all opportunities to trouble our repose. The King being sensible of this
inconveniency, had no sooner taken the Reins of the Government into his own
Hands, but he only watched for a favorable juncture, to send these dangerous
Neighbors back to their Island, and to incorporate the said place with the
rest of his Conquests.

Charles II. King of England, being lately re-established in his Throne, this
juncture seemed to be the most favorable in the World, to treat with him about
the Surrender of this place, at a time, when we were sensible that he was not
in a condition to be at the charge of maintaining a Fleet in the Port of
Dunkirk, or to provide the City with such a Garrison, as might be sufficient to
make a vigorous defense, in case of an Attack. Notwithstanding which, the
Negotiation advanced but slowly, or at least, not so well as we could have
wished. This was occasioned partly by the jealousy of our Neighbors, partly
by the reluctance which the King of England showed in parting with a place so
advantageous, both for its Strength and Situation. For it ought to be
considered, that Dunkirk was at that time, not the same little paultry Town it
was before the conclusion of the Pyrenean Peace, when it was taken and retaken
without any opposition, it being since made one of the most considerable places
in Europe, chiefly by the care of Cromwell, who had caused it to be strongly
Fortified, to serve upon an occasion, as a safe retreat to him and his Party,
or else, that the English might always be sure of a Gate, by which to enter
into the Heart of France at their own pleasure. Besides this, the Spaniards
making more advantageous offers than the French, and the Hollanders striving to
out-bid both, each Party having sufficient reasons to overbalance one
another: Dunkirk bought from the English.
It was looked upon as one of the most refined pieces of Policy in the French,
to have managed that grand Affair with so much dexterity, as to make themselves
Masters of a place of that importance, at the price of four Millions of Livres,
in spite of all the opposition of their jealous Neighbors. The King had no
sooner received the News that his Forces had taken possession of it, but he
went thither to give the necessary Orders for the accomplishing the
Fortifications of a place, which was of the highest consequence for the safety
of his Kingdom.

These several Affairs of the highest moment, though they took up much of the
King's time, who spared no labor nor care, till they were brought to a happy
issue; yet did this not so confine his Active Genius, but that at the same time
he applied his thoughts toward the re-establishment of the decayed Military
Discipline, and to find out suitable remedies against those abuses that were,
by degrees, crept into the Government. Lewis XIV Reestablishes the Military
Discipline.


Before the Conclusion of the late Peace, all sorts of licentiousness had been
practiced among the Soldiers, with Impunity, and the neglect of the due
observance of Military Discipline, had introduced such disorders both among the
Officers and Soldiers, that in all likelihood, it must have in time proved
fatal, not only to many private Persons, who extremely suffered under these
violences, but also dangerous to the State, if the King had not put a stop to
these enormities.

As he was sufficiently accquainted with the Natural Inclinations of Mankind,
to know that the most Valiant Men in the World, if not confined under certain
Rules and Discipline, must be more hurtful than profitable to the State, so he
took a firm resolution to re-establish among them such Laws, as founded upon a
Prudent severity, should be sufficient to keep them within their due bounds. As
he took effectual care that his Soldiers, whether in sickness or health,
should be provided with all things necessary for their subsistence, so he would
not allow any one to be exempted from the exact observation of these Rules; and
all the Employments in the Army from the highest to the lowest, being bestowed
upon such as had deserved well, in proportion to their Merits, there was a
strange alteration to be observed in the Army. For, the desire of Glory, the
Honor to please the King, the fear of Punishment, and the hopes of Reward;
this happy mixture, I say, of several Interests and Passions, made such
powerful impressions upon the minds of the Soldiery, that every one in his
Station, strove as much to outdo the other, in the just observance of his
Duty, as they formerly had been eager after Rapines, and negligent in
performing their Military Functions. Thus a good Order being re-established in
the Army, it may be said without boasting, that possibly, there scarce ever
appeared better disciplined Troops in the Field, than the French Armies under
the Reign of the present King.

After the conclusion of the Pyrenean Peace, the greatest part of the French
Forces were disbanded; nevertheless, as those that were kept in pay, were all
chosen Men, so the King took care to augment them from time to time, not only
to serve in his Garrisons, but also to have in readiness such a number of well
Disciplined Troops, as he judged sufficient to maintain his respect, both among
his Subjects and Neighbors. For, what real assurance can a Prince have of the
Fidelity of the one, and of the sincerity of the others, unless he be in a
condition to maintain his Authority by his Power?

The better to train up his Soldiers to the Wars, he ordered every Year
Encampments to be made in some place or other, where they performed all the
Exercises belonging either to Sieges or Battles, without Bloodshed. This was
looked upon as of so much consequence, that even in the most peaceable times it
was never discontinued, afterthey had once been convinced of its usefulness; it
being agreed on all Hands, that not any thing else contributed so much to the
inuring the Soldiery to the Fatigues of Wars, and consequently, to the
obtaining so many Victories in the following Years, as these Engagements,
Reviews, and Exercises, which kept the Armies under a constant good Discipline,
and trained up the young Officers as well as the Soldiers, to serve their
Apprenticeship at home in the Action of War.

Michael Francis le Tellier, Michael le Tellier Chancellor of France, had two
Sons, Michael Francis Marquis of Louvois, Secretary of State; and Charles
Maurice Archbishop and Duke of Rheims, Counselor of State, and Supervisor of
the Sorbonne.
Marquis of Louvois, Minister and Secretary of State, was the Person, whom
France, next to the King, stands indebted to, for the re-establishment of the
Military Discipline, and a good Order in the Army. It is unquestionable, that
never any Man living had a better insight into all Martial Affairs, whether in
the most exquisite advantages belonging to Fortifications, or in regard to the
raising and maintaining a great Army in the Field. He was a Person of a
mavelous Activity and Vigilance; as Firm, Resolute, and Bold in his
Enterprises, as Fortunate in the Success; and to be short, never any Minister
deserved better at the same time, both of his Prince and the State. He was
Eldest Son to Michael de Tellier Minister and Secretary of State, and
afterward Lord Chancellor of France, who rendered himself Famous by his
Prudence, Fidelity, and great Services under the King's Minority.

Neither did the King show less eagerness for settling the Administration of
Justice: He would give most particular marks of his Favor and Esteem to such
of the Judges as he knew to be proof against Corruption, crowning their Virtues
with Praises and Rewards; as, on the other Hand he despised those, who, having
purchased their Places at an excessive rate, made use of their Power to
satisfy their Avarice and Pride; these were sure to meet with deserved
punishment from his Hands, and to receive the rewards of their Treachery, in
making the Royal Authority a Cloak, where withal to cover their unjust
Proceedings. To banish for over from among his Subjects all vexatious Suits, or
at least, to retrench the extravagancy of litigious Persons, and superfluities
in the Law, which serve only to create and protract Suits, he caused a new
Codex, or Law-Book to be compiled, by the Advice of the most understanding
Lawyers in the Kingdom; and as he was not ignorant, that the best Laws are
useless, or at least, of little effect, unless those who are to put them in
execution, be careful in the observance of their duty; so he would frequently
take an account of their Transactions, and be always putting the Chancellor in
mind, to keep a strict Hand, and a watchful Eye over the Judges and
Magistrates, that they might not be remiss in their Duties to Administer
Justice, without partiality, and to punish the Transgressors, without respect
of Persons, especially in what-related to the maintaining of the public
Tranquillity.

To encourage the rest by his own Example, After the Death of the Chancellor
Seguier.
he kept the Great Seal in his own Hands near three Months; and though he would
sometimes Pardon such Trespasses as proceeded rather from passion or
misfortune, than any ill design, he never spared those who were found guilty of
disturbing the public Tranquillity; and above all, prosecuted with the utmost
severity, all such as were convicted of Dueling; for it having been judged
absolutely necessary for the public safety, that all manner of Duels should be
forbidden under pain of Death by the King, he looked upon any Act of Grace in
this kind, as prejudicial to the Royal Authority, and an unseasonable lenity,
as derogatory from the respect due to the Law, which made him take a firm
resolution to maintain its Force, by inflicting severe punishments upon the
Transgressors.

Neither was it long, before the happy effects of the King's firm Resolution
and Zeal for the impartial distribution of Justice appeared to the Eyes of all
the World, his Subjects being thereby insensibly brought into a habit of doing
well, and performing their Duty in their several stations. Hence it was, that
every one enjoyed the benefit of a Sweet and Charming Tranquillity under the
protection of the Laws, free from all fear, and the avarice of corrupted
Judges, and the oppressions of the Great ones, who, if they offered any
Violences, were sure to come to Condign Punishment. The surest way to prevent
Factions in a Kingdom, is certainly when the Prince by his Authority, keeps all
the several Orders that compose it within their bounds; for, the People being
thereby engaged to respect no other Authority so much as his own, this removes
all occasion and danger of Revolts.

What shall I say as to the most useful Arts and Sciences, which, without
contradiction, The King gives Encouragement to all manner of Arts.
flourished more than ever, under a Prince, who, as he had a true relish of
Things, so it was his greatest delight to heap Riches and Honors upon Persons
of extraordinary merits; knowing, that nothing turns more to the Honor of the
Prince, and benefit of the State, than to give due encouragement to liberal
Arts, he drew by his great Liberality into France, the most Excellent in all
Professions from all parts of Europe; with these Foreigners as well as Natives,
he filled up the several Academies, erected by his Order, for the improvement
of all manner of Sciences; of Painting, Carving, Architecture, and Music,
where these Great Masters and their Scholars strove by a Praiseworthy
Emulation, to outvie one another, and in their several Stations, to bring their
Pieces to the height of perfection.

The King, to improve the Talent of so many Excellent Masters, employed them in
making those rich Furnitures and other pieces, the like of which are not to be
met with in any other part, whether for the design, or the curiosity of the
Workmanship; he erected Noble Structures in several parts, but especially made
use of their skill in the Louvre, the Front of which is accounted one of the
finest pieces of Architecture in the World.

The Subjects encouraged by the Example of their Prince, began every where to
apply themselves to Building, especially in the City of Paris, which increased
every day by the Additions of many goodly Structures; so that in a few Years
the Streets of the City of Paris were made broader than before; the Crossways
were adorned with noble Fountains, the Channels and River side faced with
Freestone; and there was not a Street so mean, but there were to be seen some
neat Houses, built after a manner far different from what they had appeared
before. Vast numbers of Strangers, and other curious Persons came flocking from
all parts, to partake of the charming Enjoyments of Peace and Tranquillity in a
City, where there was great plenty of every thing requisite for the pleasure
and necessity of Human Life, even at the time of a general scarcity, the King
having by his own liberality and care, supplied their want, and reduced the
price of all Things to a reasonable rate.

But the City of Paris was not the only place that enjoyed the benefits of his
happy Reign; He caused Wheat to be distr^^ted at t^ Louvre, 1662.
the other Provinces of France had also their share in the public Felicity,
the King, by affording all imaginable encouragement to Commerce, made the whole
Country overflow with Riches. It is beyond all question, that the French could
not be ignorant what prodigious advantages must needs accrue by Commerce, to
such a Country as France, which being watered both by the Ocean and
Mediterranean, and irrigated by so many fair Rivers, seems to be the most
conveniently situated for Traffic of any in Europe; notwithstanding which, it
was observable, that all manner of Commerce had been neglected for a
considerable time; either because the Genius of the French Nation is more
enclinable to Warlike Exploits than Traffic, or because the Civil and Foreign
Wars, in which the Kingdom had been entangl'd for so many Years together, had
robed them of these advantages. But the King was not sparing in any thing,
which he believed might contribute to the re-establishment of Trade; in the
Seaports he made considerable abatements in his Customs; most of those that
were paid in the Rivers he took off; he gave all imaginable encouragement to
the Manufacturies of the Kingdom; he, at his own proper cost and charge,
employed a great number of Workmen to join the two Seas by a Canal, as well as
several Great Rivers, and to render many lesser Rivers Navigable; he
established a certain Council of Commerce, to be held in his Presence, by whose
Advice he created several Companies, who trafficking in all parts of the World,
rendered the Great Name of their Prince Glorious in far distant Countries.
Besides, that he granted them many Privileges, they were provided both with
Money and Ships by the King, to carry on the design, and never wanted necessary
Convoys to conduct them safely to the place whither they were bound.

It was upon the score of Commerce that an Expedition was undertaken against
the Coast of Barbary, The enterprise against Gigery, July 19, 1664.
it being certain, that it was not out of a motive of extending his Conquests
the King sent thither his Forces, but chiefly for the convenience of a Harbor,
from whence to annoy and bridle those Insolent Pirates, that are continually
disturbing the Trade on those Coasts. The success was at first answerable to
the design, they having made themselves Masters of Gigery, and,
notwithstanding, they were ill provided with Provision and Ammunition,
maintained themselves in the place three whole Months. But the number of the
Enemies increasing daily, and the Plague and Famine which at that time, October
31, 1664.
made great havoc on the Coast of Provence having retarded the Convoys
designed for their succor, they were at last forced to abandon the place, and
to return into France. This Expedition proved thus unfortunate in the end,
having been undertaken not without great charges, besides, that we lost some of
our best Troops, and received some disgrace.

But this misfortune was abundantly recompensed by the Honor the French had
acquired two or three Months before.

The Turks and Tartars having made a most powerful Eruption in Hungary, The
King sent succor to the Emperor.
and the German Emperor Leopold I. demanding Succors from our King, he sent
him six thousand chosen Men. These Troops had signalized themselves in many
Encounters, but more particularly in the Battle fought near St. Goddard.

Seven or eight thousand of the bravest among the Infidels having passed,
unperceived by the Christians, a River which parted both their Camps, charged
the right Wing of the last with such incredible fury that they made them give
way, without much opposition. In all human appearance the whole Christian Army
must have been put to an entire rout, if the French, who were in the left Wing,
had not come up very opportunely with the Turks, and like lightning charged
through them with so much bravery, that they put them in confusion, and made such
a slaughter among them, that five or six thousand remained dead upon the spot.
To be short, the Victory was complete; they brought off a great many Standards
and Colors, and sixteen pieces of Cannon, most of the abovementioned Turks
being either slain or drowned in the River. Those few that escaped by flight
put the whole Turkish Camp into such a consternation, that the Grand Vizier,
notwithstanding he had yet remaining with him an Army of above forty thousand
Men, in few days after, concluded a Truce with the Imperialists.

As the French succors had been of great consequence to the Emperor, The King's
protection of the Dutch against the Bishop of Munster, 1665.
so the protection which the King was pleased to afford to the Hollanders stood
them in no less stead, against Bernard Van Galen, then Bishop of Munster, a Man
of a turbulent Spirit, better qualified for a General than a Prelate.

For the King of England having declared War against them, had at the same time
stirred up the Bishop, who being a troublesome Neighbor to the Dutch, never
wanted pretensions, but only an opportunity to quarrel with them, being a Man
aspiring and bold to undertake any thing, and at that time when he was so well
provided with good Forces and other things requisite for such an undertaking.
The Hollanders had all the reason in the World to be surprised at this
unexpected rupture, as having lived for five Years in perfect Tranquillity, and
consequently disbanded their Troops, except such as served in Garrisons on
their Frontier places. The Bishop taking advantage from the ill State of their
Troops, made an irruption into their Territories, and overrun entirely one of
their Provinces, where he made himself Master of their Cities, and ravaged the
Countrywhere-ever he came, which struck such a consternation into the adjacent
Provinces, that it was feared, they would scarce have Courage enough to resist
his Victorious Arms. In this perplexity, having made their Addresses to our
King, he ordered six thousand Foot and two thousand Horse instantly to march to
their relief. Hitherto nothing had been able to put a stop to the Current of
the Conquests of the Bishop, but the terror of the Force of France had such a
Powerful influence over him, that he began to abate immediately of his
fierceness, and in less than three Months time, matters were brought to a
composition, by Virtue of which, he was obliged to disband his Troops, to
Surrender to the States all that he had taken, and restore to them their former
Tranquillity.

The Hollanders being by the Treaty of Cleves delivered from the fear of this
troublesome Enemy, The Dutch protected against the English, 1666.
they now applied themselves with all their might, to the prosecution of the
War against the English. The States General had, at the first beginning of the
War, solicited the King for succors against the English, or at least, his
Mediation for the composing of the differences betwixt them. The King at their
request sent a Solemn Embassy to London to offer his Mediation, which being
accepted of by the King of England, the Conferences were began in London. But
King Charles II. having happily suppressed some tumultuous Assemblies of the
Fanatic Party, which hitherto had kept matters in suspense, without expecting
the issue of this Negotiation, ordered his Fleet to put out to Sea in quest of
the Dutch, even in their Ports. Our King having all the reason in the World to
be dissatisfied with the King of England, entered into to a League offensive
with the States General.

Thus the War being kindled, 1665, 1666.
it broke out into so violent a Flame, that for two Summers successively, the
Seas betwixt the English and Flanders Coast, seemed to be all on Fire, there
being nothing to be heard of but slaughter, and the thundering of Cannons. In
these several most bloody Engagements, neither party could boast of any real
advantage over the other, the Victory inclining one time on one, and at another
on the other side; both parties at the same time claiming the Honor of the
Victory, and dissembling their losses. The Hollanders, notwithstanding they
much flattered themselves with the Honor they believed to have gained against
their Enemies, yet were very desirous of Peace, these Demi-triumphs, and the
loss of so many brave Seamen being but a slender recompense for the damage they
received in the interruption of their Commerce. The English irritated more by
shame than the consideration of their losses, left no Stone unturned to break
this Alliance, and to draw our King from the Dutch Interest; but in vain, for
the King protesting he would not abandon his Allies, a Peace was soon after
concluded at Breda, July 31, 1667.
which was very advantageous to the States.

About two Months before the conclusion of this Treaty, the King was entered
Flanders with a considerable Force, to do himself Justice on the just
Pretensions of the Queen: Her right was so unquestionable on the Duchy of
Brabant and its Dependencies, upon part of Gueldres, upon Luxemburgh, the
Franche Comte, Mons, Antwerp, Cambray, Malines, Limbourg, Namur, and some other
places on the Meuse, that the King having taken the Advice of the most Famous
Lawyers of the Low Countries, upon the point in question, under borrowed Names,
they were unanimously of opinion, that her Right was indisputable. According to
the Custom of these. Provinces, it is an Established Law, that the Children
begotten in the first Marriage become Heirs to the Possessions of their
Parents, immediately after the Decease of one of them. the Survivor enjoying
only the benefit of them during Life.

Philip IV. King of Spain had by Isabella his first Spouse, only two Children,
to wit, Prince Balthazar.
one Son, and one Daughter, since Queen of France, who surviving the Prince,
these Provinces by right of Succession, pursuant to the Custom of the Country,
which regulates as well the right of Succession in respect to Sovereigns, as
private Persons, were devolved to her.

It must be confessed, that, at the time of her Marriage, they had taken this
precaution, to make her renounce all her Rights and Pretensions to those
Provinces; but besides, the Act it self was so defective in Form, and full of
Nullities, that according to the judgment of the most understanding and
unbiased Persons, it could not pass for a Legal Act.

She renounces all her Rights and Pretensions, without naming any in
particular. She therefore resgn'd that which she knew not, and what she had not
had the opportunity to examine, of what moment it was she was going to do, and
this when she was under Age, rather out of a Motive of Obedience, than free
Choice. And to this the Authority of a Father and King, the want of Experience
and Knowledge of her own Interest, the Passion she had for the King's Person,
and the prospect of having for her Spouse, one of the handsomest and greatest
Princes of Europe; All these, if taken together, what wonder is it, if the
Infanta had not constancy enough to refuse the Request of the King her Father,
and blindly to follow his Dictates.

Thus they had made her renounce to the Succession of the Empire of the Indies,
of the Kingdoms of Castile, and Arragon, of Sicily, and Naples, Sardinia, and
Majorca, to the Duchy of Milan, and the Sovereignty of nine Provinces in the
Low Countries; I say to the hopes, forasmuch as her Brother was alive, but so
infirm, that it was supposed he could not live very long.

Another consideration, Charles II. King of Spain.
which is of no slight moment, is, that this Renunciation was made without
allowing her any other equivalent, Golden Crown 8 s. 6 d. Sterling.
except five hundred thousand Golden Crown pieces, which indeed, was owing to
her before on the account of her Mothers Dowry. Could any thing be more
injuriously contrived than this? Another thing that makes this void and of no
effect is, that this Equivalent (supposing it should be termed so) was never
paid to her, neither in her Father's life time, nor after his Death; nay, there
was no tender made of it within the time limited in the Act; without which, it
plainly appears, that the Queen did not make this Renunciation, but in
consideration of the said sum, to be paid at the terms, mentioned in the
Contract. Who is so ignorant as not to understand, that in all conditional
Contracts their validity depends on the accomplishment of the Conditions
therein contained?

Another Capital defect in this Act is, that it was not corroborated by these
circumstances, which in a case of that moment, are prescribed by the Laws. As
the order of Succession ought to be considered as one of the fundamental Laws
of an Empire or Kingdom, so the same is unalterable, unless by consent of the
People Assembled for that purpose. The Queen being, after her Brother's Death,
the unquestionable and immediate Heiress to the Crown of Spain, his most
Catholic Majesty, when he intended to deprive and exclude this Princess of her
Legal Inheritance, ought to have called together an Assembly of all the States
of the whole Kingdom, and the Queen in their Presence ought to have made a
public Renunciation, both for her self and Children, to the Succession of all
these Dominions; after which, the said Renunciation must have been Published
throughout all the Territories under the Jurisdiction of Spain. But it being
certain, that not the least of all these circumstances had been observed in
this Act, it cannot be considered as a Legal Transaction, but as surreptitious
and forced upon the Queen without her knowledge. It ought to be looked upon as
a mere State-trick and contrivance of the Spaniards, to serve their own turn
and ambitious designs, which being contrary to all Laws, could not in the least
impair the Legal Right of the Queen, or of the Prince her Son.

Notwithstanding the King had thus all the reason in the World, neither wanted
sufficient power to oblige the Spaniards to a full satisfaction, he
nevertheless offered to come with them to a Composition. The Queen Mother made
use of all her Interest to prevail with the Spaniards, either to give
satisfaction to the King upon his demands, or else to accept of the King's
Gracious offer, to take an Equivalent, and to release part of his Right,
provided they would put him in quiet possession of the rest. The Queen Mother
Anna of Austria dies Jan. 20. 1666.
But all her endeavors proved fruitless, the Queen dying before she could
bring it to a conclusion. She was universally lamented by the whole Kingdom,
and that not without great reason; France having not for many Years before been
blessed with a Queen more deserving than her self. She was of a very noble
aspect, but endowed with a much more noble Soul, a Soul truly great; and
elevated above the common rank, Pious, Obliging, and Honorable, whose greatest
pleasure was to do good, and who by her charming conversation, drew both Love
and Respect from all who had the Honor to know her.

After the Decease of the Queen, our King renewed his former demands at the
Court of Madrid, and as the case then stood with Spain, there were very few,
who balancing their Forces with ours at that time, were not of opinion, that,
if it should come to a rupture, the Spaniards might think themselves happy, if
they could come off with the loss of what they were so much afraid to lose. For
their Troops in Flanders were in a very ill condition, their Fortifications had
been neglected, and were neither provided with Ammunition, nor a sufficient
number of good Troops. The Council of Spain could not be ignorant of all this,
but whether it were that they relied upon the assistance of their Allies, or
that they did not rightly measure the King's strength and resolution, certain
it is, that he could never obtain any satisfaction as to his just Right, no not
as much as a promise of ever obtaining any upon that score; so that after a
fruitless Treaty of eighteen or twenty Months, The King enters Flanders, 1667.
our King was obliged to have recourse to Arms. He marched therefore in Person,
at the head of an Army of thirty five thousand Men, commanded under him by the
Viscount Turenne, into Flanders. At the same time he ordered two Flying Camps,
the one to enter the County of Luxemburgh, under the Command of Francis de
Crequy, Marshal of France, to observe the motions of the Germans on that side;
the other to take its march along the Sea Coast, under the Command of Anthony
d' Aumont Marshal of France, who took Courtray in two days, Dyxmuiden in four
and twenty Hours; Furnes in one Day; and Armentiers surrendered as soon as he
appeared before it. The Army which the King commanded in Person, found as
little resistance as the other, Charleroy was demolished by the Spaniards;
Binch and Aeth opened their Gates at the same moment they appeared in sight of
them; Tournay did not hold out above twice four and twenty Hours, and Dovay and
its Citadel no longer; Oudenarde not above one Day, and Alost but a few Hours:
To be short, in less than four Months time they made themselves Masters of
thirteen or fourteen places, all very considerable for their strength.

Lisle alone held out a Siege of eleven days, after opening of the Trenches. It
is a large City, very well Fortified, and accounted the most Populous of any in
the Spanish Netherlands. There were at that time within the City, no less than
thirty thousand Inhabitants capable of bearing Arms, besides four thousand
Soldiers, and a great number of good Officers and Volunteers, who had thrown
themselves into the Place, to signalize themselves upon this occasion, under
one of the best and most experienced Commanders in the Spanish Service. The
King having received Advice that the Count de Marcin General of the Spanish
Army, was on his march to relieve the Place, he detached the Marshal de Crequi
(who had joined him before with his Flying Camp) to possess himself of all the
Avenues, through which the Count de Marcin must needs approach the place. The
City being in the mean while forced to Capitulate, the King resolved to march
straight to the Enemy; But the Marshal de Crequi on one, and Bernard de Gigant
de Bellefons, likewise Marshal of France, on the other side, had saved the King
this trouble; they having before routed the Spaniards, of whom they killed five
hundred upon the spot, took from them several Standards and Kettle-Drums, and
three hundred Prisoners, among whom were many Colonels, and some of their
General Officers. Count Marcin, who was not insensible that the whole fortune
of Flanders depended on his Army, thought it most advisable to make a safe
retreat, and to throw his Troops into such places, as were most exposed to the
Victorious Enemy.

This prodigious progress of the King's Arms, did alarm all the Neighboring
Princes, who did not without great reason fear, that the next Campaign, he
would like a torrent, overrun all the rest of the Spanish Netherlands. There
had for many Years last past, been an implacable hatred between the Spaniards
and Dutch; but, as Love and Hatred among Sovereigns are swayed by Interest,
these two Nations setting aside all former Animosities, were soon reconciled,
when the last being terrified by the late success of our Arms, found their own
security to depend on the preservation of the first; to stop the Progress of
the King's Conquests, and to preserve Flanders from falling into his Hands, the
Hollanders entered into a League with England and Sueden, by virtue of which,
Jan. 23. 1668.
these three engaged themselves to furnish each of them fifteen thousand Men
(besides their quota at Sea) for the defense of Flanders: This League was
called the Tripple Alliance. But, as their chief aim was rather to terrify
both Parties into a compliance, than to enter into an open War, they offered
their Mediation with this Solemn Declaration, that they were ready to take up
Arms, against either of these two Crowns, which they should find averse to the
Peace.

The King, though in the midst of the Career of his Victories, yet was not
unwilling to hearken to their Propositions; and, notwithstanding, what he had
taken from the Spaniards did fall far short from what his just Pretensions were
on the Queen's account, yet he offered to rest contented with his Conquests.

A Treaty was therefore agreed on to be set on Foot at Aix la Chapelle, to
compose these differences; But the Spanish Ambassadors only endeavoring to
gain time by delays, the King, to oblige them to a more ready compliance, and
not to let slip any opportunity of pursuing his Right, Fell 1668.
conquered the Franche Compte in the very heart of the Winter. Neither the
Frosts nor Snow, neither the overflowing of the Rivers, nor badness of the
Ways, were able to stay him at home, nor to prevent his march, but with an
eagerness suitable to the greatness of his design, he appeared at the Head of
his Army, with such success, that the whole Province submitted within the space
of eight days, A Conquest so sudden did not only surprise the Spaniards, but
also the Mediators, to that degree, that without any further tergiversations,
they offered to grant the King's former demands, provided he would restore the
Franche Compte. The King was unwilling to part with so fair a Province,
extremely convenient for its situation; but the Love of Peace prevailing over
his Interest, he resolved rather to abandon that Province, than to continue the
War, at a time when the Allies being more powerful at Sea than the French,
might, in all probability, have made an attempt upon our Coasts, or at least
have ruined our Trade at Sea; A Peace was therefore concluded at Aix la
Chapelle, on the Second of May, in the Year 1668. by Virtue of which, our King
restored to the Spaniards the Franche Compte, all their Fortifications
demolished; and these resigned to the King all the places they had Conquered in
Flanders, with their dependencies.

This Peace was soon followed by the reestablishment of an union in the Church,
Jansenism suppressed in France.
which for these fifteen or twenty Years last past, had been interrupted by
some disputes about the true nature of Grace, and were risen to that pitch, as
to threaten the Church and State with great Commotions, if by the prudent Care
of the King the Tempest had not been laid, and a perfect Calm introduced. The
most surprising thing in the World! That Religion which should be the strictest
tie of Charity among Men, proves two frequently the scource of Contests and
Divisions. What is more frequent, than to see Mankind follow blindfold the
opinion of their Leaders with so much Zeal, as to involve the State in a Civil
War; a Prince therefore, who truly understands his Interest, can never be too
watchful to keep a strict Hand over those who sow the first Seeds of these
Discords, and when he has nipp'd them in the bud, to take effectual care to
prevent them from growing again, and taking root among his Subjects.

As it is beyond question, that Mankind are not capable of performing any good
Works meriting Eternal Salvation without God's Grace, so it is very difficult
to determine in what manner this Grace operates in us: This is one of those
Mystery's which are not to be attempted without great hazard, the scrutiny
proving frequently dangerous to the Undertaker, who flatters himself to exhaust
their meaning, rather by subtilities than a plain interpretation, Into what
gross errors are we not apt to fall, when flattering our selves to be more
quick-sighted than others, we bid farewell to true Humility and Submission.

Under Pope Clement VIII. this point first began to be called in question
betwixt two Religious Orders, who in order to take cognizance of the matter,
appointed a Congregation composed of Cardinals, and the most Learned Divines in
Rome. Pope Paul V. revived the said Congregation, with an intention to give a
final decision in the matter; but the differences arisen betwixt him and the
Venetians, having diverted his thoughts another way, all these great
preparations produced no other effect, but only a Decree from the Court of
Inquisition, forbiding all Members of the Catholic Church to Write, or enter
into any Dispute, or to accuse one another of presumption, or erroneous
Opinions concerning the Doctrine of Grace.

But this prohibition was not sufficient to terrify a certain Bishop of Ypres
in Flanders, (whose Name was Cornelius Jansenius) a Man of very profound
Learning, to write a Book concerning this Doctrine in a very lofty Style, as
believing, that his frequently perusing and pondering upon Austin, who was
always looked upon as the true Oracle of Grace, he had surmounted all
difficulties relating to this Controversy. This Book was Printed the first
time at Paris, 1639.
It was upon this assurance that the Bishop flattered himself to have found out
the true meaning of this Doctor, and to have received his Doctrine in its
genuine Purity, free from the errors, which had been neglected in the Catholic
Schools for above five hundred Years past; but these his specious pretenses
were not able to exempt his Book from the censure of Pope Urban VIII. who
condemned it, without making the least Reflections upon any of his Propositions
in particular, alleging only for a reason, because the Doctrine contained in
this Book might revive some errors, formerly condemned, as such by Pope Pius V.
and Pope Gregory XIII.

France had hitherto stood neuter, the Learned there having espoused neither
side, but after it began to make such noise in the World, a certain set of Men,
of an extraordinary Zeal, and great Austerity of Life, besides this well versed
in all manner of Learning, and Writing upon most Subjects with a great deal of
Politeness, began first to make this Book the object of their Solitary
Entertainment, and afterward publicly to espouse the Quarrel with so much
boldness, that they spared no Body in their Writings, a fault commonly
belonging to those who are very zealous and passionate for Novelties. The
extraordinary reputation of the Author, the moment of the point in question,
but above all, the great and so much admired Name of St. Austin, who appeared
in the Frontispiece of the Book; add to this the merits of the Persons who had
engaged in its defense, their intreagues and Cabals, all this together had made
this Book so Famous throughout the whole Kingdom, that it was the chief object
of Entertainment among the Learned, who for the most part talked of nothing so
much as of the Triumph and Omnipotency of Grace over the Free Will.

On the other Hand, those that opposed themselves to this new broached
Doctrine, pretended to evince, that what was contained in the Bishop's Book,
was no more than a repetition of those Errors maintained by Calvin in respect
of the Mystery of Grace. Both Parties maintaining their Opinions with so much
heat, that things seemed to tend to some remarkable Revolution in the Church,
if the Bishops had not given as many eminent demonstrations of their Zeal for
the suppressing of this new Doctrine, as its Defenders showed eagerness in
propagating and spreading it among the People.

France being about that time involved in heavy both Foreign and Civil Wars, it
was impossible to call together either a National or Provincial Assembly, for
which reason, fourscore and five Bishops writ to Pope Innocent X. to entreat
his Holiness, to put an end to these Controversies, by giving his decisive
Opinion, concerning these five Propositions, which they said, were the
Foundation, and as it were the Abridgment of the whole Doctrine contained in
the Book of Jansenius.

His Disciples on the other Hand were not negligent in the matter, but sent
some of their Members to Rome, who endeavored to maintain their Doctrine, both
in several Private Audiences which were granted them by the Pope, and in those
Congregations which were held in the Pope's Presence, to debate upon a matter
of so great moment. But all their efforts proved fruitless, their Arguments not
being strong enough to convince the Holy Father, who condemned and declared the
following Propositions as Heretical.

I. Some of God's Commandments are impossible to be performed by a righteous
Man, notwithstanding he does not want Will, and does as much as possible in him
lies, according to his present condition, to accomplish them, he being
destitute of Grace, which enables him to fulfill the Will of God. II. We don't
resist the Internal Grace, even considered as in the State of corrupted Nature.
III. To perform good or bad Works in the State of corrupted Nature, there is
not absolutely requisite a liberty in us Mortals which implies a necessity, but
only such a Liberty as excludes all constraint. IV. The Demi-Pelagians did
admit of the necessity of an Internal preventing Grace; in each particular
Action, even in the first beginning of our Faith; and they were Heretics,
because they declared this Grace to be of such a Nature, as to be in the Power
of Men either to resist or obey its motion. V. It savours of Demi-Pelagianism
to maintain, that Jesus Christ did die and shed his Blood for all Mankind in
general,
Before the Condemnation of these Propositions, there was no Body, who in the
least doubted, but that they were the same which Jansenius had maintained in
his Treatise, especially since all those who had espoused his Party had
declared them to be so in Flanders, France, and Rome, both in public and
private, in their Writings and Disputes, as being the true sense of the
Doctrine of St. Austin. But no sooner were they condemned by the Pope, but the
same Persons, who not long before had stood up in their defense with so much
eagerness, declared publicly, that these five Propositions were no where to be
met with in the Writings of Jansenius, or at least not in the same sense as
they had been presented to the Pope, and that being only an Invention of some
of his Proselytes, this Condemnation did not in the least impair the reputation
of the Book or the Author.

This dispute caused so much heat among both Parties, that there appeared
greater animosities about the matter of Fact, than there had been before
concerning the true merits of the Cause; wherefore an Assembly of Bishops being
called together, March 9, 1654.
gave their Opinion in express Terms; That these were the Propositions of
Jansenius, and were Condemned as such, in the same sense as he had maintained
them in his Treatise. This Declaration was not long after confirmed by a Brief
from Rome, with a certain Formular annexed to it. In May 1654. In September
1656.
Two Assemblies were held in France on the account of this Formular, in which
it was resolved by the Bishops there present, that the said Formular should be
subscribed by all the Bishops and other Ecclesiastics of each Diocese. But
these resolutions were not put in execution at that time, but the matter hung
in suspense, till the King interposing his Authority, brought it to perfection.

After he had taken the Reins of the Government into his own Hands, his
chiefest care was, how to find out suitable remedies against these Intestine
Divisions, which revived in him that most terrible Idea of all the mischiefs
and misfortunes, which, occasioned by the followers of the Doctrine of Calvin,
had afflicted the Kingdom for these thirty Years last past. When he recalled to
mind and seriously reflected how by the intreagues of this Sect, above a
Million of the bravest of his Subjects had been Massacred, or killed in the
Wars, how above three hundred goodly Cities had been destroyed, and the most
Ancient and Richest Families in France were very near extirpated; the more, I
say, he reflected upon these Calamities, the more he judged it becoming his
present station, to stifle in the very Cradle this growing Evil, which in time
might prove fatal both to Church and State.

The Followers of Jansenius refusing to sign the Formular, pursuant to the
Orders of the Assemblies, alleging, that they had no Authority to oblige them
to it, the King applied himself to Pope Alexander VII. desiring him to
prescribe another Formular, and by his Bull to Command every Body to subscribe
it. The Bull was dated Feb. 15. 1665.
But after this Bull had been obtained, they publicly protested they could not
in Conscience subscribe any Formular which declared the Propositions to belong
to Jansenius, and that they had been Condemned as such: That neither the Pope
nor the Church it self being Infallible in things relating to matter of Fact,
they ought not to be forced to a blind Obedience. That their Eyes and Reasons
were the most natural Guides and Judges of matter of Fact; that indeed Pope
Innocent and his Successor, and three several Assemblies of the Bishops had
given their Judgment in the matter, and declared these Propositions to be the
same, maintained by Jansenius, and they had been Condemned as such, but that it
was impossible for them to agree with them in their Opinion, they having
perused and examined the Book of Jansenius with all the Candor and Exactness
imaginable, and nevertheless had not been able to find out these Propositions.

To this it was answered, that to argue at that rate, was in effect, to declare
in plain terms, that the Pope and the Bishops had unjustly Condemned an
Innocent Prelate, and had declared a Book Heretical, which contained nothing
but the pure Doctrine of St. Austin. What a horrid confusion, said they, must
this produce, if it be allowed that the Church may err to that degree, as to
declare and condemn a most excellent Book, which contains nothing but the
purest Truth, as a Work of the Devil? Though it must be confessed, that generally
speaking, the Church is not infallible as to every particular in matters of
Fact, it is nevertheless undeniable, that in matters of the greatest
consequence, tending absolutely to its Tranquillity, and the maintaining of
Church Discipline, the Church cannot be in the dark, but ought to be the Test
of our Faith; for how could she be the Pillar of Truth, if she could be guilty
of such enormous errors, as to oblige us under the most severe punishments to
receive that for real Truth, which in effect is notoriously false.

These Disputes maintained with equal heat on both sides, were likely to have
continued for ever, if the King to put an end to the Controversy, had not
thought fit to put the last Bull in execution, and to exhort the Bishops to
take forth with effectual care, that the Formular should be subscribed by all
the Ecclesiastics, without exception, in their respective Dioceses; commanding
his Officers to assist them in their Zeal, and to give him an exact account of
their Proceedings.

When they saw the King absolutely resolved to break the neck of this
Controversy by his Authority, all obeyed, and these Prelates themselves who
had hitherto publicly protested against the signing of the Formular, following
the footsteps of the rest, Jansenism was quite suppressed, all Disputes ceased,
and Tranquillity was restored both in Church and State.

During this Calm the King employed part of his time in erecting most
magnificent Structures in several places, In October. 1668.
but especially the Palace of Versailles, which from a simple Hunting
Rendezvous, was (by his Orders) in a little time made one of the finest places
in the World: For, in less than two Years time, in a barren Ground, without
Water, or any other Advantages, there appeared vast Allies of Trees, spacious
Groves and Labyrinths, a whole Forest of Orange Trees: Here you might feast
your Eyes with Statues of the best Marble without number, and Cisterns of a
prodigious bigness of the same Materials: Wherever you turned your self, you
saw Fountains with their Cisterns adorned with Colossus's of Brass, or most
excellent Figures of the most exquisite Marble of a prodigious bigness, with an
infinite number of Water-spouts, and a Canal that reaches out of sight. To be
short, all that may be seen, that is either extraordinary or surprising in the
most famous and most accomplished Structures, is to be met with here, there
being nothing that surpasses this Palace in Magnificence; if you see it from
any of the neighboring Hills, it affords the finest and most delightful
Prospect, that can be imagined. The inside of this Palace is in all respects
answerable to its outward Grandeur. The most exquisite pieces which being done
by the Hand of the greatest Master of our Age, Le Brun.
adorn the chiefest Apartments; the fine Tapestries, interwoven with Gold,
inestimable both for their Beauty and Workmanship; that prodigious Quantity of
Plate, The King Sacrificed all his large Silver Vessels to the Necessity of the
State, 1689.
that variety of silver Cups, Basins, and other Vessels of all sorts, which are
to be seen upon the Sideboard Tables; all these admirable pieces being the
Objects of our highest admiration, are to be valued by a silent surprise.

The King taking a more than ordinary Delight in so fine a place, he made it
the constant Residence of his Court, which at that time appeared in such
splendor, that nothing was comparable to it in any other place, this great
Prince sparing no Cost to make it appear the most magnificent in the World. All
this did not proceed from any vain Ostentation, or purely to indulge his
Pleasure, but from a real intention to augment thereby in the People, the
respect and esteem due to the Sovereign; and to raise in Foreigners an Idea of
the Riches of the Kingdom, and of the Grandeur of the Prince that sways the
Scepter. But these were but weak and transitory Appearances of his Greatness;
his Riches, Power and Generosity in affording timely Succors to his Allies, To
the Venetians in Candia, 1669. A Turkish Chiaus, 1669. Ambassadors from Muscovy
and Guinea, 1670.
had rendered his great Name so famous among Foreign Nations, that the greatest
and proudest Monarchs sent their Ambassadors from far distant Countries, to
court his Friendship and desire his Protection. But as his growing Reputation
could not but be a great Eyesore to his Jealous Neighbors, who were kept in
continual Alarm by so Potent a Prince, so they left no Stone unturned to thwart
his Design, and to stop the career of his good Fortune.

Among others, Charles IV. then Duke of Lorrain, was one of the most active
against him. Conduct of the Duke of Lorrain
He was a Person equally dexterous in advising and executing, a brave Soldier
and great Captain, but the most unquiet and inconstant of all Men living, whose
delight being to fish in troubled Waters, was always in motion, always raising
Soldiers, always in the Field; making a Trade of Soldiery, choosing one side to
Day, and another to Morrow, pillaging without distinction his Subjects, his
Friends and Foes; a Character more suitable to a Cham of Tartary, than to a
Sovereign of a small Principality, whose Interest is to be gentle, and live
peaceably, and to observe either an exact Neutrality, or to shelter himself
under the Protection of the most Potent of his Neighboring Princes.

Lewis XIII. having seized upon Lorrain to chastise the Duke for his many
malicious Intrigues, he marched with his Troops into Flanders, where he
gathered vast Riches, by selling their Service at an excessive rate, at the
beginning of each Campaign putting his Soldiers Pay into his own Pocket, and
affording them no other Subsistence, than full liberty to live at Discretion
wherever they came, and to Pillage the Country at pleasure. The loud
Complaints of the People, the little account the Duke made of the Spanish
Ministers, with whom he would frequently make his Sport, having at last
occasioned great Jealousies against him, he was secured, and not set at
liberty, till after the Conclusion of the General Peace. By virtue of this
Treaty he was restored to his Dominions, but refusing to accept of these
Conditions, some more favorable were agreed on, in a particular Treaty
concluded not above two or three Days before the Death of Cardinal Mazarine.

The next following Year the said Duke having a Disgust at his Family, proposed
his two Dutchies as a Gift to the King, and as a Pledge of his sincere
Intentions, offered to surrender Marsal into his Hands. In Febr. 1652.
The Treaty was no sooner concluded and signed, but the Duke, according to his
wonted custom began to make many Evasions, and by several Delays fifteen or
sixteen Months passed without the least probability of performing his Promise,
till finding the place invested by the King's Troops, who were ready to Besiege
it, he was constrained to deliver it up.

During the Wars in Flanders, 1663.
it was much against his Will that he assisted the King with four or five
Regiments, as it plainly appeared the Year following, when he left nothing
unattempted to debauch them.

After the Conclusion of the Peace at Aix la Chapelle, it was the Wonder of all
the World to see him augment his Troops, to make new Levies, and enter into new
Alliances. The King was not wanting on his side to give him timely notice, that
he was not ignorant of those Transactions; but his ill Stars having made him
insensible of his true Interest, and incapable of receiving good Council, he
continued his former course, till the King found himself under an absolute
Necessity to drive him out of his Dominions.

The Duke was so generally hated, The King seises upon Lorrain, 1670.
that there appeared not any Body that showed the least inclination to espouse
his Interest, much less to lend a helping hand toward his Restoration. He
himself seemed not much concerned at his Loss, it being more suitable to his
Inclinations to march from place to place at the Head of a good Body of his
Troops, than to lie idle at Mirecourt, his ordinary Residence in the Dukedom of
Lorrain. Living in expectation of the next War, he employed most of his time in
making Cabals against France, being chiefly encouraged by the Hollanders, who
at that time made it their Business to embroil Europe, and consequently were
extremely glad to have met with a Prince of his Character, who might be very
serviceable to them in spreading about fears and jealousies, thereby to raise
against the King so many Enemies, as might, under pretense of protecting this
Prince, serve as a Check to the Greatness of France. A fatal Maxim of State!
which had almost proved the Destruction of the United Provinces, and in effect
brought them to the very brink of ruin.

This Commonwealth, Causes of the Dutch War.
which in the last Age was no more than a handful of Men confined to a small
corner of the World, penned in betwixt the Fenns and Waters, was since become
so rich by its Commerce, so famous by several Victories; so dreadful for its
Power and prudent Management, that they were the admiration of the World. But
for four or five Years past they had been so much blinded with Vainglory, and
their Affluence of Fortune, that by their Vanities they had drawn upon
themselves the hatred of all their Neighbors. They had been so insolent as to
cause several Medals to be made, containing very injurious Reflections against
Crowned Heads; among the rest there was one representing Hollandia, leaning
upon many Trophies with this Inscription; That she had restored vigor to the
Law, reformed Religion, protected, maintained, and reconciled Kings; cleared
the Seas and secured the Common Tranquillity, by the force of her Arms. After
the Conclusion of the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, they made it their Boast, that
it was by their means that the Spanish Netherlands had been preserved, and that
they had stopped the Career of the King's Conquests and Victories. They did
without intermission form Cabals in all Courts of Europe, being very prodigal
of their Money to set on foot new Alliances against him, and that with so
little respect to his Person, that they did not make any Secret of the matter,
adjuging it to be of such a nature as to be passed all Dissimulation.

The King to make a suitable return, and to prevent their Designs against him,
resolved to attack them with vigor, and to try whether he could humble these
proud People, and revive among them the Modesty and Moderation of their
Ancestors; and put them in mind what Obligations they had received from the
French Kings, his Predecessors, as also from him in particular. Who can be so
ignorant, as not to know that without the Assistance of France they would have
been so far from being able to make such a Figure in the World, that on the
contrary it would have been impossible for them to defend themselves against
the Power of Spain? It is to Henry IV. and Lewis XIII. they stand indebted for
vast Sums, and a considerable Body of their best Troops expended and maintained
for their Defense; and by the Confession of the Hollanders themselves, they
scarce ever obtained a considerable Victory, but these Troops had some share in
the Action; it was but lately that the King had espoused their Interest against
the Bishop of Munster, and engaged himself in their Quarrel against the Crown
of England; and upon all Occasions had given them such real Demonstrations of
his Friendship, that they might have expected any thing from him, if by their
Ingratitude they had not drawn his Anger upon them.

The Enterprise was doubtless very Glorious, but withal very difficult; they
were well provided with Money, they had a good Fleet at Sea, and an Army on
Foot; their Frontiers were covered on all sides with Fortifications; besides
that, they were encompassed betwixt the three Rivers, the Rhine, the Meuse, and
the Yssel: Notwithstanding all these Advantages, the King was no sooner entered
the Country, but he Conquered three of their Provinces, and in less than two
Months time made himself Master of above forty of their best places: A strange
Catastrophe! which ought to serve as a Lesson to the World, that soon or late
God punishes the Proud and Ungrateful, and that it is his Pleasure to give us
from time to time such remarkable Instances of the Frailty of all Humane Glory.

AN ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS the GREAT. LIB. III.
THE King having taken a firm Resolution to declare War against the Hollanders,
The Campaign in 1672.
he ordered New Levies to be made in all Parts; besides the Troops in his
Garrisons, which consisted of fourscore Thousand Men, he had the like Number in
the Field of his own Subjects; twenty Thousand Swiss newly raised, ten Thousand
Italians, six or seven thousand English, and two Regiments of Swedes. This
formidable Army was commanded by the King in Person, and under him by Lewis de
Bourbon II. Prince of Conde, and Henry de la Tour d' Auvergne, Viscount of
Turenne, the two greatest Generals in Europe. He had laid up vast Sums of Money
for the Payment and Encouragement of his Soldiers, who were for the most part
inured to the Hardships of War, and his Magazines were stored with every thing
requisite for the Maintenance of so vast a Number.

But though it might be reasonably supposed, that such extraordinary Warlike
Preparations must needs strike Terror into all the Neighboring Princes, their
Eyes were so much dazzled with the imaginary Grandeur of the Hollanders, and
with their vast Riches, that they imagined the King must have good Fortune, if
in the first Campaign he could take one or two of their Frontier places. They
were so strongly and generally prepossessed with this Opinion, that they
thought it time enough to talk of relieving the Hollanders, and in the mean
while to provide the best they could for their own Security. But the more
difficulty they had proposed in attacking this Commonwealth, the more were they
surprised a little after, when they received the News of the most stupendous
Success of his Arms.

All the Low Countries were put into such a Consternation at the King's March,
that Boisleduc, Husden, and L' Illo, though at a great distance opened their
Sluices. But they might have saved themselves that trouble, the Thunderbolt
being not to strike on that side. After he had provided all the small Places
round about Mastrick, with good Garrisons, to block up that place, he directed
his March toward the Rhine, where having divided his Forces into four several
Bodies, he ordered Orsoy, Wesel, Rhinberg and Burick to be Besieged all at a
time.

They being all Frontier Places, were very well fortified and provided with
good Garrisons and all other Necessaries for their defense; notwithstanding
which they made but a feeble Resistance, the King's Troops having forced them
to a Surrender within four or five Days time.

Rhinberg, which was Besieged by the King in Person, surrendered without
Discharging a Cannon.

The Duke of Orleans, the King's Brother, was forced to make use of his
Artillery for a few Hours before Orsoy. For which reason the King, to terrify
the other Garrisons from being so presumptuous for the future, as to refuse
Surrendering at the first Summons, ordered that both the Officers and Soldiers
should be made Prisoners of War.

Burick was but one Days work for the Viscount of Turenne; and Wesel surrendered
at discretion to the Prince of Conde, so soon as he had made himself Master of
a certain Fort which commanded the place.

The unexpected Surrender of these four Towns, struck such a terror into the
Garrison of Rees, that they did not hold out above two Days, tho it be
undeniable, that its Fortifications were at that time as complete and regular
as any in Europe. Emmerick was as soon Surrendered as Besieged; and Doctkum gave
us no other trouble than to send thither a Brigade to take possession of it.
Five or six more lesser places opened their Gates at the approach of their
Victorious Enemies, without the least Formalities of a Capitulation.

All this being performed within the space of eight Days, the King was for
improving the Consternation of the People to his Advantage, and for pushing on
his Fortune with the utmost Vigor; his first Resolution was to Besiege
Nimeguen, and at the same time to force the Prince of Orange in his
Entrenchments. This young Prince, the only Offspring, and true Heir of all the
vast Possessions and noble Qualifications of those great Men of the same Name,
(his Ancestors) who laid the first Foundation of this Commonwealth, lay
Entrenched near the Banks of the Yssel, with an Army of five and twenty
Thousand Men; but both these Designs being not to be put in Execution, without
the hazard of a great many Men, and the loss of much time, the King changed his
Resolution, and ordered his Army to march toward the Isle of Betaw, with an
intention, to try, whether thereabouts they might not find a convenient Passage
over the Rhine.

The Waters of the Rhine were very low at that Season, The King passes the
Rhine, 12. June.
by reason of the extreme Heats, and that there had not fallen any Rains for a
considerable time before; so that as deep as it is at other times, it seemed
then to be fordable in several places. Two Gentlemen living thereabouts, having
showed the Ford to the Prince of Conde, he ordered it immediately to be
sounded, which proved so shallow that Horse might pass without much danger,
they being to swim no further than about the length of an hundred Paces. The
King being extremely rejoiced at this welcome News, resolved not to stay for
the perfecting of the Bridge of Boats, and therefore, without loosing any
further time, marches by Break of Day out of his Camp, at the Head of his Gens
d' Arms, his Guards and Chevaux legers, besides a Detachment of two Thousand
Horse, toward the Banks of the Rhine, where he was to be met by the Prince of
Conde.

It was observable, that the King appeared more brisk and resolute at that
time, than he had done for a great while before; the Glorious Assurance that
appeared in his Countenance, being a happy Presage of good Success to the
Soldiery, he no sooner ordered the Signal to be given, but first a great number
of Volunteers, the French Regiment of Curassiers, and the Troops of the King's
Household threw themselves into the River, with an unparalleled Resolution,
relying more upon their own Courage, than the use of their Arms. The Rhine, tho
of a considerable breadth in this place, yet runs with a Current so swift and
violent, as if it were forced through a very straight Channel. Besides this, it
having blown a Storm the Night before, the high Winds tossed dreadful Waves
against the Shore, which well might have terrified the Soldiers from attempting
the Passage at that time; but being by their King's Presence inspired with a
Courage to despise all Danger, neither the swiftness of the Current, nor the
dreadful appearance of the high Waves, nor the sight of their Enemies, who lay
entrenched on the other side ready to receive them, nothing of all this could
daunt their Courage, or stop their Progress; there were but a few lost in this
Passage, who being carried away from the rest by the violence of the Stream,
were swallowed up by the Waves, or perished in the Whirlpools.

As they began to approach the other side of the Shore, they were vigorously
attacked by three Squadrons of the Enemy, who being entered the River, killed
and wounded some of our Men; but finding our Troops to advance without being
daunted, they after their first Charge retreated, and betook themselves to
their Heels: Then it was that the French Horse encouraging one another by their
joyful Acclamations, reached the Bank of the River, and tho they were all
dropping wet, pursued the Flying Enemy for above a League.

At the same time the Prince of Conde attacked some Dutch Battallions that lay
entrenched at the Entrance of a Wood; they were so terrified at the very sight
of the French, that in lieu of making good the Pass, they threw down their
Arms. The Prince promised them Quarter, severely forbidding any Body to attack
them; but his Nephew the Duke of Longueville, being ignorant of it, committed
an act of imprudence, in firing one of his Pistols just near their
Entrenchments, which cost him his Life; for the Enemy believing that they were
advancing to cut them to pieces, betook themselves again to their Arms, and at
their first Discharge killed the Duke with five more Persons of Quality, and
wounded a considerable number, amongst whom was Armand du Cambout, Duke of
Cosselin, a Peer of France; and the Prince of Conde, who was drawn thither by
the noise and discharging of the Fire Arms, was wounded by a Pistol-shot in his
Wrist. The French being exasperated at the loss of their Officers and
Comerades, cut most of the Enemy in pieces, except some who saved themselves by
flight.

The King in the mean while saw the other Regiments of Horse pass the River one
after another, Squadron by Squadron, with less danger than before, the great
number of Horse that swam close together, breaking in a great measure the
violence of the Waves, and swiftness of the Current. The next Day following,
the Bridge being got ready, all the Infantry pass over it with the whole Train
of Artillery.

It is not to be expressed, what a noise this Action so bravely undertaken, and
so prudently managed did make in the World; the Prince of Orange, for fear of
being surprised, thought it his best way to quit his Intrenchments, and by long
Marches retreated deeper into the Country. The generality of the People being
filled with Consternation, put all the hopes of their Safety in the Mercy of
their Conqueror; which they endeavored to purchase from his Hands, by striving
(as it may be said) who should be the first that should put themselves under
his Protection. The Soldiers got an incredible Booty, wallowing for two Months
together in Plenty and Riches.

Doesburg and Arnheim did not hold out above four and twenty Hours after
opening of the Trenches.

The Fort of Skink (Shencken Skans) so famous both for its Strength and
Situation, and the long and vigorous Attacks it has so bravely sustained at
other times, surrendered before the opening of the Trenches.

The Forts of Woeren and St. Andrew did the same.

The City of Utrecht, tho secured by several Places of good Strength, sent the
Keys of their Gates to the Victorious Enemy at a good distance: All Places in
the Betaw followed their Example, and there were very few Cities upon the
Rhine, the Meuse, the Wahle and Yssel, but what readily opened their Gates and
received Safeguards.

In the Province of Holland, the Cities of Oudewater, Voerden, and Narden were
also taken by the King's Forces, and Amsterdam it self, that proud and potent
City, was upon the point of Capitulating, and notwithstanding all the brave
Efforts of some of the Magistrates, would have been forced to submit to the
King's Conquering Arms, if the Officer who commanded in our most advanced
Quarters, had not been careless in intrenching himself immediately, in a small
place called Muyden; from whence we might have battered all their Ships going
to Amsterdam; a fatal Neglect, which preserved the whole Province from falling
into our hands.

Empires as well as other things have their certain Periods, and Critical
Minutes, which if known and dexterously managed, prove commonly fatal to them.
In the mean time Francis Henry de Montmorency Duke of Luxemburgh, having with a
considerable Body of Troops, and many experienced Officers, joined the Forces
of the Bishop of Munster, and of the Archbishop of Cologne, (who being
dissatisfied with the Hollanders) were re-entred into a League with the King
against them) had Conquered a third Province.

The Duke after having put Safeguards into seven or eight small places,
Besieged in conjunction with the Bishop of Munster the City of Groll. This
strong place having surrendered without making any resistance, the Archbishop's
Forces being joined with the rest, they Besieged the City of Deventer, which
being soon forced to come to a Capitulation, those of Zwoll and Campen, and
generally all the other Places of the Province of Overyssel followed their
Example.

To make due reflection upon these surprising Events, they appear so
extraordinary and prodigious, as to be almost past belief; for it is scarce
possible to imagine, that so many brave Cities, which hitherto had past for
impregnable, should, without making any Defense, have surrendered at
discretion, especially, if it be considered, that most of them being provided
with good Garrisons, and that in a Country, which for a considerable time had
been accounted the School of War in Europe, scarce any of their strong holds to
have defended themselves above four and twenty hours, except Zutphen and
Nimeguen, the first of which held out four, and the last nine days.

But, when People after the Fatigues of a tedious War, enjoy the fruits of a
glorious Peace, they begin to abandon themselves to their pleasures, which
renders them careless of their own security, and of improving Martial
Discipline, one of the Pillars of the State. A Nation being thus inveigled and
dazzled with their present good Fortune, are soon brought into confusion, at the
least mischance.

The Hollanders being reduced to this extremity, and seeing themselves in most
imminent danger of becoming an absolute Prey to the K's Conquering Arms, judged
it most conducible to their present condition to sue for Peace; for which
reason the States deputed some to the King, to know upon what terms he would be
pleased to grant it, and at the same time sent to Charles II. then King of
England, to be informed concerning his Pretensions against them.

For it is to be observed, that it was not the French King alone, who was
offended at the Hollanders; they had given great causes of complaint to the
King of England, by their Insolence both to him and his Subjects, by troubling
their Commerce, and especially by fomenting divisions betwixt that Prince and
his People, which ever since the Peace concluded at Breda, they had looked upon
as the main pont of their own security. Our King being not ignorant in the Art
of improving so favorable a juncture, and how to represent the injuries
received by the Dutch to King Charles II. it made so lively an impression upon
that Monarch, that he quitted the Triple-Alliance, and declared open War to the
Hollanders.

Having equipped a Gallant Fleet, the same was joined by the French in the
Channel, and the Dutch threatened with a most powerful Invasion by Sea; but the
Enemies had secured themselves so well at Sea, and had provided a Fleet so
numerous, and well manned, that when the Fleets of both Crowns engaged them on
the 7th of June, they could, after a most bloody and obstinate Fight, boast of
no other advantage, than to have chased them toward their own Coasts, and made
them retire to their own Ports.

The Propositions of Peace made by the two Kings were looked upon by the Dutch
as so extravagant and intolerable, that they resolved rather to bury themselves
in their own Ruins, than to purchase the Peace at such a Rate. Being therefore
reduced to that Extremity as to be forced to take such Measures as were most
suitable to their present desperate Condition, they had recourse to their
Sluices and Dikes, which they opened and pierced through in many places, and put
the Country under Water, to serve them as a Barricado against their Enemies,
who were upon the Point of snatching from them their so much admired Liberty:
The Remedy appeared so dangerous in the Eyes of all the World, that the most
considered it to be of worse consequence than the Evil they feared; but
nevertheless it proved the real cause of their Safety.

For our King finding all his Measures broken by this insurmountable Obstacle
left Holland, leaving the Duke of Luxemburgh to Command in his Absence, with
Orders to take the opportunity of the approaching Winter, to push on his
Conquests with all the vigor imaginable, under the favor of the Frosts and
Ice. At his Return into France, the People charmed with his Presence after so
Glorious a Campaign, received him in Triumph, and accompanied him through all
places wherever he passed, with all the joyful Acclamations and Vows due to a
Conqueror.

The Dutch Troops having taken new Courage after the King's Departure, Besieged
Voerden under the Command of the Prince of Orange, with fourteen Thousand Men.
All the Country round about it lay under Water, there being only one Passage
left to approach it, which was a Dike on the side of Utrecht. To cut off from
the Town all Communication and hopes of Succors, the Prince had caused two
Forts to be erected on each side of the Dike, and betwixt both a Battery
strengthened with a good Intrenchment. But all these Fortifications were not
strong enough to frighten the Duke of Luxemburgh, who after the Siege had
lasted two Months, advancing early in the Morning, attacked them in the Front;
but being repulsed there, he was so far from giving over his Design, that
having caused the Depth of the Waters to be sounded, and finding them not above
four Foot deep in a certain place which he judged convenient for the Attack, he
led his Men with a mavelous Resolution through the Waters, and taking them in
Flank made himself Master of one of their Quarters on that side, from whence
assaulting the Forts, he took them not without a great Slaughter on the Enemies
side, who being obliged to raise the Siege, the Duke provided the place with a
sufficient Garrison, and marched back again to Utrecht, with a considerable
Booty, and a good number of Prisoners of War. The Prince of Orange raises the
Siege of Voerden.


The bravest and most courageous Action that ever was undertaken, especsally if
it be considered, that the Duke had not above three Thousand Men with him, by
reason that he was not joined by some Troops which he expected to have met him
in his March according to Orders, and because that the French Troops were not
very numerous at that time thereabouts, the Viscount of Turenne having lately
been reinforced from thence with a good Body of the best Regiments, to observe
the Motions of the Elector of Brandenburgh.

The more all the Neighboring Princes were surprised at the stupendous
progress of the King's Arms, War with the Elector of Brandenburgh
the more they judged it for their Interests to put a stop to his Conquests. It
is not to be imagined that it was so much out of Compassion, or the
Consideration of the deplorable Condition, to which this so flourishing and
potent Commonwealth had been reduced within the space of two Months, that made
them take these Measures to prevent its ruin by their assistance; but their
own Fears and Jealousies, which represented to them Europe in Chains, and as a
Vassal of France, if the King should Conquer the United Provinces; what Wonder
then if all were ready to lend a helping hand to preserve that from whence
depended in a great measure their own Safeties; whilst some therefore
endeavored to obtain their aim by secret Intrigues, others presented
themselves with their Swords in Hand.

The Elector of Brandenburgh was the first who showed himself most concerned
for the Preservation of the Dutch, whether it was that their Money had had more
influence over him than the rest, and made him more Zealous for their Interest;
or whether it were that he was dissatisfied at our King for not restoring to
him some Places, which belonged to him, and were taken by our Troops from the
Dutch, I will not pretend to determine. It is unquestionable that he was a
Prince very aspiring and ambitious, one of the bravest Men living, and of great
Experience in Martial Affairs, who maintained at that time an Army of twenty
five Thousand Men, who wanted to be employed some where or other. Add to this
the Solicitations of his Nephew the Prince of Orange, who earnestly entreated
him to employ his Forces for the Relief of Holland, which might serve as the
most effectual means in the World to establish his Reputation among them. So
sure it is that all the Ties of Consanguinity are weak, if not strengthened and
linked together by Interest. The Hollanders offered to one of the Elector's
Sons all the Dignities belonging to the Prince of Orange in Holland, if that
Family should happen to be extinct; the Prince of Orange was of a weak
Constitution, and Unmarried at that time, who exposed his Person unto the
hazard of War upon a thousand occasions. These glorious Hopes, tho very remote,
a good Sum of ready Money, and the Glory of being the first that had so much
Courage as to oppose the Victorious Arms of our King, and consequently to prove
the Deliverer of so great and famous a Commonwealth, all these Considerations,
I say, joined together, induced the Elector to declare against France.

The number of his Forces was very considerable in comparison of ours at a time
when the King having been obliged to disperse most of his Troops in his late
Conquests, which amounted to fifty or threescore strong places, there was but a
slender share left to keep the Field. So soon as we received Intelligence that
the Elector's Army was ready to march, the Viscount de Turenne was ordered to
march with all speed to meet him on the other side of the Rhing with his small
Army, consisting only of twelve Thousand Men; the Elector's Army by several
Reinforcements, was near thirty five thousand. But if the Elector was stronger
in number of Men, the Viscount was superior in Officers, and such as were all
true Soldiers, who being all chosen Men, and flushed with their late good
Success, did breath after nothing so much, as fresh opportunity of acquiring
new Glory.

No sooner had the Elector been advertised of our March, but he first made a
Halt, and perceiving that the Viscount intended to expect his coming, he
retreated, and repassed the River Weser; if it was a Surprise to all the World
to see the Elector fly from an Army much inferior in number to his, it was the
more astonishing to see the French pursue him over the Weser, with an
incredible Swiftness, to force all the Places that durst oppose them, to ravage
the flat Country, and to take up their Winter Quarters in his Territories.

In the mean while the Prince of Orange having got together an Army of near
fourscore Thousand Men, Siege of Charleroy
was advanced toward Mastrick, with an intention to free in some measure his
own Country from the Burden of the War, by carrying it into another; for which
purpose after several Marches and Countermarches, seeming to threaten sometimes
Tongres, sometimes Mastrick, he at last Besieged Charleroy, a place situate
upon the Sambre, and of no small consequence to us, by reason of its most
convenient situation to conduct our Convoys and Recruits into Holland.

The Spaniards, tho they had very lately given the King fresh assurances of
their sincere Intentions, and that they desired nothing so much as to cultivate
a good Understanding with him, nevertheless had furnished ten Thousand Men for
the better carrying on of this Enterprise.

The Place was at that time unprovided with a sufficient Garrison to make a
vigorous Defense, the Governor was absent, and the French had no Army ready at
hand to relieve it, so that every thing seemed to concur for the advantage of
the Prince of Orange, who, it was believed, would be Master of the place in
eight Days. But our King in the same moment he received the News of the Siege,
dispatched his Orders into Flanders, to assemble his Troops with all possible
speed, he himself left Versailles in a few Days after to hasten their March,
and to put himself at the Head of them in order to relieve the Place.

The Rumor of the King's Departure being soon spread in the Enemies Camp,
Siege of Charleroy raised.
struck such a Terror among them, that without more ado they raised the Siege.

This was a killing stroke to the Elector of Brandenburgh, who being in hopes
that by so powerful a Diversion the face of Affairs would soon change for the
better on his side, and that the French would be obliged to recall their Troops
out of his Territories, in order to succor Charleroy; but finding himself
absolutely disappointed in his Expectation, he took other Measures and sued for
Peace. The King, to make him sensible of his Error, kept him in suspense for
two or three Months, in the mean while that his Troops consumed all what was
left in the Countries of Marck and Ravensbergh. This obliged the Elector to be
more pressing than ever for a Peace, which he at last obtained from the King,
who in consideration of his Submission granted him more than he could have
expected to have got by the War, and his own Courage. For the King promised to
restore to him, within a certain time limited, all the Places belonging to him
in the Duchy of Cleves, which was executed accordingly in the next following
Year; but the Treaty was but little observed on the Elector's side, who was no
sooner got into possession of these Places, but took up Arms again, and
declared against France.

After the Conclusion of this Treaty, the King having now laid aside his design
of Conquering Holland, nevertheless had taken a Resolution to make himself
Master of Mastricht, at the beginning of this Campaign, knowing it to be one of
the main Bull-works of the Dutch.

This City has been famous ever since the last Age, when it was first
surrounded with a good Fortification, by the Duke of Alva, afterward taken by
the Forces of the States, and retaken by Storm by the Duke of Parma, and in the
Year 1632. once more taken by the Dutch, after a Siege of two Months. Its
situation is one of the most convenient in the World, being built on purpose to
keep the whole Province of Brabant, the Bishopric of Liege, the Country of
Limburgh, Cleves and Gueldres in awe, which together with the Fertility of the
adjacent Country, Description of Mastricht.
its Traffic, Number and Industry of the Inhabitants, has made it at all times
to be considered as the Key and Bullwork of all the circumjaceat Provinces,
which has been the reason the Dutch have not been sparing in any thing which
might add to its strength. It is situate upon the Meuse, which separates it
from the Suburbs called the Wick, very well fortified and joined to the City by
a Stone Bridge. The Body of the Place, to the Land-side, is fortified with the
finest and most regular Fortifications that are to be seen in all Flanders,
with Ravelins, Demilines, and many Hornworks, all secured with deep Ditches.
Their Magazines were at that time well provided with all things necessary to
sustain a Siege. There was in the Place without counting the Inhabitants that
were capable of bearing Arms, a Garrison of six or seven thousand Men of their
best Troops, under the Command of an old Officer, whose Name was Fariaux, a Man
no less Brave than expert in all Matters relating to the Defense of a Place of
such importance; and the States seemed to be resolved to Sacrifice every thing
for the preservation of it. Nevertheless, in spite of all these Advantages,
this strong City so courageously defended, was not able to hold out against the
King above thirteen Days.

For the King was no sooner arrived in the Camp, Siege of Mas^^icht
but having taken an exact view of the whole situation of the Place, he ordered
immediately the Lines of Circumvallation and Contravallation to be made, and
assigned the Quarters for their Batteries. Five of these were in a condition to
play within three Days, and the Lines perfected much about the same time, tho
the Lines of Circumvallation contained eight Leagues in Circuit, and that both
of them were ten Foot high, and twelve broad. The next following Day the
Trenches being opened, they advanced the first Night within a small distance
from the convert way. It is next to an impossibility to conceive with what
dispatch Matters were carried on in this Siege. But it must also be confessed,
that if the King's Subjects were not sparing in their Labor, and undergoing
all the Fatigues that can be imagined; he on his side gave such Proofs of his
Valor, Liberality and Conduct, that all the World must acknowledge him to be
worthy to Command such brave Fellows. For he appeared every where, ordered the
Attacks in Person, animating them by his Presence, by his Liberality, Praises
and Promises of Rewards; he never rested all Night, not going to Sleep till Six
a Clock in the Morning, and getting again on Horseback immediately after
Dinner. Amongst the Variety of Business which distracted his Thoughts without
intermission, in an Enterprise of such consequence, he was never forgetful to
enquire after the State of the Wounded Soldiers, and would sometimes take his
Round among them from Tent to Tent, even of the Common Soldiers, to see whether
they stood in want of any thing for their Subsistence or Recovery. The King
having thereby gained the Hearts of all the Soldiery, as his Liberality and
Promises had raised their Courage, they were ready to Sacrifice every thing for
his Service, which was the reason that the Siege advanced so successfully,
notwithstanding the Besieged did all that could be expected from Mortal Men to
defend themselves against us, the Governor being not sparing either of his
Soldiers or Workmen, who seemed to outdo the French in repairing their
Breaches, and placing new Pallisado's instead of those ruined by our Cannon.

But the most memorable Action was performed in the two Attacks made at once
upon the Counterscarp; and it may be said without the least Contradiction to
truth, that never was a more dreadful Night known since the Memory of Man; for
what with the continual Fire from the Firelocks, Cannon, Mortars, and
Hand-Granado's, what with the Cries and Lamentations of the fighting and
wounded Soldiers, what with the Horror and Slaughter which lasted from the
Evening till Break of Day, it is confessed by the consent of all the most
experienced Officers there present, that never any thing was seen like it
before. Both Attacks were carried on with equal Bravery, and by the confession
of both Parties, both the Assailants and Besieged, gave a thousand Proofs of
their Valor, which were for the most part buried by the obscurity of the Night.

The Granadeers followed by the Grand Musketeers, all brave young Fellows, and
eager after Fighting, began the Attack, and were received with an unparalleled
Bravery by the Besieged, the Governor having posted there all the chosen Men
of the whole Garrison, and a good number of Volunteers, who had thrown
themselves in on purpose to signalize themselves upon so extraordinary an
occasion. Thus the Engagement lasted with equal Bravery on both sides, till the
Besieged were forced out of a Half Moon; this was taken and re-taken three
times in four and twenty Hours, before the French could secure themselves in it
against the furious Attacks of the Enemy. Two Days after, they took also from
them the Horn-work, which the Governor Fariau endeavored to regain, but with
so ill success, that having caused a small Mine to be sprung in hopes to ruin
ours, it sprung backwards, and carried five hundred of his Men up into the Air.

This new disaster, the fear of being Plundered, and the Miserable Condition
into which the whole place was reduced by our Cannon and Bombs, made the
Inhabitants resolve upon a Capitulation: Having accordingly made their Address
to the Governor, he refused to hearken to it, but they earnestly insisting
upon their Demand, he answered, That he was resolved to hold it out to the last
Extremity. But after a little while dreading a double Misfortune, to wit, the
effects of the enraged Multitude, and of the Enemy, he thought it more prudent
to Capitulate upon Honorable Terms, than to expose the Garrison, of which
there was but one third part remaining fit for Service, to the Slaughter;
accordingly he beat a Parley, Mastricht Surrendered
after having defended the place thirteen Days after opening of the Trenches,
with all the Conduct and Courage that could be expected from a brave Officer.

The Garrison marched out with Drums beating, Matches lighted, and two pieces
of Cannon, the King being not unwilling to grant these Honorable Terms to Men
that had behaved themselves with so much Bravery.

The taking of Mastricht would in all likelihood have been followed by the
Conquest of Boisleduc and all the other places of the Dutch Brabant, if the
Storm that arose on the German side had not drawn the King that way.

To disperse these Clouds, The German War.
or at least to prevent their Effects, the King, after having given his Orders
for the repairing the Fortifications of Mastricht, set forth on his Journey to
Nancy, where he likewise ordered the Fortifications to be put in a State of
defense, which was put in execution with incredible Diligence in less than
three Weeks; at the same time he secured Colmar and Schlestadt in his Interest,
where, as it was believed, the Imperialists had a secret Correspondence; and
having obliged the City of Strasburgh by his approach to embrace a Neutrality,
he possessed himself of the City of Treves, to be even with that Elector for the
Breach of his Word, and to make it a frontier place, to cover his Dominions on
that side. These so necessary Precautions proved of such consequence afterward
to his Affairs, that among all those Enemies that were engaged in a League
against him, during the space of five Years, whilst the War lasted, and
threatened to Invade his Country, none of them could boast to have been able to
enter his Dominions with so much as one single Squadron.

The Dutch Money, League betwixt the Emperor, Spain, and Holland.
of which they were very prodigal in most Courts of Europe, and the Intrigues
of their Ministers, who had every where raised great fears and jealousies
against the King, had at last drawn the Emperor and Spain into their Party, who
having concluded an Offensive League with them, the Emperor brought together an
Army of thirty thousand Men, which he ordered to march toward the Rhine. At
their approach the Viscount of Turenne, who was General of the King's Army on
that side, met them as far as in Franconia, in hopes to draw them to a Battle;
but they being careful in avoiding an Engagement, the Viscount could not
prevent them from passing the Rhine, in conjunction with the Prince of Orange,
and besieging Bonn.

This place was without a Ditch, its Fortifications being not quite brought to
perfection, notwithstanding which, the French Governor, with his Garrison,
consisting only of fifteen hundred Men, defended himself so valiantly against
so powerful an Army, composed of three several Nations, that they did not
become Masters of it, till after a fourteen Nights Siege. As the Conquest of
this City, as well as that of Naerden, Siege of Bonn.
a small but well Fortified Place in Holland, taken from us in the foregoing
Month of September, by the Prince of Orange, seemed to be the happy
Forerunners of the good success of this Alliance, so the Emperor and Spain
flattered themselves with the hopes of all those Advantages which the Dutch
Ministers had put them in hopes of when they entered into the League.

The Emperor entered into the Alliance not only upon that score, as having in
view thereby to put a stop to the greatness of France, which if it should
overrun Holland and the Low Countries, would, like an impetuous Torrent spread
all over Germany, but as looking upon this as a favorable juncture to increase
his Authority in the Empire. It is very well known that for a considerable time
past, it has been the main design of the House of Austria, to make themselves
absolute in Germany, by reducing these Princes under their Obedience; This
seemed to be the most Critical juncture that could be, to put this so long
projected design in execution; the Kings Conquests in Holland, and his taking
the City of Treves, were the most plausible pretenses in the World to bring a
good Army into Germany, without giving any suspicion to these Princes, whom
they hoped to ruin one after another, by drawing them into the Quarrel, under
the glorious pretext of taking up Arms for the defense of the Empire.

As for what concerned the Spaniards, they were cajoled into a League by the
fair promises of the Dutch, who offered no less than the Restitution of
Maestrick, after it should be retaken, and engaged themselves not to make
either Peace or Truce with us, before the French King should have surrendered
to them all what he had taken from them since the Pyrenean Peace. A mere Tinsey
wherewith to dazzle the Eyes of the Spaniards, their intention being, to keep
no further to their promises, than they should find it suitable to their own
Interest; as it sufficiently appeared at the Treaty of Nimeguen, when they
obliged the Spaniards to accept of the same Propositions as they were projected
by our King.

The Alliance of so many powerful Princes seemed to foretell something
extraordinary against France; but thinking themselves not in a condition to
undertake any thing of moment, unless strengthened by the Power of England,
they left no stone unturned all that Winter, to bring that King over to their
side. But all their great offers, and fair promises, would have proved
fruitless upon this King, who stood immovable in his Resolution of adhering to
our Interest, if at last some of the Parliament Men, who being perhaps overcome
with the charms of the Dutch Gold, Peace betwixt England and Holland.
had not pressed so hard upon that King, that being no longer able to resist
their importunities, he made Peace with the Hollanders, without declaring
against France.

Our King was no considerable loser by the conclusion of this Peace, his
chiefest loss consisting in the recalling of a few English Troops; for what had
been concerted betwixt these two Kings about a Descent to be made upon the
Dutch Coast, had been found impracticable, they having been sufficiently
convinced by Experience, that nothing of great moment ought to be expected from
Sea Engagements, as to the decision of the Fate of a War; witness those three
several Sea fights betwixt the Fleets of the two Kings, and that of the Dutch,
in all which, the balance appeared so little different, that it was no easy
matter to determine which of them ought with Justice carry away the Honor of
the Victory, there having been scarce any other advantage obtained on either
side, but to make a great noise without doing any considerable hurt. Thus the
Hollanders imagined, that being now Masters at Sea, they could not want an
opportunity of ravaging our Coasts, and to make themselves Masters of some
places in France; but they have been sufficiently convinced by their ill
Success, that unless an Enemy be assured of a good Port, it is a very difficult
task to make a Descent, and cannot be undertaken without vast Charges, which
scarce ever quit cost.

However, the Peace betwixt England and Holland appeared to be the Signal to
all the other Princes of Germany, who now began to throw off the mask one after
another, and declared against us, except the Elector of Bavaria and the Duke of
Hanover, who continued steadfast in their Neutrality. For the Electors of
Saxony, Mayence, of Treves, and the Elector Palatin, Germany and Denmark enters
into a League.
as well as the Landtgraves of Hesse, and Princes of Baden, with most of the
Circles of Germany did immediately take up Arms in favor of the Alliance. The
Elector of Cologne, and Bishop of Munster, left our Party, to embrace that of
the Allies; and though the King of Denmark, the Dukes of Brunswick, and the
Elector of Brandenburgh did not immediately declare against France, yet did
they engage in the Alliance from that time, and promised to put themselves in a
posture of assisting and promoting the common cause.

Now it was that the Hollanders had all the reason in the World to rejoice at
their good Success, seeing they had by their good Management transferred the
Burden of the War from their own into their Neighbors Countries; the King,
surrounded on all sides by his Enemies, which the Dutch had raised against him,
having been obliged to abandon all his Conquests in the United Provinces,
(except Grave and Mastricht, which served to bridle them) to make use of these
Garrisons against the numerous Armies of the Allies. Notwithstanding all these
Advantages, the States desired nothing so much as Peace, considering that
having now recovered what they had lost, it would be very hard for them to
maintain at their own Charge a War, where now they had no further Interest, but
what they had in common with their Allies.

After a whole Twelve Months Debate about a Peace, all Parties concerned having
at last accepted the Mediation of the King of Sweden, sent their
Plenipotentiaries to Cologne, the place appointed for the carrying on of the
Treaty. The Conferences were frequently interrupted by several Accidents, and
new Difficulties which arise from time to time, the Plenipotentiaries of the
States General applied themselves with great Assiduity, and were not without
hopes of bringing this grand Affair to a happy Conclusion, if the Emperor, who
was for continuing the War, had not caused Prince William of Furstembergh
(since made Cardinal) to be seized by force in the open Streets, without the
least Respect to his Character, he being Minister and Plenipotentiary of the
Archbishop of Cologne, and carried him afterward Prisoner to Vienna. He also
caused a House to be Pillaged about fourteen Days after, where there was some
Money belonging to the French King, and refususg to give any reasonable
Satisfaction for these Outrages, the Conferences broke off, and both sides
renewed their Preparations with more vigor than ever for the prosecution of
the War.

All Europe stood in expectation of the success of this War, there being very
few but what were of Opinion, that the King would be forced to be upon the
defensive, forasmuch as it was sufficiently known, that the Allies, had entered
into a mutual Engagement not to hearken to any Peace, unless Lorrain were
restored to that Duke, Alsace to the Emperor, and to Spain all what had been
taken from them since the Pyrenean Peace. But they were not satisfied thus,
they had laid their Designs to invade Burgundy, Picardy and Champaign, and to
ravage as far as to the very Gates of Paris; but those vast Projects were less
difficult to be conceived, than to be put in execution.

For whilst the Allies were concerting measures, The Campaign of 1674.
and buoying up one another with these Chimera's, the King laid a real Design
to make himself once more Master of the Franche Compte, thereby to cover his
Frontiers, which lay almost exposed on that side, to encourage his Subjects by
some great Enterprise, and to make his Enemies sensible, that he was in a
condition not only to defend himself, but also to act offensively against them.
When the State is threatened by some great and imminent danger, it must needs be
oppressed under the weight of it, unless the Prince do uphold and cherish his
Subjects by his good Conduct and firm Resolution; for if the Head prove
defective, the Functions of the whole Body begin to cease.

When the Spaniards declared War against us, the King proposed a Neutrality for
that Province, and the Swiss Cantons did all what in them lay to second the
King's Endeavors, as being unwilling to see a Province bordering so near upon
them to become the Seat of War; but the Allies refused to accept the King's
offer, which in lieu of proving advantageous to them caused the loss of it, or
at least facilitated the King's Conquests there; the Cantons being exasperated
at their refusal, having not only given their Consent for the King to attempt
the Reduction of it, but also denied a Passage to those Troops that were
intended for its relief. This was the only Obstacle the King had to surmount,
or at least the most difficult; for tho the Spaniards, since the Conclusion of
the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, had re-fortified most of their Places, yet it was
looked upon as a much harder task to dispose a Free People to give their
consent that a Potent and Victorious King should settle himself in their
Neighborhood, than to conquer two or three strong Holds, that were without
hopes of relief.

Accordingly the King ordered his Troops to march into the Franche Compte,
Conquest of the Franche Compte.
who immediately in the Month of February made themselves Masters of Gray and
Vesoul, besides many other small Places. But this being only the beginning of
the Fray, the rest was reserved for the King's coming in Person. For Besancon
being invested by his Forces in May following, Siege of ^esancon.
the King came himself into the Camp, his Presence being absolutely necessary
there, to qualify the Minds of the Soldiers, who were forced to undergo
incredible Hardships in this Siege. It was extreme bad Weather when the Court
set out for the Camp, and grew almost insupportable soon after, which continued
thus to the end of the Siege. The great Rains that fell without intermission,
the high Winds and cold Nights, the Waters that overflowed the Trenches, and
the whole Camp, where the Soldiers stood Knee deep in Mud and Dirt; all these
Fatigues would questionless have tired out the Patience of the Soldiers, if the
King who exposed his Person to the same Hardships had not by his Example and
Liberality upheld their drooping Courage.

Besancon is situate in a small Plain upon a very ill Ground, so rocky and full
of Stones, that we had much ado to carry on our Trenches. It is divided into
the higher and lower Town, the last is surrounded by the River Doux, which
serves for a Ditch, and being at that time overflown by the frequent Rains, did
extremely annoy us in the carrying on of our Trenches. The place was provided
with a Garrison of four Thousand Men, one half being of the Militia, besides a
good number of Volunteers, all under the Command of an Old and Brave Officer.
Notwithstanding all this, they made but a slender Defense, the Citadel it self
which was esteemed impregnable, not being able to hold out above eight Days.
This Citadel was newly fortified on the very point of a Rock very near
perpendicular on all sides, having no more than one Avenue leading to the top,
which was well fortified with several Intrenchments, strengthened with Bastions
and Half-Moons.

The place however had this disadvantage belonging to it, that it was commanded
by two adjacent Rocky Hills, but of so steep and difficult an Ascent, that in
all humane appearance, it was impossible to bring any Cannon to the tops of
them. As they lay on the back side of the Citadel and within full reach of the
Cannon, the King went in Person to view them. The Attempt seemed to be the
boldest and most dangerous that ever was undertaken, but Nature having not
framed any thing unaccessible to the Courageous, the King commanded, That all
the Night long, by the light of a great number of Torches and Links, they
should draw up the Cannon to the top of one of these Hills, and he did not stir
from thence till he saw it put in execution. The Besieged surprised at the
boldness of the Enterprise, however plied them warmly with their Cannon; but in
spite of their Fire, which played without intermission, they continued their
Work, and raised a Battery which the next following Day began to play against
the Citadel.

The inside being all built of Stone, the Cannon Bullets made a most terrible
havoc in a Fort which was of no great compass, so that you might see at every
moment the Stones fly about as thick as Hail, which did great execution among
the Garrison, many of whom were slain by the Stones, the rest not daring to
appear but in the Night time. Thus the Outworks being taken in a few Days, the
Governor was forced to Capitulate.

After the taking of Besancon, the King laid Siege to Dole, the Fortifications
of which place being not quite brought to perfection, it did hold out not above
nine Days. Salins defended it self seven Days, and the strong Castle of St.
Anne, which was hitherto esteemed inaccessible, beat a Parley as soon as a
Battery erected upon vast Wooden-Piles, began to thunder against it. Thus the
King conquered the whole Franche Compte in four or five Weeks.

After the Conquest of this Province, he divided his Army, one part being sent
into Germany to reinforce the Viscount of Turenne; and the greatest part into
Flanders to join the Army commanded by the Prince of Conde. Then he returned
into France, to suppress by his Presence some Cabals, which it was suspected
had been set on foot by the Allies in some of the Maritime Provinces. The
Kingdom was at that time threatened on all sides; it was in no small danger of
being Invaded on the German side: The Allies had three Armies in the Field in
Flanders and Spain, another in Catalonia; and to make sure Work, the Dutch
threatened either to make a Descent upon us, or at least to Bombard some of our
Seaport-Towns. But all these vast Designs vanished into Smoke; for our
Frontiers remained unattempted all this Campaign, and the King had taken such
sure Measures, that the Allies had nothing else to boast of, but of their own
Disgrace, having been defeated by the King's Troops much inferior in number to
theirs.

They were no less than threescore Thousand effective Men in Flanders, all
select and old well-disciplin'd Troops; whereas the King's Army commanded by
the Prince of Conde, Battle of Seneff.
did consist only of forty Thousand Men. The Enemy advanced toward him, but he
was so advantageously posted, that they did not judge it advisable to attack
him; thus failing in their aim, they decamped. The Germans cammanded by the
General de Souches had the Vanguard; the main Battle was made up out of the
Dutch Forces under the Command of the Prince of Orange; the Spaniards Commanded
by the Count de Monterey Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, had the Inner
Guard, being covered in their March by a Body of five Thousand Horse, detached
from the several Bodies of the three Nations. The Prince of Conde, who was
advised that in their March they were obliged to pass several Lanes, judged not
without reason, that as they passed through these Defiles, they must march at
such a distance, as not to be able to second one another timely enough, in case
of an Attack. Looking therefore upon it as a most favorable opportunity to
fall in with them, he was resolved not to let it slip out of his Hands.

Having therefore suffered the Imperialists and Hollanders to pass the Defiles
unmolested, he charged the Spaniards so furiously, that he absolutely routed
them, taking many Standards and Colors, and a great many Prisoners, among whom
were several of Quality. This first Victory did not cost the King above an
Hundred, or an Hundred and fifty Men, whereas the Enemy lost above three
Thousand; a happy Days Work, if the Prince could have been contented with his
good Success! But having afterward Attacked the main Body, and likewise
brought them in Confusion, matters seemed to tend to a total Rout, if the
Imperialists had not found means to come to their relief. The Flying Enemy
having got leisure in the mean while to Rally, and the three Generals to put
their several Bodies in order of Battle, upon an Eminency, being covered with
Bushes, Hedges and Ditches, and Cannon planted on all the Avenues, the face of
Affairs began to change, and the Fight was renewed with more obstinacy and fury
than before. The Enemies were posted in such a manner, that it was impossible
to come to Handy Blows with them, without sustaining the Fire of their whole
Infantry; but the greater the Danger, the greater the Honor; all this it seems
was not sufficient to startle the Invincible Courage of the Prince of Conde,
nor to terrify his Soldiers flushed with Success, but being resolved to
complete this Days Work by a third Victory, they fell on with incredible
Bravery. As Despair is the most powerful Motive to inspire Courage even in the
Faint-hearted, so the Enemy defended themselves with great Obstinacy; the
Engagement lasted from Noon till Night, and the Slaughter did not cease on both
sides, till Moonlight about Ten or Eleven a Clock at Night. The Enemy took few
of ours Prisoners, and among them scarce any Body of note; but we lost
abundance of brave Men and Officers, seven or eight Standards, and had about
five or six Thousand killed and wounded. The loss of the Enemy amounted to
above seven or eight Thousand; we took near five Thousand Prisoners, among whom
were four Princes of the Empire, a great number of other Persons of Quality,
many of their Colonels, and two Hundred Officers; an Hundred and seven
Standards and Colors, three Fieldpieces, two Mortars, several Kettle-Drums,
Pontons, three Thousand Wagons, with all their Ammunition, and three hundred
Thousand Crowns in ready Money, designed for the Payment of their Armies.

About a Month after, Siege of Oudenarde.
they laid Siege to Oudenarde, but no sooner had they got notice that the
Prince of Conde was marching to its relief, but they quitted the Siege with so
much Precipitation, that they left behind them in their Trenches part of their
Baggage and Ammunition, besides most of their Utensils used in carrying on of
the Trenches.

Another Army composed of the Dutch Forces, Siege of Grave.
and joined by some Brandenburgh Troops, were for two Months together busied in
the Siege of Grave. The City of Grave is considerable for its strength, and was
at that time very well provided with Ammunition, a good Artillery, and a
numerous Garrison; but the Besiegers being surrounded on all sides by their own
Country, had great plenty of every thing in their Camp, and the place being but
small, there was little appearance it should hold out long, the Place being
given over for lost by the French, without the least hopes of being able to
relieve it. The Dutch had made many Attacks upon their outworks, but with so
little success, that they were repulsed without being able to maintain
themselves in any of these Posts. The Besieged made continual Sallies, nailed
up their Cannon, filled up their Trenches, killed abundance of their Men, and
carried a great many Prisoners into the Town. Their bravery and resolution in
undergoing with undaunted constancy all the Fatigues of War, the continual
thundering of their Cannon, and their frequent Mines, which, for the most part,
did great execution, had struck such a terror among the Besiegers, that they
Deserted by whole Troops, and got into the Town.

To revive in some measure, the drooping Courage of the rest, the Prince of
Orange marched to their assistance with a Body of ten thousand fresh Men, who
being also repulsed in several Attacks, it was the general Opinion that the
Dutch, would in all likelihood have been forced to quit the Enterprise, if the
Governor, the Marquess of Chamilly, had not received Orders from our King to
Capitulate, who, after he had given a thousand Proofs of his Conduct and
Courage, surrendered upon such Conditions as he himself thought fit to propose;
the Prince of Orange being willing enough to grant him any thing, partly in
consideration of his Bravery, partly for fear, lest the Siege, by the obstinate
Defense of the Besieged, should protract, till Winter, when the Season would
oblige them to raise it. The Garrison was extremely diminished, not so much by
the Enemies Swords as by Sickness; and though they were straightened for
Provisions, yet were they resolved to have endured all the extremities, and
bury themselves under the Ruins of the Place, if the King, who would not suffer
that so many brave Men should Sacrifice themselves for the defense of a Place,
which he judged of no great consequence to his Affairs, had not sent them his
Orders to Capitulate. The King had, at the beginning of the War, made himself
Master of this Place without the loss of one single Man, but the Dutch did not
take it till after a Siege of three Months, with a prodigious Charge, and the
loss of twelve thousand Men; besides, they run no small hazard of coming off
with disgrace.

But they were less successful in their Expedition at Sea this Year; they had
near an hundred and fifty Men of War, and after the Peace with England, were
become absolute Masters of the Ocean, the King having sent most of his great
Ships into the Mediterranean. One part of this great Fleet was sent to
endeavor the Conquest of the French Plantations in the West Indies, the rest
were to be employed in making a Descent upon our Coast; but the best concerted
measures prove not always infallible.

For Admiral Ruiter did not succeed in his Enterprise against the Isle of
Martinico, and Admiral Trump, who for four or five Months threatened our Coasts
with a desent, did no other feats, but to Land in a small Island, from whence
he carried away some Cattle, and plundered a certain Abbey. The ill success of
the Allies in this Campaign seemed to be very ill presages to the League,
especially if it be taken into consideration, that the King's Arms were Crowned
with the same success in several other places; for Frederick Duke of Schomberg
had beaten the Spaniards in the Plains of Russilion; as the Vicount of Turenne
had been Victorious over the Germans in three or four several Encounters.

For, after he had prevented the Duke of Lorrain from passing the Rhine, and
consequently secured the King's Conquests on that side, he received Orders to
hinder, if possible, the conjunction of the Duke with a Body of Imperialists,
commanded by the Imperial General the Count of Caprara. Pursuant to these
Orders he marched three Days and Nights without intermission, and on the fourth
came within sight of the Enemy, whom he found so advantageously posted, that it
seemed impossible to attack them without the greatest hazard in the World. For
they were drawn up in order of Battle upon a rising Ground, being secured in
the Front by a small Town, with a deep Rivulet, and many Hedges and Ditches,
all which must be passed before they could be attacked. But what is so strong
or inaccessible to a Man who has an equal share of Conduct and Courage?

To be short, the Town was taken in less than two Hours, and the Enemies
Infantry which defended it, either cut in pieces, or taken Prisoners. But this
was only the Introduction to the rest; our Troops were extremely fatigued with
so long a March, and the heat of the Season; besides that, the Enemy having the
advantage of the Wind, they were incommoded with the Smoke and Dust which
almost choked them as they advanced toward the Enemy, where the Enemy stood
ready to receive them: Notwithstanding all these disadvantages, they were
resolute in attacking them; the Viscount of Turenne's Army consisted of nine or
ten thousand Men, and that of the Duke of Loerain was near equal in number to
his, with this difference only, that the last had more Horse, the other
exceeded in Foot. The first attack was made with equal bravery on both sides,
there being not a Squadron but what charged four or five times, and the Dukes
Forces rallied and returned to their charge seven or eight times, neither were
they put to the rout till after a bloody and obstinate Fight of eight Hours.

About three Weeks after, the Prince of Bourneville General of the Imperial
Forces, being with a Body of seven or eight thousand Men joined to the broken
remainders of the Confederate Army. July 6th.
The Viscount of Turenne passed the River Neckar at Ladenburgh, in sight of
them, and followed them so closely, that he fell in with their Rear, which he
put to the rout, forcing their Infantry to seek for shelter among the
neighboring Woods and Mountains; but their Horse being briskly pursued by the
French, did not face about till they came to Franckfort, twenty Leagues from
thence, where being covered by the River Maine, the Viscount could not pursue
them any further; but they were scattered to that degree that they were not in
a condition to appear again in the Field, till being reinforced with fresh
Supplies and Troops from the Emperor, from the Elector Palatin, the Elector of
Cologne, Bishop of Munster, Duke of Wolfenbuttel, and all the neighboring
Circles, they made up an Army of thirty five or thirty six thousand Effiective
Men.

But this great Body was commanded by five Generals independent from one
another, who being swayed by so many different Interests, did not agree in what
measures to take; one being for the attempting the recovery of the Dukedom of
Lorrain; another for the Siege of Treves or Philipsburgh; another for attacking
the Viscount of Turenne with their joint Forces, thereby to retrieve their
former disgrace. The French Army was at that time not above fifteen thousand
strong, but the renown of their General, and their late Victories had made them
so dreadful to the Enemy, that they durst not attempt to attack them.

With this small Army he kept them in play for two Months together in the
Lower- Alsace, till having at last received a reinforcement of some Regiments,
he marched directly against the Allies to give them Battle, before they could
be joined by the Elector of Brandenburgh's Forces, and those of the Duke of
Brunswick. The Name of the Viscount of Turenne famous by so many Victories, was
become so terrible to the Enemy, that most were of opinion they would scarce
care to face him, but beyond all expectation they received him with all
imaginable bravery, so that the fight was very obstinate and dubious for some
time, till at last, Victory of Entsheim, October. 4.
having brought them into confusion, they were forced to quit the Field with
the loss of three thousand Men, ten pieces of Cannon, and thirty Colors and
Standards. The French were so eager in the pursuit, that the Enemies, to fly
with the more convenience, threw away their Cuirasses and Arms, of which there
was a great quantity found all round about the Field of Battle.

This Action, as brave as it was, yet was not the most glorious of this
Campaign: For the Allies having been joined by the Troops of Brandenburgh and
Brunswick Zell, about the middle of October, were near threescore and ten
Thousand strong in the Field; an Army so numerous, it was feared, would like a
Deluge overrun all our Conquests on that side, but that the King, with an
incredible resolution, without being in the least surprised at their number,
knew by his Prudence so to manage the Matter, that all their Designs turned to
their own disgrace.

For immediately after the raising of the Siege of Oudenarde, he had ordered a
considerable Detachment from Flanders into Germany, to join with all possible
speed the Viscount of Turenne; at the same time he dispatched his Orders to
him, to keep upon the Defensive, and as much as possibly could be, to provide
for the security of those Places, which were of most consequence.

The King wisely foresaw that this vast Multitude would soon be forced to
disperse, by reason of the Divisions that were among the Generals, for want of
sufficient Magazines, and the Incommodities of the Season, which must needs
occasion many Diseases among the Soldiers; or that at last whenever they
should come to separate themselves, there could not be wanting an opportunity
to engage and vanquish them. Accordingly the Viscount of Turenne quitted his
Camp to secure a certain Port so convenient and commodious for its situation,
that with his small Army he conquered both Haugenan and Saverne. The Allies,
who did not judge it advisable to attack him in this advantageous Post,
marched directly into the Upper Alsace, with an intention to take up their
Winter Quarters in this Province, and so to march in the Spring directly either
into Lorrain, or the Franche Compte; thus they lived at discretion for the
space of two Months, over secure in their own strength, till the Viscount of
Turenne beat up their Quarters, and sent them back to the other side of the
Rhine.

After he had received the abovementioned Reinforcement from Flanders, his Army
consisted of scarce five and twenty Thousand Men; and tho he was sufficiently
informed of the strength of the Allies, who had near three to one against him,
he marched in the Month of December, taking a great compass about, as if he
were retiring from before them, and shunning to come to an Engagement. Thus, in
lieu of taking the direct Road, he marched through Lorrain, and having
traversed the Mountains without any other Obstacle, but what proceeded from the
natural situation of these Hills, Dec. 29.
and the inconveniences of a far advanced Season, he entered the Plains, where
he found the Enemies scattered up and down in a fatal Security, without the
least Apprehension of danger from an approaching Enemy; at the sight of whom
they were struck with such terror, that they were above half vanquished before
they were attacked; fourteen French Squadrons (a thing incredible, if it were
not unquestionable, that when an Army is seized with a sudden and general
Consternation, they have no leisure to reflect upon the number of the
approaching Enemy) having passed the River Illin, a place which they found
fordable, put their whole Cavalry to Flight.

Being recovered from their first Consternation, Victory of Turkheim 5th Jan.
1675.
they resolved to stand the Brunt at a place called Turkheim, but with no
better success than before, they being routed a second time, and forced to
retreat in great confusion to the Rhine, which they repassed on the 11th of
January, in the Year 1675. there being not above twenty thousand left of that
vast Army; the rest were either taken Prisoners, or perished by the Sword,
Famine, Debaucheries, and Distempers.

All these Victories as they were the happy Products of the King's Vigilance,
Campaign of 1675.
and the Bravery of his Soldiers, so they struck such a Terror among his
Enemies, that they were resolved to try their utmost, the next following
Campaign. The King finding their Preparations suitable to their Designs, set
out early in the Spring for the Army, and having ordered the Seige of Dinant and
Huy after the Reduction of these two Places, the first by the Marshal de
Crequy, the second by Henry Lewis Dalenny de Rochfort, likewise Marshal of
France, the City of Limburgh, famous for its strength, and being the Capital of
the Province of the same Name, was immediately Besieged by Henry Julius Duke of
Enguen, since Prince of Conde, which was forced to surrender within eight Days
after.

It is true, the Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, in conjunction with the
Prince of Orange, marched to its Relief with an Army consisting of fifty
Thousand effective Men, but finding at their approach, that the place was
surrendered, they retreated without doing any thing further that Campaign, than
to consume all the Forage in Brabant, and to ruin their own Territories.

But Germany was the Theater of War, where the most glorious Actions were
performed during this Campaign, Fortuneseeming to keep an equal Balance betwixt
Us and the Allies on that side. The Enemies Army upon the Rhine appearing more
numerous in the Field than it had done any time since the beginning of this
War. The last Campaign there had been so many Factions as there were Generals
among them, that, to speak impartially, they were without a Head to Command
them.

But now things appeared with quite another Face, the whole Army being
Commanded by the Count of Montecuculi, the same who two Years before had the
chief Command of the Imperial Army upon the Rhine. He was an old and
experienced General, very well versed in the whole Art, and all the Stratagems
of War, always upon his Guard, whose Ambition was, not so much to gain any
particular advantage upon his Enemy, as to bring a whole Campaign to a happy
Conclusion.

The Viscount of Turenne; General of the King's Army on the Rhine, was not
inferior to him either in Experience, or any other Qualification belonging to
a Great General; and it may be said without Flattery, that his Name was more
famous, and his Reputation better established by an infinite number of glorious
Actions, in all which he had given most ample demonstrations to the World, that
never any General was comparable to, or at least never surpassed him in the Art
of War. Among the most Renowned Heroes in former Ages, who by their great
Actions and Conquests have rendered their Names so famous to Posterity, there
are few who can boast of the same Skill wherewith this Great General used to
Discipline his Troops, to provide them with all Necessaries, and to make use of
all Advantages to thwart the Designs of his Enemies.

It was without all question a thing worth the notice and attention of all
Europe, to see these two great Captains to use their utmost Endeavors to
outvie one another in their swift Marches, in their Encampments, and to make
use of all the most refined Stratagems, to prevent one another from gairing the
least advantage. The Viscount de Turenne had nevertheless the good Fortune to
pass the Rhine almost in sight of the Confederate Army, which done, he
possessed himself of so advantageous a Post, that without the least fear of
being forced in his Entrenchments, he might cut off the necessary Convoys from
the Enemy.

An Action so Glorious which had broken all the Measures of his Rival at one
stroke, was looked upon by all Europe to be equivalent to a Victory. But the
Viscount de Turenne not satisfied with this Advantage, unless he had also
routed the Confederate Army, had enclosed them so narrowly on all sides, that
it was impossible for them to march off without coming to handy Blows.

In order to this he went out of his Camp on the 27th of July to view a certain
place, where he intended to raise a Battery the better to annoy the Enemy,
where he was unfortunately slain by a Cannon-shot, The Death of the Marshal de
Turenne.
which struck against his Breast, and laid him dead, upon the Ground.

Never was any General more universally lamented, neither did ever any one
deserve it better. He was a Person of extraordinary Merit, a Great Captain and
excellent Politician; a Man equally modest and agreeable in Conversation, who
despised Riches, and was an Enemy to Pride, who was never backward in doing all
the good he could, and never known to do harm to any Body, all his Passion
being directed to glorious Actions. It is not to be expressed how sensibly the
King was touched with the loss of so great a Man, he heaped Honors and Riches
upon his Family; The Viscount dyed without Children.
and to give the most ample Testimonies of the Value he put upon his passed
Services, and to Crown the Virtues of so great a Man with due Rewards, he
caused most magnificent Obsequies to be made in the Church of Paris, and
ordered his Corpse to be deposited in the Abbey of St. Denis, the ordinary
Burying place of the Kings of France. But the greatest ornament of the whole
Funeral Pomp was the inexpressible sorrow which appeared in the Countenance of
all the Chief Men of the Kingdom, and the everlasting Memory of his great and
Glorious Actions.

But to return to the Rhine, the Viscount de Turenne having not communicated
his design to any of his Lieutenant-Generals, the Count de Lorge, his Nephew,
afterward made Duke, Peer and Marshal of France, took upon him the Command of
the Army, and immediately after his Death repassed the Rhine, and entrenched
himself on the other side, till further Orders from the King. The Enemy during
his Retreat, Attacked him in the Rear, but were so vigorously received by the
French, that they lost above four thousand Men upon this occasion; nevertheless
the Count de Lorge was not strong enough to prevent Montecuculi from passing
the Rhine, and marching into the Lower Alsace.

The French Army was at that time in a very ill Condition, in want of Provision
and Forage, much diminished by Sickness and Mortality, and so dejected by the
loss of their General, that it was feared they would have been quite dispersed,
if the Prince of Conde, who by the King's Orders posted in all haste thither
from Flanders, had not found means to raise their drooping Courage by his
Presence. Notwithstanding which the Count of Montecuculi laid Siege to the City
of Hagenau in August, and in the Month of September following fat down before
Saverne, but upon intelligence that the Prince was marching to their Relief, he
quitted both these Enterprises. At last toward the latter end of the Campaign,
the Imperialists were obliged to repass the Rhine, and to take up their
Winter Quarters in the Confederate Territories.

But the Dukes of Zell and Lorrain had much better Success in the Siege of
Treves. Siege of Treves.
For these Princes being advertized that the Marshal de Crequy, at the Head of
an Army, was marching to the Relief of the Place, left a good Body for the
guard of their Trenches, and other Works, and marched with a Body of near
twenty Thousand Men to meet the Enemy. The Marshal had not above nine or ten
Thousand Men with him, notwithstanding this inequality of their Number, he
resolved to try his Fortune. There are certain happy Moments, when we have
known a handful of brave resolute Fellows to have driven before them, and cut
in pieces a whole Army, but these Fortunate Moments are so rare, that it is
more expedient to rely upon the number and equality of our Troops, than upon
these Accidents.

To be short, Defeat of the Marshal de Crequy
this Day proved unfortunate to the Marshal de Crequy; for his Infantry being
ill seconded by the Cavalry, he was entirely defeated, and his small Army put
to the Rout, and dispersed in such a manner, that he himself, with only three
more, was forced to shelter themselves in an adjacent Wood, from whence he
found means to get into Treves. He defended the place for three Weeks after
with incredible Bravery against his Victorious Enemy, and would not-hearken to
any Propositions of Surrender, tho all the Outworks were taken, and that there
were several large Breaches in the Walls of the Place. The Garrison headed by
some mutinous Officers, were so exasperated at this desperate Resolution, that
they resolved to capitulate without him, and accordingly surrendered him, and
many other of the French Officers to the Allies.

This being the first Campaign which since the beginning of this War had proved
prosperous to the Confederates, they were so puffed up with their late Success,
that forgetting their former Misfortunes, and the many Advantages we had over
them, they began to boast, that in the next Spring they intended to put their
so long projected great design in execution.

But it was not long, before the King made them sufficiently sensible, that by
the loss of a Place and four or five Thousand Men, he was not become less
powerful than before. For after having Besieged and Taken the City of Conde by
assault, Conde taken April the 26th.
toward the latter end of April, he ordered the Duke of Orleans to Besiege
Bouchain. whilst he himself with the head Army covered the Siege to make head
against the Enemy, in case they should come to its relief. The Governor of the
Spanish Netherlands, and the Prince of Orange brought together a good Army, in
order, as it was believed, to attempt the Relief of the Place; but judging it
not advisable to attack the King, they entrenched themselves under the Cannon
of Valenciennes, in hopes to meet with a favorable opportunity to throw some
Supplies of Men and Provisions into Bouchain, but they reaped no other
advantage by it, than to be Eyewitnesses of the Reduction of the Place. The
King endeavored by all means possible to bring them to a Battle, but they were
as careful to avoid it, not having made the least motion, but remaining in
their advantageous Station for two Months together, whilst the King remained on
the Frontiers.

But no sooner had the King left the Army, Siege of Mastrich
and was returning into France, when the Prince of Orange with the Dutch Army,
in conjunction with the Spaniards, and some Auxiliary Troops of several German
Princes, who commanded their Forces in Person, laid Siege to the strong City of
Mastricht. The King being sufficiently assured, that the present condition of
the Place, provided with all Necessaries for a vigorous defense, together with
the Bravery of the Garrison, and the invincible Courage and Experience of the
Deputy Governor the Count de Calva, a Catalonian by Birth, who commanded in
the Governor's Absence, would keep the Enemy in play for some time, before
they should stand in need of any relief, took the advantage of this
opportunity, and whilst the Enemy was busied in that Siege, he ordered the
Marshal de Humiers to sit down before Air, one of the strongest and most
considerable of that Country, situate on the Frontiers of the Province of
Artois. The Marshal having made himself Master of it in five Days, he attacked
the strong Fort of Linck, which being soon forced to follow the Example of
Air, the whole French Army by easy Marches, moved under the Command of the
Marshal Duke Frederick of Schomberg, toward Mastricht.

The Besiegers had been employed in the Siege for near seven Weeks, without
having been able to make themselves Masters of the Counterscarp or any
Outworks; they had made many and very furious Attacks, but had been always
repulsed with great loss; and their Army being by the many Sallies and Mines of
the Besieged, as well as by Mortality reduced to one half of what it was at the
beginning of the Siege, they judged it most advisable to decamp, Siege of
Mastricht raised, Aug. 26.
and to quit the Siege so soon as they saw the French Army approach toward
their Lines, they retreated with so much Precipitation, that they left behind
them fifty pieces of great Cannon for Battery, six Thousand Muskets, all their
Provision and Ammunition, with a great number of sick and wounded Soldiers.

The-Fleet which the States General had sent into the Mediterranean, Victories
obtained in Sicily.
to endeavor the Recovery of Messina, which City two Years before had shaken
off the Spanish Yoke more out of a hatred of the Spaniards, than a real love of
Liberty, had no better success than the rest. It is certain that France had not
been in the least concerned in this Rebellion, but the King being two wise not
to lay hold of so favorable a juncture and to improve it to his own advantage,
he sent them some Supplies, which at first were but inconsiderable, but were by
degrees strengthened by several Reinforcements.

Lewis Vivone, Spaniards beaten at Sea.
Duke, Peer, and Marshal of France, beat the Spanish Fleet that blocked up the
Harbor of Messina, and brought a good supply of Provision and Ammunition into
the Place on the 11th of April, in the Year 1675. and in the same Summer in the
Month of August, made himself Master of Agousta, a Port of no less consequence
and convenience than the former.

The Spaniards being put under no small apprehension of losing the whole Island
of Sicily, solicited the Hollanders to send a Fleet to their assistance into
the Mediterranean, and at the same time obtained from the States, that the said
Fleet should be commanded by Admiral Ruyter, the most famous Commander at Sea,
at that time, in all Europe. Our King gave the Command of his Fleet to another
brave Seaman, who, tho less famous, yet was not inferior to the other in Skill
and Experience in Maritime Affairs. This was one called Duquesne, born at
Diepe, who from a simple Seamen, as well as Admiral Ruyter, had raised himself
to the Supreme Command of a Fleet.

Both Fleets joined in Battle in January, in the Year 1676. The Engagement was
so terrible and furious, that according to the Letter written by Admiral Ruyter
himself, he never faw any thing like it in all his Life before. But Duquesne
forced the Hollanders to retreat, and to leave a free Passage for his Ships
into the Port of Messina, which he entered in Triumph with his whole Squadron,
and the Convoy.

In the April next following, the Dutch in conjunction with the Spaniards,
having attacked the Port of Agousta, Duquesne forced them to quit the
Enterprise. This Engagement was very bloody, Admi^al Ruyter killed.
Ruyter himself received three Wounds; one in the Head, another in the Thigh,
and the third in the Foot, of which he died in ten Days after. The Enemies
being put into a great Consternation by the loss of their Admiral, durst not
appear any longer at Sea, but retired to Palermo to refit and to expect a fresh
Reinforcemont.

But the Marshal and Duke de Vivone resolving to give them a Visit before they
could be reinforced with fresh Supplies, set Sail with his Squadron toward
Palermo, where he arrived on the second of January following, he found them
riding at Anchor at the very entrance of the Port in very good order; but no
sooner had he sent some Fireships among them, which set two or three of their
Ships on Fire, but the rest either ran a-shoar, sunk themselves, or blew up in
the Air; some few getting into the Port. The Ennemies lost twelve of their best
Ships in this occasion, The Dutch Fleet burnt in the Port of Palermo.
six Galleys, with seven hundred pieces of Cannon, and above five thousand Men.
The Houses odjoyning to the Port, and the whole lower Town were much endamaged
by the pieces of Iron Bars, and the broken Cannon and Ships, which, by the
force of the Powder were thrown into the place and crushed all to pieces
wherever they happened to fall. The Marshal having obtained this Victory,
which was one of the most complete that had been obtained for many Years
before, without any considerable loss on his side, made all Italy tremble,
especially when they saw the French within two Months after, Masters of
Taormine, of Sealette, of St. Placida, and many other small places along the
Sicilian Coast.

The Confederates took in the Month of September the strong Fortress of
Philipsburgh, Philipsburgh taken by the Allies.
which, after a whole Years Blockade, and a Siege of three Months, had been
forced to Capitulate; but the taking of this Place was looked upon as a slender
equivalent to counterbalance the losses the Allies had sustained this Campaign
in other places. It must be confessed that Philipsbourg is a Place of great
consequence, both in respect of its Fortifications and Situation, as being the
inlet into Alsace, and a Bridle to the Palatinate; but it ought also to be
considered, that this long Siege cost the Enemy such a vast number of brave
Men, that a conquest bought at so dear a rate, may well be judged less
advantageous, when attended with such fatal Consequences. For the Confederate
Army was reduced to so ill a condition after this Siege, that the French, who
observed them narrowly in all their motions, soon after obliged them, as they
did the Year before, to seek for Winter Quarters in their own Territories, and
to recruit their broken Troops.

The next following Year the King opened the Campaign with the Conquest of
Valenciennes, Cambray, and St. Omer, Campaign of 1677.
and a Signal Victory obtained over the Confederate Army in a pitched Battle;
one of the most famous Expeditions that has been undertaken for these several
Ages past, whether in consideration of the renown and strength of the
abovementioned Places, or in respect of the little time the King spent in
conquering them in a Season, when for want of Forage, there was but small
likelihood of succeeding in such an Enterprise.

The City of Cambray is Situate at the very entrance of Flanders, where it
joined on our Frontiers, and was consequently very incommodious to us, the
Garrison having often carried Fire and Flame into our Territories, as far as
the Isle of France, from whence they used to draw great Contributions,
sufficient to entertain a good number of Troops, who frequently played the
Masters over us in these parts, when for the rest we gave Laws to all the
Spanish Netherlands. The Situation of St. Omer was such, as to be in a
condition to make frequent Excursions into the Province of Artois, and the
Boulonnese Territories, Valenciennes was of as great consequence to us as the
other two; but, though the King was not ignorant long before of the advantage of
the Conquest of these three places, yet considering their strength, we durst
scarce flatter our selves to be able to undertake such an Expedition, as to
Besiege them all three at once, or if we did, there appeared but little
likelihood of succeeding in so great an undertaking.

There was in Valenciennes at that time, Valenciennes besieged.
a Garrison of three thousand Foot and a thousand Horse, besides two thousand
of the Inhabitants trained up in the Exercise of Arms, and a considerable
number of Gentlemen, who had thrown themselves into the Place to signalize
themselves in its Defense. The City was secured on one side by the Watery and
boggy Grounds, on the other, by many large Outworks, surrounded with deep
Ditches full of Water. The Inhabitants over-confident in the strength of the
Place, and recalling to their Memory the disgrace which the Marshal de la Ferte
received before that Place in the Year 1656, were puffed up with so much
Vanity, that, when the King sat down before the Place, in lieu of being alarmed
at it, they showed not the least concern in the World, but passed their time in
Feasting and other Rejoycings, and gave Balls upon their Bastions. But this
Vainglory soon vanished, and it may be said, without the least contradiction
to Truth, that there is scarce an Example to be found, where a place of such
strength, and so much reputation, has made a more faint resistance than this.

In the foregoing Year the King had made himself Master of Conde and Bouchain,
one of which being situate above, the other below Valenciennes, he by posting a
good Body of Horse near these two places, had kept this City blocked up
thegreatest part of the Winter.

It was Invested on the first Day of March, and the King being arrived on the
fourth of the same Month in the Camp, the Trenches were opened betwixt the
eighth and ninth, and pushed on the same Night for above sixteen hundred Paces.
The chief Attack was carried on against a Crown-Work, containing within its
compass a half Moon, and behind that a Ravelin, called the Pasty. Our Cannon
and Bombs had done great Execution upon these Outworks for several Days
together, when it was resolved to give the Assault on the next Morning by eight
a Clock. The Troops Commanded to give the Assault fell like Lions in four
several places upon the Counterscarp with so much fury, that the Enemy not
being able to sustain them, first gave way, and soon after betook themselves to
flight. Being pursued by the French, they retreated into the Crown-Work, but
with so much precipitation, that our Men entered pell mell with them, and
attacking them in Front, Rear, and Flank, cut eight hundred of them in pieces;
the rest, who endeavored to save themselves by flight, were beaten from Post
to Post with such an incredible Courage, that being quite frighted out of their
senses* they neglected to draw up the Bridge which joined to the Outwork. The
Conquering Soldiers encouraged as much by the opportunity as the good Success,
make themselves Masters of the Bridge, and whilst the rest are busy in
breaking open the Gates with Hatchets, some got upon the top of the next
Bastion by the help of Ladders, turn the Cannon against the Town, whilst their
Comerades that were got in through the Gates marched into the City, and
barricado'd themselves in the great Street, in sight of the Garrison, and the
City Militia, who being struck with a Panick fear at the boldness of the
Enterprise, Valenciennes takon by Assault.
threw down their Arms, and without any further Capitulation, surrendered at
Discretion.

Who is so ignorant as not to be sensible what prodigious Disorders used to be
committed in the ransacking of a Town taken by Assault, when the enraged
Soldier makes the Inhabitants, without the least difference of Age, Quality, or
Sex, feel the effects of his Fury. The dreadful Idea of all these Disasters,
their late unseasonable Bravadoes, and that implacable hatred which they had
shown against the French upon many occasions, made the Inhabitants, not without
great reason, tremble at the sight of their Conquering Enemies. But it was not
long that they were in fear of becoming a prey and Victim to the French
Soldiers, a few Minutes having delivered them from these direful apprehensions;
for, no sooner had the King been advertised of what had passed, but he sent
Messenger after Messenger, to forbid the plundering of the City.

The Soldiers had already began with some of the adjacent Houses, five or six
had been forced to feel the effects of those misfortunes which happen in the
pillaging of a Place taken by Assault; and 'twas feared that the unruly
Soldiers would scarce be prevailed upon to let slip so fair an opportunity of
satisfying both their Avarice and Revenge, and to be deaf to the Orders of
their Commanders; but no sooner were they forbidden in the King's Name to
plunder the City, but all violence ceased in an instant, to the great
astonishment of the whole City, who could not but stand amazed at the
submission of the Soldiery in the midst of their fury, who gave such eminent
marks of their Obedience to the King's pleasure, by their alacrity in gaining
the Victory, and their entire submission in relinquishing the Fruits of their
Bravery. The whole Garrison which consisted still of two thousand eight hundred
Men, were made Prisoners of War; but the Citizens had their chiefest Privileges
confirmed to them. In the Afternoon every thing appeared as quiet in the City,
as if they had not changed their Master. A most remarkable Victory, where a
handful of Men, in half an hours time, carried several strong Works by Assault,
passed four or five Ditches, and made themselves Masters of one of the
strongest and most populous Cities in all Flanders, and that with the loss only
of Forty Men on our side.

The taking of Valenciennes, did, like a dreadful Thunderclap, make the whole
Country round about tremble for fear, there being scarce one City, though never
so strong, in those parts, which did not dread to undergo the same Fate. To
raise their drooping Courage, the Prince of Orange marched at the Head of an
Army of thirty thousand Men, composed of the Dutch Forces, to endeavor the
relief either of Cambray, or St. Omer, which were besieged both at the same
time, the first by the King in Person, the other by the Duke of Orleans, his
Majesty's only Brother. Cambray being of such a strength and advantageous
Situation, that it was reported, the Spaniards made more account upon it than
all the rest of Flanders; it was generally believed the storm would fall that
way, but beyond all expectation, the Enemy rather chose to relieve St. Omer
than Cambray, partly because they might with less difficulty possess themselves
of some advantageous Posts near St. Omer, partly because they had flattered
themselves with this Opinion, that without much resistance they might force our
Quarters on one side, where they were not very well secured.

The Enemies march was so far from causing the least disturbance among our
Soldiers, that both Sieges were carried on with the same Vigor as before,
there being such an Emulation among the Soldiery, that one strove to outdo the
other in performing their duties, the more, because they were plentifully
provided with every thing necessary for their subsistence. For it is to be
observed, that the King took always this sure Maxim, to have his Magazins every
Year very well provided during the Winter, with all manner of Provisions, to be
in a condition to prevent his Enemies designs, and to appear as early in the
Field as he judged it convenient.

Cambray was so furiously attacked by the King, Cambray surrendered April 5.
that the City was forced to Capitulate within six days after opening of the
Trenches; the next following Day the King ordered a Detachment of nine
Battallions to march with all possible diligence to join the Duke of Orleans,
before the Enemy could force his Lines, or engage him. This Prince had in the
mean while advanced so briskly in the Siege of St. Omer, that at that very time
he had made himself Master of the most considerable Fort near the Place, and on
which depended hitherto the whole safety of the Town. It was at that very
instant he received certain intelligence that the Enemy were advanced within
six or seven Leagues, in order to relieve the Place. His Troops were much
harassed, and less numerous than the Prince of Orange's, but having received
the King's Orders to march against them, he marched out of the Lines, and
having left only a Body of Militia, with some regular Troops, to guard the
Trenches and Works, directed his march toward Cassel, being confident that the
King had taken his measures so surely, as that the expected reinforcement would
come time enough to his assistance; neither did he find himself in the least
mistaken in his hopes, the abovementioned Battallions having joined him at the
very nick of time, as he expected, and so a propos, that if they had come
sooner, they would have been less useful.

The Duke of Orleans strengthened by this reinforcement, and finding himself
not inferior in number to the Enemy, sought only for an opportunity to execute
the King's Commands; in order to which, with a generous resolution, he passed
the next Day with his Army a small Brook which separated the two Armies, and
attacked the Enemy with great fury. Battli of Cassel April 11.
The first Encounter was the most terrible that had been seen in the memory of
Man, both sides fighting with an equal bravery, so that the success remained
doubtful for some Hours, just as if Fortune had taken a particular delight to
see so many brave Men dispute Victory to the utmost of their power. But after
the Enemy had stood their ground bravely for three Hours,, they were at last
forced to give way, and soon after being broken on all sides, to seek for their
safety in their Heels; leaving as a pledge of their defeat, to the mercy of our
Soldiers all their Ammunition and Baggage, seventeen Standards, four and forty
Colors, thirteen pieces of Cannon, three thousand Prisoners, and the Field all
covered with dead and wounded Men; Six thousand of them were counted to be
fallen upon the spot, the rest saved themselves under the favor of the Hedges
and Defiles; the approaching Night, and the vast number of small Channels, in
which the Country abounds serving them for a safeguard against their Enemies,
who durst not pursue them but with a great deal of caution.

The Duke of Orleans acquired immortal Glory in this Action, having shown
himself as great a General in the disposition of his Army, as he behaved
himself a brave Soldier during the whole Engagement, having received two Shot
in his Armor, as he was rallying some Battallions and leading them on again to
Charge the Enemy; he continued with his Army for 2 Days after, near the Field
of Battle, the better to give his Orders for the pursuit of the Enemy, and to
see whether perhaps they might be in a condition to try their Fortune, and
attempt the relief of the Place a second time; but having received certain
intelligence that they were retreated far into the Country, he returned with
his Troops to the Lines, to continue the Siege of St. Omer without any further
interruption.

In two Days after his new Batteries began to Play against the Body of the
Place, and the Trenches were carried on to the Glacis. The Counterscarp being
taken, St. Omer taken.
a wide Breach was made, the Ditch filled up in Order to give a General
Assault, the Town Capitulated after having defended it self with a great deal
of Gallantry and Resolution.

Three days before the Citadel of Cambray had likewise been forced to a
Surrender by the King. The Garrison was composed of seven old Regiments,
whereof two were Spaniards, two Lorrainers, and three Walloons, under a
Governor who had an equal share of bravery and skill in Martial Affairs. The
Place was well provided with every thing for its Defense, and of such a
strength, that its Fortifications were looked upon as impregnable. Every thing
seemed to concur for a Vigorous Defense against the King's Forces, who were not
above nine or ten thousand strong. This seemed to be a very slender Force, and
little suitable to the greatness of the Enterprise, but the King, by his
Presence, Vigilance, and Example, did animate his Soldiers to that degree, that
redoubling their Courage and Activity, they, in spite of the continual Fire and
frequent Sallies of the Besieged, carried all the Outworks in nine or ten Days
time. Our Cannon having soon after made a Breach in one of the Bastions of the
Place, large enough for thirty Men to mount Abreast, the Governor despairing
of being able to hold out the Assault, demanded a Capitulation. It would have
been no difficult matter for the King to have obliged him to surrender at
discretion, but being free to show Mercy to one that had behaved himself so
Gallantly, The Citadel of Cambray surrendered.
he agreed to certain Articles to serve him as a comfort in his present
affliction, pursuant to which the Garrison marched out at the Breach, with
Drums beating, Colors Flying, and two pieces of Cannon.

The Conquest of these three important places, and the Battle of Cassel, put
the Affairs of the Confederacy into such a confusision, that it was a
considerable time before they could recollect themselves. For it was not till
three Months after that they held a Congress at Wesel, to deliberate concerning
some Enterprise of moment, by which they might in some measure recover their
former Reputation and Hopes. The Elector of Brandenburgh, the Duke of
Nieuburgh, who had lately declared against France, the Ambassador of the King
of Denmark, the Pensionary of Holland, Admiral Trump, and the Envoys of the
King of Spain, and several other Electors were present at this Conference,
where the Siege of Charleroy was resolved upon, and the execution thereof
committed to the Management of the Prince of Orange. No sooner was the Place
invested with threescore thousand Men, but the King's Army posted themselves
betwixt the Enemy and those Cities of Flanders, from whence they must draw
their Provisions, so that their Convoys being intercepted, they were in a
manner blocked up, and began to want Provisions in two Days time. There was no
other remedy left, than either to fight us, or to quit the Siege, but the
Confederates not judging it for their purpose to hazard a second Battle, they
decamped not without some Confusion before eight Days were expired, laying the
fault upon one another, and consuming what Forage they could meet with in the
Country, without showing any great inclination to oppose the King's Forces, who
ravaged the Country, and exacted great Contributions.

The King's Arms were attended with the same success in other parts. Victory in
Catalonia.
Philip de Montaut Duke de Nouailles, had ravaged the whole Lampourdan, and
defeated ten Thousand Spaniards, as they were repassing the Pyrenean Mountains;
there were three Thousand five Hundred of the Enemies killed upon the place,
and eight Hundred made Prisoners, with the loss of only two Hundred Men on our
side.

In Germany the Troops of the neighboring Circles commanded by a Duke of
Saxony, In Germany.
had been worsted in several Encounters, and were at last forced to seek for
shelter in one of the Islands of the Rhine. But what they intended for their
Preservation, had very near proved their total Destruction, being in eminent
danger of perishing either by Famine, or the Enemies Sword, if upon the
intercession of the Magistrate of Strasburgh, the King had not granted them a
Passport to retreat from thence in security, under condition that they should
not bear Arms against the King the same Campaign.

The Passport being signed by the Marshal de Crequy, who commanded at that time
on the Rhine, the abovementioned Forces, with their Saxon General, were
marching homeward, being conducted by a strong Guard, their main security
against their Enemies, when Prince Charles of Lorrain came in timely to their
Assistance to deliver them from so ignominious a Retreat. But it was not long
before he paid dearly for the Glory of having rescued the Germans, for within
few Days after, the Cavalry of his Right Wing was totally routed and cut to
pieces.

This Prince was Heir and Nephew to the old Duke of Lorrain, who died in the
Year 1675.

After his Death, the Emperor to bring him over to his Interest, made him
General over his Army on the Rhine, promising to give to him in Marriage his
Sister the Queen Dowager of Poland, and to make use of all his Power and
Interest to put him into the Possession of Lorrain, which belonged to him by
right of Succession.

His projected design succeeded but ill in the Year 1676. But at the beginning
of the Campaign, in the Year 1677, he thought himself so sure, that he puts
this Motto upon his Standards, Maintenant ou jamais; that is, Now or Never.
Full of these fair hopes, he passed the Saar, and advanced as far as Mouson;
but the Marshal de Crequy followed him so closely upon the Heels, that he
scarce ever missed any opportunity to intercept his Convoys, and thereby to cut
off his necessary Supplies of Provisions; he kept his Army in continual Alarm,
and by his Marches and Counter-marches, harrass'd them to that degree, that he
broke all the Duke's Measures, who was at last forced to repass the Rhine,
without having been able to do any thing of moment all that Campaign.

The Germans had no sooner repassed the Rhine, Friburgh taken.
but the Marshal de Crequy invested Friburgh, the Capital City of Brisgau. This
City is of a considerable bigness, and its Citadel very strong both by its
Situation and several good Works; notwithstanding which, the Marshal attacked
it so briskly, that he became Master of it in less than eight Days time, before
Prince Charles of Lorrain could come to its relief.

About a Month after, St. Gillian besieged and taken.
the King caused St. Gillian to be Besieged; this Place is situate in the midst
of the Province of Heinault, of very good strength, and well provided with
every thing necessary for its defense. The Soldiers were not only to fight
against the Enemy, but also against the cold Season, it being in the Month of
December; notwithstanding all these Difficulties, they carried the place in
nine Days, a convincing Instance, that the King's Troops were used to outbrave
all the Rigours of the Season.

These frequent Losses, and continual Disappointments made the People of
Holland wish as much for a Peace, as the Prince of Orange had reason to oppose
it. For it being the Interest of that Prince to keep in his Hands as long as
possibly he could, that great power wherewith he was invested as long as he was
supreme Commander both over their Sea and Land Forces, he left no Stone
unturned to prevent the States from making either a general or particular Peace
with France. But this small and troublesome War, which had already lasted four
Years, having exhausted all the Parties concerned, both of Men and Money, the
Prince judged it most for his Purpose to make his application to the Court of
England.

The English at that time overflowed in Riches, they had in a manner managed
all the Traffic of Europe alone for three Years last past. Their great
affluence of Riches, had made them jealous of our King's growing Power, and
being besides this desirous of Glory, and of signalizing themselves abroad,
they earnestly wished for a War with France, which had made them more than once
to solicit King Charles II. to enter into the Confederacy. This appearing a
favorable juncture to the Prince of Orange's Design, he undertook a Journey to
London, as well to engage that King in an Alliance against us, as to espouse
the eldest Daughter of the Duke of York. The Prince of Orange being K. Charles
II. his Nephew, was much beloved and esteemed by him. The Prince's Religion,
his great Capacity and Riches, his Aversion to France, and his great Interest
in Holland, had procured him great and many Friends in both Houses of
Parliament. It is easy to be imagined, that upon this occasion he made use of
all his Engines to draw his Uncle into the Confederacy, for which reason he
persuaded him to project certain Propositions of Peace, and to declare against
those that should refuse to accept of them. League betwixt England and Holland.
France being unwilling to hearken to these Conditions, great Levies were made
in England, and some of their Troops were transported into Flanders. But
neither this New League, neither the English Auxiliary Troops were sufficient
to stop the Progress of our King's Victorious Arms, or to hinder him from
making new Conquests in the next Spring.

The better to cover his design, Campaign in 1678.
he took a Progress into Lorrain, the beginning of February, where he continued
all that Month with the Queen and the whole Court.

During this Progress, his Armies in Flanders, in Germany and Lorrain were
continually in motion, so that these Marches and Countermarches did amuse the
Enemy to that degree, that it was impossible for them to judge which of their
Places was most in danger, and consequently to take any sure Measures for the
security of such places as they thought most exposed, for fear of leaving
others unprovided in case of an Attack. For the King having his Magazines well
provided with every thing necessary for the carrying on four or five Sieges at
a time from the Sea to the Rhine, the Confederates were put under a necessity
of fearing all, without being able to guess whereabouts the Storm would fall.

Whilst they were under this perplexity, the Marshal de Humiers made a faint,
as if he intended to Besiege Ipres, which obliged the Governor of the Spanish
Netherlands, to send thither a great part of the Garrison of Ghent. But scarce
were they on their March toward Ipres, when the City of Ghent it self was
invested by threescore Thousand Men, who were ordered thither from all the
circumjacent places; and at the same time Ipres, Charlemont, Namur, Mons, and
Luxenburgh, where the Confederates had disposed most of their best Troops, were
blocked up by several flying Armies.

Ghent has always been esteemed the largest City of the Low Countries; Siege of
Ghent.
it has a good Citadel with very fair Outworks, a strong Wall, surrounded with
a large and deep Ditch. Its Fortifications, the number and Martial Inclination
of its Inhabitants, besides its low situation in a Marshy Ground, at the
Confluence of three Rivers and two Canals, which serve for a Barricado against
an approaching Enemy, did render this Enterprise so difficult in the Eyes of
all the World, that after the Siege was begun, the News of it scarce met with
credit in the Neighboring Countries.

The King had taken such measures, and his Orders were obeyed with such
exactness and alacrity, that, though the Place had not been Invested above three
Days when he arrived in the Camp, the Lines of Circumvallation, which contained
eight Leagues in compass, were very near brought to perfection, notwithstanding
the rainy Season, and the many difficulties which were to be surmounted in
these marshy Grounds. It was extremely bad Weather when he set out from Stenay,
notwithstanding which he traveled above sixty large Leagues in less than three
Days, and arrived in the Camp before Ghent on the 4th of March, when without
dismounting from his Horse, or taking the least refreshment or repose, he took,
in Person, a view of the Place, and all the Works; the Governor of Ghent
having the same Day opened the Sluices, the King ordered so many Dikes and
Ditches for the draining of the Ground to be made, that his Forces received no
considerable damage by the Water, and were preserved in so good a condition, as
to make themselves Masters the next Day of the Counterscarp, and some
Outworks. Nevertheless this great City defended it self for some time longer,
till the Inhabitants being made sensible of the effects of our Bombs,
Carcasses, and fiery Bullets, which flew as thick as Hailstones, and destroyed
their Houses, they beat a Parley. The next day after the Citadel was besieged
by Noonday, Ghent taken.
which being defended by four good Bastions, and a Garrison of a thousand Men,
yet was forced to surrender on the third Day after opening of the Trenches.

After the taking of Ghent, Ypress besieged.
the King without loosing any time marched directly to Ipress, a well Fortified
City, and conveniently situated for the King to keep correspondence with, and
secure his other Conquests thereabouts. The Spaniards had lately drawn out of
the place two Battallions of their best Men, whom they sent to Bruges to
reinforce that Garrison; nevertheless there was, at the beginning of the Siege,
a Garrison consisting of three thousand effective Men, old and well disciplined
Troops; besides a great number of brave Officers and Volunteers, who, by their
Example encouraged the Soldiers to make a vigorous Defense. But by the bravery
of our Troops, the Trenches were carried on to the Glacis and Counterscarp, and
after a bloody Engagement taken with Sword in Hand, so the City and Citadel
being without any hopes of relief, Capitulated at the same time. The Siege cost
us abundance of Men, though it lasted not above nine Days after the opening of
the Trenches, by reason that the French were not only to overcome the obstinacy
of the Besieged, who defended themselves very valiantly, but also the rigor of
the cold Season, and the inconveniences of continual Rains.

The King's Arms being thus every where crowned with Success, it seemed that
nothing was able to resist his Power; those Princes that were entered into a
League against him, having, for four Years together raised no other advantage
by the Confederacy, than to add new Luster to his Glory and Power: He had at
that time two great Fleets at Sea, and five Armies on Land, which, together
with his Garrisons, consisted of sixty thousand Horse, and two hundred and
forty thousand Foot, all well disciplined Troops, and inured to the Fatigues of
War. His Frontiers were enclosed on all sides with strong Forts, and well
Fortified Cities; his Treasury in a good condition, and the whole Kingdom in a
profound Tranquillity. He himself both delighted in and understood the Art of
War. His Affairs being in so flourishing a condition, what could hinder him
from making new Conquests, if his desire of Glory had not been Counterbalanc'd
by his Inclination for Peace, and seeing that his Enemies were reduced to a
state of moderation, and his Frontiers secured on all sides, he resolved to
restore tranquillity to Europe.

After Charles II. King of England was entered into the Alliance with the
Dutch, King Chapter II. Mediator at the Treaty of Nimeguen.
his chief aim was, to make himself a happy instrument in procuring a general
Peace, in which he succeeded so well, that his Mediation was accepted. For
hitherto matters had advanced but slowly at the Treaty of Nimeguen, where two
Years were spent in settling some Preliminaries of little moment, in respect of
the great Work they were to transact; to wit, in Disputes about the place of
Treaty, in fixing the bounds of the Neutrality, in exchanging their
Credentials, and examining their Commissions, and such other Preliminaries as
are commonly made use of to protract these Conferences, whilst in the mean
while the longest Sword decides the principal differences in the Field.

It is sufficiently known, that scarce a Year had passed since the Declaration
of the War, wherein Spain had not been a considerable loser, nevertheless, they
were the first who protested with all the solemn expressions in the World, that
they would never consent to the Peace, unless our King did restore all what he
had taken from them: and the Emperor's Pretensions were as exorbitant as those
of the Spaniards. For which purpose the King made his chief application to the
Hollanders, being sensible that if he could draw them from the Interest of the
Confederacy, and persuade them to accept of a separate Peace, the other Princes
would soon follow their Example. The King was sufficiently convinced that the
Jealousy fomented by a certain Faction in Holland against the Prince, and their
fear, lest, if the War should continue much longer, they might be involved in
some troubles by the Prince's departure for England; the decay of their Trade,
and the immense charges they were at by bearing the burden of the War in
maintaining not only their own Troops, but also most of the Confederate Forces,
made them very desirous after a Peace; but the more it was their Interest to
promote it, the more difficulties were to be surmounted before it could be
brought to a happy conclusion.

For, though the Emperor and Spain had acted but with indifferent success in this
War, yet on the other Hand the King of Denmark and Elector of Brandenburgh had
had considerable advantages over Sueden, which had declared for us against the
Confederacy in the Year 1675. In three Years time that the War lasted betwixt
the Northern Princes, the Suedes had gained three Battles by Land, but they had
been worsted in three several Sea-Engagements, and had lost the Isle of Rugen,
and all Pomerania. This success against the Suedes seemed to intimate to the
Confederates, that the French might also be vanquished in their turn: The
Emperor and Spain showed more inclination for the continuation of the War, than
for the Peace, though it be evident, that their hopes were built but upon a very
slippery foundation, to wit, upon the chance of Fortune, and those continual
vicissitudes which are the constant Attendants of all human Affairs.

This was the reason, that notwithstanding all the earnest applications of the
States General to obtain a General Peace, yet the Treaty advanced but slowly,
and might, perhaps, have been quite rendered ineffectual, if the King had not
taken a firm resolution to see it brought to a happy conclusion, by taking such
measures as should oblige the rest of the Confederates to accept of the Peace.
The King himself drew up the Articles which he sent to his Plenipotentiaries at
Nimeguen, to be communicated to the Mediators, under this condition, that in
case the Confederates did not think fit to accept of them in forty Days, the
King should be at liberty to alter them, or to propose some new time. By virtue
of these Articles, he was to remain in possession of all his Conquests, unless
Maestricht, and six Places in Flanders, to wit, Ghent, Courtray, Aeth,
Oudenarde, Charleroy, Limbourgh, and St. Gillian demolished.

That the King promised to restore Maestricht to the Hollanders, and the six
abovementioned places to the Spaniards.

That the Peace of Munster should remain in its full force.

That if the Emperor kept Philipsbourg, the King should remain in possession
of Fribourg.

That the Prince of Furstemberg should be set at Liberty and restored to his
Honor, Dignities, and Estate.

And that lastly, the Northern Princes should restore to the Suedes what they
had taken from them in this War.

Most of the Confederates exclaimed against these Articles, but notwithstanding
all their Protestations and Clamours, their Threats, Intreagues, and Cabals,
they were at last obliged to accept of the same terms.

The Hollanders had no sooner embraced the King's offer, but the Emperor and
Elector of Brandenburgh loudly exclaimed against their Proceedings, upbraiding
them with breach of Faith, and Ingratitude. But who is so unacquained in
public Affairs, as to look for acknowledgment among Princes, or to imagine
they think themselves obliged to one another for the assistance they give, when
it is evident, that the same proceeds more from a motive of Interest than
Friendship? how can a State therefore be charged with Ingratitude, unless it be
called so when they search too narrowly into the true causes of a benefit they
have received? But, to be short, these reproaches made but slender impressions
upon the States, who were so far from changing their opinion, that they
prevailed upon the Spaniards to follow their Example; but when the Spanish
Ambassadors were upon the point of signing the Articles, there arose an
unforeseen difficulty, which was likely to have broken off the whole Treaty.

For in the Article concerning Spain, wherein the King had promised to restore
to them six Places in Flanders, there being no certain time limited, the
States had interpreted it thus, that the Evacuation of the said Places should
be made immediately after the Ratification of the Peace betwixt France and
Spain. But the King's Intention being not so much that by restoring these
Places to Spain, they should serve as a Barricado betwixt him and the
Hollanders, and to remove the Jealousy they had conceived at the Neighborhood
of so potent a Prince, as to be in lieu of an equivalent for those Places that
were to be restored to Sweden, he refused to surrender these Cities into the
Hands of the Spaniards, before the Swedes had received full satisfaction as to
their Demands.

This Spark was like to have proved the occasion of rekindling the Flames, and
renewing the War with more Vigor and Animosity than before, the Emperor and
Spain not being wanting to lay hold of this Opportunity to revive the
Jealousies, and to persuade the Hollanders, that the King had no real
Inclination for Peace, his only design being by withdrawing them from the
Confederacy, to surprise them hereafter with the more ease.

Our King had given most evident Proofs of his sincere Intentions for the
Peace; to promote which, he had recalled his Forces out of Sicily, under the
Command of Francis de Aubusson la Feuillade, Duke, Peer, and Marshal of France;
he had at the Intercession of the Hollanders, The French leave Sicily.
prolonged the Term which he had fixed to the Allies for the accepting the
Propositions of Peace; and tho he had within the last Month extended his
Conquests both in Flanders and Catalonia, by the taking of two considerable
places, yet was he so far from taking any advantage of his good Fortune, that
on the other hand he offered to restore them without any equivalent. But
notwithstanding all these Demonstrations of his most fervent Inclinations for
Peace, Matters hung in suspense for some time, neither could the Treaty be
brought to a Conclusion, till the King of Sweden declared by his Ambassadors,
That he not only consented, but also prayed His Most Christian Majesty to
restore the above mentioned Places to Spain, and not to delay any longer to
give Peace to Europe, on account of the particular Interest of the Crown of
Sweden. This grand Obstacle being removed, the Peace was signed betwixt the
King and the States the 10th Day of August in the Year 1678.

Within four Days after, the Prince of Orange attacked the Duke of Luxemburgh,
who, whilst they were contesting at Nimeguen, kept Mons blocked up with an Army
of forty Thousand Men. Peace of Nime^uen.
The Prince of Orange had in view no less than the breaking off of the whole
Treaty, or at least to obtain some more advantageous Conditions, if he happened
to succeed in this Enterprise. The Duke of Luxemburgh could not in the least
suspect his Intention, as having received fresh Assurances, that the Peace was
signed; Engagement near St. Denis.
but by his brave Resolution he diverted the danger that he had put himself
into by his being too confident of his own Security by the Peace.

The Action was very bloody, which was ended at Night without any considerable
Advantage on either side, unless that the Enemy retired in some Confusion, and
were pursued to their Camp. The next Day there was a Cessation of all
Hostilities, the Peace was proclaimed the same Day in the Camp, and ratified
within a Month after.

After the Conclusion of this Treaty with the Dutch, the Spaniards found
themselves under an indispensible necessity to accept of those Conditions the
Hollanders had procured for them. It was in vain for the rest of the
Confederates to make use of all their Persuasions and Intrigues, to prevent the
Spaniards from accepting of them, who signed the Peace on the seventeenth of
September following.

This done, the King without losing any further time, ordered his Troops
toward the Rhine, with an Intention to attack the Emperor and Empire with the
utmost vigor before the Winter; some of the German Princes dreading the Storm
that threatened them, began to withdraw from the rest, and to make their
Applications to the Spaniards and States General to be comprehended in the
Treaty. But Spain, pursuant to asecret Agreement (as it was supposed) betwixt
those two Branches of the House of Austria, made several Delays in the
Ratification of the Peace, so that the time prefixed for the said Ratification,
(notwithstanding it had been twice prolonged at the Request of the Dutch) was
very near expired.

In the mean while the French Forces made frequent Excursions into the very
Heart of Flanders, not sparing even those places that had hitherto escaped from
being visited by them; they exacted such vast Sums from all the circumjacent
Country, and pillaged all such as refused to pay them Contributions, that
according to the computation and confession of the Enemies themselves, the flat
Country suffered more from the time of the signing till the Ratification of the
Treaty, than it had done in the heat of the War. The Cries and Lamentations of
the People did at last overcome the Resolution of the Spanish Council, who in
spite of all the opposition made by the rest of the Allies, caused the Peace to
be ratified in December in the Year 1678.

Immediately after the King ordered his Ambassadors at Nimeguen to declare to
the Emperor's Ministers, that in case their Master did not think fit to accept
of the same Conditions as they had been proposed in the Project of the General
Peace, within a limited time, that after that there should be no further talk
of Peace. This Declaration and the fear they were in of the King's Forces that
were approaching the Rhine, made the Emperor and Empire at last resolve rather
to choose the Harbor, than to expose themselves in the open Sea, to so dreadful
a Tempest, as threatened their Destruction.

Thus a Peace was concluded betwixt the Emperor and our King in the Month of
February in the Year 1679. upon condition, that the Peace of Munster should
remain in its full force, and that the Emperor should resign all his Right and
Sovereignty over the City of Friburgh, and the whole Alsace to our King.

During the Treaty at Nimeguen, the King at the Intercession of the Emperor,
and the rest of the Confederates, had left it to the choice of Prince Charles
of Lorrain, whether he would accept of the Possession of the Duchy of Lorrain,
without that of Bar, pursuant to the Pyrenean Treaty; or whether he would be
satisfied, if the King restored him to the Possession of both those Dutchies,
reserving only to himself the City of Nancy, and all the Grounds and Highways
by which the King's Armies were to march into Germany. The Prince at first
chose the last of these two, but soon after repenting his Choice, refused to
accept either.

But tho the Peace was signed betwixt the Emperor and the King, the King of
Denmark, and Elector of Brandenburgh, protested against it, continuing to make
vast Preparations to maintain themselves in their Conquests taken from the
Swedes in Germany. But when the French Troops began to approach the Frontiers
of Brandenburgh, these Princes were foon brought to a compliance, and showed as
much eagerness for the Peace, as they had shown aversion against it before. The
King of Sweden received full satisfaction, they being obliged to restore all
that had been taken from that Crown, without any other Equivalent, but a good
Sum of Money, which was paid them by our King.

It will, without all question, appear surprising, and perhaps past belief to
Posterity, how France should have been strong enough to withstand so many
Enemies at one time; and that after they had been vanquished, they should have
been obliged to accept of a Peace upon the same Terms, as they were proposed by
our King. It is certain that France never made a Peace which proved more
Glorious, or more for its Interest than this, or which has been managed with
more dexterity. The chief Glory of it is due only to our King, who not only
himself made the first Project, but also, according to the different progress
of the Treaty, directed every step to be taken by his Ambassadors and
Plenipotentiaries Godfrey de Estrades Marshal of France, Charles Colbert
Marquis de Croissy, afterward Minister and Secretary of State, and Anthony de
Mesmes Count de Avaux.

Thus Crowned both with Laurel and Olive-Branches, he was ever after the Object
of Admiration, not only of his Subjects, but also of all Europe.

AN ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS the GREAT. LIB. IV.
THE King having restored Peace to Europe, employed all his care in rendering
it as durable as possibly could be; and having now laid aside his further
thoughts of extending the limits of his Kingdom, he judged it most conducing to
his Affairs, to secure his Frontiers on all sides, by good Fortifications. For
which purpose, after he had consulted with his best Engineers, he himself made
the Draughts of the most considerable Fortifications, appointed the Charges and
all other particulars belonging to the perfecting of the Works, according to
the best modern Rules. Never were any places seen exceeding either in strength
or beauty some of those that were, by the King's Orders built in Flanders, and
Alsace, the Franche Compte, to defend the Passages of the Lis, the Rhine, the
Saar, the Moselle, the Meuse, and several other Rivers that border upon his
Dominions; it has been computed, that since his accession to the Crown, two
hundred and twenty Towns, Forts, Citadels, Ports and Harbors have been
fortified by his Orders. As he was not insensible that the best safeguard of a
Prince is to maintain his Respect among his Enemies, so not contented with
having fortified his Frontiers, unless they were also guarded by a good number
of Troops, he did only disband some of his Forces, retaining the best in his
Service, to render himself at all times invincible, tho his thoughts were now
more bent to preserve Tranquillity in his Dominions, than to conquer his Enemies.

He kept all the Officers of the Disbanded Regiments in Pay, and that he might
never want a constant supply of good Officers, The Academies for the Cadies.
even in time of Peace, he erected many Companies of young Gentlemen; these
were brought up in all Warlike-Exercises, and entertained at the King's Charge
in the Citadels, and when a Captain or Lieutenant's place became vacant, it was
these that supplied those Posts proportionable to their Deserts.

The better to encourage his Troops to glorious Actions by the assurance of a
safe Retreat in their Native Country, The Invalids.
he caused that Hospital called the Invalids, to be built in one of the Suburbs
of Paris, a truly magnificent Structure, where those that are rendered
unserviceable either by Age, or their Wounds, find an honorable Retreat and
Reward for their past Labors and Toils.

To afford also foam relief to such Gentlemen as often ruin their Estates in
the Service of their Country, The House of St. Lewis at St. Cyr.
he founded a Community for three Hundred young Gentlewomen at St. Cyr. These
young Ladies are educated in this House with particular care from the Age of
Seven till Twenty, when they are either provided with some advantageous Match,
or else, if their inclination be otherwise, are sent into a Nunnery. This Noble
Community is without parallel in Europe.

For the rest the King ordered his Troops to encamp every Year, when he used
frequently to take a view of them in Person, and in his Progress to visit some
of his Frontier Places, to keep the Governors and Overseers of his Works and
Places in awe, and to encourage them by his Presence to perform their Duty.

As he was in the Year 1683. returning from one of these Progresses, Death of
the Queen of France.
where he had been accompanied by the whole Court the Queen Maria Theresia of
Austria, fell dangerously ill of a Fever, which put an end to her Life on the
30th of July, after four Days Sickness. She was a Princess endowed with
extraordinary Qualities, very Devout, Charitable to the Poor, Liberal to her
Domestics, and Affable to all the World. She had the Happiness, before her
Death, to see the Dauphin (who was Born at Fontainbleau in the Year 1661. the
first of November seven Minutes after Twelve a Clock at Noon) Married to a
virtuous Princess, and a Father of a very fine young Prince.

Of six Children which she had brought into the World, The Dauphin of France.
Lewis the Dauphin of France, was the only surviving, a very Handsome, and Wise
Prince, of great Moderation and Vigorous Constitution, as active and dextrous
in his Military Exercises as courageous in encountering of Danger.

Never any Prince had the advantage of a more Noble Education, in respect of
the Ability of those to whose Care and Tuition he was committed; the King
having made choice of Charles de St. Maurice Duke of Montausier, and Peer of
France for his Governor, and of James Bossuet Bishop of Meaux, so famous for
his many Works, for his Preceptor; but not satisfied with this, he never was
sparing in his Paternal Care, to give him in Person all the necessary
Instructions for the Accomplishment of a great Prince. A King, who really loves
his Subjects, does in vain strive to raise the Glory of his Country by his
great Actions, unless he also be careful to instruct his Successor to follow
his Footsteps, and to preserve by his own Courage and Conduct the Reputation
which he has acquired. It is easy to be imagined that there was never a Court
in Europe, but what most earnestly desired to be joined to us in Alliance by so
advantageous a Match, especially since that Engagement which was some Years
before negotiated with the Elector and Electoress of Bavaria, on the account of
Marriage betwixt the Dauphin and the Princess of Bavaria, seemed to be broken
by the Death of the Parents of the said Princess; but notwithstanding this
Change, and that the said Match was not attended with the same Advantages as
before, Dauphin Married.
the King jealous of his Honor and Royal Word, Married the Dauphin to their
Eldest Daughter, on the 7th of March in the Year 1680.

Notwithstanding all the Obstacles and Difficulties raised by the Imperial and
Spanish Ministers about the execution of the Treaty of Nimiguen, Europe enjoyed
the Fruits of a Happy Peace for three Years: In the mean while the King looking
upon it as a most Glorious Work to turn his Arms against the Enemies of the
Christian Name, he resolved to employ his Forces against the Corsairs of
Africa, a Nation whose chief Glory, Commerce and Employment, consists in
pillaging and plundering; several of their Ships were sunk, the Sieur Du Quesne
burnt eight more in the Port of Chio, in the Year 1681, and the Marshal de
Estree, Vice Admiral of France, Tripoli Bombarded in 1685.
Bombarded Tripoli four Years after, till at last at the Intercession of the
Grand Seignior, the King was pleased to grant them a Peace a second time.

The Algerines the most famous of all the Pirates on the Coast of Barbary, for
having in the last Age out-braved the power of that great Monarch Charles V.
were so presumptuous as to declare War against France. To chastise their
Insolence, the City of Algier was Bombarded three several times; In the Year
1682, 1683, 1684.
after the second Bombardment, they were forced to release six hundred French
Slaves without Ransom; and in the third they received so much damage, that
notwithstanding the Offers of the Genoueses and Spaniards to assist them
against us, they sent their Deputies into France to sue for Peace. The
Genoueses had also given great occasion of Displeasure to our King. They were
accused of having fomented and encouraged a Conspiracy which was laid to burn
the King's Ships and Galleys in the Ports of Marseilles and Thoulon; they had
lately embraced the Interest and Protection of Spain, and had built four new
Galleys in order to join them with the Spanish Squadron. To make them sensible
of their error, the King ordered the City of Genoua to be Bombarded. Thirteen
Thousand Bombs were thrown into the City with good Success, and the proud City
of Genoua would certainly have been laid quite in Ashes by a second
Bombardment, Genoua Bombarded
if by the Intercession of the Pope, and their timely repentance, they had not
prevented their own ruin.

The King of Spain had at that time among other Titles, taken upon him that of
the Protector of the Republic of Genoua, but could not prevail with our King
that the said Commonwealth should be comprehended in the Truce, which was about
the same time concluded betwixt these two Crowns; but to extirpate their former
Miscarriages, they were forced to send in the Year 1685. in May, their Doge
with four Senators, to make their Submission to the King in the Name of the
whole Republic, to implore his Mercy, and to receive such Conditions as he was
pleased to grant them.

But we have detained our selves too long in relating these Trifles, there are
so many things of greater consequence to be taken notice of in the glorious
Reign of so great a King, that these frivolous Matters ought only to be touched
upon en passant, that we may have the more leisure to pursue the Thread of our
History in relation to other Affairs of moment.

By Virtue of the Treaty of Nimeguen, the whole Upper and Lower Alsace being
granted to the King with an absolute Sovereignty over it, and all its
Dependencies, the King sent the next following Year his Summons to all the
Princes, Cities, and other Vassals depending on the said Province, to give
their appearance to do Homage and Swear Fealty to him. Some obeyed, but the
most refused to appear. Upon their Refusal, the King erected a certain Chamber
of Reunion at Brisack, who adjudged their Lands and Fiefs forfeited to the
King, according to the Laws of Fiefs, which enjoin the forfeiture of the Estate
of a Vassal, who either neglects or refuses to pay the Homage due to his Lord.

At the same time the Chamber of Reunion established by the King's Order at
Brisac, Chambers of Reunion at Brisac and Metz.
took the same Method in respect of those Fiefs, which had formerly belonged
to, and were since dismembered from the three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and
Verdun. As these Re-unions extended over a vast Tract of Ground, so the
Neighboring Princes taking the alarm, made their complaints to the Diet at
Ratisbonne, soliciting for aid to stop the further progress of these
Proceedings. They were not wanting on their side, to represent to the Diet the
pressing necessity of applying a speedy remedy, but they were very slow in
their Debates, and much slower in their Resolutions. These Re-unions being
looked upon by some of the Princes of the Empire as an infraction of the Peace,
whilst they pretended to evince them to be no more than the natural
consequences of the Treaty of Nimeguen, the first were for taking up Arms for
the Defense of the Empire, the others representing the danger of coming to
these extremities in so critical a juncture.

Whilst they thus spent their time in contests, Strasburgh Surrenders.
without coming to any final resolution, the City of Strasbourg, the Capital of
the Lower Alsace, and one of the most considerable in all Germany, submitted to
the King in September, in the Year 1681, before the King's Forces, that were on
their March from all the circumjacent Ports, in order to Besiege it, came in
sight of the Place.

They entered the City on the same Day that some of the King's Troops took
possession of the Citadel of Casal in Italy, Casal Surrendered.
which the King had bought from the Duke of Mantua.

As the King set out on his Journey to Strasburgh, (before he had received the
News of its Surrender) he pretended to take a Progress to one of his Country
Houses, but turning short, took the Road toward Germany. Before he came to the
Frontiers he was advertised that his Troops were already received within the
City, but this did not hinder him from pursuing his Journey thither, where he
received the Oath of Fidelity from his new Subjects.

The taking of this City, which was of vast consequence, served only to augment
the divisions among the Members of the Empire at the Diet of Ratisbonne, the
more, because the King proposed to adjust all those Differences, if they
pleased, in an irreconcilable way. The Ministers of the House of Austria at
first rejected these Propositions, but dreading an Invasion from the Turks,
they gave their consent, so that Plenipotentiaries were appointed on both
sides, to meet at Frankfort upon the Main, for settling the limits betwixt the
Empire and France.

But a whole twelve Months being spent, before the Conferences were opened, by
reason of some contests about Titles and Precedence, betwixt the Deputies of
the Emperor, and those of the Empire, the King thought fit to recall his
Plenipotentiaries, and to remove all occasions of further delay, declared by
his Minister Lewis Verjus Count of Creci, then residing at the Diet of
Ratisbonne, that he was willing to renounce for ever to all the other
Dependencies of Alsace, and the three abovementioned Bishoprics,
notwithstanding that his Pretensions comprehended a vast tract of Ground,
provided the Emperor, and the Empire, would, within a limited time, oblige
themselves to resign to him the City of Strasbourg with all its Territories,
and those Lands which he was possessed off by virtue of the Reunion before the
meeting of the Assembly at Frankfort. These Propositions were advantageous
enough, forasmuch as thereby the limits of the Empire and France might be
settled upon a sure Foot, and a firm Peace established betwixt these two Potent
Neighbors. The Electoral College were of opinion to accept of the Conditions,
but most of the Princes being of a contrary sentiment, two years past without
coming to a final Resolution, the King having from time to time prolonged the
prefixed time, out of a pure motive to generosity, finding in most of the
Members of the Diet, a favorable Disposition for a Peace, at a time when they
dreaded an Invasion from the Turks.

It was not long before, the Ottoman Army, like an impetuous Torrent, overrun
all Hungary, and carrying all before them, marched up to the Gates of Vienna,
which was Besieged by above an hundred thousand Turks. Siege of Vienna in 1683.
The Siege continued two Months, and the place was reduced to the last
extremity, when upon the approach of the Imperial Army, and the Auxiliaries of
the Empire, in conjunction with the Poles, commanded by John Sobieski their
King, who with great Bravery attacked the Enemy in their Lines: The Vizier was
forced to raise the Siege. The Ministers of the House of Austria puffed up with
their late good success, pressed the Diet more than ever, not to conclude
either a Peace or Truce with France. But as such vast Empires have many ways to
recover their losses, the Turks, notwithstanding their late defeat, appeared
again so formidable, that the Emperor and Empire, the better to enable
themselves to resist them, or to extend their Conquests, accepted of the King's
offers, and about ten Months after, concluded and Signed a Truce betwixt the
Empire and France for twenty Years.

Spain also agreed to a Truce upon the same conditions, Truee for twenty Years.
to put an end to the differences for that time, arisen betwixt the King and
them about the limits in Flanders. After the Ratification of the Treaty of
Nimeguen, the King made reiterated instances to the Spaniards, to send certain
Commissioners to adjust matters concerning the Dependencies of such Provinces
and Cities as were granted to him by virtue of the late Peace. But the opening
of these Conferences was delayed for some time, till the King of Spain had sent
his full Power and Instructions, which, when they were produced, it was found,
that amongst his Titles, that of Count and Duke of Burgundy was left out. The
next Year the Commissioners appointed by both Kings met again at Courtray, but
the Ministers of Spain intended nothing less than to terminate these
differences, but in lieu of it, left no Stone unturned to create new Jealousies
(as much as in them lay) betwixt our King and the Hollanders. The City of Alost
furnished them with a fair opportunity to accomplish their design; which place
being accounted to be among the dependencies belonging to France, the
States General began to be extremely alarmed at this Pretension. They
alleged, they had in vain bestowed so much labor and cost to fix a certain
Barrier betwixt the King and them, if this place so near to their Frontiers,
whose Territories reached to the Gates of Antwerp, should be put into his
possession. The King, to calm their minds, and deliver them from what they
dreaded so much, offered to be contented with an equivalent; and the Council of
Spain endeavoring to gain time by various Intrigues, he ordered the Bloccade
of Luxemburgh; but having received intelligence of the great Preparations made
by the Turks to invade Hungary, he sent his Orders to him who commanded in
Chief, to raise the said Blocade.

Spain was so far from being satisfied with this retreat, Courtray and
Dixmuyden taken.
that in a little while after they began to commit open Hostilties. Whereupon
the French besieged Courtray in November in the Year 1683; both the City and
Citadel Surrendered in five Days; Dixmuyden without striking one stroke. The
Spaniards, though without Money or Troops, or any other hopes of relief, but what
they expected from their Allies, whom they supposed would not leave them
destitute upon so necessitous an occasion, declared, in a Month after, War
against France. But it was not long before they paid dear for their folly, the
King's Troops having overrun, during the whole Winter, all Flanders, to the
very Gates of Brussels, pillaging and exacting Contributions from the flat
Country; and toward the end of April in the Year 1684, a strong Body was sent
to form the Siege of Luxemburgh.

This Place is very strong both by Nature and Art, it being situate upon a
Rock, Luxemburgh taken 1684.
surrounded on all sides by a River. The King ordered a good Army to advance
betwixt Conde and Valenciennes to cover the Siege. The Emperor was not wanting
in his solicitations to the Diet; and the Governor of the Spanish Netherlands,
as well as the Prince of Orange, made use of all their Interest, to engage the
Hollanders to endeavor the relief of a Place which was of such consequence.
But all in vain, for no succors appearing, the Place was forced to Surrender,
after a brave defense of seven and twenty Days after opening the Trenches.

This done, the King offered to restore Dixmuyden and Courtray, and to renounce
all his pretensions, provided the Spaniards would put him in quiet possession
of Beaumont, Bovines, and Chimay, three small places without any strength,
betwixt the Sambre and the Meuse, and would resign all their pretensions to
Luxemburgh, which was to be the King's for ever, with the fifteen Villages
belonging to it. The Spaniards refused at first to hearken to these
Propositions; but the Dutch, who made serious Reflections upon the present
condition of the Empire; the heavy War wherein the Emperor was engaged with the
Turks, and the little hopes there was of receiving aid from England, partly by
reason of the misunderstanding that was at that time betwixt King Charles II.
and his Parliament, partly because they were too well acquainted with the
Inclinations of that King, who preferred Peace and his Pleasures before a War,
obliged them to accept of these conditions. Thus in the Year 1684 a general
Truce was concluded for twenty Years; the Emperor, Spain, and the Empire having
Signed the Treaty within four days one after another.

But in the mean while that our King was applying his thoughts to re-establish
Peace in Christendom with good success, Differences with the Pope.
the differences arisen betwixt our Court, and that of Rome increased more and
more every Day; the Pope being so far from harkening to those gentle means that
were proposed for an accommodation, that on the contrary his whole behavior
sufficiently testified to the World, that he was resolved to carry things to
the utmost extremity.

The occasion of the Quarrel was given by the Regale, which is a certain
prerogative belonging to the Sovereign, by virtue of which they enjoy the
benefit of the Revenues of the Bishoprics, and the right of bestowing all
Dignities and Prebends, during the vacancies of the Episcopal Sees. But it is
to be observed that the Provinces of Guienne, Dauphine, and Languedoc,
pretended to be exempted from this rule, whether it were that the Law of Fiefs
(which is supposed to be the Offspring of the Regale, and by virtue of which
the Lord enjoys the Revenues of the Fief, after the Death of a Vassal, till the
time of the Investiture of his legal Heir) was never introduced in those
Provinces, among a People that were very tenacious of their natural Liberty, or
whether they enjoyed this Prerogative by virtue of some particular privileges
granted them by their Princes, before they were incorporated with the Crown of
France, I will not pretend to determine.

In the Year 1608, the Parliament of Paris, (which alone takes cognizance and
decides matters concerning the Regale) on occasion of a contest about a
Deanery, vacant in the Church of Bellay, declared by their Sentence on the 24th
of April, that the King's prerogative or the Regale, ought to take place in all
and every place belonging to the Kingdom, enjoining the Lawyers not to argue
any thing to the contrary. The Clergy being much alarmed at this Novelty, made
their application to King Henry IV. who ordered that this Sentence should not
be put in execution, till the whole matter had been further debated and
adjudged by King and Council. Accordingly these Provinces, by their Deputies
appeared before the Council, and produced their Titles, by virtue of which they
laid claim to these Privileges; they were taken into consideration, but it hung
in suspense till the Year 1673, when after many Proceedings, which lasted near
threescore Years, the Council confirmed, in February, the Sentence of the
Parliament of Paris; to wit, that the Regale ought to take place in all the
Provinces and Territories under the King's Jurisdiction.

The pointed contest being chiefly concerning the Province of Languedock, all
the Prelates of the said Province submitted to thi^ Decree, except the two
Bishops of Alets and Pamiers, who made their appeal to the Pope. He was a
Native of Cosmo in the Milaneze, his Name being Benedict Odescalchi, and
afterward assumed that of Innocent XI. a Man of very Virtuous Inclinations,
but sullen in his Temper; zealous to an excess, and too much addicted to his
own Sentiments, which is the frailty of Men, that even the most Virtuous are
too apt to indulge their own Humor; these Prelates having by their Letters, and
Agents in their Audiences, represented the Regale to the Pope, as a point of
Heresy sufficient to destroy the true ancient purity of Religion, he sent two
Briefs to the King; and in a third, threatened the King no less than with the
Fulmen Papale, or Thunderbolt of the Church, adding these following Words; That
he would be made sensible in time, that he did not oppose him alone, but Jesus
Christ himself, against whom all human Force and Prudenc could not avail.

Most People of sense and unbiased judgment, who made it their business to
dive into the Mystery of this matter, could not but be amazed, to see the Pope
oppose with so much violence so potent a King, and who had so lately given such
eminent proofs of his Zeal for the Catholic Religion, barely on the account of
the imaginary notion of the two Prelates. It was alleged by these wise
Politicians, that the subjection of the Province of Languedoc under the
Prerogative of the Regale, could not be imagined to be the true cause of the
pretended affliction of the Church, no more than the same could be imputed to
other Provinces, that at all times had submitted to the same Prerogative.

A difference of this nature might have proved of very ill consequence under
another Reign, there being too many examples, when such a spark has broke out
into a flame, which all the art of Men has not been able to quench. It being
unquestionable, that those contests which arise with the Church are to be
managed with a great deal of caution, and that it is sometimes more conducible,
to suffer with Patience, than to go about to set up a Reformation, which
generally proves unsuccessful, unless with the hazard of occasioning a Schism
in the Church.

There were not a few, who making serious Reflections upon these differences,
were of opinion, that the Court of Rome was not ill pleased to have met with
this opportunity of the Regale, and some other matters of the like nature to
serve them as pretenses to come to a rupture with us; it has been, said they,
the general Maxim of all the Popes for many Years last past, to keep up, as
much as in them lay, the balance betwixt the most Potent Princes in Europe, for
fear, least one of them should be put in a condition to prescribe Laws to the
rest, Italy, and the Popedom it self might be in danger of being swallowed up
by the most Potent. That it was upon this score the Pope had laid hold of this
specious pretense, to join with the Confederates against France; the King's
Reputation, Prosperity, and Power being raised to that pitch, as to give more
occasion of Jealousy and fear to the other Princes at this time, than the
overgrown greatness of Charles V. did in the last Age. The firm resolution the
Pope showed in adhering to his first sentiments, without giving the least ear
to the remonstrances made on our side, seemed to intimate to the World, that
these conjectures were not ill grounded.

The King, both for his own satisfaction, and to endeavor by all means
possible to persuade the Pope to a compliance, sent the Cardinal Caesar
d'Estree, in the quality of his Ambassador to Rome, a Man of a vast
understanding, a great Divine, and a greater Politician, who besides that, had
attained to a degree of Learning much above the common rank; but neither the
Conduct of this great Minister, nor the submission of the King, were prevailing
enough with the Pope to make him alter his Sentiments.

The Bishops of France taking into their serious consideration, Assembly of the
French Clergy 1682.
this unfortunate conjuncture, made their application to the King, desiring
leave to call an Assembly of the Clergy, in order to concert such measures as
might either satisfy the Pope, or if that did not succeed, might prevent the
effects of his threats. The Assembly was very remarkable for its number, and
the great capacity and known virtue of those that composed it. After having
examined the Briefs, and well weighed the matter concerning the dispute about
the Regale, the Clergy, with the King's approbation, came to this Resolution,
that his Majesty was willing to renounce any thing depending on the Regale,
that should be found contrary to the Discipline and Practice of the Church.
This Medium appeared to be much more advantageous to the Church in general,
than the pretended exemption from the Regale could be to those of Languedock;
but this was so far from giving any real satisfaction to the Pope, that he
looked upon the whole transaction to be a Crime committed against his
Authority; for which reason he sent no other Answer to the Letter written to
him in the Name of the Assembly, but a thundering Brief, in which he had
annulled all what had been done by them in this case.

The Clergy finding him more exasperated than ever, to put some bounds to his
Zeal, and to make him sensible that his Power was not unlimitted, published
their Opinions, in which they represented to the People, that they ought to pay
all due respect to the Authority of the Vicar of Jesus Christ, but that they
ought not to stand in fear of his Power and threats, if they transgressed their
due bounds. It was at that time that the Clergy of France published these
following Propositions.

Propositi- made in the Assmbly of the French Clergy. That the Pope, nor Church
it self have any absolute or indirect power over Kings in temporal Affairs,
that they can neither be deposed, nor their Subjects Absolved from their Oath
of Allegiance. That the General Councils are above the Pope. That the Pope's
Power ought to be limited and regulated according to the Canons prescribed by
the Church; and that his decisions are not infallible, unless with the
approbation of the Church.


These Propositions met with a very different reception in Foreign Countries.
Some opposed them with all their might, and even in opposition to their
Sovereigns, condemned them, as containing a new broached Doctrine. But there
were also many others who being of a contrary sentiment, maintained in their
Writings, that this Doctrine was so far from being new framed, that it had been
always taught and practiced in the Church, before the eleventh Century. They
represented to the World, that Pope Gregory VIII. upheld by the vast Treasures
of the Countess Mathilde, had been the first who had been so bold as to pretend
to depose an Emperor, laying hold of the opportunity that offered to increase
his Power by the Intestine Divisions and Civil Wars, which at that time had
reduced the German Empire to the brink of destruction. That for the first
thousand Years, the Popes had always submitted themselves to the Authority of
the General Councils, and that by their own confession, they had acknowledged
themselves to be under a more strict obligation than others, to observe their
Canons and Decrees.

There were others also, who looked upon this Declaration of the Assembly of
the French Clergy as very seasonable, at a time when the Court of Rome in all
outward appearance, had no other difference with the King but only to maintain
the Privileges of some of the French Churches: To be short every one judged of
the matter according to his Passion, it being no new thing that Interest is for
the most part the fundcmental Rule of any Doctrine.

But certain it is, that the Pope was so incensed at the Declaration of the
French Clergy, that when the King afterward had nominated some of the Members
of the Assembly, to supply the vacant Bishops Sees, the Pope refused to approve
of them, alleging that they had given their consent without sufficiently
weighing the matter, to a Doctrine directly opposite to the Rights and
Prerogatives of the Papal Chair. It was represented to him that these contests
were no Articles of Faith, but in vain, for without being moved at our
Remonstrances, he left above thirty Churches vacant in France, rather than he
would grant his Bulls to any of those that had been Members of the Assembly.

The Pope's refusal was looked upon as very unseasonable, at a time, when most
of the Churches in France, stood more than ever in need of the presence of
their Bishops; the King applied all his care to root out Calvinism in his
Dominions. Calvinism rooted out in France
A most surprising undertaking, both in respect of the greatness of the design,
and the many difficulties that were to be surmounted before it could be put in
execution. This Sect began first under the Reign of Francis I. neither appeared
they very considerable in the time of Henry II. but under the Reigns of his
Children, they began to be so formidable, that they seized upon many Cities,
demolished the Churches, beat down the Altars, and broke the Images, committing
such unheard of outrages in all places where they were Masters, that they did
even not spare the grave of the Dead. After above a Million of brave Men who
were destroyed in the Massacre, in four pitched Battles, in the Sieges and
Defense of several hundred places, and in above three hundred Engagements, they
remained yet so Potent, at the time of Henry IV. that to restore Tranquillity
to the Kingdom, he was forced to grant them liberty of Conscience, many
Churches in all parts of France, Judges of their own Persuasion, and besides, a
free access to all places of Honor and Dignities, to give them great sums of
Money to pay off their Troops, and an hundred places as pledges of their future
security, and to settle certain Funds to maintain both their Preachers and
Garrisons.

King Lewis XIII. having, after a most bloody War which lasted seven Years,
taken from them and destroyed these Sanctuaries, the public Nurseries of
Sedition and Rebellion, they were ever since without any places of Refuge, or
Head, being divested of all their Troops and strong holds; nevertheless they
increased daily in number, so that at the time of the King's accession to the
Throne, they were computed to exceed two Millions.

The King immediately after he had taken the management of Affairs into his own
Hands, prompted by a most laudable Zeal for the true Religion, and taking into
serious consideration their many revolts, their dangerous correspondence with
Foreign Princes, the several Conspiracies fomented by them within the Realm,
the Cruelties executed by them in former Reigns, had at that time taken a firm
Resolution to root out that Faction. But the first Years of his Reign being for
the most part taken up with the reformation of the State, and the heavy Wars he
was afterward obliged to carry on against his Neighbors that were grown
jealous of his prosperity, had made him to lay aside this design, or at least,
till a happy Peace should furnish him with a more favorable opportunity. After
a Sect has once got sure footing in a State, the most violent must serve only
to make them the more inveterate, as too much lenity makes them on the other
Hand the more bold and encroaching. The best way to humble them, and to make
them dwindle away to nothing, is a prudent mixture of severity and indulgence,
according to the different circumstances of time, the greatest part of Mankind
being more inclined to be governed by fear, than the dictates of right Reason.

The King being willing to make use of all possible means to suppress this
Heresy without much noise and trouble, exhorted the French Bishops to take
care, that the points in Controversy betwixt the Catholics and Calvinists,
should be fundamentally treated of in the Pulpits, especially in those places
that were mostly inhabited by the last, and that a good number of Prudent and
Zealous Missionaries should be sent among them, who by their Instructions and
good Examples, might bring back these lost Sheep to the Sheepfold. To back
their Zeal and Endeavors by his Royal Authority, he promised ample Rewards,
Honors, and Privileges to such of his Subjects as would return into the bosom
of the Church. and to punish those that remained obstinate; he not only
excluded them from his Household, and all other employments of Honor or
Profit, but ordered also that Soldiers should be quartered in their Houses,
till such time that they might be prevailed upon to change their Opinion. In
such a case as this it is not sufficient to give good and wholesome
Instructions, there being a certain benummedness (as it may be said) in
Mankind, which oweing its Offspring to a long Custom, makes them look with too
much indifferency after the means of their Salvation, unless they be spurred on
by fear. Most Men are so prepossessed with prejudices, especially if
degenerated into a habit of carelessness, that they think it scarce ever worth
their while to make a due search after Truth, unless they be forced thereunto
by the apprehensions of danger, and the desire of living in quiet.

The King ordered all the Courts of Justice, erected by virtue of the Edict of
Nantes, to be abolished, and in lieu of them made several Laws in favor of the
Catholic Religion, which debarred them from that pernicious liberty of
abjuring the true Religion, and those of the Protestants who had embraced it,
to return to their former Errors, and Heresy, under severe punishments; to
shut up all such Churches as receive them, and to forbid the Ministerial
Function to their Preachers. But these were too fond of maintaining and
encouraging their Faction, to give ear to the King's Commands, who, to punish
their disobedience, ordered many of their Churches to be pulled down, and laid
level with the ground; especially in such places where the had exercised their
Divine Worship, contrary even to those Edicts which were made in their behalf.
It is in this place that with all the reason in the World may be applied this
saying, That there are certain Truths which appear so little probable, that
they resemble more a Fable than Truth it self. Will it not appear incredible to
Posterity, when they shall read that we have seen in our times so strong a
Faction dwindle away to nothing, without any violence or commotion? For in four
or five Years time whole Cities were reunited to the Obedience of the Church,
who had this comfort to see by the conduct of her eldest Son, Two Millions of
her Children return into her Bosom. Thus the King in the Year 1685, on the 22th
of October, annulled the Edicts of Nantes and Nismes, their Churches were all
laid level with the Ground, their Ministers banished the Kingdom, and Calvinism
was entirely rooted out without the least commotion.

As by these so many and great Actions the love which the People bore to the
King increased more and more every Day, so it is scarce to be expressed with
what a general consternation the whole Kingdom was seized, when about a Year
after, his Life was in danger. For seven or eighth Months before, In December.
1678.
he had been much out of order, having at several times been seized either with
a Fever or some other Distemper, till at last it breaking out into an Ulcer, an
incision was judged the only remedy against the Evil, which being applied
accordingly, proved so dangerous, that he could not possibly have escaped with
his Life, if the Fever had returned. But the cause of it is attributed by many
to the excess of fear, which seizes the faint hearted Patient in such an
operation; so the King having born it without the least commotion, he scarce
found any alteration, having received the visits of many the same Day, appeared
in Council the next, and during the whole time he was afflicted with this Evil
(which lasted above five Weeks) he managed all State Affairs, and dispatched
his Orders with the same activity as he was used to do before.

As long as he was judged to be in danger, the whole Kingdom offered up their
Vows for his recovery. Nothing was more frequent than to see the Handycrafts
Men leave their Employments, and to run in prodigious numbers to the Churches,
which were always full from Morning till Night; the People flocking in vast
numbers to Pray for the King's Health. But as they had given most evident
proofs of their sorrow and grief hitherto, so they strove to outdo one another
in their demonstrations of Joy at his Recovery; the rejoycings made upon this
Occasion being risen to that degree of extravagancy, that it was judged
convenient to put a stop to them by public Authority. But if his recovery
filled all his Subjects with joy and satisfaction, his Enemies, jealous of his
greatness, were the more surprised, when they found themselves deceived in
their expectation.

It was above a Year since the Prince of Orange, the Ministers of the Emperor,
and the Duke of Neuburgh had fomented the jealousy, which the other Princes of
Europe had conceived at our King's Prosperity. The Duke of Neuburgh especially,
being a very active Prince, and a great Politician, who never missed the least
opportunity of promoting his own Interests, had made many Cabals against
France, especially in Germany, and Spain, where by his persuasions he animated
these Princes to enter into a League against us, insinuating to them, the
danger that threatened them sm^e the conclusion of the Truce made at Ratisbonne
in the Year 1684, which he represented to them more disgraceful than the Peace
it self made at Nimeguen, and that therefore it would be more for their
Interest to take up Arms for the recovery of their Losses and Reputation, an
open War being less dangerous, than to suffer France to bid defiance to them in
the midst of Peace; that they could scarce hope for a more favorable juncture
than this, the present greatness of France being owing to their King, whose
health being now impaired to that degree, as not to be able to get on
Horseback, and to animate his Subjects by his Presence.

These insinuations and intrigues were at last so prevailing, that in the Year
1686, in July, an Alliance was concluded at Augsburgh against France, betwixt
the Emperor, the King of Spain, the States General of the United Provinces, the
Elector Palatin, and the Electors of Brandenburgh and Saxony, many Catholic,
and generally all the Protestant Princes of Germany.

After the taking of Luxemburgh, and the conclusion of the Truce, the King had
shown more inclin^ than ever to maintain the Peace of Christendom; he had let
the Emperor gain several Battles, and Conquer a whole Kingdom, without any
opposition, or making the least Diversion, which might in all probability have
prevented the Imperialists from extending their Conquests, and ruining the
Ottoman Empire, which seemed at that time to be brought to the very brink of
destruction. And notwithstanding that the Duke of Neuburgh by his Conduct, had
given sufficient reason to the King to make him feel the effects of his
Indignation, nevertheless he resolved rather to sacrifice his present
resentments to the interest of Christendom, than by sending an Army toward the
Rhine to obstruct the progress of the Christian Arms against the Infidels.

In the mean time the Elector Palatin happened to die without Issue, who being
succeeded in the Electorate by the Duke of Neuburgh, The first Spouse of the
present Duke of Orleans was Henriette Anne, Daughter to K. Chapter I. of England.
Charlotte Elizabeth of Bavaria, the lately deceased Elector's Sister, and now
Duchess of Orleans, demanded from the new Elector all the movables, Allodian
Lands, and Fiefs belonging to her Family. The new Elector did consent to give
her all the moveaables, but refused to restore the rest, of which he had taken
possession. The better to back his pretensions, the Duke of Orleans was forced
to make his application to the King, to lend him a sufficient number of Forces
to put himself in possession of those Fiefs, which by Inheritance belonged to
his Duchess. This seemed to be the most favorable opportunity that could be
expected for the King to chastise the Elector Palatin; but his inclinations for
the maintaining Tranquillity in Christendom prevailing over all other
considerations, he would not consent at that time, that the Duke of Orleans,
his Brother, should prosecute his right by force of Arms, but prevailed with
him to leave the whole matter of the decision to the Pope.

The Heads of this new Confederacy imputing this condescension of our King
either to the present condition of his Affairs, or the ill state of his health,
left no stone unturned, especially in the Court of Rome, to prepossess the Pope
with fears and jealousies against us. He being extremely rejoiced at the happy
progress of the Emperor's Arms in Hungary, it was not without a great deal of
satisfaction, that he saw our King give such eminent demonstrations of his
moderation, as not in the least to obstruct their Conquests, besides which he
could not be sufficiently sensible of these fresh demonstrations of the King's
confidence in him, in having left the difference about the Inheritance of the
Palatinate to his Arbitration. But the Emperor's Ministers had so much the
ascendant over him, that by their insinuations, they stifled all the favorable
Sentiments he had conceived for the Interest of France; and on the other Hand,
had so deeply engaged him in their Party, that he only wanted an opportunity or
a pretext to come to a rupture with us; it was not long before he thought to
have met with the most favorable one that could be wished for, when a dispute
arose about the Franchises of the Quarters of Ambassadors.

The Palaces of Foreign Ambassadors belonging not so much to themselves as
those Kings and Princes whom they represent, Differences about the privileges
of the Ambassadors Quarters at Rome.
ought at all times to be respected as such, and for this reason it is, that by
the Law of Nations they are accounted Sacred and Unviolable. The Ambassadors of
Crowned Heads residing at Rome entertain generally a vast Retinue, so that
their Palaces being seldom large enough to contain so great a number of
Domestics, they are frequently obliged to dispose of some of them in the next
adjacent Houses, which upon that account were always esteemed at Rome as
belonging to and enjoying the same Privileges with the Ambassador's Palace it
self. for which reason the Officers of Justice were not allowed to do their
Office in these places, which were looked upon as a Sanctuary. But it happened
frequently, that the Ambassadors Domestics, and sometimes they themselves made
but ill use of this Privilege, which made several Popes forbid their Subjects,
under very severe punishments, to seek for refuge in the Ambassador's Quarters,
and ordered their Judges not to suffer any thing like it for the future. But
notwithstanding all these precautions, the Ambassadors had maintained
themselves in their right, till Pope Innocent XI. seemed resolved to abolish
them for ever.

For which purpose, he immediately after the Death of Francis Hannibal, Duke
d'Estrees, (Brother to the Cardinal of the same Name) the King's Ambassador at
Rame, by his Bull Excommunicated all such as should pretend to maintain the
said Franchises of Quarters, and all those Offenders that should pretend to
seek for refuge in those places. His judgment appeared too much inclining to
severity by the consent of all the World; it being alleged, that since the
Thunderbolt of the Church ought not to aim at any others but heinous Offenders,
why should it strike at these, who perhaps, by misfortune being fallen into an
error, or debts, shelter themselves in those places for the preservation of
their lives and liberty. After the publication of this Bull, Henry Charles de
Beaumonvil, Marquis of Leverdin, who succeeded the Duke d'Estrees in the same
station at Rome, and been present at Mass at Christmass-Eve in the Year 1686,
in the Parish Church of St. Lewis, the Cardinal Vicar taking it for granted,
that the Ambassador was fallen under the censure of the abovementioned Bull,
ordered the said Church to be shut up; but two Months after the said Judgment
was revoked, and the Church opened again, notwithstanding the said Ambassador
had not given the least satisfaction, or any demonstrations of Repentance.

The said Ambassador being, since his arrival at Rome, not admitted to the
Audience of the Pope, no body knew whether he had put himself into the
possession of the Franchises of the Quarters, in order to maintain, or else to
resign them into the Pope's Hands; having hitherto acted with so much
circumspection, as to this point, that it was the opinion of most People, that
he had received Orders from the King to renounce them, since he had not forced
all suspicious Persons to leave his Quarters, but also giving strict Orders to
his Domestics not to give reception to any for the future. As there had not
been any body to see him from the Pope, so he had not received the least notice
of this Bull against the Franchises of the Quarters, though it was evident that
it had been published a considerable time before his arrival; so that if the
high Character he bore in the Romish Court had not been a sufficient protection
for him against the censure of this Bull, it would have proved a very difficult
task to evince that considered only as a private Man, he had fallen under the
said Censure. Notwithstanding all this the Pope remained inflexible to all the
remonstrances of the Ambassador, who could never obtain to be admitted to his
Audience.

The Allies finding the Pope's resolute disposition so highly favorable to
their present design, made use of this opportunity, to bring over some of the
Catholic Princes, that hitherto had not showed much forwardness to enter into
the Confederacy, by which means they hoped to strengthen their Party to such a
degree, as to be able to cope with the power of France; for which reason also
the Elector Palatin made pressing instances at the Emperor's (his
Father-in-Law's) Court, to conclude a Peace with the Ottoman Port, and to
sacrifice some of his Conquests in Hungary to enable them to prosecute the War
with the more vigor near the Rhine. The Turks showed about that time great
Inclinations for a Peace, which they stood much in need of, to recover
themselves of the losses and troubles, which their misfortunes abroad and
Intestine Divisions at home had caused in their Empire; But having observed the
Imperialists to act with too much eagerness in what they desired themselves,
they began to take fresh Courage and Resolution not to make Peace, unless upon
very good terms. Peace is a thing so good and desirable in it self, as ought
not easily to be refused, when offered, but nevertheless it is not always
advantageous to act in a matter of such consequence with too much
precipitation. In the mean while the Confederates left no stone unturned to
strengthen their Party near the Rhine, by the choice of a new Elector of
Cologne, such a one as they knew to be absolutely devoted to their Interest,
and who should grant a free passage to their Troops upon all occasions. The old
Archbishop was so aged and decayed in strength, The Affairs of Cologne 1688.
that seeing but little probability to live many Years longer, he gave leave to
the Chapter of Cologne to choose a Coadjutor. The Elector Palatin being a Prince
who knew how to improve all opportunities to his own advantage, made use of all
his Interest to advance one of the Princes his Sons to that Dignity, being
sensible that if he could succeed in this design, to make one of them Coadjutor
of this Bishopric, and consequently thereby to make himself Master of two
Electorates, there was nothing so great, that he might not hope for in time;
and there were not a few who suspected, that notwithstanding this strict
Alliance with the House of Austria, he had not laid aside all thoughts of
meeting with a favorable opportunity to make way for his Sons to the Empire.
However it was, both the Emperor and Hollanders made use of all their Interest
to back his pretensions, but all their intrigues proved of so little effect,
that of two and twenty of which the Chapter was composed, nineteen gave their
Voices for William Eugene of Furstembergh, Cardinal and Bishop of Strasburgh,
Dean of the Church, and Chief Minister of the Archbishop of Cologne. The
extraordinary merits of the Cardinal, his great Age and Experience, his past
Services, but above all the recommendations both of our King, and the Archishop
of Cologne had been so prevailing with them, as to prefer him before all
others. But these reasons were not convincing enough to his Holiness, who in
opposition to all the remonstrances made to him in the Cardinal's behalf,
persisted in his resolution of not confirming the said Postulation, though it was
confessed on all sides, that every thing had been transacted in due form, and
that his Confirmation was looked upon as the most proper means to secure the
Peace of Christendom. The King writ a Letter to the Pope with his own Hand,
which being given to a trusty Messenger, the said Envoy showed the Letter to
the Ministers of his Holiness, and without discovering to them his
Instructions, told them that he had something to propose to the Pope in the
King's Name, which would give him all imaginable satisfaction. But what is more
frequent, than to see even the wisest to be mistaken, when they are only guided
and rely too much upon their own Counsels? For, how dangerous soever the
consequences of this refusal were represented to the Pope, he could not be
prevailed upon to receive either the Letter, or to admit the Envoy into his
presence.

In the mean while that these contests were in agitation in the Court of Rome,
the Archbishop of Cologne came to die, and the Confederates to counter-balance
the Interest of the Cardinal of Furstenbergh, raised up Prince Clement, Brother
to Maximilian II. the present Elector of Bavaria, as a Competitor against him.
He was a young Prince of no small hopes, but being not then above seventeen
Years of Age, and no Member of the Chapter of Cologne. the Pope was forced to
recede at this juncture from his wonted rigor and the strict rules of the
Church Canons, and to grant him a Dispensation to qualify him to be Elected
Archbishop of the said Church. The Confederates strengthened by the Pope's Brief
spared neither threats, offers, nor promises or intrigues. And the Emperor's
Envoy told in the Assembly of the Chapter, and in the presence of the Cardinal
himself, that if they chose the Cardinal they must expect to be deprived of all
their privileges. But notwithstanding all these violent proceedures, fourteen
remained steadfast to the Cardinal, there being only nine that gave their voices
for Prince Clement of Bavaria.

The decision of this grand affair belonging to the Court of Rome, Prince
Clement of Bavaria Elect^r of Cologne.
both these Competitors backed by the interest of those Princes that had
espoused their Quarrel, made all their credit to obtain their Confirmation by
the Pope's Bull, who called together a Congregation strictly to examine the
matter in all its circumstances. But a business of such vast quence, and that
in so nice a juncture, was not likely to be decided by such formalities as
those, but by the powerful influence of the stronger party. The Enemies of
France were not backward to represent to the Pope, that by making the Cardinal
Archbishop of Cologne, was in effect, to put our King in the possession of
Cologne and the whole Electorate; that the King when once Master of Cologne,
would in a little time be also Master not only of the Low Countries, but also
of the Empire it self, Cologne being the Gate which opened the way into the
Empire to overrun the neighboring Countries at pleasure. There needed no more
to create a jealousy in the Pope, who being already prepossessed either with a
prejudice or ill will against the Cardinal, and with a fear of augmenting the
King's Power, was ready enough to give ear to the insinuations of these
Emissaries, and to exclude the Cardinal from the hopes of the Archbishopric,
in preferring a Prince of seventeen Years, before him, whom he himself thought
worthy of the Cardinal's Cap.

Our King having thus in vain tried all possible means to preserve the Peace of
Christendom, The King takes up Arms in 1688.
took at last a resolution to come to a rupture with the Pope, and without any
diminution to the respect due to the Holy Chair, to defend himself against his
Aggressors, choosing rather to carry the War into his Enemies Countries, than to
expect it in his own. To divert the storm that was arising from Rome, he
ordered his Attorney General to bring in an Appeal to the next General Council,
against all the injustices received, or which for the future might be to be
feared from the Pope's partiality: This kind of Appeal, when founded upon just
reasons, making void and ineffectual all the Church Censures intended against
this Act, the King could not have pitched upon a more Prudent and Commodious
expedient to prevent the Popes future resolutions of hurting him, or at least
to take away the means of putting them in Execution.

He published at the same time a Manifesto, In Sept. 1688.
containing the reasons which had obliged him to take up Arms once more; and,
as his chief design was rather to be upon the defensive than to act offensively
against his Enemies, the said Manifesto had much more resemblance to a new
project of Peace, than to a Declaration of War. For the King proposed.

To put an end to the differences in Hand by an amicable composition, in
reference to the Succession in dispute, concerning the Fiefs in the Palatinate.

He offered to demolish Friburgh and Philipsbourg, after he should become
Master of the last; provided the Emperor and Empire would agree on their side
to convert the twenty Years Truce into a Peace, and would leave the Cardinal of
Furstemburgh in the quiet possession of the Archbishopric, and the Chapter of
Cologne in the enjoyment of their Rights and Privileges.

To back these pretensions by the force of his Arms, Philipsburgh taken in 1688
he ordered a good Army to advance toward Philipsburgh, which was besieged by
the Dauphin on the sixth of October. This being the first time that the Prince
appeared at the head of an Army in the Field, he gave such eminent proofs both
of his Valor and Conduct in this Campaign, which lasted not above six Weeks,
that thereby he gained the esteem of the whole French Army. There were many
difficulties to be surmounted in this Siege, the far advanced Season, continual
Rains, and situation of the Place, which was surrounded with marshy Grounds,
and the resolution of the Governor, who defended himself with great bravery,
were such obstacles as seemed to render the success of this Enterprise very
doubtful. But the Place being destitute of all hopes of relief, and not in a
condition to resist any longer the fury of our Bombs, and vigorous Attacks, was
forced to Capitulate on the twenty ninth of October, and the Dauphin celebrated
his Birthday three Days after being the first of November, by his Solemn Entry
into the Place.

During the Siege of Philipsburgh the King reiterated his former instances for
the conclusion of a Peace, in hopes, that these lightnings being the
forerunners of those thunderclaps that threatened the adjacent Countries,
might serve as a warning to the Confederates. But finding all his endeavors in
vain, and foreseeing he must prepare himself to sustain a long War, he ordered
the Dauphin to make himself Master of the whole Palatinate, The Conquest of the
Palatinate in 1688.
by the Conquest of the strong Fortresses of Manheim and Frankendal, and at the
same time, sent several flying Armies toward Spires, Mayence, Treves, and
Worms, to take possession of these places; by which means he did not question
but to oblige the Enemies either to accept of a Peace, or at least to put them
under a necessity of regaining these places with vast charges and great loss of
their Men, which had only cost him the trouble of being seized upon by his
Troops.

AN ESSAY UPON THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF LEWIS the GREAT. LIB. V.
THE whole German Empire was extremely alarmed at these Conquests made by our
King's Forces, but they were so far from being cast down at their loss, that on
the contrary, they seemed to have assumed new Courage; each Circle in
particular dreading the neighborhood of so potent a Prince, strove to out-vye
the other in making new Levies with great expedition, without entering upon the
dispute (as they used to do formerly) about the Quota each of them was to
furnish for the defense of the Empire. All the Electors and Princes of Germany,
not excepting even the Elector of Bavaria, declared unanimously against France,
notwithstanding the Sister of the last was Married to the Dauphin. He had
signalized himself upon several occasions in Hungary, and was now resolved to
maintain his Brother in the Archbishopric of Cologne; besides, that he was
flattered with the hopes of Succession in Spain. These Obligations were so
prevailing with this Prince, that contrary to the Maxim practiced in the House
of Bavaria for many Years past, to balance the power of the House of Austria,
he became one of the Heads and the most passionate adherents to the Confederacy.

It is scarce possible to be conceived that so many Sovereigns as compose the
German Empire should be swayed by the same interest, The whole Empire declares
against France.
and be all of the same opinion, the more, since History can scarce furnish us
with an instance for many Ages past, when they have been thus united in one
League, especially in espousing the Emperor's Quarrel, it being looked upon as
one of the fundamental Maxims to maintain the Liberty of the Empire, rather to
diminish than to favor the designs and growing power of their Emperors. It
appeared to most Politicians, a thing the most improbable in the World, to see
these Princes so forward in running themselves in a War, the benefit whereof
would only redound to the Emperor, whilst they in the mean while disinabled
themselves to resist his power, when at any time hereafter he should meet with
a favorable juncture to fall upon them.

Notwithstanding the conjunction of the forces of Germany, the Emperor and
Empire scarce thinking themselves strong enough to resist the King's Victorious
Arms without further supplies, they made their applications to all the Princes
of Europe, even the King of Poland, and to the other Northern Princes, who by
their vast distance feem'd to have but little concerns in the affairs of those
parts of Europe. The Swiss Cantons were more than once solicited to enter into
the Confederacy, or at least to grant a free passage to their Troops. But as
they did not fear their threats, so they rejected all their advantageous
offers, persisting in their resolution, to keep an exact neutrality, according
to the examples of their Ancestors, who thereby drew the Money of the
neighboring Countries into their Country, and made themselves to be esteemed
and courted by the most powerful Princes of Europe: among all the Princes of
Italy, though there were very few but what were glad to see a check put to the
King's power, yet not one declared against us except Victor Amadeus II. the
present Duke of Savoy.

The Glorious Name of being Generalissimo over a great Army, which the
Confederates had promised to send to his assistance, the fair prospect of
enriching himself by the great subsidies from England and Holland; the hopes of
having a share in the Conquests which the Allies proposed to make upon France,
and to make a better Figure in Europe than he had done hitherto; all these fair
pretensions, I say, were motives strong enough to induce that Duke to refuse
all the King's offers of a Neutrality, The Duke of Savoy enters into the
Confederacy.
and to join with the Confederates against us. The War in Piedmont is always
extremely chargeable to France; all the Cannon, Ammunition, and Provisions,
must be carried upon Mules through impassable Roads, and out Troops could not but
suffer great inconveniences in passing and re-passing these inaccessible
Mountains, so that nothing could be more advantageously contrived for the
Interest of the Confederates, than to oblige our King to carry on a War on that
side, where besides all the beforementioned inconveniences, our Frontiers lay
exposed to our Enemies; it having been always the Interest of Savoy to keep a
good correspondence with France, and the strict Alliances betwixt these two
Courts, the King's reputation and strength having been looked upon as a
sufficient safeguard and Bullwark for the security of our Frontiers in those
parts. It was upon this account that the Allies flattered themselves with the
hopes of making a powerful irruption upon us, and to penetrate into the very
heart of the Kingdom on this side, where it was least defensible; but though they
promised themselves no small advantages from this diversion, the main
foundation of their hopes was laid on the expected change of affairs in
England, which proved to their satisfaction, at a time when it was not so much
as dreamed of by us.

There seems to be a great sympathy betwixt the Climate and the humor of the
English Nation, the Government being subject to as many Revolutions, as the
weather is changeable in that Island, which, though very frequent here, yet are
nothing the less surprising in their events. The great diversity of Religions,
which has been introduced since the time of their separation from the ancient
Church, is an inexhaustible scource of the many intestine troubles and
divisions, which at several times have brought this Monarchy to the very brink
of ruin.

James II. when Duke of York, Revolution in England 1688.
was upon the point of having been excluded from the succession of the Crown by
one of the Houses of Parliament, notwithstanding which, he mounted the Throne,
after the Death of his Brother, with the general Acclamation of the People, at
a time when he made public profession of the Roman Religion. This Noble
confidence of not dissembling his Religion, stood him in no small stead with
the English, who looked upon this his greatness of mind, as a pledge of their
future safety, and that his Word would at all times stand inviolable to protect
their Laws and Liberties. But it was not long before they changed their
sentiments, the whole Nation being alarmed at the Zeal they observed in him of
advancing the Roman Catholics, which was improved to the King's disadvantage
by a contrary Faction, who noised it about in the ears of the People, that his
main design was to overturn their Laws, and to establish upon their ruins an
Arbitrary power. The whole Kingdom being put into confusion and fears, they
began to enter into an Association, headed by the Chief Men among the Commons,
and most of the Nobility, who under hand treated with Holland, and obtained
powerful succors with so much secresy, that there was not the least thing
discovered of it, till a few Months before the arrival of the Prince of Orange
at the head of an Army in England. The train was so well laid, and the whole
matter so well timed, that when the Prince of Orange landed in Torbay with
twenty thousand Men, both the Nobility and Gentry flocked to him in great
numbers, all the Cities opened their Gates, both the Fleet and Army declared
for him, and abandoned their King's Interest, that to save his Life, or at
least to preserve his Liberty, he was obliged to fly and seek for refuge in
France. A most notable instance of the instability of all human greatness! If
this Prince had accepted of our King's offers, Things would in all probability
never have been brought to that extremity; for no sooner had his most Christian
Majesty been advertised of what was in agitation in Holland, but he sent word
to the King of England, that he would either send a French Army to his
assistance, or else by giving a powerful diversion to the Dutch, prevent their
design against him. But the King of England, who flattered himself with these
hopes, that the Prince of Orange being his Nephew and Sonin-Law, would scarce
be prevailed upon to head a Faction against him, and that if he should have any
such intention, his Fleet and Army were a sufficient guard to him against any
attempts of the Dutch, was not, till it was too late convinced of his mistake.
For no sooner had the Prince of Orange set Foot upon the English shore, but he
found the whole Nation ready to receive him, and every thing was thus disposed,
that after the departure of the King of England, the English Nation showed more
forwardness in advancing him to the Throne, than he did, in all outward
appearances, in accepting of it. For at the first meeting of the States of the
Kingdom, the Throne of England being declared vacant, the Prince of Orange was
Proclaimed, Crowned, K. Will. III. acknowledged King of England.
and acknowledged as Lawful King of England, not only by the English Nation,
and all the Protestant Princes, but also by the Emperor, Spain, by the Electors
of Germany, an all the other Catholic Princes in general, that were entered
into the Confederacy.

It having been always looked upon as a thing past all dispute among the
Confederates, that the power of England, if joined with the Confederacy, would
over-balance, or at least equalize that of France; they now believed themselves
to be arrived at the highest pitch of their prosperity; for which reason they
boasted in all places, that France would fcarce be able to hold out two or
three Campaigns, after the Prince of Orange (King William III.) should have
joined the Forces of three Kingdoms with the Confederate Armies. There were
some who were foolish enough to imagine, and to represent the Kingdom of France
as reduced to the very brink of destruction, blocked up both by Sea and Land,
scarce able to withstand five or six Armies that were to attack it on all sides
at a time; but these unexperienced Politicians were soon after convinced that
they had triumphed before the Victory was obtained. These vast preparations
made by the Allies against France, rather served to augment than diminish the
Glory of our King, who in nine Years time gained several Battles, and took many
of their best Towns, some of which they have been forced to re-gain with
incredible charges, and greatloss of their best Men.

However, Campain in 1689.
the Revolution in England was so considerable an addition to the reputation
and strength of the whole Confederacy, that the same appeared terrible in the
Eyes of all the World, except to our King, who was so far from being terrified
by this unhappy conjuncture, that by his indefatigable care and activity, he
surmounted all these difficulties, which afterward served only as an
Augmentation of his Glory. He received the King of England with all the
imaginable testimonies of generosity, and demonstrations of honor and respect,
alloting both to the King, and the Queen his Spouse, a sufficient allowance to
keep a most magnificent Court, and showing a great readiness upon all
occasions, to satisfy them in any thing they could desire, and to find out
means to afford t^em seasonable comfort in their affliction.

A great part of the Kingdom of Ireland remaining as yet steadfast in the
Interest of their King, our King without any delay, French Forces sent into
Ireland.
sent thither a good number of Troops in the Year 1689, with a sufficient
quantity of Arms, Ammunition, and other necessaries. The King of England having
put himself at the head of these Troops, in conjunction with the Irish Forces
that had taken up Arms for him, he advanced against the Enemy with indifferent
success, there happening nothing of moment all that Campaign, as there was no
great action in other parts, the Prince of Orange (King William III.) judging
it more for his advantage at that time, to establish himself in England by his
Presence, and our King having taken a resolution to be upon the defensive this
Campaign, the better to enable himself to send more powerful Supplies into
Ireland, and to try whether perhaps by some means or other, the Confederacy
would not dissolve it self against the next Campaign. It is easy to be
imagined, that among Princes of so many different Inclinations and Interests,
the War is generally not carried on with the same Vigor as it is undertaken,
there being frequent Examples that the strictest Alliances have been broken
with as much ease as they were made.

For, near the Alps there scarce appeared any Armies in the Field. The Duke of
Noailles took Campredon in Catalonia, which was demolished quickly after. The
Armies in Flanders did nothing but look upon one another, there having been
scarce any Action there abouts all that Summer, but the Assault made upon
Wall-Court.

This being a place of small defense, the Marshal d'Humiers thought to have
carried it by Storm, without making a Breach; but the Euemies who were retired
before the Marshal, having posted themselves upon some eminencies behind the
Town, so as to keep a communication with one of the Gates, they sent from time
to time as many fresh Forces as were requisite to defend the Place; so that the
Marshal was repulsed with the loss of five hundred Men killed and wounded,
among whom were thirty or forty Officers, and many brave Volunteers, who paid
with their lives for the mistake of the Marshal, who had been misguided by his
Spies.

The Allies Forces near the Rhine consisted of threescore and ten thousand Men,
divided into three several Bodies, under the Command of Prince Charles of
Lorrain, and the Electors of Bavaria, Saxony, and Brandenburgh. To prevent the
Enemies taking up Winter Quarters too near our Frontiers, we were obliged to
ravage all the Country of Wirtemberg, and the whole Palatinate, and to lay all
desolate as far as Strasburgh. The Cities of Spires and Worms were laid in
ashes, and all the other Places thereabouts, of which we had taken possession
the Year before, were demolished, except Mayence, Bonn, Philipsburgh, and
Keyserwaerth; the last of which being a small Town of little strength upon the
Rhine, was by Frederic II. Elector of Brandenburgh, (Son to the Famous Frederic
William, who died in May in the Year 1688) taken in four or five Days.

The City of Mayence was Besieged by the Imperialists, Siege of Mayence.
under the Command of Prince Charles of Lorrain, the Electors of Bavaria and
Saxony, who joined their Forces with the others. This Place was the Year
before, when the Elector of the same name received a French Garrison into the
Town, so inconsiderable in its Fortifications, that though a great number of
Workmen were employed all the Winter long to put them in a state of defense,
they could scarce bring the Outworks to perfection. Its chiefest strength at
that time consisted in a good Garrison of nine or ten thousand Men, all
resolute brave fellows, who unanimously resolved to hold it out to the last
extremity. If it was Attacked with all imaginable Vigor, there has not been a
Place in the memory of Men defended with more bravery, In forty eight days
after opening of the Trenches, the Besiegers had only made one Lodgment upon
the utmost point of the Counterscarp. The Besieged made frequent Sallies at
Noonday, with their Colors flying, and Drums beating, sometimes three or four
times in one Day, within two hours of one another. They marched out sometimes
with a Body of two or three thousand Men in order of Battle, engaged the Enemy,
cut in pieces those that guarded the Trenches, nailed up their Cannons, filled
up their Works, and once drove the Enemies back at such a distance from the
Place, that their main Horse-guard took Post at the very Head of their
Trenches. The Confederates having often felt the effects of the desperate
resolution of the Besieged, resolved to Attack and carry the Counterscarp, let
it cost what it would. Pursuant to this resolution, all their Batteries played
most furiously by break of Day, and thus continued, till by the throwing of
certain Bombs, the Signal was given for the Assault. In a few moments you might
have seen the Ground covered with dead Carcasses, the Cannon of the Besieged,
their Hand-Grenadoes and Bombs, their Firearms, but especially their Swords
made such havoc among the Enemy, as is rather to be conceived than to be
expressed. The Assault lasted five Hours, when the Besieg'dbeing at last
overpowered by the great number of their Enemies, who without intermission,
seconded their Men with fresh Troops, were forced to give way, and to leave
them Masters of the Counterscarp, but with the loss of four thousand Men on the
Confederate side. The Besieged having, besides this, lost, during the Assault,
all their Ammunition, by a Bomb which blew up their Magazin, they offered to
try the next Day to regain the Counterscarp with their Swords in Hand, but the
Marquis d'Uxelles, their Governor, being unwilling to Sacrifice so many brave
Fellows in the attempt, beat a Parley, and the Allies being not backward in
granting him very Honorable Conditions, the Garrison marched out of the Place
with their Colors flying, and six pieces of Cannon.

Whilst they were busied in the Siege of Mayence, the Elector of Brandenburgh,
Siege of Bonn.
who commanded a separate Body, Invested Bonn. The Place was battered for two
Months together, with an Artillery of an hundred pieces of Cannon, and most of
their Houses, and some of their Outworks were laid level with the Ground by
the Bombs; notwithstanding which the Besieged defended themselves with a great
deal of resolution, endeavoring to out-vye the Garrison of Mayence in the
defense of this Place; they were very successful in their Sallies, in one of
which they missed but narrowly of the Elector himself, who being left by his
Guards, was in great danger of having been carried Prisoner into the Town.
After the taking of Mayence, the Prince of Lorrain marched with a considerable
reinforcement to Besiege the Place in due form, but could not make himself
Master of it till a Month after, the brave Governor Bidal, Baron of Asfelt
refusing to hearken to a Capitulation, till all the Outworks were taken, and
that he had neither Provision nor Ammunition left, nay not so much as room
enough to make new Entrenchments behind the ruined Bastions.

These two Sieges cost the Enemies near twenty thousand Men, and the remainders
of their Army were so harassed, by these continual Fatigues, that they were
forced to seek for Winter Quarters in October following, in their own
Territories.

The bravery the French had shown in the vigorous defense of these places made
such a noise in the World, Campaign of 1690.
that most People began to alter their opinion concerning the success of the
Confederacy, who had been forced to buy their Conquests at so excessive a rate.
But all the World stood amazed when they saw the King's Arms Crowned with
Victories on all sides in the next following Campaign.

The Confederate Army in Flanders consisted at that time of forty thousand Men,
under the Command of the Count of Waldeck, an old General, and in great esteem
among them. The Duke of Luxemburgh General of the King's Army at the same time
in Flanders, Commanded a Body not inferior in number to the Confederates, and
being come within sight of them, prepared to Attack them, according to the
King's Orders, at Noonday, being the first of July. Victory of Fleurus.
The Enemy having posted themselves as advantageously as the time and ground
would give them leave, with their Infantry in the Center, covered on both sides
by their Horse; they fired prodigiously on us for a whole Hour, their Cannon
charged with Cartruches, making most terrible havoc among our Troops as they
were advancing against them; but this was their main effort; For their right
Wing being broken at the first Onset, the left did not hold out long; the
Cavalry soon gave way, but their Infantry charged three times with a great deal
of Bravery, till they were put to the rout in the fourth, when what escaped the
Sword, retired and sheltered themselves in the adjacent Woods. The loss of the
Enemy amounted to six thousand killed upon the spot, and five thousand wounded,
and near eight thousand that were made Prisoners of War, among whom were nine
hundred Officers. We took from them forty nine pieces of Cannon, fourscore and
twelve Standards, eight pair of Kettle Drums, and an hundred and fifty Wagons
laden with Ammunition. We had on our side three thousand killed or wounded,
among whom were many Persons of note, who were much lamented. After the loss of
this Battle, the Elector of Brandenburgh came with a strong reinforcement to
join the broken remainders of this Army, but they did nothing further this
Campaign than to pillage Flanders, Victory at Sea.
which after this Battle became a prey both to Friends and Foes. Scarce ten
Days were expired after this Victory, when the King's Arms were blessed with
another at Sea, over the Confederate Fleet of the English and Dutch. In the
Reign of Henry IV. there was not one Galley or Man of War in all the Ports of
France. King Lewis XIII. was the first who began to settle our Maritime
affairs, which yet he left but in a very indifferent condition. The present
King, immediately after his accession to the Crown, spared no costs to draw
into France from the Neighboring Countries, as many able Seamen and good
Officers as he could; notwithstanding which, his Naval strength was for a
considerable time much inferior to the English or Dutch, till in the Year
1681, he gave such effectual Encouragement to the Seamen, that in the same Year
threescore thousand of them were Registered, of whom twenty thousand are in
their turns employed in the King's Service, and the other forty thousand in
Merchantmen. His next care was to encourage the building Men of War, to keep
his Ports in such a condition, as to be able to contain a good number of stout
Ships, and to erect Magazins in convenient places with all sorts of Naval
Stores, in all which he succeeded so well, that without reckoning thirty
Galleys, which he always maintained in the Mediterranean, he had a Fleet of an
hundred Men of War for the line of Battle, in the Year 1690, in the Ocean, so
well equipped and provided with every thing, that there were some, who affirmed,
that one of ours was equivalent to three of the Enemies.

The King had no sooner received intelligence that the English and Dutch Fleets
were joined in the Channel, but he immediately dispatched his Orders to the
Count of Tourville Vice Admiral in the Levant to fight them. The Count de
Tourville is a younger brother of a Family in Normandy, a Man of Fortune, The
Count de Tourville.
but who in lieu of an Estate, had all the Qualities belonging to a great
Commander, so that even in his younger days, he gave all the imaginable hopes
of becoming one Day one of the best Sea Commanders this Age has produced since
the Death of de Ruiter and Duquesne, and his gallant Actions have been most
evident demonstrations to the World, that if he did not surpass them, he alone
did not fall short of them both.

The Enemies Fleet consisted of thirty Fireships, as many Frigates, and
fourscore Men of War. The French Fleet was not above threescore and fifteen Men
of War for the Line of Battle, besides twenty Fireships, six Frigates, and
twenty other Ships laden with Provisions and other necessaries. The Enemies
had the Wind of us for seven days together, but showed no inclination to come
to an Engagement, but not being able to avoid it at last, Engagement at Sea
with the English and Dutch.
they made toward us, being favored by the Tide. They were received by the
French with an unparalleled bravery, the Count de Tourville, and all the rest
of the Sea-Commanders showing upon this occasion, their utmost skill in the
management of a Sea-Engagement, which lasted seven hours, and did not cease
till the Enemies bore away toward their own Coast. The loss on our side was
very inconsiderable, one of their Bombs carried away the Stern of one of the
King's Ships, the rest received very little damage. There being not one among
them that had lost her Masts. The Enemies had at least four thousand Men killed
in this Action. The English bearing away in good time, came off without much
loss, on their side, but the Hollanders fighting like Lions, we took one of
their Ships of sixty Guns; another was sunk, and a third burnt; besides, there
were twelve more of their best Ships so much disabled, in their Masts and
Riggings, that not being able to carry them off, they were forced to sink and
to burn them. The Count de Tourville pursued them for two days after, and would
in all probability have destroyed their whole Fleet, if the Wind had not turned
against him, which gave the Enemy opportunity to bring the rest of their Ships
into a place of security.

This disgrace put the Enemies into no small consternation, forasmuch as they
had flattered themselves that they were much superior to us at Sea, and that
no body hitherto had been bold enough to dispute with them the Sovereignty of
the Sea. The Prince of Orange (King Willian III.) laying the cause of this
disaster to the mismanagement of the English Admiral, he was tried and
acquitted of what was laid to his charge. But, whilst the English and Dutch
made heavy complaints on both sides, laying the loss of the Battle at one
another Doors, the French obtained another signal Victory about five Weeks
after, being the eighteenth Day of August.

For the Spanish Auxiliaries, Defeat of the Duke of Savoy.
with a good Body of Imperial Troops having joined the Duke of Savoy, he took
the Field, and after several marches and counter-marches, encamped boldly
within sight of the French Army, being covered on the Right by a large Wood, on
the Left by boggy Grounds, and having in the Front a small Rivulet. Both the
Armies were near equal in number, that of the Allies being Commanded, under the
Duke of Savoy, by some of their best Officers. The Sieur de Catinat, Commander
in Chief of the French in those parts, appeared the first time in this Campaign
at the Head of a great Army; He was descended from a Family that owed its
Offspring to the Gown, but by his many Services rendered himself not inferior
to any of our age, that have raised their Families by the Sword. This wise
General having taken a view of, and found a passage through the Boggs, attacked
the Enemy on that side with incredible bravery, that their left Wing was
brought immediately into confusion; the right Wing held it out for some time
after, but being likewise broken at last, a great slaughter ensued, most of
their Infantry being cut to pieces, and their Cavalry saved themselves by
repassing the River Po, leaving the Field, and their whole Artillery, (except
one piece of Cannon, which was thrown into the River) with I all their
Ammunition and many Colors and Standards to the mercy of the Enemy. Four
thousand of them were killed upon the spot; whereas on our side we had not
above an hundred and fifty dead, and four hundred wounded Men. The Conquest of
Savoy, which with some part of Piedmont submitted immediately after to our
King, was the first Fruit of this Victory. For Saluzzas opened its Gates the
very next Day after the Battle; The Town and Castle of Suza surrendered soon
after, so that we remained Masters of the Field, and all the flat Country, till
the time of withdrawing our Forces for the convenience of our Winter Quarters.
As we had been successful even beyond hopes near the Alps, so there passed
nothing of moment near the Rhine, the Germans being very careful in avoiding an
Engagement. For, no sooner had they received intelligence, that the Dauphin had
passed the Rhine, but they entrenched themselves so strongly on the other side
the River Neckar, that it was impossible to force them in their Post, or to
bring them to an Engagement. Thus this Campaign would have proved as successful
as any since the beginning of the War, if the French Troops in Ireland under
the Command of the King of England, had met with the same success on that side.

For after the Prince of Orange (King William III. Battle fought in Ireland
near the Boyne in July.
) had taken a resolution to pass over into that Island in Person, to reduce it
to his Obedience, he gave Battle to the Irish within twenty Days after his
arrival, near the River Boyne. Seven thousand French, seconded by the Irish
Horse, who behaved themselves very well, sustained for some time the whole
power of the Enemy; but the Irish Foot being immediately brought into
confusion, the rest were entirely routed. The loss of this battle put the whole
Kingdom into such a consternation, that the King of England not thinking
himself secure there, immediately repassed the Seas, and arrived safely at
Breast. The Marshal and Duke of Schomberg, who had acquired immortal Glory
whilst he was in our King's Service, was killed in the Engagement. His
obstinate perseverance in the Calvinism had obliged him to quit France, and to
engage himself in the Service of the Prince of Orange (King William III.) who
also received a slight hurt. About five Weeks after the Battle he besieged
Limerick. The Garrison of the Town consisted of near six thousand French, under
the Command of Monsieur de Boisleleau, Captain of our King's Guards, who had,
after the last Engagement, thrown themselves into the Place. The Siege was
carried on with the utmost Vigor, but by the bravery of the Garrison, and the
help of fresh Supplies brought into the Place, together with the scarcity of
Forage, continual Rains, and sickness that had infected the Camp, the Prince of
Orange (King William III.) was obliged to raise the Siege.

After his return into England he applied all his care to make the necessary
preparations for sending a considerable Body of his Troops into Flanders,
Campaign in 1691.
and to appear at the Head of them in Person, for fear least some of the Allies
might in his absence enter upon a separate Treaty with France. He was met at
the Hague by the Electors of Bavaria, and Brandenburgh, by the Landtgraves of
Hesse, three Dukes of the House of Brunswick, Congress at the Hague.
besides thirty other Princes; by the Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, the
Emperor's Envoy, those of Spain, and several other Electors, and of the Duke of
Savoy, and all the General Officers, who were at this Council of War, to
concert measures concerning the operations of the next Campaign.

But whilst they spent their time in debates, they received the unexpected News
that the City of Mons had been invested by the French on the fifteenth of
March, and that the King was expected in the Camp by the twentieth or one and
twentieth of the same Month. This sudden News, like a Thunderclap, dispersed
the whole Congress. Most of the Princes there present returned straightways
into their respective Countries, either because they did not think it
convenient to be Spectators of the taking of the Place, or to hasten their
Troops to march to the relief of it.

The City of Mons is situate upon a rising ground, surrounded with Boggs, and
consequently strong, both by Art and Nature. It is a very large Town provided
with good Outworks, having three several Ditches, which are always full of
Water, by means of some Sluyces built for that purpose. There was within the
Place a very good Artillery, the Inhabitants were trained up in all sorts of
Military Exercises, and the Garrison consisted of five or six thousand Men, all
well disciplined Troops. But the time of the Winter Quarters being not expired,
most of the Officers were absent from their Commands, and the Lines of
circumvallation were so well guarded, that notwithstanding all their
endeavors, not one of them got into the place. The Lines being brought to
perfection, the Cannon began to play from the Batteries with incredible fury,
one battery seconding the other without intermission, and with so much
dispatch, that by the confession of the most expert Engineers, never any
Artillery did greater execution. Siege of Mons.
Four and twenty Mortars, and sixty pieces of great Cannon were continually
employed against the Place; there was above a million of Powder laid up in the
Camp for the supply of them; so that wherever you turned your Eyes you saw
nothing but Bombs and hot Bullets flying in the Air, which set the whole City
on Fire, so that you might behold the Flames rise beyond the tops of the
highest Steeples. The King was Day and Night in motion, there passed not a Day
but that he visited the Trenches once or twice, encouraging by his presence
every one in his station to do his Duty, with such success, that both the
Officers and Soldiers showed so much eagerness in out-braving one another, that
the King, to moderate their heat, saw himself obliged to forbid them not to
work uncovered, and to carry their Fascins (as they did frequently) at Noon
day, in spite of the continual fire of the Garrison, to the Trenches; for they
seemed to have put their chief hopes in their Artillery, they having not made
one Salley during the whole Siege. The only place which was defended with much
gallantry was a Horn-Work, which the French, making their way through the
Grenades and Carcasses of the Enemy, which fell as thick as Hall among them,
carried with Sword in Hand. The Citizens of Mons were all along in hopes that
the Prince of Orange (King William III.) would come to their relief; and in
effect he marched with an Army of forty thousand Men as far as Hall, within six
Leagues of Mons, but finding himself not strong enough to Attack our King, he
remained in thar post till after the Surrender of the Place, which finding it
self not in a condition to sustain a General Assault, came to a Capitulation,
after a Siege of sixteen Days.

After the taking of Mons, the Troops on both sides returned to their
Winter Quarters, and the following Campaign was spent in marches and counter
marches, without any remarkable Action. The Confederates had boasted ever since
the beginning of this Summer, that they would Besiege some Place or other in
Flanders; they Attacked Beaumont, a small Place without defense, the Garrison
consisting only of one hundred and fifty Men. This done, the Prince of Orange
(King William III.) leaving the Army in Flanders to the Conduct of his General
Officers, went to the Hague, in order to his return into England; but at the
same time that he imagined the Campaign to be over, he received the unwelcome
News of the defeat of his Cavalry.

The Marshal of Luxemburgh had so narrowly observed the motions of the
Confederate Army for some time, Engagement near Leuze.
that on the eighteenth of September he found an opportunity to fall in their
Rear. He advanced with eighteen Squadrons, at the head of whom were the Troops
of the King's Household toward the Enemy, who with threescore and fifteen
Squadrons, posted in three Lines, covered with a deep Ditch, and a Rivulet on
each side, received us very briskly: But the Troops of the King's Household
advancing without fireing, received the Enemies first discharge at twelve paces
distant, when breaking in upon them only with Swords in Hand, they attacked
them so furiously, that the first Squadrons were immediately brought into
confusion, after they had returned four several times to the Charge. The
Enemies loss amounted to fifteen hundred, besides which we took three hundred
Prisoners, and forty Standards. Their whole Cavalry was engaged in this Action,
except five or six Squadrons, which being posted too near their Infantry, we
durst not attack them. This brave Action was performed only with the loss of
four hundred Men killed and wounded on our side.

In all other places the King's Arms were Crowned with the same success. The
Duke of Noailles had Conquered the whole County of Sardagne. The Marshal de
Lorges had ravaged the German Territories, and had by continual marches so
harassed the Confederate Army on that side, commanded by the Duke of Saxony,
that without striking one stroke they were ruined for want of Forage and
Provisions.

The Marshal de Catinat (I call him so at present, though he was not invested
with that Dignity till two Years after) had since the Month of March taken
Villa Franca in less than fifteen Hours; the Town and Castle of Nice in five
Days after opening of the Trenches. Villa Franca is a very good Port, and the
only one in Piedmont. The Castle of Nice is one of the strongest in Europe,
built upon a Rock surrounded on all sides with precipices. But both their
Magazins being blown up with Bombs, and five hundred of their Men killed, the
Governor was forced to Capitulate. After the taking of Nice, Carmagnole and
Veillane surrendered at the first Summons. Coni was likewise besieged to open
our way to Turin; but he that commanded in Chief being terrified, raised the
Siege with much precipitation, before he could be reinforced with necessary
Supplies. But the Duke of Savoy had no better success before Suza; for though he
received a considerable reinforcement of Brandenburghers, yet he was forced to
quit the Enterprise at the approach of our Army.

The Marshal de Catinat to put a glorious end to this Fortunate Campaign, and
to make himself Master of the Chief and only remaining Key both of Savoy and
Piedmont, besieged Montmelian about the middle of November. This so famous
Fortress defended it self very courageously; but the French, in spite of the
bravery of their Enemies, and the rigor and inconveniences of a far advanced
Season, forced the Garrison to a surrender, after a Months Siege. All these
most glorious Conquests were looked upon as inconsiderable, in respect of the
hopes we had conceived of the restoration of the King of England. Gampaign in
1692.
But we found our selves frustrated in our expectation. The hour of this
Prince, was, as it seems, not yet come, and all the efforts made on our side in
order to assist him in his design, served for nothing else but to give us new
proofs of the aversion of his People toward him, and that his ill Stars were
as powerful as ever to render him unfortunate. He had lately lost the Kingdom
of Ireland, which was Conquered by one of the Prince of Orange's (King William
III.) Generals, who had taken Limerick, and obliged the French Forces to return
into France. In recompense of this loss he was buoyed up the next following
Spring, of being suddenly restored to his Throne. There were many of his
Adherents and Creatures left in England, besides a good many of his old
Servants who being employed in bringing over the Officers of the English Army
and Fleet to their side, persuaded themselves to have managed matters with so
much dexterity, that it was impossible to fail in the Enterprise. Full of these
hopes, this Prince craved assistance from our King, who granted him a good
Fleet, and a sufficient number of Landforces to be transported into England.
Then he marched with his Troops into Normandy, expecting the success of our
Fleet, which under the Command of the Count de Tourville, Vice Admiral of
France, was gone to Sea in quest of the Enemy.

But we found our selves soon mistaken in our fond expectations, for the
English were so far from running before us, or to declare for the King of
England, (as we had been persuaded they would) that they gave Tourville a very
warm reception. Loss of fifteen Fr. Men of War in May.
The French Fleet was much inferior in number to the Enemies, consisting only
of forty four. Men of War for the Line of Battle, whereas the Confederate Fleet
was fourscore and ten strong. Notwithstanding this great inequality, the French
Attacked them so briskly, that for three hours together they had the advantage
over the Enemies, who were extremely damnified in their Masts and Rigging, lost
one of their Ships, which was sunk, and most of their Fireships, whereas we
lost not one Ship during the whole Engagement. Both Fleets being separated by a
thick Fog and the Night, Tourville fearing, not without reason, that
considering the inequality of their Forces, he should not be in a condition to
cope with the Confederate Fleet a second time, thought it most advisable to
take this opportunity of making the best of his way toward the French Coast.
But his Fleet being separated by the darkness of the Night, one and twenty of
his biggest Ships gained the Port of St. Malo, where they were sufficiently
secured against any attempt of the Enemy: But fifteen others not being able to
steer the same course, by reason of the contrary Winds, were so closely
pursued, that being in danger of being taken, they run a-shoar, and after
having taken out all their Cannon, and most of their Rigging, the French set
fire to them, rather than to leave them a prey to the English and Dutch.
Nothing is more common in the World than to lay the ill success of an
Enterprise at the Door of him who has had the supreme Direction and Management
of it, most People looking upon a disaster of this nature to proceed chiefly
from the ill Conduct of the General; whereas they attribute the happy success
of a Battle merely to Fortune. But it must be confessed, that Tourville had the
satisfaction to hear his Enemies give him this Character; That he had acquitted
himself upon this Occasion as a great Commander.

But the taking of Namur did surprise the Confederacy and all Europe in such a
manner, Siege of Namur by the French.
that our success in Flanders soon effaced the remembrance of the disgrace
received at Sea.

Namur is situated at the confluence of two Rivers; the City lies in a Plain;
the Castle is built upon a Rock, both are very regularly fortified; this being
one of the most considerable places in all Flanders for its Situation, and of
such consequence, that in the last Age, this being the only Place in the
Netherlands remaining in the Spaniards Hands, they by the help of it, recovered
all the rest of the Low Countries, which have been in their possession since.
The several Works belonging to the Castle were like so many Citadels, each of
them being provided with its Outworks, Ditch, a particular Garrison and
Commander. In the Fort William alone was a Garrison of two thousand Men, and a
train of Artillery, sufficient to defend a great City. These Forts being built
upon an assent which reaches up to the body of the Castle command one another.
And defend the avenues leading to it. At the time when it was besieged by the
King, the Place was provided with a Garrison of eight or nine thousand Men,
with great store of Ammunition and Provision of all sorts, under the bravest
and most expert Officers among the Confederates. The Prince of Orange (King
William III.) was at that time in Flanders, and the Confederates were so
numerous on that side that they could bring together an Army of an hundred
thousand Men. But all these obstacles were not capable of altering the King's
resolution, who, after every thing was in a readiness for the carrying on of so
great an Enterprise, ordered two separate Armies to take the Field in Flanders;
the less numerous of the two was employed in the Siege, the other to cover it
against any attempt of the Enemy. These two Armies consumed every Day two
hundred and fifty thousand Rations of Bread, and thirty thousand French bushels
of Oats, allowing half a bushel for each Horse a Day. And the King had taken
such sure measures as to all the necessary Supplies, that as long as the Siege
lasted, there was always in both Camps no less than for fifteen Days Provision.
Twenty thousand Pioneers were employed in making the Lines of circumvallation
and contravallation, and the Trenches were opened in three Days after. The City
made at first a vigorous Defense, but capitulated on the eighth Day, finding it
self not in a condition to sustain a general Assault. The surrender of the City
made the Enemy fear, that the Castle, though accounted impregnable, might follow
the example of the City; for which reason the Prince of Orange, (King William
III.) Count Waldeck General of the Dutch Forces, and the Elector of Bavaria,
who had lately been made Governor of the remaining part of the Spanish
Netherlands, advanced and posted themselves near the Banks of the River
Meheigne. These three Bodies made together an Army of near an hundred thousand
Men, which was continually in motion to intercept our Convoys, or to endeavor
to force our Quarters, if they should find an opportunity. The Marshal de
Luxemburgh, not inferior in number to the Confederates, being encamped on
rising Ground on the other side the Meheigne, at about half a Leagues distance
from the River, expected them in good order, there being a large Plain betwixt
them and the Enemy. But the Prince of Orange (King William III.) had either no
inclination to hazard a Battle, or else could not meet with a favorable
opportunity to put his design in execution; for he caused five or six several
times Bridges to be laid over the River, but they were immediately broken down
again. Thus these two great Armies encamped within sight of one another for a
whole Month, exactly observing and following one another's motions, frequently
saluting one another with their Cannon, without coming to handyblows. In the
mean while the Siege was carried on with all imaginable vigor, the King not
only giving his Directions upon all occasions of moment, but also seeing them
put in execution. Being seized with the Gout when they were just ready to
attack a covert way, he caused himself to be carried in a Chair to a certain
Place, from whence he could see all what passed, and give the necessary Orders,
as occasion should require.

Here it was that Lewis Alexander Count of Toulouse was wounded by his side. It
was observable that there did not appear the least change in this young
Prince's Countenance at this mishap, a happy presage of those many courageous
Actions, he has since that time given such eminent proofs of in the following
Campaigns. The King's Forces being animated by his Presence, and Example, never
behaved themselves so well in any Siege whatever, giving every Day innumerable
demonstrations of their Courage and Patience, for the besieged fired without
intermission. The weather was extremely bad during the whole Siege, the
Soldiers being continually fatigued by the Rains and Tempests; besides which,
they met with so many Rocks in the carrying on of the Trenches, that they could
advance but slowly, and with a great deal of difficulty, they being forced to
carry them round about several great Hills, and large Valleys, which took up a
vast compass. But all these obstacles served only to augment the Patience and
Courage of our Soldiers. It was next to a prodigy to see some of them crawl up
boldly to the Breaches, and to endeavor to keep their Post only with their
Swords in Hand, against a vast number of Enemies, who powered whole showers of
small-shot at them, whilst they returned them as many Hand-Granadoes as they
were able to throw. The first and the bravest Action that happened in the whole
Siege was near a certain Eminency, where the Enemy having strongly Entrenched
themselves, we were forced to drive them from that Post before we could open
our Trenches before the Castle. The King's Troops attacked them with Sword in
Hand, and Bayonetts in their Fusees: They fired very briskly from their
Entrenchments, which our Troops having sustained with great bravery, the Enemy
at their approach quitted the Post, after they had lost two or three hundred
Men. Within six Days after we forced their retrenchments and redoubts of the
Hermitage. The Fort William defended it self ten Days: On the tenth we carried
the Covert-way, not without great slaughter on both sides, when the Dutch
Garrison came immediately to a Capitulation. This done there was remaining as
yet the Castle with all its Outworks. This was the most difficult task, but by
the King's presence the Works were carried on so vigorously, that in five Days
time we made an Assault upon the Counterscarp. The Besieged defended themselves
with all the courage imaginable, but were at last forced to way to the numbers
of the Besiegers, who were from time to time seconded with fresh Troops; soon
after all their Cannon being dismounted, one of their chief Magazins blown up
by two of our Bombs, and another being fallen into the great Cistern which
furnished the Castle with Water, and our Mines ready to spring under one of the
Bastions of the Horn-work, what with hunger and thirst, what with fear of not
being able to sustain a General Assault, for want of Sleep, occasioned by the
continual throwing in of Bombs, they were necessitated to hearken to a
Capitulation, notwithstanding that the body of the Castle was entire, and that
they had as yet a Horn-work left which would have cost us no small trouble to
take. Out of eight or nine thousand Men, of which the Garrison of Namur
consisted at the beginning of the Siege, there were but twelve hundred left in
the Fort William, and two thousand five hundred in the Castle, when they
marched out. The rest perished either by sickness, or were killed by our Bombs,
or in the several Attacks and Sallies.

The taking of Namur in the sight of an Army of an hundred thousand Men, put
all the Spanish Netherlands under a most terrible consternation; the common
people being extremely dissatisfied that the relief of a place of such
consequence had not as much as been attempted by the Confederate Army,
affronted, nay assaulted the Dutch at Brussels, and several other places, and
did not stick to grumble at the Prince of Orange, (King William III.) who to
appease them, and to raise their drooping Courage, resolved, within a Month
after, to give us Battle.

Every thing seemed to conspire for his advantage: Battle of Stenkerk, Aug. 3.
He was now thirty thousand Men stronger in Insantry than the Duke of
Luxemburgh, who labored also under another inconveniency, that his Cannon was
left behind, his Artillery not arriving till the Night before the Engagement.
The Grounds on that side where the Enemy intended at Attack us being full of
small Bogs and Rivulets, with very thick Hedges and large Ditches, was only fit
for the Infantry to Engage in. Here it was that the Troops of the King's
Household were posted, who being covered by one single Brigade, (the rest of the
French Infantry were at least a League's distance from thence) the Prince of
Orange (King William III.) did not in the least question but they would soon be
overpowered by the whole English Infantry, that were to begin the Attack; all
the circumstances appearing so favorable on his side, that he thought himself
assured of Victory. To amuse the Enemies Spies, he issued out his Orders the
Night before the Engagement, that they should go a Foraging the next Day, which
done, he kept all the General Officers of the Army with him in his Tent till
ten a Clock at Night, when having sent them back to their respective Posts, the
march was begun about half an hour after, to be within sight of the French Camp
at break of Day. There appeared so much satisfaction and joy both in his
Countenance and Words, that when they arrived at the appointed place, without
being discovered by the French, he spoke out a loud to his Soldiers, that they
were going to an assured Victory, not to fight, but to cut to pieces their
Enemies; though many were of Opinion, that this assurance he gave to his Soldiers
of an undoubted Victory, was rather done with an intention to inflame their
Courage, than to express his own sentiments, it being unquestionable, that it
was always considered as one of the chiefest qualifications belonging to a
General, to know how to inspire his Soldiers with a seasonable assurance of
Victory. It is more than probable, that if at that instant he had led his Army
toward the Enemy, his design would have succeeded; but whilst he stayed for
the coming up of the Elector of Bavaria, and Count Waldeck, who stayed above an
Hour longer than was expected, the French had leisure given them to put
themselves in a posture to receive them. It is in vain to chose ones time,
unless it be improved to the best advantage. For in the mean time the Duke of
Luxemburgh ordered his best Battallions to advance with all speed, who being
posted where the Enemy must Attack us, sustained by the Troops of the King's
Household, and these again by several other Bodies of Horse. The Pass was so
narrow that not being able to extend our Lines in Front, we were forced to
double them. For the first two hours they fired most terribly on both Sides,
the Battallions advancing so near, that they discharged their Muskets cross
one another. The Enemy fired more briskly than we for some time; they got
Ground of us, and made themselves Masters of four of our Pieces of Cannon; but
the French perceiving that their Muskets were not likely to do the Work, threw
them down, and being led only by their Officers, but esspecially by the
Princes, the Duke of Chartres, the Duke of Bourbon, the Prince of Conty, Duke
de Maine, and others, charged the Enemy with their Swords in hand, so
furiously, that they forced them to retreat, many of whom were cut in pieces,
the rest saving themselves in an adjacent Wood. They were pursued for an hour
after, and the Field of Battle for a League together, was covered all over with
dead Carcasses, which in some places lay six Foot high upon one another. This
Victory cost us two or three Thousand of our best Men, among whom were many
Persons of Merit and Quality; especially the Prince of Turenue, eldest Son to
the Duke of Bovillon, who died the day after the Battle, of his Wounds. The
loss of the Enemy amounted to nine Thousand killed upon the spot, and as many
wounded. We took nine Colors, and ten pieces of Cannon, but only thirteen
hundred Prisoners, the English refusing to ask Quarter.

It was much about the same time that the Duke of Savoy made an Irruption into
the higher Dauphine, The Duke of Savoy invades France in August.
where he lost abundance of his Men without striking a stroke. The Confederates
had for a considerable time before, formed a Project of entering Dauphine and
Provence, flattering themselves with hopes, that the new Converts would revolt
and join them from all Parts of France. To put their so long projected Design
in execution, the Governor of Milan, and the Imperial General Caprara, joined
with their Troops the Duke of Savoy; They carried along with them Arms for
thirty Thousand Men, and were provided with Ministers, who in all places,
through which they passed, endeavored in their Sermons to sow the Seed of
Rebellion and Calvinism among the People. But they found themselves entirely
mistaken in their Expectation, the new Catholics being so far from showing the
least Inclination for a Revolt, that they were the most forward upon all
Occasions to do what Mischief they could to the Enemy, by drawing them into
Ambushes, and killing without Mercy, all such as they met with straggling, or
otherwise detached from their main Body. This was the Reason why the
Confederates made but little Progress, and their proposed Conquest turned to a
very slender Account. They took Guillestre in three days; Ambrun held out six,
Gap being only provided with ten Men to keep the Gates, received them without
the least Resistance. Guillestre is at present no more than a Country Town,
without any other Defense but two old ruined Bastions. Ambrun is indeed a small
City, but defended only by a single Wall; But the Besieged supplying the defect
of their Fortifications by their own Courage, defended the Place so well, that
the Enemies nemies were not Masters of it, but with the Loss of above fisteen
hundred Men. Thus ended this Expedition of the Duke of Savoy, who being fallen
ill, and finding his Army considerably diminished by Sickness and Fatigues,
repassed the Alps, carrying no other Spoils along with him, but the Bells of
Ambrun and Gap.

In the same Month the Marshal de Lorge obtained a Victory over six thousand
German Horse, in the Country of Wirtembergh, if the Pursuit of a flying Enemy,
vanquished without effusion of Blood, may be dignified with that Name. For no
sooner did the German Horse perceive the Vant. Guard of the King's Army, but
they betook themselves to flight, The Germans routed near Phortzheim toward
the latter end of August.
nine hundred of them were killed in the pursuit, and six hundred taken
Prisoners, among the last was the Duke of Wirtembergh, who commanded this Body
in Chief. The City Phortsheim was taken the next day by our Forces, where they
had laid up all their Provisions for the rest of the Compaign. The Landgrave of
Hesse was at that time taken up with the Siege of Eberenburgh, a small Place,
fortified by the French, for the convenience of their Magazines; but as soon as
he received the News of this Defeat, and the approach of the Marshal de Lorge,
in order to relieve the place, he raised the Siege with so much precipitation,
that they left behind them some of the Cannon, with all their Ammunition, and
all other Necessaries belonging to a Siege.

Most people were of Opinion, that these frequent Distasters would have both
exhausted the Strength and Hatred of the Confederates; but flattering
themselves with these vain hopes, Campaign of 1692.
that these Conquests would at last turn to the destruction of France, they
resolved to abate nothing of their Resolution in vigourously prosecuting the
War, and remaining steadfast in the Confederacy; especially since the Prince of
Orange (K. William III.) did not cease to insinuate to them by his Ministers,
that this was the only way left for their mutual Preservation, since if they
were not able, when joined together, to balance the Power and Success of our
King's Arms, it would be no difficult Task for him, to vanquish them singly,
whenever he should take a Resolution to dispossess them of their Estates, after
the breaking of the League. Both sides therefore, made all imaginable
Preparations to prosecute the War with more vigor than ever; The Confederates
to defend themselves against the Power of France, our King to attack them
afresh in the next Campaign. This Campaign was opened in Flanders in the Month
of January, Furnes taken.
by the taking of Furnes; its Garrison consisted of four thousand English, and
the Elector of Bavaria made all the necessary Preparations to Relieve it, but
it was surrendered in fifteen Hours, being a Place of great Consequence to us,
to cover our Frontiers, and to disappoint the Confederates in their Design of
Besieging Dunkirk.

The Prince of Orange (K. William III.) had at several times promised the
Allies to make a Descent in France, which he now being resolved to put in
Execution, ordered a Fleet to be Equipped for that purpose, provided with a
good number of Flat-bottom'd Vessels, for the Convenience of Landing his
Forces, which were drawn together near the Seaside, opposite to the French
shore. The King being not ignorant of this Design, to encourage his Subjects,
and take all necessary Precautions, the King ordered a good Army to serve as a
Guard of his Sea-Costs, under the Command of his only Brother, the Duke of
Orleance. The precaution, as it was founded upon a sure Maxim of Prudence, so
it proved useless in its Consequence; For, all these vast Preparations and
Threats vanished into Smoke, the Troops designed for this pretended Expedition
being sent into Flanders; which was only made use of to oblige our King to
remove part of his Forces from the Frontiers to defend his own Coasts. But this
Amusement, which was not carried on without vast Expenses, turned but to a very
slender Account on the Enemies side, without reaping any other Advantage by it,
than to Alarm our Seacoasts, with the danger of an Invasion, which being soon
vanished, the People took fresh Courage, and were prepared to encounter it with
less Surprise for the future. For the King was so far from showing the least
Fear upon this Occasion, that he attacked the Enemies with new Vigor on all
sides.

The Marshal de Noailles besieged Roses in Catalonia, which place, Roses taken.
though considerable for its Strength, he took in eight days after opening of the
Trenches, to wit, on the 29th of July. Smyrna Fleet intercepted by Tourville.


The Marshal de Tourville, was ordered toward the Streights, to intercept the
Smyrna Fleet, of the English and Dutch, of which, he, on the 29th of June,
betwixt Cadiz and the Bay of Lagos, took, burnt, and sunk, above fourscore
Merchant men. The rest were dispersed, and the Squadron of Men of War, which
served for a Convoy, made the best of their Way toward the English Coast.

For many Years before, neither of these two Nations had received such a Check
in their Trade, their Loss being esteemed at thirty Millions of Livres.

In the beginning of this Spring, our King appearing in Person in Flanders, it
was the general Rumor, that he aimed at Liege; but after having given his
final Orders concerning the Operation of the Campaign, and detached near thirty
thousand Men, under the Command of the Dauphin, to reinforce his Army near the
Rhine, he returned into France.

The Mashal de Lorge had in the Month of May, Heidelbergh taken and rased by
the French.
made himself Master of Heidelbergh, the Capital City of the whole Palatinate,
before the Enemy could march to its Relief; and after having rased the
Fortifications, both of the City and Castle, was marched directly against the
Prince of Baden, who Commanded the Confederate Army on that side, and at the
approach of the Marshal, retreated before him; but after the arrival of the
Dauphin, with the beforementioned Detachment, he entrenched himself strongly at
a Pass, which he knew impossible to be forced, choosing rather to undergo the
Inconveniences of Famine and many Distempers, which afflicted his Troops in
these inaccessible Places, than to hazard a Battle, or to decamp before the
Dauphin, for fear he should force him to come to an Engagement.

The Prince of Orange (K. William III.) did not entrench himself, but kept the
open Field in Flanders, yet so as to avoid all Occasions of Fighting. The Duke
of Luxenburgh, who had positive Orders from the King, to engage him, fained to
march toward Liege, to attack the Lines and Redoubts, which surround that
great City. This succeeded according to expectation, for the Confederate Army
advancing near to the Duke to be ready to succor the City, the Duke marched
directly toward them, and arrived in sight of their Camp, about six or seven a
Clock at Night.

The Prince of Orange (K. William III.) was not a little surprised at the
suddenness of his March; but finding himself under a Necessity to stand an
Engagement, the next Day he improved those few Hours he had, to his best
Advantage, in putting his Troops in Order of Battle, raising Batteries in
convenient Places; in fixing Pallisadoes at the Avenues leading to his Camp; he
caused two Villages, which covered his Right and Left to be Fortified, and
lined the Houses and circumjacent Hedges with his best Infantry; and
strengthened his Front, which reached to, and took up all the Ground betwixt
these two Villages: He employed a great number of Pioneers all the Night long,
in making a Ditch six Foot broad, and three quarters of a League long,
strengthened without with good Pallisadoes, and defended within by a good Line,
and Redoubts, upon which were mounted near a hundred pieces of Cannon. The main
Body stood behind this Entrenchment, sustained by the Cavalry, which was posted
behind them in two Lines. They were the finest Troops that could be seen. On
the other hand, is it possible to imagine, that our Soldiers could be so
courageous, or rather Foolhardy enough to attempt the attacking of sixty
thousand brave Men, guarded by such strong Entrenchments.

The great Artillery began to play at break of Day, Battle of Neerwinden. 29.
July.
on both sides without intermission, till four a Clock in the Afternoon. That
of the Enemies did great Execution among us, being placed upon an Eminency,
which commanded the Plain. The oldest Officers did acknowledge never to have
seen Cannon to play with so much Fury, and at so little a distance, for so long
a time together, which at a distance resembled more a Sea-Engagement, than a
Field-Battle. The Enemies fired more frequently than we, and their Artillery
did much more Execution, so that this Victory must be merely ascribed to the
invincible Courage of our Soldiery; and it must be acknowledged, that Philip,
Duke de Chartres, the Duke of Bourbon and de Maine, the Prince of Conty, and
the Count de Thoulouse, had a great share in the Success of this Day. There was
not a Battallion in both the Army's but what was Engaged in the Battle; but the
chief Attack was at a Village, called Neerwinden, which covered the Right Wing.
This Village was taken and retaken twice with great Slaughter; till at last our
Troops, having maintained and strengthened themselves in this Post, they entered
the Plain, and attacked the Enemy both in Front and Flank, who received us very
Courageously, especially the English in the main Body, who Charged six times
with incredible Bravery; but their Cavalry being brought into Confusion, and
drove into a River, the whole Army begun to disperse, and to quit the Field by
whole Troops and Companies, leaving the Victorious Enemy Master of the Field,
with threescore and sixteen pieces of Cannon, eight Mortars, nine Patteroons,
twelve pair of Kettle-Drums, abundance of Arms, threescore Standards, two and
twenty Colors, and above two thousand Prisoners, among whom were two hundred
Officers. The French lost above three thousand Men killed, and four thousand
wounded. The Loss of the Enemy amounted to near twenty thousand Men, both in
the Engagement and Flight, there being a great number drowned in endeavoring
to Ford the River, which for a considerable time after was rendered passable by
the Bridges made by the dead Carcasses of Men and Horses. This vast Army was
dispersed in such a manner, that they could not get together in a Body again
till six days after, when being reinforced with fresh Troops; and especially
with the Detachment commanded by the Prince of Wirtembergh, they appeared again
in the Field.

It is to be taken notice of here, that since the beginning of this War, our
King had ordered certain Lines or Entrenchments to be made from Mabeuge to the
Seaside, to serve as a Barricado to cover his Conquests on that side. The Duke
of Wirtembergh having been detached from the main Army with a Body three times
stronger than the French, that guarded these Lines to attack them, had forced
these Entrenchments, and was just then preparing to ravage the Country, when
receiving the News of this Defeat he was forced to turn back in order to join
with all speed the Prince of Orange (King William III.)

Within two Months after, Victory of Marsaglia the 4 October.
the Marshal de Catinat obtained another no less complete, but less bloody
Victory over the Confederate Army in Italy, under the Command of the Duke of
Savoy. The said Marshal's Army had hitherto been much inferior in Number to the
Allies, which was the Reason that he had not undertaken any thing of moment,
but only to observe the Enemies Motions, and to harress them with Marches and
Countermarches. The Duke and Spaniards willing to improve this Opportunity,
resolved to besiege Pignerol; but being discouraged by the Resistance they met
with in the Taking of St. Brigitt, which being built but a Year before, at some
distance from the Town, commanded the chief Avenues leading to it, and had held
out fifteen days before it was taken; they altered their Resolutions,
contenting themselves with throwing a vast number of Bombs and red hot Bullets
into the Place. Whilst they were flattering themselves with the hopes of either
reducing or destroying the City of Pignerol by Fire, Messengers after
Messengers came to bring the sad News to the Duke of Savoy, that not only the
French had burnt one of his Country Houses, but that also the Marshal de
Catinat, having received a Considerable Reinforcement, had made himself Master
of the Plains. The Duke immediately directing his March toward those Plains,
he was met by the Marshal. The Battle began about nine a Clock in the Forenoon;
the right Wing of the Enemy was brought into confusion at the first Encounter,
the left followed not long after the Example of the right Wing, yet they
Rallyed, and returned to the Charge twice or thrice, but without any great
Effect, for their Cavalry being entirely routed, the rest were cut to pieces,
except those who saved themselves by flight; and to fly with the less
Inconveniency, threw away their Arms, enough to Arm sixteen thousand Men. The
flying Enemy were pursued to the very Gates of Turin, the whole Plain being
covered with dead Carcasses, and in some places with entire Battallions,
especially of the Spaniards and Hugonots. The Enemies lost nine thousand Men in
this Engagement, besides two thousand taken Prisoners, a hundred Colors, forty
five Standards, and thirty four pieces of Cannon. We had twelve or fifteen
hundred killed and wounded on our side. The Gens d'Arms behaved themselves to a
miracle; Our Infantry fought with their Bayonets in their Fuszees and Sword in
hand. After the Loss of this Battle, the Duke being reinforced with the German
Troops that blocked up Casal, yet durst not appear in the Field; so that the
Marshal de Catinat, without opposition, overrun all the flat Country, and
carried away a prodigious quantity of Provision.

The King received the News of this Victory, and of the Surrender of Charleroy
in one day. This place is situate betwixt Mons and Namur, and was besieged in
November, when the Prince of Orange (K. William III.) was just ready to pass
over into England; Siege of Charleroy
but upon the News of this Siege returned into Flanders, and advanced with an
Army as far as Brussels, but did not attempt the Relief of the Place, which,
though considerable for its strength, was forced to surrender in six and twenty
days.

About the end of the same Month, English Expedition against St. Malo.
an English Squadron was sent toward St. Malo, to attempt the destruction of
that Place, not so much by their Bombs, as a certain Engine, by which they
hoped to blow up that City, or to lay it in Ashes. This Engine was a three
Deck'd-Ship, of about four hundred Tuns, lined and vaulted within with
Brick-Work. Betwixt each of these Decks, there were placed many Barrels with
Gunpowder, mixed with a certain Composition of Tarr, Pitch, and Rosin, a great
number of Bombs, Carcasses, and other Casks, filled with all sorts of
Combustible Matter. It was a fair and clear Night, very calm and Springtide,
when this infernal Engine came swimming up with the Tide, but by good Fortune
was forced upon a Rock, within Pistol-shot of the Walls of the City. The
Engineer, who had the management of this Vessel, perceiving that she took Water
was so overhasty in setting her on Fire, that both He and his Attendants were
blown up in the same moment, before they had time to get out of reach. The
springing of this Engine made a most dreadful Noise, and shook all the
circumjacent Ground for three or four Leagues; The whole City felt a most
violent Confusion, and in a moment all the Streets were covered with Slates and
Tyles, which, like a Shower of Hail, powered down from the tops of the Houses.
This was the whole Loss sustained by this dreadful Engine, which carried along
with it, more Terror than Damage, there being not one House in the whole City
that received any further Damage, neither was there one single Person killed or
wounded. For the Powder having taken vent, and being besides that, spoiled by
the Water, did not answer the pretended Effect in throwing the Bombs and
Barrels full of Combustible Matter into the Air. At low Water, near seven
hundred Bombs were taken up from the Sands, and abundance of Powder out of the
Wrack of the Vessel.

We could scarce have wished for a more prosperous Campaign on our side than
the last; Campaign in 1694.
but as there is no human Felicity without some mixture of Adversity; so when
the State suffers within, all its outward Prosperity appears to be but
superficial. I say, we could not have wished for a more glorious Campaign, if a
general Scarcity had not almost ruined several Provinces in the Kingdom; but
especially the City of Paris, with the circumjacent Parts. France is a very
fertile Country, abounding especially in Wheat, so as to be able to furnish its
Neighbors with a considerable Quantity of this useful Commodity; which, for
several years before had been so cheap, that the common People lived easy
enough, though by reason of the long War, and the decay of Trade, there was but
slender Gain among them. But the Harvest in the Year 1693, both for quantity
and quality of the Corn proved so excessive bad, that it was sold for four
times the Price than before. In this unhappy Conjuncture, the King sent a great
number of Ships, both to the North, and the Coast of Barbary, Dearth in France.
to supply our Wants; he obliged the Corn-Merchants to carry their Stores to
Market, to furnish the Country with Seed for the next following Year; he caused
a great quantity of Bread to be distributed to the poorer Sort, at half the
price it cost him, and gave every Week a good Sum for the Sustenance of the
Poor of each Parish. To these Supplies and human Aids, he joined the Prayers of
the Church, and God was pleased so to bless his Endeavors, that his Subjects
were soon Relieved, and freed from their present Misfortunes, the next Harvest
proving so plentiful, that within five Weeks time, the Price of Corn fell to
such a degree, that it was sold at the same rate, as before the time of the
Dearth.

This general Scarcity however (the constant forerunner of a great Mortality)
was a sufficient In ducement to persuade the Prince of Orange (K. William III.)
that this was the most seasonable Juncture that could offer to Invade the
Kingdom of France, The Confederates encouraged by the hopes of Success,
augmented their Forces on all sides with fresh Troops; and the English, who
ever since the beginning of this War had not been sparing of their Money, being
now more liberal than ever in granting new Supplies, he Equipped two Fleets to
back his Design. But the Success was in no wise answerable to these vast
Preparations. For in Piedmont, the Campaign passed without any Siege or Action
of Moment. In Germany the Confederate Army had passed the Rhine, in order to
ravage the Lower Alsace, but no sooner did the Marshal de Lorge march against
them, but they re-pass'd the said River without any further Action.

The Dauphin Commanded at that time in Flanders, attended by the Flower of all
the French Nobility, his Army was composed of the best Troops, but did not
exceed fifty thousand Men. The Confederate Army consisted of fourscore thousand
Men, under the Command of the Prince of Orange (K. William III.) and the
Elector of Bavaria; and it was given out that they intended to Besiege Namur
and Dunkirk, but notwithstanding the inequality of their Number, there passed
not any thing of Moment all this Campaign.

Toward the latter end of the Month of August, the Confederate Army decamped
from about Liege, directing their March toward our Lines, in hopes to force
them, and to put our Conquests under Contribution, and to open the way for some
Enterprise of more moment. To put the Design in Execution, they advanced
toward the Shield, in hopes to be able to lay their Bridges over that River
without much opposition, there being not above seven or eight thousand Men, (as
they imagined) to guard our Lines; But their Astonishment was such, as is
passed all Expression, when they saw on the other side of the River several
Batteries mounted with Cannon, and the Dauphin's Army ranged in Battle-Array,
ready to receive them. It was a good while before they could believe their own
Eyes, thinking it impossible, that, whereas they had got two days march before
the Dauphin, and the Road they had taken was by one half shorter, they should
be prevented by the French Army, which had many Defiles, and four Rivers to
pass. For, no sooner had the Dauphin received Intelligence of their March, but
he immediately dispatched his Orders, to get every thing in readiness upon the
Road, which might conduce toward the hasty March of his Army, to prevent, if
possible, the Enemies Design. His Orders were so strictly observed, that in all
places through which they passed, they found Forage, Provisions, and all other
Refreshments in abundance, many Bridges were laid ready over the Rivers, great
Numbers of Wagons and Boats attended every where, to carry the Soldiers that
were unable to follow the rest, or to convey these with more Expedition, who
were intended to be the first, that should join these Forces that kept the
Guard of the Lines. Never were any Solders seen to March with more Alacrity.
Neither the Weight of their Arms, nor the Heat of the Season, nor the Fatigues
of so long and Expeditious a March, did abate the least of their Vigor and
Activity; they strove on the contrary to out-viegh one another in their March,
aiding and encouraging those who staid a little behind. This generral Emulation
proved so successful, that the whole Army, with their Cannon and Baggage,
marched forty large Leagues in less than four days time. The Confederate Army
was so much surprised at this unexpected Sight, that they retired immediately
without attempting any thing further, that Campaign; But before they went into
Winter quarters, they sent a strong Detatchment toward Liege, which in
conjunction with the Forces of that Bishopric, took the Town and Castle of Huy
in six days, a small place; and one of those, that commonly fall to the share
of those, who are Masters of the Field. Threescore pieces of Cannon, and thirty
Mortars were made use of in this Siege; an Expense suitable to a much greater
Enterprise, but scarce worth the taking of a Place of so little Consequence.

The Conquest of Huy seemed to be but a slender Recompense to the Allies; for
the disappointments of this Compaign, which had passed without any Action of
moment, and for the loss of a Battle, and four considerable Places in Catalonia.

For the Marshal de Noailles, having immediately after his arrival in those
Parts, received the King's Orders, to find out, and fight the Enemy, he found
them entrenched to the number of sixteen or seventeen thousand on the opposite
shore of the River Ter, which is pretty broad, but fordable in many places. The
French Army was not inferior to that of the Enemy, Battle near Ter. 27 May.
consisting of twelve thousand regulated Troops, the rest of the Militia.
Several Squadrons of Granadiers, and of the Carabiniers, having thrown
themselves with break of day into the River, some with only their Swords in
hand, the rest with their Fuscees and Bayonets; the Enemy fired very furiously
upon them; notwithstanding which, they advanced with an undaunted Courage, and
attacked them with so much Bravery, that they entering Pall Mall with them in
their Camp, forced them to quit their Entrenchments. In the mean while, the
best of the whole Army, having passed the River, advanced in good Order to give
them Battle. The Spanish Horse received them with an extraordinary Courage,
whereby their Infantry got leisure to retire. The Cavalry was brought several
times into confusion, and Rallied as often, till at last being quite broken,
most of them were cut to pieces, they being pursued for three Hours together to
the Defiles. A good part of the Infantry underwent the same Fate; so that we
obtained a complete Victory, with the loss of only two or three hundred Men on
our side. The Enemies had betwixt four or five thousand killed and wounded, and
we took above three thousand Prisoners, all their Baggage, Provision,
Ammunition, and sixteen Colors. Immediately after the gaining of the Battle,
Siege of Palamos.
the Marshal de Noailles besieged Palamos, a small Maritime Town, but well
fortified. There was a Garrison of three thousand Men in the place, which did
defend themselves only five days after the Place began to be Battered by our
Cannon, both by Sea and Land. For whilst the Marshal attacked it by Land, a
French Squadron of Men of War, battered it by Sea. After we had made our selves
Masters of the Counterscarp, there were two Breaches in the Wall, but so
narrow, that not above one Man could mount it at a time in Front; Some Soldiers
having taken notice of it, showed it to their Officers, who approving of their
Design, they mounted the Breach, entered the City, and taking advantage of the
general Consternation; this unexpected Sight of the Enemy upon the Ramparts,
had put them into, they soon made themselves Masters of the City, on the 7th of
June: The Fort or Castle, being forced to Surrender at Discretion, within three
days after; the Marshal, without loosing time, sat down before Gironne

This Place was so considerable for its Strength, that in the Year 1684,
Gironne taken.
it obliged the French Army to raise the Siege. But our late Victory near the
River Ter, the taking of Palamos, the furious discharges of our Batteries, and
the vast number of our Bombs, which did great Execution, and set the Town on
fire; besides the little hopes there was of being relieved, obliged the
Inhabitants and Garrison to Capitulate in five days. We made our selves Masters
of several other places betwixt Gironne and Barcelona, and all the Country
round was seized with such a Consternation, that their Capital City it self
would scarce have been able to hold out a Week against our victorious Arms, if
the Heats had not been so excessive, as to prevent us from undertaking the
Siege; and the Confederate Fleet was so seasonably to their Assistance, and had
supplied them both with Ammunition and Men. This was the only Fruit they reaped
from the Equipment of so numerous a Fleet, it being feared otherwise, that the
Spaniards might have concluded a separate Peace with us, if they had not come
to their Relief; It was also supposed that at the Solicitations of the Duke of
Savoy, this Fleet was to endeavor the regaining of Villa Franca. It was
composed of one hundred and thirty Sail, among which were threescore and
fifteen for the Line of Battle. It was given out that they were to Retake Nice,
to Bombard Thoulon, and to lay Marseilles in Ashes. There were also some who
pretended that they were to chastise Genove, for refusing to join with the
Confederacy. But all these Projects vanished into Smoke, they being disenabled
for want of Provisions, and by the many Distempers that reigned among the
Seamen, to undertake any thing of moment; they kept the Sea for some time
after, till the approaching Winter Season forced them to seek for a safe
Retreat in the Spanish Ports.

Their Fleet in the Ocean made more Noise, but did not much more Damage.
Descent in Camaret- Bay.
They made an attempe upon Camaret-Bay, at the neck of a Land, which juts into
the Sea, near Forest. Of eight or nine hundred Men, who Landed by the help of
their Chaloops, betwixt three and four hundred were killed, the rest made
Prisoners. The rest of their Forces that were to second the Attack, being
deterred by the ill Success of their Comrades, and the continual Fire from our
Entrenchments upon the Sea-shoar, did not judge it advisable to attempt any
further Descent; but under the Protection of some of their Frigates, returned to
their Ships. On the 22th day of July, Diepe Bombarded
they Bombarded Diepe, which was laid in Ashes; most of the Houses of this City
being of Wood, and closely built; the Inhabitants fled from their Habitations,
with their best Movables; the Fire consumed the whole City, there being no
body to stop its Fury. But the Enemies were great Gainers by this Bargain, it
having been computed, that this Expedition cost them more than the re-building
of the whole City could amount to.

On the 20th of July, they appeared before Havre de Grace, which they likewise
Bombarded for some time, as well as Calais, but without doing any considerable
Damage; the Fire having been soon extinguished by the Care of the Inhabitants.
This done, they made an attempt upon the Forts which guard the Entrance of the
Port of Dunkirk; two Engines, not unlike to that they had made use of at St.
Malo's, advanced toward the said Forts with an Intention to blow them up; but
by the help of the Cannon mounted upon several Batteries along the Sea-shoar,
these two Vessels were blown up into the Air, at about a thousand yards
distance from the Mole.

The little Success of this Campaign on the Confederates side, Campaign 1695.
did in some measure abate the Heat of the English and Dutch, who for these
seven years last past, had bore the greatest Share in the vast Expenses of the
War. In Holland, the common People cried out aloud for Peace, in London, though
they did not do it so publicly, yet they were very desirous of it. The
Parliament took an Account of the Supplies granted for the use of the War, and
what Share each of the Allies ought to have in the Expenses, pursuant to the
Treaty's, concluded for that purpose. They excluded the Speaker of the House of
Commons from their House, and imprisoned several of their Members. They also
Summoned the Earl of Danby (Duke of Leeds) President of the Privy Council; but
these Proceedings ceased with the Session of Parliament.

There were some who looked upon this Affront put upon one of the Prince of
Orange's Favorites (K. William III.) as a Spark of Fire, which being couched
for some time under the Ashes, might in time break out into a Flame. And their
Conjectures seemed not ill grounded, considering that since the Death of the
Princess of Orange (Queen Mary) eldest Daughter to the King of England, who
died on the 18th of December, in the Year 1694. Queen of Englands Death.
King James's Party began to appear more formidable than before; and that the
Differences betwixt the Court and the Princess of Denmark, only Sister of the
deceased Princess (Q. Mary) might furnish them with an opportunity to Foment
the intestine Divisions in that Kingdom; or that perhaps some of the
Confederates, discouraged by the change of Affairs in England, might not
prosecute the War with the same Vigor as before. But it was not long before
these Hopes were frustrated in the end. For the Prince (K. William III.) either
by his good Fortune or Conduct, prevented all these Dangers, there being not
the least appearance of any Commotion. On the contrary, he showed such an
unparalleled Resolution in the whole management of his Affairs at that time,
that he seemed to bid Defiance to all Dangers, and inspite of all the
Intrigues, and the Hazard of quitting the Helm, at so critical a Juncture; he
passed over into Flanders in the next Spring; to encourage and promote by his
Presence, the Zeal of the Confederate Princes, who having augmented their
Forces, made all imaginable Preparations to attack us with more Vigor than
ever.

According to the measures concerted betwixt the Confederates, they were to
undertake three several Sieges at once; one in Flanders, another in Italy, and
a third in Catalonia, whilst two good Fleets were to Alarm our Coasts, and to
destroy our Seaport Towns. It must be confessed, that the Confederates were at
present in a much better Condition than ever since the beginning of the War, to
undertake something of Moment to raise the drooping Courage of their Subjects;
and it must also be allowed, that they were more successful this Campaign than
before, though at the same time, they succeeded but in one of these three. For
the Germans were not in a capacity to act offensively, having been much
diminished by several large Detachments, sent to reinforce their Army's in
Flanders. The Spaniards besieged Castle Follit in Catalonia, but at the
approach of the Duke of Vendosme, who Commanded instead of the Marshal de
Noailles, who was fallen sick at the opening of the Campaign, they quitted the
Siege.

Toward the end of the Summer, they sat down before Palamos, but with no
better success, for after five days of opening the Trenches, they raised the
Siege, upon notice that the Duke was marching against them.

For these two years past, the Emperor and Spain had pressed the Duke of
Savoy, to lay Siege to Casal, a Place situate upon the River Po; and so
considerable for its advantageous Situation, betwixt Savoy and the Milaneze,
the Petty Principalities of Mantua, Modena, and Parma. The Spaniards (who
within fifty or sixty years have besieged this Place five several times) have
for a considerable time been very ambitious of becoming Masters of this Place,
which for its convenient Situation would open to them the way to the Conquest
of all Italy. The Emperor's Design being founded upon the same Maxim, the Duke
of Savoy, for fear of endangering his own Liberty, had hitherto refused to join
with them in the Siege of this Place. But the Council at Viena having at last
found Means, to remove all Jealousy, persuaded the Duke to consent to it.
Accordingly they made prodigious Preparations for the carrying on of this
Siege, and that with so much Expedition, Siege of Casal.
that the Lines and Batteries were finished in the Month of April. But the
first Attempt proved fruitless, the Snows and cold Season having obliged the
Confederate Army to return to their Winter Quarters; so that the Siege was not
renewed till five Weeks after. The neighboring Italian Princes finding them to
persist in their Resolution, were extremely Alarmed at it, being sensible that
the Emperor, who had already under the Pretext of providing his Forces with
Winter Quarters, got a footing in Italy, would by the Conquest of a Place of
such Consequence, open himself a way into Italy. To ward this Blow, these
Princes took a Resolution, either to endeavor to oblige the Allies to desist
from this Attempt, or else to intercede with our King to restore the said Place
to the Duke of Mantua, with its Fortifications rased, under Condition that he
should be reimbursed what this Place had cost him; for which the said Princes
engaged themselves to be Guarantees. The King had bought this place for five
Millions of Livres, and it had cost him three more since, without reaping any
other Advantage by it, than to be ready at hand to succor the Princes of
Italy; whereas we were obliged to maintain in it a constant Garrison of our
best Troops, who might be better employed elsewhere. The King having well
weighed the Matter, and that our Army in Piedmont was at that time not strong
enough to engage the Enemy, or to oblige them to raise the Siege, rather
accepted their Propositions to raze the Fortifications of the Place, than to
sacrifise four or five thousand Men in the defense of it. The Swiss Cantons,
and the Venetians, having prevailed with the Duke of Savoy to consent to this
Treaty, the Emperor and Spain were obliged to accept of the same Terms. Casal
Surrendered.
Accordingly Casal was surrendered on the tenth of July, when the Enemies were
not as yet Masters of any of the Outworks after thirteen days of opening of the
Trenches.

Whilst the Confederates were before Casal, the Grand Confederate Fleet, which
had been this Winter in the Spanish Ports, appeared continually upon the Cost
of Provence, to oblige our King to employ part of his Forces for the defense of
his Seacoasts on that side, and consequently prevent the sending of relief to
Casal. The Fleet was but in an indifferent Condition by reason of the great
Mortality among the Seamen, occasioned by the want of fresh Provisions, and
many other Necessaries, which they could not be furnished withal, but from
England; yet they appeared so formidable, that it was given out they intended
to Bombard Thoulon and Marseilles; but knowing us to be ready to give them a
warm Reception, they did not think fit to attempt it. They were cruising the
rest of the Summer in the Gulf of Lions, in the Seas of Cardaigne and Liguria;
and having been over-taken by a most violent Storm, in which they lost five of
their great Ships, they came to an Anchor before Palamos; Having received
Intelligence that we began to equip at Thoulon, they chose the open Sea,
cruising from one Place to another, without any other Design than to pick up
now and then some of our Privateers, and to disturb our Commerce.

The Second Fleet of the Confederates in the Ocean consisted of Thirty great
Ships, St Malo bombarded.
Twenty Bomb-Vessels, and many other Ships laden with Ammunition, and other
Necessaries. This Squadron bombarded St. Malo, but did no further damage than
to burn Ten Houses, and to endamage several others; the whole Loss being
computed at One hundred thousand Livres. But Dunkirk being the Place which the
Enemy aimed at, they were so well prepared for their Reception, that they
appeared rather like Men, with hopes of a Victory, than discouraged with fear
at the Approach of an Enemy; the entrance of the Harbor being well provided
with Batteries, with Chains, and a good number of Chaloops full of armed Men,
commanded by our best Marine Officers. Attempt upon Dunkirk.
The first Bombs of the Enemies falling above two hundred yards distance from
the Town; the Inhabitants, even to the Children got on the top of the Houses,
and upon the Bastions, to be Spectators of this Bombardment. Four Fireships
approached the wooden Forts that defend the Mole, but were met by the Chaloops,
who blew them up into the Air, in the open Sea, in the Sight of the People; the
same Chaloops also boarded and took one of their great Ships, which they set on
Fire. They threw in all betwixt eleven and twelve Hundred Bombs, which did so
little damage that it might be all repaired for thirty Pistols.

In hopes of better Success, Calais Bombarded.
the same Fleet Bombarded Calais twice in the Month of August. But the loss
sustained by both these Bombardments did scarce amount to ten thousand Crowns.
Another convincing Instance of what we said before, that their Enterprises at
Sea succeed but seldom, and that they rarely prove answerable to the vastness
of their Expenses.

The main effort of this Campaign, as well as of most of the others, was made
on the side of Flanders. The Armies Encamped very numerous in the Field on both
sides, and thirty Thousand brave Fellows lost their Lives, without coming to a
Field Battle. For these three years last past the Confederates had formed a
Design to attack our Lines, to ravage our Conquests, and to besiege Dunkirk. To
prevent their Design, the King ordered new Lines to be made from the Schelde to
the Lis, and from Courtray to the Seaside. Twenty Thousand Pioneers made a
Ditch of fourteen Thousand Foot long, fifteen Foot broad, and twelve Foot deep,
with an Entrenchment behind it of ten Foot high, in less than eight days time.
These Lines being a fresh Obstacle to the design of the Prince of Orange (King
William III.) he assembled the Confederate Army with all possible diligence
near Ipres, to endeavor to obstruct the Perfecting of this Work, the Lines on
that side being not quite brought to Perfection. Our Army was above five and
twenty Thousand Men inferior in number to theirs, and much harassed by a long
March of twice four and twenty hours, and consequently not in a condition,
without taking some repose, to make any considerable resistance; besides that,
not above one half of their Train of Artillery was arrived in the Camp. The
Confederate Army consisted of above an Hundred Thousand Men, all fresh Troops,
provided with a prodigious Train of Artillery, so that every thing seemed to
concur to their advantage; but they let slip the opportunity of attacking us
at the right nick of time; for in a few hours after our Cannon arrived in the
Camp, and our Troops having refreshed themselves a little, the Lines were
brought to Perfection the next following Night.

Thus having missed their aim, they made an attempt upon Fort Knock, Attack of
Fort Knock.
which they attacked three several times, and were as often repulsed, with the
loss of two Thousand Men, so that in eight days time they had not got an Inch
of Ground. But a little time convinced the World that a much greater Design was
carrying on under the pretense of this Attack. For in the mean while the Prince
of Orange (King William III.) had sent some of his best Troops toward the
Mesue, and so soon as he had received advice that the Troops of Liege and
Brandenburgh had invested Namur, he and the Elector of Bavaria followed in
Person, with the rest of the Army to assist at the Siege, leaving only thirty
Thousand Men under the Command of the Prince of Vaudemont in the Lower Flanders.

Namur was so well provided with every thing necessary for its defense, that it
was not questioned but it would make a long and vigorous resistance. Lewis
Francis, Marshal of Bouflers had thrown himself into the place the same day it
was Invested. There was a Garrison in it of ten Thousand eight hundred Men,
many good Officers, and a great number of brave Volunteers, and Ammunition more
than was requisite for its defense; all which advantages appeared to be such
obstacles to the Enemies, that most were of Opinion they would be too many for
them to surmount, and that they would be forced to quit this Enterprise. The
Marshal de Luxenburgh died in the beginning of January of a Pleurisy, Death of
the Marshal de Luxenburgh.
which proved a considerable loss to the King, there being not a General left
who surpassed him in Experience and Conduct, by which he had made his Name
glorious to the World, and dreadful to the Enemy.

The King having received news of the Siege, sent his Orders to Francis de
Neuville Villeroy, Marshal of France, who suceeded the Duke of Luxenburgh in
the Command of the Grand Army in Flanders, to enter the Lower Flanders, and if
possible, to fight the Prince of Vaudemont. Retreat of prince Vaudemont
Pursuant to these Orders he advanced toward the Enemy, who would infallibly
have been put to the rout, if the Prince, pursuant to his Orders of avoiding
any Engagement, had not found means to make a safe Retreat; so that in lieu of
routing the whole Army (of which in all humane appearance but few could have
escaped) we were forced to be contented with the defeat of two of their
Regiments, who were most of them cut to pieces in the Pursuit. The most
Fortunate Retreat that ever was made; for if the Princes Army had been routed,
the Confederates must of necessity have raised the Siege of Namur.

Ten days after this retreat the Duke de Villeroy Besieged Dixmuyden, The
taking of Deinse and Dixmuyden.
which place surrendered in four and twenty hours; Deinse opened its Gates at
the approach of our Forces. There were above eight thousand Men of well
disciplined Troops in these two places, who were all made Prisoners of War,
besides which, we found the Magazine as full of all sorts of Ammunition, and
this part of the Country having been preserved on purpose by the Confederates,
our Soldiers got an incredible Booty.

By the Conquest of the two Places, our Forces having opened themselves the
waytowards Ghent and Antwerp, the Flemmings as well as the Hollanders were
extremely alarmed at it, especially when they saw them advance but slowly in
the Siege of Namur, though they were plentifully provided with every thing for a
vigorous Attack, and that they had the advantage of very fair Weather, whereas
at the time when we besieged it, our Forces were not only to fight against the
bravery of the Garrison, but also against the Inconveniences of a Rainy and
Stormy Season. They had raised before it thirty Batteries, upon which were
mounted an Hundred and thirty pieces of Cannon, Siege of Namur by the Allies.
and Fourscore Mortars. This dreadful Artillery played without Intermission
against the Place, as long as the Siege lasted, in which they consumed three
Millions of Powder. Their Army was very formidable, and constantly reinforced
with fresh Troops; what Place is able to hold out against such an Attack?
Notwithstanding all these Advantages, the Confederates could not be Masters of
the whole, till after a Siege of two Months, the Besieged, like brave Soldiers,
disputing with them every Inch of Ground. Of this we saw an Instance at the
taking of the Entrenchments, which were made only in haste at some distance
from the Town, to hinder the sudden approach of an Enemy. Monsieur de Regnac,
who commanded them in Chief, made so many Sallies as filled up their Trenches,
threw up whole Battallions by the springing of his Mines, into the Air, that it
cost the Enemy eight days time before they could make themselves Masters of
them, after they had been repulsed in the first Assault, and that the French
had been reduced to these streights as not to have room enough left to make new
Entrenchments. The Trenches opened before Namur, betwixt the 11th and 12th of
July.
The City did not Capitulate till after four and twenty days of opening of the
Trenches, all their covert ways, and other Outworks being so entirely ruined by
the Enemies great Artillery, that without the utmost hazard they could not
pretend to sustain a third Assault. The first assault was the most terrible
that had been seen in the Memory of Man, it being no less obstinate than
bloody. It was a most dreadful Sight to behold the dead Carcasses lying in
great Heaps, and to hear the doleful Groans and Cries of the dying and wounded
Soldiers. The Allies renewed the Attack four several times, without being able
to lodge themselves within either of the Trenches, though all the same time
these were seconded by a shower of Carcasses, Bombs, The City of Namur taken.
and red hot Bullets, which were shot within the Works of the Town.

This brave Resistance giving us all imaginable hopes that the Castle would be
able to defend it self much longer, the Marshal de Villeroy advanced with his
Army toward Brussels to Bombard that Place, unless the Confederades would
agree not to Bombard any place for the future without a formal Siege. Never was
any Enterprise more advantageously undertaken, and more dexteously managed than
this Bombardment. For within the place was a very strong Garrison, Brussels
Bombarded.
and the Prince of Vaudemont with his Army was Encamped under the Walls;
besides that another flying Body of at least Twelve Thousand Men was
continually in Motion to observe us, and one side of the Town was laid under
Water. At the end of a great Causey (the only way by which we could approach
the Town,) the Enemies had made an Entrenchment of twenty Foot high, having
before it a low way, which served for a Ditch. But all these Obstacles were not
sufficient to hinder the Marshal de Villeroy from opening his Trenches, and
raising his Batteries in spite of all their Entrenchments, neither the
Garrison, or of Prince Vaudemont's Army which laid Entrenched on the backside
of the Town, making the least Motion, either at our Arrival before, or at our
Marching off from before the Place. All the Batteries being ready to Play, the
Marshal de Villeroy sent his Propositions, of not Bombarding any Place for the
future without a formal Siege. But the Elector of Bavaria, whose Intention was
to gain time, being come to Brussels, the Marshal threw four Thousand Bombs in
three Nights time into the Place. It Is impossible to express the Confusion and
Terror occasioned by the fury of our Bombs in so populous a City. The best and
strongest Edifices being destroyed, and two thirds of the whole City either
Burnt, or laid Level to the Ground.

From hence our Army Marched toward Namur. The Prince of Orange (King William
III) having received Intelligence of their Approach, and being joined by the
Prince of Vaudemont, and another Re-inforcement drew up his whole Army behind
his Lines, leaving only Twenty Thousand Men to guard the Trenches, with a
Resolution to avoid Fighting as long as possible he could, and to keep on the
Defensive, being covered on all sides by unpassable Boggs, thick Wood and
Hedges, and defended by double Entrenchments at all the Avenues. The Marshal de
Villeroy left nothing unattempted upon this Occasion; he himself went in Person
to take a View of the Woods and Defiles, to see whether by some way or other it
were not possible to force the Enemies Quarters without too much exposing the
Soldiers to the Slaughter, but found all the Avenues so well secured, that it
was impossible to attack the Enemy,

All the hopes of Relief being cut off by the Retreat of the French Army. The
Confederates attacked the Castle with new Vigor. Their great Artillery had
done such terrible Execution against the Castle, that all the Outworks
appeared no otherwise than like so many heaps of Stone or Rubbish, the poor
Soldiers being for the most part forced to shelter themselves in the Vaults
against the Fury of the Bombs and Bullets which made Breaches every where, each
of which was big enough for a whole Battallion to Mount in Front. The Marshal
de Boufleurs having refused to hearken to the Summons sent him by the
Confederates, they prepared for a general Assault, which was made in eleven
several places at once.

The day appointed for this Bloody Action being come, the Besieged saw about
ten a Clock in the Morning the Enemies Infantry appear in two Columns above the
Trenches, advancing in good order toward the Breaches. Three Thousand of their
best Men, at the Head of whom were the English Granadiers, did out-brave all
the rest in attempting to mount the Breach made in the Body of the Castle.
There was at least six Hundred Yards distance betwixt the head of the Trenches
and the said Breach, defended on both sides with several Out works, well
provided with a sufficient number of Soldiers But those brave Fellows made
their way through all these Obstacles, and advanced so briskly in spite of the
Enemies Fire, which galled them so in Front and Flank, that the first
Battallion planted their Colors on the top of the Breach. This Battallion
being brought into Confusion by the irresistible Bravery of the Besieged, the
second took their place, till being quite broken as well as the former, the
flying Soldiers pressing upon one another, brought the rest that were to Second
them likewise in Coufusion, who thereupon retreated in great disorder. All the
other Assaults were made and repulsed with the same Bravery, notwithstanding
the Garrison was quite exhausted of Strength by the continual Fatigues, and for
want of Rest; but being animated by the Example of the Marshal* and the rest of
the Officers, who also remonstrated to them that the Honor of the Nation laid
at Stake, and that their safety depended only on the points of their Swords;
they gave such Signal Proofs of their Bravery, that the Enemies were repulsed
in all their Attacks with great Slaughter, which lasted till five a Clock in
the Afternoon. This was a most glorious day for the Besieged; but they had lost
so many of their Men in this occasion, that finding themselves not in a
Capacity to sustain another Assault, the Marshal de Bouflers was forced to
Capitulate, The Castle of Namur surrendered.
and to surrender the Castle on the first day of November. Namur was purchased
at a very dear rate by the Confederates, who, beside the immense Expenses
bestowed in the carrying on of this Siege, lost twenty Thousand Men, the Flower
of their whole Army.

The Confederates being flushed with this Success, Campaign 1666.
boasted every where of this Conquest, but the wiser sort among them were not
much overjoyed at this Advantage, as looking upon it as a means to retard the
conclusion of a Peace. For the People being exhausted with Taxes, wished very
earnestly for a Peace, as the only means to free them from those heavy
Impositions. Their Commerce was considerably diminished, our Privateers, who
continually infested their Coasts, taking some of them every Day; it having
been Computed, that the English alone have since the beginning of this War,
lost four Thousand two Hundred Merchant Men, valued by themselves at thirty
Millions of Sterling. But there appeared in England many other Causes of
Intestine Divisions and Confusion. For the Money began to be very scarce, and
was so much Clipped of late Years, that its intrinsic value did not amount to
two thirds, sometimes not to one half of what it ought to be. As nothing is
more pernicious and destructive to Commerce than the adulteration of Money, so
these Disorders made many grumble against the Government, it being a customary
thing for the Common People to impute any public Disaster to the
mis-management of those at the Helm, which was also improved by a Party, who
insinuated into the People that great store of the English Coin was Transported
into Holland. The Agents of the King of England believing the present juncture
very favorable to their Design, set all their Engines at work for his
Restoration. They brought over many to their side, some out of Novelty, others
being moved by a seasonable Repentance, others out of Affection to their King
joined in the Design of restoring him to the Throne. They could scarce have
wished for a more favorable Opportunity, the Prince of Orange (King William
III.) having left the Kingdom destitute of Troops, and without a Fleet to guard
the Coasts. All his Troops were transported to Flanders, the grand Fleet was at
Cadiz, and a good Squadron of his best Ships lately gone out of the Downs, to
join those in the Streights. The King of England encouraged by these hopes of
Success, came to Calais with a Body of Sixteen Thousand Men of old Troops,
under the Command of several experienced Generals, who were ready to Embark at
an hours warning. But the Winds proving contrary for some time, the whole
Design was discovered, and we lost at once both the time and hopes of putting
it in Execution. For no sooner had the Dutch received Intelligence of this
intended descent; but they put to Sea with a Squadron of twelve stout Ships,
which cruised before Calais. The Prince of Orange K. William III. without
showing the least Concern at the greatness of the Danger, soon found means to
disperse these Clouds. He secured many suspected Persons, recalled his Fleets,
and some of his Troops out of Flanders, and secured the Seacoasts on that
side, which was most exposed to danger, with a good Body of the Militia. A
Plot, when once discovered, seldom takes effect^, and in lieu of proving
destructive to those against whom it was intended, prroves generally the chief
means of their Establishment. Both the Houses of Parliament gave upon this
occasion new Demonstrations of their Zeal and firm Adherence to the Interest of
the Prince of Orange, (King William III.) by entering into an Association not
only to maintain his Interest against all Pretenders, but also to revenge his
Death if he should happen to be snatched away by some sinister Attempt against
his Life. Having received these fresh Assurances of their Zeal for his Person
and Interest, he took such sure measures to prevent all future Danger of this
kind, that without any further delay he passed over into Flanders.

At his Arrival in Flanders he found the King's Armies in the Field before him,
and in the Spanish Territories. The King having taken a Resolution to be upon
the defensive, and sent his Orders to the Marshal de Villeroy, who was to
Command the French Army in the Lower Flanders, to possess himself at the
beginning of the Campaign of some advantageous Post, from whence he might both
observe the Enemies Motions, and prevent their Designs, and subsist in their
Territories till the end of the Campaign. The Army near the Meuse was Commanded
by the Marshal de Bouflers, who, pursuant to the King's Orders, had divided his
Army into four several Bodies, at such a convenient distance as to be able to
join upon any occasion, and at the same time to cover the French Conquests. All
the measures taken by the Confederates being broken by these seasonable
Precautions, they were forced to consume their own Territories, all the Summer
long, without being able to undertake a Siege, or come to an Engagement, though
they appeared more formidable now than ever. Their Fleet consisted of an
Hundred and Thirty Sail, but did no other feats but to burn a few Houses at
Calais, near the Sands of Cologne, and at St. Martins. They had three Armies in
the Low Countries, one consisting of five and twenty, or thirty Thousand Men,
under the Command of the Prince of Vaudemont in the Lower Flanders, which
however was not strong enough to Encounter the Marshal de Villeroy, who
Forraged to the very Gates of Ghent, and exacted Contributions from all the
circumjacent Countries. Their Grand Army at least half as strong again,
threatened sometimes one, sometimes another Place with a Siege, but could not
meet with a favorable opportunity to put it in Execution. A third Army of
eighteen or twenty Thousand Men, all Germans, advanced toward the side of
Namur, under the Command of the Landgrave of Hesse-Cassal. They remained in
that Post for about a Month, when for want of Pay, or opportunity of being
employed in Flanders, they returned toward the Rhine.

Neither did the Confederates act with much better Success on the German side.
The Prince of Baden keeping close within his Lines till the latter end of
August, not thinking it advisable to meet the Marshal de Choiseul, who had
passed the Rhine with the French Army, and stayed on this side near six Weeks.
After the return of the Landgrave of Hesse, the Prince of Baden passed the
Rhine, and in Conjunction with the rest, Marched toward Philipsbourgh, without
attempting any thing against the Place. They afterward advanced nearer the
Marshal, but spent the rest of their time in Cannonading one another Camp,
without coming to an Engagement.

The Duke of Vendosme had but a small Army in Catalonia, more considerable for
the goodness of his Troops than their Number. Yet he remained Master of the
Field all that Campaign, being beloved and esteemed by the Inhabitants of the
Country, and dreaded by the Spaniards. He defeated the Body of their Cavalry,
much Superior in number of Squadrons to his. He demolished many of their
Castles which served them for places of Retreat. He observed so closely the
Motions of their Army, that he enclosed them betwixt the Mountains and their
Entrenchment, where, without striking a Stroke, they lost more Men than they
could have done in an Engagement.

In Italy the Marshal de Catinat appeared in the Field with a very numerous
Army, composed of some of our best Troops, the King having taken a resolution
either to Conquer all the Country as yet remaining under the Obedience of the
Duke of Savoy, or to oblige that Prince to accept of a Peace. So soon as the
Enemy received Intelligence that the French were preparing to pass the
Mountains, they employed a great number of Workmen to cover the City of Turin
against any Attempt, by making strong Lines and Entrenchments, they carried all
the common Cattle into places of Security, and by their Army, and numerous
Parties which they sent abroad every Day, endeavored to hinder our
Communication with Pignerol. Our Army finding nothing else to subsist on but
what they were supplied with by our Convoys, did suffer Extremely in their
March, which was not very hasty, we being at the same time in Treaty with the
Duke of Savoy, and upon the point of concluding it.

After the Breach of the Truce, the King had in his Manifest sufficiently
testified his Intention of Sacrificing all his Conquests to the
re-establishment of the public Tranquillity, and that he had not taken up Arms
to enlarge his Frontiers, but to defend himself against the Attempts of the
Confederate Princes. Upon the same score it was, that both before the Siege of
Philipsbourgh and after the reduction not only of that Place, but also of the
whole Palatinate, he pressed the Allies to change the Truce made at Ratisbonne,
in the Year 1684. into a lasting Peace. Upon the same account also after taking
Villa Franca Nice, and Montmelian, he offered the Duke of Savoy to restore to
him all the Conquests he had made on that side. Casal being demolished since
that time, the Duke of Savoy's Inclinations began to bend strongly toward a
Peace. Peace is so desirable in it self, that when offered ought not to be
refused. Happy is that Prince who knows how to improve such an Opportunity to
his own Advantage.

It Is true, the Duke made some Preparations in the next Spring to Besiege
Pignerol, but his Intention was rather to oblige us to demolish it than to
reduce it by force of Arms. He had Espoused one of the Daughters of the Duke of
Orleance, only Brother to our King, who having no Daughters, had Married the
eldest of his Nieces to the King of Spain, the second to the Duke of Savoy. The
Queen of Spain died without Issue, but the Duchess of Savoy had had three
Princesses; to one of these the King resolved to Marry the eldest of his
Grandsons, to renew by this Marriage the ancient Alliance betwixt France and
the Duke of Savoy.

This Alliance and the present Advantage of removing these inconveniences
which attended the War at so great a distance, made the King consent to the
demolishing of Pignerol, and to restore the Duke into the immediate Possession
of all his Territories, except Susa, Nice, and Montmelian, which were to be
left in the King's Hands till the Conclusion of the general Peace.

The Duke on the other Hand obliged himself by a separate Article, Peace with
the Duke of Savoy in August.
to propose to the Confederates a Neutrality in Italy, and if they refused to
accept of it, to join his Forces with France to oblige them to it.

During the Treaty with Savoy, the King had granted a Truce for one Month,
which afterward was prolonged at the Request of the Pope, and the rest of the
Princes of Italy, who were not willing to let slip this opportunity that
offered, to rid their hands of the German, and other Foreign Forces.

But the Confederates were so far from accepting the Dukes Propositions, that
on the contrary they left no stone unturned, by threats, and Promises, to
persuade him to alter his Resolution. But he stood immovable to all these
Insinuations, and the time of the Truce being expired, Siege of Valenza.
joined his Forces with those of our King's, who advanced toward the Milaneze
Territories, to form the Siege of Valenza.

The Marshal de Catinat Commanded both these Armies under the Duke of Savoy,
and the Trenches being opened before the Place toward the end of September, we
carried on our Works with such Success, that the Place was just upon the point
of Capitulating, Neutrality for Italy
when a Messenger arrived in the Camp on the ninth day of October, with this
agreeable News, that at last the Ministers of the Emperor, and Spain had
accepted of the Neutrality; the chiefest Conditions were,

That the Princes of Italy should allow a certain Sum to the Emperor, to redeem
the Winter Quarters.

And that the German Forces should begin their March, in order to return into
their own Country, the same day that the King's Army in Italy, should return
into France.

The King gained great Advantages by the Peace of Italy; Thirty Thousand Men of
his best Troops, with a great General, who had hitherto been Employed on that
side, might be made use of with much less Expense against the Enemy in another
place, which must needs oblige them then to make a Peace with us, or to
continue the War with more Vigor, and greater Expenses than before.

We reaped also another Advantage by it, which ought not to be passed by in
Silence, which was the Princess Maria Adalaida, The Duchess of Burgundy.
Eldest Daughter of Victor Amadeus II. Duke of Savoy, and Anna Mariae of
Orleance, Spouse to the Duke of Burgundy. After the Ratification of the Peace,
this Princess was conducted into France, though the Consummation of the
Marriage was deferred for fifteen Months longer. She was all that time not
quite Eleven Years of Age, but showed such a vivacity of Wit, and so much
Conduct in all her Actions, that she was the admiration of the whole Court; the
Duke of Burgundy being not then above fourteen years;

Maria Victoria of Bavaria, Dauphine of France, died in the Year 1690. in the
Flower of her Age; Death of the Dauphiness.
she was a Princess of Extraordinary Merit, of a great Soul, whose chiefest aim
was to see the Princes her Sons Educated in the love of Virtue and glorious
Actions.

Betwixt this Princess, and Lewis, Dauphin of France were begotten three
Princes, Lewis Duke of Burgundy, born the eighth day of August, in the year
1682. Philip, The three sons of the Dauphin.
Duke of Anjou, born on the 29th day of December, in the Year 1683. and Charles
Duke of Berry, on the 31st of August, in the Year 1684. Never had any Princes
in the World more noble Education, their generous Inclinations being improved,
not only by their Governor Paul, Duke de Beauvilliers Saint Aignant, and their
Tutor, Francis de Salignac Fenelon, Archbishop of Cambray, but also by the
singular Care of the King and Dauphin, who with so much Application did show
them the way to true Virtue, that following both the Footsteps and Instructions
of such Guides, there never appeared in any Princes in the World more noble
Sentiments, and generous Inclinations, than in these three; the Eldest having
given already to the French Nation, by his happy disposition to Virtuous
Actions, all the imaginable hopes of becoming one day a great Prince. If the
virtuous Inclinations of Princes are like Springs, which derive their noble
Effects, and Communicate them to their Subjects, nothing is so great but what
may be expected from the happy Marriage of so accomplished a Prince, with a
Princess, whose Merits equalize, if not surpass her high Extraction, and that
most eminent Station she is placed by Providence in the World.

The Peace of Italy proved the happy forerunner of a general Peace. It was two
years since, several Proposals had been made upon that Account, which were
often changed, according to the several change of Affairs in Christendom,
matters being at that time not brought to a perfect Maturity. But toward the
latter end of this Campaign there appeared more disposition in the Confederates
for a Peace, than before; and the People both in England and Holland showed
much eagerness for it, the Allies were for the most part discouraged by the
many Disappointments they had met with, and most of them having no particular
Interest in the War, began to hearken to these Proposals, which were made on
our King's behalf, to give Satisfaction to some of the Confederate Princes;
thus every thing seemed to tend toward the Conclusion of a general Peace, if
an un-foreseen Obstacle had not overturned all these fair hopes.

Charles II. Charles II. K. of spain.
the present King of Spain, happened to fall ill in the beginning of October,
so as to have three several Relapses in less than six Weeks time. This Prince
having no Issue, and all Europe taking Interest in the Quarrel which was like
to arise after his Death about the Succession; the Confederates showed not much
forwardness to bring it to a Conclusion, till after the recovery of this
Monarch. It was perhaps upon this score that the Ministers of the Emperor, and
of some of the rest of the Confederate Princes, found means to raise many
difficulties concerning the Passes, and the place where the Ambassadors were
to meet to carry on the Negotiation of Peace. The Conferences were already
begun at the Hague, as being the Center where the Ministers of the Consederacy
used to meet, besides that the Dutch showed more Inclination for the Peace than
the rest, and made use of all their Endeavors to promote so great a Work.
Money began to be so scarce among them, that they were hardly put to it to find
means for the raising of new Troops, to furnish their Quota of Men and Money,
which made up the largest share of the whole Confederacy. They were also under
some apprehensions that the Catholic Princes might be prevailed upon, either
by the Mediation of the Pope, or of the Duke of Savoy, to conclude a separate
Peace. For since the Conclusion of the Peace in Italy, the Emperor's Minister
remained still at Turin. The Governor of Milan had also taken several Journeys
thither; the Count de Tesse resided there in our King's behalf, and the Marshal
de Catinat had stayed there for some time before he repassed the Alps. The
long stay of these Ministers in a Court which so lately had changed its
Interest, their frequent Conferences, the many Messengers that were continually
sent forwards and backwards, betwixt Paris, Vienna, and Madrid, raised no small
jealousy in the Dutch, and made them fear, lest, if the Emperor, the King of
Spain, the Elector of Bavaria, and the other Catholic Princes should make a
separate Peace, they would be left a Sacrifice to France.

But whilst these debates lasted, both Parties began to make greater
Preparations than ever for the Prosecution of the War. Campaign of 1697.
The King's Power appeared more formidable than it did nine Years ago, for he
had more Money, more Troops, and better Officers, than at the beginning of the
War. His Forces, both in Garrisons, and in the Field, were counted to consist
of four hundred and twenty thousand Men, to wit, three hundred and fifty
Thousand Foot, and threescore and ten Thousand Horse, without reckoning those
Employed in the Sea-Service, who were no less considerable this Year than at
any time before, the King having applied all his Care to Arm in all his Ports,
and Equip all the biggest and best of his Ships. The Confederates on the other
side having taken a resolution to make their last Efforts this Campaign, the
Prince of Orange, (King William III.) and the Dutch made a defensive League
with the King of Denmark, by Virtue of which he was obliged to furnish them
with a certain number of Troops, and a Squadron of Men of War.

But in the midst of all these vast Preparations, the Plenipotentiaries of all
the Princes that were engaged in this Bloody War, began to open the Conferences
for the Conclusion of the Peace. Delft and the Hague were pitched upon for the
Places of Residence of these Ministers, and the Castle of Riswick, which lies
betwixt these two Places, to hold their Conferdnces in. A considerable time
before the opening of these Conferences, Neutrallty proposed for Catalonia.
a Negotiation had been set on Foot at Turin, to conclude a Neutrality for
Catalonia. The Spaniards cannot be more sensibly touched in any part of their
Dominions than in Catalonia, which lying so near to the Center of the Kingdom,
and Danger threatening from that side, puts the People of Spain into a Ferment,
which is more dreadful among the Spaniards than other Nations. The King of
Spain wanted the necessary Funds for the carrying on of the War; the Duke of
Savoy having not disbanded any of his Troops, either because matters were thus
concerted betwixt our Court and him, or because he intended to improve the
present Conjuncture to his Advantage, the Spaniards could draw but few of their
Troops out of the Milaneze. The Confederates had no Fleet in the Mediterranean,
and were consequently not in a Condition to succor them with any of their
Troops in Catalonia; besides, that these Foreign Auxiliaries proved more
troublesome to the Inhabitants than the Enemy; considering all these
disadvantages the Council of Spain were inclined to accept of this Neutrality,
if it had not been represented to them by the Emperor's Ministers, that if our
King should be freed at once from the War, both near the Alps, and the
Pyrenean Mountains, it would be so great an Addition to his Strength, that the
Confederacy would be reduced to a necessity of preventing their Ruin by the
Conclusion of a disadvantageous Peace: These Considerations were so prevailing
with the Spaniards, that they neglected their own Interest for that of the
Confederacy, and refused to accept of the Neutrality with Catalonia.

The glorious success of the French Arms for these nine or ten Years last past,
had given new occasion of Jealousy to the Emperor The Continuation of the War
was a plausible pretense to augment his Authority in the Empire; he had all the
Reason in the World to be afraid of the ill state of the King of Spain's
Health, and his infirm Constitution; he did also imagine that after the
Conclusion of the Peace, the German Princes would not be very forward to assist
him against the Turks; all which Inducements were sufficient to diminish the
Emperor's Inclinations for a Peace.

It was supposed that the Prince of Orange (K. William III.) was also rather
inclined to continue the War, but considering that both the English and Dutch
so earnestly desired it; there was not any reason which could oblige him to
oppose this Negotiation. For the several Plots which had been contrived against
him since his Elevation to the Throne, the decay of Commerce, the vast quantity
of false and clipped Money and the scarcity of good Coin had caused' such
Confusions in England, as could not be better repaired than by a speedy Peace,
especially since the English sustained such considerable Losses, both by our
Privateers, and the heavy Taxes, that many of their richest Merchants were
ruined by the War. Add to this that the People in Holland were so pressing for
a Peace, that for fear the States General should be prevailed upon to consent
to a separate Peace with France, the Emperor and the other Princes judged it
most adviceable not to delay any longer to send their Plenipotentiaries to
assist at the opening of the Conferences.

The King had for some time before sent Francis de Calliere, a person in whom
he put a singular Confidence, to the Hague, to adjust the main Preliminary
Points with the States General of the United Provinces, and to remove all
Obstacles which might retard, or obstruct this grand Affair, he kept upon the
defensive, for fear of raising new Jealousies against him among the
Confederates. But finding that this only served for a means to retard than
promote the Peace, some of the Confederates being buoyed up with the vain hopes
of obtaining more advantageous Conditions by these delays, he took a resolution
to act with more Vigor this Campaign.

Since the end of the last Campaign the King had ordered his Magazines upon the
Rhine to be filled with all manner of Provisions: The French Forces which
hitherto had been Employed in Italy, were put into Winter Quarters in Alsace,
and other adjacent Countries, and our Troops had been in Motion all the Winter,
the better to amuse the Enemy. The Neighboring Princes being greatly Alarmed
at these vast Preparations, caused their Territories to be covered by strong
Entrenchments, defended by a vast number of Pallisadoes; and Batteries, with
Redoubts, and Forts built on all the principal Avenues, as if they all were to
sustain the whole Force of France the following Campaign. A Rumor being also
industriously spread abroad, which was confirmed by the Motions of our Forces
on that side, that the King intended to have two great Armies in Germany, one
near the Upper Rhine, to give a Diversion to the Enemy, the other under the
Marshal de Catinat, to undertake a Siege upon the Lower-Rhine, the Confederates
fortified Mayence, and provided this as well as other places thereabouts with
fufficient Garrisons. This Rumor continued till toward the end of April, the
King having managed the whole Design with so much Conduct and Secrecy, that the
Generals, who, were to serve under the Marshal de Catinat, were upon the Road
toward Germany, in expectation to make the Campaign there, when they received
Orders to the contrary; and that they should with all speed repair to Flanders,
whither the said Marshal was gone to form the Siege of Aeth.

This Enterprise was looked upon as the most glorious that could be undertaken,
Siege of Aeth.
the Place being strongly fortified with eight Bastions, surrounded with a
broad and deep Ditch, full of Water. It was the sixteenth day of May, when the
Town was Invested, at which time, there was a Garrison in it of three thousand
seven hundred Men. Never was a place attacked with more precaution, and so much
vigor; at the same time the King having given express Orders to the Marshal,
to spare as much as possible could be his Troops, but to play against the Place
the more furiously with his great Artillery. But the besieged made but a feeble
Resistance; they fired not very briskly, nor made one Sally, when our Men made
the Assault upon the covert Way, they left their Post after the first
Discharge; so that as soon as we had made two breaches large enough to mount
them, this strong Place, which by reason of its many Outworks, Surrender of
Aeth.
was feared would cost us a great many Men, surrendered by Composition the 6th
day of June, in thirteen days after opening of the Trenches, with the loss only
of a hundred Men on our Side.

The Confederates had at the same two great Armies in Flanders, being both
computed at a hundred and twenty thousand Men. Our King, to disappoint the
Enemies design of relieving the Place, had ordered the Marshal de Villeroy, to
post himself on that side, where there was the most appearance of danger. The
Marshal de Bouflers was Encamped on the other side of the Town, and three other
Bodies were to guard some other Avenues leading to it; all which were posted at
such convenient distance, as to be able to second one another in case of an
Attack; so soon as the Enemy had been advertised of the Siege, they advanced
toward our Lines, but whither it were that they feared the Desertion of many
of their Soldiers, who were very ill paid, or that they did not think it for
their Interest to hazard a Battle at this juncture of time, when the Peace was
so near a Conclusion, for fear, that if the Success should not answer their
Expectation, they should be forced to rest contented with the less advantageous
Conditions, they divided their Army into several Bodies, the better to cover
their other Places in Flanders, without attempting the Relief of Aeth.

Soon after the taking of Aeth, they received a fresh Reinforcement of eighteen
thousand Men, but notwithstanding their vast Number, they Entrenched themselves
in their Camp, which they made impregnable by many Redoubts and Batteries. The
French Army's continued all this Summer in the Spanish Territories, without
being distubr'd by the Confederates, who avoided a Battle or Engagement. The
remaining part of the Campaign was spent without any further Action, the Allies
seeming to have no other Aim, than to prevent our Forces from undertaking any
thing of moment; and both Parties being actually inclined to expect the issue
of the Siege of Barcelona, and of the Diet Assembled in Poland, for the choosing
of a Successor to their lately deceased King John.

John Sobieski, Grand Marshal of Poland, owed his Elevation to the Throne of
Poland, not so much to his own Credit and Interest, as to our King's
Protection, and the prudent Management of the then Bishop of Marseilles, Coll.
Johnson.
and the King's Ambassador in Poland; a great Politician, and one of those
extraordinary Persons, who by their singular Merits become honorable to their
Age, and Highly Serviceable to the Church and State. This King acquired
immortal Glory about nine Years after, when he left his Kingdom, and marched in
the year 1683, to the relief of Viena. But ever since that time he had altered
his measures, and in lieu of prosecuting the War with vigor against the
Infidels, had given himself over to Idleness, his main Care being to heap up
such Treasures for his Children, as to put them in a Condition either to obtain
the Crown after his Death, John Sobieski, K. of Poland.
or at least to put them beyond the want of it; whereas the best Treasure he
could have left to his Children, would have been to bless them with the Love of
the People. But these gave such evident demonstrations of the little esteem
they had for his Family, by pillaging his Estate during the Interregnum, that
it sufficiently appeared to the World, that his memory was become odious to
them.

After the Death of this Prince, a general Diet was called together, in order
to choose a Successor to the Crown. At this critical Conjuncture, when most
Princes of Europe were engaged in a War, it was no wonder, if each Party
pretended to maintain their Interest at this Election. The Election of a King
of Poland inclining either to the Interest of France, or the Confederacy, being
looked upon at this juncture of time of such Consequence, as to carry along
with it no small Influence toward the raising or diminishing the Hopes of the
Confederate Princes; each Party therefore were not sparing in making Intrigues
for or against the Interest of such a Person, as they either wished to be
elevated, or excluded from the Throne of Poland.

Among the rest that pretended to the Crown, was the present Czar of Muscovy.
His Empire is of a very vast extent, Candidates for the Crown of Poland. Czar
of Muscovy.
reaching from the Boristhenes to the utmost Confines of the North, and on the
other side from the Frontiers of Sweden, to the River Tanais. It was
represented to the Poles, how glorious 'twould be to their Nation, to choose a
King, who Commanded over so vast a Country; but they wisely considered that
their Liberty would be in no small danger under so Potent a Master, who was
able to bring them under Subjection, by the Force of his own Arms. Duke of
Lorrian.


The young Prince of Lorrain, eldest Son to the late Prince Charles, entered
also the List of the Candidates, not so much in hopes of succeeding in it, as
out of an Ambition of being put in the same Rank with the rest, in his younger
Years.

There was also much Discourse of Prince Lewis of Baden; Prince Lewis of Baden.
This Prince was a great Master of the Art of War, and had had great Success
against the Infidels in Hungary, whom he had vanquished at several times. The
Emperor, in acknowledgment of his Services; and the Prince of Orange (K.
William III.) out of a particular Respect for his person, would without all
question, have espoused his Interest; if by joynt-consent of the Confederates,
it had not been judged more advisable to support the Faction of Prince James
Sobieski, Pr. James of Poland.
Brother-in-Law both to the Emperor, and the Elector of Bavaria. Every thing
seemed to concur for his Advantage; He was eldest Son to the late King, he
wanted not Riches to purchase the Voices and Protection of the Great ones. The
Princes of Germany had espoused his Interest, as well as the Dutch; the
Emperor, and Prince of Orange (K. William III.) made use of all their Credit
to promote his Elevation to the Crown; But all these Advantages, which in all
outward appearance seemed to be the most proper means to compass his Design,
proved perhaps the true cause of his Disappointment. For, his near Alliance
with the House of Austria, had raised a Jealousy in the Polish Lords, lest, he
should, when once their King, improve it to their disadvantage, and be
encouraged by the Neighborhood of the Emperor to make use of his Power, to
the prejudice of their Liberty. The pressing Solicitations made in his behalf
by the German Princes, began to be suspected by the Populace, by reason of a
certain Jealousy and Emulation, which is always to be observed betwixt two
Potent neighboring Nations. He was as Liberal in his Promises to pay the Debts
of the Crown, in case he was elected King, as profuse in his Money to gain the
Hearts of the Poles, but in vain, nothing being able to remove the Aversion
they had conceived against him.

The Confederates finding the Poles thus disposed, began to despair of the
Success of the Prince, for which Reason they raised a new Faction, for the
Elector of Saxony. The Elector promised to turn Catholic, and there were not
wanting those, Elector of Saxony.
who assured them that he had abjured the Lutheran Religion two or three Months
before, notwithstanding that since that time he had made public Profession of
it. He offered ten Millions for the Payment of Arrears due to the Army, who
during the time of the Interregnum had revolted for want of Pay. He promised
also to maintain at his own Cost, fifteen thousand Men, and never to make Peace
with the Turks, till he had restored all what they had taken from the Poles.
These specious Offers would perhaps have influenced the Poles to prefer the
Elector before the rest, if the Eyes and Hearts of the Polish Nobility had not
been guided by the real Prospect of more solid Advantages.

The French Ambassador the Abbot Malehoor de Polygnack, recommended to them,
Francis Lewis de Bourbon, Prince of Conty.
Prince of Conty, the eleventh Prince of the Royal Blood of France, who
promised to pay their Troops all their Arrears in ready Money, and to retake
Caminieck, without the least Expense to the Commonwealth. The Prince of Conty
had gained the Esteem of all Europe, not only by his Courage, but also by many
great and generous Actions, and his unparalleled Moderation. He had Signalized
himself in the War in Hungary, and since his Return, had given many
Demonstrations of his Valor to the World. At Steenkirk, and in the Battle of
Neerwinden, he had showed himself both an expert General, and a brave Soldier.
These great Qualifications, which made very favorable Impressions in the
hearts of a Warlike People, received a new Luster by our King's Recommendation
to the Chief Men of Poland. But, this Negotiation met with no small
Difficulties, as being opposed by almost all the rest of the Princes of Europe.
The Ministers of these Princes insinuated without intermission to the Poles,
that to choose a French Prince, would be to put all their Neighbors into a
continual Alarm; that this, whether true or false, would at one time or other,
turn to the disadvantage of Poland, which thereby would change its present
happy Condition for the Miseries of a long War. That their Riches and Forces
would be employed to promote the ambitious Designs of France; the Prince of
Conty, though invested with the Royal Dignity, not being discharged from the
Obligations due to our King, whom both in point of Gratitude and Interest, he
could not be able to refuse, whatever he desired.

They were also not sparing both in their Threats and Promises; but the King's
Interest prevailing over all their Intrigues, the Prince of Conty was Elected
by the plurality of Votes. For of thirty two Palatinates, that appeared in the
Field, eight and twenty declared for him, the Elector of Saxony having only
four on his side. This Prince being so much superior in Number of Voices to his
Competitor, was immediately proclaimed King by the Archbishop of Guesna, Pr.
Conty proclaimed King of Poland.
Primate of Poland, who has the Administration of Affairs in Poland, during the
Interregnum, and who alone has a Right of Proclaiming a King.

But the Elector of Saxony, against all the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom,
was likewise proclaimed King by the Bishop of Kujavia, who falsely pretended to
this Power. The Elector's Faction raised great Disturbances in the Kingdom,
Elector of Saxony proclaimed King of Poland.
endeavoring to maintain themselves by Force and violent Means. The most
speedy way to disperse these Clouds, and to restore a perfect Calm in the
Kingdom, and to remove all future Danger of any civil Commotions, was the
calling of a new Diet, to determine the Difference concerning this Election,
and to maintain the Prince de Conty in his Pretensions, and to confirm his
Election by the Authority, if not of all, at least of the major Number of the
Palatinates.

The issue of this grand Affair kept all Europe in suspense for some time, but
the Siege of Barcelona, which had been carried on for two Months together with
the utmost Vigor, Siege of Barcelona.
was looked upon by most to be of no less Consequence. Barcelona is one of the
most Considerable Forts in all Spain. It is a very large, rich, populous City,
Famous for its Traffic. It is tollerably well Fortified on the Land side,
having a Fort at a quarter of a Leagues distance from the Town, built upon a
steep Rock. The Place was at that time provided sufficiently with Ammunition,
besides which, they received constant Supplies, the Town being not begirt on
that side where the Fort lay. The Garrison consisted of eleven thousand
disciplined Troops, besides four thousand Miquelets. They played without
Intermission with their Cannons, Bombs, Granado's, and other Firearms, and
sometimes made four Sallies in one Night. They disputed every Inch of Ground
with us in their Outworks, some of which they retook twice or thrice, and at
last made new Entrenchments within the old Bastions, and inspite of the Prayers
of the Inhabitants, and Threats of the common People, they stood it out, with
an unparalelled Bravery to the last Extremity. The Count de la Corsana,
Governor of the City, and the Landgrave of Hesse Darmstadt, Commander in Chief
of the Garrison, acquired immortal Glory in the Defense of this Place. On the
other hand, what Pen is able to give due Praises to those who vanquished such
brave Men, who by their invincible Courage overcame their Resolution, and were
not discouraged by the Fatigues and Dangers of so long and bloody a Siege? The
number of the Besieged did bear no proportion to the Besiegers, the Duke of
Vendosme's Army consisting of no more than thirty thousand Men, at the
beginning of the Siege, and the Reinforcement which he received from Provence
and Languedock, not above eight or nine thousand strong, being all Militia. But
what is unaccessible to a General, who has an equal share of Courage and
Conduct, who knows how to manage his Troops to the utmost Advantage, who by his
Example teaches them to out-brave all Fatigues and Dangers, and to be rather
encouraged than dismayed at the Bravery of their Enemies?

Thus the Siege was carried on with all imaginable Vigor, though for want of
sufficient number of Forces, we could not carry our Lines quite round the
Place. The covered Way was attacked three several times, Attacks upon the
covered Way.
and in three several places. In the first assault we lodged our selves upon
one of the Angles, but were beaten back from the two others. We had a second
Assault the next day, but without Success, not being able to maintain us in our
Posts till the third. Then the Batteries on the Counterscarp began to play most
furiously; The Bombs and red hot Bullets laid two thirds of the Town in Ashes,
and the dead Carcasses buried under their Ruins sent forth such a nauseous
Scent, as infected the whole City. Soon after we had made Breaches both in the
Bastions and Courtines; but the Duke of Vendosme did not think it convenient to
give the general Assault, till he had routed the Viceroy, to take away all
hopes of relief by Land, from the Besieged, of which they had no hopes left by
Sea, the Allies having at that time no Fleet in the Mediteranean, and a
Squadron of nine French Men of War, many Frigates and thirty Galleys laying
before the Port. The Count d' Estree was Commander in Chief of this Squadron;
the Forces and the Officers that were embarked on board of these Ships, did
great Service in this Siege; The taking of the covered Way in the third
Assault, being as chiefly owing to the Valor of James de Noailles, Lieutenant
General of the French Galleys. All the remaining hopes of the Besieged, were in
the Relief they expected from the Viceroy, who kept the Field with four or five
thousand regular Troops, and a good Body of Miquelets. They had also another
small Body of about seven or eight thousand Horse, and a thousand Foot, which
being posted betwixt the Mountains, made frequent Incursions to annoy and
intercept our Convoys, and to prevent our Peasants from carvying Provisions to
our Camp.

The Enemies Design was to attack our Lines in two or three places at once, and
to force them, if possible, under the favor of a General Sally, to be made by
the whole Garrison at the same time. The Spanish Army surprised.
The Duke de Vendosme, thinking it the safest way to prevent them in their
Design, and having received Intelligence by his Spies, that they were very
carelessly Encamped, marched out two hours before break of Day with six thousand
of his best Men, and at the same time fent a Body of three hundred Horse, two
hundred Dragoons; and a thousand Fusiliers, under the Bommand of the Count d'
Vsson, to surprise the Spaniards that were posted betwixt the Mountains.

The Cavalry and Outguards being cut in pieces, the Duke advanced without the
least Resistance to the Viceroy's Quarter, where there was nothing but
Confusion, as may easily be supposed to be the Effects of such a Surprise.
Every one was for following the Example of the Viceroy, who saved himself in
his Shirt, without being able to take along with him his Papers, or Scrutore,
in which was a good Sum of Gold. Two or three hundred of the bravest among
them, who made some resistance, were cut in pieces, and the rest dispersed in
an instant. The whole Camp, with all their Baggage fell a Prey to our Soldiers,
who burnt their Tents and every thing else that was not portable.

The Count d' Vsson, having at the same time had the good Fortune, to drive the
Spaniards from their Post in the Mountains, we had all the reason to believe
that the Besieged, being discouraged by this ill Success, would alter their
measures, and give over their Design of holding out to the last Extremity.
Assault up on Barcelona.
But we found our selves deceived in our hopes, for they received us with
incredible Bravery, as we were giving the Assault about a Week after, upon the
Breaches of the two Bastions. They retook one of these Bastions with great
Slaughter, and after they were drove from thence a second time, retreated into
a strong Entrenchment they had made behind the Breach of the Bastion. Thus we
were to encounter the Danger of a new Siege, there being behind the
Entrenchment a strong old Wall, fortified with Towers. Our Miners were set at
Work, and every thing ready for a general Assault, when the Besieged were again
summoned to a Surrender; but without being in the least terrified at the Danger
that threatened them in case the Town should be be taken by Assault; they
refused to hearken to a Capitulation, till at last, being overcome by the
Lamentations of the Cirizens, and the Consideration of their present Condition,
which was such as not to be able to sustain another Assault, without hazarding
all, they accepted of the Conditions offered them by the Duke de Vendosme, who,
to show the Esteem he had for their Bravery, allowed them very honorable
Conditions, to wit, to march out through the Breach, with six Mortars, and thirty
pieces of Cannon. Besides which, we found in the place six Mortars, Surrende^
of Barcelona.
more and one hundred pieces of Cannon. This Siege cost the Lives of many brave
Men; we having lost betwixt four and five thousand on our side, and the Enemy
above six housand.

It was was much about the same time, that we receiveed the welcome News of the
good Success of an Expedition against Carthagena, a Place belonging to the
Spaniards in the West Indies. The Spaniards are so over-jealous of their great
Riches and vast Possessions in the new World, that they do not suffer any
Foreigner among them there. This Project had been in Debate several times
before; but never came to Maturity, till the Sieur de Ponty obtained Leave from
the King, to undertake this Eppedition in Person. The King, to encourage the
Design, provided the Ships; many particular Persons furnishing their Quota for
the Equipment of them, in proportion to the Share they expected to have in the
Booty. The Sieur de Ponty was an expert Seaman, and had rendered himself Famous
in several Exploits.

Accordingly he set Sail in the Month of January, Expedition against Carthagena.
with seven Men of War, three Frigates, two other Ships, and one Bomb-Vessel He
met with all the imaginable Success in his Voyage; and in the beginning of
March following, without having met with any Tempest, or other Encounter at
Sea, came to an Anchor before the Port of St. Domingo, where being reinforced
with fifteen hundred Buckaneers, he pursued his Voyage to Carthagena, where at
his Arrival, he found the Enemies, who had received Intelligence of his Design,
making preparations to receive him.

Carthagena is one of the most Famous and best Ports the Sponiards are Masters
of in America. Description of Carthagena.
It is a very large and populous City, built upon a Peninsula, its Avenues is
being guraded by several Forts. There the Lower and the Upper City; The last is
defended by several Bastions, and the first by a strong Fort. There were above
one hundred pieces of Cannons mounted upon their Walls and Forts, their main
Hopes; they avoiding all Opportunities of coming to Handy-blows; Our Troops
acting not with the usual Precautions, betwixt eight and nine hundred of them
were killed at their Landing by the Enemy's Cannon. In the Assault of the first
Fort, the Buckaneers attacked them with such Bravery, that they took it with
little Resistance; the other Forts were also abandoned by the Spaniards,
without striking a Blow. They defended the Fort which guards the Lower Town for
some time; but that being carried by Assault, we fired so furiously with our
great Artillery against the Upper Town, that they were forced to capitulate on
the third day after. The Sieur de Ponty entered the City in Triumph; The taking
of Carthagena.
and after he had put them to Ransom, he demolished all their Bastions and
Forts. We got a prodigious Booty in the Place; For, without reckoning the vast
Sums which each Officer and Soldier squeezed out of their Landlords, betwixt
eight and nine Millions of Livres in ready Coin and Ingots were brought into
France, and a Million more in Emeralds; other precious Stones, Movables and
Gold, and one hundred Brass Pieces of Cannon. With this vast Treasure they set
Sail from Carthagena, but were not long, before, at about fifty Leagues
distance from that place, Ponty escaped the English.
they were met by a Squadron of twenty English Men of War; they made a running
Fight for two days; but on the third, the Sieur de Ponty sound means, under
favor of a thick Mist, to alter his Course, and to escape the Danger, without
loosing any thing of his Booty.

The Expedition made much Noise in all Parts of the World, every body standing
amazed at the Boldness of the Buckaneers, it being chiefly owing to their
Bravery, that this dangerous Expedition was brought to a happy issue, though
carried on with a much less Number of Ships and Men than seemed proportionable
to the Greatness of the Enterprise.

These Advantages so lately obtained on our side, proved very instrumental to
hasten the Peace

The Jealousy which the Confederate Princes had conceived at the King's good
Fortune and Power, The General Peace.
and the hopes of reducing him into more narrow Bounds had been the chief
occasion of this War. But finding themselves deceived in these great
Expectations, there was nothing left now, but to restore Tranquillity to Europe,
by a solid and durable Peace, founded upon the same Basis with that of
Nimhegen. In this nice Conjuncture, the Prince of Orange (King William III.)
acted the Part of a great Politician; and finding that the Desires of the
People were absolutely bent for Peace, he made the first steps toward
Accomplishing it, and by his Persuasions, prevailed upon the rest of the
Confederates to follow his Example.

Accordingly the Peace was Signed with Spain, England, and Holland, on the
twentieth day of September; and with Germany, about six Weeks after.

Among other Conditions, Peace Concluded.
one was, either did propose to the Emperor, one was, either to keep
Strasburgh, and to give an Equivalent, or else to keep the Equivalent, and to
restore Strasburgh; and, that, in case the Empire did not within a certain
limited Time, accept of the Equivalent, he would be at his own Liberty to alter
the whole Conditions of the Peace. The Imperial Cities opposed the Session of
Strasburgh, and were seconded by most of the Electors, who, knowing that the
Places offered as an Equivalent for Strasburgh, must be surrendered into the
Emperor's hands, were not a I^t^le Jealous of this increase of his Power. The
Circles of Suabia and the Upper Rhine made their Complaints against it,
alleging, that if our King was left in the possession of Strasburgh, they
would be forced to keep even in time of Peace, a good number of Troops on Foot,
for their defense against so Potent a Neighbor. Whilst these Contests were in
agitation in the Empire, our King at the Intercession of the Prince of Orange
(K. William III.) granted a further delay, that by the Interposition of the
said Prince and the Hollanders, the Germans might be prevailed upon to grant
the absolute Possession of Strasburgh to him.

They succeeded so well in this Negotiation, that at last this Famous City,
which had been so long the main obstacle of the Peace, was at last surrendered
for ever to France.

Our King restored to Spain, all that had been taken from them since the
Conclusion of the Peace of Nimeghen.

The young Duke of Lorrain was restored to his Estate, under certain Conditions.

The Elector of Treves put again into possession of his Capital City of the
same Name.

And to remove for the future, all Pretenses of Contest betwixt the Empire and
France, it was agreed that the Rhine should be the common Boundary betwixt
these two Nations; That France was to remain in Possession of what they had
Conquered on the other side of this River, and to restore, or demolish all
Places on this side.

King James II. K. Will. a knowledged as King by France.
having several times requested our King, not to delay any time to put a happy
Conclusion to he General Peace of Europe, in respect of his particular
Interest. William III. Prince of Orange, was acknowledged King of Great Britain
by the French Plenipotentiaries.

Let us trace the most authentic Monuments of Time. Let us view the most
ancient Histories of all Nations, to be convinced whether they can furnish us
with an Example parallel to the Greatness of our King. Will not Posterity stand
amazed, when they Read, that there has been a King in France, who, alone, for
ten years together, has been powerful enough to carry on a War against so many
and great Enemies, with such Success! France never was fensible of its own
Strength till now; but it must be confessed, that it is owing to the Conduct of
their Prince, who knows how to improve it to the best Advantage.

FINIS.
ERRATA 's.
PAge 2. for of famous Victories, read of two famous Victories. p. 3 f.
revived, r. revive, p. 6. f. Clove, r. Clou. p. 8. f. Command, r. Commands. p.
22. f. real Esteem, r. so real an Esteem. p. 27. f. this Trust r. his Trust p.
57. f. Eruption, r. Irruption. p. 59. f. into to, r. into. f. Justice on the
Just, r. Justice on account of the Just. ibid. on the Duchy. r. upon the
Duchy. p. 61. f. but besides the, r. but the. p. 70. f. that his, r. that by
his, ibid. f. received, r. revived, p. 80. f. having a disgust, r. having taken
a disgust. p. 83. f. adjudging, r. as judging. p. 99. f. hazard r. hazards. p.
112. inst. of where, r. wherein. p. inst. of Flanders and Spain, r. Flanders in
Spain. p. 118. inst of the Inner Guard, r. Rear-Guard. p. 121. f. and buries,
r. and to bury. p. 123. f. so strong, r. too. p. 124. f. to their Charge, r. to
the Charge. p. 126. inst. of Port, r. Post. p. 135. inst. of Count Calva, r.
Count Calvo. p. 147. f. himself a brave, r. himself as a brave. p. 152. f.
small and troublesome, r. cruel. and troublesome. p. 156. f. of Glacis and
Counter sharp, r. Glacis of the Countersharp. p. 159. f. some new time, r. new
ones. p. 171. f. Nimiguen, r. Nimheguen. p. 174. f. whilst they pretended, r.
whilst others pretended. ib. f. Ports, r. Parts. p. 175. f. Irreconciliable, r.
Amicable. p. 176. f. to Generosity, r. of Generosity. p. 180. f. to the
Souvereign, r. to Sovereigns. p. 181. f. by King and Council, r. by the King
and his Council. ibid. f. pointed Contests, r: Point in Contest. p. 182. f.
which is, r. such is. p. 187. f. Bishops the, r. Bishops, and when the. p. 189.
f. violent must, r. violent means. p. 192. f. But the, r. But as the. p. 295.
f. of the Decision to the Pope. r. to the Decision of the Pope. p. 197. f. and
been read, r. and having been. ibid. f. not forced, r. not only forced. ibid.
f. giving, r. given. p. 199. f. this, r. his. p. 214. f. Wall-court, r.
Wallcour. p. 249. f. Patteroons. r. Pontroons. p. 252. f. Confusion, r.
Concussion. p. 260. f. was so, r. was not come so. p. 261. f. Genove, r.
Genova, ib. f. Forest, r. Breast. p. 262. f. were great, r. were no great. p.
267. f. Cardaign. r. Sardaign. p. 268. f. Men with, r. Men flushed with. ib. f.
that their Enterprises, r. that Enterprises. p. 273. f. or of Prince, r. or
Prince. p. 276. f. who also, r. who at. p. 279. f. Cologne, r. St. Olonne. p.
281. f. all common Cattle, r. all the Cattle. p. 284. f. all that, r. at that,
p. 294. f. actually, r. coually. ibid. f. Coll. Johnson. r. Cardinal Johnson.
p. 294 f. till he had, r. till they had. ibid. f. Malehoor, r. Melchior. p.
302. f. Forts, r. Ports. p. 302. f. as chiefly, r. chiefly.


