Analecta Caesarum Romanorum. OR, SELECT OBSERVATIONS Of all the ROMAN EMPERORS.

Illustrated with their several Effigies, according to their Coins.

The first Eighteen by EDWARD LEIGH, Esquire The others added by his Son HENRY
LEIGH, -- Masters of Art of both Universities.

Also certain Choice FRENCH PROVERBS Alphabetically disposed and Englished,
added by the same Edward Leigh.

The Fourth Edition, Corrected and much Enlarged.

crown globe

LONDON, Printed by R. D. for John Williams, at the Crown and Globe in S.
Paul's Churchyard. M DC LX IV.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and his loving Father HENRY LEIGH Esquire.
Loving Father:
HOW much I am obliged unto you both for my being and well-being, I desire now
to testify unto the world; for though to requite your love and bounty be not
within the sphere of my Activity, yet since the Apostle Quicquid est, quod dat
Patri Filius, utique minus est, quia hanc ipsam dandi facultatem Patri debet.
Seneca lib. 3. de Beneficiis. Patribus and Diis non possumus retribuere
aequalia Arist. 8. Ethic. (...) 1 Timothy 5.4.
commands Children to learn to requite their Parents, and Nature it self has
taught the unreasonable The Fowl which teaches children to requite their
Parents is the Stoak from (...) natural affection, and she is called (...);
hence comes (...) when children study to requite their Parents
Creatures this lesson; I shall endeavor, (God assisting me with his grace) to
pay that threefold debt, of reverence, obedience, and gratitude, which all
children owe to their Parents: As Aeschines therefore, when he saw his
fellow-Scholars give great gifts to Socrates (being poor, and have nothing else
to bestow) did give himself to Socrates, professing to be wholly devoted unto
him: so I shall ever devote my self unto your service, to whom (next under God)
I owe my self, and those abilities I have, both natural, and which through Gods
blessing upon your liberal education, by a double apprentiship in two
Magdalen-Hall in Oxford, and the Middle Temple in London.
famous and flourishing Societies I have acquired. To express therefore my due
observance, and grateful recognition of your former care, and cost, and withal
to give you some account of the fruitful spending of my time, I here present
unto you some Choice Observations concerning the twelve first Caesar's, Emperors
of Rome. A work (as I conceive) both delightful, and useful, and therefore to
you (I hope) not unwelcome; as Geographers express the whole world in a little
Map, so have I labored Graphically to describe these great Monarchs of the
world in a little model, neither strictly tying my self to any one Historian,
nor relating all the passages of their lives, but excerping out of the most
principal Tertul. Eusebius Eccles. Hist Josephus. Plutarch. Taciti Hist. and
Annal. Aurel. Vict. Eutropius, Pliny, Solinus, Seneca, Macrob. Saturn.
Suetonius, with Casaub. Animadvers. Eras. Apotheg. and Chiliad.
Authors, such things of them as were most memorable. Amongst all which Writers
(though I confess Tacitus his style is elegant, and full of wise sententious
Est oration Taciti mirum in modum arguta, and prudentiae plena. Bodin. l. 4. de
Method. Hist.
Apophtheg.) I have chiefly followed Suet. 1. because my worthy Mr. William
Pemble.
Tutor (whose memory I shall ever honor) made choice especially (of that
History) to read to his Pupils. 2 Because his Phrase is pure and polite, and
himself a faithful Historian: Of whom it is recorded (as I think) by Erasmus,
that he wrote the lives of the Roman Emperors, prorsus ea liberate, qua ipsi
vixerunt, with the same freedom that they lived. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. dier.
lib. 1. c. 1. calls him sincerissimum scriptorem, and Ludov. Suetonius
Tranquillus Graecorum and Latinorum scriptorum diligentissimus, atque
incorruptissimus, res duodecim Caesarum videtur mihi integerrime exponere; qui
in optimis Principibus nec vitia, nec suspiciones vitiorum tacet: in pessimis
vero colores virtutum non dissimulat.

Ludov. Vives de tradend. Discipl. lib. 5. Tranquille and aequaliter fluit,
rebusque unice addictus orationis ornamenta non negligens, sed securus
praeterit, and tamen hunc ipsum ornatum velut umbram non id agens trahit.
Famian Strada. lib. 2. Prolus. Histor.


Vives, incorruptissimum. And I desire to write as freely and unpartially of
them, since I may say of them all, as Tacitus does of some of them, that they
were Mihi nec beneficio nec injuria cogniti; only I shall herein fail, that I
write not of these Emperors, Stylo Imperatorio, with a high and lofty style.
Julius Caesar is here placed in the forefront, he being the first Emperor. Ab
Imperio dictus Imperator, cui commissa erat belli adminstratio. Vt perpetuum
Imperatoris nomen alicui assignaretur, id ab Julio Caesare originem traxit,
quem Suetonius tradit praenomen id perpetuum a Senatu accepisse. A Julio
Imperatoris appellatio ad successores derivata. Vossii etymologicon linguae
latinae. For this title was at the first given unto him, that had fought
valiantly for his Country, and slain many enemies; Julius Nature meant Caesar
for a Conqueror, when she gave him both such courage, and such courtesy, both
which put Marius into amaze. They which durst speak to him, (said he) were
ignorant of his greatness; and the^ which du^st not, were so of his goodn^ss.
Caesar (having brought the greatest part of the then known world into the
subjection of the Romans) was the first that was saluted by the title of
absolute Emperor, and all the Emperors succeeding were called Imperatores and
Caesares from him, Mat. 22.21. Yet because he ruled but a few months, and
because the monarchical Government was in its vigor under Augustus, others
make Augustus the first of the Roman Emperors, and Augustus the last. Dunbar
in his fifth Century of Epigrams has these verses of Julius Caesar's and Pope
Gregory's reforming the Calendar. Caesar Gregoriusque annum dum jure reformant,
Deformant regni res sine jure, sui:
Scilicet antiqui facies a Caesare regni
Versa est, a Papa Pristina religio:
Malo reformari civilem a Caesare flammam,
Maloreformatam Gregoriique fidem.
The Emperors after Julius Caesar were called Augusti, Imperatores omnes ad
Vitellium praecipue Caesarum genus, adeo literis exculti fuerunt, ut nicunctis
vitiis Augusto excepto nimii fuessent, tant aedotes minora flagitiae texissent
Aurel. Victor. in Vitellio. Vide Grotii Epist. Principi Condaeo, Martiano
Capellae De nuptiis Philologiae and Mercurii praefixam.
from Octavius, the second Roman Caesar, who revived the good laws, and
reformed the bad. But the Emperors succeeding him, having more care to be great
than good, rather raged than reigned, and the decrees of some of them viz.
Tiberius and Caligula, are wittily termed furores non judicia. Quatuor
Principes ferro interempti, (says Tacitus in his History) four of these
Emperors were slain with the Sword, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian: which
three first Plutarch compares (in regard of their short reign) to Kings in a
Tragedy, which last no longer than the time that they are represented on the
stage. Julius Caesar, and Caligula were also slain, Claudius, and Titus were
poisoned, Nero slew himself, Augustus Caesar died in a complement; Livia,
conjugii nostri memor, vive, and vale.

Tiberius in dissimulation; as Tacitus says of him. Iam Tiberium vires and
corpus, non dissimulatio, deserebant.

Vespasian in a Jest, sitting upon the stool, Vt puto Deus fio.

Galba with a sentence, Feri, si ex re sit Populi Romani; holding forth his
Neck.

Bacons last Essays in 4.


Augustus dyed in a complement, Tiberius in dissimulation, Galba with a
sentence, Vespasian with a jest, yet he died peaceably in his Bed, which no
Emperor since Augustus ever did. The Macrob. lib. 1. in somn. Scipion.

Timeo incustoditos aditus, timeo and ipsos custodes.


Heathens shadowed the sting of conscience by the Eagle or Vulture that fed
upon the heart of Prometheus, and by the three Virgins which they called
Furies, following men in a hideous form, with burning torches in their hands,
which some of the worst of these Heathen Emperors really felt after their
bloody cruelties, and verified that old Maxim; he must needs fear many, whom
many fear. See in the Book of him, and Domitian.
Caligula (though he contemned the gods as they called them) yet at the least
thundering and lightening would run under his bed, an cover his head. Dion in
Nerone. Our English Chronicles report of King Richard the third, that having
imbrued his hands in the Blood of two Orient Princes, he never after had quiet
in his mind, his body was privily fenced, his hand ever upon his Dagger, his
countenance grim and ghastly, his sleep unquiet, for he rather slumbred than
slept. The night before the Battle fought in Bosworth-Field, he dreamed a
terrible dream.

Credo non erat somnium, sed Conscientia scelerum. Polyd. Virgil.


Nero that monster of Mankind having killed his Mother Agrippina, could never
after endure the worm and sting of conscience for his foul fact, but confessed
that he was often haunted with the apparition of his mothers Ghost, and
tormented also with scourges, and burning torches of the Furies. We may take
notice of many Moral virtues also in the best of these Heathens. Julius Caesar,
Augustus, Vespasian, and Titus that mirror of humanity, and see in them the
truth of that old Maxim, Magistratus virum indicat a place shows the man;
and it shows some to be better, some to be worse. It was said of Caligula,
that there was never better servant and worse Master: Omnium consensu capax
Imperii, nisi imperasset, says Tacitus of Galba: but of Vespasian he says,
Solus Imperatorum Vespasianus mutatus in melius. But lest I shall be upbraded,
with the City of Myndus, for making my Porch too big, here will I cast Anchor,
ever remaining

Your dutiful Son to command, EDWARD LEIGH.

Caesar was War; Augustus Peace: impure
Tiberius was; Caligula past cure.
Claudius was Dotard; Nero beastly mad:
Galba stale; Otho trim; Vitellius Swad.
Vespatian's shrewd and base; Titus more good
Than bad: Domitian is Pride, Lust, and Blood.
Dr. Holiday's Survey of the World, Lib. 8.
Julius Caesar.
effigy of emperor
THe Iulii were so called (says Alex. ab Alex.) a prima barbae lanugine, Genesis
dier lib. 1. c. 9. (...) in Gr. (says he) signifies Primam in mento lanuginem.
from the first wool or down of the beard. Others think the name of the Iulii
came from Iulus Ascanius, the Son of Aeneas.

At puer Ascanius, cui nunc cognomen Iulo. Virg. lib. 2. Aeneid.
He reformed the Calendar which was then confused, Annum ad cursum Solis
accommodavit.
and framed the whole year just unto the course of the Sun, that it should
contain 365 days, and appointed that every fourth year a whole day should be
inserted. Sueton.
Therefore we call our year Annum Iulianum, and the Calendar which we use
Calendarium Iulianum; and that Month which was by them called Quintilis, He was
born in that month Macrob. Saturn. cap. 12.
because it was the fifth Month, is now called July in honor of him.

For his other name Caesar, there are different opinions of the original of it.
Some derive it a caesiis oculis, from his gray eyes. But Suetonius Sueton.
describes him to have been, Nigris vegetisque oculis micantibus, of a black
quick sparkling eye.
refutes that, and says he had black eyes. Others say he was so called a
Caesarie, from a bush of hair with which he was born. Some say he was Primus
Caesar, a Caeso Matris utero dictus.
cut out of his Mothers womb: although Festus Pompeius thinks such are rather to
be called Caesones, and Casaubon Animadvers. in Sueton. Alex. ab Alex. Genesis
dier. l. 1. c. 9. Beckman de Orig. Ling. Latin. vide Christiani Matthew. Theatr.
Histor. Theor. Pract. in Iul. Caes. cap. 1. Et Commentar. Schild. in Suetonium.
rejects that Etymology. Postellus in his introduction, in Chaldaic. Ling.
etc. says the first Caesar could not be denominated, a Caeso matris utero, cum
id nomen ante illum Caesarem, qui secta matre in lucem prodiit; pro Rege jam
diu usurpatum sit. Caesonis nomine insignes plures extiterunt, e quibus Caeso
Fabius, Caeso Quintius. Dictos autem Caesones a Caeso matris utero, qui necatis
matribus nati sunt, tradunt. Plin. Hist. Not. l. 7. c. 9. Et Valor. Prob. Vnde
et Caesaris nomen ortum sumpsisse sunt qui opinentur, ut Ael. Spartian in Ael.
Vero et Serve. in Aen. 10. aliis tamen in alia euntibus. Gatak. Annotat. in Lib.
4. Marci Antonini Imperatoris. Others derive it a Caeso Elephanto, from his
Grandfathers killing an Elephant, which in the Carthaginian tongue is called
Caesar. Sigonius speaks much of it, but so that it should seem to be ambiguae
fidei, and therefore I shall leave it undetermined.

He was tall Forma omnium civium excellentissimus, vigore animi acerrimus,
munificentiae effusissimus. Paterculus.
of stature, white and clear of complexion, somewhat full-faced, his limbs were
well trussed, and in good plight, his eyes black, lively, and quick. He was
also very healthful, saving that in his latter days he was given to faint, and
swoon suddenly. Seu inter res gerendas. i. e. cum aciem ordinaret. Plutarch.
Comitiali quoque morbo bis inter res agendas correptus est, says Suetonius,
twice in the midst of his Martial affairs, he was surprised with the falling
sickness, which he styles Morbum comitialem, Whiles he was setting his Army in
battle array. Fuchs. Instit. Medic. l. 3. Sect. 1. c. 11. Plato morbum divinum
appellat, quia occupat in nobis divinae particulam aurae. Alii morbum sacrum,
vel quia detestandus est, vel quia divinitus immittitur. Dicitur etiam
Herculeus, quia Hercules eo laboravit; item vulgo caducus. Lipsius.
either because it chiefly invadeth, and seizes on men in Comitiis, in popular
Assemblies; or because their Comitia, their Parliaments or Assemblies were
dissolved, and broke up by occasion thereof, if any chanced to fall sick of
that disease, they reputing such an accident to be a sinister presage. Est
Morbi species subiti cui nomen ab illo est,
Quod fieri nobis suffragia justa recusant.
Saepe etenim membris acri languore caducis,
Concilium populi labes horrenda diremit.
In Eloquence and warlike feats together, See Plinies Natural Hist. l. 7. c. 25.
he either equalled, or excelled the glory of the very best.

Eloquentia attigit summorum gloriam: re militari excessit. Lipsius.

Caesar qui ne scait moins bien fair, Imperatoriam Majestatem non solum armis
decoratam, sed etiam legibus oportet esse armatam, ut utrumque tempus and
bellorum, and pacis recte possit gubernari. Justinian. Prooem. Institut.
que bien dire.

Caesar who knows as well to write, as fight.

He held a Sword in one hand, and a Book in the other, with this Motto, Ex
utroque Caesar, Emperor by both.

He was counted the second man for Eloquence in his time, and gave place to the
first; Summis Oratoribus aemulus. Tacit. He was Cicero's rival in Eloquence.
because he would be the first and chiefest man of war, and Authority. Julius
Caesar, Scaliger writes thus of him: Duae sunt aquilae solae in natura rerum,
altera bellicae laudis, altera literariae; illa potentiae, haec sapientiae;
Caesar and Aristoteles. Exercit. 94. Sect. 2.

Paterculus reckoning up the famous wits of those times, says, Et proximum
Ciceroni Caesarem. Nay Cicero himself in his Catalogue of Orators to Brutus,
Illum omnium fere Oratorum latin loqui elegantissime, says Atticus there of
him. Caesar quotidiano sermoni egregie utilissimus, cui Cicero laudem tribuit
puri and incorrupti sermonis Latini. Ludov. Viv. l. 3. de tradend. Discipl.
says, He cannot see any to whom Caesar might give place, and he highly
commends him in his Oration pro Marcello. Est ejus viri pura oration, sine fuco
ac calamistris ornata, vel Romany, vel Atticis Musis dignissima. Lipsius.
Aulus Gellius scribit Caesarem sermonis fuisse praeter alios suae aetatis
castissimi.

He left Commentaries of his own Acts, touching the Gaul war, and the Civil war
between Pompey and him. Commentaries (says B. De Vigenere in his annotations
on Caesar's Comment. of the Gaul war) are little particular memories which one
makes either for himself, or for another, containing only the principal heads
of the deeds and acts, of which he will after write a History at his better
leisure: Caesar's Commentaries, (Sr. Francis Bacon Advance of Learn. (...). l.
2. Commentarios quosdam scripsit rerum suarum valde quidem probandos; nudi enim
sunt, recti, and venusti: sanos quidem homines a scribendo de-terruit. Cicero
de Clar. Orat.
says) is the best History of the world. King James exhorting his Son to the
study of History, above all profane Writers, commends this Book of Caesar's
to his reading, both for the sweet flowing of the style, and the worthiness of
the matter it self. Qui non minor rerum suarum praeco fuerit quam earundem
actor; says Grotius in his Epistle to the Prince of Condee, prefixed to
Martianus Capella. He says there also that he wrote excellent Tragedies, and
most large commendations of Hercules, of Grammar, and his own journies most
elegantly, and highly commends his Anticatones.

He was a famous Mathematician, and diligent in that study, as Lucan writes of
him.

-- Media inter proelta semper
Stellarum, coelique plagis superisque vacavi. Scribere and legere simul,
dictare, and audire accepimus: Epistolas vero tantarum rerum quaternas pariter
librariis dictare, aut, si nihil aliud ageret, septenas. Pliny's Natural Hist.
l. 7. c. 25.

He could at one time read and write, hear and indite, and if he did nothing
else, he could dictate to 7 Actuaries or Penmen at once.

We ought to admire two things in him, which he had to perfection, and which
render a Commander excellent; viz. that he forecast and provided for all things
which might either further or hinder his design before he undertook it; and
that in the very execution he failed not to take his advantage when occasion
presented it, or to remedy upon the instant such unexpected accidents as befell;
wherein he has been inimitable. The Duke of Rohan's Observe. upon Caesar's
Comment. L. 6.

Anthony De Bandole has paralleled Caesar and Henry the fourth King of France.
Both had (says he) very high conceptions, a solid judgment, resolute
execution; both were valiant, provident, firm to their designs, undertaking
with confidence, guiding it with dexterity, overcoming all with valor. See
more there.

In his Enterprises he was both valiant and fortunate, and therefore singled
out for an Idea or pattern of an absolute General, especially for four military
properties very resplendent in him. First, laboriousness in his affairs.
Secondly, courage in his dangers. Speed Chron.
Thirdly, industrious contriving of what he undertook. Fourthly, quick dispatch
in accomplishing what he had once begun. -- Nam Caesar in omnia praeceps,
Nil actum credens, si quid superesset agendum.
Quintus Curtius speaking of Alexander the Great, Lucan.
says, Nullam virtutem Regis istius magis quam celeritatem laud a verim. I can
commend no virtue more in this King than speed.

In eleven days he marched with his army six hundred miles.

Suetonius affirms, that Caesar did ever march foremost before his troops, and
most commonly bare-headed, and on foot, whether the Sun shined, or it rained.
Tully reports of him, that he was never heard to say to his Soldiers, Ite
illuc, go forth thither, as they should go forth upon service, and he tarry
behind in his Tent; but As you see me do, so do ye. Judge. 7.17. One says the
like of Trajan, that in all hazards and perils he never said unto his Captains
Go, but let us go: Do, but let us do.
Venite huc, Come ye hither.

-- Ignave, venire Lucan. l. 5. v. 487.

Te Caesar, non ire jubet.
Pertinax was wont to say to his Soldiers Militemus; and Severus Septimius, The
two principal men of the world, Alexander and Caesar, have slain each of them
(as Pliny reports) more than a million of men.
Laboremus: Livy brings in Valerius Corvinus thus speaking; Facta mea, non
dicta vos milites sequi volo, nec disciplinam modo, sed exemplum etiam a me
petere.

Under his conduct were slain eleven hundred fourscore and two thousand
enemies. He fought in pitched field two and fifty times, says Solinus, fifty
says Pliny, Signis collatis quinquagies dimicavit.
and never was so much as in any hazard save only twice.

He conquered all France, Germany, Plin. Natural. Hist. lib. 7. c. 25. He took
1000 Towns, conquered 300 Nations.
discovered us Britains, and made us Tributary; and triumphed five times in
Rome with unspeakable admiration.

It is observable, that in all his wars he has always been inferior to his
enemies in number, for which cause he has always helped himself by
fortifications, more than ever any other has done; which he made much the
better, when he found himself not sufficiently strong to give battle, as he was
a long time in Africa: insomuch that Scipio wondered at his coldness;
nevertheless he always continued his Soldiers in exercise, and himself
exercised new levied men, and entered them by small skirmishes, wherein by his
industry for the most part he had the best, and always attempted something
upon his enemy. The Duke of Rohan's Observe. on Caesar's Comm. L. 5.

Suetonius. Nec vana de se praedicatio est Caesaris, ante victum hostem esse
quam visum. L. Flor.
Tam celer in agendo and consulta exequendo, ut persaepe nuntios de se
praevenerit. He is renowned for his celerity in doing, and preventing the very
report of his coming.

Caesar has made himself as much redoubted and admired by the great works
which he caused his Soldiers to make, as by his great Battles. The Duke of
Rohan's treatise of Modern War. c. 4.

Having overcome King Pharnaces, and being desirous to advertise one of his
friends of his quick expedition in dispatching that war, he only wrote three
words unto Anitius at Rome, Veni, vidi, vici, I came, I saw, I overcame.

Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany said, Veni, vidi, Deus vicit. Surius in
bello Germanico.

He never put enemy to flight but he discamped him, Suetonius.
and drove him out of the field: By this means he gave them whom he had once
discomfited no time to bethink themselves.

In any doubtful and dangerous service, Suotonius. So William the Conqueror at
his arrival into England, burnt the ships which transported his Army.
his manner was to send away the Horses, and his own with the first, to the end
that when all means of flight were gone, they might of necessity be forced the
rather to stand to it, and abide to the last.

Lucan seems to have alluded to this:
Bellorum o socii, qui mill pericula mortis.
He called not his Soldiers Augustus did much reprove this humor in his Uncle,
saying, Dum affectat carior fieri, auctoritatem Principis emolliverat. Aurel.
Vict.
Milites, but Commilitones: not plain Soldiers, but by a more pleasing name,
Fellow Soldiers. He maintained them so trim and brave, that he stuck not to set
them out in polished Armor, damasked with silver and gold, as well for goodly
show, as because they should in Suetonius.
Battle keep the same more surely for fear of damage and loss.

He loved them so affectionately, that when he heard of Tiberius his overthrow,
It is reported of Alexander, that he infused such courage into his Soldiers.
Vt illo praesente, nullius hostium arma vel inermes timuerint. Justin. l. 12.
c. ult. Caesar's eye made his Soldiers prodigal of their blood. Plutarchs Lives.
and the Legions with him: he suffered the hair of his head and beard to grow
long, and would not cut the same before he had revenged their death. By which
means he both had his Soldiers most devoted unto him, and also made them truly
valiant.

He was so entirely beloved of his Soldiers, that to do him service (whereas
otherwise they were but like other men in any other private quarrel) if Caesar's
honor were touched, they were invincible, and would so desperately, and with
such fury venture themselves, that no man was able to abide them.

A private Soldier of his fought so valiantly in Britain, that by his means he
saved the Captains, which otherwise were in great danger to have been cast away
(being driven into a Bogg;) then marching with great pain through the mire and
dirt, half swimming, and half a foot, in the end he got to the other side, but
left his shield behind him: Plutarch.
Caesar wondering at his noble courage, ran to him with joy to embrace him: but
the poor Soldier hanging down his head, the water standing in his eyes, fell
down at Caesar's feet, and besought him to pardon him for leaving his Target
behind him.

Petronius being taken by Scipio, he said he would give him his life; but he
answered him again, that Caesar's Soldiers did not use to have their lives given
them, but to give others their lives; and with these words he drew his sword
and thrust himself through.

Caesar at Alexandria being busy about the assault and winning of a Bridge,
was driven by a sudden sally of the enemies to take a Boat, and many besides
making have to get into the same, Plutarchs Lives.
he leapt into the sea, and by swimming almost a quarter of a mile recovered
the next ship, bearing up his left hand all the while, for fear the writings he
held therein should take wet, Paludamentum mordicus trahens, ne spolio
potiretur hostis. Sueton. Milites erant sagati, Imperatores paludati.
and drawing his rich coat armor after him by the teeth, because the enemy
should not have it as a spoil.

Beholding advisedly the Image or portraicture of Alexander the Great in the
Temple of Hercules at Cales, at the sight thereof he fetched a deep sigh,
Plutarch and Suetonius in C. Iulio. c. 7. i. e. 33.
as being ashamed that he had yet performed no memorable act at those years,
wherein Alexander had conquered the whole world. Saepe audivi Q. Maximum, P.
Scipionem, praeterea civitatis nostrae praeclaros viros solitos ita dicere, cum
majorum imagines intuerentur, vehementissime sibi animum ad virtutem accendi;
scilicet non ceram illam, neque figuram, tantam vim in sese habere; sed memoria
rerum gestarum eam flammam egregiis viris in pectore crescere, neque prius
sedari, quam virtus eorum famam atque gloriam adaequaverit. Salust. in Bello
Iugurthino.


He was very much disquieted and dismayed with a dream the very night before,
(for he imagined in his sleep that he had carnal company with his Mother:) the
Diviners and Wizards incited him to the hopes of most glorious achievements,
Suetonius ubi supra.
making this exposition of his dream, Ita visum interpretari vanissimae artis
auctoribus vanissimis.
that thereby was portended unto him the sovereignty of the whole World; for
his Mother whom he saw under him, betokened the subjection of the Earth,
Casaubon. Animadvers.
which is counted the mother of all things.

There were two Factions in Rome at that time, Sylla was the chief of the one,
and Marius of the other; Marius stood for the people, and Sylla defended the
Nobles. Marius and all his Confederates were proclaimed Traitors, and enemies
to the Commonwealth. Sylla determining to kill Caesar, Plutarch. Suetonius.
some of his friends told him, that it was to no purpose to put so young a Boy
as he was so death: but Sylla answered again, Caesari multos Marios inesse,
that there were many Marii in that one Boy; implying, that he would be a great
enemy unto their State. When the day of Election for summus Pontifex came, he
told his Mother (kissing him) that that day she should see her Son chief Bishop
of Rome, or banished from Rome.

He said, he had rather be the chiefest man in a poor Village, than the second
person in Rome.

Lucan.
Nec quenquam jam far potest Caesarve priorem,
Pompejusve parem. --
He did extremely affect the name of King, and some were set on, as he passed
by, in popular acclamation to salute him King; whereupon finding the cry weak
and poor, he put it off thus in a kind of jest, as if they had mistaken his
sur-name, Non Rex sum, sed Caesar.

He often used these verses of Euripides, which he himself thus translated. Nam
si violandum est jus, Imperii causa
Violandum est, aliis rebus pietatem colas.
He alone managed all the affairs of State: his Colleague or Fellow-Consul did
nothing, in so much as diverse Citizens pleasantly conceited, whenever they
signed, subscribed, or dated any writings to stand upon records, would merrily
put it down thus; Such a thing was done not when Caesar and Bibulus, but when
Julius and Caesar were Consuls; setting down one and the same man twice by his
name and surname; yea, and soon after these verses were commonly current.

Non Bibulo quidquam nuper, sed Caesare factum est:
Nam Bibulo fieri Consule nil memini.
Caesar of late did many things, but Bibulus not one:
For naught by Consul Bibulus can I remember done.
He was such an excellent Rider of a Horse from his youth, Equitandi usus
Caesari a pueritia facilis adeo extitit ut reflexis in tergum manibus, equum
velocissimis concitare cursibus saepe consueverit. Plutarch. Solinus. Suetonius.
that holding his hands behind him, he would gallop his Horse upon the spur.
The Horse he used to ride upon was strangely marked, with feet resembling very
near a man's, and the hoofs cloven like toes. Like to Alexanders Bucephalus.
Plutarch.
The Beast would abide no man else to ride him, and he himself was the first
that backed him.

When one brought him his Horse to get upon, which he used in Battle, he said
unto him; Solinus.
When I have overcome mine enemies I will get upon him to follow the chase, but
now let us give them charge. He gloried in nothing so much (says Aust. 5. Ep.)
as in pardoning his enemies, and gratifying his friends.


Benignitate adeo praeditus, ut quos armis subegerat, clementia magis vicerit.
He was of so good a nature, that such as he subdued by Battle, he more overcame
with gentleness.

He held neuters for his friends, contrary to Pompey, who held them for
enemies. Aurel. Vict.
He said the greatest pleasure he took of his victories was, that he daily saved
the lives of some of his countrymen that bare arms against him.

Caesar dando, sublevando, ignoscendo, gloriam adeptus est. Salust. in bell.
Catilin.

When Pompey's head was presented to him, Vberrimas lachrymas profudit, he wept
bitterly, and caused him to be honorably buried, Idem dixit, non mihi placet
vindicta, sed victoria.
saying; Ego Pompeii casum deploro, and meam fortunam metuo: I lament Pompey's
fall, and fear mine own fortune.

When he found many Letters in Pompey's coffers, Dion.
King Cotis having received for a Present many beautiful and rich Vessels, yet
frail and easy to be broken, brake them all; that he might not be stirred to
choler when they should happen to be broken.
wherein diverse testified their good will unto Pompey, and their hatred toward
him, he neither read them, nor copied them out; but presently burnt them, lest
being exasperated by them, he should have been forced to have committed some
greater evil.

When Pompey's Images had been thrown down, he caused them to be set up again,
and Plutarch in Tullies life. Pompeii statas erigendo suas confirmavit.
Cicero thereupon used this speech, that Caesar in setting up Pompey's Images
again, made his own to stand surer.

He accounted his conquest of the two Pompeys (Sons to Pompey the great) in
Andaluzia in Spain, the most glorious of all his victories; for he would often
say afterward, that at other times he fought for Fame and Victory, but that
day he fought for his life, which he had never fought for before.

When some of his friends did counsel him to have a Guard for the safety of his
Person, Mori satius est semel, quam timore semper torqueri.
and some also did offer themselves to serve him, he would never consent unto
it; but said, It was better to dye once, than always to be afraid of death.
Plutarch.


He said also, Mori se quam timeri malle, Sueton.
says Paterculus, when some advised him to keep by Arms what he had got by
Arms.

When he was hindered by one of the Tribunes from taking some of the common
Treasure out of Saturns Temple, and told that it was against the Law, Tush,
Silent leges inter Arma.
said he, Time of War and Law are two things.

That speech of his was compounded both of terror and clemency, to Metellus
the Tribune; for Caesar entering into the inner Treasury of Rome to take the
money there kept, Metellus forbad him; whereto Caesar said, That if he did not
desist, he would lay him dead in the place; Adolescent difficilius est mihi hoc
dicere, quam facere.
and presently taking himself up, he added, young man, it is harder for me to
speak it, than do it.

Magno illi Alexandro, sed sobrio, neque iracundo simillimus; qui semper and
somno and cibo in vitam, non in voluptatem uteretur. Paterculus. Plut. Sueton.
He was a spare drinker of Wine, as his very enemies confessed, whence arose
that Apophthegm of Cato, That of all that ever were, Caesar alone came sober to
the overthrow of the State.

He was the first that devised the way for friends to talk together by writing
Ciphers in letters, when he had no leisure to speak with them for his urgent
business, and for the great distance from Rome.

He said, Caesar's wife ought not only to be without fault, but also without all
suspicion of fault.

Plutarch. in Apophtheg.
Being certified that Cato had slain himself with his own hands, he seemed to be
very sorry for it, Dixit invidere se Catoni mortem, quando sibi salutem
invidisset.
and said, O Cato, I envy thy death, because thou did envy my glory to save
thy life.

Cicero wrote a book in commendation of Cato, Plutar. in the life of Cato.
to justify that action, which Caesar answered with another, which he called
Anti-Cato, both which are lost. Schildius out of Beroaldus says, Cicero wrote
a book entitled Cato, in commendation of him, which vexed Caesar, because he
conceived the commendation of the other tended to his dispraise, and therefore
he wrote two books against Cato, discovering his crimes, called Anti-Catones.

Being in a Pinnace or small Boat in a great storm, he said to the Master of
it: Fellow, be of good cheer, for thou have Caesar and his fortune with thee.
Caesarem vehis, and fortunam ejus.


So Charles the fifth taking his Horse to rush into the main battle, was
requested to forbear; but he answered, An Emperor was never shot through with a
bullet.

So William the second of England, coming to imbark at Portsmouth, the Master
told him the weather was rough, and there was no passing without imminent
danger, Tush, said he, set forward, I never yet heard of a King that was
drowned. Dan. Hist.

Yet I may say of him as our Chronicler does of one of our English Kings,
Inerant illi confuso quodam temperamento, Cambd. in Annal. De Henrico 8. Julian
the Emperor in his Satyr upon the Roman Emperors Taxes his ambition.
virtutes magnae and vitia non minora.

Suetonius and others, speak of his unnatural uncleanness and prodigious
prodigality. He stole out of the Capitol 108000 pounds (reduced to our money)
in gold at once, gave to Servilia a Jewel which cost him 46875 pounds, owed
1953125 pounds more than he was worth by his own confession. Plin. Lib. 7. c.
25.
His shows and public Donations in costlinesse are almost in valuable.

About the trimming of his body he was over curious, Circa corporis curam
morosior, ut non solum tonderetur diligenter, ac raderetur sed velleretur etiam
Suetonius.
so as he would not only be shaven very precisely, but also have his hair
plucked.

The chiefest cause that made him mortally hated, was his excessive desire of
honor, and his slighting the Senators.

When his friends complained unto him of Antonius and Dolabella, that they
intended some mischief toward him, he answered them again, As for these fat
men, and smooth-combed-heads, quoth he, I never reckon of them, but those
pale-visaged, Odi pallidos and macilentos.
and carrion lean people, I fear them most; meaning Brutus and Cassius.

He never refused to fight but in his latter days being then of this opinion,
that the oftener he had gotten victory, the less he was to venture, and make
trial of fortune: also that a victory could gain him nothing so much as some
disastrous calamity might take from him.

There conspired against him more than threescore, the heads of which
conspiracy were Cassius and Brutus. He had fair warning of his death before it
came, by many evident prodigies; Fires were seen in the Element, and spirits
running up and down in the night, and solitary Birds at noonday sitting in the
great Marketplace; as the Bird Regaliolus did fly with a little branch of
Laurel into the Court of Pompeius, Or Regaviolus quasi Rex avium. Casaub.
Animadvers.
a sort of other Birds of diverse kinds from out of the Grove hard by pursued
after, and there pulled it in pieces.

Nec centum victimis perlitare poterat. Florus, l. 4. Hist. Romans c. 2.
Caesar sacrificing to the gods, found that one of the Beasts which was
sacrificed, had no heart, and that was a strange thing in Nature, how a Beast
could live without a heart.

Eo ipso die dum ad senatumiret, libelli conjurationem and conjuratorum nomina
indicantes, inmanus ipsi traditi.
There was a certain South-sayer that had given Caesar warning long before, to
take heed of the day of the Ides of March (which is the fifteenth of the
Month,) for on that day he should be in a great danger. That day being come,
Caesar going unto the Senate House, and speaking merrily to the South-sayer,
told him, The Ides of March were come: So they be, softly answered the
South-sayer, but yet they are not past.

[ Christianus Matthias Theat. Histor. Theoret. Pract. in Iul. Cap. 3. has an
elegant and memorable parallel history. Plutarch.
Suetonius.


Henry the 4. King of France was dissuaded from going abroad that day he was
slain, by some, as a day marked out by Astrologers to portend danger to his
person: yet he, a second Caesar as well in the course of his life as of his
death, was little swayed therewith, but like a King, and a Christian replied;
that it was an offense to God to give credit to these Prognostiques, and that
having God to his guard, he feared no man. The Life and death of Henry the 4.]

The night before this Discourse had with the South-sayer, all the windows and
doors of his chamber did fly open, and his Wife Calphurnia dreamed that Caesar
was slain, and that she had him in her arms.

He was stabbed with 23 wounds; he only gave one groan at the first thrust,
Sueton. He was slain in Pompes Court. Tribus and viginti vulneribus ad terram
datus est; sic ille qui terrarum orbem civili sanguine impleverat, tandem ipse
sanguine suo curiam implevit. Luc. Flo. l. 4. Hist. Romans c. 2.
without uttering any words. Some say, That as M. Brutus came running upon him,
he said, (...); And thou my Son?

All men are of opinion, that such a death befell unto him as he desired; for
when he had read in Xenophon how Cyrus being at the point of death, gave order
for his Funeral, he seting light by so slow and lingering a kind of death,
wished to dye quickly and of a sudden.

The very day before he was killed, in a certain discourse moved at super in
Marcus Lepidus his house, upon that point, which was the best end of a man's
life? He perferred that which was sudden and unlooked for. In the 8.
Septenarie. Plutarch. Sueton. Deum honor principi non ante habetur quam agere
inter homines desierat.


He dyed in the 56. year of his age; Et in Deorum numerum relatus est, he was
made a god after death (which could not defend himself from death, from cruel
murder) and that N^n Sueton. Of this Ceremony of the Apotheosis or deifying
their Emperors, see Dr. Hackwels Apology of Gods providence. l. 4. Sect. 2.
ore modo decernentium, sed and persuasione vulgi, Not only by their voice
which decreed such honor unto him, Tacit.
but also by persuasion of the common people.

A Comet shined then for seven days together, arising about the eleventh hour
of the day, and it was believed by those blind Heathen to be Caesar's soul, who
had been a Comet of combustion to the world.

-- Micat inter omnes
Iulium sidus, velutinter ignes
Luna minores.
Horace lib. 1. Ode 12. Percussorum autem fere neque triennio quisquam amplius
supervix. it, neque sua morte defunctus est. Sueton. Bellares est (Inquit
Seneca) mori sua morte.
Also upon his Image there is a Star set to the very crown of his head.

Of these Murderers there was not one that either survived him above three
years, or dyed a natural death.

All stood condemned, and by one mishap or other perished; A notable judgment
of God upon the unnatural murderers of their Sovereign.
some by shipwreck, others by battle, and some again shortened their own days
with the very same dagger wherewith they had wounded Caesar: Cassius as
Plutarch reports, and Brutus according to Dion.

Octavius Augustus.
effigy of emperor
HE was styled by the name of Augustus, Vel. ab augurio, vel ab augendo dictus.
Cujus vitam mira quadam diligentia et art contexuit Suetonius: quasi in uno
hoc libro voluerit singular specimen dare, in quod perfectionis fastigium
posset cura scribendi vitas eniti. Boecleri dissertatio politica in Suetonii C.
Octavium Caesarem Augustum. Although all the other lives excel with a wonderful
concinnity; yet Suetonius in this seems to have exceeded himself.
i. e. worshipful or sacred, which they thought to be a name of reverence and
Majesty, because all consecrated and hallowed places were called Loca Augusta.
That Month which was by them called Sextilis, because it was their sixth
Month, is called Augustus in honor of him, and things of greatest splendour are
called Augustissima. Julius Caesar was his great Uncle, but his Father by
adoption. He was called Octavius from his Father, and Augustus from his victory.

A man most nobly descended; for riches, honor, friends, Empire, fortunate
victories, almost adored; for bodily good things, of comely stature, Forma
eximia, Suetonies.
and per omnes aetatis gradus venustissima. Oculorum acies clarissimorum
syderum modo vibrans. Corpore toto pulcher, sed oculis magis. Aurel. Vict.
Of most amiable visage, and that also majestical by his bright and shining
eyes, Quibus etiam existintari volebat inesse quiddam divini vigoris. Wherein
also (as he would have men believe) was seated a kind of Divine vigor: and he
joyed much, if a man looking wishly upon him, held down his face, Sueton.
as it were against the brightness of the Sun; therefore a certain Soldier
turning away his eyes from beholding his face, and he demanding the reason why
he did so, he answered; Quia fulmen oculorum tuorum far non possum. Aurel.
Vict.


Knolles in the Turkish Hist. says of Tamerlane. In his eyes sat such a rare
majesty as a man could hardly endure to behold them without closing his own.
p. 235.

His hair was somewhat yellow, and his body freckled with spots, which his
flatterers would have the world believe were in form like stars.

He was indeed somewhat low, nevertheless of a comely stature, Sueton.
five foot and nine inches, His shoes were underlaid somewhat with the
highest, that he might seem taller than he was. Calciamentis altiusculis
utebatur, ut procerior quam erat videretur. Suetonius. Tertul. Apol. c. 34.
the just measure says one of our late famous Queen Elizabeth, who as she
matched that Roman Emperor in happiness, and duration of Reign, so did she
likewise in the stature of her body. Cities were called Caesareae in honor of
him, so in honor of our Virgin Queen was there a Country called Virginia.

Augustus Imperii formator, ne dominum quidem dici se volebat. Augustus the
founder of the the Roman Empire (for his Father Caesar was but Metator rather
than Imperator, the chalker of it out, than the setter of it up) This great man
would not be called Lord. Orosius lib. 7. c. 2.
Upon the same day that our Savior was born, he forbad them by Edict to call
him Lord, that all Lordship might be ascribed to him. Orosius.
The Princes which followed him (though good) refused not that title.

In his time our Savior was born, Imperante Augustus natus est Christus,
Imperante Tiberio crucifixus. He consulting with the Oracle of Delphos about
his Successor, received this answer: Hebraeus puer injungit, Divum dominator,
Hacce domo fugere, et rursum me inferna subire.
Ergo tacens aris posthac discedito nostris.
Whereupon Augustus coming home, in the Capitol erected an Altar, and thereon
in capital letters caused this inscription to be engraven, Haec est Ara
Primogeniti Dei. Totus orbis) ad verbum, Tota habitabilis, ita ut subaudias
Terra, A Hyperbolical speech.


He is mentioned in the Scripture, Luke 2.1. There came an Edict from Augustus
Caesar that all the world should be taxed, i. e. all the Provinces subject to
the Roman Empire, for the Romans called themselves Lords of the whole world.

He made not war upon any people without just and necessary causes; Nulli Genti
sine justis and necessariis causis bellum intulit.
his saying was, That neither battle nor war was to be undertaken, unless there
might be evidently seen more hope of gain than fear of damage. He likened such
who sought after small commodities with great danger, Suetonius.
Bellum est Iustum, quod necessarium est; and arma sunt pia, quibus nulla nisi
in armis relinquitur. spes. Livie Decad. 1. Lib. 9.
unto those that Angle with a golden hook, which if it be broken off, no
draught of Fish whatsoever is able to make amends for the loss. [That was
prudent advice of Henry the fourth K. of France, to Henry the third his
Brother, who would needs with those small forces they had, salley out of Tours
upon the great Army of Charles Duke of Mayen; Sire (quoth he) N'hazardons pas
un double Henry, contre un Carolus, i. e. Let us not venture a double Ducket
for a single penny.] He was so troubled and astonished at the Relation of a
Foil and overthrow of Varus, that for certain months together he let the hair
of his head and beard grow still, and wore it long, yea, and otherwhiles would
run his head against the doors, crying out Quintilius Varus, deliver up my
Legions again. Suetonius.

He deemed nothing less beseeming a perfect and accomplished Capt. than
temerity, Aurel. Vict.
or rashness: using this speech, Satis celeriter fieri, Sueton.
quicquid commode geritur, that is done soon enough, which is done well enough.

He was so exceedingly delighted with that proverbial saying, Festina lent,
Aul. Gel. l. 10. c. 11. Macrob. Saturn. lib. 6. Eras. Adag.
that he would not only use it frequently in his daily Colloquies, but would
insert it often in his Epistles; admonishing by these two words, that to effect
any enterprise, both the speediness of Industry, and the slownesse of
diligence should concur.

The City being not adorned according to the Majesty of such an Empire, Vrbem
lateritiam accepi, relinquo vobis marmoream.
and subject to the casualties of Deluges and fires, he beautified and set out
so, as justly he made his boast, Aurel. Vict.
that whereas he found it built of brick, he left it all of Marble. Sueton.
Macrob.


Augusto profluens and quae Principem deceret, Eloquentia fuit. Tacit.
Liberalibus studiis, praesertim eloquentiae in tantum incumbens, ut nullus ne
in procinctu quidem laberetur dies, quin legeret, scriberet, declamaret. Aurel.
Vict.
He had a ready, fluent, and eloquent speech, such as well became a Prince.

Grotius in his Epistle to the Prince of Con^ee prefixed to Martianus Capella,
says, he eloquently composed Sicilie, Epigrams, Achilles, some Geographical
things.

Seeing upon a time a number of Citizens clad all in black, assembled to hear a
public speech, he with great indignation cried out, Behold, Romanos rerum
Doimnos, gentemque togatam.

The Romans, Lords of all the world, and long robbed Nation.

Suetonius.
He never recommended his sons unto the people, but with this clause added
thereto, If they shall deserve.

Si merebuntur.
He gave charge to the Praetors of Rome, Ne paterentur nomen suum obsolefieri,
Not to suffer his name to be worn threadbare.

He would never lie awake in the Nisi aliquo assidente, nunquam tenebris
evigilavit. Sueton. lib. 2. c. 5.
dark without one sitting by his bed side.

The Senate and people of Rome jointly saluting him by the name of Pater
Patriae, he with tears standing in his eyes made answer unto them in these few
words; Now that I have (mine honorable Lords) attained to the height of all my
vows and wishes, what remains else for me to crave of the immortal Gods, but
that I may carry with me this universal consent of yours unto my lives end?
Macrobius writes of him, that he carried such an entire and fatherly affection
to the Commonwealth, that he called it Filiam suam, his own Daughter; and
therefore refused to be called Dominus, the Lord or Master of his Country, and
would only be called Pater Patriae, the Father of his Country, because he
governed it not per timorem, sed per amorem, not by fear, but by love.

Heraldus on Tertullians Apology, speaking of Augustus and Tiberius his
refusing the title of Lord, says; Profesto existimarim non sine numine id iis
in mentem venisse, ut vel hac ratione Chricto omnium gentium vero Domino gloria
sua servaretur illibata.

He would not lightly depart forth of the City, or any Town, nor enter into any
place but in the evening, or by night, for disquieting any person in doing him
honor by way of dutiful attendance. Suet.

The beginning of friendship between him and Cinna was strange; Cinna had
conspired against his life: After Augustus had discovered to him all his
conspiracy which he knew, he said, I have given thee thy life twice; first as
an enemy, then a Rebel, and now I give thee the Consulship. Let us now be
friends, and henceforth strive, whether I have with a better faith given thee
thy life, or thou owe it to me. Augustus (says Sueton. in vita Aug.) had not
thenceforward in all Rome a greater friend than Cinna while he lived, and when
he died, Cinna made him sole heir. vide Senec. l. 1. de clement. c. 9.

This was duly observed, that how often soever he entered Rome, no punishment
that day was inflicted upon any person.

Qui cum triste aliquid statuit, fit tristis and ipse; Seneca said of him,
Poenas dat, dum poenas exigit. lib* 1. De Clem. cap. 10.

Cuique fere poenam sumere, poena sua est.
He was grieved himself when he pronounced a grievous sentence, and he thought
himself punished when he punished others. Damnatorum poenas interdum acrius
ferebat, quam qui plectebantur. Senec. lib. de Ira.


Quique dolet, quoties cogitur esse ferox.
Aurelius. Victor.
Rarus quidem ad recipiendas amicitias, ad retinendas constantissimus.
His special friends were Mecoenas, Agrippa, Virgil, Propertius.
He would not suddenly entertain a league of friendship with any, but was a
constant friend to those he loved.

-- amare
Nec cito desisto, nec temere incipio.
Late ere I love, as long ere I leave.
Dion reports of him, that when he gave commandment to take tribute of the
Jews, He permitted the Jews to use their liberties.
he would not suffer it to be taken from them on their Sabbath, but caused them
to delay it till the next day.

He slept but upon a low bed, and the same but meanly spread, Ne toro quidem
cubuisse ajunt, nisi humili and modice instrato. Vest non temere alia usus
est, quam domestica ab uxore and sorore, filia, neptibusque confecta. Sueton.
He termed sumptuous garments, Vexillum superbiae, nidumque luxuriae, the banner
of pride, and nest of lechery.
and laid with coverlets. He seldom wore any apparel but huswives cloth, made
within the house by his Wife, his Sister, and Daughter.

He was a man of very little meat, and fed for the most part on cheat bread and
small fishes.

He caused the bones of Thallus (who had opened a Letter committed to his
trust) to be broken, to the terror of such untrusty attendants. Sueton.

By one speech he did appease a tumultuous Army. Plutarch in Apoph.
Audite juvenes senem, quem juvenem senes audiverunt. Ye young men hearken to
me now old, whom old men have hearkened unto when young.

He had a special care to express his mind and meaning most plainly, and
reprehended Marcus Antonius for writing such things, that men did rather wonder
at than understand.

It was elegantly said of him, Suetonius.
I hate alike as departing from the mean, both Antiquaries, Cacozelos and
antiquarios, ut diverso genere vitiosos, pari fastidio sprevit.
and affectors of novelties.

He did not so much observe Orthography, i. e. the form and precise rule of
writing set down by Grammarians, but seemed to follow their opinion who think
men should write according as they speak.

He could not away so much as with the Winter Sunshine, and therefore at home
he never walked up and down in the Air, without a broad-brim'd hat upon his
head.

In general Salutations he admitted the very Commons, entertaining the suits
and desires of all comers with so great humanity, Putas te assem Elephanto
dare? Macrob. lib. 2. Sat. c. 4. Quasi Elephanto stipem. Sueton.
as that he rebuked one of them merrily, because in reaching unto him a
supplication, he did it so timorously, as if he had been reaching meat to an
Elephant.

Augustus militem donis, populum annona, cunctos dulcedine otii pellexit.
Tacit. lib. 1. Annal. He won the Soldiers with gifts, the people with provision
of victuals, and all with the sweetness of rest and peace.

He said of Tiberius, Miserum populum Romanum, qui sub tam lentis maxillis
erit, O unhappy people of Rome, that shall be under such a ^low pair of jaws.
By this Enigmatical speech he compared the state of the people of Rome unto the
miserable case of one, whom some savage and cruel beast has gotten between his
teeth, not devouring and dispatching him at once, but there holds and cheweth
him a long while in exceeding pain; alluding to the secret malice and dreaming
nature withal of Tiberius.

To express the speedy expedition of a thing done hastily, he used this
proverb, Citius quam asparagi coquantur. Sparages soon sodden, see Eras. Adag.
Quicker (would he say) than Sparages can be sodden.

Beholding certain rich strangers and foreigners at Rome carrying whelps of
Dogs and Apes in their bosoms, Plutarch in the life of Pericles says no more
than Caesar, but Eras. in his Apothegmes took it to be meant of Augustus.
and making much of them, he did ask, Whether women brought not forth children
in their countries? Hereby giving a worthy and Princely admonition to them who
do consume and waste upon Beasts, the natural affection and love due to men.

When he purposed never to do what he was requested, he was wont by way of
Proverb to say, That he would do it, ad calendas Graecas, Suetonius.
i. e. in our English Proverb, The Greeks had no Calends. See Eras. Adag.
at later Lammas, never.

He was so much afraid of Thunder and Lightning, that he ever carried about
with him for a preservative remedy a Seals Or of a Seacalf, which as Pliny
writes checketh all lightnings. Tonitrua and fulgura paulo infirmius
expavescebat, ut semper and ubique pellem vituli marini circumferret pro
remedio, at que ad omnem majoris tempestatis suspicionem, in abditum and
concameratum locum se reciperet. Sueton.
skin; yea, and whenever he suspected there would be any extraordinary storm
or tempest, he would retire himself into a close secret room under ground, and
vaulted above head.

In his time Wars ceased, Aurel. Vict.
and Learning chiefly flourished. In the time of War the Temple was open.
The Temple of Ianus was then shut in Rome, peace being general through the
whole world.

Ianum Quirini clausit: Et ordinem Horace lib. 4. Carminum.

Rectum, and vaganti fraena licentiae
Injecit, emovitque culpas,
Et veteres revocavit arts.
Our Savior was born in the 42 year of his reign say Epiphanius and Eusebius,
41. say Tertullian, and Iraeneus.

Receiving a challenge from Anthony, he returned him this answer, He bid
Gatullus the railing Poet to supper, to show that he had forgiven him.
That if Anthony had a disposition to dye, or were weary of life, there were
ways enough else to death besides that. Thus the challenge was rejected, and
yet his Honor untainted.

Affectabat jocos, Macrob. Saturn. l. 2.
salvo tamen Majestatis pudorisque respectu. He was very pleasant, and had both
an excellent dexterity in breaking of Jests, Seneca de Ira.
and was very patient likewise in bearing of flouts. Vide Christ: Math. Theat.
Hist. in Aug: p. 55, 56. Convitia si irascare, agnita videntur; spreta
exolescunt. Tacitus.
Probrosis in se dictis arrisit. He made himself merry with reproachful
speeches touching himself, therein manifesting his clemency, and also his
wisdom.

When he had by Proclamation promised a great sum of money to him that should
bring in that famous Pirate Corocota, and put him in his power; He knowing the
Emperors mild and temperate vein, took the boldness to come himself, and told
him that he was Corocota which came to submit himself, and demanded the sum
promised to him that should bring him in; Augustus both pardoned him, and gave
him the money. Dion.

Macrobius reports of him, that when he heard that at the commandment of
Herod, l. 2. Saturn. cap. 4. Mat. 2.16. For his Jewish devotion prohibited him
to deal with swine, but not Religion, nor reason, nor nature could protect
those Innocents from slaughter.
all the children of Syria under two years old were slain, and that in the
stir his own son was also slain; Melius est (inquit ille) Herodus porcum esse
quam puerum. I had rather (says he) be Herod's swine than his son.

He commanded Herennius a dissolute young man to depart out of the Camp; and
when he submissively entreated him not to send him home, Macrob. ib. Quoniam
pudebat adolescentem fateri quibus ipse Caesari displicuisset, Caesar permisit
ut sermonem inverteret, and culpam in ipsum conferret. Eras. Apotheg. Macrob.
ubi supra.
alleging that he could not tell what to say to his Father, he answered, Dic
me ^ibi displicuisse, say, that I displeased thee.

When Pacuvius did petere ab eo congiarium, and said, That it was commonly
spoken among men, that he had given him a great deal of money, Sed tu, inquit,
noli credere.

Galba, who had a crooked back pleading before him, and often saying, Corrige
in me si quid reprehendis, If you find any fault in me correct it; Augustus
answered, Ego te monere possum, corrigere non possum, I can but admonish thee,
Macrob.
Saturn.
I cannot correct thee.

Being entertained by one at a Banquet very meanly and sparingly, after all was
finished he departed, and at his farewell only whispered this in his ear, Non
putabam me tibi tam familiarem, I did not think we had been so familiar.

When one tilled the place where his Father was buried, he said, Id. Ib.
Hoc vere est monumentum Patris colere.

He was choleric by nature, This counsel was given him, that when the object
and occasions of Choler were in his eye, he should not be moved before he had
pronounced over the letters of the Alphabet.
but his patience in bearing of bitter Jests deserved much to be commended. A
certain countryman came to Rome, who did much resemble him in outward feature,
insomuch that all men's eyes were cast upon him, and Augustus hearing of it,
caused him to be brought before him, asking him this question, Whether his
Mother had ever been at Rome; the young man answered, No but his Father had
oftentimes.

He sitting between Virgil and Horace, being asked by one what he did?
answered, Sedeo inter suspiria and lachrymas; per suspiria intelligens
Virgilium suspirabundum, and per lachrymas Horatium lippientem.

Habenda est ad somnum culcitra, in qua ille cum tantum deberet, dormire
potuit, Macr. Sat. l. 2. c. 4.
He hearing that a certain Gentleman of Rome (who was deeply indebted) did sleep
most securely, desired to buy the Bed whereupon he rested; it seeming a matter
of much marvel to him, that one fallen into so deep arrerages could take his
rest so well.

When a Soldier bragged too much of a great scar in his forehead, At tu cum
fugisti, nunquam post te respexeris?
he asked him if he did not get it when he looked back as he fled.

He wrote a Tragedy called Ajax, which afterward (because it displeased him)
he blotted out with a sponge. Illius Ajax utinam ne in spongiam incubuisset,
haberemus profecto quod insubidis illis opponeremus, qui principum felicissima
ingenia ab humaniorum ortium studio tanquam indigno, summo rerum publicarum
damno avertunt.
Therefore when Lucius a writer of Tragedies, asked him what his Ajax did?
Caesar very wittily answered, In spongiam incubuit, alluding to the argument of
the Fable, in which Ajax when he knew what things he had spoken and done in his
madness, lying upon his sword killed himself. Besides the pretty allusion unto
the fabulous History of Ajax, Torrentius has observed in the word Spongia a
double signification, viz. a Sponge called deletilis, which Writers had at
hand, either to wipe and wash out what misliked them, or to blur and blot the
same; Grotius Principi Condaeo.
whereupon Martial says of it, Vtiles haec quoties scripta novare voles: and
also a Sword, which adds the better grace unto the conceit, considering that
Ajax fell upon his own sword.

Having conquered his enemy, and returning home victorious, amongst others that
came to congratulate his happy conquest, there was one holding a Crow, which he
had taught to say, Ave Caesar, Victor, Imperator, Macrob. Satur.
God save the Emperor and Conqueror. He wondering to see the Bird so officious,
gave a great sum of money for him. His fellow workman to whom none of that
liberality came, affirmed that he had at home another Crow for Caesar, which he
entreated he might bring; being brought, he expressed the words which he had
learned, Ave victor, Imperator Antoni. The Emperor being nothing provoked
therewith, thought it sufficient to bid him divide the donative with the other:
being saluted in like manner of a Pazret, he caused him to be bought. This
example allured a poor Cobbler to try whether he could teach a Crow to use the
like salutation, but he being at great expenses in vain, was wont often to say,
Opera and impensa periit, All my pains and charge is lost; but at the last the
Crow began to utter the same salutation, which Augustus once hearing as he
passed by, he answered, Satis domi salutatorum talium habeo, I have such
saluters enough at home.

The Crow remembered to add that which he had heard his Master complaining say,
Opera and impensa periit, at which Caesar laughed, and gave more for him than
any of the rest that he had bought.

Quis expedivit Psittaco suum (...)?
Corvos quis olim concavum salutare,
Picasque docuit verba nostra conari?
Persius.
Magister artis, ingenique largitor
Venture, negatas Artifex sequi voces.
He wrote a bitter Satyr against a Poet, but he wiped his lips and replied
not, saying, Periculosum est in eum scribere qui potest proscribere.

Suetonius writes of him, that he loved the expressions of the good will of
his friends, and especially such as appeared by some Legacy given at their
death; but yet whatsoever it was he would return it at one time or other to
their children with advantage.

Non tamen vir tantus vitiis caruit; fuit enim paululum impatiens, levitur
iracundus, occulte invidus, palam factiosus, dominandi supra quam aestimari
potest avidissimus, studiosissimus aleae lusor. Aurel. Vict.
He wished three things to his Son, the favor of Pompey, the boldness of
Alexander, and his own fortune.

He was not without his vices, being very impatient, secretly envious, and
openly factious, very desirous to rule, and much given to dicing. Quibusdum non
caruit vitiis, vitorum severus ultor.
Emanvelis Thesauri Caesares.
Though he was a man severe enough, yet he did not know the exceeding
wantonness of Iulia his own daughter, and her open and audacious boldness; but
Suetonius seems to be of a contrary opinion, for he says, that he was much
ashamed of her, Lex Iulia (which punishes Adulterers with death) was not made
by Julius, but by him.
and that once he thought to put her to death. And when a freed woman of his
named Phoebe, one that was privy to Iulia's lewdness, knit her own neck in a
halter, and so ended her days, he gave it out, That he wished with all his
heart he had been Phoebe's Father.

Out of great indignation against his two Daughters, and Posthun^us Agrippa his
Grandchild, whereof the first two were Heroum filii noxae.
infamous, and the last otherwise unworthy, he would say, that they were not
his seed, but some impostume broken from him, and he used this verse of them, O
utinam aut coelebs mansissem, aut prole carerem!

He was almost peerless in his Government, Solinus.
yet there are to be found so many misfortunes in his life, that a man cannot
easily discern whether he was more miserable, or more happy. Nam fere quoties
audisset, cito, aut nullo cruciatu defunctum quempiam, sibi and suis (...)
similem (hoc enim and verbo uti solebat) precabatur.


Bonam mortem putabat celerem and insperatam, quae nulla aegritudine pulsaret
fores: So often as he heard of a man that had a quick passage with little sense
of grief, he wished for himself and his such Euthanasy, such an easy death. He
being at the point to die, thus addressed himself; called for his
looking-glass, Suetonius.
commanded to have his hair and beard combed, Suetonius.
Et malas labentes corrigi, his riveled cheeks smoothed up; Vita nostra sicut
fabula, nec refert quam diu, sed quam been acta sit.
then asking his friends if he had acted his part well, Cum ita responderint,
vos omnes igitur, inquit Plaudite.

l. 15. c. 7. The Climacterical year is fatal.
Aulus Gellius mentions, that he sent a letter unto his step-son to this
effect, Rejoice with me my Son, for I have past over that deadly year and enemy
to old age, threescore and three, in which number the sevenths and ninths do
concur.

He lived fifteen years after Christ was born, and dyed in his 76. year.

He was beloved of his people, for they erected a statue to M^sas the Physician
who in a sickness recovered him, and placed it by Aesculapius: and the Senate
much honored him being dead, by consecrating Temples to him at Rome, and in
other famous Cities, and all the people much lamented his death, using that
speech, Vtinam aut non nasceretur, aut non moreretur, Aurel. Vict.
Would he had never been born or never dyed.

Paterculus said of the Roman Empire after Augustus death, when there was such
hope of enemies, fear of friends, expectation of trouble in all, Tanta fuit
unius viri Majestas, ut nec bonis, neque contra malos opus armis foret: Such
was the Majesty of one man, that his very presence took away all use of Arms.

Tyberius Caesar.
effigy of emperor
LIVIA his Mother, whiles she went with child of him, Tiberius dictus a fluvio
Tibere, quod juxta Tiberim natus esset.
among many and sundry experiments which she made, and signs that she observed
(and all to know whether she should bring forth a man-child or no) took closely
an Egg from under a Hen that was sitting, Suetonius.
and kept it warm, sometime in her own, otherwhiles in her woman's hands by
turns one after another, so long until there was hatched a Cock-chicken with a
notable comb upon the head. And when he was but a very babe, Scribonius the
Astrologer gave out and warranted great matters of him, and namely, that he
should one day reign as Monarch, but yet without the Royal Ensigns, for as yet
the Sovereign power of the Caesar's was unknown.

He was of Personage tall, corpulent, big set and strong, of stature above the
ordinary, broad between the shoulders, and large brested, fair of complexion,
great goggle-ey'd, whereby he saw so clearly as is incredible to report. He
used both hands alike; Suetonius.
Nullius manus vel ad feriendum vel ad impellendum fortiores fuerunt, quum in
digitis nervos videretur habuisse non venas; nam and carra venientia digito
salutari repulisse dicitur, and fortissimos quosque uno digito sic afflixisse,
ut quasi ligni vel ferri obtusioris ictu percussi dolerent. Multa duorum
digitorum allisione contrivit. Trebel. Pollio. de triginta Tyrannis in Mario.
his joints were so firm, that with his finger he was able to bore through a
green and sound table, with a fillop also to break the head of a good big boy;
his speech was exceeding slow, not without a certain wan on gesticulation and
fumbling with his fingers.

He refused the Empire a long time, putting on a most impudent and shameless
mind, and seeming to rebuke his friends encouraging him thereto, as those who
knew not what a monstrous and untaimed beast an Empire was. Tiberio suspensa
semper, and obscura verba.
He also held the Senate in suspense by ambiguous answers, and crafty delays,
when they besought him to take it upon him, Tacitus.
yea and humbly debased themselves before his knees, insomuch as some of them
could endure him no longer, and one among the rest in that tumult cried out
aloud, Let him either do it at once, or else give over quite; and another
openly to his face upbraided him in these words, Caeteri, quod pollicentur
tarde praestant, tu quod praestas tarde polliceris. Aut agat, aut desistat.
Eras. Apophtheg. Simile est Ciceronis istud de Epicureis 2. de fin. Caeteri
(inquit) existimantur dicere melius quam facere, hi mihi videntur facere melius
quam dicere.
Whereas other men be slack in doing and performing that which they have
promised, thou art slack in promising that which thou performest. In the end,
as if he had been compelled, and complaining withal that there was imposed
upon his shoulders a miserable and burdensome servitude, he took the Empire
upon him.

The cause of this holding off and delay that he made, was the fear of imminent
dangers on every side, insomuch as he would often say, Lupum se auribus tenere,
Dicitur in eos qui ejusmodi negotio involvuntur, quod nequerelinquere sit
integrum, neque tolerari possit Eras. Adag. Eras. in Apoph. and alii.
he held a Wolf by the ears.

He knowing excellent well how to conceal his own private passions, made
himself known to be an excellent Doctor in the cunning Art of discovering other
men's thoughts, by which he may be said to set the roof over the Roman Monarchy.
Advertisements from Parnassus by Bocalini. Century 2. Advertis. 33. See more
there.

He was very patient when any bad rumors or slanderous Libels were cast out,
either of himself or those about him, and was wont to say (how wisely I
determine not) In civitate libera linguam mentemque liberas esse debere, That
in a free State men ought to have both tongue and thought free.

He taxed the indiscretion of the Ilienses comforting him long after the death
Sueton.
of his Son, with this answer, That he also was very sorry for them, because
they had lost that worthy Citizen Hector, Sueton.
one dead many hundred years before.

He was mild and gracious at the first, and seemed to be inclined to the good
of the Commonwealth: when the Presidents and Governors abroad gave him council
to burden the Provinces with heavy Tributes and Taxes; Et Alexand. Magnus
solitus erat dicere, se odisse olitorem qui herbas radicitus convelleret.
he wrote back unto them, Boni Pastoris est tondere pecus, non deglubere, That
it was the part of a good shepherd to shear his sheep, and not to flea them.

He held it good policy not to change his Officers often, lest new ones
succeeding should oppress the people too much; whereas the old having means to
enrich themselves, would not so fleece them in the latter end as at the
beginning, making have to do it, lest they were removed before they could
feather their nests well. See Montagues Acts and Monum. of the Church. c. 5. p.
37.

Et ut parsimoniam publicam exemplo quoque juvaret solennibus ipse coenis
pridiana saepe at semesa opsonia apposuit, dimidiatumque aprum, affirmans omnia
eadem habere quae totum.
That by his own Example he might put forward the public frugality, he himself
at his solemn and festival suppers, caused oftentimes to be served up to the
Board viands dressed the day before, and those half eaten, saying, That the
side of a wild Boar had in it the same of the whole.

One there was who called him Dominus, that is, Sir, but he gave him warning
not to name him any more by way of contumely. Another chanced to say, His
sacred business; and a third again, That he went into the Senate, Auctore se,
that is, by his warrant or authority. He caused them both to change those
words, and for auctore to say suasore, that is, By his advice and council; and
instead of sacred, to put in laborious and painful.

Quotidiana oscula prohibuit edicto, item strenarum commercium. He forbad
expressly by Edict the usual and daily kisses commonly given and taken, likewise
the intercourse of New Years gifts to and fro.

Suetonius writes of him, that he did Iura omnibus fere asylis adimere, take
away the privilege of almost all their Sanctuaries, because he observed the
licentious abuse of them.

At length he discovered those vices, which with much ado for a long time he
had cloaked and concealed.

He was very cruel, covetous, and libidinous. Noctem continuumque biduum
epulando potandoque consumpsit.
He was wont to adorn his chambers with most lascivious pictures, ut ita
aspectu deficientes libidines excitaret. vide Sueton. Sueton.
in ejus vita. He spent with Flaccus Pomponius and L. Piso, a whole night and
two days outright in nothing else but eating and drinking; giving the Province
of Syria into the Government of the first, and conferring the Provostship of
Rome on the other; professing even in all his Letters, that they were
Iucundissimi, and omnium horarum amici, his most pleasant Companions, and
friends at all Assaies. Propter nimiam vini aviditatem, for his excessive love
of wine and hot waters, Suetonius.
or because he loved to drink wine hot, which is delicate, Elegans Paranomasia.
So some played upon the name of Epiphanes, and called him Epimanes, or mad man.
See Iunius on 8. Dan.

Others call the Duke of Lorrain the Duke des Larrons.


he was for Tiberius named Biberius, for Claudius, Caldius, for Nero, Mero.

Le Theater du monde. l. 2. See after in Caligula and Titus. Pliny l. 14. of
Natural Hist. Not the thrice gallant Knight. Athenaeus memorat de Xenocrate,
illum scilicet uno haustu sorpsisse vini congium. Gassend. de vita Epicuri.
lib. 6. c. 6.
One gives this reason of his drunkenness, because his Nurse that gave him suck
would drink exceedingly her self, and nourished him with sops soaked in wine.

A Lombard, for drinking in his presence three gallons of wine at one draught,
and before he took his breath again, was dubbed Knight by him, and surnamed
Tricongius, The three gallon Knight.

It is reported, that in his time there was invented Glass of that temper, that
it would abide the hammer, and be beaten in length or breadth like lead, and
pliable to bend every way like paper; and that the Inventor hereof was put to
death by him. See Peacham's Valley of varieties. c. 17.

He erected a new Office, a voluptatibus, Nero had an Officer about him (to wit
Petronius) who was called Arbiter Neronianae libidinis, Tacit. Annal. l. 16*
for the devising of new pleasures, wherein he placed Priscus a Gentleman of
Rome, and one who had been Censor.

He advanced Sejanus to the highest place of Authority, not so much for any
good will, as to be his instrument for the accomplishing his wicked purposes.

He put to death a Soldier one of his own Guard, Latinis abstracta pro
concretis simpliciter posita intendunt id quod dicitur; plus enim quam vel
sordidum designat, vel sanguineum, eximie nimirum talem. Mentitur qui te
vitiosum, Zoile, dixit. Non vitiosus homo es, Zoile, sed vitium. Heins.
Exercit. Sac.
for stealing a Peacock out of a Garden.

Theodorus Gadareus his Master observing his bloody disposition, called him,
Lutum sanguine maceratum, A lump of clay soaked in blood; these verses were
cast out of him: Fastidit vinum, quia jam sitit iste cruorem;
Tam bibit hunc avide, quam bibit ante merum.
He loatheth wine, and now he after blood does thirst;
Drinks this as greedily as wine he drank at first.


He thought simple death so light a punishment, that when he heard that
Carnulius one of the Prisoners had laid violent hands on himself, he cried out,
Sueton.
Carnulius me evasit, Carnulius has escaped my hands. Sueton.


His saying was, Oderint dum probent, Let them hate me so long as they suffer
my proceedings to pass.

Nullus a poena hominum cessavit dies, ne religiosus quidem ac sacer.

There passed not a day over his head, no not so much as any festival and
Religious Holy Day, without execution and punishment of some: many were accused
and condemned, together with their Children and Wives. Straight commandment was
given, that the near kinsfolks of such persons as were condemned to die should
not mourn and lament for them. No Informer and Promoter was discredited, but
his Presentment taken, and every crime and trespass was accounted capital.

He said to one that requested death rather than long imprisonment, Nondum
tecum redii in gratiam, Thou art not yet reconciled to me that I should show
thee such favor. Suetonius.


Because Virgins by a received custom were not to be strangled; Tacitus
he caused the Hangman first to deflour a Virgin, Suetonius.
and then to strangle her.

Boeclerus in his political dissertations, observes, that he had two
instruments of his wickedness, by which he cloaked his vilest actions.

1. Sermonis artificium, his ambiguous speeches. 2. Inanis quidam color juris,
as here in that example of the Virgins last mentioned.

Among other kind of torments he devised, Suetonius.
that when men had drunk largely of strong wine, their privy parts should be
fast bound with Lute-strings, that so for want of means to avoid their Urine,
they might endure intolerable pain.

Foelicem Priamum vocabat, quod superstes omnium suorum extitisset. Suetonius.
He called Priamus happy, in that he over-lived all his Sons and Daughters.

He feared Thunder exceedingly, See the like in Augustus his life.
and when the air or weather was any thing troubled, he ever carried a Chaplet
or wreath of Laurel about his neck, because that (as Pliny reports) is never
blasted with Lightning.

He loved liberal Sciences most affectionately, Ingenio ad repentina long
ceriore.
he would do things better of a sudden, extempore, than upon study and
premeditation, Repentivis responsionibus, Aurel. Vict.
aut consiliis melior, qvam meditatis. He wrote a most eloquent complaint of
the death of Julius Caesar. Scribit Plutarchus in Apophthegmatis, Augustum
dicere solitum, se Romani Imperii successorem eum esse relicturum, qui nunquam
bis de eadem re consultasset; Tiberium significare volebat. Josephus lib. 18.
of the Antiquity of the Jews. c. 8.


He was much addicted to Astrological predictions, and such curious Arts, so
that the greater part of those things which he executed in all his life time
was ordered thereby; he gave the more credit to Divination, because in certain
things he had found the conjectures correspondent to truth.

His usual Companions were Magicians and Soothsayers. The principal of these
was Thrasyllus; whom Tiberius intending on a time, to thrust down from a Cliff
as they walked together, in that he had failed in a former prediction; and
perceiving by his looks that he was troubled in mind, demanded the cause. Who
replied, that by his Art he foresaw some hardly to be avoided danger to be near
him: whereat Tiberius amazed, altered his purpose.

Tu quoque Galba degustabis imperium.
He seeing Galba one day coming toward him, spoke thus of him to certain of his
familiars, Behold the man that shall be one day honored with the Roman Empire.
Tacit. l. 4. Annal.


He made a Law called Lex Papia, Lipsius in his Commentaries on the third book
of Tacitus, Annal. treats largely of this Lex Papia.
by which he forbad such men as were past sixty, or women past fifty to marry,
as thinking them insufficient for generation; to which Lactantius seems to
allude, thus jesting at the Heathen touching their great god Jupiter; How
comes it to pass that in your Poets, salacious Jupiter begets no more
children? is he past sixty, and restrained by the Papian Law?

Certe Iuliam legem Papia fuisse auctam atque extensam satis constat. Sed quid
sit adjectum, non ita constat Heraldi Commentarius. in Ap loget. Tertul.

Many of the Roman Caesar's have been transported with self-admiration, they
have shared the Months of the year among them; Vide Tacit. l. 16. Annal. c. 12.
April must be Neroneus, May Claudius, Domitian will have October, November is
for Tiberias, by the same token that when it was tendered to him, he asked the
Senate wittily (as Xiphiline reports it) What they would do when they should
have more than twelve Caesar's?

It is called the Sea of Tiberius, John 6.1. from a City on the bank of it, of
that name, built by Herod, in honor of Tiberius Caesar, as Josephus writes in
the 18. Book of his Jewish Antiquities.

Livie and Ovid dyed in the fourth year of Tiberius. Eusebius


Pilate by Letters signified unto him the Miracles of our Savior Christ, The
word Christians was first known to the world in his reign as Tertullian
witnesses in his Apology Tiberius ergo, cujus tempore nomen Christianum in
seculum introjvit.
his Resurrection, and that he was supposed of many to be God. The Romans had
a Law, forbidding any Emperor to consecrate or set up any god which was not
first approved by the Senate; for Tiberius Caesar hearing of Christ's fame, by
virtue of that Law moved the Senate to promulgate and relate Christ among the
number of their gods, who rejected him because he would be God alone, or
because contrary to the Law of the Romans he was consecrated for God, before
the Senate of Rome had so declared and approved him; whose folly Tertullian
thus scoffeth; In Apologet. They refused to do it, says Eusebius. l. 2. Hist.
Eccles. c. 2. that the wisdom and Divine power of God in the Doctrine of
salvation might not need the allowance and commendation of men.
Apud vos de humano arbitrio divinitas pensitatur, nisi homini Deus placuerit,
Deus non erit, homo jam Deo propitius esse debedit. God should be God if man
would let him.

Josephus a Jew, and an enemy to Christ, in his 8. Book of Antiquities, c. 4.
speaks the same things of Christ that Matthew does; that he was a most worthy
man, if it be lawful to call him a man (said he,) that he wrought many
Miracles, and that he rose from the dead. Tacitus and Suetonius speak of his
Miracles, Tacitus l. 15. Annal. c. 10. affirms that he was crucified under
Pilate in the time of Tiberius, Christus Tiberio imperante, per Procuratorem
Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus eras.
and that Teberius would have put him in the number of his gods. Plutar. De
interitu Orac. reports, that under the Reign of Tiberius all the Oracles of the
world ceased, of which the Poets bear witness, -- cessant oracula Delphis. Iuv.
Sat. 6.

Plutarch also in the same book reports, that in the later years of the reign
of Tiberius, a strange voice and exceeding horrible clamours, with hideous
cries, screetches and howlings were heard by many in the Grecian Sea,
complaining that the great god Pan was now departed. And this was brought
before the Emperor, who marvelled greatly thereat, and could not by all his
Diviners and Southsayers whom he called to that consultation, be able to gather
out any reasonable meaning of this wonderful accident: but Christians may
persuade themselves, that by the death of their great god Pan (which signifies
all) was imported the utter overthrow of all wicked spirits. John 12.13.

Our Lord was crucified in the 15. year of his reign, say Lib. adversus Iudaeos.
Tertullian and Lib. 4. de vera sapientia c. 10.
Lactantius.

But Luke the Evangelist, 3. c. 1. v. makes his Baptism to fall in the 15.
year of Tiberius his reign. So then his Passion must be in the 18. or 19. for
three years he preached salvation. Vide Vossium de tempore. Dominicae
passionis. Sect. 3.
Jerome and Eusebius.

The fear of losing his Office under Tiberius Caesar, (whose Deputy he was over
the Province of Iudaea,) made Pilate condemn Christ, John 19.12, 13. but not
long after, he lost his Deputy-ship and Caesar's favor, and fled to Vienna,
where living in banishment he killed himself; Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 7.

John Baptist also suffered in his time.

Matthew. 22.21. Our Savior says, Render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's. Romani Caesares imaginem suam imprimebant monetae tam aureae quam
argenteae


The money declared the subjection of their Nation; as if he should have said,
If you think it absurd to pay Tribute, be not subject to the Roman Empire; but
the money declares that Caesar reigns over you, Drusius.
and your own secret allowance declares that the liberty which you pretend, is
lost and taken away. Jerome on the place does well observe, that the name of
Caesar is not proper, but appellative, because from the first Emperor Julius
Caesar all the rest were so called. Yet says Gerhard in his Harmony, Christ
properly understands Tiberius who then ruled, whose Image the money did bear;
to that wicked Emperor Tribute was due; so that charge 1 Timothy 2.2. was given by
Paul, even then when Caesar was a persecutor of the Christian Religion.

Austin tells us, He that gave Sovereignty to Augustius, gave it also to Nero;
he that gave it to the Vespatians Father and Son, sweetest Emperors, gave it
also to Domitian that bloody monster, De civit. Dei. l. 5. c. 21.

Tiberius approved of the Christians Opinions, and threatened Death to them
which accused them: This came to pass (says l. 2. Eccles. Hist. c. 2.

He withheld a Legacy from the people of Rome, which his predecessor Augustus
had lately given; and perceiving a fellow round a dead Corpse in the ear, we
would needs know wherefore he did so, the fellow replied, that he wished the
departed soul to signify to Augustus, the Commons of Rome were yet unpaid: for
this bitter jest the Emperor caused him forthwith to be slain, and carry the
news himself.


Eusebius) by Divine providence, that the Doctrine of the Gospel having no rub
at the first, might run over the whole world.

He made Capreae by his cruelty and lusts, but infamous and unhappy: Who
withdrawing thither from the affairs of the Common wealth, because the Island
was unaccessible on all sides, by reason of the upright Clifts, except only at
one place, no man being suffered to land, but upon especial admittance, hence
sent his mandates of death. In the mean-time making it a very stew of
incredible beastliness. Insomuch that Capreae was styled the Island of secret
lusts, and he Capreneus, Sandys Travels. l. 4. p. 197. Capraeis marcescens
Romae aderat ferro, si non consilio. Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.

Dion writes, that a Phoenix was seen before the last year of Tiberius, which
bird is an Emblem of the Resurrection, and signifies that at that time Christ
rose from the dead, and that the Gospel was then spread abroad, which affirms
that the Dead shall rise again. Carrion. Chron.

He dyed in the 78. year of his age, say Suetonius, Tacitus, and Aurel. Vict.
83. says Eutropius. It was thought he was poisoned.

He reigned 23 years, say Eutropius, Suetonius, Orosius. 24 says Aurel. Vict.
22 years, 7 months, and 20 days, Tertull. 22 years, Clem. Alexand. 22 years, 7
months, and so many days, says Dion, 22 years and six months, Josephus.

He reigned 22 years and 7 months; Doctor Willet on the Romans 22. years, 11
months, 14 days, says Eusebius. as Doctor Willet shows in his Hexapla on Dan.
where the account differs from this certain months, because he follows Eusebius.
computation there.
but the reason of the different computation, why some give unto him but 22
years, some 24, some but 23 is, because some count only the full years, some
the months of his first and last year for whole years, some put the odd
months together, and make one year of them.

He reigned after our Saviors Passion 4 years, 11 months, and 18 days.

The people joyed so much at his death, that running up and down at the first
tidings thereof, some cried out in this note, Tiberium in Tiberim, Let Tiberius
be cast into Tiber; some offered sacrifices when they heard of it, and one
meeting with his Master in some public place, told him in the Hebrew Tongue,
The Lion was dead.

Caius Caligula.
effigy of emperor
SOme say this name of Caligula was given him, for a certain kind of shoe
called Caliga, used among men of war, and worn by him; or he got it by
occasion of a merry word taken up in the Camp, Suetonius.
because he was brought up there in the habit of an ordinary and common soldier
among the rest. Quia natus in exercitu fuerat, cognomentum calceamenti
militaris, i. e. Caligulae fortitus est.


Cajus, cognomen Caligae cui castra dederunt.

Ausonius. He carried himself well before he was Emperor, so that it was said
of him, Nec servum meliorem ullum, Aurel. Vict.
nec deteriorem Dominum fuisse. There was never a better servant, and a worse
Master.

He was very tall of stature, pale and wan-coloured, of body somewhat gross and
unfashionable, his eyes sunk in his head, and his Temples were hollow, his
forehead was broad, the hair of his head grew thin, in all parts else he was
hairy and shagged, and therefore it was a capital offense, either to look upon
him as he passed by, from an higher place, or once but to name a Suetonius.
Goat upon any occasion whatsoever. It was held crimen laesae Majestatis,
against his Imperial person.
His face and visage being naturally stern and grim, he made of purpose more
crabbed and hideous, composing and dressing it in a looking-glass, all manner
of ways to seem more terrible, and to strike greater fear. Speed. Vultus
horridus.
Being clad oftentimes with a cloak of needle work, and embroidered with diverse
colors, Sueton.
and the same set out with precious stones; Torserat per omnia quae in rerum
natura tristissima sunt, fidiculis, Eculeo, igne, vultu suo. Seneca. lib. 3. de
Ira.
in a coat also with long sleeves, and wearing bracelets withal, he would come
abroad into the City.

In omnia fuit ei pro ratione impetus, sive ad cupiendum aliquid ingens et
incredibile, se incitasset, sive ad patranda immania exarsisset. Boecleri
Dissertatio Polit. in Calig. He said that he did approve of nothing so much in
his nature as his immodesty.


On a time esteeming it a thing correspondent to his greatness who was Emperor,
to exact that superiority on the Sea, which was answerable to his Sovereignty
on the Land, being to cross the Sea between Puteoli a City in Campania, and
Misenum another maritime town, Sueton.
he caused a Bridge to be built betwixt one Cape of the Sea unto another, Novum
and inauditum spectaculi genus.
for the space of three miles and more, on which he commanded himself to be
drawn in a Chariot, as if it were answerable to his Dignity.

Some are of opinion that he invented such a kind of Bridge in emulation of
Xerxes, who not without the wonder of the world, made a Bridge of planks over
Hellespont an arm of the Sea, somewhat narrower than this: Others, that by a
bruit blazed abroad of some huge and monstrous piece of work, he might terrify
Germany and Britain, upon which Countries he meant to make war. See Sandys
Travels l. 4. p. 214.

He maintained his reputation with his Grandfather Tiberius, by no means but
this; he shadowed his cruel mind with subtle modesty, and showed not discontent
either for the condemnation of his Mother, or the banishment of his Brethren,
Pari habitu semper cum Tiberio, haud multum distantibus verbis, He did imitate
him in his apparel, in his words, in all things as near as possibly he could.

He succeeded Tiberius in the Empire, but in cruelty far exceeded him. Tacit.
lib. 6. Annal.
Thus far forth as of a Prince (says Suetonius,) relate we must as of a
Monster.

Sueton.
He usurped the name of god, commanding his subjects to dignifie him with more
than human honors; Aurel. Vict.
In his Temple stood an Idol of fine gold, of himself; which was daily clothed
and adorned with the like garments which he then wore. Cuffe of Affectation.
and ascending the Capitol, which among all the Temples in Rome is most
religiously honored, he was so bold as to salute Jupiter, and to call him
brother.

-- Divumque sibi poscebat honores. He sent Petronius with an Army to
Jerusalem, commanding him to set his statue in the Temple, and if the Jews
refused to receive it, that those who withstood him he should put to the sword,
and lead the rest captive; Joseph. l. 18. Antiq. c. 11. and 2. de bello Iudaic.
c. 9.
but partly by Petronius his prudence, and through Aristobulus his intercession
with him, and King Agrippa's with Caligula, it was hindered.

The like is in the 21. lib. of Tacitus, where he thus writes of the Jews, Sub
Tiberio quies, deinde jussi a Caio Caesare effigiem ejus in Templo locare, arma
potius sumpsere; quem motum mors Caesaris diremit.

He gave it out openly, that his own Mother was begotten by Incest which
Augustus committed with his own daughter Iulia. Suetonius.


He caused his Brother Tiberius to be slain, Suetonius.
and reserved his Uncle Claudius (who was his Successor in the Empire) for
nothing else, but to make him his laughing stock.

Many of honorable rank were by him put to death, and sawed asunder in the
midst, because they had no good opinion of his shows, or had not sworn by his
Genius.

Per Genium Principis Romanos jurare solitos, testes sunt Iurisconsulti nostri,
quemadmodum and per salutem Principis, and per Principis venerationem.
An ordinary thing it was at Rome to swear by the Genius, as also by the
Fortune, and the health of their Emperors. And what a devout Oath was this, Per
Genium, that is, the spirit or superintendent Angel of the Prince? which I take
to be as much as his own good self, as appears by Tertullian, Citius apud vos
per omnes Deos, quam per Genium principis, pejeratur, Schildius in Calig.
Doct. Holland in Annotat. in Sueton. Dio (as Heraldus upon Tertullians Apology
observes) says, Apologet. c. 28
that Augustus a most wise and moderate Prince, not only pardoned, but also
suppressed this kind of Oath.

Suetonius.
He forced Parents to be present at the execution of their own Children.

And when one Father excused himself by reason of sickness, he sent a Litter
for him. Another of them immediately after the heavy spectacle of his Son put
to death, he invited to his own board, made him great cheer, Suetonius.
and by all manner of courtesy provoked him to jocondness and mirth.

When his Grandmother Antonia seemed to give him some admonition, Momento,
ait, omnia mihi in omnes licere.

When he had at one time condemned a sort of Frenchmen and Greeks together, he
made his boast, That he had subdued Gallo-Graecia, a Nation mixed of French and
Greeks.

After he had well drunk and eaten, he took pleasure to cast his friends into
the Sea, from on high, from a Bridge which he built at Puteoli before
mentioned, and caused many to be drowned which sought to save them. Dion. lib.
50. of his Hist. Suetonius in Calig. cap. 32.

He would not permit any to suffer death, but after many strokes given, and
those very softly. Ita in bello civili Mariano, Marius quidam particulatim
amputatus, diu vivere vel potius diu mori coactus est, ut inquit eleganter
Augustine. lib. 3. de civ. Dei.
His Command being generally and commonly known, Ita feri ut se mori sentiat,
Strike so, that they may feel themselves dying, and endure the pains of an
enduring death.

He executed on a time one whom he had not appointed to die, by error only and
mistaking his name, but it makes no matter, quoth he, for even he also has
deserved death.

A certain Citizen of Praetors degree, Schildius.
desired oftentimes from the retiring place where he was at Anticyra (into
which Isle he went for his healths sake) to have his License continued;
Hellebore that grows in the Isle Anticyra, is of most effectual operation;
the root is that whereof is made our sneesing powder, it purges extremely by
vomit; thereupon arises the Proverb, Naviget Anticyram, that is, Let him sail
to Anticyra; applied to one that is melancholic in the highest degree, and
little better than mad. See Pliny's natural Hist. l. c. 342.
but he gave order he should be killed outright, adding these words therewith,
That blood-letting was necessary for him who in so long time had found no good
by Hellebore, that is, by purging.

Being highly displeased upon a time with the multitude, for favoring the
contrary faction to his, would God (quoth he) that the people of Rome had but
one neck, At tu (inquit) unam cervicem habes, nos vero manus multas.
meaning to chop them off at one blow; Vox carnifice quam Imperatore dignior.
Xiphil. A speech fitter for an Hangman than an Emperor: Over whom, being killed
by Chaereas, the people of Rome afterward insulted.

He was wont openly to complain of the unhappy condition of the time wherein he
lived, Queri de condition temporum suorum solebat, quod nullis calamitatibus
publicis insignirentur.
as not renowned by any public calamities; that his Government was like to be
forgotten by the calm and prosperous current of all things, and therefore he
would often wish for the overthrow of his Armies, Famine, Pestilence, Fire,
Earthquakes, Sueton.
and the like.

Nonnunquam horreis praeclusis populo famem indixit. He proclaimed a famine
without scarcity. Suetonius.


While he was at his recreations and disports, he practiced the same cruelty
both in word and deed; oftentimes as he sat at dinner, some were examined upon
the Rack in his presence, and others had their heads struck off.

His saying was, Oderint dunt metuant, Let them hate me, so they fear me.

Being one day very free at a great feast, he suddenly brake forth into a great
laughter, and the Consuls who were next him demanding whereat he laughed so,
his answer was, Quid nisi uno meo nutu jugulari utrumque vestrum statim posse?
At what else (quoth he) but this, that with one nod of my head I can have both
your throats cut immediately?

As often as he kissed the neck of his Wife or Concubine, he would commonly add,
Tam bona cervix, simulac jussero, demetur. As fair and lovely a neck as this
is, Sueton
off it shall go if I do but speak the word. Dirissimae immanitatis dictum; sed
in Historia Turcarum factum legimus hoc etiam dicto crudelius.


He complained of the iniquity of the time, that one doubting to be poisoned of
him did take counterpoyson, or a remedy against it; what says he, Antidotum
adversus Caesarem? Is there any Antidote against Caesar? Casaub. in Calig.


His cruelty (as Dion says) was not imputed to his Father or Mother, Vide
plura ibid.
but to his Nurse, which was a most cruel woman her self, and used to rub her
breast nipple with blood, causing him to suck it; which he practiced also
afterward, for he did not only delight in the committing of many Murders, but
through insatiable desire of blood, would with his tongue suck and lick off the
blood that stuck upon his sword or dagger.

Videtur Natura edidisse, (says Seneca) ut ostenderet quid summa vitia in
summa fortuna possent. De Cons. ad Helviam. c. 9.
Nature seemed to have brought him forth, to show what effects the greatest
vice joined with the greatest fortune could produce.

And it may justly be verified of his times, what Senecca says in another
place, Res humanas sub illo in eum statum decidisse, In his Preface to his
fourth book of natural questions.
ut inter misericordiae opera baberetur occidi. Under him things were brought
to that pass, as it was reckoned amongst the works of mercy to be slain.

De quo nescio an decuerit memoriae prodi, nisi forte quia juvat de Principibus
nosse omnia, Aurel. Vict.
ut improbi saltem famae metu talia declinent.

Concerning whom (says Aurel. Victor.) I know not whether it shall be meet to
have recorded any thing, but that peradventure it is expedient to know all
things of Princes, that wicked men at least with fear of the report may decline
such things.

He was very expert in the Greek, and vulgar Roman Tongues. He was also of a
fluent speech, and if he had been to plead and declaim against one, when he was
angry once, he had both words and sentences at will: when he was about to make
an Oration, his manner was to threaten in these terms, Peroraturus stricturum
se lucubrationis suae telum minabatur. Sueton.
viz. That he would draw forth and let drive at his adversary, the keen weapon
and dart of his night-study by Candlelight.

He would have removed the writings of Virgil and Livie out of all Libraries;
he said, Virgil was a man of no wit, and very mean learning, and taxed Livie of
verbosity, and negligence in penning his History.

He said, Seneca's works were Arena sine calce, Minutissimis sententiis rerum
fregit pondera, says Quintilian of Seneca. Sueton.
Sand without Lime, because he often spoke short sentences, having no
connextion amongst themselves.

Nepotinis sumptibus omnium prodigorum ingenia superavit, In riotous and
wastful expenses he exceeded the wits and inventions of all the prodigal
spend-thrifts that ever were, Commentus portentosissima genera ciborum atque
coenarum.
inventing most monstrous kinds of meats, and making sumptuous Feasts. He would
drink off most precious and costly Pearls dissolved in Vinegar. Sueton.
Luxus fuit portentosi, ut qui etiam panes deauratos habuerit. He spent in one
year two Millions, and 700000 of Sestertiums. He would set before his Guests
loaves of Bread and other viands all of Which had a glorious sight to look on,
yet there was nothing for the contentation of Nature: so the Papists set their
glittering service of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin before the people, a goodly
show to gaze on, and wonder at. Bish. Jewel. Cael. Rhodig. Suetonius.
Gold, saying commonly withal, Aut frugi hominem esse oportere, aut Caesarem,
That a man must either be frugall, or else Caesar.

He held the wills of great men as void and of no effect, Hic non toto vertente
anno sex millia septingenta and quinquaginta myriadum aureorum prodegit.
in case any person would come forth and say, That they purposed and intended
at their death to make Caesar their Heir; he declared also by an Edict, that he
would receive New Years gifts, and so he stood the first day of January in the
entry of his house, Cael. Rhod. lect. Antiq. l. 20. c. 14.
ready to take what pieces of money soever came, which the multitude of all
sects and degrees, with full hands and bosoms powered out before him; nay,
Contrectandae pecuniae cupidine incensus. Saepe super immensos aureorum acervos
patentissimo diffusos loco, and nudis pedibus spatiatus, and toto corpore
aliquandiu volutatus est. Sueton.
he took such delight in handling of money, that oftentimes he would both walk
barefooted up and down, yea, and wallow also a good while with his whole body
upon huge heaps of coined pieces of gold spread here and there in a most large
open place.

There were in his secret Cabinet found two Books, bearing diverse titles. The
one had for the inscription, These things were found after his death.
Gladius, the Sword; the other, Pugio, Pugio a pungendo, quia Punctim potius
quam caesim vulnerat.
i.e. the Dagger, or Rapier; They contained both of them the marks and names of
such as were appointed unto death. There was found besides, a big chest full of
diverse poisons, which soon after being by Claudius drowned in the Sea, Sueton.
infected and poisoned the same, and many Fishes were killed therewith, which
the Tide cast into the next shores.

He set light by the gods, and threatened the Air if it rained upon his
Game-players, Quanta dementia fuit? putavit aut sibi noceri ne a Jove quidem
posse, aut se nocere and Iovi posse. Senec. de Ira. lib. 1. cap. 16. How great
madness was it to think that either Jupiter could not hurt him, See before in
the life of Augustus and Tiberius.
or that himself could hurt Jupiter? Yet notwithstanding at the least thunder
and lightning he used to wink close with both eyes, to enwrap also and cover
his whole head; but if the same were greater and somewhat extraordinary, he
would start out of his Bed, and hide himself under the Bed-sted.

Dion reports of two, that when the Emperor was sick, thinking to get much as
a reward for their great love to the Emperor, vowed, that on condition he might
live, they themselves would dye to excuse him; he recovering, afterward took
them at their word, and put them to death, lest they should break their vow,
and prove perjured persons.

Having recalled one from exile which had been long banished, he demanded of
him, What he was wont to do there? Who made answer thus by way of flattery, I
prayed (quoth he) to the gods always, that Tiberius (as now it is come to
pass) might perish, and you become Emperor. Hereupon Caligula thinking that
those whom he had banished prayed likewise for his death, sent about into the
Islands to kill them every one. Sueton.

In taking the review of Goals, and Prisoners therein, as they were sorted to
their offenses, he without once looking upon the title and cause of their
imprisonment, standing only within a Gallery; commanded that all in the midst,
a calvo ad calvum, that is, from one bald pate to another, should be led forth
to execution. Sueton.

He was murdered at last himself, Only 28 years 4 months, and 24 days,
Casaubon.
who had put so many to death. He lived 29 years says Suetonius, 39 Eutropius.
He reigned three years, ten months, and eight days, There is a great
difference among Chronographers, about the computation of his years. Three
years, ten months, and eightteen days, says Eusebius. Doctor Willet on the
Epist. to the Romans
say Suetonius and Eutropius; four years say Clemens, Tacitus, and Sextus
Aurel. four years, ten months, and eight days, says Beda; three years, nine
months, 28 days, says Dion; three years, eight months, and thirteen days,
says Tertullian; three years, six months, Josephus; three years, nine
months, 22 days, says Epiphanius: but the whole time of his reign was three
years, ten months, and eight days. They which give to him full four years,
count the odd months and days for a whole year.

Valerius Asiaticus, who had been Consul, came forth among the people, who were
in an uproar because of the rumors of the Emperors death, Joseph. l. 19. of the
Antiq. of the Jews c. 1.
and supposing it a strange matter that no man knew who had slain the Emperor,
whilst every one enquired who it was that had done the deed, Vtinam ego cum
intefecissem Xiphilin.
O, says he, would it had been I that had done it!

His death concerned the security of the Laws, and the safety of all men; and
had he not been speedily cut off, Our Nation (says Josephus) almost had been
utterly exterminated.

His moneys were all melted by the decree of the Senate; as King Richard the
thirds Cognizance the white Bore was torn from every sign, that his Monument
might perish. Speed.

Claudius Caesar.
effigy of emperor
AFter the death of Caligula, certain Soldiers in a hurry going to plunder the
Palace, one perceiving the feet of a man hidden in a hole, plucks him out by
the heels; this proves to be Claudius, who falling on his knees, and desiring
his life might be spared, the Soldiers lift him on their shoulders, and
proclaim him Emperor; This took so with the multitude, that the Senate for
their own safety were fain to give way unto it.

In the fiftieth year of his Age he attained to the Empire, Primus Caesarum
fidem militis praemio pignorarus.
and he was the first of all the Caesar's that obliged unto him the Soldiers
fealty by a fee and reward.

His Mother Antonia was wont to call him, Sueton.
Portentum hominis, The Monster, and fantastical shape of a man, Nec absolutum
a Natura, sed inchoatum.
as if he had not been finished, but only begun by Nature; and if she reproved
any one for his foolishness, she would say, He was more sottish than her Son
Claudius. Ante Imperium sine fama fuit, quia latuit,
In Imperio infamis, quia non latuit.
^larior erat, fi fuisset obscurior.
Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
Triump havit semel, pugnavit nunquam,
says he also of him. And again, Omnia in imperio habuit praeter Imperium.

He was personable, and carried a presence not without Authority and Majesty.
His countenance was lively, his gray hairs beautiful, which became him well,
with a good fat and round neck under them; yet many things disgraced him, viz.
undecent laughter, and unseemly anger, by reason that he would froth and slaver
at the mouth, and had evermore his nose dropping, his head continually shaking,
somewhat stammering in his speech.

He was inhumane toward strangers, and made an Edict forbidding all strangers,
Romanorum gentilitia nomina far, to be called by the Roman names. Sueton.

He commanded all Jews to depart from Rome, Act 18.2.

The Jews (says Suetonius) who by instigation of one This some think is to be
understood of Christians, whom we find in the Ecclesiastical writers to be
misnamed by the Ethnic Infidels Christians, like as Christ himself Chrestus in
scorn.
Chrestus, were evermore tumultuous, he banished Rome.

Acts 11.28. there is mention made of a great Dearth throughout all the World,
which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar, of which famine Eusebius,
Lib 20. Antiq. c. 2.
Josephus, Lib. 12. of his Annals.
Tacitus, and Suetonius likewise speak.

There was a woman that would not acknowledge her own son, and when by
evidences and arguments alleged pro and contra on both sides, the question
rested in equal balance doubtful, he awarded that she should be wedded to the
young man; and so forced her to confess the truth, and to take him for her
child.

One cried out upon a forger of writings, and required that both his hands
might be cut off; he made no more ado, but forthwith called instantly to have
the Hangman sent for, Sueton.
with his chopping-knife and Butchers block to do the deed.

The Lawyers were wont to abuse his Patience so much, that as he was going down
from the Judgment Seat, they would not only call upon him to come back again,
but also take hold of his Gownlappet and skirt, yea and some while catch him by
the foot, and so hold him still with them; one of the Grecian Lawyers pleading
before him, in earnest altercation used these words, (...), Et tu senex es and
stultus. Thou art both old and fool besides.

Stultus prudentibus, prudens stultis visus,
Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
Claudius invisae privato in tempore vitae,
In regno specimen prodidit ingenii. Ausonius.

Libertina ferens nuptarumque improba facta,
Non faciendo nocens, sed patiendo fuit.
He gave this counsel to a libidinous young man Si non cast, tamen caute. And
his Symbol, was, Generis virtus nobilitas.

Idem plane accidit Herodi Magno, cum uxorem Mariamnem occidisset.
He was very forgetful; when Messalina was (by his own commandment) killed,
within a while after he asked, Cur Domina non veniret? Why his Lady came not to
him? Many of those whom he had condemned, Josephus Orig. lib. 10. c. 11.
Casaubonus.
the very morrow immediately after he sent for, to bear him company at
dice-play.

One of his Guests, who was thought to have closely stolen away a cup of Gold
the day before, Sueton.
he re-invited again the morrow, and then set before him a stone-pot to drink
in.

It is reported that he meant to set forth an Edict, Sueton.
Quo veniam daret flatum crepitumque ventris in convivio emittendi, wherein he
would give folk leave to break wind downward, and let it go even with crack at
the very board; having certain intelligence, that there was one who for manners
and modesty sake, by holding it in endangered his life.

Hence the Epigram, Edicto vetuit crepitus ructusque moveri
Claudius; o medici Principis Ingenium!


Suetonius.
He played at Dice most earnestly, (concerning the Art and skill whereof he
published also a little book) being wont to ply the Game even whiles he was
carried up and down, having his Caroch and Diceboard so fitted, as there might
be no confusion nor shufling at all in play.

He was very timorous and pusillanimous at his first coming to the Empire; Erat
Natura performidolosus. Aurel. Vict.
he durst not for certain days go to any feast, without Pensioners standing
about him with their Spears and Javelins, Sueton.
and his Soldiers waiting at the table; neither visited he any sick person,
unless the Bedchamber where the party lay was first searched: He would scarce
suffer Attendants and Clarks to carry their Pen-sheaths, and Pen-knife-cases.

He concealed not his foolishness, but gave it out, and protested in certain
short Orations, that he counterfeited himself a fool for the nonce during Caius
days, because otherwise he would not have escaped, nor attained to the
Imperial place which he aimed at, and was then entered upon.

He sailed beyond Britain, and subdued the Orcades, Claudius Caesar,
tumultuantem Britanniam perdomuit; ab eo Claudio cestrium oppidum, quod nunc
Glocestrium dicunt.
added them to the Roman Empire, and called his Sons name, Eutropius.
Britannicus.

He was not uneloquent, nor unlearned, but was rather a great student in the
Liberal Sciences. He wrote Histories, Livie being his Tutor. He had good skill
in the Greek Tongue, professing as any occasion was offered, his affectionate
love to it, and the excellency thereof. When a certain Barbarian discoursed in
Greek and Latin; See you be skillful (quoth he) in both our Languages. Vtroque
sermon nostro sis peritus.


Extant and in ipsa imperii Claudiani administratione, quaedam Principis non
mali documenta. Boeclerus.

It was generally thought that he was killed by poison; and it was a just
Judgment of God upon him, for he was so gluttonous and insatiable in eating
and drinking, that he thought no time or place sufficient thereto; and ever did
eat so much, that most commonly surfeiting, he used Vomits to discharge his
stomach, Others say, Agrippina his Wife tempered the poison in the meat which
he most delighted in, viz. a Mushrome, Infusum delectabili cibo boletorum
venenum Tacit. Annal. Boletum medicatum avidissimo ciborum talium obtulit.
Sueton. Whence Martial. Boletum, qualem Claudius edit, edas.
putting a feather into his throat; in which feather some Authors affirm that
poison was given him.

The Virgin Mary dyed in his time, in the 59. year of her age, says Nicephorus.

He lived 64 years, say some: 63 years, 2 months, and 13 days, says Casaubon.

He reigned 13 years, 8 months, and 20 days, 13 years, 9 months, and 7
days, says Tertul.
say Dio, and Josephus. He reigned 14 years, according to Tacitus, Suetonius,
Clem. Alexand. Eutrop. Orosius; 13 years 8 months, and 20 days after
Eusebius. 14 years, 7 months, and 28 days after Beda. Doct. Willet.
But the whole time of his reign was 13 years, 8 months, and 20 days. They
which do give unto him 14 years, do count the odd months for a whole year.

Nero Caesar.
effigy of emperor
NERO was a proper Name (which noted Virtue and Fortitude, Alex. ab Alex. Genesis
dier. l. 1. c. 9. Gell. l. 11.
of that Greek word (...) the sinews, being the conjunction and strength of the
members) and such persons also were of the Romans called Neroes, as excelled
others in the most egregious Fortitude and Noble Virtues. Afterward when this
Tyrant Nero (who descended of the Claudii which were Sabines) had degenerated
from all the Heroical virtues of his Ancestors, and became so bloody and
cruel, he gave occasion to posterity to change that proper name into a name
Appellative, so that they called them that were cruel Nerones, and those that
were more cruel Neroniores.

When Domitius his friends by way of gratulation wished him joy of his Son new
born, Suetonius.
Mali corvi malum ovum. See the like of Tiberius, and of Caligula in.
Suetonius. c. 11.
he said, That of himself and Agrippina there could nothing come into the world
but accursed, detestable, and to the hurt of the weal Public.

Of stature he was indifferent, within a little of 6 foot; his body full of
speckles, and freckles, and foul of skin besides. The hair of his head somewhat
yellow, his countenance and visage rather fair than lovely and well-favoured.
His eyes gray and dim, his neck full and fat, his body bearing out, and his
legs slender and small.

He began his reign with a glorious show of piety and kindness. Those Tributes
and Taxes which were any thing heavy, he either quite, abolished or abated.
Whenever he was put in mind to subscribe, and set his hand to a warrant for
the execution of any person condemned to dye, Suetonius.
he would say, Lib 2. de Clementia.
Quam vellem nescire literas! O that I knew not one letter of the book! Seneca
his Tutor did much extol that speech of his, as if it had proceeded from a
pitiful heart. Factus Natura, and consuetudine exercitus velare odium
fallacibus blanditiis.


He was framed by Nature, and practiced by custom (says Tacitus) to cloak
hatred with flattering speeches.

Many times he saluted all the degrees of the City one after another, Tacitus
by rote and without book. Annal. 14.
When the Senate upon a time gave him thanks, Sueton.
he answered, Cum meruero, Imitatur illam Augusti vocem, Si merebuntur.
Do so when I shall deserve.

Within the first twelve months of his Government, he poisoned Britannicus,
who was his Cozen-german, his adoptive Brother and Testamentary partner in the
Empire. Boltons Nero Caesar.

His quinquennium or first five years were such, that Trajan himself is said to
have admired, using this speech, Procul differ cunctos Principes Neronis
quinquennio. Aurel. Vict.
But it is thought that it was rather the reign of his Governors Seneca and
Burrhus, than properly his.

Neronis initia, si demas parricidium, Claudii, cujus etsi non auctor, conscius
tamen fuit, itemque Britannici jus inter versum, de caetero valde speciosa
fuerunt: Abdetis adhuc vitiis, and praevalentibus bonarum rerum auctoribus.
Boecleri Dissertatio Politica.

He delighted exceedingly in Music, Suetonius.
and would show his skill upon the open stage, often using the Greek Proverb,
That hidden Music was naught worth. All the while he was singing, it was not
lawful for any person to depart out of the Theater, were the cause never so
necessary. It is reported, that some great-bellied woman falling into travel,
Suetonius.
were delivered upon the very Scaffolds; yea, He not only commanded all the
Statues and Images of the most excellent Musicians to be defaced, and his own
to be erected in lieu of them; but also put many of them under hand to death,
by emulation of their fame. Sueton. and Bapt. Fulg l. 8.
and many men besides weary of tedious hearing, and praising him, when the Town
gates were shut, either by stealth lept down from the Walls, or counterfeiting
themselves dead, were carried forth as Corpses to be buried. But how
timorously, with what thought and anguish of mind, with what emulation of his
concurrents, and fear of the Umpire he strove for Mastery, it is almost
incredible. He never durst once spit and reach up phlegm, and he wiped away the
very sweat of his forhead with his arm only.

There was a boy named Sporus, whose genitories he cut off, and assayed thereby
to transform him into the nature of a woman: Sueton.
then he caused him to be brought unto him, as a Bride without a dowry, in a
fine yellow vail after the solemn manner of Marriage, not without a goodly
train attending upon him, whom he maintained as a wife; whereupon one brake
this witty jest, That it would have been happy for the world, if Domitius (his
Father) had wedded such a wife.

He said jestingly of Claudius, That he left morari inter homines, Suetonius.
with a long syllable, meaning that he spent his days foolishly.

Epulas a medio die ad mediam noctem protrahebat.
Sueton.
He held out his Feasts from noonday till midnight.
Divitiarum ac pecuniae fructum non alium putabat quam profusionem.
Nero quadragenis in punctum Sestertiis aleam lusit. Coel. Rhod. l. 20. c. 24.
He was very profuse and prodigal in expenses, he never put on the same Garment
twice; when he played at hazard, he ventured no less than 3125 pounds at a
cast, upon every point or prick of the chance. He fished with a golden Net,
drawn and knit with cords twisted of purple, and crimson silk in grain. When he
made any journey, he never had under 1000 Caroches in his train, his Mules were
shod with silver, Suetonius.
but in no one thing was he more wastful than in building. Bis and vicies mill
sestertium donationibus Nero effuderat.
See Sueton. and Tacitus of this house, Annal. 15. c. 10. It is reported also
of Heliogabalus, that his apparel was rich, and most extreme costly, and yet he
would never wear one garment twice; his shoes were embellished with Pearls and
Diamons; his seat strewed with musk and amber; his bed covered with gold and
purple, and beset with most costly jewels; his way strewed with the powder of
gold and silver; his vessels (even of basest use) all gold; his diet so
profuse, that at every supper in his Court was usually spent 1000 l. sterling.
His house was so large that it contained three Galleries of a mile a piece in
length, and a standing Pool like unto a Sea, and the same enclosed round about
with buildings in form of Cities. Tacit. l. 1. Hist. c. 6.
It was laid all over with gold, He most lavishly gave away two and twenty
hundred millions of Sesterces.
garnished with precious stones, and mother of pearl. He said, He now at length
began to live like a man: and himself named it, Domum auream, a golden house.
His Mother Agrippina being with Child with him, went to consult with the
Chaldeans or South-sayers about her Son; they answered her, That he should
reign, but kill his Mother; but she being very ambitious, slighted that,
saying, Occidat modo imperit, Let him kill me so he may be King.

Neque tamen sceleris conscientiam, aut statim aut unquam post far potuit;
saepe confessus exagitari se materna specie, verberibus furiarum, ac taedis
ardentibus.
This was accomplished afterward, for he caused his Mother to be murdered, and
not only so, but (which was more horrible) he took an exact view of her dead
body, and beheld it Crowner-like, saying, He did not think he had had so fair a
Mother.

The sentence nevertheless does in part acquit him from her incestuous
familiarity. For how was it strange to him that his Mother should be so
handsome, if she had been his Concubine? Boltons Nero Caesar. Suetonius.


His Father he poisoned, he slew his Brother Germanicus, and his Sister
Antonia, and both his wives Poppaea and Octavia, Eutropius.
his Aunt Domitia, Sueton.
Aurel. Vict. Orosius.
his son in law Rufinus, and his Instructers, Seneca and Lucan.

There was no kind of affinity, and consanguinity, were it never so near, but
it felt the weight of his deadly hands.

The first persecution was under him in the 13. year of his reign. In Apologet.
cap. 5. Primus Nero in hanc sectam cum maxim Romae orientem Caesariano gladio
ferociit.
Tertullian calls him, Dedicator damnationis nostrae, i. e. the first that made
a Law to condemn Christians to death.

Tertullian, Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 25.
Eusebius, L. 13. de vera Sap. c. 21.
Lactantius, Aret. Probl. Pet. du Moul. Def. of the Cathol. Faith l. ubi supra.
and others say, that he put Peter and Paul to death.

Paulus a Nerone (says Eusebius) Romae capite truncatus, and Petrus palo
affixus scribuntur; and Historia huic fidem facit, quod illic coemeteria
habentur in quibus Petri and Pauli nuncupatio ad hunc usque diem obtinet.

Chrysostom. and Theophyl. upon the fourth Chapter of the second to Timonhy, allege
this to be the cause wherefore he put Paul to death, because Paul had converted
to the Christian Faith Nero's Butler, whom he made great account of; thereunto
he commanded him to be beheaded: others say, it was because he converted one of
Nero his Concubines, which afterward refused to company with him; but we need
assign no other cause of Nero's rage against the Apostle, Though Nero were so
wicked, yet Paul makes mention of some Saints in his Court. Phil. 4.22.
than that which Eusebius and Ierom both do touch, the cruelty of that bloody
Tyrant joined with a wicked detestation of the Christian Faith.

His cruelty is by Paul compared to the mouth of a Lion, 2. Tim. 4.17. but here
then arises an objection, how Paul should suffer under him, when he says
there, that he was delivered? Therefore Paul was his prisoner twice, he was set
at liberty after his first imprisonment at Rome, Phil. 1.25. Philem. 22. Heb.
13.23. 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. The reason is thus alleged by Eusebius; Neronem in
principio Imperii mitiorem fuisse, That Nero in the beginning of his Empire was
more gentle and mild, but afterward when Paul was taken again, Eusebius. in Chron.
and Hieron. lib. de Script. Eccles.
Nero then being become a most cruel Tyrant, caused him to be put to death. He
dyed in the 14. year of Nero's reign, and the 37. year after the Passion of
Christ.

Seneca dissuaded him from killing some, with this speech, Licet (says he)
quam plurimos occidas, Yet Seneca was the Author of Agrippinas death, upon the
suppossition of necessity.
tamen non pates successorem tuum occidore. Xiphiline. Although thou killest
very many, yet thou can not kill thy Successor.

The Tyrannous rage of this Emperor was so fierce against the Christians (as
Eusebius reports) usque adeo ut videret repletas humanis corporibus
civitates, Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 24, 25, 26.
jacentes mortuos simul cum parvulis senes, Nero subdidit reos, and
quaesitissimis poenis affecit eos, quos per flagitia invisos, vulgus
Christianos appellabat; Auctor ejus nominis Christus.
foeminarumque absque ulla sexus reverentia in publico rejecta starent
cadavere: i. e. Insomuch that a man might then see Cities lie full of men's
bodies, the old lying there with the young, and the dead bodies of women cast
out naked, without all reverence of that Sex, in the open streets.

In this persecution also James the greater, Tacit. 15. Annal.
and the less, Philip, Bartholomew, Barnabas, Mark, suffered.

Addita pereuntibus ludibria, ut ferarum tergoribus contecti, canum laniatu
interirent, aut crucibus affixi, aut flammandi; and ubi dies defecisset, in
usum nocturni luminis urerentur.
Christians were covered in wild beasts skins, and torn in pieces with Dogs, or
fastened on crosses, or burn in fire; and when the day failed, they were burnt
in the night, to make them serve as torches to give light. They put a pitched
coat upon the Christians to make them burn the better, called Tunica molesta, a
troublesome coat.

Sulpitius Severus observes this of Nero (in the 3. book of his History) that
it was his own bad life which made him hate Christians; for he still thought
they censured him; Tacit. l. 1. Annal.
and could not but expect, what they knew he deserved. Sueton. in Claud.


He caused Rome to be set on fire in twelve places together, that he might the
better conceive the flames of Troy, singing unto it Homer's verses, and being a
pleasant Spectator thereof, as at a Feude-joy. Ad levandam sceleris atrocitatem
(says Polyd. Lib. 8. de Invent. rerum cap. 6. Tacitus calls them, hated for
their wickedness, guilty, and worthy of utmost punishment, and their Religion a
pestilent and pernicious superstition. See 15. of his Annal. c. 10.
Virgil) to avoid the infamy thereof, he laid the fault on the innocent, and
suborned some falsely to accuse the Christians as Authors of that fire;
whereupon he put many of them to death: but Tacitus will clear them, who yet
was their enemy. Non perinde (says he) crimine incendii, quam odio humani
generis convicti sunt.

Suetonius (being no Christian) calls the Christians men of new and
pernicious superstition: Afflicti suppliciis Christiani, Sub Nerone saeva and
infesta Virtutibus tempora. Non nisi grande aliquod bonum a Nerone damnatum.
Tertul. Apol. adversus Gentes. Nero virtutem ipsam exscindere concupivit.
Tacit. Annal. l. 16.
(says he) genus hominum superstitionis novae and maleficae.

Under Nero to do ill was not always safe, always unsafe to do well. He was
so hateful an adversary to all righteousness, that Eusebius following the
example and words of Tertullian, affirms, that if the Gospel had not been an
excellent thing, it had not been condemned by Nero. He was (as Augustine Lib.
20. c. 19. De Civit: Dei. In his time, Amnes retro fluere visi sunt. Plin. l.
2. c. 103
witnesses) commonly reputed Antichrist. He came into the world an Agrippa, or
born with his feet forward, and turned the world upside down before he went out
of it. In him alone all the corruptions which had been engendered in Rome, from
the birth of Rome till his own days, seemed drawn together into one impostume
or boil.

When one in common talk upon a time chanced to say, (...).
When vital breath is fled from me,
Sueton.
Let earth with fire mingled be.


Nay rather, quoth he, (...), whiles vital spirit remains in me.

Erat ei aeternitatis perpetuaeque famae cupido, sed inconsulta.
He had a desire (though it were foolish and inconsiderate) of eternity and
perpetual fame, and therefore abolishing the old names of many things and
places, he did put upon them new after his own. Suetonius.
He called the Month April Neroneus, Which thing in him Commodus the Emperor
imitated, calling Rome Commodiana.
he meant also to have named Rome, Neropolis, Nero's City.

He pronounced an oration composed by Seneca: Tacit. l. 13. of Annal.
It was observed, that he was the first Emperor that needed another man's
Eloquence; for Julius Caesar was equal with the famous Orators: and Augustus
had a ready, fluent, and eloquent speech, such as well became a Prince;
Tiberius had great skill in weighing his words; yea, Caligula's troubled mind
hindered not his eloquence; neither wanted Claudius elegancy, when he had
premeditated.

Post Tacitum scripsit, eumque interdum tacit redarguit. Famian. Strad.
Prolus. Hist. l. 1.
The study of Nero was Versification, which Tacitus thinks he borrowed, having
no gift therein at all; but Suetonius (who often does disagree with Tacitus,
unnamed) both proves he had, and proves it well: it was one of his exercises to
translate Greek Tragedies into Latin, who made true Tragedies in blood, Being
admonished by Astrologers that he should once be cast out of the Empire, he is
reported to have used this speech to himself, Artem quaevis terra alit; nimirum
intelligens citharistiam, principi gratam, privato necessariam, quam excercere
eum non puduit. Deductus (Nero) in forum tyro, populo congidrium, Militi
Donativum proposuit.
such as even the Greeks never feigned.

Nothing netled him more than when he was blamed by Vindex for an unskilful
Musician: he said of himself a little before his death, Qualis Artifex pereo?
What an excellent Artisan do I dye? meaning of his skill in playing of
Tragedies; as indeed his whole life and death was all but one Tragedy.

Vespasian asked Apollonius, what was Nero 's overthrow? he answered, Nero
could touch and tune the Harp well, but in Government sometimes he used to wind
the pins too high, and sometimes to let them down too low; thereby intimating,
that he applied Corrosives where gentle Lenitives would have served the turn,
and again he applied Lenitives where Corrosives were needful.

Additum nomine Neronis Donativum Militi, congiarium plebi. Tacit. 12. Annal.

The Princes liberalities to the Soldiers were called Donativa, Sueton.
(which they bestowed upon some great victory, Imperatoris munus quod populo
dabatu^ congiarium dictum est, quod vero Militibus, Donativum. Alex. ab Alex.
Gendier. l. 5. c. 24.
or rather extraordinary occasions;) to the people, or otherwise to his
friends, Congiaria; doubtless because at the first certain measures called
Congii, of wine or oil were bestowed, and afterward other things were given,
yet the ancient name remained.

Mos erat principibus Romany, ut simulatque Augusti a militibus nuncupati
erant, donativum eis erogarent, quo militum benevolentiam conciliarent sibi.
Valesius in Marcellini. lib. 26.

Vindex first stirred the stone, which rolling tumbled Nero out of his seat.
Sir Henry Savil on Tacit. Nec adhuc erat damnati Principis exemplum.


When it was told Julius Vindex, that Nero by public Edict had prized his head
at 10000 thousand Sesterces, (that is above fourscore thousand pounds in our
coin, Neither was there ever before a President of any Prince by public
sentence deposed. Tacit. l. 1. Hist.
) Well, quoth he again, and he that kills Nero, and brings me his head, shall
have mine in exchange. Qui Neronem interfecerit, and ad me caput ejus
attulerit, is meum accipiet caput in mercedis loco. Xiphilin.

Sueton.
Nero consulting the Delphick (or rather divellish) Oracle, He entreated that
some one of those that were with him, would kill himself first, and by his
example help him to take his death. Itaque nec amicum habeo, nec inimicum;
dedecorose vixi, turpius peream.
he received this answer, That he should take heed of the year 73 which he
supposing to be meant of his own age, rested secure, being far short of it; but
he was deluded by the ambiguous construction of those words, and so fell into
the hands of Galba, a man indeed of those years.

At last the Senate proclaiming him a public enemy unto Mankind, condemned him
to be drawn through the City, and to be whipped to death; which sentence when
he heard of, finding no man to strike him, Aurel. Vict.
and exclaiming against them all, What, have I neither friend nor foe? (said
he) I have lived dishonorably, let me dye shamefully; Defecit que extantibus
rigentibusque oculis, ad horrorem formidinemque visentium.
and then he struck himself throagh with his own sword, and was a hor^ible
spectacle to all beholders.

Romae demum vitam reddit cum suam projecit:
Injustus aliis Iudex, justus sibi. Sueton.

Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
He dyed in the 32 year of his age, says Suetonius; and 14 year of his reign,
say Tacitus, Clem. Alexand. Eusebius, and Eutropius, the very day of the year
on which he had murdered his wife Octavia; and by his death brought so great
joy unto the people generally, that the Commons wore caps to testify their
freedom recovered, and ran sporting up and down throughout the City.

Some say that Nero is yet alive (says Baronius out of Sueton. and Severus)
although he did thrust himself through with a sword yet some think that his
wounds were healed, Vide Boxhornii Hist. Universe. a Christi tempore. p. 125,
126, 127.
and that he survived according to that in the Rev. 13.3. and that he shall be
Antichrist; but Bellarmine himself says, It is a persumptuous folly to say
that Nero shall be revived and received as Antichrist; and Suarez calls it,
Anilem fabulam, a foolish Fable.

Sulpitius Galba.
effigy of emperor
SOme think his name Galba came by occasion of a Town in Spain, Progenies
Caesarum in Nerone defecit, says Sueton. Est certum and omnes Historici
notant, says Casaubon upon him. In Nero the majestical tree of the Caesar's
withered. Bolton's Nero Caesar c. l. 5. See more there.
which after it had been a long time in vain assaulted, he at length set on
fire with burning brands besmeared all over with Galbanum: others, because in a
long sickness which he had, he used continually Galbeum, i. e. remedies wrapped
in wool: some again because he seemed very fat, and such a one the French does
name Galba: or contrariwise because he was slender, as certain little worms are
called Galbae. Sueton.


He succeeded Nero, Ipsa aetas Galbae and irrisui and fastido erat assuetis
juventae Neronis, and Imperatores forma ac decore corporis (ut est mos vulgi)
comparantibus. Tacit. l. 1. Hist. Statura fuit justa, capite praecalvo, oculis
caeruleis, adunco naso, manibus pedibusque articulari morbo distortissimis: ut
neque calceum perpeti, neque libellos evolvere aut tenere omnino valeret.
Suetonius. Ingenium Galbae male habitat.
Both Suetonius and Tacitus accurately describe him, and his age being much
despised, there was great licentiousness and confusion; whereupon a Senator
said in full Senate, It were better to live where nothing is lawful, than where
all things are lawful.

He was of full stature, his head bald, his eyes gray, and his nose hooked; his
hands and feet by reason of the Gout exceeding crooked, insomuch as he was not
able to abide shoes on the one, or to hold his books with the other.

There was an excrescence or bunch of flesh in the right side of his body, and
it hung downward so much, as it could hardly be tied up with a truss or
swathing band: yet he had a great wit, though a deformed body, like a good
instrument in a bad case.

Being with general applause and great good liking placed in state, he behaved
himself under expectation, and though in most points he showed himself a
virtuous Prince, Suetonius.
Sir Henry Savil on Tacit.
yet his good Acts were not so memorable, as those were odious and displeasant
wherein he did amiss.

He obtained the Empire with greater favor and authority than he managed it
when he was therein; so that he overcame Nero by his good name, Plutarch.
and the good opinion men had of him, and not through his own force and power.

Major privato visus dum privatus fuit, and omnium consensu capax Imperii nisi
imperasset. Tacitus, l. 1. Hist.
He seemed more than a private man whilst he was private, and by all men's
opinions capable of the Empire, had he never been Emperor.

His verbis claudit Tacitus descriptionem Galbae, qua more Historicis usitato;
suprema ejus pro sequitur. Boecleri. Dissertatio. Historica.

Auson. Epigr.
Spem frustrate senex, privatus sceptra mereri
Visus es, Imperio proditus inferior:
Fama tibi melior juveni, sed justior ordo est,
Complacuisse dehinc, displicuisse prius.
He lived in honorable fame and estimation in the reign of five Emperors,
Tacitus, l. 1. Hist.
Alieno Imperio faelicior quam suo. He was in greater prosperity, Vetus in
familia Nobilitas, magnae opes. Tacitus.
and lived more happily under the Empire of others than in his own. His house
was of ancient Nobility and great wealth, He neither neglected his fame, Famae
nec incuriosus, nec venditator: Pecuniae alienae non appetens, suae parcus,
publicae avarus.
nor yet was ambitiously careful of it: of other men's money he was not greedy,
sparing of his own, of the common a niggard.

As he sacrificed within a public Temple, a Boy among other Ministers holding
the Censer, Tacitus. l. 1. Hist.
suddenly had all the hair of his head turned gray. Some made this
interpretation of it, Suetonius.
that thereby was signified a change in the State, Plutarch.
Aurel. Vict.
Eutropius.
and that an old man should succeed a young, even himself in Nero's stead.

He was of a middle temperature, neither to be admired nor contemned; Ipsi
medium ingenium, magis extr^ vitia, Tacitus l. 1. Hist.
quam cum virtutibus, rather void of ill parts, The same says Hayward of our
Henry the fourth.
than furnished with good.

In the Palace, Julius Atticus, one of the bill-men met him, holding out a
bloody sword in his hand, with which he cried aloud, he had slain Otho; My
friend, Hujus breve Imperium fuit, and quod bona haberet exordia, nisi ad
severitatem promptior videretur. Eutropius.
quoth Galba, who bad thee? A man of rare virtue (says Tacitus) to keep in awe
a licentious Soldier; whom neither threats could terrify, nor flattering
speech corrupt and abuse: thence it was a usual speech through the Camp.

Disce Miles militare,
Galba est, non Getulicus.
Learn Soldiers service valorous,
Galba is here, and not Getulicus.
For eight years space (before he was Emperor) he governed a Province of Spain
variably, and with an uneven hand; at first sharp, severe, violent, afterward
he grew to be slochful, careless, idle.

Being entreated for a Gentleman condemned, The Delinquent pleaded that he was
a Roman Citizen, and therefore not to be crucified.
that he might not die the death of ordinary Malefactors, he commanded that the
Gallows should be dealbata, whited, or colored for him; Quasi solatio and
honor poenam levaturus, as if the painted Gibbet might add solace and honor
to his death.

When there was a question made of an heifer before him, whose it should be,
arguments and witnesses being brought on both sides; he so decreed it, that she
should be led with her head covered to the place where she was wont to be
watered, and there being uncovered, he judged her his to whom she went of her
own accord.

Among the liberal Sciences he gave himself to the study of the Civil Law.

Laudata olim, and militari fama celebrata severitas ejus angebat coaspernantes
veterem disciplinam, atque ita 14. annis a Nerone assuefactos, ut haud minus
vitia Principum amarent, quam olim virtutes verebantur.
He cried to his Soldiers, Ego vester, and vos mei; I am wholly devoted unto
you, and you are wholly devoted unto me.

His severity which was wont to be highly commended by the voice of the
Soldiers, was now displeasant to them who were generally weary of the ancient
Discipline, and so trained up by Nero 14 years, that now they loved their
Emperors no less for their vices, than once they reverenced them for their
virtues.

His hardness toward his Soldiers caused him to fall; for a large Donative
being promised to them in Galba's name, and they requiring if not so much,
Tacit. l. 1. Hist.
yet so much at least as they were wont to receive, he wholly refused the suit,
adding withal, Cornel. Tacitus. l. 1. Hist.
Legi a se militem, non emi, That his manner had ever been to choose, and not
to buy his Soldiers.

Vox pro republica honesta, ipsi anceps; A saying no doubt fit for a great
Prince in a more virtuous age, Tacit. lib. 1. Hist.
not so in those seasons for him, who suffered himself to be sold every hour,
and abused to all purposes.

He was killed by the wiles of Otho, Eutropius.
in the Marketplace; the Soldiers flying upon him, and giving him many wounds,
Plutarch.
he held out his neck unto them, and bad them strike hardly, if it were to do
their Country good.

He dyed in the 73. year of his age, Suetonius. Eutropius. 7 Months, 6 days,
Tertul.

7 Months 2 days, Eusebius.


and seventh month of his Empire.

He reigned seven months, and so many days. Aurel. Vict.

Salvius Otho.
effigy of emperor
GALBA rather received the Empire offered to him, than took it from another.
But Otho being stirred up with an ardent desire of ruling, used ill means to
compass his design. A Galba beneficium respublica, ab Othone perniciem
expectabat, says Boeclerus in his Political dissertation. Vtrumque (says he)
brevitas temporis and infoelicitas exitus, similes facit: nisi quod Galba
alieno scelere; Otho autem suo, periere.

Tacitus and Suetonius observe, that his Father was so like unto Tiberius, that
most men held him to be his own Son.

Tam non absimilis facie Tiberio principi fuit, Sueton.
ut plerique procreatum ex eo crederent.

He was of a mean and low stature, he had feeble feet, and crooked shanks.
Galericulus capiti propter raritatem capillorum adaptatus.
He wore by reason of his thin hair a perruck or counterfeit cap of false hair,
so fitted and fastened to his head, that any man would have taken it for his
own. Sueton.
He was wont to shave, and besmear his face all over with soaked bread; this
bread was made of bean and rice flower, of the finest wheat also; a depilatory
to keep hair from growing, especially being wet and soaked in some juice or
liquor appropriate thereto, as the blood of Bats, Frogs, or the Tunie-fish: to
this effeminacy of Otho alludeth the Satirical Poet in this Verse, Et pressum
in faciem digitis extender^ panem. Iuvenal.


Which devise he took to at first, when the down began to bud forth, because he
would never have a beard.

He was of a noble house (says Plutarch) but ever given to sensuality and
pleasure from his Cradle: His Mothers side was more noble than his Fathers.
Vita omni turpis, maxim adolescentia.
insomuch as his Father swinged him and soundly for it. He used night-walking,
and as he met any one either feeble or cupshotten, he would catch hold of him,
lay him upon a Soldiers Gabardine, Aurel. Vict.
and so toss and hoist him up in the air. Suetonius.


Pueritiam incuriose, Tacit. l. 1. Hist.
adolescentiam petulanter egerat. He spent his tender years without regard of
his honor, his youth afterward in all dissolute dissorder.

Suetonius.
He repaired often to his Glass to see his face, that he might keep it clean.

Similitudo morum parit amicitiam, likeness is the cause of liking.
He was one of Nero's chief Minions and Favorites, such was the congruence of
their humors and dispositions.

Gratus Neroni aemulatione luxus.

He was in grace with Nero through emulation of vice. Tacit. l. 1. Hist.


Neroni criminose familiaris, He was sinfully familiar with Nero. Aurel. Vict.
Otho flagrantissimus in amicitia Neronis habebatur. Tacit. Annal. l. 13.
He was privy and party to all his Counsels and secret designs; to avert all
manner of suspicion, that very day which Nero had appointed for the murdering
of his Mother, he entertained them both at supper with most exquisite Dainties,
Sueton.
and the kindest welcome that might be.

Suetonius.
He subscribed Nero's name unto his Letters Patents, Plutarch.
till the Noble men of Rome misliked it.

Frustra moritur Nero, si Otho vivit.

Tacitus Hist. lib. 1.
He strove by gifts, and all other means to oblige the Soldiers unto him before
he was Emperor, Adorare vulgus, jacere oscula, and omnia serviliter pro
Imperio. Tacit. Hist. lib. 1.
and to win their hearts by fair promises; he protested before them all
assembled together, that himself would have and hold no more than just that
which they would leave for him. One calls him the Roman Absalom. He
worshipped the people, dispensed frequently his courtesies and plausibilities,
crouched and accommodated himself to the basest routs, that thereby he might
c^eep into an usurped honor. Tacit. l. 2. Hist.


Cui uni apud Militem fides, Plutarch.
dum and ipse non nisi Militibus credit. The Soldiers only trusted him, because
he trusted none else.

All of them together put up a petition to him, and besought him to command
their persons, whilst they had one drop of blood left in their bodies to do him
service. But amongst others, there was a poor Soldier drawing out his sword,
said unto him, Know, O Caesar, that all my Companions are determined to dye in
this sort for thee; and so slew himself.

Rebus prosperis incertus, Tacitus.
and inter adversa melior.

A man in prosperity uncertainly carriried, and governing himself in adversity.

At the same time that he was created Emperor in the City of Rome, Vitellius
was proclaimed Emperor in Germany.

Duo omnium mortalium impudicitia, Tacitus l. 1. Hist.
ignavia, luxuria deterrimi, velut ad perdendum Imperium fataliter electi,
says Tacitus of Otho and Vitellius.

Two of all mortal men the most detestable creatures in slothfulness,
incontinency, and wastful life, fatally elected to ruin the Empire.

But though in the first book of Tacitus his History they are both compared as
like in opposition to a good Prince; yet in his second book they are opposed
the one to the other as unlike, with notes of distinction. Vitellii ignavae
voluptates, Othonis flagrantissimae libidines. Vitellius ventre and gula sibi
ipsi bostis; Otho luxu, saevitia, audacia, Vitellius a Drunkard and Glutton,
Otho a wanton and licentious liver.
Reipublicae exitiosior ducebatur; of the one side, an ill mind in a man of
nothing, and of the other, an ill mind joined with courage and edge.

The drowsy Pleasures of Vitellius were feared less than the burning lusts of
Otho. Plutarch.
Vitellius in excess of Belly-chear was an enemy to himself; Otho in riot,
cruelty, audaciousness, reputed more dangerous to the state.

Plutarch.
It was hard to judge which of them two was most licentiously given, most
effeminate, least skilful, poorer or most indebted, before he was Emperor.

Tacitus l. 2. Hist.
Magna and misera civitas eodem anno Othonem Vitelliumque passa. A great and
miserable City, which in the same year supported an Otho and a Vitellius.

We may learn by Otho (said Sir Henry Savil) that the fortune of a rash man is
Torrenti similis, which a rises at an instant, and falls in a moment.

Tacitus l. 2. Hist.
Alii diutius Imperium tenuerunt, nemo tam fortiter reliquet; it was his own
speech, Others have kept the Empire longer, none has ever so valiantly left it.

Tacitus l. 2. Hist.
Plura de extremis loqui pars ignaviae est.

Irent propere, ne remorando iram victoris exasperarent. Tacitus Hist. l. 2.
He thought it a part of dastardy to speak too much of death.

When he saw his side the weaker and going to the walls, he counseled his
Soldiers to provide for their safety by hying them to the winner.

Martial made this witty Epigram of his death, l. 6. Epig. 32.

Cum dubitaret adhuc belli civilis Enyo,
Forsitan and posset vincere mollis Otho:
Damnavit multo staturum sanguine Martem,
Et fodit certa pectora nuda manu.
Sit Cato, dum vivit, sane vel Caesare major,
Dum moritur, numquid major Othone fuit?
He slew himself with his own hands, Plutarch reports the like of Cato.
but slept so soundly the night before, that the Grooms of his Chamber heard
him snort.

Many of his Soldiers who were present about him, Plutarch. Suetonius. Aurel.
Vict.
when with plentiful tears they had kissed his hands and feet as he lay dead,
and commended him withal for a most valiant man, and the only Emperor that
ever was; presently in the place, and not far from the funeral fire killed
themselves. Many of them also who were absent, hearing of the news of his end,
for very grief of heart ran with their weapons one at another to death.

Most men who in his life time cursed and detested him, He lived not much more
honestly than Nero, but dyed far more honorably.
when he was dead highly praised him; so as it was a common and rife speech,
that Galba was by him slain, not so much for that he affected to be Sovereign
Ruler, as because he desired to recover the state of the Republic, and the
freedom that was lost.

His saying was, Melius est unum pro multis, quam pro uno multos mori; an
excellent and worthy speech of an Emperor, preferring the public good before
his own private. Sic imperium quod maximo scelere invaserat, maxima virtute
deposuit, as Xiphilinus notes out of Dion.

More suo Tranquillus annum inchoatum pro pleno numerat. Nam alii 37. solum
vixisse aiunt. Casaub. Animadvers. in Sueton.
He dyed but 37 years old says Plutarch; 38 say Eutropius, and Suetonius; and
was Emperor but three months, Plutarch; three months and five days,
Tertullian; four months, Aurelius Victor. He dyed in the 59. day of his Empire,
says Eutropius; 95. says Suetonius.

Aulus Vitellius.
effigy of emperor
HE was beyond measure tall; he had a red face, Familia honorata magis quam
nobili.
occasioned by swilling in wine, Eutropius.
and a great fat paunch besides, and somewhat limped upon one leg, by a hurt
formerly received.

He was stained with all manner of reprochable villainies; he was familiar with
Caius for his love to Chariot-running, and with Claudius for his affection to
Dice-play, but he was in greater favor with Nero for his wicked conditions
likewise; for he attended and followed him as he did sing, not by compulsion,
as many a good man, but selling his honor to nourish his Riot, and feed his
belly, to which he enthralled himself.

He found some supplications that were exhibited unto Otho, by such as claimed
reward for their good service in killing Galba, and gave command that they
should be sought out and executed every one. A worthy and magnificent
beginning, such as might give good hope of an excellent Prince, had he not
managed all matters else according to his own natural disposition, and the
course of his former life, rather than respecting the Majesty of an Emperor.

When he came into the field where a battle was fought, and some of his train
loathed and abhorred the putrified corruption of the dead bodies, he stuck not
to hearten and encourage them with this cursed speech, Optime olere occisum
hostem, and melius civem, That an enemy slain had a very good smell, but a
Citizen far better.

[That was also a wicked speech of Charles the ninth of France, at the Parisian
massacre, when beholding the dead carcasses, he said that the smell of a dead
enemy was good.]

He banished from Rome and Italy all the judicial Astrologers called
Mathematicians, because they had said, that his reign should not endure one
year to an end.

Nulla re contemtiorem se fecit Vitellius, quam ignavia and luxuria. Boecleri
Dissertatio Politica.

If he could have forborne his riotous living, or used any moderation therein,
Prorsus si luxuriam temperaret, avaritiam non timeres. Tacit. l. 2. Hist. Homo
profuridae gulae.
covetousness was a crime in him not to be feared, but he was shamefully given
to his belly without all order or measure; Epularum foeda and inexplebilis
libido, says Tacitus: for which purpose there were daily brought out of Rome
and Italy, Sueton.
Irritamenta Gulae, Ad vos deinde transeo, quorum profunda and insatiabilis
gula, hinc maria scrutatur, hinc terras.
all provocations of Gluttony. The highways from both the Seas sounded of
nothing else but of Caterers, and Purveyors; the greatest men in the City were
spent and consumed in providing of Cates for the banquets; Seneca Ep. 89.
the Cities themselves were wasted.

The Soldiers grew worse, and degenerated from labor and virtue, partly by
turning themselves to pleasures, and partly through the contemptibleness of the
Commander.

He would eat four meals a day, 5 Says Eutropius.
breakfast, Dinner, Supper, and Rere-banquet, or after Supper; being able to
bear them all very well: he used to vomit It was an ordinary practice among
them.
ordinarily. His manner was to send word that he would break his fast with one
friend, dine with another, and all in one day; Epulas quas toto orb
conquirunt, nec concoquere dignantur.
and every one of those refections when it stood them least, cost them 3235 l.
sterling. But the most notorious and memorable supper above all other, Seneca.
was that which his brother made for a welcome at his first coming to Rome;
Suetonius calls it an Adventitious Supper.
at which were served up at the Table before him two thousand several dishes of
Fish, the most dainty and choicest that could be had, Eutropius.
and seven thousand fowl. Sueton.


His meats were not touched in gross, but an eye only of this bird, or a tongue
of that Fish were tasted, that the spoils of many might be taken at one meal.
Phoenicopterus is a water fowl haunting lakes and fens, and the river Nilus, as
Hesiod writes. The feathers be of color red, or purple, whereof it takes the
name, and the tongue is a most dainty and pleasant morsel.
Yet himself surpassed this sumptuous feast at the dedication of the platter,
which for its huge capacity he used to call the Target of Minerva. In this he
blended together the Livers of Guilt-heads, the delicate brains of Pheasants
and Peacocks, the tongues of Phoenicopters, the tender small guts of
Sea-Lampires sent as far as from the Carpathian Sea, and the straights of
Spain, by his Captains over Galleys.

For the making of this Charger there was a furnace built of purpose in the
field. Mucianus (after the death of Vitellius) alluding to this monstrous
platter, All gluttons to this day pass under his name.
and ripping up his whole life, upbraided the memorial of him in these very
terms, calling his excess that way, Patinarum paludes, Platters as broad as
Pools or Ponds.

Nunquam ita ad curas intentus, ut voluptatis oblivisceretur. Tacitus l. 2.
Hist.
He was never so intentively addicted to serious affairs, that he would forget
his pastimes.

In his Train all was disorderly and full of drunkenness, Apud Vitellium omnia
indisposita, temulenta, pervigiliis ac Bacchanalibus, quam disciplinae and
castris propiora.
more like to Wakes and Feasts of Bacchus, than to a Camp where Discipline
should be.

He was forward enough to put to death any man; he killed Noble men, and his
School-fellows. He delivered Blaesus over to the Executioner to suffer death,
but straightwaies called him back again; Tacit. l. 2. Hist. Iste mente
crudelis, avarusque cum profusione.
and when all that were by praised him for his Clemency, he commanded the said
party to be killed before his face, saying withal, Velle se pascere oculos,
Aurel. Vict.
Audita est saevissima Vitellii vox, qui se pavisse oculos spectata inimici
morte jactavit.
that he would feed his eyes with seeing his death. At the execution of another
he caused two of his Sons to bear him company, because they presumed to entreat
for their Fathers sake.

A Gentleman of Rome being haled away to take his death, Tacit. Hist. l. 3.
he cried aloud unto him, Sir, I have made you heir; then he compelled him to
bring forth his writing-Tables concerning his last Will, and so soon as he read
therein, Sueton.
that a freed man of the Testators was nominated fellow-heir with him, he
commanded both Master and man to be killed.

He was suspected also to have consented to his own Mothers death.

Impar curis gravioribus, says Tacitus of him, he was unmeet to weild weighty
affairs.

The Empire was conferred upon him by those that knew him not, and yet never
man found so constant good will of his Soldiers by virtuous means, as he did
with all his cowardly sloth.

Tanta torpedo invaserat animum, ut si Principem eum fuisse caeteri non
meminissent, Tacit. l. 3. Hist.
ipse oblivisceretur.

So great a sencelesness did possess his mind, that if other men had not
remembered that he had been a Prince, (and therefore was not to look for
security in a private estate) he himself would quickly have forgotten it.

Tacit. l. 2. Hist.
A contumelia quam a laud propius fuerit, post Vitellium eligi.

It was more a disgrace than a praise, to be chosen after Vitellius.

He used no other defenses against the ruin which approached him, but only to
keep out the memory and report of it with fortification of mirth and
fottishness, that so he might be delivered from the pains of preserving
himself. Praeterita, instantia, futura, pari oblivione dimiserat; mirum apud
ipsum de bello silentium, prohibiti per civitatem sermones, etc. Tacit. Hist.
lib. 3. Tacit. l. 3. Hist.


Ita formatae Principis aures, ut aspera quae utilia, nec quidquam nisi
jucundum and laesurum acciperet.

The Princes ears were so framed, that he accounted all sharp that was
wholesome, and liked of nothing but that which was presently pleasant, and
afterward hurtful.

Amicitias dum magnitudine munerum, Tacit. l. 3. Hist.
non constantia morum continere putat, meruit magis quam habuit.

He deserved rather than found faithful friends, because he sought them more by
great gifts than virtuous behavior.

Statim privatus Imperio, qui privatus semper fuit non Princeps.
Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
At the last he was slain in an ignominious manner, having many scornful
indignities offered unto him both in deed and word; Suetonius.
they drew his head backward by the bush of the hair (as condemned Malefactors
are wont to be served) and a swords point was set under his chin, He was killed
by Vespasians Soldiers upon the stairs Gemoniae, where he suffered Vespasians
brother to be slain.
to the end he might show his face, and not hold it down while some pelted him
with dung and dirty mire: others called him with open mouth, Incendiary or
Firebrand, because he burnt the Capitol; and Patinarium or Platter-Knight, for
his Gormandizing, and great Platter; and some of the common sort twitted him
with the deformities of his body: being all mangled with many small strokes, he
was killed in the end. Numerosis ictibus confossus interiit.

He was slain Aurel. Vict.
in the 57. year of his age, when he had reigned eight months and five days,
say l. 5. of the wars of the Jews, c. 13.
Josephus, Tacitus. Suetonius. Eutropius.
and Chron.
Eusebius; eight months and ten days, says Lib. adversus Iudaeos
Tertullian. Hist. 2.27. Ipse abunde ratus si praesentibus frueretur, nec in
longum consultans, novies mill sestertium paucissimis mensibus intervertisse
creditur.
Tacitus reports, that in those few months wherein he reigned, he had wasted
nine hundred millions of Sesterces, which amounts to seven millions thirty
one thousand two hundred and fifty pounds sterling; and Josephus Octo menses ac
dies quinque potitus Imperio, jugulatur in media Vrbe; quem si vivere diutius
contigisset, ejus Luxuriae satis esse Imperium non potuisset. Joseph. de Bello
Iudaico.
thinks if he had lived longer, the whole revenues of the Empire had not been
sufficient to have maintained his Gluttony.

Flavius Vespasianus.
effigy of emperor
GEntis Flaviae in rem Romanam merita tam prosperos habuere successus, ut
duodecimum intra annum Vespasiani and Titi industria concussum undique and
turbatum impe^ii cor in meliorem statum convaluerit. Boeclerus.

Tertius Divus, Secundus Augustus, primus pius.
Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
Princeps per omnia fortunae, Eutropius.
and humani actus morisque argumenta, vel jactatus vel exercitus. Boecleri
Dissertatio Politica. Princeps obscure quidem natus, sed optimis comparandus,
privata vita illustris.

He was of a middle stature, well set, his limbs compact and strongly made,
vultu veluti nitentis, Suetonius. That saying of Martial agrees with this. Nam
faciem duram Phoebe cacantis habes. Vir multorum salium. Lodovic. Viv.
he looked still as if he strained hard for a stool, whereupon a Buffon brake a
pretty jest on him; for when Vespasian seemed to request him to say something
of him as well as of others in the company, Dicam, inquit, cum ventrem
exonerare desieris. I will let you alone, says he, till you have done your
business.

He was very pleasant and facetious himself; for being advertised by Florus to
pronounce A word in Lat. that signifies Carts or Wains.
Plaustra rather than Plostra, Convitiorum plaustra.
he saluted him the next morning by the name of Flaurus.

When the apparition of a Comet or blazing starr was thought to portend his
death, he replied merrily, that the bushy star ( Stella Crinita) noted not him
but the Parthian King, Sueton.
Aurel. Vict.
Ipse enim comatus est, ego vero calvus; for, he wears bushy locks, but I am
bald. But he dyed a little while after, System. Phys. l. 6.
and by his example (says Keckerman) warned men to forbear jesting at Gods
great work^ and Prodigies.

A presignification of his advancement. Being elected Emperor, it is reported
of him, that he cured one desperately blind by spitting upon his eyes Tacit
Hist. l. 4.
Flava haec Caesaries Flavi, est tibi noxia Caesar,
Odit enim rufum Stella Comata caput.
Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
An Ox having cast off his yoke, ran furiously into the room where he sat at
Supper, where affrighting his attendants from him, he straight prostrates
himself before his feet, as if he had been weary, offering his neck to his
clemency. Suetonius. Suetonius.


When he came to the Empire, the Exchequer was so impoverished, that he
protested in open Senate, that he wanted to settle the Commonwealth 40
Millions of Sestertiums; which protestations (says Suetonius) seemed probable,
Quia and male partis optime usus est.

He fought 30 Battles in Britain, took 20 Towns, and adjoined the Isle of
Wight to the obedience of the Roman Empire.

When a certain gallant youth smelling hot of sweet balms and perfumes, came
unto him to give thanks for an office obtained at his hands, after a strange
countenance showing his dislike of him, he gave him also in words a most bitter
check, Maluissem allium oboluisses.
saying, I would rather thou had stunk of Garlic; and so revoked his Letters
Patents for the grant. Suetonius.


He never carried in his mind, nor revenged displeasures done unto him. He
married the daughter of Vitellius, his enemy, into a most noble house, gave
unto her a rich Dowry withal, and furniture accordingly.

He was made Totus ex clementia (as the Historian tells us) yet for all that,
Suetonius.
Placidissimae bonitatis.
Machinationes nefariorum assiduas expertus est, He found daily treacheries
attempted against him. Eutropius.


Justice etiam suppliciis illachrymavit and ingemuit. Sueton.


He was so compassionate a Prince, that he was wont to sigh and weep, even for
them that were condignly punished.

Eutropius.
An innocent person was not punished but when he was absent, and not aware
thereof, or at leastwise unwilling thereto, and deceived.

But he was severe toward Julius Sabinus, who in tims past said he was Caesar;
and taking up arms, was at last conquered and brought to Rome. His wife spoke
to Vespasian in his behalf, pleading that he had two sons of her; and
supplicating to him for mercy to her husband and her self, used these words,
Ego, o Caesar, hos in monumento peperi aluique, ut plures tibi supplices
essemus: By which speech, although she drew tears from him and those that were
present, yet she could not procure her Husbands pardon. Dion.

The Soldiers elected him Emperor, and requested him to preserve the Empire
being in great danger to be lost. Josephus, l. 5. of the wars of the Jews, c.
10.
Yet he (though he had been always careful for the good of the Commonwealth)
refused to be Emperor, deeming himself indeed to have deserved it, but rather
choosing to live a private life, wherein was security, than in the height of
fortune and honor with perpetual danger. The Captains were most earnest
because he refused it, and the Soldiers flocked about him with drawn swords,
threatening his death except he would consent to live as he deserved; yet he
strove a long time to avert their determination, being loath to be Emperor; at
last seeing he could not avoid it, he accepted their offer.

Solus ad Imperium evasit, non invasit,
Solus e vita discessit, non fugit.
Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
Dignitatem Imperio dedit cum accepit.
Id. ibid. He comforted his Soldiers with these and such like speeches,
Josephus, l. 4. of the wars of the Jews, c. 2.
I will expose my self to all dangers with you, and go first to fight, and come
last from fight. Tacitus l. 2. Hist.


Ipse Vespasianus milites adire, hortari, bonos laud, segnes exemplo incitare
saepius quam coercere; vitia magis amicorum quam virtutes dissimulans.

He would go in his own person, and encourage the Soldiers, inciting the good
by praise, the slow by example rather than correction; he was more ready to
conceal the Vices of his friends, than the virtues.

It was a worthy report which Pliny gave of him, if he flattered him not, to
whom being Emperor he wrote thus; Nec quicquam in te mutavit fortunae
amplitudo, nisi ut prodesse tantundem posses and velles. Greatness and Majesty
have changed nothing in you but this, that your power to do good should be
answerable to your will.

Solus omnium ante se Principum, in melius mutatus est. Tacit. l. 1. Hist.


The only Prince before his time which changed to the better; for after him,
Titus his Son changed also the same way.

Prorsus si avaritia abesset, antiquis ducibus par. Tacitus.

A vigilant Warrior, and in all respects, set avarice aside, comparable to the
Commanders of ancient time.

Sueton, Homo turpiter avidus.
Sola est in quo merito culpetur pecuniae cupiditas.

Eras. Adag.
The only thing for which he might worthily be blamed was covetousness.

He not only called for arrerages due in Galba's time, but raised new Tributes,
and laid upon the Provinces more grievous impositions, doubling them in some
places.

Suetonius.
Negotiationes vel privato pudendas propalam exercuit.

He did negotiate and deal in certain Trades, which it was a shame for a
private person to use: buying up and engrossing some Commodities at a cheap
hand, that afterward he might vend them at higher rates. Neither did he spare
to sell Honors to such as sued for them, or absolutions to such as were
accused, whether they proved guilty or not. Suetonius.
He was thought of set purpose to have made choice of the most greedy proling
Officers he could any where find out, Not unlike to this was that speech of
Diogenes, Dixit Dionysium amicis uti pro vasculis, quae dum plena sunt evacuat,
and abjicit vacua.
and to have advanced them to the highest place, that being thereby grown rich,
he might condemn their persons, and confiscate their goods. And it was commonly
said, that he used these men as spunges, Quod quasi and siccos madefaceret, and
exprimeret humentes; because he did wet them well when they were dry, and
press them hard when they were wet.

Some write that he was by nature most covetous, and an old neat-herd upbraided
him once therewith; who being at his hands denied freedom without paying for it
(which he humbly craved of him now invested in the Empire) cried out with aloud
voice, Vulpem pilum mutare non mores, Suetonius.
Quicquid infixum and ingenitum est, leniri potest art, non vinci.
that the Fox might change his hair but not his qualities.

He laid an imposition upon urine, and being by his Son Titus put in mind of
the baseness of it, Seneca.
he took a piece of money received for the use, and putting it to his Sons
nose, demanded of him whether he was offended with the smell or no, Sueton.
Atqui (inquit e lotio est, and yet (quoth he) it comes of urine: Vnde
Juvenalis, -- Lucri bonus est odor e re Qualibet. Sat. 14.

Adquod alludens etiam Ammian. Marcel. dixit,
Et lucrum ex omni odorantes occasion.


There are some of a contrary opinion, Infirmus, ut quidam prave putant,
adversus pecuniam cum satis constet aerarii inopia and clade urbium, ne que
novas eum, neque postea habitas vectigalium pensiones exquisivisse, Aurel. Vict.
that he was driven to spoil, to pill and poll of necessity, even for extreme
want, both in the common Treasury, and also in his own Exchequer; whereof he
gave some testimony in the beginning of his Empire, professing (as was said
before) that there was need of forty millions to set the State upright again:
which opinion (says Suetonius) seems to sound more near unto the truth,
because the money by him ill gotten he used and bestowed very well, for he was
most liberal to all sorts of men.

Restitutionem Capitolii aggressus, ruderibus purgandis manus primus admovit,
ac suo collo quaedam extulit. Suetonius.

In the third building of the Capitol, Vespasian carried the first basket of
earth, after him the Nobility did the like, to make the people more forward in
the service; and perhaps the custom of laying the first stone in a building,
Sueton.
has from hence, if not beginning, Aurel. Vict.
yet growth.

Oportet Episcopum concionantem mori. Jewel.
It was his speech, Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori, An Emperor ought to dye
standing. And likewise he said at his death, Vt puto Deus fio, id est, morior;
nam post mortem Caesares referebantur in numerum deorum. Me thinks (quoth he) I
am a deifying, Aurel. Vict.
and growing to be a god.

Annum agens vitae absque uno septuagesimum interiit. Sueton.


He lived threescore and 9 years, 7 months, and 7 days over.

He reigned 2 years, says Eusebius.

Titus Vespasianus.
effigy of emperor
FOR his natural goodness and noble disposition, Speed says as much of Henry
the 5th, whom he compares to Titus. Edgar Etheling, Englands darling.
he was called Amor and deliciae humani generis, The lovely darling, and
delightful joy of mankind. Tantum illi ad promerendam omnium voluntatem, vel
ingenii, vel artis, vel fortunae superfuit. Sueton.

So fully was he either endued with good nature and disposition, or enriched
with skill and cunning, or else graced with fortunes favor.

Augustine De Civit. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 21. calls him Suavissimum Principem, a
most sweet Prince.

He was learned in the Greek and Latin tongues, and in most excellent writing.

Yet God made him a terrible scourge to the Nation of the Jews, who forsook the
Lord Jesus, and preferred Caesar; for as our Savior prophesied concerning
Jerusalem, that a stone should not be left upon a stone, Matthew. 24.2. So it was
fulfilled forty years after his Ascension, by Vespasian the Emperor, and his
Son Titus, say Eusebius and Josephus. And by that which follows in the same
Chapter 21. v. he means the tribulation the Jews were to endure at the siege, Dr.
Sclat.
and surprisal of Jerusalem by Vespasian and Titus. In the time of which siege
the Jews were oppressed with a grievous famine, in which their food was old
shoes, Mr. Perkins.
old leather, old hay, and the dung of beasts. There dyed partly of the sword,
Vespasian brake into their City at Cedron, where they took Christ, on the same
feast day that Christ was taken, he whipped them where they whipped Christ, he
sold twenty Jews for a penny, as they sold Christ for thirty pence. B. Andr.
Cat.
and partly of the famine, eleven hundred thousand of the poorer sort; two
thousand in one night were embowelled, six thousand were burned in a Porch of
the Temple. The whole City was sacked and burnt, and laid level to the ground;
and ninety seven thousand taken captives, and applied to base and miserable
service.

Suum scripsit nomen cum urbem delevit.
Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
So many of the Jews were crucified, that by relation of their own Josephus de
bello Iudaico lib. 6. c. 12.) there remained no more space to set crosses in,
nor any more crosses to crucify bodies upon.

At the very first, even in his childhood there shone forth in him gifts both
of body and mind, and the same more and more still by degrees, as he grew in
years.

He was therefore sickly, because his Nurse was so.

Ingenium quantaecunque fortunae capax, Tacitus l. 2. Hist.
decor oris cum quadam Majestate.

A person capable of any dignity, Forma egregia, and cui non minus auctoritatis
inesset quam gratiae.
were it never so great; of a goodly presence and countenance, wherein was
seated no less Majesty than favor and beauty.

His stature was not tall, and his belly bare out somewhat with the most.
Sueton.
He had a singular memory, Facundissimus, bellicosissimus, moderatissimus.
Eutropius.
and was very docible; he was most skilful in handling his weapon, and withal
a passing good Horseman. He was facilis ad extemporalitatem usque. He was of a
prompt and ready wit, Sueton.
and would have spoken well ex tempore; He was also skilful in Music; he could
write with ciphers, and by artificial characters, both very fast and very fair,
striving by way of sport and mirth with his own Clerks, whether he or they
could write fastest: Sueton.
He was able to express and imitate what hand soever he had seen, and would
often say, that he could have been a notable forger and counterfeiter of
writings.

Suo quam Patris Imperio modestior. Tacit. l. 2. Hist.
Whiles he was a private person, he behaved himself not altogether so well as
when he was Emperor.

Exuit animum cum purpuram induit.
Lupus invasit regnum, evasit Pastor.
Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
His youthful affections were settled somewhat upon Berenice the Queen of
Iewry; Berenice. Dion. and Joseph.
notwithstanding in no such degree that it was any hinderance to his honorable
actions.

Suetonius.
The Feasts which he made were pleasant merriments rather than lavish and
sumptuous. Convivia instituit jucunda magis quam profusa.


No gross vice could be found in him, but many excellent virtues. Suetonius.


Neminem a se dimisit tristem. He never dismissed any Petitioner with a tear in
his eye, or a heavy heart; and when his Domestical servants about his Person
would seem to tell him that he promised more than he was able to perform;
Sueton:
his saying was, Non oportet quenquam a sermon Principis tristem discedere.
Hadrianus Caesar said, it was troublesome to him if he saw any sad.
No man ought to depart from the speech of a Prince, sad and discontented.

Calling to mind one time as he sat at Supper, Aurel. Vict.
that he had done nothing for any man that day, Sueton.
he uttered this memorable and praiseworthy Apophthegm, Eutropius.
Amici, diem perdidi. Or rather it must be read (says Casa^b) Amici, hodie
diem perdidi.
My Friends, I have lost a day.

If he had not bestowed some benefit upon one or other, he was wont to say
(says M^llerus) Hodie non imperavi quia nemini benefeci.

His Rule and Government was merciful, he received no accusation against those
who were reported to have spoken evil of him, saying, Ego cum nihil faciam
dignum propter quod contumelia afficiar, mendacia nihil curo. When I shall do
nothing worthy of blame, I care not for lies.

He said, Periturum se potius quam perditurum adjurans.
he would rather die himself than put others to death. He proceeded no further
against two noblemen convicted for affecting and aspiring to the Empire, Sueton.
than to admonish them to desist and give over, saying, Suetonius. Eutropius.
Aurel. Vict.
that Sovereign Power was the gift of Destiny and Divine providence; if they
were Petitioners for any thing else, he promised to give it unto them.

He would not endure to kill, or sequester and confine his Brother Domitian
(though he never ceased to lay wait for his life) but still made him partner
with him in his Sovereign Government, Aurel. Vict. Suetonius.
and often with tears exhorted him to mutual love.

There fell out in his days some heavy accidents; a fire in the City of Rome,
which lasted three days and three nights; Tacitus. Sueton. Aurel. Vict.
and a grievous Pestilence, wherein there dyed ten thousand a day; and Vesuvius
a mountain in Campania flamed with great horror; Pliny the natural Historian
then Admiral of the Roman Navy, desirous to discover the reason, was
suffocated with the smoke thereof, as his Nephew witnesses in an Epistle of
his to Cornelius Tacitus. Pliny. l. 6. Epist. 16.
Am: Marcellinus observes, that the ashes thereof transported in the Air,
obscured all Europe; others say, that they darkened the Sun.

He was a valiant Soldier; going once to espy the enemy, Joseph. l. 6. c. 2 of
the Wars of the Jews. From his wonderful escape at the walls of Jerusalem,
Josephus collects, Imperatorum pericula Deum curare; That God takes care of
Princes in their danger. Ibid.
and not to fight, notwithstanding that an infinite number of darts and arrows
were shot at him, and he had no Armor at all, yet received he not one wound,
but all past him, as though upon purpose every one had strove to have mist him.
And he with his sword made way, and cut many upon the face that opposed
themselves against him, and so they falling down, he with his horse past over
them. The Jews seeing Titus his valor, exhorted one another to set upon him,
but whither soever he turned, the Jews fled and would not abide by it.

In the last assault of Jerusalem, he slew twelve enemies that defended the
wall, Suetonius. Eutropius.
with just so many arrows shot, and won the City with great joy, and favorable
applause of all his Soldiers.

He being to see that executed which Christ foretold should happen to
Jerusalem, Josephus de Bell. Iud. l. 6. c. 14.7. and 10.
stretched forth his hands, and called Heaven and Earth to witness in great
bitterness, that he was not to blame that the Jews perished in such sort, but
they themselves; and would not by any means that fire should be set on the
Temple. Comparing the desolation of Jerusalem with the beauty and goodly
buildings that were before it was destroyed, L. 7. of the wars of the Jews. c.
24.
he lamented and pitied the overthrow thereof, says Josephus.

It is likely that he would have carried a milder hand upon the Jews his
Prisoners, after his sacking the City of Jerusalem, than to east so many
thousand of them to the Lions, and other beasts to be devoured, Illud adagium
Festina lent, arridebat du^bus Imperatoribus Romany, omnium facile
laudatissimis, Augusto and Tito; quorum utrique singularis quaedam aderat animi
magnitudo, cum incredibili quadam lenitate facilitateque conjuncta. Eras. in
Adag.
as he did on the birthday of his Brother Domitian, but that the heavy curse
of God which boiled against that Nation, did urge his gentle and calm nature to
bring them to destruction.

He did stamp in his Coin a Dolphin and an Anchor, with this Impress, Sat cito
si sat been. A Dolphin out-strips the ship, that is soon enough; an Anchor
stays the ship, that is well enough. A Dolphin and Anchor, Soon enough if well
enough.

It was said of him, Abstinuit alieno, ut si quis unquam. If ever any man
abstained from that which was not his own, he was the man.

Though he was the mirror of men among the Heathen, Suetonius.
yet he was loath to depart out of this world; Multum conquestus, eripi sibi
vitam immerenti, neque enim extare ullum suum factum poenitendum, excepto
duntaxat uno.
for being carried in his Horse-litter, and knowing that he must die, he looked
upwards toward Heaven, and complained very pitiously, that his life should be
taken from him who had not deserved to die, for he knew not (he said) of any
sin that ever he committed but only one.

Suetonius writes as if he had dyed of a natural death, Whether his over
familiar acquaintance with his Brothers wife Domitia, as Sueton. or with the
Queen Berenice, as Speed, is uncertain. Senatus tantas mortuo gratias egit,
laudesque congessit, quantas ne vivo quidem unquam atque praesenti.
but Aurel. Vict. says, he was poisoned by his Brother Domitian, Titus a
Domitiano leporis marini vi peremptus. Cael. Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 6. c. 30.

Morte praeventus est, majore hominum damno quam suo.

He was cut short and prevented by death, to the greater loss of Mankind than
of himself, says Suetonius.

The Senate gave him more thanks being dead, than ever they did living and
present.

His death was much lamented, so that they called him generally, Delicias
publicas; and wept for him as if the world had been deprived of a perpetual
Protector. Suetonius.
Tantus luctus eo mortuo publicus fuit, Aurel. Vict.
ut omnes tanquam in propria doluerint orbitate. Eutropius.
He lived 39 years five months, 25 days, says Carrion.


He dyed in the 42. year of his age, says Suetonius, 41 say Aurel. Victor. and
Eutropius.

When he had reigned two years, two months and twenty days, say Suetonius,
Aurel. Vict. Carrion; eight months, says Eutropius.

Flavius Domitianus.
effigy of emperor
HE was called Domitian from his Mother Domitilla, as Titus (his Brother) was
called Vespasian from his Father. Titus cognomine paterno dictus Vespasianus,
alter frater cognomine materno a Domitilla Domitianus est appellatus.


He was Associate to his Brother Titus in government during his life, and after
his death was his Successor. Casaub.


Perceiving many of his Predecessors to be hated, asked one, how he might so
rule as not to be hated? the Party answered, Tu fac contra, Do thou contrary to
that they have done.

Yet he neither resembled his Father Vespasian nor his Brother Titus. Neroni,
Eutropius:
aut Caligulae, Licet patris fratrisque dissimilis memoriam nominis sui in
expiabili detestatione perfudit, tamen receptissima inclaruit lege, qua
minaciter interdixerat, ne intra terminos jurisdictionis Romanae Castraret
quisquam puerum quod ni contigisset, quis eorum ferret examina, quorum paucitas
difficile toleratur? Am: Marcel: l. 15.
qut Tiberio similior, quam Patri vel Fratri suo.

He was tall of stature, his countenance modest, and given much to redness; his
eyes full and great, but his sight very dim. He was fair and of comely
presence, especially in his youth; all his body was well shaped throughout,
excepting his feet, the toes whereof were of the shortest; afterward he became
disfigured, and blemished with baldness, with a fat grand panch, and slender
shanks.

In the beginning of his Empire his manner was to retire himself daily into a
secret place for one hour, and there to do nothing else but cratch flies, and
with the sharp point of a bodkin prick them through; in so much as when one
enquired whether any body were with Caesar within? Crispus made answer not
impertinently, Ne Musca quidam, No, not so much as a Fly. Stylis ridicule
remotis omnibus, muscarum agmina persequebatur.


Terribili armatus ferula volitantia Caesar
Agmina muscarum provocat, urget, agit.
Emanuelis Thesauri Caesares.
Aurel. Vict.
Hostibus musca, muscis Hostis ad fuit.
Hippocrates reckons up this for one sign of Melancholy, when men catch flies;
And because he commanded the Vines to be cut down, he adds, Scilicet humano se
post quam sanguine Caesar
Proluit, ista sitit pocula, vina fugit.


In the Administration of the Empire, he behaved himself for a good while
variable as one made of an equal mixture and temper of Vice and Virtues, Muscas
captare atrae bilis indicium.
Sueton.
until at length he turned his virtues also into vices.

He neglected all Liberal Studies in the beginning of his Empire, albeit he
took order to repair the Libraries consumed with fire, sending as far as At
Alexandria in Egypt was that famous Library of King Ptolomeus Philadelphus, and
the other Ptolomies Progenitors, containing the number well near of 700000
Books, Aul. Gel. Noct. Attic. l. 7. c. 1.
Alexandria for copies of Books.

His ordinary speech was not unelegant, Vellem tam formosus esse quam Metius
sibi videtur.
sometimes he would deliver Apophthegms; as for example, he wished, That he had
been as fair and well-favoured as Metius did think himself to be: another time
he said, Conditionem Principum miserrimam aiebat, quibus de conjuratione
comperta non crederetur, nisi occisis.
That the condition of Princes was most miserable, who could not be credited
touching a Conspiracy plainly detected, unless they were first slain.

This speech was used also by Adrian, Misera conditio Imperatorum, quibus, de
affectata tyrandine, Sueton.
nisi occisis non potest credi. Vulcat. Gallic. in Avidio Cassio.

He had no affection to bear Arms, or wield weapons, Sagittarum tam doctus
fuit, ut inter patentes digitos extentae manus viri procul posite spicula ejus
transvolarent.
but delighted especially to shoot Arrows. He would drive his Arrows point
blank, so just against the Palm of a man's right hand, standing a far off, and
holding it forth stretched open for a mark, as they should all directly pass
through the void spaces between the fingers, and do him no harm at all. Aurel.
Vict.
Suetonius.


Simile quid audivi a fide dignis and (...) fact umde duce Brundewizensi, qui
suis pedissequis ac pueris honorariis imperavit, inter digitorum extensorum
intervalla retinerent dalerum Imperialem, quem sumpto selopo minore, e
patentibus digitis globulo innoxie exemit. Paulus Voetius in Herodiani Marcum
and Commodum. p. 178. and 179.
During his abode at Alba, many have seen him shoot at an hundred wild beasts at
a time, and purposely so to hit some of them in the head, that his shafts
appeared there like a pair of horns.

It was rumoured abroad, that in his Infancy Dragons were found about him in
manner of a Guard, which is but a Fable; for he himself, Tacitus. l. 11. Annal.
who never derogated from himself, was wont to report but of one Serpent which
was seen in his Chamber.

When he was mounted once to the Imperial state, he made his boast in the very
Senate, Suetonius.
that it was he who had given unto his Father and Brother both the Empire, and
they had but delivered it up to him again.

Martial writes thus to him in his Epigrams.

Magna licet toties tribuas, majora daturus
Dona, Ducum victor, victor and ipse tui:
Diligeris populo non propter premia, Caesar;
Propter te populus, praemia, Caesar, amat.
He was precise and industrious in ministering Justice, he reserved many times
definitive sentences given for favor, and obtained by flattery; he did so
chastise those that were faulty in that kind, that the Officers were never more
temperate, or just in their places.

He repressed false informations, and sharply punished such informers, using
this saying, Princeps qui delatores non castigat, irritat. The Prince that
chastened not Promoters, sets them on to promote.

At the first he so abhorred all Bloodshed and slaughter, that he purposed to
publish an Edict, forbidding to kill and sacrifice any Ox; and he scarce gave
the least suspicion of Covetousness. But he continued not long in this strain,
but fell after both to Cruelty and Avarice.

He was not only cruel, but very subtle and crafty in cloking of his cruelty.

Nunquam tristiorem sententiam sine praefatione clementiae pronuntiabit,
Suetonius.
ut non aliud jam certius atrocis exitus signum esset, quam Principis lenitas.
He never pronounced any heavy bloody Sentence without some preamble and preface
of clemency, so that there was not now a surer sign of some horrible end and
conclusion, than a mild beginning and gentle Exordium.

It is reported of him, that, Eum se impensissime diligere simulabat, quem
maxim interemptum vellet. He would seem to love them most, whom he willed
least should live.

It was sufficient, if any deed or word whatsoever was objected against any
one, to make it high Treason against the Prince. Inheritances (though they
belonged to the greatest strangers) were held confiscate, and adjudged to the
Emperors Coffers, in case but one would come forth and depose, that he heard
the party deceased say whiles he lived, Sue^onius.
that Caesar was his heir.

Primus Domitianus Dominum se and Deum appellari jussit.
He was the first Emperor who commanded himself to be called Lord, and God. He
sent out his writs in this form, Dominus and Deus noster fic fieri jubet, Our
Lord and God thus commands. Eusebius in Chronicis.
Whereupon afterward this order was taken up, that neither in the writing or
speech of any man, Sueton.
he should be otherwise called. Eutropius.


Aurel. Vict.
Edictum Domini Deique nostri. Martial.

Virgil called Augustus God, Deus nobis haec etia fecit.
A true forerunner of his successor the Pope, who in the Extravagants (and well
it deserves to be put there) is styled Dominus Deus noster Papa, and his
Decrees are styled Oracles. Vnde institutum posthac, ut ne scripto quidem nec
sermon eujusquam appellaretur aliter. Suetonius. An Oracle signifies the
answer of God. Romans 3.2.


Dominus meus Vnus est, Deus, omnipotens and aeternus. Qui pater patriae est,
quomodo Dominus est? Sed and gratius nomen est pictatis quam potestatis; etiam
familiae magis patres, quam Domini vocantur: tanto abest, ut Imperator Deus
debeat dici, quod non potest credi non modo turpissima sed and perniciosa
adulatione Tertul. Apol. 35. Eusebius. Eccle. Hist. l. 3. c. 15.


Portio Neronis de crudelitate; for his cruelty a piece of Nero. Tertul. He was
reproachfully called by the people bald Nero, because he was like him in
cruelty but bald.

Et calvo serviret Roma Neroni. Juvenal.


The second persecution was under him in the twelth year of his reign; he most
cruelly persecuted the Christians, because they would not give the Title of
Lord to any but Christ, Nec omitti debet in maximis ejus facinoribus,
Christianorum vexatio afflictioque.
nor worship any but God. In this second great persecution, the beloved
Disciple of Christ, the Evangelist John (when he taught the Church of Ephesus)
was banished to the Isle of Patmos for the Word of God; Boeclerus.
where he wrote the Revelation.

Cletus, Nicomedes, Pontia, Theodora, Domicilla were then famous Martyrs.

There were many learned Scholars in his time; Iuvenal, Martial, Valerius
Flaccus, Silius Italicus, Poets: Epictetus the Philosopher, and Apollonius
Tyanaeus a famous Magician: Cornelius Tacitus the Historian, Julius Solinus,
Quintilian, Josephus the Writer of Jewish Antiquities.

Boeclerus in his Political Dissertation says, He was an enemy to learning,
punishing Historians for their most true praises of great men. He thought that
wise men above others observed and disliked the heinous offenses of Tyrants,
and would record them.

He was proud like Nero, and persecuted innocent Christians as he did.

Tertullian called him Neronis portionem, In vita Agricolae.

Praecipua sub Domitiano miseriarum pars erat, videre and aspici.


Eusebius, haeredem; the one a part, the other, the Heir of Nero: Nero tantum
subtraxit oculos, jussitque scelera, non spectavit.
and Tacitus puts only this difference between them, that Nero indeed commanded
cruel murders, but Domitian not only commanded them, but beheld them himself;
and so he was Bis Parricida (as Valerius L. 9. c. 11.
Maximus says of another) Concilio prius, iterum spectaculo.

He caused the line of David to be diligently sought out, and extinguished, for
fear lest he were yet to come out of the House of David which should enjoy the
Kingdom.

He was so fearful, that he walked almost continually in his Gallery, Valde
solicitus, quod sciret ultimum vitae diem, says Suetonius. He was much
tortured in mind, because he fore-knew his end. Sueton.
which he caused to be set with the stone Phengites, that by the brightness
thereof as in a glass, ( Plin. l. 36. c. 22.) he might see what was done behind
him.

That is admirable which Writers have related concerning Apollonius Tyanaeus, a
Pythagorick Philosopher, and famous Magician, who suddenly, as amazed, cried
out at Ephesus when Domitian was slain, O Stephen, strike the Tyrant: and a
little after he said, It is well, thou have struck him, thou have wounded him,
thou have killed him.

Nactus est tandem Domitianus exitum suis facinoribus dignum. Boeclerus. He
says also, Qui hanc Historiam cum exitu Commodi Imperatoris comparaverit, non
ovum ovo similius reperiet, quam utriusque tyranni casum.

As his life was like unto the life of Nero, so was he not unlike him in his
death; for his own Wife Domitia and friends conspired against him, Suetonius.
Aurel. Vict. Carrion.
and slew him: his Body was carried to the grave by Porters, and buried without
honor; the Senate of Rome also decreed, that his name should be rased, that
all his Acts should be rescinded, and his memorial abolished quite for ever.

He perished in the 54th year of his life, Aurel. Vict. and Eutropius. Carrion.
Chron.
about the 15th of his reign.

With whom both Tacitus and Suetonius end their History.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
READER, I know Books have their doom according to thy capacity, and that such
are usually most free in censuring other men's works, which are least able to
publish any of their own. But as the Poet says, Carpere vel noli nostra, vel
ede tua: Many Carps are expected when curious eyes go a fishing, and Books are
pressed to the war as well as men; Ad praelum tanquam ad proelium. I neither
deserve that favor from thee nor desire it, that thou should respect my
toies, as Pliny said to Vespasian, Tu soles nostras esse aliquid putare nugas:
and yet if thou be such a one, that Augustus-like thou art ready to tax all the
world, I know no reason why I should regard thy censure; the French Proverb
says, De fol juge brieve sentence, and Nihil facilius quam reprehendere alium.
However, I shall say now with Julius Caesar, Jacta est alea, I have put it to
the hazard; thy applause shall not much tickle me, nor thy rash sentence
discourage me. I have taken notice of a witty allusion used by diverse of these
Emperors, and others concerning them, which I thought fit to commend to thy
observation, viz. a descanting as it were upon the double signification of the
word, as first, that of Julius Caesar's Soldiers.

Gallias Caesar subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem:
Ecce Caesar nunc triumphat, qui subegit Gallias;
Nicomedes non triumphat, qui subegit Caesarem.
Caesar did subdue the Gauls, and him has Nicomede:
Behold now Caesar does triumph, who did the Gauls subdue;
But Nicomede triumphs not, who Caesar has subdued.
Subegit carries a double sense, the one signifies the conquering of a
Nation, and so it is taken in the former place, as it is applied to Gaul; the
other, the wanton abuse of the body, in which acceptance it is to be
understood in reference to Caesar abused by Nicomedes.

So in the History of Augustus, Suetonius says, Quasi alii se puerum, alii
ornandum tollendumque jactassent; ne aut sibi aut veteranis par gratia
referretur. The grace lies in the ambiguity of the Latin word tollendum,
which in one signification, is in a manner equivalent with laudandum and
ornandum, and betokens to be advanced, extolled, or lifted up, and so it is
to be taken in good part; but in another, it is all one with tollendum de medio
or occidendum, that is, to be dispatched out of life or killed, in which sense
Augustus took it; much like to that you shall read of Nero in Martial, Quis
neget Aeneae magni de stirpe Neronem?
Sustulit hic matrem, sustulit ille patrem.


The like appears in some of Augustus his witty speeches, as that to Galba;
Ego te monere possum, corrigere non possum. Jocatus est ambiguo verbo,
corrigitur quod reprehenditur, corrigitur quod ex distorto sit rectum. Eras.
Apophtheg. Hoc vere est monumentum Patris colere; Colimus ea quae veneramur,
and colitur ager aut aliud fimile. Gemina fuisset amphibologia, si pro
monumento dixiffet memoriam, quod ab illo dictum arbitror; siquidem eorum
memoria nobis sacrosancta dicitur, quos vita defunctos veneramur, and memorias
ad Graecorum imitationem vocamus defunctorum monumenta. Erasm. in Apophth.

Nero said jestingly of Claudius, That he left morari inter homines; in which
Verb morari there is couched a double sense, which gives the grace unto this
pleasant scoff; for being a mere Latin word, and having the first syllable by
nature short, it signifies to stay, or to make long abode, and taking it thus,
Nero might be thought to imply thus much; that Claudius was now departed out of
the company of mortal men: but take the same word as Nero spoke it, derived of
(...) in Greek, which signifies a Fool, and has the first syllable long, it
imports, that Claudius played the fool no longer here in the world among men.
In the time of the two first Caesar's, which had the Art of Government in
greatest perfection, there lived the best Poet, Virgilius Maro; the best
Historiographer, Titus Livius; the best Antiquary, Marcus Varro; and the best
or second Orator, Marcus Cicero, that to the memory of man are known. The time
that the Roman Monarchy seemed to be at his (...) was (says Carrion) from
Julius Caesar to the end of Antoninus the Philosopher his reign,

Afterward, many filthy Monsters reigned, and many seditions and civil wars
followed; therefore I have not only enlarged the former Treatise, by inserting
here and there some other special observations, but have made an addition also
of six more Emperors since, (as Sir Francis Bacon also says in his advancement
of Learning) the six next Princes were all learned, or singular favorers and
advancers of Learning: which age (as he also says) for temporal respects, was
the most happy and flourishing that ever the Roman Empire (which then was a
Model of the world) enjoyed: a matter revealed and prefigured unto Domitian in
a dream, the night before he was slain; for he thought there was grown behind
upon his shoulders a neck and a head of Gold, which came accordingly to pass,
in those golden times which succeeded. Fulk in his Book of Meteors observes,
not long before the contention of Galba, Otho and Vitellius, for the Empire of
Rome, there appeared three Suns, as it were pointing out the strife which
followed soon after between them three for the Imperial Diadem; of threescore
and thirteen Roman Emperors (that perished within the narrow compass of one
hundred years) only three died a natural death in their Beds, the rest were cut
off by their lusts.

It was a heavy time then with Christians, when they groned under the
Persecuting Emperors three hundred years together, yet in that time they had
many Lucida intervalla, many breathing spaces under Princes not altogether so
bloody: there were two principal Persecutors of the Church, Dioclesian, and
Julian, but the last was the most pestilent. Jerome justly styled him Canem
rabidum; and it is remarkable what is observed of him, that going forth to the
Persian War, he asked in scoffing manner, What the Carpenters Son (meaning
Christ) was doing? To whom it was answered by a good Christian, Loculum
fabricatur, He is making a Coffin for Julian; which Prophetical speech was
indeed verified by the event; for Julian was strangely wounded and slain in
that War, and as in his life time he had blasphemed Christ, so he died
blaspheming Christ, and casting up his blood toward Heaven, he cried, Vicisti
o Galilaee, Thou have overcome O Galilean.

This may suffice to have spoken of some of the chief Persecutors in general,
since I purpose not to enlarge this Treatise any more, because there is little
said of many of the Roman Emperors, and the Mexia translated by Grimston.
History of them altogether is already written in our Mother tongue: but I
intended only at the first, Analecta, some choice and pithy observations of
them, if these therefore may benefit thee, summam votorum attigi, I have
attained the end of my desires, and so I rest

Thy Wel-wisher, EDWARD LEIGH.

A FURTHER ADVERTISEMENT.
REader, I had held my former resolution of not enlarging this Treatise, but
that the Bookseller intending a re-impression of the whole, with Cuts and
Pictures of the Emperors, sent me my part with paper between the leaves, and
therein intimated a desire, that I should insert some memorable things by way
of Addition. I have to gratify him, and I hope therein the public, both
corrected and augmented my Observations; having (by my interest in a learned
Gentleman) procured the use of Boeclerus his Political Dissertations, upon the
twelve first Caesar's; from that, and some other learned men, I have collected
such things as I hope may be useful and beneficial to others,

Thine E. L.

Coccejus Nerva.
effigy of emperor
DOmitian thus made away, He was 76 years old when he was Emperor. Carrion.
Coccejus Nerva a prudent, honorable, and aged person was elected Emperor by
the Senate; He was the first of all the Emperors not born in Rome, as after him
there were few born in it.
his birth was noble, and of Italy, in the City Narnia, and of the Province
Vmbria, ruling so well, as he may be esteemed too good a Prince long to
continue in so bad an age; who reformed many enormities, and remitted many
grievous tributes and exactions; also he recalled from banishment the
Christians severely dispersed, and suffered them to enjoy the freedom of their
profession, Suidas. Nicephorus.
at which time John the Evangelist returned from Patmos (wherein he had been
confined) unto Ephesus, a City in Asia the less, where after his return he
lived four years. The excellent temper of his Government is by a glance in
Cornelius Tacitus touched to the life, Postquam divus Nerva res olim
insociabiles miscuisset, imperium and libertatem. In vita Agricolae.
Dion writes of him, that he was so good a Prince, that he once uttered this
speech, Nihil se fecisse quo minus possit deposito imperio privatus tuto
vivere, He remembers not to have done any thing why he should not live
securely, and without fear of any body, although he gave over the Empire. His
symbol was, Men's bona regnum possidet. He discharged the City of the new
impositions which Vespasian and Domitian had laid upon them, and commanded that
goods unjustly taken should be restored to the owners.

He was very eloquent, and a good Poet, as Martial testifies of him, Quanta
quies placidi, tanta est facundia Nervae.

See Martial's Epigram of him, lib. 11. epig. 6.

Herodes Atticus found a great treasure in his house, but fearing calumnies, he
wrote to Nerva, and discovered it. He wrote back again; Vtere, use it. But he
being not so secure, wrote again; At enim thesaurus privati hominis conditionem
superat, But the treasure exceeds the condition of a private man: Nerva again
nobly replied, Ergo abutere. Lips. in Plin. Paneg.

On a reverse of Nerva is found a team of horses let loose, with this
inscription, Vehiculatione per Italiam remissa; whereby we learn (which no
Historian remembers) that the Roman Emperors commanded all the carriages of the
Country; that Nerva remitted that burden; and that the grievance was so heavy,
that coins were stamped in remembrance of this Emperors goodness that eased
them of it. See the coins in L. Hulsius, and Speed's Chronicle.

Sextus Aurel. Victor writes thus; Quid Nerva prudentius aut moderatius? quid
Trajano divinius? Quid praestantius Hadriano?

Having reigned only one year, four months and nine days, he dyed of a
passionate anger conceived against a Senator, in the year of Christ his
Incarnation ninety nine, Dion Cassius.
the twenty seventh day of January, and seventy sixth of his own age.

Vlpius Trajanus.
effigy of emperor
UNto Nerva succeeded Vlpius Trajanus into the Roman Empire, Speed Chron.
Trajanus Tudernino Hispaniae oppido oriundus est, in quo nihil praeter unum
Trajanum est quod commendemus. Opes nec exiguae, supra privatum modum evectae.
Corpore valido, and forma quae digna imperio videbatur, erat.
in the 42. year of his age, who was born near unto Sevil in the Territories of
Spain, of a Noble Family, but was much more ennobled in himself for his
Princely endowments; which moved Nerva in his life time to adopt him into so
high a calling, and the whole Senate after his death joyfully to confirm his
Election, and so often to honor him with the title of the most excellent
Prince in public Dedications. He raised the Roman Empire unto the very highest
pitch of glory, Boxhorn. orat. de vita and moribus Trajani.
and spread the power of their command into the largest circuit that ever
before or since has been possessed.

Dr. Heylin in his Cosmography in Tartaria, says Cremam or Crim, the ancient
feat of the Chams, or Princes of the Tartars, was held impregnable. But Florus
says, it was taken by some of the Roman Emperors, and so most likely to be
Trajan; the first that ever extended the Roman Empire beyond Danubius and the
Euxine.

Caput non diadema sed galea ornabat; and qua manu sceptrum domi, eadem gladium
bello tenebat.
He subdued Dacia, made subject Armenia, Parthia and Mesopotomia, conquered
Assyria, Persia, and Babylon; passed Tigris, and stretched the confines of the
Roman Empire unto the remotest Dominions of the Indies, which never before that
time had heard of the Roman name. Boxhorn.
For his person, Praesens aderat non spectator tantum, sed and inter primos
bellatorum; ut virtuti consiliisque ejus omnia deberentur.
he was not very learned, yet he was a great admirer of, and Benefactor to
Learning; a Founder of famous Libraries, a perpetual advancer of Learned men to
Office, Eruditissimos, quamvis ipse parcae esset scientiae, moderateque
eloquens, diligebat. Aurel. Vict.
and a familiar Converser with learned Professors. Quem honorem dicendi
Magistris? quam dignationem sapientiae doctoribus babes? ut sub te spiritum,
and sanguinem, and patriam receperint studia, quae priorum temporum immanitas
exiliis puniebat. Plin. Secund. Paneg.

Of stature he was big, of complexion swarthy, thin of hair both head and
beard, he had a hooked nose, broad shoulders, long hands and a pleasant eye.
Plutarch was his Master.


He stirred up the third persecution, wherein Ignatius, and Simon the Son of
Cleophas, and many other worthy saints of God received the Crown of Martyrdom,
in such cruel manner, as that his other virtues are much clouded by that
Taxation; for mollification whereof, Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 30.
he was entreated by Plinius Secundus, whose Epistles to that purpose are yet
extant, viz. the 97. of his tenth Book, where he has this passage to Trajan
concerning them; Affirmabant hanc fuisse summam vel culpae suae, vel erroris,
quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem convenire, carmenque Christo quasi Deo
dicere secum invicem; seque Sacramento non in Scelus aliquid obstringere, sed
ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne
depositum appellati abnegarent, etc. to which Letter Trajan thus replyeth,
Conquirendi non sunt; si deferantur and arguantur, puniendi sunt.

Whereupon Tertullian in his Apology has this passage, O Sententiam
necessitate confusam! negat inquirendos ut innocents, and mandat puniendos ut
nocentes. Parcit and saevit; dissimulat and animadvertit. Quid teipsum censura
circumvenis? Si damnas cur non and inquiris? si non inquiris, Nemo supplici
vultu, sed laeti and alacres non tam principem quam patrem agnoscebant.
Boxhorn. Orat.
cur non and absolvis?

He was affable and familiar even with his inferiors; of such carriage toward
his subjects, as he himself would wish (he said) his Prince to use toward him,
if he had been a subject. Aequus, clemens, patientissimus, atque in amicos
perfidelis, says Aurelius Victor of him. Accipe gladium quem pro me, si recte
impero, sin minus, contra me distringe.
He was a great observer of Justice, insomuch that when he invested any Praetor,
he commanded him to use the same even against his own person, if he violated
Law or equity.

He erected many famous buildings, and upon whatsoever he builded or repaired,
would set up a glorious superscription in honor of himself; whence Constantine
the Great called him Herbam Parietariam, the Wall-flower, because his name was
upon so many walls. Alexander Severus is rather to be commended, who caused
that precept of the Gospel to be engraved on the frontispiece of his Palace,
Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris.

Dion reports this Apophthegm of him, Nullum se unquam virum bonum male
habiturum, nedum occisurum. Dies ille triplici gaudio laetus (says Pliny in a
Panegyric to him) qui principem abstulit pessimum, dedit optimum, meliorem
optimo genuit.

In solo Plinio Trajanum habemus, in Trajano imaginem omnium magnarum virtutum.
Qui ea liberate omnia scripsit, qua Trajanus fecit; adeo ut incomparabili
principe opus dignissimum sit and ipsum incomparabile. Boxhorn. Orat.

Rara temporum foelicitas, ubi sentire quae velis, L. 1. Hist.
and quae sentias dicere licet, says Tacitus of his reign: a man so
exceedingly wel-beloved of the Senate, and of the people of Rome, that after
his days, whenever a new Emperor was elected, they wished unto him the good
success of Augustus, and the uprightness of Trajan.

He died by a flux the seventh day of August, after he had reigned 19 years,
Carrion Chron.
six months and 15 days, and of his age 64.

Aelius Adrianus.
effigy of emperor
It was his word, Non mihi sed populo, signifying that which he was often heard
to say; Ita se rempublicam gesturum, ut sciret rem populi esse, non suam,
AFTER the death of Trajan, his Nephew Aelius Adrianus by the consent of the
Army, who swore to him obedience, was proclaimed Emperor; the Senate* likewise
confirmed their choice, as being a man endued with gifts both of Art and
Nature, answerable to the fortunes of his estate. His birth was of Spain, in
the City Italica, near unto Sevil where Trajan was born; his Father Noble, Hic
Graecis literis impensius eruditus, a plerisque Graeculus appellatus est.
Aurel. Vict.
and his Mother in Cales descended of an honorable stock. Bochartus De
Phaenicum coloniis l. 1. c. 25. says, that Adrian being a private man learned
in Castalia, that he should be Emperor, by a prophecy written in a Laurel leaf
which he cast into that fountain. Res est sine exemplo (says Bochart) quaeque
illum ita percussit, ut postquam ad imperium evectus est, fontem obstruxerit
ingenti mole saxorum, ne quis ad capessendam Rempublicam eadem ratione
impelleretur. He was a great Mathematician, skilful in Arithmetic, Geometry,
and judicial Astrology, learned in the Greek and Latin Tongues, well seen in
Physic, and knew the virtues of Herbs, Roots, Stones; a singular Musician both
for Theory and Practice, and could both limn and carve with approbation of the
skilful; He said rightly, Testibus, non testimoniis credendum.
but above all is the admirable report of his m^mory, who never (they say)
forgot any thing that he had either read or heard.

If he discovered any man to have the like skill with him in all sciences (in
the which he very much excelled) by whom there might be danger lest he were
overcome, through envy and too greedy a desire of singularity, he caused him to
be killed. Among the which was Apollodorus the Architect, a man beyond
comparison excellent in that Art; for that the Emperor having sent unto him the
platform of a great work which he had contrived, he by his efficacious reasons
had proved, that in some place it was to be corrected. Cuffe of Affectation. He
quotes Dion and Bapt. Fulg. l. 8.

Curiositatum omnium explorator. Tertul. Apol.
He was the most curious man that lived, and the most universal enquirer, in so
much as it was noted for an error in his mind, that he desired to comprehend
all, Sir Francis Bacon Advanc. of Learn.
and not reserve himself for the worthiest things; but it pleased God to use
the curiosity of this Emperor as an inducement to the peace of the Church in
those days: for having Christ in veneration, not as a God or Savior, but as a
wonder or novelty; and having his picture in his Gallery matched with
Apollonius (with whom in his vain imgination he thought he had some conformity)
yet it served the turn to allay the bitter hatred of those times against the
Christian name, so as the Church had peace during his time.

He was a great favourer of learned men. In Adriani Principis aulam non viri
tantum militares, sed innumerabiles Philosophorum greges, tanquam in Lycaeum
aut veterem Academiam magnis de rebus disputaturi confluebant. Alphonsus
Garcias Matamorus in narat. Apologet. de Acad. and viris literatis. t. 2.
Piccartus Observat. Historico-polit. Dec. 17. c. 5. instanceth in K. Alphonsus
and others, who delighted in the society of learned men.

He was minded (as Lampridius writes) to have built a Temple to the service of
Christ, had not some dissuaded him therefrom.

He was of Personage tall and very strong, of a good complexion, and amiable
countenance, wearing the hair of his head and beard long.

To show that he counted hatred retained a base and unprincely disposition, as
soon as he came to the Empire, he laid aside all his former enmities; Insomuch
as that meeting with one who had been his capital enemy, he said unto him,
Evasisti, Thou art now escaped from my displeasure. Spartianus in Adriano.
videsis Casaubonum.

Valesius in his Annotat. in Cap. 18. Orat. Constantini Imp. ad sanctorum
Caetum. says the verses of the Sybils were feigned by idle men, and published
for the Sybils about the time of this Emperor Adrian. Certe (says he) nemo
antiquior Iustino eorum mentionem fecit. Nam si Sibylla (says he still) tam
clare de Christo praedixerat, cur Paulus in suis epistolis, and cum ad
Athenienses verba faceret, ejus testimonio non est usus, maxim cum Aratum
alios Gentilium poetas citare non dedignetur? Vide plura, ibid. Quid Pseudo
sibyllina oracula, quae Christiani gentibus objiciebant, quum tamen e
Christianorum officina prodiissent, in Gentium autem bibliothecis non
reperirentur? Scal. in Opusc.

When a woman called to him passing by, saying, Audi me Caesar, Hear me Caesar,
and he answered, Non est otium, I have no leisure, she cried out, Noli ergo
imperare, then cease to Some say this was spoken to Philip of Macedon.
reign; at that speech he being moved, staid and heard the Dion laudat
Adrianum, qui in causis cognoscendis fuerit and facillimus and diligentissimus,
adeo ut uni causae cognoscendae and dijudicandae saepe dies undecim aut
duodecim tribu eret, nonnunquam etiam noctes simul insumeret.
woman. It was accounted discretion in him, that would not dispute his best
with Adrian, sing himself, That it was reason to yield to him that commanded
thirty legions.

Though he was famous for his industry, wit, memory, and fortunate success,
and could in his fatal sickness command others to be slain, yet death denied
subjection to him. His servant which undertook it fled, his adopted Son
pretended piety, his own hand was prevented by attendants, his solicited
Physician slew himself that he might not slay the Emperor, who yet complained
at his death, Many Physicians have slain the Emperor. Turba medicorum Caesarem
perdidit.
He sported at death with these Verses: Animula, vagula, blandula,
Hospes, comesque Corporis,
Quae nunc abibis in loca?
Pallidula, rigida, nudula,
Nec ut soles, dabis jocos.
My fleeting fond poor darling,
Bodies Guest and equal,
Where now must be thy lodging?
Pale, and stark, and stripped of all,
And put from wonted sporting.


When he had reigned in great honor and love the space of one and twenty
years, five months and fifteen days, and lived fifty two years, he dyed the
eighth or tenth day of July of a Dropsy, which malady so tormented him, that
willingly he refused all sustenance, and languished away through faintness.

Antoninus Pius.
effigy of emperor
UNto Adrianus succeeded Antoninus Pius, Hunc fere nullae vitiorum labes
maculavit. Aurelius Victor.

Vixit ingenti honestate privatus, majori in imperio; Pius propter clementiam
dictus est.

Eutropius.


who was for his many virtues, or rather piety toward the Gods, Sur-named Pius;
for piety (to speak properly) is the true worship of God, as Austin shows in
his 10. book de Civit. Dei c. 1. But he was not truly pious, because he knew
not the true God.

He was compared for his peace and policy unto Numa Pompilius, the second King
of Rome. His birth was in Lombardy, the Son of Aurelius Fulvius. He was a
Prince excellently learned, and had the patient and subtle wit of a
School-man, insomuch as in common speech (which leaves no virtue untaxed) he
was called Cymini-Sector, a carver or divider of Cumin Seed, which is one of
the least seeds; such a patience he had, and settled spirit to enter into the
least and most exact differences of causes: he likewise approached a degree
nearer unto Christianity, and became as Agrippa said to Paul, half a Christian;
holding their religion and law in good opinion, and not only staying
persecution, but giving way to the advancement of Christians. In his time
Justin Martyr wrote notable books of Apology for the Christians, His Symbol
was, Melius servare unum quaem occidere mill.
which were preserved and read in the Senate of Rome, and mollified the
Emperors mind toward them. He was favorable to all sorts of men, having that
Apophthegm of Scipio Africanus rife in his mouth, Scipio Africanus was wont to
say, Malle se unum civem servare quam mill hosts occidere.
that He had rather save one subjects life than kill a thousand enemies.

He was of stature tall, of a seemly presence, in countenance majestical, in
manners mild, of a singular wit, very learned and eloquent, Solus omnium
principum sine civili sanguine fuit.
a great lover of Husbandry, peaceable, merciful and bounteous; he neither in
his youth did any thing rashly, nor in his age any thing negligently. Carrion.
In time of a great famine which was in Rome, he provided for their wants, and
maintained the people with bread and wine, the most of the time the famine
lasted; making victuals to be brought from all parts, and paying for the same
at his own cost.

Having reigned twenty and two years, 23 Says Carrion.
seven months and twenty six days, he dyed of a Fever at Porium the seventh of
March, 70 Carrion.
the year of his life 75. and of Christ 162.

His death was generally lamented, and the Romans did him great honor, and
made sacrifices to him, Canonizing him for a God, and building a Temple also to
him.

Lucius Aelius Verus.
effigy of emperor M. Aurelius Antoninus, Philosophus.
effigy of emperor
This was the first time wherein the Roman Empire was governed by two Augusti;
Domitian was Titus his Associate, yet was he not called or accounted Augustus
until the death of his Brother Titus: but now two Emperors reigned at one and
the self-same time.
THere succeeded Antoninus the Divi fratres, the two adoptive Brethren, Lucius
Aelius Verus, Son to Aelius Verus, (who delighted much in the softer kind of
learning, and was wont to call the Poet Martial his Virgil) and Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, whereof the latter who obscured his Colleague, and survived him long,
was named the Philosopher, who as he excelled all the rest in learning, so he
excelled them likewise in perfection of all royal virtues. Betwixt their
natures and conditions was as much odds as between day and night; the one very
moderate, loving and industrious; the other proud, careless, and cruel; the
fruits whereof the poor Christians felt, whose chiefest Pillars, Polycarpus
Bishop of Smyrna, and Justin Martyr an excellent Philosopher, with more were
put to most cruel deaths.

Yet Heraldus on Tertullian, says, they published no Laws nor Edicts against
the Christians, but the Governors and Magistrates of many Provinces were cruel
toward them, without any new command or Edict.

After his death the whole Government returned to Antoninus Philosophus only,
Vir quem mirari facilius quis quam laudare possit; a principio vitae
tranquillissimus, adeo ut in infantia quoque vultum nec ex gaudio nec ex
maerore mutaret.
whose Symbol was, Regni Clementia custos.

He wrote twelve books of his own affairs, on which both Mr. Gataker has
commented in Latin, and Dr. Merick Casaubon both in Latin and English.

He was sur-named The Philosopher, not only for his knowledge, but also
practice of Philosophy; Eutropius.
Studium Philosophiae constans, and indefessum nomen illi celeberrimum
conciliavit. Gatak. Annotat. in lib. 1. Ant. He had often in his mouth that
speech of Plato, Tune florent respublicae, quando vel Philosophus regit, vel
Rex Philosophatur. Yet some say, that this inscription (of Philosopher)
attributed to him, was not genuine. The Grecians call him only Marcus, or
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, without the addition of Philosopher. Notae P. Voet.
in Marci and Commodi Imperatorum vitam. This good Emperor possessed the Seat of
Majesty 19 years and 11 days, wherein he always approved himself in wit
excellent, in life virtuous, very learned and eloquent, full of clemency,
justice and temperance; Tantum Marco sapientiae, innocentiae, ac literarum
fuit, ut is Marcomannos, cum filio Commodo quem Caesarem suffecerat, petiturus,
Philosophorum obtestantium vi circumfunderetur; ne se expeditioni aut pugnae
prius committeret, quam sectarum ardua and occulta explanavisset. Aurel. Vict.
nothing inferior to most of all the worthiest Emperors before him, nor
matchable in qualities by many of the Monarchs that followed him.

He would not believe that Avidius Cassius could ever have deposed him; and his
reason was, The Gods had greater care of him, than to let Cassius wrong him
undeservedly. Vulc. Gallicanus in vita Avidii Cassii.

Julian the Emperor in his Book entitled Caesares, being a Pasquil or Satyr to
deride all his predecessors, feigned that they were all invited to a Banquet of
the gods, and Silenus the Jester sat at the lower end of the Table, and
bestowed a scoff on every one as they came in; but when Antoninus Philosophus
entered, he was gravelled and out of countenance, not knowing where to carp at
him, save at the last he gave a glance at his patience toward his wife.

When his Armies were even famished The Christian Legion was after that time
called Fulminatrix. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 5. though Valesius (in loc.)
think it improbable, that the whole Legion of the Roman Soldiers at that time
was Christians, (which yet Eusebius seems to affirm) and he would have it
rather called Legio Fulminea, than Fulminatrix. Tertullian in the fifth Chapter
of his Apology mentions it; upon which says Heraldus in his Commentary.
Testata historia, sed quam profani scriptores quum divinam potentiam non
intelligerent, interpolarunt, ac tantum tamque insigne Dei beneficium magicis
incantationibus sacrilege tribuerunt. Istud Cassius, Arnuphis Aegyptii, vel
Iuliani, ut apud Suidam alius nescio quis, magicis procurationibus, Marci
ipsius precibus Capitolinus, moribus pietatique Claudianus, Christiano nomini
iniquiores adscribant. Gatak. Annotat. in Lib. 1. Antonini Imperatoris. His
Wife Faustina (by whose means partly he obtained the Empire) was a Princess,
but a lewd and wanton woman; one counseled him to put her away, but he
answered, Si uxorem dimittimus, reddamus and dotem; choosing rather to have his
house defiled, than little.
for want of Water, the Christians by their prayers procured rain from Heaven
to their great refreshing, and the Barbarians were dashed with thunder and
fire; whereupon he mitigated the rage against Christ's Professors, and in his
time the Church for the most part was in peace. He dyed the seventh day of
March, in the year of our Lord 181. and of his own age fifty nine.

Lucius Aelius Aurel. Commdous.
effigy of emperor
HIS name agreed not with his disposition, he being called Commodus, who (was
according to l. 7. c. 16. Semper incommodus says Vopisous in vita Taciti
Imperatoris. c. 6.
Paulus Orosius) cunctis incommodus.

Dion writes yet, that he was not naturally malicious, but as innocent as any;
only his too great simplicity and timorousness inslaved him to them he
conversed with: through whose seduction he became debauched and cruel.

Concerning his birth there passes this story or fiction; His mother Annia
Valeria Faustina (daughter of Antoninus Pius, and wife of Antoninus
Philosophus) when she saw certain Gladiators or sword-players going to fight,
was monstrously inflamed with the love of one of them: upon whom she doted so
extremely, that her affection was almost grown to phrensy, languishing
wherewith, she confessed her love-madness to her husband. See Iuvenal of Hippia
Sat. 6. from verse 82. to the 114.
He perceiving her distemper to increase, consulted with the Chaldeans or
Soothsayers, what was best to be done in so desperate a case, for the saving
of his wife's life, and the quenching of her unchaste desires. They after long
consideration determined, that there was left for her but one only remedy, as
strange as the disease; viz. to cause the said Gladiator to be murdered
secretly that she might not know of it, and that the next night her husband
intended to lie with her, a cup full of his lukewarm blood changed into the
likeness of water should be given her to drink, ut sese Nescio quis primus
sublavaret hoc loco reposuit pro eo quod vetus editio and scripti codices
habebant, sublevaret. Quam veram esse scripturam quovis pignore contendere sum
paratus. Non dicit autem quomodo sublevaret se Faustina sanguine illius
gladiatoris occisi. Quod de industria tacuit hic auctor, and modestis verbis
mollivit horrendum medicationis genus. Non dubium certe est. pro remedio
sanguinem illum ebibisse Faustinam, atque ita se sublevasse. Nam sublevare,
subvenire, succurrere, juvare, verba sunt medelarum and medicamentorum propria
apud illos qui de experimentis scripserunt. Salmasius in Historiam Augustam. p.
91. Sunt qui scribant, gladiatoris hujus quem Faustina deperibat, sanguinem, in
aquae speciem mutatum, illi infaustae fuisse propinatum; cui reifingendae
videtur vox ista sublevaret ansam praebuisse. Hoc tamen commentum secutus est
ille suaviludius qui inscriptionem eam composuit quae a Faustina posita
fingitur, amore isto liberata. Casaubonus in hunc Capitolini locum. Palatinus
adhaeret vulgatis, sublevaret, quod tamen minus quadrat, says Gruter on the
place.
sublevaret: which was performed accordingly, and she cured of her disease, but
with this bad success; for that night, as it is said, she was delivered of
Commodus, who in qualities resembled that Gladiator upon this occasion, as some
reported: which they ascribed to the power of her imagination, but others
esteemed him a Bastard. Capitolinus in Marco Antonino. c. 17.

The conjecture that Commodus was born in adultery, is confirmed by the Extant
tamen nummi multi in ejus honorem cusi, cum hac i^scriptione, PUDICITIA.
Casaubonus in Hist. Aug.
behavior of Faustina his mother at Cajeta, where she was wont want only to
gaze on naked gladiators and mariners. Capitolinus ibid. Aurelius Victor.

When his mother was with child with him and his twin-brother Antoninus (who
dyed when 4 months old) she dreamed that she brought forth two Serpents, one
whereof, viz. Commodus, as the event proved, exceeded in fierceness. Lampridius
in Commodo. c. 1.

Tiberius presaged of Caligula, that he would prove a very poisonous Serpent to
the people of Rome, and a Phaethon to the whole earth; and so he did, showing
himself not only an enemy to virtue, but also to all that savoured of it.
Suetonius in Caligula. c. 11.

Commodus was more noble by descent than any of the former Emperors, and the
most Fuit revera Commodus forma corporis justa, ut Lampridius; sed ingenio
moribusque plane distortissimis. Gatakerus in Antoninum. p. 45.
beautiful person of his time. Herodianus. l. 1. c. ult.

He has a place in Adrianus Barlandus his book among the Litterati urbis Romae
Principes.

Julius Pollux dedicateth his Onomasticon to him.

Valesius in Excerpta Peiresci thinks Solinus, Author of the Polyhistor, to be
his contemporary, and that he was the Julius Solon who being made Senator with
other bankrupts, was said by way of reproach to he banished into the Senate.

He was so excellent a marks-man, that he would hit with an arrow or dart
whatsoever he (...).
aimed at, exceeding the most expert Parthian Archers, and Numidian Darters
which he had about him. Herodianus l. 1. c. 15. editionis Boeclerianae.

He darted at wild beasts so dexterously, that he never threw the second time,
nor gave them any wound but was mortal. Id. ibid. Nulli certior fuit manus and
majore dexteritate praedita: nisi quam his in rebus nactus erat felicitatem,
studiis foedissimis contaminasset.


-- A nulla mors est incerta sagitta.
Lucanus de Parthis. lib. 8.
His skill is the more remarkable, he being left handed, as Dio writes; who
says, he boasted thereof.

Once he shot forked arrows at Moresco Estriches, which were wonderful swift of
foot, using their wings as sails in running. These he did hit so full in the
neck, that though their heads were struck off with the furiousness of the blow,
yet they ran awhile headless, Gladiator and luctator eximius, Iaculator
certissimus.
as if they had not been hurt. Herodianus ubi supra. Herodianus fine lib. 1.
interpret Stephano.


[ Fromondus writes of an Eagle, whose head being chopped off by an angry Clown,
Dietericus in Breviario historico.
for quarreling with his dog, the Body flew over the barn near the place of
this rude execution. This was done at Fromond his Fathers house; nor is the
story improbable, if we consider what ordinarily happens in Pigeons and Ducks,
when their heads are cut off. He mentions also a Malefactor beheaded at
Antwerp, whose head, when it had given some few jumps into the crowd, and a Dog
fell a licking the blood, caught the Dogs ear in its teeth, and held it so
fast, that he being frighted ran away with the man's head hanging at his ear, to
the great astonishment and confusion of the people. This was told Fromondus by
an ey-witnesse of the fact. Dr. More of the Immortality of the Soul. lib. 3. c.
14.]

Another time a Panther having fastened upon a man, (who was brought into the
lists) so that all thought she would instantly tear him in pieces; Commodus
darted at her so happily, that he killed the beast and saved the man,
preventing the (...). Herodianus, l. 1. c. 15.
impression of her teeth with the point of his dart.

[ Alcon seeing his son Phalerus (one of the Argonauts) sleeping on the grass,
and a Serpent creeping on his breast, slew the Serpent, and saved his son.

-- Non sic libravit in hostem
Spicula, qui nato Serpentis corpore cincto
Plus timuit dum succurrit; dum jactibus iisdem
Interitum vitamque daret; stabilemque teneret
Cord tremente manum; totamque exiret in artem
Spe propiore metus; dans inter membra duorum
Vnius mortem. --
Sidonius Apollinaris in paneg. Majoriani, videsis Servium in sextam Virgilii
Eclogam.]

Commodus slew also 100 Lions with so many darts; Dio says Bears.
their bodies falling in such order, that they might easily be numbered (not one
dart miscarrying.) Herodianus ubi supra.

[ Celeberrimum illud est, Commodum Caesarem in solicitudinibus and
aestuationibus theatricorum certaminum, quando ex superiore loco ursos jaculis
impetebat: quod refert Dion, ingens poculum dulcis vini solitum haurire (...).
In quo a spectantibus id in conviviis frequens, succlamatum fuerit, (...), id
est Vivas: sed amphibolice pronunciatum Grammatici contendunt, perinde ac
dicatur; Compleas vivendi modum, id est, Morere. Rhodiginus Antiqu. Lectionum.
l. 7. c. 26.]

He used to retain with him the children of them whom he sent to be Lieutenants
of Provinces, as pledges of their Allegiance and fidelity. Herodianus l. 3. c.
2.

Commodus Imperii paterni, non and instituti haeres. Gatakerus in Ant. p. 4.
resembled his Father in nothing, but that he also in person fought fortunately
against the Germans. Eutropius l. 8.

He exceeded in lust, covetousness, and cruelty; was faithful to none: and most
fierce against those whom he had before advanced to the greatest honors, and
enriched with most vast rewards. Sextus Aurelius Victor in his Epitome.

He and Heliogabalus conferred all the dignities of the Empire upon men for
lust and licentiousness most like unto themselves. Patris virtutes spurcissimis
vitiis expunxit, adeo difficilius est, filium probum gignere, quam eligere;
felicibus ab usque Trajano adoptionibus, infelicissima in Marco sobole.
Bussieres in Flosculis Hist.
Walsinghams Manual.

Commodus was so monstrously debauched, that very often he encountered the
Gladiators at their own weapons in the Amphitheatre. Victor's Epitome.

Gladiatoribus convixit, and gladiatorem se perfectum exhibuit: secutoribus
cumprimis tam impense favens, ut (Dione auctore) eorum armatura uteretur.
Gatakerus in Antoninum (...) p. 4.

He was the first Emperor that had been hitherto born in the time of his
Fathers Empire. Dr. Heylin's Geography.

He was the first Roman Emperor who through covetousness sold offices for
money; Vespasian had done it before him, but through necessity, finding the
commonwealth in debt, and the treasure exhausted. Mariana and Turquet's
History of Spain translated by Grimston.

He killed some though innocent, instead of others who were guilty, and did let
offenders escape for money. Lampridius in Commodo. cap. 14.

If any one had an enemy of whom he would be revenged, he needed but to bargain
with Commodus for a sum of money to kill him. Id. Ibid.

He pretended that he would go into Africa, that he might raise money for that
feigned journey, which when he had gathered, he spent in banqueting and gaming.
Id. ib.

He was so careless in serious matters that he wrote nothing more than Vale in
many of his letters; and so serious in things of light or ill concernment, that
he caused to be registered how often he frequented the fence-school, with all
his cruelties and impurities. Id. ibid. c. 13 compared with the 11. and 15.

He encountered the Gladiators 735 times, says Lampridius in his life, cap. 11.
and 12. the same Author writes that 365 of those fights were in his Fathers
reign. On which place Casaubon observes, Est digna res maxima admiratione,
hanc filii sui insaniam tantum virum inhibere non potuisse.

He employed not himself in any thing which In his artifex, quae stationis
imperatoriae non erant. Lampridius. cap. 1.
became an Emperor; making glasses, dancing, singing, piping, playing the
Buffoon and fencer: bathing seven or eight times in the day, eating in the
Bath, drinking in the Theater in woman's habit; Homo furiosus putabat magnum
facere, cum suos convivas ab esu ciborum quibus ipse delectaretur hac spurcitie
averteret. Casaubonus.
mingling human excrements with the daintiest fare, tasting them himself,
thinking so to mock others. Id. Ibid.

He kept 300 Concubines, and so many Boys which he used as women; whereof
Saoterus was chief: like Commod. Imperator, qui natus est eo die quo Caligula;
tanquam eundem haberet horoscopum, and ipse sorores constupravit, concubinasque
suas sub oculis suis constuprari ab amicis jubebat. Beroald. in Suet. Caligulam
habuit velut exemplar quod imitaretur. Id. Ibid.
Caligula commanded women to be ravished in his sight, committed incest as he
did with all his Sisters; and exceeded him (says Tristan) in polluting the
Temples with whoredom and human blood.

We read not of any Emperors which were more cruel, than those who were most
fearful and effeminate; as Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, Commodus. B. Reynolds of
the Passions. p. 152.

His natural incontinence was incredibly enflamed with diverse sorts of
ointments (used by him to preserve himself from the Pestilence, whilst it
reigned throughout Italy) which were of so hot and subtle a quality, that they
excited in him the unquenchable flames of extraordinary lasciviousness.
Theodorus Metochita.

What names this beastly Monster, rather than Emperor, gave to his attendants,
I dare not mention, lest I should offend chaste ears, and modest minds. Camden
in his Remains.

He was so cruel, that when he was but twelve years old, because the bath in
which he washed was a little too warm, he commanded that the heater of it
should be cast into a hot furnace: but his Tutor Pitholaus who was put upon the
employment, burned a wethers skin instead of the man; ut fidem poenae de
faetore nidoris impleret. Lampridius in Commodo. c. 1.

Dio lib. 71. reports that the Physicians poisoned his Father to gratify him.

He put to death his Wife Crispina, his eldest sister Lucilla soror Commodi,
quae nupta fuerat Vero, post Very mortem a Commodo commode tractata. Caeterum
postquam Commodus uxorem duxit, coacta cedere imperatoris uxori, adeo id aegre
tulit, ut adversus fratrem occultam seditionem moverit. Ea cum male cessisset,
ingens Commodo in Senatum Romanum odium concitavit, ita ut inde Commodus
nunquam been commodarit urbi. Vnde Perennis occasionem nactus bona reorum
piscandi, tantas congessit divitias, ut ad imperium occupandum aspirarit. Sed
ut is oppressus, Cleander non minor tyrannus successit. Quo caeso, deinde
caedes promiscue durarunt, donec per concubinam Marciam ac alios conjuratos
Commodus strangulatus est. Glareanus in Eutropium.
Lucilla, and Annia Faustina his Fathers Cousin German, with 24 of the
eminentest Personages of the Roman Empire.

Interfecit quamplurimos senatores, maxim quos animadvertit nobilitate
industriaque excellere. P. Orosius l. 7. c. 16.

He commanded one to be cast to wild beasts, for reading the life of Caligula
in Suetonius, because he had the same birthday with Caligula. August 31.
Lampridius in Commod. c. 10.

Some for deferring to kill their Antagonists, he commanded to be tied together
with them, and so to fight all at once: which being done, they strove each
against other, and killed diverse of the Spectators, who were forced by the
narrowness of the place, and multitude to press too near. Xiphilinus in Commodo.

His very jests were cruel; seeing one have white hairs among black ones, he
set on his head a starling, which thinking it picked worms, made festers.
Lampridius in Commodo. c. 10.

He cut a fat man off at the middle of the belly, that he might see his entrals
drop out suddenly. Id. ibid. c. 10.

He called them Monopodios vocando, quibus singulos pedes fregisset Commodus,
per jocum adludebat ad gentis illius appellationem; quibus a natura finguli
tantum pedes, atque inde (...) and (...) dicebantur: nec mihi dubium est eo
respexisse per jocum, cum illis appellationibus luderet in rebus tristissimi
exempli saevissimus imperator. Salmasius. Quos luscos fecisset jocose
appellabat Commodus Luscinios. Luscinii autem sunt Lusciniae; nam Luscinius and
Luscinia dicebatur. Id. ibid.
Monopodii and Luscinii whom he deprived of a foot or eye. Id. ib.

He made the Priests of Isis beat their breasts with Pine-apples to the
mischieving of themselves; charged Bellona her worshippers to cut off their arm
in earnest: and stained the service of Mithras with real homicide. Lampridius
in Commodo. c. 9.

He imitated Chirurgions in letting blood, and Barbers in trimming; under which
pretense he cut off ears and noses: wherefore such was his jealousy of all men,
that he was forced to be his own Barber.

Commodus once gathered together all the sick men and cripples in Rome, to
whose knees tying somewhat like the feet of Dragons, (such as Poets feign the
Giants have) he killed them with his club, having first given them spunges to
throw at him instead of stones, with seeming opposition. Quia dicitur Hercules
cum monstris and gigantibus pugnasse, and vicisse, voluit and novus hic
Hercules Romanus gigantes occidere. Vix credi possit tantus furor, nisi
narraret qui praesens vidit omnia Dio. Casaubonus.

Having killed an Ostrich and cut off his head, he came where the Senators sat
in the Theater, and holding out the birds head in one hand, and a bloody sword
in the other, said nothing: only nodded his head with a smiling countenance, to
show he would do as much for them. Which moving laughter, had occasioned the
slaughter of many; had not Dio persuaded those who sat near him, to champ bay
leaves (which he took out of his Chaplet) as himself did, by the constant
motion of his mouth, to conceal the indicium of laughter.

Under a show of fencing he often slew his Antagonists, who encountered him only
with foils. Aurelius Victor.

Histories not only affirm that he played the Gladiator, but his statue in that
fashion stark naked, with his drawn sword in his hand, is yet extant at Rome in
the Farnesian Palace. See Sandys Travels l. 4.

He imitated Neronis insania Commodi turpitudini per omnes flagitii gradus
(...) est, ideoque hic a nobis producta, egregium sc. par: princeps histrio and
gladiator. Boeclerus in Herodianum. p. 380.
Nero in driving of Chariots, and if Laetus had not deterred him, he would have
burned Rome, as Nero did.

So exceeding great was the madness of this vile monster, that he sent a letter
to the Senate with this style: Imperator Caesar Lucius, Aelius, Aurelius,
Commodus, Antoninus, Augustus, Pius, Foelix, Sarmaticus, Germanicus maximus,
Peireskius misit ad Cottonum ectypos variorum nummorum, ac nominatim Commodi,
ob inusitatam scripturam vocis Britannia, per duplex T T, and simplex N.
Gassendus de vita Peireskii. lib. 2.
Britannicus, pacator orbis terrarum, Invictus, Romanus Cum quo jaculandi art
ferasque occidendi industria certabat. Ferunt enim multas summa dexteritate
necare, and uno quidem ictu solitum. Album item, quodcunque poneretur
collineando ferire consuevisse, and vulnera, plagasque lethales dijudicavisse.
Ant. Augustinus Dial. V. Antiq.
Hercules, Pontifex Maximus, Tribunitiae potestatis, XVIII. Imperator, VIII.
Consul, VII. Pater Patriae, etc. Xiphilinus in Commodo.

The former Emperors at pleasure sometimes took some few names to themselves,
sometimes bestowed them on others. In latter times, virtue decaying, ambition
in titles increased. Yet Justinian accounted as a sober Emperor, has his style
notwithstanding not much shorter. Imp. Caesar Flavius Justinianus, Alemannicus,
Gothicus, Francicus, Germanicus, Anticus, Alanicus, Vandalicus, Africanus,
Pius, Foelix, Inclytus victor, ac Triumphator semper Augustus. Sr. H. Savil on
Tacitus's History. p. 36.

He called Rome after his name, and all the months after his sur-names, viz.

January, Amazonius. February, Invictus. March, Faelix. April, Pius. May,
Lucius. June, Aelius. July, Aurelius. August. Commodus. September, Augustus.
October, Herculeus. November, Romanus. December, Exuperatorius.
Which titles through madness he often altered, except that of Amazonius, taken
up out of love to Marcia his Concubine, whose picture he wore upon the outside
of his garment; and of Exuperatorius, because he would have been thought to
excel all men: as appears by his being sacrificed to as a God. Lampridius in
Commodo. c. 11. and 9.

When his Favorite Perennis was dead, he repealed many things that were done by
him; but persisted not above 30 days in his reformation, permitting Cleander
to be more licencious than Perennis: He designing 25 Consuls for one year, which
was never done before, nor since; and changing the Pretorian Prefects daily and
hourly: Martius Quartus holding the place only 5 days, Niger but 6 hours; and
those whom Commodus himself made Prefects, lasted not 3 years. Lampridius in
Commodo. c. 6. and. 15.

Yea to such dotage he was grown, (...); Athenaeus lib. 12. c. 9.
that he refused his fathers name, commanding himself, in stead of Commodus the
son of Marcus, to be styled Hercules the son of Jupiter; and accordingly he
forsook the Roman and Imperial habit, thrusting himself into a Lions skin, and
carried a great club in his hand: and (which made him extremely ridiculous) he
put on also purple Amazonian robes embroydered with gold; expressing in one and
the same garb austerity and effeminateness: this was his daily attire.

Camden writes in his Britannia that a statue of Commodus was dug out of an
hill in Richmond-shire, called Burgh, where the Romans had a garrison. Tunc
posita haec statua videatur, says he, cum ille immodicus sui aestimator, eo
vesaniae processerit, ut Herculem Romanum Iovis filium se dici jusserit. Est
enim Herculis habitu efformata, and dextra clava armata, cui subest mutila, and
lacunis interrupta inscriptio.

Fox in his Acts and Monuments says, Commodus wore a Lions skin, that he might
be counted King of men, as the Lion is of beasts.

He commanded many Statues of himself to be erected throughout the City, and
one before the Senate House in form of an Archer ready to shoot; that his very
Images might strike terror into the beholders. Herodian. lib. 1. c. 14.
Lampridius in Commodo. c. 9. Dio.

He was so mad that he purposed to forsake his palace, and live in a
fence-school; and now being weary of the name of Hercules, he assumed the name
of a famous sword-player deceased.

On New Years day he determined in great solemnity to issue forth of a
fenceschool, from which Marcia, Laetus, and Electus dissuaded him; but he
incensed with them, commanded them to depart, and retiring into his
bedchamber, to repose himself at noon (as he was wont,) he wrote their names
in a table book, dooming them to death that night. De multis jugulandis
cogitans, ipse jugulatur ultimo die anni. Cappellus.
Having done this, he laid his table book on the pallet, not imagining that any
would enter into his chamber. His darling Philo-Commodus being sport-ful while
Commodus was bathing entered the bedchamber (as he used) and taking the book to
play with, as he came forth again was met by Marcia; who took the book from
him, lest he might spoil some weighty matter. As soon as she perceived it was
Commodus his own hand, she greatly desired to read it. But finding the deadly
contents, she discovered to Electus and Laetus the danger they were in, who all
resolved to purchase their own security by Commodus his death, and concluded it
most convenient to Et Commodum quidem primo occultatius veneno petivere, anno
regni tertio fere atque decimo: cujus vis frustrata per cibum quo se casu
repleverat; cum tandem alvi dolorem causaretur, auctore medico principe
factionis in palaestram perrexit. ibi per ministrum ungendi, (nam forte is
quoque e consilio erat) faucibus quasi art exerciti^ bracchiorum nodo validius
pressis, exspiravit. Aurelius Vict. Schotti.
dispatch him by poison; which Marcia having given to him, it cast him into a
slumber, out of which awaking he vomited extremely: the conspirators fearing
fullness might expel the poison, with great promises persuade Narcissus a bold
young man to strangle him.

He lived 31 years 4 months, reigned 12 years, 9 months and 14 days. In him
the Aelian together with the Aurelian family was extinguished, as the Julian in
Nero. Tristan.

How joyful his death was both to Senate and people, their assemblies in the
Temples to give thanks for their deliverance, and their execrations pronounced
against him, at large reported by Lampridius, do manifest.

He was counted an enemy of mankind, both while he lived and after his death.
Orosius, Eutropius.

The Christians escaped Quoniam lege veteri in Christianos confitentes ac
perseverantes capitalis poena fuerat constituta, M. Aurelius Princeps (...),
sed hac quidem in re paulo superstitiosior and legum observantior, legem omnino
tollere noluit, sed eam quo potuit modo enervavit and frustratus est, capitali
poena in accusatores constituta. Atque haec est causa praecipua, propter quam
imperante Commodo and usque ad edictum Severi Ecclesia tanta pace ac
tranquillitate usa est. Heraldus in Apologet. Tertul. p. 46.47.
persecution from him by the mediation of Marcia* who favored their doctrine.
Dio.

Of all Emperors until Constantine he was most favorable unto Christians,
whatsoever he was otherwise. Montague's Acts and Monuments of the Church. c. 7.
paragr. 115.

In respect of much persecution before, those times were called Halcyonia sub
Commodo Ecclesiae. Lloid's consent of time, p. 599.

Redintegrata adfulsit Imperante Commodo Britannis Lux Christiana. Seldeni
Janus Anglor. lib. 1.

Anno a Christo Domino in salutem misso 183. Lucius primus Rex Christianus.
Etenim (...) Eleutherius P P. and Commodus Aug. Ex quo plane fallit Beda, and
fallitur in suo de hac re (...). Idem in Chronologia ancillante ad finem Jani
Angl. Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca Christo subdita, scripsit hisce
temporibus Tertullianus. Vsserius in Indice Chronologico Brit. Eccl. Primordiis
subjuncto. p. 1079.

Silenus (in Julian the Apostate's Satyr against the Emperors his
Predecessors) passes by Commodus in silence, as not worth a jest; but taxes
his Father for leaving such a plague after him to the Roman Empire, knowing
what a one his Son was: having a Son-in-law Pompeianus worthier to rule than
this Phaethon, and who was able to give better advice to him, than he could
give to himself.

From the time of this wicked Emperor Commodus, to Gordian who was the 28.
Emperor, greater were the troubles of the Roman Empire than before. Dr. Richard
Reynolds the Physician in his Chronicle of the Emperors, p. 161.

In his reign there died often on one day at Rome of the Pestilence, 2000. An
innumerable company perished not only in the City, but also throughout all the
Roman Empire almost, by infected needles cast upon them by malicious persons;
an evil that happened in Domitian his time: but the people of Rome thought no
pest so grievous as Commodus, says Dio.

From hence the Roman story proceeds from the golden age to that of iron; such
a change there was of affairs under Commodus. Xiphilinus in Marco Ant. Philos.

A Commodo in Constantinum Magnum, si unius and alterius principis tempora and
merita excipimus, nihil aliud licet animad vertere, quam caedes assiduas
principum, scelera atque prodigia tyrannidis, lanienas virorum illustrium,
dedecora, vulnera, ruinas imperii; quas auspicato exortu Magnus ille
Constantinus paulisper stitit ac sufflaminavit. Boeclerus in Epistola
dedicatoria, praefixa Herodiano.

His Deputy in Britain, Vlpius Marcellus, was so vigilant that the Soldiers
thought he never slept at night; and of such temperance, that he caused his
bread to be brought to him into the Camp, from Rome, that for the staleness of
it, he might eat no more than was needful. See Suidas in (...).

Commodus insequitur, pugnis maculosus arenae;
Threicio princeps bella movens gladio.
Eliso tandem persolvens gutture poenas,
Chriminibus fassus matris adulterium.
Ausonius. P. Helvius Pertinax,
effigy of emperor
WAS so called either for his reluctance in accepting the Empire, or Quod long
verisimilius est, says Boeclerus in Herodianum.
rather for his pertinacious resolution in his youth to be a Wood-monger, as
his father was, when he would have made him a Scholar.

Yet at last he was persuaded by his Father to apply himself to learning, He is
reckoned by Barlandus among the learned Roman Emperors.
in which he was such a proficient, that he succeeded his Master Sulpitius
Apollinaris in the teaching of Grammar: but gaining little thereby, Xiphilinus
in Commodo says, he was skilful in Greek.
he served in the Camp with such proof of his valor, that upon the death of
Commodus he was chosen Emperor. For the murder being done in the night, Laetus
went in all have to Pertinax, and saluted him with the unexpected name of
Emperor; but he thought Laetus was sent from Commodus to kill him, till he was
certified of Commodus his death, by one of his servants whom he sent to view
his carcass.

So different was the opinion of all men concerning Pertinax and Commodus, that
many hearing of Commodus his death, thought the report was raised by himself to
try men's inclinations; wherefore many Governors of Provinces imprisoned those
who related it, not because they would not have had the news to be true, but
for that they thought it more dangerous to believe the death of Commodus, than
not to come in to Pertinax, by whom every one was confident that they should be
easily pardoned, whereas with Commodus innocence gave no security. Excerpta
Peiresci. p. 728.

Julian the Apostate in his Caesar's feigneth that Pertinax was admitted into
the Banquet of the Gods, where he complained of his Assasinates. Nemesis
commiserating him, says they shall have small joy thereof; yet charged him
that he seemed to be conscious of Commodus his death, or at least to approve of
it.

Pertinax was forced to accept the Empire by Laetus and Electus, when he was
above 60 years old; yet admitted not any symbol of sovereignty, and declined so
envious a Title, till compelled by the Senate.

He chiefly refused the Empire, because he was to succeed a Tyrant, who by his
disorders had so impoverisht the State, and rendered the Soldiers so loose, that
he saw 'twas impossible to avoid a public odium, by the use of a necessary
remedy. Tristan.

He would not let his Wife receive the title of Empress, Sufficere inquit,
debet, quod ego ipse invitus regnavi, quum non mererer.
nor his son be called Caesar, as the Senate had decreed, lest he should be
corrupted, but deferred it till he might deserve it; not admitting him being a
youth into the Court, Iornandes.
but causing him to lead a private life.

He permitted not his Name to be stamped on the peculiar goods of the Emperors,
saying, That the propriety thereof belonged to the State in general. Herodian.
l. 2. c. 4.

He enacted that all the wast ground in Italy and other Countries (though of
the Princes demesne) should be improved and freely given to them who would
manur^ it: to which purpose, he granted to husbandmen 10 years immunity from
all taxes, and security from all further trouble during his reign. Herodian.

He banished informers, preserved the commoners from the injury of Soldiers,
and released all Imposts exacted by Tyrants. Id.

He never could be induced to revenge an injury. S. A. Victoris Epitome.

He was too negligent of his Wife Flavia Titiana's chastity, who openly loved a
In matronarum, etiam principum, amoribus, primas semper ferunt parts
citharaedi; adeo per aures ad animum blande influit vox duplex, oris fidiumque:
capiunturque praterea oculi gesticulatione illa manuum irrequietarum. Gruterus.
Fiddler; he in the mean time being as ardently and infamously enamoured on his
Concubine Cornificia. Capitolinus. c. 13.

He was called (...), a giver of good words, because he was rather a fawning
than a kind Prince; promising well but performing ill.

Such was his Capitolinus negligentius dicam an sinisterius interdum de moribus
ejus judicat. Boeclerus in Herodianum. p. 395.
niggardliness, that he would set before his guests a Sallad of Lettuce divided
into two parts; and except something were sent him, he would appoint nine pound
weight of flesh unto three messes; and if any other dish happened to be
presented to him, he caused it to be set up until the next day. Gruterus.
He would send to his friends two morsels of meat, or part of a tripe, and for
exceedings a leg or wing of a hen. Capitolinus in Pertinace. c. 12.

Tristan paralleleth him with Vespasian.

His strict discipline and short donatives displeased the Soldiers, who
conspired against him, and elected Falco Emperor, whom the Senate sentenced,
but Pertinax cried out, God forbid, that during my reign any Senator be put to
death, though deservedly. Xiphiline.

Laetus pretending to punish this sedition, caused the death of diverse
Soldiers, that the rest might mutiny, which they did, two hundred entering the
Palace with drawn swords, whom Pertinax was advised to fly from: but he
indiscreetly rejecting that good council, met them, thinking with his Majesty
to make them afraid and leave off their enterprise, which fell out accordingly;
for immediately they all retreated, except one Tausius a Tungrian, who Ter
Consul, Commodi insidiis eripitur, ac diademate donatur, sed funesto, ut quo
non totos tres menses potitus sit. Jac. Cappellus in cent. Eccles. Hist. p. 46.
ran him into the breast, saying, Hunc tibi gladium milites mittunt.

Dio censureth him thus, Non norat homo multarum rerum peritus, multa simul
tuto corrigi non posse: sed si quid aliud in rebus humanis, tum imprimis
reipublicae constitutionem and tempus and sapientiam requirere.

He having endured all manner of labors, and being bandied from one extreme to
another, P. Helvius Pertinax, iterum Consul, and adhuc privatus appellatur,
Inscript. IV. p. 56. e qua simul convellitur id, quod aiunt, Pertinacem fuisse
dictum, quod imperium Pertinaciter recusasset.
was called the 'Tennisbal of fortune.

Pertinax, quamvis plerunque virtus militaris in agrestem feritatem, pacis
industria in pusillanimitatem excedit, utraque laud praestabat, gravis bello,
pace prudens. Et audaciam quidem cum virtute, adversus exteros and seditiosos:
aequitatem vero cum justitia, erga populares and modestos adhibebat. Cumque
provectus esset ad imperium orbis, non ita se imparem tali fastigio passus est
deprehendi, ut modo humiliorem justo, modo insolentiorem se praeberet, Christ.
Ad. Ruperti Observat. in minorem Besoldi Synopsin. p. 334.
sed per omnia ab initio usque ad finem aequabili tenore usus, gravis fuit sine
tristitia, comis sine humilitate, prudens sine calliditate, justus sine
acerbitate, frugalis sine sorditie, magnanimus sine arrogantia. Excerpta
Peiresci.

He lived 67 years lacking 4 months and 3 days, and reigned 87 days, says
Dio. lib. 73.

Hujusdem dignissima illa vox est, quae aureis literis scribatur in omnibus
curiis ac palatiis: Satius est inopem rempub. obtinere, quam ad divitiarum
cumulum per discriminum atque dedecorum vestigia pervenire. Christoph. Ad.
Rupertus in Besoldi synop. min. p. 335.

His greatest fault was his ill husbandry; for as trees in their first growth
are defended by briars, which afterward uncut up, overthrow the flourishing of
the tree: so an unlawful elected Prince seldom escapes pulling down, by those
that set him up; for covetousness being the cause of their combination, nothing
can serve their unsatiable desires, nor be thought a sufficient recompense. Sir
W. Cornwallis the younger in his Encomium of Julian the Apostate.

Pertinacis Principatus solo tempore minor est optimi cujusque Principis
regimine, says Boeclerus in his dedicatory Epistle prefixed to Herodian;
adding, Id quod etiam de Maximo and Balbino potest affirmari.

Being dead, it was decreed he should be called Divus; in whose praise with
ingeminated shouts, till they were hoarse again, the people cried out:
Pertinace imperante securi viximus: neminem timuimus. Patri pio, Patri Senatus,
Patri omnium bonorum. Victor's Epitome.

Helvi judicio and consulto lecte Senatus,
Princeps decretis prodite, non studiis.
Quod docuit malefida cohors, errore probato,
Curia quod castris cesserat Imperio.
Ausonius. Didius Iulianus.
effigy of emperor
Mire nugantur Georgius Monachus and Cedrenus, qui Didium (...) nuncupatum
scribunt, quod magna pecuniae vi imperium esset mercatus. Christop. Adami
Ruperti Observat. in mi norem Synopsin Besoldi, p. 337.
SOLDIERS proclaiming the sale of the Empire, Iulian's wife and his daughters,
with some Parasites, urged him to accept of the proffer, since he could exceed
any in largesses. Herodian. l. 2. c. 6.

Sulpitian Father-in-law to Pertinax offered each Soldier 200 Crowns, but
Julian out-bidding him, and promising more than they demanded or expected,
obtained the Empire of them; who feared lest Sulpitian might revenge Pertinax
his death, as his Competitor suggested to them. Xiphiline.

Herodian justly complains of this Donative; Omittitur in serie Imperatorum a
nonnullis Julianus, tum quia malo more imperium mercatus erat, tum quia statim
res novae ipsum exceperunt, rectoribus provinciarum ejus imperium
detrectantibus, donec rerum summa ad Severum pervenit. Intervallum ergo illud
inter Pertinacis mortem, and Severi initia, certamina potius de Principatu,
quam Principatum habuit. Atque ita habemus causam cur and Julianus
praetereatur, and Pertinacis imperio plures adjiciantur menses. Imperio,
inquam, ejus nor vitae intervallum turbarum post mortem ejus exortarum
contribuitur. Boeclerus in Herodianum p. 390.
From this occasion and beginning, the Soldiers grew every day more shameless,
and less regardful of their Prince: so that their covetousness increasing, and
the contempt they had of their Emperors waxing more and more, ended at last in
their frequent shedding of their blood, in hope to have a better market of the
next Successor.

Barlandus places Julian among the learned Roman Princes.

He entered the City, all the Soldiers calling him Emperor, the Citizens
neither daring to resist, nor yet approving the election by joyful
acclamations, as the custom was to other Emperors; but cursing him and
throwing stones at him. Herodian ubi supra.

He being hated, Syria elected Niger, Germany chose Severus Emperor, who took
Albinus as partner.

The rise of these 3 Commanders, with the fall of Julian, was prognosticated by
the appearance of 3 Stars about the Sun (while Julian sacrificed) conspicuous
to all but the flattering pur-blind Senators. Xiphiline.

A boy also divining by a looking-glass, saw Severus his advance and Iulian's
departure. Spartian c. 7.

Severus hasting to Rome was met by Ambassadors from Julian with the offer of
half the Empire; which he refused, and was by the Senate (who lately proclaimed
him Traitor) declared Emperor.

Duo ingentia gravabant virum odia: alterum militum quod eis promissa dare non
poterat; alterum populi, quod perfidus in optimum principem fuisse traderetur.
Glareanus in Eutropium. Orosius, ab initio Pertinacis ad finem Iuliani, annum
unum absumptum fuisse dicit, senis mensibus utriusque Imperio imputatis. Quod
falsum est; vix enim dimidium anni inter initium Pertinacis and Severi
interjectum est. Scaliger in Eusebium. Menses septem imperium tenuit, necem
magno emercatus. Cappellus.
The soldiers discontented because Julian kept not his Covenant, and hoping to
purchase favor with Severus, slew their Chapman in his palace; he thus
expostulating with them, Quid rei gravis admisi? quem interfeci?

He was so penurious, that if any one had sent him a Pig or an Hare, it served
3 days; often supping only on pulse or herbs. Spartianus in Iuliano. c. 3.

He lived 60 years, 4 months, and so many days; and reigned 66 days. Dio.

Annus CXCV. tres Imperatores vidit, P. Helvium Pertinacem, M. Didium Iulianum,
and L. Septimium Severum: priores duo paucorum mensium, posterior multorum
annorum fuit. Marcus Velserus Rerum Augustae Vindelicorum l. 6. p. 136, 137.

He being old, honorable and rich, by the purchase of the Empire lessened his
estate, impaired his credit, and lost his life.

Dii been, quod spoliis Didius non gaudet opimis;
Et cito perjuro praemia dempta seni.
Tuque Severe pater titulum ne horresce novantis;
Non rapit Imperium vis tua, sed recipit.
Ausonius. Usurpers.
Pescennius Niger, Clodius Albinus

effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
ENGAGED both in the war against Septimius Severus, Miror Onuphrium Panvinium
homi nem alioqui diligentem, adulterina quaedam secutum unmismata, in suis
commentariis edidisse, C. PESCENNIUS. NIGERIUS.
with like unfortunate event, being both conquered, and having their heads set
upon a pole.

Niger had his name a nigra cervice, says Spartian in his life c. 6. who
writes c. 1. that his Father was, called Annius Fuscus.

Albinus was so called, quod, exceptus utero, Vrsinus in Dionem. p. 1052.
contra consuetudinem puerorum qui nascuntur, and solent rubere, esset
candidissimus. Capitolinus in his life c. 4. who confirms his relation with
this passage in an Epistle of Ceionius Posthumous (Father of Albinus) to Aelius
Bassianus then Proconsul of Africa: Nigrum Albino adjunximus, quia ambo
consortes belli fuerunt contra Severum; etiam Nominis, quod alter ab albedine
corporis (qua, infans editus in lucem, caeteris infantibus rubedine obductis)
alter a nigredine colli traxit; quin and exitu similes, nam utrorumque caput
cruci affixum. Elenchus MS. Numismatum in Bibliotheca Bodleiana.
Filius mihi natus est, ita candidus statim toto corpore, ut linteamen quo
exceptus est, vinceret. Quare susceptum eum Albinorum Familiae, quae mihi tecum
communis est, dedi, Albini nomine imposito.

Fuit candore mirabili, and ut plerique putant, ex eo nomen accepit. Id. ibid.
c. 13.

Niger his voice was so loud and piercing, that it would be heard a mile,
unless the wind stood cross, says Spartian in Nigro. c. 6.

He would have his soldiers when they went to battle, carry neither gold nor
silver in their purses, but leave it with the Commonwealth, that the fight
being ended they might have it again: or if they dyed, their wives and children
might enjoy it. Id. ibid. c. 10.

He was a great admirer of Annibal and Marius; for the Scipio's he thought them
rather fortunate than valiant: there was no toil he commanded his soldiers, but
himself would bear a part therein, even in carrying of burdens. And yet so far
from vaunting, as that when one would have set forth his Acts, he bad him write
of theirs who were dead; holding it a vanity to write of those, of whose favor
or wrath the inditers stood in hope or fear. Id. ibid. c. 11, 12.

When his Soldiers mutinyed for want of wine, he said to them, What need you
wine, Spartianus operae pretium sane fecit, in colligendis, quae de Nigro and
Albino reperiri poteran; caeteri enim sparsim and carptim agunt. Boeclerus in
Herodianum. p. 308.
that have the River Nile to drink of? Spartianus ubi supra. c. 7.

That water is better than ours; (for it will feed a pace, and therefore the
Egyptians would not let their calvish God Apis drink thereof.) Bp. Smith's
Sermons, p. 28.

Idem ob unius gallinacei direptionem, december commanipulones qui raptum ab uno
comederant, securi percuti jussit; and fecisset, Praelia Severianorum eum
Nigrianis per seriem annotavit Dio. Id. ibid. p. 410.
nisi ab omni exercitu prope usque ad motum seditionis esset rogatus: and quum
pepercisset, jussit ut denorum gallinaceorum precia provinciali redderent december
qui simul furto convixerant. Spartianus in Nigro. c. 10.

Vir domi forisque conspicuus, Non tantam illi conspicuitatem tribuit Dio, qui
modice modesteque de illo loquitur. Salmasius.
imperator infaelix. Id. ibid. c. 6.

Niger was overthrown at the first encounter of his party with Severus, through
the treachery of Aemilianus his General, as it was thought; and the next fight
in which he engaged personally, was totally defeated, near the Bay of Issus,
where Alexander the Great vanquished Darius.

Severus having compelled Niger's Captains (whose children he kept as pledges)
to betray their Masters affairs, when he had attained his ends, slew them and
their children. Herodianus lib. 3. c. 2. and. 5.

Albinus warred with Severus, for withholding the copartner-ship promised him;
whom Severus feared as a valiant Soldier, whereas he slighted Julian and Niger,
who were negligent and luxurious.

Armorum strenuus, prorsus ut non male sui temporis Catilina diceretur.
Capitolinus in Albino. c. 3. Severus regnavit 18. annos, creatus hoc anno 3.
Kalend. Octobr. frustra renitentibus Albino and Pescennio Nigro. Et Niger
quidem hoc quoque periit anno. Albinum autem inescaturus Severus, ei partem
imperii offert. Jac. Cappellus in Hist. Eccles. 5. Centuriis ad annum Christi.
193.


Albinus did eat so much, as humane reason cannot well comprehend, says
Capitolinus in his life. c. 11. In the morning fasting he dispatched 500 dried
figs and an 100 Campanian peaches, 10 melons of Ostia, and 20 pound weight of
Lavican grapes, besides an hundred gnatnappers and 40 Oisters.

Hoc tamen in eo laudandum, quod aversae Veneris semper fuerit ignarus.
Christoph. Adamus Rupertus in Besoldi minorem historiae synopsin. p. 340.

Albinus with the choice Soldiery of Britain entered France and near Lions took
the fi^ld against Severus; but with no better success than Niger had done in
Asia the less.

Severus taking Albinus prisoner, commanded him to be slain, caused his body to
be laid before his palace, rode over him, and at last cast his mangled corpse
(the stench whereof could not be endured) into the river Rhosn, with the
carkases of his wife and children.

Circa majestatem Imperatoris infamamur, tamen nunquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani,
vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani. Tertullianus ad Scapulam. cap. 2.

Of the possession of the East by Cassius first against Antonine, and then by
Niger against Severus, and of the West by Albinus against the same Severus, and
by their respective accomplices Tertullian says; None of the Christians were
ever found to be Albinians, Nigrians, or Cassians. That is, they none of them
interested themselves in the causes of Albinus, Niger, or Cassius, or were
partakers with, upholders of, or sticklers for them. Mr. Gee in The Magistrates
Original illustrated and vindicated. chapter 10. Sect. 7.

L. Septimius Severus.
effigy of emperor
HE was one of the 25 Consuls made in one year by Cleander, Commodus his
favorite. Xiphilinus in Commodo.

He was an African, of so low birth, that, when he enrolled himself into the
family of Marcus Aurelius, one Pollenius Sebennus is reported to have said, O
Caesar I congratulate thy fortune, that thou have found a Father: as if he had
not had a Father before, his original being so base and obscure; reflecting
hereby also upon the chastity of his Mother. Tristan.

Having ascended from mean estate to the highest honor, he was wont to say;
Omnia fui, nihil expedit: I have been all things, and am never the better.
Spartianus in Severo c. 18.

In his childhood before he was taught Greek or Latin, he exercised himself in
no other play but that which is called in Latin Ad judices, being a
personating of Justice. Spartianus in Septimio Severo. cap. 1.

He dreamed that he saw in one of the marketplaces at Rome a horse to throw
Pertinax, who had mounted on him, Magnus revera princeps Severus; quique
severitate sua reformavit multa in melius, test imprimis Tertulliano in
libello de pallio. quare etiam FVNDATOR IMPERII, in quadam inscriptione
nominatur. Casaubonus in Historiam Augustam.
and to suffer himself to back him; a brass Image of which dream remained in
Herodian's time. Herodian, Xiphiline.

He would be called Pertinax, for the respect he had to Pertinax the Emperor
slain by Julian, says Eutropius l. 9.

He was expert in the Mathematics, a good Philosopher, and eloquent Orator.

He was sufficiently learned in the Latin, but was readier in the Punic
tongue, as being born at Leptis within the Province of Africa. Sextus Aurelius
Victor in his Epitome.

Nothing is comparable to Severus his conflicts or conquests, either for
multitude of forces, commotion of Countries, number of battles, length of
journies, or speed in marches. Herodian l. 3. c. 7.

This was a gallant, brave and active man,
Yet in his mood of Spirit somewhat furious;
Austere of life, his visage pale and wan,
Of labor great, in travel nothing curious:
Of quick resolve and nimble apprehension,
To execute what e're was his intention.
Herodian in English verse. p. 61.
His Soldiers endured all difficulties cheerfully in emulation of him, who
excited them to hardship by his own example.

He was so inured to continual action, that even at his last gasp he said; Is
there any thing for me to do? Xiphiline.

Byzantium was of great strength in the flourish of the Roman Empire. The walls
of a just height, every stone whereof was so joined with couplets of Brass,
that the whole seemed but one entire piece; adorned besides with Turrets,
Bulwarks, and other arts of Fortification. Siding with Niger in his war against
Severus, it endured a siege of three years against all the forces of the
Romans: during which time the people were so distressed by Famine, that men
meeting in the streets, would draw and fight; the Conqueror feeding on the
Vanquished. For want of Artillery to discharge on the Assailants, they cast
down upon them whole Statues made of Brass, and the like curious imagery.
Houses they pulled down to get timber for shipping; the women cutting off their
hair to inch out their tackle: and having thus patched up a Navy of 500 Sail,
lost it all by one tempest. Compelled to yield by this misfortune, the
principal of the Nobility were put to the sword, the wealth of the Inhabitants
given for a prey to the Soldiers; the walls thereof dismantled, the Town left
in rubbish. Yet there appeared so much of majesty and beauty in the very
ruins; Vt mireris utrum eorum qui primi extruxerunt, vel eorum qui deinceps
sunt demoliti, vires sint potiores, as Herodian has it.

Instead of punishing he entertained and rewarded Priscus an Engineer, who did
him most mischief in his siege of Byzantium. Xiphiline.

Entering into Alexandria he found inscribed on the gate Domini Nigri est urbs;
with which being offended, the inhabitants met him, crying: Novimus nos dixisse
Domini Nigri esse urbem; tu enim es Nigri Dominus. For which ingenious
interpretation of their ambiguous inscription he pardoned them. Suidas in (...).

When certain of his Officers went about to persuade him to raze out an Epigram
made in commendation of Niger, (at the basis of whose statue it was engraved)
he expressed his dislike by these words; Si talis fuit, sciant omnes qualem
vicerimus: si talis non fuit, putent omnes nos vicisse talem: immo sic sit,
quia fuit talis. Ingenuously and wisely confessing the worth of his enemy.
Spartianus in Nigro c. 12.

The Nigrians possessed of the Cilician streights and entrances, courageously
withstood the Severian party; till at last a sudden tempest of rain and thunder
continually darting in their faces (as if the very Heavens had been armed
against them) they were fain to leave the passage, and therewith the victory to
the adverse faction; having sold that at the loss of 20000 of their own lives,
which Alexander had the happiness or the had to buy for nothing. Dr. Heylin's
Geography.

When he was Lieutenant in Africa, one of his inferior acquaintance met him
going in state with his bundle of rods carried before him, and embraced him
familiarly as his quondam chamber-fellow; whom he caused to be beaten, the
crier proclaiming, Embrace not rudely a Roman Lieutenant. From which time
Lieutenants have not gone of foot. Spartian.

Plautian his favorite was so great with him, that one of Plautian's Officers
being commanded by Severus, then at leisure, to plead a cause, refused, saying;
He could not do it unless Plautian commanded him. Xiphiline.

Dio cumprimis diligenter describit Atr. obsidionis seriem casusque. Boeclerus
in Herodianum. p. 419.
At the siege of Atrae, when he had beaten down a great part of the wall, and
his Soldiers were ready to enter, he commanded a retreat, hoping thereby to
induce the Arabians to discover that great treasure there laid up. But his
covetous design was miserably disappointed, for the besieged immediately made
up their wall and kept him out. Xiphiline.

Being used to get the victory, he now reputed himself conquered, because he
could not overcome. Herodian l. 3. c. 9.

When one who lived in Albinus his quarters, would have excused his forced
assistance of him to Severus, demanding what he would have done if it had been
his own case? Severus answered; Ea perferrem quae tu, I would suffer as you do.
Aurelius Victor.

He boasted to the Senate of his clemency, although he slew at one time forty
of the most illustrious personages of the Roman Empire, not hearing them in
their defense, contrary to a law which himself first made; proving himself
thereby truly to answer his name; being Imperator vere nominis sui, vere
Pertinax, vere Severus: Spartianus in Sept. Sev. c. 14.
so that Silenus might well say (in Iuliani Caesaribus) I dare not speak
against him, I am so terrified with his inexorable cruelty.

Io. Antiochenus says he was a great Soldier, but his covetousness transported
him beyond his valor.

He was more covetous and cruel than any of his Predecessors. Tristan.

In his first British war he lost 50000 men, as Dio acknowledges.

Upon a second defection in Britain, he commanded an universal slaughter of his
enemies, in these verses: -- (...)
(...)
(...).
Let none escape your bloody rage,
With terror let all dye;
Spare not the Mother, nor the Babe
Which in her womb does lie.


Having vanquished Albinus and Niger, he begun to make a great slaughter of
those, Natura saevus, multis semper bellis lacessitus, fortissime quidem remp.
sed laboriosissime rexit. Orosius l. 7. c. 17. Of his virtues and vices, but
especially his dissimulation, see Brochmands Ethica Hist. c. 3.
which had taken part with them. As he was committing this slaughter, he said
unto Bassianus and Geta his children; I by this means shall ease you of your
enemies; to which when Bassianus so far consented, that he advised to have
even their children put to death, Geta is reported to have demanded the number
of them that were to be slain, which when his Father told him; he asked, Have
they neither parents, nor friends? when it was answered by Severus, that they
had many: Geta replied, Then more in the City will mourn, than rejoice for our
victory, and you will leave us more enemies than you take from us. This wise
speech of this young prince touched so well the heart of Severus (although he
was cruel) that he would needs cease from his slaughter, but that Plautian and
other courtiers, which aimed at the enriching of themselves by confiscations
incited him to continue. A Discourse against Machiavel translated into English.
p. 272. out of Capitolinus in Geta. c. 4.

For his native severity, Septimius Afer was as well fitted to the impetuous
disposition of the Roman Empire, when he undertook it, as any medicine can be
to the malady, for which it is by art prepared. And yet his practice (though
exactly answering to Machiavel's rules of reformation) found but the
Mountebanks success; be cured some present mischiefs, but procured more
grievous secret and permanent inconveniences. The barbarous nations which
longed most for Romes destruction, learned the use and art of making the Romans
weapons and artillery, from the discontented Exiles, which his severity thrust
upon them; nor did Constantine the great (though Leunclavius be willing to
prefer the unsanctified Zosimus his bil against him, to Christian Princes)
half so much weaken the Empire, by his largess toward Christians, as Septimius
did wound it, by seeking to restore, or rather to intend the rigor of ancient
discipline amongst modern dissolute Romans. Dr. Iackson of the divine
Attributes. part 2. p. 282, 283.

He gained his sur-name Britannicus, by building, or at least repairing the
Picts-wal between England and Scotland, 132 miles in length, against the
incursions of the Scots and Picts. At every miles end was a tower, and pipes of
brass (in the wall betwixt every tower) conveyed the least noise from garrison
to garrison, without interruption; so news of an approaching enemy was quickly
spread over the borders, and occasional provision made for resistance. There
were also resting places for the Areans, who were appointed by the Ancients
(says Amm. Marcellinus) to serve for foot-posts, to run as occurrents fell
between the Officers, and carry them word of the least stirring. Since the wall
is ruined, and that way of dispatch taken away, many inhabitants there-about
hold land by a tenure in Cornage (as Lawyers speak) being bound by blowing a
horn to discover the irruption of the enemy. Cambden's Britannia.

It is reported by Spartian, that in his passage to York a little before his
death, a Black-Moor with a Cypress garland on his head did meet Severus, (who
bid him, as unfortunate, to be put out of his sight) and saluted him thus;
Totum fuisti, totum vicisti, jam Deus esto victor. At his entrance into the
City, he was by error of a rustical Sooth-sayer (who guided him) brought into
the Temple of Bellona: and black beasts, being appointed for sacrifice, did of
themselves follow him to his palace. Which things, however they fell out
accidentally, yet were interpreted as ominous by others in respect of the event.

While he lay sick of the gout at York, the soldiers saluting his son Bassianus
Emperor, he arose and caused the principal of them to be brought before him,
and when they prostrate craved pardon, he laying his hand on his head, said;
Sentitisne tandem caput imperare, non pedes? Spartianus in Severo. c. 18.

Per quae verba affecti corporis impedimento animi magnitudinem atque
prudentiam contulit. Quam severe igitur arbitrari possumus in alterius generis
seditionem animadversurum fuisse, cum filii dignitatem, cujus post se
cupidissimus erat, a militibus privatim procuratam tam acerbo supplicio ulcisci
vellet? B. Fulgosus lib. 2. c. 2.

A little before his death he caused his Porphyry ^urn to be brought before
him, and taking it into his hand, said; Thou shall contain him whom the world
could not. Xiphiline.

He said to his Sons on his deathbed, Agree among your selves, enrich the
consoldiers, and contemn all others. Id. ibid.

In relation to which union he bad them read in Salust. Micypsa's dying speech
to his sons, in which there is this expression; Concordia res parvae crescunt,
discordia magnae dilabuntur. Spartian. c. 21.

By his pernicious advice to his sons to study only the enriching of the
soldiery, he made a breach in the impenetrable wall of the Roman power, as the
Greek Epigrammatist calls it. For after Severus his reign, for 30 lawful
Emperors, the Roman Empire saw in the space of 150 years, more than an 100
Tyrants. The discipline of the virtuous Emperors occasioning the wicked ones to
mount on the throne. As the tragical ends of young G^rdian, of Alexander
Severus, of Posthumus, Probus and Aurelian manifested. Tristan.

A Prince of indifferent worth, had not his virtue suffered shipwreck by his
affections; Erant ei filii multo chariores quam cives: which though a private
man may confess whose Government is but a household, it is a shame for a Prince
whose office as it resembles the gods in power, so it should in being free from
partiality. Sr. William Cornwallis junior in his Encomium of Julian the
Apostate.

He ended his life with these words, Turbatam Rempublicam ubique accepi,
pacatam etiam Britannis relinquo, senex and pedibus aeger, firmum Imperium
Antoninis meis relinquens si boni erunt, imbecillum si mali. Spartian c. 23.

Before he dyed he was so pained in all his body, but especially in his feet,
that not able to endure the torment, he called for poison, which being denied,
he greedily glutted himself with gross meats, and not able to digest them, dyed
of a surfeit. Sextus Aurelius Victor's Epitome.

The imprecation of Plautius. Quintillus that he might not die when he would,
having the like effect upon Severus, as that of Severianus had upon Adrian.
Xiph.

Some say he dyed rather through grief for his son Caracalla's wickedness,
than of any other malady.

He lived 65 years 9 months and 52 days, and reigned 17 years, 8 months and 3
days.

He was buried in a place near York, which to this day is called Severs-hill.

It was said of him by the Senate, that either he should not have been born, or
not have dyed; having done so much mischief in pursuit of greatness, and so
much good when he was established. Spartian. c. 18.

When he offered to make his Son-in-law Probus, Prefect of the City, Probus
refused, saying; It seemed less to him to be a Prefect, than to be Son-in-law
to a Prince. Spartian. 1 Samuel 18.23.

He married Martia, and after her death Iulia Matter Caracallae fuit, non
noverca, atque hinc ruit commentum illud quo dicitur Caracallus Juliam novercam
suam uxorem duxisse: quod nec agnoscit Dio, nec Herodianus, qui inter pessimi
perditissimique imperatoris probra non omisissent hoc incestum facinus refer.
Quod ut minus facinorosum videretur, finxerunt authors isti, novercam illi
Juliam, non matrem fuisse, ut sic daretur locus huic opinioni, quam matris
nomen prorsus respuebat. Salmasius in Historiam Augustam p. 143.
Domna, because he found by her nativity she should be matched with a King;
though he foresaw not by his art his destiny to marry a whore: whom he yet bare
with through excess of affection, though she was guilty of a conspiracy.
Spartian. c. 3. and 18.

He was deifyed after his death by the Senate.

He was the most warlike of all the Emperors that were before him, quick of
apprehension, persevering in all things which he determined; where he inclined
to favor admirable and constant, diligent in seeking out friends, and liberal
in rewarding them: equally vehement toward friends and foes. Sextus Aurelius
Victor in his Epitome.

He was the only Emperor created out of Africa, says Eutropius lib. 8.

Severus might amongst the best shine bright,
But that he was the eclipse of his own light.
Dr. Holyday's Survey of the world. lib. 8. p. 90.
He associated his Sons in the Sovereignty, and declared them Emperors.
Herodian lib. 3. c. 9. editionis Boeclerianae.

Sed quae putabat Severus futura amoris vincula, fiebant irarum incitamenta,
says Iacobus Cappellus in his Historiae Ecclesiasticae centuriae.

In Severus his reign the world was so loose that 3000 were indicted for
adultery.

When Iulia blamed the wife of Argentocoxus a Northern Britain, because her
country people accompanied promiscuously (10 or 12 men having 2 or 3 Women
common among them) she not ignorant of the Roman incontinency, replied; We
accompany openly with the best, but vile persons defile you secretly. Xiphiline.

Dio writes that in Severus his time it rained silver at Rome in Augustus's
forum.

O pluviam salutarem, and supparem illi, qua Jupiter ad Danaen suam penetravit!
sed nimis hic infrequentem inquies. Sed avaritiam tuam effervescentem infusa
hac frigida confutabo. Rore illo argenteo, addit Dio, nummos aliquot aereos
oblivi, mansit color 3 dies; 4to. quicquid oblitum fuerat, evanuit. Formondus
Meteorolog. l. 5. c. 6. Art. 3. Severus caused the 5th. persecution.

Tertullian his book de corona militis acquainteth us with the occasion of the
persecution of the Christians, in the reign of Severus. The Emperor ere he
marched into the East (in that expedition wherein he overthew the Parthians)
made his elder son his partner in the Tribunitial power, and by his liberality
pleased the Quinta post Neronem, persecutione Christianos excruc^avi^,
plurimique per diversos provine^^ martyria c^^^nati (...). Han^ profanam in
Christanos and Ecclesiam Dei praesumptionem Severi, coelestis ultio e vestigio
acta subsequitur. Nam continuo rapitur, vel potius retrahitur in Galliam
Severus, e Syria ad tertium civil bellum, Vnum jam enim Romae adversum
Julianum, aliud in Syria contra Poscennium gesserat, tertium Clodius Albinus
Juliani in occidendo Pertinace socius, qui se in Gallia Caesarem fecerat,
suscitabat; cujus bello multum utrinque Romani sanguinis fusum est. Albinus
tamen apud Lugdunum oppressus and interfectus est. Severus Victor in Britannias
defectu pene omnium sociorum trahitur. Paulus Orosius lib. 7. c. 17.
people formerly enraged with the many punishments he inflicted. By occasion of
this liberality, as it seems; a Christian Soldier holding a certain garland
or crown in his hand, as if it were wickedness for him to set it on his head as
the rest did, was asked why he did so, and answered, that he was a Christian.
This was the occasion of the Emperors rage. William Howel in his Institution of
general History. lib. 4. chapter 5. p. 856, etc. Thomas Ford's Apophthegmes. p. 2.

Persequutio illa exorta est, ob eam sane praecipue caussam quod contra
Principis edicta Christiani coitiones inire viderentur: quapropter
criminationem istam pluribus diluit Tertullianus hoc libro. Heraldus in
Apologet. Tertul. p. 3.

Impiger egelido movet arma Severus ab Istro,
Vt parricidae regna adimat Didio.
Punica origo illi; sed qui virtute probaret
Non obstare locum, quum valet ingenium,
Ausonius. Brethren
Bassianus Caracalla. Antoninus Geta.

effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
Succedunt duo filii, nihil paternum habentes praeter ejus vitia, imprimis vero
major. Iac. Cappellus. in 5 Centuriis Historiae Ecclesiasticae. p. 5.
BAssianus was so called from Julius Bassianus his Grandfather by the Mothers
side, and his Father named him Antoninus, out of respect to the Antonini, whose
memory was honored by the Romans.

He was called Caracalla from a new fashioned cassock he wore, reaching down to
his ancles.

He was a hopeful youth, and endeared himself to the people by weeping and
turning away his eyes, when condemned persons were cast to wild beasts (which
tenderness Baronius thinks proceeded from his Christian Nurse Eubodia) yet
after he was so changed he seemed not the same. Spartian c. 12.

He resembled his Father in conditions, but was somewhat sharper, and full of
threatening. Eutropius lib. 9.

Knowing well that he could not make himself seem more beautiful than he was,
he would take the advantage to appear more terrible, affecting a cruel and
furious countenance. Tristan in the 2. part of his Commentaries Historiques.
See the 12.18.21.26.29.31. Meda^ls of him there.

He attempted to kill his Father; and put to death the Physicians for not
hastening his death (as he commanded) slew his father in law Plautian, his wife
Plautilla, and her brother Plautus, Antipater the famous Sophister of that age,
Cilo his Tutor, and Euhodus his Foster-father: sparing not any who either
honored his Father, or was honored by him.

When at the Circensian sports (where himself was a spectator) the people cast
some scoff at a Chariotier which he favored, he taking it as an affront to
himself, suddenly commanded his Soldiers to rush among the multitude, and kill
all who had scorned the Chariot-driver. Upon this command, it being impossible
to find out the delinquents in so great a throng (none confessing himself
guilty) the Soldiers spared none who they light upon, but either slew them, or
took away what they had for a ransom. Herodianus lib. 4. cap. 6.

He put down Aristotle's Schools, burnt his books, saying he conspired against
Alexander. Xiphiline.

Having seen the body of Alexander the Great, he commanded his followers to
call him Alexander and Antoninus Magnus; and by flatterers was brought to a
fond conceit, that he walked like Alexander with an awful countenance, and bent
his head to the left shoulder; and whatever he observed in the countenance of
Alexander, he imitated to the life, and persuaded himself that he had the same
lineaments and proportions. Sextus Aurelius Victor his Epitome.

-- Simia Magni
Turpis Alexandri, cujus dum reddere vultus
Irarum plenos gestis, nihil acta moraris,
Acta quibus vaere meruit virtutis honorem.
Roberti Moore Diarium Historico-Poeticum. p. 9.
I have seen diverse ridiculous Images, which had one entire body; and one head,
which had two half-faces, to wit, Alexanders and Antonines; says Herodian l.
4. c. 8.

He was excessively given to Adultery, while able, Caius and Augustus
severissimas aliorum cupiditatibus leges statuerunt, quum ipsi interim, omnium,
qua venerant, lectorum pressores dicerentur. Rivius in Justiniani Imp.
Defensione, p. 99.
yet most severely punished it in others. Excerpta Peiresci, p. 755.

Being unable to wear true armor through his weakness of body, he wore
counterfeit harness that none might attempt to assassinate him, Excerpta
Peiresci.

Ei cum caetera omnia, tum nummus adulterinus erat: nam pro argento, aurove
quod nobis daret, plumbum argentatum, and aes inauratum parabat. Xiphilinus in
Caracallo.

He would show courtesy when he intended mischief; so that his kindness was
more feared than his anger. Spartianus in Geta c. 7.

Having miserably impoverished the people, his mother reproved him, to whom he
showing his naked sword, replied; As long as I have this, I will not want,
Xiphiline.

Where he wintered, or but intended to winter, he caused Amphitheatres and
Cirques for public games to be erected, and within a while to be taken down
again. Id. ibid.

He learned the vices of three Nations, from whom he drew his original; of the
French, vanity, timorousness, and idleness; of the Africans, roughness and
wildness; of the Syrians, cunning and malice: partaking of none of their
virtues. Boeclerus in Herodianum, p. 433.

He preferred Hannibal, Sylla and Tiberius, before other Commanders for their
cruelty; in which he exceeded his Father, and all the preceding Emperors.

He confessed that in all his life he never learned to do good. Xiphiline.

He abstained not from killing of men on his very birthday; and when a
vanquished Gladiator sued to him for protection, his answer was: Suppl^cate thy
Antagonist, for I may not save thee. Whereupon the unhappy man was destroyed by
his Adversary, who perhaps would not else have done it but for this expression,
not daring to seem more clement than the Emperor. Xiphilinus in Caracallo.

He delighted more in Magicians and Juglers than in men of worth; for seeing
himself hated, he told the Romans he could command his own security, though not
their love; and therefore he less valued reproaches, or feared dangers by their
disfavour. Xiphiline, Zonaras.

Vixit sub Antonino non Philosopho, quod in Eusebii Chronico Hieronymiano
^erperam scriptum, sed Caracalla, cui and sua (...), vivo adhuc patre Severo,
dicavit. Vossius de Poetis Graecis.
Yet Oppian, who when banished by Severus wrote the Cynegeticks, and after his
decease dedicated that work to Caracalla, was therefore called from exile, and
received a piece of gold for every verse in his Poem.

Having negotiated a marriage with Arduwan or Artabanus (the King of Parthia)
his daughter; and going to solemnize the Nuptials, he was met by the old King,
with the flower of his Soldiers, People, and Nobles in their triumphal
ornaments. No sooner was this honorable retinue come nigh Caracalla his Army,
but the watchword given, In Parthia quid gesserit, aliter Herodianus, aliter
Dio narrat. Certum tamen est eum etiam illic perfidia truculenta potius quam
virtute grassatum. Jacobus Cappellus in^ Cent. Hist Ec. Paulo fusius desc^ibit
Herodianus factum crudelitatis and perfidiae plenum: quod Dio and Spartianus
brevissime pe stringunt verius, quam narrant. Boeclerus in Herodianum, p. 433.
the Roman Soldiers (according to their Emperors direction) put them all to the
sword: the King himself hardly escaping wi^h life.

Antoninus Imperator, in toga prae^tans, and non iners, nec tutilis in bello,
cum adversus Parthos armis exerceretur, visis cataphractis, adeo totus in metum
venit, ut ultro ad regem conciliatrices literas daret. Q^as cum Rex immodicus
animi respuisset, insolentia quidem barbari debellata est, sed patefactum est,
in his tantam inesse violentiam, ut ea vincendus fideret, and superaturus
timeret. Nazarii Panegyricus Constantino Magno dictus. Tristan infers that
Caracalla is aimed at, though not named, no other Emperor surnamed Antoninus,
ever having waged war with the Parthians. Non recordor id in historicis legere.
Itaque fides sit penes auctorem, says Livineius.

As Caligula having killed many French and Greeks, bragged that he had
conquered Gallo-Graecia; so Caracalla having perfidiously slain a great number
of G^rmans and Parthians, usurped the titles of Germanicus and Parthicus.
Tristan in his parallel of Caracalla with Caligula.

Being incensed against the A^^xandrians, who traduced him for his fratricide,
and nicknamed his mother Iocasta, he commanded the strongest of them to be
listed for service; whom when he had enrolled, he killed, after the example of
Ptolemeus Euergetes, the 8. of that name, called Physcon; giving moreover a
signal to the Soldiers to kill their hosts.

A slaughter so great and universal, that the river Nilus colored with the
blood of the slain, might not improperly at that time be called a Red Sea. Dr.
Heylin's Geography.

He restored all profligate persons who were exiled, to their liberty; and
presently after filled the Islands where they were banished with more exiles.
Xiphiline.

The Senate appointing a sacrifice to the Gods, Baronius produces a Medail of
Severus with Caracalla and Geta's heads on the reverse, and these words,
Concordia perpetua.
but especially to Concord, for their agreement; a beast was prepared for
slaughter by the Priests of that Goddess, and the Consul went to perform the
Rites. But neither could he find the Priests, nor they him, though almost the
whole night was spent in seeking one another, so that then there could be no
sacrifice: the next day two Wolves ascended into the Capitol, and were driven
thence, one of which was taken in the Marketplace, the other after was killed
without the walls. This related to Antoninus and Geta, says Dion, lib. 77.

He slew his brother Geta in his mothers arms, whom he forced to dissemble
mirth; He consecrated the sword wherewith he killed him sequestered their goods
in whose wills Geta's name was found, and slew 20000 persons related to him;
spending whole nights in such tragical executions. Comdare Dion with Herodian.

To cloak which fratricide with show of constraint, first to the Soldiers and
then in the Senate, he accused his brother to have sought his death, and that
in defense of himself he was forced to kill him; and thereupon fled to the
Pretorian bands for safety of his life, as though further conspiracies had been
intended against him in the City.

Haecque omnia, probabile est divinitus contigisse, in ultionem innocentis
sanguinis Christiani; quem Severus Imperator, ac Senatus, populusque Romanus,
paucos ante annos injustissime effudissent. Besoldus in majore Synopsi Hist.
Univers. ex Baronio.

Notwithstanding his cruelty he arrogated to himself the name of Pius; and
after his conquering the Germans, he was not ashamed of the title Erat res
ridicula, Germanicum dici velle eum qui fratrem suum occidisset. debuitenim
home sceleratus cogitare, multos sic cognomen interpretaturos, quasi de sublato
fratre germano gloriaretur, non de victis Germaniae populis.
Germanicus, though through the ambiguity of the word he might be thought to
boast of his brothers murder. Hemelarius.

He allowed Geta a good funeral, buried him in a stately monument built by
Severus, called Septizonium; wept as often as he saw his picture, or heard
mention of his name: and being told that his Fratricide might be expiated in
some degree by calling his brother a God, he answered; Sit Divus modo non sit
vivus. Spartian in Geta, c. 3.

For the murder of his brother he was punished with madness by the Furies,
Casaubonus.
deservedly called Vltrice Deae.

Affrighted with the Ghost of his Father and Commodus, he prohibited any upon
pain of death to name Geta; and broke the money stamped with his Effigies, and
abolished all the plays instituted in honor of his birthday.

By his Favorites the name of Geta was rased out of all Monuments and Imperial
inscriptions, as we have seen some of them defaced upon some Altar stones found
in Britain. Speeds Chron.

He slew Papinian the famous Lawyer, Ejusdem sceleris p^incip^sque f^it,
fratrem Imperii consortem, mox jurisc^nsul^um Papin^anum licentiae adve^santem
e medio tollere. Jac Gothofredi Vlpianus, p. 11.
because solicited by him to defend his Fratricide, he said; It was a crime
ea^lyer commi^ted than excused. Spartian, c. 8.

He did chide the Executioner, because he beheaded Papinian with an Ax, and not
with a Sword. Spartian in Caracalla c. 4. and in Geta c. 6. Xiphiline.

When he ascribed to himself the titles of Germanicus, Arabicus, and
Alemanicus, Sarmaticus Maximus, and Parthicus Maximus; Helvius Perti^ax son to
the Emperor Pertinax jestingly said, Add if you please Geticus Maximus, because
of his brother Geta's murder, and because the Goths (whom he overcame in his
passage to the East) are called Getae: which occasioned Pertinax his death.
Spartian in Geta ubi supra, and in Caracalla, c. 10.

Being in Mesopotamia he writes to Maternianus, to whom he committed command at
Rome, to enquire of the Magicians (to whom he was so addicted) whether any
intended to surprise the Empire. Maternianus writes back that Series historiae
diligenter etiam a Dione est exposita; qui in aliquibus variat. Boeclerus in
Herodianum, p. 434.
Macrinus treacherously aspired to the Empire; which Letter with others
Caracalla received while he was at his ^port, and delivered them to Macrinus to
give him an account of. Macrinus broke up the letters, and fell upon that which
aimed at his destruction; wherefore finding his own danger, he reserved that
letter to himself, acquainting Caracalla with the rest. But fearing lest
Maternianus should write again of the same business, he resolved to prevent his
imminent danger by this plot. He persuades Martialis a Centurion, and one of
Caracalla's guard (whose brother the Emperor had slain a few days before, upon
an accusation without proof) to dispatch him; which he Rufus Festus in his
Breviarium, says he died propria morte, differing therein from other
Historians, as Cuspinian upon Festus shows.
did, whilst the Emperor was about to ease nature.

When he went out of a certain gate, he heeded not the detaining of him, and
tearing his garment by a Lion, whom he used to play with, and named Acinaces;
who held him as it were by an extraordinary instinct, as if he foreknew the
misfortune ready to befall him. Dion.

It was but just, that he who had killed so many of his friends, should be
slain by the treason of his enemies.

Both Caligula and Caracalla reigned but a little while. Both were killed by
military Tribunes, the one by Cassius Chaerea, whom he was wonted to tax with
effeminacy: and the other by Martialis, who was employed by Macrinus, whom
Caracalla charged with the same fault. And which is wonderful, they both dyed
being 29 years old, and both their Assassinates were slain after them. Tristan
in his parallel of Caracalla with Caligula.

He reigned 6 years, 2 months and 2 days.

Serapion an Egyptian a few days before told him, Imperante illo Sarapion
quidam Mathematicus Macrinum ostendit Antonino in Senatu, mox imperio
potiturum. Verum is, postquam demonstratum minus recte observasset, pro Macrino
alium e medio tolli jubet.
that he should die shortly, and Macrinus should succeed him: for which he was
cast to a Lion, and though the beast spared him, Macrinus would not. Xiphiline.

Both Nero and Caracalla dyed violent deaths, and both had for their Successors
old men whom they loved not at all, and who reigned not long, being both slain
by the practices of two effeminate persons, who were Otho and Heliogabalus.
Tristan in his parallel of Caracalla with Nero.

Metochita.
Tarantam vocabant eum, a cognomine cujusdam gladiatoris, and statura minimi,
and forma faedissimi, and animo tum ferocissimi, tum maxim sanguinarii. Dio
Leunclavii in octavo, p. 904.

When he was dead, it appeared that he procured as much poison from the
Inhabitants of upper Asia, as cost 220000 crowns, that he might poison several
ways as many as he pleased. Xiphiline.

Excerpta Peiresci call him furiosum, ad omnia praecipitem, virtutis, and
illustrium virorum hostem; bonis exitiosum, caedibus assidue saevientem;
prodigum in milites, (...), rapacem, nec a fraternis manibus abstinentem;
vitiis suis gloriantem, omnibus denique terribilem; nisi Germanis and alis
hostibus, qui stultum ridebant, pecunia emungebant, vel cladibus mulctabant.

It is to be admired, that a man so extremely wicked, tempered himself from
slaughter of the Christians. R. B. his lives of all the Roman Emperors, p. 61.

His Wife Plautilla had as much for her dowry as would have served 50
Empresses. Diligenter descripsit ea quae ad Plautiani historiam pertinent, Dio.
Baeclerus in Herodiadum. p. 421.
Her Father Plautian made men Eunuchs, who were married and had children; and
their children also were gelded, that she might have musick-masters who might
teach her the better, and domestics of this sort fitter to compose tunes for
her.

When Caracalla and Geta would have entered into the assembly of the Gods, with
Severus their Eather, Julian feigneth that Minos forbad them, but better
discerning one from the other, he admitted Geta the younger as less wicked,
and sent back Caracalla to suffer the punishments he deserved. See Spanhem the
Son's Remarques sur les Caesar's, p. 246, 247.

Absorpsit Britannicas res abhinc, quae ad civilem aliquatenus pertinent
administrationem, Lethe usque ad Probi tempora Imp. Seldeni Analecta Anglo
Britannica. l. 1. c. 7.

Dissimilis virtute patri, and multo magis illi,
Cujus adoptivo nomine te perhibes;
Fratris morte nocens, punitas fine cruento,
In risu populi tu Caracalla jaces.
Ausonius. Opilius Macrinus. and his Son Antoninus Diadumenus.
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
MAcrinus was of so obscure parentage, Parentum origin tam ignobili; ut long
aptissime illi asino, quem a genio deductum in Palatium diximus, assimilatus
fuerit. Dio Leunclavii in octavo, p. 904.
that according to the custom of the Moors, he had one of his ears bored
through. Xiphiline.

He was made a Prefect by Caracallus omnium durissimus, and ut uno complectamur
verbo, parricida and incest^s, patris, matris, fratris inimicus, a Macrino qui
eum occidera^, timore milium, ac maxim praetorianorum, inter deos relatus est.
Spartianus in Caracallo, c. 11.
Caracalla, after whose death he was elected Emperor by the Soldiers, who were
ignorant of his treason, the suspicion whereof he escaped by a seeming sorrow.

The Romans were so glad of Caracalla's death, that they considered not whether
Macrinus was good or bad; Macrini imperium lubentibus animis admittebant, non
tam secum expendentes, cuinam servituri essent, quam quo tyranno essent
liberati: and quemvis e vulgo putantes ipso futurum optabiliorem. Dio
Leunclanii in octavo p. 908.

He made his son Diadumenus, Caesar; so Ferunt Diadematum puerum appellatum:
sed ubi adoleverit, avi sui nomine materni, Diadumenum vocatum; quamvis non
multum abhorruerit abillo signo diadematis nomen Diadumeni. Lampriaius. in
Diadumeno.
called either from his Grandfather by the Mothers side, or because he was
born with a Diadem on his head, like a bowstring. Lampridius in Diadumeno. c. 4.

They did nothing memorable by reason of the short time of their reign.
Eutropius. lib. 8.

He commanded Diadumenus forthwith to be called Antoninus by the Soldiers; and
assumed to himself the name of Severus, whose memory he pretended to reverence,
that he might deface the suspicion of assasinating his Son, says Tristan.

He imitated Marcus Aurelius in a slow pace and low voice, and Nero in a cruel
life.

Instead of Macrinus he was by his own servants called Macellinus, as one would
say Butcher, quod macelli specie domus ejus cruentaretur sanguine vernularum.
Because his house was like a shamble of murdered men. Capitolinus in Macrino,
c. 13.

He was named Mezentius, because like him, he joined live bodies to dead.

He commanded 2 Soldiers, who had ravished their hostesses maid, to be sewed up
in the bellies of 2 great Oxen, their heads only left out that they might speak
one to another.

He caused those Soldiers who committed adultery to be tied to the women, and
burnt alive; though his wife Nonia Celsa was insatiable that way.

He shut living men in seiled walls, where they dyed miserably.

Mothe le Vayer in his Opuscules, p. 27, etc. thinks that one reason why
Macrinus banished Lucius Priscillianus a valiant Captain into an Island where
he dyed, was because he had the boldness to encounter 4 such fierce beasts, as
a Bear, a Leopard, a Lyoness and a Lion; though his cruel carriage under
Caracalla who advanced him, afforded sufficient pretense for his punishment, as
Dion informs us, l. 78.

Macrinus said he was clement, when he punished but one Soldier in an hundred
with capital punishment for a mutiny, when he thought they deserved to be
decimated, or at least one in 20 to suffer.

Having written to the Senate, that he knew no body desired his death, Fulvius
Diogenianus cried out; Yes but we all do.

Having concluded a peace with Artabanus the Parthian King, he returned to
Antioch in Syria, and there spent his time in sensual pleasures; being drenched
so far therein, that the Army began to dislike his government, and to favor
young Bassianus then at Emesa in Phoenicia, with Maesa his Grandmother by his
mothers side: who there had built a Temple to the Sun, and ordained him a
Priest, for which he was called Helagabalus, in the Phoenician language, The
Priest of the Sun. To this Temple resorted many of the Soldiers, and seeing his
beauty, allured Maesa to bring him to their Camp; where reported to be the Son
of Caracalla, the Soldiers proclaimed him Emperor, and maintained his right
against Macrinus: who met him in the confines between Phoenicia and Syria,
fought a bloody battle, but being put to flight, hasted to Dio non in loco
tantum caedis, sed in historia etiam Diadumeni variat. Boeclerus in Herodianum,
p. 438.
Chalcedon, fell sick, and was slain by the Soldiers (with his Son Diadumenus)
because he contracted their pay, and suppressed their luxury. Victor's Epitome.

Macrinus a thing made by chance, and overthrown by chance; came from a base
progeny, and was ruined by an Infant. Sir W. Cornwallis the younger in his
Encomium of Julian the Apostate.

His fate was foretold by the Oracle in these verses.

(...),
(...).
Est juvenum, miserande senex, tibi noxia pugna,
Nec tibi sunt vires, seniique gravis dolor instat.
Pater timidus and impudens fuit, Caesus est cum filio, nihil ex paterna
claritate praeter immeritam mortem auferente.
qui pacem emit a Parthis; honores dedit indignis. Sed nec in filio quicquam,
praeter pulchritudinem, memorabile. Chr. Ad. Ruperti Observat. in Synop.
Besoldi min. p. 348.

Macrinus's defeat arising from fear, Bussieres in Flosculis Historiarum.
was ominously signified by a Dove flying to the Statue of Severus (whose name
he assumed) when the Senate received his letters. Dio Leunclavii in octavo, p:
915, 916.

Laudem Macrinus supra mortales alios invenisset, si non pro se adpetivisset
imperium; sed aliquem e Senatu delectum, qui Romany praeesset rebus,
imperatorem designasset. Hac nimirum sola ratione culpam paratarum Caracallo
insidiarum (veluti qui suae tantummodo salutis causa, non imperii cupiditate
adductus, earum fuisset auctor) evitasset. Nunc autem and infamiae notam
sibimet ipse inussit, and seipsum ita perdidit; ut illa tam contumelia, quam
calamitate, dignissimus fuerit. Nam qui regnum adfectavit id temporis, quo ne
senatoris quidem nomen adhuc habebat: idem and celerime pariter and non sine
gravissimis aerumnis amisit. Id. ibid. p. 917.

He lived 54 years, reigned one year and 2 months.

Principis hic custos, sumptum pro Caesare ferrum
Vertit in auctorem caede Macrinus iners.
Mox cum prole ruit. Gravibus pulsare querelis
Cesset perfidiam. Quae patitur, meruit.
Ausonius. Helagabalus.
effigy of emperor
THE outward form is no small circumstance to induce the multitude to
reverence; since as deformity in a Prince has oftentime occasioned contempt
even to deprivation: so on the contrary has an amiable shape strengthened very
weak pretentions, and in Antoninus Non satis possum mirari, quid impulerit
hominem alioqui diligentem, and in veterum numismatum tractatione versatum,
Onuphrium Panvinium, ut Alagabalum in suis commentariis ubique edendum
curaverit, cum ut ipse testatur, in antiquis numismatibus ELAGABAL. incisum
observaverit. Ursinus in Dionem, p. 1054.
Helagabalus was sufficient title to an Empire, even in a military election.
Habington's Edward the 4th p. 6, 7.

Quoniam tota stirps Helagabali and consobrini ejus Alexandri Severi, magnopere
confusa est and obscura, eam hic proponam. Igitur Julius Bassianus e Phoenice
oriundus filias habuit Juliam Domnam Augustam conjugem Severi, and Maesam.
Juliae filius fuit Caracalla qui and Bassianus ex nomine avi materni dictus.
Maesa Julium maritum habuit virum Consularem, ex quo duas filias peperit
Sohaemiadem and Mamaeam. Quarum Sohaemias quidem Vario Marcello Senatorii loci
viro nupta filium habuit Avitum, qui and Bassianus dictus est ex avi ac proavi
materni nomine, ex paterno autem nomine Varius. Itaque fallitur Lampridius qui
Helagabalum Varium dictum esse scribit ex aviae Variae nomine. Nec minus falli
eundem puto, cum Alexandrum Severum Varii filium, Variae nepotem fuisse dicit.
Neque enim credibile est patrem Helagabali and Alexandri uno eodemque
appellatos nomine. Potius crediderim erravisse Lampridium, qui Alexandri patrem
facit qui erat Helagabali. Et enim si Varium Helagabali patrem esse scisset,
certe id in ojus vita retulisset, quo loco causas quaerit cur Helagabalus
dictus est Varius. Ac duas quidem ejus appellationis ibi causas retulit, hanc
quam dixi praetermisit. Proinde non dubito errorem illum in stirpe Alexandri
Severi ex ignoratione Lampridii fluxisse. Nisi forte Varii filium interpretari
placet, adoptatum ab Helagabalo qui and Varius est dictus. Caeterum naturalis
Alexandri Severi pater ignoratur. Ab auctoribus autem Mamaeae filius fere dici
solet. Quod in gratiam Mamaeae a Senatu decretum fuisse credibile est,
quemadmodum patres olim censuerant, ut Tiberius Augustus Liviae filius
diceretur, test Dione. Avus quidem ejus dictus est Alexianus, si credimus
Herodiano, l. 5. idque initio nomen fuit Alexandro Severo. Valesius in Excerpta
Peiresci, p. 111, 112.

This Monster had more names and surnames (says Tristan) than Hydra had heads;
for whilst he was a private man he was called Varius Avitus Lupus, Varius from
his reputed Father Varius Marcellus Nec debuit Alagabalus deliciarum portentum
alibi nasci quam in Syria. P. Molinaeus in Epist. Greg. Nysseni De euntibus
Hierosolymam, p. 26.
a Syrian, Avitus Lupus from Julius Avitus Lupus his Grandfather by the
mothers side; after being presented to the Soldiers to obtain their favor, he
was named Bassianus: by whom when he was received and proclaimed Emperor, they
gave him the name of Antoninus. He was the last Emperor upon whom that name was
conferred, which because he dishonored, he was called Pseud-Antoninus. He was
named Assyrius (says Dion) because he was often seen in public clothed with a
barbarous habit, such as his Countrymen the Priests of Syria, Quod non minus
insolens quam si Iovis sacerdos aut dialis flamen ipsam Iovis appellationem
sibi vindicasset. Casaubon.
anciently called Assyria, used to wear. His debauchednesse made him to be
sur-named the Roman Sardanapalus. He had the surname of Helagabalus given to
him, Novo exemplo hic fanaticus, de nomine ejus dei cujus sacerdos fuit, se
quoque dici voluit.
because he was Priest of Helagabalus the peculiar god of the Emesenes; so
strange a Deity, that Authors Mire variant in hoc vocabulo libri veteres.
Sylburgius in Indice rerum and verb. Notab. in Romans Hist. syntagmate
Graeco-Latino.
agree not about the writing, or meaning of his name: though it be most
probable that it signifies the Sun.

He was the spurious issue of Caracalla and Symia Syra, which Scaliger renders
Lunula Onychine.

Appellationes imponere a rebus, quae in amoribus and deliciis sunt, omnium
nationum commune est, a floribus, ab arboribus, herbis, gemmis, mundo muliebri.
Sed hoc Iudaeis, Aethiopibus, Syris, Arabibus tam frequens, tam vulgo usitatum,
ut earum nationum proprium videri possit. Scaliger in Eusebium.

He had 6 Wives in the short time of his reign; the first of which was Annia
Faustina, of Commodus his lineage, for the enjoyment of whom he caused Pomponius
Bassus her husband to be put to death, not permitting her to weep for him.
Divorcing her, On a reverse of Annia Faustina is written Concordia: and on one
of Paula's Concordia aeterna.
he married Cornelia Paula a most Illustrious Roman Lady ( That he might the
sooner be a Father (said he) who was not able to be a man;) yet soon after only
because she had a spot in her body, as he said, he put her away, Tristan.
and stripping her of all honors, sequestered her to a private life. After
pretending he was in love, he violently took out of Vesta her sacred Nunnery at
Rome, Iulia Aquilia Severa a Vestal Virgin, and married her, which by the
Heathens was held such a crime, that the Nun which had carnal knowledge of a
man, was buried alive: writing to the Senate, who were grieved at his
sacrilegious act, That she was a fit match for a Priest, and impudently
affirmed he did it, That from himself a Priest and his Wife the chief Priestess
of Vesta, there might be born issue worthy of the Gods. Yet he quickly turned
away this Wife, for to espouse another, with 2 more whose names are unknown; it
being difficult to determine whether he be to be blamed more for his frequent
and illegal marriages, or his sudden and causeless divorces. And at last being
possessed with a continual inconstancy (having changed 5 times in 4 years) he
returned to Aquiliae Severa. compare Dion l. 79. with Herodian, l. 5. c. 6.

He so favored Aurelius Zoticus, that himself commanded him to be taken (of
all the chief Officers for the Emperors husband. Zoticus was supplanted by
Hierocles, admitted to the same familiarity by Helagabalus, and styled his
husband also.

Nor did he thus play at fast and loose with humane Matrimonies only, but now
his God also wanted a Wife. Him he married first to Pallas, after (saying, His
God liked not so martial a Wife) to Urania, concluding it was fitter to match
the Sun and Moon together, making his God almost as fickle as himself.
Herodian, l. 5. c. 6.

He gave all the treasure in the Temple of Urania to his God, for a portion
with her.

He commanded all the people of Rome and Italy to use all public and private
feasts for joy of the wedding.

He erected in the suburbs a magnificent Temple, Is Deum suum circumferens ac
reliquis omnibus praeferens and Coelesti Carthaginensium deae matrimonio
copulans, Eponam etiam nescio quam deam obtrudens, nihil reliqui fecit ad
summam proterviam. Jac. Cappellus in Eccl. Christ. cent. 2. p. 51.
into which every year with great solemnity he brought his God, whom he
preferred before Jupiter, and made an Edict that the Romans should pray to the
new god Helagabalus before all other gods, who, he said, were servants of his
God, spoiling their Temples to enrich that of his, nay would have had no other
gods worshipped at Rome, says Lampridius in Helagab. c. 3. Nec Romanas tantum
voluit extinguere religiones, sed per orbem terrae unum studens ut Helagabalus
deus unus ubique coleretur. Id. ib.

So inordinate was his concupiscence, that nature not permitting, what his
desires prompted him unto; turning his lusts upon himself, he cut off his
privities, consecrating himself to Cybele; and charged all to call him
Bassiana, instead of Bassianus. Sextus Aurelius Victor in his Epitome.

Ad ritum patrium, non temere, pudenda sacravit spurcissimus ille. Seldenus de
Diis Syris, syntagmatis secundi capite primo, editionis L. B. p. 228.

He was a man for all women, and a woman for all men. Coeffeteau.

He so far differed from the manners of men, Non homo nominandus est, sed upupa
faedissima, says Benevenutus de Rambald is in his Augustalis.
that modesty permits not to relate his greatest vices; the Devil in the
form of an Hermaphrodite, not being able to act greater lewdness than he did,
says Tristan.

Lampridius thus begins the story of Helagabalus: I would never have wrote
the beastly life of Helagabalus, that it might not have been known, that he was
a Roman Emperor, unless Caligula, Nero and Vitellius had before sat in the
same throne.

Boccaline feigneth that Lampridius was severely proceeded against by Apollo,
and that by order of the whole Congregation of Parnassus, his Histories was
turned back upon his hands, and he was freely told; That he should go and teach
those execrable lusts in the public Classis, wherewith he had so delighted
himself to fill his shameful papers, wherein he had written the lives of
Helagabalus, Caracalla, and other lascivious Monsters of Nature. Parnassus
cent. 1. advertisement 55.

It is questioned whether were greater his boundless Prodigality, Iuan
Vasilowich sent to the City of Mosko to provide for him a colpack or measure
full of live fleas for a medicine. They returned answer that the thing was
impossible; and if they could get them, yet they could not measure them, for
leaping out. Whereupon he beat out of their shins 7000 rubbels for a mulct. G.
Fletchers History of Russia, cap. 12. p. 106.
his stupendous Leachery, or his fantastical Foolery; the last of which his
Imperial virtues he gave proof of, when he commanded his servants to bring him
a thousand pound weight of Spiders offering them a reward, and received of them
ten thousand pound weight, whereupon he said, That now he understood the
greatness of Rome: at another time he caused to be gathered ten thousand Mice,
a thousand Weazels, and a thousand Polecats, which he brought forth in a
public show to the people, for some wise State-purpose, like the former,
Speed's Chron.

He disfigured his fair face with foul tinctures; he slept in the day,
transacted affairs in the night.

Being near the Sea, he never tasted fish; nor flesh when he was farthest in
the Continent: he said, That fare was best which cost most.

In gluttony he exceeded Apicius and Vitellius. Lampridius in Helagabalo, c. 24.

He ridiculously wore Jewels, and those curiously engraved, on his feet; as if
the rarity of the work could be discerned there. Lampridius in Helagab. c. 23.

His habit was betwixt the sacred long vestment of the Phoenicians, and the
effeminate apparel of the Medes, for he scorned the Roman or Greek attire, as
made of greasy wool. Herodianus, lib. 5. cap. 5.

That he might seem magnificent, he drowned Ships in the Haven; paying the
owners for their fraught: and drew fishes out of his Ponds with Oxen.
Lampridius ibid. c. 32, and 24.

He built stately Baths, which being but once used were plucked down.
Lampridius c. 30.

He received the superfluous burden of his belly in vessels of Gold. Lampridius
in Helagab. c. 32.

He said, If he had an heir, he would teach him to do as he did.

When he was but a private man, being reproved for his prodigality by a friend,
who asked him, Whether he did not fear want hereafter? he answered; What can be
better for me than to be heir to my self?

In confesso est, Helagabalum Imperatorem triclinia, quandoque lectos and
porticus, omni florum genere stravisse, ut Liliis, Violis, Hyacynthis and
Narcissis, ac per eos ambulasse, seque unguentis omnium fragrantissimis nudum
saepenumero perunxisse. Quem secuti Imperatores, prope nullam molliciem sibi
non permiserunt, nullum voluptatis poculum reliquerunt ingustatum. Quod ego in
Romany principibus quamvis damnem plurimum: non tamen admodum miror, cum etiam
apud eos abjectissimi homunculi idem sibi indulserint. Jac. Grasserus in
Auctario ad Text. officin. p. 425.

He conferred honors on sordid persons, and put great persons upon mean
employments, causing the entrails of the sacrifices to be born by Generals of
Armies, and chief Officers of State.

He advanced his teachers and ministers of most lewd and wicked acts to
honors, whiles in the mean time he thrust down, or murdered excellent persons.
Holland in his Chronology, at the end of Amm. Marcellinus translated by him.
Impuros and flagitiosos homines, item aurigas and histriones, facit Legatos,
Consules, Duces. Dietericus in Breviario Historico.

In imitation of Apicius he would frequently eat Camels heels, the combs of
Cocks newly cut, the tongues of Peacocks and Nightingales, with the entrails of
Mullets, Partridges eggs, the heads of Parrats, Pheasants, and Peacocks, and
the brains of Thrushes and Phoenicopters. Id. Ib. c. 20.

He had served in at a meal the heads of 600 Estridges, only that he might eat
their brains. Id. Ib. c. 30.

He fed his horses with grapes, his dogs with The Goose is the trusty Sentinel
of the Roman Capitol, whom Helagabalus hated and the Romans honored so much.
Finch in his man transformed. 15th Character.
Geese livers (a dainty then,) Lions and other beasts with Parrats and
Pheasants. Id. Ib. c. 20. and 21.

He often changed his Pallets, and lay not on any couch unless it was stuffed
with Hares fur, or the feathers under Plinius perdices promiscue iniri fatetur.
Forsan ideo libidinosissimus homo Helagabalus, in pulvinaribus culcitrisque
substerni sibi voluit perdicum plumas. Sim. Abbes Gabbema in Priapeia, annexa
Petronio, p. 20.
Partridges wings. Id. Ib. c. 19.

One day he would eat nothing but Pheasant, another day Chickens, on another
this or that Fish, at one time Ostriches, at another Herbs, or Apples,
otherwhiles sweetmeats, or white-meats only. Id. Ib.

One of his feasts was hardly ended in a day, the several messes being
prepared, and eaten successively in the houses of his several friends, one
dwelling in the Capitol, another on mount Caelius, a 3. beyond Tiber, etc. one
staying for another, till the dishes went through all their houses. Lampridius,
c. 30.

In parasitas tantum scelestus nebulo ingeniosus and justus fuisse videtur,
says Goulartius.
He tied his Parasites to a wheel, and turned them up and down in water, calling
them his Ixionian friends. Id. ibid. cap. 24.

He thrust them also out of his diningrooms, which had deceitful floors, into
chambers filled with roses, that smothered with them, they might meet with the
bitterness of death in sweetness. Id. Ib. c. 21.

He Tantalized them with mock-feasts in wax, wood, ivory, marble, glass;
sometimes what himself did eat was woven or wrought with a needle on their
Napkins: otherwhiles so many dishes of meat as were provided for him, were
painted upon their tables: only allowing them to drink. Id. Ib. c. 26 and 27.

At the 2. and 3. course he caused Bears, Pardals, Lions and Leopards, which
lacked their teeth and claws, to be brought in suddenly by their Keepers, to
terrify them who were ignorant of their inability to hurt. Lamprid. c. 21.

He shut them up when they were drunk, turning in upon them in the night these
disarmed beasts, with the fear of which many dyed. Id. ib. c. 25.

Their yearly salaries were pitchers full of Frogs, Scorpions, Serpents and
Flies. Digna certe and domino and ministris stipendia. Jo. Cluverus in Hist.
Epit.
Id. Ib. c. 26.

Many times he kept them in their lodgings from night to morning with old
Black-moor women, whereas he told them he had provided most beautiful ones for
them. Id. ib. c. 30.

When the people had taken up their places before day in the Theater to behold
the sports, he caused Serpents to be thrown among them, whereby many of them
were sore bitten and hurt by flight. Lampridius, c. 23.

He to gratify his mother, Solus omnium imperatorum fuit, sub quo mulier quasi
clarissima, loco viri senatum ingressa est.
did fantastically set up a Parliament of Women, with suitable Orders, as how to
attire, where take place, when salute; but after his death all Women were
deprived of that privilege by the Senate. Id. ib. c. 4. and 18. Lampridius.


He did drive Chariots drawn by Elephants in the Vatican, levelling the Tombs
which stood in his way; he was also drawn by 4 Camels in the Circus, by 4
Mastives in the Palace, after he was Emperor; by 4 Stags in public, sometimes
by Lions he naming himself Magna Matter, also by Tigers counterfeiting Bacchus,
unto whom through his excessive humor of drinking he was something more like:
other whiles 4 naked Wenches drew him, he being also naked. Lampridius, c. 23,
28, 29.

He was addicted to divination by inspection of the bowels of young men
sacrificed, choosing many fair Gentlemen throughout all Italy, whose Parents
were living, that their sorrow might be the greater. Lamprid. c. 8.

By persuasion of Maesa his Grandmother, who pretended to free him from cares
of state, he proclaims Alexander Severus his Cousin-german Caesar; makes him
Consul with himself, and adopteth him for his Son: the Senate ridiculously
voting what he commanded, viz. Alex. Severus who was 12 years old, to be the
Son of Helagabalus that was but 16.

No more than 4 years 'twixt their Ages run,
Yet the one must Father be, and the other Son.
Herodian in english verse, p. 136.
He assaying in vain to draw his cosen to his unseemly courses, repented that
he had made him his Colleague in the Empire; expelled all his Tutors from the
Court, and put the chief of them to death: alleging ridiculously, That the
Pedants spoiled his Son, not suffering him to dance and revel, but teaching him
to be modest and use manly exercises. Herodian, l. 5. c. 7. Lampridius, c 13.

That he revenged himself on none who mocked him upon the reading of Macrinus
his letters against him at Rome: Tristan imputes to the prudent moderation of
Maesa and Eutychianus, by whose means chiefly he got the Empire, whom he yet
put to death with cruel ingratitude, only because he was advised by him to
reform.

The Syrian Priests having foretold him that he should die a violent death, he
built a rich and stately Tower whence he might throw himself down; preparing
also cords of crimson-silk and gold to strangle himself with; rich swords to
thrust himself through; keeping poison in boxes of Emeralds and Iacynth, that
he might choose a death according to his humor: saying, That however he dyed,
his death should be glorious in the eyes of men, and such a one as none ever
dyed. But he failed of his hope; though not of his desert; for the Soldiers of
his own guard, whom he commanded to make away his Cousin-german and deface his
Statues, for the love they bare to Alexander Severus, killed Helagabalus
himself in a Privy, whither he fled to esape them.

His body was drawn by a Soldier through all the Streets of Rome, like the
carcass of a dog, with this military proclamation: The whelp of untamed and
ravening lust. At last when the quantity of his body was greater than would
enter into the stool of a Privy, (wherein for the last funeral ceremony it
should have been buried) they drew it to Tiber, Hic finis Antoninorum nomini in
rep. fuit, scientibus cunctis istum Antoninum tam vita falsum fuisse quam
nomine. Lampridius, c. 33.
binding it to an heavy weight, and so cast it into the River, that it might
neither float above water, nor be buried; he being the only Emperor who was
ever so punished.

From these things that happened unto him he was called Tiberinus and Tractitius.

They did also thrust stakes through the fundament of some of his lewd
companions, that their death might be conformable to their life.

Brevem temporum seriem per generationes and regna primus ex nostris Julius
Africanus sub Imperatore Marco Aurelio Antonino, simplici historiae stylo
elicuit, inquit Isidorus, qui his verbis and quintum claudit Originum librum
and Chronicon suum orditur. Non est autem hic intelligendus Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus Philosophus, sed Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, qui dicebatur Helagabalus
sive potius Elagabalus. Gerh. Ioh. Vossius de Histor. Graecis. l. 2. c. 15.

It is observable that notwithstanding he not only permitted, but also
encouraged his subjects to live licentiously: Sir Thomas Elyot his Image of
Govern. chapter 3.
moreover was so liberal toward them, that he fed them with most delicate and
exquisite meats, gave unto them abundance of money, and all the plate, were it
of gold or silver, wherewith he was served, to them who dined or supped with
him, and made many other sumptuous distributions to the people: yet the Roman
nevertheless abhorring in him their own vices, or rather being satiated
therewith, slew him, as is above mentioned, in the Victor in his Epit. says he
lived but 16 years.
21. year of his age, when he had reigned Herodian says 6 years.
3 years 9 months and 4 days.

Who does not Commodus and Bassian Loath?
Heliogabalus was Himself and Both!
Dr. Holyday his Survey of the World. p. 90.
Alexander Severus.
effigy of emperor
HE was named Alexander, Long aliter hujus nominis causam explicat Dio, quem
vide. Casaub.
because he was born in the Temple of Alexander the Great, and on that day that
Alexander died; he had a Foster-father called Philip, and a nurse named
Olympias, in allusion to Alexander the Great's Father and Mother. Lampridius in
Alexandro Severo. c. 5, and 13. who reckons 14 omens of his coming to the
Empire.

Of his pedigree, see Helagabalus in the beginning.
He is called Alexander Mammaeae from his Mother Mammaea more known than his
Father.

Though he was strict in his discipline, yet Cap. 12. But Heraldus in Apologet.
Tertul. p. 40. says, Ab animifirmitudine and constantia Alexander Mammaeae
optimus Principum, Severi nomen meruit.
Lampridius erroneously affirms that he was named Severus for his severity to
the Soldiers. Tristan tom. 2. p. 385.

His Mother Iulia Mammaea (daughter of Maesa) was a Christian woman, and did
send for Origin to instruct her son in the grounds of the Christian religion.

He was the first Emperor that favored Christians.

He was the first who received at one time all ornaments and tokens of honor,
which he purchased by his honest life and virtuous manners, whereby he obtained
such favor of all men, that when his Cousin-german Helagabalus would have
slain him, he could not for the Soldiers and Senates resistance: he proving
himself worthy to be preserved by the Senate and Soldiers, and to be elected
Emperor by the votes of all good men, when he was but 16 years old. Lamprid. c.
2.

He was then so modest, that when the Senate and people would have given to him
the sur-names of Antonius and Quod ei quasi Alexandro est oblatum.
Magnus as principal titles of Honor, he humbly refused them, saying openly
unto the Senate; It pleases me not to assume what belongs to others, and I
find my self overladen with your love, for these high names of honor are too
burdensome to me. Whereupon (says Lampridius in Alexander Severus c. 12.) he
gained more honor, than if he had taken titles upon him, and from that time he
had the repute of a moderate and wise man.

By the counsel of his wise and virtuous Mother, he purged his Palace,
excluding out of his Court dishonest and infamous persons; and would suffer
none in his household but of necessary use: binding himself by an oath, that he
would not have a superfluous number of servants, lest he should burden the
Commonwealth with his provision, saying; Malum pupillum esse Imperatorem qui
ex visceribus provincialium homines non necessarios, nec reip. utiles pasceret.
Lampridius. c. 15.

He was a most virtuous young man, and of necessary use to the Commonwealth.
Lampridius in Helagabalo, c. 13. and in Alexandro Severo, c. 4.

No day passed, wherein he did not aliquid mansuetum, civil, pium; but in such
manner that he consumed not the common Treasure. Id. Ib. c. 20.

He went usually betime in the morning to his devotion in his Closet, where
were set the images of Apollonius, Christ, Abraham and Orpheus. Lampridius. c.
29.

He did read much the life of Alexander the Great, whom he imitated especially;
laboring to be thought worthy of his name, and to excel him: yet abhorred his
drunkeness and cruelty toward his friends (though the one and the other is
extenuated by some good Authors, to whom he often gave credit.) Id. c. 50, and
30

He went oftentimes to hear Greek and Latin Rhetoricians and Poets; heard also
Orators reciting causes, which they had pleaded before him, or the
City-Prefects. Lampridius. c. 35.

He would not hear Orators or Poets speak any thing to his praise (counting it
folly as Pescennius Niger did) but willingly heard Orations of the acts of
other good Princes, or of famous Romans; and most gladly such as were made in
praise of Alexander the Great. Id. Ib.

He had the picture of Virgil and Tully, with Achilles and other great persons
in his lesser lararium; Alexander the Great among those he worshipped as Gods
in his greater. Id. Ib. c. 31.

He was at first harsh, after favorable to Christians, thought to build a
Temple to Christ, but was diverted by Vlpian and others, who having consulted
their Heathen gods, received this answer (says Lampridius c. 43.) that if that
were suffered, all men would be Christians, and all other Temples desolate.

He delighted not in cloth of gold or silks, saying; Government consisted in
virtue, and not in costly apparel. Lampridius. c. 33.

At his table he drunk not in cups of gold, and kept not above Hoc quis sine
admiratione summa legate? nam per antiquissimas Romanorum leges. quae conviviis
modum ponebant, centum tamen argenti libras convivio licuis infer. Casaubonus.
200 pound weight of silver vessels in his house. Id. Ib. c. 34.

Lamprid. c. 31
He sold Jewels that were given to him, counting it unfit for himself to possess
such things, as he could neither give to his Soldiers, nor any man find profit
in. Wherefore when an Ambassador had given to the Empress 2 unions of wonderful
greatness, he commanded them to be sold: and when none could be found who would
give as much as they were prized at, lest any ill example should proceed from
his Wife, if she wore that which no body could buy, he caused them to be hanged
at the ears of the Image of Venus: Sir Tho. Eliot his Image of govern.
thereby declaring that such things either for the inestimable price were
fitter for gods than men; or for the unprofitable beauty thereof served only
for persons of wanton dispositions, whereof Venus was goddess and patroness.

He would be saluted by his name; if any man bowed his head, or spoke any thing
in flattery, he was repulsed if his quality admitted of it, or greatly derided.
Lampridius in Alexandro Severo, c. 18.

He would not suffer any to come into his presence, but such as were honest and
of good report, commanding that none should enter into his Palace, but only
such who knew themselves to be free from vice: causing it to be proclaimed that
no person knowing himself to be a Thief, should presume to salute him upon pain
of capital punishment, saying moreover; Thieves only complain of poverty,
seeking thereby to hide their mischievous living. Id. Ib.

He prohibited infamous women to salute his Wife or Mother. Id. ib. c. 25.

He ordered that condemnations should be rare, but reversed not those which
passed. Id. ib. c. 21.

He was strict in his own manners, wherefore all noble men assayed to imitate
him, and honorable Matrons followed the Empress her example. Id. ib. c. 41.

He caused the sinews of one of his Secretary's fingers to be cut through,
Spectarunt hoc saepius. antiqui legum conditores, ut qua part quis peccasset,
eadem puniretur.
so that he could never write after, and banished him, for forging a false bill
in his Counsel. Id. Ib. c. 28. Videsis plura.

He commanded one of his own servants, (who had abused him by receiving 100
Crowns of a Soldier for a bribe) to be hanged in the high way, Casaubon.
wherein his servants most frequently passed to his Manors without the City.
Id. ib. c. 23.

He used like severity toward Soldiers; Vix annos viginti natus in summa rerum
affluentia, magnoque Imperio, and ipse se egregium militaris disciplinae
exemplum praestitit, and a militib us ut idem agerent, exegit. Neque enim alio
quam militari cibo utebatur, apertoque tentorio ut omnes conspicerent
vescebatur. Fulgosius. l. 2. c. 2.
for when he heard that one of them had wronged a poor old woman, he cashiered
him and made him be bondslave to the woman, that he being a Carpenter might
with his trade and labor maintain her: and when the Soldiers were grieved
thereat, he persuaded them to be contented, and made them afraid to grudge at
it. Id. ib. c. 51.

He said that a Soldier is never afraid, but when he is well appareled, and his
purse furnished with money. Lampridius in Alex. Severo. c. 52.

He would in no case permit Offices to be sold; For (said he) he who buyeth,
must sell; I will not endure any merchandise of authority, which if I tolerate,
I cannot afterward condemn; and I shall be ashamed to punish him who sold what
I permitted him to buy. Id. ib. c. 49.

He so abborred bribery, that if by chance he saw a Judge therewith corrupted,
he was ready to scratch out his eyes; and was so incensed at the sight of such
Extortioners, that he would immediately vomit up choler, his face being as it
were on fire, and he not able of a long time to speak a word. Id. ib. c. 17.
out of Encolpius and Seprimius.

Prodiit ante annos ferme abhinc centum Londini, libellus Anglicanus Imago
Gubernationis seu The Image of Governance dicius, quem in Epistola ad proceres
Anglicanos dedicatoria, e Graeco sermon transtulisse se ait Thomas Eliotus
eques auratus, atque celebris tunc inter liberatos nominis (de quo videsis
Balaeum Cent. 8. script. 77. and Pitsaeum aetate 16, script. 969) atque
exemplar Graecum commodato accepisse a Clarissimo quodam Neapolitano, cui nomen
Pudericus. Autorem libelli asserit fuisse Encolpium Alex. Severo a
Commentariis. Et Encolpium quidem scriptis mandasse res aliquas Alexandri
illius scimus ex Lampridio qui vitam ejus contexens Encolpium semel and iterum
adhibet autorem, quo and familiarissimo usum fuisse ait Alexandrum. Graecum
puto nullibi jam extare. Sed capite libelli hujus vicesimo quinto, veluti ex
Encolpii Graecis, narratur, Alexandrum, hortatu Mammaeae matris, Origenem (qui
coaevus quidem erat) ex Aegypto accercivisse, ac literas ad episcopum
Alexandriae datas, quibus ei jussum est ne Origenis iter impediret; praefixo
qui ad hunc modum sonat titulo, Alex. Imp. Aug. etc. Alexandro Archiepiscopo
Christianorum in magna civitate Alexandriae (...). Graecum enim hoc vocabulum
in margin apposuit Eliotus, ut sciret lector quid in Graecis responderet
verbis suis Anglicanis Well to do. Dissertationes dein etiam addit aliquot
Alexandri and Originis de rebus divinis. Sed nullus tune temporis plane
episcopus Alexandriae, Alexander dictus est, nec ullus ante Constantinum. Neque
aliud quam Graeculi alicujus recentioris commentum libellum illum fuisse
dubito, utcunque sane Lampridio subinde satis concordem. Seldenus in
Interserendis ad Eutychium, p. 174, 175.

When one Septimius Arabinus, who in the time of Helagabalus, was infamous for
bribery, came in the company of Senators to salute him, he cried out invocating
his Syrian God with other Deities; O Marna, O Jupiter, O Dii immmortales,
Arabinus non solum vivit, verum etiam in Senatum venit: fortassis etiam de me
sperat; tam fatuum, tam stultum esse me judicat. Arabinus not only lives, but
comes into the Senate, (alluding to Tully his speech against Catiline) perhaps
to be presumes on me, judging me to be an ignorant and foolish Prince. Id. ib.

He had a favorite named Vetronius Turinus, who used to be more familiar with
him than others, which so blinded him, that he by lies confirmed the opinion of
many, who thought the Emperor would do nothing without his advice. Which abuse
the Emperor hearing of, used this plot to circumvent him. He caused one to
desire something of him openly, and after to sue privily to Turinus to help him
in his demand, and secretly to move the Emperor for him: which being done,
Turinus promised his good will to the Petitioner, and soon after said that he
had solicited the Emperor therein, (whereas he spoke not a word thereof) and
expected his answer; whereupon he received of the said person a great sum of
money, which the Emperor knowing, caused him to call often on Turinus; who, as
if he had other business in hand, only beckoned on him without speaking any
thing to him, the Emperor in the interim having given to another that which
this man sued for, who grudging thereat, discovered openly what Turinus had
received of him: whereupon the Emperor commanded Turinus to be accused openly
in his presence, and all things being proved by sufficient and credible
Witnesses, in whose presence he had received bribes, and in whose hearing he
had promised great matters: he was adjudged by the Emperor to be bound to a
stake in the Marketplace, and to be smothered to death with smoke of green
sticks and wet stubble, the Bedel being commanded to cry the mean while, Fumo
punitur qui vendidit fumum; He perishes by smoke who had vented smoke instead
of substance. Alexandrum Severum non laudo optimum alioquin principem, qui fumo
ex stipulis and humidis lignis facto, eum puniit, qui vendiderat fumum.
Casaubonus in Vulcatii Gallicani Avidium Cassium. cap. 4.
But lest men should think the judgment was too rigorous for one offense,
before he was condemned to die, the Emperor made diligent search, and found by
evident proofs, that Turinus had often and in many causes received money of
both parties, promising to promote their cause to the Emperor. Lampridius, c.
35. and 36.

He had in his chamber bills containing the number of his Soldiers, with their
names, and what time they had served; and when he was alone, he perused their
accounts, and the number of them with their dignities and wages, that he might
be surely provided upon all occasions: wherefore when he had any thing to do
with them, he could tell many of their names. When he was solicited to promote
any one, he marked his name, and then searched his books of Pittacia a (...),
and (...).
remembrance, wherein were the names of them who served him, with the time of
their service, also their reward, and at whose request they were promoted. Id.
ib. c. 21.

His Soldiers marched like Senators to the Persian war, the Country loving them
as brethren, and honoring him as a God. Lampridius in Alexandro Severo, cap.
50.

In his expedition if any Soldier going out of the way passed through another
man's ground, he would cause him to be beaten with rods, or be drubbed in his
sight: or if the dignity of the person freed him from such punishments, he
would severely reprove him, saying; Visne hoc in agro tuo fieri, quod alteri
facis? Lamprid. c. 51.

Sandys in his Travels lib. 1. writes, that amongst the Turkish commandments
this is one, drawn originally from our Saviors, Thou shall not do, what thou
would not have done to thee: with which speech Alexander Severus was so
delighted, that he caused it to be written on the walls of houses, and to be
publicly proclaimed by a Crier, that all might the better observe it.
Camerarius in his Historical Meditations says, Vlpian hence framed the
constitution which is found in the Pandects under the title: Quod quisque juris
in alterum statuerit, ut ipse eodem jure utatur.

When the Soldiers mutinyed at Antioch, Herodianus Alexandrum ut ignavum,
matrem ejus Mammaeam ut impiam, traducit: sed videtur id facere, religionis
Christianae, cui favebant, odio: cum Lampridius tot nominibus Alexandrum
commendet ob frugalitatem, liberalitatem, integritatem, adeoque fortitudinem.
Jac. Cappellus in Eccles. Christ. cent. 2. p. 52.
because he exercised martial discipline upon some of them for debauchedness,
he stilled them with these words; Quirites discedite, atque arma deponite. A
wonderful example, they all putting off their arms and soldiers coats, departed
to their several lodgings. Then the Emperors guard brought all the Standards
into the Camp, and the people themselves brought all their armor to the
Emperors Palace: yet that very Legion which he disbanded, being sued unto 30
days before he went toward Persia, he received again, and by their valor
especially, he overcame his enemies: notwithstanding ere he departed he put to
death the Commanders of that Legion, because the Soldiers passed their time
riotously at Daphne, through their negligence or connivence. Id. ib. c. 53, 54.

Herodian writes that the Romans were vanquished in this War. But Lampridius,
Eutropius, Orosius and Zosimus say, that Severus obtained the victory, took
Ctesiphon with Babylon, and subdued also Arabia.

Fides Herodiani nutat in Alexandro and Maximino. Vossius de Histor. Graec.

He so heard the complaints of Soldiers against their Commanders, that if he
found any Officer faulty, he punished him according to the quality of the
offense, without purpose of pardon. Id. ib. c. 23.

He made one a Pretorian Prefect, who fled to avoid so arduous an employment,
saying; Invitos, non ambientes in republica collocandos, They were fit to bear
offices of state who shunned them, not those that sued for them. Id. ib. c. 19.

He never made a Senator without the counsel and approbation of the whole
Senate, testimony of him being given by honorable persons; but if either the
Senators who gave their suffrage, or the witnesses were found to have spoke
untruly, they were put into the lowest places of esteem, being also condemned
by the people as deceivers and forgers without hope of remission. Lampridius,
c. 19.

Doctos reformidat, nihil enim acutius calamo rerum perito, is Goulartius his
marginal note.
He loved learned men, and feared them also very much, lest they should write
any thing sharply of him. Lamprid. c. 3.

He feared less a hundred lances, then
The impetuous charges of a single pen.
Allen's History of Henry the 7. p. 85.
His Mother Mammaea and his Grandmother Maesa chose out of the Senate 16 grave
and honorable Peers for his Counselors and Assistants, without whose consent
nothing was to pass as an Act of State. Herodian, l. 6. c. 1.

He transacted no weighty matter of judicature, without the advice of no less
than 50 most learned and wise men, beside 20 Lawyers (18 whereof were Scholars
of Papinian) of whom Ideo summus Imperator fuit, quod ejus consiliis praecipue
Rempublicam rexit.
Vlpian was chief. Every man's opinion was heard, and what they said was
written; a competent time being given each Counselor to consider what they
propounded, that they might not speak unadvisedly in matters of importance.
Lampridius, Lampridius c. 51. See Aelians Various History, l. 3. c. 17.
cap. 16. and 68.

In Law and business of state, intelligent, learned and eloquent men were of
his Council; in military affairs old Commanders, who had behaved themselves
valiantly in several battles, and were expert in the situation of places,
pitching of fields, and preparation of camps; in each matters he advised with
the best Historians: asking them, what the Emperors of Rome or Princes of
foreign countries in former times did in like cases as were then in debate.
Id. ib. c. 16.

He said, they only should be advanced who could order the Commonwealth by
themselves, and not by Deputies, adding thereto, that martial men had their
administrations, and Scholars theirs: and therefore every one should do that
whereof he had most knowledge. Lampridius in Alexandro Severo, c. 46.

When he appointed Governors of Provinces, he published their names, exhorting
and encouraging the people to bring in what exception they could against them,
and manifestly to prove the crime, if there was cause of accusation; provided,
if they did not sufficiently prove their charge, and that their accusation
proceeded from malice, the accuser should forthwith be beheaded: for, said he,
Since Christians and Jews use this method in ordination of Priests, it is most
reasonable that the like course should be taken in the choice of Rectors of
Provinces, to whom are committed the lives and fortunes of those who are under
them. Id. ib. c. 49.

When certain Hucksters and Cooks pretended they had right to a place which was
consecrated by the Christians, and it was enquired what was his pleasure
therein, he answered; It was better that God should be worshipped there after
any sort, than that the places should be put to vain uses. Id. ib. c. 49.

Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History l. 6. says, that there were many
Christians in his family.

He freely sent of his Treasure to many poor men for the purchasing of lands,
receiving his money from the rents thereof. Lampridius in Alex. Sev. c. 21.

To many Cities which were defaced by Earthquakes, he remitted the tribute for
their reparation. Id. c. 44.

He wrote down so far as he could remember what he had given to any man, and if
he found any to whom he had either given nothing, or that which was not equal
to his merit, he called them unto him, saying; What is the cause thou ask
nothing of me? It was more troublesome to him (says one) to be asked nothing,
than to give much.
Would thou have me be in thy debt? Ask something that thou may not
complain of me for want of promotion. He gave such things as impaired not his
honor; viz. goods of men attainted, not being in gold, silver or jewels: for
that was put in the common treasury. Lampridius in Alex. Sev. c. 46.

When any one had exercised his office in the Commonwealth well, at the end of
his term when there was a Successor appointed, he would say to him who departed
out of his office; Gratias tibi agit Respublica: and would so reward him, that
being a private person, he might according to his degree live in good fashion.
His reward was in land, cattle, horses, grain, iron, stone, and other things
necessary for Edifices. Id. Ibid. c. 32.

He allowed every Judge of a Province 20 pound weight in silver, 6 silver pots,
2 Mules, 2 Mulets, 2 Horses, a Horse-keeper and a Muletor, 2 Robes to sit in
judgment, one honorable garment to wear in his house, one for his bath, one
Cook, and 100 crowns; their employment being ended, they were bound to restore
the Mules, Mulets, Horses, Muletors and Cooks: but might retain the residue if
they had discharged their office well, otherwise they paid 4 times as much as
they received. Id. Ib. c. 42.

He thought the safety of the State depended upon the Soldiers. Lampridius in
Alex. Severo, c. 47.

He gave such lands as he won out of the Enemies hands to his Lords Marchers,
and his Soldiers, that they should be theirs, and their heirs for ever, so they
would be Soldiers, neither should they at any time come to the hands of private
men, saying They would more carefully serve, if they fought for their own
lands. Lampridius in Alexandro Severo.

He did let no day pass without exercising himself in learning and martial
affairs. Id. Ib. c. 3.

After public affairs whether martial or civil, he employed himself most about
the reading of Greek Authors, as Plato de republica. And when he would read any
Latin books, he chiefly made use of Tully his Offices, and his tract De
republica, not now extant. Sometime he read Orators and Poets, among whom was
Serenus Sammonicus (whom he knew and favored) and also Horace. Lampridius in
Alex. Sev. c. 30.

When he dined or supped abroad, he had ever with him Vlpian or other learned
men, In jocis Alexander dulcissimus fuit, in fabulis amabilis, in conviviis
comis, ita ut quisque posceret quod vellet. Lampridius in Alexandro Severo, c.
4.
that he might benefit himself by their discourse, with which he said; that he
was both recreated and fed. Id. ib. c. 34.

He delighted not so much in Latin eloquence, as in the Greek, in which he
made elegant verses; inclined to Music, was learned in the Mathematics; and
appointed the professors of those sciences openly to propose questions at Rome,
for the information of those who were that way addicted. In divination he was
so skilful, that he excelled the Augurs of Gascony, Spain, and Hungary. He
painted excellently, sang very pleasantly, but never before any, except the
Pages of his Privy-chamber. He wrote the lives of good Princes in verse, which
he sung unto the Harp and Organs. Sir Thomas Eliot his Image of Govern. ex
Lamprid. c. 3. and 27.

He never had any scenical sports at a feast, but delighted much in making
whelps to play with young pigs, in the fighting of Partridges, and in little
birds flying up and down. To lighten his public cares, he had Aviaries of
Peacocks, Pheasants, Ducks, Partridges, and Ringdoves; which he so extremely
liked, that he had about 20000 of them: for the feeding whereof his servants
provided by sale of their Eggs and young ones. Lampridius in Alex. Sev. c. 41.

Every day also he did some good to others, in which (says Tristan) he had an
advantage of happiness above Titus, who could not express the like goodness
above the space of a years in which he reigned.

Alexander Mammaeae satis copiosa expositione (quippe cum tredecim annis
regnaverit) utique est ad praeclari imaginem imperii descriptus: adeo plane
nihil desideratur eorum, quae vel ad educationem Principalis sobolis, vel ad
normam imperatoriae virtutis, vel ad temperamentum singularis potestatis, vel
ad disciplinam aulae, vel ad confilia publicae tranquillitatis creduntur
pertinere. Boeclerus in Dedicatione, praefixa Herodiano.

If necessity required, he heard matters before day, staying till it was late;
never seeming to be weary or troubled: but had all the time the same
countenance, in all things appearing merry and pleasant. Lampridius, c. 29.

He was so courteous that he visited the meanest of his sick friends, desiring
them to tell him their minds freely of every thing, and hearing them
attentively; and when he had heard them thoroughly, whatsoever he found amiss he
carefully amended: and when his Mother Mammaea and his Wife Memmia blamed him
for his great civility, saying it made his authority contemptible, he answered;
But more secure and durable. Id. ibid. cap. 20.

He repaired most of the Bridges which were built by Trajan, leaving
notwithstanding the name and honor thereof to Trajan. Id. ib. c: 26.

In all the time of his reign, which lasted 14 years, he suffered none to die,
but those who were condemned by law; a rare virtue, and not practiced by any
since Marcus Aurelius: and there had been nothing wanting to have rendered him a
most excellent Prince, had not his Mother who was (a good woman, but) Mulier
sancta, sed avara. Lampridius, c. 14.
too miserable, stained his honor by her sordid demeanor. Herodian, l. 6. c. 9.

Though duty binds, yet herein was his error,
He gave her too much sway, to others terror.
Herodian in english verse, p. 136.
When he was passing along in his expedition against the Germans through
France, a Druid woman cried out after him in the Gallick tongue, Go thy way and
look not for the victory, and trust not thy Soldiers. Purchase his Pilgrims the
first part. l. 1. c. 12. p. 101.

Thrasybulus his friend foretelling that he should die by the hand of a
Barbarian, he rejoiced, thinking that he should die a warlike death; but he was
mistaken in his interpretation, dying not in war: for the Soldiers enraged with
his discipline, and his Mother Mammaea's covetousness, slew them both near
Mentz in Quod Lampridius Alexandrum occisum refert in Britannia vel in Gallia,
videtur hinc natum, quod consilium in Britannia captum, and quidem hoc, ut
videtur, anno, proxime sequente peractum est in Gallia. Jac. Cappellus in 5
Centuriis. ad an. Dom. 234.
Germany, by the instigation of Maximinus a Muletor whom he had raised.

Herodianus VI. Maximinum ait imperium usurpasse primum: deinde Alexandrum cum
matre sua necasse; in quo a Lampridio discrepat. Petavius De Doctrina Temporum,
lib. 13. p. 699.

This end had both the Mother and the Son,
A gentle Prince of mild and temperate reign;
His edict was, none should to death be done,
Except the law did first inflict the pain:
His rule and he much longer might have lasted,
Had not his Mother thus his honor blasted.
Herodian in english verse p. 155.
S. Aurelius Victor says that when Alexander saw himself forsaken of his
guard, he cried out upon her which gave him his life, as the cause of his
death; adding that Mammaea had reduced her son to such an extremity by her
sparing humor, who if never so little was left at their overfrugal table;
reserved it till another time.

-- Civilibus occidit armis,
Maternasque cadens incusat serius arts.
Diarium Historico-poet. l. 3. p. 32.
Vere Mammaeus a studio in matrem Mammaeam, Matris cultu plus quam pius. Aur.
Vict.
ex cujus arbitrio and consilio multa administrat infeliciter and cum proprio
exitio. Dietericus in Breviario historico.

Julian brings in Silenus, Jupiter's buffon, thus deriding him: O te hominem
amentissimum, and nullius plane consilii! qui ad tantum dignitatis fastigium
elatus, tuas res ex animi tui sententia non administrasti, sed tuas pecunias
matri commisisti, neque tibi in mentem venit, long satius and utilius esse eas
amicis impartiri, quam sibi recondere.

He lived 29 years 11 months and 7 days, and reigned (says Lampridius) 13
years and 9 days.

Quibus Consulibus natus sit Alexander, legisse me non memini, inter historices
quidem omnes eum constat occisum fuisse anno Imperii tertio decimo: sed quoto
aetatis anno ambiguum. Apud Lampridium enim invenies, an. 29, in Victoris vero
Epitome 26, ex quibus tamen numeris, si tredecim annos imperii deduxeris,
Alexandrum rerum potiri coepisse anno aetatis sexto decim^ aut decimo tertio
colliges: nisi and illi quoque numeri utrique falsi sint. Vinetus in Eutropium.

He found his real Sepulcher in Rome, but his empty grave in Gallia. Dr Brown's
Urn-burial. p. 41.

He is the more to be honored and admired, since being come of uncertain
lineage, born far from Rome, and in so barbarous a Country as Syria, he so well
governed the Roman Empire, which before his time was extremely corrupted with
detestable vices. See Lamprid. c. 66, etc.

Dio was contemporary and Consul with Alexander, with whom he ends his
history, of which Bussieres in his Flosculi historici passes this censure;
Tunc Dio Cassius principi charus and fastis insertus, inauguravit literas
trabea; Romanae Graecus scriptor historiae perquam accuratus, quam tamen
negligentia temporum perdidit, dum studiosa brevitatis in Xiphilino,
ignorantiam fovet, and umbram amans corpus amittit.

Dio Cassius Coccejanus historicus prudentissimus, and immerito a J. Lipsio in
Catalogo prudentiae Doctorum [in not. ad polit.] praeteritus. Forstnerus ad
Tacitum, p. 101.

Dio Cassius in Casaubons opinion, the most accurate Historian, says Bolton in
his Nero Caesar, p. 233.

Sub eodem principe floruit Herodianus, qui Graece quoque scripsit historiam
pauciorum quidem quam Cassius annorum, sed admodum judiciosam and elegantem, a
Commodo, qui regnare coepit anno V. C. 933. ad Maximinum, qui periit anno 990.
Jac. Cappellus p. 8. praefationis, praefixae Centuriis quinque Ecclesiasticae
Historiae.

Dioni and Tacito, non contextu tantum operis, sed pragmaticae gravitatis
comparatione adjungendus. Boeclerus in Epistola Dedicatoria, praefixa Herodiano.

Sub eoque vixit Aelianus, qui de Varia Historia scripsit. Besoldus in majore
Synopsi Historiae universae.

The Persian State Alexander o'rethrew;
Rome's Alexander did himself subdue.
Dr. Holyday's Survey of the world. lib. 8.
Maximinus and his Son Maximus.
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
MAximinus spent his youth in keeping cattle, yet was advanced afterward for
his Ego (ut (...), cui magna solet esse fides, testem faciam) Belgam
(Antwerpianum se ferebat) in Galliis, Anno 1583. vidi novem pedes altitudine
excedentem.
stature which exceeded 8 foot by 6 fingers. Capitolinus in Maxim. c. 1. and in
Maximino jun. c. 2. [ Parsons by trade a Blacksmith, the Kings Porter ( anno
1624.) was found by just measure to be 7 foot and 2 inches. And I hear that a
Welsh-man lately entertained by the Prince in the like place, outstrips the
Smith in height by 5 inches, yet is still growing, so as in time he may well
come unto 8 foot. Dr. Hakewil in his Apology, Merula Cosmographiae part prima,
l. 3. c. 14.
l. 3. c. 3. sect. 3.]

His body was so great that his Wifes bracelet served him for a ring.
Capitolinus in Maximino, c. 6.

His stomach was answerable; he eating daily 40, sometimes 60 pound weight of
flesh; and drinking 6 gallons of wine. Id. Ibid. c. 4.

His strength was suitable; he being able to draw Wains laden with his hands;
Eodem tempore, quo Maximinus suae monstrosae fortitudinis opera hinc inde
exercebat, ille admirandi r^boris gigas Starcatherus pugil Sueticus (cujus
paulo ante meminimus) aliique quam plurimi, in prima Gothorum patria aditis
ubique clarissimis and memorabilibus facinoribus viguerunt. Olaus Magnus fol.
445.
to strike out the teeth of a horse with his fist, to break his thighs with a
kick; to crumble tophy stones between his fingers, and to cleave young Trees:
for which he was called Hercules, A^^aeus, and Milo; as Achilles, Hector and
Ajax, for his valor. Id. ib. c. 6. and 8.

Sept. Severus celebrating the birthday of his Son Geta with military sports,
gave the winners for a reward jewels, collars, bracelets, belts; Maximinus who
was newly come to the army, and could scarce speak Latin came before him,
entreating his leave that he might put forth himself in these exercises.
Severus wondering at the greatness of his body, granted his request; but upon
condition, that he should not encounter with any Soldier, Nequid a rudi homine
militaribus viris veniret injuriae, says Iornandes in Geticis, c. 15.
but with such as were water-bearers and servitors of the Camp, among which
were very strong and stout men. Maximinus overcame 16 of them before he rested,
receiving so many smaller rewards, but not such as were given to the Soldiers;
and was listed for service. Three days after the Emperor riding to view his
Camp, saw Maximinus (who was yet but a fresh water-soldier) out of order;
wherefore he commanded a Colonel to call him into his rank, and to instruct him
in the duty he was to observe in the Wars: Maximinus imagining the Emperor
spoke of him, kneeled down at his feet. The Emperor desiring to see whether he
could run well or no, spurred his horse and took several turns in the field;
and seeing Maximinus left not off running, old Severus being tired said to
Maximinus, Thracian, will you wrestle after your race? whereto he answered, So
long as it shall please your Majesty. Then the Emperor choosing 7 of the
strongest men in his army, Maximinus overcame them without resting between.
Whereupon Severus commanded a collar of gold to be given to him alone, with
certain pieces of silver; made him one of his guard, and commanded that he
should continually attend in the Palace: by which means he came to be esteemed
by the Commanders and Soldiers, and to obtain what he desired of the Emperor.
Id. Ib. c. 2, 3.

He was diligent as well after, as before his preferment, saying; Ego quo major
fuero, tanto plus laborabo: and rather than his Soldiers should be out of
action, he employed them in hunting.

Even in his old age he would throw down 5, 6, or 7 Soldiers (whom he wrestled
with) one after another; and being challenged by a Tribune who envied him, when
they met, Maximinus gave him such a blow on the breast with the palm of his
hand, that he threw him flat upon his back, saying in sport; Date alium sed
Tribunum. Id. ib. c. 6.

Caracallo made Maximinus a Centurion; (in Macrinus his reign he left the army
out of hatred to the assasinate of his Sovereign;) even Helagabalus permitted
him to be a Tribune: but Alexander Severus gave him the command of a Legion,
whose death notwithstanding he disloyally practiced (as is before mentioned;)
whereupon he was elected Emperor by the Soldiers, without the consent of the
Senate. Id. ibid. c. 4, 5, 7, 8.

It appears unquestionably that he committed this villainy (notwithstanding
the doubts of some) because he killed all Alexanders relations and friends.
Tristan.

He arrogantly usurped the names of Cajus Julius Verus, and the proud Epithets
of Invictus, Fortissimus and Nobilissimus; notwithstanding his ignoble
extraction. Tristan.

He suffered no noble person to be about him, and out of a desire to conceal
the baseness of his birth, slew even the best of his friends who were conscious
of it. Lampridius, c. 19.

His tyranny caused many to conspire against him, which he discovering, took an
occasion to renew his cruelty.

Maximinus first thanked Macedonius, who treacherously slew Tycus that had
rebelled against him, but afterward put him to death as a Traitor. Capitolinus,
c. 11.

Praeclarum tyranni factum, and vere singular, nam tota vita unicum hoc laud
dignum. Elenchus MS Numismatum in Bibliotheca Bodleiana.

He slew all of the faction of his adversary Magnus without any judicial
process, Maximino imperium jam constabilitum obtinente, gravis omnes incessit
poenitentia, quod acerbam tyrannidem moderato cum imperio commutassent.
Zosimus, lib. 1.
not satisfied with the slaughter of above 4000. Capitolinus, c. 10.

Maximus Pupienus (who made preparations at Ravenna to wage war against him by
the Senates appointment) was exceedingly afraid of him, saying often; that he
was not engaged against a man, but a Cyclops: and Balbinus (who was made his
Colleague in the Empire by the Senate, and staid at Rome) trembled at the naming
of him.

He was so feared at Rome, that when he was in Italy, the women with their
children prayed solemnly in their Temples that he might never return; having
heard that some were crucified by him, some enclosed in beasts newly killed,
others cast to wild beasts, others bruised with clubs, without any regard to
the quality of persons. Id. ibid. c. 8.

For his cruelty (which he thought necessary for his security) he was hated,
and called Cyclops, Busiris, Scyron, Phalaris, Typhon, and Gyges. Id. ib. and
c. 9.

He was so infatuated with the confidence of his own greatness and personal
strength, that he entertained a conceit, that death durst not adventure to
encounter him, for fear of having his Javelin broke about his own crazy skull,
and all his Skeleton of bones rattled to dust. Dr. Charleton's Darkness of
Atheism dispelled by the light of nature, p. 178.

Because he thought himself immortal, he was covertly defied in the Theater by
a Comoedian in these verses: Qui ab uno non potest occidi, a multis occiditur:
Elephas grandis est, and occiditur:
Leo Fortis est, and occiditur:
Tigris fortis est, and occiditur:
Cave multos, si singulos non times.
Capitolinus, c. 9.


What was spoken in sport, befell him in earnest; for Maximinus hasting with his
army toward Rome to be revenged of the Senate which intended resistance, was
opposed at Aquileja, where women made bow-strings of their hair to shoot
against him; Capitolinus in Maximino jun. and in Maximo and Balbino.
at which repulse he became so furious that he killed many of his own Soldiers,
wherewith the rest being enraged slew him and his Son, saying; Canis pessimi ne
catulus quidem relinquendus: Of a bad litter not a whelp is to be left.

He was 65 years old when he dyed, and his Son 21.

The time of their reign is not agreed upon.

The Messenger who brought word of their death, came from Aquileja to Rome (798
miles) in 4 days. Capitolinus, c. 25.

Magna sane diligentia: sed non incredibilis; cum similis celeritatis aut etiam
majoris exempla and apud veteres legantur, and hodieque edi saepissime
videamus. Constat hodiernos veredarios Roma Lutetiam saepe diebus sex septem
commeare: quae long major contentio est. Casaubonus.

When his head with his sons were brought to Rome, all ran to the Altars to
thank the Gods, and Balbinus sacrificed Hecatombs for his deliverance,
commanding the same to be done throughout the Empire. Maximinus junior tantae
pulchritudinis fuit, ut passim amatus sit a procacioribus feminis. nonnullae
etiam optaverunt de eo concipere. Capitolinus in Maximino jun. c. 1.


Scribit Aelius Sabinus (quod pretermittendum non fuit) tantam pulchritudinem
oris suisse in filio, ut etiam caput ejus mortui jam nigrum, jam sordens, jam
maceratum, defluente tabo, velut umbra pulcherrima videretur. Denique quum
caput Maximini pilo circumferretur, and ex hoc ingens gaudium esset, prope par
moeror erat, quod and filii caput pariter portaretur. Capitolinus in Maximino
juniore, c. 6.

Maximinus was the Author of the 6. persecution, Persecutio ista sub Maximino
Imp. post diuturnam Ecclesiae pacem repent oborta est ob frequentes and
gravissimos terrae motus, quos more suo Gentiles Christianis imputabant ut
testis est Firmilianus in Epistola ad Cyprianum. Vide Baronium ad annum Christi
237. Valesius in Eusebium, p. 127.
which Tristan thinks he raised only that he might confiscate the Christians
goods, his sacrilegious covetousness not permitting him to spare Heathen
Temples.

As this persecution was the shortest, so it was the most violent; not of the
common sort so much, as of their especial Leaders: who were either cut off from
them, or hirelings intruded for them, or their flock set up against them.
Bishop Prideaux in his Introduction to History, out of Chrysostom.

Hujus Maximini monumenta sunt, Bracarae Augustae vicus and porta Maximini,
quae hodie quoque post tot saecula nomen retinent. Certum est Romanos omnes
Imperatores tum per se tum per magistratus, res praeclaras in Hispania
gessisse. Quod tum ex plurimis ipsorum monumentis, tum ex antiquis numismatis
constat. Quae ego omnium fere Imperatorum insignita nominibus vidi, and
pleraque etiam habeo penes me, multa largitus amicis. Vasaeus in Chron. Hispan.
p. 266.

Bistoniis armenta jugis paulo ante regebas,
Romani fraenos qui regis Imperii.
Boissardus. Gordian the Father.
effigy of emperor
GORDIAN the elder was son of Metius Marullus and Vlpia Gordiana, deriving his
pedigree by the Fathers side from the Gracchi, and by the Mothers from Trajan
the Emperor. Capitolinus in tribus Gordianis, c. 2.

His Father, Grandfather, and great Grandfather were Consuls; as also were
his Father-in-law, with his Grandfather on both sides, and both her great
Grandfathers. Id. ibid.

He was made Pro-consul of Africa at the age of fourscore, having been Ruler of
many other Provinces, and well exercised in State Affairs. Herodian lib. 7.
cap. 5.

The Africans so loved him, that some compared him to Scipio, De Gordiani
dignitatibus, laudibusque per gradus honorum and gloriae partis, ut and de
delato imperio prolixe Capitolinus in Gordiano a c. 3. usque ad 9. Boeclerus in
Herodianum, p. 452.
others to Cato; many called him Mutius Scaevola, Rutilius, and C. Laelius.
Capitolinus in tribus Gordianis, c. 5.

Moribus ita moderatus ut nihil possis dicere quod ille aut cupide, aut
immodeste, aut nimie fecerit. Id. ib. c. 6.

Populo Romans ita commendatus suis actibus erat ut toto dignus videretur
imperio. Id. Ibid. c. 9.

The young Gentlemen of Tysdrum exasperated by the tyranny of Maximinus his
favorite (Governor of Carthage) slew him; and proclaimed Gordian Emperor, whom
they thought the Romans would like, because he was nobly descended: He though
somewhat coy, yet being naturally desirous of honor, accepted their offer with
a little reluctance: choosing rather to avoid the present, than future peril;
holding it not inglorious to die in his old age (if need were) in Imperial
robes. Hereupon all Africa revolted, and many Cities pulling down Maximines
Images, erected Gordians Statues; whom they surnamed African: (for so the
Southern Libyans are called by the Romans.) Herodian, l. 7. c. 5.

He banished all Informers, and suffered those that were unjustly condemned to
reverse the judgment by pleading. Id. ib. c. 6.

He recalled all exiles, and promised to give the Soldiers more than ever
Emperor did, and to reward the Commons with an extraordinary Congiary. Id. Ib.

Vitalian, the Pretorian Prefect at Rome, a bloody instrument of Maximinus's,
was killed by Gordian's appointment.

Those who obeyed his order therein, gave out that Maximine was slain; at the
hearing whereof, the Romans defaced the Images and Statues of Maximinus: hatred
(which till then was overawed by fear) pouring out it self, without stop,
through the Floud-gates of licentiousness. The Senate also conjecturing that it
was so, decreed that all Maximine's honors should be abolished: and declared
Gordian and his Son Emperors. Idem ubi supra, and c. 7.

The Senate at last understood their danger, better than their relief, Maximine
his affairs prospering at Carthage unexpectedly. Capellianus an enemy to
Gordian, and true to Maximine, defeated Gordian his Son (who was sent against
him) with all his followers. So great was the number that fell, that the
principal persons could not be found to receive funeral honor, nor the dead
body of the young Prince. Idem ubi supra, etc. 9. Capitolinus in tribus
Gordianis, c. 16.

Gordian the Father hearing of this, through despair strangled himself.
Capitolinus, ubi supra.

Sane etsi uter perierit prior non plane constat, ambos tamen in Afr^ca mortem
obiisse, non est dubium. Zosimus tamen ex aliis scriptoribus tradit naufragio
utrumque periisse, cum ex Africa in Italiam trajicerent. Casaubonus.

Gordian the elder lived 80 years, and yet died of a violent death, when he was
scarce warm in his Empire; A man of an high spirit, and renowned, learned, and
a Poet; and constantly happy throughout the whole course of his life, save only
that he ended his days by a violent death. Sir Francis Bacon.

Eo solum Imperator, ne sua morte decederet. Bussieres in Flosculis Historiarum.

Gordian the Son had 22 Concubines, by each of which he left 3 or 4 children;
being therefore called the Priamus, and by many in merriment The Priapus of his
time. Capitolinus in tribus Gordianis, c. 19.

Quidam Sammonicus Serenus LX. and duo millia librorum censuit in sua
Bibliotheca; quam moriens reliquit Gordiano minori, a degustato imperio
obscuro, ab ista literatorum ore ad coelum lato. Lansius in Mantissa
consultationum de primatu inter provincias Europae, p. 76.

Concerning the time of their reign, and Capitolinus his error therein, See
Petavius's Rationarium Temporum, the 2. part and 4. book, p. 200.

Sane, quod pretermittendum esse non censui, quia mirabile visum est, This is
questioned by Tristan in his Historical Commentaries, tom. 2.
lectum apud Vulcatium Terentianum, qui and ipse historiam sui temporis
scripsit, in literas misi; Gordianum seniorem Augusti vultum sic representasse,
ut and vocem, and oris honorem, and staturam ejus oftentare videretur: filium
vero, Pompeio simillimum visum, quamvis Pompeius obesi corporis fuisse
denegatur. Capitolinus in tribus Gordianis, c. 21.

Pupienus and Balbinus Colleagues.
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
Maximus idem est, qui Pupienus. Quod ignorasse Capitolinum Maximini junioris
fine, plerique mirantur. Boeclerus in Herodianum, p. 454.
UPon the death of the 2 Gordians the Senate chose Pupienus and Balbinus
Emperors in opposition to Maximinus. In the mean time the Commons decryed the
election, but especially rejected Pupienus, as too austere; and cried out that
they would presently kill them both, and have a Prince of Gordian's lineage,
Tristis ac severus Pupi^ni vul^us fuit, quod and nummi ^^i^ui test^ntur quos
vid^^us. Casau^^n.
that the Empire might con^inue in that name. Balbinus and Pupienus assaying to
go forth of the Capitol, were kept in with clubs and stones, till they deluded
the people by this invention.

There was in the City a little boy, Son to Gordian's daughter, and of his
Grandfathers name; whom they sent for thither. They who were sent for him,
finding him playing at home, lifted him on their shoulders, and so carried him
through the crowd, telling the people he was G^rdian's Nephew, and of his name;
the people shouting for joy, and casting leaves upon him. When the Senate had
proclaimed him Caesar (his minority not permitting him to manage the state) and
the people were calmed, the elected Emperors were suffered to pass to the
Palace. Her^dian. l. 7. c. 10.

Balbinus was both noble and ancient, Ridicule Orosius, l. 7. fratres fuisse
scribit, cum alter nobilis, ignobilis alter fuerit, Capitolino auctore.
Schottus in Aur. Victorem.
Pupienus was ignobly descended, but had born many offices, which having
discharged with wisdom and valor, he was highly prized by the Senate.

Nonnulli ita hos comparandos putant, ut alterum severum, clementem alterum;
bonum illum, istum constantem; illum nihil largientem, hunc affluentem copiis
omnibus dicerent. Capitolinus in Maximo and Balbino, cap. 7.

Timebant severitatem Maximi homines vulgares, quam and Senatui acceptissimam
and sibi adversissimam esse credebant. Capitolinus in Maximo and Balbino, ex
correctione Salmasii, p. 271.

These Emperors were not joined in affection, as in authority; each holding
himself most deserving: each having their own, and standing upon their own
guard.

The election of these Emperors by the Senate displeased the Soldiers so much,
that at last they assaulted the Court, and easily Maximini imperio duo
GORDIANI, pater and filius principatum arripientes, unus post unum interiere.
Pari etiam tonore PUPIENUS and BALBINUS regnum invadentes, peremti sunt.
slew these Senatorian Emperors, (as they called them) being at variance;
crying out to the people, that they had but slain them, whom themselves first
rejected.

This wretched and disastrous end had these venerable and renowned Personages,
whom their noble lineage and illustrious merits mounted to the highest Throne
of human glory. Herodian, l. 8. c. ult.

Zosimus says that Balbinus and Pupienus would have killed young Gordian,
Victoris Epit.
because he was more beloved of the Soldiers, by whom he was made Caesar; who
hearing of their design, prevented them: but Boeclerus on Herodian, p. 457.
thinks he is mistaken, or that this was but pretended.

Confundit, ut arbitror Historiam Philippi cum hac narratione: nisi fors
milites ad excusandum parricidium tale quid in vulgus sparserunt.

Antonius Gordianus.
effigy of emperor
UPon the death of Balbinus and Pupienus, Amatus est a populo, and Senatu and
militibus ante Philippi factionem, ita ut nemo Principum. Capitolinus in tribus
Gordianis, c. 31.
Gordian the third, before created Caesar by the Senate through the importunity
of the Soldiers, was made Emperor by a general consent in the 13. year of his
age.

Capitolinus in tribus Gordianis, c. 21. says he resembled Scipio Asiaticus.

He married Tranquillina daughter of Misitheus, whom he loved and honored for
his learning; by whose advice he transacted state affairs prosperously,
expelling Sapor King of Persia from Syria, recovering Antioch, Nisibis, and
Carrae by his assistance: for which success the Senate appointed a triumph for
Gordian, and a triumphal Chariot for Misitheus with this inscription: Misitheo
parenti Principum Pop. Romans Tutori Reip. S. P. Q. R. The Inscription is
singular, and the quality of the Prince's Father nothing common, at that time
when the seat of the Empire had not yet been transferred from Rome to
Constantinople: For after that, this quality was conferred as a Title of
Office; and vulgarly, those who had the principal direction of affairs, were
called the Fathers of the Empire, and of the Emperor. Balsac's Aristippus, p.
15.

Misitheus was soon missed for counsel and trust, being poisoned by Philip an
Arabian of ignoble parentage, who was made Prefect in his stead, and aspired to
the Empire.

Philip secretly caused a scarcity of victuals in the Army, which he did, that
the Soldiers might imagine it to be occasioned by Gordian's neglect, whom he
charged with inability to govern, being so young.

The Officers were corrupted by Philip, and the Soldiers through ignorance of
his deceit, made him Gordian's Governor, whereupon he grew so insolent, that
he commanded all, as if he had been sole Emperor.

Gordian disce^ning his aim, complains openly to the Soldiers of the wrong
which was done to him by Philip, notwithstanding all obligations to the
contrary; but Philip's project prevailing, Gordian since he could not share in
the Empire, sued to be a Captain, which was denied him: Philip not thinking
himself safe (whilst Gordian of great blood and esteem was alive) slew him in
the Victor in his Epit. says the 20th.
22. year of his age, and 6. of his reign; as if Justice her self appeared
evidently to take vengeance on the Traitors, each of his Murderers with the
same Poinyard wherewith they slew him, Indicium non diu imperaturi Gordiani hoc
fuit, quod eclipsis solis facta est, ut nex crederetur, neque sine luminibus
accensis quicquam agi posset. Capitolinus in tribus Gordianis, c. 23.
killed himself.

The Soldiers that buried him near Persia, wrote his title of honor upon his
Sepulcher in Greek and Latin, in the Persian, Jewish and Egyptian tongues,
that it might be read of all, as Capitolinus writes in Gordianis.

His body being interred in the confines of the Roman and Persian Empire, gave
name to a place, which was for that cause called The Sepulcher of Gordian.
Sextus Aurelius Victor in his Epitome.

Five Languages secured not the Epitaph of Gordian, says Dr. Brown in his
Urn-burial, p. 81.

Gordian's Motto was, Miser est imperator apud quem vera reticent^r; which was
his own case.

Inventas tandem est orbis moderator and orbis,
Insignis patria nobilitate puer.
Boissardus. Philippus Arabs and his Son.
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
PHILIP the Father writing to the Senate of Gordian's death as if it had
happened naturally, S. P. Q. R. primo imperium Marco cuidam, cum is subito
moreretur Severo Hostiliano detulit, sed cum and hic vena male secta decederet,
toleravit Philippum. Laet in compend. Hist.
was by them proclaimed Emperor, through fear of the Soldiers.

He was born of mean Parents, his Father having been a notable Captain of
thieves in Arabia. Sextus Aurelius Victor in his Epitome.

Patre latronum Duce natus, latrocinio quasi Imperium rapuit. Pareus (vel
potius Altingius) in Medulla Historiae Profanae.

Per militiam ad honores venit, and per scelus ad Imperium. Glareanus in
Eutropium.

The Goths infesting Mysia and Asia, Jo^apianus Philippi temporibus imperium
in Orient occupavit: sed statim oppressus, cum imperio vitam simul amisit.
Auctor Zosimus. Casaubonus de iis qui post Gordianum tertium Principes fuerunt
ad Valerianum usque.
Philip sent Marinus against them, who as soon as he came into those parts drew
his Army into a rebellion, and proclaimed himself Emperor; taking (he said) his
example from Philip, who raised his title by his Sovereigns fall.

Philip complaining very much to the Senate of Marinus his ingratitude, Decius
bid him not fear, for Marinus should suffer for it, as he did; for the mutable
Soldiers, who even now erected him, suddenly threw him down, and slew him.

Decius being sent in Marinus his room, was also proclaimed Emperor by the
Soldiers, though against his will, out of their hatred to Philip. Eodem tempore
quo Jotapianus in Syria, Marinus in Pannonia vel Moesia a legionibus
praesidiariis salutatus est imperator, nec multo post trucidatus, ut narrant
Zosimus and Zonaras. Id. ib. Victor Schotti makes Iotapia^us to usurp the
Empire in Decius his time.


Decius sent secretly to Philip, professing he meant to escape the Soldiers,
and persist in his allegiance: Philip fearing that was but policy (lest Decius
should be stronger by delays) hasted himself with a great Army, and being
overcome was Ferro adeptus imperium, ferro vitam pariter cum Imperio finivit.
Aventinus.
slain by the Soldiers at Verona, his head being cut off through the teeth.

At the news whereof the Pretorian Soldiers slew his son, but 12 years old; who
was so composed, Ambo, quamvis dive^sis locis tumultu militari and Decii fraud
interfecti sunt. O^^sius, l. 7. c. 20.
that from the 5th year of his age, none by any invention could make him laugh:
and when his Father was tickled with laughter at the secular plays, he looked
on him with an estranged countenance.

Baronius in A. C. 253. de utriusque morte hanc inscriptionem profert, and
agn^scit pro ve^^ri: ANNO CHRIST. CCLIII. IMP. DIVVS PHILIPPUS SENIOR VERONAE
ETROMAE IVNIOR A SATELLITIBVS OCCISVS EST. Sed Scal. ad Eusebius. supposit^tiam
esse satis demonstrat, and descriptam ex Chronico Hieronymiano Rupertus in min.
synop. Besoldi, p. 358.

Veronensi^ Inscriptio, quam in Annalibus laudat Baronius, and Adolphus Occo,
testatur Anno Christi CCLIII. caesos esse Philippos. Sed adulterina and
nugatoria est epigraphe, quam merito neglexit Onufrius. Neque enim annorum
putatio ita vetus est; quam demum post Dionysium passim usurpatam esse constat.
Itaque nihil erat, quod ad rations suas cum (...) illo monumento conciliandas,
Annalium, Chronicorumque Scriptores biennium Philippis arrogarent. Atque ut
Deciis ambobus Coss. necatos esse Philippos arbitremur, nequaquam is annus erit
aerae Christianae CCLIII, ut Annalibus esse videtur; sed CCII. verum ante
Decios amb^s Consules, Philippos extinctos esse, probabilius est. Petavius De
Doctrina Temp^rum, l. 11. c. 26.

The time of their reign was 7 years, say some, others say 6, some but
Theodorus Metochita in hist. Romans
5

Annos potentiae quinque egere. Victor Schotti.

The elder Philip's age is not related by any Historian.

Eusebius reports of him, that he was the first Christian Emperor; and that
being desirous to join with the multitude in the Ecclesiastical prayers, he
could not be admitted till he had first rendered an account of his Faith, and
joined himself with such as for their sins were examined, and set in the place
of Penitents; therefore because he was faulty in many things, says the
Historian, he willingly obeyed, and declared by his works his sincere and
religious mind toward God. The Martyrologies will have him and his Son
converted by occasion of the celebrating the 1000th year from the building of
Rome, and being baptized by Pope Fabianus, after confession of his sins, to
have been admitted to the Communion. But says Cappellus, if any of this had
been true, would the Senate that was so set against the Christians have
reckoned him among the Gods? At least would not Deciu^ have objected this as a
crime against him? William Howel his History from the beginning of the world to
Constantine, p. 872.

Marciam Otaciliam Severam Augustam, Philippi senioris ux^rem, religionis
Christianae sacris imbutam fuisse plerique autumant. Quae res effecisse
videtur, ut Philippum quoque uxoris gratia aequiorem piis, palam Christianum
fuisse Eusebius aliique multi scripserint. Assentior vero doctissimis viris,
qui putant cum Zonara, duos Philippos, hunc nempe Augustum, and alterum
praefectum Augustalem, Eugeniae martyris patrem, ab antiquis rerum
Ecclesiasticarum scriptoribus Graecis fuisse confuses. Casaubon.

Roma necat natum, perimit verona Parentem.
Dum furor in Decios arma movere jubet.
Boissardus. Messius Quintus Trajanus Decius, and his Son Etruscus Decius.
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
DECIVS was elect^d Emperor by the Persian Legions, proclaimed in Verona by the
Roman Soldiers, and had the voices of the Senate to confirm him.

He was noble by birth, an experienced, wise and valiant Prince; and might have
been reckoned among the best; had he not with an heathenish rage Ad
persequendos interficiendosque Christianos, VII. post Neronem feralia dispersit
Edicta, plurimosque sanctorum ad coronas Christi de suis crucibus misit.
Orosius, l. 7. c. 21.
persecuted the Christians, being Author of the 7. persecution.

Persecutio non ab aliquo principali edicto coepit; In Decius his time Lucius
Priscus Viceroy of Macedonia usurped the Empire, and Marcus Aufidius Perpenna
Licinianus.
sed integro anno antecessit. Vates enim sive poeta, quisquis tandem ille fuit,
vulgus adversus nos compulit and concitavit, superstitione propria and gentili
adactum atque inflammatum. Hi autem ab eo excitati totam pietatem and daemonum
culturam in eo sitam existimarunt, ut caedibus contra nos grassarentur.
Heraldus in Apologet. Tertul. p. 142, ex Eusebio.

He put more Christians to death in a year and an half, than Trajan (whose name
he had, See Besoldus his major synopsis of Hist.
and whom he would have been thought to resemble) in 20. Tristan.

It was the Devils policy to employ especially men noted for moral honesty and
abilities to massacre God's Saints, that the world might believe those could
not choose but be most abominable, whom such wise and pious men were so earnest
to extinguish. Prideaux's Introduction to History.

The Novatians would not communicate with them, who had denied the Faith in the
persecution of Decius, and afterward repenting turned to the same Faith again.
Nicephorus Callistus, l. 12. c. 38.

Ille, qui omnes a baptismo vel semel relapsos crudeli errore damnabat, non
existimans iterum in Ecclesiam recipiendos, quid aliud quam Ecclesiarum
concordiam dissipabat: hos ad desperationem, illos ad privata agens concilia
and coetus? Giselinus in Prudentium, p. 446.

Eusebius Eccles. hist. l. 6. says, Novatus taught there was no hope of
salvation for them that fell in time of persecution; though they performed all
things that appertain to true conversion, and a right profession of the Faith.
Yet Socrates affirms Eccles. hist. l. 1. that the Novatians did not simply
deny salvation to such, but the peace of the Church only, and the participation
of holy mysteries. There is no heed to be given to Socrates in this relation
(though otherwise a faithful Historian) because he was a Novatian, and would
therefore speak as favorably as he could of his own opinion, which was hateful
to most of the Churches in those times. Hoard his Soul's misery and recovery,
p. 472, 474.

The fear of Decius his persecution gave the original to a Monkish life.

He was victorious against the Goths, and joining a fresh battle with them,
was overthrown by the treason of his General, Gallus, says Pomponius Laetus.

His Son was mortally wounded by an arrow, himself leaping into a Iusta Dei
vindicta, ut qui sanguinem Christianorum sitierat, coenum biberet, and in
terram uliginosam vivus descenderet.
whirl-pool was never seen after.

Tristan thinks this misfortune befell Decius for a punishment of his
persecutions.

Vopiscus in the life of Aurelian, and Pomponius Laetus compare Decius and his
Son with the Decii Mures, Hemelarius.
who devoted themselves to destruction in a dangerous fight, for the safety of
their Country, which depended thereupon. But the comparison does not agree,
says Tristan. For the 2 ancient Decii rendered the Romans victorious by their
death, whereas these by theirs made them slaves to the Barbarians, and lost
many of their Provinces. Besides that Decius the Father was drowned and
swallowed up in his flight, which has no resemblance with the end of the Decii
of the ancient Commonwealth.

He dyed at the age of 50, having reigned 2 years.

Non tacendum Imperatores aliquot Romano imperio genuisse Pannoniam, inter quos
Decius, Aurelianus, Valor. Probus, Flav. Valentinianus praecipui fuerunt.
Vadiani Epitome trium terrae partium.

Pro patria Decii dum proelia fortia miscent,
Filius occubuis Mart, palude pater.
Velius. Caius Vibius Trebonianus Gallus, and his Son Volusian
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
GALLVS appearing much grieved for Decius his death, was not suspected; which
facilitated his attaining of the Empire.

He descended from an honorable Family in Rome, but was stained (besides
Treason) with a cruel and evil Government.

He made a dishonorable peace with the Goths, whereby the Romans became
tributaries yearly to them; who violated the agreement, spoiling Dardania,
Thrace, Thessaly, Macedonia, Greece and Asia: by their example the Persians
entered Syria, and ruiyned Armenia. P. Laetus.

He caused Virtus Augustorum to be stamped upon his, and his Sons Medals, as if
he had got the Empire by valor and not by deceit. Pomponius Laetus.

Gallus and Volusian continued the 7th persecution, of which Dionysius Bishop
of Alexandria, in a Letter of his recorded by Eusebius, wrote thus. As for
Gallus, he neither remembered the calamities of Decius, nor did he so diligently
as he ought, consider with himself beforehand, what it might be, that had been
the chief occasion of his ruin: but unhappily, to his great misery, stumbled
upon the same stone, though apparently set before his eyes. Who in the full
sail of prosperity, when he might have boasted of his hearts desire in all
things, by cruel Edicts began to proscribe those religious men, who for the
peace of his Kingdom, and for the health and safety of his own Person, were
wont to make earnest prayers and intercessions unto God. Who therefore at the
same time, when he drove them away, did drive with them those prayers also,
which for him they were accustomed to pour unto God. And lest any man think it
strange, that this holy Bishop should lay it to a professed Heathen Emperors
charge, that he made no greater account of the solemn prayers and supplications
of Christians; I would not have it unknown, that even Heathen Emperors (some of
them) though otherwise very ill affected to Christianity, had nevertheless such
an opinion of these prayers, as that they thought themselves and their Empire
the more secure for them. The use of daily public prayers, in 3 Positions, p.
24, 25.

Under these two Emperors arose a plague in Ethiopia, which spread it self by
degrees in all the Provinces of the Roman Empire, Exoritur ultio violati
nominis Christiani, and usque quo ad profligandas Ecclesias Edicta Decii
cucurrerunt, eatenus incredibilium morborum pestis intenditur; nulla fere
provincia Romana, nulla civitas, nulla domus fuit, quae non illa generali
pestilentia correpta atque vastata sit. Orosius, l. 7. c. 21.
and lasted 15 years says Ignatius; and so great was the mortality, that in
Alexandria, as Dionysius above mentioned reports, there was not one house of
the City free, and the remainder of the Inhabitants equalled not the number of
old men in former times: By means whereof St. Cyprian, Bishop of Carthage, (who
lived in that age) took occasion to write that excellent Treatise De
Mortalitate. And Lipsius his censure of this pestilence is, Non alia unquam
major lues mihi lecta, spatio temporum sive terrarum.

Ex apertione cujusdam cistulae, tam saeva universo orbi incubuit pestis, ut
Romae quotidie ad VM. hominum in Libitinae rations venirent. Laet 's history
from Christ's time.

Huc pertinet nummus Imp. Galli, APOLLINI SALVTARI. Nam quoties alicui Deo
cognomen SALVTARIS apponitur, id argumento est hostiis illi Deo factumad
pestilentem morbum expiandum. Scaliger in Eusebium.

Gallo Volusianoque favor quaesitus, eo quod anxie studioseque renuissimi
cujusque exequias curarent. Sextus Aurelius Victor de Caesaribus. Vtrique
Aurelius Victor HOSTILIANVM PERPENNAM adjungit. Micraelius in Syntag. hist.
polit. C. A. Rupertus and Goltzius call him C. Valens Hostilianus Messius
Quintus.
Aemylianus, his General having overcome the Goths, grew so proud thereupon,
that he aspired to the Empire, which he purchased by the good will of the
Soldiers, who slew Gallus and his Son in battle.

Dexippus who lived in those times says, he governed but 18 months.

Gallus habet, nato cum Principe sceptra Biennis,
Desertum occidit miles utrumque suus.
Velius. Aemylianus.
effigy of emperor
HE was an African of obscure parentage, Aemylianus obscurissime natus,
obscurius imperavit, ac rertio mense extinctus est. Eutrop. l. 9.
and arose to be a General from a common Soldier.

His election was at first contradicted by the Italian band, who sought to make
Valerian Emperor, to which the Senate inclined because of Valerian's renown.

Aemilian's Army hearing of the election of Valerian, tumultuously Quasi
parcarum forceps Imperium esset, aut Purpura foret stola libitinae. Bussieres
in Flosculis Historiarum.
murdered their own creature. Zosimus, whom Besoldus follows in his major and
minor Synopsis of History; ut Casaubon concurs with Aurelius Victor, who says
he died of a disease.

He was 46 years old, says S. Aurelius Victor in his Epitome, representing him
to be valiant, without rashness or precipitation.

Some reckon him among Usurpers, but his title is allowed by Eutropius.

Of 30 Emperors who reigned since Octavius Augustus his time, until Valerian, 6
of them escaped not the hands of murderers. Lloid's Consent of time.

Spanhem the Son in his Remarques upon Iulian's Caesar's, p. 253. thinks Julian
mentions not those Emperors that reigned between Alexander Severus and
Valerian; because the Roman Empire was invaded by Tyrants, who reigned but a
few months, or years at most; which reason is alleged by Lampridius for his
passing from Alexander Severus to Aurelian, and those that governed the Empire
a longer time.

Maurus and imperii rapit Aemylianus honores,
Hic ad Spoleti moenia caesus obit.
Velius. Valerianus.
effigy of emperor
HE was nobly descended, and of such esteem among the Romans, that being a
private man, and absent, they chose him for their Censor; Valeriani vitae
censura est.
an office of great dignity, ever conferred upon the best, says Trebellius
Pollio who wrote his life.

Haud consona de hoc Valeriano authors prodidere. Sex. Aurel. stolidum and
multum inertem narrat, neque ad aliquem usum publicum, officio, consilio vel
gestis aecommodatum. Contra Trebellius mire hunc laudat, adducto
Senatusconsulto in ejus rei testimonium. Pomponius Laetus ait eum fuisse
hominem majoris spei ac opinionis, quam fortunae: id quod res ipsa ostendit.
Glareanus in Eutropium, p. 223.

At the beginning of his reign he was gracious to the Christians above any of
his Predecessors, but after being perverted by Macrianus an Egyptian Magician
(who aspired to the Empire in his Son's time) he was Author Adigi per tormentae
Christianos ad idololatriam, abnegantesque interfici jussit, fuso per omnem
Romani regni latitudinem sanctorum sanguine. Orosius, l. 7. c. 22.
of the eighth persecution.

As this was the outward and political cause, so St. Cyprian shows other
causes more special and Ecclesiastical in the 4th Epistle of his 4th Book. In
which Epistle (worthy to be read of all) Cyprian describes a certain vision,
seen long before this tempest of persecution happened; wherein the Christians are
upbraided for not being so vigilant in prayer as they should.

Tarapha de Regib. Hisp. says Hemiterius and Chelidonius 2 Spanish Martyrs (of
whom Prudentius writes (...) hymno primo) suffered under Valerian.

Prudentius in hymno dicit ignorari tempus, quo passi sint; sed Chronica
Hispana huic adscribunt persecutioni: quod ita esse, ex Eborensi Breviario
constat. Vasaei Chronicon. Hispan. p. 276. Where it is added, that they were
Soldiers, and sons of Marcellus a Centurion, who also was a Martyr (says
Vasaeus, p. 282.) being beheaded for professing Christianity, by Agricolaus,
Licinius's deputy.

Fructuosus a Bishop, being charged to worship Gallienus his heathen Gods,
answered; Prudentius Peristeph. Hymn. 6.
I worship no dumb God of stocks and blocks which the Emperor worshipeth, but I
worship the Lord and Master of Gallienus, the Father and Creator of all times.
For witnessing which good confession, this blessed and fruitful Bishop with his
2 Deacons Augurius and Eulogius were burned.

Marinus a Nobleman and Captain in Cesarea Palaestina standing for a
Centurionship, that fell to him by right of succession, his Competitor to
prevent him, accused him to Achaius the Judge for being a Christian; who
examining him of his Faith, and finding it true, gave him three hours to
deliberate, whether he would lose his Office and life, or renounce Christ and
his profession. Marinus being much perplexed what to resolve on, Theotecnus the
godly Bishop of Cesarea took him by the hand, led him into the Church, set the
New Testament and his sword (representations of God and the world) before him,
bidding him freely choose which of them he would have. He taking up the New
Testament, the wise Bishop convinced thereby that he preferred God before the
world, encouraged him to be constant even to death, and God whom he chose would
be constant to him. Whereupon he went boldly to the Judge, from whom he
received the sentence of death. Eusebius, Ec. Hist. l. 7. c. 14.

Prudentius Peristeph. Hymn. 2.
Saint Laurence refusing to deliver the Churches money to the Prefect of Rome,
was adjudged by him to be broiled on a Grid-iron; which torments he bore
bravely, saying in a facetious Sarcasm, Tyrant, this side's enough, turn up the
rest;
Or roast, or raw try which thou likest best.
Billingsly's Brachy-Martyrologia, p. 40.


Cyprian Bishop of Carthage was crowned with Martyrdom, Prudentius Peristeph.
Hymm. 13.
who when the sentence was passed against him, gave God thanks; and being
advised by Galerius the Pro-consul to consider and recant, answered: In re tam
sancta non opus est deliberatione, There needs no deliberation in this case.

In his forementioned Epistle, he writes that in a Revelation he was bid be
quiet, for peace would come though there was stay for a while, that some men
might be tried.

In Valerian's reign there suffered 300 Martyrs together Massa Candida in
Africa.
at Carthage, whom the Governor of the City commanded either to throw
frankincense into the fire (set before them) in honor of Jupiter, or else to
cast themselves headlong into a Limekiln hard by; which they did, choosing
rather to embrace fire, than resist light.

Corpora candor habet, candor vehit ad superna mentes,
Candida massa dehinc dici meruit per omne seclum.
prudentius in Peristeph. Hymn. 13.
Cheraemon Episcop. Nicopoleos sub Valerian. Imp. in fuga cum aliis exul, vivus
una cum uxore in coelum sublatus est. 257. Oraeus in Nomenclatore praecipuorum
Doctorum, etc.

As all the persecutors before had their deserved reward at the hand of God,
who renders to every man according to his works: so this cruel Valerian, after
he had reigned with his Son Gallienus 6 or 7 years, and about 2 years had
afflicted the Church, felt the just stroke of his hand, whose indignation
before he had provoked, as is related by Eutropius, Sabellicus, Volaterranus:
for when he warred in Mesopotamia, he was taken prisoner by Sapor, Surnamed
Dhul-aktaph from his broad shoulders. Shikard in his Tarich Regum Persicorum,
l. 110.
or Schabur King of Persia (through the treachery of Macrianus) and used like a
slave as long as he lived, Sapor setting his foot upon his neck whenever he
mounted on horseback, to the utmost vilifying of Majesty, and the regret of
diverse interceding Princes.

It was the most signal affront which the Romans hitherto ever received in the
person of their Emperors. Tristan.

At last says Eusebius, by Sapors command, his eyes were pulled out, wherewith
he dyed; Agathias says he was flayed alive, and rubbed all over with salt: a
calamity which may challenge tears of blood.

All his skin from the neck to the soles of his feet, was so artificially
pulled off, that it might be blown like a bladder, and so was hung upon a rock,
for an example to all ages. Schickard his Tarich, p. 111.

He lived a long, but disgraceful age; was 76 years old before he was taken
Prisoner: after his captivity he lived 7 years in reproaches, and then dyed a
violent death. A man of a poor mind, and not valiant; notwithstanding lifted up
in his own, and the opinion of men, but falling short in the performance. Sir
Fr. Bacon.

Infoelicissimus Principum a filio Gallieno in Deos relatus est, quasi Deum
facere posset, quem liberum facere aut nequiverat, aut neglexerat. Cluverus in
Hist. Epit.

Sub eo fames tanta fuit, quanta nunquam, and cadaverum multitudo, quam effari
nemo possit. Quippe a mari pariter ac terra, fluviisque and paludibus, vapores
quidam oriebantur, adeo quidem perniciosi, ut rores ipsi cadaverum humores
viderentur. Itaque nulla inventa domus in qua non cadaver aliquid foetidum
esset; moriebantur enim homines numero plures. Metochita in Hist. Romans

Gallienus tam claro Dei judicio territus, tamque misero collegae permotus
exemplo, pacem Ecclesiae trepida satisfactione restituit, says Orosius, l. 7.
c. 22.

Julian the Apostate, who so smartly censureth the Emperors his Predecessors,
arrogantly taxes the misfortune of Valerian in his Cesars, reproaching his
servitude, and representing him laden with his chains to enter the banquet of
the Gods.

Valerian Christians vexed, Sapores flayed him,
How cruelty helps justice! they repaid him.
Dr. Holyday's Survey of the world, p. 90.
Gallienus.
effigy of emperor
WHen Valerian his Father was taken prisoner, he was made Emperor.

He was expert in Oratory, His Epithalamium is more fully expressed in
Swartius's Analecta. lib. 1. c. 10. than in Tr. Pollio.
Poetry, and all other arts, but was defective in qualifications which are
requisite in an Emperor. Trebellius Pollio.

He Governed the Commonwealth prosperously, with his Father Valerian;
indifferently, with Valerian his younger Brother: At the last destructively,
when he managed all himself. Glareanus on Eutropius, p. 224.

Ob meritum vel propriae libidinis, vel paternae theomachiae innumera Barbaris
assurgentibus, regni detrimenta sustinuit. Haymo Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 6.
At first he acted like a valiant Captain, overcame and slew Ingenuus (who
usurped the Empire) as also Regillianus; and overcame 300000 Goths and Almans,
having but 10000 on his side, (says Zonaras) but after he gave himself so much
to sensuality, that when the World was infected with Wars, he continued for
the most part in Rome among Whores, compassed with Roses and Flowers; seeking
new delights, often bathing himself, studying how he might keep Figs and other
fruits green all the year; having ordinarily at his table most exquisite and
delicate meats, and of great cost. Trebellius Pollio in Gallieno, c. 16.

Quod insolens ille Princeps castella de pomis, etc. fieri jussit, merae
fatuitati (ne quid turpius dicam) perpetuo attribuendum erit: Quia nulla specie
fortitudinis, quae gloria Principum est, id fieri decuit, prout hic superius de
nivalibus castellis est deductum: in quibus jactu globorum se pueri and
adolescentes (futura certamina fortiter toleraturi) exercent; nulla coeli,
elementorumve injuria fracti, vel fatigati, dum in tam duris lusibus, and
aspera hieme fuerint educati. Olaus Magnus de ritu gent. Septentr. lib. 1. c.
23.

A facetiis aliquam meruit laudem, says Micraelius in his Syntagma Hist. Polit.
When a shooting prize was played before him, he gave the garland to one who
shot always wide, concluding that it was the more improbable difficulty to aim
so often, and never to hit. Taurum toties non ferire difficile est. Treb.
Pollio in Gallieno, c. 12.

When it was told him that Egypt rebelled, he answered, Cannot we live without
the linen of Egypt? France being lost, he laughing said; Cannot the Land stand
without those Soldiers Cassocks which France sends us? Being advertised also of
Asias destruction, by Earthquakes and Scythian invasion; Cannot we subsist
(said he) without Saltpeter?

It Is observed that there were thirty competitors once on foot, for one and the
same throne, to wit, that of the Roman Empire, who confounded one another. And
I think our age has seen a greater number of aspirers for a narrower
Territory. Mr. Gee in his Preface to the Divine Right and Original of the Civil
Magistrate from God, illustrated and vindicated.

In his reign the Heavens were darkened so, Tot rebelliones Gallieno Principe
extiterunt, imo tot tyranni, qui imperatoris nomina tulerunt, quot a Caesare
Dictatore ad id tempus in tam longa imperatorum serie nunquam inventi f^ere.
that the Sun was not seen for many days; in the bowels of the earth were
heard roarings, with the fear whereof many dyed; Earthquakes threw down many
houses, whereby the Inhabitants were destroyed; these Earthquakes were
frequent in Rome, Africa, but especially in Asia; the Earth opened in many
places, and showed Vaults and Caves, from whence salt water streamed; and
several Cities were drowned by the Sea: Olaus Magnus, fol. 29*
and in Rome there dyed above 5000 in one day of the pestilence. Treb. Pollio.
c. 5.

Gallienus addicted only to his pleasures, was not affected with these
calamities, thinking they proceeded rather from chance than any signal
punishment.

He grieved not for his Fathers captivity, but, when he was informed of it,
(alluding to the speech of Xenophon the Philosopher who having lost his son,
said, Sciebam me genuisse mortalem;) answered, Sciebam patrem meum esse
mortalem: I knew that my Father was liable to the miseries as other men. Nec
defuit Annius Cornicula, qui eum quasi constantem Principem falso sua voce
laudaret, pejor tamen ille qui credidit, says Pollio, c. 16.

Romae in arcu S. Viti reperta est haec inscriptio:

Galieno clementiss. Principi, cujus invicta virtus sola pietate superata est.

M. Aurelius Victor deditissimus numini majestatique ejus.

Sic est nulla labes tam grandis, quae non possit obscurari: and vitia suum
habent defensorem. Cuspinianus in Gallieno.

Odenatus, though an Independent Prince, was of such moderation, that he held
correspondence with Gallienus, and sent him such of the Persian Nobility as he
had taken prisoners, for monuments of his victory over Sapor, and revenge of
the indignities offered to Valerian: thus Odenatus conquered, and Gallienus
triumphed, who when he could not eclipse Odenatus his merit by any Princely
virtue, or suppress it by valor, sought to deface it by treachery; but failing
of his aims therein, he made him partner of the Empire for fear; Odenatus
receiving the titles of Imperator, and Augustus, from Gallienus and the Senate.

Being not ashamed ridiculously to triumph over the Persians, who detained his
Father prisoner, and to lead them captive in his mock-shew; some jeering
companions mixing themselves with the Persians, exactly viewed their
countenances, and being asked wherefore they did it, answered, We seek for his
Majesty's Father; which when Gallienus heard of, he was so incensed at the
taunt, that he commanded those who uttered it to be burned alive.

The Scythians invading Cappadocia, the Soldiers attempted to make a new
Emperor, for which Gallienus put them all to the sword. Pollio, c. 11.

In his time the City Byzantium (renowned for the sea fights, and the place
which barreth in the Euxine Sea) was destroyed by his soldiers; to revenge
which, he being received into Byzantium, compassed them unarmed with armed
soldiers, and slew them contrary to his covenant. And as if he had done some
great matter, he posted to Rome, and summoning the Senators, appoints
decennial plays to be celebrated novo genere ludorum, nova specie pomparum,
exquisito genere voluptatum, says Pollio c. 7.

He killed sometimes 3 or 4000 soldiers in a day. Id. Ib. c. 18.

At last he himself, with his brother Valerian and his son Gallienus, were
slain near Milain (where he besieged Aureolus) by the treachery of Marcianus
Ceronius, Aliter Aur. Victor.
or Cecropius and Heraclian. Pollio, c. 14.

He was a bad man, and a worse Governor; yet an act of clemency that he did,
gat him much love, and covered many of his vices: the act was this. One sold
unto the Empress counterfeit Jewels instead of true ones, and so cozened her of
much money; she complains thereof to the Emperor, importuning him to execute
the Law in all rigor: who seems to give way, commanding the Malefactor to be
exposed to a Lion. But when this Chapman looked for nothing less than death,
and that a cruel one; in the room of a Lion rampant a Capon was ordered to be
put out through the Den, at which all the Spectators marvelling, Gallienus bad
the Crier proclaim: Imposturam fecit and passus est, He deceived others, and
now is cozened himself; being made to believe he should die, is suffered to
live, and has a Capon to his supper. Bp. Smith's Sermons, p. 244.

Nempe id leporis voluit, id spectaculi,
Id Gallienus muneris populo dare,
Id ultionis conjugi, id metus reo.
Angelini Gazaei Pia Hilaria, edita Cantabrig. tom. 1. p. 168, 169.

He lived 50 years, reigned 15, 7 with his Father, 8 alone.

At once Rome 30 Tyrants had; this fits
A monster: many Heads! how many wits?
Dr. Holidays Survey of the world, lib. 9. p. 100.

Saloninus Gallienus
effigy of emperor
WAS Son of the forementioned Gallienus and Cornelia Salonina Pipara, whence
some think he was called Saloninus; though others conceive him to be so named
for being born at Salona: but Casaubon inclines to the former opinion.

There is little memorable recorded of him besides his noble extraction and
education, and that he was murdered not so much for his own, as his Fathers
sake. Trebellius Pollio in his life, c. 1.

Exiguum decus nobile stemma and regia educatio, nisi virtus accedat, says
Goulartius in his marginal observation.

He was substituted by his Father, in the place of his elder brother Cornelius
Valerianus, who died in his minority.

Diverse Soldiers invited to a feast by Gallienus, in the time of their repast
laid aside their Girdles and Belts, which being gilt, or studded with gold,
silver and precious stones, Saloninus took away: which being hardly recovered,
when lost in a Princes Court, the military Officers silently bore their loss,
but the next time they were invited sat not down ungirt. And being demanded
why their Girdles were not put off? they answered, Salonino deferimus. Tr.
Pollio in his life, c. 2.

Ambiguum hoc militarium virorum responsum, quod non videntur animadvertisse
doctissimi viri. Duplicem enim sensum potest habere: aut Salonini honori se hoc
tribuere, aut ejus causa hoc facere, ut baltheos non deponerent, ne iterum ab
ipso raperentur, hoc responso voluerunt intelligi milites isti. Sed magis verum
est, illos sic intellexisse, ne iterum perderent baltheos suos, quos prius
rapuerat Saloninus, Salonini causa se facere, ne eos dimitterent. Salmasius.

Of the 30 Tyrants contemporary with Valerian and Gallienus.
I. CYriades instigated the Persians to invade the Roman territories, by their
assistance took Antioch, and was by them elected Emperor. Having terrified all
the East with his puissance or adventurousness, and killed his Father, he was
slain by the treachery of his own party, when Valerian went to the Persian war.
Trebellius Pollio in triginta tyrannis, cap. 2.

Hunc clarum, perfugium, and parricidium, and aspera tyrannis and summa
luxuries literis dederunt. Id. ibid.

II. Ingenuus rebelled against Valerian in Hungary (as Cyriades had done in
Syria) but was defeated by Gallienus who was so cruel to the Moesians for
electing Ingenuus, that he made most of their Cities void of Males. Ingenuus to
escape Gallienus his cruelty, stabbed himself with a dagger, says Tr. Pollio
ubi supra, c. 8.

III. Regillianus commanding in Illyricum, was made Emperor by the friends of
those Moesians who were vanquished with Ingenuus, and so barbarously used by
Gallienus. The occasion of his advancement was strange, he getting the Empire
only in favor of his name. For when a Tribune demanded at supper, whence
Regillianus was derived? one answered a Regno, another began to decline Rex,
regis, regi, Regillianus; whereat the Soldiers (who in all actions are forward)
brake out into these acclamations; Ergo potest Rex esse; Ergo potest nos
regere; Deus tibi regis nomen imposuit: and within few days the chief military
Commanders saluted him Emperor. Ita quod aliis vel audacia vel judicium
detulit, huic jocularis astutia, says Tr. Pollio in 30 tyrannis, c. 9.

He fought courageously against the Sarmatians now called Poles, but was slain
by the Roxolani (at present styled Russians or Muscovites) with the consent of
the Soldiery and Peasants, who feared lest otherwise Gallienus would express
greater cruelty toward them than before. Id. ib.

V. Macrianus the Father ascended the Imperial throne by the assistance of
Balista, who moved with the misery of the Commonwealth, resolved by election
of an Emperor to prevent the ruin of his Country. The affection of the Army
forcibly set the Garland on Macrianus, and his 2 sons, Macrianus and Quietus as
most worthy.

Egypt and all the East acknowledged Macrianus for Emperor, as Tristan proves
from an ancient Medal, in his Historical Commentaries, tom. 3.

He advanced his sons to the same dignity, which himself was ambitious of; his
bodily weakness rendering him unfit for the discharge of his place, says
Valesius in Eusebium, p. 147.

Ioannes Zonaras in Annalibus Macrianum claudum fuisse scribit: quem in
historia illorum temporum consulere, haudquaquam in utile fuerit. Solus enim ex
iis qui ad nos pervenerunt scriptoribus, Macriani and filiorum ejus res gestas
accurate commemoravit. Id. ibid.

Macrianus had the conduct of 45000 men against Gallienus, encountered with
Aureolus in the confines of Thrace; where he and Macrianus the younger were
discomfited and slain by Domitian, Aureolus's General; 30000 of his Soldiers
that escaped going over to the adverse party. Tr. Pollio ubi supra.

Macriani clade audita, Dionysius Alexandrinus Gallieno gratulatur. Eusebius. l.
7. c. 25. gratulatur, inquam, aliquanto plus quam par sit. Nam nec erat
victoria tanta, quantam putabat Dionysius: nec erant ii Gallieni mores, quos
putabat Dionysius. Jac. Cappellus in Eccles. Hist. centuriis quinque, p. 59, 60.

Macrianus's Standard Bearer falling by chance bowed his Banner, which other
Ensigns seeing, and being ignorant of the cause, suspected he did it as
yielding to the Emperor, whereupon the rest did the like with acclamations in
favor of Gallienus. Zonaras.

VI. Macrianus junior has been discoursed of in the account that is given of
his Father.

VII. Quietus the other son of Macrianus was killed by Odenatus; after he heard
of Aureolus's success against the Macriani and Quietus: that thereby he might
seem to revenge the wrong done to Gallienus.

VIII. Valens was made Pro-consul of Achaia by Gallienus. Macrianus exceedingly
fearing Valens, sent Piso a valiant Gentleman, that had been Consul, to kill
him; Valens hearing thereof, and seeing no other means of security, assumed the
Empire; which he enjoyed not long, being slain by his own Soldiers, after he
had overthrown

IX. Piso; who using his enemies policy, had proclaimed himself Emperor,
assuming the name of Thessalicus, from the place whither Valens had forced him
to retire.

X. Balista assumed the Empire, when Quietus was slain by Odenatus, though
pardon was offered him; because he durst not commit himself to Gallienus,
Aureolus, or Odenatus. Tr. Pollio in 30 tyrannis, c. 18. who says, others
affirm that he died a private man.

Some report he was killed by Aureolus, others by a common Soldier of Odenatus.
Id. ibid.

Ea temporum illorum segnities erat, ut proxima quaeque ignorarent, quae ab avo
nostro remotissima hodie scimus ex numis. C. A. Rupertus in minorem Synopsin
Besoldi, c. 14.

Balista is erroneously called Callistus by Zonaras.

XI. Maeonius was another Usurper, who out of envy murdered his cousin
Odenatus, having nothing to object against him, but the luxury of his Son
Herod. Tr. Pollio ubi supra, Odenatus and his Son Herod were no Tyrants,
receiving the title of Emperor from Gallienus and the Senate. Tristan in his
Historical Commentaries, tom. 3.
c. 16.

E Zonara disces occisum Odenatum non a consobrino, sed a fratris filio. Causam
etiam illatae necis inde cognosces. Casaubon.

Pollio in the place above cited says, Zenobia grudging that her Son-in-Law
Herod should be placed before Herennianus and Timolaus, (whom Odenatus had by
her self) conspired with Maeonius, who soon received his guerdon by the
Soldiers.

XII. Aemilianus being in danger from a sedition of the multitude, for his
preservation assumed Imperial power in Egypt, but was overcome by Theodotus a
Captain of Gallienus, who commanded him to be strangled in prison. Tr. Pollio
in triginta tyrannis, c. 21.

XIII. Saturninus also received there the Imperial dignity from the Army, yet
was slain for his severity by those very Soldiers who advanced him. Id. Ib. c.
22.

XIV. Trebellianus usurping in Isauria, is slain by Causisoleus, brother to
Theodotus. Id. ibid. c. 25.

XV. Celsus was elected Emperor by Fabius Pomp^nianus General of Africa, and
Vibius Passienus Pro-consul. He reigned but a week, being put to death by
Galliena, cosen to Gallienus; and had his corpse eaten by dogs. Pollio in libro
eitato, c. 28.

effigy of emperor

XVI. Posthumus the Father was the first Tyrant among the Gauls.

Tristan thinks none of the contemporarie Usurpers are to be compared to him,
whom he calls the French Hercules.

Valerian preferred him before Aurelian, to be Tutor to Gallienus, says
Vopiscus in Aureliano, c. 8.

Posthumus though meanly born, assumed the Empire, which he so governed for 10
years, that by his great valor and moderation he recovered those Provinces
which were almost lost. Eutropius, l. 9.

He was slain in a tumult of the Soldiers, because he would not permit them to
pillage Mayence which rebelled against him in Lollianus his conspiracy. Id. Ib.

XVII. Posthumus junior also was slain in Lollianus his rebellion. Tr. Pollio
in 30 tyrannis, c. 5.

He was so eloquent in declaming, that his controversies are said to be
inserted into Quintilian. Id. ib. c. 4.

Lollianus is confounded with Lucius Aelia^us in the Latin Eutropius, as
appears by his Metaphrast, Paeanius.
XVIII. Lollianus mounted the throne, where he sat not with like continuance,
though confusion, as Postumus did.

Lollianus and Posthumus privata virtute clari, non nobilitatis pondere
vixerunt. Pollio in 30 tyrannis, c. 5.

XIX. The restless humor of the giddy Commons casts it self next on Marius a
Smith, a suitable sovereign to their base affections; to whom they were no less
unconstant and cruel than to the rest: putting a period to his government after
But both Pollio and Victor's assertion is questioned by Tristan.
3 days, with a sword of his own forging. Tr. Pollio in 30 tyrannis, c. 7.

Ioculariter dictum, nequaquam mirum videri, si rem Romanam Marius reficere
contenderet, quam Marius ejusdem artis auctor, stirpisque ac nominis,
solidavisset. Victor Schotti.

Tumults seem incident to Smithe by fate,
Whose very trade does as an Emblem show
Both the Incendiaries of a State,
And bellows too which the sedition blow;
The hammers with their harsh tumultuous jar
Make in their brains a kind of civil war.
Allen's Henry the 7th.
The veins of Marius his hand seemed as if they were finews, he staying carts
with his 4th finger: if he gave but a fillip to the strongest men that lived in
his time, they would feel it as much as if they had been struck with an hammer.
Tr. Pollio ubi supra.

XX. Victorinus the Father was deputy to Posthumus in France, and inferior to
none in the office; not to Trajan in valor, nor to Antonine in clemency, nor
to Nerva in gravity, nor to Vespasian in ordering the Treasury, nor to Pertinax
or Severus in military discipline: but all these virtues were obscured by his
desire and use of women. Pollio in 30 tyrannis, c. 6.

He forcing other men's wives, was slain at Colen in the 2. year of his
usurpation, by a Clark whose wife he had ravished.

XXI. Victorinus junior was slain at the same time with his Father.

XXII. Tetricus the Father assumed the Empire by the solicitation of Victoria
or Victorina, upon the death of Victorinus her son, and grandchild.

He ascended to the Throne with great applause, but considering the desperate
practices of the vulgar, chose to adorn Aurelian's triumph in a voluntary
captivity, rather than rule or live at the devotion of a lawless multitude.

XXIII. Tetricus junior was named Caesar by Victoria or Vitruvia, when his
Father was styled Augustus.

He submitted to Aurelian as his Father did.

XXIV. Zenobia took the government upon her in the name of Herennianus and
Timolaus her sons, says Tr. Pollio in triginta tyrannis, c. 27 and 30. But
Vopiscus in Aureliano, c. 38. writes, that she held the Empire in the name of
Vaballathus, son of Herod, whom Odenatus had by a former Wife.

She was a Lady of so strong a virtue, and of such command upon her self, that
she is said never to have made use of her husbands company, when she perceived
her self with child. Dr. Heylin in his Geography.

Zenobiam Longini discipulam Christianam fuisse suadere satagit magnus
Baronius, sed nondum persuadet. Langbain in Longinum, p. 53.

She not only insulted over the Romans, but held the Arabians, Saracens,
Armenians, and other fierce and intractable people in such awe, that although
she were both a woman and a Barbarian, they never stirred against her. Tr.
Pollio in 30 tyrannis, c. 30. out of Aurelian his Epistle.

In Occidente per Posthumum Praesidem Galliae, in Orient per Odenatum regulum
Palmyrenorum and ejus uxorem Zenobiam, servatum imperium. Laet in Compend.
Hist. Vniv.

She was somewhat brown, had black and bright eyes, teeth like pearl, a shril
and manly voice.

She read the Roman history in Greek, and also had her self abridged the
Alexandrian and all the Oriental Histories, whereby she attained the highest
pitch both of wisdom and authority. Sir John Hayward in his Epistle to the
Reader before his life of Henry the 4th.

Larga prudenter, conservatrix thesaurorum ultra foemineum modum. Pollio ubi
supra.

She was led in triumph by Aurelian, as well as Tetricus both Father and Son.

XXV. Herennianus son of Zenobia was killed by Aurelian, says Tr. Pollio de 30
tyrannis, c. 27.

XXVI. Timolaus brother to Herennianus had the like fate, as the same Author
writes in the place before cited.

He was an excellent Latin Orator. Pollio de 30 tyrannis, c. 28.

XXVII. Hermias Vaballathus, grandchild of Odenatus, is reckoned among the
Usurpers in Gallienus his time, by Tristan in his Historical Commentaries, tom.
3. and C. A. Rupertus on Besoldus's minor synopsis of History.

XXVIII. Victoria or Vitruvia for her desire of rule was called the Mother of
Armies.

She was mother to Victorinus the elder, who usurped in those times, and
grandmother to the younger Tyrant.

The relations of her death vary.

Non tam digna res erat ut etiam Victorina sive Victoria, in literas
mitteretur, nisi Gallieni mores hoc facerent, ut memoria digna etiam mulieres
censerentur. Pollio de 30 tyrannis, c. 31.

XXIX. Aureolus assumed the Empire by constraint of the Soldiery.

He was killed by Claudius the Emperor at a bridge, which from that time
bears his name. Pollio de 30 tyrannis, c. 11.

XXX. Antoninus is reckoned by Zosimus among the Tyrants of those times, but he
relates not where his Usurpation was; for which Tristan calls him a
negligent and confused Historian.

Titus and Censorinus are omitted here, (though mentioned by Tr. Pollio in his
book of Usurpers) because the one lived in the time of Maximinus the Emperor,
the other of Claudius.

Claudius the second and his Brother Quintillus.
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
CLAUDIUS was appointed Emperor by the will of Tantum ad arma and magnifica
facinora promptus ac paratus, quantum alter luxu, deliciis and omnibus
flagitiis contaminatus.
Gallienus being ready to die, who by Gallonius Basilius, sent the Imperial
Robes to him, then at Ticinum. Sextus Aurelius Victor in his Epitome.

He was elected by the Soldiers before the Walls of Milain, Olaus Magnus, fol.
673.
and confirmed in Rome by the Senate with much joy.

He was so renowned a Prince, that he was said to have Tito ille Vespasiani
filio omni virtutem genere par, nisi forsan major: sed and spatium regnandi
compar; biennium utrique imperandi finem fecit. Rivii Hist. Navalis Media, l.
2. p. 90.
Augustus his moderation, Trajans virtue, and Antoninus his piety met in him.

A Woman desiring him after he was Emperor, to restore an inheritance, which he
had unjustly took from her when he was but a private person; he graciously
granted her request, saying; Quod Claudius dum privatus erat, nec leges
curabat, abstulit; factus Imperator restituit. Zonaras.

In his time Athens was ransacked by Goths, who piled heaps of Books to burn,
but were advised by one to forbear, that the Grecians spending their time in
them, might be less fit for war. Cedrenus, B. Egnatius. Iudicium barbari non
prorsus vanum. Etsi Cleodemus Atheniensis fuga clapsus, coactaque manu and
navibus hosts invadens, Graecis librorum tractatione virtutem non demi ipsorum
clade docuit. Heidmannus in Epitome Historica de Imp. Romans

Aureolus being slain by his own company, Claudius received the government of
those Countries; and fighting against the Almains, he overthrew above half of
them. S. Aur. Victor.

He waged war with the Goths, who infested the Empire 15 years with continual
irruptions (says Iornandes) and now in league with many barbarous Nations,
invaded Thrace and the Countries before them, even to Macedonia; and thence
came through Hungary down Danubius with 2000 sail of Ships fraught with
ammunition and men: to meet which Claudius prepared, and engaged them so
valiantly, that he slew and took 320000 men, and 2000 Ships laden with shields,
swords, lances, etc. so that houses were filled therewith.

Hic autem quid dicam satis haereo: unum tamen o Claudi, sive Claudiane
scriptor hic admiror: si tot Gothorum millia in hoc bello corruerunt, rogo unde
iterum tot Gothi confestim succreverint, viresque reparaverint, ut vix anno
elapso difficilimum negotium potentissimo duci Aureliano, and toti Romanae
Reipub. facessere potuissent? proinde si Gothis aeque doctus scriptor
accidisset, quemadmodum Romany, multa utique aliter de sua gente tradidisset:
quamvis adhuc nonnulla vetustissima fragmenta Gothicae historiae in eorum prima
patria inveniantur, ex quorum antiquitate aliquando consummatior historia de
Gothicis rebus (ut spero) elici^tur: interim oportebit ut nobis ex illis
historiarum monimentis quae a Romany traduntur, satisfactum putemus.
Attendendum tamen est testimonium Tiberiani, and Flavii Vopisci, qui asserunt
Trebellium in historia Claudiana adulationibus corruptum plura addidisse
veritati: quibus ego eo facilius consentio, dum excepto eo Trebellio, priscorum
nullus tot occisorum recordetur. Praeterea Sabellicus de ipso Trebellio ait,
quod de Claudio e familia Constantini prognato adulatione plena omnia scripsit.
Olaus Magnus, p. 678.

He intended to go against Tetricus and Zenobia, but was hindered by a fever
which soon put an end to his life. He reigned 1 year, 10 months and 15 days.
He was deifyed by the Senate; had a statue of gold 10 foot high erected in the
Capitol in honor of him by the people at their own cost, (which they never did
to any before:) and a target of the same metal, with his picture in it, was
hung up in the Court by the Senates appointment. There was also by general
consent set up for him a pillar composed of the prows of Ships; upon which was
placed his statue, representing him clothed with his Consular Robe, of 1500
pound weight of silver.

It was a providence, that Claudius found the Empire so beset with enemies,
that he could not exercise so much cruelty as he intended against the
Christians. R. B. of the Roman Emperors.

Julian feigneth that the Gods seeing Claudius enter the place where they
assembled to banquet, received him very honorably, admiring his magnanimity,
and esteeming him worthy of posterity that should enjoy the Empire a long time,
because he showed so much love to his Country. After at the end of his Cesars
this Apostate (who hated the memory of Constantine and his sons, for their
abolishing idolatrous worship in many places) says; the Gods tormented
Constantine and his children in Hell a great while for cruelty to their
relations, but at length Jupiter delivered them from their torments, for the
sake of Claudius and Constantius Father of Constantine: the reason of which
fiction was certainly, because Claudius was a great Persecutor. Tristan.

After Claudius, his brother Quintillus was chosen Emperor by consent of the
Soldiers; being a person of singular moderation, and courteous, worthy to be
compared with his brother, or rather to be preferred before him: the Senate
also consented to the election. But being unable to resist Aurelian, chosen at
the same time by part of the Army, he made away himself by opening a vein (at
Tarsus in Cilicia) say some, having reigned but 17 days; but others write that
he was killed by the Soldiers.

Claudius insigni memorandus clade Gothorum,
Quem rapit ante annos invida parca duos.
Boissardus. L. Domitius Aurelianus.
effigy of emperor
HIS Parents being mean, he followed the Wars, and advanced himself thereby.

There being in the Army another Tribune, who was named Aurelian, and had been
taken prisoner with Valerian the Emperor; to distinguish the one from the
other, this was called Aurelian with his hand upon his Sword: Aurelianus manu
ad ferrum.
he being upon all occasions with a weapon in his hand, ready for service.
Vopiscus in Aureliano, c. 6.

He made no use of Physicians when he was sick, but cured all excess by
abstinence. Id. Ib. c. 50.

He delighted exceedingly in a Glutton who at his Table in one day ate a whole
Boar, and 100 loaves, with a Weather and a Pig; drinking through a tun-dish
plus orca: which Lipsius says was bigger than the Amphora, The Amphora
Capitolina held 6 gallons, says Dr. Hackwel in his Apol.
but how much he knows not. Id. Ibid. c. 50.

He was wont to say of Bonosus, Non ut vivat natus est, sed ut bibat; He was
not born to draw in breath, but beer. Vopiscus in quadriga tyrannorum, c. 14.

Aurelian married this Bonosus a Spaniard (but son of an English man) to Hunila
a noble Gothish Woman, merely that by her means he might discover the Goths
secrets. Vopiscus in quadriga tyrannorum, c. 15.

Sagacissimus Quaesitor est Foemina.
Blande torquendo verum extorquet.
Tergiversari difficile est,
Cum Apparitor Cupido faces admovet.
Eman. Thesaurus in Samsone.
Aurelian appointed Bonosus to carouse with Ambassadors, that they might be
brought to bewray secrets by this lene tormentum; whilst he (who had this
wonderful property, that he could piss as fast as he drunk, without containing
any jot within his body) faultred not, but was more discreet. Id. Ib.

[ Schenkius arma nunquam accuratius tractabat, quam quum effuse potus, ac vino
amens: immo ebrietate ipsa, quae resignare ac aperire occulta quaeque
consueverit, illum ad arcana occultanda uti solitum ferunt. Strada Belli
Belgici Decade secunda, l. 10.]

Aurelian was Colonel of Horse under Claudius in Persia; he slew in one day 48
of his Enemies with his own hands in the War against the Sarmatians: and slew
in several days above 950; whereupon Ballads were sung by Boys on Festivals
in praise of him.

Mill, mill, mill decollavimus,
Vnus homo mill decollavimus,
Mill vivat, qui mill occidit.
Tantum vini habet nemo,
Quantum fudit sanguinis.
Vopiscus in Aureliano, c. 6. as Salmasius has corrected the printed Copy from
the Manuscripts.

When the Enemies of the Romans had overrun all France, he made such havoc of
them at Mentz, that he slew 700, and sold 300 sub corona; upon which occasion
new Jigges were made.

Mill Sarmatas, mill Francos
Semel and semel occidimus;
Mill Persas quaerimus.
Id. ib. according to the Manuscript Copies.
He overcame all his Enemies in 3 years, whereas Alexander the Great traveled
13 years by great victories, before he came into India; Caesar spent 10 years
in overcoming the Gauls, and 4 years in conquering the Romans. Sextus Aurelius
Victor in his Epitome.

He was the first Roman Emperor that wore a Diadem on his head, and also used
garments of gold and precious stones, which before that time the Romans were
little acquainted with. Id. ibid.

He caused a Soldier, who had committed adultery with his Hostess, to have his
feet tied to the tops of 2 Trees bent downward, and suffered suddenly to start
back again; so the wretch was twitched in sunder, and hung on both sides in
halves.

He wrote to one of his Lieutenants; Vopiscus in Aureliano, c. 7.
If thou will be a Captain, nay if thou will live, contain thy Soldiers in
their duty. I will not have a peasant wronged in a Chicken, nor a Grape taken
without his permission; not a grain of Salt or a drop of Oil unjustly exacted.
I desire my Soldiers should be enriched with spoils of Enemies, not the tears
of my Subjects. I would have them chaste in their Quarters, and no Quarrelers.
Which commands Baronius compares with that of John the Baptist to the
Soldiers, Luke 3.14.

Hujusmodi erat militaris disciplina sub Imperatore Ethnico; quam si nostri
Christiani Reges servarent, profecto hostibus formidabiliores, and civibus
amabiliores haberentur, nibilque tam nobili eorum virtuti usquam praevaleret.
Olaus Magnus, l. 17. de rebus septentr. p. 675.

He advanced Tetricus (one of the 30 Tyrants in Gallienus his time, whom he
overcame) and made him Provost of Lucania who had been before proclaimed
Emperor by the French Army; elegantly upbraiding him, That it was more
majestical to rule some part of Italy, than to reign beyond the Alps. Sextus
Aurelius Victor's Epitome.

Being incensed against Tyana, because the Gates of the City were shut against
him, See in Sir Thomas Herberts Travels the pillar of beast heads erected at
Spahawn on such an occasion.
he vowed, He would not leave a Dog in it; But having taken it, upon a fright
by the ghost of Apollonius Tyanaeus (dead long before) he commanded his
Soldiers to kill all the Dogs, but spare the Citizens. Vopiscus in Aureliano,
c. 23.

This story if it was not true, it was handsomely contrived, both for the
keeping up the honor of the deifyed Apollonius, by making him so seasonably
deliver his native Town in so great an exigency; and also for the saving of the
Emperors credit with the Soldiers, that he might seem by Divine powers to be
absolved from that rigid vow, of giving the whole Town up to the slaughter and
plunder of the Soldiery. Dr. Mores Explanation of the grand Mystery of
Godliness, p. 151.

Aurelian demanding how he might govern well, Amicos suos honest ditavit and
modice; ut miserias paupertatis effugerent, and divitiarum invidiam patrimonii
moderatione vitarent. Vopiscus in Aureliano.
was answered by a great personage: You must be provided with Iron and Gold;
Iron to use against your Enemies, and Gold to reward your Friends. Zonaras.

Aurelian takes this counsel: to bestow
Gold on his men, and Iron on his fo.
Aleyn's Battle of Poictiers, p. 120.
Aurelian's chief engagement was against Zenobia, the most beautiful, chaste,
learned, wise, and valiant Woman of that age.

Her Letter in answer to him (who sorely tired, proffered her life, and
liberty, and wealth, if she would yield) shows her resolves for fight.

He was so enraged at her haughty reply, that he forthwith besieged Palmyra,
destroyed her aids, and at last took Her prisoner, whom he led in triumph; ea
specie, ut nibil pompabilius populo Romans videretur, says Treb. Pollio in
Zenobia.

He put Longinus to death upon a supposition that he dictated Zenobia's Epistle.

He is called Necessarius magis quam bonus Imperator, a Prince rather necessary
than good; because he wanted clemency, says Vopiscus.

He was so bloody, that he put to death his own Sisters son.

Being about to sign an Edict for the 9th persecution (of which he was the
Author) God hindered his purpose, cramping as it were his knuckles, manifesting
to all, that the Princes of this world have no power to practice any thing
against the Church, any farther than God permits. Eusebius, l. 7.

At the same time also a Thunderbolt fell so near him, Nona correptio fuit,
cum Aureliano persecutionem decernenti, diris turbinibus terribile ac triste
fulmen sub ipsius pedibus ruit, ostendens quid, cum ultio talis exigeret,
tantus posset ultor, nisi and clemens esset and patiens: quanquam intra sex
abhinc menses succidui tres Imperatores, hoc est, Aurelianus, Tacitus and
Florianus diversis causis interfecti sunt. Orosius, l. 7. c. 27.
that all thought he was slain; by which messenger God warned him to be wise,
lest he perished in those destructive ways, as shortly after he did; Mnestheus
his Secretary fearing punishment for some offense, for which the Emperor
threatened him with death, and knowing that he used not to pardon if he
threatened, counterfeited the Emperors hand, and wrote the names of many in a
roll as appointed by him to die; mixing the names of some, with whom the
Emperor was truly offended, with those of others whom he was not displeased
with, adding his own name that he might the easilier be believed. They upon
sight hereof, thinking to prevent the worst, slew him in a Castle called
Coeno-phrurium, betwixt Byzantium and Heraclea.

Id vero in ultionem Sanguinis Christiani, ab eo effusi contigisse,
Constantinus Magnus in quadam Orat. ait. Baron. Anno Christi 278. number. 1.
Besoldus in majore Synopsi Historiae Vniversalis, p. 179.

When Mnestheus his Treason was discovered, he was cast to wild beasts as
appears by marble pillars placed on both sides the monument erected in honor
of Aurelian, even by those who slew him. Vopiscus in Aureliano, c. 37.

When the Treasury was emptied after Gallienus and the calamities of the
Commonwealth, Aurelian came in manner of a torrent upon the rich. Ammianus
Marcellinus, l. 30. c. 28.

He reigned 4 years 11 months and 7 days. Vopiscus calls him Bonum Medicum,
sed mala ratione curantem; A good Physician, had not he administered too bitter
potions: in reference to which Julian feigneth, that he had much ado to defend
himself at the Tribunal of Minos, before whom many accused him of injustice;
but that the Sun, who had always in his life specially assisted him in all his
enterprises, excused him to the other Gods, saying, That he had been punished
enough by his death, according to the Delphick Oracle, which says: (...).
Iudicium, si quis quae fecit perferat, aequum est.


Porphyrie that surly Antichristian Predicabilist grumbled against Christians
in his time. Bishop Prideaux's Introduction to History.

Triginta circiter scriptores Catholici blasphemias ejus refutarunt: si qua
fides Fl. Lucii Dextri Chronicis. Lucas Holstenius De vita and Scriptis
Porphyrii, p. 14 and 62.

Reginam frustra optaras, Auguste, triumpho:
Elusit propria te generosa nece.
Sors nobis melior. Pars spectatissima pompae
Ducta ante est currus foemina victa meos.
Anonymus. Tacitus, and his Brother Florianus.
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
UPon the death of Aurelian, the Soldiers who would not have any of his
Assassinates to succeed, sent to the Senate to choose an Emperor; the Senate
refer the election to the Soldiers, who, they knew, used not to be pleased with
the Senates choice: half a year passed in complements with a peaceable
interregnum, at last the Senate and Soldiers jointly elect Tacitus.

He retired to his Manor in Campania, where he was secret 2 months, shunning
that dignity which might prove his overthrow; was often solicited, but with
hearty thanks absolutely denied; affirming his age made him unable to satisfy
expectations: at length, necessity of state so requiring, he accepted of their
proffer; at which all rejoiced but himself.

He was so abstemious, that he never drank a pint of wine in a day, and often
less than half a one. Vopiscus in Tacito, c. 11.

He was such an example of moderation to others, that he permitted not his
Empress to wear jewels.

He honored Tacitus the Historian, He called September Tacitus, because he was
born and made Emperor in that month. Vopiscus in Tacito, c. 13.
whom he called his Father, commanded his Works to be put in every Library
through the Empire, to be transcribed 10 times every year at public cost.
Vopiscus in Tacito, c. 10.

When the Senate chose him Emperor, they cried out, Quis melius quam gravis
imperat? and quis melius quam He has a place in Barlandus's Literati urbis
Romae Principes.
literatus imperat?

When he objected his age, they answered, that Trajan, Adrian, and Antoninus
were old when they came to the Empire; whom they mentioned because they reigned
well and fortunately: omitting Vespasian, Nerva, Pertinax, Macrinus and Decius,
who came older to the Empire; but their reign was short, especially that of the
four last: the three last also dyed a violent death. Tristan.

When the Senate denied him the Consulship, which he sought for his brother
Florianus, he took it very well, saying; Seit Senatus quem Principem fecerit.
Vopiscus.

He gave the Soldiers all the money he had in silver, which was a great sum; he
having had more than 9 millions in gold for his patrimony.

His death proceeded from grief occasioned by factions, infirmity of age
helping to break his heart, when he had reigned Above a year says Christ.
Adamus Rupertus on Besoldus his minor Synopsis of History.
6 months. Vopiscus in Tacito, c. 13. and Eutropius, l. 9.

His brother Florianus ambitiously strove to get the Empire as true heir,
though he knew Tacitus was engaged to the Senate, that he would prefer worth
before his relations in the designation of his Successor.

Florianus Taciti frater arripuit Purpuram, qua secundo mense exutus a Probo,
dominationis umbram cum morte mutavit. Bussicres in Flosculis Historiarum.
Being not able to withstand Probus who was chosen by the Army, he was killed by
the Soldiers, say some; but most write, that having as it were in sport swayed
the Empire but 60 days, by opening a vein he killed himself at Tarsus: as
Quintillus also did, who was reduced to the same extremity.

Theod. Metochita, Glycas and Caedrenus write, that Probus killed him
counterfeting the fool.

Accipit imperium Tacitus praebente senatu,
At cito castrensi seditione cadit.
Velius. Probus.
effigy of emperor
UPon Tacitus his death, the Army unanimously cried out, Let us have Probus for
our Emperor: and the Senate with applause confirmed the election.

The manner of his being chosen by the Soldiers was thus; The Officers told
them the requisites of one that should be elected, that he should be Fortis,
Sanctus, Verecundus, Clemens, Probus: which when it was spoke to many
Companies, on all sides they cried out as it were by a divine instinct, Probe
Auguste, Dii te servent. Vopiscus in Probo.

Valerian the Emperor called him Vere Probum, saying in an Epistle, that if he
had not had Probus for his name, he deserved to have had it for his Vir, si
quis unquam in illo imperio, magnus simul and bonus. Rivii Hist. Navalis media.
l. 2. p. 91.
surname. Id. ib. c. 4.

He was made Tribune by Valerian, in which office he served under Gallienus,
Claudius, Aurelian, and Tacitus.

He was so noble a warrior, and mighty in feats of Arms, that the Senate wished
for him, the Soldiers chose him, and the people of Rome with open acclamation
called for him.

His first service after he became Emperor, was in France, Vopiscus in Probo,
c. 13, 14, 15. Iulianus in Gaesaribus.
against the Germans who had conquered it; where in one battle he slew almost
400000 Germans, 9 of whose Quibus obsides, frumentum, ac postremo etiam pecudes
imperavit, in praesens usui, in futurum terrori. Dousae filii Batavia, p. 30.
Kings prostrated themselves at his feet: he won also and repaired 70 of their
Cities in less than 7 years.

Non omittenda hic bella quae ab eodem Imperatore ad Rhenum gesta referuntur a
Zosimo: quae in his locis potissimum accidisse haud absimile vero est, quum
captivos in Britanniam miss^s idem referat, praesertim tam opportuno trajectu.
Initio belli gravissima fame a Romany laboratum, qua tandem liberati eo
miraculo, ut fides rerum commento fabulae adumbrata videatur. Quippe magna vis
aquae coelo missa una cum imbre frumentum detulit, cujus acervi sponte structi
multis locis. Obstupefactis ad rem novam atque incredibilem omnibus qui
aderant, initio quidem, Religione quadam obstrictis mentibus frumentum
attingere non audebant. Verum tandem, ubi necessitas metum vicit, panes ex eo
cocti ita ad usum ipsis suffecerunt, ut pulsa fame alacriores ad belli munia
animos adferrent: atque ad extremum virtute sua, atque Imperatoris Fortuna
superiores discederent. Hujus prodigiosae pluviae meminit quoque Cedrenus,
nulla tamen aut belli, aut loci (ubi id accidit) facta mentione. Dousae filii
Batavia, p. 31.

The Egyptians electing Saturninus a wife and valiant Captain Emperor, so sore
against his will, that he was like to be slain for gainsaying their desires;
Probus hasting toward them offered them pardon, out of an unwillingness to
shed civil blood, or to lose such a man as Saturninus: but upon refusal of his
clemency, he engaged in a sharp battle, wherein most of the revolters were
overthrown, and Saturninus slain in the assault of a besieged Castle, to the
grief of Probus who sought to save his life. Vopiscus in quadriga tyrannorum,
c. 11.

Bonosus had charge of Ships, which the Germans burned in the mouth of the
Rhine through his negligence, if not treachery; who fearing punishment for his
fault, rebelled likewise against Probus, but was overcome and through despair
hung himself: whereupon it was said, Amphoram pendere, non hominem; That a
barrel or tankard hung there, and not a man; because he was so given to drink.
Vopiscus ibidem, c. 15.

For be that holds more wine than others can,
I rather count a Hogs-head than a man.
Randolph in his Poems, 35th Precept, or Necessary Observation.
There rebelled also against Probus, Proculus as insatiate a vassal to Venus,
as Bonosus was to Bacchus; so impudent that he did not only commit filthiness,
but boasted of it, as appears by his Letter wherein he braggeth that having
taken 100 Sarmatian Virgins he deprived 10 of that name in a night, and all the
rest within a fortnight: inter fortes se haberi credens, si criminum densitate
coalescat. Id. ibid. c. 12.

Probus honored Aradion a most valiant man (whom he overcame in wrestling)
with a Tomb 200 foot broad remaining in Vopiscus his time; which he caused the
Soldiers, whom he never suffered to be idle, to erect: testifying the greatness
of his respect by the largeness of his monument. Vopiscus in Probo, c. 9.

Quo latior agri modus sepulchro assignab^tur, eo magis crescebat bonos.
Casaubonus.

Being presented with a Horse taken in War, which it was said, could go 100
miles in a day, for 8 or 10 days together, he said, He was fitter for a
cowardly, than a valiant Soldier. Id. ib. c. 8.

Some say he was the last Emperor who triumphed, after his Victory over the
Germans and the Blemyae a people of Africa.

He commanded to be let loose at once 1000 Estriches, 1000 Stags, 1000 wild
Boars, 1000 fallow Deer, beside wild Goats, wild Sheep, and other creatures
which fed upon grass, as many as could be fed or found; which he gave to the
people to catch as they could: the Circus being set all over with great trees,
which by the Soldiers were taken up by the roots, as they grew in the woods,
and planted there with green turf about them, and fastened with beams and irons:
next day he let into the same place 100 maned Lions, (which filled the air with
roaring as if it had thundered;) 100 Lybian Leopards, 100 Syrian, 100 Lionesses,
and 300 Bears. Vopiscus in Probo, c. 19.

As Hanibal filled most parts of Africa with Olive-yards planted by his
Soldiers that they might not be idle, to the endangering of the Commonwealth;
so Probus, (who for his famous acts is compared with Hannibal and Caesar) for
the same reason caused the Soldiers to plant vineyards throughout all France,
both the Pannonias, and the Mysian hills. Aur. Victor.

He was a valiant and just person, matched Aurelian for military renown, and
exceeded him in courteous behavior. Eutropius, l. 9.

Flav. Vopiscus tres causas Probi mortis recitat. Primam, quod milites nunquam
ociosos permisit. Secundam; quod dixerat brevi fore, ut nullis militibus opus
sit. Tertiam, quod in patria sua amplianda ad sordida ac servilia ministeria
milites coegisset. Glarenus in Eutropium.
He undid himself by that speech of his Brevi milites necessarios non futuros:
wherewith the Soldiers being offended murdered him, when he had lived 75 years,
and reigned Quamvis quinto imperii anno interfectum scribit Vopiscus; tamen
alii omnes ipsi adversi sunt. Chr. Ad. Rupert. Observat in Besoldi synop. min.
p. 388.
6 years 4 months; others say 6 years.

Cum Probus imperii fraenos and jura teneret,
Tam pax tranquillo dulcis in orb fuit,
Caesar ut ipse brevi post diceret esse futurum,
Non opus ut castris praesidio que foret.
Audiit hoc miles, motusque his vocibus, ipsum
Interimit stricto cominus ense Probum.
Lingua quod incauto peccans effutiit ore,
Hoc animae sraudi saepius esse solet.
Pantaleon Candidus in Epigrammat. Historicis, p. 157, 158.
Julian (in his Cesars) feigneth that Silenus reproached him with severity
toward his Soldiers; who adds that he underwent deserved punishment, though
unjustly inflicted by them.

It is thought, that because he suffered the Christians to live in peace, God
gave him so many victories against the Barbarians. R. B. of the Roman Emperors.

Hic ille est, cujus gemmant tibi munere vites,
Gallia; cui libes cum tua vina bibis.
Vere dat pacem, bellis Probus orb fugatis,
Qui tribuit curis solvere corda mero.
Anonymus. Carus, with his Sons Carinus and Numerianus
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
PRobus being slain, Aurelius Carus Carinum and Numerianum filios collegas sibi
assumpsit, quorum hic probus, ille adeo protervus ut pater saepius exclamaret,
Non est meus. Io. Laetus in Compend. Hist. Vniv.
the Army chose Carus Emperor, whereunto the Senate consented.

The Sarmatians threatening Italy, he engaged with them, and overthrew them with
the slaughter of 16000, taking 20000 prisoners. Vopiscus in Caro, c. 9.

Leaving Carinus his elder Son to govern Britain, France, Illyricum and Spain;
he prepared with Numerian against the Persians, in which expedition he took in
his way Mesopotamia, Ctesiphon, etc. Whereby he purchased the surname of
Persicus.

Ambassadors coming to him from the King of Persia, find him lying upon the
grass, eating black broth and morsels of swines-flesh; whom he bad to tell their
young master: If he continued obstinate, within one month all his woods and
fields should be as bare as his bald pate; which he showed: offering them to
eat out of the Pot, if they pleased, otherwise to depart forthwith. Lipsius in
his notes to his second Book of Politics and the fifteenth Chapter out of
Synesius de Regno, where see Petavius, who applies it to Probus.

Quamvis ethnicus, ecclesiam Thessaloniceusem a tributis immunem fecit. Chr.
Schotanus in his Catalogue of Cesars, at the end of Sulp. Severus's History
continued by himself.

Surprised with sickness he pitched his Tent on the shore of Tigris; where he
and others were slain in their beds by a thunderbolt.

-- Fulmine captus Imperator
Vitam fulminibus paerem peregit.
Sidonius Apollinaris. Memorabile maxim Cari, and Carini, and Numeriani hoc
habuit imperium, quod ludos Romanos novis ornatos spectaculis dederunt, quos in
palatio circa porticum stabuli pictos vidimus. Vopiscus in Caro, Numeriano and
Carino, c. 19.

Arrius Aper a Pretorian Prefect having murdered Numerian (his Son-in-law)
being troubled with sore eyes upon his return from Persia (says Zonaras)
pretended to those of the Army who enquired how he did, Numerianus post Cari
parentis obitum, ex Orient, ac Perside rediens, a socero in itinere est
interfectus; recenti adhuc Cari funere: cui pius juvenis praeter modum
illacrymans, ocularem in morbum inciderat. Petavius De Doctrina Temporum, p.
11. c. 26.
that his infirmity only kept him from sight, but at length his treason was
discovered by the putrefaction of Numerian's body. Whereupon Aper being brought
by the Soldiers before the Tribunal, was slain by Diocletian; who was both his
Judge and Executioner. Vopiscus in Numeriano.

In the life of Carus, written by Eutropius in the later edition set forth by
Frobenius, I find (which in other editions of Eutropius does not appear) that
Numerianus slew Babylas the Martyr. But that seems not likely, both by
narration of Chrysostom and Vrspergensis, who, declaring the same history, and
in the same words, as it is in Eutropius, says it was Cyrillus whom Numerian
killed, the story whereof is this: When Carus in his journey toward the
Persians remained at Antioch, Numerian would enter into the Christians Church,
to view their Mysteries. But Cyril their Bishop would not suffer him, saying;
It was not lawful for him to see the mysteries of God, who was polluted with
the sacrifice of Idols. Numerian not suffering that repulse at the hands of
Cyril, in his fury slew the godly Martyr; and therefore justly (as it seems)
was himself slain by the hands of Aper. Fox his Acts and Monuments of the
Church, tom. 1. p. 69.

Calpurnius the Poet was Secretary to Carus, and after him to Numerian, says
Vopiscus in vita Cari. Nemesianus the Poet was also contemporary with Carus and
his Sons.
Numerianus versu talis fuisse praedicatur, ut omnes Poetas sui temporis
vicerit. Nam and cum Olympio Nemesiano contendit, qui (...), and (...)
scripsit, quique omnibus coloniis illustratus emicuit, and Aurelium Apollinarem
iamborum scriptorem, qui patris ejus gesta in literas retulit, iisdem, quae
recitaverat editis, veluti radio solis obtexit. Vopiscus in Numeriano, c. 11.

Carinus gave himself to all lusts, married 9 Wives, and then divorced them
being big with child; he was twice overcome by Diocletian, and slain by a
Tribune, whose Wife he had abused. Vopiscus in Carino.

Tristan parallels Carinus with Gallienus.

Some say Carus and his Sons reigned but 2 years or somewhat more, others say
but a little above one.

These 7 Emperors, Claudius, his brother Quintillus, Aurelian, Tacitus, his
brother Florian, Probus and Carus reigned but 18 years. Lloids Consent of Times.

Persica diminues victricibus agmina signis:
Foelix, ni torto fulminis igne cadas.
Boissardus. Diocletian and Maximian Colleagues.
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
DIocletian's parentage is uncertainly reported, some making him the son of a
Scrivener, and others of a bondsman made free by Anulinus a Senator: but all
agree he was a Dalmatian of base birth.

Haec eadem est Dalmatia quae Hieronymum ceu patronum ecclesiarum, and quem
nemo Latinorum lucubrando vicit, nobis dedit. Tam vere igitur quam eleganter a
Sulmonensi vate dictum est: Terra salutifer as herbas eademque nocentes
Gignit, and urticae proxima saepe rosa est.
Vadiani Epitome trium terrae partium.


The name of his Mother (and of the Town wherein he was born) was Dioclea,
whence he was called Diocles till he came to be Emperor, and then named himself
Diocletian (converting a Greek name into a Roman form) and upon the conquest of
the Persians and Egyptians, Iovii cognomentum primus sibi sumpsit Diocletianus,
ut collega ejus Maximianus Herculii. postea cum Caesares facti essent
Constantius and Galerius: Galerius quidem qui Diocletiani filiam duxerat, and
qui cum Diocletiano in Orient fere semper versatus est, Caesar Iovius est
appellatus. Sic enim in Chronico Alexandrino dicitur, and in vetere nummo quem
edidit Johannes Tristanus. Constantius vero, utpote qui Maximiani Herculii
privignam duxerat, and cum illo in Occidente versabatur, Caesar Herculius
dictus est, ut ex vetere panegyrico observavit frater meus Hadrianus Valesius.
Mortuo deinde Galerio, Maximinus qui Caesar ab illo factus fuerat, cognomentum
Iovii assumpsit, ut ex hoc Eusebii loco discimus. Valesius in Eusebium, p. 186.
Iovius; as Maximian his Colleague styled himself Herculius: velut ille Jovis,
hic Herculis haeres says P. Laetus, who parallels Diocletian with Jupiter, and
Maximian with Hercules.

Jupiter, gigantes, ut coeli regiam defenderet, perdidit; Diocletianus, ut
orbis terrarum regiam tueretur, tyrannos surgentes, ut Centimanos, diligenti
cura delevit; says the same Author in Romans Hist. Comp.

Maximianus se progeniem esse Herculis non adulationibus fabulosis, sed
aequatis virtutibus comprobavit. Paneg. Constable. dictus.

Iovius and Herculius a Gallis adeo dilecti, ut ab eis duo populi nomina
sumpserint Ioviorum and Herculiorum; and Viennenses duas urbis portas, Ioviam
and Herculeam appellavere, ut epigrammata docent. Pomponius Laetus, ubi supra.

When Diocletian serving as a common Soldier in France, reckoned with his
hostess (one of the Druids) she told him he was too penurious; Oraculum apud
Plutarchum monebat quendam ut anguem sedulo vitaret: id cum praestaret ille, in
militem cui anguis insigne clypei erat, incidit, ac obtruncatus fuit.
he jeastingly answered, that he would be bountiful when he came to be Emperor
of Rome: she bid him not mock, saying; Imperator eris cum aprum occideris. From
that time he hunted often and killed many boars, to see if a Crown would spring
from their blood; but still missed the Empire, which Aurelian, Tacitus, Probus
and Carus obtained, whereupon he said: I kill many boars, Quanquam putem ego
(pace magni istius Philosophi, and Historici tamen) monuisse Deum ut (...)
vitaret, quod commune nomen and clypei and serpentis est; ita oraculo illi
aequivocatio sua constat. Heinsius in Crepundiis. Vide Val. Maximum, l. 1. c.
8. de Daphida and Philippo Macedone.
but others go away with the flesh. At last Aper having killed Numerianus (as
is above mentioned) was brought by the Soldiers before Diocletian, who being
told his name, (and concluding at length that the prediction was to be
understood of a man) presently killed him; in outward show for zeal of justice,
as being not able to endure so foul a fact, but in truth to fulfill the
prediction of his hostess the Druid: for that Aper signifies a Boar. Vopiscus
in Numeriano says, that his Grandfather, from whom he had this report, was
present when Aper was slain, to whom Dioeletian, when he struck him, said in a
bravado; Gloriare Aper, Aeneae magni dextra cadis: adding; Tandem Aprum fatalem
occidi. Vopiscus in Caro, Numeriano, etc. c. 15, 16.

Promisit verace tibi Druis hospita voce
Imperium, fuerit cum tibi caesus Aper.
Boissardi Distich. in Iconas, l. 1. p. 30.
Diocletian was a man greatly esteemed, but thus conditioned; for he was the
first that wore cloth of gold, trod on silk and purple embellished with
pearls; which, though it were more than did become him, and argued in him a
lofty and proud spirit; yet this was nothing in respect of his other carriage:
for (next after Caligula and Domitian) he was the first, who allowed himself to
be called Lord and God, and would be sued unto as a god, though (says Aur.
Victor) he carried himself liker a Father, Diocletianus, aurei parens saeculi,
and Maximianus (ut vulgo dicitur) ferrei. Lampridius in fine Helagabali.
than a Tyrant.

Sibi immani saevitia, qua religionis odio in omne Christianum nomen est
grassatus, aeternas infamiae notas, ceteroqui non pessimus Princeps inussit. M.
Velserus Rerum Aug. Vind. l. 6. p. 136, 137.

It was a good speech of him though an evil Emperor, That the best and most
wary Prince may be abused by bad servants. Vopiscus in Aureliano.

Vt maxim infame Diocletiani Imperium fuerit, ob excitatam and exercitam
saevissimam in Christianos persecutionem, and privata insuper vitia nonnulla;
attamen and alias laudatissimum Principem fuisse, and constitutiones de jure
nobilissimas and aequissimas promulgasse constat, and quidem ex veteri
Iurisprudentiae passim petitas, and ad ejus normam compositas. Gothofredus in
secunda dissertatione juridica, p. 39.

Notwithstanding his cruelty condemned even by Libanius a Heathen (in his
Oration to Theodosius the Great) yet he counterfeited Clemency, and in
appearance had the memory of Marcus Aurel. in great veneration, as a God,
saying often, that he desired to resemble him in humanity. Capitolinus in Marco
Antonino Philosopho.

Rescriptum Diocletiani and Maximiani, l. 6. C. de. Patr. potest. Abdicatio,
quae Graeco more ad alienandos liberos usurpatur (f. usurpabatur) and (...)
dicebatur, Romany legibus non comprobatur. Rittershusius in Salvianum, p. 499.

Diocletianus, si quisquam alius Principum, praecipuam Testamentorum rationem
habuit, enixeque testantium utilitati consultum ivir. Jac. Gothofredus in
secunda dissertatione Iuridica, p. 40.

Diocletian by his Prudentiae illa Diocletian. (quae Christi nomen
insolentissime contemnebat, and se pro Deo adorari jubebat) prohibere nequivit,
quin ubique terrarum plures uno tempore rebellarent, alius hic, alius ibi, vel
alibi. Olaus Magnus, fol. 675, 676.
profound wisdom wherewith he was endued, found out a more assured way to
secure himself against rebellions, than others had discovered: for having taken
Maximian for his Companion and Allie: and afterward created Galerius and
Constantius Cesars, he rendered himself formidable to those who desired to make
themselves Emperors. For in what part soever the rebels rose, one of these four
was upon their backs, and stifled them in the birth. Only For subduing of whom
Constantius is compared to Pompey the Great, by Dr. Rives in his Historia
Navalis Media, l. 2. p. 96, 97.
Carausius, whom the situation of great Britain rendered invincible, stood out 7
years. But all the other who had the boldness to make themselves Emperors, as
Aulus Pomponius Aelianus, Amandus, Iulianus, etc. were quickly defeated before
they could make any considerable progress. Tristan.

Diocletianus post segetem tyrannorum Maximianum Caesarem and collegam feeit.
Chr. Schotani Heptaemeron, p. 215.

These 2 Emperors chose 2 Ceterum, ut inquit Ammianus, hi Caesares ipsis
Augustis tanquam apparitores obtemperarunt, ultro citroque pro eorum arbitrio
commeantes. Sigonius de Occid. Imperio, l. 1.
Cesars; Diocletian chose Galerius surnamed Armentarius, and Maximian,
Constantius Chlorus; enforcing them to put away their wives, and take their
Daughters for an assurance of love by the bonds of that alliance. Aur. Victor.

Whereas Eutropius calls the marriage of Constantius Chlorus with Helena,
obscurius matrimonium, Pauca supersunt nobis hodie gesta Diocletiani, penuria
auctorum. Ex iis qui supersunt, nullus plura de eo paucioribus verbis complexus
est, quam Eutropius. Scaliger in Eusebium, p. 244.
a more obscure marriage, his meaning is plain. For he neither meant, nor said
that it was simply ignoble, but speaking comparatively, and comparing it to his
second marriage with Theodora the daughter-in-law to the Emperor; by which he
obtained first to be Caesar and then Emperor: in respect of the splendour of this
second marriage, and the Imperial dignity obtained thereby, he did and might
well say, that the former was more obscure, or not so illustrious; though in it
self it was both very honorable, and in no sort any disparagement to
Constantius. Dr. Crakanthorp's Defense of Constantine. chapter 10.

In the 19. year of his reign he raised the 10. and extremest persecution, Quae
persecutio omnibus fere anteactis diuturnior atque immanior fuit Nam per december
annos incendiis Ecclesiarum, proscriptionibus innocentum, caedibus martyrum
incessabiliter acta est. Sequitur terrae motus in Syria, ex quo apud Tyrum and
Sidonem passim labentibus tectis, multa hominum millia prostrata sunt. P.
Orosius, l. 7. c. 25.
wherein 17000 men, women and children were martyred within one month, besides
infinite numbers otherwise punished: the Christians torments lasting 10 years
without intermission, no place being free.

Eusebius l. 5. de prep. Evang. writes that Diocletian going to Apollo for an
Oracle, received answer, That the just men were the cause that he could say
nothing. Which just men, Apollo's Priests interpreted to be Christians,
whereupon Diocletian began his most fierce and cruel persecution. Bayfield of
the Trinity, chapter 2. p. 51.

Infinite multitudes were every where imprisoned, and the Prisons of old
appointed for murderers and riflers of graves, were then filled with Bishops,
Ministers, Deacons, Readers and Exorcists, so that there was no room in them
for heinous offenders. Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, l. 8. c. 6.

Nullus dies cui non ultra quinque millium numerum Martyrum reperiri posset
ascriptus, excepto die Calendarum Ianuarii. There was never a day in the year,
Heylin's Geography.
except the first of January (on which they used not to shed blood) whereto the
number of 5000 Martyrs at the least might not be ascribed says Hierome in Si
tamen illa sit Hieronymi epistola, says Dr. Hakewil in his Scutum regium, p.
74.
his Epistle ad Heliodorum and Chromatium.

Nicomedia was honored with the seat and residence of many of the Roman
Emperors, when their affairs called them into the East, before the building of
Constantinople; on that occasion made the Throne on which many of God's Saints
received the Crown of Martyrdom, especially in the persecution under
Diocletian. Dr. Heylin's Geography.

Cyprian a Magician, converted at Nicomedia by Iustina a Christian Virgin,
suffered under Diocletian. Velserus Rerum Boicarum, l. 3.

Quis non horreat in una Aegypto 144 millia mortalium caesa, 700 millia in
exilium acta; praeter Africam totamque Europam in carnificinam versas? ut totum
orcum dicas in orbem effusum, ubi nemo nisi tortus vel tortor sit. Vide
Hottingerum Hist. Ecclesiast. part prima, p. 182.
Triumphavit tamen iis cladibus Christi Ecclesia, and scoria per ignem purgata
long illustrior, damnis suis ferax, miseriis foelix, ruinis erecta, jacturis
dives, rediviva in morte, mortalium victrix and Daemonum, sementem fecit effuso
sanguine, profligatura statim Imperium, and Orbem totum missura sub jugum.
Bussieres in Flosculis Historicis.

Evectus ad imperii culmen Diocletianus, cum inter caeteras provincias bello
subactas, Aegyptus maxim Achilla duce rebellasset, ex indignatione summa, ob
contumeliam, ut ipse putabat, sibi a Refractariis illis illatam; in furorem
versus, mox ea expugnata non satis esse ratus est, Achillam jam in potestatem
suam redactum, feris dilaniandum objicere: sed vindictam quoque omni
crudelitatis genere refertam, sibi exercendam existimans, in cujuscunque
conditionis homines foedum in modum debacchatus est. Verum inter alia, tria
potissimum quae persecutionem vehementer auxere, contra eos machinatus est.
Primum fuit, ut omnes cum aliorum, tum Christianorum libros sacros hinc inde
per universam Aegyptum collectos, aboleret; his enim abolitis, ad Romanorum
ritus facilius eos allectum iri confidebat. Alterum erat, ut artem
transmutationis metallorum interdic^ret; timebat enim, ne inde locupletiores
facti Aegyptii, collectoque exercitu multum Romany in posterum fortassis
facesserent negotii. Tertium denique erat, ut computus anni Aegyptiis usitatam
rationem, Romano stylo accommodaret. Duo prima, esti multum in eis desudaverit,
assequi nunquam potuit; hoc uti voluit, ita and perfecit. Kircherus in Prodromi
Coptici, c. 2. p. 21, 22.

Divine mercy herein magnified it self toward this Island, that the last
Ecumenical was the first Provincial Persecution in Britain. Dr. Fuller's
Church History of Britain, p. 17.

The persecution of Diocletian in Britain, continued only one year, says Mr.
Ball against Can, c. 2. p. 62.

Magnum Christianorum numerum, quod Amphibalum praedicantem audivisset,
Johannes Rossus Warwicensis (in libro de Wigorniensibus Episcopis) impiorum
telis occubuisse narrat, in loco qui ab eventu Lichfield, id est, Cadaverum
Campus appellatur. Qua vocis etymologia nixi Lichfeldenses, pro civitatis suae
insignibus Campum occisorum cadaveribus constratum etiam nunc usurpant. Nec
desunt qui mill and ducentorum monachorum Bangorensium caedem ab Ethelfrid
Northanhumbrorum rege factam eo trahant: sed contra Historiae fidem, quae non
juxta Lichfeldiam, sed prope Vrbem Legionum, quae hodie Occidentalis vocatur
Cestria, interemptos illos fuisse confirmat. Usserius De Britannicarum
Ecclesiarum Primordiis, p. 161.

In the said British Churches Antiquities, p. 145, 167, 170, etc. he says
this persecution lasted but little above a year in France, imputing the
shortness thereof to Constantius his Calvisius in the quarto edition of his
Chronology, p. 555. gives the same reason why Germany then escaped persecution.
moderation.

Hujus persecutionis non minima laus debetur Hispaniae, atque haud scio, an
ulla tunc provincia plus effuderit sanguinis pro fide and nomine Christi. Sola
Caesar-Augusta, ni fallor, potest hac part contendere cum quavis non dico
civitate, sed provincia, ut eleganter testatur Prudentius in hymno de octodecim
martyribus Caesar-Augustanis. Vasaei Chronicon Hispaniae, p. 272.

Cum non sine stupore Diocletiani Thermas perlustrare possis, quarum vastitatem
and sumptuositatem vix unquam satis admiraberis, scias, in illis olim
construendis quadringenta Christianorum millia, per annos quatuordecim, servili
more, sub crudelissimo persecutore vexata esse. Joh. Jac. Grasseri Itinerarium,
p. 228.

Saint Macra suffered in Diocletian's persecution (by command of Rictiovarus)
whose passion Ondart thus expresses in his Ecclesiastical Ephemerid^s.

Rictius injecit te praeses Varus in ignem,
Praeciditque ferox ubera Macra tibi.
Attamen haud quidquam flammae nocuere rogales,
Vber utrumque loco restituitque Deus
Quod notum Rhemis; quorum tegeris solo, acuta
In testa oranti postquam ibi obisse datum.
Usserius in Addendis ad Britannicarum Ecclesiarum primordia, p. 1040.
Genesius being the chief of the Theatrical Mimi, Genesius Abbas Arelatens. per
jocum baptisatus, and serio conversus. 289. Oreus in Nomenclatore Praecipuorum
D D.
at the command of Diocletian, acted a play of the Christian religion before
the Emperor, in derision of the Christian Faith and Mysteries. To express the
custom of Christians, he was laid as one Clinicus, on his couch upon the
Theater, then he called for baptism; the mimical Presbyter being brought, asked
him if he did believe? who answering he did, he was mimically baptized: then
apparelled in white, and for making that profession, he was in mimical fashion
led to be executed. But this play was then turned into sad earnest, for at that
time he being truly converted to Christianity, instead of cursing and deriding,
began to bless and adore Christ, and seriously exhorted the Emperor, and all in
the Theater, to embrace the holy Christian Faith, as himself did: at which the
Emperor being incensed with rage, commanded him to be most cruelly tormented;
and when by no torments whatsoever, he could be driven from the constant
profession of Christ, he was at last beheaded, and is now enrolled among the
blessed Saints and Martyrs. Dr. Crakanthorp's defense of Constantine, c. 6. p
84. out of Martyrologium Romans and Mart. Vsuardi.

S. Helychius, sub Diocletiano cum esset, and praeceptum audisset, ut quisquis
non sacrificaret idolis, cingulum solveret, repent cingulum solvit. Ob hanc
caussam Imp. colobio muliebri indutum primo eum in gynaeceum dedit. Savaro in
Epist. S. Sidonii l. 1. Pontanus Attic. Bellariorum part secunda, p. 300.

Diocletianus edictum eum Maximiano proponit, ne cui vendere aut emere, aut
molere, aut aquas haurire liceret, nisi statuis thura incenderet. Baronius
cited by Calvisius in the quarto edition of his Chronology, p. 551.

Diocletiano and Maximiano imperantibus, acerbissima persecutio exorta, quae
per december continuos annos plebem Dei depopulata est, qua tempestate omnis fere
sacro martyrum cruore orbis infectus est: quippe certatim gloriosa in certami^a
ruebatur, multoque avidius tum martyria gloriosis mortibus quaerebantur, quam
nunc Episcopatus pravis ambitionibus appetuntur. Nullis unquam bellis mundus
magis exhaustus est, neque unquam majore triumpho vicimus, quam cum december
annorum stragibus vinci non potuimus. Sulpitius Severus Sacr. Hist. l. 2.

There was a Column (as a Trophy of extinguishing the Christian Faith) erected
to him with this Inscription. Diocletiano Caes. Aug. Nomine Christianorum
deleto, QuiRemp. evertebant.

Galerio in Orient
Adopt.
Superstitione Christi ubique deleta, In another Inscription mentioned by
Baronius anno 304.

Et cultu Deorum ubique propagato.
Gruter's Inscriptions, p. 280


Maximian at Octodurum commands the Army to sacrifice to false gods; the
Theban Legion consisting of 6666 Christians remove their quarters to Agaunum,
to avoid (if possible) occasion of discontenting the Emperor; who summoneth
them to perform their parts in this devilish worship: they return an humble
denial, with their resolve not to disobey God, for whose sake they would ever
continue faithful to him. He unsatisfied with this answer, puts them to a
decimation; to which they submit with cheerfulness, praying for their murderer.
His commands are renewed, but prevail not on the remainder, who are butchered
without resistance, there being no delay in their death, except from the
weariness of their Executioners. Mauricius their Colonel could not contain his
joy, when he saw the first decimation gallantly suffered. How fearful was I,
said he to his a while surviving Soldiers (for armed men may be attempted to
defend themselves) lest any of them might upon color of just resistance for
self-preservation in an innocent cause have strugled against this blessed
slaughter! I was watchful and had Christ's example in readiness, who commanded
his Disciple to put his Sword into his scabbard. Salus vestra non
periclitabitur, nisi armis vestris. Despair it self could not conquer one
single patience, which yet creates valor in cowards, and makes them more
courageous in such extremities, because they are fearful; since they are like
to do most to preserve life, who are most afraid of death. Eucherius
Lugdunensis.

Maximianus adhuc grassatur in milites sed non caede, ut hactenus fecerat, cum
nihil proficeret; sed damnat eos ad labores serviles, ad aedificandas thermas
Romanas and Carthaginenses. Eusebius cited in the quarto edition of Calvisius's
Chronology, p. 554.

This most bloody persecutor Diocletian, at last persuaded Maximian to lay
aside with him all government (not because he was weary of persecuting, but of
Zonaras, Nicephorus Callist. Th. Metochita, etc. but neither Tristan, nor Chr.
Matthias hold this to be the sole, or chief cause of his resignation.
disappointment) since he could not ^atch his long brooded designs for the
utter extirpation of the Christians; being thus out of hope to do all the
mischief he intended, Nova certe, quaecunque ea fuerint, in eo haec duo
contigerunt, quod primus ut oratores dixerunt, Imperium and communicavit, and
posuit. Sigonius de Occidentali imperio, l. 1. Quanquam aliis alia
aestimantibus very gratia corrupta sit; nobis tamen excellenti natura videtur
ad communem vitam spreto ambitu descendisse. Aurelius Victor.
by resigning the Empire, he puts himself out of power to do any.

Both of them on one day changed their Imperial estate, returning to a private
condition, Diocletian at Nicomedia, and Maximianus Herculius at Milain; so soon
as they had finished the triumphs kept at Rome with great solemnity of
Pageants: in which the Concubines, Sisters, and Children of Narseus were led
before their Chariots. This triumph being ended, one of them went to Salona,
and the other into Lucania. Eutropius, l. 9.

De hoc Diocletiani ac Maximiani Augustorum triumpho multa Pomponius Laetus, ut
nullus ethnicus copiosius. Glareanus in Eutropium, p. 246.

Eusebius l. 8. c. 13. imputes Diocletian his resignation to phrensy.

Equidem facile crediderim, Diocletianum post coeptam persecutionem morbo
correptum, de statu mentis aliquantisper deturbatum fuisse; maxim cum
Constantinus and Eusebius id constanter affirment. Hoc enim evenire solet
aegrotantibus, and praecipue melancholicis, cujusmodi Diocletianum fuisse ex
nummis conjicere licet. Sed nego illum ob hanc causam imperium posuisse.
Valesius in Eusebium, p. 270.

Being solicited 4 years after by Maximianus Herculius and Galerius to resume
his charge, he answered; Did you see the herbs set with my own hands in my
Garden at Salona, you would think me too good a Gardener to become a miserable
Emperor.

O thou great Monarch, and more great therefore,
For scorning that whereto vain pride aspires,
Reckoning thy Gardens in Illyria more
Than all the Empire; took'st those sweet retires:
Thou well did teach, that O he is not poor
That little has, but he that much desires:
Finding more true delight in that small ground,
Than in possessing all the earth was found.
Daniel of the Civil Wars between the houses of York and Lancaster, l. 3.
Diocletian being invited by Constantine the Great and Licinius to their
marriage feast, excused himself, that by reason of his age he could not come;
upon which they wrote back a threatening Letter, wherein he was charged with
inclining to Maximinus, and assisting of Maxentius: whereupon fearing some
shameful death, he poisoned himself. S. Aur. Victor.

Eusebius de vita Constant. l. 5. says

Diocletian's house was wholly consumed with lightning, and that he hiding
himself for fear thereof, died within a little after.

He was deified, though a private person when he dyed; an honor that had not
been conferred on any before. Eutropius, l. 9. c. ult. Quem honorem ab Augustis
admiratione virtutis accepit, says Sigonius de Occid. Imp. l. 3.

Eusebius reports that Arnobius then a Teacher of Rhetoric and a Gentile,
Vadianus in Epitome trium terrae partium, makes Hierom the Author of this story.
was constrained by sundry dreams to believe the glorious Gospel, yet the
Christian Bishops would not receive him to their Fellowship, till he had
written and published those excellent books of his against Gentilism; wherein
he confuted that vain superstition and Idolatry, whereof he had been before so
great a Patron and Advocate. Larkin's Speculum Patrum, p. 27.

Herculius, was openly fierce and of a rude disposition, showing his austerity
by the terror of his countenance; complying with Diocletian in all his cruel
designs. Eutropius, l. 9.

Mamertinus non minus ad fidem, quam ad laudem dixit, Maximianum primum omnium
Imperatorum probasse, Romani Imperii nullum esse terminum, nisi qui suorum
esset armorum. Sigonius de Occidentali Imperio, l. 1.

Julian the Emperor feigneth that Silenus judged him not worthy to break a jest
on, or to be admitted into the assembly of the Gods; from whence Nemesis soon
chased this excessively intemperate person: who was not only addicted to all
sorts of lusts, but also perfidious and factious.

Maximianus tradit fasces imperiales non Maxentio, quem filium habebat, sed
(imperii caritatem paterno amori praeferens) Constantio Chloro, In historia
reruma Maximiano gestarum merae tenebrae apud scriptores qui nunc extant.
Livineius in Panegyrica, p. 316.
privignae suae marito. Dietericus in Breviario Historico.

Maximian seemingly taking offense at his son Maxentius, then at variance with
his Son-in-law Constantine the Great, under color of this dislike, repaired to
Constantine, who married Fausta his daughter, with whom he tampered to make
away her husband: but she revealed his treachery to Constantine, who thereupon
Solus Zosimus Maximianum, in desperationem rerum omnium adductum, and apud
Tarsum morbo extinctum ait, confundens Maximianum, cum Maximino. Chr. Ad.
Rupertus in Besoldi min. synop. p. 399.
put him to death.

Herculius natura impotentior, simul filii segnitiae metuens, inconsulte
imperium repetiverat: cumque specie officii dolis compositis Constantinum
generum tentaret acerbe, jure tandem interierat. Aur. Vict.

Vtinam Maximianus suo potius ingenio, quam alieno exemplo fastidiisset
fortunae fastigium. Diocletianum secutus est. Sic vero animi inconstans; quia
cum ex Augusto privatus esset, e privato tyrannus esse voluit. Nam ut ad
Imperii majestatem eveheret Maxentium filium, acriter afflixit Rem Romanam: ut
deinde evectum rejiceret, pater quoque esse recusavit. Iam nec in filio
Maxentio, nec in genero Constantino purpuram ferens, dum insidias utrique
struit, interficitur. Puteanus in Historia Insubrica.

Reus insidiarum in Constantinum, Massiliae cervicibus laqueo fractis,
impietatis perpetuae and ambitionis praeposterae poenas luit. Bussieres in
Flosculis Historiarum.

Shrewd Diocletian Empire got: Designed
Partners! reigned long: then rule and wit resigned,
Dr. Holyday's Survey of the world, l. 9. p. 100.
Constantius Chlorus, and Galerius Armentarius, Colleagues. To whom are joined
SEVERUS, MAXIMINVS, MAXENTIVS, LICINIVS. Sequentium Imp. usque ad filios
Constantini, historia valde perturbata est, ob concursum multorum Caesarum.
Helvici Theatrum Historicum, p. 94.
Etsi Diocletianus and Maximianus imperium ejurarant, etenim gravissima
premebatur persecutione Ecclesia Dei. In Orient Galerius quoniam mire
superstitiosus erat, in Africa Maximinus, in Occidente and praecipue Romae
Maxentius truculenter grassabantur. Jo. Laetus in Compend. Hist. Vniv.

effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
WHen Diocletian and Maximian laid down the Ensigns of command; Constantius
Chlorus was chosen Emperor in these Western Provinces of France, Spain, and
Britain: unto to Galerius his government fell Egypt and the Provinces in Asia.

Alter natus est, qui acceptam ignominiam Valeriani captivitate deleret: alter
qui Gallias Romany legibus redderet. Vopiscus in Carino, c. 18.

Constantius was not only beloved, but had in great reverence of the French,
chiefly because by his accepting of the Empire they escaped the suspected
wisdom of Diocletian, and the bloody rashness of Maximian. Eutropius, l. 10.

Galerius took for ease of his burden Severus, and Maximinus surnamed Daza, his
sisters Son, whom he elected Caesar's and after Augusti.

Constantius (who chose rather to govern well than much) gave up Africa and
Italy to Galerius, as too remote from the seat of his residence, and eye of his
direction.

Constantius homo frugi quum esset, ne plus agri possideret, quam colere
posset, Italiam and Africam deposuit. Rivii Historia Navalis Media, l. 2. p. 98.

Constantius and Galerius Imperium, quod commune Diocletianus and Maximianus
habuerant, novo, ut Orosius dixit, exemplo inter se diviserunt. Sigonius de
Occidentali Imperio, l. 2.

Constantius was by birth a Roman; his Father was named Eutropius, his Mother
Claudia, Niece to the Emperor Claudius Gothicus.

Tristan thinks that Constantius was not called Chlorus from his Paleness,
since Eumenius attributes to him a very sanguine complexion; but from some
green garments which he wore when he was young: and he mentions others who
had the same surname.

Carus intending to kill his Son Carinus for his wickedness, determined to
substitute in his place Constantius (then President of Dalmatia, but afterward
Emperor) because none seemed more deserving than he. Vopiscus in Carino, c. 17.

He was very affable, reigned to enrich his subjects, saying; It was fitter
that the wealth of the Land should be dispersed into the Commons hands,
Eutropius, l.
than locked up in Princes Coffers: concurring with Elizabeth Regina non tantum
non ^ sit subditos (...) dictionibus, (...) etiam tribu^ quae tertio q^^ que
anno ex^ consueveran^^ sustulit, imo^ cum regni o^dines aliqua^ do magnam
p^cuniae summa pro sumptibu^ Reipublicae n^cessariis offerent, illa magnam
partem recusavit, ac populo gratias egit; dictita^ pecuniam in subditorum
arculis esse perinde ac in suis. Lansius (...) Oratione pro Britannia.
Trajan, who compared the Exchecquer to the Spleen, by the growth whereof of
the limbs are lessened.

[Howsoever this comparison has been applauded; (neither do I think it simply
to be condemned, specially for some States, and some comings-in) yet I do not
think it to be fit generally. In my judgment the Exchecquer may fitly be
compared to the stomach; for as if the Ventricle be not plied with necessary
meats and drinks, the Mesaraic veins sucking continually from it and the
bowels, and the Liver continually sucking from the Mesaraics, and the Capillar
or small veins (dispersed over the body) sucking from the Liver; there must
needs ensue first a hungriness, secondly, a faintness, thirdly, in time a wast,
and lastly, an untimely death: so if the Treasury should not have as great
supplies, as it has evacuations, if it should not have as well Oesophagum to
bring in, as Pylorum to send forth, and venam portam, as well as cavam, it
cannot be but the whole Estate will be greatly enfeebled, that I do not say
endangered. Bishop Smith's Sermons, p. 221, 222.]

Being but nominated for the Empire, and reproached for his poverty by
Diocletian, Eusebius de vita Constantini, l. 1. c. 10
who sent to exhort him to heap up treasures; he advertised the people of his
want, who vehemently contended among themselves to fill his Exchequer,
rejoicing greatly, that now they had that long wished for opportunity to
witness their benevolous minds unto the Emperor: whereupon he truly and
excellently said; That the love of the people is the richest and safest
Treasury of the Prince. Showing to Diocletian's Ambassadors the great sums
which be had ammassed in few hours, they were amazed thereat; after whose
departure he returned all the Subsidy that was presented to him; Constantius
Pauper. See Suidas in (...).
by which custom he rather got the Epithet of poor, than was so indeed; being
by this voluntary poverty, richer than Diocletian himself, yea than all the
other Princes together who were partners with him.

And as this one action showed his royal magnificence, so this other declares
his piety; in both which he was exemplary. To try the hearts of the Courtiers,
he proclaimed, that all they who would not forsake the worship of the true God,
should be banished the Court, and should have heavy penalties and fines laid
upon them; presently upon this (said the story) all who were base and came to
serve him only for ends, went away, forsook the true God, and worshipped Idols:
by which means he found out who were the true servants of God, and whom he
intended to make his own; for he considered that they who deserted God for
fear, would not stick to betray their Prince for gain, says Dr. Cheynel in his
Epistle Dedicatory, before his Book against Socinianism.

Fighting in France, he had the same day both adverse and prosperous fortune.
For being assaulted on the sudden, he was forced to retire to Langres in such
have, that the Gates of the City being shut, he was fain to be drawn up the
wall by Ropes. Yet within five hours space, his Army approaching, he slew
almost 60000 Almains. Eutropius lib. 9.

Ea victoria maximam ei, si qua alia, in re militari gloriam peperit. Sigonius
de Occid. Imp. lib. 1.

Mirum vero Eumenium verba habentem ad Constantium tam insignem Victoriam
obiter perstrinxisse, hominem alioqui laudum Constantii prodigum. Quum toties,
inquit, pro culcata esset Alemannia. Scaliger in Eusebium p. 244.

Eusebius says that Constantius preserved ((...)) such Christians as were
under his command from harm.

Under him the Church in these parts had a breathing-time from persecution. But
I am afraid that that learned Pen goes a little too far, Camden his Brit. in
description of York.
who makes him founder of a Bishopric at York, and styles him an Emperor
surpassing in all virtue, and Christian piety. Dr. Fuller inhis Ecclesiastical
History of Britain.

Nullo modo Jacobus Philippus Bergomensis audiendus est, qui Constantium
repudiata Theodora Helenam, Anglorum regis filiam captivam, uxorem duxisse
fabulatur: cum ex Romanorum annalibus certo constat, Helenam illum coactum
repudiasse, ut Theodoram Maximiani Augusti privignam conjugem acciperet.
Usserius in Antiquitat. Britann.
He married Helena (daugther of Coilus, who entertained him when he was
Lieutenant of Britan) but Maximian tyrannising as well over loves, as men,
declares Constantius Caesar, on condition he would forsake Helen, and marry
Theodorae his daughter-in-law. He was won by ambition, and easiness of his
nature (which bowed to those who seemed to wish him well) and by the luster of
the purple presented to him.

He married Theodora; which alteration Helena bore with great constancy,
counting it an honor, that to refuse her no other cause was found, but the
good fortune of her husband; Constantius lived in body with Theodora, and in
heart with Helen: the torrent of ambition and affairs of the world having
parted their bodies could not hinder the inclinations of their hearts. For
Constantius returning to Britain, dyed in York; and being asked on his
deathbed which of his children should succeed him, since besides Constantine
he had two sons by Theodora viz. Constantius and Annibalinus: he then
forgetting his second wife and her offspring, cried aloud Constantinum pium,
Scribit quidan Graecus Constantium ex novacula cum esset moriturus, seque de
lecto protenderet, ut ambabus manibus filium Constantinum, qui jam concito
gradu advenerat, amplecteretur, dxiisse Mortem esse immortalitate meliorem.
Cuspinianus in Caesaribus.
he would have no other successor than the pious Constantine, which was
approved by the Army: who cast the purple Robe upon Constantine at York,
whilst he wept, and put spurs to his horse, that he might avoid the
importunity of the Soldiers, who attempted and required so instantly to make
him Emperor: but the happiness of the state overcame his modesty.

Constantius lived 56 years; was Caesar 16 years, and Emperor 2, says Eusebius.

Cambden reports that at the demolition of Monasteries, there was found in
his supposed monument in Yorkshire, a burning lamp, thought to have burnt
there ever since his burial, above 300 years after Christ, and he adds out of
Lazi us that the ancient Romans used in that manner to preserve lights in
Sepulchers a long time, by the oyliness of Gold, resolved into liquid substance.

Omnibus virtutibus insignem passim depraedicant Scriptores. Rupertus p. 402.

Fictilibus mihi posse uti moderatio suasit;
Pauperies priscos dura coegit avos.
Hoc mea laus major; quod cum mihi cuncta licerent,
Quam minimum volui collubuisse tamen.
Anonymus. Vere Armentarius, and quasi regeret tauros non homines, stoliditate
forti conspicuus. Bussieres in Flosculis Historiarum.
Galerius born of mean parents (surnamed Armentarius, because he kept cattle)
bragged that a Serpent begat him, as one did Alexander the Great. Moribus certe
odioque in Christianos Draco fuit, nec indignus eo, quo se natum parente
fatebatur. Jo. Cluverus in Hist. Epit.

Having succesfully fought against the Persians, and being emboldned therewith,
he again encountered them between Callinicum and Charrae; a City famous for the
slaughter of Crassus the Roman General. Where more resolutely than advisedly
engaging a few against multitudes of his Enemies, he was overthrown, and losing
most of his Army, escaped by flight. Whereupon he returned to Diocletian for
aid, whom he met by chance in the way. Diocletian was so displeased with him
for this disaster, that he suffered him to go some miles on foot by his
Chariot, though clad in purple; for he was then Caesar. At length he permitted
him to depart for the recruiting of his forces, to recover his honor. Galerius
levyeth an Army in Sclavonia and Mysia, fought again with Narseus in the
greater Armenia, with very good success, and no less circumpection and courage;
for trusting no^-Scouts, he went himself with two Horsemen to view the adverse
Camp: Which when he had fully observed, he assaulted them unawares in the night
with 25000 men, discomfited Narseus, plundered his Tents, took his Wives,
Sisters and Children prisoners, with many Nobles of Persia; forcing the King to
fly to the uttermost desert places of his Kingdom. Returning to Diocletian,
then in Mesopotamia, with so rich spoils of the Persian treasure, he was
received very honorably by him.

When he rifled the camp of Narseus King of Persia, Haec prospere pro republica
gesta imperium principum istorum valde commendant; sediidem immani in
Christianos saevitia id meruere, ut hodie utriusque nomen, velut detestabile,
abominemur; utque nec benefactis quidem gratia sit, si quae in republicam
unquam contulerunt, ut Brunnerus lib. Annal. Boic. 6. p. 445. loquitur. C. A.
Rupertus in synopsin Besoldi. p. 397.
a common Soldier having met with a Parthick satchel, wherein were pearls,
through simplicity threw out the gems, and went away contented with the beauty
only of the leather bag. Amm. Marcellinus l. 22. c. 3. Vide Piccarti
Observationes Historic-politicas, Dec. 3. c. 3.

He made Constantine the Great (who was his hostage) General of an Army which
he sent against the Sarmatians, (a very furious people); supposing Constantine
should there lose his life. The young Prince (who shut up his eyes to danger,
and only opened them to glory) went thither, and returned Victorious, leading
the Barbarian King enchained. Galerius excited by a most ardent phrensy, after
Constantine's return from this battle, engaged him with a Lion, purposely let
loose upon him; which Constantine slew with his own hands, and won the esteem
of the Soldiers: getting passage to the Throne by the same degrees, which were
prepared for his ruin. Zonaras in Constantio Chloro.

He boasted the acuteness of his wit by the invention of new tortures for
patient Martyrs; notwithstanding when he felt himself invaded with a verminous
Ulcer, or Fistula in his secret parts, which did evaporate so contagious and
pestilential a stench, Redivivum quodammodo per similem morbum habemus nunc
Herodem.
that some of his Physicians, not able to endure that mephitis or stream of
intense corruption, fell down dead; he understanding this to be a judgment sent
from God to retaliate upon him those tortures, Ille quia Christum persequitur,
pube tenus inflatus scatet vermibus, and iste probroso eodem laborat exitu,
quiae persequitur Christianos. Actum siquidem pulchro divinae considerationis
intuitu, ut daretur intelligi, quanta sit capitis and membrorum connexio,
quanta and quam indivisa sit Christi charitas, zelus ad Ecclesiam, dum eandem
infert vindictam persecutoribus suorum, quam sui ipsius persecutori. Haymo
Hist. Eccl. lib. 8. c. 3.
which he had inflicted on many innocents; then his flinty heart melted within
him, and at length he began to think of his wicked practices against the holy
worshippers of God, gave commandment for cessation of the Christians
persecution, confessed the equity of divine retribution, and in the midst of
these confessions of his own guilt, and Gods justice, he breathed out his
execrable soul from a gangrenous and loathsome body. In supplicium
persecutionis iniquissimae ad auctorem scelerati praecepti justissima poena
redeunte. Excerpta Sirmondi, p. 472.

Galerius lived not a year after his edict for the persecuting of the
Christians. Eusebius, l. 9.

Under him Quirinus Bishop of Siscia having a hand-mil tied about his neck, was
thrown headlong from a Bridge into a River, where yet he floted a great while,
exhorting the lookers on, not to be dismayed with his punishment, and so with
much a do was at last drowned. Prudentius Peristeph. Hymn. 7.

Haec aetas Mrtyres solum, sed and Historicos and philosophos fudit. Nam Aelius
Spartianus, Julius Capitolinus, Aelius Lampridius, Vulcatius Gallicanus,
Trebellius Pollio, Flavius Vopiscus, e quibus pleraque Caesarum descripsimus,
historias suas Diocletiano and Constantio Augustis inscripsere. Arnobius e
Philosophis Christianus, egregie fidem tutatus, parem discipulum Lactantium
tulit. Joh. Cluveri Epitome Hist. totius Mundi, in Constantio and Maxim.

Galerius was endued with very good qualities, and expert in Martial affairs.
Eutropius lib. 10.

Homo gloria rei militaris illustris, verum saevitia in Christianos crudelis.
Vnde foedum exitium habuisse creditus est. Pomponius Laetus in Romans Hist.
Compendio.

Fl. Valerius Severus and C. Galerius Maximinus. Associates of Galerius
Maximianus Armentarius.
effigy of emperor effigy of emperor
Priori Italia, posteriori quae Iovius obtinuerat, destinantur. Victor Schotti.
MOre for cruelty against the Christians, than for nobility of descent or degree
of honor, this name agreed to Severus, his pedigree being unknown. R. B. in
his lives of all the Roman Emperors, p. 145. Penes autorem fides esto.

When Constantius deceased, his son Constantine was created Emperor in Britain,
where he became Governor in his Fathers room by the earnest desire of all. In
the mean while the Pretorian Soldiers raising a mutiny at Rome, nominated
Maxentius son of Maximianus Herculius (who dwelt in the highway not far from
the City) Emperor. At which tidings Maximianus Herculius hoping again to
recover the Empire, which he resigned against his will, hasted to Rome from
Lucania; writing also to Diocletian to resume his former power, which motion
was slighted. Severus Caesar was sent to Rome by Galerius, with an Army to
repress the commotion of the Guard and Maxentius. But as he besieged the City,
his own Soldiers treacherously forsook him, by means whereof Maxentius was
fortified in the Empire. Severus defending himself in Ravenna, is drawn from
thence by Maximianus Herculius, who (circumventing him with oaths) persuaded
him to go to Rome, whither going, he was taken and strangled at the Tres
tabernae, by some whom Maxentius had there appointed to lie in ambush. Zosimus,
l. 2.

Maxentius Severum Ravenna evocatum perimit, tam cito nullum quam Caesarem.
Bussieres in Flosculis Historiarum.

Severus his Corpse was put into the Sepulcher of Gallienus, distant from Rome 9
miles by the via Appia. Victor in his Epitome.

Galerius incensed with the outrage of Maxentius, intended to fall upon the
West, in revenge of Severus's death, but was frustrated therein; for
distrusting the safety of his Territories, he created Licinius Caesar: after
whose nomination he survived not long.

Per tres tabernas, intelligimus eas quae tribus millibus passuum ab Interamna
fuerunt, eo loco, qui vulgo dicitur Ponteconfino. Haec enim inter Romam and
Ravennam sitae sunt, ita dictae a tribus cauponis, vel diversoriis publicis. C.
A. Rupertus in minorem Besoldi synopsin, p. 405. concurring with Cluverus in
his Italia antiqua, l. 3. c. 8.

Maximinus was the Son of the sister of Est hic solemnis ac pervulgatus error
Graecorum, ut Maximianum cum Maximino permisceant. Valesius in Eusebium, p. 208.
Galerius, surnamed Armentarius. Victor in his Epitome, with whom Zosimus
(rightly interpreted by Stephen) concurreth.

He was Caesar 4 years, and Emperor 3 in the East. Victor, ubi supra.

By his birth and education he was a Pastoral man, but a great lover of wise
and learned men; of a Yet Glareanus on Eutropius, p. 248. more probably calls
him immanissimam belluam.
quiet disposition, but much inclined to wine, in the excess whereof he
commanded many things, of which he afterward repented: giving a This is
erroneously ascribed to Galerius, in Sirmondus his Excerpta.
charge to his followers, that they should not execute his desires, except he
was sober, or gave them a command in the morning. Id. Ib.

He persecuted the Christians, being instigated thereto by Theotecnus, a
Conjurer of Antioch.

Maximinus, pernicies propemodum ultima nominis Christiani; and dirum exitium,
si vires animum adequassent, says Bussieres in Flosculis Historiarum.

Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem and Paphnutius Confessors were condemned by him
to the Mines, Metuentes solitudinem urbium tyranni, contenti fuerunt oculum
effodere, and crus alterum suffringere confessoribus, and metalla iis imponere
eruenda. Cluveri Epit. hist. univ. in Constantio and Maxim.
having their right eyes pulled out, and one of their ham-strings cut.

Constantine the Great kissed the hole in Paphnutius's face, out of which the
Tyrant Maximinus had bored his eye for the profession of the Faith; the good
Emperor making much of the socket even when the candle was put out. Dr.
Fuller's Holy-State, l. 3. chapter 15.

Adversus Christianos Maxentius and Galerius Maximinus caetera discordes,
instaurant persecutionem, quam Eusebius vocat secundam, sui videlicet aevi.
Praesides provinciarum, quasi propositis praemiis nequitiae, certabant inter
se, ut novorum acerbitate suppliciorum se invicem superarent. Sed major erat
Dei virtus in sanctis, quam ut deleri ulla Satanae art aut virulentia possent.
Cluveri Epit. hist. univ. in Constantio and Maxim.
Jac. Cappellus in Cent. Hist. Eccl. p. 69.

The heathen Presidents of Provinces forged certain acts of Pilate and our
Savior, full of blasphemy against Christ, which by consent of Maximinus, they
send abroad throughout his Dominions; commanding by their Letters, that the
same (both in City and Country) should be expounded to the youth by
Schoolmasters, and committed to memory instead of their Themes. Eusebius in
his Ecclesiastical History, l. 9. c. 5.

Maximini exemplo nihilo melior factus Maximinus, persecutionem instaurat,
Antiochiae Lucianum occidit, Alexandriae Petrum Episcopum.

Maximini furorem castigat Deus, tum quod ab Armeniis quos lacessebat, turpiter
profligatus est; tum immissa peste and fame, in qua Christianorum humanitatem
tam admirabilem reddidit Deus, quam nuper constantiam in martyriis. Cappellus
in Eccles. Hist. cent. p. 70.

In Armenia contra Parthos bellum gerens, urget in vicinis locis persecutionem,
necessitate tamen coactus destitit, cum a Parthis magna clade afficeretur, and
Oriens universus fame, and peste saevissime affligeretur: fames adeo invaluit
ut mensura tritici bis mill and quingentis drachmis venderetur, nostri aeris
ultra 350. floren. Calvisii Chronologia in quarto, p. 559.

After the death of Galerius and Miror, unde in Eusebii Chronicon irrepserit
adeo gravis error, ut mors Maximini ante caedem Maxentii referatur.
Maxentius, Licinius and Maximinus beheld each other with a jealous eye, and
made show of contest; but Maximine at Tarsus desided the difference by an
irrevocable resignation.

Maximinus edicto publico Christianos insectatus A. D. 311. coactus est ante
vertentem annum palinodiam canere, Quod quidem Hieronymi culpa commissum
videtur, quippe qui Eusebiano Chronico multa de suo addidit. Valesius in Eusebius.
p. 189.
eamque duplicem, primum A. D. 312. tum hoc anno. Sed tam inutilis ipsi fuit
adulatio, quam comminatio. Periit Tarsi molli flamma medullas exedente and
corpus ejus ita mutilante, ut fieret horrendum aspectu. Eusebius l. 9. c. 9,
10. Ita tum exitum habuit tertia persecutio. Ab initio primae ad exitum ultimae
sunt anni circiter december. Jac. Cappellus in Eccl. Chr. Cent. tertia, ad A. D.
313.

Peccat Eusebius in Chronicis aliquot annoram prochronismo, in referenda
Maximini morte, mirasque dat turbas in recensendis illius rebus gestis in
Historia Ecclesiastica: quem secutus Baronius praeter haec peccat, quod
Maximinum mortuum scribat anno Constantini Magni nono; quum tamen mense Iunio,
anno Constantini, ut numerant, octavo, paulo antequam Tribunitiam potestatem
octavum iniret Constantinus, mortuus sit Maximinus. Petitus in Diatriba de
jure, principum edictis, etc.

His death was after the same manner as his Uncles.

Ambos praeter similitudinem nominis, idem fere mortis genus propemodum
confundit. Petavius de Doctrina temporum, l. 11. c. 34.

Legamus Ecclesiasticas Historias, quid Decius, quid Valerianus, quid
Diocletianus, quid Maximiani duo, quid saevissimus omnium Maximinus, and nuper
Iulianus passi sunt. Et tunc rebus probabimus, etiam juxta literam prophetiae
veritatem esse completam. Quod computruerint carnes eorum, and oculi
contabuerunt, and lingua in pedorem and saniem dissoluta sit. Hieronymus in 14.
c. Zachariae.

Prope Maximini hujus cadaver positum Iuliani cadaver, convenienter scilicet,
Philostorgii judicio, etsi casu; velut qui inter se tot in rebus alioquin
pariabant. Et vero ideo quoque factum videmus, ut nonnulla quae Maximini
temporibus and persecutioni convenient, ab aliis Iuliano tribuantur.
Gothofredus in Philostorgium, p. 316.

Maxentius
effigy of emperor
WAS the Son-in-law of Galerius Maximianus, as appears from an ancient Medal
mentioned by Baronius A. D. 306. n. 23. and at least the reputed Son of
Maximianus Herculius.

He was never beloved of any, neither of his own Father, nor his Father-in-law
Galerius. Victor's Epitome corrected by Valesius in his notes on Sirmondi
Excerpta.

He made himself Emperor by consent of the Soldiers, to recompense whom he gave
leave to sin cum privilegio; no words being more frequent than these in his
speeches to them: Fruimini, dissipate, prodigite. Incerti Paneg. Constantino
Aug.

Though for a while he put on a sheeps skin, Initio dominatus cohibita
Christianorum persecutione moderationem affectaverat ^ sed firmior sibi visus,
Galerio par crudelitate, moribus etiam deterior fuit. Cluverus in Epit. Hist.
yet quickly he imitated his Father in persecuting the Christians, exceeding
him in rigor.

As he was cruel, so he was incontinent; and sometime his lust of incontinency
prevailed against that of his cruelty: as instance is given in a Christian
woman, whom he attempting to defile, sent for her by his servants (her husband
not daring to refuse for his life) of whom she desired time to make her self
ready; which having obtained she goes into her chamber and kills her self:
the Officers (when they could stay no longer) broke open the room, and finding
her dead, reportit to Maxentius. By which act says Eusebius, l. 8. c. 16. she
proclaimed to the world, the invincibleness of Christian chastity.

Lipsius in his Monita and Exempla Politica, and Christianus Matthias call her
Sophronia. Quarles in his Divine Fanci^s, l. 3. Epig. 84. composeth this
Epigram on her.

The chaste Sophronia knows not how to escape
The inevitable danger of a Rape;
Cruel Sophronia draws her hasty knife,
And would relieve her chastity with life;
Doubtful Sophronia knows not what to do,
She cannot keep the one, and to other too;
Sophronia's in a strait, one eye is fixed
Of The seventh Commandment, to other on the sixth.
To what extremes is poor Sophronia driven!
Is not Sophronia left at Six and Seven?
Mill and sexaginta annis contractas ex toto orb divitias monstrum illud
redemptis ad civil latrecinium manibus ingesserat. Incerti Paneg. Constantino
Aug.

By Necromancy, Adulteries and Murders Maxentius grew so intolerable, that the
Senate sent to Constantine, craving his aid against him.

Constantine drawing Licinius to his side (by marrying his sister Constantia to
him) hasted to Rome with 90000 foot and 8000 horse, levied out of Britain,
France and Germany.

Maxentius framed a deceitful Bridge over Tiber near Pous Milvius, to entrap
Constantine: but being overcome in battle, he fled (through forgetfulness or
have) over the same Bridge, which falling under him, he and many more were
drowned.

Through the weight of his armor he sunk so deep in the mud, that his body
could hardly be found, says Sextus Aurelius Victor in his Epitome.

Missum tyranni ad permulcendam Africam caput; ut quam maxim vivus afflixerat,
laceratus expleret. Nazarius.

The Army of Maxentius was composed by the report of Zosimus, of an hundred
threescore and ten thousand footmen, with eighteen thousand horse. All the
forces Constantine could get, amounted but to ninety thousand foot, and eight
thousand horse by the same Author his computation, although others sufficiently
declare the troops were far less. Causin's Holy-Court.

There was in the beginning a great slaughter of those who made resistance; but
in the end seeing their Emperor drowned, they yielded all to the mercy of
Constantine; who stayed the victorious sword in the hands of Soldiers, to
consecrate it to clemency. Causin in his Holy-Court, part 2.

The Senate, to witness the joy they conceived for this victory, prepared him a
triumphal Arch, all of marble, one of the stateliest Monuments that ever had
been raised to the honor of a Conqueror, wherein this inscription was
engraven. Imp. Caes. Fl.

Quod instinctu divinitatis, mentis magnitudine, cum exercitu suo, tam de
Tyranno, quam de ejus omni factione, uno tempore, justis Rempublicam ultus est
armis, arcum Triumphis insignem dicavit. Id. ibid.

In the passage through, on the one side is engraven Liberatori Vrbis, on the
other Fundatori Quietis. Raymond's Mercurio Italico, p. 77.

Constantino cognomen Maximi inditum a Senatu (etsi usus and vulgus scriptorum
magnum eum cognominant) postquam Maxentium juxta pontem Milvium, prope Roman
and exercitum ejus 178 millium, superasset. Elenchus MS Numismatum in
Bibliotheca Bodleiana.

Constantine in his War against Maxentius taking Verona, and wanting bands for
so many Captives as he had, caused the prisoners swords to be turned into
manacles; ut servarent deditos gladii sui, quos non defenderant repugnantes.
Incertus Paneg. Constantino Aug.

Some make the victory over Maxentius to be the occasion of Constantine the
Great's conversion to Christianity.

About noon, the day somewhat declining, Constantine saw in the sky a lightsom
pillar, in form of a Cross, wherein these words were engraven; In this
overcome. Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 2.

Hanc vero visionem non Gentiles modo scriptores (quod Baronius recte
observavit) nuspiam memorant, imo ne Publius Optatianus Porphyrius quoque, qui
in Daedaleo alioquin opere suo seu Panegyrico ad Constantinum, multa habet de
Christi monogrammate, quod and Coeleste signum vocat, verum neque Eusebius
ipsemet historiae Ecclesiasticae libris: qui illud tantum refert, lib. 9. cap.
8. Constantinum subsidii sibi divinitus allati conscium, statim passionis
salutiferae trophaeum, seu crucis signum, Romae dexterae statuae suae imponi
voluisse, eum inscriptione praeferente, sese urbem Tyranni jugo liberasse, etc.
At de crucis visione Constantino oblata nihil Eusebius libris illis.
Gothofredus in Philostorgium, p. 17.

Quam fabulam suspicatos nonnullos jam olim Gelasius Cyzicenus. lib. 1. histor.
Council. Nic. cap. 4. tradit. Id. ib. p. 18.

Quicquid mali sexennio toto [Maxentii] dominatio feralis inflixerat,
[Constantini] bimestris fere cura sanavit. Nazarius in Paneg.

Divina men's, and ipsius Vrbis aeterna majestas nefario homini eripuere
consilium, ut ex inveterato illo torpore ac foedissimis latebris subito
prorumperet, and consumpto per desidias sexennio ipsum diem natalis sui ultima
sua caede signaret, ne forte septenarium numerum illum sacrum and religiosum,
vel inchoando violaret. Incerti Paneg. Constant. Aug.

Constantious primo imperium assumens, caeteros Aug. (Galerium and Licinium)
irritare noluit, ut ita Maxentium se opponentem facilius supprimeret: Deorumque
Gentilium nominibus N N. suos signavit; usque dum in Imperio stabilitus,
universum Idolorum cultum and Templa, tuto and pacate demoliri posset. Elenchus
MS. Numismatum in Bibliotheca Bodleiana. Vt vexata tibi tandem sit libera Roma,
Sub positis te pons Milvius abdet aquis.
Boissardus.

Licinius
effigy of emperor
WAS born in Dacia, known to Galerius by long acquaintance, and so esteemed of
him for his service in the War against Narseus, that he was created Emperor by
him, says Eutropius lib. 10.

He had little good in him, but that he disliked Eunuchs, calling them, the
Mothes and Rats of the Court. Victor's Epitome.

He was extremely covetous, much addicted to lust, very austere, and
excessively impatient, Id. ibid.

He was a great enemy to learning (especially pleading at the Bar) calling it,
through his ignorance, A poison and public plague. Id. ib.

In reference to which the Emperor Julian (who was a great lover of learning)
feigneth that he attempting to enter the banquet of the Gods, was streightwayes
ignominiously expelled by Minos.

When Licinius came into the Court of his Palace (where there was a great Bath,
and some Vines growing about it, with the Image of Bacchus set up amongst them)
he bade Auxentius draw his Sword and cut off a bunch of grapes; it being done,
he further commanded him to offer it at the feet of Bacchus, which was an
acknowledging him to be a God: Auxentius answered, I am a Christian, I will not
do it. What? not upon my command, said Licinius? then you must quit your place.
With all my heart, Sir, said the Christian Soldier, and in token of it, put off
his belt (which was as much as the giving up of his commission) and went away
with joy in that suffering for Christ. Suidas in (...).

Quadraginta milites Christ. cum inter aulicos proceres magni essent nominis,
veritatis confessionem favori and gratiae Imperatoris praeposuerunt. Saevientis
igitur Tyranni furor nudatos omnes, and sub brumam Sebastiae congelato frigore
impositos necari jussit. Osiander, as I find him quoted by Chr. Matthias in his
Theatrum Historicum, etc. part 2. p. 294.

He was well affected to Husbandry, and to Country People, being educated among
such; was a great observer of Martial discipline, according to the institution
of former Ages. Victor's Epitome, ubi supra.

Erat ingenii duri, bonarumque literarum, and Christiani nominis persecutor;
quamvis interim putaretur Reipub. maxim necessarius, and in re militari
peritissimus. Olaus Magnus, fol. 676.

Duplex fuit civil bellum inter Constantinum ac Licinium. Primum quo Licinius
victus fuit ad Cibalim Pannoniae, anno Christi 314. eujus belli causas unus
quod sciam retulit auctor excerptorum de gestis Constantini, quem ad caleem
Amm. Marcellini jampridem edidi. Posterius vero bellum fuit illud, quo juxta
Hadrianopolim fusus as fagatus fuit Licinius, tandemque ad deditionem compulsus
anno Christi 324. Ac prioris quidem belli mentionem nullam facit Eusebius; Ideo
fortasse quod Licinius nondum adversus Christanos persecutionem excitasset. Diu
siquidem post prius illud bellum Licinius Christianos persequi instituit, anno
scilicet 14. Imperii Constantini, ut sequitur in Chronico Eusebii editionis
Scaligeri ac Miraei, id est anno Christi 320. Idem annus habetur in Chronico
Cedreni. At Baronius Licinium anno 319. Persecutionem in Christianos commovisse
scribit. Verum in Baronii annalibus historia utriusque Liciniani belli admodum
confusa est; quae partim ex Fasti^ Idatii, partim ex gestis Constantini a me
olim editis restituenda est. Certe Sozomenus in libro. 1. cap. 7. diserte
testatur, Licinium post Cibaleuse demum bellum Christianos persequi
instituisse. Valesius in Eusebium, p. 207, 208.

Edicto proposito Episcopos inter se de more convenire, ac de rebus ad
Ecclesiam pertinentibus consultare prohibuit; alterutrum necessario
consecuturum arbitratus, ut aut dicto non audientes capitals supplicio
vindicaret, aut obedientes a Christi veneratione averteret. Sigonius de Occid.
Imperio, lib. 3.

effigy of emperor

He maligning Constantines fame, Potestas orbis Romani duobus quaesita; qui
quamvis per Flavit sororem nuptam Licinio connexi inter se erant, ob diversos
mores tamen anxie triennium congruere quivere. Aurelius Victor.
at last persecuted the Christians in the East, where he reigned with
Martinianus, whom he before made Caesar at Byzantium, and his own son Licinius
at Arles.

Constantine warred against Licinius his colleague, not because he was an
Infidel, but for persecuting the Christians, contrary to their Capitulations,
one Article of the League betwixt them, being this, to permit the Christians to
live in peace. Squire on the Thessalonians, p. 426.

The reason why he grew so desperately mad against the Christians (whom he had
formerly defended) was because in their meetings they prayed for Constantine,
but not for him, as he believed; his guilt causing suspicion. Eusebius in his
Ecclesiastical history, l. 10. c. 8.

In persecutione Christianorum superavit omnes fere in crudelitate, ut copiose
describit Eusebius. cap. ult. lib. 9. Ecclesiasticae historiae. Primum enim
Palatio pellit. Secundo in carceres conjecit. Tertio prohibet eis alimenta.
Glareanus in Eutropium, p. 253.

He was overthrown by Constantine the Great in several battles, losing many
thousands of men, and was himself taken prisoner; yet by mediation of his Wife
Constantia, Sister to Constantine, had his life spared, and was confined within
Nicomedia: But for his Treasons after, he was put to death.

Constantinus M. non tantum Christiana fide in Galliis imbutus; atque inde moto
Gallicano exercitu, test ejus aevi oratore, and Zosimo lib. 2. Maxentium
superavit A. D. 312 verum and deinceps quoque robur ejus exercitus potissimum
in millite Gallicano, etiam adversus Licinium, extitit. Haud aliter atque
Julius C. olim Romanae monarchiae fundamenta Galliarum praesidio jecerat.
Gothofredus in Libanii orationem pro Templis, p. 42.

In the Latin Chronicle of Eusebius there is this set down, that Constantine
against right, and contrary to his oath, put Licinius to death at Thessalonica.
This is out of doubt an addition thrust in by some, who finding that calumny
against Constantine, set down in Zosimus (as it is most maliciously,) thought
good to insert it also into the latin Chronicle of Eusebius; whereas neither
is it in the Greek, nor is it true that Constantine brake his oath or promise
therein with Licinius: for his promise of life was conditional, as Socrates
expressly shows, and Licinius quickly violated the condition by attempting a
new rebellion. And Eusebius in his other books is so far from imputing any
blame or blemish to Constantine touching that action, that he expressly says,
Licinius suffered just and deserved punishment, which had it been effected by
the perjury of Constantine had certainly been unjust. Crakanthorp's Defense of
Constantine, p. 29, 30.

Licinius's ill success was foretold by Apollo his Oracle to this effect.

Te juvenes grandave pater, vexare feroces
Certum est, te infirmum manet aerumnosa senectus.
Laet in his History from Christ's time. Neque illud hic omittere possum, quo
loco Cibalis a Geographis ponitur, ibi jam in itinerario Peutingeriano poni and
bis quidem, Ad labores, proximeque ad eum locum, pontem hiulcae, nam ita
rescribendum patet ex Zosimo, lib. 2. and ex Victore: ut proinde locus ille, Ad
labores idem mihi videatur cum Cibali: ita enim dictus tum videtur ob asperimum
proelium ibi inter Constantinum M. and Licinium recenter habitum. Gothofredus
in Philostorgium, p. 352. (...) Secunda pugna Constantini adversus Licinium, in
Thracia facta, eodem anno contigit quo Cibalensis, ut ex narratione Zosimi, and
auctoris ignoti colligitur. Quod quidem etiam hoc argumento demonstrari potest.
Post hoc proelium pace inter Constantinum and Licinium facta, Consules sequenti
anno facti sunt Constantinus and Licinius, and in Occidente quidem annus ille
inscriptus est Constantino IV. and Licinio IV. Coss. in Orientis autem partibus
Licinii nomen praepositum est hoc modo. Licinio Augusto IV. and Constantino
Aug. IV. Coss. ut legitur in Excerptis de Gestis Constantini. Valesius in
Eusebium, p. 210.

He lived 60 years, and reigned 15. Victor's Epit. Licinius a Constantino morte
mulctatur: vel ut alii tradunt, Hemelarius.
quum filiam suam Herinam eo quod Christiana esset, ab equis discerpi
mandasset, ipse adstans and inspecturus, equi morsu interfectus ect. Elenchus
MS Numismatum in Bibliotheca Bodleiana. In Mus^s tibi trux odium est, sed
bellica virtus
Famam, qua possis nomen habere, dedit.
Boissardus.

Select and Choice FRENCH PROVERBS, Some of which were collected out of
Gruterus, de la Noue, Meurier and other Authors, diverse observed by my self
when I was in France, Alphabetically disposed and englished, and compared also
sometimes with the Refranes or Spanish.
ABandon fait larron, ou autrement, or otherwise, Loccasion fait le larron.

The sense in English, Fast bind, saft find.

Qui fait nopces and maison il met lesen en abandon.

The buildings of Houses, and making of Feasts are unlimitted wasters of a man's
substance.

Chien qui abbaye ne mord pas.

The barking dog bites little, or, be that says most, commonly does least.

Il abbaye contre le lune.

He barks at the Moon.

Qui sert commun, null ne le pay, and sil defaut chacun labbaye.

He that serves a Commonalty is controlled by every one, rewarded by none.

Saccomoder au tems.

To serve the time, or to do as others do.

Mieur vaut estre seul, que mal accompagne.

It is better to be alone, than with idle, or ilsorted company.

Deur chiens ne saccordent point a un os.

Two cats and a mouse, two wives in one house, two dogs and a bone, never agree
in one.

Aller ou le Roy va a pied.

1. To the Stool.
To go where the King goes on foot.

Aller sur la Hacquenee des Cordeliers.

To go upon the Franciscans Hackney, 1. to go a foot.

Aimer n'est pas sans amer.

Love is (...) a bitter sweet.
Love is not without bitterness.

Ainsi va le monde.

So the world goes.

Amasser en saison, despencer par raison, font la bonne maison.

A seasonable gathering, and a reasonable spending make a good housekeeping.

Amiens fut prinse en Renard, reprinse en Lion.

Amiens was taken by the Because the Archduke took it by a stratagem, and
Henry the 4. regained it by force.
Fox, retaken by the Lion.

Amor peut moult, argent peut tout.

Love can do much, silver can do all.

Amor, toux, fumee and argent, on ne peut cacher longuement.

Love, the cough, smoke and money, cannot long be hidden by any.

L'on d'it ausfi

L'amour, la tousse, and la galle ne se peuuent celer.

We say, Love and the cough cannot be hidden.

A Pere, a Maistre, a Dieu tout puissant,

Null ne peut render l'equivalent.

To Father, Master, and God All-sufficient,

None can render equivalent.

A petit Mercier, petit panier.

A little Pedlar, a little pack.

Moutarde apres disner.

After dinner mustard.

Apres la mort le Medecin.

After death the Doctor.

Apres la pluye Post nubila Phoebus.
vient le beau temps.

After rain comes fair weather. After a storm comes a calm.


A quoi pensez vous, quand vous ne pensiez rien?

A vous respondre, quand vous me demandez rien.

On what think you when you think on nothing?

To answer you, when you ask me nothing.

Argent contant port medicine.

Ready money is a ready medicine.

A rude Chien faut dur lien.

A cursed Dog must be tied short.

Attente tourmente.

Expectation torments.

Au jourdhuy marry, demain marri.

Married to day sad tomorrow.

A un bon Entendeur ne faut que demi mot.

Half a word is enough Verbums sapienti.
to an understanding Hearer.

Autant de Pais, autant de coustumes.

So many Countries, so many customs.

B
COmmander a baguette.

To command absolutely, or with authority.

Si tu veux cognoistre un villain, baille lui la baguette en main.

The way to discern a Knave or Clown, is to give him authority.

Bailler de lavoine, pour du foin.

To return a benefit with usurie.

Bailler du foin, a la mule.

To deceive or beguile.

Bailler surle nez du Roy.

To coin false money.

Bailler du plat de la langue.

To smooth or flatter.

Baiser le babouin.

Basely to submit himself.

Grand bandon, grand larron.

Great liberty breeds much thievery, or much liberty brings men to the gallows.

Apres grand banquet, petit pain.

After feasting, fasting.

Il nest banquet que d'homme chiche.

There is no feast to the Misers (and by a Misers feast we mean) a plentiful,
though a rare one.

Beau parler n'escorche pas la langue.

Good We say, Good words cost nothing. The Spaniards say, It is much worth and
costs little, to give to evil words a good answer, Refranes d' Oudin.
speech fleas not the tongue.

Beau^e sans bonte est comme vin esvente.

Beauty without goodness is like wine that has taken wind.

Belles filles se trouent au bourdeau, and les beaux hommes es mains du Boureau.

The fairest woman in the Stews, and the hansom'st man at the Gallows.

Bon march tire l'argent de la bourse.

Good cheap commodities are notable pick-purses.

Bon sang ne peut mentir. A worthy nature cannot conceal itself.


Good blood cannot ly.

Bonne renommee vaut mieux que ceinture doree.

A good renown is better than a golden girdle. See Prove. 22.1. This Proverb is
well explained by Bodin de Repub. l. 5. c. 3. and Pasquier de Recherches de la
France, l. 6. c. 11. Some make it all one with that Proverb, The hood or habit
makes not the Monk, others say, that only women of a good name and not whores
were suffered to wear a golden girdle. The Spanish Proverb is, He that has
lost his renown, is dead in the world. The English is, He who has an ill name
is half hanged.


Bonne Terre mauvais Chemin.

Bon Advocat mauvais Voisin.

Bonne Mule mauvaise best.

Bonne Femme mauvaise test.

Good Country and bad way.

Good Lawyer and bad Neighbor.

Good Mule and a bad beast.

Good woman and a bad head.

Borgne est Roy enter les aveugles.

He that has one eye is a King among the blind.

C
MAl est cache a qui lon void le dos.

He ill conceals himself that shows his back.

Mieux vault estre oiseau de bois que de cage.

The difference between liberty and thraldom.

Fol a 25 carats.

A fool beyond all proportion. (The finest Gold being but of 24 carrats.)

Au jourd huy caissier, demain casse.

To day cash-keeper, to morrow cassed. We say, To day in request, to morrow
cassed.

La langue human, na point d'os.

Et casse poictrine et dos.

A Proverb expressing the force of a malicious, enraged, or infected tongue.

Qui a des noix il en casse, and qui nen a il sen pass.

Many when they have superfluities, can use them, and when they have none, can
want them.

Tell a bonne cause, qui est condemn.

A good cause, often speeds but badly.

Au chat cendreux jamais ne tomb rien en gueule.

The idle house-dove never gets ought.

Ce qu'on apprend au bers, dure jusques aux verse.

That which one learns in youth, will continue till old age.

C'est la Philosophy de Quenoville.

It is the Philosophy of the Distaff.

C'est un mouton It is the custom of the Shepherds of that Province in France
so to mark their Sheep, therefore if in brabling or otherwise one has received
a blow on the nose and it appears, then men merrily say so.
de Berri, il est marque sur le nez.

It is a sheep of Berrie it is marked upon the nose.

C'est un bon harquebusier, See l' Etimologie des Proverbes Francois, l. 3. c.
25.
il vise aux talons and frappe le nez.

They speak merrily of a fart.
It is a good Harquebusier, it aims at the heels and hits the nose.

C'est une toux de renard, qui nous menera au terrier.

It is a cough of the fox which will bring us to the grave. Bochart says this
is a Proverb usual among them.

Chair de Mouton manger de Glouton.

Flesh of Mutton is meat for a Glutton.

Chascun a son tour,

Le devise du Mounsieur de Guise.

Every one has his turn,

The devise of the Duke of Guise.

Chascun est Roy en sa maison.

Every one is King in his own house.

Commun n'est pas comme un.

The public is not as private.

Court mess, and long disner.

Short Mass, and long dinner.

D
DAme qui trop se mire peu file.

She that heeds her beauty much, tends her benefit but little. A proud and a
good Housewife are incompatible.

En moissons dames chambrieres sont.

While harvest lasts, all fell^ws

Chacun nest pas aise qui danse.

Every one is not merry that dances. Of such a one, we say; His heart is not so
light as his heels.

Nimium altercand^ veritas amittitur.
Partrop d^batre le verite se perd.

By too much arguing truth is lost.

Denier sur denier bastit le maison.

One penny after another builds the house, or by little and little great
matters are effected.

Un jour juge de lautre, and le dernier juge de tous.

One day rules another, but the last overrules all.

Deux loups mangent bien vne brebis.

Two Wolves can make good shift with one poor sheep.

Deux orgucilleux ne penuent estre ports sur un asne.

One simple Ass cannot bear two proud persons.

D'eau benite le moius suffit.

Of holy water the less suffices.

De fol Juge brieve sentence.

We say, A fools bolt is soon shot.
From a foolish Judge a quick sentence.

De la pance vient la dance.

Dancing follows a full belly.

De mauvais payeur il faut prendre paille.

Of an ill play master take any thing.

Depuis que Decret a prins ailes,

Et les gendarmes portent malles.

Et les moines vont a cheual,

En tout le monde n'a que mal.

Since the Decree has taken wings,

And the Soldiers carry males,

And the Monks go a horse back,

There is nothing but ill in all the world.

Desjuner de chasseurs, disner d' Advocats.

Souper de Marchands, and collation de Moines.

The Huntsmans breakfast, the Lawyers dinner.

The Merchants supper, and the Monks drinking.

De trois chooses Dieu nous guard,

De Beuf sale sans Moutarde,

Dun Valet qui se regard,

D'une Femme qui se farde.

From three things God keep us,

From powderd Beef without mustard,

From a Servant which vieweth himself,

From a Woman which painteth.

Du cuir d'autruy large courroye.

A large thong of another leather.

E
EAu benite de Cour.

Court holy water;

Medecin deau douce.

A young or unexperienced Physician.

Amener leau au moulin.

To draw in gain.

Pescher en eau trouble.

To seek for gain.

Qui mal entend mal respond.

He that understands wrong, answers awry.

A mal exploicter bien ecrit.

A fair pretense for a foul act. Good words after ^vil deeds.

Tell sexcuse, qui saccuse.

Some when they mean to excuse, accuse themselves.

En gouttes Medicin ne voit Goutte.

The Physician sees but little in the Gout.

En Orange il n'ya point d'Oranges.

In Orange The Prince of Orange his Country is fertile of all fruits save
Oranges, whence came this Proverb, says Iodocus Sincerus in his Itinerarium
Galliae.
there are no Oranges.

En Pont, en Planche, and en Riviere.

Valet devant Maistre derriere.

On Bridge, on Plank, and on River,

The Servant before, and Master Like to this is the Spanish Proverb, Al gran
arroyo passer postrero. At a great River one should pass last. Multa cadunt
inter calicem supremaque labra.
after.

Enter deux selles le cul a terre.

Between two stools the tail to the ground.

Enter la bouche and le verre,

Le vin sonvent tomb a terre.

Between the lip and the cup

The wine is often spilt.

Eschorcher le To spue, cast, vomit, (especially upon excessive drinking)
either because then one makes a noise like a Fox which barks, or because the
slaying of so unsavory a beast will make any man vomit. See l' Etymology des
Proverbes Francois, l. 2. c. 33.
Renard.

To flea the Fox.

Estre sur la board de la fosse.

To be upon the brink of the pit.

Alterum pedem in cymba charon it is habere.

F
DU dire au faict, y a grand traict.

There is great difference between words and deeds.

Bien faict n'est jamais perdu.

One seldom loses by a good deeds doing.

Encor na pas faille qui a aruer.

He has not mist that has one throw to cast.

Il nest si bon qui ne faille.

The best men have their faults, the honestest their errors.

La faim chasse le loup horse du bois.

Hunger drives the Wolf out of the wood.

A la faim ni a point de mauvais pain.

To him that is hungry any bread seems good.

Fais ce que tu dois, advienne ce que pourra.

Do thou thy duty, happen what hap may.

Il fait asses qui fait fair.

He does hurt, or good enough, that makes it to be done.

La fin fait tout.

The end proves all, or is all in all.

Fair de Chasteaux en Espagne.

To build Castles in Spain.

We say, to build Castles in the air.

Fair de son Medecin son heritier.

To make his Physician his heir.

Fair grand cas de peu de chose.

To make great account of a little thing.

Femme, argent and vin

Ont leur bien and leur venin.

Women, money and wine,

Have their good and their evil.

Femme rit quand elle peut and pleure quand elle veut.

A Woman laughs when she can, and weeps when she will.

Fille fenestriere and trotiere, Rarement bonne m^snagere.

Beneficium accepisti, libertatem vendidi isti. Terence.
A gazing and gadding Maid seldom proves a good House-wife.

Fille qui done s'abandonne.

Pitissando dolium exhauritur.
A Maid which gives is easily g^tten.

Fille qui prend son Corpse vend.

A maid that takes sels her body.

Terence.
Fille trope veue, rob trop vestue, n'est past chere tenue.

A maid often seen, a garment often worn,

Are disesteemed and held in scorn.

The Italian Proverb is: A woman that takes is easily yielding.

Formage, poir, and pain,

Est repas de vilain.

Cheese, bread, and pear,

Is the Husbandmans fare.

Les plus courts folies sont les mellieures.

The shortest follies are the best.

Fols sont sages quond ils se taisent.

Fools are wise men when they hold their Prove. 17.28 Si sapiens stultus, si
stultus sapiens.
peace.

G
ASses gaigne qui malheur perd.

He gets enough that misses an ill turn.

Il nest marchand, qui toujours gaigne.

He trades not cunningly that always gains.

Tell change, qui ne gaigne pas.

Some change for the worse.

H^^di gaigneur, hardi mangeur.

They that work hard, eat hard.

Mieux vaut bon gardeur, que bon gaigneur.

A good keeper is better than a good gainer.

Ourrier gaillard cele son art.

The industrious workman prostitutes not his art.

Le petit gain emplit la bourse.

Light gains make heavy purses.

Goutte a goutte la Mer s' esgoutte.

By drop and drop the Sea runs out.

Homme chiche jamais rich.

A covetous man is never rich. Semper avarus eget.


Home roux and femme barbue,

De trente pas loin le salve,

Avecques trois pierres au poing,

Pour t'en aider a ton befoing.

Salute no red hair'd man, nor bearded woman nearer than thirty foot off, with
three stones in thy fist to defend thee in thy need.

H
L'Habit ne fait pas le moine.

It Is not the habit (but the heart) that makes a man religious.

Haine de Prince, signify mort d'homme.

A Princes hate, imports the death of a man.

Null bien sans haine.

No happiness without hatred.

Oncques n'ayma bien qui pour peu hait.

He never soundy loved that hates for a toy.

Le cacque (ou la poche) sent toujours le harene.

The poke still of the herring smells.

Chien hargneux, a toujours les oreilles d'eschirees.

A brabling curre is never without torn ears

Qui trop se haste en cheminant en beau chemin se four voye souvent.

The more have the worse speed, or,

They that make too much have mistake the fairest way.

I
JEunesse oiseuse, vieillesse disetteuse.

An idle youth makes a needy old age.

The Italian Proverb is, A young man idle, an old man needy.

Il a tousiours une This is spoken of one that has a great appetite, the
second small gut is named, Iei unum, because it is always void, whence
springs this Proverb.
aulne de boyaux vuides, pour festoyer ses amiss.

He has always an ell This is spoken of one that has a great appetite, the
second small gut is named, Iei unum, because it is always void, whence
springs this Proverb.
of empty guts to feast his friends withal.

Il est bien avance qui a bien commence.

He is well advanced who has begun well.

Dimidium facti qui been caepit, habet.

Il a beau mentir qui vient de loin.

A Traveller may lie by authority.

Il gaste comme le fange de Paris.

It staineth like the dirt of Paris, Lutetia a luto.

Il a la conscience large, comme la manche d'un Cordelier.

He has a conscience as large as a Franciscans sleeve. Me quasi pilam habet
Plautus.


Il joue de moy a la pelotte.

He plays at foot-bal with me.

Il meant comme un Aracheur de dents.

He lies like a Tooth-drawer.

Il n'est eschappe qui train son lien.

He is not quite got away who drags his chain after him.

Il n'est jamais feu sans fumee.

There is never fire without some smoke.

Il n'y a pire sourd que celuy qui ne veut ouir.

There is none so deaf as he that will not hear.

Il ny a tant des Moutons en Berry

There be not so many sheep in There is such store of Sheep in that Province,
that they have this by - word when they would tax a fellow for his notable
lying, and telling a greater number then the truth.
Berry.

Il ni a que la premiere pint chere.

The first pint is the dearest.

Il vaut mieux tard que jamais.

It is better late than never.

Ils ont du coeur, mais les jambes leur faillent.

They have more stomach than strength.

Qui na coeur ait jambes.

Let him that has not a heart have heels.

Un vieil chien jamais ne jappe en vain.

An old dog never barks in vain. We say, the warning or advise of an old man is
ever to some purpose.

Meschante parole jettee va par tout a la volee.

A bad word blurted out (soon) roaveth all a broad

A vray dire perd on le jeu.

By speaking truth men (often) lose their game.

Apres la feste and le jeu, les pois au feu.

Those that will make good shift, must after play use thrift,

Il fait bon laisser le jeu, qu'and il est beau.

It Is good leaving at play when it is at the fairest, or, It Is good to leave
(when one has got) at play.

Jeu, putain, and vin friand.

Font l'homme pauure en riand.

Play, a whore, and brisk wine make a man poor laughing.

The Italian Proverb (whence this seems to be borrowed) is, Play, women, and
wine consume a man laughing.

L
L'Un a le bruit, lautre lave la lain.

The one gets the credit, the other takes the pains.

Qui na lain, boive a la fontaine.

Let him that has not wool drink at the well.

On ne doit pas laisser bonne terre pour mauvais Seigneur.

Rich Land must not be left for a rigorous Landlord, nor a good Country quit
because it is governed by a bad Prince.

Hardy langue, couarde lance.

Courageous language, a cowardly lance, or, those that brag most, execute
least.

Longue Langue court main.

Those that promise most, perform least.

Qui langue a, a Rome va.

He that knows what, and when to speak, may travel any whither.

Mieux vaut glisser du pied, que de la langue.

Better may a foot slip, then the tongue trip.

Longues paroles, font les jours courts.

Long discourses make short days.

La belle plume fait le bell oyseau.

The fair fair feathers make fair a fowl. See l'Etymologie des Proverbes
Francois. l. 1. c. 4.


L'appetit vient en mangeant, and la soif s'en va en beuvant.

The stomach comes by eating, the thirst is quenched by drinking.

L'asne du common est tousjours malbaste.

The common Ass is always ill sadled.

La soye esteint la feu de la Cuisine.

Silk Sumptuousness of apparel destroys Hospitality and good Housekeeping.
does quench the fire of this Kitchen.

La trop longue demeurer fait changer l'amy.

Too long abiding causes a friend to change.

L'eau qui dort est pire qui celle qui court.

The standing water is worse than that which runs.

Le coust en fait perdre le goust.

The cost takes away the desire to the thing.

Le desir nous tormente and l'espoir nous content.

Defire torments us, and hope comforts us.

Le maison est malheureuse and mechante,

Ou le Poul plus haute que le coq chante.

The house is unhappy and wicked, where the hen cr^weth louder than the cock.

Le mari veut (and doit) estre maistre, la femme veut (and doit) estre
maistresse, mais non pas de son mari.

The husband will and ought to be master, the wife will and ought to be
mistress, but not of her husband.

Les mots termines en ique font au Medecin la nique.

The words ending in Such be Hectique, Paralitique Apoplectique, Lethargique,
because they are hardly or never cured.
ique do mock the Physician.

Le plaisir engendre l'autre.

One good turn requires another.

Le Royaume du France ne tomb point en quenouille.

The Kingdom of France falls not to the distaffe. Lex salica Gallorum, imperii
successor masculus esto.


Les Apprentiss ne sont pas incontinent maistres.

The Prentises are not presently Masters.

Les bons rendeurs font les bons presteurs

Good restorers make good lende^s

Le Soleil qui se leve matin,

La Femme qui parle latin,

L'enfant qui boit du vin,

Font rarement bonne sin.

The Sun which shines early in the morning,

A Woman which speaks Latin,

A Child that drinks wine,

Seldom make a good end.

Le test d'une Femme,

La corpse d'un Sergeant,

Les jambes d'un Lacquai,

C'est un Diable parfaict.

The head of a Woman,

The body of a Sergeant,

The legs of a Lackey

Make a Devil perfect.

Le vin se cognoist a la saveur, and le drap a la coleur.

Wine is known by its smell, and cloth by its color.

Lire beaucoup and rien n'entendre,

C'est beaucoup chasser and rien prendre.

To read much and understand nothing,

Is to hunt much and catch nothing.

M
MA chemise blanch

Baise mon cu chaque dimanche.

My fair shirt kiss me behind once a week.

Bonne la maille, qui sauve le denier.

Well is the half penny spent, that saves a penny.

Main lavee, moins levee.

The more good parts one has, the less he should boast of them.

A main lavee Dieu mande la repue.

God sends the upright all necessary food.

Pour laver les mains, on nen vend pas sa terre.

A clean washed hand, makes no man sell his Land.

De mains vuides, prieres veins.

Empty hands (had Orators) make entreaty prove idle.

Vne main, lave lautre.

One hand washes the other; applyable to such as give upon assurance, or hope
to be given unto; or unto such as any way serve one another turn.

Il faut acheter maison faitte, and femme a fair.

Purchase a house ready made, but let thy Wife be of thine own making.

Manger It is spoken of those who in their youth have all prosperity, bu^ in
the end sorrow and care.
son pain blanc le premier.

To eat his white bread first.

Mars venteux, and Auril pluvieux font le May gay and gracieux.

A windy March, and rainy April make a May trim and gay.

N
LE mal an enter en nageant.

The unseasonable year, begins with rain.

Celuy peut hardiment nager a qui lon soustient le menton.

A favorite of the time, or of authority, may boldly swim where another would
sink.

Il ne faut apprendre aux poissons a nager.

We must not teach a fish to swim; a Scholar to read, a Master to work.

Pour neant demand conseil, qui ne le veut croire.

In vain the incredulous council asks.

Pour neant recule, qui malheur attend.

They that ill luck attend, give back unto no end.

Pour neant va au bois, qui marrein ne cognoist.

To no purpose goes he, who knows not wood, unto the wood.

Necessite est lamoitie de laraison.

We say, That necessity has no Law.

Necessite fait trotter les vieilles.

Need makes the old wife trot (say we.)

Tell a necessite, qui ne s'en vante pas.

Some are in greater want, than they will vaunt of.

N'irritez point les chiens, au paravant que vos soies aux pierres.

Provoke not the Dogs before you be at the stones.

Nouer l'esguillette.

To tie the A Charm which they use to hinder a man from accompanying with his
wife.
point.

Nourriture pass nature.

Nurture surpasses nature.

Null bien sans peine.

No good without pain and labor.

This Proverb is meant principally of virtue, it comes not without labor.

O
ALoeil malade la lumiere nuit.

An eye distemperd, cannot brook the light, or, sick thoughts cannot endure the
truth.

Orgueil napas bon oeil.

Pride looks not well on any.

Qui na quun oeil bien legarde.

Let him that has but one eye keep it well, or, Let him that has but one
help, strive to preserve it.

A tous oiseaux, leurs nids sont beaux.

To every bird her nest seems fair: or, Most men like houses of their own
contriving.

Vieil oiseau, nese prend a reths.

The old (in experience) are not subject to surprisal.

Apres pasques, and rogation, fie, deprestre and d'oignon.

After the week of Easter, and rogation,

A Priest and onyons are abomination.

Si tu te trouues sans chapon sois content depain and d'oignon.

If thou want a capon, fall to bread and an onion; or let not the want of
dainties discontent thee.

Oy, voy, and te tais, si tu veux vivre en pais.

Hear, see, and be silent, if thou will live in peace.

Audi, vide, tace, si vis vivere in pace.

Oignez vilain, il vous poindra, poignez vilain il vous oindra.

Sooth a Clown and he will deal roughly with you, deal roughly with him, and he
will speak you fair.

The Italian Proverb is, Do good to a Clown, he wishes thee evil for it, do
him an evil turn and he wishes thee good for it.

On ne doit parler Latin devant les Clercs.

One must take heed to speaking Latin before Scholars.

On ne prend pas le lieure au son de Tambour.

Men catch not a Hare with the sound of a Drum.

On ne scait, que la chose vaut, jusqu' a tant qu'on l'ait perdue.

One knows not what a thing is worth till he have lost it.

The Spanish Proverb is, Buen perdido ay conocido. A good thing lost is known.

Bonum magis carendo quam fruendo cognoscimus.

Oui dire va par ville.

Hearsay goes throughout the town.

P
PApe par voix, Roy par nature, Empereur per force.

The Pope comes by voices, the King by nature, the Emperor by force.

Pardon, on a pardon.

By a gift one obtains a pardon.

Par l'eschantillon on cognoist la piece.

By a pattern one knows the whole piece.

Petite pluye abbat grand vent.

A small rain allaies a great wind.

Poisson sans vin est poison.

Fish without wine is poison.

Pour un plaisir mill douleurs.

For one pleasure a thousand sorrows.

Qui tient la parlle par la queue, la turn ou il ve^t.

He that holds a frying pan by the tail, may turn it which way he list.

La paelle se mocque du fourgon.

Said, When one friend or fellow derides another.

A tell paelle tell fourgon.

One sloven matched with another.

Avec le temps and la peille l'on meure les mesles.

In time, and straw are medlers mellowed.

Null grain, sans paille.

No corn without some chaff.

Pain, tant quil dure, vin a mesure.

Eat at pleasure, drink by measure.

Ou pain faut, tout est a vendre.

Where bread is wanting all is to be sold.

Croustes de pastes, valent bien pain.

Pieces of pie-crust are as good as bread; or, he does not wrong that gives
cake for bread.

De tout s'avise, a qui pain faut.

Necessity invented all good Arts; Want, more than any thing, makes men
industrious.

Q
QUand Italy sera sans poison, France sans trahison, Angleterre sans guerre,
lors sera le monde sans cerre.

When Italy shall be without poison, France without treason, England without
war, the World shall be without earth.

Quand le danger est pass, le Saint eff oublie.

When the danger is past the Saint is forgotten.

Quand le soleil est couche tons les bestes sont a l'ombre.

When the Sun is set all the beasts are in the shade.

Un quartier fait lautre vendre.

One quarter makes the other to be sold.

A la quenoville le fol sa'genoville.

Fools kneel to Distaves, weak men unto women.

On ne doit point querir brebis qui ce veut perdre.

The sheep which will be lost must not be looked for.

La queue est le pire a escorcher.

The last is hardest to be done.

A la queue, gist le venin. Appliable to such as reserve the discovery, or
execution of their villainous projects unto the conclusion of a business.

Le renard cache sa queue.

The cunning Knave conceals what would discover him.

Vache ne scait, que vault sa queue, jusques ace quelle lait perdue.

We know not the worth of things till we have lost them.

Quatres bonnes meres engendrent qua, tree mauvaises silles, Grande familiarite
mespris, verite haine, virtue envy, richesse ignorance.

Four good mothers beget four bad daughters, great familiarity contempt, truth
hatred, virtue envy, riches ignorance.

Qui a bon voisin, il a bon matin.

Est aliquod bonum propter vicinum bonum
He that has a good neighbor has a good morrow.

Qui a le bruit de se lever matin peut dormir jusques a disner.

He that has the fame of rising early may sleep till dinnner.

Qui a terre il a guerre.

He that has land has also strife.

Qui monte plus haut qu'il ne doit, descend plus bas qu'il ne voudroit.

He that mounteth higher than he ought, shall descend lower than he would.

Matrem proles sequitur. See l'Etymologie des Proverbes Francois, l. 2. c. 15.
Qui naist de geline il aim a gratter.

He that comes from an Hen loves to be scratting.

Qui parle du loup, il en void la queue.

He that speaks of the Like to which is both the Latin Proverb, Lupus in
fabula, See Erasm. Adag. and the Arabic, Quando mentionem feceris lupi,
praepara illi baculum.
Wolf, sees his tail.

While the Shepherds talk of the Wolf he comes sometimes, so does he often of
whom we speak.

Qui regimbe contre l'aiguillon, merit d'en estre picque deux fois.

He that kicks against the pricks, deserves to be pricked twice.

Qui veut jeune chair and vieux poisson, se trove repugner la raison.

He that loves young flesh and old fish, loves contrary to reason.

Qui veut manger de noiaus, qu'il casse la no^^.

He that will eat the kernel, Qui vult nucleum, nucem frangat oportet.
let him break the nut.

R
REmede contre la Peste par art.

Fuir tossed and loing, retourner tard. Cito long, tarde.


An artificial remedy against the Plague, to fly swift and far, and return
slowly.

Render la pareille. Par pari refer.


To render the like.

Retournons a nous moutons.

Let us return to our sheep.

This Proverb is used when in some long discourse, one having made some
digression from the matter, will return to the thing he first spoke of.

The original of it is taken from Shepherds which sometimes leave their Sheep
to solace themselves while they feed, but fearing danger to them, after say,
Let us return to our Sheep.

Rouge soir and blanc matin.

C'est le plaisir du Pellerin,

The evening red and the morning gray,

Are hopeful signs of a fair day. See of the French Proverb l'Etymologie des
proverbes Francois, l. 1. c. 6.


The Italian says, The evening red, and the morning duskie joyeth the
Traveller.

Tell racine, tell fueille.

Such root (We say, such tree) such fruit.

Qui veut tuer son chien, lui met la rage sus.

He that will hang his dog, pretends he is mad.

Apres raire, ny a que tonder.

Sheeres after shaving find no work to do.

A barbe de fol, on apprend a raire.

By trimming fools about the gill, or barbers prentice learn his skill: unseemly
presidents are warnings to the wise.

Un barbier rait lautre.

One great man, rich man, cunning man, serves another turn.

Mets raison en toy, ou elle s'y mettra.

Let reason rule, or it will overruled thee.

A barbe de fol, le raisoir est mol.

A goose will brook any jest, or put up any abuse.

Fair la barbe a quelqu'un sans vasoir.

To affront, brave, or abuse one.

S
SI l'espine non picque quand nal,

A peine que picque jamais,

A thorn unless at first it prick.

Will hardly ever pierce to the quick.

Souvent and peu manger,

Ce faict l'homme engraisser.

Often and little eating makes a man fat.

D'un sac a charbon, ne peut sortir que de la poussiere noire.

Naught but black dust from Colliers sacks can come. A vicious man will be lewd
in his talk.

Es petits sacs, sont les fines espiceries.

The little head, a dainty wit contains.

Avarice rompt le sac.

The miser coveting to make his bags hold over much breaks them.

Il ne peut sortir du sac, que ce quil y a dedans and on ne peut tirer du sac
que ce quy est.

You can have no more of a cat but her skin; or, there can come no more (no
other stuff) from a man that is in him.

Femme safre and yurongnesse, de son corpse nest pas maistresse.

A wanton and win e-bibbing dame, her body yields to open shame.

Chascun est sage apres le coup.

An after wit, is every bodies wit.

Un sol advise bien un sage.

A fool may some times give the wise advise.

T
TAble d'abbe ou de prelat.

A plentiful, or well furnished board.

Table sans sell, bouche sans salive.

An unlearned discourse is (commonly) as vain, as meat without salt is
unsavory.

Table vaut escole notable.

Table discourse is an excellent Schoolmaster.

Ronde table oste le debat.

Round tables take away contention.

De toute taille bon leurier.

There are good, and bad, valiant and cowardly, strong and weak, of all shapes
and sizes.

Taire and fair sont requis par mer and par terre.

Be doing still, and cease to talk, Whether by sea or land thou walk.

Bien dire fait rire, bien fair fait taire.

We laugh at good words, but admire good deeds.

Tout ouir, tout voir and uien dire. (Ouse taire) merit on tout tems, qu'on
ladmire.

To hear all, see all, and say naught, merits, eternal admiration.

Tell refuse qui apres muse.

He refuses who after bethinks himself.

Tout se qui reluist n'est pas or,

All is not gold that glistereth.

Tossed on tard, prez au loing,

Le fort du foible a besoign.

Soon or late, near or far, the strong has need of the weak.

Trois chooses sont d'un accord,

L'Eglise, la Court, and la Mort,

L'Eglise prend de vif and mort,

La Court prend le droict and le tort,

La Mort prend le foible and le fort.

Three things agree in the world; The Church, the Court, and Death, The Church
takes the living and the dead, the Court right and wrong, Death the weak and
strong.

The Italians have the like Proverb,

Three things are much of nature:

A Priest, an Attorney, and Death;

The Priest takes from the living and the dead;

The Attorney right and wrong,

And death takes along with it both weak and strong.

Trop grater cuist, trop parler nuist.

Too much scratching smarts, too much speaking hurts.

Tu as frappe au blanc.

Thou have hit the white. Rem acu tetigisti.


Tu as memoire du Lieure ou Lapin, tu la pers en courant.

Thou have as much memory as a Hare or Coney, The Cony by reason of his fear is
very forgetful. whence came this Proverb,
thou have lost it in running.

V
AUssi tossed meurt vache comme veau.

The skipping Calf, and wanton Lamb,

Are often killed before their dam.

Qui plus quil n'a vaillant despend;

I fait la cord a quoy se pend.

He that fears not to spend more than he has;

Sets, at the least, one foot in the Hangmans path.

Cheval fait and valet a fair.

Choose a horse made, a servant to be made.

Apres grande vall ee, rude montee.

After great rest, much toil, after much ease great pain.

Apres grande montee, grande vallee.

They that the highest climb, the lowest fall.

Un coup de langue nuist plus qu'un coup de lance.

A word hurts more then a wound.

Un grand Seigneur,

Un grand Clochier,

Une grande Riviere sont trois mauvais Voisins.

A great Lord,

A great Bell,

A great River are three ill Neighbors.

Une bonne femme est une mauvaise best.

A good Wife is an ill beast.

Oftentimes in the contracted inscriptions of ancient Tombs these 2 capital
letters, M. B. have been found which signify Mulier Bona in French Bonne Femme.
Some Drollers finding that these 2 letters M.B. signify as well Mala bestia as
Mulier bona; thrice used this Proverb.

Un homme de paille vaut une femme d'or.

A man of straw is worth a woman of gold.

Un Ministre ne doit scavoir que sa Bible. That is, to teach or profess no
more, 1 Cor. 2.2.


A Minister ought to know no more than his Bible.

Vouz mangez vostre chemin, par ou retournerez vous.

You eat your way, Mocking those that eat by the way.
which way will you return?

FINIS.
These two, viz. Diadumenianus and Maximus being very comely persons, for the
Readers satisfaction, are more exactly here presented to his view.
Diadumenianus.
effigy of emperor

Maximus.
effigy of emperor


