Carolus Leigh M. D.
W. Faithorn delin.

I Savage sculp.

portrait

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF Lancashire, Cheshire, AND THE Peak, in Derbyshire: WITH
AN ACCOUNT OF THE British, Phoenician, Armenian, Gr. and Romans ANTIQUITIES IN
THOSE PARTS.

By CHARLES LEIGH, Doctor of Physic.

OXFORD: Printed for the AUTHOR; and to be had at Mr. George West's, and Mr.
Henry Clement's, Booksellers there; Mr. Edward Evet's, at the Green-Dragon, in
St. Paul's Churchyard; and Mr. John Nicholson, at the King's- Arms, in
Little-Britain, LONDON. MDCC.

IMPRIMATUR,

GUIL PAINTER, S. T. P. Vice-Cancel. Oxon.

To His GRACE, JAMES, Duke of ORMOND, Chancellor of the University of OXFORD;
To the Reverend the Vice Chancellor, THE DOCTORS, PROCTORS, HEADS of Colleges
and Halls, AND THE Rest of the Learned MEMBERS OF THAT Flourishing and Famous
University, THIS WORK is humbly Dedicated.
IT was some Years since by Recommendation from several of the Heads of Houses,
Professors, and Doctors of Physic, that this Work was undertaken; it is
therefore from You that it presumes to seek a Protection, which if it has the
Honor and Happiness to obtain, the Censorious Critics may show their ill
Temper, but will be too Weak to wound it.

I must own it may be looked upon by some, perhaps, as a Piece of Arrogance for
so obscure a Pen, to solicit a Protection from such a Learned and Honorable
Body: But since the Sun, that great Luminary of the Universe, sometimes gilds
the darkest Grotto's, I presume therefore so far as not totally to despair of
Your Favor. I do with the profoundest Gratitude acknowledge that an
Encouragement from so many Learned Persons, contributed no small Matter to this
Undertaking, and had that been wanting, the Difficulties I met with were so
many, and so insuperable, I should not have been able to have accomplished my
Design. The Method I have taken in this Book, (which has been a Work of
Seventeen Years) is chiefly to relate Matter of Fact; having seen the
Misfortunes of many, in swelling their Books with Digressive Quotations, and
Chimerical Hypotheses, and as the French observe, frequently losing the Truth
by Argument. I can solace my self with this, that I dread not to be
Contradicted in any Instance I have mentioned, having been Critically Curious
in each Observation and Experiment, and those frequently repeated. It is my
Hopes that several Matters in the following Sheets may occur, that in future
Ages may not only tend to the Wealth and Honor of those Counties, but the
Improvement of Natural History, and the general Good of Mankind, no Counties in
England affording so great a Variety of Mines, Minerals and Metals, with other
choice Products, and the most surprising Phenomenon of Nature, if it happen to
have this Effect, it will be to the infinite Satisfaction of

Your Ever-devoted, Most Humble, Obliged, and Obedient Servant, Charles Leigh.

To His Excellency, WILLIAM, Duke of Devonshire, etc. ONE OF THE Lords Justices
of ENGLAND. The Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Derby, etc. The Right
Honorable, RICHARD, Earl Rivers, etc. WITH The Rest of the Nobility and
Gentry, Encouragers of this WORK.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THERE are particular Spirits in Mankind which soar above the common Level:
Hence it is, that true Patrons of Learning and Honor, have such an Influence
over those who move in a lower Orb, that they are enabled by that borrowed
Luster, to dart such Reflections, as raise some Sort of Men to that Pitch of
Thought, that can allure them to the Perusal of a Book.

So little, indeed, by a great many is Learning esteemed, and a Public Good
encouraged, that an Author like an Ass in the Indies, may be overloaden with
Treasure; but the Brambles in his tedious Fatigues, are frequently his
Recompense: The Poets, how unhappy soever they may have been upon other
Accounts, have had their Moecenas's in all Ages, to guard them from the Fury of
the Critics; while the Philosopher, generally like Truth, the Object of his
Intentions and Discourse, comes into the World naked: It Is only his Innocence
and Integrity that skreens him from their Malevolent Censures; but to add
Luster and Energy to his Performances, is to derive it from the Patronage of
the Great, which gives to 'em (if the Metaphor be not too uncouth) a kind of
Perpetual Living.

Since therefore, so many Noble Personages and Worthy Gentlemen, have been
pleased so far to encourage this Undertaking, by honoring both it and me with
your Generous Subscriptions; I hope you will pardon this in me, who cannot but
now, and ever shall acknowledge it with the deepest Sense of Gratitude, and
remain with the Profoundest Respest,

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most Obedient, and Obliged Servant, Charles Leigh.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Candid Reader.
I Cannot but be conscious to my self that several Errors may occur in the
following Work, which have slipped my Observation; but in relation to those, I
have only this to say, as an Apology for my self, the Work consisting of that
Variety of Subjects, I had so many different Persons to deal with, I could not
give that attendance to the Press, which otherwise I would have done; and that
if any material ones be met with, they are not mine.

There are some of the Plates which are figured twice over, but those being
wrought off while I was in Oxford, the Error could not be rectified, but those
are ranged in the Book with their proper Explications, so that the Fault is not
material. It is said of Demosthenes, when he gave the Athenians an Account how
their Ancestors fought by Land at Marathon, and by Sea at Salamis, he took not
the least Notice of their being Victorious, but all he aimed at, was to conceal
that Tragical one at Chaeronea. If therefore the candid Reader in the ensuing
Work meets with any thing which may be of Use or Divertisement to him, I hope
he will be so benign, as to erase, or at least correct the Errors, since the
Author, though he may be apt to flatter himself, to have been in some measure
happy in the Former, may be as unfortunate in the Latter. The Design of the
whole Work is briefly recited in the Preface; to that therefore I refer him,
and shall not presume upon his Patience by Harangues and Repetitions; but
subscribe my self,

His Humble Servant, Charles Leigh.

THE PREFACE.
SO different are the Tempers of Men, and so various the Impressions made upon
their Minds, that as it would be an high piece of Folly in me to expect the
Favors of all; so on the other hand, it is equally prudent to be armed against
the Criticisms of many, who will be apt to quarrel with diverse Things contained
in this Work; the Method whereof, (wherein I have endeavored to be as concise
as I could, having evaded Quotations from others, as far as the Subject would
bear,) I shall briefly touch upon, having first premised, that what is recited
therein, is chiefly from my own Observation and Experiments.

This Work therefore is divided into Three Books, the First relating to Natural
Philosophy; the Second chiefly Physic; and the Third, the British, Phoenician,
Armenian, Greek and Roman Antiquities of these Counties.

As for the First, There is an Account given therein of the various
Temperatures of the Air in those Parts, with the different Effects it has upon
Humane Constitutions, and other Animals: The Pressure of the Air is likewise
fully examined, and it is made highly probable from various Experiments, that
the Ascent of the Mercury in Glass-Tubes is not made by an External Pressure
upon the Surface of the Quicksilver contained in the Cup, but by the various
Elasticities of the Air in the Top of the Tube.

The Rise of Rivers, Meeres, Lakes, Ponds and Springs, with the Origin of them,
is here accounted for; the Principles of Mineral Waters from diverse Experiments
demonstrated; a full Account of Hot and Cold Baths, and in those Waters the
different Causes of Heat and Cold assigned, with their various Effects upon
Humane Bodies.

Likewise, there is an Enquiry made into the different sorts of Earth and Coals
here met with, with the Methods of Improving them, and the several Manufactures
that are or may be made from them; the Mosses or Morasses, in respect to their
Nature and Vegetation, from the Plants that grow upon them, are examined, with
the different Trees found in them, and diverse other Phaenomena' s: An Universal
Deluge is fully demonstrated from several Topics; but that there was a total
Dissolution of the whole Strata of the Earth at that time, is proved
impossible, both from Scripture and Observations in Nature: Whence it is
evident, Dr. Woodward' s Hypothesis is Erroneous, as is likewise that of the
Theorist.

I have farther considered the different Minerals and Metals, made various
Experiments upon them, and have not past over the Methods of discovering an
Essaying them; the Mineral Damps are also examined, with a full Account of
their Causes and Effects; so are the Diamonds cast up by the Moles, and the
Vegetation of Sea-Plants briefly, but fully illustrated: There is a concise
Account given of the Physical-Plants, with a Rationale of their Effects and
Tastes, and the Poisonous Plants ranged in their different Classes, with an
Account of their Causes.

The Generation of Fishes, with the different Kinds of them, the Formation of
Shells, and the Vegetation of Pearls are enquired into, and solved; besides
which, you have a Description given of Mineral plants, Shells, Fish Bones,
Teeth and Formed-stones, with the Causes of them; to which is added an Account
of Animal-Shells, and Subterraneous Skeletons, Foreign to this Island; as the
Stag of Canada, the Elk, Hippopotamus or Seahorse, together with some American
Canoes found upon the Draining of Martin Mere in Lancashire. Neither have I
overlooked the Reptils, Infects and Birds of these Parts, particularly the
Barnacle. And for the Quadrupeds, they are likewise described, and diverse
Experiments and Observations made upon them.

The Second Book treats chiefly of Distempers both Chronick and Acute; besides
which, it contains an Account of Persons that have been Eminent for Arms, Arts,
Professions, Sciences, and Trades; for Erecting Hospitals, Colleges, and other
noted Acts of Charity.

The Third and Last Book relates to Antiquity, wherein you will find diverse
Heathen Altars, Sacrificing-Vessels, Coins, Fibulae, Lamps, Urns, Tyles,
Fortifications, Signets, Pagods, etc. found in these Counties, described and
explained: Likewise it is next to a Demonstration from the Armenian, British and
Phoenician Languages compared together and examined, their Deities, the
Asiatick Manner of Fighting, the Eastern and British Way of computing Time, the
Reverse of a Coin and diverse other Things, that not only show these Counties,
but the whole Island was chiefly and primarily inhabited by Colonies from Asia
long before either the Greeks or Romans came hither.

As for the Cutts of the Coins and other Curiosities contained herein, which
will be found to be numerous, I have not declined the Charge of having them
drawn and engraven by the best Artists I could meet with, and I do not doubt
but it will appear to be so to the Judicious Eye.

I hope, I shall not be reputed guilty of Tautology and Impertinence, because I
have recapitulated some Things now and then for the further Illustration of
other Matters: And for the Language I have only this to say, that I have
endeavor d to adapt my Expression to the Nature of my Subject, and that in
writing of Philosophy, Physic and Antiquity, the Embelishments of Classick
Eloquence is not much to be expected, since those must be expressed in Terms
peculiar to themselves, and to do otherwise were to grasp at a Cloud instead of
Juno, and instead of reciting the Fact only express the Shadow.

But after all that has or could be said, I know there are some Men of that
assuming Temper, that there is nothing grateful to them which is not their own;
but how unjustly they usurp that Authority I leave to their own Consideration,
and shall only desire the Impartial and Unbiassed to satisfy themselves with
the Truth of any Observation recited in this Book, and I shall not then despair
of their favorable Opinion of me.

There is one Thing more that I cannot but take Notice of, and that is, the
Unfairness of some Modern Authors in laying down Theorems upon Experiments
which were not their own, and not acknowledging from whom they had them: And
this may be observed in the Natural History of Staffordshire, and a late Latin
Piece concerning Digestion, as will appear by Two Letters inserted in this
Book. I might enumerate more Failings incident to the Humors of the Age, but I
shall endeavor to evade the Calumny, of erecting a Porch larger than the
Building, and shall therefore proceed to the First Chapter.

To his Ever-honour'd Friend Dr. CHARLES LEIGH, upon his Natural History of
LANCASHIRE, etc.
WHen by the powerful Sanction of a God,
From shapeless Nothing, and a dark Abode,
This newborn World, and early Nature rise,
Those shining Lamps, and you expanded Skies:
Then Man was dropped on this capacious Ball,
Large in it self, a Point unto the All;
His wise Creator never did design
His Life a lazy Round, and him supine;
Large Scenes he drew as Subjects for his Pen,
Worthy the Almighty Author, and of Man;
The whole Creation in a Choire does move
From Plants below, to spacious Orbs above,
Those twinkling Lights we ken in yonder space,
For ought we know, are Globes of Earth and Seas.
But above all Man is alone supreme,
Vast in himself he forms a finished Theme:
Through all his Structure shines a Power Divine,
He speaks a God in every Stroke and Line,
To him subservient the Creation bows,
And all its Blessings for his Health bestows.
Of old what Egypt and Arabia taught,
And what learned Greece to more Perfection brought,
What high Improvements After-Ages gained,
And what Industrious Moderns have attained,
In you comprised we all their Knowledge trace,
And new Additions do your Volume grace.
From Paean's Shrine fresh Laurels are designed
To pay you Homage, and your Temples bind,
Even Natures self does all her Treasures yield,
And quits to you the Trophies of the Field;
Her in her dark Recesses you have viewed,
Through every Maze her wondrous Paths pursued:
What Magic late and Mystery they call,
Now Art appears, and Demonstration all,
Nature exalted, rears her shining Crest,
And in her Works the Omnipotent's confessed.
You chiefly teach this curious Age to know
What Mineral Seeds in Purling Waters flow,
In raging Fevers how the Blood takes Fire,
And how in tedious Chronicks we expire;
In darksom Mines where noisome Damps offend,
Even there your conquered Empire you extend;
What Air, or Earth, or liquid Seas contain.
Your comprehensive Genius does explain.
Old Rome to Britain once again returns,
And Heroes rise out of their dusty Urns,
Their Votive Spoils proclaim their Grandeur here,
Speak how prevailing once their Legions were,
Rescued from Rust of Time they live in you,
Whilst we their Power in their great Ruins view.
May you these high Discoveries still pursue,
(If ought remains of that great Task to do)
Your Labors will the Test of Time endure,
Whilst you beyond the Critick's Rage secure,
Lord of your self, are pleased with future Toil,
And spread your healing Wings over all your Native Soil.
R. J.

Some of the Names of the Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry, Subscribers to this
book. Many are omitted (several Persons Subscribing for different Numbers)
whose Names are not known to the Author.
A
SIR Willoughby Aston Dr. Robert Andrews Dr. Archer of Kendall Thomas Ashurst,
Esquire John Atherton of Busy, Esquire Edward Aid, Esquire John Aglonby, Esquire Thomas
Ashton, Esquire Mr. Alonson, A. M. Mr. Henry Ashton Mr. Thomas Askue Mr. Thomas
Armatryding, Mr. Adir Mr. Atherton
B
Sir John Bridgeman, Bar. Sir Benjamin Bathurst Sir Roger Bradshaigh Sir Rich.
Blackmore Sir Rich. Brooks Sir Tho. Billet Sir Will. Busby Sir John Bland Sir
Henry Bunbury Reginald Britland, Sergeant at Law Dr. Bateley, Archdeacon of
Cant. Dr. Birch of Westminster Dr. Breech of Christ-Church Dr. Baynard. Dr.
Daniel Brown Joseph Brown, M. D. Thomas Brotherton, Esquire Geor. Birch, Esquire Thomas
Brooks, Esquire Humphrey Booth. Esquire Allen Bathurst of Trin. Coll. Esquire John
Braddyle, Esquire Henry Brown, Esquire Henry Bradshaw, Esquire Geo. Beach, Esquire Lawrance
Booth, Esquire Nath. Booth, Esquire Orlando Bridgeman, Esquire Orlando Bridgeman, Esquire Rich.
Bold, Esquire -- Be^^ford, Esquire William Blencore, Esquire -- Brockhall, Esquire Mr. Bradshaw
of New Coll. A. M. The Reverend Mr. Hugh Barrow, B. D. Roger Bolton, M. A. Adam
Budle, M. A. Mr. Becinsall, B. D. Braz. C. Capt. Booth. Madam Brooks. Mr.
Robert Brewer Mr. Thomas Bennet Mr. Thomas Barbon Mr. Tho. Briggs of Lostock
Mr. Tim. Bancks. Mr. Thomas Bradshaw Mr. Butterworth Mr. Michael Burton Mr.
Nathaniel Boothhouse Mr. William Burhell Mr. John Bradshaigh Mr. John Brenand
Mr. Henry Brooks Mr. John Brown
C
Lord Cavendish. Lord Cholmondeley. Lord Bishop of Carlisle. Lord Bishop of
Chester. Sir Robert Cotton Sir Edward Chisnal Sir John Crew The Reverend Dr.
Charlott, Master of University College, Oxon. Dr. Chamberlain of London. Dr.
Cox of London. Dr. Covel, Master of Christ's College, Camb. Dr. Carmichal Dr.
Carter Henry Chetham, Esquire John Cheshire, Esquire Robert Cholmondeley, Esquire Tho.
Cliffton of Litham, Esquire Samuel Crook, Esquire Allen Chamber, Esquire Lawrence Charter
Prof. of Divinity. Colonel Codrington. Daniel Chaddock, Gent. Mr. Carswell Mr.
John Charleton Mr. Robert Cheshire of Runchorne Mr. Francis Cholmondeley Mr.
John Clayton Mr. Clark of Wicham Mr. Thomas Clopton Mr. James Crayle of London
Mr. George Corbishley Mr. Thomas Crowther
D
His Excellency the Duke of Devonshire The Earl of Derby. Countess Dowager of
Derby. Sir Thomas Delves Dr. Drummond Samuel Daniel, Esquire Cha. Dartigueneve, Esquire
Christopher Dauntesy, Esquire -- Domvil of Linn, Esquire Mr. Delves, M. B. Edw. Denham,
A. M. Mr. Delves of Manchester Mr. Davy of Fradsham Mr. Charles Du-Bois Mr.
Davenport
E
The Honorable Madam Egerton. Edmund Entwistle, D. D. Dr. Eives. Peter
Edgerton of Shaw, Esquire John Eglenby, Esquire Thomas Ewer, Esquire Mr. Joseph Eaton Mr.
Robert Eskrigg of Eskrigg
F
Sir Daniel Fleming. Dr. Thomas Fern, London Dr. Fenton Dr. Pet. Fulwood at
Stampford, Lin. Lawrence Fogg, D. D. D. C. William Farrington, Esquire Thomas
Foster, Esquire Edward Fleetwood, Esquire John Ferrers, Esquire John Franks, Esquire Thomas
Fleetwood, of Bank, Esquire Richard Fleetwood, Esquire Roger Fleming, Esquire Thomas
Fleetwood of Staffordshire, Esquire Mr. Stephen Fox Valentine Farrington, Gent. Mr.
John Farrington Mr. Fiswick Mr. Fernill of Ridgeley Mr. Henry Fean Mr. Barwick
Fairsax
G
Sir Christopher Greenvil Dr. Gibbons, London Dr. Goodall, London Dr. Gould,
London Dr. Grundy. Thomas Gerrard, Esquire Thomas Glasier, Esquire Thomas Gardener, Esquire
Henry Gilberson, Esquire -- Greenvill, Esquire John Grosvenour, Esquire -- Greenvill, Esquire
The Reverend Parson Gibbs of Bury Mr. Gwin, Fellow of Jesus Col. Ox. Josiah
Gregson, Gent. Mr. Thomas Gibson. Mr. John Gadbury. Mr: Henry Glibberton Mr.
Edward Graves. Mr. Francis Gregg Mr. Green, London
H
The Marquess of Hartington. Sir Henry Hunloke Dr. Halkat Dr. Lancelott
Harrison Dr. Henshaw Dr. Hicks, London Dr. How, London William Haddock, Esquire
Thomas Hanmore, Esquire John Harrison, Esquire Richard Hardy, Esquire John Harleston, Esquire
Thomas Hesketh, Esquire Robert Hesketh, Esquire Henry Hodgkinson, Esquire John Hodgson, Esquire
James Holt, Esquire Benjamin Houghton, Esquire -- Holt of Crisleton, Esquire John Hopwood,
Esquire Edward Hornby, Esquire Hurleston, Esquire Hulme, Esquire William Hulton, Esquire -- Hulton,
Esquire The Reverend Mr. James Hamer, B. D. The Reverend Mr. Hall Mr. Holbrooke, M.
B. Mr. Haydock Capt. Hambleton Mr. Haddon Mr. Haywood Mr. John Harrison Mr.
James Harvey of Knutsford Mr. Harrison of Poulton Mr. Thomas Haworth Mr.
William Hawkins Mr. John Hawkins Mr. Hargraves Mr. Hyde, Br. Coll. S. Mr.
Thomas Hodgson Mr. Thomas Hunt Mr. Robert Hyde Mr. Francis Hopson Mr. James
Holland Mr. Hunt Mr. Hulme Mr. Hind Mr. Humphrey Hutchinson Mr. Christopher
Hopkins. Mr. Charles Halstead. Mr. James Hardy Mr. Hall of Knutsford Mr. Hall
of Hulms Chap.
I
Alexander Johnson Esquire Mr. Michael Johnson Mr. Nicholas Iackson
K
Lord Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland. Lord Killmorry. George Kenyon, Esquire Mr.
Aaron Kinton of St. Martins in the Fields. Mr. Keil of Ball. Coll. Mr. Knaplock
L
Lord Bishop of London, Sir Fancis Leicester, Sir William Lowther, Dr. Levett
Robert Law, M. D. Rich. Legh of High Legh, Esquire Peter Legh of Lime, Esquire Peter
Legh of Booth, Esquire Obad. Lane, Esquire John Legh of Adlington, Esquire Peter Legh of
High Leigh. A. M. Mr. Rich. Langon, Mr. William Law, Mr. John Legh Mr. John
Leadbeater Mr. Roger Langton, Mr. Arthur Laundres. Mrs. Ann Loveday, Mr. Rich.
Lownds,
M
Sir John Manwareing, Sir George Markham Sir Strencham Masters Sir William
Meredith, The Reverend Dr. John Mear, Dr. of Divinity, and Principal of
Brazen-N. Col. Thomas Mather, Esquire John Minshall, Esquire -- Minshall of Gray's Inn,
Esquire -- Minshall of the Temple, Esquire Alexander Moson, Esquire Ralph Milbank, Esquire
Thomas More, M. B. Mr. Joseph Milner Mr. John Markland of Wigan Mr. Bevin Mr.
Valentine Moneston Mr. Thomas Moss Mr. Richard Mostyn Mr. Francis Moult. Mr.
George Moult
N
George Nodes, Esquire Roger Nowell of Read, Esquire Mr. Thomas Newby Mr. Nisbet
O
Crew Offley, Esquire -- Oaks, Esquire -- Ogle, Esquire Alex. Olbeldston, Esquire Mr. John Ody
Mr. John Offley, Grays- Inn. Mr. Thomas Ogle Mr. William Only Mr. Osborn, Ex.
Coll. Mr. Andrew Osborn Mr. Ambrose Osborne of Warrington.
P
Dr. Thomas Parnell Dr. Parsons John Price, M. D. Edward Parker, Esquire Robert
Parker, Esquire The Reverend Mr. Price. The Minister of Penwortham The Vicar of
Presbury Christopher Parker, Gent. William Patten, Gent. Nicholas Penington,
Gent. Mr. Pictairn Mr. Parker, Mr. Parker of Oxford Mr. James Pearson Mr.
Thomas Patten Mr. Plumtree Mr. Henry Prescott of Chester. Mr. Thomas Proddy Mr.
John Pope
R
The Earl Rivers. The Countess Dowager Rivers The Lady Elizabeth Rivers Sir
Alex. Rigby, Knt. Dr. Tancred Rovinson, London Dr. Rule. Thomas Rigby, Esquire
William Rosthorn, Esquire John Risley, Esquire Edward Rigby, Esquire Charles Rigby, Esquire
Christopher Rawlison, Esquire Richard Wright Preb. of Chester Mr. Keel of Baliol
Mathematick Lecturer. Mr. Richards, Ex. Coll. Mr. Thomas Rean. Mr. Jonathan
Rose. Mr. Reiner, London
S
His Grace the D. of Somerset. The Honorable James Stanley, Esquire Sir Alexander
Setton, Baronet. Sir Archibald Steinson, M. D. Sir Thomas Stanley. Sir Robert
Sybbald, M. D. Sir Thomas Standish Dr. Sloan, London Dr. Sherwood, London
Thomas Slater, Esquire William Stanford, Esquire Thomas Stafford, Esquire Nicholas Starkey,
Esquire Richard Spencer, Esquire Roger Sudel Major of Preston. Charles Smallwood, L. L.
B. The Reverend Mr. Nicholas of Stocport. John Smith, Gent. John Smith Gent.
Daniel Sanford, Gent. Mr. Strathem Mr. Slyford, London Mr. Skeer Mr. William
Shaw Mr. Stanwicks Mr. Nathaniel Spooner Mr. Barton Shuttleworth. Mr. Edward
Shelton. Mr. Savile. Mr. Samuel. Shaw. Mr. John Stringham. Mr. James Smith. Mr.
John Sheer of Doddington Mr. John Sutherland.
T
Sir Tho. Tyrrell of Thornton Nicholas Townley, Esquire Richard Townley, Esquire
Richard Tompson, Esquire Thomas Townley, Esquire Dr. Tyson, London Dr. Tod John Thane,
Preb. of Chester Mr. Edmund Townley, A. M. Zachariah Tailor A. M. Mr. William
Tailor Mr. Richard Thompson Mr. Benjamin Took Mr. Thomas Tatham
U
Mr. Thomas Vernon
W
The Earl of Warrington. Dr. John Wainright, DD. LL. The Reverend Dr. John
Wallis Dr. Woodroff Dr. Wroe Dr. Willoughby, London Dr. Waterhouse John Ward of
the inner Temple, Esquire Lawrence Walmsley Esquire Bartholomew Walmsley, Esquire Benjamin
Walmsley, Esquire John Wedgewood, Esquire Gabriel Wood, Esquire William Wooley of Derbsh.
Esquire Mr. Will. Ward, Vicar of Portsmouth Mr. Thomas Waltham Mr. Thomas Watson
Mr. Westby Mr. Thomas Wareing Mr. Henry Wise Mr. Richmond Walton Mr. Evan Wall.
Mr. Thomas Williamson Mr. Thomas Wilson Mr. Withers Mr. Whitehead Mr. Thomas
Winkely Mr. Richard Walmsley of Showley Mr. Joseph Walker Mr. Whitehead of
Kirkham Mr. William Walbanck
Y
Joseph Yates, Esquire Charles Yarborough, M. B. Mr. Peter Yates
Advertisement.
I Thought it necessary to give this public notice to all that Subscribed to
this Book, That several Impressions of Seals came to me, enclosed in Letters,
but the Gentlemen who Writ them, mentioned not to whom each particular Coat
belonged; for want of those Directions, I was obliged to omit several; but have
left a Plate, and given Orders for the Engraving of them; So that if those
Gentlemen be pleased to send an Impression of their Arms to Mr. Sturt, an
Engraver, near the White-Lyon in Red-Cross-Street, in London, they may have
their Arms Engraved; and that Plate annexed to the rest.

Place this before the first Plate of the Arms.

blaaon

blaaon

A New Map of LANCASHIRE, CHESHIRE and DERBYSHIRE, in which are Delineated most
of ye Towns, Rivers, Meers, and Places Relating to ye Natural History of these
Countries by Charles Leigh Doctor of Physic
map of Lancashire, Cheshire, and Derbyshire

THE Natural History OF LANCASHIRE, CHESHIRE, AND THE PEAK in DERBYSHIRE.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Ancient Inhabitants, and of the Air in those Counties.

LANCASHIRE, my Native Soil, has its Denomination from Lancaster, the County
Town, an Ancient Corporation, in which there are many and spacious Buildings:
It is Situated upon the River Lune, of which I shall have occasion to treat
hereafter. This Country was formerly Inhabited by the Brigantes, who settled
behind the Mountains, toward the Western Ocean: From what Country these Men
came is not very certain, (as Mr. Cambden affirms) some deriving them from
Spain, others from the Alps, and a third sort giving them that Name from the
Piracies they committed, as the French: However thus far we may conclude, They
were a Warlike People, inhabiting amongst the Ancient Britains; and the further
Disquisition of that matter I leave to the Antiquaries, it being foreign to this
Undertaking: Wherefore I shall hasten to the Natural History, and according to
my designed Method, First, Treat of the natural and various Temperaments of the
Air, and afterward of the unusual Phenomenon which have hapen'd in that
Element.

However before I leave the Ancient Inhabitants of this County, take a farther
Account of them, given by that Learned and Eminent Antiquary, Mr. Hollingworth,
once Fellow of the Collegiate-Church of Manchester, his Manuscript being now
Reposited in the Publick-Library there. The Ancient Inhabitants (says he) of
Yorkshire, Lancashire, Westmorland, Cumberland and Durham, were the Brigantes,
their chief City was York, sometimes called Brigantia: In Vespasian's Time,
Petilius Cerialis struck a Terror into the whole Land, by Invading at his
first Entry the Brigantes, the most populous of all the whole Provinces; many
Battles, and some Bloody ones, were fought, and the greatest part of the
Brigantes were either conquered or wasted.

I dare not be positive in Matters of so abstruse a Nature, but my own Opinion
is, That they Originally were Phoenicians; and this I shall in some measure
endeavor to make out, from the Name of the Island in general, and the
Phoenician Name of a River in these parts. As to the Island it self, as some
have asserted, it was anciently called Bratanac, that word in the Phoenician
Language signifying Tin, which was the chief product of the Isle they
Traffick'd in: However, though that may seem to admit of a debate, yet it is well
known to be the Custom of the Eastern Nations to express themselves by
Allegories, Metaphors, and concise Expressions, and so the Hypothesis is not
irrational. As to the derivation of the word Britannia, it may thus be
accounted for in another sense, Brit in the British Language signifies Paint,
and all our Historians agree the Britains were a painted People; and, as is
imagined, made use of the Juice of Glastum or Woad, and the Land at that time
probably had no other Name save that Monosyllable: But upon the Phoenicians
arrival to Trade upon their Coasts, which chiefly they did in Cornwall, where
the Tin Mines were discovered, and whose Inhabitants were called by the Greeks
Cassiterides; it is very likely then their Weights, which were the Standards of
Commerce, were made of Tin, Lead perhaps not being then discovered. Hence, it
may be, the Phoenician Merchants to the word Brit added anac, which in the
Phoenician Language is Poise or Balance by which they Trade; nor do the
Arabians differ much from that, stiling it ana, which by an easy corruption may
be reduced to Britannia. As to the Brigantes, it is reasonable to conclude, a
greater part of them Phoenicians, a People of Syria, very industrious Improvers
of Navigation, since we have a remarkable River in Lancashire called Ribbel, by
Ptolomy styled Bellisama, which word undoubtedly he derived from the Phoenician
words Belus and sama, signifying in that Language, the Moon, or Goddess of
Heaven, she being supposed to have a particular Influence over Waters, and at
that time the Deity they Adored. Hence it is evident, That before the Greeks
Traded into Britany, the Phoenicians had been there, and no doubt discovered
the greatest part of the Island: Since therefore a River in this Country, in
those early days, retained a Phoenician Name, as the Greek Geographer Ptolomy
makes it manifest it did, to me it seems an undeniable Conjecture to suppose,
that that Name must be attributed to it from the People of that Country, viz.
Phoenicia, that resided near it; probably in the pleasant and beautiful Town
now styled Preston*

To this we may introduce one reasonable Allegation more, That these People
were of an Asiatic Origin, that is, from their manner of making War, which was
in managing their Chariots, as the Eastern Nations practiced, a Custom not made
use of in any European Kingdom, save this Island only: This Julius Caesar found
upon his Invasion of the Isle, which way of Fighting he had not met with,
either in Germany, Gaul, Belgium, or other his conquered Countries.

To these may be added the Reverse of a Roman Coin of Asia minor, which shows
the Expertness of those People in Navigation, above all the World; which may
still more easily induce us to believe, they were a great part of 'em a People
of that Nation; but that will be explained in its proper place, viz. in the
Chapter of Antiquities: However thus far we may venture to conjecture, since
the Asiaticks were so great Masters of that Art, that they might easily
Transplant themselves hither.

For the further Confirmation of what is here laid down, I shall only produce
one Instance more, and so close this Head. It is affirmed by Strabo, and
several others, that the most Northern part of Britany was anciently styled
Thule, which at this Day the Scots term Orkney, and the Latins Orcades. Now
Thule being a Phoenician word, signifying Darkness, by an easy Train of Thought
we may reasonably infer, the Phoenicians might give that Name to those Islands;
either from the great Shadows of their Woods, which were then numerous, or the
Shortness of their Days, many of which are but Five Hours. Since therefore we
may reasonably suppose, the Phoenicians were in those more Northern parts, to
me there appears no difficulty to conceive, how they might Transplant
themselves into Lancashire, and other Counties Inhabited by the Brigantes.
Having now accounted for that River styled by Ptolomy Bellisama, and likewise
made it highly probable, that the Phoenicians were in those Parts, it remains
in the last place, that I assign some Conjectures, why afterward that River
was called Ribbel. Concerning this the Suppositions are various, some deriving
it from the Greek Verb (...), which to me seems irrational; since Bell, which is
a Phoenician word, cannot be accounted for in the Greek Language. Others would
make it British, but I do not see how in that Language that can be made out;
since in British, Avon or Savon are the Names for River, which Words cannot
bear any relation to Ribbel. Wherefore, with submission to the more Knowing in
those Languages, it is my Thoughts, that since from the preceding Topics, we
may reasonably infer the Phoenicians were in those Parts, and cohabited with
the Britains, who being a People of vast Industry and Experience in Navigation,
might from their Neighbors, the Persians, with their Colonies, send hither
several of that Country. The Persians, as well as they, in those Days Deify'd
their Rivers, sometimes stiling them Heaven, and the God and Goddess of Heaven:
Wherefore Arribel in the Armenian Language (which is the Language commonly
spoke in Persia) signifying Heaven, thence Ribbel may be accounted for, and not
otherwise. So far as from the Harmony of Languages I am able to conjecture, the
radical Letters in the Armenian Tongue, and in the River now styled Ribbel,
being in a great measure the same; and the Rivers then, by those People, being
sometimes styled Heaven, I do not see how that consent of Languages and History
can be reconciled, but by supposing People from that Country inhabiting amongst
the Britains.

The more clearly to illustrate, that the Brigantes were a mixed People of
Phoenicians and Britains, I shall produce but one Instance more, and upon that
Head not further presume upon the Reader's Patience. The Instance is taken from
a Rivulet, a Branch of that River before treated of, styled Ribbel; this
Rivulet is at this day vulgarly styled Savig: Now ig in the British Language
being a Diminutive to show the distinction betwixt a River and a Rivulet, which
is therefore added to Avon, which in that Language signifies a River, Afonig
and Savonig in the British Language signifying Rivulet, from thence may easily
be accounted for the Name of that Rivulet now styled Savig: Since therefore in
those Parts we find a mixture of Phoenician, Armenian and British Languages, we
may thence make this reasonable Corollary, that those People lived together.
And why they were styled Brigantes, I presume may be accounted for from
Tacitus, who very likely might take 'em to be a People from Gaul or Belgium,
that is, from the Brigantines Rovers and Pirates; since in those Countries, to
this very time, the Vessels commonly made use of for expedite Sailing, are
styled Brigantines.

The Air for the most part is mild, serene and healthful, excepting on the
Fenny and Maritime parts of the County, where they are frequently visited with
malignant and intermitting Fevers, Scurvies, Consumptions, Dropsies,
Rheumatisms, and the like; occasioned by Sulphurous Saline Effluvia, sometimes
extremely foetid, which I have frequently observed to be so, before the
approaching of some extraordinary Storm; and it is most certain, the
Inhabitants upon the Sea Coasts, from the hollow murmuring Noise, which is
frequently heard from the Ocean, and the offensive Smells perceived from those
Coasts, will make as early and certain a Prognostic of the Change of Weather,
as the Modern Virtuosi can do by their Mercurial Tubes.

It is observable, whilst this Noise is heard in the Ocean, the Surface of the
Water is elevated after an unusual manner; and upon the subsiding of the Water
it is observed, the Storm immediately succeeds: From which Phenomenon it is
reasonable to conclude, the following Tempests to be occasioned by Eruptions
from the Bowels of the Earth, struggling with that mighty Element, till they had
forced their way through its immense Body, which afterward flying about in the
circumambient Atmosphere, frequently occasion tempestuous Commotions, and
sometimes pestilential Distempers. These being the Phenomenon which are almost
each Year observable, I hasten to more unusual Accidents; and, first, shall
begin with those of Lightning and Thunder, and other Appearances in the Heavens.

About Eight Years ago, in a small Village, called Elswick, upon a Sunday about
Three of the Clock in the Afternoon happened a terrible Tempest of Lightning
and Thunder, which produced very dismal Effects. The particulars of it were
these: After several amazing Claps of Thunder, and dreadful Flashes of
Lightning, at last struck through the Air a Blaze, not much unlike that of an
artificial Serpent; it took its course into a Chimney, and beat down the Bricks
outwardly, seemed to burst like a Squib upon the ground, and afterward clouded
the House with Fumes, which had exactly the smell of Sulphur. A Man lying in
the Range of the Chimney, was Killed, and lay as if he had been sleeping; the
Bench upon which he lay was split under him, and under that an Hound-Bitch
Killed; near to him was sitting the Wife of the House, with a little Child upon
her Knee, the Mother afterward was wore away with the Fluor Albus, and the
Child fell into the Rickets, which distorted the Spine, and after some Years,
being confined to his Bed, died of that Distemper.

Behind a Table several Persons were sitting, and from amongst Four or Five,
only One was struck off his Seat into the midst of the Room, and was for some
time Paralytick in his lower Parts; but I afterward by a due Course of
Physic, and Bleeding, and Blistering him immediately upon the Accident,
restored him to his former Health. Another Gentleman sitting in a Chair near
him was struck out of it, and lay upon the Ground in most violent Torture, in
which I saw him; but by Bleeding and Blistering in some Days recovered him.

In the outward Porch were sitting several Persons, and a young Man Killed out
of the midst of 'em, none of the rest being Injured, or sensible of any
Disturbance; only one Woman perceived a Waft, like a Gust of Wind, under her
Coats, but received no damage.

In the Rooms above I observed the following Phenomenon: The Chamber Door was
thrown off the Hinges into the midst of the Room, the Curtains of the Bed were
singed, and its two diagonal Posts split in pieces; the Windows, though fixed
firm in a Brick-Wall, were forced from their stations, but no Glass broke; upon
the outside of the Glass I observed a black Steam, which was insipid, and had
no smell; the Brick Pillars, in which they were fixed, were pierced through
with the Lightning, the Holes were about an Inch diameter, and seemed as if
done Artificially. From these its plain the Matter of the Lightning was in part
Sulphurous, and in this I am further confirmed by some Phenomenon communicated
to me by several, who had made Voyages to the West Indies, who do all affirm,
that in those Parts are frequent and terrible Lightnings, in which dreadful
Hours the Smell of Brimstone is very distinguishable; and sometimes upon their
Hats, and the Decks of the Ships, they find perfect Brimstone collected.
Wherefore it may suffice us Mortals, to be satisfied what is the material Cause
of Lightning and Thunder; but Mechanically to explain how they produce these
wonderful Effects, I do judge is not in the Power of Human Understanding: But
in general, by the Symptoms in the Instances recited, we may conclude, there
was a total Dissipation of the Animal Spirits, and a Coagulation of the Blood:
Wherefore Bleeding and Epispasticks, if any thing be to be done, must certainly
be the Method that ought to be taken.

Many more Instances of this kind might be produced, but it has never been my
Temper to swell a Book with unnecessary Quotations, or to trangress so far upon
the Reader, as to tire out his Patience with Instances of Authors tending to
the same purpose; unless something occurred, that might clearly and fully
evidence the Truth of an Hypothesis, or some wise conduce to the Good of
Mankind: If therefore this History be comprised in a smaller Volume, than
perhaps some might expect, let such be satisfied it is for the Reasons alleged;
and as that hitherto has been, so shall still continue my Resolution.

Mock-Suns, or Parhelii, and Moon-Bows have been observed in this Country; but
as they have not happened in this Generation I shall pass them over, and
proceed to give an Account of some Damps which Infect the Air, in which no
Creature can live. It is observable in several Cellars, especially against hot
Weather, a suffocating Damp arises out of the Earth, this is usually most
violent when any Quantity of strong Liquors are fermenting; in this I have seen
Candles extinguished, Creatures rendered Lethargick, Asthmatical, and their
Tongues lolling out and salivating, and Boys thrown into Swoonings or
Deliquiums. The time I stayed in the Damp, which exceeded not one Minute, I
found a very unaccountable Chilness seize my Spirits, and was sensible of an
universal Weakness, was deeply Asthmatical, and could abide it no longer: This
is removed by Opening the Cellar-Windows, and putting Fires into the Place,
which will not Burn till Vent first be given. Of this I shall have occasion to
treat more fully in the Discourse of Mineral Damps, wherefore shall in this
place pass it over.

The next things remarkable are Hailstones, of which the Year 1697. afforded us
a pregnant Instance. The Wind blowing high at North-west, happened a violent
Storm of Hail, several Stones were Nine Inches in circumference, others were
Six, Seven and Eight. In this Storm several Rooks were Killed in their Nests;
some Hares upon their Seats; vast Quantities of Glass broke, and all Kinds of
Cattle in a general Consternation. Before the Storm happened, several Birds
were taken up, never before that time seen in these Parts; from this its
probable to conjecture, the Tempest arose from the more remote Northern Climes,
and spent it self when it came into a warmer Climate, but was driven by the
Wind: For it was observable, it was almost forced directly cross the County, in
a direct line from the Sea Coasts. Allowing Nitrous, Saline Particles to be the
Cause of Snow and Hail, it is easy to solve the rest of the Phenomenon, by
alleging a greater quantity of those Particles collected in the Atmosphere, at
those times, when these Storms invaded us: Wherefore I shall not form
unnecessary Schemes of Reasoning upon that matter, but proceed to what I next
design; and that is to give an Account of the various Alterations observed in
Quicksilver, upon its Surface in the different Tempers of the Air, and shall
then close this Chapter.

The Learned Mr. Boil, in his Hydrostatick Experiments, and Linus and
Torricellius in theirs, upon Tops, and at the Bottoms of Mountains, have
sufficiently demonstrated, by the Quicksilver ascending the higher, by how much
the more it was immersed in Water; and likewise by rising higher in the
Valleys, than on the Tops of Mountains: The ascending of it in the
Weather-glasses to be by pressure, the weight of the Atmosphere in those Cases
being much greater, and consequently the pressure more. To these I shall add
what has been observed by our Learned Warden, the Revd Dr. Wroe, who for
several Years has kept an exact Diary of the Weather-glass: He always observed
the Quicksilver, upon its ascending, to alter its Surface, insomuch as in very
dry Weather to become perfectly Unequal; and upon an Alteration of the Air to a
wet Temper, to alter to a plain Surface, and in extreme wet Weather to a
perfect Concave, the Mercurial Particles hanging on the sides of the Glass: By
this it should seem, that besides the Ascent made by the Pressure, there is
another also made by the intestine Fermentation of the Quicksilver; and in this
I am the farther confirmed, since Quicksilver in Glass Tubes Hermetically
Sealed, has been observed to Rise and Fall; which could not be, was the Ascent
by Pressure wholly upon the Surface of the Quicksilver contained in the Cup.

Another thing remarkable in the Air, is the exposing openly dried Leaves of
Tobacco, which in the hottest Days do soonest grow Moist; for which no other
Reasons can be assigned, but the Exhalations in hot Weather are far greater,
and consequently the aqueous Particles more numerously ranged in the
Atmosphere: And this I take to be the reason why the Drops of Rain are then
usually larger; and perhaps, for the same reason, the Bigness of Hailstones may
in some measure be solved.

CHESHIRE, a County Palatine, and amongst other Things, Famous for its Earls,
who had a Palatine Jurisdiction belonging to them; and all the Inhabitants held
of them as in Chief, and were under a Sovereign Allegiance and Fealty to them,
as they to the KING. This County was anciently Inhabited by part of the
Cornavii: The Air there may be said to be more Healthful and Mild than in
Lancashire, this County not so much abounding with Fens, Salt-Marshes and
Mosses: What is said more of the Air in Lancashire, may serve as to this Place;
and as to its farther Antiquities, the following Account may be added.

According to Sir Thomas Elliot, the First Name given to this City was
Neomagus, so called from Magus Son of Samothes, Son of Iaphet, its Founder,
(see Lambert page 17th) about 240 Years after the Flood. Were this Account
true, for ought I know it may stand in Competition with the most antique City
in the Universe. Its Second Name was Caerleon, (see Albion Mareoticus) so
nominated from Leon Vaur or Gauer; who, as some will have it, was a Giant in
Albion, and One of its Restorers. The reason of this Conjecture I suppose may,
in some measure, be grounded upon the following History, i. e. upon a Giant's
Skull being dug up in Pepper-street, with the rest of the Bones. Upon the
Britains coming over and settling there, it was afterward called Caerleil; and
afterward Caerleir, because these Two British Kings were Enlargers and
Beautifiers of it, according to Iackson, Stow, and others. Before the Arrival
of the Romans here, it is probable this City was called Genuina or Gunia, as
will more fully appear from the Inscription of a Votive Altar, dug up in this
City, and Dedicated to Jupiter Tanar, that is, in the Welsh Language, the
Thunderer; which language it is likely the Romans might make use of in this
Inscription, to demonstrate their Conquests over the Britains. After the Romans
had six'd here their conquering Legion, styled Valens and Victrix, it was then
styled Caerlheon; Caerlegion, or as it is otherwise commonly called, Ardourdwy;
and Caer by way of Excellence, as Mr. Cambden observes, to distinguish it from
the other Caerleon, or Caerusk, in South Wales. The Latin Historians style it
Cestria, that is, a Castris which the Romans had fixed there; and Leincestria,
that is, the City of the Legions. It has likewise been styled (as is evident
from the Roman Tiles dug up there) Deunana, Deva, and Devana Civitas; and these
Names I presume to be attributed to it from its Proximity to the River Dee. In
later Ages it was styled Legan-Chester, Lege-Cestre; but in these Days
West-Chester, or Chester, as the Greeks express it, (...), that is, to denote
its Preference to Dorchester, or Rochester. By Ptolomy it is sometimes called
Oxcellum, Uxcellum, Plegimundham, and Leogria, or Locrinus Land; of which the
Three first denote no more (as Hollingshed observes in the First Volume of his
Chronicles of England) than a Rock, an Island, or Place of strong Defense; by
which we may easily observe, that this was the Boundary of King Locrinus's
Kingdom Westward: This was the chief City of the Ordovices before the coming in
of the Romans, (as most of our ancient Historians do affirm) those People were
the Inhabitants of North Wales.

The Greatness of this ancient City is still the more conspicuous, from those
stately Remains of its Ruins: I mean the subterraneous Vaults in Cellars
through Freestone Rock; the Entrances into them are ranged into several
Angles, and by what I can learn from the Descriptions of the Catacombs in
Italy, we may reasonably conclude, these to have been made for the same
purpose. This Instance sufficiently demonstrates the Greatness of the Roman
Power at Chester; and likewise, that it is probable, since by their Conquering
Legion there, they had Blocked up the Britains in Wales, that they were
resolved, not only to keep Incorporated while living, but likewise to preserve
even their very Ashes together. In these Passages have been found several Roman
Coins, as I have been informed, which more fully illustrates these Vaults to
have been Heathen, and not those subterraneous Passages made use of by the
Monks, which may be observed in various Monasteries. This may be seen in a
Cellar in Bridge-street, belonging to Mr. John Minshull.

DERBYSHIRE was anciently Inhabited by the Coritani, who these were, as well as
the Cornavii, is uncertain. The Air in the Peak of that Country, is more
subject to Rains and Winds than in Lancashire and Cheshire; and its not
unpleasant to see the Clouds riding after the sides of the Mountains, which by
dashing upon them are frequently forced down in Showers; and by the sudden
Rarefaction of the Meteors in the Air, pent up betwixt the Hills and the
Clouds, and getting vent in the spaces betwixt the Hills, I think may fairly
illustrate, why Winds are in those Parts so frequent; but this will be more
easily conceived, if we consider those Artificial Winds, which are made by an
Aeolipile; which Instrument it was, gave me the first hint of Dulcifying
Salt Water, which Experiment I showed to the University of Oxford, some Years
before Mr. Fitzgerald had a Patent for doing it; who Communicated this
Experiment to him I know not, but its most certain it was not his own. Having
now given Account of what is most remarkable in the Air, I shall proceed to
consider the next Element, and that is Water.

But before I enter upon that, must beg leave to add Two remarkable
Observations. The first is to illustrate the Elasticity of the Atmosphere: The
second is a Description of a Noted Echo at Norton-Hall in Cheshire, the Seat of
my Honored Kinsman Sr. Richard Brook, Baronet. The first was Communicated to
me, and Experimented by Christopher Dauson of Langcliff in the County of
Yorkshire, Esquire which he did in the following manner. At the Bottom of a
prodigious high Hill called Engleborough in Yorkshire, he took a Bladder about
a quarter blown, and tied the Neck of it very close; as he ascended the Hill
the Cylinders of the Atmosphere growing shorter, and consequently pressing less
upon the sides of the Bladder, the internal Air expanded it self so far, that
when he came to the Top of the Mountain it was fully blown, and as he descended
the Hill again, gradually subsided, so that at his coming to the Bottom it was
but a quarter blown as at first; from which Phenomenon the Elasticity, or
Spring of the Air, is manifestly evident.

At Norton in Cheshire there is a remarkable Echo, where at about 60 Yards
distant from the Hall Stairs, the sound of a Flute can scarce be discerned, but
may be heard exactly in an opposite Gate about 30 Yards from the Place
abovementioned; but moving some Six Yards further, in a direct line toward the
opposite Gate, the Sound then vanishes from the said Gate, but may then be very
clearly heard from the Place where the Instrument is sounded: The Sound is
doubtless reverberated from the first Gate House, and then repercussed again by
the opposite Gate House, and forms a Triangle, as near as I could think, by the
opposite and parallel Stations: I observed by distinguishing the sound in this,
the sphere of Activity in Perception is evident, and cannot be more aptly
compared to any thing, than that of Sight; in which to have a true Idea of an
Object, a due distance is necessary, both as to Proximity and Remoteness,
otherwise the Object is not adequately discerned; as we may observe by holding
any Object too near, or too remote from the Organ.

To these may be added an Experiment no less diverting, from Two Chemical
Preparations, e. g. From Spirit of Hartshorn, and Elixir of Vitriol, prepared
by Vigani. Open Two distinct Vials of these, neither of them will emit any
visible Effluvia; but by bringing the Glasses near to each other, you may then
perceive a continued Cloud hang over them. I do not remember the like
Phenomenon to be observed from any other Two Liquors in distinct Vials; which
Experiment may demonstrate to us, the strange Propensity there is in Matter to
separate or unite; but it is most probable, the Volatile Alkalious Particles of
the Hartshorn, and the Volatile Acids of the Elixir, even in the Air, by their
Points and Pores united, by their magnitude become visible, which before could
not be discerned separately: And this I think is the first Experiment that
presents us with a Fermentation hovering in the Air, and likewise demonstrates
to us abundantly, how Saline Particles may, and do invisibly float in the
Atmosphere; but are undiscernible, till concreting into Moleculae, and adapted
to the Figures of the several Pores of their distinct Ores, where they form
Efflorescences; this granted, it will be no difficult matter to account for
Renascences of Salts, and may likewise hint to us, how by such Concretions of
Saline Particles, Distempers are frequently caused in Animals. I have in some
Persons in acute Distempers, ordered the Patient to hold his Finger upon a
Thermometer, or small Glass Tube, impleted with Spirit of Wine; but perceived
nothing further remarkable, than a quick and considerable Ascent, which I might
have expected from the like degree of Heat in any other Body.

These following Observations of the Barometer, were Communicated very lately
to me, by Mr. Prideaux near Ludgate Hill in London, which take as follows. It
is evident, that the Ascent of Mercury in the Barometer, is in a great measure
made by pressure; but whether that pressure be from the circumambient
Atmosphere, upon the superficies of the Mercury contained in the Glass, in
which a Tube containing Mercury is immersed; or from the various Elasticities
of the Air, that implete the Top of the Tube, is the next Thing that merits our
Enquiry. For my part I cannot but adhere to the latter Hypothesis, since the
subsequent Experiments seem to demonstrate it: As first, Let there be immersed
a Mercurial Tube, in another of a larger size, containing Quicksilver; the
smaller Tube is to be annexed to the end of a Trabea, the opposite end of which
is balanced by a Weight or Pondus, that keeps those Two in Aequilibrio; so
that the smallest pressure upon the Superficies of the Mercury, contained in
the larger Tube, in which the small One is immersed, depresses it; thence it
must necessarily follow, as the Mercury in the smaller Tube ascends, the larger
must subside, and alter the Equilibrium, were the pressure upon the Superficies
of the Mercury contained in the Dish. The contrary of which is Matter of Fact:
For as the Mercury in the small Tube ascends, the Balance rises at the same
Time, which it could not possibly do, were the pressure upon the Superficies of
the Quicksilver, contained in the larger Tube, but a different Phenomenon must
necessarily have followed.

Besides it is evident, that a Mercurial Tube, immersed in a Cup, containing
Quicksilver, does not considerably ascend so high in the Tube, as the
Quicksilver in a Tube of the same Length and Diameter, suspended in the Air:
The Reason is, the Air contained in the Top of the Tube, has only that Mercury,
contained within the small Tube to raise, and not that contained in the Dish,
which doubtless must clog its Spring, or Elasticity.

To these may be added a Third Experiment, and that is, Let Two Tubes of equal
Size and Diameter, be immersed in Two Cups containing Mercury; the one a plain
simple Tube, the other in the form of a Bicornu; at the Top of this last the
Mercury ascends considerably higher than in the former; the Reason is plain,
because the Elasticity of the Air in the Bicornu, is double to that in the
single Tube. Now were the Ascent of the Mercury occasioned by the pressure of
the circumambient Air, upon the Superficies of the Quicksilver, contained in
the Dish, its Ascent in the Two different Tubes would be the same; the contrary
of which is Matter of Fact. Any of the Curious may any Day see these, and many
other Observations at the aforesaid Gentleman's House. I could wish the
Gentleman, for his ingenious Experiments, by an Assent of the Learned to his
Hypothesis, might receive his due Honor: Or that our Modern Virtuosi, because
the Notion is New, would not, but upon solid Reasons, endeavor to explode it.
The most material Argument against it is, that of Bladders carried up to the
Tops of Mountains; but supposing the Air to be Thinner at the Bottom of the
Mountain, than it generally is at the Top, and consequently the Spring of the
Air not so clogged, which I am positive is true, that Objection vanishes;
wherefore I shall not expatiate further on this Topic, but leave every Man to
his own Conjecture.

CHAP. II.
In which is accounted for, Waters remarkable for their Levity, those that have
their Flux and Reflux; Mineral Waters of all sorts, those that have been
thought to Transude through Glass Bottles; Subterraneous Eruptions, and the
most Remarkable Rivers and Ponds.

AS these Counties are more subject to Rains, than some of the more Inland
Ones, they likewise afford us greater Variety of Waters, than any One; or
indeed, than all the Counties in England. The most Remarkable are, either
Ponds, which they vulgarly call Meers, Rivers, or Springs. The most Noted Ponds
are only Two, and both of them called by the Name of Martin-Meer: The Larger of
which is now Drein'd by that Ingenious Gentleman, and Generous Undertaker,
Thomas Fleetwood of the Bank, Esquire and will, no doubt, turn to his extraordinary
Advantage, Part of it being a fat, muddy Soil, and containing a great Quantity
of Marle. Its Circumference is about Eighteen Miles, its Diameter Two: In it
were found great Quantities of Fish, as Roach, Eels, Pikes, Perch, Breams, and
the like. Upon the Dreining of this Mere were found, no less than Eight Canoos,
in Figure and Dimensions not much unlike those used in America: And in a Morass
in Sawick, about Nine Miles distant from the Mere, was taken up a Stone, not
unlike a sort of Whetstone, though different from any other Stone I yet saw; and
with it an Instrument of a mixed Metal, resembling the Securis, or Roman
Sacrificing-Ax, though somewhat less; nor unlike that which the Native Indians of
Old used, formed of Stone, in making Hollow their Canoos after Burning, and in
Barking their Trees, which they call a Tomahoke; how therefore, in these
Places, these came to be lodged, is next to be enquired into.

As to the Kinds of Boats the Ancient Britains made use of, we have only this
Tradition from Julius Caesar, that they used Wicker-Boats covered with Hides,
that his Ships of War and Galleys were an unknown Terror to the Inhabitants
here. He likewise tells us, the Britains on the the Maritime Coasts, Traded to
Belgium and Gallia, by which he probably means, Holland, Flanders, etc. that
their Buildings were very Eminent, their Manners, Customs and Politeness, like
their transmarine Neighbors; that they made use of Brass Imported, that Iron
was a Product of the Country, but in small quantity; but that Lead was
discovered in the Inland Counties, and so proceeds.

As to these Canoos, One of which had some Plates of Iron upon it, it is my
Opinion, they were made use of by the Ancient Britains in Fishing these Meers,
and passing Rivers; not that the Inhabitants were so long in forming them, by
burning them hollow, and shaping them with sharp Stones, as the American's
were, before the European Metals came amongst them; which as the Missionaries
inform us, with One of our Instruments, could in One Day dispatch as much as in
Six Months before. The Britains doubtless had the Use of Iron, etc. and were
furnished with it from the Maritime Ports, and they from the foreign Merchants;
these Canoos might probably be sunk here, that they might be rendered of no
Advantage to the Romans, when the Natives were forced to quit their
Habitations, by their prevailing Arms; nor can I imagine these an Effect of the
Deluge, neither the Metal Instrument, nor Stone found in the forementioned
Moss, but that they further confirm what I shall make out afterward, that
Morasses Vegetate, and that they proceed and increase from the Plants that grow
upon them; and notwithstanding the Subterraneous Trees found there, though we
consent to omit them in the Argument, there are yet so many others of different
Species, together with Marine Shells, and other Exotic Exuviae, found many
Yards in Marle in the Inland Counties, that without supposing Morasses to
proceed from the Deluge, as many contend, they may fairly and fully be
otherwise accounted for. As to the Instrument and Stone, they might casually be
lost there, and lie absconded for successive Generations.

I had almost slipped one thing, which may give us a clear Idea of the Greatness
and Difficulty of this noble and useful Enterprise, the Dreining of this
remarkable Mere, in effecting of which there were sometimes no less than two
Thousand Hands at once employed; so that to surmount all the natural and
artificial Oppositions of the Work, there was highly needful a Person of so
generous and piercing a Spirit, and so extraordinary a Temper, as the worthy
and successful Undertaker.

Besides these sorts of Canoos, it is unquestionably true the Britains made use
of another kind of Boats, the use of which proved of great Service to Julius
Caesar, as we find in the first Book, de Bello Civili, cap. 11. for when he had
pitched his Tents betwixt Sicoris and Cinga, two Rivers in Spain, over which he
had the Convenience of two Bridges, a sudden Inundation broke them both down,
and overflowing the Banks, cut off all Communication betwixt his Foragers that
were sent out, and his Friends marching to his Assistance, and his distressed
Army. He was reduced to great Extremity, nor could he possibly repair the
Bridges, by all the Efforts he made, the Opposition of the Enemy's Cohorts were
so vigorous on the other side. His last Refuge was for building these light
Boats, the use of which he had learned in Britain, and which proved of high
Advantage to his perishing Army: Imperat militibus (says Caesar) ut naves
faciant, cujus generis eum annis superioribus usus Britanniae docuerat. Carinae
primum ac statumina, ex levi materia fiebant: reliquum corpus navium, viminibus
contextum, coriis integebatur. And Lucan, speaking of the same thing, expresses
himself thus, lib. 4. ver. 130.

Utque habuit ripas Sicoris, camposque reliquit,
Primum cana salix madefacto vimine parvam
Texitur in puppim, caesoque inducta juvenco
Vectoris patiens tumidum superenatat amnem.
Sic Venetus stagnante Pado, fusoque Britannus
Navigat Oceano: sic cum tenet omnia Nilus,
Conseritur bibula Memphitis cymba papyro.
The Commentator upon the Place quotes Pliny, lib. 4. c. 16. Ad eam Britanni
vitilibus navigiis corio circumsutis navigare. From the whole it may seem
probable the Britains upon the Ocean might make use of their Wicker-Boats, in
Meers and standing Waters of their Canoos. Lucan's Verses may be thus rendered:

Caesar the Champain leaves and spreading Ground,
When Sicoris Waves his daring Troops surround;
The twisting Willows to the Keel he joins,
And reeking Hides cement and close their Lines:
Proud of their Crews, they waft them to the Shore;
Such Venice knows, such Britain taught before,
Such Boats has Nile it self to Memphis bore.
The other Mere is about Two Miles in Length, and One in Breadth; and is famous
for Pearches, and vast quantities of Fowls, as Curlews, Curleyhilps,
Wild-Ducks, Wild-Geese, and Swans, which are there sometimes in great Numbers:
There was killed upon that Water an Asper, of which I prepared the Oil, but did
not find that it answered the Character generally given of it for taking of
Fish. These Meers lie in low Grounds, have Rivulets or little Rivers, that
discharge themselves into them, and having but little Vent out, form themselves
into these large Area's. In the Mere that was drein'd were found great Numbers
of Firr Stocks, and Firr-Apples; so that Mr. Cambden is certainly mistaken,
when he asserts those Stocks not to be really Firrs, but other Woods only made
Resinous by a Bituminous Earth, in which they have been lodged, as is commonly
conjectured, since the noted Deluge; however the Woods might be altered, its
certain the Apples could not belong to any other Tree: But I shall have
occasion to treat more fully of these, when I come to treat of the Mosses.

The Rivers of most Note are, the Mersey, Ribbel, Lune, and Wire; the Dee and
the Dove in Cheshire and Derbyshire. Mersey runs by Warrington anciently
remarkable for its Lords, the Butlers, who obtained for it the Privilege of a
Market Town in Edward the First's Time; and is now a Town famous for its Trade
and Market, where I think I may safely affirm, Maulting is brought to as great
Perfection as at Derby, or elsewhere, the Liquors brewed from it being no ways
inferior to the most noted Ales in England. From Warrington the Mersey grows
broader, and soon after contracts it self again, but at last opens into a wide
Mouth very Commodious for Trade; and then runs into the Sea near Leverpool, a
Town formerly but mean, but now the Third Seaport of England, and as well
Built as any I have seen. In this River are taken vast quantities of Sparlings,
or Smelts, a Fish remarkable for its Smell, as well as Taste.

Ribbel, called anciently Bellisama, has its Rise from amongst the Mountains in
Yorkshire, and runs by Ribchester and Preston; from thence grows wider, and in
the Meals empties it self into the Sea. This River affords us plenty of
Salmon, Codfish, Flounders, Turbut and Plaise; but a River by reason of its
Sands, very unfit for Trading.

The Lune, (from what will hereafter be observed, may take its Name from Luna,
the Moon or the Goddess of Heaven) runs by Lancaster, and arises from the
Mountains in Westmorland: Upon this River is a noted Salmon-Fishing, the best I
have eat any where, and is very Commodious for Trading, which is there now
blooming.

Wire issues from the Mountains in Wiresdale, runs not far from a Market Town
called Poulton, as Commodious for Trading as any of the rest: This River
affords us a Pearl-Fishing, which are frequently found in large Muscles, called
by the Inhabitants Hambilton-Hookins, from their manner of taking them, which
is done by plucking them from their Skeers or Beds with Hooks; but of these I
shall have occasion to treat more fully, when I come to speak of Shell-Fishes,
and the Germination of Pearls.

The River Dee is the most Noted in Cheshire, in Latin called Deva, as appears
by the Roman Tiles dug up there, upon some of which are these Letters in Roman
Characters, COLL. DEVA LEG. XX. V. V. In British it is called Dyfyrdwy, as
springing from two Fountains in Wales, from which some believe it had its
Denomination, dwy in the British Language signifying Two: Others say those
words signify black Water; but why that Epithet should be applied to this
River, I see no ground for it, the River being large and open, and the Water
clear and pellucid. Some allege these Words signify a divine Water, and hence a
Fountain sacred to the Gods was called Divona; and upon some Roman Tiles dug up
at Chester I have seen that word in Roman Characters: Nor is this Conjecture
altogether improbable, since in those Days divine Honors were paid to Rivers,
as Gildas informs us, the Thessalians paid them to Peneus, upon account of its
Pleasantness; the Scythians to Ister, for its Largeness; the Germans to the
Rhine, because it was their Judge in Cases of Jealousy betwixt Married Persons.
It is said moreover of this River Dee, it seemed Holy to the Christian
Britains, for when they were drawn up in Order of Battle, ready to engage the
Saxons, they first kissed the Earth, then devoutly drank of this Water, in
Memory of the Blood of their Holy Savior.

The River Dove in Derbyshire, called so by the Inhabitants from its
Transparency, I imagine, as resembling the silver Feathers of that Bird, is
remarkable for a Fish called the Grailing, and likewise Trouts said to be the
best in England. It runs for the greatest part through a Limestone, which
renders its Water so fertile a Manure, that even in Winter the Meadows on both
sides of it appear fresh and green; and if it overflows them in the Spring,
like another Nile, it enriches them: In Commemoration of which high
Improvements, the People have this Saying: In April Dove's Flood
Is worth a King's Good.


But of this River in a far loftier Strain the Ingenious Charles Cotton Esquire
writes; for by his witty Flights on these Streams, one would rather conclude
they washed the Banks of Helicon, than the rugged, unpolished Mountains in
Derbyshire. This River swells sometimes so much in twelve Hours time, to the
great terror of the Inhabitants, that it carries down their Sheep and other
Cattle; yet in the same Compass of Time falls again, and returns to its old
Mounds; whereas the Trent, when it overflows its Banks, keeps the Fields in
float four or five Days: these Reasons are manifest; because in one the Country
is Mountainous, the other is a large extended Flat. This River runs to Ulcester
seated upon an Hill of easy Ascent, where it draws to the Trent; it inclines
toward Tutbury-Castle formerly very large, and also called Stutesbury,
commanding as it were the lower Country by its high Situation on an
Alabaster-Hill, where there is a little Monastery built by Henry de Feriers, a
Noble Norman, to whom William the First gave large Possessions hereabouts; but
they were all lost by Robert de Feriers, Earl of Derby, upon his Second Revolt
from Henry the Third.

There are now Proposals for making the River Dee Navigable, which, if
effected, will doubtless be very advantageous to that ancient City, where that
Honorable Legion, viz. the Twentieth was fixed, styled by the Romans, Valens
Victrix, which was of those by Tacitus termed Emeriti or Veterani.

Having done with the Meers and Rivers, according to my proposed Method I come
now to treat, first, Of the Springs, not properly to be called Mineral-Waters,
but yet remarkable, either for their Lightness, Coldness, Perspiration, Flux
and Reflux; and of these some are continual, others at certain Seasons, as
after wet Weather, and some are remarkable for throwing up several Marine
Shells. Secondly, of Mineral-Waters, and the various Kinds of these, with an
Account of their Principles and Uses; and of those, these Counties afford us a
great Variety.

Near to a Noble Seat called Ashton-Hall about two Miles from Lancaster, which
Seat is now in Possession of the Rt Honble the Lady Gerrard of Bromley, from a
white Marle issues a pleasant and smooth Water remarkable for its agreeable
Taste and Lightness: This Water is lighter by an Ounce in a Pint than any I have
seen in these Parts. Now all Waters containing more or less of Earthly
Particles, and in the various Consistencies and Quantities of those, differing
one from another in Gravity; it may be imagined this Water to receive its Oily
Taste and Lightness from the white Marle, that being an Oily and light Body, and
the best Tillage this Country affords.

A Spring remarkable for its Perspiration is that near Stalo-Bridge in
Cheshire: This Water, if put into a Glass Bottle closely Corked, will force its
way through the Pores of the Glass; or the Water by emitting cold Effluvia upon
the external Superficies of the Glass condenses the aqueous Particles of the
Air, and so forms that Dew, or Sweat so often observable there: For my part,
considering how difficult it is for any Menstruum whatever to penetrate the
Pores of Glass, nay even for Air it self, as is sufficiently evidenced by the
Experiments in the Air Pump: I must own my assent to the latter; and this may
be farther illustrated by the Dews upon Bottles in Wine-Cellars, which are
wholly insipid, and consequently cannot be spirituous Liquor that perspires
through the Pores, but the aqueous Particles of the Air there condensed.

Springs remarkable for their Coldness in these Countries we have none, save
One near Larbrick, which is a Water extremely Cold, and of which I shall treat
in its proper place; this Water is the Coldest I have seen in these Parts, and
may no doubt answer the ends performed by that of St. Mungus in Yorkshire.

We have only One Spring that Ebbs and Flows, and that is called Tideswell in
the Peak in Derbyshire, though nothing so Noted as that near Gigleswig in
Yorkshire, where I have seen the Water to ebb and flow several times in an
Hour; and always upon the subsiding of the Water, heard a gutling Noise within
the Mountain, not unlike that obvious to us in pouring Liquors out of Bottles,
only it is much louder; Conjectures about this Flux and Reflux are various,
some imagining it to be caused by the return of a Stone, that in an Aqueduct
hangs in aequilibrio, as the Learned Mr. Hobbs; others that a large Receptacle
filled with Water by subterraneous Winds from the opposite part is blown over,
as LeGrand and others of the French Virtuosi.

Though Mr. Hobbs's Hypothesis seems to carry the greater stress of Reason along
with it, yet at the same time if we consider the Effects Water has upon Stone,
upon which it continually falls, or runs over, in diminishing its Superficies,
or over-turning those of a prodigious Bigness upon Floods, or other Eruptions,
it will be as difficult to conceive, how a Stone should be so exactly poised in
an Aqueduct so long a space of time as this must needs have been, so as to
occasion a Flux and Reflux of the Waters, as is observable in these Fountains.
Wherefore I shall venture to form a different Hypothesis, and that it may be
performed with all the Perspicuity so dark a matter will admit, in the first
place I will describe the Spring, and its situation, as exactly as I remember.
The most noted Spring of this Nature is at Gigleswig in Yorkshire, as
abovementioned: The Well lies at the Bottom of a Mountain of a considerable
Height, and is almost contiguous to a great Road betwixt Settle, Lancashire,
and Westmorland. The Diameter of the Spring, as I think, is about a Yard, and
the Perpendicular near the same dimension: The Flux and Reflux is not always
certain being sometimes only once, again twice, sometimes thrice an Hour; and I
think the Water upon the Flux may subside about three quarters of a Yard, and
then you always hear an hollow gutling Noise within the Mountain, as is above
recited: From these Phenomenon it seems reasonable to conjecture, that within
the Mountain is a considerable Cavity impleted with Air, from which the
Aqueducts that form the Spring run; and that those and their Exits are but
small, and it is very probable from this Cavity they do not run in direct, but
spiral Lines like those in a Worm used in Distillation: Now when the Water that
ascends out of the Earth, which composes these Springs, reaches this Cavity,
they must necessarily, as it fills gradually, press the Air into the spiral
Aqueducts, and force it forward to the end of the Aqueduct; it is there then
obstructed by the Water in the Well, only a little Air and Water getting vent
raises gradually the Spring; the Duct still continues to fill higher and higher
with Water, till at length by its Gravity the Air is forced through, and then
it is the Flux happens, and the hollow gutling Noise is heard, occasioned
undoubtedly by the external Air rushing in, and struggling with the Water to
supply the Cavity of the Mountain, which is now discharged of that Water, but
still impleted with Air; it is now the Flux ceases, and again renews as before,
and so it reciprocally succeeds. Such spiral Aqueducts I have frequently
observed in the Mountains in Derbyshire, particularly near Tideswell, where
that other Spring ebbs and flows, hence it seems rational the same may be here
also: However here is not any thing dogmatically asserted, nor am I so bigoted
to this Hypothesis, but can easily quit it when any more reasonable is offered,
and more exactly quadrates with the Phenomenon of these Springs. Now as these
Aqueducts are more or less Spiral, or of different Dimensions from the Sinus
within the Mountain impleted with Air; or as the Spring that fills the Duct
with Water is but easy, or rapid, so its probable the Flux and Reflux becomes
so uncertain, for in some it flows not once in several Hours, as in that called
Tideswell, the Water perhaps being sometimes diverted by other Aqueducts, and
reaches not the Cavity or Sinus within the Mountain; this may happen by several
accidents, as the falling in of Earth, or Pebles, which for a time may divert
the common course of the Spring, till by a continual currency it forces its
passage again.

Several Springs we have which are only at certain Seasons, as some near the
Manor in Furness, these are occasioned by Rains, or an hazy Atmosphere. At
this Abbey are the most stately Ruins I have any where observed, as most
beautiful Pillars, spacious Windows, noble Arches, and subterraneous Vaults.
Near this place is a considerable Salmon Fishing, and a large Park, in which
are variety of Deer, as Red, Fallow and White, and is by much the most curious
Seat in these Parts: It was formerly possessed by Sir Thomas Preston, who quitted
it; and as I have been informed, is one of the Religious, and amongst them one
of the meanest Order: But is now possessed by the noble and virtuous Lady Madam
Katharine Preston, Daughter and Heiress of Thomas Preston of Holker Esquire. Though
this Digression be foreign to a Natural History, yet I hope the Reader will
pardon it, since I could not well pass by so considerable a Building.

Some Waters we have which cast up Marine Shells, as Latham Spaw did formerly;
but that being troublesome to the Drinkers has been prevented by laying
Millstones upon the Spring, so that the Sand and Shells cannot boil up so high
as formerly: This is one of the best sorts of Vitriolic Chalybeates, and is
remote from the Sea, or any Salt Rivers; whence therefore these Shells come may
be worth our enquiry, and a clear decision of that may farther illustrate those
other Marine Shells found in Marle; as the Echini, Cochleae, Torculars, Whilks
and Periwinkles, of which I have great Numbers by me, and took them my self out
of firm Marle at three Fathom deep, some being entire, others broken, but all
soft and friable, yet grew hard as Coral being exposed to the Air. The Decision
of this Phenomenon in a great measure depending upon the Origin of Fountains,
I think it a pardonable digression, if I a little expatiate on that subject
before we descend to the particular Case.

Springs by the French Virtuosi are supposed to flow from the Dews, Rains and
Mists imbibed in the Earth, and afterward formed into various Currents, which
are those we commonly call Springs: Now this being a Notion inconsistent with
Reason I cannot adhere to it; for were this Hypothesis true, it would hence
follow in the various Seasons of the Year, as Summer and Winter, they would
vary very much in their Currents as to quantity, which in several Springs is
not discernible. Secondly, Several Springs are found in Mines in the Bowels of
the Earth, deeper than the Dews and Rains are supposed to descend. Thirdly,
Some Countries abound with Springs where Dews and Rains are never known to
fall; from all these it is evident continual Springs can never be imagined to
be caused by Rains and Dews; it remains therefore that they either proceed from
the Ocean, or a subterraneous Abyss: The latter of these the Learned Dr.
Woodward adheres to, and could such a thing be made out, his Hypothesis would
be undeniable; but such a thing as an Abyss being no where to be discovered in
Nature, and that what Notions we have of it are only from Moses that divine
Philosopher: In what sense the inspired Legislator might take the Abyss we
pretend not to determine, whether the Ocean in general, or a subterraneous
collection of Waters equal to it, and keeping a Communication with it, as Dr.
Woodward supposes: Wherefore we rather assert what the great Aristotle supposes
concerning Springs, that they have their Rise from the Sea; of this Caesar had
a clear Demonstration when he Invaded this Island, and Encamped upon the Sea
Coasts, where by digging in the Sands he was instantly supplied with a
sufficient quantity of fresh Water, which by filtring through the Sand became
sweet the saline Particles sticking in the Sand. A Phenomenon like to this was
observed when that great General Duke Schomberg Encamped upon a Plain called
the Mels near Hile-Lake: This granted then that Springs have their Rise from
the Ocean, it is easy to imagine how they may bring up Marine Shells, and unless
this be allowed, I think the Phenomenon cannot otherwise be fairly
illustrated; but how this becomes a Mineral Water is from the Mineral Bass from
which it springs. Against this Hypothesis there remains yet one material
Objection, viz. If Fountains have their Rise from the Sea, how comes it to pass
that there are Springs upon the Tops of Mountains, which are higher than the
Sea, since it is evident from Hydrostatick Experiments Water will not naturally
rise above its level. To this I answer, in the first place it is no wise
demonstrable that there is any Mountain higher than the highest part of the
Ocean, since it is supposed to be a Globe of equal Magnitude with the Earth.
Secondly, Granting it were so, yet it is probable those Mountains lying in the
middle Region, a sufficient quantity of aqueous Particles might be imbibed by
the Earth to produce Springs there, and yet this particular Instance does no
ways invalidate the general Hypothesis, in which is meant the generality of
Springs, and not each particular Fountain. It is true subterraneous Eruptions
of Waters especially after Earthquakes, as at Port Royal in Iamaica, and at
Kirby in Furness in Lancashire have happened, which have drove down Houses, and
Rocks of that magnitude, that many Teams of Oxen could not move, by which it
may be concluded there is a subterraneous Abyss of Waters: To this I say, it is
not certain whether these come from the Ocean, or from an Abyss, and shall not
therefore pretend to determine it, but shall proceed to what I next proposed,
and that is to treat of Mineral Waters: In doing of which I begin with those
impregnated with Vitriol.

The Vitriol Spring in the Kennel-Pits at Haigh, when I first tried it, yielded
an Ounce of Vitriol from a Quart of Water; nay it was so highly impleted with
Vitriol, that any common Alkaly would raise a Fermentation with it, and cause a
Precipitation: The Vitriol it yields is White for the greatest part, though there
is some Green mixed with it; it is not now of that strength several fresh
Springs having broken in, which yet might easily be diverted; of this the Revd
Dr. Wroe our Warden has been frequently an Eyewitness: Notwithstanding this
Dr. Lister with unequaled Assurance tells the World Vitriol is not to be found
in any Waters in England, but that all Waters of a Vitriolic Taste are only
impregnated with a Pyrites (which we vulgarly call Fire-Stone) Germinating in
the Waters; and this must be imposed upon the World as implicitly, as if it was
an Article of Faith in Philosophy: For any Man to oppose him he brands him
strait with the Character of Mean and Impudent, and such like opprobrious
Epithets, a Language, if I mistake not, unaccountable for one of his Gown and
Dignity: For my part what I relate is matter of Fact, and the Dr. may be fully
convinced if he pleases, if not it is no fault of mine; and since I cannot as
firmly believe the Germination of the Pyrites in our Chalybeat Waters (as they
are commonly called) to be like that of Mint in Bottles of Water, I hope the
Dr. will pardon my Infidelity till he give me better grounds for it, at which
he has not yet offered any farther than a capricious ipse dixit.

Adjacent to a Place called Humblesco-Green, in a small Farm in Maudsley is a
Spring impregnated with Sulphur and a Marine Salt; the Water is extremely
foetid, tinges Silver a Copper color by its Sulphur; in Distillation a Quart
of Water yields half an Ounce of sulphur Salt. This Spring no question would
answer all the Intentions of the sulphur Water near Knaseborough in Yorkshire
either as to Bathing or Drinking; and no doubt by the addition of Rock Salt
might be made an advantageous Salt-work, having Coals so convenient. The Salt
at the first boiling is brown and foetid, but dissolved and evaporated again
makes as good a Salt as any I have seen; it springs out of Bass and has I
presume from that its sulphurous and saline Particles: The various Kinds of
Bass I shall discourse of in their proper place, and there show how they are
impregnated with different Principles.

There are other Springs that arise out of Bass, and are sulphurous and saline
yet different from the former, as St. Anne's, and the hot Baths at Buxton in
Derbyshire; here the Waters are sulphurous and saline, yet not foetid, but
very palatable, because in these Waters the Sulphur is not united with any
Vitriolic Particles, or but very few saline, it tinges not Silver, nor is
Purgative, by reason its saline Parts are dispensed in such small proportions,
which saline Particles make up a compound Salt constituted of a marine Salt,
and the Sal Catharticum Amarum, which indeed is the Nitrum Calcarium, that
impregnates Epsom, Northall, Dulech, and the rest of the Purging-Waters in
those Parts. These Waters if drank create a good Appetite, open Obstructions,
and no doubt, if mixed with the Chalybeat Waters that are there, may answer all
the Intentions of the Bath Waters in Somersetshire, and that of St. Vincent's
near Bristol so noted for Curing the Diabetes, of which I have seen several
Instances in these Parts; and likewise for Curing of Bloody Urines arising from
the weakness of the Urinary Vessels, of which I saw a most noted Instance in
Leverpool. This Bath is of a temperate Heat, and without question by
reverberating the Halitus, might be brought to any degree of Heat; but I think
in its own natural Heat it may in general be said to be more agreeable to the
Constitutions of those Parts, and where the hot Baths cannot be safely used
this may. This last Summer I saw remarkable Instances of its Effects in
scorbutic Rheumatisms, in Persons that could not go before without the help of
Crutches, who came from thence to Manchester on Foot without them, distant from
Buxton full sixteen Northern Miles.

But the Virtues as well as Use of Bathing are so particularly described by my
Honored Friend Sir John Floyer of Lichfield, that for your further
satisfaction I refer you to his elaborate Piece, and shall only abridge those
Cases he recites. These hot Baths spring out of a Bass not unlike Marble, and
it is pleasant to see in what Bubbles the sulphurous Halitus breaks out of its
Matrix, and impregnates the Waters. After our worthy Author had given us a most
exact Account of Perspiration, from his Own and Sanctorius's Observations (in
rightly considering which consists the Basis and Usefulness of all Bathing) in
the first place he enumerates the Mischiefs of the hot Baths.

In his 2d Part, p. 2. I observed (says he) that many Persons came to the hot
Baths at Bathe without any good Advice; or they who came with it used it
indiscreetly, and imprudently managed their Bathing, by using it without any
due Evacuation, or continuing it too long, that they went from thence worse
than they came; some having enflamed their Blood, and thickened its Serum, so
as to renew their Rheumatick Pains; others Died of Fevers, Consumptions,
Convulsions, Bleeding, and Imposthumes. Instances of these I have seen in
several in these Parts; but this Point Dr. Pierce is pleased to touch as
tenderly as an Hypothesis about the Waters, of which he seems afraid, but would
have us rest satisfied without asking Questions, and bring the Ingenuity of the
most polite Parts, to an equal level with the most unthinking Animal: For my
part I shall not fear to deliver my Sentiments, since I have no other end in it
than to inform the World, in the Phenomenon I observed in Nature; and if these
be exposing One's self to be thrown at like a Shrove-tide Cock, as he observes,
if I escape the terrible Blow of being Neck'd, and survive the Combat, the
Comb shall be at his Service.

These Instances, as he proceeds, may convince all considering Persons, that we
ought not to use hot Baths for Pleasure, especially where there is a fullness of
Humors, and a hot Constitution; and since the following Accidents frequently
happen upon Bathing, they will certainly overbalance all the Pleasure of it;
the Inconveniences he reckons are profuse Sweats and Haemorrhages, Apoplexies,
Sleepiness, Vertigo's, Convulsions, Asthma's, debility of the Sight, Swooning,
a general lassitude and dejection of the Appetite, Torpor of the Mind, and
Effeminacy of the Flesh, page 4. My Journey to Buxton this last Year discovered
to me a Bath, very different to that at Bathe, it being a very temperate one,
producing no Sweating after it, but rather a Coldness; and upon a due
Consideration I found the Bath very useful in many Cases, in which that of
Bathe did Injury, as in Comsumptions, hot Scorbutic Pains, and all Defluxions
of Humors, and Bleedings, and all hot inordinate Flatulencies of the animal
Spirits, in Hysteric and Hypocondriac Cases. The farther Particulars may be
seen at large in his third Chapter, to which I refer you, as likewise to his
Extract out of Dr. Jones, and the Observations annexed to his ingenious
Treatise.

Before I close the Discourse of this Bath it may be enquired, why the Sulphur
in one Bath tinges Silver a Copper color, as that at Knarseborough and
Maudsley; why others of a Golden or Yellowish color, as those in
Somersetshire; and why others impregnated with Sulphur tinge not at all. To
these I answer, Where Sulphur tinges a Copper color, it is from the addition
of a Vitriolic Salt, as is common to observe from the solutions of Sulphur and
Vitriol; but where a Golden color ensues it is from a greater proportion of
mineral Sulphur, and but little of Vitriol, as in the sulphur Auratum of
Antimony, and the golden Pyrites: But where they Tinge not at all, its from
Sulphur only, as that at Buxton, which seems to arise out of a Bassy Marble.

The Waters we shall next consider are the Acidulae, or those commonly called
Chalybeats, with which these Counties abound. The most Notes are those near
Lantham, Wigan, Stockport, Burnley, Bolton, Plumpton, Middleton, Strangeway
near Manchester, Lancaster, Larbrick, Chorley, and of these Stockport is much
the strongest; these Waters spring out at the Bottom of a great Rock, in
strength are much the same in Winter as Summer, which is a Convenience very few
in England besides them have; these Waters give as deep a Tincture with Galls,
as any I ever saw, and where Chalybeats are indicated exceed those of
Knarseborough and Tunbridge; they will in twenty-four Hours, by being exposed
to the Air become insipid, and then yield no Tincture; these Waters lie very
light, not heavy upon the Stomach, which is a Convenience the Drinkers of
Knarseborough and Tunbridge have not.

These Waters are impregnated with Sulphur, Vitriol and Ocre, a little of the
Lapis Scissilis, and a marine Salt united with the bitter purging Salt, as in
the Chalybeat Water at Latham, but these Two last it yields in small
quantities, a Gallon of Water not affording many Grains of Salt, but Ocre and
Vitriol they contain plentifully; the Ocre is impregnated with Iron, and for
that reason, and no other, may these Waters be called Chalybeats: the Sulphur
is only discernible early in the Morning, and that chiefly by their smell, though
there is a Chalybeat near Manchester, whose smell is very Sulphurous at all
times; these Waters most commonly spring out of a Bass that is impregnated with
Sulphur, Ocre and Vitriol, which I demonstrated to the Hond Sir John Floyer at
Buxton: I showed him the Shale or Bass, and by infusing various Proportions of
it in common Water, you may have all the various Colors of the Acidulae, viz.
A pale Red, a deep Red, a Violet and a Purple: As therefore the Acidulae are
differently impregnated with this Bass, their Colors are likewise different.
At the same time I showed him an Acidula springing out of this Bass, and
likewise that the Bass was impregnated with Sulphur, Vitriol and Ocre, though Dr.
Lister vehemently affirms, no Stone but the Pyrites contains Vitriol; but when
a Man writes only what he fancies, and not what he sees, it cannot be imagined
but he must assert many Paradoxes; and by too tenaciously adhering to a well
woven Hypothesis, in effect makes himself one of the meanest of Philosophers.
It is not the mechanisme of Reason, and the espousing of a Word which sounds
pleasantly, that illustrates the Phenomenon of Nature; but that which is plain,
easy and intelligible, and what may rationally from Experiments be deduced,
that gives a Man a true Gust in natural Learning: The Dr. then may rail as long
as he pleases, but he can never make me disbelieve my Senses, or assent to that
which is contrary to the common Reason of Mankind. Of these I have given a full
Account in my Tentamen of Mineral Waters, and my Exercitations, to those
therefore I refer my Reader; I shall only presume so far upon the Reader's
Patience to annex the following Experiments, and shall not expatiate further on
this Subject.

The First is to show, Why Galls, Oak-leaves, etc. will give a Tincture with
those Waters vulgarly Chalybeats, and why other Acids will not. The Second is
to illustrate, How by mixing Acids with those Waters before you put the Galls
to 'em, that then the Galls, etc. will not. To clear these Phenomenon we must
premise these Hypotheses, viz. That several of the mineral Particles are
suspended in the fluid, perhaps as near to an Equilibrium or Balance as can
easily be conceived; so that the least addition of another Body to 'em, must
instantly cause a Precipitation, and consequently then give a Tincture to these
Waters, by impleting their Pores, and so in different Angles transmitting the
Light, which must needs introduce a Diversity of Colors, viz. A pale Red,
Agat, Violet, Purple, or intense Red, according to the various Proportions of
the Mineral impregnating the Water: Hence therefore it is, that the Galls
containing a volatile Acid, or rather austere, that by their hooked Particles
they easily clasp themselves about the mineral Particles, and must therefore
(as is evident from the Premises laid down) necessarily cause a precipitation
of the Mineral; which I shall more fully illustrate, by making it probable,
that the mineral Particles are suspended in the fluid in the manner recited. It
is observable, that the Earth over which these Springs run is always covered
with an Ocre; which to me seems evidently to hint, that the mineral to the
fluid retains so equal a balance, that the least motion occasions a separation;
and thence it is, that in those places where they have their currents, they
constantly drop an Ocre, and color the Earth as before observed.

The second Experiment is this: If before you put in the Gall you add an Acid
to the Water, as for example, Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur, the Gall then gives
little or no Tincture to the Water; and the Reason I take to be this, the Acid
you mix with it being specifically heavier than either the mineral Particles or
the fluid, by their rigid inflexible Particles keep the Mineral suspended; so
that consequently the acid of the Gall being volatile, it is not powerful
enough to bring 'em down, and thence it is that by this method they usually
hover upon the surface of the Water in an azure Cloud, the Mineral as well as
that being Volatile; which is abundantly evident, both in the Evaporation of
those Waters, and likewise by exposing them to the Sun, which in twenty-four
Hours makes them insipid, and in that space of time so sequestered of the
mineral Particles, that then they will not yield any Tincture with a Gall, or
if any but a faint one: So volatile is the Vitriol in those Waters, which no
doubt is carried off by the Sulphur, which from its Volatility might justly be
drawn like the Statue of Mercury winged, and still pointing upwards.

To these I thought necessary to add the following Experiments, that I might do
Justice both to the public, and to that most Learned and Ingenious Gentleman
Richard Townley of Townley Esquire who Communicated them to me.

In the Water at Burnley in Lancashire he has observed the following
Phenomenon: First, That if that Water be exposed to the Air there will subside
a Scarlet sediment. This being a Phenomenon never observed before in any Water
in England I ever heard of, it may therefore justly challenge our Conjectures
about it. Ocre and Lapis Scissilis, which are the usual Hypostases of those
kind of Waters, it is most evident it could not be; the one being of a Yellow,
the other of a Greyish color; but to me it seems to be a Bituminous exalted
Sulphur, and this will more fully appear when we come to examine its Salts, of
which it contains Three different species: First, A small proportion of Natron,
or Egyptian Nitre, which if exposed to the Air will like that, or Salt of
Tartar, dissolve per deliquium; will ferment with any Acid, and has a strong
lixivial Taste. After the Natron has run per deliquium there remains another
Salt entire, which if dissolved in Spirit of Wine or Water totally flies off;
by which it is plain the Salt is volatile, and most probably the volatile Salt
of the Natron, which is the only fixed Alcali in the World I know of, that by
this method, or by the fixed Salt of Tartar, will yield a volatile Alcalisate
Salt: From which Phenomenon it is undeniably evident Dr. Lister was mistaken,
when (to use his own words) he violently affirms, No Waters in England
contained Natron; a Gallon of this Water contains about twelve Grains of
Sediments, and four or five of Salts; the Salts when separated from their
Earths are White, but will not shoot into any regular Chrystals; have a smell
much like that of Natural Balsam, which to me seems to be the scarlet Sulphur
that precipitates in the Water by exposing it to the Air; this Water has a
vitriolate Taste, and with Galls yields a Tincture of an Agate color; has been
experimented in scorbutic Cases, and answered the desired end.

The Hanbridge Water, a small Spring which lies betwixt Burnley and Townley,
yields a Natron or natural Alcali, as those Bourbon Waters in France, cited by
Monsieur Du-Closs; and another alcalious Salt, which like a Terebinthinate or
Resinous Body, will melt with a small degree of Heat; it is plain, the Reason
why this Salt melts by Heat is only from a volatile Bitumen united with it, for
the Salt being long kept in a glass Vial, will not melt by any moderate degree
of Heat, but is then purely Alcalious, the Bitumen being wholly evaporated, as
I found in my Observations at Townley. This Water at the Fountain with Galls
yields a Tincture inclining to a faint Orange; if kept any considerable time in
Glass Bottles a perfect Citrine; contains the greatest quantity of Natron of
any in these parts; purges by Stool and Urine, and is of great Use in the Stone
and Scurvy, as has been found by several Persons, who in those Cases have
tried them with great success.

The Water near Emmet, which is about two Miles distant from those
forementioned Waters, is of a vitriolate Taste, and sulphurous Smell, which
with a solution of Sublimate yields a white Precipitate, which no other Waters
in those parts will do, nor any in France, as the French Virtuosi have
observed, and indeed only those at Spada in Germany; and if so it may be highly
worth our time by frequent and strict Trials, both in Cases in Physic, and
Experiments in Chemistry, to find out the Principles and Use of it, which may
perhaps save us the Expenses of a tedious Fatigue to Spada.

At the same time I saw there a Salt prepared from a Water in Yorkshire, which
had exactly the smell of Hipposelinum or Horse-Parsley, a Phenomenon never yet
observed in any Salt before; this smell proceeds from a certain proportion of
bituminous, saline and terrene Particles; for what remained after evaporation
was of a Yellowish color, and contained a great deal of terrene Matter, but
the Salt when separated is perfect concocted Vitriol. Dr. Lister may here again
be satisfied of his Error, for not only the Waters in Lancashire, but those
likewise in Yorkshire contain perfect concocted Vitriol: Nay, in the same
Coal-Mines near Burnley, there are Springs of perfect Vitriol, and under these
others that contain Natron or Egyptian Nitre, as the abovementioned ingenious
Gentleman fully demonstrated to me when I was last there. Another Salt the said
Richard Townley of Townley Esquire showed me, which was perfect Saltpeter,
prepared from a very rapid Spring, a Gallon of which contained half an Ounce of
this Salt, which upon Chrystallization shoots like Saltpeter from India into
long Striae, and fulminates with Sulphur. This Salt he had from a Gentleman
that discovered the Spring, but at present conceals the Place: So that what my
self and others have alleged in affirming, no Waters in England to contain
Saltpeter is erroneous; let others retract when they think convenient, for my
part I fairly own my Error, and from repeated Observations can positively
affirm, there is no marine Salt but what contains more or less of Indian Nitre,
but the proportion is so small, and the method of preparing it so tedious, it
would not be of any farther use than to satisfy the curious Enquirer; but the
Advantages that may accrue from the before recited Spring, may for ought I know
be one of the greatest Treasures, as well as Secrets in Nature.

The next Mineral-Waters I shall consider, are those springing out of Bass, and
Sulphurous only; of these the most Noted is One near a Place called
Inglewhite, this springs out of a Black Bass, which by Calcination I found to
contain Sulphur; the Water has a very sulphurous Smell, as strong as that near
Harrigate in Yorkshire, but contains little or no Salt, which is the reason it
is not Purgative like that, but by adding the like proportion of common Salt to
it, viz. about a Dram to a Pint of Water, that Inconvenience is remedied, and
then you have either sulphurous Baths, or purging Waters; for my part I should
rather choose to add the bitter purging Salt, as being most agreeable.

Having now examined all the various Waters springing out of Bass, we proceed
in the next place to give Account of saline sulphurous Waters arising out of
other Minerals.

And I shall begin first with the sulphur Water near Wigan, called by the
Inhabitants of that place, the Burning-Well; this is a very diverting
Phenomenon, and for its Rarity is visited by most Persons whose Curiosity
leads them to Natural Enquiries. It is about two Miles from Wigan, in a Village
called Aucliff, in the Ground of William Mollineux of that Place Esquire. The Well
is at the Bottom of a Tree, the Water Cold, and without any Smell; when any
Person comes to see it, a Man clears the Well from all its Water, that done you
will immediately hear a hissing Noise in a Corner of it, and by holding a
lighted Candle near to it, the sulphurous Halitus immediately takes Fire, and
afterward spreads it self upon what Water has issued in, and it is only then,
indeed, it ought to be called the Burning-Well: It Is observable, though this
sulphurous Halitus continually mixes with Water, yet the Water continues Cold,
nor will it tinge Silver; wherefore I imagine this Halitus is purely
sulphurous, consisting only of Oily inflammable Particles, without any mixture
of Vitriol, or if any but inconsiderable, and it is reasonable to suppose this
kind of Sulphur to impregnate the Baths at Buxton. It Is plain from these and
the sulphur Wells at Maudsley, and those at Harrigate in Yorkshire, which are
all sulphurous, and yet all Cold Waters, that it is only by accident that
sulphur Waters become hot, viz. by Collision of the sulphurous Particles, when
in the Spiracles of the Earth they have not a free open passage, they beat and
dash one upon another, and by that Collision grow hot, as we may observe in the
rubbing of the Phosphorus, which immediately takes Fire; likewise in new Hay,
and in Wheels taking Fire by Motion only: For to imagine the Heat of the Baths
to proceed from Fermentation in the Waters, or from subterraneous Fires, is no
wise consistent with Experience, which after all our Hypotheses must be the
true Touchstone of our Reason.

The foregoing Instances may convince the World, that sulphurous Particles
grow hot without Ignition, and that there are sulphurous Particles in all hot
Baths is abundantly demonstrated: But for a farther Illustration of this
Hypothesis take this following Experiment, Let some Brimstone be set on Fire in
a Glass Body, immediately upon its taking Flame stop the Mouth of the Glass and
the Flame expires, yet by the sulphurous Fumes dashing upon each other the
sides of the Glass wax warm; a certain signal this must needs be, that where
sulphurous Particles are denied a passage, or where they force their way
through uneven Sinuosities, by beating upon and encountering one another, an
Heat must be produced, as is apparent by the Sunbeams in Unequal Glasses. And
this is farther confirmed by the Learned Dr. Brown in his Treatise of the
Mines in Hungary; in some Places of the same Mine it was extremely Cold, in
others so intensely Hot, that though his Clothes were never so thin, the Heat
would be troublesome to him. The Miners work all Naked, and Eight Hours are as
much as most can endure.

The Heat in these Waters cannot arise from Fermentation, because no
fermentation can be discovered in them; nor by any Experiments, either in
Distillation, Precipitation, or any other Method could I ever observe such a
Contrariety of Matter in them, that one part would ferment upon another, so as
to cause any sensible Heat.

From subterraneous Fires they cannot proceed, because in these parts such were
never known; or were there any, could not but discover themselves, since no
Fires will burn without admission of Air, and there must likewise be Flues and
Chasms whence they vent their Smoke and foeculent parts; but since none of
these were ever disclosed in these parts, it is not probable the Baths should
grow hot by any such cause; and when the Heat of the Baths may be sufficiently
explained by the Collision of sulphurous Particles, what necessity is there we
should have recourse to any such unwarrantable Hypothesis, as a Fermentation in
the Waters, or to subterraneous Fires: Those two Notions are lately espoused by
Dr. Guidot and Dr. Pierce of Bathe, but I am apt to think those Gentlemen
rather fancy than observe the Phenomenon of Nature: For I am very well
satisfied, had they made strict Enquiries into those Waters, they would never
have troubled the World with such Chimerical Hypotheses. Dr. Pierce indeed does
not much trouble himself or the World with any Scrutiny into the Contents of
the Baths, or the Causes of the Heat of them; but only gives you an Instance
from Savoy, which is as remote as that place to his Undertaking: And as for Dr.
Guidot he is so Inconsistent with himself, that unless he have the Art of
reconciling Contradictions, I am sure his Thermae Britannicae are not to be
accounted for. I do not speak this as any wise arrogating a greater Genius to
my self, or to lessen those worthy Persons, but only from the Phenomenon I have
observed in Nature; and if they please to do the same, I despair not of their
Pardons.

Having now done with the sulphurous saline Waters, in the next place I shall
proceed to treat of saline Ones only, as those at Northwich, Namptwich,
Middlewich, Dunham in Cheshire, and Barton in Lancashire. Various have been the
Notions concerning the Rise of these Springs, some imagining they proceeded
from the Sea, others from subterraneous Rocks of Salt which have of late Years
been discovered, and first made Useful by my self, in refining that Rock to a
White granulated Salt, which is now practiced in many places. These Springs
sometimes break out in the Rock, but oftener either above or under it; some of
them in a Quart of Water contain about seven or eight Ounces of Salt, whence
its plain that quatenus Salt-springs they proceed not from the Sea, because a
Quart of the best of that Water affords seldom above an Ounce and Half of
Salt. Some of these Springs will tinge with Galls, but most refuse it; whence
its plain Dr. Lister in his usual manner is much mistaken, in forcing the
Pyrites upon us. It Is true from the sulphurous Smell that may be observed in
the Fermentation betwixt this Salt and Oil of Vitriol, that there is a Sulphur
contained in the Salt, but that no wise warrants a Pyrites, since that is an
aggregate of different Principles, viz. Ocre and Vitriol, besides Sulphur;
which Bodies by the Dr's own Confession Salt does not contain, which is the
only true Notion he lays down about those Waters, and that he may assume as an
Observation of his own.

It is likewise observable, that the Salt made from the Brine-springs, and the
Rock-salt dissolved in fresh Water, that these Salts will shoot into different
Figures; whence it is evident the Brine-springs proceed not from the Rocks of
Salt that are discovered, but from Rocks of Salt that lie deeper in the Bowels
of the Earth.

Besides in different Springs I have observed the Figures of the Salt to
differ, as some in Middlewich, from those at Northwich, where by
Chrystallization they shoot into quite contrary Figures; so that the Sal
Mediterraneum, as the Dr. styles it, is like to lose its Character: Nay,
Rock-salt it self will never shoot into any regular Figure at all, whence it
may be averred, these Salt-springs have not their Saltness from any
subterraneous Rocks of Salt yet known; it follows therefore, if they are not
saturated either from the Sea, or from subterraneous Rocks of Salt, we may then
form another Hypothesis, and conclude them to arise from Aerial saline
Particles impregnating a proper Bass, and so by various Solutions and
Impregnations, keeping a continual Circulation, and so constantly supplying us;
and what chiefly gives umbrage to this, is the Renascence of marine Salt, which
is so prodigiously made out by Untzerus, in his Account of those Mountains of
Salt that supply Russia, Persia, Mesopotamia, Media, and those vast Countries;
which as he affirms, every Year Vegetates, and the places whence the Salt was
dug is the Year following as full of Salt as before. Phenomenon like to this
may be observed in the Vitriol-stone near Hesse-Cassel, and in those Iron-Mines
belonging to the Duke of Florence, as is related by Fallopius. Besides the
marine Salt these Springs do likewise contain the Nitrum Calcarium: Its
observable the Salt of some of these Springs will not easily precipitate, but a
little Alum and fresh Butter will effect it, and then it makes a larger Grain
and stronger Salt than any of the rest. In the Evaporation of these Salts there
is likewise observed a white Sand, which is thrown to the Corners of the Pan;
and this by frequent Evaporation and Filtrations I found to be the Particles of
the Bass, out of which these Salt-springs arise.

The most noted Purging-Waters in these parts are those in a Village called
Rougham, adjacent to the remarkable Sands which are the great Road into Furnace
nine Miles in breadth, and at each Springtide entirely covered with Water;
these in calm Weather afford us very pleasant Traveling, but in tempestuous
Seasons no less dismal, than we can suppose the wild Deserts of Arabia. From
the bottom of an high Rock near these, the Water issues forth in a very
plentiful Current; it is a little brackish, taken inwardly it purges both by
Urine and Stool, and no doubt, by a due preparation of the Body they become of
extraordinary use in the Scurvy, Worms, crude Digestions, and Distempers of
that Nature; the Water by Evaporation at the last becomes lixivial, and is then
extremely brackish; as the Water evaporates, there successively arise Films at
first reddish, and afterward of a gray Color: these Films will ferment with
any Acid, and contain a little of a natural alcalious Salt, which I take to be
the Natron of the Ancients; the Salt which remains after Evaporation, seems to
be a Marine, but by frequent Filtrations and Chrystallizations, I found it
likewise contained a bitter purging Salt, which is truly Dr. Lister's Nitrum
Calcarium, and is that purging Salt which impregnates Epsom, Dullech, Northall,
and other purging Waters in England, as is hinted above; besides the Salt there
likewise remains a greyish Earth, which will ferment with any Acid. When the
Water is evaporated to a lixivial Color, if you then drop Spirit of Hartshorn
into it, it immediately makes a Coagulum, and precipitates; which Phenomenon
is only observable in those Waters that contain the Sal Catharticum Amarum,
which demonstrates that Salt likewise to contain a natural Acid, and if in the
like Water you drop any acid Spirit, as that of Sulphur and Vitriol, you will
then perceive a very sulphurous smell. From these it is plain these Waters
contain three different sorts of Salts, as the Natron, the Marine, and the Sal
Catharticum Amarum; likewise two sorts of Lapis Scissilis, either of which will
ferment with an Acid, and Sulphur too. From a mixture of such Principles as
these, what Effects may not be hoped for, in Scrophulous and Leprous Persons,
and other Distempers of that nature? Nay, I have been assured by some of the
Inhabitants there, that some Persons by drinking these Waters have been
recovered from periodical Epilepsies: but again, I say, the Body ought to be
rightly prepared before the drinking of them, and that Consumptive Persons
ought not to meddle with them, at least very sparingly; some Persons by
drinking of these have been freed from the Jaundice, others from Quartan Agues,
and in the Pica Virginis, if the Patient be not emaciated, you may reckon it a
specific; by drinking of these, prodigious Worms, as the Cucurbitae, the
Ascarides, and Bunches of Worms, have frequently been voided, and I do not
think in that Distemper the like to these are to be had.

There are other Purging-Waters which arise out of a Morass in a Village called
Witherslack: these Waters contain a marine and a bitter purging Salt, but are
inferior to the former. There is another purging Water which springs out of the
Sand, near a Place called Mine-End, which is the Mouth of the River Wire: This
no doubt is the Seawater, which filters through the Sand, but by reason of the
shortness of the Filtration, (the Spring lying so near the River) or the
looseness of the Sand, the marine Water is not perfectly dulcified, but retains
a pleasing Brackishness, not unlike that which is observable in the Milk of a
Farrow Cow, or one that has Conceived; this Water purges a little, but is much
inferior to either of the other. These Waters give no Tincture with Galls, though
Dr. Lister violently affirms all saline Springs will do it. These are the most
noted Purging-Waters that I have seen in these Parts, I shall therefore in the
next place proceed to those, which may be ranked amongst the Acidulae, but do
likewise contain Natron: and those are the Waters near Burnley and Emmett,
which were first discovered to me by that most Learned and Accomplished
Gentleman Richard Townley of Townley Esquire The like to these Mons. du Clos
affirms are in several places in France; for a full Account of which, I refer
the Reader to that ingenious Author.

From the Experiments made by the Royal Academy in Paris in the Bourbon-Waters,
and the parallel Observations those in these Parts entertain us with, we may
make a probable Conjecture of their Principles, and I think may safely affirm
that in the Cases where those are proper, these as a most natural Succedaneum
may be made use of, and will, I question not, answer what Intentions may be
expected from the former. These Waters with Galls give a Citrine Tincture, and
the Gall immediately precipitates in white perpendicular Lines: but you must
note these Experiments were made in the Waters remote from the Fountains; I
evaporated several Quarts of the Water, and toward the latter end found it to
have a little of a lixivial Taste, after the surface was covered with a thin
greyish Film; this Film consisted of saline, alcalious and terrene Particles,
and would make a brisk Fermentation with any Acid; afterward the Salts rise in
perpendicular Lines upon the sides of the Retort. The like Phenomenon I
observed in evaporating the Water that came from Nitria in Egypt; and the like
may be observed in Evaporation of other alcalious Salts: After the Water was
wholly evaporated there stuck to the sides of the Retort a greyish Matter of a
very lixivial taste, and would ferment with any Acid. By Filtration the Earth is
easily separated from the Salt, and then you have a natural alcalious Salt the
true Natron of the Ancients, as is manifest from those Specimens of Egyptian
Nitre, brought from Nitria to the Musaeum at Oxford by the Learned Dr. H. and
likewise by the Description of Natron recited by Dioscordes; though our
Countryman Dr. Lister boldly affirms there is no such Salt in any Waters in
England: but this is not the first piece of Boldness he is pleased to arrogate;
and if his Reason be not totally screen'd, he may, if he pleases, be satisfied
he is mistaken. These Waters are of great use in the Stone, Scurvy, and other
Chronical Diseases, of which I have seen several Instances. There are other
Waters of an austere styptick Taste, that will coagulate Milk, but give no
Tincture with Galls, as some Pumps near Bury and Chorley; these I conjecture
arise out of Alum Ore, or Marle; they lather not with Soap, but make a perfect
Coagulum from the Acid and the Alcaly fixing together. Some Springs we have
that petrify, as one in a Wood near Bury, and another by the side of a Rivulet
near Manchester; these Waters superficially incrustate as the Chemists call it,
stratum super stratum; are of an austere Taste like those in Yorkshire; in
Evaporation they yield a great quantity of a greyish Earth that will ferment
with an Acid, and some little proportion of Salt. By these Phenomenon I do
conjecture the terrene Particles are dissolved in Minimis. by the natural Acid,
or (as Helmont calls it) the Esurine Spirit, and when on the surface of any
Body they are united they form these Incrustations: I am the farther confirmed
in this Hypothesis, because I have observed Petrefactions where only there
could be an Acid halitus, as in several Plants and Roots adjacent to the
petrefying Waters near Knarseborough. These Waters inwardly taken are commended
by several in Dysenteries, and for the same reason they are proper in those
Cases; I do judge them of use in the Cure of a Diabetes. These are the most
remarkable Phenomenon I could ever observe of the Waters in these Parts: having
therefore examined those, I shall, according to my proposed Method, in the next
place proceed to give an Account of the various Earths these Counties afford us.

An Appendix to the WATERS.
AFter I had finished my Experiments of Mineral Waters, I had the fortune to
meet with an elaborate Tract entitled, The Natural History of the Chalybeat
and Purging Waters in England, with their particular Essays and Uses, with
likewise Observations on the Bath in Somersetshire, dedicated to the Rt Honble
the Earl of Manchester, by Benjamin Allen, Med. Bacc. Th^se I shall examine in
their Order, and shall in the first place take notice of his Observations
concerning the Rise of Chalybeat Waters: Page 14. he says, the Earth and Soil
of these Springs is ever a Sand or Gravel, and that the Water issues from, or
rather makes a Rock cemented of Stones, which are never to be found but where
the Water is Vitriolic. How true this is, the World may judge from the
following Observations: In the Rocks at Strangeway near Manchester in
Lancashire, three or four Yards in Freestone Rock, are several Chalybeat
Springs, which with Powder of Galls give a deep Claret Tincture, and will
answer all other Experiments usually tried upon the Acidulae. Eight or nine
Yards within a Freestone Rock near Stockport, in the same County, are several
Chalybeat Springs, which with Galls yield a purple, fully as deep as Tunbridge,
or Knarseborough, and will turn green with Syrup of Violets; in these Rocks are
found sometimes small Vitriol-stones, a small quantity of which scraped into
common Water, instantly makes the artificial Chalybeat Waters, but there is not
the minutest Particle of the Pyrites to be found here. It is plain hence, that
these Springs proceed, not always, from Sand and Gravel, nor are they (as he
alleges) Marcasitical, that is, Springs impregnated with the Pyrites; for to
satisfy his Curiosity farther, the Pyrites here is neither discoverable by
Ocular Demonstration, nor by dissolving the Rock in Aqua fortis, which he
asserts, if it contains the Pyrites, will turn to a Gelly; and yet that very
Assertion is without ground, for because the Pyrites will turn to a Gelly, does
it thence follow all Bodies that will do so, participate of the Pyrites? By the
same reason he may aver, That because Bones and Hartshorns with a little common
Water, in Mons. Papin's Digesting Instrument, become gelatinous, that either
the Bones contain the Horns, or vice versa, the Horns the Bones. Now since
these Rocks answer not this end, it is evident these Springs, according to his
own Notions, cannot be derived from the Pyrit^^; but this, I presume, he only
asserted as a Compliment* to an eminent Physician, and if he prefers his
Friendship before strict and true Observations in Nature, I envy not his
Choice. His other Experiments upon the Acidulae are no more than what have been
before observed by other Authors, I shall therefore pass them over.

As to the Purging-Waters, he derives them from the Pyrites, Selenites, and
Loame, and are (as he alleges) impregnated with purging Salts of various
kinds, formed into a saline Nature, by an acid Mineral Juice in the Loame.
Hence, page 117. he has this Period: So I conclude the Salt of these purging
Waters to be of a middle Nature, betwixt Nitres and Vitriols, and formed out of
the Loame by the help of a Vitriolic Juice, or liquid Salt, and collected in
most Cavities. As to this Hypothesis, from the following Phenomenon, I doubt
not but to convince him that he is again mistaken; that is, that there are
Springs which do contain the bitter purging Salt, and yet arise not out of
Loame, (e. g.) At Rougham in Furness in the County of Lancaster, at the bottom
of a Rock issues a purging Spring, at least twenty Yards perpendicular from its
Summit, where there is neither the Pyrites, the Belemnites, nor Loame: the
Spring flows in a luxuriant Current. This Water, upon the first Evaporation,
affords a Salt not much unlike Sea Salt, but the marine may be easily separated
from the bitter or purging Salt; and then you have a Salt which affords
Bacilli, or Stiriae, which will easily dissolve even by the heat of the Hand,
nay even by the Air it self, and answers all the Experiments Dr. Grew made upon
Epsome-Salt: It is hence evident that these Salts have not their Origin (as he
alleges) from the Pyrites, Selenites, and Loame; the Earth after distillation
was light and of a greyish Color, and would strongly ferment with an Acid. But
to give him an ampler demonstration of his Error, I shall produce him another
Instance or two: At Thernham in the County of Lancaster, there is an Earth
which contains Loame, and a great quantity of Selenites; and the same
Phenomenon may be observed upon the Ridge of Hills that run upon the Seacoasts
toward Rossall, in the same County: out of both these Earths issue several
Springs, which will neither tinge with Galls, nor are they Purgative; hence it
is evident, though the Principles he lays down do all concur, yet that thence
does not necessarily follow a Marcasitical, or Purging Water, nor are the
Salts, as was observed before, collected so superficially as he alleges; it is
true indeed I have seen the Salt Bass, by being exposed to the Air, shoot out
various Efflorescences, at the same time from a Spring issuing out of the same
Bass, at least 20 Yards within the Earth, may be prepared the true bitter
purging Salt: So that what he has informed us in relation to the Purging
Waters, is as groundless as the former. As to his Method of preparing a Salt
from Loame, by Spirit of Nitre, it is no wise convincing, since the Phenomenon
he recites may happen barely from the Spirit, without a Salt congenite to the
Loame* the different Salts he prepared from the Purging Waters, may, for ought
I know, be true and exact; but what I allege is, that neither the Chalybeats
are always from the Pyrites, nor the Purging Waters* from Loame, Marcasite, and
the Selenites. His other Experiments are but what were before observed by Dr.
Plot, and Monsieur du Clos, to whom I refer the Reader.

I shall in the next place examine his Observation upon the Bath in
Somersetshire* P. 178. he says, that The Salt contained in this Water appeared
fully to be Saltpeter, in that it did not disturb a solution of Sal Saturni in
fair Weather. But this is no Demonstration at all of Saltpeter, for the bitter
purging Salt will do the same, which is not at all Nitrous, although it bears the
same Bacilli or Stiriae with Nitre; for since the Salt is not inflammable,
there is no reason to suppose the Existence of Saltpeter. It now appears his
Attempts upon Bath-Waters are as fruitless as his other Experiments, and in his
reasoning about them he is inconsistent with himself: I shall only remark one
thing more, that when this Purging Salt becomes stiriated, if it be dissolved
in a small quantity of Water, in a few Days it drops an hard pellucid Salt,
which will not dissolve in the Air; is bitter and pungent, the Figures of it
are various, sometimes Cubical, sometimes Pentagons, and Parallelopepedons; so
that it is manifest it is very difficult to reduce Salts to their distinct
species, by determinate Figures. It is certain by these Experiments, that the
Salt in this Purging Water, which at first by its Taste and Figure seemed only
to be a common marine Salt, consists of three different Kinds; why therefore it
should be styled a Nitre, I can see no reason. I have often wondered why some
Persons ambitiously affect the Imposing of Terms, assuming to themselves Titles
of New Discoverers, without any ground at all: For if from the mere Trunk of a
Mole, I should go about to prove it was the species of an Elephant, the World
would doubtless conclude me the blinder Creature.

I shall beg leave to add to this Appendix one thing more relating to Cold
Springs; in which, as the Moralists assure us of the two contrary Passions, Joy
and Sorrow, that the former is an Expansion, the other a Depressure of the
Spirits; so it is no less probable in these two opposite Qualities, Heat and
Cold, that in one the Nerves are dilated, in the other shrivel'd or contracted:
But since the Cause of intense Coldness is the Subject of this Paragraph, I
shall only expatiate on the latter; in order to that I shall lay down a general
Hypothesis, and afterward illustrate it, first by the Effects of Cold, and
afterward by parallel Experiments that produce it. Coldness therefore in
Waters I suppose to proceed from volatile saline Particles, which by their
Points contracting the Extremities of the Nerves, obstruct the Spirits, and
thence proceeds an Horror or Trembling; and if the Cold be intense, a Stupor,
or Numbness, hence it is that the Capillaries in the Skin, by the Punctures of
those saline Particles corrugate, and the Blood thereby stagnates, and by the
distention of those Vessels the Skin appears extremely red. That Coldness in
Waters proceeds from these saline Particles, is evident from solutions of Snow
in common Water, in which those Particles are so volatile, that upon
Distillation I found them wholly to evaporate: It is not therefore as the
Peripateticks imagine, that Coldness proceeds from dull unactive Principles,
but from volatile saline ones, which by their Inflexibility or Rigidness, like
so many Barriers, fix the Particles in Water, which are of a softer Temper; and
thence it is that it freezes, and is turned into Ice: In Springs therefore that
are naturally intensely Cold, I suppose the Loam, from whence these arise, to
have Pores so configurated, as constantly to imbibe these saline Particles from
the circumambient Atmosphere, which doubtless are of as Volatile nature as
those of Snow; for I never could find in the Distillation of Cold Baths any
Salt that could be reduced to a Crystal, except a marine one, and that in so
small a proportion, that it is impossible to suppose that the Coldness should
proceed from thence. It Is true indeed in artificial Cold Baths the Water is
made violently so by solutions of marine Salt, and Saltpeter, but then to
effect that, there are those quantities of Salts, that are never to be found in
Baths naturally Cold; whence it is evident the Coldness in them cannot proceed
from a solution of those Salts, but from a Volatile Aerial Nitre doubtless
brought into the Atmosphere by particular Winds; for it is evident in opposite
Parallels from the Line, in the one you have violent Frosts, in the other
intense Heats, as the Ingenious Dr. Monday of All Souls College in Oxford,
beyond contradiction has made evident.

The most remarkable Cold Spring in these Parts is that at Larbrick, of which
take the following Account. Upon immersing your Hand into it, the Part
immediately grows extremely red, and you will then perceive a most violent
Pain; Fishes of several sorts I have seen put into this Spring, which make but
one Effort, and instantly expire. It is an Acidula, or Chalybeat Water, and
therefore is accounted for in another place; as likewise the Effects of Cold
Baths, which are considered in the following Treatise of the Scurvy and Rickets.

But more fully to illustrate the unaccountable Penetrancy, Agility and
Rigidness of those Particles that produce Cold, take the following Experiment:
Let a Thermometer of a Foot long, and Hermetically sealed at both ends, and
about half filled with Spirit of Wine, be immersed in a Cold Spring, for
Instance in that at Larbrick, and continue suspended in it about half an Hour;
in that space of Time the Spirit in the Tube will subside a full Inch, which
Instance fully demonstrates how penetrating those frigorific Particles must be,
that thus enter the Pores of the Glass, and force the Spirit to subside to that
degree: This Instance likewise demonstrates their Inflexibility, that by
penetrating the Pores of the Glass, they should so fix their Points upon the
superficies of the Vinous Spirit, which being of a softer Texture must
necessarily give way and subside. By this Experiment you may easily find out
the various Degrees of Cold in Springs, and by comparing those with
Observations of the like nature, made in the two noted Baths, Holywell in
Wales, and St. Mungus in Yorkshire, may easily find of what use the Springs in
these Counties may be in the like Cases which these are eminent for. I must
needs own that in Leprous Distempers, Scorbutic Rheumatisms, the Rickets, and
Scorbutic Atrophies, before the Hectic heat is grown too intense, I have not
seen any Medicines perform the Effects which these Waters frequently do.

CHAP. III.
Of Earths, Clays, Boles, Marles, Improvements by Shells, Shell-Fishes, Hares
and Rabbit-Skins, Sope-Boylers Ashes, and Putrified Ferns; of Morasses, and
their various Improvements.

THese Countries afford us various sorts of Earths, but the most noted are the
Black Soil, the Foxglove-Earth, and the Clay-Earth, which indeed is a mixture
of Clay and Marle. The Black Earth is commonly rich Pasture, or Meadowing, or
good Corn-Land; the Foxglove-Earth, which is a tender Earth, and of a brownish
Color, is usually good Pasture, and by Improvement brings plentiful Harvests
of Corn; the Clay-Earth is chiefly for Corn, and in that either for continuing
long, or producing a well fed Corn, exceeds both the other. Sometimes these
Earths abound with great quantities of Lime-stones and other Stones, which
mightily contribute to their plentiful Productions, as is observable in the
Closes near Lancaster, and other parts in the North; the Country People imagine
it proceeds from the Warmth they impart to the various Earths, but I rather
attribute it to their Nitrous or Alcalious Salts, which, as I shall demonstrate
hereafter, conduce to the fructifying of Earths. These Earths are usually
improved either by Marle, Dung, Lime, Shell-Fishes, Shells, Rags, Hares, or
Rabbit-skins, Sope-maker's Ashes, Sea-Mud, the common Dirt of the Lanes, or
putrified Ferns. The Marles, where there is depth of Soil are usually the best
Improvements; and indeed a good Marling is often counted equal to the Purchase
of the Land; the Marle affords a Nitrous Salt, and Oil, which I take to be the
Principles that make it so fertile; its Salt I conjecture is imbibed from the
Air, which may be the reason that the longer it lies exposed, the more prolific
it is: Hence it is common amongst Persons that can afford, to Marle their
Ground, and break it up several Years afterward, by which it becomes more
fruitful, and continues much longer. The white Marle is of a brittle, short
Body, and consequently more easily washed away by the Weather; for this reason
it only renders the Soil fruitful for a few Years, not comparable to the other
for continuance. The like may be said of Lime, and putrified Marine-Fishes, and
Shells, which by their Calcination by the Sunbeams are converted into Lime,
these being of a looser Body than the Clay-Marle, more speedily mix with the
Earths, and for that reason, as the Country People term it, will sooner white,
that is, will sooner produce Corn; the same may be said of Sea-mud, however the
Continuance of these are far inferior to the other: The Fruitfulness of the
last mentioned I judge may proceed in a great measure from their Oils and
alcalious Salts, with a due proportion of Earth, and no doubt but Acid and
Alcaly have the same use in fructifying Soils, as they have in Animals; and
hence I believe that from the Dung of the Sea-Fowl in Fowley-Island, which
takes that Name from the abundance of Sea-Fowl there, the Pasture becomes so
pregnant, that it surpasses all in these Parts; a Sheep from thence is usually
sold for 50 s. or 3 l.

The most noted Clays in these Parts are the Potters-Clay, Tobacco-pipe-Clay,
and Sope-stone, as the Miners call it. The Potters-Clay is usually blew or
yellowish, or of a Dove or Coushat-Colour, as the Workmen term it; after it is
molded into Pots, it is burned in a circular Oven, and is glazed with a
Slurry, and Lead-Ore finely powdered: This Slurry is made of a different Clay
to what the Pot is; it is usually reddish, and will run to a Glass, which the
others will not; which is the reason that with this and Lead-Ore they glaze
their Pots. It is observable this Slurry upon one sort of Clay will be yellow,
upon another black, on another green, and on others of the Color of the Duke
of Alva's Bottles, which must proceed from various Metals that flux from the
Clays, and consequently produce various Colors.

I was informed from my Ever-honour'd Friend Sr. Roger Bradshaw of Haigh, that
it was upon a whitish yellowish Earth, in a Field near the Kennel-Pits at
Haigh, that Mr. Dwight made his first Discovery of his most incomparable Metal:
I have attempted several Colors with Smalts, and found that by those, and an
azurine Spar frequently found in Lead and Copper Mines, I could upon
Barnstable-Clay run a Glass not easily distinguishable from Tortoise, and no
doubt if experimented by an Artist, he would find it of extraordinary use. I
have likewise with several of these Earths run black Lead, by which and a
little Horse-Dung finely powdered and then wrought together, I have seen it
stand Fire, when a good German Crucible has broke in pieces. Instruments of
this may doubtless be made of great use to the Essayers and Refiners of Metals,
and be had at far more easy Rates than those brought from Germany. Tiles of any
sorts are likewise made from these Earths.

The Tobacco-pipe-Clay is usually blew, or of a Color betwixt white and
yellow; there are at Rainforth tolerable Pipes made of this, but not comparable
to those at Chester, these are made of Clays brought from the Isle of Wight,
Poole and Biddiford, which are esteemed the best in England, and if I mistake
not the best in Europe. Boles we have only in two places, Eller and Heesham;
these are of a yellow Color, stick close to the Tongue, and will ferment with
an Acid. In the same place we have likewise a white Earth, or Sope-stone; this
will lather with Water, I have seen some Persons trimmed with it; this is
usually full of the Pyrites, when wet very Oily, but when dry put into Water
will make an hissing like unquenchable Lime: Upon which Phenomenon I shall beg
your patience, to expatiate a little before I proceed to the next particular.
Mons. L'Emery has observed, That the reason of the Ebullition of unquenchable
Lime with Water, proceeds from the setting at liberty the igneous Particles
locked up in the Lime, hence they disentangle themselves, and rallying with
united Forces, must consequently produce that Ebullition. The like I think may
be affirmed of this, only here the Ebullition causes not any sensible Heat,
which notwithstanding may be, though igneous Particles be contained in the Water,
as I have seen in the Burning-Well near Wigan, which is actually Cold. But that
this Ebullition does proceed from sulphurous Particles, I have reason to
conjecture, because out of these Earths, through the salt Water, frequent flashes
of Flame may be observed like Lightning to dart by Intervals; it appears a
diverting Phosphorus in the Nightseason, at which time spreading the said Earth
upon my Hand, I have discerned the like Phenomenon.

Morasses we have several in these parts, which may be distinguished into these
Classes, the White, the Gray, the Black: It is plain from Microscopical
Observations, that the White is nothing but a Compages of the Leaves, Seeds,
Flowers, Stalks and Roots of Herbs, and Fruits or Shrubs which no doubt
increase every Year; these burn to white Ashes, but yield but little of
lixivial Salt. The Gray is harder and more ponderous, and to me seems to be but
a more perfect putrefaction of the former. The Black is the best Fire, and the
most Bituminous, which I take to be a consummated putrefaction of the Plants
that grow upon these places, as Elaeagnus, Ros Solis, Erica, and the like; and
in this I am farther confirmed, because I have frequently observed the white
Moss, which is demonstrably a Compages of the recited Plants, converted easily
to black Moss, which is done by draining of the Dales, or cutting Sluices through
the Morasses; by which means the white Moss which before was like a Sponge
saturated with Water, now drained, contracts to a more compact Body. Besides
these are the Heath-Turffs, and a bituminous Earth near Ormskirk, but of that I
shall discourse in its proper place. It Is the received Opinion, that these
Morasses had their Rise from Noah's Deluge, and this Hypothesis seems to be
backed by the great quantities of exotic Trees, marine Shells, and other
Phenomenon that are observed there; I have likewise seen a Brass-Kettle which
was given me by Major George Westby, and a small Millstone found in those
places, as likewise Beads of Amber. It Is plain these could not be brought
thither by Noah's Deluge, since in those early days the Refining of Metals was
not known, and it is very probable such kind of Millstones not made use of: But
since I have shown how Moss may, and doubtless does increase, it is easy to
conceive how such things may sometimes be found in Morasses; but whether these
subterraneous Trees, Pine-Cones, Nuts and Shells did grow in these places, or
were brought thither by the universal Flood, is a Question that may challenge
our next Consideration. I must confess I have not seen Firrs grow naturally in
any part of this Kingdom, but what there are have been raised by great Care and
Industry; and Caesar assures us, that when he first invaded this Island there
did not any Firrs grow in it. From these to me it seems plain, that these could
not come from any other Cause but a Deluge, and it is most probable from that
dreadful one recited by Moses: Some persons I know have endeavored to evade
this Assertion by averring, that these subterraneous Trees were not really
Firrs, but only Woods made Resinous by a bituminous Earth, and so consequently
might be there without a Deluge. To these I answer; Not only Firr-stocks, but
Firr-Apples are likewise found in these Morasses, and these I hope those
Gentlemen will allow me could not belong to any other Tree but to the Firr;
besides the grain of the Wood, and the Turpentine that upon burning drops from
it, sufficiently demonstrate it to be really Firr: so that what is argued upon
that account is but a mere Subterfuge, and bears nothing of Argument along with
it. I have often indeed wondered how upon the tops of Mountains there are
sometimes these Morasses, and the adjacent Valleys Arable Ground; but in that
terrible Confusion which doubtless was at the Deluge, I think the Phenomenon of
Nature cannot be mechanically accounted for: so that if a Naturalist can but
demonstrate a Deluge by Matter of Fact, that it only could produce these
wonderful Effects; whether he can or not assign the Modus of doing it, is not
material. These Firrs are split and dried, and by the poorer People made use of
instead of Candles.

It is urged by the Learned Dr. Plot, that these Morasses were the products of
the Woods that grew upon them, which by putrefaction of the Leaves, Rains and
Dews, may, as we daily see, be converted into Boggs or Morasses; and that the
Firrs found there were not brought thither by any Deluge, but were the product
of the Soil, and in probability ruined by the Britains, in revenge to the
Danes, the Pines being their darling Tree; and he adds that Caesar having never
seen the Northern Parts where the Pines grew, might easily be mistaken in that
as well as in the Beech-Tree, which he asserts was not in this Island, though
found contrary by Experience. To these I answer, Though the Hypothesis be
ingenious, yet for the following reasons I think it not to be defended: For in
the first place I think it not rational to conjecture, that the Pine through the
whole Island could be so universally destroyed, as that for the future it
should never be the natural product of the Soil, as we find at this day it is
not; besides had the Pine, as he asserts, been destroyed in revenge to the
Danes, by the Britains, they would for the same reason have destroyed the Oak
too, the Danes at that time being an Heathenish People, and their Druids
Worshipped that Tree, for which therefore they must doubtless have a far greater
Veneration than for the Pine. Wherefore had the Pines been destroyed for this
reason only, the Oak likewise could not but have falln a Sacrifice to their
fury; for surely their own Superstition in that revengeful Juncture could never
have been a Curb to their unbounded Rage. Secondly, The Postures the Firrstocks
are found in, evince they were brought thither by a Deluge; I have seen seven
or eight of a vast Thickness contiguous to each other, and whoever considers
the Circumference of them must necessarily conclude they could never grow there
in that Order, it being impossible there should be a distance betwixt each Tree
for the ascending Boughs. Thirdly, Under these are frequently found the Exuviae
of Animals, as Shells, Bones of Fishes, under one particularly I saw the Head
of the Hippopotamus; it is plain from hence these could not come from any other
Cause but a Deluge; and if so, since the Pine is not the product of this
Island, we may as reasonably suppose those to be brought thither after the same
manner. What Caesar alleges of the Beech not growing here, I am apt to think
that kind of Beech he saw in Italy never grew wild in this Country; we may
conjecture this from the description Virgil gives of the Beech-Tree, when he
terms it Patula Fagus, which cannot be affirmed of those produced usually in
England: And this may serve for an Answer to what is espoused by Dr. Plot. I
shall therefore in the next place proceed to consider the bituminous Earth near
Ormskirk, that being another species of Moss; but before we close this
Paragraph I shall presume so far upon your Patience, as to give a solution to
an Objection urged by some, and then conclude. It is observed by some the Pines
by themselves are found in Numbers, and likewise other Trees ranged in order
are discovered together, as Birch, Ash and Oak, distinguished in several
Lines, whence they probably infer that Woods of those distinct Trees once grew
there. To this I answer, That though they may be observed so in Martin-Meer, yet
the Assertion is not generally true, for I have observed them in other places
to lie promiscuously; here a Firr-stock, next to it a Birch, an Oak, or an
Ash, not keeping any Order at all; so that what one particular place may do,
no wise illustrates a general History of those fossile Trees, since generally
speaking the quite contrary is observed. Secondly, These Ranks of Trees found
together no wise invalidates the Deluge, for the same Argument may be urged
against fossile Shells, which are frequently found collected there; yet I
suppose no Man will urge this as an Argument of their not being brought thither
by a Deluge, but rather the contrary, since upon the Seashore in their native
Beds they are always found in great Numbers.

To these may be added that remarkable Mountain called Naphat in the Province
of Conought in the Kingdom of Ireland, which is several hundred Fathom above
the surface of the Sea, yet at the top of this Mountain ten Yards within it are
vast Beds of all sorts of marine Shells, as Whelks, Muscles, Cockles,
Perewinkles, Torculars, Pectinites, Turbinites, Oysters, etc. which doubtless,
considering the immense height of the Mountain, could not be deposited there by
any means but a Deluge, and that an universal one. Parallel to these are those
vast Mountains of Oyster-shells in Virginia, and other parts of the
West Indies; likewise the vast quantities of marine Shells found several Yards
deep in firm Marle in Lands remote from the Sea, in which five Yards within the
Marle I saw the Skeleton of a Buck standing upon his Feet, and his Horns on its
Head, which are yet preserved at Ellel-Grange near Lancaster.

I Will give you one Instance more, That eight Yards within Marle in Larbrick
near Preston in Lancashire, was found the entire Head of a Stag, with the
Vertebrae of the Neck whole, which by its Branches and Magnitude is foreign to
any I ever observed in these parts; but by the Cuts of those in Canada, I
cannot judge them any other than of those in that Country: These are now in the
Custody of Richard Longworth of St. Michaels Esquire when they were taken out of
the Earth they were soft and pliable, but now hard and firm. A Phenomenon not
unlike to this is observable in Coral, which immediately grows hard, the humid
Particles being spent by the heat of the Air; so that the saline and
terrestrial Particles are not longer disunited, but thence come to a strict
union, and consequently an hard and firm Body. More Instances of this nature
might be produced, but what are recited are sufficient to confirm an impartial
Reader in the truth of what is alleged; and to others I think it not worth
while to make any Address at all.

However I shall produce another Instance, and then leave every one to his
particular Sentiments: In a Place in Lancashire called the Meals, under the
Moss four Yards within Marle was found an exotic Head, which by the description
given me of it by the Country People, may doubtless be that of an Elke; the
Brow-Antlers were bigger than usually the Arm of a Man is, the Beams were near
2 Yards in height, and betwixt the two opposite Tips of the Horns, which is the
Diameter, was 2 Yards likewise. Such a Curiosity never before seen in these
Parts induced the Country People to cut it asunder into many pieces, each
preserving a part as a Rarity; so that had it been entire, it had been much
greater: The scattered remains of it may now be seen in different Places, but
that is but a slender satisfaction to a curious Enquirer. The Elke most
certainly is and ever was a Creature foreign to this Nation, how therefore so
many Yards in Marle under the Moss this should come to be deposited, by any
other means than an universal Deluge, I would gladly be informed; considering
likewise the wildness of the Place, and the thin number of People where this
Phenomenon was observed, (for the Meals are little more cultivated than the
Deserts of Arabia) I think I may venture to affirm, if a Man will lay aside
Prejudice, and not be too fond of an overweening Opinion, he cannot account
for it any other way.

To close this Head it may be agreeable enough to insert that remarkable
Instance of Andrea de Valeta, Communicated to me by Signior Vigani, who had
itfrom the Person himself: viz. That in the Kingdom of Granada, remote from the
Sea, he saw an Indian Canoo or Boat dug out of a solid Rock. These all
thoroughly considered undeniably evince an universal Deluge, which doubtless
could not be any other than that of Noah, of which Moses gives so ample a
relation; and if so, the recited Phenomenon amount to no less than a
Demonstration of the Truth of what that inspired Philosopher has transmitted to
us.

As to the Forms of other Fossile Plants found in solid Rocks, as some not far
from the Coal-Mines adjacent to Latham, where I have seen the Impressions of
Polypody, Maidenhair and Thorn Leaves in an hard greyish Rock, imprinted in a
Black bituminous Matter. I likewise observed in a Marble near Holker, the
Lineaments of a Man; and in Pool's Hole near Buxton Bath, the Representations
of several other Creatures, and various Modifications of Matter. These I take
to be purely the wanton Sportings of the Fluor Stalactites, and do believe
these Lusus Naturae are caused by different Mixtures of bituminous, saline and
terrene Particles; and are not the Exuviae of Plants in the Deluge, which in
that universal Destruction subsided with the broken Strata according to
specific Gravitation.

At Halsil near Ormskirk is a Bituminous Turf, which emits a Smell like the Oil
of Amber; and from it may be prepared an Oil not easily distinguishable from
the former, and answers all the Intentions of that noble Medicine, but this
must be discreetly managed, otherwise it contracts a foetid Empyeuma. Pieces of
this by the Country People are made use of instead of Candles, and burn like
Torches; I have seen it flame upon the surface of Water, as long as any part
above its superficies remained. Where this is got there floats a bituminous
Oil, I have seen strange Effects of it in preserving Raw Flesh, which comes
near to the Egyptian Mummy.

The Morasses are made Arable by Draining and Marling them, and bring then very
good Corn; they frequently pare off the Tops of these with Push-plows, which
the amass together in small Heaps, when they are dry they set them on Fire, and
by their alcalious Ashes the Ground is made very Fertile, but will not continue
so above three Years, after that it is very Barren. One thing had almost slipped
me, how sometimes in Mosses are found human Bodies entire and uncorrupted, as
in a Moss near the Meals in Lancashire. In Eller-Moss was found the Skeleton
of a Stag standing upon its Feet: These are the most remarkable Phenomenon I
have observed in Morasses, I shall not therefore swell these Sheets with
unnecessary Recapitulations, but according to our Design proceed to the next
Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
Of Mines and Minerals, as Coal-Mines, Kennel-Mines their various sorts; the
Method of Discovering them. An Account of Sparrs, Talcs, Stalactites, Asbestus,
Alum and Vitriol Ores; Salt Ores of various sorts, Salt Rocks, Sulphur Ores;
the Pyrites, Native Vitriol, Salts of various kinds; Mineral Damps, and
Diamonds.

IT is an Observation as common as true, and which may justly challenge our
Admiration, That the Mines in all Parts of the World (I mean Coal and
Kennel-Mines) are always found in Strata, shelving toward the Center; or as
the Miners call it, Dipping: Insomuch, that the same which in one part perhaps
cannot be discovered under Twenty Fathom, is yet at the Rise of the Mine
frequently found near the Surface of the Ground: These generally keep the same
Dip as the Coal Slat that lies over them, and by finding that you speedily
disclose the Mine; and whatever the Miners may pretend, so far as I have been
able to observe, more certain Directions for the Discovery of these Mines
cannot be given. If the Mines ly in any considerable Strata, (or as the
Workmen style it) ly True, their usual Dip is East or West; or as they
vulgarly word it, to the Twelve-a-Clock, or Four-a-Clock Sun. In these Mines
are those luxuriant Springs of Acidulae, that it would be impossible ever to
make them serviceable, if they lay not in this shelving Posture: For did they
ly in an Horizontal Plane, they would most commonly not be found under some
Hundred Fathoms, and then the Quantities of Water would be too great for any
Engine to discharge. It was therefore, no doubt, the wonderful Providence of
the Almighty at the universal Deluge, in the Disruption of the Earth, that as
the Psalmist terms it, They started aside like a broken Bow, to remain as
everlasting Monuments of his Power, as well as Kindness to Mankind: And a
farther Argument of his infinite Goodness is, that they are most commonly found
in cold Climes, and not in those Regions where they have a more kindly
Influence of the Sun. To pretend to solve the Postures of these, in so great a
Confusion as was at the Deluge, by specific Gravity, is I think but to trifle
in Terms: For Mechanically to account for these wonderful Phenomenon, would be
an Undertaking equal to that Genius who so easily discovered a Pacing-Saddle,
or preserved Antiphthisical Air in Bottles brought from Montpellier. In these
Mines it is plain no specific Gravitation is observed, for Coals, Strata of
Marle, Coal Slats, in all the Mines I have seen always ly promiscuously; for
sometimes you come to a Stratum of Marle, afterward to a Stratum of
Freestone, Iron-stone, or the Pyrites; then to a Coal or Kennel-Mine, then to
a Stratum of several Kinds again, and then to Coals or Kennel again, and
sometimes to Coals above them all; from which it is evident, that in their
subsidence they were not determined to any specific Gravitation, but as Dr.
More terms it, were solely governed by an Hylarchic Spirit. These things
premised, I shall proceed to the Phenomenon frequently observed in them, As the
constituent Principles of Coals, their Mineral Waters, Damps, and Pyrites.

Coals may be said to consist of Bitumen or Sulphurous parts, Vitriolic and
Ferruginous, sometimes interlarded with a mixture of Ocre and Terrence parts;
the sulphurous Particles are easily distinguishable by their Burning, viz. By
their Smell and the azure Color of the Flame; the Vitriolic parts are proved
two ways, first, I have sometimes seen Native Vitriol in these Mines: secondly,
By Distillation; as more particularly in the Kennel near Haigh, from which by
Distillation in a Retort, will come over a very austere Vitriolic Water:
Besides the Springs that issue out of these do sometimes afford us quantities
of Vitriol, as I have before remarked. Their ferruginous Particles are
discovered in the Cinder, by their adhesion to the Magnet, which I take to be a
Pathognomonical Symptom of Iron in that case, though Dr. Lister is pleased to
style it one of the Pyrites: But when the Dr. is framing an Hypothesis, he is
no Slave to his Senses; and by the same Parity of Reason, he might put forth
Comments upon Transubstantiation. Ocres frequently adhere to Coal, as do the
Bass and Terrene parts: As to the Pyrites, that darling Proteus of the Dr.
which at a dead-lift helps him to a Solution of any Phenomenon, and which has
given him the Character of a profound Naturalist amongst several Persons,
perhaps because they were incapable to apprehend him; nor indeed can I think he
apprehends, or believes himself those Assertions he lays down concerning this
Pythagorical Gentleman the Pyrites. This Pyrites is frequently found betwixt
the Lamellae of the Coals, and sometimes in Fissures and Strata: These by their
Configuration to the Receptacles in which they are disclosed, appear to have
once been fluid; I have seen some Cubical, others in Pentagons, and some rolled
up in Magdalons, and Striated like Cockle-shells, in lines exactly like those;
a Collection of these I have by me, and design them for the Musaeum at Oxford.
Others I have seen in the Shape of the Pectinites. The Pyrites consists of
Sulphur, Vitriol, Ocre, Metallic parts, as Iron, Copper, etc. Of this there
are various sorts, as the Aureus, Argenteus, Ferreus, Cupreus. The Sulphur is
distinguishable in it by the Detonation it makes with Nitre, as likewise by the
sulphurous Smell which by Collision may be observed in it. The Vitriol is
known by its Germination, which it frequently emits exposed in the Air. The
Ocre, and Metallic parts are discovered by Calcination and Fusion, and of
these I have seen several Essays. These are the most noted Phenomenon I could
ever observe in this Minion of Dr. Lister; but if he would have greater Matters
credited of it, he surely writes not what he has seen, but what he fancies: Let
him first oblige the World with more ample and convincing Discoveries of its
Merit, otherwise why should we Attribute to it more than its Value? It may be
freely said of this as of most of the Dr's Notions, All is not Gold that
glisters.

Sparrs there are of several sorts, but the most Noted may be reduced to these
Classes, the Rhomboidal Pellucid Spar, the Sapphirine Rhomboidal, or Azure
Spar, the Opace Azurine Spar, the Alabastrites and the Stalactites, the
Pellucid irregular Spar, the Diamond Spar, so denominated from its figure:
These all will run, and are commonly made use of by the Miners to run down
their Ores. These are a Composition of Vitriolic Salts, Sulphurs, and Terrene
Particles: The Sulphur is discernible by Calcination, as are likewise the
Saline, and Terrene Particles, which are very austere, and like a Bole will
adhere to the Tongue. The Rhomboidal Spar is frequently found in the Mines in
Derbyshire, and is constituted with various Lamellae, which are all Rhomboidal;
which figure no doubt proceeds from a particular mixture of Saline and Terrene
parts. Sometimes I have seen Sparrs consisting of various Parallelograms; these
are Pellucid like Diamonds, and will cut Glass, and are frequently found in
Mole-Hills, at Downham in Lancashire: These are not to be found by Digging, as
I have been informed by several of the Neighboring Inhabitants, from what
Depth therefore these Earthy Pioneers do bring them up is uncertain; they are
called by the Names of Downham-Diamonds. The Sapphirine or Azure Spar is
frequently found in Copper and Lead Mines in Lancashire and Derbyshire; some
are more Opace than others, which no doubt proceeds from the different mixture
of Saline and Earthy parts. The Alabastrites and Stalactites are found
plentifully in those most noted Cavities, Pool's Hole, and the Devil's- Arse in
the Peak in Derbyshire: These are not so pellucid as the other, therefore seem
to contain a greater proportion of Terrene, and less of Saline Particles. The
Figures which these Stalactites shoot into are Wonderful, and to a Thinking Man
the most diverting Objects in the Universe. In some places the Cavity is scarce
a Yard deep, in others an Hundred Fathoms perpendicular, of a most magnificent
Arch: From the Top of this vast Roof there continually drops a Water, which
forms various Lamellae of the Stalactites, in the shape of Hay-cocks, Lions,
Men, Fret-work, and several other diverting Phenomenon.

Dr. Woodward supposes the Stalactites to be formed by the Water in some Strata
of Earth, filtring from the Spar, and so according to the position of
Particles, to constitute various Lamellae of Spar. I shall not deny but this in
part may be true, yet in those Cavities it is most certain the Water forms
various Lamellae of Spar, after it is fallen from the Rock, as is very
discernible in those little Hills called Hay-cocks, upon which the Water is
continually dropping, and each Year forms various Lamellae of the Stalactites;
the Water is clear, and of a pleasant Taste, and in Distillation yields a good
quantity of this Sparry Matter: Wherefore it is most probable, there is a
continual solution of this kind of Matter, by some acid Esurine Halitus, which
may likely be the Effluvia of some of the Mines, or Minerals in those parts. I
am farther confirmed in this, because the Sparrs by Calcination are of a very
austere styptick Taste; therefore it is most rational to think, that they may be
some Vitriolate Effluvia which make this solution, but are not to be discerned
in the Water, because the Saline Particles are sheathed in the Terrene, and so
cannot exert their pungent Qualities until they are disentangled: And hence it
is that the Water, though it be highly saturated with these Spars, is yet of a
pleasing Taste; and no doubt but a thorough Discovery of the Principles of these
Waters, would give us a satisfactory Account of the Formation of Gems, and
might likewise be of Use in Physic.

There are different Kinds of these Sparrs; as to their internal Qualities,
some if taken inwardly will Vomit, and Purge most violently, as that in the
Lead Mines near Andlesack in Lancashire; and this no doubt consists in a great
measure of Salt and Sulphur, which I take to be the reason that it is Emetic.
But the Nature of this Spar will be more fully made out from the subsequent
Instances, and the first is by Calcination, in which you may easily discover
that a Pound of this will yield a Dram of Arsenic at the least, lying betwixt
the Lamellae of the Spar. Whence therefore this comes to be of so Poisonous a
Nature is plainly evident: Notwithstanding this, the Neighbors thereabout will
frequently take a Scruple at least of this in Fits of the Stone, in whom it
vomits, purges, and works violently by Urine; in this Case, as they have
frequently assured me, they have found great Relief: Whence the Vomiting and
Purging proceed is evident, as we have before observed, viz. from the Arsenical
Sulphur; as likewise from that profuse quantity of Urine, which may
sufficiently hint to us what kind of morbifick Matter it is, that causes the
Diabetes, both from the Quickness of its poisonous Quality, and likewise the
Sweetness of the Urine. There are some have been so daring, as to venture to
take a Dram of this, particularly One James Barns's Wife and Child, but alas!
to their woeful Experience they found the sad Effects of it; for in about Nine
Hours afterward they both Expired. The like Quantity of this, in about Three
Hours time, will Kill a Dog; and it is observable, that the Dog while living is
deeply Lethargick, which may farther illustrate to us, in malignant Fevers
attended with those Symptoms, what kind of Matter probably it is that causes
those Symptoms; but that is more fully Discussed in its proper place. Nay, so
spreading is the Poison of this Spar, that it has not only been fatal to the
Creature that has taken it, but a Dog by licking the Blood of a Swine, which
had accidentally taken it mixed with Meal and Butter, expired likewise; and it
is farther observable, that the Flesh of the Swine was afterward Eaten, and
did no mischief though the Blood was poisonous; because as we may reasonably
conjecture, the Arsenic had not spread it self farther than the Mass of Blood.

There is likewise in the same Mine a Black Spar, which affords a diverting
Phenomenon; or perhaps by some may be esteemed a melancholy Scene, which is
in the following manner, If you calcine this Spar in a Crucible, its
sulphurous Particles so diffuse themselves in the ambient Air, that the
Persons standing by, by their Paleness resemble the Corpse of so many deceased
Persons. It is further remarkable, that there are sometimes Cavities in the
Body of this, and likewise in the Lead-Ore, which are impleted with Water, though
there are no apparent Aqueducts leading to them; these by the Miners are styled
Self-Loughs: Whence this Water is derived may merit our Consideration; but it
is most probable it is raised from the more remote Bowels of the Earth, by a
subterraneous Heat, and collected in those Cavities; so that it is undeniably
demonstrable, that the aqueous Particles must penetrate the Pores of the Rocks,
Sparrs and Ores, which will more plainly illustrate to us how sometimes in
those kinds of Cavities there are found living Toads, which some have had the
vanity to fix there ever since Noah's Deluge; but from the Ova, or Eggs
floating in the Particles of the Water, it is most probable to conclude they
bred there. Others are Diuretical, and are frequently taken with success in the
Gout and Stone, which no doubt they effect by their saline Particles inciding
the Lentor in the Blood, and so consequently give ease in those Cases:
Instances of this kind I have seen several, but to insert them here is foreign
to this Undertaking. These are the most remarkable Phenomenon I have observed
of Sparrs, I shall therefore in the next place hasten to Talcs and Amianthus,
or that which is called Feathered Alum.

The Talcs are pellucid, and frequently found in Marle, and will easily calcine
into brittle white Lamellae, and would no doubt make a very good Plaster,
which in the Malt-Kilns might be of great use, being far better than those
common Clay-Floors; this is not at present made use of any farther than a
common Mortar, but its farther Improvement succeeding Generations may discover.

The Amianthus is likewise found in Marle, it consists of various Filaments,
and is that which the Ancients made their perpetual Lamp with; I have seen
Cloth and Paper made of this, which would stand Fire, and doubtless it would
be highly worth the while of some of our ingenious Mechanics to make farther
Essays upon it. It is called by some the Salamander's Wool, because, as I
imagine, like that it is able to withstand the fury of the Flame: Iuncker and
Etmuller give us an account of its Principles, and likewise of some Trials they
have made upon it; I shall therefore refer the Reader to those Authors. It is
used by some Physicians in Unguents, in Distempers of the Nerves, but for my
part I cannot see what use it can be of in those Cases; I cannot conceive how
so sluggish and unactive a Body can penetrate and open the Obstructions of the
Nerves, nor is it likely that its Particles should be absorbed by the Capillary
Vessels, and so destroy that Acidity of the Blood that may occasion the
Distemper. The next thing to be considered are the Alum and Vitriol-Ores, and
of these there are various sorts.

Vitriol is a Salt so denominated from its being like Glass pellucid, and of
this there are three sorts, White, Red and Green. The Red is found in the Mines
in Hungary, and the White and Green in Lancashire and Derbyshire: The Green is
either Natural or Artificial; Natural, such as is that in the Kennel-Pits at
Haigh in Lancashire, and in some Lead-Mines near Castleton in Derbyshire;
Artificial, such as is prepared from the Pyrites, by Calcination and
Fermentation. Of the Green there are two sorts, the one spongy and the other
solid, but with Galls all yield the same Phenomenon. Of the White likewise are
two sorts, the solid and the Trichites, the solid is found sometimes in
Laminae, betwixt those of the mineral Bass, or Shiver, as the Miners term it;
the Trichites is an Efflorescence from the Ores in the form of Hairs, and for
that reason so styled from the Greek word (...), which signifies an Hair; the
Ores of these are commonly Bass, and as I suppose have their Pores so
configurated, as not to admit of other Salts, and with these Salts we do imagine
they may be impregnated from the Bowels of the Earth, by the ascending
Effluvia, or by those Particles which fall from the Atmosphere, as is evident
from those Stones near Hess-Cassel in Germany, which by exposing them to the
Air, afford at several times a greater quantity of Vitriol than the whole
substance of the Stone amounts to. The white Vitriol is frequently found mixed
with Alum, which I suppose might give occasion to some to make no difference
betwixt those Salts; but they may easily be distinguished, for the vitriolic
Particles will spend themselves in Efflorescences in the Air, but the
alluminous remain fixed; and then it is, and not till then, that the Alum
ought to be prepared. Roch-Allum we have at Brindle and Houghton in Lancashire,
where great quantities might be made, those Parts being most modious of any in
the Kingdom for this Business, since they may be so easily supplied with that
Sea-plant which the Arabians called Kali, and we in our Idiome Kolp.

Alum, as well as Vitriol, is most commonly found in Bass, and as we suppose
may challenge the like production; they differ likewise in their Figure in
Chrystallization, yet neither of them do at all times shoot into one and the
same Figure. Here one Question of moment offers it self to our Enquiry, (viz)
Whether or no green and white Vitriol be specifically different, or only differ
in Color as they are differently saturated with some Ore or Mineral: It is
certain I have in the same mineral Water observed, both green and white
Vitriol, and likewise out of the same Ore both green and white Vitriol make
their Efflorescences; wherefore it seems probable to me that these two are not
specifically different, but that the one consists of a more compact and close
Texture, and the other of more loose Particles: I am farther confirmed in this
Opinion, because I find that they will both turn black with Galls, and are both
Emetic. The Ores of Vitriol are either Marcasite, or Bass; the Methods of
making Vitriol have been before recited, both in the Philosophical
Transactions, and in a Piece of Mr. Ray's; I shall not therefore transgress on
the patience of my Reader.

As to marine Salts they either make their Efflorescences out of some kind of
Limes, or Bass, as I have observed upon several Walls in Lancashire; and upon
the blew Bass in Cheshire sometimes upon old Walls may be observed Saltpetre,
and oftentimes an alcalious fixed Salt, which I take to be the Natron of the
Ancients; and which we likewise find in some Waters in Lancashire, as in those
near Townley and Burnley. If the Use of this Salt was fully prosecuted, it
would doubtless be of great Benefit, as far surpassing all our artificial
Alcalies, if we may judge of it either by the Phenomenon observable in it, or
from those Accounts which the Ancients give of it, as Hippocrates and
Dioscorides; and Vauslebius, a modern Author, in his Account of the Plague at
Grand Cairo, assures us of the wonderful Efficacy of this Salt, of which he
himself was an Eyewitness; for though Hundreds in a Week constantly expired of
the Plague then raging, yet so soon as the Nitre falls, which they know by the
Turgidness of the Nile, and the fermenting and rising of the Nitre-Pits, the
Sickness immediately ceases. Polyd. Virgil informs us that the first Invention
of Glass was by an Accident which happened from this Salt, (viz.) Some
Merchants who had been at Nitria, a place in Egypt where it is collected in
greatest quantities, taking several large pieces of Natron on board their
Vessels, and having a mind to go on Shore for their Diversion, ordered some
Piles of it to be raised on the Ground, upon which they might fix their
Kettles, as on Furnaces, to boil their Meat; but when the Fire grew to an
intense heat, the Salt and Sand flux'd together, and ran into a transparent
Glass, a Method not much unlike that which is practiced from the Ashes of Kali;
how far therefore it might be useful upon this Account, deserves our
Consideration.

Rocks of Salt of a vast thickness are frequently found in Cheshire, some of
them twenty-five Yards or more thick; but whence these came, whether from the
universal Catastrophe of the World at the Deluge, or have been since formed in
the bowels of the Earth, admits our next Enquiry. It is observed that such a
quantity of Water will only dissolve such a proportion of Salt, nor will the
Salt after dissolution precipitate; if then we imagine these Rocks to proceed
from the Deluge, we must conclude that vast Globe of Water that drowned the
World, to be more saturated with Salt than any of the Brine-springs in
Cheshire; and if so, the Rocks of Salt had been universal over the World.
Wherefore to me the most rational Conjecture is, That upon the Rupture of the
Strata of the Earth, Islands of those Salt-Rocks floated in the Flood, and so
for a considerable time might be tossed to and fro undissolv'd, and in that
general Confusion upon the subsiding of the Water, might settle with the rest
of the Mines and Minerals, and so have continued in the Posture we find them
ever since. I have before demonstrated that the Brine-springs do not proceed
from the Rocks of Salt that are already discovered, but from the Rocks that lie
deeper in the Bowels of the Earth, or it may be from none at all, because the
Figures of the Salt are different; I shall not therefore insist further upon
that Point, but pass on to what I next proposed; and that is to give an Account
of Alum, and its various Ores.

Alum may be divided into three Classes, the Roch, the Feathered, and the
Trichites, the which is made most commonly from an Ash-colored Bass, and is
frequently mixed with white Vitriol, as may be observed in the Ores in
Lancashire and Derbyshire: The Feathered Alum, as was noted before, is often
found in reddish Marles near Thernham in Lancashire. The Uses of these are so
notorious, I shall not insist upon them.

The next Mineral that bears the nearest affinity to its Salts is the
Downham-Diamond; these, as we hinted, are cast up by the Moles, and in those
little Mountains often discovered after showers of Rain, I have seen some of
them as dazzling as those from India, and would likewise for some time cut
Glass, but not like those continue it. The Learned Mr. Boil, and Seignior Bret
have given us a large Account of their Formation, to whom therefore I refer my
Reader; only in short I shall give you my own Conjecture, which is that I take
them to be a Composition of saline and terrene Particles, perhaps not unlike
those of the most refined Sparrs; and in this I was confirmed by the
Calcination of them, in which I could discover a perfect vitriolic Taste, and
found a cretaceous Matter; but this I presume is in that small proportion, and
so curiously interwoven with the saline Particles, that the whole Body becomes
transparent, as we see in those of Glass the like Phenomenon are observable.

The next Minerals to be prosecuted are the Sulphurs, of which various kinds
are observable in these Countries, as in Mines, Metals and Minerals; and these,
as they are united with different Bodies, may be ranged into several Classes:
some may be called Vitriolic Sulphurs, because consisting of oily and vitriolic
Particles, and form that Body which we commonly call Brimstone, and these are
observable in Coal-Mines, Mineral-Basses, Ores, Metals and Minerals; others are
Oleaginous Sulphurs, as the Halitus in the Burning-Well near Wigan, the
Sulphur-Damps in several Mines, and the burning Turf near Halls-hall, and a
Sulphur different from all these is observable in Lead, Copper, and the
Pyrites. But to give a clear Idea of all these I shall delineate their several
Effects, by which the Reader will the better judge of their constituent parts.

I shall therefore in the next place proceed to the Oily and Metallic Sulphurs:
The Oily Sulphurs are easily inflammable, but in their burning have no smell;
these are observable in the Burning-Well near Wigan, and the burning Damps in
Coal-Mines, as was before hinted: sometimes these take Fire by Collision, and
sometimes by Accension, as from the flames of the Candles the Miners work with,
and then too often produce dismal Effects, as the blowing Men out of the
Shafts, scorching them to Death, and sometimes destroying the Works. The
Effects of these are as fatal as those of Lightning, and frequently present us
with very odd Phenomenon, as the rending in pieces prodigious Rocks, ejecting
several great Stones perpendicular, with a thousand other Disasters in the
Works. From these things to me it seems plain, the wonderful Effects produced
from Lightning upon Animals, are chiefly from their sulphurous Particles, by a
total and sudden dissipation of the animal Spirits, whence necessarily follows
a coagulation of the Blood, and consequently Death: Wherefore in these Cases to
save the Life of the Patient, if possible, as was inserted before in the
Chapter of Air, speedy bleeding in the Jugulars or Arms is to be used,
Cupping-Glasses, volatile Alcalies, Friction, Epispastics, and the like, are
the Methods to be taken; and not to trifle with Milk, expecting that to imbibe
the Poison, as is the common Custom.

Other Sulphurs are observable in Lead and Lead-Ores, the Effluvia of which are
apt to produce Palsies, the Byon, and Consumption; in these a metallic
corrosive Salt is united with the Sulphur, and so either by causing a
coagulation of the Lympha, or serum of the Blood, entangles the Spirits,
obstructs the Lungs or Nerves, and so produces the fore-recited Distempers. The
Byon is not much unlike a Quinsy, the symptoms running parallel, and no doubt
but the like Method in that as in an essential Quinsy ought to be taken. The
Sulphur of the Pyrites will easily fulminate with Nitre, which Pyrites is a
Complex of different metallic Particles, as they are found in different Mines,
as in Lead, Copper, Iron, Antimony, etc. as was before related. Sulphur is
discernable in some mineral Waters by their smell, and by a Reverberation of
the sulphurous Steams of hot Baths in Cupulos, native Sulphur may be
collected. Sulphur by the Greeks is called (...), because they thought in this,
in those times of Heathenism, the Gods descended, and by Thunder and Lightning
destroyed the Provinces: But by modern Authors it is taken for an inflammable
or oily Concrete from some mineral Acid, which is rendered evident in the
preparation of common Brimstone, which contains both an inflammable Oil, and an
acid Spirit, and accordingly as the Acid is united with the Sulphur, the
Sulphur is benign or poisonous; hence it is that common Brimstone may more
safely be taken, because it contains a mild Acid; but the Sulphurs of Antimony,
Arsenic, and other Minerals, are poisonous because they contain more
penetrating Salts, and so inflame and lacerate the Vessels.

As to Mineral Damps it is observable that they will continue upon the surface
of the Water in the Mine the space of a Month at least, in an Oval form, as the
Miners assured me, and then frequently break; at which time, if the Miners be
within the Works, they are often suffocated: I discoursed with one who had like
to have perished by them; he told me he perceived a sudden Coldness to strike
to his Heart, as he termed it, and an extraordinary sweetness in his Mouth,
that he lay like a Person in a Swooning Fit, and was not sensible of either
Pain or Sickness, nor could he remember any thing farther, save that he drew
his Breath short as he recovered, and was drowsy for some time afterward. The
Phenomenon seem to indicate these Damps to consist of arsenical Sulphurs, and
vitriolic Effluvia, which suddenly entangle the Spirits, and so produce a
Coagulation of the whole Mass of Blood, and consequently Death it self, if not
speedily prevented. The way the Persons have in those Cases to save themselves,
is by digging an Hole in the Earth, and lieing in it upon their Faces till such
time as the Damp has spent it self; and sometimes by shooting at it, and so
firing it out: One of the Men, whose Ignorance led him to Superstition,
affirmed it to be an infernal Spirit; and indeed if a Man reflect upon the
Wickedness of most of the Miners, one might have too much reason to conclude
that they have too great a Correspondence with such sort of Company, their
Morals being inconsistent with any Religion; there is scarce a vicious Act but
they are guilty of it, their Folly is as notorious as their Vice; after all
their toilsom Labors for a whole Week in dismal obscure Cells, the product of
all their six Days Work is generally on the seventh expended in Drunkenness and
Lewdness.

Sometimes in these Mines are observable mineral Earths, by the Miners called
Coke, and Toftan, but to me they seem a courser sort of Sparrs: These, as the
Miners affirm, are unerring Indications of Lead, and when they come to those
Minerals, they will pretend to tell you how far they are from Lead; but too
much Confidence is not to be given to these Assertions, for I have observed
these Minerals to be where no Lead could ever be found; nor indeed considering
the various Bodies Lead is found in, is there any reason to conclude these to
be the preceding Characteristicks of that Metal; but these things being to be
more fully considered in the Chapter of Metals, I shall not expatiate upon them
in this, but to that refer the Reader.

The Metals in these Countries are Lead, Iron, and Copper; the Metallis
affinia, or Bodies betwixt Metals and Minerals, are Antimony, Black-Lead, and
Lapis Calaminaris. Lead-Ore is frequently found either in Sparrs, white Sand,
(some of which is as white as the most refined Sugars I have seen) in the
Fissures either of Limestone or Freestone, and then it runs in Veins, as the
Workmen call it: These are of different sizes, sometimes the Mine being a
quarter of a Yard diameter, and the same Mine sometimes not above an Inch, and
a little after the the Rock clasping together, the Vein entirely disappears,
through which the Miners continuing to work recover the Vein of Metal as
formerly; this kind of Ore is most commonly found in the Fissures of Lime and
Freestone. Another kind of Lead-Ore is found in Lumps, and that in white Sand,
as in the Lead-Mines near Keswick. There are four sorts of Lead-Ore, viz. the
Spar-Ore, Coke-Ore, Potter's Ore, and White Ore: The Spar and Coke-Ore are
about equal Value, and are fluxed with white Wood in Furnaces for that purpose,
and they usually run about a fourth or fifth; Potter's Ore will not lose above
a seventh, and frequently contains a proportion of Silver; the White Ore is a
natural Ceruss, and yields a greater quantity of Metal than any of the rest.

Iron Ores there are of four sorts, as the Raddle-Ore, Clay-Ore, Blue Ore, and
the Button-Ore, so called from little globular Protuberances that cover its
superficies: The common way of fluxing these is by a large Blast with
Wood-Charcoal; but I am informed that lately by the Cakes of Pit-Coal those
Ores may be run into a malleable Iron; and if so, the Profit in the Northern
Parts will be extraordinary, they having vast quantities of that Ore, and
likewise of Coals. It Is most certain it is nothing but the Sulphur of the
Pit-Coal that renders the Iron brittle, and runs it to a Regulus, but whoever
understands the fluxing of Metals, may easily by Lixivials and due Preparations
know how to manage that Point. In the running down of all Metals a particular
care ought to be taken of the Workmen, otherwise they will too often evaporate
it, sink it into a Lithorhage, or run it down with the Cinders, by which means
they have an opportunity at leisure to convert it to their own Use, and so to
defraud the Proprietor: And unless this Disadvantage is prevented, tho there is
a vast gainful prospect from the Mines in Lancashire, they will never answer
expectation; for I my self have fluxed the same sort of Ore to a fourth of
malleable Metal, whereas the Forger has only run it, as he averred, to a
twentieth, nor would he account for any more to the Proprietor.

Copper Ores may be reduced to the following Classes, viz. The Azure, the
Green, the Golden, and the Cinerous, or Ash-colored; and these are found
simply of themselves, and sometimes mixed with Iron, Lead and Antimony, of
which I have various Specimens, but when the Ores are so compounded they never
turn to Account. The Azure might for ought I know answer all the Intents of
Ultra-Marine, and in fluxing will not lose above a twentieth Part; but of this
the quantity is so small, that no great Advantage can be expected from it. The
Golden Ore is so called from the Pyrites Aureus mixed with it, which gives it
that Color: Of these there are quantities sufficient, I do think, to supply
all Europe, and were the Mines rightly managed, we should not have any
necessity to import our Copper from Sweden, which would be of vast Advantage to
the Kingdom; but either the Ignorance or Fraud of the Smelters is such, that
the Product is in a manner destroyed. The Method of rightly running this Metal
is, by reducing the Ore to a small Powder, and afterward roasting it till all
the Sulphur is evaporated, and then by an addition of lixivial Ashes. Nitre and
Tartan, the Ore in a proper Furnace will run to a fourth Part of malleable
Copper; whence it is plain by the quantity of Ore got Weekly, that the Profit
would be vastly considerable, but at present, for ought I can learn, they are
so miserably managed, that they turn to no Account at all. The Green Ore is of
two sorts, the Vitriolic, and the Stoney: The Vitriolic will run to an half
malleable, the Stoney not to a twentieth; and this may be done without either
Roasting, or the Flux-powder, which in the Golden Ore cannot be effected. The
Cinerous Ore must be fluxed as the Golden, and then it will run to one half
malleable; and of this kind there are in Lancashire quantities sufficient.

But that the Method of Essaying Metals may be more easily apprehended, I shall
in each of them set down the particular Forms, which I found most practicable;
and shall in the first place begin with Iron, and so descend to the rest. The
Species of Iron Ore are all enumerated before, wherefore I shall directly begin
with the Process in running down that Metal, with some Experiments upon the
Haematites or Boodstone. The Furnace in which this is run down is about two
Yards square, and so rises perpendicular a Yard or more; it is lined within
with a Wall of the best Freestone, to keep off the force of the Fire from the
Walls of the Furnace; the Bellows which are large and moved by Water, enter
about the middle of the Focus. The rest of the Furnace is raised upon this, six
or seven Yards in a square or quadrangle, but tapering, so that the sides draw
each other by degrees, and the top Hole or Orifice where they throw in Baskets
of Stone and Fuel, is but half a Yard square; into this place they put down a
Pole, to know how far it has rested for a certain time, and when they find it
to have subsided about a Yard and half, then they put in more till the Furnace
is full again. There is a sort of Iron Ore that yields an Iron that is brittle
when it is cold, this abounds with too great a quantity of Sulphur, however it
may be made a Metal malleable as any of the rest, by reducing to Powder, and
roasting the Ore till the Sulphur is sublimed, then running it down with common
Salt or Potashes, or the Ashes of Ferns. There is another sort of Ore they
call Red-shire, that is such an Ore which yields an Iron, which if hammered
when red-hot proves very brittle; therefore these two melted down together
produce a good sort of Iron. Their Fuel is Turf and Charcoal, and in some
places Charcoal only; several trials have been made with Pit-coal, but all
hitherto unsuccessful, that Fuel abounding with too great a quantity of
Sulphur, by which the Metal is rendered friable; but I am apt to think if they
used the Pit-coal made into Coke, that Inconveniency might be avoided; the
dusty part of the Charcoal is useful for burning the Iron-stone; to every
Basket of this burnt Stone they put in one of Brimstone, to make it melt
freely, and cast the Cinders. This Mineral has a strange Effect upon Iron, as
we see by the various Preparations made from it by this Body; the Rationale of
which I take to be this, That the Body of the Iron is opened by the Acid of the
Sulphur, and so quits it self of the Cinder, or terrence Particles. It Is
strange to imagine the wonderful Effects Acids have upon Iron, even the least of
them making an alteration in that Body; the very Acidity of a Potato, which is
not distinguishable by the Palate, will make the Metal when polished livid, and
raise a Rust or Crocus upon its Superficies; other stronger Acids make a
perfect solution of it, particularly Oil of Vitriol converts its Body into a
green Chrystalline Salt, which may again be run down into malleable Iron: So
wonderfully are the terreous Particles dissolved in Minimis, or as we express
it, in Miniature, that they are not to be discerned by the naked Eye, or the
best Microscopes. This Metal, if rightly prepared, comes nearer to a Panacea,
or universal Medicine, than any Drug yet known, and in Chronic Scorbutic Cases
is doubtless as much a Specific as the Peruvian Bark in Intermitting
Distempers, but this by the By; I shall now proceed to other Phenomenon
observable in its Fusion. In the midst of the Furnace is a Tunnel, at which
they put in Charcoal, where it is kindled, then they add Ore broken into pieces
about the bigness of a Pigeon's Egg, so much as they intend to melt down; then
they set their Bellows at work, and continue blowing about twelve Hours,
feeding it still with new Charcoal as it settles; the glassy Cinder being very
liquid, is let through an Hole at the bottom of the Wall; the Iron is left in a
Conical Hole in the midst of the Hearth, which they take out with great Tongs,
then put it under heavy Hammers, moved as the Bellows by Water, whereby after
several heatings, in the same Furnace it is melted in, it is beaten into Bars:
About an hundred Pounds Weight of Metal is gained at one Melting, which is the
Product of about three times as much Ore. This indeed was the ancient way of
running down Iron Ore, but of late the following Method is practiced. They have
a plain and open Hearth like that of a Blacksmith, without any enclosing
Walls, excepting where the Bellows enter there is an hollow place, which they
fill and heap up with Charcoal; then lay the Ore broken small round it upon the
flat of the Hearth to bake, or as some express it, to Roast or Aneel, and by
degrees thrust it into the hollow, where it is melted by the Blast; the glassy
Scoriae run very thin, but the Metal is never in a perfect Fusion, but runs
into Clods or Masses, which taken out are beaten into Bars, as before: To some
of this Ore adheres a green Chrystalline Spar, which consists of ferreous,
vitriolic and terrene Particles; the ferreous Particles may be discovered by
Fusion, and the vitriolic, terrene and sulphurous Particles by Calcination; by
which Method you may distinguish a strong sulphurous Smell, and afterward by
exposing it to the Air may discern Mr. John Sturdy in the Philosoph* Transact.
vitriolic Efflorescences formed like Needles, or small Bacilli. The soft Clay
Ore is reddish, and is that which we may style Haematites, equally good as that
from East India; the Tea-Pots in London made of it, and in Staffordshire, for
Art and beautiful Color, are not behind any from China. This Ore is frequently
used with success for the Murrain in Cattle, and for all Diseases in Swine, to
which latter they will give an handful or two in Milk; which may sufficiently
hint to us of what extraordinary Use it may be in Inflammatory Diseases,
Quinsies, and Pestilential Fevers, and may in all likelihood, by a particular
Composition of ferreous, saline and sulphurous Particles, far surpass all
those Boles and sealed Earths which we import from the Levant and the Indies;
and may for ought I know in Chronic Cases likewise be a better Mixture to
reduce the Mass of Blood to a right Crasis, than the most eminent Chemists
could yet effect by their elaborate Preparations: And why may not this Ore,
being opened by a Volatile temperate Acid, answer all the Indications of the
Acidulae in England? since what Phenomenon we find in the Acidulae by Galls,
either as to Tincture, Precipitation, or Evaporation, may by preparing this
Ore, as recited, and infusing it in common Water, be observed. These are the
most remarkable things which I took notice of in this Metal, we proceed next to
Copper Ores.

And here I shall give you a Process in making a small Essay to satisfy the
Curious, what quantity of Copper the yellow Ore contains; it is effected in
this following Method: Take twenty Penny-weight of Copper Ore, beat it in a
Mortar and searce it fine, then put it into a Crucible thoroughly Anneil'd; keep
it constantly stirring in the Crucible, placed in the Fire, with an Iron
Spatula, otherwise it will run into minute Masses, and be very difficult to
flux down the Metal, because the Flux-powder cannot so entirely mix with the
Copper Particles, so many of the Scoriae interposing: Let it thus be stirred
about two Hours, or till it be of a dark Color, not much unlike Aethiops
Mineral, and emits no sulphurous Smell at all; for if the Sulphur be not
entirely burnt off, it will carry off the Metal in Fusion, or at least if there
be any considerable quantity of it, convert it to a perfect Regulus, and be as
brittle as Glass. I have seen a Regulus run from this sort of Copper Ore, which
when taken out of the Furnace after Fusion, has been hard, but brittle, yet it
has by lieing in the Air moulder'd to a small Powder, in Color not unlike the
Pyrites, which I presume might be occasioned by the Particles of the Air making
a solution of the fixed Salt, which the Metal was run down withal, and so the
Mass must necessarily be reduced to Powder, not unlike Coal-slates, in which by
their long continuance in open Air we may observe the parallel Phenomenon.
After the Ore is thus prepared, if it be that of Tilberthet or Cocklebeg in
High-Furness in Lancashire, it will then weigh about seventeen Penny-weight and
an half. After this to run down the Metal, proceed in the following Method:
Take of Crude Tartar and Nitre each, one Ounce, powder and mix them well
together, afterward flux them in a Mortar, which is thus done. Put an Iron
Spatula, or any other piece of Iron red-hot into the mixture, continually
stirring it till the great Emotion ceases, powder the remaining part when cool,
and add to it two Penny-weight of Pit-coal beaten also to Powder; mix these
with the prepared Ore, then put them all into a Crucible, place it in a Furnace
armed with Bricks, with a Wall about a Foot square, and as much in
perpendicular; cover the Crucible with a Plate of Iron, to reverberate the heat
upon the Ore, by which means it more easily fuses; let the Bellows be blown
with a moderate Blast, and keep the Focus of the Furnace from suffocating with
Cinder, by frequently elevating the Fire with the Spatula, or Iron Salamander;
in about half an Hours time, or less, the Ore will run, which may be discerned
by the violent Boiling of the Salts: Then remove the Crucible from the Furnace,
and strike it easily for some little time upon the Ground, which motion makes
the Metal more readily to separate from the Scoriae. If when the Crucible is
thus hot, you should immerse it half way in cold Water, it is diverting to
observe, that this glowing Heat emits for a considerable time an actual Flame,
occasioned (as it is probable) by a Concentration of the Igneous or fiery
Particles: The Crucible being cool, you will find at the bottom of it about six
Penny weight of Copper; so that it is evident the Ore contains betwixt a third
and fourth Part of Metal. If the Metal, occasioned by the remaining Sulphur,
should prove brittle after it is thus run down, you must then run it down again
in the same Furnace, by addition of some Saltpetre, and by repeating the Fusion
twice or thrice, you will have a malleable Copper, or that which the Workmen
call fine Copper. This is the best Method for Essaying this sort of Ore that I
ever yet could learn, nor do I think it can be well effected otherwise. The
reason why the Saltpetre and Tartar are thus prepared, is this, (though it is not
usual in other Flux-powders, because the Ore abounds with so great a quantity
of Sulphur) If the Saltpetre was not thus bridled with the fixed Salt of
Tartar, it would doubtless carry away the greatest part of the Metal: I have
been informed that this Ore when prepared as directed above, may be run down
with Flanders-Ashes; and it is very likely it may be so; to Experiment which
would be highly worth the time of the Gentlemen that are concerned in Copper
Mines; for by that means they may perhaps prevent the Expense of repeated
Fires, which they are at before they can reduce it to malleable Copper. These
are the most remarkable Phenomenon I have observed in Fusion of Copper Ore, I
proceed next to treat of the Fusion of Lead Ores; which is done only by
roasting of the Sulphur, and afterward in a common Furnace by running it down
with white Wood.

This Ore contains a very corrosive Sulphur, insomuch that when it was Essayed
in an Iron Vessel, I have known it corrode it quite in pieces, which Sulphur is
I doubt not, the occasion of that Distemper the Smelters call the Byon. I have
in some of these Mines observed a liquid Metal, not much unlike Quicksilver,
but cannot aver it to be the same; and have frequently in Copper Mines seen
small pieces of Virgin Copper malleable without Fusion; but how it came to be
so, I do not determine, considering with what difficulty the Metal is ravished
from its Ore; on that Topic therefore I leave every Person to his own
Conjecture. There is some Lead Ore which contains Silver, which after Fusion
may be separated from it with Spirit of Nitre, and so both the Metals
preserved. But let us consider farther this poisonous Sulphur of Lead, which
will better be understood by the tragical and various effects which it
produces, not only upon Human Kind, but upon Quadrupedes. The other Distemper
is by the Miners called the Belland, which discovers it self in the following
Symptoms, A continual Asthma or difficulty of Breathing seizes the Patient,
with a dejection of Appetite, his Complexion turns pale and yellowish; these
are attended with a dry Cough and Hoarseness; swelling of the Limbs and Joints
ensue, which are rendered useless. This Distemper may be taken either by
working in the Lead-Mines, or by the Fumes of the Ore in smelting of it: These
very Symptoms happen to Horses and other Cattle; these generally take the
Distemper either by feeding on the Grass where the Lead-Ore is washed, or by
drinking of that Water: In some Horses that have died of this Disease, the Ore
has been found in Lumps and Masses in the Stomach. Let us now enquire into the
Cause of these Distempers, since it may perhaps seem strange how an Ore without
any diminution of its Substance in appearance, should so far affect the extreme
Parts, as to cause them to swell, and render them useless: In prosecution of
which I allege that it is probable the Sulphur of the Lead is a Substance as
minute as that of Antimony in Crocus Metallorum, which we find by daily
Experience will cause most violent Vomitings, without the least diminution of
its Weight, why may not this Sulphur then enter the very Penetralia of the
Nerves, and in those by its saline Particles produce a Corrugation, and by that
means obstruct the Influence of such a proportion of Spirits as are necessary
to Nutrition? Hence the Blood becomes dispirited, and performs not its due
Circulation, but stagnates in various parts of the Body; the Serum becomes
Effoete and Viscid, and thence proceed the Hoarseness, Asthma, weakness and
swellings of the Joints. It is probable this Distemper in the beginning, before
it has too far affected the Nerves, might be cured by repeated Emeticks, but
after it has once advanced to that State, all Endeavors are vain.

In the Discovery of these Mines, I do not find that the Miners use the Virgula
Divina, or the Forked and Virgin Hasel, but the Ore generally discovers it self
in the Fissures of Rocks; and this they follow till they break into the Bole or
Trunk of it, which resembles the Trunk, and its Veins, the Boughs of a Tree. I
have sometimes observed in the Center of a piece of Limestone, like a Frog
involved in Amber; an entire piece of Ore, without any Strings or Leaders
directing to it; which brings me in the next place to consider the Formation of
Ores, whether they germinate, or are the Exuviae of the Deluge.

It is affirmed of the Iron Mines in the Duke of Florence's Country, that in 3
Years time the same Mine will be as pregnant with Ore, as it was before it was
exhausted: Which Instance to luxurious Wits has afforded sufficient grounds to
descant upon the Germination of Metals, even to that excess, that some fond
Opiniatres who have observed the metallic Tree in a Course of Chemistry, have
almost reduced the Metals to Vegetables; but he that considers the Fissures of
the Rocks, and the closing of those again, where the Metal entirely disappears,
no Strings leading to the subsequent Body, and likewise the preceding Instance
in Limestone, together sometimes with petrified Plants, Shells, Bones, and the
Exuviae of Fishes, unless for the fake of being styled an Atheist, he would be
esteemed a Philosopher, he cannot conclude these to be any thing else but the
Ruins of an universal Deluge; and in a serious Contemplation of these in those
dark Recesses of Nature, the Power of the Almighty is as discernible, as in the
great Luminaries of the Universe. As to that Instance of the Iron Mine in the
Grand Duke of Tuscany's Country, this may be said: It Is probable it is a soft
Ore, which by the Effluvia continually ascending from the Central part of the
Earth, may carry along with them metallic Particles, and consequently in such a
space of time fill up those Vacuities again, or the empty spaces whence the Ore
was extracted; which Phenomenon to an inconsidering Eye, might give reason to
judge the Ore Vegetated. Having now discovered the ways of Finding, Essaying,
the Site and Formation of Metals, I proceed in the next place to the Methods of
their Separation, and thence to the Metallis affinia, and so I shall close this
Chapter.

The Separation of Metals from Ores is twofold, either by Menstruum, or the
Test, which Artificers call the Couple: The Menstruum, if the Ore contains
Copper, Gold or Silver, is Spirit of Nitre, Aqua fortis, or Aqua Regia, which
make a solution of the metallic Particles, and by Alcalies may easily be
precipitated, and then by Fusion you may judge what quantity of Metal the Ore
contains. The Separation by the Test is the common Method of the Mint, and of
the Silver-Smiths; which being a particular Trade, and not properly the
Province of Natural History, I shall not interfere in that Business, but to
those I shall refer the Curious.

Quicksilver is found sometimes, but that rarely and in small quantities; I
remember once out of a Lead-Mine I saw about a Pound of Virgin Quicksilver, but
never any native Cinnaber in these Parts, which is its usual Ore. Black Lead we
have near Keswick, which might be got in great quantities, but the Mines are
opened only once in seven Years, that being engrossed by the Dutch and Germans,
and by them made use of in glazing Earthen Ware, and in making their
Melting-pots, but I presume they make a farther Use of it, in mixing it with
Metals, which is not yet communicated to us; but by mixing this with Red-Lead,
I have seen it run upon an Earth near Haigh, a Glass scarce discernible from
Tortoise. The Lapis Calaminaris is sometimes found in the Copper Mines, and
made use of in converting Copper into Brass, and is likewise used in the
Dysentery, which being a strong Alcaly, by imbibing the Acid, may be a Specific
in that Distemper. I having now accounted for the most remarkable Phenomenon in
Metals and Metallis affinia, I shall in the next place, according to my
intended Method, proceed to give an Account of Vegetables remarkable in these
Countries, and their various Operations.

CHAP. V.
Of Plants, the various Species of Marine, Amphibious, Sea Plants, and their
Vegetations illustrated; of Plants peculiar to the Counties; of the Physical
and Poisonous Plants, with a Rationale of their Effects; Fossile Plants
examined, and demonstrated from various Observations, that they are but Lusus
Naturae.

THE Learned and Indefatigable Mr. Ray has discoursed with that accuracy and
fullness of these, that there is little room left to enlarge upon this Subject;
wherefore what I shall offer in this Chapter shall be chiefly about their
Germination, and some particular Phenomenon which I have observed in some of
them. Their Virtues and Classes being before by that incomparable Man so fully
explained, that to touch upon those would be but to Copy him, and would be
indeed superfluous.

In some of the Alga's or Sea-Oaks I have observed various Capsulae impleted
with a pellucid Gelly, and in those an infinite Number of globular Grains,
which I cannot imagine but to be their Seed; wherefore it seems probable to me,
that when those Capsulae are come to their full Maturity, as in those of a
foetus, there is a Disruption of their Membranes, then that chrystalline
Humor, (so I call it because it so nearly resembles that of the Eye) with the
Seeds is excluded; the Taste of it is a little Mucilaginous and somewhat Saline,
which Phenomenon demonstrate it to be a proper ferment to propagate the
Germination of those Plants: I am farther confirmed in this Opinion, because
upon the Rocks where these Plants grow, I have frequently seen this kind of
chrystalline Humor, and out of that, various kinds of Alga's or Sea-Oaks
germinating, first sprouting with two small Leaves, and afterward successively
formed into the whole figure of the Plant. What therefore the ancient
Botanists, and some of our modern Ones have alleged of these, asserting them
to be amphibious Plants, only produced without Seed, if we fully consider the
above-recited Phenomenon I think may fairly be judged an Error. I can only
speak experimentally as to the Alga, but for the Seeds of the Corals,
Corallines, Mosses, Spunges, Alcyoneas, I will not be obliged so strictly to
account for.

Coralline we have in these parts in great quantities, and it is almost noted
to any vulgar Eye for its eminent Virtues in killing Worms; and I think it may
be preferred to any other Alcaly, it being a composition of marine and alcalious
Particles, and by that means answering two Intentions; and by reason of its
safeness, in giving of which there can be no mistake in the Dose, it may
challenge a greater Fame than Mercurius Dulcis, which by being given either in
too great a quantity, or not being rightly sublimed, has sometimes produced
most dismal Effects; wherefore the Person who meddles with this ought to know
the right Dose for the Years, and particular Constitution of the Patient, and
likewise be rightly satisfied that the Medicine is true, for I am certain no
one Remedy is so commonly adulterated; so that he who prescribes it, not only
runs the risk of his Reputation, but hazards likewise the Life of his Patient:
by mistaking this I saw Two Persons Poisoned beyond recovery; which Instance I
think may sufficiently caution us when, and how to prescribe it, and that
Ladies, Nurses, and Apothecaries, and wise Women, who are not competent Judges
whether it is rightly, or not rightly prepared, may not hereafter attempt to
give it so liberally as they have done.

Spunges we frequently find thrown upon the Shores, but I do not remember that
I ever saw them growing. Corals we have not any, but Mosses and Alcyonia of
various sorts. The Alga Saccarifera is frequently found upon these Coasts, and
by hanging in the Air it will yield repeated Efflorescences of a white Sugar,
as sweet as any prepared from the Sugarcanes; it is not for the present of any
known use, but perhaps by Experiments which may easily be made upon it,
succeeding Ages may farther inform us; however I can only add this, that the
quantity of Sugar that may be had from one of these Alga's is very
considerable. There are other kinds of Alga's which the Inhabitants commonly
call Mermaids Purses, of these there are Two sorts, the Black and the Yellow: I
do not remember any One to have given an account of these, nor can I inform my
self to what Species they belong, having never yet seen them growing, and I
only found them scattered on the Sea-shores. The Sea-Grapes may likewise be
observed on these Coasts; and these I think are the most remarkable of
Amphibious Plants in these parts.

The perfect Marine Plants are not very numerous, but the following are common
enough, Eringo, Soldanella, Buckthorn, Plantain, Sea-Colewort, Spurge, Squills,
Sea-Purslain, Sedum Minimum, Sea-Spurge, Thrift Marsh-Pinks, Rock Samphire,
Marsh Samphire, Horned Poppy Flore Luteo, Sea-Scurvy-grass, Serpillum, Carduus
Mariae, Verbena, Rocket, Absinthium Abrotani Folio, or Sea-Wormwood. The Eringo
is of frequent use in Scorbutic and Consumptive cases, and makes a most
pleasant Ale by infusion. Soldanella is commonly used in Hydropic Cases, and
often with success; nor have I observed it to be so rough an Hydragogue as some
Botanists have pretended. Squills that grow here are not used, but I see no
reason why they may not answer all the ends of the other. Serpillum is a Plant
often successfully made use of in Catarrhs, and in the Fluor Albus. Rock
Samphire makes a most delicate Pickle, and may be ranged in the first Class
amongst Anti-scorbuticks. Sea-Wormwood is a Plant of extraordinary Virtues,
yielding an Aromatic Oil, a volatile and fixed Salt, and is of great use in
Hysteric, Hypocondriac, and Hydropic Cases. Carduus Mariae in Pleuritic Cases
may be styled amongst the first; and no doubt but the Juice of it taken in
inflammatory Distempers may be of great use. Marsh Samphire has a Taste
perfectly Saline, makes an agreeable Pickle, and doubtless helps Digestion.
These Plants may be counted Specifics for the Distempers incident to those
Coasts, which if duly considered, give us pregnant reason to admire the
Goodness of Him that made them. The amphibious Plants are not of use in
Physic, but their Ashes are serviceable to Glassmakers, and spread upon Ground
make very good Tillage. Some have pretended that in dulcifying Seawater these
have been made use of; and it may be the Mucilage of these Plants may bridle
the Sulphurous part of the Salt, which makes the Water unhealthful, but
however this method can never be serviceable at Sea, nor is there any necessity
for it.

Having now dispatched the amphibious and perfect marine Plants, I shall in the
next place proceed to the Inland Plants of these Countries; but shall not give
an account of each particular Plant, but only of those that are esteemed rare.
The Vaccinia Nubis, or Cloud-berries, are found upon Pendle-Hill in Lancashire,
a Fruit of a pleasant Taste, and a good Anti-scorbutic. The Lilly of the Valley
is in many of our Woods, and is a noted Sternutatory. Herba Paris is in many
places, and is an eminent Counter-poyson. Androsaemum grows frequently about
our Mosses, a most excellent Balsamic and Vulnerary. Nummularia grows in many
of our Mosses, a Balsamic. Ros Solis is very common, carries a pellucid
Mucilage, in which I presume consist its Virtues in Atrophies; and no doubt
were these fully enquired into, they might give reason to enlarge farther upon
its Qualities, for where there is a necessity to bridle an Acid, as there is in
most chronic and acute Distempers, this may doubtless be a proper Vehicle to
entangle those Salts; besides which it yields a volatile Oil and Salt, which
sufficiently correct Acids. The Services we have growing in great quantities
upon the Rocks near Rougham, which yield a delicious Acid. The Dwarf
Cynorhoidon grows in great plenty, the Conserve of its Fruit is a good
Antiscorbutic, and of great use in Consumptive cases. Scolopendrium grows
frequently upon the Rocks. Ophioglossum or Adder's-Tongue grows near some of
our Meers, as Martin-Meer. Calamus Aromaticus grows in several places: as
Osmund Royal frequently upon the Morasses, the Root of which is of great use in
the Worms, Rickets, and Consumptions; and I think I may aver that I was the
first that in that Case prescribed it. Virga Aurea grows upon the Sea Coasts in
Furness. A particular kind of Scurvy Grass grows upon the Rocks near Castleton
in Derbyshire, more acrid and pungent than any I have observed, and has a small
Leaf, exactly resembling that called the Danish Scurvy Grass. The fresh Water
Plants in these parts are common with most others, therefore I shall not insist
upon them. Lunaria is in some places, but very rare; Origanum is common,
Mountain Sage and Buckbane are likewise so; and I think amongst the Vegetables
they may be esteemed Two of the best Anti-scorbutics, either in infusion or
decoction. Rocamboes grow in the Meadows near Preston, and make an agreeable
Sauce. The Dutch Myrtle or Gale is common upon the Mosses. Erica or
Cypress-Heath is common in these parts, and of great use in Hydropic cases.
Telephium is in plenty, and useful in curing the Piles. We have the Filipendula
Aquatica, as likewise Solanum Lethale, Sphondylium, Hyoscyamos, and other Herbs
of poisonous qualities. The Viscus Corilinus is common, but I have not observed
the Quercinus, but either of them will answer in the Cases directed for: These
by the Ingenious Mr. Ray are supposed to Vegetate from a Seed devoured by some
Birds, which in their Bowels receives a Fermentation, and by a Mucus which is
injected with it adheres to the Tree, and so by the imbibed ferment begins its
Germination.

An Instance not much unlike this Tavernier gives us of the growing of Nutmegs
in East India, which he affirms are swallowed by the Birds of Paradise, which
by intoxicating them, urge them to vomit them up again; then by a ferment which
adheres to the Nutmegs, ejected from the Stomachs of the Birds, they begin to
germinate, and cannot any otherwise be propagated: But this by some is looked
upon only as a Stratagem of the Dutch to keep the world in Ignorance, they
having engrossed all the Nutmeg-Islands; and to divert others from attempting
the planting of them. Tavernier is positive in the Instance, so that what he
lays down whether true or not I shall not pretend to determine; but if it be
so, it fairly illustrates the other Instance.

The Lady-slipper we have in several of our Woods, and the Geranium
Robertianum, which is of extraordinary use in scrophulous Cases, either in
Powder or Decoction. Spatula foetida grows in some parts, but very rare. Lamium
album grows in several places, and is a good Anti-strumatic. Dulcamara grows
very common, and is an Anti-scorbutic, good in the Jaundice and Dropsies; the
Bark of it is used, and that in infusion. Upon the Draining of Martin-Meer
several unusual Plants were observable, never before seen in these Parts,
particularly a kind of Grass which grows to a prodigious length, and is as
sweet as Liquorice; this in a very short time fattens Sheep and other Cattle,
and makes them very delicious Food, but then they must be slaughtered out of it
when thoroughly fatten'd, otherwise they are apt to grow rotten and dye: Which
Distemper (by what I can observe in the Dissection of those Creatures) is
nothing but an Anasarca, or Dropsy of the whole Body; and in these we have the
fairest opportunity of discovering the Lymphatic Vessels, which if thoroughly
known both as to their Uses and Rise, would bring Matters in Physic very near
to a Demonstration, and in Hydropic Cases might save the Lives of several
Persons, by having a clear Idea of the Cause of that Distemper in those
Creatures. Erysimum we have in these Parts, and it is of use in Asthma's,
Consumptions and Dropsies. Feverfew grows common, a noted Anticsteric and
Diuretic. White Hoare-hound likewise, and is an excellent Pectoral. Scabios is
plentiful, and Tragopogon or Goats-beard, of great use in Consumptive Cases.
Centaury and Celandine are very common, and are used in the Jaundice and
Intermitting Distempers. Asarum grows in several places, and likewise Arum or
Wake Robin, its Water is an Antiscorbutick, and the Roots are used in
Distempers of the Stomach, and the Pica Virginis. Enula Campana is very common,
as likewise Bistort, Echiums, and Buglosses; we have both the Hispidum and
Glabrum, and Hieracia of several sorts, particularly the Lactescens, which
deserves our strict Enquiry into its Virtues, of which the Botanists have not
taken notice. Water-Plantain grows common, and is much used in Arthritic Cases;
we have likewise the Plantago Rotundi-folio; other Plantains are common, which
in the Autumnal Season are apt to collect a white Powder from the Air, about
which time Intermitting Distempers are generally Epidemical: This Powder has no
peculiar Taste, I have given it to Dogs and Cats, but never found any Effects
from it. Ebulum or Dwarf-Elder grows in several places, and is of great use in
Hydropic Cases. There are several other Plants in these Counties, but these
being the most remarkable for their Virtues in Physic, I have only given an
Account of them for the benefit of the Inhabitants of these parts, the other
are already described at large by the incomparable Dr. Morrison, Mr. Ray, Dr.
Plackenet, Dr. Sloane, Dr. Robinson, and Mr. Dale; wherefore for a full and
entire satisfaction in those Matters, to those eminent and learned Authors
refer the Reader.

As to fossile Plants, Dr. Woodward in his Essay toward an universal Natural
History, seems not to give a more probable Conjecture of a total dissolution of
the Strata of the Earth at the universal Deluge, than by the Observations he
has made upon Plants discovered in Rocks: But since this Hypothesis labors
under so many unanswerable Difficulties, I cannot till more pregnant Proofs are
produced, adhere to it; nor can we reasonably suppose a dissolution of the
Strata of the Earth, and yet conceive these to be kept entire: That very
Instance in Coal-Mines is a demonstration against it. To these I shall add
another Instance, I have now by me of a stony Substance of the exact
resemblance and magnitude of a Cockle-shell, found many Yards in Stone, yet
much lighter than any Cockle-shell of the same bigness; which could never be
performed by specific Gravitation, as the Dr. alleges. In the next place to
imagine a dissolution of most solid Rocks, and Bodies of more obdurate
substance, this surely must be effected by some peculiar Menstruum, distinct
from Water; and why then in the Name of common Reason should not Plants run the
same risque? That Menstruum that could make so severe an Impression, and
disunite those compact Bodies, would certainly have easily reduced Plants to
ruin. That there was a Disruption of the Strata of the Earth, is but reasonable
to allow, and likewise that various Bodies floated in that general Inundation;
but that these Plants are any Argument for a Dissolution, or that they were the
Exuviae of the Deluge, is in the next place to be considered. In the Rocks in
these Parts are only found Polypody, Wall-Rue, Scolopendrium, or Leaves of
Thorns; doubtless other Plants as well as these would have occurred to our
Observation, had these been deposited here by Noah's Deluge. Again, these
Leaves are never found doubled, which certainly in so dismal a Confusion as the
Deluge was, would have happened had they here been deposited in that general
Catastrophe. My Sentiment of the whole is this, (That as it is observable in
Chemistry that the Salts of some Plants will divaricate themselves into the
figure of the Plants) that these representations of Plants in Rocks are nothing
but different Concretions of saline, bituminous and terrene Particles; and I am
farther confirmed in this Hypothesis, since they, as well as the Capsulae they
are found in, seldom fail to afford us that mixture. Various Specimens we have
of these in Rocks in these Counties, in one particularly near Ormskirk in
Lancashire, in which Scolopendrium may be seen exactly delineated: This was
communicated to me by Mr. William Barton Apothecary in that Town, and is as I
remember in some Rocks near Latham, belonging to the Rt Honble William Earl of
Derby, to whom I am infinitely obliged for the Honor done me, in having had
the Honor to be frequently Physician to his Lordship, and to that unparalled
Youth, his Son, the Rt Honble James Ld Strange. There are other Rocks in which
may be observed Leaves of Thorns, as in some Rocks near Heesham, and in the
Coal-Pits near Burnley in Lancashire. These are all the reputed Plants that I
have found remarkable in these Parts.

Having now fairly illustrated it to be highly improbable, that these Plants
should be the Exuviae of the Deluge, but rather Concretions of Matter, or the
Disports of Nature, it may perhaps be expected by some, that I should give an
account of the different Opinions concerning the Universality of the Deluge, as
well in respect of the Terrestrial Globe, as of the total Destruction of all
its Inhabitants. I shall therefore give you a Scheme of the most principal
amongst them: The first is of the Jews, who extend the Universality of the
Deluge, not only to all the Terrestrial Creatures, but the Fish they say, were
suffocated by the Heat of the Rains, and Waters which broke out of the deep
Fountains of the Earth. There are others also amongst the Jews, who deny this
Universality of the Deluge, not only to all terrestrial Creatures, but pretend
that besides the Eight Persons included in the Ark, Og the King of Basan was
preserved. But to these I reply, that whoever considers those prodigious
Mountains of marine Shells, in Ireland, Virginia, the East and West Indies,
cannot but conclude that they were deposited there by the Deluge; and then
considering the height of the Mountains, and the vast remoteness of the Places,
one from another, that the Deluge must be Universal also: But this particular
is fully discoursed of in a preceding Chapter. The third Opinion relating to a
Deluge is that of the Scholasticks, who are of Opinion that Enoch, who they say
at that time lived in Paradise, was not involved in the Deluge: But since the
holy Writ is silent in that matter, and that neither the Egyptian, Chaldee,
Hebrew, or Greek Versions of the Old Testament take any notice of that Opinion,
I cannot but conclude it erroneous and unwarrantable. There was a fourth
Opinion of the Jews, who maintain, that not only a few Persons, but whole
Nations never felt the Effects of this great Inundation, but that the Jews
only, and other Inhabitants in Palestine perished in it; but what has been said
in answer to the preceding Opinion may serve for this. There was a fifth Rank,
who affirmed that there was a total Destruction of Mankind at the Deluge, yet
so as that the whole Terrestrial Globe was not overwhelmed by the Waters; which
Opinion is founded on two other Hypotheses, viz. That at the time of the Flood
the Earth remained for the greatest part desolate and without Inhabitants, and
that all the Waters in the Universe were not sufficient to cause so general a
Deluge: Abraham Mylius pretends to demonstrate, that if all the Waters of the
Universe had been sent down upon the Earth, they could not have covered the
tops of the highest Mountains. Isaac Vossius approves of both these Hypotheses,
but since from the vast Beds of marine Shells even upon the tops of the highest
Mountains, it is undeniably evident that the highest Mountains were covered; it
thence follows that the Deluge must be universal, and that Mylius and Vossius
are both mistaken. The sixth and last are those that have chosen the truest
Opinion, and maintain that the Deluge was universal, both in respect to the
Terrestrial Globe, and its Inhabitants; because the Motive that induced God was
universal; God complains that the Imaginations of men's hearts were only evil
continually; his Threats likewise were universal, I will destroy man whom I
have created from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and every creeping
thing, and the fowls of the air, for it repents me that I have made them.
Hence therefore it is evident from the holy Scriptures, and from the Phenomenon
in Natural History, that there was a Deluge, and that this Deluge was universal
too; wherefore I cannot but admire that the great St. Austin should be so far
mistaken, as to affirm that there were not the least footsteps of the Deluge,
either in the Greek or Latin Writers, since the contrary is so clearly
demonstrated by Hugo Grotius.

I shall now in the last place lay down some Hypotheses concerning the
Qualities in Plants, and so close this Chapter, and by drawing a Parallel
betwixt Chemical Preparations, and the Qualities in Physical Herbs, endeavor
to give a Rationale of their Effects. But this having in a great measure been
attempted by Pechlinius, Wedelius, Sr. John Floyer, and others, I shall but
briefly treat upon that Head, and that in the following Method: First, By
giving an account of Emetics, and the Rationale of their Qualities; afterward
of Cathartic or Purgative Plants, Antiscorbutics, Balsamics, Diuretics,
Antistrumatics, Stomachics, Cardiacs, Anti-hydropics, Anticterics,
Antepileptics, Restringents, Opiates, Paragorics, Alexipharmacs. The Emetic
Plants are only two, Squills and Asarum, and both are of a bitter and nauseous
Taste: first therefore we shall enquire into the Cause of the Bitterness in
these, and then how that becomes Emetical. Bitterness consists in rigid,
pungent and inflexible Particles, pointed upon terrene ones; hence the Points,
by their continual Irritations, contract the Fibers of the Stomach, and still
pressing it by their Inflexibility, at length they throw it into Convulsions,
and so become Emetical, or Vomiting: Thus we see in a solution of Silver in
Spirit of Nitre that the Points of the corroding Spirit being sheathed in the
metallic Particles, it not only becomes extremely bitter, but likewise
Emetical; the like may be observed by pouring Spirit of Nitre upon the Lapis
Calaminaris: and doubtless thus it is that the Leaves of Asarum are so famous
an Errhine, and of so great use in inveterate Head-achs, viz. Their acrid
saline Particles continually pressing the Glands of the Nostrils, force them to
discharge that acrid Serum, which occasions that Distemper.

The most noted Cathartics are Buckthorn, Monks Rhubarb, Elder, Damask Roses,
Iris, Soldanella, Spurge, Mezereon. Buckthorn is extremely bitter, and affords
an Oil and a pungent Spirit, neither of which are bitter, or in the least
Purgative; whence it seems evident to me, that its bitterness and Purging
quality consist in its saline Particles being strictly united with terrene
ones, and so by that means contracting the Fibers of the Bowels, they become
purgative. Roses, Iris, and the rest are likewise bitter, but they all differ
in their Pungency. Mezereon, Spurge and Iris are both Emetic and Cathartic,
which sometimes not only cauterize the Coats of the Stomach, but the Skin it
self, if externally applied: No doubt but by due Corrections these might be
made most noble Medicines, and the likeliest Method to effect this (as far as I
can conjecture) would be by obtunding their saline Particles by the Lapis
Calaminaris, or some such Alcaly; or if their Virtues consist in an acrid
Alcaly, a proper Acid might be thought on; and I think it would be highly worth
our while to make strict Enquiries into these Matters, that being the likeliest
Method to bring us to a Certainty in the Practice of Physic. Before I close
this Head I shall only offer two Experiments, and then proceed: The first is
concerning Aloes, which by being infused in Spirit of Wine loses its Purgative
quality, but yet retains its Bitterness; the second is concerning a solution of
Aloes, which being injected into the Veins of a Dog, will inevitably purge him:
From which Observations naturally arises this Question, Whether Cathartics
effect their ends in the first passages, or by working Elective in the Mass of
Blood, as the Physicians style it? I affirm the former, and to the first
Experiment make this reply; The volatile, acrid, saline Particles in the Aloes
being dissolved by the Spirit of Wine, it must of necessity (for the Reasons
before alleged) be deprived of its purgative quality, yet so as still to
retain its Bitterness, because it is probable some saline Particles are so
inveloped with the oily and terrene ones, that a separation is not easily made,
perhaps not without Distillation or Calcination; so that the Aloes in some
measure may retain its Bitterness, yet be deprived of its purging quality. To
the second I reply thus, A solution of Aloes being injected into the Mass of
Blood, it is most probable its Particles are again separated from the Blood, by
the conglomerate Glands of the Bowels; it is not therefore that they work
Elective in the Mass of Blood, but by their contracting of the Bowels upon
their separation: for it is undeniably evident, that several Purges will
operate before they could possibly be supposed to have mixed with the Mass of
Blood.

In the next place Anti-scorbutics may be said to be either Bitters, Acrids, or
Nitrous Plants: The Bitters are Lapathum acutum, Mountain-sage and
Water-Trefoil, and these all afford an Oil, and acid Spirit, and a fixed
alcalious Salt, but the Salt in the greatest proportion, next to that the Oil,
and then the Spirit; hence it is that these Herbs, by their saline and oily
Particles attenuating the Serum of the Blood, coagulated by its Acids, restore
it to its due Circulation, and are for that reason of great use in
Anti-scorbutic Cases. The Acrids are the Cresses, Asarum, Scurvygrass, and
Radishes, and do all of them afford Oils, and volatile alcalious Salts,
wherefore for the Reasons before alleged they may properly be styled
Anti-scorbutics. The Nitrous are the Aparine, Vetches, Ground Ivy and Nettles,
these all yield a volatile, nitrous, essential Salt, as may be seen in the
freezing of their depurated Juices; and hence it is that by tempering and
diluting the bilious Particles in the Blood, they allay those Scorbutic heats,
and are of great use in violent Bleeding, particularly Ground Ivy, which by its
saline Particles, not only deterses and quits the Breast from an oppressive
Phlegm, but likewise by its Balsamics, consolidates. Balsamics do all of them
afford terebinthinate Oils, and the chief amongst these are St. Iohn'swort,
Herb Robert, Tutsal and Pennywort. Diuretics are generally Anti-scorbutics, and
those being treated of before, I shall not enlarge farther on that Head.
Cardiacs are either mild Acids that temper too volatile a Bile, which
continually irritates the Spirits, as in several Fevers, and of this sort are
Wood Sorrel, Berberries, Rasberries, and the like: or those that yield volatile
Aromatic Oils, and so disentangle the Spirits, struggling in a Viscid Serum, and
of this sort are Butter-bur, Angelico, Eringo, Balm, and the like.
Antistrumatics are Whitlow-grass, Herb Robert, stinking Gladdon, and Dropwort,
and no doubt but they effect their Ends by terebinthinate Particles, since most
of them emit Effluvia of that Nature, which doubtless correct the Acid, that
make the Gland scrophulous, by coagulating the Lympha, as may be observed in
scrophulous Glands. Anti-hydropics, as Alteratives, are in the Class of
Anti-scorbutics. Stomachics for the most part being Bitters, I shall not
enlarge further on them. Anticterics consist of volatile acrid Particles, which
attenuate a foeculent Bile, and the chief of these are Celandine, Pilewort, and
Madder. Pectorals are Maiden-hairs, Ferns, and Bitters, the two first are
Nitrous. Opiates and Paregorics are the white and red Poppies, and Cowslips,
but how these bridle the impetuous Tumults of the Spirits shall be accounted
for in its proper place.

Poeony and Misleto are Antepileptics, and I am apt to think that it is by a
Mucilage, which contains a volatile alcalious Salt, that they are of use in
that Case, (viz.) by the innate Heat of the Stomach and Bowels the Salt
sublimes from the Mucilage, and is there immediately imbibed by the Extremities
of the Nerves; and hence they become of use in Convulsive Cases; whereas other
volatile Salts are spent before they can reach the Nerves. Restringents are all
of them either of a mucilaginous or austere Taste, as Comfry, Horse-tail,
Sloes, etc. The one by sheathing the Acid, which makes a Disruption of the
Vessels, and the other by austere vitriolic Particles pursuing them up, no
doubt, effect their Ends.

The poisonous Plants, it is plain, consist sometimes of saline, corroding,
acrimonious Particles, such as inflame, and sometimes sphacelate the Stomach,
and contract the Branches of the Par vagum, and then produce Tremors and
Convulsions, as is evident in the Dissection of those Creatures that have been
poisoned with these Herbs: Of this sort are the Cicuta aquatica, Ranunculus
flammeus, Solanum lethale, Aconitum hyemale, etc. Some poisonous Plants are of
a Narcotic Quality, as Poppy and Henbane, these are of a bitter Taste, and no
doubt contain a volatile acrid Salt, which by fixing its points upon the
Fibrillae of the Brain, and the Extremities of the Nerves occasions a
Corrugation in them, and by that means hinders a Separation of the animal
Spirits from the Mass of Blood, and consequently their Dispensation into the
various parts of the Body: Hence they being taken in too great a quantity
become poisonous: Lettice likewise, Melons and Cucumbers, consisting of a
mucilaginous Water, doubtless entangle the animal Spirits, and hinder their
Expansion; hence by being too liberally taken, the whole Economy of the Body
is disordered, the Spirits receding like the Sunbeams, which being screen'd by
thick interposing Clouds leave all in Darkness.

An Appendix to the Chapter of PLANTS.
HAving completed my Hypothesis concerning the Vegetation of Sea-Plants, I
shall in the next place propose some Conjectures about the Vegetation of River
and Land-Plants, and give an account of the Experiments on all sides, and add
some Trials, which I proved my self, and amongst the rest offer my own
Sentiments. The most material Hypotheses relating to this Topic are reduced to
Two, the one asserting that Vegetation is from Earth, the other from Water
only; A Suffragan to the latter is the Ld Bacon, Not. Hist. Cent. 5. Par. 411.
Where he asserts, That for Nourishment of Vegetables Water is all in all, that
the Earth only keeps the Plant upright, and guards it from too great Heat or
Cold. Others in this Hypothesis are more positive, as the Honble Mr. Boil,
Helmont, and his Followers; these back their Assertions with the two subsequent
Experiments, the first is that concerning Mint, and several other Plants, which
prosper and thrive greatly in Water; the other which you have in the Skeptical
Chemist, writ by Mr. Boil, is as follows: Take a certain quantity of Earth,
bake it in an Oven, then weigh it, and having included it in an Earthen Pot
well watered, make choice of some fit Plant, as a Pompion, which being first
carefully weighed and set in it, there let it grow, continuing to water it till
it is much advanced in Bigness; then take it up, and though the Bulk and Weight
of the Plant be much greater than at first, yet the Earth will be found little
or nothing diminished in Weight; therefore it may be concluded that it is not
the Earth, but Water that Nourishes, and is converted into the Substance of the
Plant. Thus far likewise proceeds the ingenious Dr. Woodward, but had the Dr.
given us a full account of his Sentiments on those Authors, he might likewise
have observed that they not only took Plants, and put them in the Earth
prepared as he recites it, but likewise the Seeds of Cucumbers and Pompions,
which acquired their due Magnitude, and yet the Earth was not diminished in
Weight; these Experiments indeed considering the minuteness of the Seeds of
those Fruits, with the largeness of their Size when grown to perfection, and
yet no decrease of the Earth, might give them very pregnant Reasons for their
Conjectures, but these I shall examine in their place. The other Hypothesis is
that of the Ancients, which Dr. Woodward asserts, for the confirmation of which
the Dr. has offered the following Experiments.

Common Spear-Mint was set in spring Water, the Plant weighed when put in July
20th just 27 Grains, when taken forth October 5th 42 Gr. so that in the space
of 79 Days it had gained in Weight 15 Gr. the whole Water expended during the
79 Days amounted to 2558 Gr. and consequently the Weight of the Water taken up,
was 170 8/^5 as much as the Plant had got in Weight. Common Spear-Mint was set
in Rainwater, the Mint weighed when put in 28 Gr. when taken out Gr. 45 having
gained in 79 Days Gr., the Dispendium of the Water Gr. 3004, which was 171
23/35 as much as the Plant had received in Weight. Common Spear-Mint was set in
Thames Water, the Plant when put in weighed Gr. 28, when taken forth Gr. 54, so
that in 77 Days it had gained 26 Gr. the Water expended amounted to Gr. 2493
which was 92 21/26 times as much as the additional weight of the Mint. Solanum
or Nightshade was set in Spring Water, the Plant weighed when put in Gr. 49,
when taken out 106, having gained in 77 Days 57 Gr. the Water expended during
the said time was 3708 Gr. which was 65 3/7 times as much as the Augment of the
Plant; this Specimen had several Buds upon it when first set in the Water,
these in some Days became fair, and Flowers, which were at length succeeded by
Berries. Lathyris, Sea-Cataputia Gerhardi was set in spring Water, it weighed
when put in Gr. 98, when taken forth Gr. 101 ^^^, the additional Weight for
this whole 77 Days being Gr. 3 (...) the Quantity of Water spent upon it during
the Time was Gr. 2501, which is 714 4/7 times as much as the Plant was
augmented. It is to be noted that the Orifices of these Glasses were covered
with Parchment, perforated with an Hole, adapted to the Stem of the Plant. Mint
was set in Hyde-Parke Conduit Water, which weighed when put in 127 Gr. when
taken forth 255 Gr. the whole Quantity of Water expended upon this Plant
amounted to 14190 Gr. the Plant had run up two Foot in height and had shot one
considerable collateral Branch, to the Fibrillae of the Roots adhered a
terrestial Matter. Mint was set in Hyde-Parke Conduit Water, in which was
dissolved an Ounce and half of common Garden-Earth, the Mint weighed when put
in 76 Gr. when taken out 244 Gr. Water expended was Gr. 10731. Mint was set in
Hyde-Parke Water with the same Quantity of Garden-mould as the former, the Mint
weighed when put in 92 Gr. when taken out 376 Gr. the Water expended was 14950
Gr. the Earth in both these Glasses was very sensibly and considerably wasted,
it left a green Substance here as above. Mint was set in Hyde-Park Water
distilled off in a great Still, the Mint weighed when put in 114 Gr. when taken
out 155 Gr. Water dispended was 8803 Gr. this Plant was pretty kindly, had two
small collateral Branches and several Roots, with terrestrial Matter adhereing
to them, the Water was pretty thick, had many and numerous terrestrial
Particles swimming in it, and some Sediment at the bottom of the Glass, this
Glass had none of the green Matter abovementioned in it; the residue of the
Water remaining in the Still was very turbid, high colored and reddish, like
ordinary Beer; the Mint weighed when put into this Water 31 Gr. Water expended
4344 Gr. This Plant was very lively, and had sent out six collateral Branches,
and several Roots. I took Hyde-Park Conduit Water, in which was dissolved a
Dram of Nitre, the Mint set in this suddenly began to wither and decay, and
died in a few days, as likewise did two more Sprigs that were set in it
successively. In another Glass I dissolved an Ounce of Gardenmould, and a Dram
of Nitre, and in a third half an Ounce of Wood-Ashes and a Dram of Nitre, but
the Plants in these succeeded no better than in the former. In other Glasses
were dissolved several sorts of Earths, Clays, Marles, and variety of Manures;
Mint was set in distilled Waters, and other Experiments I made of several
kinds, in order to get Light and Information, what hastened or retarded, what
promoted and impeded Vegetation, but these do not belong to the Head that I am
now upon. In Hyde-Park Conduit Water I fixed a glass Tube about 10 Inches long,
the Bore about one sixth of an Inch in diameter, filled with very fine and
white Sand, which I kept from falling down out of the Tube into the Vial, by
tying a thin piece of Silk over that end of the Tube which was downwards, upon
the Immersion of the lower end of it the Water by little and little ascended to
the upper Orifice of the Tube, and yet in all the 56 Days it stood thus, a very
inconsiderable quantity of Water had gone off, viz. scarce 20 Grains, though the
Sand continued moist to the very top to the last; the Water imparted a green
Tincture to the Sand quite to the top of the Tube, and in the Vial it had
precipitated a greenish Sediment mixed with black, to the bottom and sides of
the Tube, as far as it was immersed in Water, adhered pretty much of the green
Substance described above.

From these Experiments the Dr. draws these Corollaries, That Earth, and not
Water, is the Matter that constitutes Vegetables, that Improvements by Nitrons,
and Alcalizates, are only by the saline Particles attenuating the earthly ones,
and preparing them to be carried up by the Water, and disposed of into the
substance of the Plant; that Water serves only as a Vehicle to the terrestrial
Matter which forms Vegetables, and does not it self make any addition to them.

Now, if I mistake not, if we must make Earth a mere simple Body, and that to
be the Matter only that is converted into the substance of the Plant, this
Hypothesis will labor under more Difficulties than the former, if (according
to the Doctor's Notion) the saline Particles contribute no farther than in
preparing this Mould; for we may undoubtedly assure our selves, that the
Manchinello in the West Indies, that irresistible and deceiving Poison, must
needs consist of more Bodies than Earth alone, otherwise how comes its Fruit to
be so fatal, that not only the Eating of it is present Death, but the very
eating of the Creatures that have fed upon it produces the same Effect; nay
even the drops of Rain that fall from its Leaves are of so poisonous a Nature,
as to blister and inflame the Skin: Here doubtless is more than a bare
Contexture of Earth, and without question the most corroding, sulphurous and
penetrating Particles we can have any Idea of. Besides, were Vegetation from
Earth alone, I cannot see how one Plant could be distinguished from another;
wherefore to me it seems rational to infer, That the Body which the Dr. calls
Earth, consists of as many different Bodies as that which the Chemists call
Water; so that from either of these two Bodies simply considered as such, it is
equally absurd to derive Vegetation; but these two Bodies do indisputably
consist of variety of Corpuscles, e. g. Saline, Terrene, Aerial, and
Bituminous, and as the Vessels in Plants by their various Orifices and
Contextures, admit of different proportions of these, so accordingly the Plant
is differently modified, and from their different digestions and proportions
receives its Form, Color, Substance and Virtues. And by this Hypothesis we may
account for Plants physical, poisonous, fragrant, foetid, and of other kinds;
hence Ialop and Scamony a sort of Spurge in the West Indies, by their resinous
saline Particles, become purgative, and if taken in too large quantities,
poisonous; the same may be affirmed of Laureola, Aloes, Spurge, Senna and
Agaric: It is manifest from the Dissection of those Creatures to which
Nightshade, Nux Vomica, Calculus Indicus, and Water-Hemlock are given, that
the Poisons of these consist in acrimonious, saline Particles, corroding and
inflaming the Stomach, of which the learned Wafer gives us various Instances;
others by exalted Sulphurs quit from saline Particles, doubtless become
Fragrant, Aromatic and Cordial, being by their size and figure (which we
presume to be Spherical) the more readily adapted to assist the animal Spirits
by their activity. When these Sulphurs become pointed with Salts, it is most
likely that the Plant becomes foetid and unpleasant, as the stinking Garden
Orach, and Herb Robert: I might likewise account for the Heat, Blisterings, and
other qualities of Herbs, but those being in part done before, and not properly
within the Verge of this Undertaking, I shall not recapitulate, but to the
ingenious Sr. John Floyer of Lichfield on that Head refer the Curious, in whose
Works they may find variety of Experiments on those Subjects.

I must confess that the Experiments which Dr. Woodward has made relating to
Vegetation, are exact as well as learned, he having besides the dispendium of
the Water in so many Days, fully demonstrated the Plant to have gained a
considerable Weight, which he affirms to have been from Earth; but then (as I
affirmed before) the question is, what he calls Earth; for if by that he means
a pure simple Element, viz. a Body consisting only of one size and figure, then
(from what has been hinted before) it is as absurd to deduce Vegetation from
that, as from Water. I shall only beg leave to add an Experiment or two, and so
conclude: I took the Seeds of Nymphaea or Water-Lilly when full ripe, and put
them in glass Vials, in which they continued twelve Months, I added fresh Water
to them as the other evaporated; the Seeds at the bottom of both Vials stood
erect, and emitted a pellucid Mucilage, which stood in opposite Globules near
the upper end of the Seed; the Water deposited a great deal of green and earthy
Matter, but the Seed never vegetated or sprouted at all, though this be a Water
Plant. From this Experiment it is evident, that besides Earth and Water barely
considered as such, other Bodies are necessary to the Vegetation of various
Plants, and probably to this a fat sulphurous Ouze, in which it usually grows,
and has Roots of an immense Magnitude, some I have seen as thick as the Thigh
of a Man, which were taken out of the Pond at Tabley in Cheshire, when it was
drein'd, where the remaining Earth or Mud, which was black and foetid, was
wholly overspread with them. This Instance, I think, may fairly serve to
illustrate the Hypothesis that I have laid down concerning the Vegetation of
Plants.

To these may be added those extraordinary Improvements made by Chandlers
Ashes, consisting of oily and saline Particles, as likewise the Impost of
Malpighius, prepared with an Infusion of Sheep's Dung, Pigeon's Dung, and a
small quantity of Nitre; of which I saw an Instance the last Year at Edgecroft
in Lancashire, by which from a fourth part of Seed, in the most barren part of
the Field, I saw a very luxuriant Crop: It might do well for our Gentry (who
inhabit their Country Seats) and Husbandmen thoroughly to consider this, since
the right application of it to a proper Soil, may be of so great Advantage; and
who knows what this, even in the most cold and barren Ground, may effect, which
hitherto for the greatest part has lain useless; but besides what is here
offered, their Interest may be a more inciting Argument to induce them to
Trials of this Nature.

But can there be had a more ample Demonstration of this Hypothesis, than even
from Water and Earth themselves? How common is it to observe Earth, by being
long pent up, to emit sulphurous Effluvia? Hence we have foetid Smells by
opening of Ditches and Sluices, and hence probably it is, that in Consumptive
cases, from plowed Grounds that have for a considerable time been Pasture, many
persons have received Benefit, which must assuredly proceed from sulphurous
benign Particles loosened from their Cells, and conveyed to the Mass of Blood,
which by their activity obtund the saline Particles that make the Coagulum, and
in short prevent the putrefaction, which brings on a Phthisis or Consumption.
And as to Water, nothing is more common, than it to grow nauseously foetid by
long keeping, which Phenomenon sufficiently evinces the Existence of
sulphurous Particles in that Element; besides, some sulphurous Waters in four
Days by being close stopped, become extremely foetid as St. Ann's at Buxton in
Derbyshire, which exposed to open Air, alters not at all, nor has the least
ungrateful smell: The reason is, because those sulphurous Effluvia which have
spent themselves in a free Air, are now forced by their confinement, to unite
with saline Particles, and thence by their Points grate upon the Organ, and are
foetid and offensive.

It is likewise to be observed, that if these sulphurous Particles are pent up
in any Aquaeduct, that then by their Collision upon one another, they become
excessive hot; hence it is that the hot Baths at Aix la Chapel, in the Bishop
of Leige's Country are caused, by retarding the hot Spring with a Stoppel, and
in a little time after by giving it Vent the Waters are rendered very hot, and
even too intense to be endured. This Instance farther confirms our Hypothesis
concerning the Heat in Baths, and by this Phenomenon it is evident, that if
the same Essay was put in practice at Buxton, the Bath there might be brought
to any degree of Heat, and at the same time likewise they might have temperate
Baths to answer the variety of Cases and Constitutions, and by that means
acquire an advantage above any Baths yet discovered. Thus I have made it
evident how compounded those Bodies are which we commonly style Earth and
Water, nor can I see any reason to assign either of them as the principles of
Vegetation barely considered as such.

CHAP. VI.
Of Subterraneous Skeletons, Petrified Shells, Subterraneous Shells, and Formed
Stones.

A Midst all the Mazes and Recesses of Nature, none are more common or more
amazing than these following Phenomenon: Near Chippin in Lancashire, 20 Fathom
in Limestone Rock, I have seen Cockles, Muscles, and the Pectinites, all of a
perfect flinty Substance. In High-Furness in the same County I have observed,
as to their outward appearances, the Bones and Fins of Fishes, and sometimes
Bones of a Gigantic Magnitude, and those of a sparry Substance, which may be
reduced to the Fluor Alabastrites; I have likewise seen the Glossopetrae or
Crow-Bills, and those invested with an hard flinty Film, the Matter contained
therein being a black hard Stone. Upon these Phenomenon it is that Dr. Woodward
supposes them to be the Exuviae of those Creatures at the Deluge, and deposited
in those Rocks by specific Gravitation; for he takes it for granted, that there
was a total dissolution of the Strata of the Earth, and that the whole Globe
was but one continued Fluid, and that in variety of Temperatures, and in some
Balsamic mixtures these Shells, Fins, Fishes and Bones, have been embalmed ever
since that terrible Catastrophe. A Notion (could it be maintained) as wonderful
for the profound Respect it bears to the Truth of Moses's History of the
Deluge, as to Static Philosophy: But since the Deluge has been before fully
demonstrated from other Phenomenon observable in the Earth, and that against
this Hypothesis there are so many concluding Arguments, I shall in the first
place to clear this Head, enquire into the Nature of these Petrifactions, and
reduce them to their different Species, and then lay down some Arguments to
convince the World, that they are not the Exuviae of those Animals.

As to the Testaceous Petrifactions, they are either the Cockle, Muscle,
Oyster, or Pectinites; the three first are of a Flinty substance, of the
Pectinites there are two sorts, the one is Flinty, and the other is the Pyrites
Aureus, or golden Marcasite; I have likewise observed in that substance
representations of Fibulae or Buttons, these may be observed in the Copper
Mines in High-Furness; the Glossopetrae are found in some Mines in Wales and
Derbyshire, and of those there are three sorts, the one resembling the Bill of
a Crow, another that of a Lapwing, and a third the Bill of a Perr, a small Bird
very common upon the Seacoasts: These were given me by my worthy Friend and
Relation Peter Legh of Booths in the County of Cheshire, Esquire

We therefore come in the next place to lay down some Arguments, why these
Bodies could not be the Exuviae of Animals at the Deluge; for had these been
the Exuviae of Fowls, Fishes, and other Creatures, how is it possible but that
other Shells, and Beaks of other Fowls, as well as of these, might sometime or
other have been discovered in these Rocks; but since no others are found, it
seems probable to me that they are but what I formerly alleged, the Disports
of Nature. In some Marbles gotten near Holker in Lancashire, I have seen the
exact shape of a Man, and that in six Inches compass. In some Mines in
Derbyshire I have seen a Substance bearing exactly the similitude of a Man's
Tooth, and that as big as a Child's Head, to which was annexed an Head which
would have contained several Measures, and the Limbs proportionable. In
Pools-Hole there is the resemblance of a Lion, a dead Man, a Chair, and a
Flitch of Bacon; yet no Man (I suppose) will assert these to be Exuviae, or the
Chair one of the Household goods of the Antediluvians, no more than the
forementioned Cloak-Buttons the Appendices of their Apparel. In other Mines I
have observed the resemblances of Skrews, Stars, Feathers, Bones, and Shells,
and all in the same Stratum: Now, I say, considering all these together, unless
we will conclude the rest petrified, as well as the Shells, there is no
necessity to assert the former, but that they may equally be different
Modifications of Matter.

Once in an Earth that came from East India, I saw the the perfect shape of
Cockles of several sizes, where there were not the least signs of any Shell, or
any Petrifaction at all; it was a brownish soft Earth, and indifferently
friable; It was communicated to me by Mr. Edward Ent, Son to Sr. George Ent,
and formerly of Balliol-College in Oxford. I have feen great variety of
Petrifactions, performed by the Seawater it self, at Hagy Bar Hills in
Lancashire: The Marle there shelves downwards, and several sorts of Pebbles are
included in various Capsulae; this Marle is converted by the Seawater into a
firm Grit, or Freestone, in some pieces of which we find Shells of Sea-Snails
embalmed, and those not in the least petrified. Consider we then this
Petrifaction of Earth, and though the Shell is often very minute and tender, yet
it still retains its Identic Body; I say, if we reflect on this, it is not so
easy to imagine (as some conceive) that after the Deluge the Petrifaction of
Shells ensued with such facility; for in a multitude of Instances, here the
Earth only, not the Shells have undergone that This Marle, I presume, may be
petrified after this following manner, viz. Let us allow Marle to be a
substance apt to dissolve in Water, it is probable then that the Seawater by
frequently overflowing it, in tract of time makes a solution of its Particles,
and in their room deposites white gritty Particles, with which even clear
Seawater much abounds, which is demonstrable in the Evaporation of that Water
into a granulated Salt, at which time vast quantities of Grit are collected in
the corners of the Boylers; but the Particles of this Grit are so minute, that
till they concrete into Moleculae, they are not discoverable either by
Microscopes, or by the nicest Filtration: These then being amassed together by
the motion of the Seawater, are wedged and riveted so close, as at last to
form a perfect Freestone; some large Columns there are of these, on which the
Country People hang their Wooden Gates, and serve instead of Posts, others seem
exactly to resemble Persons standing in old decayed Hats. From which Phenomenon
it is demonstrable, that there may be perfect shapes of marine Shells, Bones,
Plants, and Beaks of Birds in some Earths, and yet not the Exuviae of those
Creatures.

I must confess the most complete Collection of these (I do believe) in the
World is in the Custody of Dr. Woodward, and could I receive a satisfactory
Answer to the Arguments above recited, I would willingly adhere to his
Hypothesis; but since they amount to no more than a Conjecture, and that those
Phenomenon may be otherwise solved, and indeed that there are so many
convincing Reasons to the contrary, I am forced to deviate from an Hypothesis,
which I could wish were true: The divine Splendour of such an Undertaking, as
well as the irresistible Charms of his Style, almost commanding an assent to
it. It Is true, what Mr. Robinson has replied to the Dr. carries not the air of
an Orator and Philosopher, his Language for the most part being grating,
particularly those unaccountable Terms of the Miners themselves; but since
Truth walks naked, and needs not the Embellishments of Eloquence to set her
forth, I must needs own, that what he relates in his Observations of the lying
of the Strata in several Mines, is true and exact; and though Dikes, Riders and
Leaders, with several other Idioms, may look rather like a piece of Magic than
Philosophy, yet surely the things signified by these, are observable in all the
Mines which I ever yet saw.

But amidst all the Disports of Nature, there is none more remarkable occurs
than that which I saw among the many and choice Curiosities of my Honored
Friend Mr. Henry Prescot of Chester, Deputy-Register of the Ecclesiastical
Court there. The Figure is as follows: There are six Calvae, or Skulls,
contained in a Shell, with the representation of Hats upon them, included one
within another, with the Brims cocked up; on the backside of the Head are four
rhomboidal Figures, an Ellipsis with an Ecliptic Line, and the Parallels upon a
Globe, and branching from those the Vertebrae and Medulla Spinalis. If
therefore the Dr. will still pertinaciously affirm that those representations
of Plants, Bones and Shells in Rocks, were the Exuviae of real ones, deposited
there by specific Gravity, and embalmed ever since the universal Deluge, he may
with the same parity of Reason allege these to have been the Heads of the
Antediluvian Patriarchs. From the Phenomenon laid down we may now without
great difficulty account for those representations of Shells, Bones, Fins of
Fishes, and Plants, observable in Rocks and Quarreis, and may easily be
convinced, that to solve these there is no necessity to suppose an universal
dissolution of the Globe of the Earth at the Deluge, but indeed are Arguments
conclusive to the contrary; wherefore to these I shall only add one general
Remark, and so close this Head. Can it be imagined that in that general
Destruction there should be such a Menstruum, or universal Dissolvent in
Nature, that should convert all the Strata of the Earth, Mines, Minerals and
Metals into a liquid Form, and yet some few Shells, Bones and Plants remain
undissolved, which are of a much softer Texture, and as we find by repeated
Experiments, far more easy to be dissolved? He, I say, that can averr this,
cannot fairly tax a Rosicrucian with Enthusiasm, nor justly blame the Adeptist
for his extravagant Notions relating to the Alchahest, that Chemical universal
Dissolvent, which he himself does not believe, yet would so far impose upon the
World as to have others to do so; but for this the Dr. has promised to account
in his general History of the World.

Having now dispatched this Point, I shall in the next place proceed to real
Shells, Skeletons, and Fins of Fishes, which are sometimes found under Ground,
and from those deduce some Corollaries. The subterraneous Skeletons observable
in these Parts are only two, the one an human Body found in the Morasses of the
Meals, and the other a Skeleton of a Buck, found erect in Ellel near
Lancaster; both which being mentioned in a preceding Chapter, I shall not
enlarge further upon them.

As to subterraneous Shells they are frequently found in Marle-Pits, about four
Yards deep in solid Marle, and often in places remote from the Sea. These
marine Shells are of various sorts, as Whilkes, Periwincles, Cockles, Muscles,
Torculars, and the Echini Marini, and of these I have several Specimens in my
Custody.

I consider next the formed Stones, and those are the Bufonites, the
Belemnites, and the Ophites or Cornu Ammonis, so denominated from the figure of
a Serpent, or the Horn of a Ram. The Bufonites I have seen in Marle near
Preston in Lancashire; the Belemnites in a Freestone Rock near Stockport in
Cheshire, in which Rock likewise are observable several small Pebbles, that lie
frequently in black Capsulae, and as I have been informed by the Masons,
sometimes a living Toad has been found in Freestone Rock, in the like Cista or
Cavity, which doubtless must be lodged there in this following manner: It is to
be presumed that the Ovum of some Toad was brought thither by a Spring or Vein
leading to that Cavity, for Springs are very often discerned in Freestone
Rocks, ouzing through their Pores; now it cannot be imagined that it was lodged
there ever since the Deluge, which must necessarily follow, unless we allow the
recited Hypothesis. Of the Lapis Serpentarius there are two sorts, the one
bears the Image of a Viper wreathed up in spiral Lines, and that I have seen in
the Copper Slates in Furness in Lancashire; the other the shape of a Serpent at
length, and this was found in a Freestone Rock at Haigh in Lancashire, and
communicated to me by that learned Lady, the Lady Guise.

As to the Shells remarkable in these Parts, they are either the large
Sea-Cockle, in which I never yet saw Fish, the Navel Shells, the Turbo, the
Echinites, the large Wilkes or Periwinckles; these are cast upon the Seacoasts
in great numbers; there is likewise another Shell which resembles the Scabbard
of a Sword, and by the Seamen commonly called the Sword-Fish; the Echinites
has several little Hairs that grow through small Orifices, but I could never
discover a Fish in any of these, which that I should not, has often caused my
wonder: I imagine therefore that they are brought from a great distance to the
Shore, by the violence of Storms, and that the Fishes in those turbid
Commotions quit their Shells. Of the Pectinites there are various sorts, and
those variegated sometimes with red parallel Circles, sometimes they are
smooth, sometimes they have little Protuberances upon their superficies, as has
likewise the large Sea-Cockle.

Let us now come to that grand Enquiry of the learned Steno, (viz.) Whether or
no Rocks were at first a Fluid, and by subsidence of terrene gross Particles
formed into that substance? The clearing of this point will depend upon the
Phenomenon observable in them, and those are chiefly Flints, and a kind of
Pebbles that will run into a Glass: Now it is most evident that these are of a
Nature very different from that of the Rock, and have likewise never in any Age
been observed to germinate; we may hence reasonably allow that Rocks were first
fluid, and that different kinds of Fluids did then precipitate by specific
Gravity, that eternal standard communicated to them from the first formation of
Bodies, which doubtless did in a great measure depend upon the Magnitude and
Number of their Pores, and according to those variously subsided: Conformable
to these Phenomenon is Moses's History of the Creation, where in the first
Chapter of Genesis he tells us, that the earth was without form and void, and
darkness was upon the face of the deep, and that the spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters. But these last Words are more aptly expressed by Iunius
and Tremellius, those two great Masters of the Hebrew Language, who from the
Hebrew Text translate it not Movebat, but Spiritus Dei incubabat superficiei
aquarum, that is, the spirit of God brooded upon the face of the waters; a
Metaphor taken from a Fowl hatching her young ones. The Explication of which
Text further evinces, that at the Creation, before any thing was reduced to
form, this Globe was an immense Liquid, consisting of all sorts of Particles.
Hence not only from Phenomenon in Nature, but likewise from Divine Writ it is
evident that these prodigious Mountains were the subsidence of a Fluid;
wherefore how rugged soever these may appear to the Eye, yet even these, if we
pry into their innermost Recesses, undeniably evidence the Power of Nature, and
the Existence of an omnipotent Being; so that though there was not an universal
dissolution of their Strata at the Deluge, as was before manifested, yet to
account for the various Phenomenon observable in those Mountains, it is certain
that they must once have been fluid Bodies, and successively indurated into
these hard Consistences by their own Gravity, and the Heat and Salts of the
ambient Air, upon the receding of the Waters, as Moses clearly evinces in the
same Chapter, where God said, Let the waters under the heavens be gathered
together into one place, and let the dry land appear, and it was so, and the
evening and the morning were the first day. Which brings me to a small
Digression, in enquiring what in those Antediluvian Ages was meant by a Day, an
Hour, or a Year.

The Latin word Hora has been judged by some to be derived from the Greek word
(...), which signifies to limit or bound, because it is the measure of Time, so
in Mathethematics comes the word Horizon, because that terminates the sight;
but Macrobius and Pausanias both allege that its original is owing to the
Egyptians, because the Sun in their Language was styled Horum; the Septuagint
Interpreters would have it indifferently to express a short space of time,
hence in St. Luke (...) is used for Supper-time; some are of Opinion that Hours
anciently signified the four Seasons of the Year, hence the Greek Annals called
them their Hori, and their Writers Horographici; some there are that think the
Greeks called that part of Time an Hour wherein the Dog Star arises, hence
Galen in his Book De Alimentis, calls those Horean Fruits which spring up at
that time wherein the Dog Star arose; In general by an Hour the Ancients have
signified an Age, and by the twelfth Hour Old Age, as some would have it, hence
in that Dialogue of Marcus Crassus and the K. of Galatia, comes that
Expression, What Man, says he, art not thou now arrived at the twelfth Hour,
and yet talkest of building a new City? but I am apt to think this might rather
be Metaphorically spoken, because in the computation of Time for the greatest
part, so many Hours terminate the artificial Day; it might therefore not
unaptly be compared to the Period of Old Age. Herodotus relates that the
Grecians from the Egyptians received the use of the Pole, the Gnomon, and the
twelve parts of the Day, and the original of that Use among the Egyptians was
because their Priests in those Days were accustomed twelve times a Day to make
a noise to their Cynocephalus; and Cicero takes notice of such a Ceremony to
Serapis, from which it seems clear that an Hour in those Days was the same as
now in the computation of Time; and that Dial of Ahaz, where the Miracle was
wrought of the Sun's going back ten Degrees, seems to confirm that the Jews in
those days computed Time in the like manner, for all Interpreters agree those
Degrees were the Indices of such parts of the Day; and the description that
Pancirollus gives us of an Instrument amongst the ancient Romans, farther
evinces the truth of this Hypothesis: They took (says he) a Vessel made of
Glass, in the bottom of which was a narrow Hole done about with Gold, lest the
Water should wear it away; on the other part of the Vessel was drawn a right
Line, having the 12 Hours set upon it; after which they filled the Vessel with
Water, which issued drop by drop out of the little Hole; they thrust a Cork
into the Water fastened to a little Wand, the end of which pointed at the first
Hour, and as the Water decreased at the second and third Hour, and so on; this
the Greeks called Clepsydra. From all which, both from the Practice of the
Jews, Egyptians, Greeks and Romans, it is most probable that the Antediluvians
computed Time as we do now, and that Noah very likely transmitted those
Instructions down to his Posterity.

The next thing therefore to be considered is to illustrate what is meant by
Days: Days by all Nations are divided into two kinds, the one natural, the
other artificial, the one consisting of twelve, the other of twenty-four Hours;
having therefore fully explained what the Ancients meant by Hours, I need not
farther to insist upon this Point. I shall then proceed to explain what is
meant by a Year: The word Annus, or Year, in the three ancient Languages is
derived from a thing that turns round, or a Circle, for so much the Hebrew word
does signify (...); hence the Egyptians represented the Year by a Snake biting
its Tail, but whether a Lunar or Solar Year is meant by the Patriarchs, is next
to be considered. The Turks and Arabians use the Lunar Year, and the same
Custom is observed in Tartary, Siam, Iapan, Peru, and in other Places; but
Kepler alleges that the Jews after their departure out of Egypt used only the
Solar Year, The Patriarchs, says he, used the Egyptian Year of 365 Days, and
divided them into 12 Months; and it is certain the Jewish Year, until the
Grecian Monarchy, was wholly Solar, that all their Months, save the last,
consisted of 30 Days; and Josephus writes that there was no Innovation in their
Rites as to their Year, wherefore from the afore-recited Authorities, and
likewise from the Jewish and Egyptian Hieroglyphical representations of a
Year, it is highly reasonable to conclude, that the Years spoken of by the
Patriarchs were Solar Years, or 12 Months, in which the Sun perfects its Course
in the Zodiac: So that what some have offered to prove an Hour or Month to be a
Year amongst the Ancients, is groundless, and is only a metaphorical Allusion
to a Custom very frequent in the Eastern Countries.

To conclude, from all the recited Phenomenon, if we will but appeal to our
Senses, it is evident that Moses's Narrative of the Deluge is not only the most
true, but the most complete; I cannot therefore but admire at the Theorist, and
Mr. Whiston, who affirm that before the Deluge there were no Mountains: In the
first place the Arguments they offer are no way conclusive, but barely
Hypothetical, a mere begging of the Question; they have indeed supplied us with
polite Schemes, and witty Allegories, and where they do not by dint of Reason
convince us, like Sirens, by their Wit they charm us: but it is not Paint that
can long preserve the Features, after that is once discovered, the Face appears
more deformed; I can no more think the World before the Deluge was formed like
an Egg, or that there were no Mountains, or that upon the breach of the Shell
the Waters gushed out and overwhelmed the Globe, than I can espouse that wild
Notion of the Philosopher, who fancied himself an Egg, and dreaded lest the
Heavens should fall and destroy him: What Moses has delivered upon that Subject
exactly quadrates with Nature, and from his History it is very clear, that
there were Mountains before the Flood; in the seventh Chapter of Genesis he
says, the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth, and all the high hills
that were under the whole heaven were covered; fifteen cubits upwards did the
waters prevail, and the mountains were covered. Whence it is plain that before
the Deluge there were Mountains, otherwise how could they be covered; he may as
well reconcile the contradiction of a Man covering his Head with his Hat, when
he had none upon his Shoulders, and the one Absurdity is as easily defended as
the other. In the same Chapter that inspired Philosopher very clearly conveys
to us the beginning, progress, and conclusion of the Deluge, all which
thoroughly considered, one would think, to any unbiased Person are Arguments
too plain and convincing to be obviated; for let us take him barely and
literally as an Historian, where he acquaints us, that the fountains of the
great deep were broken open, the windows or the clouds of heaven poured down
their waters, for it rained forty Days and forty Nights. What can we imagine
those Fountains to be but the Freshes separated by the Earth from the Sea,
which upon those Convulsions of the Earth, when it was broken open, issued
forth upon its surface? And then that great fall of Waters from the Clouds,
which doubtless incessantly and vehemently poured down Night and Day, joining
with them, might easily cause that general Inundation. To those that allege
the deficiency of the Waters to accomplish so universal a Flood, let us by
plain Text and Demonstration answer; in the first Chapter of Genesis, when the
earth was without form and void, then darkness was upon the face of the deep,
which plainly shows (as was asserted before) that this Globe was a mere immense
Liquid, for the Earth surely would have had a Form, though Darkness had been upon
it, had it then been separated from the Waters, but upon their subsidence dry
Land appeared, and received a Form; wherefore then by a very reasonable
Consequence could not that Power, that made the first great separation of
Fluids from Solids, once again cover all with Fluids? or why could not the same
proportionate quantity of Liquids, that could dilute such a Mass of Solids,
once again overwhelm them? but where was then the necessity of a total
dissolution of all the Strata of the Earth at the Deluge? or why must all again
return to its primitive Chaos without form? Besides the Evidence of all the
recited Phenomenon, Moses very readily clears that difficulty, for Chap. 7. he
tells us, that the Ark was lifted up above the Earth, that all the high hills
and mountains were covered; which lifting or floating of the Ark above the
Earth, and covering of the Hills and Mountains, seems to be very dissonant to a
Dissolution; not but that a strange Catastrophe occurred to the superficies of
the Earth, by the resistless motions of the Waters, which gave so many
evidences of their Power and Universality at that time: Again, Chap. 8. The
waters returned from off the earth, not separated as at the Creation, and again
that they decreased continually, till the tops of the mountains were seen. Upon
the whole I can see no reason why any should so elaborately endeavor to answer
Difficulties, where none present themselves, and that by so quaint a Method, as
to amuse the Reader by starting greater.

Having now from Observations in Nature and Divine History, given an account of
the Deluge, that we may form some Idea of it, I thought it not inconsistent
with my Design, to insert the following Phenomenon. About three Years ago near
Hyde in Cheshire happened an unusual Flood, which overwhelmed the Banks of the
River, and violently broke in at the Eye of a Coal-Pit, the Water in its
impetuous Current through the hollows forced the Air before it, which when pent
up in the Extremities of those Passages, by its Elasticity divided a solid Rock
at least 20 Yards perpendicular; the Water over the greatest part of the Field
appeared in large Columns, not much unlike the Spouts in Africa; when having
spent its force, the Rock closed again, and all over the Field were to be seen
various pieces of Coal scattered. Hence we may imagine when all the Springs of
the Deep were broken up, and the Clouds poured down their Waters in continued
Cataracts for forty Days and Nights, in so strange a Convulsion, I say, from
the recited Phenomenon, we may form some inadequate Idea, how that terrible
Destruction was accomplished.

And since we are treating of Floods, I think it a pardonable Digression, if I
give an account of a Spout seen by my Brother within these two Years, in his
Voyage to Virginia. The figure of it (as he affirms) was like a Spire-Steeple
inverted, and hung for a considerable time from the Clouds to the surface of
the Sea; it afterward divided, and then the Sea was in a most violent
Commotion, which was observed by the flowering of the Water, as he styled it;
the lower Pillar hung for a considerable time upon the surface of the Water,
but at length vanished, the upper part from the Clouds remained longer. His
Conjecture is, that the Spout was not a Column of Water that ascended out of
the Sea, but a Cloud only that hung down to the surface of the Water, and he
gives these Reasons for it, first, because the upper part of the Pillar
continued much longer than the lower part, after its division: in the second
place, before the Spout appeared the Air was extremely dark, and by that the
Seamen predicted the appearance of a Spout. What former accounts we have of
Spouts in Authors, are different from this, whether therefore there may be
various sorts of Spouts, I shall not determine, as being foreign to this
Undertaking.

Dampier confirms this Account, by the Description which he gives us of a Spout
in his first Volume, page 451. he says, It is a small ragged piece or part of a
Cloud, hanging down about a Yard seemingly from the blackest part thereof;
commonly it hangs down sloping from thence, or sometimes appearing with a small
bending, or elbow in the middle; I never saw any hang perpendicularly down. It
is small at the lower end, seeming no bigger than ones Arm, but it is fuller
toward the Cloud from whence it proceeds. When the surface of the Water begins
to work, you shall see the Sea for about 100 Paces in circumference foam and
move gently round, till the whirling Motion increases, and then it flies upward
in a Pillar about 100 Paces in compass at the bottom, but lessening gradually
upwards to the smallness of the Spout it self, there where it reaches the
lower end of the Spout, through which the rising Seawater seems to be conveyed
into the Clouds; this visibly appears by the Clouds increasing in bulk and
blackness, then you shall presently see the Cloud drive along, although before it
seemed to be without any Motion, the Spout also keeping the same course with
the Cloud, and still sucking up Water as it goes along, and they make a Wind as
they go: thus it continues for the space of half an Hour, more or less, until
the sucking is spent, and then breaking off, all the Water which was below the
Spout, or pendulous piece of Cloud, falls down again into the Sea, making a
great noise with its fall and clashing Motion in the Sea. Page 452. he adds
farther, 'One Capt. Records of London, bound for the Coasts of Guinea, in a
Ship of 300 Tuns, and 16 Guns, called the Blessing; when he came into the
Latitude of 7 or 8 Degrees North, he saw several Spouts, one of which came
directly toward the Ship, and he having no Wind to get out of the way of the
Spout, made ready to receive it, by furling his Sails; it came on very swift,
and broke a little before it reached the Ship, making a great noise, and
raising the Sea round it, as if a great House, or some such thing had been cast
into the Sea. The fury of the Wind still lasted, and took the Ship on the
Starboard-Bow with such violence, that it snapt off the Boltsprit and Foremast
both at once, and blew the Ship all along, ready to over-set it; but the Ship
did presently right again, and the Wind whirling round, took the Ship a second
time with the like fury as before, but on the contrary side, and was again like
to over-set her the other way; the Mizen-Mast felt the fury of the second
Blast, and was snapt short off, as the Foremast and Boltsprit had been before;
it came on very swift, making a great noise, and raising the Sea round it, as
if a great House, or some such thing had been cast into the Sea. From these
Instances it is undeniably evident, that a Spout is rather a Cloud, than a
Pillar of Water, rising in a pyramidal form out of the Sea, as some affirm in
their Voyages upon the Coasts of Africa, or such a Column of Water occasioned
by a Commotion in the subterraneous Abyss, as Dr Woodward in his Philosophical
Essay alleges.

To these I will only add an Instance or two more, which might easily slip an
undiscerning Eye, and though the Observation to some may seem trivial, yet I
doubt not but the Matter when rightly considered, carries weight along with it,
and may justly challenge our Enquiry. I have in some Parts several Leagues from
the Ocean, two Yards within Marle, seen Stones of a considerable magnitude most
exactly divided, yet adapted to that height of Symmetry, and nice proportion of
Parts when joined, that no Tallies, nor the most curiously divided Bodies,
could more exactly close their Fissures, and in an horizontal Line betwixt
these 8 or 10 Yards of Marle interposing: Considering therefore that those
Stones in all probability were originally but one, the distance betwixt them
and their depth in the Marle, it must surely be most consonant to Reason to
conclude that they were only split, not dissolved in that unaccountable hurry
at the Deluge, and embalmed there to perpetuate its Veracity; betwixt these are
often to be found marine Shells, which sufficiently evidences this Hypothesis.
Nor have we those Disports only of Shells and fossile Plants, in Bodies that
are impregnated with Spar, Alabaster, Bitumen, and the Pyrites, but likewise
other Phenomenon of the like Nature, particularly at the Kennel-Pits at Haigh
in Lancashire, in several Slates of which I have seen long parallel Cylinders
joined together, and running in direct Lines, imprinted in solid Stone, twice
the length of a Man's Finger, and the breadth or more of his Hand; an evident
Demonstration that this firm Substance must originally be a Fluid, which
allowed, it will be no difficulty to account for the various representations of
Shells and Vegetables: These were first communicated to me by that honored and
learned Lady, the Lady Guise, Mother to the present Lady Bradshaw of Haigh.

But farther to demonstrate that Solids were originally Fluids, a more
convincing Instance cannot be produced than in the Stone called Buphthalmos, or
Ox-Eye, so styled from the analogy it bears to that Organ: In this there is a
Pebble of a sable Color, included in an Alabaster Spar, and the Spar so
strictly adheres to the surface of the Pebble, without the least unevenness,
and composes so exactly a Unequal figure like that of an Eye, that it is
impossible they should come into that shape, but as the Chemists term it, In
statu fluoris: These are found on the Seacoasts in Lancashire, and Wirehal in
Cheshire.

CHAP. VII.
Of Fishes.

THE Curious here have a large Field of Philosophy to range in, since both the
Seas and Rivers in these Counties present us almost with an infinite variety of
these Creatures: I shall not expatiate upon each particular Species of Fishes,
but only take notice of the most remarkable, which have occurred to my
Observation, in the Seas, Rivers, Ponds and Meers.

The Seas frequently afford us Seals, or Sea-Calfs, and those of different
Magnitudes; they are often thrown up in Salt-Rivers formed by the Tides, some I
have seen eight, some twelve Foot long, but these are most common in the Baltic
Ocean, where the Russes take them in great quantities; the Method is very
remarkable, They generally go out in great Numbers to hunt them, sometimes they
find three or four Thousand together, basking themselves upon the Ice; these
then they surround, which when the Sea-Calfs discern, they pile themselves upon
an heap (as it is probable) by that means to break the Ice, and quit themselves
from the Enemy, which they sometimes do, and frequently so bend the Ice, that
they are obliged to wade to a considerable depth to attack them; so remarkable
is the Principle of Self-preservation in all Creatures whatever. Their Food is
upon Fish, but I found by one which I had alive, that he could not eat under
Water, and when he dived for his Prey he closed his Mouth and Eyes, and pursed
up his Nostrils so close, that the least drop of Water could not enter: I did
not find that he could continue long under Water, but frequently mounted up
into the Air, and then immediately dived again. They are extremely smooth, and
will bite severely, having Mouths like those of Tigers, and indeed when
provoked, make their Attacks with that kind of spitting, harring Noise.

I thought it not amiss to add the Account which Dampier gives of the Sea-Dog,
called by the Dutch Hound, which is agreeable to the shape and size of those
which I saw: They are (says he p. 89.) as big as Calves, the Head of them like
a Dog, and therefore by the Dutchmen called Sea-Hounds, but it had been more
proper if they had said English Bull-Dogs: Under each Shoulder grows a long
thick Fin, these serve them to swim with when they are at Sea, and are instead
of Legs to them when on Land, for raising their Bodies up on end by the help of
these Fins or Strumps, and so having their Tail-parts drawn close under them,
they are bound, as it were, and throw their Bodies forward, drawing their
hinder Parts after them, and then again rise up and springing forward with
their fore Parts alternately, they lie tumbling thus up and down all the time
they are moving on Land; from their Shoulders to their Tails they grow tapering
like Fish, and have two small Fins on each side the Rump, which is commonly
covered with their Fins; these Fins serve instead of a Tail on the Sea, and on
Land they sit on them when they give suck to their Young: Their Hair is of
diverse Colors, as black, gray, dun, spotted, looking very sleek and pleasant
when they come first out of the Sea.

The next remarkable Fish is the Sepia, or Ink-Fish, of which I have seen
several upon these Shores; it has ten Horns, not much unlike those of a Snail,
and with these, as with Oars, it rows it self forward in the Water; it has two
full Eyes, its substance seems to be a kind of Pulp, and one half of it is
invested with a Membrane like a Leg within a Stocking, and therefore by some it
is called the Hose or Stocking-Fish; it has only one Bone, and that upon its
Back, thin, flat and pellucid; from its Mouth descend two pellucid Ducts, which
terminate in a Vesica which contains its Ink, by pressing this the Ink quickly
ascends, and as some Naturalists affirm, when they are-in danger of being
taken, by contracting this they discharge such a quantity of Ink as blackens
the Water, and secures them from discovery; I have a Letter by me writ with
this Ink about ten Years ago, which still continues: this Liquor was the Ink of
the Ancients, hence came that Expression of the Poet, Nigro distillans
Sepianodo; it has no remarkable Taste, and by reason that the whole substance
seems to be a kind of Pulp, it is hard to determine whether this Liquor is its
Chyle, or perhaps the Juices of some Sea-Plant which it lives upon, or else a
Liquor separated from its nutritive Juices; for what else to term it I know
not, since I could not observe in it either Veins or Arteries, yet doubtless
there are other Vessels adequate to those. This Fish sometimes the People eat,
and it is observable, that it will mildly purge them, like Cassia, or some such
Lenitive.

The next to be remarked are the Pisces Vaginales, so called because they
resemble the Pudenda of a Woman; these stick fast in the Sand, and are scarce
to be pulled out, when you touch them, they contract strongly, and emit a
Liquor like that of the Vagina in Coitu; of these there are great quantities on
the Sands near Leverpoole, and other parts of the County of Lancaster.

We have frequently cast upon the Seashore the Sea-Blebs, the whole substance
of which seems to be nothing but a perfect Gelly, and to view it, you would
wonder how it had Life; only in the Center of it is a knot of Vessels which
appears red, and is branched like the Leaves of the Herba Paris, or True Lovers
Knot, and in these no doubt the greatest part of the Circulation is performed:
It Is wonderful to me, what the use of that Gelly can be, and whether or no it
has any communication with that knot of Vessels, with Microscopes I could not
discern any: This by being too long held in the Hand, is apt to make it break
out in Pustules.

The Star-Fish, so called from the resemblance it bears to a Star, is very
common in these Parts; its Stomach is in its Center, and the rest of its Body
is fibrous, which no doubt conveys a Liquor analogous to Blood or Chyle; when
touched it contracts very strongly, and I presume its Food is Sea-Plants: Male
and Female in these I could not observe, but presume that they are rather of an
Hermaphrodite species; these are not of any known use, as I remember. Sometimes
we have Whales and Sturgeons, but these very rarely, one of the latter I saw
taken near Warrington of about 12 Foot long, and 2 Foot deep.

Three Fishes I took of an unusual shape, and cannot find the figure of them in
any Author; their Heads are extraordinary large, and their Aspect terrible,
they have two large Eyes upon the midst of their Foreheads, an extraordinary
wide Mouth, and different Rows of Teeth, like those of a Shark, and within the
Stomach equal Rows of Teeth parallel to those above, and no doubt but there
must be a Mastication there, as in the Mouth. They have no Gills, but instead
of those Bones like cross Bars, from their Spine there are not any Bones that
branch forth as in other Fishes, like Teeth from the midst of a Comb, instead
of those they have a round pellucid Body, not unlike a blown Bladder; from the
Head along the Body there are Bones descending in Lines, like the Meridians of
a Globe: The rest of the Body is like that of a Dog-Fish, they have a Stomach,
Bowels and Liver, but I could discern no Lungs; their Membra Genitalia seem to
be after the manner of Dog-Fish.

The Green-back and Mullets are very common, they afford an excellent
Nourishment and a delicate Taste; we have likewise great quantities of Soles, a
species of Flounders, these are in my thoughts the best of Fishes; the Turbut
is likewise very common and very palatable; the Sand-Eels are very frequently
taken, and dug out of the Sands by the Fishermen, like Worms; and it is not an
unpleasing prospect to observe the infinite number of little heaps like
Mole-hills, formed by the Worms themselves upon the Sands; these are only the
Faeces of the Worms, collected by their twisting round one another in so exact
a figure, that the Fishermen by their magnitude can judge, what Worm is fittest
for their purpose, and accordingly dig up such or such a Bed. The Oyster and
Lobster are very common, and likewise the Shrimp and Prawn; the Prawn is a Fish
not much unlike the Shrimp, but much larger, and far better Meat, and in my
thoughts the most pleasing of any Shellfish whatever; it generates in Eggs,
and of these it deposites an infinite number, which by a clammy Matter it
fastens to the Rocks, and piles them one upon another, till they look like a
Pyramid inverted, and hang like Icicles on the Verge of a Penthouse. We have
the best and largest Cockles in England here, and Muscles in that number, that
upon the Seacoasts they manure their Ground with them. The Pearl-Muscles are
very common: Which leads me to give an account of the Germination of Pearls.

The Formation of the Shells of Muscles I have observed from the bigness of a
Pins head, to 2 Inches in length, and find in their first Formation, that the
Shells are pellucid, but afterward, as the Lamellae are constantly formed,
they become opaque; their substance at first seems to me to be a Gluten thrown
off from the Fish, and indurated by the Air; as the Fish grows in bigness, it
still emits a greater quantity of this, and so the Shell continually increases,
till it arrives to its full hardness and maturity. In these Shells (and
likewise in Oyster-shells) I have frequently found Pearls, some just appearing
through the innermost Lamellae, others half through, some hanging like Fruit upon a
Pedestall, others dropped from the Mother of Pearl, and sticking on the outside
of the Fish; whence it is plain that Pearls are not formed by Dews, (as some
have observed,) nor within the Fish, (as others,) but in the Shell it self. I
find the Pearls as well as the Shells to consist of various Laminae, wrapped one
within another, and betwixt the Matter Perlarum and the Pearl I could never
observe any extraordinary difference, only I think the Pearl makes a greater
fermentation with an Acid; whence it is most probable, that the most Volatile
part of the Matter Perlarum protrudes it self from the rest of the Laminae, and
so constantly presses forwards till it forces its passage into the Shell it
self, and so forms the Pearl. They are generally of a Sphaerical figure, made
so (I conjecture) by the figure of the Shell; these Pearls are of great use in
Physic, and did the People industriously apply themselves to the getting of
them, considerable quantities might be acquired, at a less Price than Crabs
Eyes, which they infinitely surpass, though they were genuine, but for the most
part they are adulterated, and instead of Crabs Eyes we have merely a
Composition of Chalk and Mucilage, or perhaps Tobacco-pipe Clay, to the
infinite prejudice of the Patient.

From what has been observed in the Germination of Pearls, it is evident that
what Christophorus Sandius from Hamburgh transmitted to the Royal Society at
London, must necessarily be a Mistake; which that the Reader may more easily
apprehend, I shall transcribe the Account he gave to that learned Body, and
leave it to any unprejudiced Person to judge of his Error: since any of the
most Curious may any day in the Year, in the River Wire near Hambleton in
Lancashire, have a full Demonstration to the contrary. The first Letter runs
thus, being translated by the Publisher of the Philosophical Transactions,
March 25. A. D. 1674.

Touching the Origin of Pearls, of which I formerly gave an Intimation, be
pleased to receive the following Account. The Pearl-shells in Norway and
elsewhere do breed in sweet Waters. Their Shells are like to those which
commonly are called Muscles, but they are larger; the Fish in them looks like
an Oyster, and it produces a great cluster of Eggs, like those of Cra-Fishes,
some white, some black, (which latter will yet become white, the outer black
Coat being taken off) these Eggs when ripe are cast out, and being cast out
they grow, and become like those that cast them; but sometimes it happens that
one or two of these Eggs stick fast to the sides of the Matrix, and are not
voided with the rest: these are fed by the Oyster against its Will, and they do
grow, according to the length of Time, into Pearls of different bignesses, and
imprint a Mark both in the Shell and Fish, by the situation conform to its
figure.

Upon which I cannot but remark in the following manner, and indeed in doing
that, can scarce confine my self within the Rules of Decency, there being not
one true Line in the whole Letter: For in the first place they do not always
breed in fresh, but likewise in salt Waters, as is evident in the River Wire,
where the Water is continually salt, and when the Tide flows, little less
brackish than the Sea it self; in the second place, the Shell is not only like
that of a Muscle, but the Fish also is a real Muscle, and not an Oyster; in the
third place, in those Fishes never any Eggs are discerned, consequently it is
not possible that the Pearl should be the Egg of the Fish, but on the contrary
it is demonstrable, by the Instances above-recited, that the Pearls are various
Protrusions from the Laminae of the Shell, and those I have observed as well in
the black, as in the chrystalline Laminae, having frequently seen black Pearls,
as well as the chrystalline ones, which are so many Envelopments of the Mother
of Pearls; Fourthly, by what is alleged it is evident, that these are not fed
by the Oyster against its Will, and that they do not any farther imprint a Mark
into the Shell, than by dropping out of it, but indeed after that they do
commonly leave a Bruise there, by which you may easily discern how many Pearls
have vegetated from each particular Shell: A Phenomenon not much unlike this I
once observed at Oxford in a Water-Rat that was pregnant, upon a Dissection of
her, for by opening the Ovaria, we found as many Knots in those, as there were
young ones in the Uterus. His second Letter was dated the 27. of February,
1674. and is as follows.

As to the Authority I have to assert such an Origin of Pearls, as I have done
in my former, I here declare that a certain Dane, called Henricus Arnoldi, an
ingenious and veracious Person, having by his own Experience found it so at
Christiania in Norway, did in that manner relate it to me, as I imparted it to
you, he having with great seriousness assured me of the truth thereof: besides
the thing seems highly probable, neither do any considerable Objections appear
against it; if I should chance to go into those Parts, or at least into the
Country of the Duke of Brunswick, where also Pearls are found, not inferior to
the Oriental ones of the same size, I should not fail to endeavor to make the
Observation my self.

From what has been before observed, it is plain his Hypothesis is not
probable, and that there are unanswerable Objections against it; so that his
very All centring only in a Relation from the forementioned Dane, is altogether
fictitious, nor do I believe there are Pearls, either in Brunswick, or any
other part of the World yet known, comparable to those in East India, the
Mother of Pearl of the Oysters in those Parts being much finer than any
discovered here, or in the West Indies: And if so (by what has been observed)
it is most certain, that the Pearls must be finer also, which are only the most
refined parts of those defecated Laminae of the Shell. It is true indeed there
are in fresh Waters hereabout Muscles of the magnitude he mentions, which are
commonly called Horse-Muscles, of these vast numbers were found in the Pond at
Tabley in Cheshire, when it was drein'd, but not any of them contained Pearls,
nor was the Fish palatable. These, I think, may serve for a full Answer to
Sandius's Hypothesis, I shall not therefore transgress longer on the Reader's
patience, but only take notice of the Phosphori, or flashes of Fire in the
Nightime, frequently observable in Muscles and Oysters, and so close this
Head.

It is observable that these Fishes abound with a great quantity of volatile
Sulphur, and hence it is, that in Tabid Cases, as in scorbutic Atrophies, they
are of extraordinary use, for their sulphurous Particles being communicated to
the Mass of Blood, they afresh inspirit and restore it to its due Circulation,
and then the Blood distributes its nourishment to the Body, which before
stagnated in several Capillaries, where for want of a daily supply the Body
emaciated. Another confirmation of their great quantity of Sulphur, is their
extreme foetidness upon Putrefaction, which is as offensive as any preparation
of Sulphur whatever. These granted, and that Flame it self is only a due
quantity of sulphurous Particles put into a particular Motion, and then again
considering what vast numbers of those Particles abound in those Fishes, and
their extraordinary Activity, it is easy to imagine how those Noctilucae, or
flashes in the Nightime, when their Particles are not scattered by the Beams
of the Sun, may frequently be observed in them; and it is probable that if some
of our Virtuosi made their Experiments upon foetid Oysters, they might more
easily prepare the Phosphorus, than from Blood, Flesh, or Urine, which is the
common, but very tedious Process.

The Echini are common, as likewise Torculars, Whilkes and Periwinkles; we have
likewise another Fish shaped like the Head of a Rabbit, and thence called the
Rabbit-Fish. The Pap-Fish is common, so called from the likeness it bears to a
Nipple, the Country People use them for their Nipples when sore, which by
guarding them from fretting on their Clothes, give relief. These are the most
remarkable of Sea-Fishes that I have observed in these Parts, wherefore I shall
in the next place descend to River and Pond-Fish, and of these the most
remarkable are the Salmon, Sparling or Smelt, and the Char, as likewise Eeles
in the River Erke near Manchester: And of these I shall show the difference,
and their manner of Generation, and so conclude this Chapter.

The Rivers abound with great quantities of Salmon, but chiefly those into
which the Sea flows daily, as Ribble, Lune, Wire, and the Mersey, in these
there are considerable numbers taken, but the most in Ribble and the Lune.
Concerning the Growth of these the Opinions are various, some asserting that
after the Salmon leaves the Sea, she makes to fresh Rivers, and constantly
presses forward till she gains the Shallows, and in the Sands, Stones and
Pebbles deposites her Spawn or Eggs, upon which the Male ejects a Milk which
fecundates them, and so the formation of the Foetus is begun, which first is
styled a Salmon-Smelt, the second Year a Sprod, the third a Mort, the fourth a
Forktail, the fifth a Runner, and the sixth a Salmon. Others assert that the
Salmon comes to its Maturity in one Year, and the Morts, Forktails and Runners
are a distinct species of Salmon, and will never attain to the magnitude of a
grown Salmon, and that because (as they allege) several of these have been put
into Ponds, and never arrived to any other pitch of greatness. Now it is
certain that the Salmon are always best, and grow most, when they immediately
leave the Seas, and by their continuance in fresh Waters they still decline,
and wax leaner; when they first quit the Seas their Flesh is firm and
well-tasted, and at that time they have often abundance of little Insects upon
them, which the Fishermen call the Salmon Lowse, and it is then that she is
best in season: The Fishermen will actly tell you, by observing of these, how
long they have left the Seas, but upon their continuance long in the Freshes
they become extremely lean, and not at all palatable; so that it is probable if
these Morts and Sprods which were taken into Ponds, and did not increase at
all, 'twas because they were out of their proper Food, and so consequently
instead of growing did emaciate; for it is most certain, when they deserted the
salt Water, 'twas not for any Food they expected in fresh Rivers, but indeed to
reach the Shallows, as well for the preservation as propagation of their Fry,
which in the Deeps would be destroyed by other Fishes: so admirable is the
Conduct of Providence even in the meanest of Creatures. Though the Rivers are
frequently stemmed and barricado'd with Wears of a considerable height, yet
it is wonderful to observe how they will leap over these to gain the Shallows,
to deposite their Spawn: since therefore the Smelt comes down from the
Shallows, and makes toward the salt Waters, it is probable that the fresh
Rivers are disagreeable to them; and since the Sprod seems to be the same Fish
of another Years growth, and the rest likewise gradually till they complete the
Salmon it self, I am rather inclined to adhere to the former Opinion, for why
should not there in this, as in other Creatures, be a gradual Increase? I
apprehend not any convincing Reason to the contrary, nor do I believe Nature
here alters her established Methods in arriving to a full Growth and Maturity.

The next remarkable Fish is the Char, and that is found in Winder-Meer in
Westmoreland, and no where else that I know of, except in Conningston-Meer in
Lancashire. This Fish is not very unlike a Trout, only the Flesh is much more
red, and when Potted, it is most delicious Meat; of these great quantities are
yearly sent to London, from Kendall and Lancaster. It Is likewise observable
that these Fishes are only found in one part of Winder-Meer, the other part
being destitute of them, which perhaps may be occasioned by the Pikes taken
there in great quantities. There is another Fish taken there not unlike the
Char, but something less, nor is the Flesh quite so red. The Water is
extraordinary clear, and contains several small Islands, in one of which Sr.
Christopher Philipson once resided, and in another a Hermit, a Relation of Sr.
Francis Sawcole's, who for some Years subsisted only on Roots and Fish, and
never went to Bed, but is now dead.

What farther may be said in relation to the Char, was communicated to me by my
honored Friend and Relation Sr. Daniel Flemming of Rydall in the County of
Westmoreland. Winder-Meer (says he) according to the English Saxon is
Windal-Meer, which some think to be so denominated from the great Winds
frequent there, others from its winding and turning in and out, and others from
a Person's Name, as well as that of Thurston-Meer, now called Coningston-Water
in Lancashire, and that of Ulfes, now styled Uls-Water in Cumberland, which are
both near thereunto, which makes the last Conjecture the most probable.

This Lough, Lake or Mere, is about a Mile in breadth, and ten Miles in length,
with great variety of crooked Banks, which afford an agreeable Prospect; it is
in several places of a great Depth, and produces many kinds of Fish, as the
Char, Salmon, Pike, Bass, Perch, Eeles, etc. This Lake by some is placed in
Lancashire, but by others in Westmoreland, which is the more likely, since the
Fishery thereof belongs to the Barony of Kendall, a Town of great Trade,
particularly for Cottons, and the most noted in that County. This Mere is the
largest in England, and looks as if it was paved or flagg'd at the bottom with
square Stones, a sight diverting enough in Fishing. Our learned Clarenceux was
imposed upon, when he was informed that the Char was a Fish peculiar to
Winder-Meer, since in Coningston-Meer, within five Miles, a Char much fairer
and more serviceable is caught.

The Char is a sort of Fish about a quarter long, somewhat like a Trout, and
generally red bellied; there are three sorts, the Male, which is large, with a
red Belly, but the Flesh thereof somewhat white, having a soft Roe, and is
called the Milting-Char; the Female Char is large, but not so red-belly'd, the
Flesh is very red, within being full of hard Roes or Spawn, which our
Philosophers in their Discoveries sufficiently demonstrate to be the Ova, or
Eggs of the Fish, which are fecundated by a Milk injected on them by the Male,
and perfected by the kind influence of the Sun: the Ova thus impregnated, are
buried by the Female in Slutch or Sand near the adjacent Banks, and so receive
Invigoration, these are commonly called the Roving Charrs; the third sort
having no Roe, is commonly called the Gelt Char. These Charrs differ from the
Welsh Torgough, a Fish taken in Carnarvan-shire, and the Switzerland Rentel,
these being probably the same with the Case, a sort of Fish something like the
Char, but spawning at a different time, and caught in the River Brathy, that
runs into Winder-Meer. The Char is not to be caught by Angling, or any other
Method but by Nets, they keep generally in the deepest parts of the Water, and
are most commonly caught in the coldest Weather, when the Banks are covered
with Snow; the Char never swims out of the Mere, but the Case is taken in
diverse Rivers.

The River Erke is remarkable for Eeles, which I think I may affirm to be the
fattest in England, and indeed to that degree of fatness, that they almost
nauseate; and this a late Author, a Gentleman of a considerable Estate near
Manchester, chiefly attributes to the Fat, Grease, and Oils, which by the
Woke-Mills are expressed from the Woolen Clothes, and so mixed with the Water:
And indeed considering the number of these Mills standing upon that River, and
the extraordinary fatness of the Eeles, I do not think the Conjecture amiss.

It may now be worth our time to make Enquiry into the manner of the Generation
of this kind of Fish: I could not in these, by any Dissection I ever made,
observe the distinction of Male and Female, which has given occasion to some to
conjecture they came from the middle Region, since Ponds and Pits are found
frequently full of them, in which none had ever been deposited, and therefore
it is concluded that their Ova being so small as not to be discerned by ocular
Inspection, they might be exhaled with the Waters, and consequently fall down
with the Rains, and when these happened to fall into Rivers and Ponds, they by
the influence of the Sun, begin and complete their Generation. But whence arose
those Ova to be thus exhaled? they must needs claim some Origin or Formation
before they ascended to the middle Region; there is no doubt but the Rains are
oftentimes saturated with Ova of diverse Species, as may be seen by Putrefaction
of the Water, in which an infinite number of small Worms are discerned, these
indeed may be small Ova wafted up by the Winds, and descending with the Rains.
It is affirmed in Russia and Lithuania, after excessive Showers, that the
Ground is almost covered with Creatures not unlike Mice, which often produce by
their corrupting, pestilential Fevers, which in some occasioned the like
Conjecture; yet this Phenomenon may admit of another solution, for why may not
those Creatures be there generated, and after the fall of those Rains desert
their Cells or Latebrae, to bask upon the surface of the Ground, as we daily
see here in Frogs and Worms, and other Reptiles? However it is, the Ponds that
were never stored may be supplied other ways, for it is usual for Eeles to quit
the Pits, and creep into the Grass and Ditches, and this I have often observed,
having found Eeles in the midst of Fields, remote from any Pit, by which means
other Ponds may be replenished with this kind of Fish: for my part I shall not
determine the Point, but these being industrious Ages, by the assistance of
Microscopes, which are daily improved, others may give us farther satisfaction
in this Matter.

But I cannot here omit that remarkable Experiment of the most ingenious
Lewenhooke, who in this Creature was the first that gave us an ocular
Demonstration of the Circulation of the Blood, and beyond contradiction has
made it manifest that the Vein and Artery are one continued Canal, showing a
Pulsation in one part of the Vessel, and none in the other, but that the Blood
slowly creeping on, the Arteries at their Extremities form a kind of
Semicircle; so that the strait Line being terminated, the Systole of the Heart
at so great a distance is not able to affect a Curve, for we must imagine the
Pulse to be extremely weak at the Extremities of the Arteries, for when a
Vessel deviates from the direct Line of the Power, it thence ceases to be
affected with it; and hence it is that the Veins, though they are continued
Vessels with the Arteries, have no Pulsation at all. What is said of this Fish
generating with Vipers, is trifling and ridiculous, for whoever examins the
Parts of these two Creatures subservient to Generation, will find it wholly
impossible, the Male Viper containing a Penis, and the Female Ova and Ovaria,
but in Eeles neither are discernible.

The next remarkable Experiment in this Fish is the long continued Systole and
Diastole of the Heart after it is taken out of the Body, which sometimes is for
some Hours: This may justly challenge our strictest Enquiry into its Reasons,
since (were they clearly demonstrated) it might be of great use in Anatomy.
From this it is plain that Muscular Motion is not performed by the Blood and
Nitro-aerial Particles fermenting in Metaphorical Glandules, in which the
Extremities of the Arteries terminate, which a late young Author forwardly and
foolishly affirms, in his small Book of Muscular Motion; for it is plain here
that the Circulation is cut off, so that this Motion cannot be performed by any
Blood flowing from the Arteries, in the manner he alleges; besides, the
Globules of the Blood it self are discernible by Microscopes, one would think
then that these Glandules which separate the Globules, should be much more
perceiveable themselves: But these Glandules are neither to be observed by
Mercurial Injections, nor Microscopical Observations; it would be better for
the Author to lay by his Suppositions, and much to his advantage to apply
himself to an industrious Education, to render himself Master of right Reason,
which done, he will soon see the vanity of his own Attempts in this kind. In
explaining Muscular Motion, Borellus and Steno are deficient, and Dr. Charleton
after all his elaborate Experiments, fairly owns his dissatisfaction in any
Hypothesis, that he could form concerning it; for my part I think it is only to
be solved by Him that gave it: How can we suppose Muscular Motion to be
performed in most Shellfish, which have no Blood nor Glandules? yet some of
them have very brisk and active Motions, as the Shrimp and Prawn; or how in
Convulsions come the Muscles to contract so strongly? It is impossible a little
Blood and Lympha should effect this, but indeed (as Dr. Willis very well
imagins) it is rather a violent Explosion of the Spirits. But then it is
impossible that the Spirits should be a Mucilage, (which the forementioned
Author of Muscular Motion affirms, whose unparalled Assurance admits not of a
Rival) that being too unactive a Matter to produce such Effects; the Spirits
are sure the most volatile, refined parts of Matter we can form any Idea of,
wherefore what that Author has writ in relation to this Matter, amounts to no
more, than to show him consummately ignorant.

One remarkable Fish had almost slipped me, it is called the Cat-Fish, from the
likeness of its Whiskers upon the upper Lip to those of a Cat: This Fish is of
a Taste indifferently palatable, but what is most observable in it, is the prick
of its Fins, which are of a very poisonous Nature, though none of its Bones
produce the like Effect; upon a Puncture the part will presently look red, be
very painful, and swell to an extraordinary bigness, not much unlike a Phlegmon
Erisipiloides: This is found about the Peele, and sometimes near Heesham. How
this Puncture comes to be of so poisonous a Nature, we shall now examine: The
Fins look pellucid, and seem hollow, like so many parallel Tubes centring each
upon a Cistus, impleted with a pellucid Liquor; it is probable therefore that
upon the Puncture the Fin pressing upon the Cistus, the Liquor contained in it
necessarily ascends, and mixes with the Blood, which being of an Acrimonious
nature, contracts the Capillaries of the Cutis, and so causes the Inflammation,
perhaps not unlike that arising by the bite of a Viper.

Another Fish we have called the Rabbit-Fish, from the resemblance of its Mouth
to that of an Hare or Rabbit: It is about 4 Inches in length, and as much in
depth, the Back of it is arched and sharp, and in its Belly is an Orifice not
unlike the Vagina of the Uterus. Lamperns and Congers are frequently found, and
a small Fish called a Hue, exactly like an Anchove, and like that, by a proper
Pickle, its Flesh and Bones will dissolve, this eats as agreeably as those from
Genoa; vast quantities of these commonly hang in the Nets of the Fishermen, the
Sea-Gulls feed upon them, and it is a diverting Scene enough to see their
frequent Skirmishes about them. The Skeate, Thornback, and Rea, are taken in
great quantities, as likewise the Dog-Fish, which some would have to be a
species of a Shark, but whoever inspects their Jaws, the Roes, Figure, and
position of their Teeth, will find it only a vulgar Error. They do not
externally emit their Ova, as many Fishes do, but generate as Dog and Bitch; in
the Womb of the Female I have often found a great number of young ones; it is
reported that if at any time her Whelps be in danger, they run within her and
so secure themselves. They are but ordinary Food, yet are frequently eaten by
the Country People. The Trout and Grayling may be plentifully had at Buxton,
which are generally esteemed the best in England; to these kinds of Fishes I
presume the Water issuing from Limestone, is most agreeable. I have by me a
round flat Bone, taken up from the Seacoast near Hilbree-Island in Cheshire,
the inside of which is woven with an infinite number of Vessels, like the
Cortical part of the Brain, but to what species of Fish it did belong, or what
was the proper use of it, I cannot yet learn; its Diameter is about five or six
Inches. Since the writing of this I find it to be a Bone betwixt the Vertebrae
of a Whale.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Reptiles and Insects.

THERE being little room left for making Additions to these, they being
described so accurately before by Dr. Lister and Mr. Ray, I shall not trouble
the Reader with Repetition, but only give an account of some particular
Observations which I have made. The Viper is common in most of our Mosses, as
is likewise the Adder or Longworm, which exceeds the other both in length and
thickness, but its Bite is not so poisonous. In what particularly the the
Poison of a Viper consists, has been an old Dispute betwixt Monsieur Charras
and Seignior Redi; the one asserting the Poison to consist in a yellow Liquor
contained in a Bladder, at the bottom of its Tooth, which Liquor, upon its
biting, by the Pressure of the Bladder, is forced through a Tube within the
Tooth, and consequently into the Wound, and thence ensue very direful Effects;
he alleges likewise that by this Liquor Pigeons and Pullets, by dropping it
into a Wound made in either of them, have been killed, though the Liquor he took
from the Viper when dead. The other asserts that he has tried the same
Experiments, but observed no such Effects at all: These two Seignior Vigani has
in some measure reconciled, who alleges that the yellow Liquor with which
Seignior Redi killed Pullets and Pigeons after the Death of the Viper, was
either saturated with the Spirits of the enraged Viper, by whipping it before,
by which means it was rendered more poisonous; or else (as its probable) that
in the hot and dry Climes of Italy, those Creatures are more venomous than in
colder Countries: To me this Conjecture seems reasonable, however what its
Venom is, is not so material, but it is certain very noble Medicines are
prepared from them, and a Wine from their Flesh, singular in Consumptive,
Leprous and Scorbutic Cases; they afford likewise a volatile Salt, the most
generous Cordial in Nature.

The Lizard is frequently found in the Mosses, and is said to be one of those
which the Naturalists style Philanthropi, or Lovers of Men, never (as they say)
doing injury to Mankind, but destroying any venomous Creature hurtful to him.
These are the most noted Reptiles.

Amongst the Insects we shall begin with the Grasshopper: This Creature in its
Infancy is wonderfully preserved by a Froth which it raises upon the surface of
some Plant, concealing it self by that means from Birds, or other Creatures
which might destroy it. This Froth by the Vulgar is called Cuckow-spittle, by
some a Meteor that falls from the Air, and is by them esteemed poisonous,
whereas indeed it is nothing but a Froth formed from the Plant, by this little
Insect: I have taken several of these, and closed them with some Plants in
Boxes, so that they could have no communication with the Air, and the Day
following they were all covered with this kind of Froth, which Experiment puts
the Matter beyond Controversy.

The Caterpillar deposites her Eggs in Cotton, in the Clefts of Trees, which
are enlivened by the influence of the Sun, at a proper season of the Year; I do
think she is destroyed by her young ones, which creep within her to suck, for I
have sometimes found them creeping upon Cabbages, with twenty young ones within
them, and sometimes dead with these within their Bodies; they enter them at
little Orifices like Nipples, on either side of the Belly, and sometimes creep
so far as to be scarce discernible, but most commonly one half of them hangs
out. The Possum in the West Indies is said after the same manner to convey and
nourish its young ones, which are observed to run into an external kind of a
Womb, in which they lodge whilst she endeavors an Escape: so various are the
Methods which different Creatures have for the preservation of their Species.

The Locust-Fly I have been informed has been found in Wales, but I remember
not any to have been discovered in these Parts. The Red Spider is very common,
and is said to be that, which frequently poisons Cattle; of this I call to mind
a remarkable Instance upon a Cow, which a Farrier asserted was poisoned by this
kind of Spider: The Beast was extremely swelled, and her Belly extraordinary
hard, she lay moaning upon the Ground, doubtless in violent Pain, and past
hopes of help; the Farrier however offered, if the Owner consented, to thrust
his Knife in her Stomach, to put her out of Torment; the Owner complies, and
the Farrier immediately enters in his Knife, upon which there instantly issued
forth a Steam, which took Fire at the flames of the Candles, and blazed all
over the Barn, and was with some difficulty exstinguish'd; the Cow suddenly
rusht upon her Feet, began to eat, and afterward grew perfectly well. How this
sulphurous Halitus got into the Stomach, is not easily solved, and indeed it
is a very odd Phenomenon, but it is certainly the most probable that it
proceeded from the sulphurous Particles of some Herbs she had eaten, for I
cannot conceive, how any Insects she had swallowed could produce such Effects.

Human Worms I have observed of various kinds, as the Cucurbitoe, so called
because they resemble the Seeds of Cucurbits, are joynted one into another, and
hence are extended to three or four Yards in length: Of these the learned Dr.
Tyson has given a most exact Account, to whose Works I refer the Curious. The
Ascarides are commonly seen, but how these are generated in the Stomach and
Bowels, may merit our Enquiry: It seems probable to me that the Ova of Insects
are either mingled with the Liquors we drink, conveyed thither by the Air, in
which doubtless they continually float, and when received into the Stomach and
Bowels, by the innate warmth of those Parts, are gradually formed till they
arrive to their full growth: Parallel to their Formation may be the hatching of
Eggs in Egypt in Stoves, or by the heat of the Sun. Another way of Conveyance
of these Ova into the Body, may be by the Roots, Fruits and Herbs, or even in
our common Food, allowing first that the Generation of all Creatures arise from
Ova, which we must necessarily espouse, otherwise the origin of these Worms is
inexplicable, for to assert that they proceed from a Putrefaction of Humors,
is but a general Term, and indeed rather gives an account of the Effect, than
the Cause.

Of what we have alleged there cannot be a clearer Demonstration, than in the
following Instance, as appears from the History of the Free-booters in the
South Sea in America, in the Year 1685. where in the Island of St. John, not
many Leagues distant from Panama, they give us this Account: There are but four
Months of fair Weather there throughout the Year, which are December, January,
February and March, the other Months are incommoded with great Rains, which
fall almost without intermission, and which, besides the Bloody Flux they
bring, are so pernicious, that if a Man has been wet with them three or four
times, if he do not presently shift himself, there breed large Worms betwixt
the Skin and the Flesh, in form somewhat like unto a Quill, and about a Finger
long; whence to me it seems evident that the Ova of various Insects impregnate
the Rain-waters, if so, it is easy thence to conjecture, how by the Liquids,
Fruits and Aliment we take, Worms may breed in human Bodies. Against this
Hypothesis there remains one material Objection yet to be solved, That if Worms
in human Bodies arise from their Ova, conveyed thither in the Meats and Liquids
we take, how comes it to pass that they are so usually formed in Infants, who
never tasted any thing but the Milk of their Parents or Nurses, a Nourishment
that has passed the first digestions of the Stomach and Bowels (where the Worms
are most frequently nested) and separated from the Blood in the Breast by the
Glands, and other Vessels adapted to that purpose? To this I answer, That the
Ova of Worms, and several Insects, are as small as the Globules of the Chyle,
and may consequently mix with the Blood, by the same Ducts the Chyle does; if
this be granted, it is no difficult matter to assign a Reason how Worms are
generated in the Stomach and Bowels of Infants, for the Ova are thence carried
along with the Milk, and lodged in the Stomach and Bowels of the Child. To
illustrate this the subsequent Instance will be very necessary: In the Year
succeeding the great Frost, I frequently took notice of little white Grubbs
lodged within the Pippins of several Apples, like those in the Kernels of Nuts,
though the Skin and Pulp of the Apple were entire without the least Perforation.
Now, I say, considering the minuteness of the Vessels that convey nourishment
to the Kernels of the Apple, which are much smaller sure than those that bring
Milk to the Breasts in human Bodies; by the same parity of Reason we may affirm
that the Ova are introduced into the Body of the Infant, by the Chyle Which it
receives from the Breasts. But perhaps it may be objected, if the various
substances of Creatures are included in Minimis in their distinct Seeds, what
necessity is there for these Ova? To this I reply, Though Malpighius and
Lewenhoeck have discovered Animalcules in the Seeds of diverse Animals, and in a
late Transaction, in human Seed there are delineated different growths of them,
that although I should grant this, yet I affirm that these Animalcules could
never arrive to Perfection, until they are deposited in their proper Ova, and
there they receive their Nutriment; and this is not only evident in Insects,
but even in Fishes, Birds, Quadrupedes, etc. and Mankind it self.

As to Frogs they generate in Eggs, the first formation of the Foetus is in a
black Speck, adhering to the Ovum, after they are enlivened, they have long
small Tails, and are then called Bull-heads; in a little time this shapeless
Covering is thrown off, and their perfect shapes are disclosed, they have a
peculiar Membrana Nictitans, with which they cover the whole Eye, which
preserves them from the points of Reeds, Rushes and Prickles, which otherwise
might injure them; they will lie with their Lungs expanded a long time,
squeezing out the Air by degrees, and so it is they continue under Water so
long; at a certain time of the Year they have a Membrane which closes their
Mouths, it is wonderful how long a time they sleep in the Water, without any
Food, their Mouths being still closed by this Membrane; but Iacobaeus, a Danish
Physician, assures us, that they have two peculiar Vessels, which carry nothing
but Fat, which he imagins nourishes them in that Interval, but this being
spent, the Blood grows sharp, and then by its Irritation they immediately
awake. In Consumptive Cases the young ones are frequently made use of in
France, and, as I have been often told by the Inhabitants of that Country, with
great Success; I do judge that for the same reason that Snails are prescribed
in those Cases, these may be also, both of 'em consisting of a viscid Mucilage,
which probably may sheath the acid Salts of the Blood, which in the first place
coagulated the Serum, converting the Lympha into a Size, as may be frequently
seen upon the surface of the Blood taken from Consumptive Persons, and so
having reduced it to that cross Consistence, it is very probable that it may
raise Obstructions in the Lungs, whence ensue Nodes, Tubercles, and at last
Imposthumations, many of the small Bladders of the Lungs being distended beyond
their natural tone, and at last breaking one into another. There is a Water
distilled from the Spawn of these, frequently (and with success likewise) used
in Spitting of Blood, for which, in some measure, the same Cause may be
assigned, as in the former Case. But I have often wondered, why Plasters of
these are so frequently prescribed in most of the scrophulous Cases, not only
in our own Dispensatories, but in foreign likewise; but it may be, that in the
Mucilage of these there may be invelop'd volatile alcalious Salts, that may
destroy those Acids in the Blood, which so incrustate the Serum, that it
obstructs the Glands, and so makes 'em scrophulous: This I rather surmise,
because I know by repeated Instances, that from the Mucilage of several Plants
(whose Virtues have been always supposed to consist in that, because it is
easily prepared from them) a Volatile alkalious Salt may be separated; and if
it be so in a Vegetable, why not in an Animal likewise? There only remains one
Observation more relating to this Creature, upon which I shall descant a
little, and then not trouble the Reader further; and that is to show what that
Substance is which is vulgarly called Starr-Slime, whether the Frogs spawn, as
some imagine, or a Meteor that falls from the Air, as others allege, or lastly
a Body that arises out of the Earth: And these I shall examine in their several
order. That it is not the Spawn of a Frog, is evident from the subsequent
Argument, because it is frequently found in those seasons of the Year in which
the Frogs do not spawn, as in Winter; nor does it seem probable that it should
be a Meteor, because I do think that no Man can Experimentally aver, that he
ever saw such a Substance fall from the Air upon the surface of the Earth,
which doubtless in some Generation would have happened, had the Production of
it been in that manner; it remains therefore in the last place, that we
conclude it to be a Mucilage arising out of the Earth, which is usually in low
moist Grounds; and what is said in relation to this, may in a great measure be
applied to that Substance vulgarly called Faries Butter, both of which, as I
suppose, may in small portions be raised by a subterraneous Heat, but
successively condensed into that Body in which we find 'em, by the intense
coldness of the ambient Air.

Having finished my Observations in reference to Frogs, I shall in the next
place proceed to what I proposed, and that is, to make some Remarks upon the
Toad. As this Creature (like the Viper) contains one of the greatest Poisons in
the Universe, so (like that also) it supplies us with the richest Cordial. I
have in the late pestilential Fever seen repeated Instances, which demonstrate
the truth of these: In a low vermiculating Pulfe, so called from the analogy it
bears to the creeping of a Worm, (a melancholy Hieroglyphic, to show a Man by
what Reptile he is just a hurrying to be devoured) by giving plentiful Doses of
a Powder prepared from these, many have been snatched from the very brinks of
Eternity. Nor has it less frequently in more lingering and tedious Distempers
afforded us an easy and a large Reprieve, I having by the repeated taking of
this Medicine in Hydropic Cases, seen the Lives of many for several Years
protracted; so that as in the former Case it saves us from perishing by the
scorching heat of a Fever, so it does in the latter likewise keep us from
sinking in the Waters of a Dropsy. The Taste of it (if rightly prepared) is a
little Acid, which I take to be the Effect of a volatile, alcalious Salt, and
it is I presume in these Cases by attenuating the viscid Serum of the Blood,
that it produces these wonderful Effects. I have been lately informed by
Persons of great Learning, as well as Integrity, that in the Fever before
recited, large Doses of Laudanum have effected the same thing, a Practice
modern to what has been formerly laid down; but the reason of the giving of
this in so large quantities, was grounded in a great measure upon Experiments
tried with a solution of Laudanum, by injecting it into the Mass of Blood,
which was always found to make it fluid; and if so, to me the Method seems
rational. Some Years ago I laid down some Arguments in the Exercitations I
printed at Oxford, accounting for the Cause and Cure of that Distemper, from
which it is evident, beyond contradiction, that the Mass of Blood in that
Distemper is coagulated; and this may fully hint to us what I shall afterward
make out, viz. that Opium, by its acrid Salt making the Mass of Blood too
fluid, becomes poisonous, or else because the Points of this too much contract
the Fibrillae of the Brain, and so obstruct the separation of the animal
Spirits; it is not to be imagined that by crass faeculent Particles it should
effect these Matters, since it is abundantly known to be a most noted
Diaphoretick, and consequently a Medicine whose Ingredients are volatile, and
it is therefore, I doubt not, that in the confluent Pock it is of that
extraordinary use, viz. by attenuating the Serum of the Blood, which was almost
converted to a putrid Pus. Much more might be added in relation to this, but I
hasten to some other Observations, and so shall close this Chapter; and those
are chiefly concerning Butter-flies, Bees, Hornets, and the Heminens, or the
American, or Humming Bird.

The Butter-flies, by the ingenious and industrious Mr. James Pettifer of
London, as to the Descriptions of them are ranged into that accurate Order,
that it would be but superfluous to add any thing in relation to that Matter;
wherefore since the Preparation from 'em yield us not any thing material, and
their Generation having been fully accounted for by others, I shall pass 'em
over; as likewise the Bees, their Government, Generation, Stings, and Honey,
having been before accounted for by so many various and learned Hands; however
I shall make some few Remarks, by what a wonderful, but natural Chemistry they
elaborate their Honey, and how though seemingly dead, they revive, and lastly the
difference betwixt them and the Heminens. So wonderful is the structure of the
Organs of these Insects, and so differently modified, that the various Juices
which they suck and extract from Plants, that the greatest Bitter they convert
into one of the sweetest Extracts, and the rankest of Poisons into one of the
most balsamic Medicines; with what little reason therefore do some so
vehemently inveigh against our Chemical Preparations, as not safe or agreeable
to human Constitutions, since we see one of the meanest of Insects does so
fully evince the contrary. Can I see that Creature imbibing the Juice of the
most poisonous Vegetable, and converting it to a safe and a palatable Medicine,
and not allow to Man, that he shall with all his exalted Reason, be able so far
to correct the Poison of a Metal or Mineral, that it shall become a safe
Medicine? Surely he that of human Kind has these Apprehensions, either wants a
public Genius, to exert its Faculties for the good of Mankind in general, or
that he has a mind to rest satisfied in the ignorant Traditions of his
Ancestors, and at last be entombed in Cimmerian Darkness.

I shall now in the next place assign some Reasons how after being seemingly
drowned in Water, or suffocated by the steams of Brimstone, they will revive.
It is certain that Air is not conveyed into the Bodies of these Insects, either
by the Mouth, or any Nostrils, they not being supplied with Lungs, but has its
admission through the Pores of the Body; if these therefore either be impleted
with Water, or their Orifices pursed up by the Restringency of an Acid, as in
that of Sulphur, it is then that the Be lies as if dead, the animal Spirits in
her wonderful Vessels being deprived of a fresh supply from the Air, but as
soon as the humid Particles are either scattered by the heat of the ambient
Air, or that the Orifices of their constringed Pores recover their natural
tone, it is then, if the Spirits expand themselves again, that this Insect
seems, as it were, re-animated. The Heminens, or Humming Bird, though it seems to
ply about a Flower, after the same manner as the Be, and has a Proboscis like
that of a Be, and is much about the size of the largest of that fort, yet this
Creature never produces Honey, and the reason I take to be this, because that
Bird has Viscera and Bowels like other Birds, which the Be has not, and
therefore the Digestions being different, so must the Effect be likewise. The
Sting of the Hornet and Be are fully accounted for by others, wherefore I
shall close this Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
Of Birds.

THESE Counties afford us great variety of Birds, and in some places even clog
the Inhabitants with their Plenty. Amongst the rest, the Barnacle being very
common, and the manner of its Generation having been a Matter of Controversy, I
shall recite my Observations upon it, and endeavor to reconcile that Point. It
is observable of our Ships which Trade to the West Indies, that upon their
return home, an infinite number of small Shell-fishes often adhere to them, at
the first view not much unlike young Geese; these for several Ages have passed
for Barnacles, not only amongst the Vulgar, but Men of Learning likewise,
wherefore to set things in their true Light, I shall in the first place give
the Anatomy of this Shellfish resembling the Barnacle, and afterward that of
the real Bird, and then lay down some Reasons to show the Impossibility of
their being bred after the manner formerly received.

This Shell sticks to the outward Planks of Ships by a glutinous Matter, it
resembles the Head of a Goose, to which there is a Neck annexed, yet this Neck
is not conserted to the Body, but terminates immediately within the Shell,
whence it is impossible that this should be the Barnacle in Embryo. Within the
Shells are Claws, with Hairs like those of Lobsters, wound within one another
in spiral Lines, and are not very unlike the Wings of a Goose, but these I
found to be perfect Shells, and not Quills or Feathers; whence it is plain,
that they could not appertain to the Barnacle, that being of the Feathered
Kind. These Shell-fishes are observable upon several Sea-weeds in the Gulf of
Florida, and are there chiefly picked up by our Shipping: I never yet could
meet with any Seaman who could affirm that he had seen any fall from Ships, and
swim, which must have necessarily happened, had they been converted into
Barnacles; besides, in the Anatomy of Barnacles, I found them (as other Geese)
Male and Female, the one having a Penis, the other Ovaria, whence it is evident
that their way of breeding is no wise different from that of other Birds; what
therefore has been asserted by Speed and others concerning this Bird, is only a
vulgar Error, and they only wanted a through Enquiry, to give them satisfaction
in this Matter.

The Sea-Crow is a Bird common in these Parts upon the Seacoasts, the shape of
it is like that of other Crows, and it only differs from them in Color, the
Head and Wings being black, and the Body blue; its Food for the most part are
Muscles, and I have often with admiration observed these Birds to peck up
Pebble-stones, and then to soar with them in the Air to a considerable height,
then to let fall the Stones amongst the Beds of Shell-fishes, which most
commonly break some of them, they afterward alight, and feed upon their Prey.
These Fowl are said to breed in the Isle of Man, but are not used as Food.

The Puffin is a Bird about the bigness of a Duck, and sometimes is seen in
these Parts, they are generally extraordinary fat, and when Pickled are
relishing Food; this Bird breeds likewise in the Isle of Man, in a Place
commonly called the Calf of Man, in little Cells within the Rocks, and it is
observable when they have young ones, that they take their flights to the
Scotch Shores, and there fish for small Fry; when their Stomachs are full, they
return and eject their Prey for the nourishment of their young: so endearing
and indissoluble an Affection is imprinted on all Creatures for the
preservation of their Species.

The Asper is a species of the Sea-Eagle, and is sometimes observed in these
Parts; its Food is upon Fish, one I dissected, and in its Stomach I found a
great number of small Fishes, some entire, some half digested, and others
turned to a perfect Mucilage; in the Coats of the Stomach I discovered several
tubular Glands, which by compression would emit an insipid kind of Lympha,
which with any kind of Alcaly or Acid, would not cause any fermentation, and
yet the Fishes that lay in that part of the Stomach were either thoroughly
digested, or had half ways arrived to it. From which Phenomenon it is evident,
that this Liquor is the ferment of the Stomach in these kind of Birds, and that
Digestion is not always performed by Acids, (as some affirm,) nor by Alcalies
(as others) but indeed by an unaccountable mixture of both these united with
several other Bodies; of which, Steno speaking of the Saliva, has this
Expression, Nihil invenies, quod illa respuet, nihil cui sine pugna non
associetur. If therefore we can but content our selves, in having the
satisfaction to know how to correct too prevailing an Humor in this wonderful
Mixture in a Morbific State, it is as much as relates to the Preservation of
Mankind; I think I may affirm, that all we can attain to from all Hypotheses
hitherto formed about Digestion, falls infinitely short of that universal
Menstruum, whatever the Adeptist may pretend, he only amuses us with obscure
and Utopian Preparations, and gives us the Cloud to grasp at: But here Nature
plentifully distributes, what he only imagins, and without torturing us with
unmerciful Flames, by Methods easy to her self, though unknown to us, she
prepares the true Alkahest, or Universal Dissolvent. How trifling then is it to
affirm this to be a Sal. Volat. Oleos. as a late Author has done; for if so,
how comes Digestions of Bones and Metals to be performed in the Stomach? no
such Phenomenon ever was effected by the preceding Liquor hitherto prepared by
any Man: why then should that be the universal Menstruum of Nature, set up
merely to support a tottering Hypothesis? Or why should we frame Schemes of
Matters, which are not really what we fancy them, but what we could only wish
them to be? And thus by an overweening Affectation of our own Conceptions we
lick our deformed Offspring, imposing upon the World groundless and imaginary
Ideas, for absolute Demonstrations. Others by Acid and Alcaly will unmask all
the dark Recesses of Nature, and make these two Combatants all the Ingredients
of the Universe; but let these Men consider the wonderful structure of the
meanest Vegetable, the unaccountable preparation of its Juices, the wonderful
preservation of its Species, and they will then find Acid and Alcaly to be too
pitiful Principles to account for these admirable Phenomenon. Others with their
Striate Particles presently set together all the Operations of the six Days of
the Creation, yet at the same time they cannot demonstrate the Properties of an
equilateral Triangle. Thus we crowd our Heads with unnecessary and false Ideas
of Things, and neglect the most useful part of Learning, which is a true
knowledge of the Properties of Bodies, so far as we can attain to it by
Experimental Learning: But I fear I have made too long a Digression on this
Point, and shall therefore proceed to what relates farther to this Head. As to
the Oil of the Asper so vulgarly famed for alluring of Fish, it is only a
general Mistake, and in no wise answers the End.

The next remarkable Bird is the Sparling-Fisher, it is about the Bigness of a
Duck, and by a wonderful Activity in Diving catches its Prey, and yields a very
pleasant Diversion when pursued by Water-Dogs. The Cormorant is common in these
Parts, and in the Indies it is made use of to take Fish withal, the manner
which they do it by is this: A Ring being fixed about the lower end of the
Oesophagus, its swallowing any farther is prevented, and then he is turned into
the Water; when his Prey is caught, he returns to the Shore, and immediately
ejects what Fish he had taken, and again pursues his Game: The Guts in this
Bird have but small Circumvolutions, hence the Food which he takes passes so
very quick, that he is almost continually hungry, which renders him more fit
for this kind of Diversion. Not much unlike this is a Creature in Lithuania
called a Ierfe, whose Bowels have no Windings, and so it becomes continually
craving, and gorges until its Belly is distended like a Drum; and then gets
betwixt two Trees, and presses forth the Foeces, and so returns with as eager
an Appetite to its Prey as ever.

Two White Crows I have seen in these Parts, One of which was Presented to King
Charles the Second, and kept as a Curiosity in the Park at St. James's, the
Present was made by that ingenious Gentleman Edward Tidesley of the Lodge, Esquire.
It is said in Russia and other cold Climes, that Birds and other Animals, which
in the Springtime are of a brownish Color, in the Winter turn as White as
Snow, which argues different Exaltations of the Sulphurs both in Hairs and
Feathers. Of Moor-Game we have great Plenty, both of the Small, and the Black,
they live upon Heath, but more particularly upon that part, which we call
Erica, or Dwarf-Cypress; they afford us a pleasant Recreation, and when caught
they are delicious and healthful Food: The Description of these are so
accurately delivered by Mr. Willoughby, that I thought it not worth the time to
trouble the Reader farther.

Of the Curlews there are Two sorts, the Curlew and the Curlew-hilp, these are
the larger, and not very unlike the Woodcock; they frequent the Seacoasts, and
are very good Meat. The Water-Hen is common in Ponds and Meers, but not much
regarded, because esteemed unpleasant Food. The Rale is a Bird about the
bigness of a Partridge, and is common in these Parts, it hides it self in the
Grass, and is discovered by the snarling Noise, that it continually makes; it
is very excellent Food, and doubtless of extraordinary Nutriment. The Quails
are likewise common, and generally extraordinary Fat, and eat delicately. The
Rasor-Bill is sometimes observed upon the Seacoasts, so called from the
similitude which its Beak bears to a Rasor, but this Bird is more common in the
Isle of Man than here.

The last Winter at a Place called Durton near Preston in Lancashire, I had a
diverting Relation of a small Bird, in shape resembling, and about the bigness
of a Water-wagtail, which was as follows: A Troop of Dragoons having been
Quartered in that Town, some of the Soldiers were constantly commanded to
attend the Horses, it was in the Summertime, and they generally lay, and
reposed themselves upon the Grass: The Bird would frequently fly toward them,
and make its approaches to their Bodies, and at length reached their Faces, and
offered to their Mouths, what it had conveyed out of the Grass, and then would
return and come and offer its Food as before; but what is most remarkable is,
that the Bird would not approach any Person but those in a Soldier's Habit,
which was Red: This was confirmed to me by several of the Soldiers, whom the
Bird had attacked in this manner; and likewise by a great Number of Persons of
undoubted Credit, who were Eyewitnesses of the Fact, so that the truth is not
to be questioned: From this Passage many Conjectures arose, but that not being
a Matter relating to Natural History, I shall not trouble the Reader with them;
whoever pleases may make their Presages from this, as the Romans did of old
from the Pecking of Chickens: However, it is probable that the Redness of the
Habit might be to this Bird, as a Cloth of that Color is a Lure to an Hawk,
and here all their surprising Interpretations may center.

Sea-Gulls are of Two sorts, the Great and the Less, the Great Gull is near as
large as a Goose, the Lesser about the bulk of a Partridge, they both live upon
small Fish, which they frequently take up in the Shallows, and it is a very
diverting sight to see them mount, and hover in the Air, spying out their Prey,
which discovered they strike instantly into the Water, take it up in their
Pounces, convey it to Shore, and there feed upon it; these Birds frequently
pursue one another in their flights, and if in pursuit one Gull happens to
Mute, the Excrement is frequently caught by the other, and swallowed; it is my
opinion, That oftentimes the Apous a Fish not wholly digested, may be ejected,
which is the allurement of the Pursuer so eagerly to devour their Foeces: There
are vast Quantities of these in the Isle of Walney, particularly in the
Breeding-time the whole Island is near covered with Eggs, or Young-ones, so
that it is scarce passable without injuring them; their Taste is very strong,
and ungrateful, and therefore not much regarded.

The Sea-Pyes are very common, they are Birds of the Color, and about the size
of a Magpye, and are a very agreeable Food. The Red-shanks and Perrs are common
likewise upon the Seacoasts, and are relishing Food. Wild-Ducks, Geese and
Teal are very plentiful; but the most remarkable thing of the Wild-Ducks is
their way of feeding them at Bold in Lancashire: Great quantities of these
Birds breed in the Summer-season in Pits and Ponds within the Demesne, which
probably may entice them to make their Visits in the Winter; they oftentimes
adventure to come into the Moat near the Hall, which a Person accustomed to
feed them perceiving, he beats with a Stone on a hollow Wood Vessel, the Ducks
answer to the sound, and come quite round him upon an Hill adjoining to the
Water, he scatters Corn amongst them, which they take with as much Quietness
and Familiarity, as Tame ones; when fed they take their flight to the Rivers,
Meers and Salt-Marshes. Swans are common in these Parts, but more particularly
upon the Seacoasts, and upon Martin-Meer near Poulton in Lancashire: The
Cygnet is very good Food, but the old Ones not tolerable.

Sometimes there are Birds not common in these Parts brought hither by Storms
(as was hinted before) particularly about Two Years ago, by a violent Hail
Storm; amongst the rest there was a Bird all White (except only a short Red
Beak) about the bigness of a Pigeon; and by what I observed of it, I could
apprehend it to be no other, than what our Travelers call the Tropick-Bird,
met with usually in crossing that Line. The Kings-Fisher and Heyhough are
likewise common enough, as are the Fieldfeir and Woodcock, which visit us in
Wintertime, and then return Northwards; they are said to breed in colder
Climes, as in the High-lands in Scotland, Norway, Russia and Sweden, and such
like Parts: It is probable therefore, when those Countries are buried in Snow,
and the Brooks and Rivers frozen up, that they take their flights hither. The
Cuckoo and Swallow leave us in Winter: the Opinions of some are, that they
sleep during that Season, and they ground their Conjectures upon finding many
of them in hollow Trees, and subterraneous Vaults; but why these may not as
well pursue the Heat, as the other, is the Query: I have not dissected any of
them taken from their profound Dormitories, so I pretend not to decide that
Controversy.

ERRATA in the First BOOK.
IN the 2d Epistle Dedicatory, l. 2. for Respest r. Respect. In the Preface, l.
3. for Coals r. Boles. Page 2. l. 9. for Cerialis r. Cerealis. p. 3. l. 17. for
Britany r. Britain, and so wherever you meet with it. p. 5. last l. after
Brigantines r. of Rovers, etc. p. 8. l. 26. for wise r. ways, ibid. l. 30,
before shall r. it. p. 10. l. 8. after Mountains a Comma instead of a Colon. p.
13. l. 11. for after r. by. ibid. l. 33. for Yorkshire r. York. p. 18. l. 9.
for nor r. not. p. 19. l. 5. for nor r. neither. ibid. l. 6. for neither r.
nor. p. 20. l. 6. dele for, and r. the building of. p. 23. l. 35. for easy r.
easy. p. 24. l. 17. after Lightness r. or Coldness, etc. p. 32. l. 32. after
considering r. of which. p. 33. l. 35. for Comsumptions r. Consumptions. p. 36.
l. 6. after vulgarly insert called. ibid. l. 20. dele that. ibid. l. 21. dele
they. p. 40. l. 6. after tedious insert that. p. 41. l. 23. for wise r. ways.
p. 43. l. 5. for wise r. ways. p. 44. l. 1. dele that. p. 45. l. 3. for Furnace
r. furness. p. 50. l. ult. for stiriae r. striae. p. 51. l. 16. after thence
insert it. ibid. p. and l. after follow insert to be. p. 52. l. 2. for weather
r. water. ibid. l. 5. for stiriae r. striae. ibid. l. 11. for stiriated r.
striated. p. 54. l. 9. for make r. made. expire r. expired. ibid. l. 14. for
Penetrancy r. Penetration. p. 56. l. 4. after afford insert it. p. 57. l. ult.
for unquenchable r. unquenched, r. the same p. 58. l. 4. p. 61. l. 1. for falen
r. fallen. p. 61. l. 10. after should be a insert convenient. p. 64. l. 31. for
Empyeuma r. Empyreuma. p. 65. l. 3. for the r. they. p. 67. l. 21. for
Transubstantiation r. Transmigration. p. 67. l. 33. for Magdalons r.
Magdaleons. p. 76. l. 25. for Bret r. Boet. p. 78. l. 12. for Quincy r.
squinsy. ibid. l. 13. r. squinsy. p. 81. l. 20. for Cinerous r. Cinereous. Item
p. 82. l. 12. for Cinerous r. Cinereous. p. 83. l. 4. after reducing insert it.
p. 97. l. 17. for Anticsteric r. Antibysteric. p. 98. l. 7. for Plackenet r.
Pluckenet. ibid. l. 10. in beg. add l. ibid. l. 22. dele the first of. p. 102.
l. 4. for only r. chiefly. p. 110. l. 6. for Nitrons r. Nitres. p. 111. l. 17.
for Wafer r. Wepfer. p. 112. l. 29. for Impost r. Compost. p. 115. l. 13. for
Animals r. Creatures. p. 120. l. 15. for Echinites r. Echini, and so elsewhere.
p. 135. l. 10. for opaque r. opac. p. 136. l. 22. for Cra-fish r. Craw-fish. p.
140. l. 9. for Salmon r. Salmons. ibid. l. 16. for actly r. exactly. ibid. l.
20. dele and. p. 149. l. 12. for them r. her. p. 150. l. 15. dele either. p.
151. l. 31. for Pippin r. Peppin. p. 155. l. 32. for Heminens r. Hemineus, Item
p. 156. l. 11. r. Hemineus. p. 156. l. 12. for that r. tho. ibid. l. 27. dele
that. p. 157. l. 9. for Heminens r. Hemineus. p. 189. l. 13. for Liquid r.
Fluid.

TAB. I.

An Explication of Mr. Burgher's first Plate.
(a) The first Figure in the upper part of the Plate is a Man sounding a Flute
upon the Stairs leading to the Hall.

(b) The first Gate House.

(c) A Man standing about 30 Yards from the first Gate House, where observe
that the Sound is not then discernible at the first Letter (a), from whence the
Man sounds the Instrument, but at the Letter (e), which is another Gate House
standing as described in the Cut.

(d) Is a Man moving about 10 Yards nearer to the Gate House (e), and then the
Sound is not discernible from the Gate House (e), as it was before, but from
the first Letter (a) upon the Hall-stairs, where the Man is sounding the
Instrument.

These Phenomenon clearly demonstrate to us, that the Motion of Sound is
undulating or waving, and not in direct Lines; so that the Sound being
repercussed from (b) the first Gate House, the Undulation from thence passes by
the Man standing at (c), but is repercussed again from the Gate House (e), from
whence the Undulation of the Air being much greater, it there terminates at
(c), and that is the Centrum Phonocampticum, or Center of Sound in that place:
But the Man standing at (c) moving to the Man standing at (d), then the Sound
vanishes from the Gate House (e), but is very discernible from (a), where the
Man is sounding the Instrument; and the reason is very obvious, because the
Undulation of the Air passes by him standing at (d), but is repercussed again
from the Hall, from whence then it terminates at (d), which is the Centrum
Phonocampticum, or Center of Sound in that place.

The lower part of the Plate shows the Flashes of Lightning, the largeness of
the Hailstones that fell in that Storm and Hares and Birds that were killed by
them.

Note here, That the Explication of this Plate refers to the first Plate
Engraven by Mr. Burghers of Oxford, figured TAB. 1. and the Explication of Mr.
Townley's Micrometre, as likewise Mr. Brotherton's Experiments described in the
Book, relate to Mr. Burgher's second Plate, figured TAB. 2. where his various
Experiments concerning the Circulation of the Sap in Trees, are fully
described, being taken from the original, as likewise the Observations made by
the Micrometre; I thought it necessary not to insert these Cuts with the rest,
because they were those Gentlemen's, and not mine.


An Explication of the Cuts, contained in the second Plate:
Engraved by Mr Sturt.
THAT I might do justice to the Author of the Experiments, lest I should in any
wise mistake his Notion, or as I have expressed them, that they should not be
thoroughly understood, I have for the Readers further satisfaction, annexed to
those the Cuts of the various Barometres, and shall explain the different
Phenomenon, which I observed in them: But the Reader must here be pleased to
take notice, that the Gentleman's Name is not as is before asserted, Prideaux,
but John Patrick, who lives in Ship-Court in the Old Bailey, in London, near
Ludgate; where any Person at any time may see the various Experiments.

Fig. I. A Glass-Tube, weighing exactly a Pound, fixed to the end of a
Balance, as described in the Figure.

Fig. II. A pound Weight ballancing the opposite end of the Beam, so that the
two opposite ends of the Beam hang now in aequilibrio, that is they are equally
Balanced. To illustrate the Phenomenon observable in this Experiment, proceed
in the following Method.

Fill the Glass-Tube with Mercury, afterward immerse it in the Cistern, at the
bottom of the Tube, as described in the first Figure containing Mercury, the
Mercury then forms the Vacuity in the top of the Tube, and shows the Scale of
the Weather for that time. Now it is that the Tube, and the Mercury contained
in the Tube and Cistern, complete four Pounds. Hence it should follow, that
four Pounds suspended at the opposite end of the Beam, ought to be an equal
Balance to the Tube Cistern, and Mercury suspended at the other end of the
Beam, but quite different Phaenomena's are observable; for by only hanging two
Pounds and five Ounces at the opposite end of the Beam, the Mercury contained
in the Tube and Cistern, all of which weighing four Pounds, are immediately
boy'd up. Hence it is plain the Mercury contained in the Tube, does not
gravitate upon the Mercury contained in the Cistern, for if it did, the two
Pounds suspended at the opposite and of the Beam, could not have boy'd them up,
two Pounds being only half Balance to four, it must therefore necessarily
follow, that the Mercury in the Tube hangs pendulous from the Crown of the
Glass, and becomes of no weight below, whence it is plain, the Quicksilver does
not ascend in the Tube by a pressure from the Quicksilver contained in the
Cistern, for had it done so, it would then have followed, that as the external
Air pressed upon the surface of the quicksilver in the Cistern, and by that
forced upward the Mercury in the Tube, that as the Mercury ascended in the
Tube, the Balance should have fallen lower, but a quite contrary Observation
occurs, for as the Mercury ascends in the Tube, at the same time the Balance
rises also.

Fig. II. In a Glass-Tube four Foot long, containing half a Pound of
Quicksilver, without a Cistern, and the Mouth of the Tube wide open, the Column
of Quicksilver, contained in the Tube, is about thirty inches, the Quicksiver
in this Tube rises and falls 9 inches, and seven tenths prependicular, for fair
and foul Weather, and presages the change of Weather very nicely; there are
several other Tubes of a smaller size, which perform the same. This Tube
hanging at the bottom of a Balance, at whose opposite end was suspended a
Weight which was an Equilibirum to the other, had the external Air forced up
the Mercury in the Tube, it must thence have followed; that as the Mercucury
ascended, the Tube would have risen at the same time, but the contrary of this
is very evident, for though the Mercury contained in the Tube, arise to the
inches before mentioned, yet notwithstanding that the Tube never moves at all,
which Observation plainly Demonstrates, that the Mercury hangs pendulous in the
Tube, and only rises and falls according to the different Springs or
Elasticities of the Air, contained in the top of the Tube.

Fig. III. A Tube in the form of a Siphon, turned up 8 or 9 inches at the
bottom, when filled with Mercury its ascent or descent is but one inch and a
half.

Fig. IV. Another Tube of the same form at the bottom, but at the top in the
form of a Bicornu, or forked, which Branches are about four inches long, the
Mercury in this ascends three inches, which doubles the Scale to the former,
which shows the ascent of the Mercury, is from the various Elasticities of the
Air at the top of the Tube, and not from the pressure of the Ambient Air
contained in the Cistern, add to these one Head more, the Mercury will then
ascend one inch and a half higher, add two Heads it will rise three, and so on
proportionably, which Phenomenon, in my apprehension, amount to an absolute
Demonstration of the truth of this Hypothesis.

Fig. V. A plain Barometre, in this the Mercury only rises three inches.

Fig. VI. A Bicornu, or forked Tube. In this the ascent of the Mercury is the
same as in the other, which could not have been, had the Gravitation of the
Ambient Air caused the ascent of the Quicksilver, since according to that
Hypothesis, the Quicksilver in this should only have risen half an inch, since
the Cistern of each only contained one Pound of Mercury.

Fig. VII. A plain Tube open at the bottom, with a Column of Mercury about
thirty inches, in this the motion of the Quicksilver is very discernible at the
top, before it is moved at the bottom, which plainly shows the ascent or
descent of the Mercury, is from the Dilatation or Contraction of the Spring of
the Air contained in the top of the Tube.

Fig. VIII. By moving this Tube a little upwards, if the Air incline to a fair
Temperature, the Mercury immediately ascends in that small Tube, but if to
foul, as quickly subsides, but if upon that motion it neither moves upwards nor
downwards, it shows the Air at that time to be of a settled temper. Let the
Column of the Mercury be what it will, as for example twenty eight inches, when
it rises to the top of the Scale, it will then complete thirty one, which
Observation fully Demonstrates, that the Mercury contracts and dilates three
inches.

Fig. IX. Shows the Mercury moving thirty inches upon the Declivity, this sort
of Barometre shows the variation of the Weather much more exact than any other.
There is a Thermomete on the opposite side of it, and in the middle may
conveniently be fixed a Looking-Glass. To these Experiments may be added the
following Observations, which may not only be diverting to the curious, but
likewise may tend to the good of the Public and perservation of the Mariners.
It is Observable, that under the line, the Mercury scarce either rises or
falls, except about two or three tenths, and will not stir while they continue
there, the reason is, either that the extraordinary heat there, so rarifies the
Air in the Tube, or that the Etherial Particles there, are so clogged with the
Rains of the Mosoons, that the Spring of the Air is very much weakened, and
consequently therefore cannot elevate or depress the Mercury as in other
Chines. But when you come into the Latitude of fifteen degrees, either North or
South, the Mercury then will rise and fall an inch, when in thirty degrees it
rises two inches, when in forty five it rises then full three inches, when in
sixty degrees Latitude, it then shortens and returns to two inches, in seventy
five it shortens to an inch, in eighty one it neither rises nor falls a quarter
of an inch. By an accurate Observation of these, when rough tempests, and
interposing Clouds prevent the taking of an Observation exactly, the Mariner
may easily see in what Latitude he is in, and by that means may perhaps by
observing his Compass at the same time, to let him see whether he is North or
South; may not only frequently make his Voyages in a much shorter time, but
likewise preserve his Cargo. Which if thoroughly pursued, will not only be of
extraordinay use but Diversion also. Those Barometres were invented by the said
Mr. Patrick, who is willing both to show them to the curious, and supply any
Person with them; and methinks when both interest and pleasure Prompt to a
through Prosecution of the Experiments, it cannot be reasonably thought that a
suitable encouragement should be wanting. It is further remarkable, that in
those hot Climes, though the motion of the Mercury is so little, that in the
variation of the Weather it cannot but with great difficulties be observed; yet
by his Barometre, showing the motion of the Mercury upon the Declivity, by
having an account of the Latitude of the place, he adapts his Barometres to it,
by which the different motions of the Mercury are as discernible as in
different Latitudes.

This to be inserted after the Cuts of the Barometres.

An Explication of the Cuts contained in the Plate marked FIG. 1.
Fig. 1. Is one side of a terrene course Fluor or Spar, found in the Mines in
Derbyshire, in which are very discernible those Bodies which we commonly call
the petrified Bones of Fishes of various sorts, some like the Vertebrae of a
Flounder, and the horizontal Bones branching with 'em; it contains also very
lively representations of Feathers, Skrews, Stars, pieces of Shells, and the
Exuviae of Reptiles.

Fig. 2. Is the Reverse of the same Fluor, in which are very discernible those
Bodies which we commonly call petrified Cockles, Oysters, Pectunculi, Patellae,
the Nautilus (which is observable near the lower Verge of the Figure)
resembling in a great measure a Crescent; various Bodies like the Vertebrae, or
Entrochi, Snails, representations of Stars, and various striated Figures;
pieces of the Capsulae of Insects, like those of Butterflies; there are also
some Figures resembling the half part of a Worm, besides various Bones of
several small Fishes, and all petrified, or perfect Stone. Surely in these the
Disports of Nature are very remarkable, and to me it seems very evident, that
they are but the various Contextures of Salts, Sulphurs and Earths, and not the
Exuviae of Creatures deposited there by specific Gravity at the Deluge, when
the Earth was universally dissolved, as an eminent Author affirms; since this
stratum of Earth contains all those different Bodies, viz. Salts, Sulphurs and
Earths, the various mixtures of which show us diverting Representations, as
will be observed in other Tables; so that he who contends for these to have
been the Exuviae of those Creatures which they represent, must likewise account
for the Figures of Feathers and Stars observable in the same stratum, which I
do conjecture is not easily done, taking the whole Matter together.

In Fig. 3. Are two pieces of Marle petrified by the Seawater near Rossal in
Lancashire, which shelves from those (I)
Hills called Hagbur-Hills, where the Seawater frequently overflows, and in 7
Years time converts the Marle into a Grit or Freestone, which is used by the
People in Building, and is (I am very well assured) the best sort of Stone that
can be made use of. Of this I saw an Instance in a convenient Pile of Building
(commonly called Fox-Hall) belonging to Thomas Tildesley of the Lodge, Esquire. The
small Figure betwixt the two pieces of Marle, is a Shell which the Naturalists
style a Buccinum, the two Cavities delineated in the Marle, are the Capsulae in
which the Shell was included, but not petrified. Surely therefore were those
different representations of Shells in Rocks, the Exuviae of Shell-fishes, this
Shell ought also to have undergone the same Transmutation, since the Marle in
which it was found, was converted into a perfect Stone; but since it has not,
till more conclusive Arguments are offered for that Hypothesis, I cannot but
adhere to what I formerly asserted, viz. That the representations of Shells in
Rocks are but different Concretions of Sparrs, Salts, Bitumens, and terrene
Particles. The most remarkable Instance which I have seen of those kinds of
Petrifactions, was indeed at Gresham-College, which was a stony Figure, and as
I remember, of a gritty substance, representing that Shellfish called by the
Naturalists the Nautilus, or the Sailor, because it is said of this Fish, that
like the Carvel, (which is constantly observed in the Voyages to Virginia) it
will put its Body into that Posture, that it will sail with the Wind, and
thence doubtless had the Denomination of Nautilus, or the Sailing Fish. It Is
affirmed likewise of the same Fish, that there runs a Grit quite through the
Body of it, by which it can dive or sink it self at pleasure, and so preserve
it self, when pursued. Were this a Petrifaction of the real Fish, it is
doubtless one of the greatest Rarities in the World, that being an Indian Fish.
It does indeed bear a great resemblance to the Nautilus, yet falls infinitely
short of the natural one, neither the representations of the Crania, and the
Vertebrae branching from them, nor the Lines upon the different parts of the
Body being comparable to those upon the natural Nautilus. Hence it is evident
that in most kinds of Shells (I think I might say all) Nature frequently shows
her Disports, but at the same time falls infinitely short of those Creatures
that are represented.

Fig. 4. This is a Stone taken out of the Bowels of a Man in Lancashire, and
covered with Sponge.

Fig. 5. Is a species of Coral, the Superficies is tubulous and stellated; this
seems likewise partly to consist of a Fluor, and if (as in this it is evident)
Nature manifestly shows her Disports, viz. in the representations of Asterisms
in Miniature, why may she not as well do it in the representations of Shells in
Rocks.

Fig. 6. Is the Ophites, or Cornu Ammonis, that is, the Serpent-stone, or
Rams-horn, found in the Mines in Derbyshire. This Stone bears the Figure of the
Serpent, some of which I have seen so extremely exact, viz. those that come
from the Isle of Malta, that in those not only the external Figure of the
Viper, but the very Vertebrae, Head, Teeth and Eyes were most exactly
described, and far surpassed the Petrifactions of any Shell whatever. By the
same parity of Reason therefore they may urge these Stones to be petrified
Vipers, as they do those Shells to be petrified Fishes, which I presume none
will attempt, lest perhaps after an elaborate Hypothesis, he may at last find
the Snake in the Grass.

(2)

An Explication of the Cuts contained in the second Plate, marked FIG. 2.
Fig. 1. By some styled a species of the Bufonites or Brainstone, viz. from the
representations which it bears to a Toad, or as some would have it, to the
Cortical part of the Brain. He who here observes the curious Composure of the
Lines upon the surface of the Stone, and the infinite Number of small Striae
included in them, must acknowledge that the Disports of Nature are not to be
paralleled; for what can I else call 'em? surely no Man's Reason is so totally
eclipsed, nor can his Forehead be so extremely hard, as to assert this to be a
petrified Brain, if he does, I am sure I envy not the Product of his own.

Fig. 2. The Cylindrical Pyrites striated, found in the Kennel-Mines at Haigh
in Lancashire. Upon the superficies of this the striated Lines are drawn
exactly like those upon Cookle-shells; to me therefore (from what is before
observed) it seems very obvious, how the representations of those Shell-fishes
may frequently be found in Quarries.

Fig. 3. A petrified Oyster, found in Derbyshire.

Fig. 4. A Cookle petrified, found in Lancashire; this is likewise styled the
Pectunculus Auritus.

Fig. 5. One of the Echini petrified, with the representations of Trees upon
it, as may be observed by the Cut: Here again the Disports of Nature are very
remarkable, for surely none will affirm that ever Timber grew upon this small
Pebble.

Fig. 6. A Cockle of an irregular Figure, or Pectunculus, found in Lancashire.

Fig. 7. A Snail-shell petrified, found in the Copper-Mines in Lancashire.

Fig. 8. Moss petrified by a Water near Manchester, toward a place called the
Collyarsts.

Fig. 9. A Hair-Ball taken out of the Stomach of a Calf.

Fig. 10. A petrified Pectunculus with spiral Lines, found in Lancashire.

Fig. 11. A Glossopetra or Crow-bill, by some called the Sharks-tooth, found in
the Lead-Mines.

Fig. 12. A Glossopetra found in the like Mines both in Wales and Derbyshire.
Here again are extremely remarkable the Disports of Nature, for what else can
they be termed? Can I call 'em the Exuviae of those Creatures before mentioned?
surely he that has seen that large one in the Possession of Mr. Charleton of
the Temple, and the great variety of others, that are frequently found in this
Kingdom, some representing the Bills of Crows, others those of small Birds, and
will affirm them to be the Exuviae of those Creatures, has a Fancy
extraordinary luxuriant, and I doubt not but he will attempt to fly, and
convince the World, that Man is not that Creature Plato took him for, viz. an
unfeather'd Animal.

Fig. 13. A piece of a Pectunculus petrified, specifically higher than the
common Shell of that kind, by which it is plain that Shells at the Deluge
subsided not by specific Gravity.

Fig. 14. One of the same Kind.

Fig. 15. The Figure of a Cockle or Pectunculus, of a Flinty Substance.

Fig. 16. Another sort of the Echini petrified.

Fig. 17. A Pyrites in the form of a Pectunculus. From all which it is plain how
various the Disports of Nature are.

Fig. 18. A Stone taken out of the Kidneys of a Gentleman.

Fig. 19. A Stone taken out of his Bladder.

Fig. 20. A Shell taken out of the Bladder of a Hog, representing one of the
Curvirostra. Hence it is plain that Shells may be found where Fishes of that
Kind never were; and since the Formations of 'em, and the different
Representations of 'em in Rocks, may with no difficulty be otherwise solved,
can I see any necessity from those Phenomenon, to infer an universal
Dissolution of the Globe at the Deluge? So many unaccountable Absurdities
attending that Hypothesis.

Fig. 21. A Stone taken out of the Gallbladder of the beforementioned
Gentleman, viz. Major Ashurst of Ashurst in the County of Lancashire, Esquire.

(3)

An Explication of Cuts contained in the third Plate, marked FIG. 3.
The Spots in the three first Shells-shew the Germination of Pearls in Muscles,
that is, their Eruption from the Lamellae of the Shell; these I have observed
from their very first appearance, to their dropping from the Shell upon the
surface of the Fish.

Fig. 4. Is a Turbo: In this Shell I never saw any Fish, but I presume it quits
its Shell when by Storms it is forced from the Bottom of the Sea, where I do
conjecture is its natural Abode; these Shells therefore being found in Inland
Countries in firm Marle, do now fully confirm the Disruption of all the Strata
of the Earth at the Deluge.

Fig. 5. Is a Curvirostrum, found upon the Seacoasts in Cheshire, though most
commonly in India.

Fig. 6. Is a Pectunculu(...) with Azurine, circular Lines Interpolated.

Fig. 7. Is a Pap-Shell, or Patella.

Fig. 8. Is a Spar consisting of various Rhomboids, found in Derbyshire in the
Lead-Mines.

Fig. 9. Is a Buccinum, found upon the Seacoasts near Hillbree-Island in
Cheshire.

Fig. 10. Is a Trochus, found near the same Place.

Fig 11. Is a different sort of Buccinum from the former, found likewise near
Hillbree-Island in Cheshire.

Fig. 12. Is a third sort of Buccinum, found near the same Place.

Fig. 13. Is a Concha Veneris, found likewise upon that Coast, but most
commonly in India.

Fig. 14. Is the white feathered Lead-Ore, found in the Lead-Mines in
Lancashire and Cumberland; the Lines you see are Tubulcous, and striated like
those upon a Cockle, from which it is observable that Metals, as well as
Minerals, have their various Disports.

Fig. 15. Is a sort of Iron-Ore, with several globular Protuberances upon its
Superficies, and for that Reason vulgarly called the Button-Ore.

Fig. 16. Is a Fluor or Spar, of quadrangular, and several rhomboidal Figures.

Fig. 17. Is a Fluor found in the Lead-Mines, consisting of irregular and
triangular Figures.

Fig. 18. Is a different Kind of Fluor, found also in those Mines, constituting
six triangular Figures in one equilateral Quadrangle, and another broke off,
from the various Contextures of which it is easy to imagine how those different
Representations of Bones and Shells found in Rocks may be accounted for.

Fig. 19. Is the Buphthalmus or Ox-Eye, described in the Book.

Fig. 20. Is one part of a Bile-Stone taken out of the Bladder of an Ox.

Fig. 21. Is the other part of the same Stone, both of them resembling the Bark
of a Tree, in which the Disports of Nature are still further remarkable, which
I have now traced through Minerals, Metals, Quadrupedes, and Shells themselves,
I shall in another Chapter proceed to more Observations in Minerals, and some
in fossile Plants, and human Kind.

(4)

An Explication of the Cutts contained in the Fourth Plate, marked Fig. 4.
FIG. 1. A Cut of an Indian Canoo found upon the dreining of Martin-Meer in
Lancashire; it is very probable the Britains were taught the Use of these Boats
by the Asiatics who inhabited amongst them, (the Colonies of which People we
have before proved in these Parts) it being found in the Slutch under the
Water, adjacent to a River now styled Ribbel, formerly Bellisama, both which
are Phoenician and Armenian Words, and likewise a Rivulet branching from it
styled Savig. It is very likely those People in those Days might make use of
these Boats in Fishing and passing Rivers.

Fig. 2. and 3. These were found in a Moss not very remote from the Canoo; the
former is a Stone like that of a Whetstone, the other a Copper Instrument not
much unlike the Head of an Ax; the like to these Dr. Plot observed in
Staffordshire, but not of so large a Size; he looks upon them to be Roman Axes,
and that they might be lost in those Days by the Soldiers in their Passes; the
one he styles the Securis Lapidea, and the other the Securis Cuprea: But since
they are both of so small a Size, that it is not possible that a Beast should
be slaughtered by them, as may be observed in those collected by him, now in
the Musaeum in Oxford; and further, since that which he styles the Securis
Cuprea has not the Shape of the Roman Securis, which I have frequently observed
upon their Sacrificing-Altars, I cannot but conclude that he was certainly
mistaken, and do rather look upon 'em to be Indian Instruments, since the
Indians at this Day make use of such a kind of an Ax or Securis in forming
their Canooes and barking their Trees, which at this Day they call a Tomahowke.
These therefore being found under Ground near the same River where the Canoo's
were, to me it seems more probable that they were Instruments made use of by
the Asiatic Indians then residing in those Parts: And for the Stone, to wit,
Fig 2. I only take it to be the Cos or Whetstone for the Securis. These
considered together, I look upon 'em to be the greatest Relicts of Antiquity in
the Universe, and clearly confirm to us what has been alleged before in
Relation to the Asiatic Colonies in these Counties.

Fig. 4. The Sepia or Ink-Fish; he lies upon his Back, which shows his Spots
which are not very unlike those of a Trout, the white Specks shows the Bladder,
which contains the Ink, and the white Lines the Ductus's branching from it,
through which, by contracting the Bladder, he ejects his Ink, and darkens the
Water when he would hide or preserve himself; and it is wonderful to observe
the vast Quantities of Ink that one of these small Fishes will discharge, I
having writ several Letters with the Ink which I pressed from the single Bladder
of only one of them.

Fig. 5. Shows him dissected lying upon his Back.

Fig. 6. Shows him lying upon his Back not dissected.

Fig. 7. and 8. The Urtica Marina or Piscis Vaginalis, described before in the
Book.

Fig. 9. The Head of a young Hippopotamus or Seahorse, as he just shows his
Head above Water, as a Seaman described him to me who saw him, but it is not
very like that Head found under Moss in Lancashire, as will appear by the Cut
of it in the Sixth Plate.

An Explication of the Cutts contained in the Fifth Plate, marked Fig. 5.
THE Figure is the Head of a Stag of Canada found Eight Yards within Marle in
Lancashire, with the Vertebrae of the Neck adhering to the Head, one as large
again as this was found Four Yards under the Moss in the Meals in the same
County. These Creatures being Foreign to this Island, I think, sufficiently
demonstrate the Universality of the Deluge, but this being before fully
discussed in the Book, to that I refer you. The Explication of the Head is
included in the Plate, wherefore it needs not to be inserted here.

(5)

(6)

An Explication of the Cutts contained in the Sixth Plate, marked Tab. VI. of
Fishes.
FIG. 1. is a sort of Patella that lies betwixt the Vertebrae of the Back of a
Whale; this I found to be so by the Skeleton of one which I lately saw in
Smithfield in London. This Bone was found near Hillbree-Island in Cheshire. The
Use of it I take to be twofold; the First, to facilitate the Motion of that
immense Creature; the Second, to prevent its Vertebrae from grinding one upon
another, which, did not this interpose, probably they might do; so admirable is
the Conduct of Providence in the largest Creature in the Universe, as well as
in the minutest Insect.

Fig. 2. A Sturgeon taken in the Mersey near Warington in Lancashire, in a
Salmon-Fishing belonging to Mr. Thomas Patten of that Town.

Fig. 3. A Seal or Sea-Calf, called by the Dutch, Sea-hound, taken in the
River Ribbel in Lancashire, near that pleasant Seat called the Bank, the Seat
of that Honored Gentleman Thomas Fleetwood, Esquire

Fig. 4. is an exact Cut of that Hippopotamus or Sea-horse-head dug up under
Moss in Lancashire, which I frequently saw: This is a Creature peculiar to the
South-Seas, and never was by any Mariner whatever observed in these Seas which
encompass our Island: Unless therefore, a Man purely for the Sake of
Contradiction will oppose the Universality of the Deluge, I am apt to think, he
will scarce be able to account for all these surprising and different
Phaenomena's by any other Method; so that whoever considers the Account given
of the Deluge by Moses, will find him one of the greatest Philosophers, as well
as most faithful Historians that ever writ since the Creation, his Style being
throughout nervous, and his Thoughts sublime, insomuch, that as it is said,
Longinus, that great Master of Sublimity, could not but admire his Eloquence.

Fig. 5. is the Rana Piscatrix, or Sea-Toad found frequently in the River Wire
in Lancashire: It has an extreme wide Mouth, and is said to be a very voracious
Creature, it is not eaten as Food by the People, but I have seen them eagerly
devoured by the Sea-Gulls, and some of them almost peck'd to a perfect
Skeleton; the Rows of its Teeth are not much unlike those of a Shark; wherefore
I conclude its usual Food is upon small Fishes: It yields a great Quantity of
Oil but extremely faetid.

TAB. VI

An Explication of the Cutts contained in the Sixth Plate, marked Tab. VI.
relating to Pooles-Hole in Derbyshire.
THESE perhaps, are the most amazing Vaults in the Universe that are Natural
and not Artificial. These described in this Plate are Pooles-Hole and
Elden-Hole, the most terrible Chasm that I ever yet beheld: How therefore these
Cavities came to be formed in these Mountains is the next Thing to be enquired
into. It is very probable that these Cavities have continued in those
unpolished Mountains ever since that terrible Deluge, so fully before
discoursed of, and in my Sentiments absolutely demonstrates the Veracity of it;
for so far as I am able to conceive, it is not in the Power of Humane
Understanding to give any rational Account of those prodigious Cavities, but
either by Earthquakes or that general Inundation; but since there is no
Historian that gives an Account of any such Earthquake in this Island, and that
by the Experience of those which have happened in all preceding Ages in these
temperate Climates, we may reasonably suppose there never were any such. I
adhere therefore to the latter Hypothesis, and do suppose that at that
Universal Destruction, the Strata of the whole Globe were broke asunder, most
of them lying in a shelving or dipping Posture, as in all the Quarries we find
at this Day they do; it is probable therefore that they tossing to and fro in
the Flood upon the receding of the Waters, most of these Strata lying shelving,
sometimes Two opposite Summits convened and in that terrible Confusion wedged
themselves together, and by that means might easily form those prodigious
Arches and Cavities which in our Days we observe in these Mountains. These
Phaenomena's, if I mistake not, absolutely evince the Universality of a Deluge,
but on the other Hand as clearly convince us, that the World was not then
converted into a Fluid; for had the Globe then been an Universal Fluid, and all
Things subsided by Specific Gravity, as Dr. Woodward affirms, there being no
empty Space in the Fluid, as all Philosopers averr there was, was it possible
that ever such Cavities could have been formed? I am certain, if it was so,
whoever considers the Immensness of these void Spaces, must needs acknowledge
that the Fluid then retained the most prodigious Pores that ever it did since
the Creation. This Cavity entertains us with several very diverting Objects,
which shall be accounted for in their Order: And, indeed, considering the great
Diversity of Figures that may be observed in the different kinds of Sparrs in
these Places, and the great Affinity the Substance of the Alablaster Sparr has
to that of petrified Shells by the different Convening of these, does it at all
seem difficult to me to imagine how in those Mountains those Mineral Shells are
frequently found? But I must own they are sometimes so extremely like those
Shell-Fishes which they represent, that to a vigorous Fancy they afford Subject
sufficient to write ingenious Novels.

A. The Cut of the Woman who had Horns, whose Picture I saw at Whalley-Abby in
Lancashire.

B. The Child that was born of a Lancashire Gentlewoman with the Representation
of a Flame upon its Body, the Mother being affrighted with that terrible Flame
when the City of London was burned.

C. The Representation of Plants in Rocks in a black Bituminous Substance
imprinted in that from the Rock it self, like that of an Impression in Wax from
a Signet; the Rock seems to be a coarse sort of Marble or Limestone, but
extremely hard: Instances of this kind I have seen at Heseham near Lancaster,
likewise at Latham near Ormskirk, and in the Coal-Mines near Townley in the
same County; so that in Vegetables, as well as Shells, the Disports of Nature
are very obvious. From these Instances it is very demonstrable that the Globe
at the Deluge was not dissolved, for had it been then a Fluid, that Bituminous
Matter in which the Plants are delineated could not have taken an Impression
from the Rock, since according to that Hypothesis, the Rock at that time must
be a Liquid also; and consequently therefore could not give an Impression to
the Bitumen. The Observation may be further illustrated by a very familiar
Instance: Let us suppose an Impression made upon Wax by a Signet, take another
Piece of Wax, and by the Heat of a Flame reduce it to a Fluid, apply this to
the Wax that has the Impression upon it; it is true, indeed, the Heat of the
melted Wax will likewise turn the other Fluid, but at the same time it erases
the Impression; so that it is plain, that had the Rock been then a Fluid, it
could not have given an Impression to the Bitumen, unless you will imagine the
Rock both above and under the Bitumen, to indurate before that which is both
Chimerical and Absurd.

D. Shows the Entrance into the Cave.

E. The Figure of the Lion formed by the Dropping of the Water from the Top of
the Sides and Top of the Arch.

F. The Pillar commonly called, the Queen of Scots Pillar, consisting of an
Alabaster Sparr, formed after the same Manner.

G. The Figure of a Humane Corpse, formed likewise by the Dropping of the Water
from the Top of the Arch and the Sides.

H. The Sparry Globe called the Font, in the Top of which there is a small
Cavity constantly filled with Water; this consists of various Lamellae
inveloped one within another, and is likewise formed by the Dropping of the
Water.

I. Is another Globular Sparry Substance, commonly called by the Natives, One
of Mr. Cotton's Haycocks, formed after the same Manner.

K. Is that Sparry Substance hanging at the Top of the Arch, commonly called,
the Flitch of Bacon, formed also by the Water, which is that kind of Sparry
Matter styled, the Stalactites, as are all the rest described in this Plate.

L. Are those Sparry Substances hanging at the Top of the Arch, commonly
called, the Chairs, formed after the same Manner.

M. Is the Place called, the Needle's Eye, which is a small Hole that goes
quite through the Rock, so that from thence a Person standing with a Light to
the Person that stands at the Bottom near the Water; the Light seems to
resemble a Star. The Current through the Cavity is in a great measure made by
the Dropping of the Water, and likewise the Fret-Work that resembles a Choir.

An Explication of the Cutts contained in the Seventh Plate, marked Tab. VII.
relating to the Devils Arse, near Castleton, in Derbyshire, etc.
THE First Figure on the Right Hand is a Piece of the Nautilus, found in
Lancashire; in this the Disports of Nature are wonderful, as may be observed by
the various Figures included in the Shell, and the curious Lines upon its
Superficies.

The Second Figure is the Cheshire Woman who had Horns; an Account is given of
her in the Plate, so that a further Relation needs not to be inserted here.

The lower Part of the Plate is that wonderful Arch, commonly called, the
Devil's Arse, near Castleton, in Derbyshire, the Area where the Persons and the
Houses are, where a great many of the poor Inhabitants live, is within the
Arch, and reaches to the first Water which runs cross it, as you may observe by
the shadowed Figure stretching in that Line.

The Second shadowed Figure is the Second River, and then the Rock opens again,
as may be observed in the Figure.

The Third shadowed Figure is the Third and Last Water, where the Rock and the
Water closes, and then you cannot pass further.

TAB. VII.


The next Thing to be enquired into, is whence in this prodigious Cavity these
Subterraneous Rivers have their Origin: It is observable in several of the
Mountains in Derbyshire, that at the Bottoms of the Mountains there are several
Cavities, which the Inhabitants call Swallows, into these run several Rivulets
of Water, but where the Water has its Exit is not known: It is therefore my
Opinion, that in large Subterraneous Cavities, as in that at Castleton, several
of those Rivulets convening, it is from them these Subterraneous Rivers are
formed, and am apt to think, that those Springs which issue out of the
Mountains in such rapid Currents, as some near Castleton do, are from them also.

From all these the wonderful Disports of Nature, are not only discernable, as
is fully demonstrated in Minerals, Metals and Plants, but in Animals also; Why
therefore some Persons should spin out such elaborate Hypotheses to amuse
Mankind, when these Phaenomena's may otherwise be familiarly enough solved, I
cannot apprehend? But those Heads having been fully enough discussed before, I
shall not therefore recapitulate, but shall desire each Person to make his
Observations accurately, and weigh the Whole together; and could heartily wish
some Persons of no mean Character, would not violently espouse Hypotheses which
are not warrantable, and not fly into violent Passions when they are not
opposed in any thing, but what is not consonant to Experiments and Natural
Observations. How these Gentlemen may resent these I am in no wise uneasy, and
whatever their Opinions may be of themselves is not my Business to enquire
into, but when from Persons of Learning, in Answer to the Experiments I fully
tried, I received no Answer but Opprobrious Calumnies and Supercilious
Arrogance; let those Gentlemen be assured that I am ready to justify what I
have recited, and when ever they think convenient to make and Reply, either to
them or these, if any thing material be offered, or more probable Arguments be
produced, I will either acquit my self or fairly drop the Argument, for I am
not so bigoted to any mean Performances of my own, but when more probable
Conjectures are offered, can easily relinquish them, but in those Matters which
I have recited as Experiments or Observations, I dread not their Criticisms.

TAB: YE I. OF BIRDS.

An Explication of the Plate of Birds, marked Table the First, of Birds.
1. THE Sea-Crow; its Food is upon Shellfish, and its manner of Feeding is
very wonderful, as is observed in the Book. These Birds are said to breed in
the Hollows of Rocks in the Isle of Man, and though common upon the Seacoasts
in these Counties, yet never known to breed here; their Flesh is not grateful,
and therefore not eaten.

2. The Brasilian Magype; this was driven upon the Coasts by the violent Hale
Storm, described in Mr. Burgher's first Plate, and found dead upon the
Seacoasts in Lancashire.

3. The Tropic Bird, driven in at the same time.

4. The copped Wren that fed the Dragoons near Durton, in Lancashire, of which
an Account is given in the Chapter of Birds.

5. The Asprey or Sea-Eagle. See likewise an Account of that in the same
Chapter.

6. The Barnacle or the Anser Bassanus; in these, as in other Geese, there are
Males and Females, and they breed after the same manner, as may be observed in
the Chapter of Birds, that Species of the Shellfish, they have formerly been
said to proceed from, is a Species of the Pectunculus, resembling that
contained in the second Plate, Number 15. which I found in the Copper-Mines in
Lancashire: These Shells are usually licked up by the Ships in the Gulf of
Florida, and do not breed in these Seas; which Phenomenon still further
confirms to me, these Petrifactions to be nothing but different Concretions of
Fluors, Sulphurs, Salts and Earths, and may justly be styled, Lapides sui
generis.

FINIS.
The Author's Vindication of himself, from some Calumnies lately cast upon him.
SO strangely Opinionative are some Persons, and fondly linked to the Wild
products of their own teeming Genius, that an Ocular Demonstration to these
amounts not to a thorough Conviction; nay, so prodigiously overweening of
those are their Sentiments, it is so far from attaining of it, that against the
most evident Truths they wilfully shut their Eyes; and fall into such
extravagant Expressions, that they almost exceed the rudest Offals of
Billingsgate, and that for no other reason, but because I do not, as they
suppose, that at the Deluge the Globe was Universally dissolved, or, as some
will have it, converted into a Pudding, and instead of Plumbs, was larded with
Cockles, which are since petrified: Those Gentlemen may be assured, I shall not
concern my self with their Missionaries; but when they themselves judge it
convenient to make a Reply that is material* I shall then be at their Service.
Some of these have endeavored to traduce me, both at the Engravers, and the
Press, but have, in some measure, been disappointed in their Expectations: They
have indeed, out of their unexpected Candor, been pleased to acknowledge, that
there was somewhat of Style in the Work; but for that reason were pleased to
allege, it was not my own; in Answer to that, I have only this to say, in
Vindication of my Self, that in Composing the Work, I had not the least
assistance from any Person whatever; and have not in any wise been defective to
make my self so far Master of the Language that I write in, as to adapt my
Expressions to the subjects that I treat off.

How far these kind of Actions are reconcilable, either to Justice, Honor, or
Learning, I freely submit to the common Censures of Mankind; nay, even to their
own Sentiments. And would gladly be informed, by what unaccountable Methods
they have so totally Monopolized all natural Learning, that the freedom of
thought shall not be allowable to another. Notwithstanding their wonderful
assurance, I will once again venture to affirm, their Petrefactions, many of
them, at least, are not so exquisitely like the Shells which they represent,
but we may as reasonably suppose, that the Espousers of this Fiction, may be as
much mistaken as the Bird which peck'd upon the Grapes drawn by Zeuxes: And am
apt to think, that upon a serious Consideration of the whole matter, The one
will be found as starving an Entertainment as the other.

It Is true some of these Gentlemen have very choice and curious Collections of
Natural Curiosities, and in their Collections of petrified Shells, as they term
them, even outstrip all the Trophies of Caligula, when he made that vast
Collection upon the Belgic Shore; but if these Gentlemen cannot be certain,
that those Shells are the Exuviae of those Fishes they take them for, they do
but impose upon their own Judgments, and only entitle themselves to a spurious
Offspring; wherefore considering the many absurdities that inevitably arise
from that Hypothesis that Learning is built upon, I shall not expatiate upon
them here, but leave the further disquisition of those matters to the Unbiassed
Readers.

This to be incerted, as a Postscript, at the end of the First Book, after the
Explication of the Cuts.

THE Natural History OF LANCASHIRE, CHESHIRE, AND THE Peak in DERBYSHIRE. BOOK
II.
CHAP. I.
Of Quadrupeds, unusual Phoenomena in Human-Kind, of Persons noted for Arts,
Professions, and Acts of Charity.

THAT there should be a Species of Quadrupeds in these Parts, different from
others in England, is scarce to be imagined, I shall therefore only take notice
in this Treatise of what are most remarkable amongst us; In a Park called
Stiperly in Cheshire, belonging to John Legh of Adlington, Esquire from which
Family my Ancestors had the Honor to descend, are an unusual kind of Sheep;
they are of a larger size than most others, and bear rather a kind of Hair,
than Wool. They have all Four Horns, and some of them of an Extraordinary
size, the Two Horns next the Neck, are erect like those of Goats, but larger,
the other next the Forehead are curved, like those of other Sheep, whether or
no these be a particular Species of Sheep, or perhaps might come at first by
Goats and Sheep engend'ring together I cannot determine, their Flesh is
agreeable enough, yet different from other Mutton, yet more resembling that
than Goats Flesh; Not far from thence lies Lime-Park, belonging to Peter Legh
of Lime, Esquire in which there are a great Number of Red-Deer, of which this is
remarkable, that once a Year the Keepers drive them together upon a grass Plain
before the Gates of the Hall, a thing, I believe, not practiced upon these Wild
Creatures in any other part of the World; The wonderful consent there is
betwixt the Horns and Testicles of these Creatures is scarce to be imagined, as
likewise their Yearly casting their Horns, it is most certain if these Deer be
gelded before the Eruption of their Horns, they never produce any afterward,
and if before the usual time of casting them, they then never cast those they
are possessed of; which Phoenomenon to me seems to argue, that the principal
occasion of casting their Horns is, that about Rutting time their Testicles are
more pregnant than at other Seasons, hence their Blood being raised to an
higher Ferment, nay indeed to so touring a Pitch that Nature it self is almost
unhinged, hence the Blood Vessels being distended beyond their Natural Tone,
are incapable to contain any longer, but are forcibly burst asunder, by the
disruption of these, the Horns, which abound with them, are dispoiled of all
possible Communication of Nourishment, by which means the Nerves are rendered
Weak and Languid, the Horn consequently by its own Weight declines, and falls
off; these Horns afford us in Chemical Preparations, an Oil, and a Spirit,
which is indeed nothing but the Volatile Salt dissolved in Phlegm, and a
Volatile Salt, which are all of them of Extraordinary use in Languors, and
Convulsive Distempers, or in any Malady of the Nerves; It is affirmed, by the
Learned Dr. Brown in his Travels in Hungary, that in Servia where the Plague
frequently rages, they find no better Antidote against it than Eating the Flesh
of these Creatures, for which there may be this Reason, it is probable the
Flesh of these Creatures, contains a greater quantity of Volatile Salt than
other Flesh may, by which means it becomes a more generous Food, and by a more
than an Ordinary Volatilized Chyle, prevents Coagulation of the Blood which
causes that Pestilental Distemper, those Volatile Alkalies, destroying the
other Saline, Acid particles that make the Coagulum; The Horns of these
Creatures by their own Effluvia are Convertible into a Jelly, which is of great
use to Emaciated Persons, and a noble Food to any, it may be it was from this
Preparation that Monsieur Papin received the first hint of his New Digester, by
which he Converted Bones into Marrow by their own Effluvia, which I have seen
frequently Experimented by that Excellent Chemist Christopher White of Oxford,
Operator in the Public Laboratory of that most Flourishing University; it is
affirmed by the Huntsmen, that these Creatures when they find themselves
Encompassed by the Dogs, and no possibility of escape, will weep most
Mournfully, a sight that to a Tender Spirit would damp the Divertisement of
that days Recreation, so endearing a Principle is Life to all Creatures.

In the Park near Manor in Lancashire are spotted Deer; There are some of
these likewise in Dunham-Park, belonging to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Warrington in the County of Chester. In a Park near Bury in Lancashire are Wild
Cattle, belonging to Sir Ralph Ashton of Middleton, these I presume were first
brought from the high-lands of Scotland. They have no Horns, but are like the
Wild Bulls and Cows upon the Continent of America, of which Monsieur Hennipin
has given us a full account in his Travels up the River Mesashippi, upon the
Banks of which great Herds of these are frequently seen Grasing, and are Hunted
by the Indians, as the Deer by us; The defect of Horns in these Beasts brings
into my Mind a very remarkable Phoenomenon of one Alice Green, whose Picture I
have seen in Whalley-Abbey in Lancashire, this Woman had Two Horns which grew
out at the back part of her Head, they grew backwards like those of Rams, and
were about three Inches long, these she cast once in three Years, and had
always intolerable pains before the Horns broke out, whence came this Lusus
Naturae, or Praeternatural accident, is, I think, a Phenomenon not to be
accounted for, unless at the time of Coition some such Monstrous Idea might
then be imprinted on the Faetus, which is the most probable Conjecture I can
make on this point, since we have several Instances of strange Impressions thus
Effected, a Remarkable one is mentioned in Van Helmont, where he tells us, of a
Woman who Dreamed she was with Child of a Cherry-Tree, which made such a
wonderful Impression upon the Faetus, that in the Palms of the Hands, instead
of those Lines usual to Mankind, were to be seen the Figures of the Leaves, and
Boughs, and Cherries, several other accounts of this Nature might be produced,
which would too much swell this Chapter to recite them, I shall only insert one
more which was upon a Woman near Clitheral in Lancashire, this Woman when with
Child was affrighted with Fire, and upon the Body of the Infant, was very
discernable a Lively representation of Flames, this was Communicated to me by
Dr. Parsons of Preston, and I am satisfied in the Truth of it; how these
representations of things, and sometimes the things themselves, are caused by
Ideas imprinted by Mothers upon the Faetus, is in my Judgment a matter that may
admit of various Hypotheses, but not any that will amount to a Demonstration,
for how is it solvable by any Rules of Mechanism, that the Faetus which by a
few Vessels adheres to the Womb of the Parent, that an Artery and Vein, which
only carry and reconvey Blood to its subsistence, should ever perform these
amazing Phoenomena, it is certain the Faetus has no Communication with the
Mother any way, than only in the Chyle, which is separated by the Glandules in
the Placenta Uterina which cannot possibly be imagined to produce these
effects, how therefore the motions of the Animal Spirits penetrate through all
these recesses of Nature, so far as I am able to apprehend, surpasses human
Conception, and is indeed only solvable by him who knows no Limits, but Acts
according to his own Almighty Will and Pleasure: The Atheist here may have room
enough for Contemplation, and then let him tell us, how an Artery carrying only
a little thoughtless Blood, and a Vein returning what is not spent upon the
nourishment of the Embrio, let him tell us, I say, how by an Accidental
concourse of Monades or Atoms, it is possible these things should be effected;
but since I am apt to think he cannot define me what thought is, he may here
acquiesce, and needs not blush to acknowledge his Ignorance, but may conclude
with the Royal Psalmist, that it is, the Fool has said in his Heart, there is
no God, and indeed only he.

Lancashire chiefly in these Parts is most remarkable for breeding Cattle, of a
size more than Ordinary large, particularly about Burneley, and Maudsley, from
which places I have known Cattle sold at extraordinary Rates, an Heifer
sometimes amounting to Fifteen or Twenty Pounds, the ground they Feed upon is
usually upon an Ascent, and the Grass shorter than in lower Grounds; The usual
method is to buy Calves in those Parts, when they are about One Year Old, then
by removing them to a more Fruitful Pasture, they arrive to a larger Pitch than
usual; The like is Observable in Horses, and hence it is, that in Yorkshire,
they generally breed the best of that Species.

Let us here add something concerning the Superfaetation of Hares, which though
not always, yet is frequently observed, that in the Uterus at the same time,
Young ones of different Productions are discovered, one perhaps no larger than
a small Plumb, another about half its due size, and a third at perfect
Magnitude, I have often seen here the Caesarian Birth, that is a Young one
taken alive from the Do ripped open, preserved and nourished for a considerable
time afterward, Phoenomena not unlike to these Superfaetations, are observable
in various Plants, especially the Orange-Tree, upon which are Blossoms, and
Fruits of different growths at the same time. Let us enquire into the Rationale
of this, and in the first place consider, that these Creatures have frequent
Coitions after Conception, and then why may we not easily suppose, according to
our former Hypothesis, that the Semen equally at one time, as an other, after
it is injected into the Uterus, may be absorbed there by the Capillary
Arteries, and by them be conveyed, and deposited into the Ova, and cause a
Faecundation, and since there are various Ova's in the Ovaria, it does not at
all seem difficult to me how Superfaetation happens; But rather indeed wonder
there are not the same effects in Female Human-Kind, the same circumstances
concurring; But some may object against this Hypothesis, and allege that
impregnation is not performed by the Semen thrown by the Mass of Blood within
the Ova; But that only a Gas, or Aura of the Seed is by the Cornua conveyed to
the Ova, and so produces Faecundation. But to these I answer, since with small
Bellows at the end of the Tubes, I have frequently attempted to force only Air
within the Ovaria, but could never effect it, and since the Ovaria are likewise
involved in a double Membrane, I do not see how in the least that Hypothesis
can be defended, but since the Cornua, or Horns of the Womb, convey the Faetus
from the Ovaria thither, to assert too that they likewise carry the Semen to
them, to me seems very Preposterous; besides Dr. Harvey assures us, he has
often immediately after Coition, dissected the Womb and its Cornua, but never
in those could discover the least relict of the Semen, which probably he might
have done, had it been only thrown there to transmit its Aura into those
Organs, to convey it to the Ovaria; again, if we consider the sudden
Indisposition of Persons after Conception; The several Hereditary Distempers
that attend many Births, as the Gout, Stone, Dropsy and Consumption, can we
imagine how these causes should be solved, unless we suppose the very substance
of the Seed to be deposited in the Ova; for how an Aura should ever bring these
about to me is unaccountable; But if, as some defend, Faecundation is effected
by Animalcules floating in the Semen, and that the Ova are only recipients to
them, I would then appeal to those Modern Virtuosi, that espouse this Doctrine,
to solve the causes of Hereditary Distempers, and enquire of them if these
small seminal Gentlemen, have not frequent fits of the Gout, and are not
sometimes Hydropical and Consumptive: But how Rational this is to imagine, I
leave it to the World to judge, but shall rather conclude my self, that the
very substance of the Seed is deposited in the Ova, and that as that is
tainted, so likewise is the Faetus, and hence Hereditary Distempers arise. But
to return to the Hare, it is observable those bred upon Morasses, and Parts
adjacent to the Seacoasts, are usually the swiftest, though of the smallest
size; But this their Velocity may, I presume, proceed in some measure from
their Diet, which as I have frequently found by dissection, is a short dry
Grass, and sometimes the Tops of Heaths, and Barks of Trees, which being
excellent Antihydropics, may occasion the dryness of their Constitutions, and
in some measure their swiftness, by absorbing the Serum, or watery Parts of the
Blood, by which the Muscles consequently must have less pressure upon them, and
doubtless the Lymphaducts are less numerous in these than in other Creatures.
As to their different Colors it is observable those in colder Climes, as in
Russia, and the High-lands of Scotland, are White or Gray, but in other
Countries they are of a Brown Color, these variations of Colors by the
Chemists are solved by their Experiments on Sulphur, which by different degrees
of heat turns White or Red, as it is more or less Exalted, and considering the
Down of these Creatures, abounds with a great quantity of Sulphur; I think the
conjecture not irrational. Distempers most incident to this Animal are commonly
in the Liver, which are Hydatides, or Blisters upon its Superficies, proceeding
doubtless from a Rupture or breach of the Lymphatick Vessels in that part,
occasioned by violent running, and afterward the coldness of the Earth too
suddenly closing the Pores, and Obstructing perspiration, hence those Vessels
become distended beyond a natural Tone, and Burst; This Creature is highly
commended by the Germans to be a Healthful, Noble, and Generous Food,
particularly by Ab-Heers, of which in his Spadacrene you may see a full and
large account. But before I close my observations upon Quadrupeds, I thought it
not a miss to insert two Instances, they being not only unusual, but of great
Importance, the first is of two Persons, who in a small Cottage near Bury in
Lancashire, dyed of the small Pox, during the whole time of their Sickness, Two
Cats for the most part lay upon the same Beds with the Patients, in a little
time after these Persons had Expired; Both the Cats fell Sick, with the usual
Symptoms in the Apparatus of the small Pox, and so regularly proceeded to the
State of Eruption, and Maturation, with Pustules exactly like those in
Human-kind; at last those subsided, and soon afterward both the Cats died. By
this instance it is evident the small Pox is not a Distemper peculiar only to
Human-kind; But why to Mankind more than other Creatures, is the next thing we
are to enquire into? The Decision of this Question depends upon two Topics; The
first is the particular Composition of the Blood in Mankind, differing from
that in other Creatures, and consequently those not so subject to this
Distemper; That the Blood in Humankind does differ from that in Quadrupeds, is
evident from the different Proportion of muriatick, fixed, and volatile Salts,
that may be obtained from it, and this probably may proceed from their variety
of Food and Liquors, and for that reason, I think, it would be highly worth the
time of our Modern Virtuosi, to take an exact Proportion in each of those, and
to observe the Distempers the most incident to different Creatures, as likewise
those that are Carnivorous, and those that Feed only upon Plants, and
distinguish them accordingly; its most certain, it is a particular Crasis in
the Blood, when Man is disposed to receive this Distemper, some Persons I have
known conversant with People in the small Pox, and yet Twenty Years afterward
have themselves been infected and dyed of them, when therefore by a particular
Crasis the Blood is so disposed to receive the Morbisick particles of the Air,
partly taken into the Body by the intromitting Pores, and partly by
inspiration, it is then by the various concretions of these the Serum of the
Blood is converted into a Poisonous Ichor, which by its acrimony separates the
Cutis from the Cuticula, and forms those Pustules we Name small Pox.

A second reason why Man is peculiarly subject to this Distemper, may be the
variety of the Orifices in the Miliary Glands of the Cutis, which doubtless in
Mankind, are much different from those in other Creatures, it must therefore
necessarily follow, that where there are not proper secretory Vessels to
receive such particular Coagulations, those Creatures cannot, as Man, be alike
subject to equal Distempers; These may suffice for a Decision of the Question
proposed, I shall therefore in the next place proceed to the second Instance,
and that is of a Mastiff-Dog; he belonged to the Honorable Peter Bold, of
Bold, Esquire this Dog still attended his Master in his Chamber, during a tedious
Sickness, being a Consumption of the Lungs, after this generous Gentleman
Expired, and his Corpse removed, the Dog almost each moment entered the Room,
making a Mournful, whining Noise, and prosecuted his researches for several
days, through all the Rooms of the House, but in vain; He then retired to his
Kennel, from whence he would not be Courted, but refusing all manner of
Sustenance, died there; of this I was an Eyewitness, being through the whole
course of the Distemper concerned for that Honorable Gentleman; what some may
Bogle at to call Reason, I know not, but, I think, a deeper Sense of Sorrow and
Gratitude, could not be shown in any Creature whatever. Which brings me in the
next place to consider what the Philosophers call the Knowledge of Brutes,
concerning this there are various Opinions, the Platonists did not seem to
doubt of it, and for that reason when they defined Man, to distinguish him from
other Creatures, only styled him an unseather'd Animal.

The Pythagoreans run into a wilder extreme, and were so fully possessed with
the Opinion of the Souls of Brutes, that they believed there was a mutual
Transmigration of Souls. And hence surely we could not blame the Poet, when he
says, the mighty Thunderer transformed himself into a Bull. But however, though
without question there is something of a Spiritual distinguishing being, that
actuates the Body of a Brute by the assistance of the Animal Spirit; yet the
before recited Hypothesis of Pythagoras, in bringing their Souls upon the level
with that of Man, I look upon to be groundless; since Man is the only Creature
in the World that has a reflex thought, and can abstract from matter, and that
has any Notion of a Deity; But alas! how imperfect would that be, had not God,
out of his Infinite goodness, been pleased to communicate himself to us by
Revelation, as we may find by too many Instances amongst the poor Americans,
who though they have Notions of a Being Infinitely Good, yet have likewise the
same of one equally Bad; and therefore Worship one through Love, and the other
through Fear. Knowledge in Brutes by the Peripatetics is styled natural
Instinct: But since they are not able to define what that is, it is only to
explain an obscure Matter by one more dark. I shall therefore pass it by as not
material to this Subject. But the Cartesians Quadrupeds are looked upon as a
most complete Piece of Clock-Work, or Automala, moved only as the Object makes
an Impression on the Organ, but since these Creatures are certainly endued with
Thought, and Memory, which can never be explained by Rules of Mechanism, that
Hypothesis is but ill grounded; Nay, they are so far from explaining these two
faculties by their Problems in Mechanics, that they are at a full stop, even
by those Rules. To unfold to me the more easy instance of voluntary motion,
Steno, Charleton, Borellus, and Crone, have made Ingenious Conjectures on this
Point, yet are defective when they come to examine the main business on those
Notions; Epicurus, Lucretius, and Mr. Lock, refine, and explain, the Knowledge
of Brutes, by Images, and Ideas, and these they make either Simple or Complex,
and those imprinted upon the Organ by the Object, and thence it is through a
long experience of those Ideas, they are able to think and distinguish, and in
that, as they would have it, consists their Knowledge: Now I would only enquire
of these Learned Gentlemen, a solution of one Question, whether or no these
Ideas imprinted on the Organ, by the Object, be Material or Immaterial; if they
allow them Material, it is impossible but by such a weight of matter, through
the whole Series of a Creatures Life, imprinted on the Organ, the Organ must
unavoidably be too oppressed even to distinguish at all: It is plain the Eye, for
a small Season, may view the Sun, but by a pressure of its Particles upon it,
it soon becomes dim, and undescerning; But to this they may reply, that an
Impression on the Organ is made equally as that of the Effigies of a Signet on
Wax; But this will appear as liable to absurdities as the former, for from the
same object on the same Organ, still new Impressions must succeed, hence the
Organ in a common tract of time, must necessarily be worn out and destroyed,
and consequently not be able to distinguish any thing; for doubtless if the
Object could at any time stamp any Impression or Idea, it must Caeteris paribus
still do so, and then the consequence is unavoidable: But if they allege these
Ideas or Images are Immaterial, then a Soul or Spiritual being follows
evidently in those Creatures, sufficient to actuate the Body, and be capable of
some degrees of Knowledge; this allowed, there is no occasion for these Images,
or Ideas, for why should Nature produce any thing in vain; Beings without a
necessity are never multiplied: And now after all the Blaze that Elaborate
Piece of Human Understanding has procured in the World, from what is observed,
it is easy to learn, that it amounts to no more than trifling in Philosophy,
and refining on the Godhead; and perhaps to too many unwarily caught, has been
of pernicious consequence; I have insisted the longer on this subject, because
this Book, though so Universally received, if rightly weighed, is no more than
what Mr. Hobbs has before alleged; I shall therefore Examine his Hypothesis,
that being the Basis of the former; Mr. Hobb's Notion was, That all Beings were
material, and that betwixt Matter and Nothing there was no distinction; which
notion, no doubt, gave hint to that great Man before mentioned to form his
Ideas; how far Mr. Hobb's Hypothesis is consistent with reason, for the
following Reason I submit to the Judgment of the World: In the first place let
him tell me how Matter can think; if he be there at a loss, his Notion
unavoidably falls; but to say it can, is only to assert Matter acting upon
Matter, and then I would know what it is that judges of that action Thought,
when it abstracts from all material Objects; This cannot be supposed to be a
being consisting of Matter, for then it could not judge of the Action for the
Reasons before alleged: It is true in Mathematical Argumentations we have not
Ideas of any Beings, but what consequently we must suppose to be Material, for
our apprehensions of them are under some determinate Figure, and so
consequently Material, because that is a Quality, viz. Extension, inseparable
from Matter: But since to form adequate Conceptions of immaterial Beings,
surpasses both our Intellects and Organs, it does not therefore follow that
there are not any such Beings, no more than since a Mathematician cannot by the
Rules of Arithmetic demonstrate why one Grain should become five hundred,
which notwithstanding is obvious, and familiar enough. It is strange such
absurdities should be put upon the World; methinks the Being that has no
dependence upon the Pen I write with, sufficiently evinces me to the contrary:
Not that I speak this out of a conceit of any mean performances of my own, but
only that it is actuated by a Being independent from it, by which I am able to
demonstrate I am a Rational Creature. I proceed next to Dr. Willis's Hypothesis
concerning the Souls of Brutes, which is, that they are an actual fire, I shall
endeavor to examine his Reasons, and Conjectures relating to that Opinion, and
then lay down some Arguments why it cannot be so; in order to which, I shall
examine the various Species of Fires, and their different Pabulums, and shall
then, from the Experiments he recites, see how far they are convincing upon
that Topic: of Fires there are various sorts, but all of them may be reduced to
these generical Heads, viz. Aerial, Terrestrial, or Animal, the Aerial ones are
those of Lightning, shooting of Stars, flying Serpents, the twins Castor, or
Pollux, called by the Spaniards Corpse le Saint, and these frequently fix upon
the Masts and Sails of Ships; the Seamen by their long continuance, or quick
disappearance, will pretend to Prognosticate the future Weather, it is
impossible from any experiment he could make upon these in the Air Pump, that
he should form any Corollaries, and since these no ways refer to this business,
I shall not farther enlarge upon them. The Experiments recited by the
Honorable Esquire Boil and the Doctor, are upon common Fire in the Air Pump,
which they found to extinguish as they drew out the Vitrous parts of the Air,
and the same thing happening to Animals in the Air Pump, the Doctor hence
concludes the Souls of Brutes to be an actual Flame; and had he lived to have
seen the Phosphorus prepared from the Blood, I question not but his pregnant
parts would highly have improved that Notion; in answer to his Hypothesis I
would gladly know of any Man, whether it is possible Fire should think, or that
voluntary motion can be solved by that Element, when it is by the Laws of
Nature confined only to one motion, and that is Ascension, as the Psalmist
Philosophically, and truly words it, as Naturally as the Sparks fly upwards,
and these granted, it necessarily follows the Hypothesis is groundless, because
in Brutes there is both Thought and voluntary motion, as is before sufficiently
demonstrated; the next Hypothesis is that of Dr. Mayow, who supposes the Soul
of a Brute to be a Nitroaerial Spirit, and for that Hypothesis recites the same
Experiments Dr. Willis does, for that of Fire, the same difficulties therefore
lying against that Notion, as the Doctors, I shall not recapitulate but pass it
over; these are the most remarkable Authors that have writ on this subject: I
shall therefore in the last place, propose my own Sentiments on that Head, my
Thoughts are, that in all living Creatures whatever, there is a Spiritual,
immaterial Being, that thinks, and actuates them: To this some may reply, if
so, where then is the difference betwixt Man and Beast? There Souls must be
both equally immortal with sounds contrary to Revealed Religion. To those I
answer, that these Creatures have only a lower degree of Reason, not comparable
to that of Man, even as we can imagine ours to be Inferior to the Intuitive
Knowledge of Angels, their Allegations therefore on this account are Foreign to
the purpose, but suppose I allow farther, that the Almighty may Annihilate the
Souls of these Creatures, after Death; but whether he do or not, or in what
future State they are like to be, since his Infinite Wisdom has not
condescended to Reveal his Actions so far to Mankind, does it at all concern
me? And therefore I can easily conclude with the Philosopher, Quae supra nos,
nihil ad nos; and it would be much better to acquiesce in a modest ignorance,
than disturb our selves, and amuse the World with these unaccountable Theorems.

Having thus far accounted for Phoenomena preternatural in Animals, in the next
place, I shall descend to give an account of Persons in these Parts, that have
been Eminent for their Learning, and Inventions, in Natural Philosophy, or
Mechanics; Amongst these the Learned Dr. Pearson may justly be placed the
first, witness his most Learned Exposition on the Creed, and his unanswerable
piece de successione Patrum, which at this day is received in the Vatican it
self, though he a Bishop of a different persuasion from him that presides
there, and esteemed as Sacred as a general Council, or any Authority of the
most noted Father; For Learning likewise and Pious generosity, Bishop Smith,
and Dean Nowel have immortalized their Names, the former was one of the
Founders of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford, the latter gave several Scholarships
to it, which to this day are called the Nowellians, to these Men of Learning we
may justly add Sir Peter Leicester of Tabley, to whom the World owes a great
deal of Thanks, for his History of the Antiquities of Buckley-Hunder'd, and I
hope it may be Pardonable, though I add my great Grandfather William Legh
Parson of Standish, he was Tutor to Prince Henry, and Chaplain to Henry Earl of
Derby.

As to Pious, and Charitable Foundations, there are three very remarkable in
Manchester in Lancashire, viz. a College, a Public School, and an Hospital;
The College was first founded Ann. Dom. 1421. By Thomas De la Ware, first
Rector of the said Parish Church, and Brother to the Lord De la Ware, whom he
succeeded in Estate, and Honor, and then Founded a College there consisting of
one Master or Keeper, Eight Fellows Chaplains, Four Clerks, and Six Choristers
in Honor of St. Mary, St. Denis of France, and St. George for England, to whom
the said Parish Church was formerly Dedicated: This Foundation was dissolved
1547, in the first Year of King Edward VI. the Lands and Revenues of it taken
into the King's Hands, and by him demised to the Earl of Derby, and the College
House and some Lands, sold to the said Earl: The College was refounded by Queen
Mary, who restored most of its Lands, and Revenues, only the College it self,
and some of the Revenues, remained still in the hands of the Earl of Derby; it
was also Founded a new by Queen Elizabeth, Ann. Dom. 1578. By the Name of
Christ College in Manchester, consisting of One Warden, Four Fellows, Two
Chaplains, Four Singing Men, and Four Choristers, the number being lessened
because the Revenues were so, chiefly by the Covetousness and False dealing of
Thomas Herle, then Warden, and his Fellows, who sold away, and made such long
Leases, as could never yet some of them be retrieved: It was last of all
refounded by King Charles I. Ann. Dom. 1636. constituting therein One Warden,
Four Fellows, Two Chaplains, Four Singing Men, and Four Choristers, and
incorporating them by the Name of the Warden and Fellows of Christ's College in
Manchester; the Statues of the same being drawn by Archbishop Laud.

The Hospital was Founded by Humphry Chetham, Esquire that great Example of
industrious improvement, and incorporated by King Charles II. designed by that
bountiful Benefactor, for the Maintenance of Forty Poor Boys, out of the Town,
and Parish of Manchester, and some other Neighboring Parishes, but since then,
it is enlarged to the number of Sixty, by the Governors of the said Hospital;
the Boys are to be taken in betwixt the Age of Six and Ten, thereto be
maintained with Meat, Drink and Clothes, and at the Age of Fourteen to be bound
Apprentices, to some honest Trade or Calling, at the charge of the said
Hospital, for the maintenance of which he endowed the same with the Yearly
Revenue of 420 l. which is since improved by the care and good Husbandry of the
Feoffees or Governors, to the Yearly value of 517 l. 8 s. 4 d. they having
laid out in the purchase of Lands, 1825 l. which was saved out of the Yearly
income over and above the maintenance of the Poor Children, and others
belonging to the said Hospital; wherein there are annually near Seventy Persons
provided for. Within this Hospital, by the Bounty of the said Founder, is also
erected a fair, and spacious Library, already furnished with a Competent stock
of choice and valuable Books, to the number of near four Thousand, and are
daily increasing with the income of 116 l. per Annum, settled upon the same by
the said worthy Benefactor, to buy Books for ever, and to afford a Competent
Salary for a Library Keeper; there is also a large School for the Hospital
Boys, where they are daily instructed, and taught to read, write, and keep
Accounts.

The Public School was Founded Ann. Dom. 1519 by Hugh Oldham, D. D. and Bishop
of Exeter, who bought the Lands on which the School stands, and took the Mills
there in Lease of the Lord de la Ware for 60 Years, afterward, with the
Bishop's Moneys, Hugh Bexwick, and Joan his Sister, purchased of the Lord de la
Ware his Lands in Ancoats, and the Mills upon Erkes, and left them in Feofment
to the Free School for ever; which Revenues are of late very much increased by
the Feoffees of the School, who out of the improvments, have as well
considerably augmented the Masters Salaries, as the Exhibitions annually
allowed toward the maintenance of such Scholars at the University, as the
Warden of the College, and the High-Master shall think requisite, and have
besides, for some Years past, added a Third Master, for whom they have already
erected a New, and convenient School, at the end of the other.

Besides these public Benefactions, and Endowments, there have been several
other sums of Moneys, and annual Revenues, left and bequeathed to the Poor of
the said Town, by several Persons, who are thereby, with the Charity of the
present Inhabitants, competently provided for, without starving at home, or
being forced to seek relief abroad.

Let us do Justice to the Memory of the generous William Hulme of Broadstone,
Esquire who has nobly added to the Benefactions of the public School four
Exhibitions; The Scholars are to be Batchellours of Arts, in the College of
Brazen-Nose in Oxford, these are to be elected by the Wardens of Manchester,
the Rector of Bury, and Parson of Prestwich then Living, they are at present of
value betwixt Twenty, and Thirty Pounds per Annum each, but after the Death of
his Lady, will advance to near Sixty Pounds a piece Yearly; and these they are
to hold till they have commenced Masters of Arts, and I do believe they will
then be the best Exhibitions in that University.

The Town gives Title to an Honorable Family, Henry Mountague, being Created
Earl of Mancester by King Charles I. Ann. Dom. 1625. which Honor is now
possessed by Edward his Grand Child, third Earl of the said Family; This
account was given me by my honored Friend the Reverend, and Learned Dr. Wroe,
the Present Warden of the Collegiate Church at Manchester, within which Church,
are inscriptions of some Eminent Persons.

At Maclesfield in Cheshire was a College Founded by Thomas Savage first Bishop
of London, and afterward Archbishop of York, in which several of that noble
Family, the Savages, are buried; as also of the Family of Dunham, which from
Hammon de Massy, By the Fittans, and Venables, came Hereditarily to the famous
Family of Booth.

After these Learned and Charitable Personages, let us rank others Eminent for
natural discoveries, of which these Countries have not been altogether Barren;
The World owes a great many Obligations to the great industry, and Knowledge of
Richard Townley, of Townley, Esquire which will be the best understood by a recital
of his own Experiments, and Performances.

His Letter to Dr. Croon, touching the invention of dividing a Foot into many
thousand Parts for Mathematical purposes is as follows.

Finding in one of the last Philosophical Transactions, how much M. Auzont
esteems his invention of dividing a Foot into near 30000 parts, and taking
thereby Angles to very great exactness; I am told, I shall be looked upon as a
great wronger of our Nation, should I not let the World know, that out of some
scattered Papers and Letters, that formerly came to my hands, of a Gentleman of
these parts, one Mr. Gascoigne, found out, that before the late Civil Wars, he
had not only devised an instrument of as great a Power as M. Auzonts, but had
also for some Years made use of it, not only for taking the Diameters of the
Planets, and distances upon Land; But had farther endeavored out of its
Preciseness, to gather many certainties in the Heavens, amongst which I shall
only mention one, (viz.) the finding the Moon's distance, from two
Observations, of her Horizontal, and Meridional Diameters, which I rather
mention because the French Astronomer, esteems himself the first that took any
such notice, as thereby to settle the Moon's Parallax. For our Countryman
fully considered it before, and imparted it to an acquaintance of his, who
thereupon proposed to him the difficulties that would arise upon the
Calculation; with considerations upon the strange Niceties necessary to give
him a certainty of what he desired; The very instrument he made I have now by
me, and others more perfected by him, which doubtless he would have Infinitely
mended, had he not been slain unfortunately in his late Majesty's Service. He
had a Treatise of Optics ready for the Press, but though I have used my utmost
endeavor to retrieve it, yet I have in that point been totally unsuccessful:
But some loose Papers and Letters, I have particularly about this instrument
for taking of Angles, which was far from perfect; Nevertheless I find it so far
to exceed all others, that I have used my endeavors to make it exact, and
easily tractable; which above a Years since I effected to my own desire, by the
help of an Ingenious and and exact Watch-Maker in these parts, since which time
I have not altogether neglected it, but employed it particularly in taking the
distances (as occasion served) of the Circum-Jovialists, toward a perfect
settling their motion. I shall only say of it, that it is small, not exceeding
in weight, nor much in bigness an ordinary Pocket-Watch, exactly marking above
40000 Divisions, in a Foot by the help of two Indexes, the one showing Hundreds
of Divisions, the other Divisions of the Hundred; Every last Division in my
small one containing 1/10 of an Inch, and that so precisely as I use it, there
goes above 91/22 Divisions to a second. Yet I have taken Land Angles several
times to one Division, though (for the reason mentioned by M. Auzont) it be
very hard to come to that exactness in the Heavens, (viz.) the swift motions of
the Planets; Yet to remedy that fault, I have devised a rest, in which I find
no small advantage, and not a little pleasing those Persons who have seen it;
being so easy to be made, and by the observer managed without the help of
another; which second convenience my yet nameless instrument has in great
perfection, and is by reason of its smallness and shape, easily applicable to
any Telescope. Sir, if you think this invention thus improved, worthy to be
take notice of by the Curious, you may command a more perfect description of
it, or any of the observations, either Mr. Gascoigne or my Self have made with
it.

A Description of the Instrument referring to the CVT.
THE 1, 2, and 3. Figures do represent the several Parts of this Instruments;
the 4th Figure part of the Telescope with the Instrument applied to it, and the
5th, the rest on which the whole reposeth.

The first Figure represents the Box with the whole Instrument, (excepting only
the movable Cover) and the Screws, by which it is fixed to the Telescope. In
this Figure (aaaa) is a small oblong brass Box, serving both to contain the
Screws, and also to make all the several moveable parts of the Instrument to
move very true, smooth, and in a simple direct motion; To one end hereof is
Screwed on a round Plate of brass (bbbb) about 3 inches over; the extreme Limb
of whose outside is divided into 100 equal parts, and numbered by 10, 20, 30,
etc. Through the middle of this Plate, and the middle of the Box (aaa) is
placed a very Curiously wrought Screw about the bigness of a Goose Quill, and
of the length of the Box, the Head of which is by a fixed Ring, or Shoulder on
the inside; and a small springing Plate, (dd) on the outside, so adapted to the
Plate, that it is not in the least subject to shake; The other end of this
Screw is by another little Screw (whose small point fills the Center or hole
made in the end of the longer Screw for this purpose) rendered so fixed or
steady in the Box, that there appears not the least danger of shaking, upon the
Head of this Screw without the springing Plate is put on a small Index (ee) and
above that an handle (mm) to turn the Screw round as often as there shall be
occasion, without at all endangering the displacing of the Index; it being put
on very stiff upon a Cylindrical part of the Head, and the handle upon a
square; the Screw has that third of it, which is next the Plate, bigger than
the other two thirds of it, by at least as much as the depth of the small Screw
made on it, the thread of the Screw of the bigger third; is as small again as
that of the Screw of the other two thirds; to the grosser Screw is adapted a
Socket, (f) fastened to a long Bar or Bolt (gg), upon which is fastened the
moveable sight (h) either a Thread nearer or a Thread farther of from the fixed
sight (i), the (kk) which will not admit of any shaking; There are Sixty of
these Threads, and answerable thereto are made Sixty divisions, on the edge of
the Bolt or Ruler (gg) and a small Index (l) fixed to the Box (aaa) denotes how
many Threads the edges of the two sights (h) and (i) are distant; and the Index
(ee) shows on the circular plate, what part of a Revolution there is more,
every Revolution as was said before being divided into an hundred parts, at the
same time that the movable sight (h) is moved forwards or backwards, or more
Threads of the courser Screw, is the plate (pp in Fig. 2) so as the middle
betwixt the sights may lie in the Axis of the Glass, however the Screw be
turned, the midst betwixt the sights will always be in the Axis, and the sights
will equally, either open from it, or shut toward it.

Figure 2. Represents the moveable cover containing the Screws, to be by the
Bookseller cut off by the pricked line (xxx) from the Paper, and to be fitly
placed on Figure (1) according to the pricked line (yyy) answering thereto,
that by the taking off as it were, or folding up of this cover, the inward
Contrivance of the Screws, and sights may appear.

And because it is conceived by some Ingenious Men, that it will be more
convenient instead of the edges of the two sights (h and i) to employ two
sights, fitted with hairs, therefore is added Figure (3) Representing the two
sights, (r and s) so fitted with Threads (t and u) that they may be
conveniently used in the place of the solid edges of the sights (h and i)

The fourth Figure represents, how the Screws are to be put on, The Table (A.
D.) is divided into three lengths, of which (as in ordinary ones) (B. C.) is to
lengthen or Contract, as the object requires; But A. B. is here added, that at
A. you may put such Eye Glasses, as shall be thought most convenient, and to
set them still at the distance most proper for them, Indexes, or Pointers,
which here are supposed to be at, B. which length also alters also in respect
of diverse Persons Eyes, (E.) is a Screw, by which the great Table can be fixed
so, as by the help of the Figures any smaller part of it can immediately be
found, measuring only or knowing the Divisions on (B. C.) the distance of the
object Glasses from the Pointers (F.) is the Angular piece of Wood that lies on
the upperScrew of the rest, this rest is represented by Figure the 5th. As for
a description of the uses of this ingeniously contrived, and very curious
Engine, the Reader may understand it by the preceding Letter.

To this may be annexed another Letter of the same ingenious Gentleman,
containing Observations on the quantity of Rain falling Monthly for several
Years successively, which is as follows.

Ian. 9th 1693/4
I Have now completed this last Years Observations, which I was very desirous
should accompany the others I now send you, and I hope you will be pleased upon
that score to pardon my delay in obeying your Commands, I wish they had been
more exactly made, and should have been so, had they been intended for any
thing but my own satisfaction, and enabling me to give some Conjecture at the
Proportion of Rain that falls in this Country, with that at London, and in
other parts of this Kingdom, but in this I have not yet attained my desired
end, not having heard of the like made in any part of England, though a Friend or
two had promised to undertake, and afford me an Account of their Observations,
but it may be they did not think it worth their while, or that it would prove
more troublesome than I found it; For I only fixed a round Tunnel of 12 inches
Diameter to a leaden Pipe, which could admit of no Water but what came through
the Tunnel, by reason of a part soder'd to the Tunnel it self which went over
the Pipe, and served also to fix it to it, as well as to keep out any wet, that
in stormy Weather might beat against the under part of the Tunnel, which was so
placed that there was no building near it, that would give occasion to suspect,
that it did not receive its due Proportion of Rain, that fell through the Pipe
some nine Yards perpendicularly, and then was bent into a Window near my
Chamber, under which convenient Vessels were placed to receive what fell into
the Tunnel, which I measured by a Cylindrical Glass, at a certain mark,
containing just a pound, or twelve Ounces Troy, and had marks for small parts
also; I preferred this way of finding the Contents of my Vessel, for measuring
the Water, before any other, of gaging of small Cubical or Cylindrical ones,
where an inconsiderable and almost indiscernible Error, in the dimensions, will
prove much greater in the content, whereas in the other way, provided the
Cylinder it self be small, or like a very small Neck at the marked place for a
pound, one may easily come to as great exactness as may be wished, by the help
of this Cylindrical Glass, I thus kept my account of what Rain fell, and
generally twice or thrice a Day, when I took several other Observations, both
of the Thermometer, Barometer, Winds, etc. what Rain I found in the Receivers,
if not more than made what was left in the Cylindrical Glass, a full pound I
again left in it, but if there was more than that quantity, I filled it just to
the pound mark, which I threw away, and did the like with the remaining Water,
as often as it would allow, still keeping an account of the pounds thrown away,
and noting also the parts of a pound remaining in the Glass, by the help of
which latter, and the parts remaining at any time before, by numbering the
Pounds, and Substracting the Parts at the end, for Example, of one Month, from
the Pounds thrown away, and the Parts remaining, at the end of another; I find
the quantity of Rain fallen betwixt these two times, and that so as to assure
me, that I erred no more in the quantity of Rain of another Year, than by
mistake in the differences of the parts of a Pound, in the first, and last
Observation, whereas should I still Write down the Rain that falls between two
Observations, I might be subject to make as great a mistake, in every one of
them, and consequently be much more uncertain of the quantity of Rain fallen,
in many of those added together; Besides, this Addition is longer in
performing, and giving the quantity sought, than the method I make use of, I
have added these particulars to show you how little trouble there is in this
task; which therefore I hope some of your ingenious Friends may be persuaded to
undertake, and then by continuing my own Observations, I may be farther
satisfied than hitherto I have been with them, for I have yet Learned as to the
main point, is, that here we have almost just twice the quantity of Rain that
falls at Paris. This County, and particularly that part of it where I live,
being generally esteemed to have much more Rain than other Parts, and in a
greater Proportion than I thought reasonable to be allowed, however it be yet
by what I have sent you, 'twould be unjust without farther Observations of the
like Nature in other Parts, that all England should be esteemed to abound as
much in Rain as these parts do, where by reason of the very high Grounds in
Yorkshire, and the Eastern Parts of Lancashire, the Clouds driven hither by the
South and S. W. the general Winds in this part of the World, are oftener stopped
and broken, and fall upon us, than such as come by an E. and S. E. Winds, which
broken by the Hills are generally spent there, and little affect us; and this
is the reason that Lancashire has often considerably more Rain than Yorkshire.

The above mentioned method of estimating Rain by pounds, to those of my
Family, gave a sufficient Idea of the Proportions of the falling Rains, and the
Wetness of the different Seasons, though they knew not how high it would raise
the Water in a Cylinder Equal, at the bottom to my Tunnel; but to inform others
of this with little trouble, in the Table I have sent you the Pounds and Parts
are doubled, and these I have rather sent you than those of the whole Pounds,
since the same gives both the quantity of half Pounds, and the height in
inches, according to the general way of estimating the quantity of Rain, only
with this difference, that for the half Pounds only the last Figure, is a
decimal Fraction, and the other the number of the half Pounds, and for the
height, the two last Figures denote the Decimal Fraction of an inch, and the
remainder of the height in inches, so near the truth, that they only fall short
of it one inch in 200. which defect is easily supplied; To this I need only add
that the numbers on the right hand, are the sums of all those in the same
line, that is, in the first part of several numbers for Ten Years, so that the
last of them shows the sum both of the half Ounces, that have fallen during
that space of time, and the height the Water would have been raised in that
time also; To this I shall only add one Example; The sum of all the Rain in
the Ten first Years 41227. and therefore according to what has been said
4122(7. is the number of half Pounds, that fell in Compass of the Tunnel during
those Ten Years, and 412(27. the height it would have raised the Water during
that time: But if you desire to be more Critical, if you add 2(06 its 200th
part, you will have 414(33 for the true height; and 41(413 for the mean height
by those Ten Years observations; and 412(27 for the mean quantity of half
Pounds; by the same method you will have the means for the other Five, viz. Of
height 41(78, and 417(8 for the mean number of half Pounds, which means do
strangely agree, and both considered do give for the mean by all the Fifteen
Years 41(516 inches in height, which is about of an inch more than double to
that raised by the Water at Paris, which as set down in the Memoirs for the
Ingenious, for February last, is stated about 19 French inches, which make 21
English, I have omitted the accounts of the Years 87, and 88, which I found
faulty by reason the Person (who had the charge of noting what Rain fell during
my absence several times then from home) did not punctually observe the usual
method I had prescribed him. I forgot when I mentioned my way of Gauging by
weight that it was grounded upon 22(7368 Cubical inches of Rain Water, being
equal in weight to one pound or 12 Ounces Troy, so that dividing any
superficies in inches of a Vessel for receiving the Rain Water, by the before
mentioned number it will give you the Pounds and parts, that will raise the
Water upon that superficies with up-right sides, just an inch, and thus I found
that 4(974 Pounds would fill a Cylinder equal at the Bottom to my Tunnel, and
one inch high, which you see is very near five Pounds, which you will also find
will only raise the Cylinder by 1/200th part; but now I have detained you so
long, and I am afraid needlessly, so that I trust to your goodness for Pardon
in, and what else you shall find amiss upon the score of my Eyes, which oblige
me to trust more to others, than otherwise I should.

I am Your Humble Servant.
The Table of Rain.
1677 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 Sum January 472 371 043 512 053 986 238 032
110 472 3289 February 270 371 161 492 363 135 245 483 042 020 2582 March 245
250 202 413 235 237 305 087 185 572 2731 April 325 170 092 222 057 308 402 370
380 305 2631 May 313 581 105 188 069 315 353 097 201 437 2659 June 516 257 298
342 397 517 468 192 410 473 3870 July 351 339 350 302 292 482 412 313 497 188
3526 August 485 145 835 502 425 385 582 338 398 870 4965 September 223 527 553
146 607 293 152 199 163 572 3435 October 333 644 616 570 170 427 330 425 325
293 4133 November 432 555 127 479 235 525 192 579 522 709 4355 December 400 057
439 269 423 456 037 299 548 132 3051 Sum 4365 4267 3821 4428 3326 5066 3716
3414 3781 5043 41227 1687 88 89 90 91 92 93 Sum January 333 707 197 054 218
1509 February 393 171 112 168 078 922 March 875 145 476 342 298 2136 April 468
078 386 498 539 1969 May 182 244 300 330 093 1149 June 302 179 412 416 181 1490
July 120 218 285 448 112 1183 August 222 402 193 198 668 1683 September 442 403
215 605 641 2306 October 470 765 165 273 514 2457 November 415 717 230 148 627
2137 December 368 262 169 892 261 1952 Sum 4860 4291 3140 4372 4230 20893




These following Observations of the Eclipse of the Sun were communicated by
the said Learned Gentleman, in a Letter to Mr. Flamsted which I will first
transcribe, and then for the satisfaction of the Reader translate.

Coelum ante Eclipsin valde fuit Pluviosum; attamen nisi de futura serenitate
desperassem fere ipsum defectus initium, non minus accurate, quam finem
observare, credo, Liquisset. Omnino certas esse omnes has observationes
asserere non ausim; quippe nubes frequentissime solemn subtercurrentes,
ventusque validior Tubam aliquando quatiens, haud utique justas capi mensuras
sivere. Accessit and aliud infortunium, quod cum Phasium, captas mensuras,
binis Partibus, duobus Micrometri locis, ostensas, retro numerarem, servus cui
scribendi negotium demandaveram, vitiose aliquando eas descripsit, quod tamen
percepi, and correxi, credo. Quales quales sint observationes, tui esse Iuris
jubeo; Exitus locus adeo vertici vicimus erat, ut in quam ab ea partem
inclinaret, been non potuerim definire; etiamsi hora 9. 29. per horologium,
cuspides horizonti apparerent Parallelae.

Solis Diameter hora 9. 10 erat 2334; satis, ut putavi praescice.

Deinde accedente sole ad meridiem per lineam longam meridianam horologium
justo tardius inventum fuit scrupulis 1. 42. Magno tamen Aequinoctiali
sciaterico, quo medias minoresve scrupuli Horarij parts, possum distinguere,
horologium toto hoc mane tardius duntaxat 45.

Lineam longam meridianam iterum prima occasion examinabo; interea correctioni
per hanc factae potius quam sciaterico fidendum puto. Townleij Latitudo
observata (ut ad me scribit) 53. 44. Longitudo a Meridiano Londinensi 9.
Circiter scr. hor. ad occasum.

Horahorol. Oscillatorij. h Correct. p. Lin. Merid. h Mensurae Phasium 8 06 45
8 08 27 A B 1190 16 09 forsan 1109 14 50 8 11 00 8 12 42 C D 1935 26 15 18 00
19 42 A B 1405 19 04 21 00 22 42 C D 1805 24 30 26 14 27 56 A B 1504 20 47 34
00 35 42 C D 1711 23 13 42 15 43 57 A B 1551 21 03 accurate 46 30 48 12 C D
1702 23 20 vel 1720 23 15 8 51 45 8 53 27 A B 1553 21 04 accurate 9 00 00 9 01
42 C D 1809 24 23 9 12 34 9 14 16 A B 1357 18 25 9 30 55 9 32 37 A B 872 11 50
9 41 15 9 42 57 Precise. Desit Eclipsis, quantum per Aeris Vibrationem potui
discernere.

It was very Rainy Weather before the Eclipse came on, so that had I not lost
all hopes of a clear Sky, my Account of its beginning had been as exact as that
of its Exit, I cannot ascertain to you all my Observations, because the Clouds
often intervened betwixt me and the Sun, and many a blast of Wind discomposed
my Tube, and so altered the measures I had taken. Another accident also
interposed, for even when I came to compute the Dimensions I had observed of
the Phases in two places from two parts of the Micrometer, my Servant that was
to note down my observations through mistake had penned them very faulty,
however I corrected them the best I could. Such as they are, I freely recommend
them to you, the place of Exit of the Eclipse was so vertual that I could not
possibly determine to what part it inclined from it. However at about 29
Minutes after nine by the Clock, I found there appeared points Parallel to the
Horizon. The Diameter of the Sun betwixt Nine and Ten was 2334 parts as I
conjecture Eclipsed; afterward the Sun coming to the Meridian, by a long
Meridian line I found the Clock was two slow by one Minute, and 42 seconds, but
by a large Equinoctial Dial upon which are drawn Minutes and seconds, I found
the Clock during the whole Morning had only been two slow by 45 seconds, I
shall again Examine the Meridian line the first oppertunity that offers.
However in the mean time, I think we ought rather to confide in the correction
made by that, than to rely upon the Aequinoctial Dial. The Eclipse by Mr.
Townley was taken in the Latitude of 53 and 44, the Longitude from the London
Meridian is about 9 hours to the West.

After this worthy Gentleman, let us mention our much Lamented, and Eminent
Countryman Mr. Jeremiah Horrax. Of whom take the Learned Dr. John Wallis's
Character, and account of his Works; This Horrax says he is the same with him
that is the Author of that excellent Tract, called Venus in Sole Visa,
published by the Famous Hevelius, together with his Mercurius in Sole Visus:
Who if he had not been snatched away by an untimely Death, in the flower of his
Age, would certainly by his industry, and exactness, which did accompany his
great affection to Astronony, have very considerably advanced that Science. Now
we have only left us these imperfect Papers, digested not without great care
and labor, by that Learned Mathematician Dr. John Wallis Professor of
Mathematics in the University of Oxford; whereto do occur,

First, The Keplerian Astronomy, asserted, and promoted, which this Author
undertook, after he had spent much time and great pains in acquainting himself
with that of Lansbergius, which he at first embraced with so much eagerness and
addition, that it was difficult to divorce him from it; Till at length by the
Advertisements of William Crabtree, a Sagacious and Diligent Astronomer at that
time, he found that neither the Hypotheses of Lansbergius, were consistent
among themselves, nor his Table agreed with observations exactly made; nor the
precepts of them were well demonstrated, nor could be, whatever that Man
boasted of his wonderful agreement of his Tables, with the observations of
former times; all which Errors being found at last by our Author himself, and
withal the Writings of Kepler, and the Rudolphin Tables, by him searched into,
he saw cause to prefer them to the Lansbergian, because grounded upon
Hypotheses consonant to Nature, and well agreeing with the Heavens, though he
found causes, by his accurate observations, to amend even these Tables, yet
without a necessity of changing the Hypothesis, in which Work when he was well
engaged, he was cut of by Death very Young, in the 23th Year of his Age; His
first pieces then were his Disputations against the Astronomy of Lansbergius,
in which he clearly demonstrates that the Hypothesis of that Author do neither
agree with the Heavens, nor among themselves, which argument he carried on so
far, that having finished the four first Observations (as they are here to be
found) he had begun a few sheets of the fifth, which was about the Diagram of
Hipparchus, from which some have pretended exactly to demonstrate the distance
of the Sun. After which follow two disputations more, the one of the Celestial
Bodies, and their motions, the other his Answer to the Cavils of Hortensius,
against Tycho, so much of the first part of this Volume.

The second contains a good number of extracts out of this Authors Letters to
his intimate Friend, and industrious Companion in the study of Astronomy,
William Crabtree, in which occur many good Celestial Observations, interlaced
with many notable Discourses, concerning the method of his studies.

The third is a Catalogue of AstronomicalObservations as they were made by our
Author, without allowance for the Excentricity of the Eye, which he afterward
Castigated by a Correction fairly written with his own hand.

The fourth is his new Theory of the Moon together with the Lunar numbers of
Mr. Flamsted upon it.

To these let us add the curious Experiments and Observations of Thomas
Brotherton of Hey, Esquire in the County of Lancaster, concerning the growth of
Trees, which are as follows; The first Experiment was made in the Year 1671,
upon a Crab-Tree about four Inches in Diameter. It was hacked round with an
Hatchet, so as to cut pretty deep into the wood, besides cutting of the Bark
for about four inches wide; after which it was observed to increase above the
said hacking very considerably, and to shoot in length of Wood about one foot;
the next year it increased considerably, and shot in length about nine inches,
but the third Year it died to the very Root.

Much the like was observed in another, part of whose Bark was Eaten off by a
Canker, that the lower part stood without increasing, and by degrees the Wood
Rotted and Mortified; but the upper part increased to the third Year when it
died also.

Most of the following Experiments were tried on the Abies or Scotch-Firr, and
on the Black Poplar with White Bark, and on Hazel or Ash-Trees.

A Scotch-Firr of three Years growth, having a Ring of the Bark cut off of the
breadth of three inches, near the bottom of of the stem or stalk, below the
uppermost knot, or joint, was observed to grow and shoot out its Top about half
a Yard; and the parts all about the Ring to increase very much in thickness,
much more than it would have done if the Section had not been made; But all
that part of the stock between the said Ring, and the knot next below it
increased not at all; but that part that was below the knot increased somewhat,
yet not so much as if the said Ring of the Bark, had not been cut off; the
second Year it also increased considerably, but not so much as the first Year,
but the third Year it died; the Branch that was here produced had the Ring cut
off from it, April 1st 1686. and the part above the Section increased, and grew
till the 17 of October following, when it was cut off from the Tree; In this
space of time the part below the Ring increased not at all, but stood at a
stay, but the part above the Ring shot out a new joint, between a Foot and half
a Yard, and increased in thickness for the whole length of it, and in all its
parts twice as much as it would have done, if it had not been cut, as was
apparent by a like Branch on the opposite side of the knot, which was not cut
or barked round in the same manner; The Bark also of the part above the
Section, swelled or grew downwards over the woody part (which was bare) above
half an inch in breadth.

The usual time for making this Section, was either in March, or the beginning
of April; Trial was made upon some Young Trees, cutting a Helical swath of the
Bark, about half an inch in breadth, by leaving a like Helical swath of Bark,
to communicate betwixt the upper and under part; in this Trial the difference
of growth succeeded not, but the remaining swath of the Bark swelled downwards,
and by the end of the Year, covered the bared part of the Wood; The like event
almost followed, upon making an invented Section round, of about half an inch
in breadth, the upper Bark quickly swelling downward, and joining again with
the lower. It was also observable, that as the upper Bark grew downwards, so it
increased also in thickness, whereas the Bark below thickened not at all.
Several of those Boughs which were about an inch Diameter, and had increased as
above, the Summer before were observed to outlive the great Frost, and to
receive no considerable Damage, whereas others otherwise ordered, were Killed
by it, as will appear by and by more particularly: In the first Figure is
represented a Scoth-Firr of three Years growth (it shooting forth every Year,
both from the Body and the Branches, a new joint and Circumambient Sprouts to a
determinate length) barked with three Rings of about 1 inch broad, each about
the middle of the Internodia, or parts of the stock between the joints, at c.
b. and a. this in one Year increased and shot forth branchings, as in the
second Figure that is the stock at a. which was about the bigness of a Quill,
below the Ring to the next joint, continued of the same bigness, but above the
Ring it increased, and grew to the bigness of ones Finger, and from the new
joint, at e. e. shot out new Limbs and stock, about a quarter of a Yard, which
was somewhat bigger than if there had been no Ring made; next the branch f. f.
increased likewise proportionably, by swelling in bigness, and from a new joint
shooting out new Body and Limbs, as the top and Body, and the Body of the Tree
below the joint h. to the Ring b. increased more than if the Ring had not been
made, but the part of the stock below the Ring to the next joint, increased not
at all; The like shooting forth and increasing, was observed in the second
Limbs, joint and stock, below it, g. g. i. to c. between which and k. it
increased not; the like also succeeded in the lower Branches l. l. any joint k.
and in the stock d. below the joint k.

Figure third represents a young Scoth-Firr of two Years Old, on one of the
lowermost Branches c. was made a Ring Section, between the Body, and first knot
of the Limb; The following Year, that part of the Limb above the Ring,
increased twice or thrice as much as the Corresponding parts of the other
Limbs, from the same knot, as a. which increased as if there had been no
Section made at B. but the part below b. to the Body, increased not at all.

Figure fifth represents a young Hazet cut into the Body with a deep gash, and
the Parts of the Body above and below, cleft upwards, and downwards, and the
Splinters a. and b. by wedges kept off from touching each other, or the rest of
the Body; these in the following Year were observed to be in the State,
represented in the sixth Figure, that is the Splinter a. above the gash, was
grown very much, but the Splinter b. below, stood at a stay and grew not, but
the rest of the Body at c. grew as if there had been no gash made.

Figure seventh represents a like gash made just above the lowermost knot, and
the part Splinter'd or Cleft, and Wedged off from each other, and from the Body
as before, but there is left a Branch upon the lower Splinter, to see what will
be the state there of the next Year, or in October next, when it is probable by
the other Experiments the lower Splinter and Branch upon it, will be found to
have grown and increased, as the Splinter, in the former Experiment did above
the gash, though not in the same Proportion.

Figure eight represents four young Poplar-Trees. A. B. C. D. all of equal
bigness, growth, situation, and soil, as near as could be found; these were
ordered as is represented in the 9th Figure, that is, A. had all its Branches
and Top cut off, B. had all its Branches pruned off, but it was left with a
small head at the Top, C. had its Branches cut about half way, and those of the
upper half left growing; D. was left growing, without being at all pruned or
lopped, the event was expected, the success was found to be thus, A. in the
following Year shot out many Twigs round about, but the Body increased but
little in height or bigness; B. shot out likewise many Twigs, where it had been
pruned, and the top Branches and top also increased considerably, and the Body
also increased much more in height and bigness than did the former; A. C.
increased much more in all its parts than B. But D. increased in Limbs, height,
and bigness most of all, swelling in bigness and stretching in height, and
spreading in its Boughs much more than C. and in about ten Years time, was more
than four times as big as A.

The same worthy Person also observed, that all the Poplars, that has been
pruned died in the Great Frost, 1684. in so much that in 25 that were so
ordered, he observed 19 to be killed by it, and remaining to be very weak and
hardly able to recover, and increased very little in the following Years; These
Poplars were about 30 Foot high, and had only a small head left at the Top,
unlopped, of about 4 or 5 Foot, and were pruned the Spring before the Great
Frost; He observed also that diverse of those that had been pruned, two Summers
before the Frost, were killed by it; but not one of those that had been pruned
at all were hurt by it; He took notice likewise both in Lancashire and
Cheshire, that Trees of 60 Foot in height, that had been pruned, and had only a
small top left, were also killed by the said Frost, whereas those of the same
kind and height which stood near to them, and had not been pruned, continued
to flourish, and suffered no harm thereby. Several of those Branches of about
an inch Diameter, and Trees that had been barked round, as above theSpring
before the Great Frost, outlived the Violence of the same, and the preceding
Winter.

Where these prunings had been tried upon Trees Twenty Foot high, the
difference of their increase was sensible the following Summer, but in 7 or 8
Years time the difference is Prodigious, the unpruned, Trees growing several
times bigger than the others that were pruned, both in Body and Branches even
to Admiration; He has often observed also that when the top Branches would
shoot out, and grow two Foot, or more, in length, the lower branches would not
shoot above four inches; and farther that in the Branches of the Scotch-Firr,
the joints above the Rings barked round would increase, and grew much bigger in
three, than they would in five Years, if the said Rings were not cut of.

The same reason upon discoursing some other particular enquiries about the
spreading and increase of the Roots, assured that he had observed a very large
Pinaster, about two Foot and half Diameter, and of an height proportionable,
(viz. of about 20 Yards, the lowest Boughs of which were about 30 Foot above
the ground) did spread and flourish on every side alike, though it had no Root
at all toward three quarters of its Situation, but only toward one quarter,
into which it spread its Roots very far, and large, diverse of them reaching
above 70, or 80, Foot from the Body of the Tree, the Reason of which spreading
was occasioned by its being Planted just within the square Angle of the Corner
of a deep thick and strong Stone Wall, which was a kind of Banking, or Warfing,
against a River that ran by it; this Tree I say, though it had nourishment only
from one Quarter of four to its Roots, yet did the same flourish, and spread
equally on every side.

Upon consideration of these and diverse other Observations and Experiments, Mr.
Brotherton is of Opinion (1.) That the sap, most of it, if not all, ascends in
the Vessels of the Lignous part of the Tree, and not in the Cortical part, nor
between the Cortical and Lignous Parts.

(2.) That increase and growth of a Tree in thickness is by descent of the sap,
and not by the ascent, and if there were no descent, a Tree would increase but
very little, if at all.

(3.) That there is a continual Circulation of the sap all the Summer Season,
and during such time as the sap is stirring, and not a descent at Michaelmas
only, as some have held.

To me it seems very probable, that the Bodies of Plants, as well as those of
moving Animals, are nourished and increased by a double Food, the one an
impregnated Water, and the other an impregnated Air, and that without a
convenient supply of these two, the Vegetable cannot subsist, at least not
increase; these do mutually mix, and coalesce, and parts of the Air convert to
Water, and parts of Water to Air, as some of these latter are rarified and
freed from their Chains, and become Spiritual and Airy, so others of the
forementioned, are clogged, and setter'd, and become debased. To this purpose
all Plants, as well as Animals, have a twofold kind of Roots, one that
Branches, and spreads into the Earth, and another that spreads and shoots into
the Air, both kinds of Roots serve to receive and carry their proper
nourishment to the Body of the Plant, and both serve also to convey and carry
off the useless Recrements; Useless I mean any farther, within the Body of the
Plant, though useful to it when they are separated, and without it, the one for
seasoning the Earth and Water, wherein it is Planted, and the other for
seasoning the Air, the method of which I have elsewhere explained.

To these, I hope without offense, may be subjoined two Letters, writ by my
self some Years ago, to that Learned Society; for whatever is drawn from the
Transactions relating to these parts, though before published, may yet give a
diverting information to many Gentlemen, who are strangers to those Papers, the
first Letter directed to Dr. Plot Secretary to the Royal Society, runs thus.

Since you gave me some Specimens of the Water of Latron, and likewise of
Nitrian Nitre, I have found that those descriptions the Ancients gave of it,
exactly agree with those Specimens we have here; Their Encomiums of it were so
many, and so different the Names, which they ascribed to it, as a Sceptick
indeed might equally Question whether or no they writ of any thing else, or
whether or no they writ of any such thing, that we might therefore better
understand the writings of the Ancients concerning it, and the Phenomenon which
it afforded here, I have thought convenient to make use of this method: I shall
in the first place show whence Nitre had its Denomination; in the second, the
different Names which Ancient Authors ascribe to it; in the third, the
different places whence it comes; In the fourth, a description of it as it is
when a Compositum; In the fifth, the number of its principles when Chymically
resolved; in the sixth, the rise of them; in the seventh, its Separation from
the Water of Latron; in the eighth, its use in Physic; in the ninth, in
Agriculture and Mechanics; in the tenth, wherein it differs from Sal Ammoniac;
in the eleventh from Salt Petre.

That all Nitre took its Name from a Town in Egypt, called Nitria, I shall
take for granted; I shall therefore in the next place give an account of the
different Names which by Authors are ascribed to Nitre.

By Hypocrates it is sometimes called Sal Aegypti, Sal in Aquis crescens, and
Nitrum Rubrum, By Basil, Serpens Terrenus, By Vitruvius, Flavilla Salis, By
Pliny, Spuma Nitri, and Ros pinguioris Naturae; By the Graecians, Halmiraga; By
Encelius, it is called Cryfocolla, Baurac, Sal Lucidum; Sal Petrosum, Sal
Anderenae; but the word Baurac by the Babilonians is less restrained, for they
divide Nitre into two Species, the one they term Sal Petrosum Purpureum, Modice
Amarum, the other Species they term Baurac, which they used in Seasoning of
their Meat; the former of these may probably be the Nitre here spoke of, and
the latter Salt Petre. By Iungius and Hofman, it is called Cerberus Chymicus,
and Sal Infernalis; By Rulandus and Johnson, it is called Faex Vitri, and Cinis
Clavellatus, and so by Fallopius, and sometimes Cabalatar, Algali, Anatron,
Tincar, Sago; Here likewise is to be noted that Aphronitrum, called by
Schwenckfeldius in his Tracts de Fossibus Silesiae, flos Asiae, and Spuma
Nitri, is not, as I conceive, specifically distinct from the Natron here spoke
of. For according to Molenbrochius, and Iunken, that will Ferment with an Acid,
and is commended in the same Distempers, as the Nitre of Nitria; again it is
said by Pliny, fontibus quibusdam innatat, Videturque nilo deferri.

By Encelius it is said to be found in Armenia, Rabbath, Africa, Rome, Egypt,
or Babylon, and therefore by him is divided into six Species, Nitrum, vel est
Armen. Afric. Egypt. Rabbath; Romans Vel. Babyl. By Wormius it is said to be
found in Nova Hispania; The Natron may be described thus, it is an Alkaly Salt
perforated like a Sponge, and of a Lixivial taste, and thus I find it described
by Pliny, Mathiolus, and Agricola. Its Principles I take to be chiefly two,
viz. a Sal Marine, and an Urinous Salt.

That it contains a sal Marine seems manifest, by these Experiments, first,
because that a Solution of the Natron has much of the taste that a Solution of
Sal Marine has, secondly, in Evaporation the Particles of the Natron
incrustated upon the surface of the Water, as the Particles of Sea Salt do in
Evaporation. Thirdly, because the Natron is perforated, which proceeds as I
suppose from a Sal Marine, for that when it Chrystallizeth shoots into little
Cavities; Fourthly, if the Natron be mixed with Salt of Tartar, it emits the
same Spirit as Sal Ammoniac, when mixed with the same Salt. And Lastly, That it
contains a Sea Salt seems plain from Cesalpinus. Says he, Efflorescit etiam
sponte non solum in salinis ad similitudinem lanuginis canescentis, sed etiam
in Vasis in quibus sal continetur; But here it is to be noted, that though the
Nitrian Water is of a blushy Color, and makes a brisk fermentation with an
Acid, yet a solution of Natron looks clear, and will not ferment with an Acid;
the reason why a solution of the Natron looks clear, though the Nitrian Water,
which is but a solution of the same Salt, is of a blushy Color, may perhaps be
this.

I suppose that the Water of Latron receives its redness from a red clammy
substance, which serves chiefly to cement the two Salts together, and this I
the rather conjecture, because after a solution of the Natron had passed
through a Filtre, there stuck to it a red clammy Matter and the solution was
clear, and the reason why a solution of the Natron will not ferment with an
Acid I conceive to be this, because in a perfect dissolution its parts being
separated one from another by the parts of the Water, their struglings are too
weak to make an Effervescency with an Acid, and in this I was farther confirmed
by these two Experiments.

I found that if into a solution of the Natron, I poured an Acid while the
Water looked Whitish or Disturbed, the Salt not being perfectly dissolved, it
made a brisk Fermentation, but when the Water came to be clear, the Salt being
then perfectly dissolved, if I then poured an Acid upon it, it would not
ferment; I likewise found that this solution being Evaporated to a third part,
would ferment again.

Its second Principle I take to be an Urinous Salt, First, because if mixed
with Salt of Tartar, it smells like Sal Ammoniac when mixed with the same Salt.

Secondly, when it was distilled with Salt of Tartar in a retort, it afforded
an Urinous Spirit as piercing as Spirit of Sal Ammoniac.

I come now to the rise of its Principles Sal Marine, and a volatile Alkaly,
Sal Marine being a Fossile Salt, I shall take for granted it receives from the
Earth, and shall endeavor to illustrate it has its volatile Alkaly from the
Air; First, because it is said by Pliny spumam Nitri (which is the Natron here
spoke of) Antiqui negebant fieri nisi ros cecidisset. By Monsieur de le Chamber
it is affirmed, that three or four days before the Nile begins to overflow,
there falls a certain dew which has a fermenting virtue, and leav'ns a Past
exposed to the Air, and at that time says Pliny, and Le Chamber, the Nitre
Pits grow full of Nitre, and sands. Vanssebius, and several say, that though
500 in a day die at Grand Cairo of the Plague, before the beginning of the
Inundation of the Nile, yet the very day after there does not one die, which
doubtless could not proceed from any other reason, than because at that time
the Air was impregnated with this volatile Alkaly, for at that time the Nitre
Pits grow full, and this dew falls; This I think may sufficiently hint to us
the great use of its volatile Spirit; Especially in Pestilential Distempers.

Lastly, about that time the Nile begins to overflow those Specimens which we
had here, grew heavier by being exposed to the Air; Here it is to be noted that
this Alkaly is not made so by Fire, I cannot therefore conclude with Helmont,
that all Alkalies are made so by that Element. The next thing to be considered
is its separation from the Water in Latron, of which the Learned Dr.
Huntington, who was at Nitria, gives us this account; There is a Town in
Egypt, called Nitria, which gives name to the Nitrian desert, where there is a
Lake called Latron, taking up an Area of six or seven Acres, situate about
thirty Miles West and by South from Terena a Town lower upon the Nile than
Grand Cairo, and about the same distance Northwest from the Pyramids. From the
bottom of this Lake arises this sort of Nitre, called Natron, to the top (as
they do apprehend) and there by the Heat of the Sun condenseth into this kind
of substance, that all the Nitre comes from the bottom to the Top I dare not
affirm, I shall therefore premise some Phoenomena it afforded in Evaporation,
before I give you my conjecture about it; I took an Evaporating Glass which
held about four Ounces, and poured into it two Ounces of Nitrian Water, this I
set upon a sand Furnace, giving it Fire by degrees, as soon as the Water was
warm, the particles of Nitre began to swim upon its surface, in straggling and
uneven numbers, these after a while United, and afterward there arose a Salt
sufficient to Color the whole superficies of the Water, I took then a thin
Glass and skinn'd off this Ice, but could scarce take it all of before it was
seconded by another, and thus the Salt did rise successively in Films, as long
as there was any Water in the Glass, these Films had the Color and taste of
the Nitre that came from Nitria, and did like it ferment with an Acid; And
these are they which by Pliny are called Flos Salis, and if I mistake not, the
same with that which Herodotus says, they make their Mummy with, if therefore
by the Languishing heat of a Digesting Furnace, the the Nitrous Particles could
separate themselves from the Water, and over that spread themselves in an Ice,
it may be as probable that by the greater heat of the Sun, the Nitre of Latron
is separated from the Water after the same manner, and as in the Evaporation of
other mineral Waters, when the Water is not strong enough to hold up the Salt,
it is generally covered with a thin Film; so I suppose in the Evaporation of
Natron some Particles of the Water being flown away, the Particles of the Sal
Marine branch one into another, and so incrustate upon the surface of the Water.

In this Hypothesis I was the farther confirmed by this Experiment: I took some
of the Natron and dissolved it in Water, and set it to Evaporate, and I found
that the Salt did not incrustate upon the Water, till three parts of the Water
was Evaporated, it did not therefore seem probable that all the Nitre came from
the bottom to the top, and so condensed by the heat of the Sun, but that they
incrustated when the saline Particles branched one into another, some of the
Aqueous parts being exhaled.

The reason why its volatile Alkaly in Evaporation does not fly quite away, is
because it is held there by the Sal Marine.

The next thing to be considered is its use in Physic; by Pliny it is
commended in Ulcers, and Inflammations, Palsy in the Tongue, Consumptions,
Cholick Haemorhagies, Purulent Ears, and Intermitting Fevers; By Galen it is
said, desiccat, and digerit, Multo autem majus ejus spuma; By Agricola its
prescribed in the same cases, commended as a Cephalic, of wonderful success in
the Griping of the Guts, intermitting Fevers, and the Leprosy, Mathiolus
commends it in the same cases; By Hypocrates it is commended when the Menstrua
are obstructed, and again says he, purgat humores albos, convenit in
abortionibus ubi puer haud exierit, he likewise commends it in some kinds of
barrenness, and to this Kircher in his Mundus subteraneus alludes, when he
says, Nili aqua in potum redit non modo saluberrimum, sed and faecundandis
mulieribus mite opportanum; and Petrus Giurius, gives us this memorable story
out of Caesius, that when Philadelphus King of Egypt Married his Daughter
Berenice, to Antiochus King of the Assyrians, he Commanded his Daughter to
Drink of the Water of Nile, that she might make her Husband happy in a numerous
Offspring; By the Testimony therefore of Hypocrates, Galen, Mathiolus,
Diascorides, Pliny, and Agricola, it appears to have been of great use in
Physic. But here it is to be noted, that when Nitre is prescribed by the
forementioned Authors, that Nitre which is an ingredient in Gunpowder is not
to be understood; Amongst the Moderns we have this account of it, Monsieur du
Closs is of Opinion, that most of the Mineral-Waters in France, are impregnated
with this sort of Nitre, and that all their Cures are done by it.
Molenbrochius, affirms a Tincture of Aphronitum to be of wonderful Efficacy in
the Stone, this I the rather Credit, because it is said by Iunken, in his
Medicus, the Nitre of Nitria is of so piercing a Spirit, that it will not
permit either Stone or Rock to be thereabout; And Ten Rine in his Meditations
de Veteri Medicina, affirms it to be of wonderful success in the same
Distempers.

The next thing to be considered is its use in Agriculture, and in Treating of
this, I think, it convenient to premise one Phenomenon which it afforded in
Evaporation: when the Salts had spread themselves over the Water in an Ice,
those thin Plates after a while would break, and ascend in perpendicular lines
to the top of the Glass, I do say therefore, that Nitre may be said to
fertilize the ground after this manner; Its volatile Particles being by some
subterraneous Fire, or else by the heat of the Sun, they do quickly ascend into
the small Tubes of the Plant, and by their Elastick Nature carry along with
them, or force before them, those Particles which as they differently convene,
constitute the different parts of the Plant.

But this conjecture will be made something the more probable, by an Experiment
in Kircher, where he says, if you take a wooden Tube, and put into it Tartar,
Quicklime, Salt, and the Urine of a Wine Drinker, reduced into a Mass, which
is to be hardened in the Sun, and after that set in a cold Cellar, by the help
of Saltpeter from the beforementioned Mass, you will not without admiration
see Flowers branch out of it; yea, such is the force of Nitre, that if in a
Glass kept close shut, you put the juices of some Nitrous Herbs, on the
beforementioned Mass, Nitre contained within it being pregnant with Spirits,
will force it self through the very Pores of the Glass.

M. de La Chamber says, Plants do grow in Egypt in such abundance, that they
would Choke one another, if not hindered by throwing Sand upon the Fields,
insomuch, that the Egyptians must take as much pains in lessening the fatness
of their Land, as other Nations do to increase the fatness of it.

In Mechanics we have this account of it, its said by Pliny, Cap. de Vitri
inventione, that a Company of Merchants being thrown upon a shore, where there
were not any Stones to be found, were forced to take great pieces of Egyptian
Nitre out of their Ships, and make Walls, upon which they hung their Boiling
Kettle, the Nitre being heated by the Fire mixed with the Sand, ran into
several Streams of Glass, which afterward hinted the way of making Glass, it
is likewise of use in Dying; for Pliny and Vitrivius affirm, that by the help
of this, true Azure is made, and that without this, there cannot be a true
shadow.

In the last place, I come to consider wherein it differs from Salt Petre, and
Sal Ammoniac, it may be distinguished from Salt Petre; First by its fermenting;
it will ferment with any acid, but Salt Petre will not, I found it would
ferment with Vinegar, as the old Commentators observe in their Comments upon
Jeremiah and the Proverbs; but Salt Petre will not, which gave occasion to some
in those Texts to alter the Word Nitre.

Secondly, It may be distinguished from Salt Petre in its taste, for Natron
has a Lixivial taste, the other not.

Thirdly, By the volatile Spirit it affords: For from one comes over a volatile
Alkaly, but from the other a Corrosive Acid.

Fourthly, The Natron affords a red clammy substance, insipid, but the other
not, this Clammy substance, if I mistake not, is that which by Pliny is called
Aerugo Salis, this it has from the Earth, and therefore it is again said by
Pliny, sunt ibi Nitraria in quibus, and rufum exit a color Terrae.

Fifthly, Like Salt Petre it will not Chrystallize.

Sixthly, in the fire it makes no Detonation, but in this it resembles Salt
Petre, as that by the Flowers of Sulphur is made into a Sal Prunellae, so this
if you drop Spirit of Sulphur upon it, shoots into Pyramidal Salt, that is not
by the taste distinguishable from Sal Prunellae, though its taste before was
Lixivial; From Sal Ammoniac, it may be distinguished first by its Color, for
the Natron is redish, the other not; secondly, by the Texture in Sal Ammoniac
the parts seem close, and firmly knit together, but the Natron is Spungy and
Perforated, thirdly, if mixed with Sal Ammoniac, Sal Ammoniac Emits the same
Spirit, as it does when mixed with Quicklime.

But I think it comes more near to the Nature of Sal Ammoniac, than Salt Petre,
first, because it is composed of a Sea Salt, and an Urinous Alkaly, secondly,
like Sal Ammoniac when dissolved in Water, it makes it extremely cold, and as
Franciscus Hernandez says, in his History of Mexico, it produces the same
effect when dissolved in Wine; but I have not at present the convenience of
trying this, the Specimens now being but small.

I cannot therefore conclude with Kircher, that the Natron is not Specifically
distinct from Salt Petre, or with Libavius, that it is a Composition of Alum,
Sea Salt, and White Wind; These all are the Observations I have been able to
make at present concerning this Mineral; if any more occur, you shall have an
account of them. Note here I was the first that ever prepared a volatile Alkaly
from that Salt.

The Second Letter concerning Digestion take as follows.

Should I reckon up here the many Controverted Hypotheses of Anatomists
concerning this subject, and set up a new one of my own; it might perhaps seem
a piece of fond presumption: I shall not therefore be so vainly Opinionative,
as to think I have fully explained here the Nature of Digestion, but shall only
give you an account of an Artificial Digester, which I hope may something
illustrate the Natural one, It has been observed by Helmont Maebius, Tachenius,
and the Honorable Mr. Boil, that Meats by being kept in an acid Liquor, would
look extremely White; But I do not find, that by the help of a Salt, that is
merely an Acid, there can be any Chyle prepared from any Meats; Wedelius is of
Opinion, that Chyle is nothing but a mixture of Oil, and Serum; Tilingius
affirms it is made by a Nitrous Salt, Dr. Harvey by Tritruration; Dr. Willis by
an Acid and Sulphur; Sylvius and Diemerbrook by the Salva, Dr. Mayow by a
Nitroaerial principle; Galen and Aristotle by Heat; others by a Ferment spewed
from the Glands at the bottom of the Stomach; others by the relics of the meat
grown sour. So many different Opinions, I shall neither endeavor to reconcile
nor decide; I shall therefore only lay down the Phoenomena, this Liquor
afforded, and from thence draw inferences as probable conjectures; But shall in
the first place premise a description of this digesting Liquor, and see how far
it may probably Parallel the natural ferment of the Stomach. The taste of it is
like Meat vomited out of a full Stomach, something sour, but will not ferment
with an Alkaly.

It is prepared from Spirit of Sulphur, Spirit of Hartshorn, the Chyle of a
Dog, and is Saliva; it is pellucid and without any smell; the Salt that it
shoots into is Cubical; upon Veal it afforded these Phoenomena, into a Dram of
this Liquor, I put a piece of Veal the bigness of a Nut, and set it upon a
digesting Furnace, in two hours time there came from the Meat a Liquor, that
had the Taste and Color of Chyle, and the Meat was afterward Lighter, Dry, and
Insipid, and it afforded the same Phoenomena likewise in Beef, Mutton, or any
other Meat I could meet with: And here it is to be noted, though it has been
affirmed by some, that the same thing may be done by acid Liquors only, yet
since by all the Trials I have made upon them, I have not yet observed them, I
hope my Skepticism in this Case may be pardonable; If therefore we now
consider, by the help of this Menstruum, there came from the beforementioned
Meats, a Liquor which had the Color, and Taste of Chyle, and if we farther
consider, that the Taste of this Menstruum is not distinguishable, from the
Tastes of Meats vomited out of a full Stomach, I hope I may, without being
thought fond of an Hypothesis, conjecture, that by some such Menstruum, the
Meat is Digested in the Stomach; But here I would not be thought to affirm that
by a liquid Menstruum only, the Meats are digested in the Stomach, but that
there are likewise required these farther requisites in some or in most
Creatures; First, That the Stomach receives a gentle heat from the Liver, it is
therefore for this reason, said by the Learned Glisson, Calor hepatis in hepate
est actio, and Ventriculo est Usui. Secondly, That the Stomach have a Natural
Situation, for says Riolanus, interdum Ventriculus propendit usque ad umbilicum
ut observatum in Cadaveribus, quod vitae coctionem multum incommodat, and
Vesalius in his Anatomy, Lib. 4. gives us this Example, Observavi Omentum in
scrotum, devolutum, and auctum Ventriculum, ex sede sua destraxisse, adeo ut
munus ejus deficeret. Thirdly, it is assisted by the Omentum, these may be
argued from those Creatures that have no Caul helping concoction by doubling
their hinder Legs, and resting their Bellies upon them as Hares, and Coneys. A
second instance may be brought from Valentinus; Andreas Molenbrochius in
Miscellaneis curiosis, Ann. 1670. Militaris quidam vir, dum viveret nil nisi
Ventriculum accusabat, quod nullum cibum appeteret, coqueretque cui ad
confortandum Ventriculum multa adhibita fuere, sed omnia incassum, dissecto
cadavere, Omentum plane putrefactum est, ventriculo reliquisque Visceribus
Salvis; ex quo colligitur, Omentum ad Ventriculi coctionem non parum facere;
Fourthly, its necessary that the Stomach have a Tunica Villosa; First, because
that by that it is enabled to divide the Meat into Parcels, which undoubtedly
must much Facilitate the Operation of the natural Ferment, as we see all
Menstruums, will sooner dissolve Metals, when they are filed into Parcels, than
when they continue in the Lump; Secondly, if it had not a Tunica Villosa, the
Tunica Carnosa, would be apt to be too much distended, by our Meat and Drink,
which would necessarily weaken the Tonical motion of the Stomach, and
consequently therefore its Digestion.

Fifthly, That there be right Digestion, its necessary that there be Windings
of the Intestines, for if it were not for these, the Digested Meat would move
too fast from the Stomach, and so torment us with perpetual Hunger, which
assertion, I think, may be sufficiently confirmed by these two Instances, the
first is from Cabrollius, Observation the 10th, and Riolanus Anthrop. Lib. 2.
Cap.

Firminus Chaudonius voracitate erat Erysictonaea, cui causam praebuit, quod
nec stomachi nec intestinorum figuram ullam habebat proportionatam unicum a
Pylori locem ad anum, intestinum erat sine ullo anfractu, cumque aliorum
intestina quatuordecim aequant ulnas, hujus vix ad quatuor spithimas accedebant
in formam Literae. S. the second instance is taken from a Creature in
Lithuania, and Muscovy, that generally feeds upon its prey, till its Belly be
swelled like a Bladder, then conveys it self to some strait place, and so
violently forces the Meat out of its Stomach and Intestines, and then
immediately returns to its prey with as craving an Appetite as before; which
continual and insatiable Hunger, is judged to proceed from the straitness of
its intestines, for as the Learned Pawius observed in its dissection, its Guts
had no Circumvolutions, or Windings; From these therefore it is plain, that
besides a fermenting Liquor in the Stomach, other External means concur to
Digestion. I shall therefore in the last place, inquire what may probably be
the ingredients of the natural Ferment, and so conclude; The ingredients of the
natural-Ferment, I take be these; The Saliva, the Succus of the Glands of the
Stomach, and a Nitro-Aereal Spirit of the Nerves, that the Saliva is an
ingredient may seem probable from these Reasons; First, because that by the
help of this, Meats though impregnated with different principles, may be made
to mix with a Menstruum; for as the Learned Steno has it, Page 27. de glandulis
oris. Saliva omnia far valet, sive intra Corpus, sive extra Corpus
examinaveris, nihil invenies quod illa respuet, nihil cui sine pugna non
associetur. Secondly, since the Saliva is impregnated with a volatile Salt, it
is probable that that may help Digestion. The second ingredient I take to be a
Liquor, that is separated by the Glands in the bottom of the Stomach; and this
I shall evince by the Authority of the Famous Willis, and Silvius de Le Boe,
and first from Dr. Willis in his Pharmaceutice rationalis, page 6. Tunica haec
villosa in postica sive Convexa ejus superficie, qua Tunicae Nerveae cohaeret,
glandulis annulatis numerosissimis ubique consita est, quae proculdubio vasorum
in Tunica Nervea dehiscentium ora Contegunt; ac (uti Videtur.) Humorem illis
destinatum aut ab ijs depositum, immediatius excipiunt, ac percolant; Sylvius,
page 881. gives us this account of it; Hoc Chylificans fermentum, in recens
natorum vitulorum, ventriculis reperitur crassiusculum, diciturque coagulum,
sensim autem minuitur, ac in adultis, glutinis instar, offenditur
liquidiusculum, inter ventriculi rugas haerens; By these therefore it seems
probable, that the Glands in the Tunica Villosa, separate a fermenting Liquor;
and its farther observed, that those Creatures which have the most of these
Glands, are the most voracious; Lastly, that the Nitro-Aereal Spirits of the
Nerves, are ingredient of the Stomachical ferment, seems reasonable from the
Arguments of Dr. Mayow, page 55. He argues thus, Iam vero cum Spiritus
Animales, a particulis Nitro-Aereis constant, haud difficile erit intellectu,
quomodo effectus predicti, ab iisdem in ventriculo perficiuntur, quanquam enim
Spiritus Nitro-Aereus acidus non est, ab eodem tamen ferrum corroditur,
vitriola perficiantur, Salia fixa ad fluorem perducuntur, rerumque compages,
tanquam ab universali menstruo, solvuntur; These therefore, are my Thoughts
concerning Digestion, but here is nothing in these Dogmatically asserted; If
therefore any Hypothesis here may be found Erroneous, upon better grounds I
shall readily lay it down.

CHAP. II.
Of DISTEMPERS.

BEfore I enter upon the Treatise of Distempers, I think, it may be suitable to
my present business, to insert here some preternatural remarks on various
Phoenomena found in Human, and Animal Bodies of different Species; I have now
by me Red Stones, and others of a Chalky matter taken out of the Calf of a
Man's Leg; from another voided by stool, a stony substance covered over with a
Body resembling a Sponge, from others concreted, bile Stones perfectly
Triangular, and smooth as polished Marble, taken out of the Vesica fellea of an
Ox, from another a substance exactly like that of the Bark of a Tree; This was
presented to me my worthy Friend Henry Bradshaw, of Marple, Esquire I have likewise
by me a perfect Shell taken out of the Bladder of a Hog, hair Balls taken out
of the Stomachs of Calves, Cows, and Oxen are familiar enough, as to spungy and
stony substances, in the Bowels and Bodies of Men and Women, it is most
probable they are produced by a mixture of Marine and Bilous Particles,
converting the aliment, and the juices in those parts into those Bodies; But
the Vegetation of Spunges not ing perfectly discovered, pretend not in this
matter to be positive, for none ever yet could discover their Seeds, so that
they seeming to be only Concretions of various Bodies, from Seawater, the
Hypothesis concerning these may challenge the more probability; as to Shells
found in Animals: The illustration of these will the better appear by giving
you an account of the Formation of Shells in general, which may be reduced into
two Kinds, the Pearly, and the Chalky kind, the former are composed of several
Laminae, and frequently contain Pearls, as Muscles, and Oysters, the Lobster,
and Coc^le, etc. seems to be concreted Chalky substances, the Pearl it self is
likewise composed of various Laminae, and is the most volatile part of the
Matter Perlarum, but of that I have sufficiently treated before to which I refer
you, these kind of shells are composed of Oily Saline, and Viscid Particles,
and are indurated by their Saline and the Nitrous Bodies they imbibe from the
Air, not much unlike those Concretions Observable in the mixtures of Alkalies,
and Acids. The Chalky Shells are nothing but a mixture of Alkalious Saline and
Terrene parts, and in their first separation from the Fish are Viscid, and
Pellucid, and receive their hardness, and Colors from various mixtures of the
Particles of the Air; The truth of this Hypothesis is evident from their
Calcinations, Fermentations, Solutions, and gradual Vegetations; now the Shells
of the Fishes being formed after this manner, it may not be difficult to
account for Shells sometimes found in the Bladders of Animals, since there is
no Animal but what contains a sufficient Proportion of such Saline and Terrene
Particles. As to Hair Balls they are usually found in that part of the Stomach
of the above mentioned Beasts called the Reticulum, or manifold. They are
generally of a Black, or Dusky shining Color, not much unlike that of Bezoar
Stone found in the Bowels of Indian Goats, under the superficies is a stony
substance, but will not as Bezoar ferment with an Acid, nor indeed with an
Alkaly. Wherefore to me it seems probable, it may be a Concretion of the Succus
of the Glands, Choler, and the Mucus of the Stomach, which may reasonably be
supposed to indurate into that matter, the liquid parts being cast off by the
innate heat of the Stomach, the more Terrene ones must consequently fix and
incrustate, in those Cells which are not to be discovered in other Creatures.
The Hairs contained in these are usually short and broken, which by the rough
superficies of the Tongues of these Creatures, either by sucking in, or licking
them, they are conveyed into the Cells of the Ventricles, and there formed into
a Globular Figure; for though some may urge that their Ventricles abounding
with Glands, those Hairs might as well be formed there, as in other parts of
the Body, as sometimes in the Kidneys, yet that conjecture is groundless,
because the Hairs there are fixed and terminated upon Glands; but these Balls
are independent of the Stomach, and seem not to have ever been inserted in any
Glandules there.

And now before I proceed to Distempers in general, I shall beg leave to insert
some few, peculiar rather to these, than the more Southward parts of the
Kingdom; The first is the Felon only incident to Infants, and usually in their
first Year; it breaks out upon the Body like an Itch, with an inflammation
attending it; The Face, and Head, and sometimes the Arms, and other parts of
the Body are overspread with a White or Yellow Scurf, not unlike that in the
recedence of the Smallpox; It is certain this nauseous Distemper is very
pernicious in these tender Blooms; But again, those Infants that have it not,
are commonly unhealthful; The Origin of this Distemper must certainly come
from the Saline Particles of the Air, and the same temper of the Milk,
occasioned doubtless from the plenty of Salt Meats, and Leavened Bread, the too
common Food of these parts, the Blood thus saturated with these Particles, and
they separated by the Miliary Glands of the Cutis, must necessarily stagnate,
and consequently inflame, and corrupt, whence inevitably follows this
Epidemical Scab, or Psora.

The method of Physic in this case is but small, since it may easily be taken
off with a little Calomelanos, or Sir. Cichor cum Rhab, and Anointing the parts
with Ol. Ros. Camphorat. Sometimes the Poor Infants take the Distemper from
their Nurses, who have frequently the Itch, and in those it is the more
difficultly Cured, wherefore I could heartily wish the Gentry, who often Nurse
forth their Children, would be very cautious in their choice of these Persons.

The Rickets, and Scrophulous cases, are likewise very common amongst us, but
chiefly occasioned by the Milk of Nurses with Child, who for a small advantage
prostitute their Consciences, to an unpardonable Wickedness, and make no
scruple by this means to ruin Hundreds, the Act is so opprobrious, and the
Mischiefs so numerous, that for my part, I think, Romulus and Remus, when
nourished by the Milk of a Wolf, on the Banks of Tyber, received a more
Palatable, and much more healthful Diet. Scrophulous cases may be ranked
amongst the Opprobria Medicorum. They may be divided into these Classes,
Strumous, Glandulous, Cutaneous, and Osseous, the first may be termed
Mesenterical, the Glands there being obstructed, and thence ensue the Rickets,
or Consumption; the other species are attended very often with that Herculean
Distemper, called a Spina Ventosa, I have seen the Scrophulous Glands of the
Mesentery, impleted with a pellucid Liquor, not unlike the White of an Egg, and
sometimes like Honey, which no doubt proceeds from no other cause than the
Serum made too Viscid by its saline Particles, which then stagnates distends
and swells up the insterstices of the Fibers, and thence proceed their bigness,
and hardness, this humor being long entertained, and lodged there, at length
acquires so high an Acrimony, as by the perpetual Corrugations of the Fibers,
they become Cancerous, and very difficult, if not incurable, wherefore in this
Case, before the Patient is too much Emaciated, or the Hectic too far
advanced, after the common Method has not Answered, it is prudent, as well as
necessary to attempt a Salivation, managed with great care, and discretion, as
to the Cutaneous Scrophules, occasioned by a Viscid Lympha, distending the
Miliary Glands; their Tumors are usually soft, white, and without pain, and
common both in Young, and adult Persons, but are by a gentle Salivation easily
removed; In the Spina Ventosa in the joints, or elsewhere, the Bone is Carious,
and the Humor so Virulent, it swells the Bone like an Honeycomb, and
sometimes throws it off in Exfoliations, or by digesting it in a purulent
matter, this is seldom, or difficulty Cured, but often terminates in a
Consumption; I have known some linger long in this Malady, actual Cauteries
applied to the Bones, and Salivation carried on very regularly, and that too
for no short time, yet all these processes unsuccessful; I could wish our
Learned Surgeons in this case would make their utmost Applications, for the
discovery of some specific to correct this Humor, I have often seen a bright
Silver Probe, turned to a Livid Color by merely passing it into the Orifice,
wherefore to me it seems probable some potent Alkaly might be thought of to be
of service here.

And now having dispatched my remarks on the preceding particulars, I shall
enter on the Treatise of other Chronical Diseases, and since after all my
Observations in Natural History, Man justly assumes the noblest part in the
Creation, for whose good each individual in its proper Sphere does, or ought to
Act in this World; he only then may Challenge our strictest enquiries: Here
indeed is a Field large enough, and a subject too Copious for these Sheets, I
shall therefore contract my self on the several Heads, and be as short as the
subjects will admit, and shall first begin with that Distemper called the
Scurvy, as being the Basis of many others.

SECT. I.
Of the SCURVY.

I Thought it necessary to give a full account of this Distemper, that I might
thereby more fully illustrate those that are Concomitant with it, in order to
which, I shall in the first place, acquaint you with its various Denominations
amongst the Greeks, Arabians, Latins, Germans, Dutch and Danes; in the second
place show in what Countries it is most Epidemical, and assign the reason of
that; and thirdly, shall describe its various Symptoms, with a rationale of
them; and illustrate these by various Histories; and lastly, lay down a general
Method of Cure for the Whole. The Word Scurvy most probably took its Name from
Danish, Dutch, or Saxon, particularly in Lower-Saxony, viz. Schobrock,
Scorbock, Schaerbunck, Scharmundt, Schorbeck, which in those Languages
signify, or denote a faetidness of the Breath, Gripes of the Bowels, and
Universal pains, a Debility of the Limbs, and spots upon the Skin, which to
this Distemper being inseparated Symptoms, it is evident the Word must be
derived from thence. By Marcellus in the time of Gratian and Theodosius, Roman
Emperors, it was styled Oscedo, ab Oscitatione, from frequent yawning usually
attending this Malady; Pliny assigns it a different Denomination, viz.
Scelotyrbe, which is very clear by the description he gives us of a Distemper
contracted in a Camp on the Banks of the Rhine, in the time of Germanicus
Caesar; By the Greeks, particularly by Strabo it is called (...), that is as
the Latins express it, quasi oris merda, from the faetidness of the Mouth, a
Symptom general enough here. Hippocrates, that great Master of Learning and
Physic, describes it to be Lien Magnus, and Illeon Haematitis from indurations
of the Spleen, and fluxes of Blood, from the Bowels, of which I shall give you
several instances; The Lepra of the Arabians is but an higher species of this,
and that I shall make evident in its proper place.

This Distemper is the nearest Epidemical in these Northern Climes, and upon
the Baltic, occasioned doubtless by the Saltness of the Air, and the living on
too saline a Diet. Nor is it less raging in Virginia, and the West Indies,
particularly in those places styled the Salts, where there is almost
continually a saline, faetid, and hazy Atmospher; which Phoenomena thoroughly
considered sufficiently demonstrate its causes; which shall be more largely
treated of in the ensuing Discourse of Consumptions; As to its Symptoms, and
their causes, they are to be divided into a simple, and complicated State, the
most common in a simple State are as follows; the Patient is frequently
afflicted with a faetidness, and shortness of Breath, an Universal Debility,
looseness of the Teeth, spots upon the Skin, and sometimes Ulcers, Pustles,
Morphew, Eprysipilas, Phlegmons in the Cutis, Erratick pains, violent
Sweatings, numbness in the extreme Parts, Head-Achs, spitting of Corrupt putrid
Blood, frequent Tooth-Achs, Gripes, Vomiting, and purging of Blood, with a
stinging, and itching in the Skin, sometimes a Vermiculation, as if something
quick crept within the Skin, intermitting Heats, and sometimes extreme
Coldness, particularly on the Head, frequent Convulsions and Tremours, a blew
Viscid spitting, and a lixivial Urine, with a pricky lateritious Sediment, and
often sweet Scented, pains and swellings in the Gumms, blackness of Teeth, and
inflammations of the Uvula, and Amigdilares, or Almond Glandules; This
Distemper by our Modern Physicians, especially the Learned Dr. Willis is
divided into two Classes, the one he styles an Hot, the other a Cold Scurvy;
viz. a Sulphureo saline, and a saline Sulphurous, in the one the Blood being
saturated with too great a quantity of Muriatick Salt, in the other too much
Exalted with Sulphur; These I shall particularly examine, and afterward
account for the Symptoms. The cold Scurvy no doubt proceeds from too great a
quantity of saline Particles abounding in the Mass of Blood, and this is
evident from the Muriatick Salt, that may be prepared from the Urines of those
Persons abundantly more than from others, as likewise from their extreme Salt
spitting which is sometimes Vitriolick, and Aluminous. How far the Blood may be
said in an hot Scurvy to be too highly exalted with Sulphur, is the next thing
to be examined, Its true indeed in this Distemper there are frequent heats, and
inflammations, but those may be supposed to be effected in the following
manner; e. gr. the Bilious Particles of the Blood united with the saline ones,
become of too large a size to be separated by their proper Emunctories, hence
the minute Glandules of the Liver not making their due separation of the Bile,
it necessarily Regurgitates into the mass of Blood, and partly thrown off by
the Reins, the Urine is rendered thereby highly Lixivial, this has been made
very familiar to me in the dissection of the Livers of some Persons, where all
the Glandules have been highly distended, and totally obstructed by a crass,
feculent Bile; which containing too great a proportion of a fixed Alkaly, and
Muriatick Salt, raises a fermentation with the Juices of the Blood, and
assuredly occasions those Heats, and flushings common in Scorbutic Persons;
this intense Acrimony acquired, by its pointed Salts the Capillaries of the
Membranes and Cutis being contracted, great pains and inflammations unavoidably
ensue. These are the distinguishing Characteristics so far as I could hitherto
observe in practice, that can fairly be accounted for in hot and cold
Scorbutic cases. In the next place I proceed to give the Rationale of
theSymptoms: The fetidness of the Gumms may arise from the putrefaction of the
Blood in those parts, which I presume to be effected in the following manner:
Those parts in their Natural temper being of a loose and spungy Contexture, and
consisting of an infinite number of Capillary Veins and Arteries, which run not
Parallel, but are interwoven one with another, and compose an Aggregate of
Spiral lines; hence the Blood in this case grown too grumous by the Acid Salts,
more readily stagnates here, and consequently putrifies; whence proceeds that
fetidness or stench of the mouth, called by the Greeks (...). By the same
Coagulations and Acrimonious humors lacerating and distending the Nervous
parts of the Lungs, thence unavoidably ensues a difficulty of Breathing, and
sometimes a violent Haemorrhage, the Capillaries being thereby corroded, whence
if the Diaeresis or Rupture be of any considerable Vessel, the Patient
frequently dies Vomiting Blood almost in an instant; TheSpirits likewise by
these saline, feculent Particles become entangled, so that for want of a due
distribution of them, an universal Lassitude and Debility happens: From these
kind of humors likewise falling upon the Nerves, and Membranes of the Teeth,
they grow loose, turn black, become hollow and decay, and thence ensue violent
Tooth-Achs. By these Acrimonious Particles continually vellicating those parts,
a Stupor and Numbness, I presume, must necessarily follow, from an Obstruction
of the Spirits, Vermiculations or Creepings, Coldness, Itching, or Stinging,
from the same Humors lodging upon the Muscles and Membranes, as likewise those
violent Hemicranias, and Head-Achs, which are often periodical. Sometimes
happen unruly Gripes in the Stomach and Bowels, sometimes dry, at other times
attended with a Diarrhaea or Purging, the one may be caused by a Saline
Acrimonious Viscid Phlegm, adhering to the Coats of the Stomach and Bowels,
the other by an Acrimonious Choler. It is observable these Symptoms happen
frequently about the Autumnal Aequinox, and commonly after a very hot Summer,
one as I presume, by the intense heat of the Weather generating too great a
quantity of Bile, and the other by the North-West-Winds, common at that time of
the Year which implete the Air with saline particles, which is manifest at that
Season more than usual. A remarkable instance in this case occurs in the
Philosophical Transactions, where an account is given of a Lady in America, by
Mr. Clayton of Croffton in Yorkshire, in the following manner. I stood at the
Window, says he, and could veiw the Clouds, for there small black fleeting
Clouds will arise, and be swiftly carried cross the whole Element; as these
Clouds arose and came nigher, her torments increased, which were grievous as a
Laboring Woman's, there was not the least Cloud but Lamentably affected her,
and that at a considerable distance, but by her Shrieks, it seemed more or less
according to the bigness and nearness of the Clouds. This happened in
September, which is the time before recited in which the Symptoms are most
raging, and the Air most Nitrous and Saline; it is probable the saline
Particles may stick upon the Bile, like the Prickles upon an Hedgehog, and
occasion these tormenting Symptoms. When this Distemper arises to that, we call
a confirmed Scurvy, its then frequently attended with spots of various Colors,
as Red, Livid, Yellow, Green, and with Ulcers, Pustules, or a White Scurff, the
same with the Lepra amongst the Arabians, and Indians; It is certain in the
Capillary Vessels of the Cutis, not running in direct but rather Spiral Lines,
and forming a Retre or Net, by the stagnation of the Blood there, I say, we
discover those spots of various Colors in the Skin, according to the different
Proportions of Choler intermixed, which renders them Yellow or Green, etc. And
as the Humors acquire a more intense degree of Acrimony, it then proceeds to a
solution of continuity, and those Scorbutic Ulcers grow Numerous: Lixivial
fomentations are here of use, and come near to a specific, an evident argument
the Blood does not abound with too great a quantity of Alkalies, as Colebatch
Foolishly, and Ignorantly imagins, but doubtless with too many Acid, or Acrid
Particles. It is true indeed, the Elesh may be corroded by an Acrimonious
Alkaly, as in potential cauteries of Lap. Infernal. etc. but it is not then
these Ulcers are Cured again by the same kind of Alkaly, their use there would
rather enlarge the Ulcers; whence it necessarily follows, those Ulcers that
proceed from the Habit of the Body, and are cured by Alkalies must arise from
Acids. The next Symptom to be accounted for in this Distemper is the Lepra, and
is as difficultly Cured as any that Occurs to Observation, its cause I take to
be from Volatile Acrimonious Particles, mixed with a feculent Bile, and
separated by the Milliary Glands of the Cutis, discovered by Leevenhock, and
Malpigius, and bursting them Concrete into a Dry, White and Yellow Furfur: That
the cause of this Symptoms is from such Acrimonious Particles, is evident from
the Excoriation of the Cuticula, and the Gleeting, continual Itching, and
Stinging, which are very obvious. This Symptom is not so common amongst the
Europeans, as the Indians, particularly in the Mindano, Malagan, and Philippine
Islands where it is almost Epidemical; the Natives there are not much disturbed
at it, having a certain Cure by Vigetables there produced, the discovery of
which could not yet be extorted from them by any Method whatever. In this state
of the Diseases, I have frequently Salivated the Patient, and it has as often
returned, yet have more than once known it Cured by a long continuance of the
Acidulae or Chalybeate Waters, cold Baths, and an universal abstinence from
Flesh Meats, of which Regimen that Learned, and ingenious Gentleman, Edward
Baynard, Doctor of Physic, and Fellow of the College of Physicians gave me the
first intimation. Who some Years ago recovered a Patient at the Bath, when
Bathing, and Drinking those Waters, and repeated Salivations had all been
insuccessful, the Person I saw at London, in perfect Health, and I believe to
this day continues so; sometimes in this Distemper there happens a flux of
Blood from the Bowels, shining and black as Pitch, caused by a Rupture of the
Vessels, but this Symptom being in a great measure accounted for before, I
shall not recapitulate. By the Viscidness of the Lympha in this Distemper, the
Nerves that branch into the Muscles become Obstructed, hence in the hands I
have often observed the Chorea Sancti Viti, or the Dance of St. Vitus, when by
the Antic motions of the hands, the Persons seems to Mimick Buffoons and
Juglers: And sometimes in the Thighs from a parallel cause arise those
Unaccountable Convulsive Motions; that one might reasonably have concluded some
living Animal had there taken its abode, Muscular motion is peformed by every
Muscle (except the Sphincters) having its opposite, or Antagonist, hence as one
Dilates the other Contracts, so that the Nerves obstructed in either of them by
these Humors, such kind of motions must consequently ensue. Having now
assigned the Rationale of its various Symptoms in a simple State, in the next
place let us consider it as complicated with the Iaundice, Drospy, Strumas,
periodic Hemicranias, Epilepsies, Vertigos, and Asthmas, and in those Enumerate
only some particular instances, the Symptoms being before accounted for. As to
its complication with the Jaundice and Dropsy, I shall give you some instances
in my ensuing Discourse of the Dropsy, which will illustrate the Hypothesis by
peculiar Demonstration in the Dissections of some Persons that died of the
same, I will only insert the cases of two Persons yet living, and in Health in
this Town of Manchester, the one was of Mr. James Scot, the other of Mrs.
Boulton, Wife to one of our Chaplains; the Skin was Yellow, and Livid, the Eyes
Yellow, the Urine Black, and resembling Mum, its quantity small, the Appetite
dejected, the Limbs swelled, and pitted, a continual Thirst, and universal
Weakness; these by Emollient Hydragoges, Antiscorbutics, Anteicterics,
Aperitives, Stomachics, and Chalibeated Syrups prepared from Sal. Martis. were
to the surprise of their acquaintance restored to their perfect Healths: By a
method not much unlike this, I recovered the Lady Leicester, of Higher-Tabley
in Cheshire, who was then afflicted with the black Jaundice, a violent
Hemicrania complicated with this Distemper.

One remarkable instance I will insert more, of Mr. John Sherburn, Steward to
the Honorable Bartholomew Whalmesly, of Dunkenhall in Lancashire, Esquire in whom
these Symptoms were observable, he was incessantly tormented with an
intolerable Headache, to that intense degree, that even Life it self grew
burdensome, and had not the Dictates of Conscience interfer'd, could have
acquiesced willingly in a Manumission; The Spirits by the saline Particles of
the Blood, were put into such disorderly motions, that he often fancied the
Persons attending him, were inverted and stood upon their Heads, and himself
too in the same Posture: at other times he imagined there was an Aperture of
the Sutures of the Skull, and seldom slept but in some small intervals in the
Day time; his Urine was often Lixivial, and sometimes faetid, and bore upon its
superficies a saline Film, where the Salts were Chrystalline, and shot into
Needle like forms, or Bacilli; The points of those, I presume, occasioned his
insufferable pains; the Pulse was generally Depressed, and Languid, but
Frequent, and Vermiculating; Methods of various kinds were attempted, but in
vain, as Blistring, Bleeding, Vomiting, Purging, Cupping, Antiscorbutics,
Cephalics, Issues, the Cortex, Shaving the Head, all which afforded but some
small intervals of ease, hence I concluded the Mass of Blood to be too deeply
saturated with saline Particles to yield to those courses; so I resolved to
proceed to a Salivation, and try by that means to remove the Malady, this was
affected by Calomelanos, prepared by Signiour Vigani Professor of Chemistry at
Cambrige, and by that method he was perfectly recovered.

The general method of Cure in Scorbutic cases, may be composed of the
following intentions: First, to cleanse the first Passages by universal
Evacucations, as Emetics, and Cathartics, secondly, by Antiscorbuticks to
reduce the mass of Blood to a regular Crasis: The forms of those are at large
described by other Authors, wherefore I shall not trouble the Reader with them;
I only observe this, that the best of those I have found, are the Natural
Chalibeat Waters, and after due preparations, Bathing in temperate or cold
Baths, as at Buxton and St. Mungus, what farther is to be done chiefly consists
in Diet, which ought to be but a moderate quantity of flesh Meats, and those
fresh, Antiscorbutick Teas, Fruits, Gruel, and Panadoes, these are the most
remarkable things relating to this Head, so I shall close this Section.

SECT. II.
Of CONSUMPTIONS.

COnsumptions in general as they occur to us in daily practice may be reduced
into these following Classes, (viz.) Scorbutic, Strumous or Chylous, or they
are frequently the effects of Epidemick intermitting Fevers, or Dropsies, the
Rickets, Surfeits, Impetigo, the Chlorosis, fluor albus, Rheumatick,
Scorbutic, Jaundice, of an Hernia Carnosa, spitting or Vomiting Blood, and
very often the Worms.

But since the Scorbutic Phthisis rages more Familiarly amongst us, it shall
chiefly be the subject of my present Discourse.

Scorbutic Phthisis may challenge three Originals contracted either from the
Air, or they are Hereditary, or proceed from some error in the six Non-naturals.

I Will speak first of those that arise from the Air, they are called Stationary,
or Diseases peculiar to such a place.

In those parts which abound with Marshy grounds, or where the Air is all
impleted with the smoke of Pit Coal, these Consumptions are in a manner
Epidemical.

This granted, it is plain this Distemper owns its rise, and Progress, to
Vitriolick, Sulphurous, Saline Particles; But to illustrate this Hypothesis
take these following Experiments.

Drop a little Spirit of Vitriol upon Spittle, there immediately ensues a White
Viscous Coagulum, like what is frequently Coughed up in Consumptions.

Or take some of the Vitriolick Spring near Haigh in Lancashire, mix that with
Saliva, you will then distinguish the Coagulation to be of an Ashy Color,
Parallel to that I have often observed in a Scorbutic Phthisis.

Or if you distill Kenel, there strait ascends a Vitriolick Liquor, mix that
with the Serum of the Blood, it passes strait into a very Viscous Coagulum, the
same as in a Scorbutic Phthisis.

These things premised, it is evident that by Vitriolick Particles, the
Spittle, and Serum of the Blood are rendered Viscid, and in Taste, Consistence,
and Color adequate to what we find in Scorbutic cases.

Since then as is Demonstrable by Chemistry, these Vitriolick Partricles are
disunited by Fire, and fill in Crowds the circumambient Atmosphere, and that in
such an Air the Phthisis is most general and particular, it is but a rational
consequence to imagine, that then these Vitriolick Particles communicated to
the Mass of Blood by the Air we breath in, begin, and cherish this Stationary
Phthisis.

But now the principal difficulty to be solved is this, how the Inhabitants
bordering on Salt and Marshy Coasts, become the subjects of this Distemper, and
are so much infested with it, who live only upon the products of the Fields,
and altogether abstain from Meats Salted, or Dried in Smoke, how, I say, the
Air here becomes saturated with saline Particles, since Marine Salts, as is
plain by Evaporation, are of a more fixed Nature than to ascend by the Heat of
the Sun or the force of the Winds.

Having had several Thoughtful Essays on this subject I brought it at length to
this Conclusion.

It is very clear to any Man's Observation, that these Maritime Climes abound
both with Sulphurous, and Saline Particles, this Hypothesis is confirmed by
the subsequent Arguments.

In the first place about Even-tide in these parts are to be seen infinite
flashes, like so many Phosphors bursting from out the Earth which undoubtedly
argues a Sulphur to be there, in the second place very fetid smells are often
emitted like what are discernable in a Mixture of Sulphur and Salt, so that
from these Salt and marshy places, Sulphurous Particles continually arising,
are yet so entangl'd with Saline ones, that they bear them up upon their
Points, and by that means impregnate all the Neighboring Atmosphere; for since
this Phthisis is so universal in those Airs, it is but reasonable to suppose it
draws its nourishment from Sulphurous, Saline Particles.

For a farther Confirmation of this Hypothesis we may draw an Argumen te
Contrario, as for instance, this Distemper is very rare where these saline
Loams are wanting, hence it is that in some places of Russia, and New England,
for a whole Year together you will scarce hear a Person Cough, though he
inhabits on the Sea Coasts, and why may it not be for the same reason that the
Air in Monpelier, is become so famous against Consumptions though it borders on
the Mediterranean Sea.

When on the other hand in the first mentioned places not a Year passes, but
Consumptions, Dropsies, Scorbutic intermitting Fevers, nay whole Myriads of
Diseases very severely abound, so that we may almost say of these Salt and
Marshy places, as Pythagoras did of the Herb Aproxis, whose Root takes Fire
like Naphtha, and by whose Effluvia the Air is renderd infectious.

It remains now that I treat of the other species of a Scorbutic Phthisis,
(viz.) arising from some error of the six Non-natnrals, and those that are
Hereditary, as to the first, their causes may be explained by the above recited
Arguments, so waving them, I Will proceed to the Scorbutic Hereditary
Consumption.

It passes for an undoubted truth amongst Philosophers, and Anatomists that an
Human Foetus is formed in the Ovum, but the manner how these Ova become
impregnated is the Controversy.

The Ova are guarded by a double Membrane, and involved in their proper Coats,
so that not one Drop can be squeezed from them, there are some that very
zealously assert, they are impregnated by a certain Gas Virile, or Seminal Air;
certain it is, and very obvious to us in practice, that many laboring under
this Distemper have prosecuted the steps of their Forefathers, although their
Mothers through the whole Course of their Lives have continued strong, and
healthful, some are seized with it about the same Age their Fathers were
before, some perhaps sooner, some later, some have all along continued sickly
and infirm, others robust, and vigorous enough, till the very seizure of the
Consumption, and all this according to the different Crasis of the Semen
Virile, even as the Spirits are lodged there, or more or less depressed, or the
Saline Particles exalted, hence the very Principles of Life form our different
Constitutions, and so early or late the Person becomes Consumptive.

Upon the whole it is my Opinion, that the Semen Virile in the Uterus is
absorbed by the extremities of the Vessels, and thence communicated to the mass
of Blood, which by its Circulation impregnates the Ova, for how is it possible
the Gout or the Stone should be derived from the Father by a Seminal Air? The
conclusion is very evident to the contrary; but of this I have treated before.

I shall proceed now to the Symptoms of this Disease, which I will very briefly
lay down as I have Experimentally found them.

A loss of Appetite, and Strength, generally attends the Patient, with a
straitness or compression of the Breast, a tickling Cough, the Spittle Large,
Thick, White, and sometimes Yellow, Pellucid, Sky Colored, Faetid, Salt, Acid,
Sweet, more or less, according to the Discrasy of the Blood, and the quality of
the Obstruction, with profuse sweatings in the Night time, a tabidness of the
Flesh, hot and cold fits alternately succeeding, the Urine Lixivial, with a
very large sediment, sometimes Yellow, and sometimes Red, many times a
Diarrhaea, and Gripes of the Belly torment them, with swelling of the Extreme
parts.

These things observed I will now endeavor to assign the reason of those
Symptoms, and first, as to the loss of Appetite it may thus happen, those
Glandules seated in the lower part of the Stomach, which were wont to separate
subacid Humors flowing from the Arteries, by which the Nervous Fibers
irritated, the Appetite was excited, but they being now clogged with viscous
Humors, are rendered very unfit for that motion, hence proceeds that loathing
of Meat: That there are such Humors is very apparent in some Persons after
taking a Vomit, if we observe the great quantity of tough phlegm they discharge.

By the same Viscid Humors extravasated in the Lungs, the inspiration of the
Air is interrupted, hence proceeds that straitness of the Breast the Person
complains of; this glutinous matter separated by the tracheal Glands is often
thrown up in large quantities, and this also besmearing all the Trachaea,
occasions hoarsness, the Conglobate Glandules thus stuffed by these Coagulations,
and the small Foramina of the Lymphaeducts at the same time obstructed; that
Lympha which used to pass through them, now deprived of its proper Emunctories,
regurgitates into the mass of Blood, and forces its way through unwonted
Passages, and thence it happens, that by the Glands of the Windpipe those
continued showers are distilled as is plain in a tickling Cough.

By the same parity of reason those large sweats are so frequent, and hence
comes the Diarrhea, Gripes, and Swellings of the extreme parts.

Sometimes by these tough and clammy Humors, the Glandules of the Mesentery
become Obstructed, and even the Chyle it self is intercepted in its Passage to
the Blood, whence the whole Body robbed of its daily nourishment, the strength
decays, the Patient Emaciates, and the Excrements are often White, the very
Lacteal Vessels disappear, just as we may observe the Milky Way in the Heavens,
screened from us by interposing Clouds.

Some portions of the Chyle are precipitated by Saline Particles, thence
happens the spittle emitted by Cough to be white, thick, and sweetish; and
sometimes urged through the Kidneys, the Urine then becomes filled with a
white, and plentiful Sediment.

By the subsidence of the Muscles, the Prognostication is Ominous, as the
common People apprehend, the Soul then being about to desert the Body and ready
to take Wing; Hippocrates and others of the Greeks Denominate such Persons
(...).

The Glands of the Liver Obstructed forbid a due separation of the Bile, which
rebounding into the Blood, and Fermenting there with its Acids, thence a slow
Fever ensues, and the same reason may be alleged for so large, a Yellow, or Red
Sediment in a Lixivial Urine.

As to the hot and cold fits successively intervening, they may very easily
proceed from such a Fermentation, and so unequal a mixture of the sour Chyle in
the Blood.

The Spittle as we hinted before in this Distemper is often Thick, White, and
Sweet, occasioned by a Precipitation of the Chyle upon the Lungs, and sometimes
it happens to be thin, and Pellucid, commixt with Thick, this I conclude to be
the Lympha which instead of passing through its proper Ducts, by reason of the
obstructions of the Conglobate Glands, forces it self through other secretory
Vessels; and in this case He mightily errs, who offers obstinately to stay the
the Defluxion by Opiates; He might equalty pretend to check the Billows in a
raging Storm.

At other times the Spittle is Sky Colored, Salt, and Bitter, these happen as
the Bile, and Salts of different species are indifferently intermixed.

There yet remains another familiar Symptom to be explained, how in this
Distemper the Urine becoming so very Lixivial, and depositing so large, and red
a Sediment, yet affords a very grateful and sweet smell, not unlike those
Urines voided after the Administration of Turpentine, and preparations of
Sulphur, its superficies at the same time being all overspread with a thin
Oleagenous Pellicle: In this case I suppose the Urine to be highly saturated
with Saline, and Vitriolick Particles, the Saline Particles after their
Effervessence with the Bile Precipitate it, hence ensues that vast quantity of
Sediment, and those two Bodies by Fermentation grow Red, just like Sulpher
exalted by Fire, and thence it is the Deposita of the Urine appear so like
Brick; The Saline Particles likewise in their Fermentation entangle some
Oleagenous Particles, which in that hurry being forced through the Reins, and
the Urine thus impregnated, being exposed to Air, these Oily Sulphurous
Particles striving to disengage themselves, float upon the surface, and emit so
pleasant on Odor, an instance like to this is in dulcifying Spirit of Nitre,
with Spirit of Wine, which must necessarily strengthen the Hypothesis, where
the like smell is very distinguishable.

But now the Query is, whether in this State the Lungs are always full of
Tubercles, as the Eminent Morton proposes; I confess indeed in these parts the
People are generally as averse to a Dissection, as an Execution, so I neither
deny nor assent to it; yet as far as I have observed in practice, I affirm,
that not one Symptom of an Inflammatory Fever has appeared in many Persons who
have sunk under this Distemper; to this Opinion the History of Dr. Bennet
agrees, taken out of Theatr. Tabidor. page 96. (viz.) When I practiced Physic
at Bristol, in that Vaulted City Consumptions were very frequent, I met with
some that with no great difficulty Expectorated a sweetish Spittle, yet in the
space of three Months were grown very feeble, and enervate, some indeed of
these, though not all were much fatigued with Coughing, and so wasting
insensibly dyed Tabid, for satisfaction in this Case we opened a certain
Person, who after he had ceased Spitting a Salt Phlegm, for some time Coughed
up Blood, the Lungs indeed had lost their Tone, yet both them, and the other
Viscera appeared sound.

However mistake me not as if I inferred from this instance, that the Lungs in
Consumptive Cases were never filled with Tubercles, for I have often seen them
Ulcerated: I only affirm this, that in this common Lancashire Consumption,
where the Patient suffers a daily decay, and continually throws off a Thick,
and White Spittle, in the beginning, I say, and increase of this Distemper, the
Lungs could not be pierced, nay I have known many die without one Symptom of an
Hectic, through the whole course of the Disease, so that we may reasonably
conclude their Lungs could not be Ulcerated.

Proceed we now to treat of the Phthisis in a confirmed state, and here we may
observe Nature every day declining, insomuch that the Mass of Blood contracting
a very Vitriolic habit; the Spittle tastes like Alom, or Salt of Steel, and
now it is the Saline Particles range at Large, and know no bounds, now the
Fever becomes more continued and strong, by Fermentation of the Vitriolic, and
Sulphurous Particles; as when you mix Oil of Vitriol, and Oil of Turpentine
together.

By this Effervescence the Capillary Vessels of the Cheeks become distended,
hence happens that fixed red Color on both sides the Face, a certain signal of
approaching Death; just like the last efforts of a Lamp deprived of Oil, it
flashes and expires, or like a setting Sun, gilding red all the Hemisphere.

The Conglobate Glandules thus more and more Obstructed, and a greater quantity
of the Nutritious juice being daily precipitated, a thicker and more plentiful
Spittle follows, by the Vitriolic Particles commixt with the Sulphur of the
Blood, and hence ensues a smell like that of Faetid Fish.

The Lungs at length oppressed with an uncommon weight of Phlegm, the Patient
becomes Asthmatical, and finds a continual burden upon his Breast, and in this
case I have known the Spittle to be extraordinary Faetid, yet not always
proceeding from Ulcers of the Lungs, as some assure us, for how could those
Persons be free from a Diarrhaea, and sweats, when the Lungs are all penetrated
with Ulcers; The cause of this stench may rather be attributed to Volatile
Sulphurous Particles, pointed with Saline Ones, with which the Serum of the
Blood abounding they commix with the Saliva, for the Sulphurous Particles apt
enough to fly off, bear along with them the Saline Ones, and strike upon the
sensory, and affect it with a Nauseous smell; When on the contrary Sulphurous
Particles, per se, disentangl'd from SalineOnes, touch upon the Olfactory
Fibers, produce a very grateful scent, as is Evident in the Effluvias of
Aromatic and Balsamic Flowers, and now the Nutritious juice Expectorated in
vast quantities, the Facies Hippocratica, and a Marasmus of the whole Body is
the consequence.

The Conglobate Glands being still more Obstructed, and the Blood all
degenerated into a Saline temper, the Patient is now afflicted with profuse
sweats, violent Diarrhaeas, with acute pains like those in Rheumatisms almost
intolerable, some complaining of Pains in the Bones, in whom there is not the
least suspicion of the Lues Venerea.

One Symptom more remains not less common than the rest, and worthy our highest
regard, in many Persons emaciated to mere Skeletons, and reduced even to the
last Extremity, the Appetite yet remains good and laudable, nor is any Hectic
heat the effect of Eating, no Sweats nor Diarrhaeas nor inflation of the
Stomach, attend the Patients, and yet they insensibly wast away, throwing up a
large quantity of Thick, and White Plegm.

From what has been said we may sufficiently gather, that the Natural ferment
of the Stomach sharpened with the Vitriolick Particles of the Blood, irritate
its Nervous Fibers: The Spirits thus excited, produce a quicker motion, and
promote the Appetite, which, Ostrich like, covets and dissolves whatever is
ingested, hence passing through the Lacteals, and Chyliferous Ducts it enters
the Mass of Blood, and is there by the Saline Particles precipitated into
Thick, and unnutritive Humors, incapable to transpire by Sweat, or descend by
Diarrhaeas, but subside in the Lungs, and by that means the party continually
declines.

There is yet another remarkable Symptom under this Head, that an irregular
intermitting Fever seizes very many almost spent with this Distemper, some it
assaults only once, others twice or thrice in the space of Twenty four Hours;
It rushes on with great disorder with an Itching betwixt the Scapulas and
Loins: The whole Body trembling is rendered Convulsive, and an intense heat
succeeds, and after that sweats, and sometimes a looseness; what can these
Reciprocal returns of Heat, and Coldness proceed from? But from sharp Salt
Humors extravasated upon the Nervous Membranes, upon the Extremities of the
Nerves, and the subcutaneous Miliary Glands, these parts being saturated to
excess, and Vellicated by their Acrimony, of course produce those Chilling
Pains, but at Length the Humors being absorbed by the extremities of the
Vessels, and then mixing with the Blood, a new Fermentation with the
Sulphurous Particles arises, and so the Feverish heat renews; The Morbifick
matter at length overcome is cast off by Sweat or Siege.

I have known some who in a State of Health, have been of a very pleasing and
agreeable Disposition, yet being much worn out by this Distemper, have grown
very fretful and peevish, and so violently Passionate, that they could scarce
endure to see, or hear any one speak; this must needs be the effect of the sour
juices of the Blood, that nettle, and enrage the Spirits.

To conclude, something might be added here concerning the other Species of
Consumptions, those that are either Hereditary, or arise from some error of
living, but since their Symptoms are observed to be much the same, it is but
reasonable to suppose their Originals so too.

Every State of the Consumption might be Illustrated with Parallel Histories,
as likewise the Methods of Cure might here be proposed, but those being
accounted for before in my Phthisiologia Lancastriensis, to that I refer you.

SECT. III.
Of the DROPST.

I Shall now proceed to treat of the Dropsy which the Greeks divide into three
Species, (viz.) The Timpanites, the Ascites, and Anasarca, the Timpanites
receives its Denomination from its Sound, the Ascites from the Figure it
represents of a Bottle, or the Uterus, and the Anasarca from an ill Habit
contracted in the Muscular parts, but to reconcile the different Opinions of
the Ancient and Moderns, which are near as Numerous as their several Authors,
would be to as slender purpose, as to Command the Winds raging in a Storm: I
therefore only take notice of some topping Hypotheses, and so give you my own
Opinion; The causes assigned by the Ancients for Dropsies, were either a Flatus
as the Timpanites, or else a Weakness of the Liver, and thence by a defect of
Sanguification ensued the Ascites and Anasarca; According to our Celebrated
Willis, the Timpanites proceeded from a Convulsive motion of the Stomach,
called Tetanus, disturbing its Nervous Fibers; This Opinion seems to me very
improbable, for how can a Convulsive motion in that part continue so equally
for so many Years: I have known many afflicted with the Timpany and all along
have digested well their Food, have been free from Thirst, and disturbed
neither with Sweats nor Gripes, their Urine has been plentiful and laudable
enough, which agreeable Symptoms could never happen, was the Stomach still
inflated with such a Convulsive motion; as to the other species of the Dropsy,
he alleges, they arise from the Mass of Blood become Acid and Vapid, and the
Chyle by that means rendered incapable to assimilate it self to it, but how
this Discrasia comes in that point he is silent; which, in its proper place, I
will endeavor to disclose. What our Eminent Sydenham Writes concerning this
Disease, respects chiefly the Practice, to whose Works I refer you; The late
Dr. Morton asserts their causes to arise from the Conglobate Glandules grown
Schirrous, which tumefying burst the Lymphatick Vessels, but his error in this
will very plainly appear in a Dissection or two I shall instance in. The
Learned Dr. Lister in his Exercitation of Dropsies, positively assigns the
Origin of this Disease, to proceed from a defect of the first Concoction, and
from the Stomach being inflamed even to a Cauterisation, but his mistake in
this, as in many other things, shall be briefly shown.

I do here affirm, I have known many Dropsical Persons through the whole Course
of the Disease retain a very good Digestion, and their Urine both in quantity
and quality agreeable enough, which things considered, it is beyond the Power
of Sense to reconcile those Placid Symptoms to a Stomach so highly inflamed; It
now remains, with the leave of so many Eminent Authors, that I propose my own
Opinion, which I am far from positively asserting, but shall fairly refer it to
the judgment of the Learned World: The Dropsy then may be divided into two
species only, (viz.) the Bilious and Lymphatick; I call that Bilious,
proceeding from thick condensated Choler, Obstructing both the Glands and
Biliary Pores of the Liver, hence the Bile denied a due separation, the
Lymphatick Vessels, both in the Liver, Kidneys, and others parts of the Body,
become distended, and at length bursting, produce indifferently, either the
Ascites or Anasarca. The Lymphatick Dropsy arises from a Viscid Lympha,
producing the same effects in those Vessels as are alleged above; the Aetiology
whereof shall in what follows be explained.

That the Dropsy may proceed from thick Coagulated Choler, is confirmed by the
Examination the Learned Sylvius makes of its Principles; it consists of a
Lixivial Volatile and Oily Salt, very apt for Fermentation with any Acid, and
thence according to the different Genius of the Acid, different effects are
produced; let us then imagine the Bilious Particles either in the first
Passages, or in the mass of Blood, altered from their Natural Crasis by Saline,
Acid, Muriatick, or other Acrid Bodies, by which means the Bile becomes
faeculent, perhaps not unlike Vitriolated Tartar; The Glands of the Liver hence
become Obstructed, and its due secretion forbidden, they then swell beyond a
common Compass, and the Particles rush qua via datur into the Lymphatick
Vessels, which they must necessarily Distend, and Lacerate; it is very common
to our Observation, that where ever this faeculent matter is deposited the part
tumifies even to a solution of continuity, from whence a Yellow Liquor
continually distills, of a bitter Pungent taste, which is a certain Argument of
its being saturated with Bilious Particles.

The Kidneys likewise obstructed by this faeculency, we find the Urine to be
small, and of an high Color, not unlike Brumswick Mum, its sediments Yellow,
and often times Black and Red, the Tongue Yellow and Dry, a continual Thirst,
Pungent Pains all over the Body, and a general Lassitude: In these desperate
Circumstances Mankind lives like an Amphibious Animal, and in a Deluge of
Waters breathing in Air, hence through defect of Inspiration that difficulty of
breathing ensues.

As to the Lymphatick Dropsy it may thus happen, the Saline Particles of the
Blood, as was alleged before in the Treatise of Consumptions, according to
their different species Coagulating the Mass of Blood, in what ever part of the
Body they are nested, there assuredly they condense the Lympha, and render it
gelatinous like the Whitesof Eggs, and so consequently must swell and burst the
Vessels as is above recited; One thing in this kind of Dropsy is worthy our
taking notice of, that the Patient is not disturbed with Thirst, the Urine in
quantity and quality laudable, the Appetite rather too craving than dejected,
no pains invade, save that of bearing about so heavy a mass of Water, and this
sort of Dropsy is more incident to Women than Men, and though it has hitherto
been mistaken for a Timpanites, it is truly a Dropsy of the Peritonaeum, the
Lymphaeducts of which Membrane are burst, and its Glandules highly tumify'd,
hence and no otherwise ensues the Timpanites, as shall be rendered apparent by
the following Histories.

For a farther confirmation I refer you to Nuck, Ettmullerus, and Iuncken. From
what has been said the causes of the Ascites, and Anasarca may be easily
deduced, wherefore I shall not insist longer on their Aetioligies, but shall
proceed to illustrate our Hypothesis in the following cases.

The first, shall be of Mr. John Leeds, Bachelour of Physic, who practiced
many Years in this Town of Manchester, he was seized with the Black Jaundice,
upon which ensued, an Ascites, and Anasarca; no endeavors were wanting to
relieve him, and no Methods of Physic unessay'd to Cope with the Disease, but
in vain; generally Beloved, and now as generally Lamented, he Expired: through
the whole course of his Distemper, his Digestion was good, his Thirst little or
nothing, at which I wondered, his Urine but small, yet for Color and
Consistence like Brumswick Mum, with a Black Sediment, his Body was Emaciated,
and his Countenance Ghastly and Wan; toward his latter end, a Cough was very
troublesome to him: His Body being opened, thirty six Pints of a Yellow bitter
Water was discharged from the Abdomen, there was little or none of the Omentum
remaining, the Stomach was some what contracted but no ways inflamed, the
Spleen retained its Natural Color and State, the Conglobate Glandules were of
a suitable Magnitude, neither schirrous nor fumify'd, the Lacteal Vessels as
much as I observed of them no ways altered.

But when the Liver was exposed, its whole substance was indurated, inscision
being made into it, those Glands first discovered by Malpigius, were turgent,
and large as common Hail Stones, all impleted with a faeculent CrassBile; from
the whole it is undeniably apparent, this must be a Bilious Dropsy and
Challenges no Original, either from the Stomach inflamed, or the Conglobate
Glands indurated, but only from a faeculent Bile obstructing both the Glandules
of the Liver, and its Lymphatick Vessels: How the Bile becomes thus degenerated
is before Explained.

The next instance Parallel to this is of Lieutenant Colonel John Williams, in
Her late Majesty's Regiment of Dragoons, he was seized with the Black Jaundice,
at his Quarters in Manchester, the same Ominous Symptoms ensued, as in the
preceding Case, he swelled gradually in the Belly, his Urine in Color and
Quantity as is above recited, yet his Digestion was laudable enough, and his
Thirst not troublesome; the Ascites, and Anasarca came on a pace, all our
attempts in the Physical way, gave only some intervals of ease, alleviated
indeed, but removed not the main Obstructions; for several Weeks he kept
regularly to a course of Physic and Diet, toward the end of his Distemper his
Cough was violently tedious, and the swellings of his Thighs, and Legs fatigued
him with a constant uneasiness, insomuch, that all Rest interrupted, even Life
it self grew burdensome; thus every Day declining, his Manly Soul at length
took flight: About twenty four Pints of Water were taken out of the Cavity of
the Abdomen; the Omentum was not so much consumed as in Mr. Leeds; the Stomach,
Spleen, and all the other Viscera were genial enough, except the Liver, where
the same Scene was represented to us as before, and from whence unquestionably
all that Tragic Series of Mortal Symptoms arose.

It was easy to account for many more of the like cases, where the same unhappy
Train of consequences attended, but these being particular Dissections, I
fairly in them appeal to a Demonstration.

I shall now descend to illustrate my Hypothesis of the Lymphatick Dropsy by
the following instance.

Mrs. Heywood living at the Roades near Manchester, aged about Fifty Eight; for
four Years was afflicted with the Tympany, all along she Eat her Food, and
Digested it will, was clear and free from Thirst, her Urine was plentiful
enough, nor was her Countenance any ways altered from an healthful Complexion,
and save for the increase of the Tumor of the Abdomen, she was other wise very
hearty, and sprightly, she had gone through all the Classes of Physic, but
alas! The Numerous Prescripts of a multitude of Physicians were all
unsuccessful; Her case was sent up to the London Physicians, where different
Opinions, directed different methods, whether they had not rightly the Case
stated to them, or that the distance of place precluded their nicer
Observations, I cannot be positive, but all endeavors were in vain; Her Belly
still increasing to the Magnitude of a large Globe, she sunk beneath the Load:
Full seventy Pints of Water, the greater part very Viscous, were discharged
from the Cavity, the Muscles of the Abdomen were all Emaciated, and the Omentum
totally consumed; The Peritonaeum was full five Inches thick, whose Duplicature
formed a very large Sacculus, all repleted with Schirrous Glandules highly
tumify'd, and pellucid Vesicules, as big as the common bunches of Grapes, the
Liquor contained in these Bladders, was like the Whites of Eggs clear and
Gelatinous; The Stomach, Spleen, Liver, Mesentery, as much as I could perceive
of them were in a pure Natural State, nor were the Ovaria impleted with those
Vesicules, but appeared very sound; These were the most remarkable things to be
taken notice of, and doubtless the case was what is generally called a Timpany;
which notwithstanding if we'll but Credit our Eyes, arose neither from a
Tetanus of the Stomach, nor as the Ancients would have it, from the flatness,
or vapors of the Abdomen; But merely from the Lymphatick Vessels of the
Peritonaeum, distended, and burst.

I had two cases sent me, by the Learned Dr. Griffith, who resided at
Warrington in Lancashire, in the Year 1696. since removed to Dublin, the one
was in all Circumstances like the last mentioned, so I shall forbear to relate
it; In the other the Uterus proved to be the seat of the Tumor from whence
about sixteen Pints of very putrid Water were Emitted, his account may be seen
at large in my 54 Exercitationes, Printed at Oxford. From all which it is
abundantly Demonstrable, that this Lymphatick Dropsy arises from the Lympha
renderd Viscid by Saline Particles, for did it proceed from the Inflammation of
the Bowels, or Glandules, the Patients would assuredly be afflicted with
thirst, and complain of Heat, whereas neither was a grievance. Yet mistake me
not as if I imagined every Lymphatick Dropsy to arise from the Peritonaeum, I
only assert that Dropsy which is commonly called the Timpany.

The other Species, as well the Ascites as Anasarca, may happen in any part of
the Body abounding with Lympheducts; The Timpany likewise in other Membranous
Parts may form Cistus's and Vesicules, as in the Uterus, or the Cornua Uteri,
or many other places, but most frequently in the Peritonaeum; Whoever has a
desire to be farther informed how these Hydatides are formed in the Lymphatick
Vessels by Mercurial injections into those Vessels, he may soon satisfy his
Curiosity.

And now as to Dr. Listers Hypothesis, the Query is whether Dropsies arise
sometimes from the Stomach in a manner cauterized, or from the Tunica Villosa
of the Stomach, having lost its Tone, as the Learned Willis would have it, for
my part I believe from both causes, as I have seen from many dissections; But
though it be allowed that Dropsies often arise from continued Debauches, and
surfeited Habits of Bodies, it does not thence follow that all the Species of
Dropsies spring from the same Origin: For how could it possibly be I beseech
you, that many Persons Temperate to a wonder, should yet so commonly die
Hydropical? As may be daily observed in them that are worn out, and almost
spent with lingering Fevers, and all Cacochymical, and Scorbutic constitutions;
I profess sincerely there is not any distemper tending more to the discredit of
Physicians, than the several Species of Dropsies: Hydragogues, Antiscorbuticks,
and Diuretics, of all degrees and kinds, I have known too often unsuccessfully
used, so could heartily wish for the good of Human kind some other more happy
methods were discovered.

As to the Cure in general of this Distemper, there are Specimens sufficient in
most Authors, I shall not therefore fill these Sheets with a Train of Recipes,
but shall only touch upon Two uncommon Heads, and refer them to the Learned
World.

The first shall be of the Pills prescribed by Crato, and his own disquisition
upon them, which are as follows, Terebinth. Clarae ss aq. Adianthi lbj, misce
and bulliant ad totalem aquae absumptionem, and add Cantharidum, abscissis
alis, and pedibus capitibusque subtiliter pulverisatarum j Mastich. Cinnamom.
ana. ss Rhabarb. elect, and pulv. j cum Ol. Amigdilar, q. s. f. Mass. Cujus ij
tuto dari possint, of which he thus descants, the Turpentine though in greatest
quantity, yet conduces much to the opening of the Urinary passages, and
strengthens the Entrails, the other Correctives are for the sake of the
Cantharides, as the Mastic, Rhubarb, Cinnamon and the Oil, how far these Pills
may benefit, or what improvements may be added, I have not yet Experienced, but
can see no reason why Cantharides may not be rendered as safe and wholesome a
Medicine, as Corrosive Sublimate, from which our Famous Calomelanos is
prepared; why may not the Volatile Salt of those Flies, though highly
Corrosive, be matched with an equal Correctour. Bartholine commends an infusion
of them, and if the Eminent Dr. Lister had directed his infusion of them, in
the Dropsy as well as in the Gonorrhaea, I believe he had not mist the mark.

The second Question is of no small moment, whether a moderate Salivation may
not be of advantage in this Distemper, the great effects that method produces
in Scrophulous, Scorbutic, and Venereal cases, are apparent to all the World,
when all other endeavors have failed; and since Dropsies generally arise and
bloom from the like Vitiated Ferment, why may not the success be as answerable
too?

That the Blood is effaete and vapid in Dropsies is evident enough, from whence
some Object the whole Economy of the Body is too infirm for that Course; But
whence is it this Debility of the Blood arises? Is it not from Saline Particles
abounding in the Mass of Blood? And how can the Body be more effectually, and
readily freed from them than by the proper Emunctories, the Salivating Ducts;
Nature her self methinks points us out the Road: To conclude, my advice is
this, whilst the Viscera remains sound, let this or some other promising method
be Essayed, to relieve the Languishing Patient.

I will give you one instance of a Dropsy proceeding from an unweildy fatness;
it was of Mr. Richard Heap, Bachelour of Arts, and Usher of Manchester School,
who as I conjectured had labored under a Dropsy, and an Hernia Intestinalis,
for near two Years; for all the Integuments of the Abdomen were suspended like
a large Satchel betwixt his Thighs, and were no little trouble to him in
Walking, various Methods were Essayed, and for about Twelvemonths he seemed to
be relieved, but the following Winter his Distemper renewed, and in the space
of three Weeks an Hundred and Twenty Pints of faetid Water, Issued through the
Velamina of the Scrotum, which at length Sphacelating he died; His Body being
opened, the substance of the Cutis was found to be very Schirrous, over all the
Region of the Groin, the Membrana adiposa was full seven Inches Thick, the
Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Intestines, and Mesentery Glandules, were in a sound
and healthful State; The Peritonaeum was entire and firm, a Corner of which
Membrane pierced through the whole substance of the Liver, and adhered to the
Vertebrae of the Spine, there were betwixt Twenty and Thirty Saccule's of Fat
about the size and shape of Pears, that adhered to the Bowels, but within the
Cavity not one Spoonful of Water: Through all his Distemper, he Eat, Drank, and
Digested well, and plentifully, had no extraordinary Thirst, and voided Urine
in quantity sufficient, and only that the swelling daily increased, he was
otherwise no ways indisposed; This must needs ensue from that weighty substance
of Fat pressing upon the Lymphatick Vessels, and thence Obstructing the due
Secretion of the Lympha, the Dropsy followed.

Having thus as briefly, and comprehensively as possible run through this large
Field of Chronical Diseases, from which Hypotheses many other Corallaries may
be deduced, I shall now descend to treat of acute and intermitting Distempers,
and so close the Chapter.

SECT. IV.
Of Acute Distempers in general, particularly the Pestilential Fever raging in
Lancashire, in the Years 1693, 94, 95, 96.

THere is scarce any Year but the Fever receives some new Appellation from the
common People, but those Fevers that rage chiefly amongst us at set Seasons, as
the Spring and Fall, may be reduced to these two Heads; They are either
inflammatory, malignant, intermittent Fevers, or they are simply intermittent:
In all the Learned Treatises yet Extant on this subject, nothing is more
familiar to us than an inflammation of the Blood, but what is meant by
inflammation seems yet to me to be unsolved; The Greeks divide inflammations
into two Species, (...), and (...), and these two Terms are taken either in a
large or strict Sense; when at large they mean any immoderate flushing
Momentaneous heat, that appears without a Tumor, such as present themselves
daily in Scorbutic Cases; But when strictly taken they signify to us a severe
hot swelling, red, and painful in the fleshy Parts of the Body, proceeding from
a Collection and stagnation of overheated Blood, Violently flowing upon the
Part, and disturbing all the inferior Orders of Vessels around it, but these
distinctions of inflammations our Modern Authors take no notice of; our
Celebrated Sydenham makes no difference betwixt Malignity and Inflammation, but
as the Blood is more or less Inflamed, so is the Malignity greater or less; as
for Malignity it self he condemns it as a subterfuge of ignorance, yet explains
not what he means by inflammation of the Blood, his whole performances rather
delineate to us the effects, than causes of inflammation; The Eminent Morton
says, the inflammation continues until the Febrile Poison, the Primary cause of
inflammation, is either expelled by Art or Nature, or that the Spirits sink
under it: by which account it is very plain he places the causes of
inflammation, in a certain Poison oppressing or destroying the Spirits, but
passes by in silence what that Poison is, so Noxious to Human kind, so that the
inflammation of the Blood, thus accounted for amounts to no more, nor gives us
any clearer Idea of its Aetioligy, than that Archaeus of Helmont, a mere riddle
to himself and all the World, or that Light within which directs to greater
Obscurity; Wepfer was in the right of it, when he takes notice of Helmont's
Ferment, that it was neither Substance, nor Accident, neither Man, Woman, nor
Hermophrodite; so consequently nothing. True indeed he acknowledges various
Species of Poisons, but reduces their Operations all to Occult qualities, and
to attempt their Explications, as he alleges, is only a Philosophical trifling;
but with the leave of so Eminent an Author, let us take Oil of Vitriol, Spirit
of Nitre, or any other Menstruum, we may readily discern their Effects, in
Corroding of Flesh, or Coagulating the Blood, or by a Menstruum prepared from
Cantharides, the like Phoenomena are produced, and all arise from a like cause,
but must it be no less than madness it self to endeavor their Analisis? And
must they altogether be solved by Occult qualities? If the matter stands thus,
how comes it that a Philosopher of the first Class, is Eminent beyond a Noisy
Mountebank? Or in relation to Physic, how comes it that a regular Physician,
out-strips a vulgar Emperick? Let us suppose a Person making his Observations
with Microscopes, whether shall we solve the different Phoenomena there, by
different refractions, or by Occult qualities? No one certainly in his Senses
would take the last for a Rational reply; This I know, that Sulphurous,
Saline, and Oleaginous Poisons, may be prepared out of various Bodies, nor does
it seem unreasonable to me, their different effects should be solved by certain
Principles: For my part let them Delight that will in Darkness, and by dusky
Notions obscure the sight of Mankind, I shall think it no Error freely to
Essay a solution of causes, and perhaps to will in some is to effect it.

To set aside all Controversies of this Nature, I will briefly explain what I
mean by Malignity or Inflammation of the Blood, by an Inflammation of the
Blood, I mean a Coagulation of its Serous Parts, proceeding from certain,
Saline, Austere, Acid, or Acrid Particles: For confirmation of which
Hypothesis, take the following Experiments: In the first place, Let Alum or
Vitriol be mingled with the Serum of the Blood, it straitways passes into a
sizy Viscous Coagulum, like what is observable on the superficies of the Blood
in Malignant inflammatory Distempers.

In the second place, Scorbutic Persons, Drinkers of Wine, and the Inhabitants
near the Seacoasts, whose Blood doubtless abounds with such Particles, are
above others subject to these Distempers, or how comes it that Bezoardick
Medicines are of such Efficacy here, unless by absorbing or otherwise altering
these Saline Particles, for Particles of different kinds will exert themselves,
and show their Power; that the Animal Spirits by these Medicaments are
expanded, and excited as some affirm, I confess is true, but thus I imagine it
to be Effected, not that the Medicines immediately act upon the Spirits, but by
destroying the Saline Particles, they dissove the Coagulation of the Blood, and
hence the Animal Spirits unfettered, in a constant, and continued Course
perform their waving Motions, and like the Sun darting its rays through all the
enlightened Hemisphere, actuate the whole Microcosm, and those Noble actions of
the Spirits display themselves, which were almost extinct in a Viscous Lympha,
and appeared only as a Star twinkling in an hazy Air, and diffused only some
Languid Motions, through the whole frame of the Body; that saying of
Hippocrates agrees with this (...), that is an interception of the Spirits in
the Veins, occasioned by a severe Obstruction there; for this reason it is,
that Camphir, a Natural Sal. Volat. Oleos. is so much applauded in Pestilential
Diseases, by Iunken, Ettmullerus, and others, and this I Experimentally speak,
that for two or three Years past, I made use of Electuar. de Ovo, in which
Camphir is an ingredient, and met with desirable success in Malignant
Pestilential Fevers, and judge it equal to the Noblest Alexipharmics, from the
whole we conclude, that the more or less these Saline Particles are Malignant
or Inflammatory, the Distemper is more or less Acute or Pestilential: For a
farther illustration, if we drop a little Spirit of Nitre into Blood
immediately taken out of the Arm, it produces even in the twinkling of an Eye,
a Black Viscous Coagulum, which a solution of Vitriol effects but very slowly,
and hence it is these Distempers are sometimes called Essential, Spurious, and
sometimes Scorbutic, which is attributed to the solutions of Salts of
different Kinds, Coagulating the Lympha, and Contracting, and Vellicating the
Membranes, Nerves, and all the Limbs of the Body, but against this Hypothesis
these Objections occur.

First, In inflammatory Distempers it very often happens the Blood is diluted,
so consequently cannot be Coagulated, as is evident from the frequent large
returning Haemorrhagies, and from the use of Acids, and a slender diet in these
Cases.

Secondly, In these Distempers the very first Symptoms sometimes appear in the
Genus Nervosum, and produce Deliriums, continual Watchfulness, and Convulsive
motions, wherefore it may seem reasonable they do not always proceed from a
Coagulation of the Blood, but rather from the Genus Nervosum.

To these I reply,

That doubtless there are Poisons of various Kinds, some of which fuse and
others Coagulate the Blood, as in that Disease called the Plica Polonica, and
others; but the present Controversy is not about these: we only enquire now
whether those Distempers called inflammatory amongst us, whether, I say, in
those the Blood is Coagulated or Colliquated, that is made to fluid.

To the first Objection I answer, though there happen sometimes Violent
Haemorrhagies in these Cases, yet these arise from a Coagulation of the Blood,
in this manner, in many of the Capillary Vessels the Blood being either
Coagulated, or through its Viscidity moving slowly, and still pressed forwards
from the larger Vessels, urges its passages through other Ramifications, and
hence ensues that expense of Blood through the Nostrils, sometimes the Stomach,
and Womb at Critical Seasons, which with Evacuations the Patient many time
expires; yea, very often we observe that even in those Persons these
Haemorrhagies happen, whose Blood upon the opening of a Vein appeared Black and
Sizy, which is an undeniable Demonstration of its Viscidness. To these may be
added the frequent fluxes of Blood in Scorbutic Cases, where the Blood is
unquestionably condensed, as the Purple Livid Spots abundantly evince: And in
these Persons, Testaceous Powders, preparations of Steel, Mineral Waters
Natural or Artificial, Challenge the first Class, either in absorbing or
altering the Saline Particles, and so promoting a free circulation of the
Blood. In the second place, as to what relates to Acids, we may allege with
Wedelius, that they both Coagulate and dissolve a Coagulation of the Blood, and
for this reason may be of Excellent use in these cases; besides, yet there are
Acids which Act upon each other, as Spirit of Niter and Oil of Vitriol, Vitriol
and Marine Salt, and thence are converted into a third substance, by the same
parity of reason though the cause of inflammatory Distempers may be deduced from
a Coagulation of the Blood, or Lympha from Saline Particles, etc. yet there are
Acids of different kinds, imagine the juice of Berberies, or Limons, or Gas
Sulphuris, by adhering to the Saline Particles, Coagulating the Blood and
Nested there, by their adhesion, thus they become so far altered and augmented
in bulk; that they are rendered incapable to penetrate the Lymphatick Globules,
or coalesce longer with them, whence the circulation returns, the Blood
reassumes its wonted vigor, and the Distemper ceases.

To the third thing of a slender Diet being given in these cases, as Gruels,
Panado's, and Posset Drink, it is certain that these given in large quantities
dilute the Saline Particles, and render the Lympha fluid, and by that means
assist the circulation, and hence are of Extraordinary use.

To the fourth I answer, That some Saline Particles are of so Active and
Penetrating a Nature, That even in a moment of time they may be transferred to
the Genus Nervosum, as is observable in that Sulphurous Halitus near Mount
Aetna, where a Dog instantly grows Convulsive, and expires without Speedy
relief. Let us imagine then when in the beginning of the Distemper such severe
Symptoms attend, the Morbifick Ferment to be Acrid and Volatile, such perhaps
as Spirit of Niter, by these Corrosive Particles smartly irritating the Nervous
Fibers, and Whirling them into twisting Motions, and at the same time
Coagulating the Lympha, sometimes the Patient is Molested with Wakefulness, and
Convulsive motions, sometimes a deep and heavy Coma, or becomes Paralitick, or
Apoplectick; the Animal Spirits thus entangled in a Viscid Lympha, cannot be
separated from the Nerves, which now deprived of their wonted Pabulum, the
Person becomes Pallid, like the Image of Death.

But against these Assertions, there yet remains one Powerful Argument, and
urged Vehemently by Persons of no common Fame; (Viz.) That no Acid could ever
yet be produced from the Mass of Blood by any Art yet known; to Vindicate which
the Learned Boil is very often quoted, who could never by any Experiment
whatever effect it.

But to that I thus reply,

That all the Experiments tried by that Eminent Philosopher, were only on the
Grumous part of the Blood, as I remember, not in the Lympha, but in the Massy
Red Body of the Blood, the Saline Particles are so involved with others of a
different kind, that they are not distinguishable by the taste, and sight, nor
can they be separated by any Art of Fire, but only by their proper Emunctories,
(Viz.) The Lymphatick Vessels, and Glandules of the Body, as is evident in very
many instances; for pray tell me whoever yet could separate one Particle of
Bile or Urine from the Blood? Or what Person will deny such Liquors are therein
contained? Besides, it passes for an undoubted Truth, as Demonstrable, that the
Lymphatick Vessels are only Compages of small Arteries, and consequently
whatever is contained in them, first passed through the Arteries; this granted
it is beyond dispute, the Lympha sometimes affords an Acid; the truth of this
is confirmed by the Learned Nuck, who by many repeated Experiments knew how to
discover an Acid in the Aqueous Humor of the Eye, which by a peculiar
Lymphatick Vessel is separated from the Artery; for this Humor is only brought
thither by the ramuli of the Carotide Artery. I Will annex one Argument more,
that if no Acid be contained in the Blood how comes it, I beseech you, that in
Carious or Virulent Ulcers, the Silver Probe becomes instantly of a Livid
Color, which can only be effected by an Acid not an Alkalious Menstruum? or
what causes the Spittle of many Consumptive Persons to be like a solution of
Alome? That Argument will not abide the Test, set forth by a late Scribler in
assigning the causes of Distempers to Alkalies not Acids, but like his New
Light to Surgery vanishes like a wandering Star. In the Gout or Stone, says he,
a Chalky matter is deposited in the Ioints, Reins, and Bladder, fermenting with
any Acid, so consequently of an Alkalious Nature, therefore these Distempers
arises rather from Alkalies than Acids. We allow it to be true indeed, that
those Bodies may be reputed Alkalies, for from them Volatile Alkalies may be
prepared, but whoever denied Alkalies to be contained in the Blood? Or what
then? Does this prove the consequences, that they produce Distempers? no more
if I mistake not than the frothy Spittle of Epileptick Persons demonstrates the
causes of their Convulsions, or the Ocre of Mineral Waters discloses their
Principles. We allege then that in those Distempers the Blood having acquired a
Saline, Acid, Austere, or Acrid Temper, and in that case commixing with the
Alkalies of the Blood, become like a certain Magistery or an Adiaphorous Salt,
by which faeculent matter the Capillary Vessels and Membranes become distended,
and contracted by its Acrimony, hence in the parts affected arise those
Inflammations, and pungent pains, the like Cretaceous substances may if I
mistake not, be observed by a mixture of Spirit of Niter, and Oil of Vitriol,
with the Serum of Blood, yet this is not to be supposed to be produced from
Alkalies, but by Acids United with them; daily practice illustrates the truth
of this. It is very well known Lime Water, Millepedes, Mineral Waters, a Milk
diet, and other Medicines of an Alkaline Nature, which infringe Acids, are
preser'd: In the Cure of these Diseases, which success could never ensue if
their causes were Alkalious, more might be added but these may suffice. Let
such Persons who Pride only in a gingle of words, and argue against confirmed
Principles, perhaps rather through the Protection of a Patron, than an awful
regard to Philosophy, and the truth of things, be assured they mount like
Icarus on Artificial Wings, and may expect an equal ruin.

The truth of our Allegation may farther appear from an Experiment first shown
to me by my Learned and Worthy Friend Dr. Edw. Baynard of the College of
Physicians, London. He ordered the Urine of Rheumatick Persons to be distilled
by Mr. George Molt Chimist; after distillation scarce one grain of Salt was
found remaining, which he had never observed in the distillation of any Urine
before, which doubtless must proceed from this cause, that the Saline Particles
lodged in the Mass of Blood, were so entangl'd in a Viscous Lympha, that the
Glandules of the Reins, and Urinary passages were Orifices too small to
separate them: The same reason may hold in those laboring under the Dropsy,
for their Emission of so small a quantity of Urine.

These things premised, proceed we next to give an account of the Pestilential
Fever raging in these Counties, the Aetiology of which may be deduced from what
proceeds: Sometimes it seized the Patient with an intermittent fit or Two, and
then instantly turned continued, and in this Class Malignant intermittent
Fevers may be ranked; sometimes Violent Pleuritick, and Rheumatick pains attend
them, the extreme parts, were elevated to an uncommon bulk, and many times the
Groin swelled; and which was worthy our Observation these Symptoms receding the
Patients grew Delirious, or Comatose, sometimes their Pulse seemed regular, but
oftener weak, quick, unequal, and intermitting, with Vibrations, and twitching
of the Tendons, sometime they were oppressed with Cold clammy Sweats, Convulsive
Motions and an Universal trembling, yet many thus afflicted recovered, and many
sunck away in an irrecoverable Coma, others were all distained with spots of
different Colors, as Red, Yellow, Purple, and sometimes with Purple Tokens
about the Neck, that many times the Patients seem as though they had been
strangled. I saw Carbuncles upon the spine with all the Ambient flesh Black and
Sphacelated, but indeed these were only in one Person. One there was that was
Paralitick but he recovered; many complained of insufferable Headaches, as if
the very Cranium had been opened; they were very restless, and had repeated
Deliriums, and sometimes it fell out, that even to their Dying hour, many were
neither sick in appearance, nor was the Pulse irregular, their Urine well
digested, and were sensible all along; many were seized with Violent
Haemorrhagies, at the Nostrils, and sometimes the Uterus; others complained of
Nauseousness, and continual Sickness, and Vomiting, the Tongue was spread over
with a Yellow Pellicle, with sometimes Black or White Fissures, the Urine often
Lixivial, full of Red, White, Black, and Dusky Sediments, many of these Dyed
Convulsive, or Comatose, sometimes the Urine was pellucid, and for many Days
deposited a Bricky Sediment, yet having observed remissions in many of these by
the use of the Cortex desirable success attended.

What the Eminent Dr. Morton takes notice of as to this Bricky Sediment, I
rather attribute it to a peculiar Bilious Scorbutic Temper of the Blood, than
the febrile ferment as he would have it. The Urine sometimes had no Consistence
with it, was greenish and bore an Oleaginous scum over it, but the Patients
voiding such were afflicted with very severe Symptoms; many were oppressed with
cruel Diarrhaeas and Gripes, and others with Costiveness, their Egesta
downwards were of a Blackish green, become so doubtless by very Acrid humors
commixt with Bile; by the Learned Hippocrates such sort of Excrements were
styled (...) (...), and those Persons very Mortal Symptoms attended; that
Expression of Galen, occurs with this, (...) (...), that is, The Bowels bound,
and the Excrements black and small, like those of Goats, is Ominous. The Blood
upon the opening of a Vein was generally sizy, and sometimes very florid, with
a separation of little or no Serum, for that was too much entangl'd with the
grumous part of the Blood by Saline Particles to disengage from it; in some the
Spittle was thick, and plentiful, sometimes Yellow, and sometimes streaked with
Blood, and very often so faetid, there was no abiding in the same Room; many of
them toured on to forty Days, when being counted Consumptive, and no regard had
to the Fever, they expired; their Teeth frequently, in Twenty four Hours, grew
very Black, though White enough before; and when Dead, purple spots appeared
thick about their Neck and Breasts, which Symptoms to me are undeniable proofs
of a Coagulation of the Blood: Besides, can any one observe the vast quantity
of Viscous Phlegm expectorated, and not conclude from thence the Serum of the
Blood to be Coagulated? Or who in the Name of common Sense, that sees the
different Coagulations performed by different Acids, and the various solutions
from various Alkalies, will not upon the whole matter Vote these Distempers to
arise rather from the first than the second Principle? But this Hypothesis will
be the farther illustrated by what follows, Let Blood be taken from the Arm of
an Healthful Person, and as it flows into the Porringer, mingle with it some
Spirit of Hartshorn, Sal Armon. or Viganis, Tinctura Antimon. and in another
Porringer mix some of his SalVolat. Oleos. impraegnated with Salt of Amber, in
the first Vessel the Blood remains fluid and florid, in that commixt with
SalVolat. Oleos. a sizy Pellicle covers all the Superficies, as in Blood in
inflammatory Distempers; proceeding doubtless from that Acrid Volatile Salt,
Coagulating the Serum, which by the heat of the Blood endeavoring to fly off,
is condensed like Bird-Lime. Note well here, if I mistake not, this Phoenomenon
clearly Demonstrates to us the causes of these Distempers, and may be of great
use in Physic. The Famous Malpighius and Borellus, have observed in that
Epidemick Distemper in Pisa, that by certain Fermentative Particles, a too
great Secretion of Bile happened, insomuch, that many Alkalious Particles were
thrown out of the Mass of Blood, notwithstanding which the Distemper did not
arise from them as such, but only as they were armed, Porcupine like, with
other Morbifick Particles.

In one Porringer let the Blood remain as it comes out; in another mingle
either Hungary Water, Ticture of Tartar, or any Volatile Alkalious Spirit; in
the first you will observe all the Superficies sizy, and in the second the
whole to be Florid, it abundantly appears hence, that the Viscidness of the
Blood arises not from Alkalies as they are such, first, because Blood mingled
with Alkalies becomes Florid, yet that very Blood mixed with an Alkaly, armed
with an Acid grows sizy; these are the most remarkable Symptoms observable in
these Distempers; and as to the Therapeutick part I refer it to be deduced from
what precedes.

Of Intermittent Distempers.
IT is reported by the Germans, that an Eagle was so Artfully formed of a
certain Wood, that it took Wing to meet the Emperor Maximilian upon his road,
and appeared as though alive. The truth of this is not our present enquiry, but
an easy Parallel may be produced; any one that reflects on the admirable
Virtue and force of the Peruvian Tree, amidst the Crowds of almost breathless
Persons languishing in Fevers: Hence it is that so many prolifick Wits have
been exercised in explicating its qualities, and the doubtful Controversy of
the cause of intermittent Distempers, some have placed the seat of the Disease
in the Mass of Blood, as the Celebrated Willis; others in the Pancreatick juice
grown too Austere, as the noted Sylvius de Le Boe; others from Salt Humors
thrown by the Arteries into the Miliary Glands, as the Learned Dr. Jones,
others in a certain Poison oppressing the Elastick force of the Animal Spirits,
as the late Dr. Morton, and others in the Nervous juice Vitiated as the
accomplished Dr. Cole: but to make strict enquiries into these several Opinions
would be too tedious a matter, I shall not therefore insist upon them, but
passing over these Philosophical disputes, shall assign the cause of all
intermittent Fevers, their Seat and modus; In the first place, therefore let us
suppose all intermittent Fevers to arise from Saline Particles Coagulating the
serous part of the Blood, the truth of this may be thus rendered apparent; as
first from the Air, the Season of the Year, or an Error in the six
Non-naturals, in those places where the Atmosphere abounds with Saline
Particles, as in Moist and Marshy parts, there intermittent Fevers Yearly
Epidemically rage, as in Holland, some Parts of the West Indies, in the Marshes
of Kent, Essex, Lincolnshire, Lancashire, and other the like Countries, that
the Air does abound with such Particles in such places has been before shown,
from the Season of the Year it is very clear, as about the Vernal, and Autumnal
Aequinox, at which times of the Year above the rest the Air is filled with
Saline Particles, for at these Seasons Saline Efflorescences are more
observable, as may be seen on the Lime of Walls, and then it is these Fevers
rage most. That they arise from an Error of living, is very plain from the
meaner sort of People, who are more subject to them, and whose Diet is chiefly
Salted or sour Meats; to these we may add, that after the fit is ended, the
Urine often is highly Lixivial, emitting a Pleasant smell, and depositing a
Lateritious Sediment, which is very familiar in the Scurvy, in which case it is
allowed by all, the Blood abounds with Saline Particles, hence we may take
notice the Cortex may be of no small use in Scorbutic cases, whose success we
have Experienced more than once; From what has been said it is plain;
intermittent Fevers arise from Saline Particles. Proceed we next to show the
seat of the Distempers, and this may be evinced from the following Heads:
First, From Observations in cases, and again from the Opinions of the Ancients,
and their Methods of Cure, and after all, our own conjectures in the matter.

As to the Historical part, I will first instance in the case of Alexander
Rigby, of Laton in Lancashire, Esquire he was seized with a Quartan Ague, that
continued upon him some Months, which Proteus like, still altered its form,
many times after theCold trembling fits were passed, upon approach of a Hot
fit, he became Epileptick though of no long continuance, but by a regular
method with the Cortex, and other alterative Medicines, he perfectly recovered,
and lived many Years afterward.

The second instance is of Mrs. Clegg, Wife to the Reverend Mr. Clegg, of
Kirkham in Lancashire; who for a whole Winter, and some part of the Spring, had
been afflicted with a Quartan Ague, which at last altered into a double
Tertian; but alas! Instead of those Reciprocal returns usual, Convulsive
motions succeeded to that degree, that for many hours her Limbs were all
distorted, an Aphonia, or loss of Speech seized her, so that the very Standers
by concluded her Dead. Many of these fits she had, and then fell into an
Hipocondriac Melancholy, being called into her relief, Apperitive Apozems were
prescribed, afterward the use of Mineral Waters and Chalybeats,
withCatharticks in due intervals; by the use of these and the Sulphur Spaw in
Yorkshire, in about a Month her Melancholy vanished, but her Aguish fits
returned, which were only weakened by the preceding Method, the Cortex with the
bitter alterative Decoction, with Rad. Serpent. Virg. were directed, which
being regularly pursued she recovered.

Another case on this Topic I Will produce you, of Ann Cambell, Wife of Thomas
Cambell, at Stakes near Preston in Lancashire; she was seized likewise with a
Quartan in Autumn, and for about a Month her fits were regular enough, but then
a very tragic alteration ensued, it seized upon the Nerves, and instead of
Aguish fits, she became Speechless, except some inarticulate inward Mutterings;
her Sense, and Memory were lost, that for the time she knew no one nor
remembered any thing; the day after cruel Spasms disturbed her, and thus she
continued for four or five Months; about three in the Afternoon the fits came
on, and after all she labored under a severe Anasarca, from which and her
Quartan, by the use of Hydragogues, Antiscorbuticks, and the Cortex, she
recovered her former Health.

From these Historical cases it is evident the Genus Nervosum is effected in
intermittent Fevers; it now follows, in the next place, to confirm it by the
Opinions, and Practice of the Ancients. That our Predecessors in Physic were
Inferior to us in Anatomy, is not to be disputed, hence it was they transmitted
to us their Sentiments in very Ambiguous expressions; however by Comparing
their Theory and Practice together, we find they placed the cause of
intermittent Distempers in a certain Spirit, piercing through the Blood and
entering even the Penetralia of the Nerves. To evince this take Hippocrates's
Thoughts, (our Primitive Standard in Physic) let any one consult his Book de
Flatibus, where they may find he assigns the cause of intermittent Distempers
to certain Malignant Spirits commixt with the Animal Spirits; I will only
produce, two instances relating to the thing, the first is this Aphorism (...).
On which words Duretus, thus Comments, The Sense of any cold Cause first arises
in the Limbs, then coursing through the Back effects the Head, but still
occasioned by an ill Digestion, (...); In another Aphorism thus, (...), on
which words the same Author thus proceeds, For a Rigor or Chilliness in the
Back, denotes the Seat of the Distemper there; but repeats the words occasioned
by an ill Digestion, (...) as Hippocrates said before, it is plain from these
Aphorisms and Commentaries, this Cathectick Habit of the Blood affixt to the
Nerves, was the cause of intermittent Fevers, in page 130. and 131. he adds
thus, This cause may be given for the Yawnings, and Stretchings, which are
common Symptoms in this Distemper, for the Nerves, Tendons, and Ligaments, by
concenter'dBlood grow hot, and are contracted, and by the Flatus's force are as
it were distorted.

Hollerius in his second Book of Distempers, page 23. says, It was Customary
among the Ancients, and practiced by the Moderns, that besides other Medicines
directed before the fit, upon its approach to Anoint the Spine, Scapulas's, and
Arms, and use the Oil of Chamomel prepared with Wild Cucumers, with a Decoction
of Rose-Mary in it, and other ingredients agreeable in a Palsy, so those crass
Humors which occasioned the Quartan, and produced the Palsy, were prevented.

In Clusius, translated by Christopher Acosta, page 326. These may be noted, In
Diurnal intermittent Fevers after the Spine is Anointed with Peruvian Balsome
made warm, half an hour before the fit, let five or six drops of the same, be
taken in a little Wine as before directed, it allays all their Symptoms if
repeated twice or thrice.

Vallesius in his sixth Section of Epidemick Distempers, page 219. thus
proceeds; To what was before prescribed the Egyptian Nitre may be added, with
Coriander and Cummin Seeds applied to the Orifice of the Uterus, in Barrenness
and in intermittent Fevers to the Loins, and the whole Spine; He alleges the
fits arise thence, from all which it is evident, the Opinions of the Ancients
were, that all intermittent Fevers arose from a certain Fermentative matter,
impacted upon the Nerves, but knew not how to explain the Modus through their
Ignorance in Anatomy, which is brought to a Noble perfection in these Days, but
that is not not so much to our purpose, it is sufficient for me to show these
were the Sentiments of the Ancients.

I cannot therefore see why the noted Dr. Morton in his first Exercitation of
intermittent Fevers, page 72. thus argues against the Ancients, in these words,
Argumentis quae in Hypothesi nostra generali attulimus pensitatis, nemo opinor
in receptaculis, Visceribus, aut recessibus ad Mentem veterumCollocabit, verum
ingremioSpirituum delight scere concedet; the arguments duly considered which
we urged in our general Hypothesis, no one, I think, will place their cause
either in the common receptacles, the Bowels, or other recesses of Nature as
the Ancients would, but solely in the Spirits; since assuredly by the instances
quoted the Opinions of the Ancients, placed the Causes of intermitting
Distempers in the Spirits.

Having now made it highly probable that intermittent Fevers arise from Saline
Particles Coagulating the serous part of the Blood, it now remains, to show how
it produces these Tragedies, and assign the seat of the Distemper: Upon the
Coagulations accruing in the Mass of Blood, the Lympha is rendered too Viscid
to be separated by its proper Vessels, hence it regurgitates back or forces its
way through more open Passages, which we may reasonably suppose to be the
ConglomerateGlands seated in the Areolas of the Stomach, and Bowels, hence by
repeated Circulatious thoseSalt Humors are discharged upon the Stomach and
Bowels, first, producing but slight Corrugations, or Tremblings, but afterward
more dismal Agonies; these Saline Particles at last entirely entangled in a
Viscous Mucus, are still hurried about, and irritate or disturb the Animal
Spirits, insomuch, that the whole Body seems to be in a general Convulsion, for
now it is the extremities of the Nerves, and the Nervous Membranes, by consent
bring in the Genus Nervosum, as first, the Par Vagum, then the spinal Marrow,
and all the other Nervous ramifications, so that from Head to Foot the whole
Animal Economy is disturbed, the Saline Particlesat length encountering with
the Bile, from this Emotion it is those heatsarise, those inquietudes and
pungent Pains; at length precipitated by the Peristaltick motion of the Bowels,
it enters, the Lacteals, and Passes into the mass of Blood, there fresh
disturbances arise, as well in the Nervous parts, as the whole Habit of
theBody, till it is partly thrown off by Sweat; when I have often observed in
many Persons, their Sweats to be perfectly of a sour smell, and partly by
Urine, which being highly Lixivial deposites a Lateritious Sediment by reason
of the Bilious Particles too much exalted, and United with Saline ones; But
against this Hypothesis many important Arguments may be objected, I will
Enumerate the most Material;

First, If the Seat of this Distemper be in the Stomach or Bowels or both, it
is not probable the whole Body should so instantly be shaken as in this
Distemper it generally is,

Secondly, We find the Genus Nervosum effected and very severe Symptoms
attending, as Convulsions, Epileptick, and Apoplectick fits;

Thirdly, How happens that feebleness, and pain of the Loins, those Yawning and
Stretchings, if the Morbifick matter was confined only to the Stomach, and
Bowels.

Fourthly, If in intermittent Distempers, the Lympha was grown too Viscous; How
comes it the whole Body seems to be dissolved in such profuse Sweats,

Fifthly, If they arise from Salt Humors, whence comes it that from Salt and
Acid things inwardly taken, Agonies and Tremblings do not always immediately
ensue.

To these I will Answer in Order:

To the first, although the Morbifick matter be lodged only in the Stomach and
Bowels, yet by irritating their Nervous Membranes all the Nerves are effected,
and consequently the whole Body suffers, the truth of this is rendered apparent
by those instances produced by Wepfer, particularly that of the Poisonous
Aquatick Hem-Lock, where he reports of a Woman, who having Eaten of this Root,
in the space of half an hour was seized with Convulsions, a stiff bending
forwards, and as intensly backwards, and likewise with the Cramp; in which
small time it can scarcely be immagin'd it should enter the Mass of Blood, and
the Penetralia of the Nerves, but after she had taken a Dose of Theriaca mixed
with Vinegar, the Roots were vomited up entire, her Epilepsy ceased, and she
recovered; others instances he brings like this tried upon Dogs, and Wolves and
Cats, by Harderus, Hurterus, and himself, where by the use of Cocculus Ind.
Nux-Vomica they were seized, with Agonies and Tremblings, in space of half a
quarter of an hour, and upon a dissection of them they found the Powders had
not passed the Stomach, but by irritating its Membranes brought in the whole
Order of Nerves, with the spinal Marrow; whence ensued those violent
Convulsions, and Spasims, from all which it may be concluded beyond dispute,
that the Body may generally suffer, though the Morbifick matter be nested only
in the Stomach and Bowels: More-over, who is not sensible that the Histerick
Epilepsy arises from the Membranes of the Uterus, and that cruel Convulsions,
Agonies, and Tremblings proceed from the Cholick, whose Seat is doubtless in
the Intestines: To these may be added that strong Convulsions arise from the
puncture of a Nerve, and sometimes from the Herniatomia, which things
considered it seems easy to conceive, how Agonies seize the Patient in
intermittent Fevers, though the Stomach and Bowels are only effected,
therefore, I think, my self Excusable to so many Learned Men, though I dissent
from their Nervous Hypothesis in this case for these following reasons, First,
I cannot think these Salt Humors that are the causes of intermittent Fevers
can enter the Substance of the Brain, the Passages or Tubes of the Nerves, or
Nervous Membranes except Vertigoes, Convulsions, Stupors, or the like Symptoms
had preceded the fit, which seldom happens here, Secondly, The Orifices of the
Nerves are so small, that they are scarce distinguishable by the most improved
Microscopes, nor can we discern any tumefaction above a Ligature, how then can
we Imagine these Salt Crass Humors, can penetrate the Genus Nervosum, so as to
occasion intermittent Fevers, pardon me if I bring a Comparison from the sacred
Writ, no more than an Elephant can pass the Eye of a Needle.

To the Second and Third Objection brought against this Hypothesis, the
preceding Arguments may suffice; To the Fourth I reply, the Nervous System is
doubtless deprived of its due Pabulum, by the Viscous Lympha entangling the
Animal Spirits, hence the Face grows pale, the Strength decays, the Appetite
fails, and the Subcutaneous Glandules, deprived of the elastick force of the
Spirits which contracted them, now become Flaccid, and open with wider
Orifices, insomuch that the serous part of the Blood continually throws off,
and the patient dissolves in continual Sweats, for when we affirm the Serum of
the Blood to be over Viscid, it is not to be understood of an Universal
Coagulation, but that various humors contained in the Mass of Blood, are
condensed according to the Quality, and Quantity of the Saline Particles, hence
the fits ensue at certain distances of times, by the Circulation of the Blood,
which granted it is plain enough to conceive how those profuse Sweats come on;
To the fifth I Answer, perhaps by the Mucus of the Stomach besmearing its
Tunicles, though Salt and Acid Liquors may be immediately received into it,
notwithstanding that it is so defended by it that no Agony can instantly arise,
or perhaps by the various alterations the Saline Particles undergo in the mass
of Blood, they become so Volatilized they produce different effects, the truth
of which is plain from the difference betwixt Crude and Fermented juices; These
things allowed, we may readily solve how by one only Dose of the Cortex, taken
half an hour before the approach of the fit, very often diverts it, and
secondly, how by Purges though very gentle, as even Milk glisters, the
Distemper returns, thirdly, how the fits renew within a Month, the Cortex not
being repeated; and fourthly, this leads us to a solution of other Inflammatory
Cases, as the Pleurisy, Apoplexy, Rheumatism, Colic, etc. That a small
quantity of the Cortex taken half an hour before the fit, may produce these
effects, let us suppose, that by the innate heat of the Stomach and Bowels, and
by the Humors there lodged, in a Moment almost a Tincture is extracted from
the Cortex, just as we see in Galls put into Mineral Waters, even in the
twinking of an Eye it becomes of a purple Color, and Precipitates: by a
Parallel reason may we allow the Cortex to Precipitate the Saline or Austere
Particles, hence the Morbifick matter altered, the Nervous Tunicles are no
longer twitched nor Corrugated by their Points; thus many times by one single
Dose the fit is diverted: But this could never ensue in so short a time, by
only one Dose of the Cortex, if the Morbifick matter lodged in the very
substance of the Nerves, and that the Particles of the Cortex according to the
Nervous Hypothesis, were to pass into the very Genus Nervosum, whose Penetralia
are too small for such Particles as we asserted before, some urge indeed that
by a puncture of the Nerve many times a Lympha distills, but this does not
demonstrate that a Lympha passes through the Nerves, but rather shows it to be
a Lympha flowing from Capillaries adhering to the outward Tunicles of the
Nerves, or it may be a Lymphatick Vessel it self wounded: but against these
assertions one strong Argument remains, that if intermittent Distempers arise
from Saline Particles lodged in the Stomach and Bowels, thrown of thither by
the mass of Blood, how comes it then since the Circulation of the Blood is so
swift, that the fits come not once every hour but only at stated times, and
hence are called Quotidian, Tertian, and Quartan Agues.

To this we say, it is very true the Circulation of the Blood is very often and
swiftly performed, and each in dividual Emunctory endeavors its proper
Secretions, but the Lympha here having acquired such a thickness, that it
cannot duly enter its proper Vessels, is forcid to rush into more open
passages (viz.) into these Conglomerate Glandules, through which perhaps it can
only enter in the space of Twenty Four Hours, sooner or later, according to the
quality of the Disease, nay even these Glandules themselves, in a sound and
Natural state, separate a Viscous Mucus but in very little quantity; and
perhaps whilst the Blood performs its many Circulations, this febrile matter
touches upon the the Membranes of the Muscles, and hence it is those Symptoms
called Antesignana, or Forerunners, as Yawning, Stretchings, Pains of the
Loins, etc. proceed; but after a sufficient Collection of Acrimonious matter
separated by the Conglomerate Glands, then ensues that train of Agonies; it is
certainly very wonderful to consider, what horrid Tumults the Particles of the
Blood, deprived of a separation by their proper Emunctories, raise in the Body;
That Particles of Bile are separated from the mass every Circulation is
indisputable, but when the Glandules of the Liver become incapable to do that
Office, then they rebound into the Blood, and are hurried here and there, and
rush thorough any Avenue, so that in some I have known periodical Convulsive
fits return once in 24 hours; for the truth of which one instance shall
suffice; In January, 1696. the Honored Robert Hesketh, of Rufforth, Esquire was
seized with the Black Jaundice, insomuch, I concluded all the Glands of the
Liver to be Obstructed, his Urine was Black, so impregnated was it with Bilious
Particles, which at length invading his Brain, thence a Phrensy ensued, and for
three Nights together about a certain hour he became Epileptick, from which
instance it is clear that Particles denied a separation by their proper
Emunctories, undergo various Circulations before they are separated from the
mass of Blood, by the same parity of reason the Lympha rendered Viscid, must
undergo the same Stages before it can exert it self, and at last being
separated by theConglomerate Glandules, by itsAcrid Viscocity it frets the
Nerves both of the Stomach and Bowels, and so brings on the fits; some indeed
allege if the Morbifick matter was lodged in the Mass of Blood, at the end of
the fit the Distemper would be removed by Sweat, but that is their mistake; for
in these Distempers we suppose the mass of Blood to have contracted a Saline
temper, so that every day Coagulations are generated, according to their
quality sooner, or later; It was very strange to observe what unaccountable
Ideas those Extravasated, Bilious Particles produced in the forementioned
Case; he would sometimes tell me at Noonday he saw various sorts of Creatures
crawling around him, vast Cities and in them innumerable Crowds of People
Walking, Trees, and many other things. All which put together let us imagine
that a daily Tincture is extracted by the Humors from the Cortex as was said
before, by which means the fits are weakened, until its Virtue being spent the
Morbifick matter renews, and the Fever returns; hence it is easy to show how
Purges revive them, but if we remove the cause first the effects appear no
more: that these Distempers, Proteus like, put on many shapes is evident. I
will only add that intermittent Fevers, and other inflammatory Distempers
commonly so styled, may be reduced under the same Class, and differ only in
degree, as the Morbifick matter is Qualified.

From the whole in these cases the Cortex has acquired a merit durable as time.

To conclude, let us suppose that Natural Ferment composed ofa Volatile Alkaly,
an Oily Succus, and an Acid, to be altered in these Distempers from its Natural
Crasis, and converted into a Saline temper, whence flow those infinite
distribances, and perplexing Agonies, such a Ferment as this was prepared by me
at Oxford in August, 1684, and inserted in the Philosophical Transactions.

To which I refer you, and could not therefore but wonder at a late piece
concerning the Ferment of the Stomach relating to the same matter, and the
Author not having the Ingenuity to acknowledge from whom he had the Notion.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 34. read honored, p. 9. l. 8. r. the same, l. 23. r. Spirits, p.
10. l. 3. r. Automata, p. 12. l. 17. r. and, p. 13. l. 14. r. their, Ibid p.
and l. r. which, Ib. p. and l. 23. r. it does not, p. 14. l. 1. r. Fathers, p,
15. l. 36. r. Erke, p. 17. l. 5. r. Fittons, p. 18. l. 34. r. taken, p. 19. l.
3. r. Instrument, p. 25. l. 3. after in add this, p. 26. l. 11. r. vicinus, Ib.
l. 23. r. Horologii, p. 27. l. 13. r. vertical, Ib. l. 22. r. opportunity, Ib.
l. 29. r. Horrox, and so every where else, p. 28. l. 16. for the first His, r.
the, Ib. l. 27. r. Hypotheses, p. 31. l. 21. r. and, Ib. l. 30. r. Hazel, p.
33. l. 23. r. Person, Ib. after discoursing add of, Ib. l. 35. r. Wharfing, p.
36. l. 13. instead of the last Vel with a Capital and full point, read it
without either, p. 37. l. 29. r. negabant, Ib. l. 34. r. Vanslebius, Ib. l. 36.
r. Syrians, p. 40. l. 4. r. Dioscorides, Ib. l. 24. after being add raised, p.
41. l. 18. r. Vitruvius, p. 42. l. 21. for all are r. are all, p. 43. l. 5. r.
Saliva, Ib. l. 18. for the first is, r. the, p. 44. l. 9. r. Coctioni, Ib. l.
12. r. detraxisse, p. 45. l. 5. instead of a Pylori locem, r. tantum a Pyloro
locum, Ib. l. 2. after take add to, p. 46. l. 10. r. Ingredients, Ib. l. 17. r.
tanquam, p. 47. l. 11. after me add by, Ib. l. 19. for ing r. being, Ib. before
pretend add I, Ib. l. 26. before the Lobster, add the other as, p. 51. l. 26.
for to r. from, Ib. l. 27. r. inseparable, p. 52. l. 25. r. Erisypelas, Ib. l.
13. r. Bricky, p. 55. l. 21. r. Rete, p. 56. l. 7. r. these, Ib. l. 13. r.
Vegetables, and so every where else, Ib. l. 16. r. Disease, p. 57. l. 21. r.
hydragogues, Ib. l. 26. before a violent add and, Ib. l. 29. r. honored, p.
59. l. 5. r. Scorbutic Rheumatisms, Ib. l. 10. r. Phthises, p. 61. l. 2. r.
Argument e contrario, p. 63. l. ult. for in r. with, p. 64. l. 14. r. becomes,
deposites, Ib. l. 29. r. so emits a pleasant odor, p. 71. l. 8. r.
Aetiologies, p. 72. l. 29. r. well, p. 73. l. 11. r. vesicles, and so
elsewhere, p. 75. l. 1. r. on, p. 78. l. 4. r. Aetiology, p. 80. l. 28. r. too,
Ib. l. ult. for which with r. with which, p. 83. l. 17. r. Consequence, Ib. l.
29. after Serum r. as the.

TAB. II


THE Natural History OF LANCASHIRE, CHESHIRE, AND THE Peak in DERBYSHIRE.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
Of ANTIQUITIES.

TO know what our Ancestors were, cannot be more lively delineated to us, than
by the Ruins we discover of those Days; hence it is that by penetrating the
Bowels of the Earth, we can trace the Footsteps of our Forefathers, and imprint
upon our Minds some Idea's of their Times: The Politeness of the Roman
Eloquence was admirable, and methinks to see the Vas Lachrymatorium, as the
last Obsequy to a deceased Friend, as we are Men, demonstrates to us what we
ought to be, but as we are Christians much more: But, alas! an adequate Idea of
those Days cannot be expected, yet I shall endeavor to revive the Phoenix from
its Ashes, and in order to that give you an Account of some Roman Urns, with
other remarkable Antiquities, of which these Counties furnish us with no small
Variety: The most noted Place for these, is Ribchester in Lancashire, by
Antoninus called Coccium from Coccius Nerva, or Goccium, and doubtless a Town
of large Circumference, as is visible by its Ruins; I have seen there
subterraneous Walls, Urns, Coins, Romish, Danish and Saxon, Anchors, Rings, and
Nails of small Vessels or Boats; this Place however is at a great Distance from
the Ocean, and to which there is no River Navigable; how therefore the Exuviae
of those Times came there to be deposited, may challenge our Enquiry. That this
Place was a Roman Station seems unquestionable, and maintained as a Fortress to
keep that Part of the Country in Awe, and it is not improbable but that here
they placed their Machines; and hence it is those Relicts are daily discovered,
for in all likelihood, when the Romans, commanded Britain by Legions, they
would never much subdivide or disperse themselves thinly into different Parts,
but rather keep embodied and entire: But to make it clear how these Utensils,
and Marine Antiquities came here to be lodged, though it certainly was never a
Port, being now so far distant from the Sea, take these following Particulars:
The First is in a Letter from the Ingenious and Learned Mr. Oddy, Schoolmaster
at Blackburn. When we were at Ribchester together, and had carefully viewed the
Place, you may remember I gave you my Opinion, and Reasons why Ribchester had
never been Navigable so high, and that Doubt raised about the Place called
Anchor-Hill, may easily be solved; that that Bank was a Rampire of the Fortress
is very visible, under which there is yet a broad and deep Fosse leading toward
the River, serving, as I conceive, for a double use, viz. as a Trench to
fortify the Place, and a Canal (like to that up to Holbournbridge, London,)
for Boats for the Garrison upon all Occasions, to pass over and repass the
River, which is not fordable thereabouts but in dry Weather; and we may
reasonably suppose there was a great Number of Boats of all forts belonging to
so large a Fort and City, the Anchor-Hill, so called, being as it were a little
Dock or Hithe, for the Building or Repairing them, and that the Anchors, Rings
and Nails there found, were only for then use, and not for Ships, they being
far too little either for Ships of Burden or War.

We cannot rightly make out what Legion of the Romans was planted here, by any
of the noble Ruins we disclose; however, by what has been discovered, both the
Antiquity and Grandeur of the Place, will be clearly represented, and our
modern Observations be no small Supplement to the more ancient Ones, where Mr.
Cambden and others have saved me the Trouble, I shall fairly name them in
order, and in Conclusion add my own. The first Inscription Mr. Cambden takes
Notice of, is at Salisbury-Hall, on the Pedestal of a Pillar, which is as
follows:

And in the Wall adjoining to it is another Stone, with the Portraiture of
Cupid, and another little Image, and in the backside of it is this Inscription;

These Mr. Cambden supposes to be British Names of Places, but I do not see how
that can be made out, but rather look upon 'em to be the Names of Officers in a
Wing of the Sarmatians. AL. Q. Q. SAR denoting the Ala Sarmatum, or a Wing of
the Sarmations, of which Tacitus gives a full Account; Osalvedn may probably
signify Oswalds Town, the noble Family of the Osbaldstones still residing
there; so that these Names may not only be British, but likewise Roman and
Sarmatian.

His next Account is of a fair Altar, with this Inscription*

The Signification of which, as Cambden himself is silent, so I refer it to
other Antiquaries to discuss: However, upon my being last at Oxford, I received
there the Satisfaction to find, that Juno and Diana were constantly called by
the Romans Deae Matres. And the further Explication of this Altar, is that
Ingenuis, an Asiatic one of the Decuriones of the Asturian Wing, dedicated this
Altar to the Mother Goddesses, Juno and Diana.

Another little Altar he saw cast out amongst the Rubbish, with this
Inscription;

This Altar from its Smallness Mr. Cambden takes to have been some poor Man's
Altar, to carry about with him, and to have been for offering Incense, Salt and
Flower. But to me this Interpretation seems more reasonable, from the very
Words themselves at length, that Elegaurba, doubtless a Commander there,
dedicated this Altar to Mars after some signal Overthrow of the Enemy; and
thence Peace ensuing, he styles him Pacifero, but who this Elegaurba was, or
what Country Man, I pretend not to determine.

He speaks also of another Stone dug up, with the Portraiture of a naked Man on
Horseback, without Bridle or Saddle, brandishing his Spear with both Hands,
and insulting over a naked Man prostrate, who held out before him a kind of
square Piece; between the Horse and the Person prostrate stand the Letters D.
M. under the prostrate Man are GAL. SARMATA. There were other Letters too
defaced to guess at, one would imagine, says he, both from the former
Inscription and this that was found many Years ago, that a Wing of the
Sarmatae had their Station here.

This Inscription, as I take it, may be thus translated, Aael: a Matron who
lived 28 Years, Two Months and Eight Days, in this Earth lies entombed; and
Marcus Julius Maximus her Son, who lived Six Years, Three Months and Twenty
Days; and Campania Dubba her Mother, who lived Fifty Years: Julius Maximus and
Alae a Sarmatian, Wife to her incomparable Husband, erects this to perpetuate
the Memory of Simo the Son of a pious Father, and his Father in Law.

Now the Word Asiaticus in the Inscription beginning with Deis Matribus, and in
that preceding it beginning with Seoseam, and in this last of all, that Word
Sar, being repeated, it makes it more probable to me, that Sarmatia being a
Part of Asia, and likewise Part of Europe containing Poland, Russia, Muscovy,
and most of Tartary, from which vast Country the Phoenicians, being an
industrious and trading People, transplanted several Colonies hither, and on
the Portraiture of the naked Man these Words Gal. Sarmata being found too, does
farther illustrate these People called Brigantes residing here, to be for a
great Part Asiatics, of which Mr. Camden takes no Notice.

Thus far and no farther Mr. Camden proceeds in the Antiquities of this noted
Station; but as to the ancient Name of the Place, he says, Ptolemy styles it
Rigodunum, and that being corrupted from Ribodunum may not be unlike
Ribbochester. It is his Opinion likewise, the Town of Preston, called so from
the Religious, quasi Priest Town, sprang from the Ruins of this remarkable
City which might be ruined by Wars or Earthquakes.

I shall now acquaint the Reader with my own Observations, made in this present
Year 1699 when I was upon the Place, which gave me a new and different Prospect
of Matters above what he has recited: The first remarkable Piece of Antiquity I
took Notice of, was a Fortification called Anchor-Hill, because Anchors have
sometimes been found there under Ground, with Rings and Nails of small Vessels,
Roman Paterae of a Metal like that of our China Tea-Pots, with the Effigies of
Wolves and Flowers upon them, and at the Bottom of some these Letters Fab. Pro.
which doubtless must be in the Time when some one of the Fabii were Pro-Consul
or Procurator. From Anchor-Hill there goes a Way to Preston and a Road to
Lancaster, where there was another Fortification, and a Roman Wall; another
Road likewise directs to Mancunium, or Manchester, where was a Fortress called
the Giants or Torquins Castle, and doubtless that was their Highway to Devona
or Chester, where the Twentieth Legion, styled Valens and Victrix, was fixed;
Chester was then a Blockade to the Britains in Wales: Not far from this
Fortification, called Anchor-Hill, at Ribchester, I saw a Common-shoar, and a
Floor composed of Roman Tyles, which absolutely demonstrates the River there
was never Navigable, for had it been so that City must unavoidably have been
under Water, together with in that Country, commonly called the Field, from its
resemblance to a Field being all Champaign. Near this Shore I saw a Pillar
about Seventeen Inches Diameter, with Letters upon it, but those in a great
measure erased, and not at all legible. This Pillar in all probability was
erected in Commoration of some remarkable Victory the Romans obtained over the
Britains. The Roman Coins I met with there, which are discovered as the Hill
shelves into the River, were one of them Augustus Caesar's, the rest Titus
Vespasian, Dioclesian, Coccius Nerva, from whom it is likely the Place by some
was called Coccium, Domitian, Trajan, Adrian, Severus, Commodus, Marcus
Antoninus, and Iulia, some in Copper, and some a mixed Metal, in which last
the Letters are very legible; likewise one Saxon Coin, and that in Silver;
amongst these was likewise found a Ruby, with Mars on the Reverse, the Genius
of the Place, as appears by a Roman Altar dug up there, which is now removed to
Dinckley, a Seat not far remote from thence, and now in the Possession of
Edward Warren, Esquire who married a Talbot, an Heiress of that noble Family; on
this Altar these Words are inscribed, Deo Marti and Victoriae: There is another
Roman Altar, but on that the Letters are erased, and are not legible. I saw
likewise Two Coins found at the same Place with Crosses on the Reverse, and the
Head of an Emperor, but the Letters too obscure to be read; however, it is very
probable it may be of Constantine the Great, from the Figure of the Cross
appearing to him in the Air, with these Words, Sub hoc Signo Vinces: At the
same Place are frequently found several Pieces of Roman Urns, and Flower-Pots,
all which considered: fully demonstrate the great Antiquity of the Place, and
in those Days its Magnificence, which is now but a small Village, though it is
still honored with several Noble Families that are Neighbors to it. But its
Greatness in those Days may appear farther from the Finger of a Copper Statue,
which doubtless was erected for one of their Emperors, and found amongst the
Ruins. The Romans to perpetuate any memorable Overthrow of their Enemies had
Three Ways to do it, either by erecting of Pillars with Inscriptions, or the
Statues of the Emperors, or by Triumphal Arches, of which here are the Ruins
of the two first: But, though all these represent to us the Grandeur of the
Place, yet they prove not to us that any Roman Emperor ever resided there, but
rather that the Station was commanded by Tribunes, Pro-Consuls, and Procurators.

These following Pieces of Antiquity were communicated to me by Mr. Oddy,
Schoolmaster, at Blackburn; and the Reverend Mr. George Ogden, Fellow of the
Collegiate Church of Manchester, and present Vicar of Ribchester.

Besides the engraven Altars here mentioned, I saw another when I was last over
there with this Inscription,

This seems to be an Altar dedicated to Mars and Victory, the Genii of the
Place, by one of the Decurions, by Birth an Asiatic, commanding in a Wing of
the Sarmatae, and the fix last Letters may be Imperatori Triumphanti Caesari
Coccio Nervae, to the Triumphant Emperor Coccius Nerva; from whom this Place by
Antoninus was called Coccium: This is truly Antique, and gives us an ample
Demonstration of the Truth of what Antoninus relates.

From our Observations upon the Inscription of the Altars found at Chester, and
Hulme, we may readily inform our selves who commanded the Legions or
Detatchments from them; the twentieth Legion at Chester, styled doubtless
Valens Victrix, was commanded by Longinus Flavius, a Tribune. That at
Manchester by the Inscription at Hulme, seems to be only a Detatchment from the
Sixth Legion residing at York, styled also the Conqueror, and commanded here by
Lucius Senecianius. Brutus was the third Commander in it.

Yet this at Ribchester only acquaints us with the Title of the Officer, a
Decurion commanding the Tenth part of a Legion; but whether this Detatchment
was from York or Chester, is not apparent by any Account these ancient Ruins
afford us.

However, considering the Roman Ways leading to Ribchester, both from York and
Chester, we may equally balance the Dispute, and conclude, Parties from both
Legions might be dispatched thither as their Conveniences stood. These Ways
are yet to be seen over the Forest of Fullwood, near Preston, to Lancaster and
Appleby, etc. others are visible from Manchester by strange Ways, toward Bury,
and so to Ribchester.

There was one very eminent Piece of Antiquity dug up at Ribchester, viz. a
large Stone, now a Cornerstone in Salisbury-Hall, which anciently belonged to
the Talbot's; on one side is Apollo with his Quiver on his Shoulder, leaning on
his Plectrum or Harp, with a loose Mantle or Velamen, and on the other side Two
of his Priests in the same Habit, with an Ox's-Head in their Hands, sacrificing
to him the Heads likewise of various Animals lying prostrate at his Feet.

We may here raise a very probable Conjecture of this Votive Altar, that it was
erected in the Time of Dioclesian, as Mr. Leigh's Caesar's informs us. Eusebius,
in Lib. 5. de Prop. Evang. assures us, that that Emperor going to Apollo for an
Oracle, received for Answer, That the Just Men were the Cause that he could say
nothing: Which Just Men Apollo's Priests interpreted to be Christians. Upon
which Dioclesian began his most inhumane and barbarous Persecution; so cruel it
was, that Dr. Heylin in his Geography, tells us, There was not a Day in the
Year, except the First of January, (on which Day they used not to shed Blood)
but there were sacrificed Five Thousand Christians at the least; as he makes
evident from St. Ierome's Epistles to Heliodorus and Chrosmaticus: However,
this Island in some measure escaped the Fury of it, Divine Providence
interfering: For Fuller in his Church History of Britain, informs us, it
continued for one Year only.

That this Altar was erected here in Dioclesian's Time, is further probable,
from the great Number of his Coins frequently found here.

This is a true Relict of Antiquity, and, perhaps, as valuable as most in the
Kingdom: It gives us a clear Idea of the Pagan Superstitions, and their
unmerciful Butcheries of the increasing Christians, as likewise of their
obstinate Adherence to their Heathen Rites, notwithstanding the convincing
Tokens of a Superior Power: Neither the Silence of their Delphick Oracle,
struck dumb at our Savior's Nativity, nor the free Confessions of their
inferior Pagods, were any Motives to their Conversion, but they rather added
Fuel to their Rage, and spurred them to more intense Persecutions.

At Lancaster, lately in digging up of a Cellar of Mr. Partington's, were found
several Roman Disci, and Sympuvia, or Cups used in Sacrifice, and Coins, as
some of Aelius, Adrianus and Augustus Caesar; the Cups have upon their sides
the Figures of various Creatures, and Julius Flavius in Letters; on the bottom
of one of these appeared very legibly these Letters, Regin. I. which we may
easily interpret, a Discus used in Sacrifice to Juno, as she was styled Regina
Caeli. These and the foregoing Observations, together with the Roman Wall
there, commonly called the Weary-Wall, abundantly demonstrate that ancient Town
to have been a most eminent Roman Station at the least.

The next Place remarkable for Antiquities is Coln, in the same Hundred with
Ribchester, the Antiquities of which Place were transmitted to me by the
Learned Mr. Hargrave, Rector of Brandsburton, near Beverly in Yorkshire, in the
following Words:

I have often from the Name Coln conjectured, that the Place was of more
ancient Original, than the Tradition current among the Inhabitants made it; and
I was the further confirmed in this by the great Number of Roman Coins, which
have been frequently dug up nigh it, as at Wheatly-Lane, which are generally
Copper; and those Silver Ones cast up by a Plough, Three or Four Years ago,
nigh Emmet, enclosed in a great Silver Cup, some of which I have seen; one of
Gordianus was very legible, and another not so: I have seen Parts of others,
whose Remains show they were one of the Antonines. But that which most
confirmed my Conjecture of this Town's being a Roman Station, was a
Conversation I was honored with the last Summer, by our Reverend Dean of York,
Dr. Gale, who was pleased to show me a Book written about the Seventh Century,
by a nameless Author at Ravenna, which is so far as I know of it nothing but an
Itinerary, wherein many ancient Names of Towns through the Roman Empire are
remembered, which others have omitted, especially in Britain: That Author comes
from our Camolodunium to Colunium, and thence to Gallunium, which by the usual
Transmutation of the Roman G. into our W. that Learned Person concludes to be
Wally, and thence, I think, I may safely, from the Distance of Coln from
Almondbury, and its lying in the Road betwixt that and Whalley, conclude that
Coln was a Roman Station. I will only add, Sir, that the Book I have mentioned
was printed at Paris 1670, or thereabouts, and if our Dean's Copy was procured
from the French King's Library, and (which is strange) that inquisitive Person
told me, he could no where meet with an other Copy, this last Thing has induced
me to think, that somewhat I have troubled you with in Relation to the
Antiquity of the Place, may be new to you. The Respect I bear to the Place of
my Birth, has perchance tempted me to determine too peremptorily in favor of
it, which I wholly submit to your very judicious Censure; and if what I have
written so hastily may be any ways serviceable to your Chapter of Antiquities,
I shall be extremely proud to have been in the least measure,

Your Humble Servant.

With all Deference to that Learned Gentleman, it is my Opinion, Coln was not a
Roman Station, and that for these following Reasons: First, Because where the
Roman Stations were there are usually Fosses, and Fortifications, of which this
learned Gentleman gives no Account; and though the Coins found there might induce
him to think it so, yet that Instance is not convincing, since they are
frequently found in several other Parts, which in probability were never Roman
Stations, as at Bury, and Standish in Lancashire: Besides, it is frequently
observed, that where the Roman Stations were, there are usually found Roman
Altars dedicated to the Genius of the Place, Paterae and Fibulae; it is very
likely therefore that where those Coins are found, and not the other
Antiquities, they were only buried there by the Romans in their Marches, when
they quitted their Stations, who rather chose to hide them in the Earth, than
let them fall into their Enemies Hands. Secondly, It is probable it was not a
Roman Station, from the Account that is given of the Boundaries belonging to
them; for, as Siculus Flaccus informs us, the Fields that lay near the Colonies
were determined by several sorts of Bounds; in the Limits there were placed for
Marks, sometimes one thing, and sometimes another; in some a little Statue of
Mercury, in others a Wine Vessel, in others a Spatula, in others a Rhombus, or
a Figure in shape like a Lozenge; and in some, according to Vitalis and
Arcadius, a Flaggon or Jarr. Now, none of all these, as ever I heard of, having
been dug up at Coln, I cannot conclude it a Roman Station, but that the Coins
found there were lodged by the Romans in their Itineraries; but, by reason some
of these have been found at Upholland in Lancashire, that Place, indeed, may
have been a Roman Station.

From what has been observed, to me it seems more feasible, that the Name Coln,
is derived from the Saxon Word Culme, in that Language signifying Coal, that
Place abounding with that sort of Mines.

That Manchester was a Fortress of Note in the Romans Days, is apparent, from
the large Ruins remaining in a near adjoining Field, and some Inscriptions
that have been found in Neighboring Places: But, that I may do Justice to the
Memory of Mr. Hollingworth, once Fellow of the Collegiate Church in Manchester,
I hope I shall not be censured in transcribing his Manuscript, relating to the
Antiquities of this Town, and now reserved in the Library there. He supposes it
received its Denomination from Maen, which, as we find from the Glossaries of
the British Tongue, signifies a Rock or Stone, because it is seated on a Rock
or stony Hill: The Romans called it Mancunium, or Manucium, according to the
Variety of Copies mentioned by Antoninus the Emperor, who lived about an
Hundred and Twenty Years after Christ: The Thorough-fares ascribed to him, are
from Eboracum (York) to Calacina (Tadcaster;) then to Cambodunum, a Place now
ruined near Almondsbury, in Yorkshire; then to Mammuncio, or Manucio
(Manchester;) thence to Condato, Congleton in Cheshire; and then from Coccium
(Ribchester) to Mancunio, and so to Condato. This Town of Manchester was a
Station or Fort of the Romans; now the Stations of the Roman Colonies were the
several Plats of our Cities, and principal Towns, before whose Coming the
Britains had no other Cities or Towns, than Woods fenced with Trenches and
Rampires, which were Places of Retreat, to avoid the Incursion of the
Borderers. In Aldport, close by the Town, was another Fort, where many Roman
Coins have been dug up; it was built Apiece, was commonly called
Mancastle, or Mamcastle, being built, as may be presumed, by Vicius Lupus,
Pro-Praetor, and Lieutenant of Britain, as Ulpian the Civil Lawyer called him,
who strengthened these Northern Parts with Forts and Castles. From this ancient
Fortress the Place was afterward called Aldport; Ald for Out-Post in Teutonic,
(from whence, and not from the French they anciently have it) was sometimes
used for a City, Walled Town, or Fenced Place.

Near to the Confines of the Parish toward Prestwich, there is a Field called
Ho-Castle-Field, and a Lane called Ho-Castle-Lane; Mr. Cambden visiting these
Parts, saw at the Fort of Alpark, upon a long Stone this Inscription,

And John Dee then Warden of Manchester, copied out this for him.

These Two Pieces it seems were for the Preservation of the Memory of Two
Centuriont, that had so many Years faithfully and worthily served the Romans
there.

In the Year 1692, under the Root of an Oak, in Med-Lock, near Knot-Mill, was
found a Stone Three Quarters long, Fifteen Inches broad, Eleven Inches thick,
with the Lettered side downward, which Mr. Cambden saw not at least before the
Finishing his Britania, but is now to be seen in the Garden of Holme, the Seat
of Sir John Bland, Bar to whom that Estate descended, the same formerly
belonging to the Moseley's, in Right of his Wife, a Lady of great Temper, Piety
and Prudence. The Inscription of the Stone is thus;

This seems to be an Altar dedicated to Fortune, by Lucius Senecianus Martius
Brutus, a Commander in the Sixth Legion, which remained in York in the Time of
Severus his being there, after he had vanquished Albinus, General of the
Britains, and reduced their State under his Obedience: It was surnamed Victrix,
and is placed by Dio in Lower Britain, and the Twentieth Legion, surnamed also
Victrix, remained at Chester, which was placed in Higher Britain: This Division
it seems was made by the said Severus, and the Country about it where these
Legions were, were divided into little Regions, since called Hydes. This was
part of the Kingdom of Deiara, several of whose Youth being sent to Rome, and
Pope Gregory admiring their Beauty, sent over Augustine to convert the English.

Edward, the First King of the West Saxons, and afterward of the Mercians,
sent into the Kingdom of the Northumbers an Army of the Mercians, says
Hoveden, ordering that they should fortify the City of Manchester, and place
valiant Soldiers in it, it being defaced by the Danes: It was a Frontier Town
betwixt the Mercians that inhabited Cheshire and Derbyshire, and the
Northumbers inhabiting Lancashire and Yorkshire; and in their Wars and mutual
Incursions, was sometimes possessed by the Mercians, and sometimes the
Northumbers. Thus far our Author proceeds.

As to the present State of the Town, it is vastly populous, of great Trade,
Riches and Industry, particularly for the Fustian Manufacture, and Printing
them, as for those likewise which are called Manchester Wares; both which are
now sent all over the Kingdom, as well as to the Indies: It is watered by the
Rivers Erwell and Irke. Little can be added of Lancaster for Antiquity, save
that it was doubtless a Roman Fortress, as appears by the Roman Wall and Road
leading to it; it is at this time a very thriving Corporation, and an improving
Port: Its Eminency chiefly lies in this, that many Branches of the Royal Family
have enjoyed Titles derived from it; which for the Dignity of the County in
general, I will enumerate as briefly as possible. The First that was styled
Lord of the Place in the Beginning of the Norman Government, was Roger of
Poictou, surnamed Pictarensis, because his Wife came out of Poictou in France:
He was succeeded in that Honor by William, Earl of Morton and Warren, upon
whose Death King Richard the First bestowed it on his Brother John, afterward
King of England; of whom Gualter De Hemingford and R. Hoveden gives this
Account: That King Richard showed great Affection to his Brother John; for,
besides Ireland, and the Earldom in Normandy, he bestowed upon him such great
Preferment in England, that he was in a manner Tetrarch there: For he gave him
Cornwall, Lancaster, Nottingham, and Derby, with the adjacent Country, and many
other Things.

After this, King Henry. III. Son of King John, promoted his younger Son Edmund
Crouchback (he having been prevented of the Kingdoms of Sicily and Apuleia) to
the Earldom of Lancaster, giving it in these Words: The Honor, Earldom, Castle
and Town of Lancaster, with the Cow-Pastures, which at this Day they call
Vaccaries from thence, and Forest of Wiresdale, Lownsdale, New Castle under
Lime, with the Manor, Forest, and Castle of Pickering, the Manor of Scateby,
the Village of Gormancester, and the Rents of the Town of Huntingdon. Edmund
had Issue, Thomas, Henry, (and John, who died unmarried) which Thomas was
Second Earl of Lancaster, and was succeeded in that Honor by his Brother
Henry, whose Son Henry was in Parliament created Duke of Lancaster, (being the
Second Dukedom that was erected in England, that of Cornwall being the First in
the Person of Edward the Black Prince) and left Two Daughters, Maud, Duchess
of Bavaria, and Blanch married to John of Gaunt, so called because he was born
at Ghent in Flanders, Fourth Son of Edward the Third; who thereby coming to the
whole Estate, and being now equal to many Kings in Wealth, was created Duke of
Lancaster by his Father; he also obtained the Royalties from him, and the King
then advanced the County of Lancaster into a Palatinate: By this Rescript,
wherein after he had declared, the great Service he had done his Country at
Home and Abroad; he adds, We have granted from Us and our Heirs, to our Son
aforesaid, that he during his Term of Life, shall have within the County of
Lancaster his Chancery, and his Writs to be issued out under his own Seal,
belonging to the Office of Chancellor; his Justices likewise as well for Pleas
of the Crown, as for other Pleas relating to Common Law, to have Cognizance of
them, and to have Power of making all Executions whatsoever by his Writs and
Officers; and to have all other Liberties, and Royalties whatsoever,
appertaining to a County Palatine, as freely and fully as the Earl of Chester
within the said County is known to have. Nor was he only Duke of Lancaster, but
by Marriage with Constantia Daughter to Peter, King of Castile, sometime bore
the Title of King of Leon and Castile; but by Contract he parted with this
Title, and in the Thirteenth of King Richard the Second was created Duke of
Aquitaine by Consent of Parliament, to the great Dissatisfaction of the
Country. At that Time his Titles were, John, Son to the King of England, Duke
of Aquitaine and Lancaster, Earl of Derby, Lincoln and Leicester, and High
Steward of England. After this Henry de Bullingbrook his Son succeeded in the
Duchy of Lancaster, who having deposed Richard the Second, obtained the Crown,
and conferred that Honor upon Henry his Son, afterward King of England; and
that he might entail it upon him and his Heirs for ever, he had an Act of
Parliament made in these Words: We being unwilling that our said Inheritance,
or Liberties, by reason of our now assuming the Regal Seat and Diguity, should
be any ways changed, transferred, diminished or impaired, but that our said
Inheritance, with its Liberties and Rights aforesaid, should in the same Manner
and Form, Condition and State, wherein they descended, and fell to us; and also
with all and singular Liberties, Franchizes and Privileges, Commodities and
Profits whatsoever, which our Lord and Father in his Lifetime had and held it,
for term of his Life, by Grant of the late King Richard, and wholly and fully
continued, preserved and enjoyed, by Us and our Heirs, specified in the said
Charters; and by the Tenure of these presents, we do upon our certain
Knowledge, and with the Consent of this our present Parliament, grant, declare,
decree, and ordain for Us, and our Heirs, that as well our Duchy of Lancaster,
as all and singular Counties, Manors, Honors, Castles, Fees, Advowsons,
Possessions, Annuities, and Seigniories whatsoever, descended to us before the
Royal Dignity was obtained by us, how, or in what Place soever, by Right of
Possession, Inheritance, or in Reversion, or other way remain to Us, and our
said Heirs, specified in the Charter abovesaid after the said Manner, for ever.

And in this State and Condition it remained from that time, saving that Edward
the Fourth, in the First Year of his Reign, when he had attainted Henry the
Sixth for Treason, appropriated it, as they term it, to the Crown; that is to
say, to him and his Heirs, Kings of England: However, Henry the Seventh broke
this Entail; and so at this Day it has its peculiar Officers, namely, a
Chancellor, Attorney, Clerk of the Court, Six Assessors, a Messenger, Two
Auditors, Three and Twenty Receivers, and Three Supervisors.

Chester, the Metropolis of that County Palatine, is very remarkable for the
many Antiquities there discovered, and will furnish us with Variety of Matter,
both in relation to its self, and the many celebrated Personages that have
received Titles from it, that it was Eminent in the Romans Days is
unquestionable, by the numerous Spoils of their Grandeur, and Magnificence
found there. I will briefly give you the most noted Observations of Mr. Cambden
upon it, and then add what has been more lately observed: That it was a Roman
Colony, the Tyles daily dug up there confirm to us; on the Reverse of some is
inscribed, Col. Divana Leg. XX. Victrix. It is true, indeed, we cannot expect
to behold the stately Ruins of the Place in this Generation, which preceding
Ages did, yet even in the last Age it was not barren of them, as Ranulph, a
Monk of this City tells us, in his Polycronicon: There are Ways, says he, under
Ground wonderfully arched with Stone-work, Vaulted Dining-Rooms, huge Stones
engraven with the Names of the Ancients; and sometimes Coins dug up with the
Names of Julius Caesar, and other famous Men. Likewise Roger of Chester, in his
Polycraticon; When I beheld the Foundations of vast Buildings, up and down in
the Streets, it seemed rather the Effect of Roman Strength, and the Work of
Giants, than of British Industry: As to its Situation, Lucian the Monk, who
lived Five Hundred Years ago, speaks very largely, both for its Pleasantness
and Convenience; and doubtless it was an Argument of the Roman Prudence, here
first to form a Camp (for so the Word Chester from Castrum implies) and then to
build a City; for as Lucian observes, this Place standing in the West Parts of
Britain, was very convenient to receive the Roman Legions, transported hither;
and besides, it was proper for Watching the Frontiers of the Empire, and was a
perfect Key to Ireland; its Harbor supplied it with the Products of all
Europe: For, says the same Author, Ships come in from Gascoigne, Spain, Ireland
and Germany, so that we drink Wine very plentifully. Mr. Cambden takes no
Notice of any Antiquities in this City, except some Pavements of Chequer-work;
so that our Votive Altars, and Curiosities must be of more modern Discovery:
Mr. Gibson, indeed, the late Publisher of him with Additions, has an Altar with
this Inscription;

Which he thus reads; But upon this Altar Mr. Prideaux, who writ the Marmora
Arundeliana, Comments thus; That it is an Altar dedicated to Jupiter the
Thunderer; Tanar in the British Language signifying Thunder, and makes Praesens
Guna to Praeses Gunathae, that is, Governor of North Wales.


From which Inscription he argues the Twentieth Legion was styled Victrix
Valeria, and not Valens Victrix, as Mr. Cambden and others would have it.
Another Inscription he mentions, is,

And here the V being doubled, he appeals to Dio, who says the Twentieth
Legion, which is called Valeria and Victrix, is now in upper Britain, which
Augustus preserved, together with the other Legion that has the Name of
Vicesima, and has its Winter Quarters in Lower Germany, and neither now is,
nor then was usually and properly called Valeria: He farther proceeds, that
Valeria may as well be allowed, as to other Legions, the Additional Titles of
Ulpia, Flavia, Claudia, Trajana, Antonina, etc. were. But as to this disputed
Title, we shall give the Reader full Satisfaction in what follows:

Before I take Notice of his other Altar communicated to him by Mr. Henry
Prescot of Chester, let me insert what the same Author acquaints us was found
round it: About the Foundation where the Altar lay were to be seen the Signs of
a Sacrifice, as the Bones, Horns and Heads of several Creatures, as the Ox,
Roe-Buck, etc. with these Two Coins,

1. Brass on the first side,

And the Face of the Emperor on the Reverse. Victoria Augusti, S. C. and a
Winged Victory standing.

2. Copper on the first side, FL. VAL. Constantius. Nob. C.

And the Face of Constantius on the Reverse. Genio Populi Romani, a Genius
standing, holding a Bowl, (used in Sacrifices) in the Right Hand, and a
Cornucopia in the Left.

One of these Coins is not spoke of in the following Manuscript given me by Mr.
Prescot, so I thought it not amiss to quote Mr. Gibson for it.

But that I may now do Justice to the Courtesy and Generosity of that curious
Gentleman Mr. Henry Prescot of Chester, the Reader may here take a full Account
of that Altar from his Manuscript.

To Kendrick Eyton, Esquire at Eyton, in the County of Denbigh.
SIR, Chester, Ian. 12. 1693.
THE Altar found here, is a considerable Piece of Antiquity; it does, indeed,
prove it self so at first sight, but because the Names of the Emperors and
Consuls are wanting, it requires greater Skill in Antiquity, than I pretend to,
to fix its Era; however, since you command me, I will give my Conjectures upon
that, and other Circumstances of it:

In July last, 1693. upon Occasion of digging a Place for a Cellar, in the
House of Mr. Heath, in the Eastgate, about Two Foot deep, it was found with
the Inscription downward, upon a Stone Two Foot square, and One in thickness,
which is supposed to have been the Pedestal, being mouldred off on three sides;
the Foundation lay deep and broad, consisting of many great Stones; the Earth
about was solid, but of several Colors, and Ashes were frequently found. About
the Foundation were found the Heads, Horns, and Bones of several Creatures,
viz. The Ox, Wolf, Roe-Buck, etc.

On the Left Side of it was a Flower-Pot, on the Top is a Cotyla or Cavity, in
the Bottom of that Cavity a young Face, supposed to be that of the Genius; on
the Back, Ornaments, or Drapery of uncertain Figures.

On the Right Side, a Genius standing with a Cornucopia in his Left Hand, the
Right Hand being cut off by the Workman unawares, together with several Letters
of the Inscription signified by the Blot.


It is plain then in Fact, that the Altar was erected by Flavius Longinus,
Tribune of the Twentieth Legion, named Victrix and Valens; and Longinus his Son
descended from the House (City rather) of Samosate, in Performance of their Vow
made for the Prosperity of the then Emperors, to the Genius of the Place: Yet
in order to discover the Manner of that Performance, who the Tribune, or
Augusti, or Emperors were, the Era of their Reign, and the Year of our Lord
(all which are very doubtful) I offer these Observations. (Genio Loci) In the
Roman Heathen Theology, the very Genii are almost innumerable, one being
deputed to every Person, Place, and almost every Thing useful in their
Families, and for their Occasions: They are more frequently understood to
preside over Generations, Nativities, and after that, to be Tutelary to the
Person all his Life long: Hence it is, that the Effigies of the Genius is
commonly Juvenile, crowned with Plantane-Leaves; and Flowers, Wine, Nard and
Honey are offered to him in Sacrifice, on Nativities; and the Reason is,
because the Birthday, whereon the Person first enjoyed that cheerful Gift, the
Light of the Day, should not be defiled or profaned with Blood, or the
Depriving another Creature of that Light. Indeed, that Place in Horace, Lib. 3.
Ode 17. Cras Genium Mero
Placabis and Porco Bimestri,
Is brought for an Per Demsterum in Rosinum, ad C. 14. Lib. 2.
Authority, to prove the Sacrifice of an Animal to a Genius: But to me it is a
Mistake, and contrary to Horace's Intention; he there urging Lamia to spend the
Day merrily (Indulgere Genio genialiter vivere) and not advising to any Solemn
Act of Religion; and in some Additions more agreeable to this Interpretation it
is, Curabis (not Placabis) Genium, and Cutem curare is a proper Phrase for the
same Purpose: And this Sense is confirmed by the same Poet, Epist. L. 2. Epist.
1. V. 144.
Tellurem Porco Sylvanum Lacte Piabunt,
Floribus and Vino, Genium Memorem brevis aevi.
But to the Genius of a Place, a larger and more indulgent Province was
delegated: There might be subordinate Genii, and particularly such as presided
over Nativities within it, and to this Genius for the Plenitude of his Power
and Superintendency, more magnificent and pompous Immolations were made, and
from the same Opinion many Altars were erected to that Genius, as appears in
Gruter, IV. 7. VI. 2. VIII. 4. 6. 7. IX. 23. XC. 10. CV. 2. CVII. 5. ClXXVII.
5. MXVII. 7. MXVIII. 9. MlXVIII. 2.

Longinus Flavius;) This Tribune does not occur in any History I have read: We
Andr. Shotti, Gentes and Famil. Roman.
find that from the Cassia Gens, there descended a Plebeian Family, surnamed
Longini; it is very probable that G. Cassius Longinus, one of the ancient
Lawyers, remembered by the Digest. Lib. 1. Tit. 2.
Emperor Justinian, was of that Family. It is manifest, the same Longinus was
Praeses of Syria in Claudius his Time, and very credible, that he was of the
same Family with Cassius the Assassine of Caesar, as appears by the
Commendation of his Skill in the Law, and Arms, and his own Endeavor to
support the Honor of that Family. (Caeteros praeminebat Peritia Legum, nam
Militares Arts per Otium Ignotae, Industriosque ac Ignavos pax in aequo tenet,
attamen quantum sine Bello dabatur, revocare priscum Morem, Exercitare
Legiones, Cura provisa perinde agere, ac si hostis Ingruerit, ita digna
majoribus suis, and familia Cassia ratus, per illas quoque Gentes Celebrata.)
Cassius Longinus, the Assassine of Caesar, was Q^^^stor to Crassus in Syria,
and after Crassus his Death he returned back to Syria: It is probable during
his Residence there, he might plant that Family which above an Hundred Years
after (when the Lawyer Cassius Longinus came Praeses thither) was held in great
Esteem in those Parts. From so great and illustrious an House, many Families,
no doubt, were propagated, and considering into what Displeasure that House
fell with the Imperial Family, upon the Occasion of Caesar's Murder, it is
reasonable to think they would rather propagate and flourish in Syria, than at
Rome be obnoxious to the Envy and Revenge of the Julian Family.

This Supposition granted, the Number of 346 Years (viz.) the Space betwixt the
Time that Cassius fixed in Syria, viz. Anno U. C. 700. and the Era which I
shall presume to assign to our Tribune, viz. Anno U. C. 1046, will be found
sufficient for the Propagation of many Families out of the Cassian Gens, or
Stock. If then the Nomen of our Tribune had been Cassius, this might have given
more probability of his Pedigree or Derivation from the famous Cassius. The
Flavian was an ancient Stock or Gens, though Plebeian, and its likely our Tribune
was descended from it, and was of a different Stock from Cassius; but the
Cognomen Longinus is at least a Note of their Collateral Relation: Rosini, Lib.
4. L. de Patria pot.
Differunt enim Agnati a Gentilibus hoc modo, quod Agnati dicuntur, qui ex
eadem Familia nascuntur, and idem cognomen habent, Gentiles qui ex eodem genere
nascuntur, and simili nomine appellantur; and therefore a Conjecture may be
tolerably inferred, that, from what is here observed, our Tribune was of
Relation (though of several Descents) to the famous Cassius.

Leg. XX. The Workman's rude Instrument here wounded the Stone so deep, that we
may safely conclude, there was room for the Addition of Two Letters, and then
it will be Leg. XX. VV. It is certain, that Gruter and Rosinus.
Victrix was the ancient Epithet to the Twentieth Legion, and the most
authentic Proof of that Epithet is the ancient Column at Rome, whereon the 32
Legions were recorded. Another Epithet is added, but variously interpreted,
some take it for Valeriana or Valeria, others for Valens; but the latter seems
to have the Preference by the Authority of this Inscription, Gruter, p. 492. V.


Tacitus in Vita Agric. 13.
Julius Caesar rather discovered than subdued this Island to the Roman
Greatness; Augustus waved the Prosecution of Julius his Attempt out of
Prudence, and Tiberius out of Policy; but Claudius reassumed it with Success;
he sent over hither several Legions, and its most probable the Twentieth: In
his Reign we find a very great Impression made upon Britain, several Provinces
subdued, a Warlike Prince (Caractacus) carried Captive to Rome, and a
magnificent Triumph thereupon: In the Course of the Conduct of Ostorius Scapula
the Legate, it is remarkable what is said in Tacitus, Ann. 12. 32. (Et ductus
in Cangos Exercitus.)

The Learned Cambden supposes upon the greatest Deliberation, whereon he was
put by Lipsius, that the Cheshire.
Cangi were those Britains inhabiting these Parts, he being induced thereunto
by the Pigs of Lead found in the Ground, and having this Inscription on them;
IMP. DOMIT. AUG. GER. DE. CEANG.

We find the Provinces about the Brigantes, Silures, and Ordovices, subdued by
Ostorius, and considering the Situation of Chester, as it lies to those several
Provinces, it is not improbable but the Twentieth Legion might in his Time be
encamped here. In the Reign of Vitellius, this amongst others was accounted a
standing Legion in Britain, as appears by that in Tacitus, Hist. Lib. 2. 22.
Cum vexillis Nonae, Secundaeque, and vicesimae Britanicarum Legionum. Upon
obtaining of the Empire by Vespasian, we find it here Ejusdem Vitae Agr. 7.
under the Conduct of Roscius Celer, Agricolam xxmae Legioni tarde ad
Sacramentum transgressae praeposuit.
and very difficultly drawn to swear Allegiance to the new Emperor: And he that
considers the Success of Agricola in his Proconsulship of Britain under that
Emperor, and particularly in these Parts, will be induced farther to believe,
the said Legion had its Residence here; and from thence it is most probable the
City was called Cestria, or Caerlleon in British, a Castris; and the Learned In
Not. in Polyalbion.
Seldom does therefore reconcile the Saying of William of Malmesbury, Emeriti
Iulianarum Legionum ibi residere, by applying Iulianarum to Julius Agricola the
Lieutenant, and not to Julius Caesar.

Yet, though it is credible this Place might become considerable from the so
long Residence of a Legion or Legions here, as being a necessary Consequence of
drawing a Confluence of conquered Britains to them, and of their Inhabitation
there; it is not easy to believe it did improve and advance to the
Denomination and Grandeur of a City, before it was made a Colony by an Imperial
Charter. Had it been a Municipium or Hans-Town using its own private Laws and
Customs, or had it been a City in the Time of Vespasian, or before Septimius
Geta, it is likely some History had mentioned it, and also that it would not
have been made a Colony by Septimius Geta: In Cheshire.
Mr. Cambden mentions a Coin of that Emperor, the Reverse whereof is, COL.
DIVANA. LEG: XX. VICTRIX.

That Coin is a most valuable Piece of Antiquity, and to be preferred before
all our Charters; it founds us a Colony from Rome, and proves (what we so much
seek after) our Relation to that Legion: That Chester was called Deva, is also
proved by the Itinerary ascribed to the Emperor Antoninus Pius, wherein it is
thus inserted, DEVA. LEG. XX. VICT. M. P. XX.

That is, from Candato or Congleton, Twenty Miles to Deva or Chester. This too
proves the Residence of the Twentieth Legion here, and if the Itinerary be as
ancient as some assert it, we may boast of a much greater Antiquity than we
pretend to; but quitting that, we are not to question but it is very ancient
and of good Authority.

As for the forementioned Coin of Geta, it is unquestionable, and it is
probable Chester was made a Colony in the Year of Christ, 211.

Another Coin of this Emperor of the same Year with this Inscription, IMP.
CAES. P. SEPT. GETA. PIUS. AUG. BRIT. On the Reverse, VICTORIAE. BRIT. seems to
attest so much. Admitting this; it is manifest, this City was a Roman Colony
1482 Years ago; and no doubt but the Residence of the Twentieth Legion so many
Years before qualified it for that Dignity, the Legionary Soldiers being by
long Succession naturalized to the Place; and the Emeriti or Veteranes of them
were the first Petitioners for the Honor, and the first regular Inhabitants,
and Fathers of the Colony.

Longinus Fi. Ejus.) There is here a Flaw in the Stone, but the Space is so
small that one Initial Letter only seems wanting; and since it is but one, it
rather denotes the Proenomen, as A. for Aulus, C for Cajus, D. for Decimus, L.
for Lucius, etc. than the Nomen, viz. Flavius to be wanting: This, indeed,
would be a greater Matter of Scruple, but that it is found common amongst the
Romans, to omit, or assume their Names, or their Surnames pro re Nata, or at
their Pleasure. Macrob. Saturnal, Lib. 1. Cap. vj.
Nec Mirum si ex cognominibus nata sunt nomina, cum contra and cognomina ex
propriis sint tracta nominibus.

Domo Samosata.) The Place is here used substantively, by Apposition, as is
frequent in Inscriptions, (viz. Gruter, 634. 5. Domo Africa, 873. 15. Domo
Asia, 385. 1. Domo Carthagine, 174. 34. Domo Roma, etc.

Since there might be, as is before presumed, several Families descended from
the same Gens, in Syria, the Addition of Samosata does ascertain the Person,
and his Family: Plin. Hist. Not. Lib. 5. Cap. 24.
Samosata is the Capital City of Comagene, a Region of Syria, and is seated on
the River Euphrates.

Augg.) But since neither the Emperors nor Consuls are named in the
Inscription, and that our Tribune Flavius Longinus is not mentioned in History;
we are yet in the Dark as to the Era of it: We find by Experience that the
Romans, perhaps, careful to preserve their own Greatness, used to throw Coins
Cotemporary to the Work into the Foundations of their Theaters, Temples, Altars
and Public Buildings, and by very good Fortune in the Foundation of this Altar
was found a Coin inscribed thus, On the first Side, FL. VAL. CONSTANTIUS NOB:
C. On the Reverse, GENIO POPVLI ROMANI.

This is an Evidence so current and natural to the other Inscription, that it
must be admitted by the most rigid Antiquary; it is manifest then from History
that Constantius, when only Caesar, was sent over into Britain by the Emperors
Dioclesian and Maximinian, with a great Force against Allectus, (which
Allectus, after he had slain Carausius, assumed the Empire to himself, about
the Year of Christ 293, and about the Ninth Year of the said Emperors,) that he
was successful in his Expedition against Allectus, and reduced the Island to
Peace, and under the Obedience of the Emperors.

And it is reasonable to conclude, that upon such Commotions in this Island, as
must be upon such Vicissitudes, a Man of that Post and Character as our Tribune
was of, being a Tribune of that old Britanic Legion, and most probably well
affected to his lawful Masters, the Emperors, (together with his Son then with
him) did make, and perform his Vow to the Genius, or Tutelary God of the Place,
upon the Prosperity and Success of the said Emperors, or Augusti, against the
said Usurpers, under the Conduct of Constantius, then adopted Caesar.

Here follows a Letter from Dr. Fowke of Little Worley, to the said Mr. Prescot:
Dear SIR, Little Worley, Apr. 15. 1697.
YOU have taken much learned Pains to oblige me, more than I any way expected,
or could modestly ask, I have not Skill, nor Leisure, nor Memory enough, that
you may fear my Critic or make any Argument of it: If I had Time I would
rummage some Books, but indeed your Comment seems to me so reasonably founded,
that I think it will be hard to correct it. In so obscure and private a Matter
as the Subject of the Inscription, I cannot find any thing material of the Gens
Cassia or Flavia in Patin or Ursin de Famil. Romans so late as your Tribune, as
you have dated him: I think there is something in Remetius's Epistles, but I
have not Time to turn it; it is now to be wished Mr. Cambden had told us where
that Coin of Geta is, you value so much, it is not among those of Mazzobarbaon
Occo in Geta. Neither can I readily recollect where there is a full Catalogue
of the Roman Colonies, and among them your Divana, or methinks, it should be
rather Devana, from the River Dee and the old British Dwy; it would indeed be a
great Reputation to you to be a Colony, and not a Municipium only of the
Romans: If that Conjecture be well founded, I have little to say else about
your learned Pains, (and I will not offer to pay your Kindness with a cold
Complement) only at the Beginning where you interpret Domo Samosata of the
House of Sa -- this, methinks, should rather be rendered the City or Country of
Sa -- qui Genus? unde Domo? Virgil. Aeneid 8th Servius; and the Dauphine
Interpreters read it Country or City, but this is a small Matter; and I have
nothing greater to offer but my hearty Thanks and Acknowledgments, and that I
will keep your Comment, not only as a Monument of Antiquity, but of your
Learning, Skill and Friendship to me, which shall ever be cherished in whatever
may be returned to it material to your Service or Satisfaction, by,

SIR, Your most Faithful humble Servant, PH. FOWKE.


I had almost omitted the other Antique Rarities shown me by Mr. Prescot; one
was a small Copper Effigies dug up in Lancashire, about a Span long, with Wings
upon the Shoulders, and one Leg lifted up, and bended backwards as if ready to
take flight; the Face seems like that of a thoughtful old Man: I showed it
several eminent Antiquaries, who all conclude it no Mercury, but rather a
Domestic Pagod, and a very noble Relick of Antiquity. He likewise showed me a
Roman Lamp, two sorts of Brass Fibulae, with which their loose Garments were
clasped, and like those in the Eastern Countries, ready to throw off at
Bathing-time: There was another sort of Fibula like an Amethyst; this, perhaps,
belonged to a Roman of Quality; we had likewise a vast Collection of Roman
Coins which shall be accounted for.

And now what may farther be added to the Antiquities of Chester, may be
reduced to these Four Heads. First, The Government of the Romans in Cheshire.
Secondly, The Chronology of the Kings, Dukes and Earls of Mercia, of which this
County was a Part. Thirdly, The Bishops of Mercia and Chester from the first
Planting of Christianity there. Fourthly, Their Parliamentary Barons, Spiritual
and Temporal, who were to assist the Earl in Council at home and Wars abroad. I
will be as brief as possible in the Account, and must here acknowledge my self
indebted to the ingenious Author of the Vale Royal, whose Credit is authentic
with the Curious and Learned. As to the Names of the Britains inhabiting this
County in the Times of the Romans, they were called Devani, Cornavii, and
Cangi; of the Cornavii, Ptolomy gives the following Account, in the Second Book
of his Geography, Cap. 3. (...); that is, The Cornavii lie East of these, whose
Cities are Devana, and have there in Garrison the Twentieth Legion, called the
Conqueror: This Twentieth Legion was raised by Augustus Caesar, as Dion Cassius
relates in his 55th Book of the Roman History. They were placed first of all in
Gallia Belgica, now Lower Germany, and from thence by the Command of the
Emperor Claudius transported into Britain under the Command of Aulus Plautius,
in the Year of Christ 43, whom the Emperor himself followed the very same Year,
as the same Author testifies, which he confirms by the famous Eclipse that
happened therein on Claudius's Birthday (the Sun being darkened about Five
Digits) the First of August, in the Sixth Degree of Leo: But at what Time to
fix this Legion in these Parts, is something difficult to determine; yet we may
reasonably conjecture it to have been in that Year when Caesonius Paetus, and
Petronius Turmilianus were Consuls under the Reign of Nero, and in the Year of
Christ 61, considering the Coins of Nero which are frequently found at Chester;
and that that likewise was the Time when Suetonius Paulinus attempted the
Conquest of Anglesey: But this may admit of a farther probability from the
Scheme of Thirty Three Legions of the Empire (then in being) Eight Years
afterward drawn up by Galba their Emperor; in which, as Onuphrius relates it,
he places the Twentieth Legion in Britain, styled Valeria Victrix, which Error
is before answered, and will farther appear so from Tacitus, Ptolomy, and Roman
Tyles dug up at Chester. They continued in this Station when Marcus Aurelius
Alexander was Emperor in the Year of Christ 223; and also when Constantine the
Great had newly built Constantinople, this Legion remained in its old Station
till the Year of Christ 330, and probably was transported out of Britain by
Constantine, he laying great Stress upon his Countrymen: Frequent Musters were
made of the British Youth, and powerful Levies transported for the Service of
the Empire. Richard Broughton assures us in his Ecclesiastical History
published at Doway, out of a Jewish Author, that so early as Vespasian's Reign,
Twenty Thousand Britains were translated hence for Palestine, and were at the
Sacking of Jerusalem: There were standing Alae of them both in Asia and Europe;
but toward the Declension of the Empire, when so many numerous Provinces
revolted, especially in Valentinian the Third's Reign, about the Time of Aetius
his Second Consulship, he being then President of Gallia, all the British
Forces then in Arms were carried away, and the whole Island left enervate,
disarmed, undisciplined, and not one Roman Legion to assist them, but the
Inhabitants all lay exposed to the Insults of their more potent Invaders.

The Cangi may reasonably be supposed to inhabit these Parts, as has been
hinted before, and that Conghill in the Hundred of Brexton in Cheshire, and
Congleton in the Hundred of Nantwich, and Kendale in Westmoreland, and Kentsand
in Lancashire, received their Denominations from that People by an easy
Corruption.

As to the Kings of Mercia, who were Governors of this Province, in that
famous Heptarchy of the Saxons, the first of the Royal List is by Hollingshead
called Crida, who left it to his Son Wibba, Anno Dom. 595, this King had Wars
with the Northumbers, and slaughtered Twelve Hundred Monks at Bangor, Anno Dom.
604, as is manifest from the Computation made by Henry of Huntington, and
Bede's Ecclesiastical History: This City till now was in the Possession of the
Britains, but their King being defeated, it fell into the Hands of the
Northumbers, as Malmesbury testifies; but as Sir Henry Spelman observes, they
were stopped by the British Forces under the Command of Bledrick, Duke of
Cornwall, Manaduc, Duke of South Wales, and Cadwan, Duke of North Wales, who
slew Ten Thousand of their Soldiers, and forced them to retreat to their own
Country, North of Trent. Cadwan was now crowned King in the City of Chester, as
Dr. Powel, Gyraldus in his Description of Wales, and Dr. Llwyd affirm: Ceolus,
Brother of Wibba, was the next Mercian King, and Penda the Son of Wibba
succeeded him, Anno Dom. 625. He was a great Warrior, and succeeded by Peada,
the Son of Penda, Anno Dom. 655. he married Alfleda, Daughter of Oswy, upon
Condition he would turn Christian, as Florentinus testifies, and was baptized
by Finanus in the King of Northumberland's Palace: Afterward he founded the
stately Abbey of Peterborough; he was succeeded by King Oswey, as Bede relates,
who was dethroned by Three Captains, Immin, Eada and Eadberht, and Wulferus
fixed on the Mercian Throne; he was the second Son of Penda, and began his
Reign 658: In the Beginning of his Reign he was unfortunate, but at length
gained the chief Rule over the Saxons. Etheldred succeeded him A. D. 676, in
the Kingdom of Mercia; this Prince changed his Crown into a Cowl, and became a
Monk in the Abbey of Bardny in Lincolnshire, as the Monast. Angl. informs us.
Upon this Resignation of the Throne, Kenred the Son of Wulfer ascended it. He
took a Journey to Rome A. D. 709, became one of the Religious and died there.
Cheldred, the Son of Etheldred succeeded next, in 716, and was buried at
Litchfield in Staffordshire. Ethelbald, the Son of Alwey, the Son of Eoppa, the
Son of Wibba, began his Reign the same Year of our Lord, as appears by the
Saxon Annals; he laid the Foundation of, and gave a Charter to the Abbey of
Crowland in Lincolnshire; he was powerful in Arms, and lead a great Army
against Somerton Castle, Six Miles from Glastenbury in Somersetshire, An. 757;
he was slain at Sekinton in Warwickshire, and buried at Repton in Derbyshire,
his Death was brought about by his own Subjects, especially Bernred, who
succeeded him in the Mercian Kingdom: He lost his Kingdom to Offa his
Successor; for his Parentage and Progeny not being known, the Legality of his
Right was suspected, so he was deposed and afterward burnt, after his
Engagment with Offa: Egfrid the Son of King Offa succeeds him, whose Reign was
One Hundred and Forty One Days; he was buried at St. Alban's, and succeeded by
Kenulph, in Seven Hundred and Ninty Six: In his Reign Egbert, King of the West
Saxons wasted the Welsh Territories, and took the City of Chester from them; he
died in the Fourth Year of his Reign and was buried at Winchcomb in
Gloucestershire, An. Eight Hundred and Twenty, as Malmsbury testifies. Kenelm
succeeded him, an Infant, and he, as Ingulph reports, died a Martyr. Some say,
he was murdered, and buried at Clent in Staffordshire. Ceoluph was expelled
his Kingdom by Bernulf, who was an Usurper, and began his Reign, An. Eight
Hundred and Twenty Two; he was slain in the Fourth Year of his Reign by the
East Angles: Ludican his Kinsman began his Reign in 826, and he likewise was
slain in Battle by the East Angles.

Whitnaff of the Mercian Blood Royal was chosen King, before he understood
Martial Discipline; he was overthrown in a Battle by Egbert's Captains, and
absconded in a Monastery, as Huntington testifies; he died in Eight Hundred and
Forty, and was buried at Repton in Derbyshire. Bertulph, Brother of Whitnaff,
by Permission of the Saxon Monarch, obtained the Mercian Kingdom, An. Eight
Hundred and Forty Eight. In the Year Eight Hundred and Forty Nine King Alfred
was born, in the Third Year of whose Age, the Danes came into the Mouth of the
Thames with Three Hundred and Fifty Nine Ships, with whom Bertulph had an
unhappy Engagement, as Hoveden testifies; he died in Eight Hundred and Fifty
Three: In that Year Burthred ascended the Mercian Throne, and was assaulted by
the Danes: This King died at Rome, and was buried in the Church of the English
College there, dedicated to the Virgin Mary. Selulfe a Servant of his was
substituted by the Danes in his Room, in Eight Hundred and Seventy Five, and
bound by Oath to keep Possession in their Name, as the Saxon Annals assure us.
He commanded the Danish Army against King Alfred, An. Eight Hundred and Seventy
Seven: In the Year Eight Hundred and Eighty Six, after King Alfred had
overpowered his Enemies, he made Etheldred Duke of Mercia, and Captain of his
Forces in the City of London, and so the Mercian Kingdom ended, and instead of
Kings, the noble Alfred substituted Dukes, under him to Govern it, which
happened in the Year 886, as Matthew of Westminster testifies, it having
continued under the Reign of Twenty Two Kings from King Crida.

Of the Dukes of Mercia.
Etheldred, one of the Race of the Kings of Mercia, being constituted Duke, he
married Elfleda, the Daughter of Alfred. The Danes in 894, took the City of
Chester, but were therein besieged and reduced to great Streights, and they
quitted it in 908, as Matthew of Westminster affirms: This Duke and his Lady
Repaired the City of Chester, and Walled it about; he was buried at Gloucester.
Afterward Elfled ruled and built Edesbury, once a famous City, now nothing but
Rubbish: It is at this Day called the Chamber of the Forest. Near this Place
are many Fortifications and Fosses; she made Wars upon the Britains at the
Castle of Brecknock, took it, and therein their Queen and Thirty Three
Prisoners: She had a War with the Danes at Derby, assaulted the Castle and took
it: She died at Tamworth the Thirteenth of July, and was buried in the Porch of
St. Peter. Elswina the Daughter of Etheldred succeeded her, An. 919. The City
of Chester in 941, was surprised by the Welsh, and won again by King Edward the
Elder, whose Fifth Son Edward married this Elswina, as Matthew of Westminster
testifies, who was Mother to King Edgar. At this Time the Danes still usurped
some Parts of England: Alfarus was the next Duke of Mercia; Alfric, the Son of
Alfar, succeeded him in 986, who when he should have engaged the Danish Army,
counterfeited an Infirmity to the Dishonor of the Nation. Edrick, the Son of
Egilricus, was the Sixth Duke of Mercia, and the Danes hitherto continued their
Usurpations: He was deposed from his Dukedom by King Canutus, and that Part of
the Kingdom of Mercia was afterward governed by Earls, commonly styled the
Earls of Chester.

Of the Earls of Chester.
Leofric, the Son of Leofwin, (the Danes still continuing in these Parts) was a
great Lover of Chester, and adorned it with several Buildings; Algar the Son of
Leofric succeeded him; he died in the Year 1059, and was buried at Coventry:
Edwin, the Son of Edgar, succeeded him in his Earldom; but after the Defeat of
Harold, by William the Conqueror, the Saxon Nobility ended; and this Earl was
by the Conqueror carried into Normandy, from whence he attempted to make his
Escape into Scotland, but was slain in his Journey thither, as Hoveden
testifies: Gherbod, a Fleming, was the First Earl of Chester after the
Conquest; then Hugh Lupus had the Earldom, and he was succeeded by Richard his
Son; Ranulph, Nephew to Hugh Lupus, succeeded him in the Earldom, then Ranulph,
Son of the former Ranulph, received that Dignity in 1141, was poisoned, and
succeeded by Hugh Kevelioc his Son; then Ranulph the Third, surnamed
Blundevill, succeeded his Brother Hugh; John Scot, Nephew to Ranulph, succeeded
him, he likewise was poisoned, died at Darnel Grange, in the Hundred of Edsbury
in Cheshire, and was buried at Chester: After his decease Henry the Third held
that Earldom in his own Hands, till he created Edward his Son Earl of that
Palatinate; Edward the First, Son of Henry the Third, succeeded him, who
mightily delighted in the Pleasantness of the City of Chester, and for that
Reason termed the Country the Vale-Royal of England; he was succeeded by Simon
de Montfort, who was a Warrior, as appears from his Battle at Jews in Sussex,
wherein he defeated the King, and afterward received the Earldom of Chester;
he was slain at Evesham, and his Honors returned to the Crown in 1265. Edward
the Second, born at Carnarvan in Wales, succeeded him, he was Earl of Chester
and Flint; Edward the Third his Son was created Earl of Chester, as likewise
Prince of Wales, and Duke of Aquitain; Edward the Black Prince ensued next,
then Richard his Son, born at Bordeaux, likewise assumed the Title of Prince of
Chester, as Wallingham testifies; Henry the Fifth was after him Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester; Henry the Sixth succeeded him in
that Earldom; the next Earl was Edward, Son of Henry the Sixth, he was
murdered at Tewksbury by Richard Crouchback; Edward the Fifth succeeded him,
who was likewise murdered by his Uncle; Edward, the Son of King Richard the
Third, was next Earl of Chester; then Arthur, Eldest Son to Henry the Seventh,
who was succeeded by Henry the Eighth, his Brother; afterward Edward the Sixth;
then Prince Henry, Eldest Son of King James the First, and he was succeeded by
King Charles the First, and he by Charles the Second his Eldest Son. Thus it
remains Titular to the Royal Family, and for ought appears may continue so for
a Series of endless Generations.

The Bishops of Mercia.
The Two First Bishops were Diama and Ceollah, Two Scotch Men; the Third was
Tramkere, an English Man, but ordained by the Scots; after him Iarnman, or
German, as Bede relates it. To these succeeded Bishops, who had sometimes their
Sees at Coventry, sometimes at Chester, but most commonly at Litchfield: Those
were all in the Saxon Government, of whom there is a full Account in Ingulphus,
Bid, and others. The First after the Conquest was Petrus, who removed his Seat
from Litchfield to Chester, but was afterward altered by Robert Pecaam, who
had Three Seats, Chester, Litchfield and Coventry, but the Episcopal Seat was
again restored to Chester, in King Henry the Eighth's Time, and that of St.
Werburgh, appointed the Cathedral Church, and the Bishop made a Suffragan of
York: The Catalogue of the Bishops after that Time may be seen at large in
Godwin, and others.

The Barons of Chester.
The First Barons we read of were Nigell, Baron of Haulton, Robert, Baron de
Mount Hault, Seneschal or Steward of the County of Chester, who dying without
Issue, it came to Isabell, Queen of England, by Settlement, and John de Eltham,
Earl of Cornwall, and his Heirs; thence to William de Malbedenge, Baron of
Malbanc, whose Great Grand-daughters transferred this Inheritance by their
Marriages to the Vernons and Bassetts, and for want of an Heir Male to Vernon,
Baron of Sipbroke, it came by the Sisters to the Willburhams, Staffords and
Littleburys: Robert Fitzhugh, Baron of Malpas, Hammons de Massey, Fittons de
Bolin, Gilbert Venables, Baron of Kinderton, Warrens of Pointon, Barons of
Stockport, descended from the Noble Family of the Earls of Warren and Surrey,
succeeded in Right of Marriage. I have not met with any farther Antiquities of
Chester, or the County, but by what has already been discovered, we may
assuredly conclude the City of Chester to have been the most Ancient and August
Colony in these Parts.

Derbyshire (especially the Peak, which in the Saxon Language fignifies
Eminence, part of the famous Mercian Kingdom, whose Inhabitants were called
Coritani) will afford us but a slender Scene of Antiquities; the very Nature of
the Place rendering it inhospitable to Mankind, and at the same time indulgent
to Wolves, and Beasts of Prey; yet withal, we may with Admiration contemplate
the Conduct of wife, and provident Nature, where amidst all this unpolished
Rubbish of the Globe, she her self sits in State, and displays her Works
equally compatible with the most desirable Objects: Those uneven Mountains she
has made pregnant with a very useful and necessary Metal, and as useful
Minerals; she has here and there scattered her Disports for the Diversion of
the Curious, and cut out large Themes for Philosophical Enquiries; she
liberally affords Hot and Mineral Waters, for the Relief and Comfort of infirm
and decrepid Mortals; so that these untractable and dispeopl'd Parts become
frequented with numerous Crowds, who yearly arrive here, either through a
Prospect of Ease from their Pains and Infirmities, or for the pleasing
Entertainment of the Mind with new Objects, of which these Parts are very
prolifick. I will as briefly as I can give you my Thoughts of what is most
remarkable. I have not heard of any Roman Antiquities save that Place, called
Little Chester, mentioned by Mr. Cambden, where Coins of several sorts, and
different Metals are sometimes dug up, some of Copper, Silver and Gold; and an
Altar mentioned by Mr. Gibson dug up near Bakewell, in the Grounds belonging to
Haddon - House, the present Seat of the Right Honorable the Earl of Rutland,
with this Inscription,

As to the Tooth, Skull and Bones, found in digging a Grove, mentioned by Mr.
Gibson, I have spoke of such Forms before, and take them to be only the Lusus
Naturae, in Sparr and other indurated Bodies, which unquestionably at the first
were all fluid, and capable of any Impression: We have such a Tooth, though
scarce so ponderous, in Manchester, yet it weighs Two Pounds and a Half, having
been found in Derbyshire, with a Skull, and Limbs resembling those of a Man,
reported to have been found with it, though those are long since lost; the
Tooth it self is a Surprise to many Beholders, who after their superficial
Eyeing it, conclude it absolute Bone, and stand amazed at its Bulk and Weight;
when, in truth, it is only a Sparry Substance impressed with such a Form: For, do
we not daily discover the Forms of Plants, and the seeming Beaks of Birds,
Effigies of the Bones of Beasts and Fishes, all of solid Stones? Why Nature
therefore should be tied up only to these, and not in her Sports and Interludes
divert her self, and Mankind with Humane Shapes, I can see no Reason for.

I shall now first begin with the Baths at Buxton, but having sufficiently
treated in a preceding Chapter of Hot Baths in general, the Cause of their
Heat, and their Uses, I Will refer the Reader thereto, and here first give you
the Distick of Verses made by Mary, Queen of Scots, who honored this Place
with her Presence, as Mr. Cambden has them: Buxtona, quae calidae celebrabere
nomine Lymphae,
Forte mihi Posthac non adeunda, Vale. Buxton, whose Fame thy Baths shall ever
tell,
Whom I, perhaps, shall see no more, Farewell.




That these Baths were eminent in the Times of the Romans is most certain;
Lucan and others acquaint us, they were extraordinary hot; the high Road,
called the Roman Bath-gate, as Mr. Cambden says, further confirms it, but it is
especially evident from a Roman Wall cemented with red Roman Plaster, close by
St. Ann's Well, where we may see the Ruins of the ancient Bath, its Dimensions
and Length. This Plaster is red and hard as Brick, a Mixture not prepared in
these Days; and indeed, the white Plaster the Romans used was much firmer and
harder than any made in these Times, being harder than the Stone it self; the
red Plaster appears as if it was burnt, exactly resembling Tyle, but I rather
am inclined to think it was a Mixture of Lime and powdered Tiles cemented with
Blood and Eggs, which acquired that Hardness: Nor is it unlikely, but the white
Plaster was effected by some such Method, only instead of Tyle they might use
Chalk.

I shall briefly now take a short Survey of the Wonders of the Peak, though I
confess, they do not directly fall within the Heads of this Chapter, however,
being so universally remarkable, I cannot well omit them. Pool's Hole within a
Quarter of a Mile of the Well, may be thus described; it enters in at the Foot
of a large Mountain with a small Arch so low, that for several Paces you are
compelled to creep upon all Fours, but it then opens to a considerable Height,
not unlike the Roof of some large Cathedral; on the Right Hand stands an
Hollow, commonly called Pool's Chamber, where by striking with a Stone upon the
Walla noisie Echo rebounds: From hence you march forward over Ridges of Stones
and Rocks, conducted with a Guide and a Candle, and in that rough unequal
Passage we received the Diversion of beholding various Representations produced
by the petrifying Water continually dropping from the Roof and Sides of the
Rock. Here indeed, we must use more Caution than the Star-gazing Philosopher,
who being taken up with a profound Contemplation of the Heavens, was surprised
by a Stumble into a Ditch. Here you may see the Representation of most curious
Fret-work, Organ and Choir-work; in other Places the Figures of Animals, as the
Body of a Man, a Lion, and many other Things which a pregnant Fancy may
suggest; here is one Thing called a Font, by others Esquire Cotton's Hay-Cocks,
a Chair and Flitches of Bacon, with many more Varieties. Now you arrive at the
Queen of Scot's Pillar, clear and bright as Alabaster, beyond which is a steep
Ascent near a Quarter of a Mile high, which Terminates near the Roof in an
Hollow, called the Needle's-Eye, in which a Candle represents a Star in the
Firmament: The whole Prospect, indeed, in this remarkable Cavity is augmented
by the Light of Candles. Near the Pillar we fired a Pistol, which redoubled
like the Noise of a Cannon. You return the lower Way, where there are many
small Currents of Water: These are what I observed remarkable here.

Elden-Hole is a terrible Chasme, it was plumm'd Eight Hundred Fathom by the
Ingenious Charles Cotton, Esquire but no Bottom found; if a Stone be cast in you
hear its Sound a considerable time; it is about Seven Yards in breadth, and
double that in length, and very astonishing to look into. That called the
Devil's-Arse is a large and most graceful Arch, from whose Top continually
drops a Sparry Water, which like that in Poole's-Hole, petrifies; within the
Arch are several small Buildings, where the poorer sort of People inhabit; and
I could not but fancy them to be like the Troglydites, or Cunicular Men,
described by Dr. Brown, that lived not like Men but Rabbits. From this Arch I
passed to a Water which almost closed with the Rock, however this Water may be
passed, and then the Arch opens again, when you come to very large Banks of
Sand; at the third Water the Rock closes, and is impassable any farther.
Mam-Tor is another Thing remarkable in the Peak, this is an high Hill near
Castleton, under which there are several Lead Mines; this Hill is almost
perpetually shivering down Earth, and great Stones, yet never visibly grows
less, and has thus continued for several Generations; indeed, the Hill extends
a great way in breadth, so that although it constantly diminishes, it is not
discernable by the Eye.

The next Thing to be noted is Tide's-Well, that ebbs and flows, but that being
accounted for in another Chapter, I shall not recapitulate here.

Having now given an Account of the Natural Wonders of the Peak, I shall
proceed next to the Artificial ones which occur, and are not less surprising.

What I have observed before in the foregoing Rarities, are the rough Draughts
of Nature; yet being nearly viewed, they are of so admirable a Texture, and
managed with so unerring a Conduct, that they justly challenge the Skill of the
most daring Artist. In what follows, Art sits Triumphant, and bids fair for a
Corrivalship with Nature. Chatsworth, like a Sun in an hazy Air, adds Luster to
those Dusky Mountains, and attracts a general Congress to be Spectators of its
Wonders: It is the Seat of His Grace, William, Duke of Devonshire; the Passage
to it is of an easy Ascent; the Gate it self is very remarkable, adorned with
several Trophies; the Hill composes a stately Square, from which through a
Gallery upon Stone-Stairs, so artfully contrived, that they seem to hang in the
Air, you have the Prospect of a most beautiful Chapel, as likewise of the
Hall, in both which are choice and curious Paintings, performed by Seignior
Vario, Master of that Art; in the Hall is the History of Caesar, stabbed in the
Senate; and in the Chapel an admirable and lively Draught of the Resurrection:
Hence we were conducted into the Chambers, which are Noble and Great, and most
richly Inlaid, with the choicest Woods, and Compose a very stately Gallery. At
the upper End of it is his Grace's Closet, richly beautified with Indian Paint,
where there are various Figures of Birds, as Drawn by the Native Indians: Here
stands a stately Looking-Glass, which, when you approach it, reflects the whole
Gallery back again, and so deceives the Sight, that the Walk seems to continue
to the Eye, though you have reached the Bounds of the Gallery. The next
Curiosity were the Gardens, very delightful, pleasant and stately, adorned with
exquisite Water, Works; the First we observe is Neptune with his Sea-Nymphs
from whence, by the turning of a Cock, immediately issue forth several Columns
of Water, which seemed to fall upon Sea-Weeds: Not far from this is another
Pond, where Sea-Horses continually roll; and near to this stands a Tree,
composed of Copper, which exactly resembles a Willow; by the turning of a Cock
each Leaf distills continually Drops of Water, and lively represents a Shower of
Rain: From this we passed by a Grove of Cypress, upon an Ascent, and came to a
Cascade, at the Top of which stand Two Sea-Nymphs, with each a Jarr under the
Arm; the Water falling thence upon the Cascade, whilst they seem to squeeze the
Vessels, produces a loud rumbling Noise, like what we may imagine of the
Egyptian or Indian Cataracts: At the Bottom of the Cascade there is another
Pond, in which is an Artificial Rose, by turning of a Cock the Water ascends
through it, and hangs suspended in the Air in the Figure of that Flower: There
is another Pond, wherein is Mercury pointing at the Gods and throwing up Water;
besides, there are several Statues of Gladiators, with the Muscles of the Body
very lively displayed in their different Postures: The Pile is not yet
finished, but will assuredly be a very complete and magnificent Structure, and
worthy of so illustrious a Family.

Haddon-House is a stately Building, with noble Gardens, the Seat of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Rutland, and worthy the Sight of the Curious.

I shall now in the next place proceed to give an Account of the Earls of
Derby; the First of whom were the Peverels, Earls of Nottingham and Derby, as
Mr. Cambden transmits it to us from good Authorities: Afterward King Richard
the First gave and confirmed to his Brother John the County and Castle of
Nottingham, Lancaster, Derby, etc. with the Honors belonging to them, and the
Honors of Peverel: After him those of the Family of the Ferrars are allowed to
be Earls, whom King John created Earls of Derby with his own Hands, but his Two
Sons William and Robert in the Civil Wars were stripped of this Dignity, and
many Possessions of Robert were given by King Henry the Third to his younger
Son Edmund; and Edward the Third by Act of Parliament gave Henry of Lancaster,
the Son of Henry of Lancaster, the Earldom of Derby, to him and his Heirs, and
likewise assigned him a Thousand Marks yearly, during the Life of Henry his
Father: From that Time this Title continued in the Family of Lancaster, till
King Henry the Seventh bestowed it upon Thomas Stanley, who had not long before
married Margaret the King's Mother; afterward William the Sixth, Earl of Derby
of this Family, a Man of great Worth and Honor, enjoyed it, when the Author
Mr. Cambden writ this; William departing this Life, Anno Dom. 1642. was
succeeded by James his Son and Heir, Eminent for his good Services to King
Charles the First, as was also his Excellent Lady Charlote, who with a true
Masculine Bravery sustained the Siege of Latham-House against the Parliament's
Forces, when my Grandfather Colonel Chisnell Commanded under her: He received
Two Commissions, One from His Majesty King Charles the First, for a Regiment of
Horse, the Other from his Highness Prince Rupert, for a Regiment of Foot; in
which are these Expressions: For the Desence of the True Protestant Religion,
by Law established, the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and Defense of His
Majesty's Person; which is an invincible Argument of the Degeneracy of the
contrary Party, who would calumniate these worthy Patriots, with being Abettors
of Popery and Arbitrary Power. The worthy Earl after the Fight of Worcester,
being unfortunately taken in Cheshire, was on the Fifteenth of October Beheaded
at Bolton in Lancashire: He was succeeded by his Son Charles, and he by his
Eldest Son and Heir William, the present Earl; he had Issue James, Lord
Strange, by Elizabeth, Granddaughter of the late Duke of Ormond, and Daughter
to the late Earl of Ossory: This young Gentleman in the ripening Bloom of his
Years, had all the Marks of a sweet Temper, real Honor, and solid Judgment,
that in those Years could possibly be expected; but to the unspeakable Loss of
his Parents, and the universal Sorrow of the whole Country, he unfortunately
died the last Year at Venice of the small Pox, in the Course of his Travels:
The present Earl has now Two Brothers, (but no issue Male) Persons of great
affability, true Conduct and Bravery, as the World is sufficiently convinced of
by their repeated Actions in Flanders, in the Service of his present Majesty,
King William the Third.

Having thus far proceeded in the Antiquities of these Countries, which
unquestionably add to the Glory of them, in laying before us the Regard the
Romans had by erecting their Colonies, and forming their Stations for the
Security of these Parts of Britain; it remains now for the Satisfaction of the
Reader, that I give him an Explanation of the Reverses of the Coins dug up in
different Places here. I pretend not hereby to add many to the numerous
Catalogues collected and explained by the Care of preceding Antiquaries; but
that I may give what is due to these Parts of our Isle, esteemed, indeed,
obscure and barren by many, one may by these Reverses form some Idaea's of the
Extent of the Roman Empire, and their wondrous Transactions carried on in those
Times. One thing is observable here, that as it was an universal Custom in
Egypt and China to deliver their Sentiments by Hieroglyphical Representations,
so in those Days the Roman Emperors were no less devoted to that Piece of
Vanity. I shall not observe any strict Method in the Successions of the
Emperors, but give you the Coins indifferently as they came to my Hands.

On the Reverse of one of Julius Caesar's Coins was Mars with a Spear, or
Scutum, or Target, which doubtless denoted his Warlike Temper.

On one of Augustus Caesar's was Pallas with these following Letters, DESID. P.
R. thus interpreted, the Desire of the Roman People; which sufficiently
evidences to us the great Encouragement given to Learning in those Days, at
which Time it was, those great Masters of Eloquence and Poetry flourished, viz.
Cicero, Virgil, Horace, etc. Others of his have a Peacock on the Reverse; that
doubtless denotes his Apotheosis, or being deified; that being a Bird sacred to
Juno, who in those Days was styled the Mother Goddess, or the Goddess of
Heaven: It must needs be amazing to consider, that such strange Impieties and
unaccountable Ignorance, and yet such exalted Learning, should then abound.

I have seen others of the same Emperor which bore Ceres with a Cornucopia in
one Hand, and a Flower-pot in another, which in that Reign denoted Pleasure and
Plenty.

The same I have seen upon Adrian's and Domitian's Coins, wherefore I shall not
need to expatiate further upon those.

Only some of Domitian's have Augustus Germanicus, which denotes his Conquests
in Germany.

Titus Vespasianus has on the Reverse an Altar with a Cotyla, which must
likewise signify either his Sacrificing to the Gods, or that Divine Worship
was paid to himself.

Those coined by the City of Rome have usually Two Infants sucking a Wolf,
which allude to the Story of Romulus and Remus, of which Florus gives a
Relation, to whom I refer you.

Upon Helena's, the Mother of Constantine the Great, I have seen Mars with a
Spear in his Right Hand, holding the Left upon the Head of a Monkey, which seem
to hint to us the Extent of the Roman Empire in those Days, that Creature being
the Product of Asia.

There are frequently found Victoria winged, and in one Hand holding a
Victoriola winged, which seem to point out to us their unlimited Conquests.

I have on some observed Proserpina sitting in a Chair feeding Snakes, which
probably may allude to an Universal Quietness and Plenty, she and Ceres being
the supposed Goddesses of the Valleys, making all Things fruitful.

I have seen upon a Coin Sibilla Belgica, and upon the Reverse a Man with a
Spear and a Trophy upon his Shoulder, who this should be, I cannot make out
from any Author.

There are several others of Septimius Severus, and Geta his Son, that have on
the Reverse Iuventus, which denotes the flourishing State and blooming
Greatness of the Roman Empire.

Some have a Man with a Torch in his Left Hand, signifying, either a
Sacrificing to the Genius of the Place or to the Emperor.

Upon others are Neptune's with a Trident in one Hand, and a Dolphin in the
other, which may represent their Conquests by Sea, and probably upon this
Island.

On some an Eagle and the Word Consecratio, which intimates the Emperor's being
deified, or his ascending to Heaven; that being a Bird sacred to Jupiter, and
as it has been affirmed, one that only proves its Legitimacy, by not being
dazzled with the Beams of the Sun, whence came that Metaphor in the Greek Tongue
(...), which implies Sincerity.

Many times we meet with Apollo's Priests with Simpuvia's or Sacrificing-Cups
in their Hands together with the Securis and Dolabrum, which are all
Instruments that denote Sacrifice.

Some have on the Reverse Justice with a Sword and Bilanx, which represent
Authority.

There are of Geta's that have a Cupid in the Right Hand, and a Cupid and a
Laurel in the Left, which may represent his Juvenileness and Martial Temper,
being, when but a Youth, put into great Commands by his Father Severus, who
obtained many Victories over the Britains: Afterward the said Geta was slain
by his Brother Caracalla in the Arms of his Mother, as Herodian testifies.

Others bear a Palm with these Words, PAX AB TE, these hint to us, that Peace
usually succeeds Victory.

Antoninus Pius has some with Britania on the Reverse holding a Cornucopia,
which manifest to us the Plenty in Britain in those Times.

Upon some he styles himself Britannicus, denoting his Conquests here.

Severus has on the Reverse Two Cornucopia's, evidencing the Abundance of
Plenty in the Empire in his Reign.

Severus Alexander has on the Reverse one of the Popae or Agones holding a
Palm, which probably may signify, that by their Prayers to the Gods the
Emperor became Victorious.

Others have the Flaminii with Torches in their Hands, which was another Order
of their Priests that assisted at Sacrifices.

Some have a Woman with a Crow in her Hand, which may relate to Sacrifice, that
being a Bird taken notice of by their Augures and Aurispices in their
Predictions.

Some are adorned with the Tubicines, which was another Order of their Priests
sounding their Trumpets during the Sacrifice.

I have some with the Flaminii sacrificing Two Pigeons to Jupiter, and the
Genii of the Place.

Others have the Sagittarii, another Order of their Priests.

Others have Ceres and Annona, arguing Plenty and an Universal Amnesty and
Charity.

Some with a Tripos and Caduceus, denoting Peace.

Upon some may be observed Ceres holding a Spike of Corn in the Left Hand, and
a Torch in the Right, intimating, as I conjecture, that for reaping Harvest a
Sacrifice ought to be performed to her: Some of Faustulus's Coins are of this
Kind.

Upon some are stamped a Star with a Crown and Fasces, which seems to allude to
the magnificent Custom, when Caesar ordered his Golden Bench to be brought into
the Theater, and appeared there with his Crown adorned with Gold and Gems;
this, as Lipsius observes, was likewise an Honor dedicated to the Gods.

The like may also be seen at large in Tacitus's Annals, and Causabon's Comment
upon Suetonius's first Book.

I have seen on some Venus Victrix, in one Hand holding a Victoriola or Victory
in Miniature, with a Scutum along with it, under which are these Words, Sub quo
Orbis Terrarum jacet: This seems to indicate, that by the Assistance of Venus
the World must be subject to Caesar's Arms.

Upon others are Orbis Terrarum Caduceus, duae Dextrae junctae, Concordia
Insignis, with the Fasces and Securis; which intimate, that under Caesar the
World should enjoy Concord, signified by the Two Hands; by the Caduceus and
Fasces, are meant the Vigor of the Laws, and their Religion by the Securis or
Sacrificing-Ax.

Upon some are Caesar in the Habit of a God, holding in his Right Hand a Cornu.
which was an Honor dedicated to the Genii and to Heroes, and in his Left Hand
a Victoriola with the Statue of Mars.

Others have a Sacellum or Temple dedicated to Julius by the Triumviri.

Others a Plow and a Perticus or Plow-share used in Tillage.

Upon some are the Stern of a Ship, a Globe, Cornucopia, Caduceus, and Apex
Pontificalis, which intimate Caesar's governing the World, and represent Peace,
Happiness and Religion.

Some have Venus Clypeo Caesaris, and an Eagle fixed upon an Altar; for then
the Surname of Jupiter was publicly attributed to Caesar.

Some have Minerva bearing a Trophy with a Dragon at her Feet; because, as
Pliny, Plutarch, Pausanias and others observe, that Animal was sacred to that
Goddess.

On those of Marcus Brutus is an Anchor with a Dolphin; this indicates the
Command or Sovereignty of the Sea, which the Ejurati by a powerful Navy assumed
to themselves.

Some of his also have the Lyra, Laurus and Culter Victimalis, these all relate
to the Ludi Apollinares, which in the Absence of Brutus were acted.

On others of his are Caduceus Orbis and Clavus, which indicate, Caesar being
slain by Brutus, the World should be governed with utmost Felicity.

Upon some are Cancer, Acroterion and Rosa, which refer to the Victory of
Cassius after the taking of Rhodes; for the Rose is observable in all the Coins
of the City, and the Crab-fish or Cancer only indicates the Maritime Places and
adjacent Islands; the Acroterion indicates Victory after a Naval Engagement.

On others I observed Mars naked, with an Helmet on his Head, leaning on a
Spear, pressing a Scutum with his Foot, in his Left Hand holding a Flagellum or
Scourge; the first of these intimates the Power of Mars in time of War; the
last his Justice in punishing Mutiniers or Offenders; this is the proper Habit
of Mars, and no doubt, the Ground of it was to imprint a lively Idaea upon the
Minds of the Soldiers, both as to their Valor and Duty.

Upon some by the Urceus Lituus, and Pullus Gallinaceus of Mark Antony's, are
delineated his Inauguration. A full Account may be seen of the
Superstitiousness of those Times in Goodwin, Dupry, Rosinus, and others.

Upon some is one of the Equites carrying a Trophy upon his Shoulders, which
might probably be stamped after some Victory.

On the Coins of Marcus Lepidus, who was Tutor to Ptolomy's Children, may be
observed one offering a Diadem to a Youth holding an Eagle; this doubtless in
their younger Years was to instill into them true Principles of Honor and
Greatness, the Diadem being the Regalia of the Emperor, and the Eagle a Bird
Sacred to Jupiter.

On some I have observed Four Spikes of Corn, designing an Annona, or a general
Amnesty, which doubtless signifies in that Year the Sacrifices to Ceres were
numerous; at which Time Lepidus returned out of Africa, where he presided and
eased the Romans of their Bondage.

Others have a Tripos, out of which a Serpent appears, the Lituus, and
Sympulum, these only design the Sacerdotia.

Some have a Vessel betwixt a Thunderbolt and a Caduceus; this by some is
thought to intimate thus much, that we ought to spare the Humble, but pull down
the Proud; Peace and Clemency being prefigured by the Caduceus, and by the
Thunderbolt War and Contention.

The Tripos with a Star, is discernable upon some, on one side environed with a
Lituus or Trumpet, on the other side a Sympuvium, or Sacrificing-Cup; the Birds
which stand in the midst are Crows, of which we have spoke before.

I have seen likewise the Sellae Curules, to which there are affixed Three
Laurels, placed upon a Crown; these were in Honor to the Triumviri, they
having each of them One.

Some have a Caduceus with a double Cornucopia, and a Poppy on the Reverse;
whence it is signified, That by the Poverty of some Men Plenty and Security is
obtained: As in the dubious Fate of War, by impoverishing some Persons, the
Fortunes of a greater Number are raised: The double Caduceus denotes Plenty,
but the Poppy may import either Quiet or Sadness.

Upon those of Cneus Domitius is the Keel of a Ship with the Sun, because he
coined that Money when he Commanded in the Ionian Sea.

Upon others are the Insignia of Cohorts, Praetors, and different Legions, all
which bore the Eagle, but had their various Distinctions.

Some have Two Hands conjoined with a Legionary Eagle, and under that the
Rostrum of a Ship; this denotes Concord both by Land and Sea.

I have seen a Palm with a Crown of Ivey, with this Inscription, ALEXANDRIA
AEGYPTI, perhaps, because the Palm was plentiful there; the Crown was of Ivey,
because Antoninus commanded himself to be styled Bacchus, or because at
Alexandria Bacchus was the presiding Genius.

Upon others Piety with a Cornucopia, the Stern of a Ship, and a Stork, the
Ensign of Piety; because the younger Storks nourish the old Ones.

Upon several are the Temples of D. Julius, upon some the Triumviri joining
Hands, and Tellus or Ceres adjacent, holding a Cornucopia and Caduceus; hence
is signified, that the Earth by the Concord of the Triumviri, enjoyed Happiness
and Plenty.

Upon one of Dioclesian's Coins is Ceres leaning upon an Hasta, and holding a
Cornucopia, denoting Plenty; at her Feet are these Letters, P. L. N. which
Letters imply, pecunia Londini notata; that is, Money coined at London; the Two
other Letters D. N. that stand before the Head, signify, Deus noster, as
having caused himself to be styled, and worshipped as a God.

Upon some are the Bows and Quivers of the Armenians; these denote the Extent
of the Roman Empire in those Parts.

Upon others these Words, Armenia Romanorum Clypeis oppressa, which relate to
the same Matter.

Upon some Nux Pinea, which is the Ensign of the Vintagers that Year, probably
abounding with Plenty of good Wines.

Others have painted Targets, bespeaking the Roman Conquests there.

Upon some is Victory standing on a Basis, below her Two Snakes wreathed and
raising themselves upwards, which wonderfully exercise the Learned: It may be,
by the Two Snakes is intimated the Division of the Roman Empire into Two
Factions, that is the Hospitalitates, and Distdia, which were composed by
Victory mediating; for the Snake is the Symbol both of Friendship and Division.

In some there is Victory sitting upon a Celestial Sphere, as though she would
diffuse her Power above Heaven it self, and holds a Velamen in her Hand, which
composes a Circle that her Eternity might be by that denoted. So prodigiously
aspiring were the Emperors in those Days, that they even out-did the very
Cyclops, who waged War with Heaven it self.

Others have a Caduceus, and a Scutum, stamped with the Image of the Sun; these
indicate the Felicity of the Times, sought for by the Ludi seculares, the
Caduceum signifies Happiness, and the Sun the Age, which by its Circumvolutions
it commensurates. Thus we may observe how the Romans were addicted to
Hieroglyphical Representations: However, to have a clear Sense of them, may
give a Man a Gust of the Flights of the Roman Poets in those Days of
Heathenism, in their Characters of, and Addresses to the Emperors.

Some have Phoebus naked, sitting on a Rock, and playing upon an Harp; it is
probable by Apollo here is meant Augustus Caesar, in whose Reign Learning was
so much Encouraged.

Augustus is on some Togated, holding in his Hand a Victoriola, which still
shows his great Inclination to Learning and Arms.

Some have Venus Victrix, with a Spear and Helmet, and a Scutum adjacent, which
had for its Ensign a Star; this probably represents the Shield of Augustus,
which for the Memory of his Father he adorned with a Star, as likewise his
Helmet.

Some have Neptune pressing the Keel of a Ship with his Foot, in one Hand
holding a Trident, in the other a Dolphin; these bespeak the Sovereignty of the
Emperor at Sea.

Others have Diana Venatrix, denoting the great Pleasures of those Days.

Others have Hispania holding Spikes of Corn, showing the Plenty thereof in
that Province; she holds likewise Darts in her Hand styled Gosa, which were
taken by the Romans from the Spaniards.

In some are discernable a Siren, one half representing a Woman, the other a
Bird; this denotes the Cumaeans, a Colony brought over to the Roman Empire by
Augustus, for Cumis was commonly called the Body of Parthenope, which was one
of the Sirens.

Some have a Parthian carrying Banners.

Some Victory, sitting on the Rostrum of a Ship, with a Laurel and a Palm,
denoting Victory at Sea.

Others have Parthians offering a Boy to Augustus, and as appears by the
Bracelets, they carried supplicated Peace from him; these sufficiently denote
to us the Power the Romans had amongst those Warlike People; if we consider
therefore the Roman Puissance in those and succeeding Times, and withal the
Effeminacy of the Italians in these Days, it may give us just Reasons to
suspect the ancient Race of the Romans is extirpated, and the present
Inhabitants are but the spurious Offspring of the Scythians, Goths and Vandals.

On some there are these Words, QUERNA CORONA, a Crown of Oak, perhaps,
alluding to the British Druids who worshipped under Oaks.

Severus Pius Augustus has on the Reverse these Letters, P. M. T. R. P. a Man
holding a Patera, and Discordia; the ters may be interpreted, Pontifex Maximus
Tribunitiae Potestatis.

On some is a double Cornucopia, which is the Ensign of Vibo Valentiae, as is
manifest from the Coins of that City.

Some have Pietas holding a Spear and a Laurel, because the Laurel was chiefly
made use of in Sacrifices, which they held in their Hands, when they worshipped
their Gods, imploring, as we may conjecture, Success and Victory to Caesar's
Arms.

Upon some is Tiberius sitting on a Star, denoting either Eternity or Victory
to him.

There is likewise Antonia in the Habit of Constantia Aug. holding a
Cornucopia, with a Torch for the Priesthood of Augustus, denoting all Virtues.

Upon some is Augustus amongst the Seven Planets in the Habit of a God.

On others Caligula sitting upon a Star, holding a Laurel and Spear, denoting
his being deified and his Victories.

I have seen those of Germanicus, holding the Eagle of the Legion, which he
retook after it was lost at the Battle of Varvana.

Some have Hope clothed in a divided Garment, with one Hand lifting up the
Skirts of it, and with the other preferring an Herb to it, which shows how
little we ought to value our Expectations in this World.

There are Coins of Titus Claudius with the Sacerdotia and Sacrificing-Vessels.

Sometimes Peace stands winged, touching with a Caduceum the Head of a Serpent,
which seems to hint, the best way to compose Differences is by Clemency.

Constantia is observed sitting in a Roman Stola, lifting up the Foremost
Finger of her Right Hand, which Posture denotes Vigilance.

Britania is observed holding in her Right Hand the Stern of a Ship, what is in
her Left Hand is not distinguishable; adjacent to that is the Keel of a Ship,
denoting the Kingdom encompassed by Sea, as likewise the Inhabitants
Application to Navigation.

Vesta covered sitting, holding a Sacrificing-Cup, and offering a Lamp, denotes
the Perpetuity of that Fire.

On another of Constantia's, she leans upon a Spear in a Military Habit,
lifting up the foremost Finger of her Right Hand, which shows how constant and
indefatigable Claudius was for the Commonwealth, and indeed, there is just
Reason to believe it, since he sailed round the Island, and was the first Roman
Emperor that made any considerable Progress in Britain, as Dion, Suetonius,
Tacitus and others observe.

Others have a naked Barbarian with a Dagger, fighting with a Roman in regular
Armor: It Is probable, this naked Man was a Britain, for Zonaras and Xiphilinus
assure us, the Armor of the Britains was a short Shield, Dagger and Spear.

Some have the Genius holding a Patera and Cornucopia.

Constantius has on the Reverse sometimes Mars, Virtus, Exercitus; for by his
Warlike Temper he wrested the Empire from his Two Brothers, which his Father
Constantine had divided.

Domitian has Ceres with a Cornucopia, denoting Plenty.

Sometimes he has Mars holding in his Right Hand a Spear, in his Left a Target.

Antoninus bears a Cippus, an Instrument to punish Offenders.

Nero may be observed with his Head radiated with a Victoriola and with a
Laurel, which denotes his Ambition to represent the Sun; and in sacrificing the
Laurel, a Tree sacred to Phoebus, he compared himself to Apollo, by reason of
the Victories he obtained by his Harp and Singing: One remarkable Instance Nero
afforded, was that he played upon his Harp the Burning of Troy, as Rome it self
was in Flames.

Others have Roma Armata, with Breasts exerted like an Amazon; this doubtless
was to Typifie the Valor of the City of Rome.

Some have Victory offering a Shield to Nero.

Some an Hunter pursuing a Boar.

Some Hispania with a Quiver and Two Darts, signifying the Valor of that
Nation, and with a Spike of Corn, showing its Fertility.

Galba may be observed Gown'd, holding the World in one Hand, and with the
other touching the Head of a Youth: This seems to relate to the Galbae in Piso,
in adapting the Hospital Boys, instituted by Galba, to Piety.

Otho has these Words, SECURITAS POP. ROMANS with a Spear and a Laurel, which
denote, that by the Victories of Otho, Security was brought to the People of
Rome.

On the Reverse OTHO PONTIFEX MAXIMUS, with a Branch of Laurel and a Spear,
denoting that Expiations and Purgations by Sacrifice were performed by them;
and these are all the Otho's I have seen.

Some Coins have Jupiter sitting upon a Star with a Spear.

Others Mars Grandivus, with a Spear and a Trophy.

Others Fortune, holding the Helm of a Ship in her Left Hand, and a Cornucopia,
representing what vast Riches may be acquired by Navigation.

Clementia, sitting with Spikes of Corn, may be observed in Vespasian's Coins.

As likewise the Palm, that abounding in Judea, which he Conquered.

Jupiter Custos standing before the Altar with a Patera and Hasta, which seem
to show that by Government and Religion the World is preserved.

Peace holding an Olive Branch, burns her Arms; behind her stands a Pillar,
supposed to be Bellona's, from which a Spear usually appears.

Tutela Dea protecting Vespasian or Titus, and Domitian.

Eternitas represented by the Sun and Moon, those being by the Egyptians deemed
Eternal.

Neptune Redux with a Trident and Acroterion, for the Return of Titus to Rome
by Sea.

Domitian in the Habit of Piety, a Son standing by, which Typifies that by
Piety the Empire nourished and cherished her Son Caesar.

In some Coins may be observed Hercules, or Trajan the Emperor, he much
affecting to be clad in that Habit.

The Via Trajana in Species of a Woman holding a Wheel and Reed, denoting
probably the Industry of the People of Rome.

Matidia with her Two Daughters, which represent Piety, with which she
preserved her Two Daughters Sabina, and Matidia the Younger.

Adrianus, the Reverse a Woman holding a Globe in her Hand, which shows that
Adrian and Venus governed the World.

Egypt leaning upon a Basket of Fruit, holding a Cistrum, or Horn like a
Trumpet in her Hand; Ibis, a Bird Sacred to the Egyptians, is adjacent, and
was the Bird, when it found it self indisposed, that injected Salt Water by the
Help of its Beak into the Anus; and thence showed us the Use of Clysters.

Cappadocia holding a Mountain in her Hand; its probable, because the
Cappadocians worshipped a Mountain for their God.

Africa sacrificing, by reason of the Coming of the Emperor, and holding Spikes
of Corn covered with the Exuviae of Elephants.

Asia Minor with the Rostrum, and Stern of a Ship to demonstrate their
Expertness in Naval Affairs, in which her Inhabitants then excelled, and
holding in her Right Hand a Serpent, perhaps, because the Country abounds with
them: This Emblem, as it delineates to us the Industry of those People in
Navigation, at the same time renders it very probable, that many Foreign Parts
might be Peopled thence; and Britain, by what we have hinted before, as likely
as any.

But the more fully to evidence the Truth of this Conjecture, I shall in the
First place back it with a Quotation from Divine Authority.

In the Second place, clearly and fully evince, that the Britains in those Days
worshipped the same Deities as the Phoenicians did.

And in the Third and Last place make it evident, that in Nero's Time a British
Queen wore a Golden Torques, which sufficiently demonstrates the Britains
traded with other Nations before Caesar made his Attempts upon this Island,
which from the subsequent Observations may fairly be proved to be Phoenician.

Of the First; Ezekiel, Chap. 27. gives us this Geographical Account, which, if
I mistake not, exactly quadrates with the Reverse of the forementioned Coin;
and fully illustrates to us, how from their vast Industry, Skill and Experience
in Navigation they might transplant themselves hither; that the People of
Tirus, which was one of the chief Cities of Phoenicia, were seated at the Entry
of the Sea, were Merchants and a People for many Isles, that their Ships were
made of the Fir-Trees of Senir, and their Masts of the Cedars of Lebanon, that
they had Oars from the Oaks of Bashan, Benches of Ivory from the Ashurites,
brought out of the Isles of Chittim; embroidered Linen from Egypt for their
Sails, Blue and Purple from the Isles of Elisha, the Inhabitants of Zidon and
Arvad were their Mariners, and the Wisemen in Tyrus their Pilots, the Wisemen
of Gebal and Ancients thereof their Calkers, that all the Ships of the Sea were
there to occupy their Merchandise, those of Persia, of Lud and of Phut were in
their Armies. Observe here Lud in the Hebrew Language signifies Lydia, a
Country bordering upon Phoenicia; that therefore the British King assuming that
Name (from whom the City of London, as most conjecture, is denominated) seems
to me to produce, that the Phoenicians had discovered the whole Island, since
it is probable, he might chiefly affect the Name from some eminent Lydian he
most admired among the Phoenicians; whether it be so or no, I shall not take
upon me to determine: However, it may merit the strictest Enquiries of the
Learned. That the Phoenicians Traded to Tarshish is certain, which by the best
Commentators is esteemed to be the Mediterranean, and likewise to Tubal, Iavan
and Meshech, which signify the North, amongst which, its probable the Britains
may be included; that they likewise traded in precious Clothes for their
Chariots, an Instrument only that they as well as the Britains, made use of in
Fighting.

Having now cleared the first Head, I shall proceed to the second, and that is,
to prove that their Way of Worship in Britain and Phoenicia was the same;
which, if I mistake not, duly weighing the preceding Arguments, to wit, the
Phoenician Words in these Parts and Manner of Fighting, with their prodigious
Merchandising, puts it beyond Contradiction, that this Island must necessarily
be inhabited from that Country, in a great Measure at least. The Deities they
then worshipped retained the following Names, Andraste and Astarte, of which
Dion Cassius gives the following Account in his Life of Nero. The British
Amazon Bonduca or Boadicia, says Leo, before she engaged the Romans, with her
Hands lift up to Heaven, had this Ejaculation; O Astarte, Protectrix of Women,
I invocate thee. Now the Phoenicians, as well as she, worshipped Astarte, by
that meaning the Moon or Venus, which sometimes they termed Venus, sometimes
Belisama, sometimes Diana and sometimes Proserpina, from the benign Influence
that they expected from her in the Rivers, Woods, Valleys and their Pleasures,
she being styled Belisama upon the Waters, in the Woods Diana, in the Valleys
Proserpina; and when they implored her Assistance for Pleasure and Felicity,
Venus. Schaedius likewise in his Account of the German Gods gives us a
Relation, that they paid a most profound Adoration to this Deity, insomuch,
that when she was in her Wane they declined Fighting, of which the Romans
frequently took their Advantage, and made by that Method their Conquests the
easier. Their Manner was always, in the New Mood to engage their Enemy, of
which Superstition to this very Day there remains still some Footsteps, it
being a common Custom amongst the Populace upon the first Appearance of the
New Mood to put up a Benediction to her in the following Form, to wit, Yonder
is the New Mood, God bless it.

I shall now in the Third and Last place endeavor from another Relick of
Antiquity to make it evident, that the Britains traded with the Eastern
Nations, to wit, Phoenicia, and that is from a Torques lately found in
Staffordshire, belonging, as may be supposed, to the British Queen Boadicia: Of
which take the following Account:

In the County of Staffordshire, in the latter end of April, 1700. a poor Man
in the Parish of Patingham, found a large and ponderous Torques of fine Gold,
the Weight of it was Three Pounds and Two Ounces, in Length it was about Four
Foot, curiously twisted and writhen, with Two Hooks at each End, cut even but
not twisted; one of the Hooks seemed to have a small Notch in it, as if
something had worn it by hanging to it; it was fine Metal, very bright and
flexible, it would wrap round your Arm, your Middle or Hat, and be extended
again easily to its own Shape, which most resembled the Bow of a Kettle.

It seems to be a British Piece of Antiquity for the following Reasons:

First, Its being found near an old British City, as Dr. Plot in his Natural
History of Staffordshire, makes that Place to be.

Secondly, Dion Cassius assures us, that Bonduca or Boadicia wore a Golden
Torques.

The Romans, as well as the Britains, wore these Torques's, and probably both
of them had it from the Asiaticks. Titus Manlius had the Surname of Torquatus
given him, as an Achievement of Honor for killing Gallus, a Man of a
prodigious Magnitude. The Torques by Virgil is thus described, -- Is petere
summo
Flexilis obtorti in collum circulus auri.
which exactly quadrates with the Account given of it. From this Instance
therefore, we may deduce this reasonable Corollary, that since the Britains, as
well as the Romans wore Golden Torques's, and that Gold is not the Product of
this Island; and that as it is evident from the Quotation in Ezekiel, the
Phoenicians Traded in Gold, Precious Stones, and all the Eastern Spices, and
might for these trade with the Britains, for Tin, Iron, Copper, and other
Products of the Island; that several Colonies of the Phoenicians were seated
here before the Romans made any Attempts upon it. The Account of this Torques
was communicated to me by the Reverend Mr. Smith, Batchellor of Divinity, and
Senior Fellow of Brazen-Nose-Colledge, in Oxford.

Faustina, on some representing Lucina, predicts Faecundity, she being the
Goddess that assisted in Women's Labor, she has Three Infants standing by her;
upon some is Eternitas alata, holding a Torch in her Hand, and carrying
Faustina to Heaven.

Heliogabalus has a Patera pouring Liquor upon an Altar, holding in the
Left Hand a Ferula, in Imitation of the Magi, who near the Altar sang the Hymns
of the inextinguishable Fire, holding their Ferula's.

Hercules Densoniensis; this relates to Denso, a Town or Castle upon the
Frontiers of the Franks, behind the Rhine, as St. Hierome ad Chronicon Eusebii
says, In the Year 376, the Saxons were routed at Denso.

Upon some is Laetitia holding in her Right Hand a Diadem, in her Left an
Anchor, showing that Joy to be firm and right grounded.

Upon others is the Image of the Sun radiated, holding in the Left Hand a
Spear, a Captive sitting upon the Ground at his Feet, an Epithet ascribed to
the Conqueror, Hercules Scytalo Sagitti Pelliger: This Sign the Pagan Emperors
carried in their Expeditions.

On others Securitas holding a Laurel, because it was supposed to divert
Dangers.

Imperator Crucem Tenens, which was in the Insignia of Constantine the Great.

Victoria Crucem Gemmatam Tenens; under that Sign assuring the most glorious
Victory.

Caesar Valerianus with Proserpina feeding Snakes, which is explained before.

Antoninus, with a Person holding a Discus, denoting Sacrifice.

Septimius Geta, Mars holding a Spear in his Right Hand, and a Torch in his
Left with these Letters, I. N. C. IUVENTUS; the first argue his Martial Temper,
as likewise his Regard to the Gods by the Torch adapted for Sacrifice: The
Letters may mean thus, Imperator Noster Caesar, and Iuventus either signifies
his Youth or the flourishing State of the Empire.

Severus Maximus Critinus Augustus has at the Bottom of the Head IVVI. on the
Reverse L. TAVG. This seems to be a Coin stamped by some Tribune of an august
Legion, as the Letters seem to imply; but why Severus was styled Critinus, I
cannot make out by any Antiquary.

Valerius Maximus with a Neptune, Dolphin and Trident, explained before.

Severus sometimes has Providentia Deorum and Pallas, implying his great
Veneration for the Gods and for Learning.

Iulia has sometimes on the Reverse Pietas Publica, and a Woman with a Patera
at her Feet; she was Wife to Severus, and as some affirm, very lewd; wherefore
by having the Sacrificing Cup by her Feet, it looks as if she scorned and
trampled upon Religion.

Iulia Maesa has on the Reverse Venus and Foelicitas; she was Mother to
Commodus, who, as some declare, was got by a Gladiator, for which Reason,
perhaps, she fixed her chief Happiness in that Goddess.

She sometimes holds a Patera in her Hand, denoting Sacrifice, very likely to
Venus.

Severus Alexander has a Man holding a Patera with these Letters, M. P. T. P.
COS. II. implying Sacrifice, and that he had been of the Tribunitial Power, and
twice Consul.

Severus Augustus has a Sacellum, signifying his Veneration for the Gods.

Septimius Geta, a Man holding a Trophy with these Letters, P. O. N. U. T. H.
which may probably be Pontifex, the Emperors being frequently styled, Nobilis
victor, Triumphator Heroicus, and Cos. II. twice Consul.

Severus Alexander has Virtus, Exercitus, Augustus, a Man holding an Hasta and
Patera, denoting his Application to Morality, Arms and Religion.

Valerius Maximus has on the Reverse Proserpina holding a Snake in one Hand,
atd another hissing at her; this denotes the Division of the Roman Empire,
spoke of before.

Iulia has sometimes S. V. AU. AUG. P I. with Pallas on the Reverse, which is
no more than Votum solvit Augusto Principii, she stiling her self Augusta, and
that Pallas was one of her Genii.

Some bear these Words IMPERATOR. CAESAR AUG. on the Reverse a Man holding in
one Hand a Bidens, and in the other a Scutum: The Bidentes, as Scaliger upon
Varro observes, were Cornigerae, and denote Sacrifice; the Toga signifies
Peace, the Scutum Authority, and the Letters A. P. O. L. may be thus
interpreted, Augustus Pontifex Legislator.

Iulia Mammaea, on the Reverse a Man holding a Spear and Scutum, URBIS ROMANAE
CONSERVATRIX; this was found in a Roman Urceolus, near Standish in Lancashire,
with Two Hundred Roman Coins more, and Two massy Rings of Gold, belonging
doubtless to the Equites Aurati.

Severus Pius Augustus has on the Reverse these Letters, D. M. T. R. P. with a
Man holding a Patera and Discordia; D. M. may signify Dominus Maximus or Deus;
T. P. that he was of the Tribunae Potestatis, the Patera Sacrifice, and
Discordia argues they were dissatisfied about the Worship of the Gods, or
perhaps, that the Christians divided from them.

Commodus Antoninus Aug. has sometimes Ceres with Spikes of Corn, which denotes
only Plenty, with these Letters L. I. R. AUG. V. TRIUMVIR. which may denote
Liberalitas, and Iuventus Romana, and that he had been Five times Triumvir; as
likewise PO. IIII. COS. fignifies Pontifex or Princeps, and Four times Consul.

Antoninus Pius Aug. I find him with a Man holding a Patera and Bidens; both
denote Sacrifice, with these Letters, P. M. T. P. D. X. IIII. COS. IIII. P. R.
the first five Letters may signify Pontifex Maximus Tribunitiae Potestatis
Deus; X. and IIII. may denote the Year of his Reign, and Four times Consul; P.
R. is the People of Rome.

Another of the same Emperor has Libertas.

Another of his has Neptune, a Spear and Star, a Trident, Sacellum and
Caduceum, denoting his being deified, together with his Power and Peace at Sea.

Iulia Mammaea has Providentia sitting, which may imply, Providence by a Nod
directs the World.

Another of Antoninus has a Man with a Star and a Scutum, in the Posture of a
Gladiator, which shows the Soldier is ready to defend the Emperor's being
deified; like the Knights of Maltha drawing their Swords at the reading of the
Creed, to show their Readiness to venture their Lives in its Defense.

There is another of Iulia Mammaea with Juno on the Reverse, with a Spear in
one Hand, and a Cornucopia in the other, and a Peacock with a Conservatrix at
her Left-foot: These point to us her Power and being deified, and that Juno was
her Genius.

Another of Antoninus has Aesculapius on the Reverse; this probably might be
coined after some severe Sickness, and makes clear to us the great Regard the
Emperors had for the Profession of Physic.

There are of Diadumenus's Coins, on the Reverse of which are PRINCEPS
IUVENTUTIS, and Two Pillars of Crescents by him, which typifie his Youth and
future Hopes of Grandeur.

Iulia has sometimes a Vestal Virgin, a Symbol of Eternity.

Another of Antoninus has Britania sitting, with a Cornucopia and these
Letters, P. M. T. P. XV. which signify Plenty, and Pontifex Maximus
Tribunitiae Potestatis, XV. Year of his Reign: COS. III. P. P. so that he had
been Tribune, thrice Consul, and styled himself Pater Patriae, that is, Father
of his Country.

Severus Alexander has Apollo, which may hint his Affection to Music.

Iulia has Faecunditas, Lucina and a Child, signifying Fruitfulness.

Severus Alexander has on the Reverse one of the Agones holding the Branch of a
Tree, in which, it may be presumed, the Genius most delighted.

Others of his Coins have one of the Flaminii with these Letters, M. T. R. P.
COS. which denote that he was sometimes styled Marcus, and that he had been a
Tribune, Prince and Consul.

There are some of Titus Elupius Galerius with Proserpina and a Serpent in her
Hand; this Person was Governor of North Wales, and dedicated an Altar to
Jupiter, as appears from the Inscription of one dug up there; the Serpent at
that Time might signify Peace.

Marcus Aurelius has Liberalitas, and a Man holding a Sword and
Sacrificing-Cup, which show his Hospitality and Promptness to defend Religion.

Iulia has Concordia and one of the Flaminii, only implying Quietness and
Sacrifice.

Antoninus Pius, on the Reverse Marti Deo Victoriae.

There are some where Caesar is not legible, but have on the Reverse SACERDOS
with a Man on Horseback; several British Coins of Cunobelin's have the same,
but the Word Sacerdos makes me to take it for Roman, and one of Coccius
Nerva's, by reason of the Imposition he took off that was laid on Carriages and
Traveling Horses, which may be seen at large in Suetonius.

Maximianus has on his Reverse Juno.

Commodus Augustus has this Word OPTIME and one of the Tubicines, which only
implies, that whilst those Priests were sacrificing they sounded well.

Clemens Augustus has a Woman with a Dove, hinting Mildness.

Valerius Divus Augustus has on the Reverse one of the Flaminii sitting, which
implies his being deified, and likewise a Priest sacrificing.

Antoninus Pius has these Words VOTA SUSCEPTA, and a Tripos, which indicate he
had performed his Vows to the Gods for the Peace he then enjoyed.

Marcus Severus Alexander has sometimes Annona, explained before.

Iulia has sometimes Discordia, which wants no Explanation.

Valerius has Pietas and one holding a Simpuvium, denoting Sacrifice.

Another of Alexander's with Victoria and a Trumpet in her Hand.

Others of that Emperor have one of the Flaminii sacrificing Two Pigeons, IOVI
and VICTORIAE, which only denote that Jupiter and Victory were his Tutelar
Genii.

Imp. Aael. this cannot be made out, nor do I pretend to determine it.

Marcus Valerius Alexander has a Man holding a Spear and leaning on a Tripos,
which probably signifies the Sword was there sheathed.

Macrinus has a Woman holding a Sacrificing-Knife and Ax.

Aelius Adrianus has Ceres with a Cornucopia and COS. III. denoting Plenty, and
that he had been thrice Consul.

The next Thing to be considered, is to account for the Caesar's in Britain,
that the Reverses of their Coins may be the better understood.

Julius Caesar, as appears by his own Account, descended from from Ancus
Martius, an ancient King of Rome, by his Mother's Side, by his Father's from
the Gods; at Seventeen Years of Age he was made Flamen Dialis, Seven Years
afterward Questor of Spain, next Aedilis, and afterward Pontifex Maximus.
Whilst he was invading this Island, his Daughter Iulia died, and as Seneca
testifies, he fought Fifty several Battles with Success, had Five Triumphs,
been Four times Consul, and at last was murdered by a Conspiracy of the
Senators, the Chief of whom was his Relation Brutus.

The Second Caesar that made any Advance in Britain was Drusus Claudius: He
landed at the Mouth of the Thames, and there joined his General Plautius. For
his Success here his Army saluted him by the Name of Imperator. The Britains
for his Clemency after their Overthrow, erected Temples and Altars to him and
worshipped him as a God. He had a Triumph erected to him: Upon the Louver of
the Palace a Naval Coronet was fixed, as if at that Time Britain had been the
Mistress of the Sea, and that the Ensign of its new Subjection. See Suetonius.
He had Two Sons in Law, Pompeius and Silanus, who, while he ascended the
Capitol upon his Knees, constantly supported him. He exhibited Triumphal Sports
and Games, assumed the Consular Office and Authority, diverted himself with the
Killing of Bears, Fighting of Champions, and the Youths of Asia Dancing in
Armor.

Nero sent into Britain his General Suetonius, who defeated the British Queen
Boadicia, who as some allege, afterward poisoned her self, others that she
sickened of Grief and died, having lost 230000 Men; 'twas he that sent hither
the Twentieth Legion.

Galba continued in Britain his General Trebellius Maximus.

Otho continued the same General, and governed but Ninety Five Days. Vitellius
succeeded him.

Vespatian takes the Opportunity of the Civil War betwixt them: He had served
from a Youth in the British Wars; commanded the second Legion; and sent into
Britain that great General Julius Agricola, who destroyed the Ordovices.

Titus Vespasian brought the Britains to the Roman Customs and Habits, who for
the great Exploits performed by his General Agricola, was Fifteen times saluted
by the Name of Imperator: He was styled the Joy and Delight of Mankind.

Domitian passed over to the Orcades; these he subdued in many Battles, as
likewise the Caledonians under the Conduct of Agricola: In his Lifetime he
commanded himself to be styled God and Lord.

Nerva reigned only One Year, Four Months and odd Days: According to Antoninus,
he built Coccium in Lancashire, now styled Ribchester.

Ulpius Trajanus reduced the revolting Britains: During these Two Emperors
Reigns, the Times were troublesome in Britain, since Nerva in his Lifetime
accepted Trajan as his Partner in the Empire: He constituted in Britain the
Municipal Laws; at Sessions and Assizes ordered the Rods and Axes to be
presented to the Backs and Necks of the common People, and enlarged many of the
Roman Ways: He died at Seleucia in Asia the less; his Ashes were sent to Rome,
and enclosed within the Crown of a goodly Pillar of One Hundred and Forty Foot
in Height.

Aelius Adrianus made a Journey to Britain in Person in the Sixth Year of his
Empire, was thrice Consul; by Force of Arms he reduced the Britains to
Obedience, as is manifest from the Three Soldiers upon his Coin, denoting Three
Legions, of which the Roman Army then consisted, with this Inscription EXER
BRITANNICUS RESTITUTOR BRITANNI. He built a Wall Fourscore Miles in Length
cross the Island, from Solway Frith upon the Irish Seas to the Mouth of the
Tine by Newcastle on the German Ocean.

Antoninus Pius was next, in whose Time the Brigantes broke in upon Genounia,
which is North Wales, the Inhabitants of which were then under the Protection
of the Romans. He reigned Twenty Three Years, and died of a Fever at Lotium.

Marcus Aurelius was the adopted Son of Antoninus Pius and Son of Elius Verus;
he married his Daughter Faustina, and upon the Death of Antoninus Pius, took
upon him the Empire, and chose for his Associate Lucius Verus.

In Aurelius his Reign the Britains again revolted, for appeasing of whom
Calphurnius Agricola was sent Lieutenant hither, and for the Subduing of whom
was raised that Altar to the Syrian Goddess.

Commodus Antoninus his Son succeeded him, his Flatterers gave him the Name of
Britannicus.

In his Reign were many Seditious Troubles in Britain, the Northern Nations
breaking down the Wall which was raised to keep them out, and cut in Pieces the
Romans that came against them: He sends over Ulpius Marcellus as prime
Commander, who by his Conduct soon repelled them; but being for that envied by
Commodus, he was then speedily recalled, upon which, through the Licenciousness
of the Romans, the Britains again revolted.

Clodius Albinus was created Caesar by Commodus, who understanding his Design
refused that Honor; yet hearing of his Death ascended the Tribunal, and in an
elegant Speech pressed the Senate to make him Consul.

Helvius Pertinax, after Commodus was slain, was by Laetus saluted Emperor,
being an aged Commander. The Senate moved to have Albinus joined with him, but
he being jealous of Albinus refused it, and sent him back into Britain with a
Commission to be his Lieutenant, which Albinus revenged by exhorting Iulianus
to assassinate him.

Didius Iulianus upon his Death bought the Empire: He was slain by the Soldiers
that advanced him; Albinus being still Lieutenant in Britain.

Septimius Severus having disarmed the Praetorian Bands, but being jealous of
Albinus in Britain, ordains him his Caesar and Successor, himself pretending
Age, which the other accepted by this Cajole. Severus marches into Syria to
subdue Pescennius Niger, who pretended to the Empire, in a pitched Battle
overcame Niger and slew him, subdued the Adiabenes, and Arabians, and then
returned to Rome: He then being weary of a Rival in the Empire, sent over
Murderers into Britain to dispatch Albinus, which Albinus too late discovered,
and then declared himself Emperor.

Hereupon Severus sent Onuphrius Heraclitus to take Possession of Britain.
Albinus refused to resign, declares for the Empire, erects his own Statue, and
stamped his Picture on his Coin, and to justify himself, with the choice
Troops of all Britain entered France, and near unto Lions took the Field against
Severus; Severus declares Albinus a Traitor, and gives him Battle. The Army of
Albinus, says Herolian, was very hot at the first, and the Battle seemed to go
for the Albinians, insomuch, that Severus flying, flung off his Purple Coat and
hid himself.

Hence the Britains concluding all to be their own, fell into Disorder, which
Letus Albinus the General perceiving, came upon them with fresh Troops,
thinking Severus had been slain, and designed to make himself Emperor, and
totally routed them; which Severus perceiving, he reassumes his Robes, recalls
his Forces, slays Albinus, and recovers a most fortunate Victory.

After this Severus divides the Sovereignty of Britain between Vitius and
Heraclitus; but in the Year 208, he came himself into Britain, where he had
many Skirmishes: He built a Wall cross the Island from Sea to Sea, but this by
some is supposed to be the same with Adrian's.

Septimius Geta his Son was slain by his Brother Caracalla in the Arms of his
Mother Iulia, who afterward married Bassianus Son to a former Wife of Severus.

Bassianus had no Issue but was succeeded by Heliogabalus; it is reported, he
died in Britain. Macrinus succeeded him.

Heliogabalus, the supposed Son of Bassianus, took upon him the Name of
Antoninus.

There are other Coins, but the Collection not being complete, I refer the
Reader to the Cutts.

These are the most remarkable Antiquities relating to this Island during the
Roman Government, what People preceded them, as is hinted before, is evident
from these following Heads, (which if we consider the Remoteness of the Places
from each other) clearly evince to us, that the Asiaticks, before the Greeks
and Romans came hither, had discovered the whole Island and fixed in it various
Colonies. For the clearing of this Head I shall begin with the most Northern
Part of Britain, and thence briefly proceed to the Lands End of England, in
doing which I must a little recapitulate.

Thule, the most Northern Part of Britain, is a Phoenician Word signifying in
that Language Darkness, either from the Shadows of their Trees, or the
Shortness of their Days; these Islands the Latins called Orcades, and the Scots
now Orkney: That this Thule was the Orcades is evident from Strabo, since, as
was before observed, he mentions Thule Britanica, which could be no other Place.

Kent, the Name of a great River near Lancaster, in the Armenian Tongue
signifies a great River.

Lune the Name of a considerable River near the same Place, in the Armenian
Tongue signifies the Moon.

Bellissama, the Name of a River near Preston in Lancashire, in the Phoenician
Language signifies the Moon or the Goddess of Heaven, whom the Britains, as
well as the Phoenicians, style Andraste, and Astarte, as we may find by that
Invocation made to her by that famed Heroine, but unfortunate British Queen,
Boadicia, which was in the following Manner, O Andraste, I being a Woman
invocate thee, Woman.

Ribel, now the Name of the same River, in the Armenian Tongue signifies Heaven.

Savig, a Branch of the same River, in British and Phoenician is Rivulet.

Caer, the primitive Name of Chester is British and Phoenician.

Lud, from whence London is most probably denominated, is Hebrew, signifying in
that Language Lydia, a Country joining to Phoenicia.

Add to these the Counties of Cornwall and Devonshire, which at this Day in
their Language retain many Phoenician Words and Idioms, as Mr. Sams in his
Britania informs us, as likewise the Islands of Silly; which Observations
rightly weighed, make it a clear Demonstration that the Phoenicians had sailed
quite round the Island, and in all Parts of it fixed their Colonies.

I shall but produce one Instance more, and not further transgress upon the
Readers Patience, that is the Method the Britains had in numbering their Days
and Nights, a Way only particular to them and the Eastern Nations, viz. to make
the Day to follow the Night, and not the Night the Day, as the Germans and
Romans did, as Caesar in his Commentaries assures us: Which particular
Instance, in my Opinion, makes it as clear as those Lights they numbered, that
this Island was chiefly inhabited from the Eastern Nations, this Custom being
exactly conformable to the Primitive Eastern Way, of their Numbering of their
Days and Nights, as is manifest from that in Genesis; And the Evening and the
Morning were the first Day: And this evidently transmits to us the great Value
and Antiquity of our Country, and undeniably demonstrates the Veracity of the
History cited from Ezekiel, Chap. 27. relating to their extraordinary
Merchandising and Transplanting Colonies into distant Countries, which that it
may not slip the Reader, I shall here transcribe so far as relates to this
Matter, though the Head was before touched upon.

Thy Borders are in the midst of the Seas, thy Builders have perfected thy
Beauty. They have made all thy Ship-boards of Fir-trees of Senir: They have
taken Cedars from Lebanon to make Masts for thee. Of the Oaks of Bashan have
they made thine Oars: The Company of the Ashurites have made thy Benches of
Ivory, brought out of the Isles of Chittim. Fine Linen with broidered Work
from Egypt, was that which thou spreadest forth to be thy Sail; Blue and Purple
from the Isles of Elisha was that which covered thee. The Inhabitants of Zidon
and Arvad were thy Mariners: Thy wise Men, O Tyrus, that were in thee, were thy
Pilots. The Ancients of Gebal, and the wise Men thereof were in thee thy
Calkers, all the Ships of the Sea with their Mariners were in thee to occupy
thy Merchandise. They of Persia, and of Lud, and of Phut were in thine Army,
thy Men of War: They hanged the Shield and Helmet in thee, they set forth thy
Comeliness. The Men of Arvad with thine Army were upon thy Walls round about,
and the Gemmadims were in thy Towers; they hanged their Shields upon thy Walls
round about: They have made thy Beauty perfect. Tarshish was thy Merchant by
reason of the Multitude of all kind of Riches; with Silver, Iron, Tin, and
Lead, they traded in thy Fairs. Iavan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy
Merchants: They traded the Persons of Men, and Vessels of Brass in thy Market.
They of the House of Togarma traded in thy Fairs, with Horses, and Horsemen,
and Mules. The Men of Dedan were thy Merchants, many Isles were the Merchandise
of thine Hand: They brought thee for a Present, Horns of Ivory and Ebony. Syria
was thy Merchant by reason of the Multitude of the Wares of thy making: They
occupied in thy Fairs with Emeralds, Purple, and broidered Work, and fine
Linen, and Coral, and Agate. Judah and the Land of Israel, they were thy
Merchants: They traded in thy Market Wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and Honey,
and Oil, and Balm. Damascus was thy Merchant in the Multitude of the Wares of
thy making, for the Multitude of all Riches: In the Wine of Helbon, and white
Wool. Dan also and Iavan going to and fro, occupied in thy Fairs: Bright Iron,
Cassia, and Calamus were in thy Market. Dedan was thy Merchant in precious
Riches for Chariots. Arabia, and all the Princes of Kedar, they occupied with
thee in Lambs, and Rams, and Goats: In these were they thy Merchants. The
Merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy Merchants: They occupied in thy
Fairs with Chief of all Spices, and with all precious Stones and Gold. Haran
and Canneh, and Eden, the Merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad were thy
Merchants. These were thy Merchants in all sorts of Things, in blue Clothes,
and broidered Work, and in Chests of rich Apparel, bound with Cords, and made
of Cedar among thy Merchandise. The Ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy
Market, and thou wast replenished and made very glorious in the midst of the
Seas. Thy Rowers have brought thee into great Waters: The East Wind has broken
thee in the midst of the Seas. Thy Riches and thy Fairs, thy Merchandise, thy
Mariners, and thy Pilots, thy Calkers, and the Occupyers of thy Merchandise,
and all thy Men of War that are in thee, and in all thy Company which is in the
midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the Seas in the Day of thy Ruin.
The Suburbs shall shake at the Sound of the Cry of thy Pilots. And all that
handle the Oar, the Mariners, and all the Pilots of the Sea, shall come down
from their ships, they shall stand upon the Land; and shall cause their Voice
to be heard against thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up Dust upon
their Heads, they shall wallow themselves in the Ashes. And they shall make
themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them with Sackcloth, and they shall
weep for thee with Bitterness of Heart, and bitter Wailing. And in their
Wailing they shall take up a Lamentation for thee, and lament over thee,
saying, What City is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the Sea?
When thy Wares went forth out of the Seas, thou filledst many People, thou
did enrich the Kings of the Earth with the Multitude of thy Riches, and of
thy Merchandise. In the Time when thou shall be broken by the Seas in the
Depths of the Waters, thy Merchandise and all thy Company in the midst of thee
shall fall. All the Inhabitants of the Isles shall be astonished at thee, and
their Kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their Countenance.
The Merchants among the People shall hiss at thee, thou shall be a Terror, and
never shall be any more.

So far concerning the first Peopling of this Island of Britain from the
Eastern Nations, upon which I could have farther enlarged very much, but that
not falling directly under my Cognizance, I shall wholly desist, and proceed to
give a succinct Account of the History of the Romans in Britain.

We may thus by the many Relicts of Roman Antiquities, in every Generation
still improving, form to our selves some general Apprehensions of that powerful
Empire, and its extensive Boundaries, and by the mystic Representations on
their Coins, and their votive Inscriptions explained, we very readily arrive to
to their most Sacred Retreats, and find laid open to our View, all their
exorbitant Superstitions, their idolatrous Immolations, the Plurality of their
Gods, the impious Ambition, and resistless Will of the Emperors, together with
the Universal Complacency, and Servile Flattery of all Orders of the Empire
paid to them.

Though as Christians, we may be too apt to pass our Resentments on their
Ignorance and Worship, and at the same time admire that such sublime Learning,
and singular Perspicuity should produce no better Effects: But if we duly
consider the Thing, and take the Roman Nation, in the common Acceptance of
Mankind, we shall find the Subject worthy rather our Pity than our Censure;
for, if we reflect on the Divine revealed Will confined only to that Corner of
Asia, called Palestine, and all the rest of this immense Globe, involved in
invincible Blindness, erring through depraved Nature, the Romans may admit of
the same general Excuse, and share the same equal Lot with their
Fellow Creatures.

That they were a Nation designed for Empire, their Character deservedly shows,
besides the Situation of Italy, which doubtless is a Plan of Ground seated
conveniently for the Conquest of Europe, Asia and Africa, the very Genius and
Temper of the Roman People, with their unerring Conduct in Civil and Military
Affairs, bespoke them rising to Universal Monarchy. We need not blame them in
giving the Denomination of Barbarous to all other Nations; for compared with
their Humanity and Conduct, all preceding Empires, and particular States may be
regarded as such; their Ambition extended rather to a Dominion over, than
Extirpation of Kingdoms, Obedience and Tribute were chiefly the Goal they aimed
at; and happy it was doubtless for many Countries, where their prevailing
Armies cut their Way to Victory. To close this Chapter;

For the Reader's Satisfaction, I shall give a brief Account of their Attempts
and Progress upon this Island, the Difficulty of their Enterprise, the Benefits
accruing by their Conquests, their high Regard and Esteem for Britain, with the
ill Consequences their voluntary Desertion occasioned to that unfortunate
People.

When Gaul, that Terror of the Roman Empire, was reduced into a Province, and
Caesar's successful Arms had reaped the Spoils of Germany, and the Belgic
Territories, it was then his Ambition, great as Humanity was capable of, led by
a secret Decree of Providence, urged him to the Invasion of Britain; but
whether it was certainly known then to be an Island, or rather part of a new
World, as the Soldiers termed it, adjoin'd to some remoter Continent, is not
now the Enquiry.

However, the Country, he tells us, was well Peopled, and Warlike enough, that
the Maritime and Inland Inhabitants differed much, both as to their Way of
Living, their Manners, Behavior and Customs; the first having built them Towns
not unlike those of Gaul, and Belgium, whose Dress was much the same; the
others were painted, and went naked, lived in Fortresses formed in Woods, and
were very Savage; their Way of Fighting was singular to any other of these
Western Nations, they made War in Chariots, which they managed dexterously,
after the Asiatic Manner: He found a great Plurality of Kings amongst them;
this, though it rendered the Conquest more tedious and difficult to the Romans,
yet it was sure to be effected at last, and every petty State, though perhaps
Confederates with some few Neighboring ones, were certain to be involved in
the general Overthrow.

It is not my Purpose to particularize the Actions of the Emperors, and their
Lieutenants here, that being already performed by many learned Hands and full,
as the Histories of those Times convey to us, I shall only cursorily take
notice of some general Things, which may, perhaps, prove of useful Diversion to
the Reader.

It was about Fifty Three Years before the Birth of our Savior, Julius Caesar
made his Two Descents upon this Island; he was doubtless the first public
Invader of it, and Success attended his Enterprise, after struggling with
Storms and Shipwrecks by Sea, and all the Difficulties of a rough opposing
Enemy by Land, his Fortune yet surmounted all; and several of the Southern
Counties, (for it was at the Downs he landed, as Mr. Halley demonstratively
makes out,) having felt the Smart of the Roman Arms, were compelled to give
Hostages for Peace, and submit to a Tribute imposed upon them. Though this was
only a Footing for the Empire, yet it showed the Way to farther Progressions,
and gave them a Taste of a Country they parted not with till the last
Convulsions of the Empire obliged them: This was the first Era of Britania's
lost Liberty, which continues by successive Revolutions to this Day; though it is
reasonably thought after Caesar's Departure the Britain's paid no Tribute, nor
performed any other Articles, but that they lived under their Native Governors
as of old, till the Reign of Claudius Caesar.

The Great Julius diverted by intestine Wars, made no more Attempts upon it,
nor did his Successors the Renowned Augustus, Tiberius, or Caligula think fit
to proceed; Caligula, indeed, made a Flourish upon the Belgic Shoars, but
pleased his Ambition only with some Marine Shells, as vain Trophies of the
Conquered Ocean.

Claudius succeeding him, began in Earnest to grapple with these Transmarine
Natives, and in Anno Dom. 43. detatches his Lieutenant Plautius from Gaul, who
successfully landing, had some Engagements with the Enemy, when Claudius
himself arriving with Elephants, and strong Reinforcements, in a pitched Battle
routs the Britains, and immediately returns. This Exploit was performed during
his Sixteen Days stay in the Island, and Six Months from Rome: This Action, as
Mr. Tyrrel observes, was regarded by the Roman Senate as no small additional
Glory to the Empire: The Emperor's Son had the Title of Britanicus given him;
to himself a Triumph was ordained, Annual Games constituted, and Triumphal
Arches erected: The Officers in this Expedition were rewarded with Triumphal
Ornaments, and all Things performed with high Solemnity; the Title of
Britanicus, which many succeeding Emperors espoused, was esteemed as Glorious
as that of Germanicus, Africanus, and Asiaticus: Under this victorious Emperor
his Lieutenants finished many fortunate Campaigns, and in at least Thirty
pitched Battles were successful; they pierced even to the Brigantes,
Inhabitants of Lancashire, Yorkshire, etc. but met with a bold and vigorous
Opposition from the Silures, possessing South Wales. Here Caractacus their King
had mustered his British Forces, seized upon advantageous Passes, secured the
Avenues, and very Manfully encouraged and commanded his Troops; nothing was
defective in his Conduct, or the Courage of his Followers, save Fortune her
self, imprisoned on the Roman Side: This Great unfortunate General fell a
Captive, and his Army a Prey to the Romans; himself in Golden Chains was led in
Triumph to Rome, to whom the Emperor for his Princely and Undaunted Behavior
granted Pardon: The Triumph over this British Prince, was esteemed at Rome
equal to that of King Scyphax by Scipio, or Perseus by L. Paulus; Ostorius,
General in Britain, had all the Ensigns of a Triumph decreed him. From these
great Advances of Claudius's Arms, we may reasonably conclude, the Britains had
received deep Impressions of the Roman Prowess; first from the Landing and
Victories of Julius Caesar, and for many Years afterward from their Commerce
with the Romans in Gallia, Belgium, and elsewhere; so that the Keeness of their
barbarous Violence seemed to have lost its Edge; for at Plautius's landing the
Southern Counties made little Opposition, but timorously declined to fight, and
were easily routed: Its true, indeed, the farther they pierced, the more stout
Opposition they encountered withal, as shall be farther taken notice of.

But now it was, whether from a Supineness on the Roman Side, or indeed from
some very severe Injuries imposed on a Part of the Britains, or both, they
gather to a monstrous Head, and with a very barbarous Violence destroy all
before them; several of the Roman Troops were cut in Pieces with cruel
Devastations of Towns, and their Inhabitants, whilst they being Masters of the
Field, omit nothing that Revenge and Fury could dictate.

Thus Nero found Affairs in this Province, and in this Extremity Paulinus
Suetonius commanded; he resolves with about 10000 Men to give them Battle,
encamps himself advantagiously, whilst the Britains headed by an enraged Queen,
presuming on Victory, with an Army of 100000 Men engaged them: The Success fell
to the Roman Side, with the Slaughter of at least 80000 of the Enemy; this
proved a finishing Stroke, and retrieved all the Romans had lost.

For some Years afterward little Action was farther known till in the Year of
Christ 71, Vespasian mounting the Imperial Throne, sends great Armies and noted
Generals into Britain, amongst whom was the Great Agricola whose Life Tacitus
gives us more particularly than what we find of any other Lieutenant: In the
Eight Years of his Command here, he finished a complete Conquest of Britain,
and doubtless had confirmed it, had not Domitian's Envy recalled him. Like a
general Inundation he overthrew all Opposition in many pitched Battles, being
still victorious, his Conduct and personal Courage was equal to ancient Heroes,
he pierced beyond the Two Friths, now Dunbritton and Edinburgh, and there found
new and unknown Nations of the Caledonian Britains: His Fleet still coasting
along discovered the Isles of Orkney, having finished his Conquests by Land, he
commanded his Admiral whom he furnished with all Things necessary to sail round
the Island, which was accordingly performed. Many Forts this accomplished
General built, and in the Year of Christ 85 delivered the Province in Peace and
Quiet to his Successor.

For many Years nothing further occurs remarkable, save the constant Commotions
of the more Northern Britains, and some Revolts in the Inland Countries; these
obliged the Presence of succeeding Emperors: Adrian built a Wall Fourscore
Miles long to keep in the Caledonians, which was greatly improved by Severus,
who in Person marched to the utmost Limits of the Island, yet never engaged in
a pitched Battle, but only some tumultuary Skirmishes, wherein and by Surprises
and Sickness he lost 50000 Men.

We may hence reflect on the Difficulties the Romans underwent in the Conquest
of Britain, which was not the Business of one Campaign and one Army, for as Mr.
Tyrrell observes, it cost as many Soldiers and as much Expense to reduce this
Province, as it did the Empire in the Reduction of all Asia.

But now Britain is cemented a Province to Imperial Rome, which was continued
to be retained in its Allegiance by strong Legionary Forces; and doubtless it
was in these Times, and in these Parts they established their Colonies, fixed
their Stations, built their Forts and Cittadels, which improved into fair and
spacious Towns, now the Woods being levelled produced Structures worthy the
Roman Greatness, their Boggs and fenny Places as numerous in those Days as of
late in Ireland, were drein'd or rendered passable by Causeways, and their
Rivers by Bridges. The Britains now relish the Roman Manners, and admire their
Eloquence, leave their Fastnesses in Woods and inhabit Towns, wear the Roman
Habits, use Baths, and marry interchangably. Husbandry now flourished and
supplied 'em with Plenty of Grain, shipping from all Parts arrive, importing
all Things necessary for the Pleasure and Use of Man. The British Youth were
disciplined, and proved a strong Bulwark to the Empire: Preceding Emperors had
drawn large Supplies from hence to assist them in their Wars, but now they were
made standing and continued so.

Now the revolving Reigns furnish us with the noble Ruins we discover of their
Votive Altars, Statues, Coins, and other Spoils of Antiquity.

Let us at length view the Empire in its declining State, and see the Island
suffer equal Revolutions with it. This unweildy Bulk of Roman Greatness oppressed
with its own Weight, long staggering, at last sunk beneath it; what by
intestine Divisions when either Side exhausting their Provinces sheathed their
Swords in each others Bowels, through whose Wounds Foreign and Barbarous
Nations made an easy Entrance. Britain suffered still in all these Struglings,
being dispoil'd of its Youth and Soldiery, for now the Empire could no longer
sustain it self against the terrible Invasions of Goths, Vandals, Gauls, and
other as barbarous and potent Enemies; amongst all the Emperors that plumed the
Strength of this Island, to the Tyrant Maximus is chiefly attributed its final
Ruin. Most of the Military Forces were drawn into Gaul, and never returned,
they being either slain or planting themselves in Armorica. It was in this
Juncture the Scots landing form Ireland, and joining with the Picts or Northern
Natives, break all their Mounds, and ravage cruelly amongst them, prove too
strong for the raw undisciplined Remains of the Britains, who now being
deserted and distressed, and ready to fall unto more miserable Captivity,
pitifully implored Relief of the Romans, with Promises of perpetual Subjection
to them. For once or twice a Legion or two succored them, but then hiding or
carrying off their Treasures, they bid the forlorn Britains an Eternal Adieu,
advised them to stand to their own Defense, and boldly oppose the Foe, which
how weakly they performed, succeeding Annals make manifest. These may suffice
for the Roman Affairs in Britain, I shall only add, that in the Reign of the
Emperor Valentinian the Third An. Dom. 435. the Romans deserted this Island,
which from the Time of Julius Caesar's second Landing to this their
Dereliction, was the Space of 488 Years.

Thus from the Explications of the Heathen Altars, their Pagods and various
Genii, the Roman Highways, their Colonies and Stations, the Lives and Actions
of the Emperors, their Coins, and different Explications of their Reverses, I
have endeavored, with as much Brevity and Perspicuity, as Matters of so
intricate a Nature will admit of, to account for the Roman History in these
Northern Parts. And though Caesar affirms in his commentaries, that all the
Inland Britains inhabited in Woods and Fastnesses; yet I think, whoever
considers the Country adjacent, and the various Names given to that ancient
City Chester, together with the City it self, cannot but conclude he was
certainly mistaken; and he might easily be so, having never advanced his
irresistible Legions so far as these Countries. It now remains in the last
place, that I give some Account of the British Antiquities in those Parts, but
since none that I could certainly call such, have occurred to my Observations,
I cannot expatiate upon that Topic. It Is true, indeed, I have seen various
Coins, which Mr. Cambden calls British, but since the same Reverses are
frequently observed on the Roman Coins, I dare not be positive in that Matter;
nor, indeed, does it clearly appear to me, what the British Coins were, whether
any sort of Metal or Shells, as the Americans have at this day; had they been
of any kind of Metal, it is very probable that in these Parts, in some
Generation or other some of 'em would have been found: Wherefore I can only add
further upon that Head, that I have seen a Copper Coin dug up at Ribchester,
which seemed to have had a Head, but not like any of the Romans or Greeks that
I ever yet saw; along with this there was another of an odd kind of mixed
Metal, such as the Romans never used, that I know of, it had no Letters or
Stamp, but looked like a Piece of Money, and seemed to be a Composition of Tin
and Copper. Since therefore that Matter, so far as I am able to judge, cannot
be fully determined, I shall leave every Man to his own Conjectures; and in the
next Place proceed to the Explications of the Plates, and not transgress
further upon the Reader's Patience, but close the Whole.

FINIS.
Postscript.
I Desire the Reader would be pleased to observe, That when the Armenian
Language is mentioned, that he would likewise take notice of the great variety
of pronunciation of the same words amongst those People; in this our Lexicons
and Manuscripts are so far from informing us, that though a Man should be
Complete Master of most of their Idioms, yet their variety of Elocution is so
great, that should he discourse the different sorts of People from the distant
Parts of that Country, he would scarce be able to apprehend their common
Conversation. I have been Conversant with several Natives from different Parts
of that Country, and find, in some measure, the difference of their Elocution
to proceed from a mixture of Sclavonian and Persian, as they differently Border
upon Russia, and Persia: To illustrate the truth of this assertion, I shall
produce but some few instances, which in this Book are recited, relating to
those Antiquities, that it may be the better apprehended, and doubt not then,
but by a thoroughObservation of those, and the Arguments before premised, to
satisfy the Unbiased, from what Continent this Island was in a great measure
Inhabited. The words are not many, but are as follows: The Moon some Armenians
pronounce Lune, others Luce, others Lucen; Note here that Lune is the Name of
that River from which the County of Lancaster is denominated. A great River
some pronounce Keat, others Geat, some Kear, others Kent; where observe, that
the Names of two great Waters upon Kent Sands, are Kear and Kent: Wherefore for
any Person to derive the Names of those Places, as Mr. Cambden and others do,
from the Saxon word Can, denoting a Corner, to me seems to be a manifest
Error; and I do with a great deal more reason surmise, that they are the small
Relicts of the Asiatick Colonies.

This to be incerted after the third Book.

ERRATA in the Third BOOK.
Page 10. l. 16. after Aelius dele the Comma. p. 14. l. 16. for 1692, r. 1612.
p. 38. l. 19. for Wallingham, r. Walsingham. p. 46. l. 22. before the sixth
instead of after, the Comma should be before. ibid. l. 30. for Chisnel r.
Chisnalle. p. 68. l. 17. for Principii r. Principi. p. 69. l. 4. for Tribunae
r. Tribunitiae. p. 72. l. 3. for there r. then. p. 74. l. 10. for Lotium r.
Lorium. p. 90. l. 20. for underneath Judea, r. Judea underneath. p. 89. l. 5.
after Peacock put a Comma. p. 95. l. 1. for VII r. VI.

TAB. I.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE CUTTS.
TAB. I.
1. A Ruby found at Ribchester in Lancashire; as the Earth shelved down near
the Riverside; a Signet doubtless of some eminent Roman. The Figure is Mars
holding a Banner in the Left Hand with a Scutum or Target at the Bottom of it,
in the Right Hand a Thunderbolt; this doubtless was one of the Genii of the
Place.

2. A Signet found near Standish in Lancashire in a Copper Urceolus, with Two
Hundred Roman Coins and Two Gold Rings of the Equites Aurati or Roman Knights;
these were found by a Countryman as he was plowing. The Figure is Mars leaning
with his Left Hand upon a Spear, holding in his Right Hand a Victoriola or
small Victory, with a Target at his Right-Foot.

3. An Idol found near Up-holland in Lancashire by a Countryman as he was
plowing; this I take to be Victory, the Genius of that Place.

4. An Altar dedicated to the Genius of the Place found at Chester.

5. An Altar to Jupiter dug up at Chester.

6. An Altar to Coccius Nerva dug up at Ribchester.

7. Another Altar found at Ribchester, dedicated by some Asiatick, one of the
Decurions of the Asturian Wing.

8. Another Side of the Altar at Chester dedicated to the Genius of the Place.

9. An Altar to Caligula found at Ribchester.

10. An Altar to Apollo found at Ribchester, holding his Plectrum in his
Right Hand, pointing with his Left to a Quiver upon his Soulder; on the other
Side of the Altar are Two of his Priests in their Habits sacrificing to him,
holding the Head of an Ox in their Hands.

11. The Vessel in which the Coins were found, near Standish in Lancashire.

12. A Roman Discus or Sacrificing-Cup found at Ribchester, when one of the
Fabii was Proconsul or Propraetor.

13. The Bottom of a Sacrificing-Vessel.

14. The same, both these probably belonging to some private Soldiers.

15. A small Altar found at Ribchester.

16. A Piece of a Simpuvium.

17. A Simpuvium out of which they drank by small Draughts as they sacrificed
to their Gods.

18. The Finger of a Copper Statue dug up at Ribchester.

19. A Piece of a Roman Tyle taken out of the Commonshoar at Ribchester.

20. A Roman Pillar several Yards under Ground at Ribchester.

21. The Ring of a Boat found under Ground at the Place called Anchor-Hill in
Ribchester.

22. A Piece of the Top of a Roman Urn found at Ribchester.

23. One of the Roman Fibulae found at Ribchester.

24. The Ring of a Roman Boat found under Ground at Anchor-Hill in Ribchester.

TAB. II.
1. A Piece of a Sacrificing-Cup to Juno found at Lancaster

2. The Bottom of it.

3. Two Sides of the Sacrificing-Altar found at Ribchester, showing the
Thuribulum, the Vessels out of which the Frankincense was smoking while they
were Sacrificing, the Vessels they melted it in, with the Securis and Dolabrum,
the Sacrificing Ax and Knife.

4. Two other Sides of the Altar at Chester to the Genius of the Place, on one
Side of which is a Flower-pot, on the other Venus holding a Cornucopia.

5. An Amethyst Fibula found at Chester.

6. The same; these doubtless were the Fibulae of very eminent Romans.

7. Another sort of Fibula in Copper.

8. Another kind of Fibula in Copper, both found at Chester.

9. The Horn of the Rane-Deer found under the Altar at Chester.

TAB II.

Tab: 3 RIBCHESTER AND LANCASTER COINS

An Explication of the Cutts contained in the Plate, marked Tab. 3.
FIG. 1. AUG. GERM. COS. This is a Coin of Augustus Germanicus, who had been
Consul. The Reverse is erased.

Fig. 2. HADRIANUS. The Letters on the Reverse are AUGUS, denoting Augustus, a
Title assumed by most of the Emperors. The Letters S. C. denote, Senatus
Consultum. The Figure is naked standing, holding in the Right Hand a
Cornucopia. I take the Figure to be Quies, a Goddess amongst the Romans.

Fig. 3. AEL. ADRIANUS. The Figure is standing with Two Infants standing naked
on each side. I take this likewise to be the Goddess Quies. The Letters COS.
III. at the bottom, show he had been thrice Consul.

Fig. 4. AUG. The Reverse A. R. This is Antoninus Pius, and Marcus Aurelius,
Emperors.

Fig. 5. G. ASIATI. This I take to be Sergius Galba, who took the Name of
Asiaticus. The Letters COS. III. show he had been thrice Consul: The Reverse is
erased.

Fig. 6. DN. DIOCLETIANUS AUG. that is, either our Lord or our God. Diocletian
styled likewise Augustus. The Reverse is the Goddess Quies, holding a
Cornucopia in the Left Hand. The Letters IVO seem to be an Abbreviation of
Invicto. The Letters PLN at the bottom, according to some, is Pecunia Londini
Notata. It was this Emperor who raised that terrible Persecution against the
Christians in Britain.

Fig. 7. GALIENUS AUG. The Letters on the Verge, VIRTUS AUGUSTI. The Figure is
naked standing; and is the Type of the Goddess Virtue.

Fig. 8. ANTONINUS AUGUSTUS. The Reverse is Orbis; the Figure sitting.

Fig. 9. IMP. CONSTANTINUS PII. This is Constantine the Great; the latter P
denotes, he took upon him the Title of Pontifex. The Reverse is SOLI INVICTO
COMMIT 1. At the Bottom of the Figure PLN. The Figure is the Type of the God Sol
standing, naked; and by the Words Invicto Comiti, he seems to hint, that he
would extend the Roman Empire as far as the Sun went; that is, all the World
over.

The Figure at the Bottom was likewise found at Ribchester, with some of these
Coins; and since it is not a Romish Coin, if the Britains in those Days had
Copper Coins, I do judge this may be one.

NOte here, That the Explications of some of the Reverses of the Coins in the
Fourth Plate must be interpreted thus, and not as printed in the Explication of
the Coins contained in that Plate.

In Fig. 1. The Reverse is the Spolia, denoting Victory.

In Fig. 2. The Adverse is a Dolphin, or as some will have it, a Navis
Praetoria; the Reverse the Signa Militaria.

The Reverse in 3. the Figure is lying, leaning with the Right Hand upon a
Spear, holding a Crow in the Left, denoting Sacrifice.

In 4. the Figure is a Sacellum.

In 6. Upon the Reverse the Figure is sitting, holding in the Right Hand a
winged Victory, leaning with the Left upon a Scutum.

In 13. the Figure is sitting, holding in her Left Hand a Bough, and in the
Right a Spear.

In 14. the Figure is sitting, holding in the Right Hand a Spear, in the Left a
Bough.

In Fig. 15. the Reverse is an Eagle upon an Altar, intimating, the Emperor's
being deify'd.

In 16. the Figure is standing, holding in the Right Hand a Patera, sacrificing
alone at an Altar.

Tab 4 CHESTER COINS

TAB. IV. An Explication of Mr. Henry Prescot's Coins found at Chester,
contained in Table the Fourth.
1. THE Type of a Peacock. On the Reverse is L. Hostilius Sasern.

2. Ant. Aug. iij. Vir R. P. C. Navis Praetoria: The Reverse is Leg. XVI. two
of the Signa Militaria, with a Legionary Eagle betwixt them: The Explication of
which is, That by Arms and Navigation the Roman Commonwealth was constituted:
Those two I take to be Consular Coins.

3. Is the Head of Julius, with a Star: This shows he was Emperor and Caesar,
and that he was deify'd. The Reverse is P. SEPVLIUS MACER. The Figure standing
holding a Spear in the Left Hand.

4. Is Divus Augustus, T. P. P. which shows he was deify'd, and had been of the
Tribunitial Power. The Reverse is Rome and Augustus, with two winged Victories
holding Garlands in their Right-Hands.

5. TI. CAESAR DIV. On the Reverse the Figure is sitting holding in the
Right Hand a Spear, in the Left a Bough, with these Letters on the Verge, P. M.
which shows that he was deify'd, and likewise styled Pontifex Maximus. This I
take to be a Coin of Tiberius Augustus.

6. Nero Caesar Augustus. The Reverse is the City of Rome, sitting upon the
Spolia.

7. Imp. Ser. Galba Aug. On the Reverse is a Garland of Oaks, with these
Letters on the Verge, S. P. Q. R. O. B. C. S. by which Letters are chiefly
intimated the Senate and the People of Rome.

8. Otho Caesar Aug. The Reverse is Securitas P. R. intimating the Security of
the People of Rome under Otho. The Figure holding in the Right Hand a Garland,
in the Left a Spear.

9. Vitellius Germ. Imp. Aug. The Reverse is Pontifex Maximus: The Figure
sitting, holding in the Right Hand a Patera, in the Left a Spear.

10. Imp. Caesar Vespasianus Aug. The Reverse is a Woman pensive, sitting by a
Trophy underneath Iudaea, alluding doubtless to his sacking of Jerusalem.

11. Imp. Caes. Vesp. Aug. P. M. From these it is plain he was then styled
Pontifex Maximus. The Reverse is Four of the Signa Pontificalia, with these
Letters on the Verge, AUGUR TRI. POT. which denote Sacrifice, and that he had
been of the Tribunitial Power.

12. Imp. Titus Vespasianus Aug. P. M. The Figure on the Reverse is an
Elephant, with these Letters on the Verge, T. R. P. XII. IMP. XV. COS. VIII. P.
P. all which show he was styled Pontifex Maximus, Pater Patriae, Emperor, of
the Tribunitial Power and Consul.

13. Adrianus Aug. Cos. III. P. P. The Reverse is Vota Publica. The Figure a
Person alone sacrificing at the Altar. This Coin shows that the Public Wishes
were for Adrian, that he was thrice Consul, and Pater Patriae.

TAB. V. An Explication of some Roman Medals found in a Copper Urceolus, by a
Countryman, as he was Plowing near Standish in Lancashire.
THE Series of these Caesar's begins thus: You must begin with the First Head
upon the Left Hand, which is Domitian, who was Emperor; you may observe by the
Medal he was likewise styled Augustus Germanicus, and Pontifex Maximus, and had
been of the Tribunitial Power, and likewise Consul. The Reverse is Pallas
standing, holding in her Right Hand a Dart, and in her Left Hand a Scutum or
Target.

The Second is Trajan; and you may observe by the Coin, he was styled both
Emperor and Caesar, and likewise Nerva and Augustus Germanicus, Pontifex
Maximus: He was of the Tribunitial Power, Four times Consul and Pater Patriae.
The Reverse is Victory standing, holding in her Right Hand a Laurel, in her
Left a Palm.

The Third is Antoninus Pius; he was Four times Consul, was likewise styled
Pater Patriae. The Reverse is Two Right-Hands holding Spikes of Corn and a
Caduceus.

The Fourth is Marcus Aurelius; he was Emperor and thrice Consul, he was styled
Augustus, and of the Tribunitial Power. The Reverse is a Soldier holding a
Spear in his Right Hand, laying his Left upon a Target.

TAB. V.


The Fifth is likewise Marcus Aurelius; he was also styled Marcus Antoninus,
Augustus, and was of the Tribunitial Power. The Reverse is a Man stolated
standing, holding a Bough in his Right Hand, and in his Left a Spear.

The Sixth is Faustina, the Wife of Marcus Aurelius; she was likewise styled
Diva Faustina. The Reverse is Consecratio, and a Peacock, which shows her being
deify'd.

The Seventh is Lucius Verus; he was likewise styled Divus Verus. The Reverse
is Consecratio, and an Eagle, which denotes his being deify'd.

The Eighth is Commodus; he likewise assumed the Name of Antoninus Augustus,
was of the Tribunitial Power, Emperor and thrice Consul, and Pater Patriae. The
Reverse is Liberalitas holding in the Right Hand a Tessera, and in the Left a
Cornucopia.

The Ninth likewise is Commodus; he then assumed the Titles of Antoninus Pius,
Felix, Augustus and Britannicus, and had been at that time Five times Consul.
The Reverse is Jupiter standing, holding in his Right Hand a Thunderbolt, and
in his Left a Spear, with these Letters upon the Verge, OPTIME MAXIM.

The Tenth likewise is Commodus. The Reverse is a Woman holding in each Hand a
Signum militare.

The Eleventh is Commodus. The Reverse is Securitas Orbis. The Figure sitting,
holding in the Right Hand a Globe.

The Twelfth also is Commodus. The Letters of the Reverse are Fidei Coh.
denoting the Fidelity of the Cohorts; he then had been Six times Consul: The
Figure is a Person stolated, holding in the Right Hand Spikes of Corn, in the
Left a Spear.

The Thirteenth is Divus, Clodius Septimius, Albinus, Caesar. The Reverse is
the City of Rome sitting, holding in her Right Hand a Victoriola or small
Victory, in her Left a Spear, with a Target under her Seat.

TAB. VI.

TAB. VII. An Explication of the Coins contained in the Sixth Plate, found
likewise at Standish in Lancashire.
THE First Head is Severus Pius Augustus. The Reverse is Fortuna Redux; the
Figure is the Type of Fortune sitting, holding in her Right Hand a Prora, in
her Left a Cornucopia, intimating Plenty by his return from Foreign Countries.

The Second is likewise Severus. The Reverse is Fundator pacis; the Figure is
stolated and veiled, holding a Bough in her Right Hand; the next Reverse of his
is Liberalitas, the Figure is standing holding in the Right Hand a Tessera, in
the Left a Cornucopia.

The Third is Severus Pius Augustus. The Figure upon the Reverse is two
Captives sitting by a Trophy. The Letters are PART. MAX. P. M. T. R. P. X. COS.
III. P. P. By these it is plain, he was styled Pontifex Maximus, and Pater
Patriae, was of the Tribunitial Power, and thrice Consul; and by the Letters
PART. MAX. it is probable he styles himself of the greatest Part, which perhaps,
may refer to the Division of the Empire at that time betwixt him and Albinus,
who was then Caesar in Britain.

The Fourth is likewise Severus Pius Augustus. The Reverse is Victoria
Britannica. The Figure Victory, holding in the Right Hand a Palm, in her Left a
Laurel.

The Fifth is IMP. CAE. SEP. SEV. PERT. AUG. This probably was stamped after he
had vanquished Albinus, he then styling himself Emperor and Caesar. The Reverse
is Vict. Aug. T. R. P. Cos. the Figure Victory, Gradient or Passant, holding in
the Right Hand a Laurel, in the Left a Palm; the Letters denote he was of the
Tribunitial Power and Consul. The next Reverse is FELICIT. TEMPOR. the Figure
is two Cornucopia's joined, and a Spike of Corn betwixt 'em.

Another Reverse of his is Moneta, the Figure standing, holding a Bilanx in the
Right Hand, in the Left a Cornucopia. The Reverse of another is APOLLINI
AVGVSTO: The Figure is Apollo standing in a Woman's Habit, holding in the
Right Hand a Patera, in the Left a Harp or Plectrum. The next Reverse of the
same Emperor is HERCVLI DEFENS. The Figure is Hercules leaning with his
Right Hand upon his Clavus or Club, and holding in his Right Hand a Bow.

After Severus the next Head is Iulia Augusta his Wife. The Reverse is
LAETITIA; the Figure is stolated, holding in the Right Hand a Laurel, in the
Left a Temo.

The next likewise is Iulia Augusta. The Reverse is PIET US PVBLICA; the Figure
is stolated, standing with Hands expanded before an Altar.

The next is IVLIA AUGUSTA. The Reverse is PIET AS AVG. The Figure is one
sacrificing at an Altar.

Another of hers is PIA IVLIA FELIX AVG. The Reverse is VENUS GENETRIX; the
Figure is Venus sitting.

The next likewise is IULIA PIA FELIX. The Reverse is DIANA LUCIFIRA, holding a
Torch with both her Hands.

The next also is another of the same Empress. The Reverse is VESTA, holding in
the Right Hand a Palladium, in the Left a Spear or Hasta Pura.

TAB. VII. An Explication of the Coins contained in the Seventh Plate.
1. UPon the First Head are these Letters, IMP. CAES. M. AVR. ANTONINUS AUG.
The Reverse is FIDES EXERCITUS; the Figure is sitting betwixt Two Signa
Militaria, holding in the Right Hand an Eagle.

2. IVLIA PAVLA AVG. The Reverse is Concordia holding a Patera in the
Right Hand with a Star.

3. IVLIA MAESA AVG. The Reverse is FECVNDITAS; the Figure is stolated,
standing, holding in the Right Hand a little Boy, in the Left a Cornucopia.

4. IVLIA MAESA. The Reverse is PIETAS AVG. the Figure the Type of Piety at the
Altar.

5. IVLIA MAESA. The Reverse is PVDICITIA, the Figure sitting, in the Left Hand
holding a naked Spear, moving her Right Hand toward her Face, as if she would
cover it.

6. IVLIA MAESA. The Reverse is SAECULI FELICITAS, the Figure is stolated at
the Altar, holding in the Left Hand an Hasta with a Caduceum, in the Right Hand
a Patera with a Star, which shows her being deified.

TAB. VII.


7. IVLIA SAEMIAS AVG. The Reverse is VENUS CAELESTIS; the Figure is a Woman
stolated standing, holding in her Right Hand an Apple, in the Left a naked
Spear with a Star.

8. IVLIA SAEMIAS. The Reverse is VENUS CAELESTIS; the Figure is sitting,
holding in the Right Hand an Apple, in the Left an Hasta pura, with a little
Boy at her Feet.

9. IMP. C. M. AVR. SEV. ALEX AND. AVG. This is Alexander Severus: The Coin
shows he was Emperor and Caesar. The Reverse is FIDES MILITVM; the Figure is
stolated, standing betwixt Two of the Signa Militaria.

10. ALEXANDER SEVERUS. The Reverse is FIDES MILITVM; the Figure sitting,
holding in each Hand a Signum Militare.

11. IMP. C. M. AVR. SEV. C. The Reverse is IOVI VICTORI; the Figure is Jupiter
sitting, holding in the Right Hand a Victoriola, in the Left an Hasta Pura.

12. IMP. C. M. AVR. SEV. C. The Reverse is LIBERALITAS AVG. The Figure is
standing, holding in the Right Hand a Tessera, in the Left a Cornucopia.

13. IMP. C. M. AVR. SEV. C. The Reverse is P. M. T. R. P. II. COS. P. P. The
Letters show he was styled Pontifex Maximus, was of the Tribunitial Power,
twice Consul, and Pater Patriae. The Figure is a Military Man holding in his
Right Hand a Bough, in the Left an Hasta.

14. IMP. C. M. AVR. SEV. The Reverse is P. M. T. R. P. III. COS. P. P. This
Coin shows he was likewise thrice Consul; the Figure is sitting, the Type of
Health.

15. IMP. ALEXANDER PIUS AVG. The Reverse is PROVIDENTIA AVG. The Figure is
standing, holding in the Left Hand an Half Hasta, in the Right Spikes upon a
Panarium.

16. IMP. SEV. ALEXANDER AVG. The Reverse is PERPETVITATI; the Figure is
stolated, leaning upon a Pillar, holding in the Right Hand an Hasta, in the
Left a Globe.

17. IMP. SEV. ALEX. The Reverse is P. M. T. R. P. VII. COS. P. P. The Figure
is Mars Gradivus holding in his Right Hand an Hasta, in the Left the Spolia
upon his Shoulder.

TAB. VIII

TAB. VIII. An Explication of the Coins contained in the Eighth Table found at
Standish in Lancashire.
1. IMP. SEV. ALEXANDER AVG. This Head is Severus Alexander, who was Emperor,
and styled likewise Augustus. The Reverse is P. M. T. R. P. VIIII. COS. III.
These Letters show he was likewise styled Pontifex Maximus; was of the
Tribunitial Power; thrice Consul; and likewise styled Pater Patriae. The Figure
is a Military Man, holding in his Right Hand a Pilus, and in his Left a Globe.

2. IMP. SEV. C. The Reverse is LIBERALITAS AUG. IIII. The Figure is standing,
holding in the Right Hand a Tessera, in the Left a Cornucopia.

3. IMP. SEV. C. The Reverse is VICTORIA AVGVS. The Figure is Victory, holding
a Clypeus, in which is VOT. X.

4. IVLIA MAMAEA AVG. This is Iulia Maniaea Augusta. The Reverse is FECVND AVGV
8 TAE. The Figure is a Woman fitting, with a little Boy standing by her, to
whom she seems to offer a Patera.

5. IVLIA MAMAEA. The Reverse is FELICITAS PVBLICA. The Figure is standing
leaning upon a Pillar, with her Left Elbow in the Right Hand, holding a
Caduceum.

6 IVLIA MAMAEA. The Reverse is IVNO. AVGVSTAE. The Figure is Juno sitting,
holding in the Right Hand a Flower, and in the Left a Scepter.

7. IVLIA MAMAEA. The Reverse is IVNO CONSERVATRIX. The Figure is Juno
standing, holding in the Right Hand a Patera, in the Left an Hasta, with a
Peacock stretching out his Head toward the Patera, or Sacrificing-Cup.

8. IVLIA MAMAEA. The Reverse is VENERI FELICI. The Figure is standing, holding
in the Right Hand a little Boy, and in the Left an Hasta or Spear.

9. IULIA MAMAEA. The Reverse is VENUS VICTRIX. The Figure is Venus, with an
Helmet, and an Hasta, and at her Feet a Scutum or Target.

10. IULIA MAMAEA. The Reverse is VESTA. The Figure is standing veiled, holding
in the Right Hand a Palladium, and in the Left an Hasta.

11. IULIA MAMAEA. The Reverse is VESTA. The Figure is veiled standing, holding
in the Right Hand a Patera, and in the Left an Hasta tranvers'd.

12. IMP. MAXIMINUS PIUS AUG. This is Maximinus, who was Emperor, and styled
Pius and Augustus. The Reverse is P. M. T. R. P. P. P. The Letters show he was
likewise styled: Pontifex Maximus, of the Tribunitial Power, and Pater Patriae.
The Figure is standing betwixt two of the Signa militaria, elevating the
Right Hand, and holding in the Left an Hastile.

13. IMP. MAXIMIN. The Reverse VICTOR. AVG. The Figure is Victory Gradient or
Passant, with a Garland and a Palm.

14. IMP MAXIMINVS PIUS AVG. The Reverse is FIDES MILITUM. The Figure holding
in either Hand a Signum militare.

15. MAXIMINVS PIUS. The Reverse is PAX AUGUSTI. The Figure is the Type of
Peace standing.

16. MAXIMINVS PIUS AUG. GERM. Hence it is plain, he also assumed the Name of
Germanicus. The Reverse is PROVIDENTIA AUG. The Figure is the Type of
Providence.

17. IMP. C. M. CLOD. PUPIENUS AUG. This is Clodius Pupienus, who was Emperor
and Caesar, and styled likewise Augustus. The Reverse is PAX. PUBLICA. The
Figure is the Type of Peace sitting, with a Bough and a Hasta.

17. IMP. GORDIANUS PIUS FELL. AUG. This is Gordianus, who was Emperor, and
styled Pius Felix and Augustus. The Reverse is VIRTUTI AUGUSTI. The Figure is
Hercules standing, holding in his Right Hand his Clava or Club.

Tab. 9.

TAB. IX. An Explication of the Coins in the Ninth Table, found in the same
Place.
THE First Head is Plautilla, the Wife of Caracalla. The Reverse is a Woman
standing, holding in her Right Hand a Spear, and in her Left an Infant, with
these Letters upon the Verge, PIETAS AUG.

The Second is Plautilla Augusta. The Reverse is Venus half naked standing,
holding in her Right Hand an Apple, and in the Left a Laurel with a Target;
before her an Infant or other small Figure standing; upon the Verge of the Coin
are these Letters, VENUS VICTRIX.

The Third is Septimius Geta; he was styled Caesar and Pontifex Maximus. On the
Reverse upon the Verge of the Coin are these Letters, PRINCEPS IUVENTUTIS: The
Figure is a Person standing, holding in the Right Hand a Bough, and in the Left
a Spear.

The Fourth likewise is Septimius Geta. On the Verge of the Reverse are these
Letters, PRINCEPS JUVENTUTIS. Caesar Paludatus standing, holding in his
Right Hand a Pilus, and in his Left a Spear, with a Trophy at his Back.

The Fifth also is Septimius Geta. On the Verge of the Reverse are these
Letters NOBILITAS; the Figure is stolated standing, holding in the Right Hand a
Spear, and in the Left a Palladium.

The Sixth is another of Septimius Geta. The Reverse shows him to have been
Consul as well as Pontifex; in the Figure's Right Hand is a Shield, and in the
Left a Spear.

The Seventh is another of Geta's. The Reverse on the Verge has these Letters
PROVID. DEOR. The Figure is the Type of Providence.

The Eighth is Marcus Opel. Sev. Macrinus Aug. He was Emperor and Caesar. The
Reverse is LIBERALITAS AVG; the Figure is stolated standing, holding in the
Right Hand a Tessera and Frumentarium, and in the Left a small Cornucopia.

The Ninth is an Altar of Macrinus. The Reverse is A EQVITAS AVG. the Figure is
standing, holding in the Right Hand a Bilanx or Balance, and in the Left a
Cornucopia.

The Tenth is Marcus Opelius Antoninus Diadumenus Caesar. The Reverse is
PRINCEPS JUVENTUTIS; the Figure is standing with Two of the Signa Militaria.

The Eleventh is ELAGABALVS; he assumed the Name of Antoninus Pius Augustus,
Pontifex Maximus, Pater Patriae, was Four Times of the Tribunitial Power, and
Thrice Consul. On the Reverse the Figure is Passant, lifting up his Right Hand
toward Heaven, holding in his Left a Flagrum with a Star, which denotes his
being deified.

The Twelfth is another of Elagabulus. On the Reverse the Figure is sacrificing
at the Altar with a Star at the Top, holding in the Right Hand a Patera, and in
the Left a Scepter with a Star.

The Thirteenth is Elagabalus also. On the Reverse is SACERD. DEI SOLIS ELAGAB.
the Figure is stolated standing, holding in the Right Hand a Sacrificing-Cup
upon an Altar, after the Manner of one sacrificing to the Gods.

The Fourteenth is another of Elagabalus. On the Reverse is ABVNDANTIA AVG. the
Figure is standing, pouring Moneys from its Bosom, near the Head is a Star.

The Fifteenth is Elagabalus likewise. On the Reverse is INVICTVS SACERDOS AVG.
The Figure is stolated, sacrificing a Victim at the Altar, holding in the
Right Hand a Patera, and in the Left a Parazonium.

The Sixteenth is another of Elagabalus. The Reverse is a Type of Providence.

The Seventeenth is likewise Elagabalus. The Reverse is LIBERALITAS AVG. the
Figure is standing, holding in its Right Hand a Tessera, and in the Left a
Cornucopia with a Star.

The Eighteenth is Elagabalus. The Reverse is LIBERTAS AVG. the Figure is
standing, holding in the Right Hand a Shield, and in the Left a Cornucopia with
a Star.

TAB. X. An Explication of the Coins contained in the Tenth Plate.
THE First Head is that of Iulia Domna, who was likewise styled Augusta. On the
Reverse are these Letters VENERI VICTR. The Figure is Venus half naked, in her
Left Hand holding the Branch of a Palm, in her Right Hand a Globe, and with her
Left-Arm leaning upon a Pillar.

The Second is Caracalla, who assumed the Names likewise of Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus, and was styled Caesar. The Reverse is SECVRITAS PERPETVA; the Figure
a Military Man standing, holding in his Right Hand a Shield, and in his Left a
Spear.

The Third is another of Caracalla's. The Reverse is SEVERI AVG. PII. FILL. that
is, he was the Son of Severus Augustus Pius; the Figures are the Signa
Pontificalia.

The Fourth is a Caracalla; he was then of the Tribunitial Power. The Reverse
is MINER. XXX. VICTRIX. The Figure is Pallas standing, holding in her
Right Hand a Victoriolia, or little Victory, in her Left a Spear, and behind
that stands a Trophy.

The Fifth is another of Caracalla's. The Reverse is FIDES MILITUM, denoting
the Fidelity of the Soldiers. The Figure is stolated standing, holding in the
Right Hand a Labarum, and in the Left a Signum militare.

Tab 10


The Sixth is likewise of Caracalla's. The Reverse is TEMPORUM FELICITAS; the
Figure holding in the Right Hand a Spear, and in the Left a Cornucopia.

The Seventh is another of Caracalla's. The Reverse is PROVID DEORUM; the
Figure is a Type of Providence holding in the Right Hand a Globe, and in the
Left a Cornucopia, denoting that Caesar governed the World in Plenty.

The Eighth is likewise Caracalla. The Reverse is JOVI CONSERVATORI; the Figure
is Jupiter standing naked, holding in his Right Hand a Thunderbolt, and in his
Left a Spear inverted, with an Eagle at his Feet, and at his Back Two of the
Signa Militaria.

The Ninth is another of Caracalla's. The Reverse shows he was then styled
Pontifex Maximus, had been thrice of the Tribunitial Power, thrice Consul, and
was likewise styled Pater Patriae; the Figure is Jupiter sitting, holding in
his Right Hand a Victoriola, and in his Left a Spear.

The Tenth likewise is Caracalla. The Reverse is the Emperor Paludatus, holding
in his Right Hand a Victory affixed to a Globe, and in his Left a Spear, and at
his Feet a Slave.

The Eleventh is another of Caracalla's. The Reverse is FELICITAS AVG. the
Figure is standing, holding in the Right Hand a Caduceum, and in the Left a
Cornucopia.

The Twelfth is likewise Caracalla. The Reverse is a Military Figure standing,
holding in the Right Hand a Spear, and in the Left a Scipio.

The Thirteenth is another of Caracalla's, in which he then assumes the Name of
Britannicus; the Figure is the Type of Health sitting.

The Fourteenth is likewise a Caracalla. The Reverse is PROFECTIO AVG. the
Figure is a Military Man advancing, holding in his Right Hand a Spear, with two
of the Signa Militaria at his Back.

The Fifteenth is another of Caracalla's, and he was then also styled
Germanicus. The Reverse is MARTI PROPVGNATORI; the Figure is Mars Grandivus
holding in his Right Hand a Spear, and in his Left the Spolia upon his Shoulder.

The Sixteenth is also a Caracalla. The Reverse is VENUS VICTRIX; the Figure is
Venus Half naked, leaning upon a Scutum, in her Right Hand holding an Icuncula
or small Image.

Having now explained all the Antiquities that I was able to discover in these
Parts, I thought it would be ungenerous in me, should not I name the Persons
who shared with me in the Fatigues I had in the Explications of them. I cannot
therefore but return my unfeigned Thanks to the Learned and Reverend Dr.
Crostwhite, of Queen's College in Oxford; who freely and generously assisted me
in tracing the Oriental Languages through the best Authors, and likewise to the
Natives of those Countries themselves, whom I found very affable, and extremely
communicative. And as to the Roman Antiquities, for my fuller Information in
those, I must own I was infinitely obliged to the Learned and Generous Mr.
Charleton of the Temple, Dr. Williamson and Mr. Prescot of Chester, and Mr.
Oddy of Blackburn in Lancashire: Wherefore, I hope those worthy Persons will
accept of this Acknowledgement; which will ever oblige

Their Humble Servant, Charles Leigh.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A
ADrian, Emperor, his Coins, Book 3. Page 61. Item 72. Goes in Person to
Britain, and his Conquest, p. 73. Built a Wall Eighty Miles long there, p. 74.
A Coin of his found at Chester, p. 91.
Egypt, Coins relating to it, B. 3. p. 61. Aeolipile; what, and how made use
of by the Author, B. 1. p. 13. Africa, Coins relating to it, B. 3. p. 61.
Agricola (Julius) Vespasian's General in Britain, B. 3. p. 73. Makes a complete
Conquest of Britain, p. 77.
Alabastrides, where found and described, B. 1. p. 69. Albinus (Clodius)
created Caesar, etc. B. 3. p. 74. Continued in Britain, p. 75. Declared himself
Emperor, and was slain near Lions, ibid. A most valuable Coin of his found at
Standish, p. 94.
Alexandria Aegypti with a Palm, etc. on Coins; explicated, B. 3. p. 54.
Alga's, various Capsulae in them impleted with a pellucid Gelly, B. 1. p. 92.
Alga Saccarifera where found, and its Produce, B. 1. p. 93. Alum, where found,
and the Nature of it, B. 1. p. 74. Divided in three Classes, p. 76.
Amianthus, where found and described, B. 1. p. 72. Anasarca, a Species of the
Dropsy, B. 2. p. 68. Andraste, a British Goddess, B. 3. p. 63. Annus (a Year)
the Etymology thereof, and Extent considered, B. 1. p. 123. and seq. Antonia,
etc. on Coins; the Meaning, B. 3. p. 57. Antoninus Pius, Emperor, some Account
of his Coins, B. 3. p. 50. More, p. 59. More, p. 66. Item, p. 69, 70, 71. His
Affairs in Britain, p. 74. A Coin of his found at Standish, p. 92.
Apollo's Priests, etc. on Coins; the Meaning, B. 3. p. 49. Armenian Bows, etc.
on Coins and why, B. 3. p. 55. Ascarides, a Worm, its Generation in Human
Stomachs, etc. enquired into, B. 1. p. 150. Illustrated with a Story of the
Freebooters in America, ibid. and seq. Objection against the Author's
Hypothesis answered, p. 151. and seq.
Ascites, a Species of the Dropsy, B. 2. p. 68. Asia Minor, Coins relating to
it, B. 3. p. 61. Asper, a kind of Sea-Eagle; its Food, B. 1. p. 159. Dissected
by the Author, and his Observations from it. ibid. and seq.
Atmosphear; the Elasticity of it illustrated, B. 1. p. 13. etc. Augustus
Caesar, Emperor, some Account of his Coins, B. 3. p. 48. More, p. 56. and seq.
A Coin of his found at Chester, p. 89.
Avon or Savon; the British Name for a River, B. 1. p. 4. Aurelius (Marcus)
Emperor, his Coins accounted for, B. 3. p. 70. His Affairs in Britain, p. 74. A
Coin of his found at Standish, p. 92, 93. Another, p. 98.
Author, Experiments made by him upon Waters, B. 1. p. 36. and seq.
B
Barbarian naked, etc. on Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 58. Barnacle, a Bird; its
Generation from Shell-Fishes, examined and refuted, B. 1. p. 157. and seq.
More, and the Cut of it annexed, B. 1. p. 190.
Barometer; curious Observations of it, B. 1. p. 15, 16. Bassianus, Emperor, B.
3. p. 76. Bath, in Somersetshire, Mr. Allen's Observation on it, examined and
refuted by the Author, B. 1. p. 52. Bees; Remarks how wonderfully they
elaborate their Honey, B. 1. p. 156. The Reason of their Reviving after being
seemingly drowned in Water, or suffocated by Brimstone, ibid. and seq.
Belemnites; Stones, where found, B. 1. p. 119. Bellisama, a River in
Lancashire; the Etymology of it, B. 1. p. 3. More, B. 3. p. 76. Bile-stone: See
Cut and Explication, Fig. 20, 21. in Plate 3. at the End of B. 3. Birds
described, B. 1. p. 157. and seq. A diverting Relation of a Bird at Durton, in
Lancashire, p. 162. Uncommon Birds sometimes in Lancashire, etc. p. 164.
Black-Lead, where found, and by whom engrossed, B. 1. p. 90. and seq.
Boadicia's Prayer to Andraste, B. 3. p. 63. Her Golden Torques, p. 64. and seq.
Boil Mr. His Experiment of the Vegetation of Plants, B. 1. p. 106. and seq.
Brigantes, ancient Inhabitants of Lancashire; why so called, B. 1. p. 1, 2.
ibid. p. 5. Britain, when Conquered by the Romans, B. 3. p. 25. Peopled from
the East, p. 61. Proved from Scripture, and by other Arguments, p. 62. and seq.
More of its being Peopled from the East, B. 3. p. 77. and seq. How described by
Caesar, p. 74. When first Invaded, p. 75. Revolt in Nero's Reign, but are
reduced, p. 77. Made a Roman Province, p. 78. Quite deserted by the Romans, p.
79.
Britania; its Etymology, B. 1. p. 2, 3. Represented upon a Coin, B. 3. p. 58.
Brotherton (Thomas) Esquire in Lancashire; his Experiments of the Growth of Trees,
B. 2. p. 29. Illustrated by several Figures, described, p. 30. and seq. The
Author's Opinion hereupon, p. 34.
Brutes, of their Reason, B. 2. p. 9. and seq. Authors refining their Knowledge
by Ideas, etc. examined and rejected, p. 10. and seq. Their Souls are not an
actual Fire, p. 12. Nor Nitro-aerial Spirit, p. 13. The Author's own Thoughts
upon it, ibid.
Brutus (Marcus) and Cassius, some Coins accounted for relating to them, B. 3.
p. 52. Bufonites, Stones, where found, B. 1. p. 119. See the Cut and
Explication, Fig. 1. in Plate second, marked Fig. 2. at the End of Book 1.
Buphthalmos, a Stone in Lancashire, etc. B. 1. p. 130. Bull-Heads. See Frogs.
Burning-Well, near Wigan, described and accounted for, B. 1. p. 40, 41. From
whence the Heat proceeds, p. 42.
Buxton in Derbyshire; Hot Baths there, and their Virtues, B. 1. p. 31. Their
Virtues and Use, p. 32. and seq. The Queen of Scots Latin Distick upon them, B.
3. p. 42.
Byon, a Distemper how caused, B. 1. p. 88.
C
Caduceus Orbis on Coins, explicated, B. 3 p. 51, 52. One with a double
Cornucopia, etc. explained, p. 54. One with a Scutum explained, p. 55.
Caer, the Etymology of it, B. 3. p. 77. Caligula, Emperor, his Coin, B. 3. p.
57. Cancer, Acroterion and Rosa on Coins; the Meaning, B. 3. p. 52. Cangi, what
Part of Britain they inhabited, B. 3. p. 26. More of them, p. 33.
Canooes, found in Martin-Meer, B. 1. p. 18. The Cut explained, p. 181.
Cappadocia, Coins relating to it, B. 3. p. 61. Caracalla, his Coins explained,
p. 108, 109, 110. Caractacus, a British Prince, carried Captive to Rome, B. 3.
p. 26. More of it, p. 76.
Caterpillar, how she generates, and is destroyed by her young Ones, B. 1. p.
149. Cattle, large ones bred in Lancashire, B. 2. p. 5. Cattle wild in
Lancashire without Horns, B. 2. p. 3. Cat-fish, the Pricking of its Fins
dangerous, and why, B. 1. p. 146. Ceres and Anona on Coins, B. 3. p. 51. Item,
Ceres alone, ibid.
Char, a Fish found only in one part of Winder-Meer, described, B. 1. p. 141.
Item, p. 142. How caught, ibid. and seq.
Chatsworth in Derbyshire, the Duke of Devon's Seat, described, B. 3. p. 44.
and seq. Cheshire, described; its Air, B. 1. p. 11. The ancient Inhabitants of
it, B. 3. p. 32.
Chester, its Etymology and various Names, both Ancient and Modern, B. 1. p.
11, 12. Its ancient Greatness, ibid. Remarkable for many Antiquities, B. 3. p.
18. and seq. Diverse Roman Inscriptions here, p. 19. and seq. The Twentieth
Legion, styled Valeria and Victrix, quartered here, p. 19. and seq. Two
remarkable Coins here, p. 21. Another Inscription, p. 25. Made a Colony by
Septimius Geta, p. 27. A Coin of Constantius found here, p. 29. More of the
20th Legion being here, p. 32. and seq. An Account of its Earls, p. 37, and
seq. Of its Barons, p. 39, and seq. Roman Altars dug up there, p. 82. Several
sorts of Fibulae, p. 84. Horn of a Rane-Deer, ibid. Two Consular Coins found
here, p. 89.
Claudius (Drusus) Emperor, his Expedition to, and Conquest of Britain, B. 3.
p. 72. More of it, p. 75. and seq.
Claudius (Titus) etc. his Coins explicated, B. 3. p. 58. Clays, the different
sorts in Lancashire, etc. B. 1. p. 56. Clemens Augustus, his Coins, B. 3. p.
71. Clementia, etc. on Coins explained, B. 3. p. 60. Clepsydra, an Account of
it, B. 1. p. 123 Coals, the Nature of them, B. 1. p. 67. Cockles, the best in
England in Lancashire, etc. B. 1. p. 135. Coke or Toftan, what it is, B. 1. p.
79. Its strange Effect upon Iron, ibid.
Coins accounted for, B. 3. p. 48. and seq. Coln in Lancashire; its Roman
Antiquities, B. 3. p. 10. and seq. No Roman Station, p. 12. Its Etymology, ibid.
Commodus, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p. 69, 71. His Affairs in Britain, p. 74.
Diverse Coins of his found at Standish, explained, p. 93, 94.
Consecratio, upon Coins explicated, B. 3. p. 49. Constantia, some of her Coins
described, B. 3. p. 58. Constantius, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p. 59. Consular
Coins, B. 3. p. 89. Consumptions, reduced to Classes, with an Account of the
Rise of them, B. 2. p. 59. Why the People on Salt and Marshy Coasts are subject
to it, p. 60. The Species of Scorbutic Consumptions treated of, p. 61. and seq.
The Symptoms of the Disease, p. 62. The Reasons of them assigned, ibid. and
seq. Why the Urine is so very Lixivial herein, p. 64. Whether the Lungs are
always full of Tubercles, p. 65. Symptoms of a Consumption in a confirmed
State, p. 65. and seq.
Copper-Ores, the several sorts of them, ill managed, B. 1. p. 81. and seq.
What quantity of Copper it produces, and the Fusion described, p. 85. and seq.
Coralline, where found, and the Use thereof in Physic, B. 1. p. 92. and seq.
Coritani; the ancient Inhabitants of Derbyshire, B. 1. p. 13. Cormorant; a
Bird, how used to take Fish with, in the Indies, B. 1. p. 161. Cornavii; the
ancient Inhabitants of Cheshire, B. 1. p. 11. Cornucopia, etc. on Coins
explicated, B. 3. p. 54. Double, p. 57.
Crows, two white ones, B. 1. p. 161. Cuckoo and Swallow; a Query, whether they
sleep in Winter, B. 1. p. 164. Cuckow-Spittle, what it is, B. 1. p. 148. and
seq.
D
Damps in Lancashire, and the Effects of them, B. 1. p. 8. and 9. Damps
Mineral, described, B. 1. p. 78. and seq. Day, what meant by it, B. 1. p. 123.
Dee, a River in Cheshire; its Etymology, B. 1. p. 22. Proposed to be made
Navigable, p. 22.
Deer Red in Lime-Park in Cheshire; an unusual Thing concerning them, B. 2. p.
2. Observations of their casting their Horns, ibid. Use of their Flesh and
Horns in Physic, ibid. and seq.
Deer spotted in Dunham-Park, B. 2. p. 3. Deluge, various Opinions concerning
the Universality of it, B. 1. p. 100. and seq. Moses his Narrative of it most
true, p. 124. and seq.
Derby, a Catalogue of its Earls, B. 3. p. 46. More particularly of the present
Family, p. 47.
Derbyshire; an Account of it, B. 1. p. 13. More, B. 3. p. 40. The Peak
described, p. 42. and seq. Pool's- Hole, and other Rarities there described, B.
3. p. 187. and seq.
Diadumenus, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p. 70. More explained, p. 106.
Diana Venatrix, etc. on Coins explicated, B. 3. p. 56. Dioclesian, Emperor, a
remarkable Coin of his, B. 3. p. 54. Distempers intermittent; accounted for,
and illustrated with diverse Cases, B. 2. p. 87. and seq. Dog at Bold in
Lancashire, his odd Manner of Dying, B. 2. p. 9. Dog-fish described, and
generates like a Dog and Bitch, B. 1. p. 1^7. Domitian, Emperor, his Coins, B.
3. p. 48, 59, 60. Subdued the Orcades and Caledonians, p. 73. A Coin of his
found at Standish in Lancashire, p. 92.
Domitius (Cneus) his Coins, B. 3. p. 54. Dove, a River in Derbyshire, the
Etymology of it, B. 1. p. 23. Course and Overflowing, ibid.
Downham Diamonds, how cast up, described and compounded, B. 1. p. 76. Dropsy;
the different Species of it, and Causes assigned, with the Author's Sentiments
and Experience, B. 2. p. 68. and seq. Whence it may proceed, p. 69. As also the
Lymphatick Dropsy, p. 70. Particular Cases in the Dropsy recited and
accounted for, p. 71. and seq. The Cure in general, p. 74. and seq. Whether
Salivation be proper for it, p. 75. Another odd Case recited, p. 76.
Ducks wild, their most remarkable Feeding at Bold in Lancashire, B. 1. p. 163.
and seq.
E
Earths; the several sorts of them in Lancashire, etc. B. 1. p. 55. Bituminous
Earth, where, with the Nature and Use of it, p. 64.
Echo in Cheshire of a strange Nature, B. 1. p. 14. The Cut and Explication
at the End of Book 1.
Eels, an Enquiry into the Generation of them, B. 1. p. 143. and seq. The BIood
circulates in them, p. 144.
Elagabalus. See Heliogabalus. Elden-Hole. See Pool's- Hole. Elke's Head found
deep under Ground, and where, B. 1. p. 63. Elixir of Vitriol, B. 1. p. 14, 15.
Emmet-Water; accounted for, B. 1. p. 39. Equites on Coins, and why, B. 3. p.
53. Erke River remarkable for the fattest Eels, and why, B. 1. p. 143.
Eternitas, etc. on Coins, B. 3. p. 60. Experiments Chemical, from Spirit of
Hart's-horn, etc. B. 1. ibid.
F
Faustina, her Coin, B. 3. p. 66. One found at Standish, p. 93.
Feather'd-Allum. See Amianthus. Felon; a Distemper in Infants in Lancashire,
etc. Its Symptoms, Origin and Cure, B. 2. p. 49. Fires; several sorts noted,
B. 2. p. 12. Fishes described, B. 1. p. 130. and seq. Three strange ones taken
by the Author, described, p. 133. and seq.
Flaminii upon Coins, B. 3. p. 50. Flood, an unusual one in Cheshire, with the
Effects of it, B. 1. p. 126. and seq. Fluor or Spar, strange one, in
Derbyshire. See the Cut and Explication at the End of Book 1. Fig. 1, and 2.
in Plate marked Fig. 1. Of other Forms. See Plate 3. Fig. 8. 16, 17. at the End
of Book 1.
Fortune, etc. on Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 60. Frogs, how they generate, B.
1. p. 151. Sleeping long without Food; and the Reason of it, ibid. Medicinal,
ibid. Waters distilled from their Spawn, used against Spitting of Blood, p.
153. Plasters of them, ibid.

G
Galba, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p. 59. His General in Britain, p. 73. One of
his Coins found at Chester, p. 90.
Galerius (Titus Elupius) his Coins accounted for, B. 3. p. 70. Germanicus,
etc. his Coins explicated, B. 3. p. 58. Geta, Roman Emperor; a Coin of his
proving the Antiquity of Chester, B. 3. p. 27. More, p. 28. More of his Coins,
p. 49. and seq. More, p. 67, 68. Slain by Caracalla his Brother, p. 76. His
Coins found at Standish explained, p. 105, 106.
Gigleswig, a Spring in Yorkshire that ebbs and flows, described and accounted
for, B. 1. p. 26, etc. Glass, how first made by accident, B. 1. p. 75.
Gordianus, Emperor, his Coin explained, B. 3. p. 104. Grasshopper, how strangely
preserved in its Infancy, B. 1. p. 148. Green-back and Mullets, excellent Food,
B. 1. p. 134*
H.
Haddon-House, whose, B. 3. p. 46. Haematides, or soft Clay Ore; its Goodness
and Virtue, B. 1. p. 85. Hailstones, a dreadful Storm in Lancashire, and when,
with the Effects of them, B. 1. p. 9. Cut and Explication at the End of Book 1.
Hair-Balls in the Stomachs of Beasts, described and accounted for, B. 2. p.
48. Hares, somewhat concerning the Superfaetation of them, B. 2. p. 5. and seq.
Whence comes their Velocity, p. 6. Their Colors different, and why, p. 7.
Distempers, ibid.
Helena, her Coin, B. 3. p. 49. Heliogabalus, Emperor, his Coin, B. 3. p. 66.
Took the Name of Antoninus, p. 76. His Coins explained, p. 106, 107.
Hemeneus, or Humming-Bird, why it produces not Honey like the Be, B. 1. p.
157. Hercules Densionensis on Coins, and why, B. 3. p. 66. Hippopotamus, some
Account of it at the End of B. 1. p. 183. Item, p 185.
Hispania, Coins of it, B. 3. p. 156. Item, 59.
Hope, etc. on Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 58. Hora, the Etymology and ancient
Signification of it, B. 1. p. 122. Horrax (Jeremiah) Eminent for his Skill in
Astronomy, and his Character by Dr. Wallis, B. 2. p. 27. and seq. Item, An
Account of his Works, p. 28. and seq.
Hue, a Fish, eats pickled like an Anchove, B. 1. p. 146. Human Worms, B. 1. p.
150.
I
Imp. Aael, an obscure Coin, B. 3. p. 71. Imperator Crucem tenens; the Meaning,
B. 3. p. 66. Imperator Caesar Aug. with a Bidens, etc. on Coins, explicated, B.
3. p. 68. Inflammation of the Blood, what is meant by it, B. 2. p. 77. and seq.
Ink-fish. See Sepia. Inscriptions Roman at Ribchester, B. 3. p. 3. and seq.
Item, p. 8. More at Manchester, with their Interpretations, p. 14. and seq.
Diverse at Chester also interpreted, p. 19. and seq. One near Bakewell upon an
Altar, p. 41.
Instruments, strange ones found near Martin-Meer, B. 3. p. 181, 182. Iron-Ore,
the several sorts of it, and how best run into malleable Iron, B. 1. p. 80. and
seq. More particularly described, p. 82. and seq. With Protuberances, Cut and
Explication, Fig. 15. in Plate 3. at the End of Book 1.
Iulia, etc. on Coin, B. 3. p. 67, 68, 70, 71. Iulia Augusta Pia, etc. diverse
Coins of hers found at Standish, explained, B. 3. p. 36, 37. Iulia Domna, her
Coins explained, B. 3. p. 108. Iulia Maesa on Coin, B. 3. p. 67. More Coins of
hers explained, p. 98.
Iulia Mammaea, her Coins explained, etc. B. 3. p. 68. Item, p. 69, 101, 102.
Iulia Paula Aug. a Coin of hers, B. 3. p. 98. Iulia Saemias; Coins of hers
explained, B. 3. p. 99. Iulianus (Didius) Emperor, slain by the Soldiers, B. 3.
p. 75. Julius Caesar, Emperor, Observations of his Coins, B. 3. p. 48. More, p.
51, 71. His Exploits in Britain, p. 72. A Coin of his Head, with a Star, etc.
found at Chester, p. 89.
Jupiter, etc. on Coins, B. 3. p. 60.
K
Kent, a River in Lancashire, its Signification in Armenian, B. 3. p. 76.
L
Laetitia, on Coins, the Meaning, B. 3. p. 66. Lancashire, its Denomination, B.
1. p. 1. Air, p. 6. Observations of the Weather-Glass here, p. 10. More of the
Effects of the Air, ibid. Made a County Palatine, B. 3. p. 16.
Lancaster, Sympuvia found there, B. 3. p. 30. But few other Antiquities, p.
15. A Catalogue of those to whom it gave Titles of Honor, p. 16. and seq.
Lapis Calaminaris, where found, and how used, B. 1. p. 91. Lapis Serpentarius,
two sorts, and where found, B. 1. p. 120. Larbrick Cold-Spring; Experiments
upon it, B. 1. p. 14. Lead-Ore, how found, described, and the several sorts of
it, B. 1. p. 80. The Fusion of it, p. The Distempers that arise from it, ibid.
and seq. How the Mine is discovered, p. 89. Lead-Ore feathered. See Fig. 14. in
Plate 3. at the End of Book 1.
Leicester Sir Peter, writ the Antiquities of Buckley Hundred, B. 2. p. 14.
Lepidus (Marcus) some Coins referring to him accounted for, B. 3. p. 53.
Letter, one from the Author to Dr. Plot, concerning the Water of Latron and
Nitrian Nitre, B. 2. p. 35. Gives the Denomination of Nitre, and diverse other
Things, ibid. and seq. Another Letter concerning Digestion, p. 42. and seq.
From Mr. Oddy, concerning the Antiquities of Ribchester, B. 3. p. 2. From Mr.
Hargrave, of the Antiquities of Coln, ibid. From Dr. Prescot, concerning the
Antiquities of Chester, p. 21. and seq. From Mr. Fowke to Mr. Prescot, p. 30.
Lewenhoke demonstrates the Circulation of Blood in Eels, B. 1. p. 144.
Lizards, frequent in Lancashire, B. 1. p. 148. Longinus Flavius, a Roman
Tribune in Britain; with an Account of his Family, B. 3. p. 23. and seq. Lud,
the Etymology of it, B. 3. p. 77. Lune, a River in Lancashire, B. 1. p. 22. In
Armenian, signifies the Moon, B. 3. p. 76.

M
Maclesfield in Cheshire, a College founded there, by whom, B. 2. p. 17.
Macrinus, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p. 72. More explained, p. 106.
Manchester, a College, Public School and Hospital founded there, when, and by
whom, B. 2. p. 14. and seq. College dissolved, when, and refounded by Q.
Elizabeth, and after by Charles the First, ibid. Revenues of the Hospital and
Public School, p. 15. Other Charities in Manchester, p. 16. Benefactions added
by William Hulme, Esquire to the Public School, ibid. Town gives Title of Honor,
to whom, ibid. Its Antiquity and Etymology, B. 3. p. 13. Roman Inscriptions
here, p. 14. Vastly populous, and flourishing in Trade, p. 15.
Marcus Valerius Alexander, his Coins, B. 3. p. 72. Marles, an Account of them,
B. 1. p. 56. Petrified, where: See the Cut and Explication at the End of Book
1. Fig. 3. in Plate marked Fig. 1.
Mars on Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 52, 59, 60. Martin-Meer drained, B. 1. p.
17. Canooes found in it, p. 18. Firr-stock and Apples found therein, p. 21.
Matidia, etc. on Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 61. Maximinianus, Emperor, his
Coins, B. 3. p. 71. Maximinus, Emperor, his Coins explained, B. 3. p. 103.
Mercia; an Account of the Kings of it, B. 3. p. 34. and seq. Item, Dukes of
this Country, p. 36. and seq. Its Bishops, p. 39.
Mermaids-Purses, where, B. 1. p. 93. Mersey, a River in Lancashire, described,
B. 1. p. 21. Metals in Lancashire, etc. what they are, B. 1. p. 80. How
separated from Ore, p. 90.
Mineral-Waters, accounted for, B. 1. p. 24, etc. Item, Those that arise out of
Bass, p. 40.
Minerva, etc. on Coins, B. 3. p. 52. Mines, Coal and Kennel, always found in
Strata, B. 1. p. 65. How to be discovered, p. 66. Farther Observations, ibid.
Mint, the Vegetation of it, Experiment by Dr. Woodward, B. 1. p. 107. and seq.
Morasses, several sorts in Lancashire, etc. described, B. 1. p. 58. An Enquiry
into the Rise of them, p. 59. and seq. How manured, p. 65.
Muscular Motion hard to be solved, B. 1. p. 145.
N
Natron, where found in England, B. 1. p. 38. More of it, p. 39.
Nautilus, a Fish; some Account of it at the End of Book 1. in the Explication
of the Cut contained in the Plate, marked Fig. 1. annexed to B. 1. Neptune
upon Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 49, 56. More, p. 60.
Nero, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p. 59. His Wars in Britain against Boadicea,
p. 73. One of his Coins found at Chester, p. 90.
Nerva, Emperor, built Coccium in Lancashire, B. 3. p. 73. Nitre, the great Use
thereof in a Plague, B. 1. p. 75. Its Denomination, B. 2. p. 35. Different
Names given it, ibid. Different places whence it comes, p. 36. Its Description
as it is when a Compositum, ibid. The Number of its Principles, when Chymically
resolved, p. 37. Rise of them, ibid. Its Separation from the Water of Latron,
p. 38. Use in Physic, p. 39. Agriculture and Mechanics, p. 40. and seq. How
it differs from Sal Ammoniac, p. 41. From Salt Petre, ibid.
Nitria, a Town in Egypt, B. 2. p. 38. Nitrum Calcarium, where contained, B. 1.
p. 44, 45. Nowell, Dean, gave several Scholarships to Brazen-Nose College in
Oxford, B. 2. p. 14. Nutmegs; an Account of their Growth, B. 1. p. 96. Nux
Pinea on Coin, and why, B. 3. p. 55.
O
Ocre, where found, B. 1. p. 67. Oddy Mr. his Letter concerning the Antiquities
of Ribchester, B. 3. p. 2. Optites, or Cornu Ammonis; a Serpent-stone See the
Cut Fig. 6. in Plate marked Fig. 1. at the End of B. 1. Ores, the Formation of
them enquired into, B. 1. p. 89. and seq. Otho, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p.
60. One of his found at Chester, p. 90.

P
Pap-fish, described, B. 1. p. 139. Parthians, etc. on Coins, explicated, B. 3.
p. 56, 57. Patella of a Whale, and the Use of it, at the End of B. 3. p. 185.
Peace winged, etc. on Coins, explained, B. 3. p. 58, 60. Peak, in Derbyshire;
its Natural Wonders described, B. 3. p. 42. and seq. Item, Artificial Wonders,
p. 44. and seq.
Pearl-Muscles, common in Lancashire, etc. B. 1. p. 135. Pearson Dr. Eminent
for his Learning in these Parts, B. 2. p. 13. Pearls, an Account of the
Germination of them, B. 1. p. 135. Sandius, in his Letter to the Royal Society,
mistaken, p. 136. and seq.
Pectunculus petrified. See Cut and Explication, Fig. 10, and 13. in Plate 2.
marked Fig. 2. at the End of B. 1. Pertinax (Helvius) Emperor, refused Albinus
for his Colleague, and was assassinated, B. 3. p. 74, 75. Petrifactions, where
found, the different sorts of them seen by the Author, B. 1. p. 115. His
Arguments against their being the Exuviae of Animals at the Deluge, ibid. and
seq. Examples of diverse Petrifactions, p. 116. And how effected, p. 117.
Phoebus, etc. on Coins, B. 3. p. 56. Phoenicians, Traded into Britain, B. 1.
p. 3. etc. More, B. 3. p. 76. and seq.
Phosphori in Muscles and Oysters; from whence they arise, B. 1. p. 138. and
seq. Pietas, etc. on Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 57. Pisces vaginales, where,
and described, B. 1. p. 133. Plants Antepileptic, which they are, and their
Use, B. 1. p. 105. Plants Anticteric, which they are, B. 1. p. 105. Plants
Balsamic, which they are, B. 1. p. 104. Plants Cardiac, which they are, B. 1.
p. 104. and seq. Plants Cathartic; their Names, Nature and Physical Uses, B. 1.
p. 102. and seq. Plants Emetic, which they are, and an Enquiry into their
Bitterness, B. 1. p. 102. Plants Fossile found in solid Rocks, etc. accounted
for, B. 1. p. 64. More of them in opposition to Dr. Woodward's Hypothesis, p.
98. and seq.
Plants Marine in Lancashire, etc. accounted for, B. 1. p. 94. Plants Inland in
Lancashire, etc. accounted for, B. 1. p. 94. and seq. Plants Opiate and
Paregoric, what they are, B. 1. p. 105. Plants Poisonous, what they are, and
how they operate, B. 1. p. 105. and seq. Plants River and Land, Experiments of
their Vegetation, B. 1. p. 106. and seq. Plautilla; her Coins found at Standish
explained, B. 3. p. 105. Pool's- Hole and Elden-Hole, in Derbyshire accounted
for, and described, annexed to, B. 1. p. 187. and seq. Potters-Clay, an Account
of it, B. 1. p. 56. Pox Small, two Cats contracted it of two Persons, and died
of it in Lancashire, B, 2. p. 7. Not peculiar to Mankind, p. 8. The Reasons why
more frequent than in other Animals, ibid.
Prawn, a Fish described, B. 1. p. 134. Proserpina upon Coins, explained, B. 3.
p. 49. Puffin, a Bird, described, B. 1. p. 159. Pupienus, Emperor, his Coins
explained, B. 3. p. 103. Pyrites, where found, B. 1. p. 67. What it consists
of, p. 68. The Cut and Explication of a Cylindrical one, Fig. 2. and 17. Plate
2. marked Fig. 2. at the End of B. 1.

Q
Quadrupeds described, B. 2. p. 1. and seq. Querna Corona on Coins, explicated,
B. 3. p. 57. Quicksilver, where sometimes found, B. 1. p. 90.
R
Rabbet-Fish described, B. 1. p. 146. Rain, Townley's Table of it, B. 2. p. 25.
Rale, a Bird in Lancashire, described, B. 1. p. 162. Rana Piscatrix; an Account
of it annexed to B. 1. p. 186. Red-Spider poisonous to Cattle, etc. B. 149.
Reptiles and Insects described, B. 1. p. 147. and seq. Ribbel, a River in
Lancashire; the Derivation of the Word and Argument from it, B. 1. p. 45. More
of that River, p. 22. More, B. 3. p. 77.
Ribchester in Lancashire; its ancient Name, and famous for diverse Antiquities,
B. 3. p. 2. and seq. Diverse Roman Inscriptions here, p. 3. and seq. Explained,
ibid. Other remarkable Antiquities here, p. 6. and seq. More, p. 9. Antique
Ruby found there, described, p. 81. Diverse Roman Altars found there, p. 82.
Item, A Roman Discus, etc. ibid. A Sympuvium, Roman Tyle, Urn, Fibulae, Ring of
a Roman Boat found here, p. 83. Item, Two sides of a Sacrificing-Altar, p. 84.
Rickets common in Lancashire, etc. how occasioned, B. 2. p. 49. Divided into
Classes, p. 50. Cure, ibid.
Rocks; an Enquiry whether at first fluid, B. 1. p. 120. and seq. Rome, her
Coins, B. 3. p. 48. and seq. More of its Empire, p. 55. Armed, etc. p. 59.

S
Sagittarii on Coins; the Meaning, B. 3. p. 50. Salmon, abounds in the Rivers
of Lancashire, etc. B. 1. p. 139. An Account of their Growth, ibid. and seq.
Salmon-Lowse, what, B. 1. p. 140. Saltpeter contained in Water, affirmed, B.
1. p. 39. Salt Rocks in Cheshire, and Conjectures upon it, B. 1. p. 75. and
seq. Salts Marine, where they make their Efflorescences, B. 1. p. 74.
Sand-Eels, what they are, B. 1. p. 134. Sandius, his Letter to the Royal
Society of the Germination of Pearls, B. 1. p. 136. Another Letter, p. 137.
Mistaken in his Notion, p. 138.
Savig; a Rivulet in Lancashire, the Etymology of the Word and Argument from
it, B. 1. p. 5. Item, B. 3. p. 77.
Scurvy; its various Denominations, B. 2. p. 51. Its Epidemicalness, p. 52.
Symptoms, ibid. Divided into Classes, p. 53. The Rationale of its Symptoms, as
Faetidness of the Gums, etc. ibid. and seq. Spots and Lepra, p 55. and seq.
Particular Instances of its Cure, p. 56. and seq. The general Method of it, p.
58.
Sea-Blebs, Fishes cast upon the Shoars of Lancashire, etc. described, B. 1. p.
133. Sea-Crow described. Item, Its Food, B. 1. p. 158. Cut, and further
Account of it annexed to B. 1. p. 159.
Sea-Dogs, as described by Dampier, B. 1. p. 131. and seq. Sea-Gulls,
described, and why they pursue one another in their Flights, B. 1. p. 163.
Seahorse. See Hippopotamus. Sea-Oaks. See Alga's. Sea-Toad. See Rana
Piscatrix. Seals, or Sea-Calves, how taken, and described, B. 1. p. 131. More
of the Seal at the End of B. 3. p. 185.
Sellae Curules, etc. on Coins, the Meaning, B. 3. p. 53. Sepia, or Ink-fish;
the Nature of the Ink discharged by them, described, B. 1. p. 131. More of it,
p. 182.
Severus (Septimius) and Geta, Emperors, their Coins accounted for, B. 3. p.
49. and seq. More of Severus, p. 67, 69. His Affairs in Britain, p. 75. Built a
Wall there, ibid.
Severus Alexander, Emperor, somewhat of his Coins, B. 3. p. 50. More, p. 67,
68, 70, 71. Diverse Coins of his found at Standish, explained, p. 95, 96. More
Coins of his explained, p. 99, 100. More Coins explained, p. 101.
Severus Pius Augustus, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p. 57. Item, p. 69.
Sheep, strange ones in Stiperly-Park in Cheshire, described, B. 2. p. 1. and
seq. Shells Marine, found deep under Ground in Lancashire, etc. B. 1. p. 62. In
Marle-Pits, p. 119. Remarkable ones named, p. 120. Pearly and Chalky kinds of
Shells, and the Formation of them, B. 2. p. 47. and seq. Taken out of an Hog's
Bladder, ibid.
Sibilla Belgica on a Coin, B. 3. p. 49. Slurry, what it is, B. 1. p. 56. and
seq. Smith Bishop, Founder of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford, B. 2. p. 14. Sol,
etc. on Coins, explained, B. 3. p. 66. Sope-stone, where, and the Nature of it,
B. 1. p. 57. Sparling-fisher, a Bird, described, B. 1. p. 161. Spars, several
sorts of them, where found, and described, B 1. p. 68. and seq. Uses in
Physic, p. 70. and seq. A black Spar that affords a diverting Phoenomenon,
ibid.
Spikes of Corn (four) on Coins; the Meaning, B. 3. p. 53. Spout at Sea
described, B. 1. p. 127. The Account confirmed by Dampier, ibid. and seq.
Springs; an Account of the Origin of them, B. 1. p. 28, etc. A Spring
impregated with Sulphur, where, p. 31. Springs arising out of Bass, accounted
for, ibid. and seq.
Stag's- Head entire, found deep under Ground, and where, B. 1. p. 62. More of
it, p. 184.
Stalactides, where found, and described, B. 1. p. 69. and seq. Stones of exact
Symmetry deep in the Earth, B. 1. p. 129. Stones of different Forms, Color,
etc. taken out of the Bodies of Animals, B. 2. p. 47.
Standish in Lancashire, a Roman Signet and Coins found there, described, B. 3.
p. 81. The Vessel wherein the Coins were, p. 82.
Star-fish, described, B. 1. p. 133. Star-slime, what it is, examined, B. 1. p.
154. and seq. Sturgeon, the Figure of it, B. 3. p. 185. Sulphur in Baths, why
it tinges of a different Color, accounted for, B. 1. p. 34. and seq. Several
sorts described, p. 77. and seq. Etymology, ibid.
Siren, etc. on Coins; the Meaning, B. 3. p. 56.
T
Talcs, where found, and the Nature of them, B. 1. p. 72. Tempest, a terrible
one, and when, in Lancashire, B. 1. p. 6. The Effects of it, p. 7.
Thermometer, Experiment with it, B. 1. p. 54. Thule, the Etymology of it, B.
1. p. 4. More to the same Purpose, B. 3. p. 76.
Tiberius, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p. 57. A Coin of his found at Chester, p.
90.
Tideswell, a Spring in Derbyshire ebbs and flows, with an Enquire into the
Reason of it, B. 1. p. 25, etc. Timpanites, a Species of the Dropsy, B. 2. p.
68. Accounted for, p. 69.
Titus Vespasian, Emperor, his Coins, B. 3. p. 48. His Affairs in Britain, p.
73. A Coin of his found at Chester, p. 91.
Toad very poisonous, but the Excellency of its Use in Physic, demonstrated,
B. 1. p. 154. and seq. Tobacco-Pipe Clay, B. 1. p. 57. Townley (Richard) Esquire
his Letter to Dr. Croon, about the Invention of an Instrument for dividing a
Foot into 40000 parts, B. 2. p. 17. and seq. His Instrument described, p. 19.
and seq. Another Letter about the Quantity of Rain falling Monthly for diverse
Years, p. 21. and seq. His Table of Rain, p. 25. His Observations of the
Eclipse of the Sun, p. 26.
Trajanus (Ulpius) Emperor, his Affairs in Britain, B. 3. p. 73. A Coin of his
found at Standish, p. 92.
Trees, found deep under Ground, discussed, B. 1. p. 61. and seq. Tripos with a
Star, on Coins; the Meaning, B. 3. p. 53. Triumviri, their Coin explicated, B.
3. p. 54. Trout and Grayling plentiful at Buxton, and the best in England, B.
1. p. 147.
V
Valerianus (Caesar) etc. his Coins explained, B. 3. p. 66. Valerius Maximus,
etc. on Coin, B. 3. p. 67, 68. Valerius Divus Augustus, Emperor, his Coins, B.
3. p. 71. Venus Victrix, on Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 51. Item, p. 56.
Verus (Lucius) a Coin of his found at Standish, B. 3. p. 93. Vespasian,
Emperor, his Affairs in Britain, B. 3. p. 73. Coins of his found at Chester, p.
90.
Vesta covered, etc. on Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 58. Via Trajana, etc.
Coins; the Meaning, B. 3. p. 61. Victoria winged, upon Coins, explicated, B. 3.
p. 49. With her Two Snakes, p. 55. Upon a Celestial Sphere, etc. ibid. Item,
p. 56. Item, p. 66.
Viper in Lancashire, described, B. 1. p. 147. An Enquiry wherein its Poison
consists, p. 148. Its Flesh Medicinal, ibid.
Vitellius, Emperor, his Coin, B. 3. p. 90. Vitriol, three sorts of it, where
found, and described, B. 1. p. 73. and seq. Vitriol-Spring, where, B. 1. p. 30.
Its Produce of Vitriol, ibid. More of Vitriol, p. 39.
Up-Holland; an Idol found there, B. 3. p. 81. Urceus Lituus, etc. on Coins,
and why, B. 3. p. 53.
W
Waters, that cast up Marine-Shells, B. 1. p 28. At Burnley in Lancashire
accounted for, p. 37. Natron found there, and at Hanbridge, p. 38. Its uses in
Physic, ibid. Waters of a Stiptick Taste, and the Nature of them, p. 48.
Coldness in Waters, whence, p. 53.
Waters out of Bass, B. 1. p. 40. Waters Chalybeat, where, B. 49. Proceed not
from the Pyrites, and why, ibid. and seq.
Waters Mineral. See Mineral-Waters. Waters purging, where, and the Rise and
Nature of them described, B. 1. p. 45. More of these Waters, p. 46. Farther
discussed, p. 50. and seq.
Waters ranked amongst the Acidulae, where, and contain Natron, B. 1. p. 43.
Experiments thereupon, p. 47.
Waters Saline, where, and the Rise of them, B. 1. p. 43. The Nature of the
Salt made from them, ibid. and seq.
Waters Sulphurous Saline, accounted for, B. 1. p. 40. and seq. Winder-Meer,
described, B. 1. p. 141. and seq. Wire, a River in Lancashire, the Fishing
there, B. 1. p. 22. Woman with Horns in Lancashire, B. 2. p. 3. and seq. An
Enquiry into the Reason, ibid. One with Child frighted, and the Effect, p. 4.
Item, p. 118. One with a Crow upon Coins, explicated, B. 3. p. 50. More of a
Woman with Horns, ibid.
Woodcocks, where they breed, B. 1. p. 164. Woodward Dr. his Experiments
concerning the Vegetation of Mint, etc. B. 1. p. 107. and seq. His Corollary
therefrom, examined and refuted by the Author, p. 110. and seq. Wrong in his
Notion of Petrifactions, p. 115.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
There is newly Printed for John Nicholson, at the King's- Arms, in
Little-Britain, London,
A Complete Dictionary of the Greek and Roman Antiquities; explaining the
obscure Places in Classic Authors, and Ancient Historians, relating to the
Religion, Mythology, History, Geography and Chronology of the Ancient Greeks
and Romans; their Sacred and Profane Rites and Customs; Laws, Polity, Arts and
Engines of War: Also an Account of their Navigations, Arts and Sciences, and
the Inventors of them; with the Lives and Opinions of their Philosophers.
Compiled Originally in French, at the Command of the French King, for the Use
of the Dauphin, the Dukes of Burgundy, Anjou and Berry: By Monsieur DANET. Made
English, with the Addition of very Useful MAPPS.


