ANNOTATIONS UPON ALL THE NEW TESTAMENT PHILOLOGICALL AND THEOLOGICAL: Wherein
The Emphasis and Elegancie of the Greek is observed. Some Imperfections in our
Translation are discovered. Diverse Jewish Rites and Customs tending to
illustrate the text are mentioned. Many Antilogies and seeming Contradictions
reconciled. Several dark and Obscure Places opened. Sundry Passages
vindicated from the false glosses of Papists and Heretics.


By EDWARD LEIGH, Master of Arts of both the Universities.

(...)

Plantavit. in Florileg. Rabbin. Number. 93. (...).

Crysostom. (...). Singuli sermones, syllabae, apices, puncta, in divinis
Scripturis plena sunt sensibus.

Hieron. in Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 3. LONDON, Printed by W. W. and E G. for
William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Turks-Head in Fleetstreet
next to the Miter and Phoenix. Anno Dom. 1650.

ALMAE MATRI CELEBERRIMAE ACADEMIAE OXONIENSI.
ACademiae nomen (Alma matter) Athenis primum inclaruisse apud omnes fere Iunii
Academia.
auctores convenit. Vna urbs Attica (inquit Paterculus Lib. 1. hist. Sub finem.
Recentiorum quidam scholas publicas, quod auctoritate publica, sive quod idem
fere est, public instituuntur. quidam Vniversitates appellare malunt.
Middendorpius de Academiis, lib. 1. cap. 1.
) pluribus annis eloquentia quam universa Graecia, opibusque floruit, adeo ut
corpora illius gentis separata sint in alias civitates, ingenia vero solis
Atheniensium muris clausa existimes. Graeci Athenas vocant (...), id est,
Graeciae Graeciam. Ex Athenis omnes fere praestantissimi Oratores, optimi
Philosophi, excultissimi Poetae emicuerunt. Oxonium (Athenae nostrae
nobilissimae) vere (...) Kiriath Josh. 15.15. Vide Menochium de Repub. Heb. l.
7. c. 1. and in loc.
Sepher, Academia Angliae est (ut Drusii verbis Praefat. ad Proverb.
utar) atque adeo totius Europae ut vetustissima ita celeberrima and
amplissima. Bellositum Vide Wake Rege^ Platonicum. p. 3. and 21. Loci salubris
ratio in instituendis Vniversitatibus habenda est, Poetae musas in Helicone and
Pamasso amaenissimis rutissimisque montibus finxerunt. Middendorp. de Acad. l.
1: c. 2.
olim ob amaenitatem loci audiebat, at nuper propter fossas, aggeres,
propugnacula, copiasque militares, haud inconcinne sic nominares. Bibliothecam
Bodleianam non nemo Masonus libro. 10. de ministerio Anglicano.
Oxoniae decus, Angliae gemmam, exterorum stuporem, totiusque orbis terrarum
Phoenicem appellavit. Ex uno Collegio Mertonensi Vide Wake Rege^ Platonicum.
page 184. and 20^.
(bonorum ingeniorum feracissimo) Occhamus, Scotus, Bradwardinus, aliique
melioris notae Scholastici prodierunt. Faxit Deus ut Academia vestra aeternum
sit sanae doctrinae juxta ac pietatis fons limpidissimus, qui Ecclesiae and
Reipublicae hortos suavissime irriget. Inscribatur portis Collegiorum vestrorum
(ut Collegij Caii in florentissima Academia Cantabrigiensi) porta laboris,
porta virtutis, porta honoris. Inscribatur Musaeis vestris singulis, ut olim
Melchior Adam in ejus vira.
Vrsini Amice, quisquis huc venis,
Aut agito paucis, aut abi,
Aut me laborantem adiuva.


Bonorum artium studiis non solum immorari, verum etiam immori volupe sit.
Absit tamen Academici, imo procul a vobis absit, odas Pindaricas Psalmis
Davidicis, Thomam Aquinatem Apostolo Paulo praeferre. Quinimo -- Vos exemplaria
Sacra
Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.


Vos Oxonienses (qui linguarum callentissimi, inque artium and scientiarum
encyclopaedia versatissimi estis) Christi verbis alloqui liceat, Ioh. 5.39.
Vide Bezam in Epist. 1. Pauli ad Corinth. c. 11. verse. 6.
(...). Marcus Marinus in praefatione ad Arcam Noae dicit, Nullum Oratorem vel
Latinum vel Graecum Mose and Esaia dictionum puritate esse facundiorem, nullum
Poetam Davide and Jobo figuris in versu argutiorem, nullum Historiographum
Samuele fideliorem. Aureum erat dictum Comitis (supra aetatem docti) Pici
Mirandulae: Veritatem Philosophia quaerit, Theologia invenit, Religio possidet.
Augustinus Confess. l. 3. cap. 14.
Hortensium Ciceronis avide legebat, verum hoc solum (inquit ille) me in tanta
flagrantia refrangebat, quod nomen Christi non erat ibi. Alibi Conf. l. 8. c. 8.
sic Alipium suum affatur, Surgunt indocti and coelum rapiunt: and nos cum
doctrinis nostris sine cord, ecce ubi volutamur in Carne and sanguine.
Hieronymus de Nepotiano sic scribit, nempe quod lectione assidua and
meditatione diuturna pectus suum bibliothecam fecerat Christi. Epist. ad
Heliodorum Epitaphium Nepotiant.
Isaacum Casaubonum Londini narrare mihi memini (inquit Scultetus Observat. in
primam Epist. ad Tim.
) scilicet cum primum ingenii sui foetum Criticum, notas nimirum in Diogenem
Laertium, Patri suo ministro in Galliis Evangelico misisset, hoc ab eo responsi
tulisse, Mi Fili, laudo tuum studium: verum hoc scito: rem gratiorem te mihi
facturum, si vel unum dictum sacrae scripturae difficultatibus aliquibus
obstructum explicueris, quam si mill prophanorum Scriptorum loca depravata
correxeris.

Dignissima sane vox haec (ait Scultetus loco citato:) and Casaubono Patre and
homine Theologo: quam ego ita adprobo ut ab aliquot jam annis omnes fere curas
cogitationes que meas in illustrationem Novi Testamenti conferam. Hoc semper
sibi in animo haesisse professus est idem Isaacus Casaubonus audiente
Doctissimo Praesule Hiberniae aliis que quibus hanc narrabat historiam. Vereor
autem ne Ipse hujusmodi oneri impar plane sim, and vix aut ne vix pro dignitate
subjecti hoc argumentum tractaverim. Annotationes tamen has quales, quales, in
novum Testamentum tibi dicare visum est, Matter veneranda, cui me maxim
obaeratum esse non invitus fateor. Solvendo licet non sim, hunc tamen librum
tibi pro beneficijs tuis abunde in me cumulatis tanquam grati animi (...)
lubens offero. Viginti plus minus anni effluxerunt ex quo materiem hujus operis
colligere occaepi. Quicquid jam inde ab eo tempore memorabile, and ad
elucidandos textus Sacrae paginae utile, vel occurrebat in libris, vel audivi a
concionatoribus, ad singula Capita and versus annotavi, Adeo ut opus viginti
amorum aliquo saltem sensu appellari possit. Longum tempus insumpsi
exscribendis and ad praelum parandis hisce notationibus. Multos non
contemnendos Philologos Heinsius and Grotius in Novum testamentu^. Drusti
Praeterita and pars altera. Cameronis Myrothecium and Capelli Spicilegium.
Sculteti exercitationes Evangelicae. Delit. Evang. and observat. in Mat. Marc.
in Tim. and Tit. Casaub. Notae in Novum Testamentum. Lodovici de Dieu. Comment
in 4or. Evangelia and Act. Apost. and opera Posthuma. Fulleri miscel. Sac.
Mayeri Philol. Sac. Spanhem. Dub. Evang. Drusii. Observat. Sac. de quaesisis
per Epist Quaest. Heb. Parallela, de 3. Sectis Judaeorum, de Proverb. G^assii.
Philol. Sac. Grammat. and Rhet. Sac. Dilheri electa Sacra and Eclog e ad Novum
Testamentum. Caninii loci Novi Testamenti. Alardi Pathologia Sac. Chitomaeus de
Graeco-Barbaris N. T.
imo and Theologos, Interpretes tum Protestants, tum Pontificios consului, qui
vel in totum Beza, Piscator, Cartwrightus, Fulco, Quistorpius, a Lapide,
Novarinus, Menochius.
Testamentum, in quatuor Calvinus, Cartwrightus, Chemnitius, Polyc. Lyser. and
Gerh. Jonsenius. Brugensis, Maldonaetus.
Evangelia, in Acta Apostolorum, Epistolas omnes Calvinus, Estius, Vorstius.
Paulinas, aliasque Catholicas, vel in singulas, atque Pareus, Brightmannus,
Mede, Dent, Ribera, Gerhardus, Joannes de vado, Anglice Forth vel Foorde.
Apocalypsin scripserunt.

Quibus omnibus Calvinus Hoc unum asseverate pronuntiare non dubito
Institutionem Calvini and Commentarios in utriusque Testamenti tabulas a nullo
ad hunc usque diem scriptore coaequari potuisse. Alexandri Mori Calvinus. vide
plura ibid. Ego certe nullo negotio plurima loca ex Salmerone, Maldonato,
Fevardentio, and aliis Papistis Jesuitisque proferre possem, (habui enim
jamdudum ea annotata) in quibus tacito ac suppresso Calvini nomine, Calvini
expositiones pro suis verbo tenus lectoribus venditant. Grotii Epistola ad
Laurentium anatomizata. p. 19.
Interpres (...) palmam praeripere, and utramque (quod aiunt) paginam implere
videtur. Beza fertur omnes Graecos autores, sacros and prophanos evolvisse,
antequam Annotationes in Novum Testamentum auspicaretur. Voces sunt non paucae
in Novo Testamento (inquit Clarissimus Seldenus in Vxore Ebraica. l. 3. c. 23.)
veluti (...). id genus aliae, quarum interpretatio solummodo ex usu qui tunc
temporis inoleverat, nec aliunde rite petenda. Verim Epistolae modum excessi;
sereno vultu accipere digneris quaeso hoc munus literarium, and sicubi
erraverim clementer ignoscas, cum nullum unquam sine venia placuerit ingenium.
Academia vestra Scholae in Ecclesiae secundae Wake, Regem. Platon. Vide p. 2.
and Camdeni Britanniam in Comitatu Oxoniensi.
nomine olim inscripta, pietate and vera eruditione sit nulli secunda, hoc ex
animo precatur, summisque a Deo votis expetit

Tibi submississime devotus EDVARDUS LEIGH.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
READER,
THere is a threefold manner of citing Scripture out of the Old Testament used
by Christ, the Evangelists and Apostles, for either they say simply, it is
written, or it is said, Matthew. 4.4.7.10. Or it is written by the Prophet,
Laurentius in 1 Pet. 1.2.6. p. 122.
or in the Prophets, John 6.45. Or lastly it is written by the Prophet with the
name expressed, Esaias, Joel, etc. Mark 6.7. Acts 2.16. Neither is it strange,
that neither the Chapter nor verse is named by them, since this Arithmeticall
distinction both of Chapters, and specially of verses (which we have now in
our Bibles) is a very late invention. See my Annotations, and Beza on 1 Cor.
11.1.
This distinction of the Bible into Chapters and verses was made by men subject
to error, and therefore is found oftentimes irregular, separating that which
ought to follow in a continued thread, and confounding that which ought to be
distinguished. That note on Matthew. 5.26. the farthing was the least coin used
amongst the Jews, etc. that had from Mr Perkins on that place, yet how is that
the least, if a Mite be less by one half? Matthew. 12.33. Christ can moderate
the observing of the Sabbath, as he does the other Ceremonies of the Law, these
are Calvin's words, by which he seems to make the observing of the law a
Ceremony.
The Books of the New Testament are 27. the Chapters 260. I do often in these
notes relate the opinions and expositions of others, without passing my censure
upon them, as Luke 2.7. I relate Mr Cartwrights opinion though I approve it
not; for the original is most clear against it. And Mark 16.7. Peter is set
behind, etc is Mr Cartwrights observation, but not so solid; the marginall
notes and those in the text may perhaps therefore sometimes interfeire and
cross each other, as Mark 1.1. I say in the text (out of Gerhard) that Mark
relates Histories more largely, whereas the margent and the thing it self
speaks, that he related them more briefly, sometimes the several notes in the
text it self may seem repugnant, as Matthew. 24.14. I say from Calvin, that
Christ only affirms, that the Gospel shall be propagated to the utmost ends
of the earth before his last coming, whereas v. 3. I observe out of B. Downam.
that Christ's coming is not treated of till, v. 23. Luke 5.39. Old wines are
wont to be of a more gentle taste, etc. is contradicted by the margent and
experience.

I hope Divines will not censure me, as if I did Falcem in alienam messem
immittere. Dr Hall Practic. Cases of conscience resolved. lec. 3. case 10.
does determine it lawful for those that are not professd Divines, in some
cases to interpret the Scripture. I shall need the favorable construction of
Divines in the work it self, since it is the first of that nature wherein I
have adventured (though by the help of the best Commentators) purposely to
explain the sacred text. I desired (having had opportunity of consulting with
so many Critics for the accomplishing of my Critica Sacra) to make an Essay as
it were in this book, how useful such kind of learning was for the clearer
explication of the Scripture. I shall therefore much vary I believe in these
Annotations from those Englishmen and others, which have formerly expounded
either the New Testament or whole Scripture. In such a multitude of Collections
taken from several Writers, and many of them long since, there may be some
luxuriant branches, which might by Judicious Divines have been thought fit
perhaps to have been lopt off, could I have been so happy as to have had them
first diligently scanned by such.

Opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum. I shall willingly submit it to the
Judgment of experienced Divines, and such especially as are versed in this
kind of learning. The New Testament in the Greek is so little, that by one
hour in the morning and evening in one week (says Broughton Explicat. of the
Apocal.
) one may with ease and great delight read it over, yet this book (says he)
has above 4600. words. Pasor inlargeth the number; He says the Appellative
words are 4168. The proper names 474. The whole 5242. He reckons up seven
Dialects of the New Testament. Neither is it strange (says he) that the
footsteps of all dialects are to be found there, since the Apostles published
the Gospel, not only to the Jews, which used the Septuagint or Greek version
of the Old Testament, but also to other people differing in several Dialects.
The Attick Dialect, as it is the most elegant of all the rest in the Greek, so
it is most frequent in the New Testament. If Christians may by these
Annotations (which have cost me a great deal of pains) be furthered in the
study and knowledge of the Scriptures, I shall bless God for it, See my
Annotations on John 5.39.
and think my labor well bestowed. Austen l. 3. confess. c. 5.
while he was a Manichee slighted the Scripture for the plainness of the
style. Visa mihi est (says he) indigna scriptura quam Tullianae dignitati
compararem, the Scriptures seemed to me far unworthy to be compard to the
stateliness of the Ciceronian eloquence; but after he grew acquainted with
Christ, though he much delighted in reading Tullies Hortensius, yet this thing
only (says he) in such a heat of zeal took me off, l. 3. confess. c. 4.
that the name of Christ was not in it. I shall wish thee as much delight and
benefit in perusing my Book, as it has cost me pains, in collecting,
transcribing, enlarging, and reviewing it, and rest.

Thy Hearty well-wisher, EDWARD LEIGH.

The names of such Books as this Author has formerly written.
viz. 1. A Treatise of Divine Promises. 2. Analecta, or Observations on the
Twelve first Caesar's. 3. Critica Sacra on the Greek of the New Testament. 4.
Critica Sacra on the Hebrew of the Old Testament. 5. A Treatise of Divinity in
Three Books. 6. The Saints Encouragement in Evil Times.


ANNOTATIONS UPON THE NEW TESTAMENT.
The Gospel according to St MATTHEW. CHAP. I.
THE word Translated Gospel in Classical Authors signifies, first, Glad
Tidings, or tidings of some good. 1 Samuel 4.10. and 18.24, 26, 27. Secondly, a
reward given to him which brings gladsome news. Thirdly, Sacrifice or thanks
offered to God for some acceptable thing. In the Scriptures of the New
Teastament it signifies, First, the history of those things which Jesus both
did and taught, Mar. 1.1. Mat. 26.3. Secondly, Preaching or publishing of the
doctrine of Salvation. 1 Cor. 9.14. 2 Cor. 8.18. Romans 2.16. Thirdly, The glad
tidings of Salvation in and through Jesus Christ, Isa. 40.9. and 52.7. and
61.1. Romans 10.15.

(...), signifies a gift or tribute due for good tidings, whether as an
offering to the Gods, the Authors, or as a reward to men, the messengers and
bringers. M. Mede. See more there. 1 Cor. 9.14.

Matthew is the first of the Evangelists, because he wrote first, the others
Mark, Luke, Lucas Brugensis.
and John follow likewise according to the order of time in which they wrote.

Matthew proceeds in this manner: First, he describes the Nativity of Christ.
Secondly, his Baptism. Thirdly, his Temptation. Fourthly, his Doctrine.
Fifthly, his Miracles. Sixthly, his Passion. Seventhly, his Resurrection and
Ascension.

Matthew and Luke agree; First, In their general scope, which is to show that
Christ is the true Messiah coming from Abraham and David. Secondly, In the
subject matter or argument, which is to draw Christ's Genealogy. Thirdly, In
the persons of the first fourteen generations from Abraham to David, for the
same persons altogether are rehearsed by both the Evangelists.

They differ; First, In the form of the series, Matthew proceeds by
descending, Luke by ascending; Matthew includes their generations in certain
classes and generations, but not Luke. Secondly, Spanhem. Dub. Evangel. part
1. Dub. 19.
In the Head or original which Matthew makes in Abraham, Luke in Adam or God.
Thirdly, in the Order of the description, Matthew praeposeth the genealogy to
the conception and birth of Christ, Luke postposeth it.

VERSE I.

THe (...) Syrus paraphrastes simpliciter dicit, descriptio generationis.

Parum accommodate Munsterus vertit liber generationum. In tali enim
constructione Sepher non significat librum, sed catalogum, seriem, recensionem,
ut ex Genesis 5.1. patescit; nec libri totius argumentum Christi genealogia, sed
exiguae tantummodo eius particulae. In eodem significatu voce (...) utuntur hic
Hellenistae Dilher elect. l. 1. c. 9. Generationis id est majorum ex quibus
ortus est Christus, ut Tertul. vertit. Bez. vide Pis. in loc.


Booke] This first word of the first Evangelist, is a Greek word, but in
signification Hebrew. It is taken after the manner of the Hebrews, who Genesis
5.1. have Sepher tholedoth, the book of the generation, that is, a catalogue
or reckoning up, but Moses speaks of the catalogue of the generation of Adam,
Matthew of the book of the generation of Jesus: so that generation is taken
there actively, for them which Adam begot, that is, his posterity; here
passively, for those of which Christ is begotten, that is, for the Ancestors of
Christ.

Jesus] The name in Greek and Latin, imitateth the Syriac Ieshuang, it
signifies a Savior, as the Angel explains it. v. 21. To save sinners was the
maine design of Christ's coming into the world. He is first the alone Savior,
Acts 4.12. there is an utter inability in any other to save. Secondly, the
Almighty Savior, able to save. Isay 63. Heb. 7.25. Thirdly, it is his peculiar
office to save those which were appointed him of his Father. Fourthly, it is
for his glory that the Father has made him a Savior, John 5.22.24.

Christ] It is a greek word, and signifies anointed, and comprehends in it
all his Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, they being all anointed: He is
called (...) the anointed, by an excellency, 1 John 41. and 4.42.

Who is the son of David, the son of Abraham] These words may be taken two
ways; first, this may be the sense, the son of David, which was the son of
Abraham: Or thus, the son of David and Abraham, the conjunction and being
understood, and the sense then is, that Christ was the son of both. Jansenius
likes the former better.

Spanhem. Dub. Evangel. Facit autem Matthaeus Abrahami and Davidis specialiter
mentionem ob promissa illis facta; Abrahamo de populosa progeny, Davidi autem
de regni stabilitate, quorum utrumque in Christo eminenter impletum est.
Grotius in loc.
Matthew calls Christ the son of David and Abraham. 1 Because the most
special and frequent promises concerning the Messiah were made to Abraham and
David, begun to Abraham, Genesis 12.2, 3. repeated and confirmed to David. Psalm.
89.29. 2 Because these two were most in the esteem and speech of the Jew^s, as
men excelling among the rest, one among the Patriarchs, the other among the
Kings. 3 Because the Messiah among the Jews was thought to be the seed of
Abraham and the son of David according to the promises.

He premiseth David before Abraham, First because it is solemn in the
contexture of genealogies to ascend from the nearer to the more remote, as Luke
does c. 3. Secondly, for the better coherence of this verse with the other
following, and Maldonate observes that it is usual with the Hebrews to
postpose that from which they will begin what follows, as in 1 Genesis 1.
Thirdly, because indeed Christ was not the son of Abraham but by David, and
of him first and nearer than the other.

Verse. 5. All the women in Christ's Genealogy except his most holy Mother, have
a mark of infamy upon them, Notandum in genealogia Salvatoris nullam
sanctarum assumi mulierum sed eas quas scriptura reprehendit, ut qui propter
peccatores venerat, de peccatoribus nascens omnium peccata deleret. Hieron. in
loc.
Thamar, verse. 3. with whom Judas her Father in law had committed incest, Genesis
38.18. Secondly, Rachab, verse. 5. who was a common strumpet, Heb. 11.31.
Thirdly, Ruth, verse 5. she came of Moab, whom Lot begat of his own daughter,
Genesis 19.37. Fourthly, Vriahs wife, verse 6. with whom David committed adultery,
and for whom he was so plagued of God, 1 Samuel 12.9, 10.

Verse. 6. David the King] Only David is adorned with this Elogie, because in
his person God propounded a type of the Messiah to come. Calvin. Because a
promise of a perpetual kingdom was made to him, 2 King. 7.12. Maldonate.

David is here called the King, because he was the first King in the genealogy
of Christ, and because he was the first King among the people of Israel, in
whose seed the Kingdom long continued. Jan sen. comment. in concord Evang.

Verse. 8. Joram begat Ozias] It is manifest from 2 King. 8.24. and 11.2. 1 Chronicles. 3.11, 12. that Ioram begat Ahaziah, Ahaziah Ioaz, Ioaz Amazia, and
lastly Amaziah Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.1. who also is called Azariah. Here three
Kings, Ahaziah, Ioaz, and Amaziah are premised in this Genealogicall series; as
Grandchildren are called sons amongst the Hebrews, so grandfathers and
great-grandfathers, fathers, who may be thought to have begotten their
grandchildren and great grandchildren, viz. in a mediate generation. So
Christ v. 1. is called the son of David and Abraham, Spanhem dub. Evang.
so we are all called the sons of Adam, John 8.33.39. And those three are
pretermitted for the peculiar curse which God twice threatens to power on the
house of Ahab, 1 King. 21.21. and 2 Kings 9.8. which curse the Lord would
ratify here, by altogether rasing out these three Kings which were of the
posterity of Ahab, (for Ahaziah was begot by Ioram of Athaliah the daughter of
Ahab) out of the catalogue of Christ's progenitors. Or these three Kings may be
omitted, Annotations in folio.
because Matthew intended to keep within the compass of fourteen generations
here as well as afterward.

Verse. 11. By the first Iechonias in the 11 verse. is understood Iehoiachim the
son of Josiah, who also is called Eliakim, and he was either of two names and
called also Iechonias which is not unusual in the holy story, or it may be
said the name Iehoiakim is rendered of Matthew per euphoniam, Spanhemitis.
Gomarus. vide de Dieu. et Pisc. in loc. Josias tanquam avus nepotem mediante
patre Iechoniam gignere dicitur, genuit enim Josias Ioiachimum, Ioiachim vero
Iechoniam, cujus fratres non leguntur quidem germani extitisse, sed
intelliguntur patrui atque agnati ex Iosia rege descendentes. Iun. in Parallel.
Iechonias. There seem to be but 13. in the last generation, unless he that
was last named in the second be again to be rehearsed the first in that last,
as some reverend Divines think, viz. Iechonias the father, and also the son,
which both are to be reckoned in the genealogy, and are called Iehoiachim and
Iehoiachin, 2 Chronicles: 36.8, 9.

Verse. 16. Quest. Why is the genealogy of Christ drawn from Matthew here,
verse. 16. to Joseph, and not rather to Mary, Spanhemius.
when yet Christ neither was the son of Joseph nor descended from him. The
common answer both of the ancient and modern interpreters (which Augustine
propounds and defends, Lib. 2. Cons. Evang.) is this, that it was not the
custom of the Jews to rehearse a catalogue of generations by women, Number.
1.26. Hence it is an ancient maxim among them, familia matris non familia.

Verse. 17. From David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen
generations.] Iun. in paral. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. praelect. 8. er alij.
There were indeed 17. generations from David to the Captivity, but for
memories sake three are omitted, that the same even number might be kept in all.

Verse. 18. She that is betrothed is counted for a wife. Deuteronomy. 22.24.
Espoused] Contracting is an ancient and commendable custom, see Genesis 19.8.14.
Deuteronomy. 22.22. the very Heathens had their espousalls, Judge. 4.1. Placuit
despondi, nuptiis hic dictus est dies, says he in Terence. Came together] The
word which the Evangelist uses, either modestly signifies a (...) de mutuo
conjugij usu honest dicitur ut 1 Cor. 7.8. Cui respondet Latina vox, coire sed
minus verecunda.
lying together, or is simply taken for to dwell together, that the husband and
wife make a house and family, so the sense shall be that the Virgin was not yet
delivered from her parents into the hand of her husband, but lived under their
custody. Calvin.

V. 18. With Child] Word for word, (...), ut Iud. 13.5.

Pro eo quod Evangelista Matthaeus dicit, inutero habebit, in Propheta Isa. 7.
scriptum est in utero accipiet: sed propheta quia futura praedicit, significat
quid futurum sit, and scribit, accipiet: Evangelista quiae non de futuro, sed
de praeterito narret historiam, mutavit accipiet, and posuit, habebit, Qui enim
habet, nequaquam accepturus est. Hieron. in loc. See Luke 1.35


having in her e belly, as ver. 23. of the Holy Ghost.] Christ was not
begotten spermatice, not of the substance, but of the power of the Holy Ghost.
He had his principium formale from him, and passivum from the Virgin Mary.

Verse. 19. He was a just man, and therefore not willing to accompany with a
defiled woman as he might suppose, but gentle also, See in Beza the difference
between divortium and repudium.
and so chose rather to put her away privily, than to cause her to be stoned as
the Law was, Deuteronomy. 22.21. After marriage he could not have done this, but must
have given her a bill. He would put her away because he was just; and privily
because he would not traduce her; He would put her away, that he might
satisfy his own conscience; and privily, that he might consult for his wives
credit. Lucas Brugensis comment. in 4. Evangelia.

Verse. 20. But while he thought on these things] In the Greek, and as he had
these things in his mind. For that which is conceived in her is of the Holy
Ghost] Angelus docebat Iosephum numinis esse quod ille putaverat criminis.
August. Epist.

Verse. 21. Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sinnes] To save from their sins is to deliver a sinner from all that
hurt and mischief which sin would bring, viz. 1 from the guilt of it, by
which it defiles the conscience, Certum est illudnomen Inau^s Jesus, a Graecis
Latinos, ab Hebraeis Graecos accepisse. Maldonatus in loc. See 2 Samuel 3.18.
and makes it to accuse, condemn and terrify, and causes it contrarily to
acquit and comfort. 2 From the punishments of sin, that is, from all evils
in this life so far as they be punishments, that is, testimonies of Gods
hatred against the sinner, and from the eternal misery of Hell and the loss
of heaven, making a man again an heir of the kingdom of heaven. 3 From the
dominion and tyranny of sin upon the will, by which one is a slave to it. 4
From the stain and filth of sin, and makes the soul clean and amiable in
the sight of God, the filthiness of sin being taken away.

Verse. 22. Of all the writers of the Old Testament the Prophet Esaias has the
honor to be the first that is vouched in the New, and of all places this has
the honor to be the first of all in the first Evangelist and in his first
chapter.

(...) Virgo illa. Genesis 3.15.
Verse. 23. A Virgin] That virgin (...), that famous Virgin foretold, Isay 7.14.
and selected from eternity, whose seed was to break the Serpents head.

They shall call] So the Vulgar, Syriac, and Ethiopic read it, the Arabic in
the same sense passively, He shall be called, Beza. Vocabis, Thou shall call,
Vide miscell Drusij cent. 1. c. 72.
The right of giving the name, (which rather agreed to the Father, and not to
the mother, but by his Genesis 35.18. Luke 1.60.62. Iun. Esa. 7.14. renders it,
vocabis O virgo.
consent) is here given to the mother, by which it is signified that this son
as he was man was without Father. But in the 21. v. (as de Dieu. notes) the
giving the name seems to be ascribed to Joseph.

Nobiscum carnis similitudine, nobiscum utilitate. Bern.
Emanuel] Which being interpreted, is God with us, that is, in our nature, as
Cartw. or graciously present with us, as Calvin. Chemnit.

Verse. 25. Helvidius would gather from these two words until, and first borne,
that Mary after had children by her husband. The word until in Scripture is
taken for never. Genesis 28.15. Primogenitus est non post que^ alij, sed ante quem
nullus alius genitus est. Pareus Chemnit.
He is called the first borne in Scripture, which first opens the womb,
whether others follow or no. Yet it is the ancient and common opinion of the
Church (says Pareus) that Mary always remained a virgin, which we willingly
follow.

(...), Illum promogenitum, that first borne, to show that Christ is not called
the first borne of Mary, but absolutely the first borne, because he is that
famous first borne, viz. the first begotten of all creatures as Paul has it,
that is, begotten before the Creation of all things. Iansen. comment. in
concord. Evang.

CHAP. II.
Verse 1. BEthlehem] signifies domus panis, the house of bread, so called from
its fertility, the bread of Life is found in Bethlehem the house of bread. of
Judea,] that is which is in the tribe (...) of Judah. Judge. 19.18. To
distinguish it from the other Bethlehm in the tribe of Zebulon. Josh. 19.15.

Herod] the Great, King of Judea. Luke 1.5. called Ascalonita from his Country,
son of Antipater. Herod which killed John Baptist in the 14. Chap. was called
Antipas and was his Son. Herod the killer of James Acts 12. was named
Agrippa, he was the grandchild of this Herod the Great by his son
Aristobulus.

Ascalonita necat pueros, Antipa Johannem,
Agrippa Jacobum, Claudens in carcere Petrum.
Wise men from the Terra unde venerant Magi, non Coeli regio hac voce
denotatur, inquit Grotius. Quot fuerint nu^ero, quia non exprimit evangelista,
nescire praestat quam temere pro certo asserere quod dubium est. Calvin. Magus
vox non Latina, a magis, nec Graeca, aut Hebraea, sed Persica, ut volunt, fig.
sapientem: Quos enim Graeci Philosophos, Assyrij Chaldaeos, Indi
Gymnosophistas, eos Persae magos proprie vocabant. Pareus. Non parva quaestio
est, quales fuerunt hi magi. Quidam n. maleficos fuisse autumant, alij
sapientes, plerique etiam reges, Evangelista eos reges non vocat, vocaturus ut
apparet, si tales fuissent, cum id ad gloriam Christi non parum pertinuisset.
Sed nec veterum interpretum quisquam hos magos reges vocat. Iansen. Comment, in
Concord. Evang.
East] Three say the Papists, because they offered gold, frankincense and
myrrh, but they were commonly offered by them all, not every one severally his
proper gift. Some make gold a symbol of Christ's kingdom, frankincense of his
Priesthood, myrrh of his burial, but that is not solid; it was solemn with
the Persians to have some present in their hand when they saluted their Kings,
and they chose those three as being the principal commodities of the East,
Genesis 43.12.

Verse. 2. Where is he that is borne King of the Jewes] Some think a King borne
here is secretly opposed against a King made or created, but that is too
subtle, they mean that this King was lately borne and remains yet an
infant, to distinguish him from the King that was at his full growth and then
governed.

Which words may be understood two ways; first simply, that the sense should
be, Where is that King of the Jews who is now borne. Secondly, they may show
that that King which they seek for is a King borne; that is, not chosen by men
for a King and anointed in his fit time, but who was at his Birth the King of
the Jews, to distinguish him from other Kings of the Jews. Jansen.

His Starre] Vide Spanhen. Dub. Evang. part 2. Dub. 27. and 28.
Origin says it was a comet, Chrysostom and Theophil. an Angel, Hoc est
certam illam and infignem Stellam. Al^rdi. Pathologia N. T.
others say it was a wonderful meteor, some say it was an extraordinary
star, wonderfully made by God. For other stars in their daily motion move
from East to West, this moved from North to South, from Jerusalem to Bethlehem.
It was seen in the day, other stars are then obscured by the Suns
splendour. These Astrologers (says Chrysostom) are taught here the truth by
this new star, which had abused the old stars to all impiety.

And are come to worship him] The Greek verb (...) is either derived a moto
galero, vel ab osculando, vel a canibus, from a hat moved, from kissing, or
dogs, (...) is a hat, (...) is to kiss, (...) are dogs, by it is signified
the gesture of low veneration when one casts himself at another feet, as
fawning dogs do. Lucas Brugensis.

Verse. 6. And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah] That is part of Judah.
Propheta Bethleemam minimam appellans indicat, illam quantitate and angustijs,
opibus and splendore minimam. Matthaeus vero non minimam appellans intelligit
illam honor and existimatione non esse minimam. Matthew. 6. Cartw. historia
Christi in 4. Evagel. (...)) Nihil hic Contra mentem prophetae, si verba ejus
legas per interrogationem, parva es ut sis in Chiliadibus Juda? Nam quid hoc
aliud est, quam quod Evangelista posuit, nequaquam minima es. Sic Apostolus
expressit locum Davidis, An est intelligens? (...). Romans 3.11. Alij aliter haec
conciliant, nec in ullo loco laboratum magis, mihi simplicissinam videtur quod
posui. Atque haud scio an hic locum habere debeat illa quorundam excusatio
quod, quae prius minima fuerat, postea ex eventu haud minima evaserit, quum
Matthaeus ipsum prophetam adducat suis verbis loquentem. Sic enim inquit,
scriptum est per prophetam. Aut si haec dicantur in persona Pharisaeorum, ne
sic quidem, vereor, curiosis ingenijs fiet satis. Nam non legimus usquam
notatos Pharisaeos, quod Prophetarum verba immutarint aut corruperint. Drusij
not, in paral. sacra.
Art nor the least] Object. The Prophet Micah says that Bethlehem is little,
that it should be accounted amongst the Governors in Judah, Matthew on the
other side extols its dignity, as if, it should be one of the chief, not the
least, that is by a miosis, the most excellent. Answer. The Prophet (Christ
being not yet borne) called it least in respect of outward splendor, and
earthly riches, yet he seems to signify, that this town otherwise but
little, obscure and base, should be honored and made famous by the birth of
the Messiah, now Matthew looked to the event of the prophecy, so it is not
little in esteem.

Verse. 10. They rejoiced with exceeding great joy] There is a three fold
emphasis. 1. An Attick elegancie to rejoice with joy (...), as (...). Iliad. ^.
the Latins say, servire servitutem, 2. Great joy. 3. Exceeding great joy.

Verse. 12. Vide Canin. loc. novi Testamenti and Appendicem de Dieu.
Being warned] having been warned (...).

They departed another way] Greek, They passed secretly by another way, as v.
14. and departed, Greek passed secretly.

Verse. 18. In Rama was there a voice heard] Vid. Spanhem, Dub. Evang. partem
secunda^ Dub. 82.83.84. Dr. Clerk.
Rama was far from Bethlehem, which made St. Jerome make Rama an Appellative,
In excelso vox audita est. The voice of the dying children and the crying
parents was heard on high, reached round about throughout all Ephrata. Three
Synonima, as with the Prophet, lamentation, weeping, bitternesses.
Lamentation, weeping, and great mourning] If we observe this place, we shall
confess with Jerome that Matthew in relating this testimony, neither exactly
followed the Hebrew nor the Septuagint. Drus. not. in parallel. Sac.

Per Rachel. (...) intelligit matres Bethlehemiticas in vicinia sepulchri
Rachelis habitantes. Piscat. (...) and noluit consolari. Quo loco consolari
accipit vulgatus pro consolationem accipere sive admittere, quo sensu. Genesis
chap. 37. v. 35. extat de Iacobe vicem Iosephi dolente. Noluit consolationem
accipere, ut ibidem vulgata versio habet. Passive hoc dicitur Ier. cap. 31. v.
15. Comprobant haec Scriptorum Testimoniis. Dieter. Antiquit. Bibl. part. 1.
Rachel weeping for her children] That is, the mothers which inhabited those
parts where the sepulcher of Rachel was.

Verse. 22. He turned aside] Greek he passed secretly.

Si ullus locus in toto novo Testamento Calumniae and cavillis hostium
Evangelii opportunus videtur, and Lectori attento crucem figere potest,
fatendum hunc prae omnibus alijs and majori specie urgeri, and difficilem pati
solutionem, Span. dub. Evang. Part. 2 Dub. 87. Vide plura apud Spanhem. loco
citato and Dub. 88.89.90.91.92.93.94. et de Dien. Append. Sculter. Exercit.
Evang. l. 1. c. 60.
23. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets] By which of
the Prophets was this name given to Christ, for we find no such testimony?
Chrysostom and Theophylact, because they cannot undo this knot, cut it thus,
saying that many of the books of the Prophets are lost. Bucer thinks that
that place, Judges 13.5. is here noted. Sampson was a most excellent figure of
Christ as he was a Redeemer, and did most notably represent him in his death
wherein he killed more than in his life, and the book of Judges was composed
by diverse Prophets. Calvin, Beza, and Mr. Perkins, do incline to this opinion,
Causabon in his exercitat. Iunius in his paralells and analys. in Number.
Piscator, Dr. Tailor, Mr. Dod say, that Matthew has respect to those places,
Esaias 11.1. and Zach. 6.12. a branch, in Hebrew Netzer, therefore Weemes in his
Christian Synagogue says, these words in Matthew, should be interpreted, he
shall be called a flower or branch.

He shall be called a Nazarene] The Papists are of opinion, that our Savior
wore long hair, and so picture him, because, we read here he was a Nazarite,
or rather a Nazarene, as with Beza our best Translators read it, by education,
not by profession and institution, in regard of the place where he was educated
and conversed, not any vow whereunto he was bound, Numb. 6.4. He drank wine
and touched the dead. He observed not the rites and orders of the Nazarites,
but he was the truth and substance of that order, for in him was fully
accomplished that holiness which was figured by that order, he was perfectly
severed from all sin and pollution.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. IOhn] signifies the grace of God, for he did preach the grace of God
in Christ then exhibited. The Baptist] so named to distinguish him from John
the Apostle, and because He first administered baptism the Sacrament of the new
Testament. Vel quod primus baptizare coepit, vel quod Christu^ baptizaverit.
Maldonatus, vide Bezam.
In the wildernesse] A place wherein we find six Cities with their villages,
John 15.61. but called a wilderness because thinly inhabited.

Verse. 2. For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand] That is the Church of the Old
Testament is now abolished, and the Church of the New Testament is ready to
take place by Christ's coming, and therefore repent and amend.

Verse. 3. The voice of one crying] or, bellowing like an Ox. Rollock
observes, that John Baptist entered upon his calling in the year of Jubilee,
which used to be proclaimed by a Crier with the sound of a trumpet, and he is
called the voice of a crier in allusion thereunto.

Illud observatu non indignum, factum divina providentia ut qui veniebat in
Spiritu Eliae, Elias propterea a Prophetis nominatus, etiam habitu exteriori
Eliam referret. Grotius in loc. vide Sculter. exercit Evangel. li. 1. c. 15.
Verse. 4. Locusts] have their name in Greek ((...)) from the tops of the ears
of Corn which they fed upon as they fled. The question needs not to be
whether these be man's meat or no? it is certain that the Jews might eat them
by the law of Moses, Levit. 11.22. Pliny l. 1. c. 29. speaks of them,
Matthiolus upon Dioscorides says, this was the reason, why John Baptist made
use of them, as a strict observer of the Law; they are eaten in the East and
else where.

Verse. 4. In regionibus Calidioribus tanta apum Copia esse solet, ut cum
alvearibus Capi non possint in sylvas avolent, and aut in arborum truncis, aut
in rupium fissuris mellificent, vidi ego in Boetica homines pauperes, qui hoc
ex sylvis colligendo, vendendoque melle quaestum factitarent. Id in Palaestina
multum fuisse credendum est, and quia calida and fertilis erat regio, and quia
Deus saepe vocat terram lacte and melle manantem, and quia ex facto Ionathae,
manifestum est mel a rupibus revera fluxisse. Maldonatus. Vide Scult. Delit.
Evang. c. 9.
Wild honey]

Verse. 6. Confessing their sins] The confession of the Converts was voluntary,
not constrained. 2. In general, not of every particular sin. 3 Public, not
into the ears of a Priest.

Verse. 7. When he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his baptisme]
Two kinds of men which were of great authority among the Jews, with whom
Christ had perpetual enmity, as also with the Scribes, 5 Cha. 20. and 16.21.
and 22.23. and 23.13.

Generation of Vipers] The whole body and corporation of them was full of
deadly poison. It is an allusion (say some) to Genesis 3.15. Progeniem viperarum
nominat potius quam viperas ut toti ordini exprobret virulentam malitiam, neque
enim paucos tantum illos qui aderant sed totum corpus damnari voluit, ac si
diceret, utramque factionem non nisi serpents gignere. Calvin. Chrysostom. Opere
imperfecto. Vide Spanhem. Dub. Evang. part 3. Dub. 30. Viperae venenum in
lingua, pellis speciosa. Alluditur simul ad locum Geneseos, ubi diabolus
serpens Grotius.
Where the wicked are called the seed of the Serpent, Chemnit. Others allege
many properties of the Vipers. 1. He has his Teeth covered and buried in his
gummes, so that one would think it a harmless Beast and that it could not
bite. Viperae dentes gingivis conduntur, Pliny. l. 11. c. 37. So also have
these deceitful Hypocrites their conveiances wherein they so cunningly couch
their wickedness, that one would take them of all others to be most innocent,
and to this appertains the similitude of our Savior, Luke 11.44.

Secondly, The nature of Vipers is such, that when they have bitten a man, they
presently run to the water, but if they find not the water they die: so He
calls them Vipers who committing deadly sins did run to baptism, as Vipers
to the water to avoyde the danger of death.

Thirdly, it is the nature of Vipers to make themselves a passage through their
mothers bowels, (though some deny this) and therefore they are called Viperae,
quasi vi partae; so the Jews daily persecuting the Prophets did break through
their mother the Synagogue, Cant. 1.6.

Fourthly, The Viper is very specious and beautiful without, as it were
painted, but full of poison within; so the Pharisees made a show and
ostentation of holiness, but had the poison of malice in their hearts.

Verse. 8. Meet for repentance] It is a metaphor taken from trees transplanted
or grafted into other stocks, they must bring forth a new fruit.

Verse. 9. God is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham.]
Spanhem. Dub. Evang. part. 3. Dub. 35.
The Baptist mentioned stones either because there was plenty of them in that
place where he taught and baptized, as the similies and examples that Christ
brings are often fetched from things obvious, or he puts a definite thing, for a
thing indefinite, stones, that is, things unfit for such a matter, as Luke
19.40. or else alludes to Esaias 51.2.

Verse. 10. Now] That light is come into the world, also] this implies something
before of the same kind, axe,] some would have that to be Gods own immediate
hand, but it is here an instrument, the Roman Empire.

Laid] A metaphor taken from the custom of men which cut with an axe, they
usually lay the axe at the place where they would strike, to guide their
stroke; God to prevent his.

The roote] Some would have Abrah. to be the root, others Christ, rather the
Jewish State and Church, some say Gods presence in his ordinances, the civil
government, and saints.

Therefore] After so many warnings and convictions. Tree] The Nations of the
Jews.

Every tree which brings not forth] Not that has or will bring forth, but
which does not bring forth, that is, is not in a growing, bearing, thriving
way; Fructus a fruor.
it is not enough to bud or blossom, but must make it out to the use of the
husbandman. Fruit,] not leaves or blossoms. Good] Answerable to the soil, the
purpose God has ordained it for, and his care and cost bestowed on it. Is cut
down] As sure to be as if it were done already. Pareas. Exo. 3.5. Josh. 5.15.
Maldonate has both those expositions. Vide Drusij. Adag. Class. l. 3. Solvere
calceu^ vilissimum ac maxim despicax est ministerium. Aug. and Theoph. vide
Bezam.
Cut downe] by Gods hand, judiciously, and efficatiously, though they deserve
it meritoriously. Cast into the fire,] which is proper for a barren tree, never
to be plucked out again.

Verse. 11. Whose shoes I am not worthy to beare] That phrase is taken from the
custom of the Hebrews, who being to enter into the more holy place laid by
their shoes as the Turks and Africans do now; those which were more noble,
had a boy who carried their shoes when they laid them by. The other
Evangelists have expressed it in a different phrase, Mark 1.7. Luke 3.16. John
1.26, 27. And they all allude to the form of the shoe, for in the hotter
countries, the shoes had soles only below, they were tied above, so that they
were to be loosed in their bonds, before they could be pulled off.

Verse. 11. Baptize] That is, drown you all over, dip you into the ocean of his
grace, opposite to the sprinckling which was in the Law, with the Holy Ghost,
and with fire] That is with the Holy Ghost, which is fire, et is taken not
copulative, but exegetice. The Aethiopians (which we call Abisseni) take this
word properly, See Genesis 3.16. Hoc est Spiritu sancto igneo, Spiritu Sancto qui
est ignis, id est, qui est similis igni. est Hendyadis. Cornel. a Lap. Vide
Scultet. Exercit. evang. l. 1. c. 35.
and mark their children as we do our beasts with an hot iron when they
baptize them. It must be expounded metaphorically, or rather prophetically
with reference (say some Cameron and Mr. Bedford on the Sac. part. 1. chapter 2.
) to the History of the fiery cloven tongues, the visible representation of the
Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. Act. 2.2, 3. or to Esaias 6.6, 7. (says
Spicileg. in. loc.
Capellus) where one of the Seraphims is said to have taken a burning coal
from the Altar, and with it to have touched the lips of the Prophet, by which
coal the Holy Ghost was signified, or his most efficacious force of purging,
and by those words thy iniquity is taken away, inward baptism (which wholly
consists in the purgation and expiation of sins) is noted.

Glass. The. Sac. Tract. 1. c. 11.
Verse. 12. In which Allegorical speech by the floor, the Church of Christ
dispersed through Iudaea and the whole world is understood; by the fan the
means by which Christ separates believers from the hypocrites and wicked,
which are preaching of the Gospel, afflictions, and the last judgment; by the
purging of the floor, the action of separating; by the wheat, the believers;
by the chafe, Impij and damnandi vocantur paleae, quia ut paleae sunt
levissimi, vilissimi and ad nihil fere utiles nisi ad ignem. a Lapide
the wicked; by the garner, the kingdom of heaven and eternal life; by
unquenchable fire, the torments of hell, Winnowing signifies the temptations of
Satan, Luke 12.31.

Here the error of Origin is condemned, who thought that the torments of hell
would not be pepetuall, but should end after the great year of Plato, in which
all things shall be renewed, it is unquenchable fire. He alludes to the 66 of
Esaias 24. and 33.14.

Verse. 14. But John forbad him,] He earnestly forbad him, as the (...), Obnixe
prohibuit. (...) in compositione intendit significationem.
Geeke word signifies.

Verse. 16. Apertio caelorum pro manifestatione gloriae Coelestis interdum
accipitur, hic vero etiam significat visibilis Coeli cissuram ita ut perspicere
potuit Johannes aliquid planetis and astris superius; neque ^. alius potest
esse sensus verborum Marci cum dicit eum vidisse diffindi coelos. Calvinus.
Videtur respicere atque alludere ad locum qui est Proverb. 8.30.
It is most likely it was a real body, and corporal dove, for Luke adds in
a bodily shape. The word likeness is not to be referred to the Dove, but to
the Spirit, which manifested his presence in this likeness. Secondly, that
phrase does not always note likeness and similitude only, but verity and
identity, John 1.14. Phil. 2.7. Mahomet, that wicked impostor, and ape of
Christ, imitated this. For that he might persuade his followers that the Holy
Ghost was familiar with him, he by often feeding a Dove brought her to fly over
his head, and to pick grains of corn out of his ear.

Verse. 17. In whom] Not with, or by, or through whom; but a larger preposition
than them all, which signifies two things: first, that God is well pleased
with Christ. Secondly, in and through him with others.

CHAP. IV.
The weapons used in this combat by Christ art partly offensive, the sword of
the Spirit, it is written, partly defensive, which are principally three
correspondent to the number of our three mortal enemies, the World, Flesh, and
the Devil. He uses the wilderness against the temptations of the world,
fasting against the temptations of the flesh, and prayer against the
temptations of the Devil.
Verse 1. THen] This word has reference to the end of the former chapter, so
soon as Christ was solemnly inaugurated into his Office, and proclaimed from
heaven to be the sole Doctor and Prophet of Gods Church, even then immediately
without any delay was he driven forth, as Mark says, 1.12.

Wildernesse] The great wilderness is here meant says Chemnitius; whose
reasons are these. First, The other Deserts are circumscribed by some addition,
as the wilderness of Iudaea, Ziph, Maon, the great wilderness is simply so
called without any addition.

Verse. 2. Matthew expressly makes mention of nights, lest it should be
thought to be such a fast, as that of the Jews, who fasted in the day, and did
eat at the evening and in the night. Chemnit.
He would not extend his fast above the term of Moses and Elias, lest he
should have seemed to have appeared only, and not to have been a true man.

Verse. 3. It is probable (says Maldonate) that he appeared in a humane shape,
because he spoke to Christ of many things, and because he sought to be
worshipped.

The Devil is called the Tempter because he gives himself to tempt all men,
by all means, at all times. Perkins.
Command that these stones be made bread] The sense of the words is, since thou
see thy self to be forsaken of God, necessity compells that thou should
provide for thy self, therefore command that these stones be made bread.

Verse. 4. That is, that special and powerful word, Vide Pisca. in loc.
whereby he appoints and commands it to nourish us, the word of command
and benediction.

Verse. 5. The Devil (says Chemnitius) appeared in some visible and corporal
shape to Christ, as the words of the Evangelists intimate: The tempter coming
to him, took him with him, and get thee away Satan. Calvin and Scultetus think
rather it was in a vision; but first then Satan's persuasion to Christ to cast
himself down could have been no temptation. Secondly, Christ might be led
of the Devil the ordinary way from the wilderness to Jerusalem, so much the
words will bear. Thirdly, the Devil might carry Christ's body really through
the air, Piscator, Perkins, Dike, Tailour. In the fifth verse the words
following confirm the real transportation, for it is said the Devil set him
on a pinnacle of the temple, therefore having power to set him there he might
carry him thither; besides the word signifies he set him down, who had
formerly taken him up.

Verse. 7. It is written againe] Not that another Scripture opposes the true
meaning of the Psalm, but he opposes it against, the corruption of the Devil
which he made by mutilating the words of the Psalmist, or rather by depraving
them, says Delit. Evang. c. 30.
Scultetus.

Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God] He is said to tempt God, who not
ordinarily but presumptuously without necessity seeks an experiment of the Si
locum Deuteronomij cum historijs antecedentibus, and cum Psalm. 95.8. Conferas,
apparebit (...) proprie hic esse Dei potentiam aut providentiam experiri, cum
satis magna jam ejus documenta apparuerint, Sic Act. 15.10. Grotius.
power, wisdom, goodness, and truth of God.

Verse. 10. Get thee hence Satan] Signifying thereby not only his abhorring of
that sin, but also the danger of the assault by the world.

For it is written] All the Scriptures which Christ as yet cited, he brings out
of Deuteronomie, After the manner of the Jews, who were especially versed in
that as an epitome of the whole law. Lucas. Brugensis.

Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve] By
worship is properly signified bodily worship in a bodily gesture, the meaning
then is, thou shall with thy body adore the Lord, for so it is suitable to
Satan's demand. The word serve] Signifies all worship due to God both inward
and outward. onely] This word appertains to both the members, and so to the
whole sentence, Vbi fatetur Iansenius quod res est, in primae etiam part
intelligi debere vocem solam: Alioqui tentatori ceu ad rationem deposcentis
minus apt respondisset Christus. Down Diat. de Antich. vide Piscar. v. 2.8.
for else there should be no direct denial of Satan's temptation, requiring
only the former and not the latter.

Out of the words of Moses, that we must serve God, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Christ makes
collection that we must serve God alone, teaching us to conclude in like case,
that if the Scripture do show, that there is not any other power of conversion
besides the Spirit of God, then where it is said the Lord converteth or
allureth Japheth, it is there meant, that the Lord only converteth and
allureth, and none other.

Verse. 11. Angels ministered unto him] Non tanquam misericordes indigenti, sed
tanquam subjecti omnipotenti. Augustine. Hom. 8.

Verse. 18. As he walked by the Sea of Galilee] It was not properly a Sea, but
according to the phrase of the Hebrews, who call all great meetings of waters
by that one name. The River Jordan falling into this flat, makes sixteen miles
long and some six in breadth, which was famous for fish though of ordinary
kinds, yet of an extraordinary taste and relish.

Verse. 19. Follow me] (...) Come and follow me.

V. 23. Vox haec (...) tam late patet quam Hebraea Gnedah, aut Latina
conventus. Omnis enim hominum Coetus qui ex instituto est sive judicioru^, sive
publici consilij, sine rerum sacrarum gratia, hoc nomine appellatur. Deinde
vero coepit and ad loca transferri, in quibus isti conventus habebantur, ut
Luc. 17.5. Hic sive Coetum, sive locum in quo lex divina exponi solebat
intelligas, nihil refert. Ne Christianos quidem ab hoc vocabulo abhorruisse
apparet. Iac. 2.2. Grotius.
Teaching in their Synagogues] The word (...) is usual with the Septuagint
Interpreters in the old Testament. In its first original it is a general word
signifying the very act of gathering together. Genesis 1.9. and 28.3. Esaias 19.16.
Ier. 44.15. and 50.9. Ezeck. 38.4. But in special it is used of the Church of
Israel, Exodus 16.3. Levit. 14.3. In the same manner it is used by the
Evangelists and Apostles in the new Testament, for the gathering together, viz.
of the Jewish people, as in this place, and metonymically for the place in
which the Jews met every Sabbath to hear the Law and the Prophets read, Luke
7.5. Acts 15.21. and 18.7. Gerh. loc. commun. de ecclesia. c. 1.

The Gospel of the kingdome] Because it declares both the nature of this
kingdom, and the way leading to it. Heron.

Verse. 24. And his fame went throughout all Syria] And the fame of him went
into all Syria. Possessed with Devills] Greek, vexed with Devils.

Lunatickes] Vel quod interlunio nati comitiali morbo laborare soleant, vel
quod epileptici ad conversiones lunares paroxysmis corripiantur. Scultet.
exercit. Evang. l. 2. c. 12. vide Fulleri miscell. Sac. l. 2. c. 17.
They are called Lunatickes in whom the force of the disease increases or
decreaseth after the inclination of the Moon, as those that have the falling
sickness.

CHAP. V.
LInacer reading these fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of Matthew, burst out
into this protestation, Either these sayings are not Christ's, or we are not
Christians.

In this Chapter, and the two next, is contained Christ's Sermon in the Mount,
preached to his Disciples and others that were converted unto him among the
multitude. This Sermon may be called the Key of the whole Bible; for here
Christ opens the sum of the Old and New Testament. Christ quotes and
repeates whole sentences out of it else where, Luke 11.2. and 12.22.13. chapter
14.14. chapter 34.16. chapter 18. This Sermon is the same with that which is set down
by Luke 6.20. For they have one beginning and one matter, the same order of
preaching and the same conclusion. Luke relates things more briefly, Matthew
more fully, Chemnitius, Calvin, Perkins, though Piscator and others be of
another opinion.

Our Savior shows here, that the happiness which by him they were to
expect, did consist in spiritual grace and eternal glory, the one being
beatitudo viae, our happiness in this life, the other beatitudo gloriae, our
happiness in the life to come.

Verse. 1. The Mountaine] By the highness of the place Lex quae in monte lata
fuerat, in monte exposita fuit. Heinsius in exercitat. Dominus ad montana
conscendit, ut turbas ad altiora secum trahat. Hieronymus in loc.
declaring that He would deliver nothing common or low. Eras.

And when he was set] It belongs to the Teacher to sit in a chair or higher
place, that he may be heard from far. Session also notes the tranquillity of
Christ, for the body sitting, the Spirit is quieted, and is apt to meditate in,
and teach divine things. Corn. a Lapide.

Verse. 2. Haec potius vis est hujus generis loquendi, ut qui sermones mente^
conceptos proferant, ij dicantur aperto ore loqui ea quae mente prius
conceperant alij^ loquenda. Rainold. de lib. Apoc.
And he opened his mouth, and taught them] Theophylacts note is witty. He makes
a question whether the first word be not superfluous or no, for how could
Christ teach but he must open his mouth? He answers that these words were not
idle, for Christ did sometimes teach and opened not his mouth, viz. By his life
and miracles; but now he opened his mouth and taught them by doctrine.

It is a pleonasme, Calvin, as we use to say, I have heard it with mine ears.
An Hebraisme. i.e. He bagan to speak. Some interpret it thus, he spoke before
by the mouth of his Prophets, now with his own mouth.

This phrase is emphaticall, and signifies that He delivered to them deep
matters of weight and importance. Ephesians. 6.19. Job. 32.23. Iansen. Chemnit.
Perkins.
And this may appear by the conclusion of the Sermon. chapter 7. v. 29. Yet this
is not perpetually true of this phrase says Beza. These words imply two
things, First, the excellency of the Speaker, Psalm. 78.1. Secondly, the
Majesty and authority of the Speaker, Pro. 31.28.

And taught them] Not upon a perfect Text as He did Luke the fourth.

These eight Beatitudes are as it were the eight Paradoxes of the world: Cornel
a Lap.
for the world and Philosophers place happiness in riches, not in poverty; in
sublimitie, not in humility; in fullness, not in hunger; in joy, not in
mourning.

Verse. 3. Christ sets not down that wherein formally blessedness consists,
but rules whereby we may know whether we be blessed or no, occultae
praedestinationis indicia, and futurae gloriae praesagia. To be poor in
Spirit, pure in heart, meek, merciful, are styled so many beatitudes.
Schoolmen say truly, they are beatitudo disponens, so many dispositions to
perfect blessedness.

Vos crediti^ beatos esse pauperes, ergo ut tanto facilius fiatis beati, omnia
bona vobis adimimus. Iuliani Scomma in Christianos jactum.
Poor in Spirit] Graeca dictio (...) proprie mendicos significat. Iansen.
Beggars in Spirit, Esaias 66.2. Austin and Chrysostom expound it of inward
humility; the meaning is, those that have a spiritual sense of their spiritual
misery.

Verse. 4. Mourn Doleat homo Christianus, and de dolor gaudeat.
] It signifies great sorrow. Piscator and others expound it of sorrow for sin.
For they shall be comforted.] They shall have inward and outward comfort.

Verse. 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousnesse]
or, they that are hungring and thirsting, So the Greek runs, after the
participle of the present tense, intimating that wherever this is the present
disposition of men's souls, they are blessed.

Verse. 8. Pure in heart] Austin renders it mundi-cordes. Purity is of two
sorts, First, that which is contrary to pollution, as water when it is clean,
and not mudded nor defiled. Secondly, Which is contrary to mixture, as wine
when it is not mixed. Not carnal nor hypocritical.

For they shall see God] In the Hebrew phrase to see is ordinarily used for to
enjoy. Psalm. 4. Who will she us any good? The word in the Hebrew is, who will
make us to see any good, that is, to enjoy good. To see God is to enjoy him,
there is no seeing God but in Christ.

Verse. 9. Peace-makers] i.e. such as love to maintain unity, concord,
good will and good agreement amongst men. Not only those which take up
differences, but the parties at variance which are most inclinable to peace.

For they shall be called] i. e. they shall be indeed, Luke 1.76. Called) i.
e. accounted. Calvin.
and shall also be known and reputed to be, the Sons of God, by their
likeness to him.

Verse. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad] Or, rejoice, and that Vt sit
posterius verbum loco adverbij Hebraeorum more.
exceedingly.

Great is your reward] Object. Rev. 12.12. A reward implies the merit of
works preceding. Answ. A reward is taken, First, strictly, for that which does
answer and is equal to the work. Secondly, Largely, for whatsoever is
consequent to the work; Heaven is a reward in this latter sense, therefore
salvation is called a gift.

Verse. 13. The salt of the earth] In regard of their ministry, they are to be
totius orbis magistri, Chrysostom. The interrogation wherewith imports a vehement
denial, as if Christ should say, if salt once lose his natural property of
saltness, it can never be recovered. Perkins.


First, Discipuli sal terrae vocantur a Domino, and emphatice quidem cum
articulo (...), quas^ eximium illud sal terrae; nec Iudaeae duntaxat sal, sed
sal terrae, pro latitudine vocationis Apostolicae, ex porrectis ecclesiae Dei
pomoeriis contra distinct ad angustias vocationis Prophe^icae. Spanhem. Dub.
Evang. part tertia. Dub. 91.
Salt has heat and acrimony by which it pierces, attenuates and subdues the
whole lump: nothing is more piercing than the word, which being committed to
the Apostles subdues the whole man and seizes upon the vitalls. Heb. 4.12.

Secondly, Spanhemius Dub. Evang. part. 3. Dub. 91.
Salt preserves from corruption, whence a perpetual Covenant is called a
Covenant of Salt. Numb. 18.19. The word which the Apostles brought is permanent
and the Covenant of grace published by them is a stable and perpetual Covenant.

Thirdly, Salt is a symbol of wisdom. Wise men are called salsi, and fools
insulsi: so there is no true wisdom but in the word committed to the
Apostles, without which no man is wise.

Verse. 17. Our Savior uses four arguments to show that He had no intent to
abrogate the Law. First he tells them in this verse. that He came to fulfill
the Law.

2ly v. 18. He tells them that not any thing of the least signification in the
Law shall fail.

Thirdly, In the 19. Verse. He that breaks the Law, and teaches men so, shall
be least in the kingdom of Heaven.

Fourthly, His doctrine required a greater right than that of the Scribes and
Pharisees.

Verse. 18. Till heaven and earth passe] Greek shall pass away. Some do very
subtly play with the word until, as if that the passing of Heaven and Earth,
which shall be in the last day of Judgment, should put an end to the Law and
the Prophets. And truly (says Calvin) as tongues shall then cease, and
prophecies be abolished, so I think that the written Law with the exposition
shall cease.

One Jot, Ioth apud Ebraeos inter alphabeti literas minima est, huic respondet
(...) Graecorum. Venustissime usus hac hyperbola poeta ille nostri temporis
videtur, qui dixit, Nescit Scripturae vel breve iota sacrae. Drus. Prove. Class.
2. l. 3.
or tittle] Jerome calls Drusius de recta lectione linguae Sanctae. vide
Capellum de punctorum Hebrarcorum antiquitate. l. 2. c. 14. and Piscat. in loc.
Per (...) intellexit Christus literam minimam, quae est jod apud Hebraeos:
probabile itaque, illum per (...) intellexisse Puncta and Accentus, figuram
minorem habentes; quia praeter literas nihil aliud est in Lege Hebraeorum, vim
seu potestatem aliquam habens, praeter Puncta, vocalia, and Accentus, and
diversum quid a literis existimant ideo denotari, quia (...) and (...)
distinguntur per particulam disjunctivam. Aut, ut quasi oppositionem videatur
facere inter Iota and Apicem. Buxtorf. de Punctorum Antiquitate and Origin.
part 2. c. 15.
apices (tittles) those by which like letters in times past were distinguished,
when he says, that Resh and Daleth differ only in the tittle; those err that
interpret them de punctis vocalibus;

Iod the least of the Consonants, tittle of the vowells, which were as ancient
as the Hebrew Consonants.

Fulfilled] In respect of unpartiall and sincere obedience, for of that our
Savior speaks as is manifest by the words following, He that shall break the
least of these Commandeme^^s and teach men so, shall be called least, and
except your righteousness exceed, that is, righteousness of Habit and
practice, which is that which the Law as it is taken in that place required.

Verse. 20. The Scribes were the best in those days for learning and
interpreting the Law, Pharisees for practice, the strictest sect, Acts 26.
Theirs was but an outward civil righteousness whereby they kept the Law only
in outward actions.

Ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of Heaven] Shall neither be
accepted as members of the kingdom of grace Chemnit. in loc. commun. By the
kingdom of Heaven, understands the Church; Grotius, that time when the Goats
shall be severed from the Sheep.
here, nor enjoy glory hereafter.

Verse. 21. He does not oppose his answer against the Suam doctrinam non opponit
Mosi ut illum vel reijciat and damnet, sicut manichaei delirarunt, vel velit
tradere meliora, perfectiora and graviora praecepta quam Moses, sicut
Scholastici somniarunt, Moses enim plane eodem modo tradidit explicationem 5.
praecepti. Levit. 19. v. 17. Sed Pharisaeorum corruptelas and reprehendit and
reijcit. Chemnit. loc. commun.
Commandment of Moses, but the common conceit of the Scribes.

Verse. 22. But I say unto you] The Expositors are so at discord in the
interpretation of these words, that while they endeavor to explain the sense,
they forget the duty contained in it, and scarce any where show more anger than
here, calling one another Heretic and fool.

He alludeth to the custom of punishing offenders used among the Jews; as
there is a gradation of sin, so of punishment. Judgment, a less court which
inflic^ed small mulcts as it were by a leete; Council, the greater Court, as
it were quarter sessions; Thirdly a more numerous Senate, a grand assise.

Augustine says in primo est ira tantum, in secundo est ira and Sermo, in
tertio ira and certa expressio irrisionis.

Our Savior interprets the sixth Commandment and shows besides the actual
taking away of life to which the Pharisees bound the breach of it, three
degrees of sinners against that precept, He that is angry with his brother
without cause, or rashly, or for nothing, for an injury offered to himself,
not a sin committed against God. Secondly, He that says to his Brother Racha
Rectius Raca vel Raka, (...), Ex Syriaco Raka vanus, cerebro vacuus a radice
Rik evacuare, fundere, effundere. Ita censent plurimi, Verum ita cum sequente
convitio, stulte, conveniret. Quid enim aliud est Cerebro vacuus, quam stultus?
quid stultus aliud, quam cerebro vacuus. Dilherri electa. l. 2. c. 20. Alij
volunt, (...) esse interjectionem and sonum indignantis, and tres dicunt
constitui gradus eorum quos Christus contra quintum docet peccare praeceptum;
primum eorum, qui intus duntaxat adversus proximum commoventur, iramque gerunt
animi restricti; alterum eorum, qui eo usque effervescunt, ut iracundum aliquid
evomant; tertium denique eorum, qui in apertum aliquod convicium erumpunt.
Racha indignantis vox, Hosanna laetantis. Vide Rainold. de lib. Apoc. tom.
secundo praesect. 167. and Bezam in loc. Hoc verbum proprie Hebraeorist, Rakah
enim dicitur inanis aut vacuus: quem nos possumus vulgata injuria absque
Cerebro nuncupare. Hieron. in Loc.
Racha, which is an expression of anger, in a word of lighter disgrace, as
sir, or pish, or the like. Thirdly, He that says, thou fool, which is a
word of reviling and soonest offers it self to him that is angry.

Verse. 23. That phrase, has ought against thee] is a Law-terme, Non dicit si
tu habes aliquid adversus fratremtuum: sed si frater tuus habet aliquid
adversum te, ut durior reconciliationis tibi imponatur necessitas. Hieron. in
loc.
and implies a suit in Law. Act. 24.20.

Verse. 24. Agree] i. e. Use means to become friends with him with whom thou
art at variance. Quickly] i. e. Without delay; rather yield from thine own
right, than defer to be reconciled. Satius est totam locutionem quae
metaphorica and proverbialis est, quam particulae donec idiotismum, in
explicatione hujus loci, attendere. Glass. Gramat. Sac. lib. 3. Tract 5. Ad
ultimum quadrantem solvere dicitur is, cui de debito nihil remittur. Germanum
proverbiale. Quadrans nummus est, qui a quibusdam vocatur teruncius. Drus.
Prove. Class. 2. l. 3.
Whiles thou art in the way] i.e. Whiles thou art going with thine Adversary to
have the matter tried before the Magistrate, Luke 12.58. Lest.] i. e. Lest
thine Adversary having a good Action against thee, do convince and cast thee
before the Magistrate and the Judge. Lest after thou art convinced of wrong
doing, the Judge command the Sergeant to cast thee into prison. Farthing] This
farthing was the least coin used among the Jews, called a Quadrin, which
contains two Mites, Mark 12.42. and it is the fourth part of a penny in
English. This last phrase, (To pay the uttermost farthing) is proverbiall, like
unto which is that in French, Payer jusques au dernier denier. As if he had
said, See Maldonate, Tolet, Iansenius.
Look for no compounding or agreement with thine Adversary when thou art once
cast into prison, for he will show thee no favor, but use thee as hardly as
may be, remitting nothing, but causing thee to make full restitution and
satisfaction, even to the uttermost farthing.

The Papists expound it allegorically, Chrysostom. Theoph. Cartw. Mr. Perkins.
and say that by Adversary is meant God commanding men in his Law; and by Way
is meant the space of time in this life; by Judge Christ; by Sergeant Gods
Angels; by Prison Hell, or rather Purgatory; and by the uttermost farthing,
venial sins. As if this were the meaning: Dr. Pride.
Agree with God while thou art in this life, between this and the day of
judgment, lest thou come before Christ, and he cause his Angels to cast thee
into Purgatory, and there thou remain, till thou have satisfied for the least
venial sins. But this cannot be the true meaning of this place, for first,
these words depend upon the former, and are a continuance of the rule of
reconciliation between man and man, and not between God and man. 2ly Mr.
Perkins.
By this exposition they confound the Adversary and the Judge, (for the Father
and the Son are one) which in this Text are made diverse and distinct.

Verse. 28. Quod in homicidiis est irasci, hoc in adulteriis est concupiscere.
There may be adultery (says Austin) and a woman not touched; murder, and a man
not killed. Lust after her] with a will and desire to her.

Verse. 29. Right eye, and right hand] are mentioned, because the right parts
are dearest to us; some special darling sin, wherein the flesh most
delights, Beza. Dike. Illa expositio probabilis per oculum dextrum and manum
dextram rem eandem, pretiosissima nimirum and Charissima quaeque intelligenda,
quae aeque nobis Chara ac oculus dexter and manus dextro, talium videlicet
jacturam voluntariam potius faciendam, si nos pelliciant ad malum, quam ut
illorum occasion in peccata, and sic in exitium praecipitemus. Hac
interpretatione admissa non tantum constat sensus verborum Domini, sed and
nexus. Christus adspectum inordinatum uxoris alienae vocaverat adulterium,
adeoque grave peccatum coram Deo, quod ordinary videtur leve. Inde occasionem
sumit hortationis sequentis, ut summo studio caveantur cupiditates pravae, and
Charissimarum ac pretiocissimarum etiam rerum dispendio potius redimatur salus,
quam ut patiamur illas nobis exitiosas esse and lethales. Spanhem. Dub. Evan.
part 3. Dub. 146.
which is as her right eye in regard of pleasure; as her right hand in regard
of profit. Pull it out,] not pick it out, as the Eagle does the eye of her
prey, by degrees, but pull it out all together.

Verse. 30. Cut it off.] In the Original it is (...), which signifies in the
emphasis of the word, chop it off; not saw it by degrees, but chop it off; that
is, on a sudden cut it off; on a sudden cut off thy sins which are as dear as
thy right hand.

Verse. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all.] The Manichees and
Anabaptists altogether reject the use of an Oath; and they cite this place, and
that of James 5.12. but in both these places an Oath is not forbidden, but
restrained. There is a prohibition only of idle Oaths, and collusion of
Oaths (as Bucer,) or swearing lightly and loosely (as Gualther,) or swearing
in common talk (as Zanchius,) or rash and unnecessary Oaths (as Vrsinus,
Omnino, i.e. per ullam rem creatam. Beza.
) or private and ordinary swearing (as Aretius and Melancthon,) or swearing by
the creatures (as Beza and Pelican.) At all] in your usual talk. he forbids
us not simply to swear, but not to swear by the creatures, since that is to
ascribe a Deity to them, Dr. Featlie.
or to swear upon any trifling occasion, or in their ordinary communication.

Verse. 37. Qua^ Iacobus repetit capite ultimo, qua geminatione videtur usus
dominus ut describeret duplicem conformitatem nostrae vocit aut verborum
nostroru^, unam cum re, alteram cum conceptu nostro, ut id efferamus quod est
and quod esse sentimus. Riverus.
But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay,] Affirm a truth, and deny a
falsehood simply and barely, without making the name of God accessory to your
vain discourses. Dr. Featlie.

Dr. Hamond. Vide Piscat. in Loc.
In ordinary discourse you may use an affirmation (that is, one yea) and if
occasion require, an asseveration, (that is, another yea) and so a negation and
phrase of some vehemence (as a redoubling) to confirm it, that is, Nay, nay.

The Evil one] a Malo illo vide Bezam.
That evil one, that is, the Devil, because he is, 1. evil in the highest
degree. 2. commits evil without ceasing, 1 Pet. 5.8. 3. he practices all
sins of all sorts and degrees, in himself and by his Ministers.

Pricaeus in Matthaeum.
No so much the prepositive article ((...)) confirms this exposition, for John
uses that 1 John 5.19. where he speaks of the world, as another place of the
same Writer, 1 John 3.12. which is to be understood not of the thing, but
person.

Mr. Perkins. Phrases illae Christi, percutienti nos in unae maxilla obvertenda
altera, volenti tollere tunicam relinquendum etiam pallium, figuratae sunt, nec
alius scopus dicentis, nisi Christianos paratos esse debere, ad ferendam
secundam potius injuriam, quam ad regerendum priorem. Spanhem. Dub. Evang.
part tertia, Dub. 125.
Verse. 39. Christ's meaning is, that a man must suffer rather a double wrong,
than seek a private revenge. Resist not evill] This is to be understood of
private revenge, and so it makes nothing against lawful War, as the
Anabaptists say. Vide Bezam.

Verse. 40. Our Savior there condemns not all going to Law, but he intends to
forbid all private revenge of a man's self, More Hebraico sub uno exemplo,
similia, seu quae ejusdem generis sunt, complectitur, ut, 1. sub alapa,
comprehendit omnes injurias, quae corpori seu personae vel cum laesione vel cum
contumelia inferuntur. 2. Sub spoliatione, complectitur injurias and
detrimenta, quae rebus inferuntur. 3. Sub angariis, complectitur injustas
superiorum exactiones, gravamina and oppressiones. 4. Sub contentione judicii,
complectitur injurias, quae vel sub specie juris, vel denegatione aut
perversione justitiae forensis inferuntur. Chemnit.
in case he be wronged; or he speaks comparatively, as if he should say,
Rather suffer two wrongs than do one.

Verse. 41. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain] As
in our Commonwealth we have Post-masters, so in Persia there were like
Officers, who by authority from their Kings or Emperors, might take men's
Cattle, nay men themselves, and use them for travel and carriage at their
pleasure. And this custom the Jews had got among them, Mr. Perkins. Verbum
hoc angario, usurpatum Interpreti vulgato and Vlpiano, I. C. metaphoram
continet proverbialem, quae ab angaris sumpta regum tabellariis apud Persas.
(...) est ex verbis peregrinis, quibus usa olim antiquitas in Judaea: neque
Graecum est, sed Persicum, ut Suidas dicit. Drus. Class. Prove. 2. l. 4.
as may appear, Matthew. 27.32. Christ here speaks of the abuse of this
Authority, saying, that if a man compel thee wrongfully, under color of the
Magistrates Authority, to go with him one mile, go with him two: That is,
rather than by resisting thou should revenge thy self, go with him two miles.

Verse. 42. Whether he be known or unknown, a friend or an enemy, although he
do not deserve; whether he be able and willing to recompense that office or
not, yet give him according to thy ability, Chemnit. Asks thee.] (...),
Luther rightly observes that this word implies indigence or necessity (...),
signifies beggarlinesse, as Acts 3.2. we must give them what is necessary to
relieve their necessities.

Verse 44. Bless them which curse you] (...). See Luke 6.27. The word in
Greek, and the opposition to cursing, ( i.e. evil and bitter speaking,) notes
kindness and friendlinesse of language.

Verse. 45. That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven] We
have the example of the great God for this, we say it is baseness to seek
reconciliation; what had become of man, if Christ had staid till he had sought
unto him? it is our glory to be like God. 2. He is our Father, his love is
manifested to us in this: He is not our Father now by Creation, but by Adoption.

Verse. 47. What do you more than others?] Or, what singular thing do you?
Christians must be singular.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 1. TO be seen of men] The meaning is, to this end they did all their
works, that they might be admired by men, so that they might be seen and
praised of them; (...) plus est quam videri, significat enim proprie spectari,
id est, cum peculiari quadam attentione and admiratione videre, quod Poeta sic
expressit, Digito monstrari and dicier hicest. Syrus hoc loco habet verbum quod
significat accuratam contemplationem.
and rested in this vain glory, as in their last end.

Verse. 2. In the Synagogues] The word Synagogue is from the Greek (...) to
gather together, and it is applied to all things whereof there may be a
collection. But Synagogues are commonly taken for houses dedicated to the
worship of God, wherein it was lawful to pray, preach, and dispute; but not to
sacrifice.

The Temple at Jerusalem was the Cathedral Church, the Synagogues as petty
Parish-Churches belonging thereunto.

They have their reward] Not Gods reward, but theirs; for they are praised of
men, for whose sake they exercised their virtues. Jerome.

Verse. 3. An hyperbolicall metaphore, by which he gives understanding to the
hands. Piscator. Do it without any ostentation. Calvin. Dextera quid faciat,
fas est nescire sinistram.

Verse. 5. As the Hypocrites] Christ commanded his Disciples, that they should
not be as the Hypocrites; it is one thing to be Hypocrites, another thing as
the Hypocrites; In angulis platearum] Versio Aethiop. in angulis platearum
portae. Respexit ad locorum orientalium consuetudinem, ubi multae plateae
portis claudantur, and a se invicem distinguntur, Dilher. Elect.
he would not have his to be like the Hypocrites.

Verse. 7. He uses two words but in the same sense, (...) is a superfluous and
putide repetition, (...) vain garrulity.

Popish prayer in an unknown Tongue is idle babbling, in the rosary and
canonical hours the same things are repeated again and again.

Verse. 9. Yee] First the Disciples, and under them he means all Christians.

Therefore] Has a double reference, both to the sinful manner dehorted from,
and to the holy manner exhorted to. He reasons thus, the manner of
hypocritical and heathenish praying is sinful, this manner here propounded is
most holy, therefore pray in this manner: After this manner, or thus, or in
this manner, it is a note of likeness pointing unto the pattern following,
that is, say Our Father, as Luke 11.21. Or if you use other words, let them be
according to this pattern.

As the Decalogue is distinguished by two Tables, so is this prayer as it were
distributed into two Tables of petitions, the three first of which respect God,
the three latter our selves and our Neighbor. In the petitions which directly
respect God, the first prays for the glory of God, the two other declare the
reason of glorifying of him.

Which art in heaven] These Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 10.
words signify the majesty and power of God, Heaven the place thereof being
put for the things themselves, and then the meaning is, which art of infinite
greatness, and height, and power, and immortality.

Hallowed Sanctificari Dei nomen nihil aliud est quam suum Deo haberi honorem
quo dignus est, ut nunquam de ipso loquantur vel cogitent homines sine summa
veneratione. Calv. in loc. Hoc enim rogas ut quod semper sanctum est,
sanctificetur in te. Austin.
] We wish that honor to be given to God, which He is most worthy of; that men
never think or speak of him but with exceeding great reverence; that God
would not only deliver that holy name of his from all contempt and dishonor,
but subdue all mankind to the worthy esteeming of it.

Verse. 10. We pray that God would exercise his power both in his word and
Spirit, that the whole world may voluntarily submit unto him. Calvin.

Verse. 11. Supersubstantiall Rhemist. Luke (as Dr. Fulke notes) is the best
interpreter of the Greek word, who shows that it signifies bread sufficient
for every day, in which place our Remists themselves translate it daily.

(...) vetus interpres quotidianum reddit, ut ex Hieronymo in hunc locum
manifestum est. Atque ita omnes veteres authors Latin legunt. Hieronymus
supersubstantialem vertit quanquam in eo veterem versionem corrigere noluit.
Itaque caute quidam nostro tempore in vulgata editione pro quotidiana
supersubstantialem posuerint, quod corporis cibo quem hic a nobis peti
probavimus, minime convenit. Maldonatus in loc. Panis nomine intelliguntur
quaecunque ad hanc vitam spectant. Cartwright. Historia Christi ex 4.
Evangelistis. (...) Graecis proprie significat quod nobis sustentandis aptum
and accommodatum est. Noster dicitur panis quia nobis datur, and quia nostro
labor parari debet. Genesis 3. 1 These. 5. Psalm. 128. Hodie a Deo nobis dari
precamur, ut sciamus nobis assidue and in singulas horas a paterna ejus
providentia hoc benestcium petendum. Deinde ut doceamur curam nostram non in
longinquum tempus extendere. Adverbium hodie fraenandae nimiae aviditati
additum est, ut discamus singulis momentis a Dei beneficentia pendere, and eo
demenso contenti esse quod de die in diem nobis suppeditat. Calvinus in loc. Ob
Quomodo panem, quem jam vocamus nostrum, petamus nobis dari Sol. Vocatur noster
non quod jure debeatur, sed quia paterna Dei beneficentia in usum nostrum
destinatus est.


Why should the Latin Interpreter translate it here Supersubstantiall, and
Luke 11. Daily, when one and the same Greek word is used in both places, and
it has the same signification in each? Food and raiment, all things needful
for the preservation of this bodily life are here meant, as the Roman
Catechism tells us, so the word bread is used, Prove. 30.8. If it be translated
supersubstantiall bread, how can bread and other bodily necessaries be thereby
meant? for these things are substantial, and serve to nourish and maintain
the substance of man's body, but not supersubstantiall. Austin denies the
Eucharist to be here meant. To translate it supersubstantiall is not so right
as to translate it daily, as Jansenius (Concord. c. 4.) their own learned
Bishop confesses, who adds that by the Greek word used in both the
Evangelists is most rightly understood bread necessary for the sustenance of
the body, He proves also that by daily or substantial bread here is not
meant the bread of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, because when our Savior
taught his Disciples this prayer, the Eucharisticall bread was not instituted,
neither did the Disciples so much as think of it, and if that should be here
meant, how can the Lay-papists then say this prayer in sincerity, and yet be
present when the Eucharist is celebrated at their private masses, and never
desire to partake of it?

Verse. 12. And forgive us our debts] There is no word which the Evangelists and
Apostles more frequently use to signify the remission of sins than the word
(...) here used, it is used of them seven and twenty times as Wotton de
reconciliat. observes. It seems to be taken from releasing of debts, and
loosening of bonds; in which the conscience of a sinner was tied, being bound
to answer at Gods tribunal. See Par. on Romans 12. p. 29.

As we forgive our debtors] Which is a promise of ours to the Lord, or a Law
binding all that look for mercy from the Lord, to show mercy, or a note of
assurance.

Sicu^, as, is taken three manner of ways in Scripture. First, for a note of
paritie, as Matthew. 10.15. and 19.19. Secondly, as a note of identitie, as
Matthew. 20.14. and Luke 15.19. John 1.14. and Thirdly, for a note of similitude,
as here, and Matthew. 18.33. and John 17.22.

Verse. 13. The meaning is not that we may not fall into temptation, but we be
not overcome in it Dictio graeca significat utrumque, infer and inducere,
magis tamen infer.
.

But deliver us from evill] (...) is affirmed rather of a person than a thing.
Beza. The Devil is called (...) a labor, because he troubles others with his
wickedness. This name is often given to the Devil, as 5. chapter 37. 3 John
17.15. 2 These. 3.3. 1 John 2.13.14. and 3.12. and 5.81.

For Coronis precationis Dominicae, Quia tuum est regnum etc. etsi in multis
Graecis codicibus, and apud Syrum quoque interpretem reperitur, tamen Beza
referente, in vetustissimis aliquibus Graecis codicibus deest, and a nemine
exponitur praeterquam a vulgato and a Chrysostomo. Deest quoque in versione
Arabica, nec in ullis Latinorum exemplaribus visitur: ut non immerito Erasmus
conjectet ex solenni consuetudine a Graeci^ adjectam, and postea in Textum
ipsum fuisse translatum. Sculter. exercit. Evang. l. 2. c. 33.
thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever] Erasmus says, that
they which added this conclusion unto the Lords prayer did divinae precationi
suas nugas assuere, to so heavenly a prayer did sow patches of their own. Mr.
Cartwright says, it appears manifestly that this sentence was borrowed from
the Prophet David, 1. Chr. 29.11. with some abridgement of the Prophets words.
Secondly, without this we should not have had a perfect form of prayer, it
consists of thankes-giving as well as petitions, it is also a reason of that
which goes before. This clause was added by our Savior, and registered by
Matthew, 1. the Greek Copies have it. 2. The Syriack Paraphrast translates it.
3. Chrysostom. and Theoph. expound it.

Amen.] This is the seal of the Lords Prayer. Jerome.

This word was not added (says Grotius) by Christ, but according to the manner
of the ancient Church; by that word approving of the public prayers. It
signifies truly, or even so, or so be it. It is an Hebrew word, but the
Grecians and Latins have made it theirs, the Syriacke and Arabicke versions of
the New Testament keep it, and so do the Occidentall Tongues.

Verse. 16. Of a sad countenance] The Greek word signifies properly the look
of a wild beast, a Lion or a Bear robbed of their whelps, grim and ghastly;
(...), optime tristes vetus, injuria a recentiore notatus. Qui cast inter
Latinos loquuntur, affectatam gravitatis and auctoritatis speciem indicare
volentes, ea voce utuntur. Pricaeus. in loc. Tristes: been vulgata versio. Vide
Luke 24.17. Grotius.
one would be afraid to look on them, (...) from (...) sad, and (...)
countenance.

Disfigurs] The Greek word is properly to take a thing away so that we cannot
see it. Hence some read it exterminare, others demoliri, others deformare,
(...) est nativum colorem sinere obliterari, ambire ut pallor in ore sedeat,
maciesque in corpore toto. Pricaeus. in loc.
some others corrumpere, the meaning is the same, they endeavor to take away
the natural frame and shape of their countenance.

Their reward] viz. Here in this life, they shall have none hereafter.

17 But thou when thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face] That is,
Ruth. 3.2.
be as you were on other days; for the Jews did usually anoint Mos erat
patrius Judaeorum (id quod multis locis sacrae literae testatum relinquunt.
Ru^h. 3. v. 3. 2 Reg. 12. v. 20. Luke 7.46.) ut qui laetitiae vacare, aut
comtiores gratioresque vellent prodire aliquo, lavarent faciem caputque
ungerent; lavarent faciem, quo munda ea and nitida appareret; ungerent caput,
quo colorem illius odoremque commendaret. Psalm. 103.15. John 12.3. Lucas
Burgensis Comment. in 4. Evangelia.
themselves on days of mirth. Our Savior prohibits all vain affected kind of
sorrow.

Our Savior uses many arguments in this Chapter against the immoderate
sinful cares of this world. 1. More common. 2. More special to believers.
Those of a more common nature. 1. From the consideration of the things
themselves. The things themselves are perishing, they perish two ways, either
by open violence, or secret corruption.

Verse. 19. Lay not up for your selves treasures] That is, striving to be rich
and to get a great estate together. de Dieu refers moths to garments, thieves
to money, and that which we translate rust to food, under which fruits and
cattle are comprehended; in which three things the whole treasure of man
consists.

Verse. 20. Some say this treasure in heaven is alms, as 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.
Others say, make God thine, rather Christ, make him thy treasure; make him sure
by being united to him. Ephesians. 2.6.

Verse. 22. The light of the body is the eye] i. e. the understanding in man the
little world, is as that great light the Sun in the great world.

If therefore thine eye be single] That is, thine understanding be well
illuminated, and do clearly discern the truth.

The whole body shall be full of light] The whole man throughout will be well
ordered.

A single eye is that which looks but upon one object, upon God, and God
only, and God principally; and on all other things in him, and with reference
to him. The double eye, is that which though it looks to God, and does many
things in obedience to him, yet it looks to somewhat else, and takes other
things as greater encouragements.

Verse. 23. But if thine eye be evill] If the understanding be blind; the whole
body shall be full of darkness] the whole man must needs be out of order. Dr.
Gouge.

Verse. 24. Here is another argument, particular to Gods people, against the
cares of this world, you profess your selves the servants of God.

No man can serve two masters: Intelligendum est hoc proverbium de dominis in
solidum, quomodo and Juris consulti dicunt non posse duos esse dominos ejusdem
roi. Grotius.
] Two, that is, contrary, for many agreeing amongst themselves are counted for
one. That this is the meaning the words following show, You cannot serve God
and Mammon] that is, God and Riches. Mammon is a Syriack word. See my Critica.

Verse. 25. Take no thought for your life] So it is in the English Books, but
the word signifies, do not take such thought as should cut your heart asunder;
it is derived from a Phrase which signifies, Mr Buroughs his Irenicum.
to divide the mind; so ver. 28. (...), why do you divide your hearts? And ver.
31, and 34. the same Greek word is used again. Here is a third argument more
common and general against carking cares.

He reasons from the greater to the less, the Lord which gave life it self,
will not suffer us to want those things which appertain to the sustenance of
the same; All that you take care for is meat and raiment, God gave you life
without any care of yours, and a body without your contributing any thing to it.

Verse. 26. Behold the fowls of the aire] Luke for the fowls names Ravens,
alluding peradventure to that, Psalm. 147.9. and some think David did especially
speak of the Ravens, because, when the old ones have forsaken them, it is
necessary that they should be fed of God. This is a fourth common argument
against worldly cares, if God make provision for these Creatures, much more
will he for us.

Verse. 27. The words being propounded by way of question import a more vehement
negation, as if Christ had said, undoubtedly not any of you by taking care can
add one cubit to his stature. Here is then another argument taken from the
vanity and unprofitableness of this care.

A Cubit is a Perkins Cubitus humanae staturae mensura est. Euthymius.
Definitum est divinitus cujusque hominis staturae (...), Grynaeus.
measure taken from a part of man's body, being the length of the arm from the
elbow to the length of the longest finger.

(...) (says Beza) signifies both the stature of man's body, and the age of
ones life, but in this place it seems rather to denote the former only; as Luke
12.25. and 19.3.

Verse. 29. Even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.] His
beauty was Cujus rei causam Craeso Solon olim reddidit, cum splendori ejus
gallinaceos, pavones, phasianos praeferebat, quia iniquiebat hoc quod habent,
natura habent. Heinsius.
artificial, theirs natural.

Verse. 32. Here is an argument peculiar to Gods people against wordly cares;
you that profess the name of Christ, or would be loath to be found in the
condition of the Gentiles, should not do as they.

After all these things.] That is, meat, drink, and clothes, do the Gentiles
Ethnicorum istae voces sunt non Christianorum, siquidem illi aut Deum esse non
credunt, aut non credunt agere curam mortalium. Erasmus.
] that is, such as are yet strangers from God, Ephesians. 4.17. seek] that is, only
or chiefly; the Greek word signifies, to seek vehemently, and importunately.

For your heavenly father knows that ye have need of all these things] A man
may know our wants, and yet say, as James 2.16. another may desire to supply
our wants and not know them, the Prodigal Son being in a far Country might
have been starved for want of food, and his Father not have known of it; but 1.
God knows our wants. 2. Will supply our wants, for he is a Father. 3. Can
supply our wants, for he is a heavenly Father.

Verse. 33. Seek the Kingdom of God] Endeavor by an entrance into grace to
gather assurance of an interest into glory.

First] In time, in affection, before and above all other things.

Righteousness] The righteousness, by which man being a vile and base sinner in
himself, is accepted righteous before God, and justified in his sight, called
Gods righteousness, because, as it is acceptable to God, so it is wholly
wrought in man by God through Christ.

See my Greek Critica.
Added unto you.] Over-added, cast in as an overplus, as a handful to the sack
of grain, as an inch of measure to an ell of cloth. See 1 Timothy 4.8. There is
bread as well as grace, and clothing as well as righteousness in the promise.

Verse. 34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow] Pythagoras said well,
Chaenici ne insideas, Waserus de mensuris Hebraeorum. l. 1. cap. 6.
that is, be not solicitous for thy food to morrow. For the Chaenix was the
demensum, or daily meat of Greek soldiers, or slaves, to which our Savior
alludes.

To morrow] not only signifying the day immediately following, but also the
time to come indefinitely, and at large, as also, Exodus 13.14. that is,
hereafter, Dyke of the deceitfulness of the heart.
in the time to come, and in that of the Poet.

Quid sit futurum cras fuge quaerere. Seek not what shall be too morrow. For
the morrow shall take thought for the things of it self; sufficient unto the
day is the evil thereof] that day will have its care when it comes, and this
day has enough of it self now it is come.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1. IVudge not, that ye be not judged] as if he should say, if you would
have your own infirmity pitied, and your words and deeds construed in the best
sense, then show the like kindness unto others.

By judging is meant, 1. All rash and temerarious, 2. All severe, unmercifull
censuring of other men. He does not forbid to judge, but rather teach how to
judge. Hierom. There is a twofold judging; First, of the action when I condemn
it as naught, it being so, this is lawful. Secondly, of the person, when
because the deed is naught I condemn the person as an Hypocrite, this is
blamed, unless the action cannot be found but in an Hypocrite. Vt salutabis,
ita and resalutaberis, qui male loquitur de proximo, pejus audiet. See Judge.
1.7.


Verse. 2. The reason against rash judgment, lest you be judged] It was an
Hebrew Proverb, midda bemidda, measure for measure; as if Christ had said, if
ye judge men rashly, then men again by the appointment of God shall give rash
judgment upon you: But if ye judge men righteously, then likely they will judge
you so. This Law is established, Lev. 24.19. See Obad. 1.15. and James 2.13.
Pharaoh that drowned the children of the Hebrews, was drowned himself.

Ver. 3. Why beholdest thou the mote] That is, upon what ground, for what
cause, (...) significatur curiositas intuendi in alienos errores studio
reprehendendi. Lucas Brugensis.
with what conscience see thou? and so in the fourth verse, How say thou]
that is, with what face, with what honesty, and conscience say thou? so much
these interrogatories import. Mote] that is, small and little sins, or supposed
sins, sins in his opinion, which gives rash judgment. And perceivest not] that
is, well weighest and considerest not with thy self. Beame] that is, great and
notorious reigning sins. Mr Perkins.

The moral of the Fable of the man that had two wallets, Stultitiae proprium
est aliorum vitia cernere, oblivisci suorum. Cicero Tusc. 3.
in the former part of which he put the faults of other men, in the hinder part
his own faults, whence that saying, Sed non videmus id manticae quod in tergo
est, is suitable to this Proverb used among the Jews.

The difference between the third and fourth verse is only this: In the third
verse Christ speaks of rash judgment conceived in the mind, in the fourth of
rash judgment uttered in speech. Christus reprehendit nimiam pe^spicaciam quae
ex defectu charitatis nascitur, dum nimis scrupulose excutimus fratrum vitia:
Et indulgentiam qua peccata nostra tegimus and fovemus. Calv. In proximo
reprehendendo cavenda est hypocrisis, ne scilicet vel amplificemus atque
exaggeremus peccatum illius ex festuca facientes trabem, seu ex musca
elephantum. Piscat.


Verse. 6. Impure men are here compared to Creatures unclean according to the
Law, dogs and swine. See 2 Pet. 2.21.

Mr Wheatly thinks he means not this either of the word preached publicly, or
of the Sacraments, (for dogs and swine will not at all ren^ him which gives
them the Sacraments, and lets them come to Church, but they would rather all to
rent him that should debar them from the fame) but of speaking to a man in
private, by way of admonishing and persuading him.

Holy things] That is, first and properly the word of God and Sacraments (say
some) being holy, and the instruments of Sanctification.

Dogs and swine] That is, malicious and obstinate enemies of Gods word. Dogs]
that is, oppugners of the truth. Swine] contemners. tread under feet] that is,
profane and abuse. turn again] that is, to revile and persecute Gods Messengers.

That our Lord Jesus was much delighted with the similitude of pearls, we may
collect from thence, that in Matthew he uses it twice, here, and 13.45. which
latter place declares the former and shows that the Gospel is that precious
pearl which is not to be thrown to swine; and which being found, is to be
changed with no riches in the whole world. There is a great agreement between
Pearls and the Gospel. It is called a pearl in Greek, from its shining
glory. See 2 Cor. 4.4. The Latins call them uniones, because they are found
alone, so the truth of the Gospel is one.

Verse. 7. It is not a simple repetition of the same thing, but a gradation.

Aske] as a beggar, seek] as with a Candle, knock] as one that has power, with
importunity. This promise, ask and you shall receive] is meant of things
necessary to Salvation, Perkins, etc.
and not of particular and special gifts as continence, etc.

Verse. 10, 11. A stone may be like bread, and a fish may be like a Serpent, yet
Parents will not be so unnatural as to give the one for the other to their
Children. Pulchra oppositio piscis and serpentis, rursus panis and lapidis:
figura enim sibi mutuo cum persimilia sint, ad hominis usum ex diametro
distant. Lucas Brugensis.
This adage concerning bread and a stone has passed from the Hebrews also to
other nations, as it appears by Plautus, Altera manu fert lapidem, panem
ostentat altera.

Luke 6.31. Perkins on Jude.
Ver. 12. That is, look what we would have other men to think, speak, and do to
us, that must we think, speak, and do unto them, and no worse; And on the
contrary. This is not to be understood of evil wishes, but of a will and
desire well ordered, either by grace, Voluntas naturalis been ordinata nulla
perturbatione infecta. A mes. l. 5 de Cons. c. 1.
and according to the written word, or at least by the light of natural
knowledge and conscience; whatsoever thing either by the light of nature, and
conscience, or by direction from Gods word, you would that men should do to
you, that do ye unto them: Nor yet of all things in particular (so Masters
should serve their Servants) but by a proportion.

Severus the Emperor was much taken with this sentence, and caused it to be
written in his Palace, and else where, Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris.
Law] That is, the five Books of Moses, Luke 16.31. Prophets] that is, all the
rest of the Books of the Old Testament, Mat. 2.23. 2 Pet. 1.19. The sum of
the Law and Prophets, the Doctrine of the Law and Prophets. Brugensis. On this
hang the Law and the Prophets, as after, 22.40. Grotius.

Verse. 13. Christ is the door for entrance, and the way for progress, called
straight] because of the great disproportion between us and it, we must deny
our selves; By the narrow way] is meant a conversation bounded by the
restraints of the Law and Gospel, to enter into this gate] is to have
experience of such a work in himself.

Verse. 14. The way to heaven is a straight way, a perplexed, afflicted,
persecuted way, that is the force of the word there used.

Few there be that find it] Few comparatively.

Is ferme habitus erat Prophetarum, at Christus, ut ex opposito membro liquet,
sub habitus nomine omnem exteriorem innocentiae speciem in vultu, verbis, and
operosis ritibus vult intelligi. Grotius.
Verse. 15. Christ alludeth to the practice of false Prophets in former times
who counterfeited the true Prophets in their attire, which were usually
clothed in rough and corse attire, 2 King. 1.8. Heb. 11.37. This the false
Prophets did that they might more easily delude the people, Zach. 13.4. Christ's
meaning in this allusion is, to show that false Prophets have plausible
pretenses for their damnable Doctrines, and therefore are the more dangerous.
In Esops Fables the wolf is brought in, clothed with the Sheeps skin.

Verse. 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits] That is, by the works of
iniquity, as after in Ver. 23. So Grotius. He means not so much the fruits of
their lives, as of their doctrine, said Brugensis and Dike. He alludes to
trees, as he shows after, who are known to be good or bad, not by their leaves,
or flowers, but by their fruit.

Verse. 20. That is, Perkins case of Consc.
partly by their doctrine, and partly by their lives, being judged according to
the rule of Gods word.

Ver. 22. Prophesied] Here to prophecy signifies, to teach the people of God
by expounding the Scripture, Geminatio significat zelum and exaggerationem.
Chemnit. He brings them in doubling the word, to express their earnestness of
affection, and confidence that they have in him. Mr. Hildersam.
and applying the same to their consciences for their edification.

Name] Jer. 27.15. that is, being rightly called thereunto, id est, Prophetare
in Christi nomine, est ejus autoritate and tanquam ipso duce fungi docendi
officio. In nomine Christi edere virtutes, nihil aliud est, quam ejus virtute,
auspiciis, imperio ac ductu miracula facere. Calvinus.
ex autoritate and delegatione tua, Brugensis; to preach in the room and stead
of Christ, to preach that which Christ would preach, and in that manner also
which he would use, 1 Cor. 15.20.

Ver. 23. Lo preaching it self, though in Christ's name, because, Dikes
Deceitfulness of heart See Mat. 25.41
yet not for Christ's name, is with God but a work of iniquity, and hell fire is
the reward of it.

Never] This word excludes all times, as if he should say, I do not now,
neither ever did, approve and accept you for mine own, yea, even in that time
when you professed me, preached and wrought wonders in my name, even then I
say, I did not accept and approve of you.

Workers of iniquity] That is, men addicted to all sins, (in the Hebrew
Idiotisme, Pognalei aven, Psalm. 6.9.) and who as it were exercise an art of
sinning.

Verse. 28. Ended these sayings] That is, when he had in diverse places given a
taste of his doctrine to the people.

Verse. 29. The Scribes] For first, they failed in the matter, they delivered
not the Doctrine of God. Secondly, in the manner, they taught coldly, and
without zeal. Thirdly, in the end, they taught in pride and ambition, seeking
themselves, and not Gods glory.

CHAP. VIII.
IN this Chapter are specified four several miracles: 1. The cleansing of the
Leprous man. 2. The curing of a woman troubled with a fever. 3. The healing of
the Centurions servant. 4. Lastly, the strange appeasing of the wind, and
therefore this is rightly called by Ambrose, scriptura miraculosa, the
miraculous scripture.

Verse. 1. The mountain] Where he preached the Sermon which is contained in the
three precedent Chapters.

Verse. 2. And worshipped him] Mark says, he kneeled down; and Luke says, he
fell upon his face, Luke 5.12. He showed reverence in his gesture. Lord if thou will thou can make me cleane] He acknowledges a divine power in Christ, in
that he says, he could make him clean if he would; a short prayer but a sign
of great faith and special modesty.

Verse. 3. The Law did not forbid to touch the Leprosy. That the Lepers might
be healed thereby, but contrariwise, lest those that were not Lepers might be
infected thereby.

Hand] A right one it is probable. Piscat.

Verse. 4. See thou tell no man] Some (that they may excuse the leprous person)
do not think that he was seriously forbidden by Christ from divulging the
miracle, but rather to provoke him to tell it: Others more rightly, that he was
seriously forbidden, and think the cause was, because the seasonable time was
not yet come. Calvin.


Show thy self to the Priest] 1. To confirm the truth. Marlorate. 2. The Law
is the witness of Christ. Jerome. 3. To magnify the Priests calling.
Melancthon. Quia nondum abrogatae erant ceremoniae legis, eas contemni vel
praetermitti noluit Christus. vide Levit. 14.22. Calvin.


He sends him to the Priest, (says Jerome) 1. For humility, that he may seem
to give honor to the Priests, for it was commanded in the Law, that those
which were cleansed of their Leprosy should offer their gifts to the Priests.
2. That they seeing the Leper cleansed, might believe in Christ, and then they
should be saved, or if not, they were inexcusable.

Verse. 5. Luke sets down the same history; the two Evangelists do so agree
in all circumstances, as it were folly to imagine two miracles of one. Calv.
Piscator is of the contrary opinion; this only is different in the words, that
in Matthew, the Centurion is said to come to Christ, in Luke he is said to send
some of the Jews, which in his name did speak to him. Jansenius also says, it
is the same history.

Verse. 6. Matthew says, the young man was grievously vexed; Luke that he was
near unto death.

Verse. 10. Dictum est secundum quid non simpliciter, hoc praesertim nomine
ipsum commendat quod acquiescat in nudo verbo. Calvin.
Not that he was ignorant of his faith, but that he might make it wonderful to
others, and upbraid the Jews of their incredulity.

Ver. 11. Many shall come from the east and the west] That is, from all the
parts of the world, and shall sit down as at a feast. See Luke 22.30. See Beza
and Piscator.

Verse. 12. Children of the kingdom] That is, many Jews Filij regni potius quam
filij regis, quoniam multi sunt in regno quos tamen rex tandem ut infidos
reijcit: omnes autem regis filij sunt unici illius naturalis fillij cohaeredes.
Beza.
by birth borne in the Church.

Utter, or outward darkness] It notes two things, 1. The extremity, 2. The
eternity of the torments. See 22.13. and 25.30. A state far removed from
heavenly joy, called light.

Gnashing of teeth] Signifies either horror from the thoughts of their
consciences mutually accusing them, as Romans 2.15. or most bitter indignation
and murmuring proceeding from impatience; for so to gnash with the teeth is
used, Psalm. 35.16. and 37.12. and 118.18. Lamen. 2.16. Acts 7.54. That is
foolish which some imagine from the phrase, Chemnit.
that hell fire with its smoke does stir up weeping, and that there is so much
cold there that the teeth gnash again with it.

Verse. 17. In Esaias, it is he has borne our griefs, or diseases: Here it is
applied to Christ's healing of diseases, Mr Burges of justification. Propheta
non de morbis agit proprio, sed de vitiisanimi, quae nos peccata dicimus, and
morbi appellantur ducta metaphora a corpore ad animum. Ad hanc objectionem
respondent nonnulli, ut dicant morborum causas, ut plurimum peccata esse,
secundum illud Hieronymi, Propter peccata pleraeque eveniunt corporum
debilitates. Itaque qui haec e medio tollit, and morbos quoque non inscite
auferre, dicitur, aut in se recipere: Ego magis putarim verba Esatae late
accipienda, ut morbos corporis etiam comprehendant, quibus sanandie Christus
quasi specimen and imaginem exhibuit sanationis animi, quae fit criminum
condonatione. Proinde quum paraliticum sanaret, confide, inquit, fili remissa
sunt tibi peccata. Drus. notae in parallela sacra.
and 1 Pet. 2. to his suffering upon the Cross. This may well be, because the
outward healing of diseases, was a Symbol or testimony of his inward healing;
Although Grotius observes, that Christ is therefore said to bear our diseases
when he cured them, because of the great pains and travel he took therein,
for it was after sunset, and the multitude did much throng him.

Verse. 20. Son of man] Some think he was so called, because he was borne of a
Virgin, Hellenistis (...) dicitur Ezekiel, Cum ubique Dominus servator, (...)
dicatur: primi hominis respectu sine dubio, qui Adam, sive (...) vocatur, ut
(...) sit homo primus, (...), qui secundus Adam dicitur.
and had but one Parent, and so was a Son of man, not of men, that is, only of
a Mother, and not of a Father and Mother both, as others are; but by the same
reason it might be inferred that Ezekiel had but one Parent, because he is
called son of man: but this title is given him to show, 1. That Christ was true
man. 2. That he came of the stock of man. 3. That he descended very low for our
sakes. Dr Gouge.

Adeo se remotum a divitiore fortuna Christus ostendit, ut ne domum quidem
habeat propriam. Grotius.
It is a wonder that Christ denied that he had any where to lay his head, when
he had many godly, and courteous men who would willingly have entertained him,
but this is spoken by way of caution, lest the Scrib should expect an ample and
rich reward from him as a rich Lord, since he himself lived precario in others
houses. Calvin.

Dr Denison. Tantum docere voluit, quicquid nos a recto cursu revocat
velmoratur, nihil nisi mortem sapere. Calv.
Ver. 22. As if he should say, if thou will be my follower, thou must totally
addict thy self to me.

Ver. 24. He was in a fast and dead sleep (for so much the word signifies)
(...), ex (...) and (...), ex (...) and (...) ligo, Vere soporatus aut demersus
somno profundo, his senses were well and fast bound, as if he had had no
operation of life, and therefore the Disciples are said to raise him, as it
were from the dead, suscitaverunt, the same Greek word is used in many places
where mention is made of the resurrection, Joh. 2.19. Mat. 27.52. 1 Cor. 15.12.
Stulte quid est somnus. etc.

Ver. 25. The three Evangelists use three several titles to our Savior in
this compendious form of prayer, all which (though the Latin and our English
express not) are significant and emphatical in their original proprieties, That
here imports power, or might, answerable to Jehova; Marks title signifies, a
teacher of letters, or any art; Lukes is englished, Defender, a present helper,
and he to express the Disciples zealous devotion ingeminates the title with a
double appellation.

They stuck too much to the carnal presence of their Master, for as it
appears by Mark they do not simply entreat him, but they expostulate the
matter with him, Master carest thou not that we perish, Luke also notes an
amazed trembling, Master, Master?

Verse. 26. Vt ostenderet se element^rumomnium Dominum.
Rebuked] Restrained and stopped.

Verse. 28. The unclean Spirit kept this miserable man among the graves that he
might torment him with continual terror, from the sad sight of death, as if
being exempted from the number of men, he now conversed with the dead. Calvin.

Verse. 29. Torment] Judicis sui praesentia expavefacti de poena sua
cogitassent, mala enim conscientia quid meriti essent, ipsis tacente Christo,
dictabat. Calvin.
The word in the original is very significant, to cast us into the torments of
hell, so the same word is expressly used by Luke 16.23. and 28. verses.

Before the time] Either before we expected, or before the last day of
judgment. So Gotius. See Aug. de civitate Dei. l. 8. c. 23. They who scorn
the day of judgment are worse than the Devils; those who deny the Deity of
Christ are worse than the devils, are Piscat.

Verse. 31. The Devils desire to go into the Swine, being the most unclean of
all Beasts; and having his name porcus quasi spurcus, Non quod concesserit
salvator daemonibus quod petebant, dixit ite, sed ut per interfectionem
porcorum, hominibus salutis occasio praeberetur: pastores enim ista cernentes,
statim nunciant civitati. Erubescat Manichaeus, si de eadem substantia, and ex
eodem auctore hominum bestiarumque sunt animae, quomodo ob unius hominis
salutem, duo millia porcorum suffocantur. Hieron. in loc.
delighting in filthiness as the Devil with sin, given to devouring, as he
himself is. 2. That doing so much hurt they might stir up the inhabitants
against Christ, and cause them to curse him for the loss of their Swine.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 1. AND came into his own City] viz. Capernaum. Mark. 2.1. Vide Brugensem.
There are three Cities of Christ rehearsed; The first was Bethlehem, in which
he was borne, Micha. 5.7. Secondly, Nazareth, in which he was educated, whence
he was called a Nazarene. Drusius de quaesitis per Epist. Epist. 4.6. Their
Faith, portantium and paralitici Chrysostom, only offerentium, Jerome.
Thirdly, Capernaum, in which he sometimes dwelt. Matthew. 4.13. Hence
Theophylact. Bethlehem genuit, Nazareth educavit, Capernaum incolam habuit.

Verse. 2. To him] viz. Sitting and teaching, Luke 5.17. and that at his House,
Mark 2.1. The glory of this Miracle was wonderful, that a man taken in all
the Cadaver ho^inis verius qua^ homo. Eras. Chemnit in Harm. Inaudita
mansuerudine filium appellat. Eras. Qua compellatione promptum animi sui
affectum ad sublevandum miserum ostendit, sicut pater miseretur filiorum. Psalm.
103.13. Chemnit.
parts of his body, whom they had let down in a Bed by cords, Mark. 2. Luke
5. Suddenly arose both sound and nimble. Although they neither said nor asked
any thing, God saw and knew their faith, lurking in their hearts, Psalm. 37.10.
Romans 8.27. by the painful endeavor of those that carried him, and the
patience of him that was sick of the palsy. Yet he says not he seeing the
patience of him that was sick of the Palsy, and the desire of charity in them
that carried him, but seeing their faith, when yet it is certain that they
also were acceptable to Christ. Two things are to be noted in that 1. That
faith alone (although other virtues also be present) is that instrument by
which the benefits of Christ, especially remission of sins is received. 2.
That other works are approved of God, and accepted of him, if they proceed
from and be done in faith.

Verse. 3. The other two Evangelists add, who can forgive sins but God alone]
The Scribes accused him of Dicitur hic (...) Non qui Deo maledicit, sed qui
quod Dei est sibi arrogat, vide infra. 26.65. Mark. 2.7. Grotius.
blasphemy, the Pharisees of eating with Publicans and sinners, 11. v. the
Scribes accusation was a breach of the Law, the Pharisees, a breach of
traditions.

Verse. 5. Piscator. Quanto praestantior est anima corpore, tanto praecellit
corporis sanitatem peccatorum remissio. Sed Christus sermonem ad eorum captum
accommodat, qui ut erant animales externis signis magis movebantur quam tota
spirituali Christi virtute quae ad eternam salutem valebat. Calvinus.
This interrogation has the force of a negation, that is, neither is more
easy than the other, but both equally difficult, and to God alone possible. He
applies his speech to their capacity, who being unregenerate were more moved
with outward signs, than all the spiritual power of Christ.

Ver. 6. The Son of man has power to forgive sins, but Luke 23.34. says,
Father forgive them.

Answ. Though all the persons in the Trinnity forgive sins, yet not in the
same manner, the Father bestows, the Son merits, the Holy Ghost seals up
and applies remission of sins.

This clause in earth] means, that Christ for this cause came down to the
earth, that he might offer to men the present grace of God.

Take up thy bed] That that which was a witness of thy infirmity, may now be a
witness of thy health restored. Brugensis.

Verse. 9. A man named Matthew] The Evangelist speaks of himself in the third
person, 1 Timothy 1.13.14, 15, 16. Piscat. Levi significat additum Matthaeus
datum, donatum. Chemnit.
He is called of Mark and Luke, Levi, therefore he had two names; He was at
first called Levi, after his calling Matthew, and so he is styled after, though
Grotius seem to differ from this opinion.

Luke says, He made him a feast. Our Savior invites him to a Discipleship,
Matthew invites him to a feast.

Verse. 10. At Jesus sat at meat in the House] viz. of Matthew, as it is
plain in Mark and Luke especially, for Matthew in modesty conceales his own
name.

Many publicans and sinners] Publicans and sinners will flock together, the
one hateful for their trade, the other for their vicious life.

These two publicans and sinners are often joined together, Luke. 7.34. and
15.7.

Verse. 11. The squint-eyed Pharisees look a trosse at all the actions of
Christ, where they should have admired his mercy, they cavil at his holiness;
when these Censurers thought the Disciples had offended, they spoke not to
them, but to their Master. Why do thy Disciples that which is not lawfull] Now
when they thought Christ offended, they spoke not to him but to the Disciples.

Verse. 13. I will have mercy and not sacrifice] That is, rather than sacrifice.
By sacrifice all external worship of God is understood.

Call the righteous but sinners] Those who acknowledge themselves to be
sinners, confessing and forsaking their sins, Perkins on Jude.
and not such as presume of their own righteousness.

Caskes (...) Judge. 4.19. and she opened a Caske of Milk. Mollerus in haec
verba psalmi. 50. pone lachrimas meat in utere tuo, Solebant orientales in
utribus servare vinum and oleum, ideo hac metaphora utitur.

The same thing is meant in both the similitudes, of discipline more harsh than
weak Disciples were able to bear. Vide Scultet. Exercit. Evang. l. 2. cap. 52.


Verse. 16, 17. No man puts new wine into old bottles] That is, exacteth
rigid and heavy services of weak and tender Disciples, and therefore my
Disciples fast not while I am amongst them in the flesh.

But the days shall come] When I shall send them my Holy Spirit, to strengthen
and prepare them forhard service, and then they shall fast.

Calvin.
Christ therefore compares his Disciples to old bottles and torn garments, not
because they were worn with long use, but because they were weak.

Verse. 18. All Alardi pathologia Sacra. N. T.
the Three Evangelists begin this History of Jairus, with the particle Behold,
which yet here is not a Demonstrative adverbe, but rather an adverbe of
admiration. For it is manifest that the men of this rank were the greatest
adversaries to Christ. John 7.48. and 9.22.

The name of Jairus is suppressed by Matthew, but set down by Mark and Luke.

Worship him] That is, bow the knee, which was common among the inhabitants of
the East. He did not give divine honor to Christ, but worship him as a Prophet
of God.

Ver. 20. Diseased with an issue of bloud] It is but one word in the (...).
Greek, The Evangelists do expressly declare that this Issue of blood had endured
for the space of twelve years, and that the woman had consumed all her
substance upon Physicians, whereby the glory of the Miracle was so much the
greater.

Verse. 21. She had no devotion to the hemme of his garment, but because she was
kept off by the Press, so that she could not come near to desire his aid as
others did, she said within her self, if I shall but only touch the hemme of
his Garment. Cartwright.

If I may touch] A weak action, the hemme of his garment] the remotest part,
with a trembling hand, a feeble apprehension; the virtue proceeded not from his
garment, but immediately from himself, therefore he says virtue is proceeded
from me. Luke 8.8.

Verse. 23. Minstrells] Tibia utebantur in funere puerorum puellarumque, nam
instrumentum est exilis and angustae vocis. Lactantius. Iubet religio ut
majoribus mortuis tuba, minoribus tibia caneretur. Vide Scultet. observe. in
Matthew. 1.29. Christus loquitur eis qui flentes and ejulantes parabant exequias
defunctae, and non suscitandae; voluit testari se eam statim suscitaturum,
quasi ex somno expergefactam, non potuit igitur aptius hoc significare quam
illis verbis quibus est usus. Amesius de consc. l. 5. Tibiae praesertim and
solum puerorum exsequijs adhibebantu^, sicut tubae in funeribus aetate
provectorum. Alardi epiphyllides Philol.
Who played with their sad tunes. Cantabat maestis tibia funeribus. Ovidius.

Verse. 24. She was dead, therefore they scoffed at him, as though he
endeavored to raise one dead, as if she were only a sleep; but He really
demonstrated that she slept to him, because He raised here only by his call,
as we can those that sleep. Piscat.

Verse. 25. Took her by the hand] As we are wont to do, when we raise one from
sleep. Christ hereby demonstrated, that it is as eas^y for God to raise the
dead, Grotius.
as to awaken those that sleep, which might much confirm their faith.

Verse. 33. I marvel not if the people marvelled, for here were four wonders
in one, the Blind saw, the Deaf heard, the Dumb spoke, the Demoniacke is
delivered; rarity and difficulty are wont to cause wonder, but meet in this.

If we respect either the multitude, or power of working miracles, Chemnit.
there was never the like done.

Verse. 34. The Pharisees were mad, to defame with wicked speech so notable a
work of God, for the Antithesis is to be noted between the praise of the
people and the blasphemy of these men, what could malice say worse?

Verse. 36. He was moved with compassion] The word signifies the yearning of
the bowels, such as is in the most tender pity and compassion, as Zachary
explaines it, (...) verbum (...) a visceribus deductum, quod plus habet
emphaseos quam latinum misereri Hebraei enim viscera vehementem atque intimum
affectum vocant, in visceribus enim residet humanitas, and mutua compassio ergo
proximos. Indicat itaque hoc verbum, quo Graeci interpretes expresserunt
hebraeum Raham, quod hoc etiam loco Syriace est, summam and vehementem
commiserationem ex intimis visceribus profectam, non sine externa corporis
alteratione; tanquam si dicas, commotus viseribus. Lucas brugensis. Comment. in
4. or Evangelia.
Luke 1.78.

Verse. 37. By this metaphore he declares that many of the common sort were
ready to receive the Gospel, see John 4.35. Vtitur allegoria sumta a re
rustica. Brugensis.
Those which profess themselves to be Gods people, and are in some kind of
ripeness to be instructed and become obedient to him, are the harvest. This
was spoken at the feast of Tabernacles, which was in the midst of harvest, the
Parable also of the Sower was in sowing-time.

Labourers] The Ministers of Christ, see the 10. of Luke the beginning. few]
almost, only Christ and John. A harvest-labourer, or reaper, should be first
skillful, secondly, industrious, thirdly, sent.

Verse. 38. Send forth] Word for word, cast them out, Extrudat rather than
emittar.
for men are very slow in so holy a work.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. THE number of Twelve did note the future restoring of the Church,
Calvinus.
for as the people rose from Twelve Patriarchs, so now Christ recalls the
scattered relickes, to the memory of their original, that they may conceive a
certain hope of their restitution.

Potestatem adversus spiritus impuros. Beza. (...), potestatem spirituum
immundorum. vulg.
Power against unclean spirits] It is well translated so by Beza, and us,
according to the meaning of the phrase, word for word, it is in the original,
power of unclean spirits, and so the Vulgar reads it.

Verse. 2. Peter and Andrew named first, because they were first called, Mat.
4.18. Theophylact. This is such a primacy as a foreman of the Quest is wont to
have in Juries: not a primacy of power, as over inferiors, but a primacy of
order, as amongst equals. Dr Rain. against Heart. C. 5. p. 174, 175.
Peter is placed first here, but Luke 6. and Mark 3. the same order is not
observed, and by Paul himself, Gal. 2.5. James is put before Peter. We
acknowledge the primacy, but not the pre-eminence of Peter above the other
Apostles.

Peter signifies a rock which has firmness, he was so called for constancy,
Andrew manlike, James striving, John the grace of God, Philip a light or lamp,
Bartholomew full of water, Thomas engraffed in Christ, Matthew plucked out of
the world, James a striver, Lebaeus hearty, Simon zeal.

That they are sent two and two, as in Luke 10.1. The seventy Disciples are
sent by paires, Polic. Lyser.
this makes for the commendation of brotherly Charity among the Ministers of
the Word, for the mutual keeping of works and doctrine, also for consolation
and mutual help in adversity, and for the greater confirmation of the truth of
the word preached. Deuteronomy. 17.6.

Because Christ sent his Apostles by paires, the Jesuits walk two together in
the streets, but if more of them go forth together, there is a mystery in it,
according to that speech. Iesuitae semper sunt bini, si vero sint trini,
tertius est generis faeminini.

Ver. 3. Matthew in describing his person, keeps humility and candor; humility
in that, that when other Evangelists prefer him (in rehersing his pair) before
Thomas, he for modesties sake postposeth himself to him; candor, that he makes
mention of his ancient sinful condition, Polic. Lyser.
and confesses that he was a Publican.

Verse. 5. Sent forth] or commanded forth, for (...), whence the Apostles are
derived, signifies properly, Cum mandatis emittere, to send forth with
commands.

Go not, etc.]

Object. Mark. 16.15. Answer, Distinguish times, and the Scriptures will be
consonant enough, that in Mark is meant of preaching after Christ's time, this
in Matthew while he was living on the earth, both are true, because the times
are diverse.

Verse. 6. He assigns the first place to the Jews, because they were the
firstborn. First, Calvin.
Miraculous cures are there meant. 2. For those days only. 3. There is a
difference between action and labor. 4. Forbids a mercenary affection.

See 4. Deuteronomy. 5. and 14.
Verse. 8. It may be understood of the Lords work generally, that as freely they
have received the grace, so freely they should do the work. 1 Pet. 5.2.

Verse. 9. Provide neither gold nor silver, nor brass in your purses] The
Commandment was temporal, and given to the Disciples but only for the time of
their first embassage into Jury, That is, of all necessaries for the
maintenance of this life.
as appears in the fifth verse; and the Commandments of their first message
were reversed afterward, Luke 23.36. Mr Perkins.

Verse. 10. Scrip] Necessary provision. two coats] Change of raiment. staves]
defense.

Objection, A staff is allowed, Mark 6.8. but here in Matthew, and Luke 9.3.
it is denied.

Marcus loquitur de virga seu baculo and fulcimine cui innitaris. Hic enim est
symbolum viatorum pauperum, qui baculo innixi incedunt ut fatigationem levent,
sicuti incessit Jacob peregrinus in Mesopotamia, Genesis 32.10. Matthaeus vero hic
loquitur de virga defensoria, vel vindicatoria, quam Christus Apostolis vetat.
Cornel a Lap.
Answer, Matthew and Luke mean staves which are a burden to them that bear
them, but Mark means a staff whereon travelers do ease themselves, Genesis
32.10. a walking staff, take no staff to strike with. See Piscator.

Shoes] See Mark 6.9.

The shoes which Matthew mentions are new, such as are with care and
diligence prepared to travel in, the Sandales in Mark are such as are daily
worn on the feet. Mr Perkins.

Verse. 11. And into whatsoever City or house ye shall enter, enquire who in it
is worthy] and there be bold to tarry and receive entertainment; as if he
should say, every one that is worthy will be ready to show kindness unto you.
Acts 16.15.

And there abide till ye go thence] Abide in that house till ye go out of that
City; go not from house to house. See Luke 10.7.

Verse. 14. (...) excutitur de pedibus in testimonium laboris sui, quod ingressi
sint civitatem, and praedicatio apostolorum ad illos usque pervenerit. Sive
excutitur pulvis, ut nihil ab eis recipiant, ne ad victu^ quidem necessarium,
qui Evangelium spreverint. Hieron. in loc. Piscat. Calv. See Acts 13.51.
It is probable that the Jews then used to shake off the dust as a figure of
cursing, as if they did it to witness, that the Inhabitants of the place were
so wicked, that they infected the earth and dust with their contagion, and that
they would not communicate with them in any thing. Iansen. Harm.

Chrysostom, Jerome, Theophylact, and Austen say, that Christ commands them
this, To show the labor of them that came, their feet were dusty. Aquinas,
Erasmus. To show that their labor was lost. Jerome.
that they might show they would have nothing to do with them, and not carry
away their dust who contemned the Gospel.

Verse. 16. Behold I send you] The mission of the Apostles was twofold, first,
more particular in this Chapter, Vtitur Particula demonstrandi ecce qua and
attentionem excitat and rem notatu dignam se indicaturum innuit. Apostolis and
verbi praeconibus ovium naturam tribuit. Ovium ingenium est simplex non
versutum, secundo hominibus in omnibus, lana, lacte, carne, fimo, usui and
commodo sunt, denique est animal inerme, placidum, mansuetum. Polycarp. Lyser.
when Christ sent them only to preach the Gospel in the land of Judea, 5, 6. v.
Secondly, more general after his resurrection, Mat. 28.18, 19. These words
pertain to Christ's first mission.

As sheepe] Harmeless, and helpeless. Among wolves] so called, first, Per lupos
intelligit hosts veritatis quales tum temporis fuerunt Sacerdotes, Scribae,
Pharisaei, sic vocantur partim propter rapacitatem partim propter indomitam and
insatiabilem rabiem. Pol. Lyser.
For their antipathy to the sheep; secondly, For their cruelty, thirsting for
their blood.

Be wise as serpents, and simple as doves] Be wise lest ye be circumvented by
others, Vide Fag. in Genesis 3.1.
and simple lest ye hurt others; Sine prudentia simplicitas stultitia est.
Drusius.

The Serpent is very quick sighted to escape danger, Tam cernis acutum quam aut
aquila aut Serpens epidaurius, and therefore, He is called Draco of seeing. 2.
He stops his ears against the Charmer, with the earth on one side, and his
tail on the other, and will not be gotten out of his hole. 3. Seeks to save
his head, Jerome, Austen, Ambrose, Totum corpus in orbem circumvoluit ut caput
occultet. 4. He has a tortuous way not to be found; He has respect here to
that place. Genesis 3.1.

The Serpent had in his Creation a special impresse of wisdom above all other
Creatures, therefore Satan made use of him to deceive our first Parents.

Doves] The Dove Simplex est animal, fell caret, rostro non lae dit. Bernard.

The properties of the Dove, 1. Meekness, the Dove is without gall. 2.
Simplicity, Bish. Lake.
innocence, as here, the Dove is, without guile, a simple and harmeless bird.
Cant. 4.1. and 5.12. and 6.8. The third quality is Chastity, she keeps to her
mate, sincerity and singleness in heart and life. 4. Is neat, ad candida tecta
columbae, they are pure, not defiled with sin. 5. The Dove is a loving, and
lovely creature. Dr Tailor.
6. The Doves fly together, Esa. 60.8. So they must join together in Gods
pure worship.

Verse. 17. But beware of men] As if he should say, what speak I of Wolves, you
have more cause to fear danger from men, than Wolves, or from any other
creature whatsoever. Homo homini lupus.

Verse. 18. Governours] As Paul before Felix and Festus, Act. 23.24, 25. and
24:25.

Kings] Peter before Herod, Act. 12.4. and Paul before Agrippa, Act. 25.26.

Verse. 23. Son of man] It is a comfort given peculiarly to the Apostles. Calvin.
Christ is said to come, when he brings remedy to things in despair.

Verse. 24. The Disciple is not above his Master] While he continues a Disciple,
as Christ's Disciples should never cease to be his Disciples, so Grotius
interprets this proverb Dum adhuc discipuli fuerint minores sunt
praeceptoribus, si vero praestantiores magistris evaserint, non amplius erunt
discipuli. Theoph
usual among the Hebrews.

Verse. 28. As if he should say, I allow and command you to fear men only for
God, who has set them over you; but fear God for himself. Perkins.

Verse. 29. Farthing] The tenth part of a Roman penny, of our Coin half penny
farthing; (...) passerculus is a diminutive of (...) or (...). There is almost
nothing less esteemed than Sparrowes, for two were then sold for a farthing,
or as Luke says, five for two farthings, and yet the eye of God is watchful
to defend them, they are not shot and so fall down without his providence. The
Epicure altogether denies providence, See Dr. Gouges Sermon on this text.
Aristotle includes it in Heaven, some of the Arabians say it is employed about
universalls not singulars, but this verse and the next confutes them all.

Mr. Perkins.
Verse. 34. To send peace but the sword] That is, division by means of the
doctrine of the Gospel.

By the sword Tralatio inde sumta quia (...) proprium quasi officium est (...),
quo alludit etiam scriptor ad Heb. 4.12. Grotius.
here not war but division is understood, as is most evident by Luke 12.51.

Verse. 37. That is, whosoever loves what he has best reason to love in this
life more than his Savior is not worthy to have any benefit by him, any share
in his mercyes.

Whether our love be an ascending love up to Father or Mother, or a descending
love down to Son or Daughter, it may not be greater than our love of Christ,
nay our love of all others in comparison of our love to Christ must be hatred.
Luke. 14.26. Is not worthy of mee] That is, shall have no benefit by him, shall
not be saved by him.

Verse. 39. He that finds his life shall lose it] That is, He which thinks
he finds his life, he that thinks that by the denying of the Gospel whereby
he may preserve his life, and obtain good days in it, he shall lose life.

Loseth] It is not meant of an actual losing, but a disposition or preparation
of the heart to lose for Christ's sake (if need be) the dearest thing we have,
that is, our life. Mr. Perkins.
Luke 14.26.

Verse. 40.41. He that receives] That is, does any good office, or deserves well
of a Prophet.

Righteous] Is to be taken by way of eminency, for one of eminent sanctity,
such as among the Jews had therefore the surname of Iusti, as Simeon Iustus,
Iacobus Iustus.

Give to drinke] Whence we may gather what receiving before is meant, viz.
relieve, maintain, support.

A Prophets reward] An eminent reward, or of the quality of a Prophet, though
himself be none. Mede in loc.

These words of beneficence to Ministers of the word, are expounded by the
chiefest Divines, that the sense should be, as they who give honor to the
Ambassadors of Kings or Princes, do procure the favor of the King, so he
that respects and honors the Apostles and the Ministers of the word, as the
Ambassadors of God, 2 Cor. 5.20. shall certainly receive a large reward from
God. This is a pious interpretation, and not strange from the mind of Christ;
yet it does not fully express the sense. For it is the same to receive the
Apostles, Christ, a Prophet, a righteous man, as to receive the words of the
Apostles, Christ, a Prophet, a righteous man, or to believe and hearken to
them, so that true faith is especially expressed by this phrase, laying up in
their hearts the word of Christ, the Apostles and Prophets; and adhering to him
with all the heart, which shows it self afterward in beneficence and
hospipitality toward the Preachers of the Gospel. That this is the mind of
Christ, appears by a parallel place, Luke 16.16. where Christ expounds
himself, what it is to receive the Apostles and Ministers of Christ. It is the
same thing to hear one and receive him; Mayetus in ^hilol. Sac.
so Matthew. 11.14. if you will receive me, if you will believe me, hear me.
John 1.11.12.

Eo nomine.
To receive in the name of a Prophet, and of a righteous man] signifies, as
much as to do them good, for the honor of the Gospel, and in respect of the
Gospel. Mark 9.41.

A Prophets reward] Some understand it, that they shall be partakers of the
same reward, Calvin.
which is laid up for the Prophets and righteous, rather a reward which is fit
for the worthiness of the person, upon whom the liberality shall be bestowed.

Pro poculo aquae frigidae torrens voluptatis, for a cup of cold water (water
the common element, and cold water which cost thee not the charge of fire to
warm it) there is a torrent, nay, a very Sea of all pleasures provided for
thee for all eternity. Bish. Andrews. Frigidae, inquit aquae, non calidae: ne
and in calida paupertatis ex penuria lignorum occasio quaereretur. Hierom. in
loc.
Verse. 42. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a
cup of cold water onely] A proverbiall kind of speech, which we use to this
day in many tongues, as often as we would express the least benefit. God
esteems men's deeds by their mind, not their mind by their deeds.

In the Greek it is (...) Cold only, not water, as the Latins say, frigidam
bibere and frigida lavare.

CHAP. XI.
Verse 4. Go and show John again those things which ye do hear and see] Our
Savior answers them by a real demonstration.

Verse. 6. In me] With the simplicity and humility of my person, kingdom,
Zepperus.
word, worship and administration of the Sacraments. See 26.31. 1 Cor. 1.23.

Verse. 7. Iohn] His name was famous among the people, and they spoke honorably
of him, but his doctrine was little esteemed; therefore Christ tells them
that they lost their labor, which went forth to see him, except they would
observe his doctrine.

Verse. 8. The simple meaning of this place is, Author imperfecti operis. Non
simpliciter redarguit sed dixit cui statui conveniat.
that there was no such thing in the Wilderness, which should allure the people
thither, for all things there were rude, they should rather look in Kings
Courts for fine trimming, which delights the eyes.

Verse. 9. 1. Prophesied of all things, the old Prophets did. 2. In his Mothers
belly, Luke 1.41. 3. Pointed at Christ with a finger; he was middle between a
Prophet and an Apostle.

Verse. 10. Behold I send my messenger before thy face, who shall prepare thy
way before thee] It is a metaphor taken from Kings, for whom going forth the
ways are wont to be prepared, the streets made clean and adorned, Tostatus.
Pareus.
and his chief servants to go before him, the chiefest of which is he that
goes next before him. Such a one was John the last of the old Prophets, and the
first of the new.

Verse. 11. John Baptist was nearer Christ in time, being the very next unto him
of all the Prophets which ever went before him; he was therefore more happy
than the rest, for he saw what they desired to see, and saw not; See Luke 7.28.
Calvin. Harm. Evang. Peter Martyr. loc. commun. Beza. in Annotat.
and also of a more worthy calling, as pointing out Christ with the finger,
which the rest only descried afar off.

He gained more to God by his Ministy, than any of them had done, as appears
verse 12.

Notwithstanding, etc.] That is, in the new estate of the Church, not in
respect of his person and gifts, but of his ministry, greater than John
Baptist. Hildersam. See Dr. Sclator on 1. of the Romans p. 1. because he is all
what John was half, John was so great, because He was last of the Law, and
first of the Gospel, and the old rule is, minimum maximi, majus est maximo
minimi. Instituitur collatio non juxta mensuram donorum, sed gradus
revelationis, Prophetae nunciabant venturum, Baptista monstrabat praesentem.
Chemnit.
wholly under the Gospel of the kingdom. The least Minister of the Gospel is
greater than John, in respect of the preaching of Christ, so Bishop Down. de
Antich.

Grotius says, the comparison is wholly in the gift of the Prophet, which Luke
7.28. expresses more evidently, as much as John excelled all the Prophets before
him, so much the lowest Prophets of the New Testament excel John, viz. in
greater knowledge of man's redemption: for that before John was a mystery, in
John's time it began to shine forth, after the passion and resurrection of
Christ, and sending of the Holy Ghost, it was more evident than the light at
noone day.

Verse. 12. The Kingdom of heaven] Christ himself, Ambrose; Eternal life, or
Heaven, Gregory and Bid; Faith, Chrysostom, Euthymius and Theophylact; some
say the Church, or Gospel, Sancta fidelium in novi Testamenti Ecclesia
irrumpentium violentia. There was such forwardness and zeal in them which heard
John preach, to procure to themselves the kingdom of heaven, that they strove
most earnestly to get it. Mr Perkins.

The kingdom of grace is called the kingdom of heaven, in opposition to the
Kingdoms of the world, and to the spiritual kingdom of the devil, and
because the Lord of it has his throne in heaven, and all good things come to
them from heaven, and because it differs but in degrees from the kingdom of
glory; this is mixed and imperfect, that is pure and entire.

s Metaphora sumta a Castris vel ab arce quapiam, quae irrumpentibus hostibus
diripitur. Beza, Brugens.
Take it by force] As a Castle is taken by a storm. These words are
restrictive, the violent and only they, and promissive.

Verse. 14. And if ye will receive it] That is, if you will give credit to my
speech.

This is Elias which was for to come] viz. in spirit and power like to Eliah,
Luke 1.17. but not the person of Elias, John 1.21.

Talia apud Poetas, Audire est operae pretium, and audite atque animis
advertite vestris. Grotius.
Verse. 15. He that has ears to hear let him heare] An Epiphonema with which
Christ, and John in the Revelation following him, Apoc. 2.7, 17. often shut up
their speeches concerning things of great moment. Christ would signify that it
was a matter of great moment, to believe that John was the Eliah promised by
Malachie, for they mistaking in that might be deceived in the Messiah.

Verse. 16. Christ uses a similitude (as it is supposed) of a game commonly
used by children, Children leading several dances did so sing one to another;
Christ that he might overthrow the pride of the Scribes, took occasion to
reprove them from children playing together, Calv. Paraeus.
their song was enough to condemn them.

Verse. 17. We have piped unto you, and you have not danced] They were neither
moved to mirth with merry things, nor to sadness with sad things.

Vsus tibiarum apud Hebroeos duplex erat, Vsus tibiarum ad laetitiam erat in
Templo and in festo Tabernaculorum.
in hilaritate and gaudio, and in luctu, in nuptiis and infuneribus; We have
mourned unto you (viz. with pipes) and you have not lamented. Mat. 9.23.

When as he had lived an austere and straight life, preached repentance, and
sang a mournful song, and the Lord himself, as with a merry and cheerful
song applied him self more pleasantly to allure them to his Father, yet neither
of these ways profited amongst them.
Verse. 18. He abstained from common meats, and common order of diet. Luke has
it, not eating bread, nor drinking wine.

Verse. 19. That is, to live after the common order of men, but he drank only
water, and did eat only locusts and wild honey.

Verse. 19. There is a secret Antithesis between natural children and bastards,
which vaunt of a vain title without a cause, as if Christ should say, let them
go on in their pride which gloriously boast themselves to be wisdoms children
in vain, she shall yet have her praise, and her authority amongst her natural
children. Luke therefore adds, of all her children, whereby he declares,
that the resistance of the Scribes was not such a let to any, but that all the
Elect of God should remain in the faith of the Gospel; that place, Luke 7.29.
well explaines this, that is, acknowledged the wisdom and goodness of God
shining in Christ, and John.

Verse. 21. Hypotheticall propositions presuppose not a truth, as here, and Luke
19.37. not that stones can speak, nor Tire repent.

Proverbialis est locutio etiam Graecis and Latinis, ad astra tolli, aut
sublimi vertice sidera ferire, pro eo quod est rebus florentibus and illustri
loco esse. Grotius.
Verse. 23. A proverbiall speech, and an allusion to the words of Esaias 14.14,
15, 25. 1 Cor. 1.27, 29.

Verse. 25. These things] That is, the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the
mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.

Verse. 27. The opposition is made to exclude Creatures, and false Gods, not the
Holy Ghost; the meaning is, None, that is, no Creature, or Idoll-God knows
the Son of God but the Father. Mr Perkins.

Verse. 28. Come Non simpliciter dixit venite sed (...), quae particula est
hortantis.
] That is, believe, so Christ himself expounds it, John 6.35. No man can come,
that is, believe, except the Father draw him. John 5. You will not come to me.

Wearied, and heavy laden See my Greek. Crit. Observa emphases in vocibus
(...) and (...), Priori peccatum durissimo labori, posteriore gravissimo oneri
comparatur. Glassius.
]The first word signifies such as labor until they be weary: and the other
signifies such as are heavy laden with a burden unsupportable, and being
grievously pressed therewith, desire to be eased of it.

Heavy laden] Some say, 1. with Crosses, as Aug. de verb. Dom. 2. Rigor of the
Law, Theophylact 3. Sin, Ier. 9.5. as Chrysostom.

Rest] From reatus, vis, regnum, paena peccati, not radix of it, therefore not
said take away, but rest, from the four first; Here is no exception of sins,
times, or persons.

Verse. 29. Learn of me] Austin says, what to do? Not to create the world, to
walk on the water, to raise the dead; we must follow him, non in quantum Filius
Dei, but in quantum Filius hominis; the same Father, He gives us a precept, and
a pattern, the one requiring our obedience, the other our conformity.

And ye shall find rest.]Not outward, natural, but the repose of the mind and
conscience.

Verse. 30. My yoke) Not only Christ's, because he as Lord puts it upon us,
(...) a levitate and agilitate cervorum nomen habet. (...) non solu^ exonerabo,
sed quod multo amplius est, in omni quiet vos constituam.
but because he as a fellow servants helps us to bear it. Metaphora a jumentis
deducta.

Easie] 1. By presence of grace. 2. Help of the spirit, Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. 3.
Love to it, yet a yoke and a burden; suave, sed amanti, is Bernards gloss, i.e.
Ioh. 5.3, 4. Iugum ejus merito est suave, cui servire est regnare. Augustine.

My yoke is easie] The Greek word signifies more rightly, my yoke is a benign,
a gracious, a pleasant, a good, and a gainefull yoke, all pleasure and profit
is made up in the Word.

CHAP. XII.
Verse 1. THe purpose of the Evangelists in this history, was to show, partly
how malicious the Pharisees were, and partly how superstitiously they were
addicted to outward rites of small importance, insomuch that they placed all
their holiness in them.

Verse. 3. Christ defends the fact of his Disciples, and confuteth the cavil
of the Pharisees by five arguments: 1. By David's example, necessity freed him
from fault, for the Priest which gave him leave to take the shewbread is
commended by the Holy Ghost; indeed it was not lawful but for the Priest only
to eat the bread, that is, by the common Law. The second Argument is in the
fifth, because it is lawful on the Sabbath days to kill Sacrifices, to
circumcise Infants, and to do all other things that pertain to the worship of
God; the works of godliness cannot be contrary one to another. The Law] That is
the Books of Moses, which describe the Law, a Metonymie of the Subject. Broken
by the Priests] An improper speech which Christ uses, that he may frame
himself to the hearers. The third argument is in the seventh verse, Christ
reproves the Pharisees because they considered not for what purpose the
Ceremonies were commanded, nor to what end they did belong. Hos. 6.7. Mercie]
That is, Calvin.
all works of Charity, and under sacrifice is all the outward worship of the
Law comprehended. The fourth reason is in verse. 8. Christ says here that he
has power given him to set his people free from the necessity of observing the
Sabbath, the Son of man (says he) can of his own power moderate the observing
of the Sabbath, as he does the other Ceremonies of the Law. The fifth argument
is reported by Mark only, Chap. 7.27. The sum of it is, they do wickedly
which turn the Sabbath to man's destruction, which God instituted for his sake.

Verse. 5. On the Sabbath day the Priests in the Temple profane the Sabbath, and
are blameless] That is, they do such things as in other cases not concerning
the worship of God, would be a profanation of the Sabbath. If a Butcher in his
slaughterhouse should so slay, flea, and cut beasts in pieces on the Sabbath,
he would therein profane it. Dr Gouge.


Verse. 9. He went into their Synagogue] viz. On another Sabbath. This history
and the former tend both to one end, viz. that the Scribes were maliciously
bent to carpe and cavil at every thing that Christ did.

Verse. 10. They asked him] viz. the Scribes and Pharisees, Mark and Luke do
only say, they watched what the Lord would do; but Matthew sets it down more
plainly, that they tempted him also in words. And it is likely that he had
healed some others on the Sabbath before, having therefore taken occasion of
that, they demand of him, whether he think it lawful for him to do again that
he had done before, but God who instituted the Sabbath, laid not a Law upon
himself, they should have considered whether it had been the work of God or man
to heal a dried hand only by touching it, or with a word.

Verse. 11. Christ shows again what is the true and right observation of the
Sabbath, and also reproves them for their malicious dealing, because they
cavilled at him for that which was usual amongst them all. Mark and Luke have
not this similitude, they only say that Christ demanded whether it was lawful
to do a good deed on the Sabbath day, or to do evil? For he that destroys
the life of a man is guilty of an offense, yea, differs little from a
manslayer.

Verse. 14. Held a counsell] Or took counsel, with the Herodians says Mark,
whom yet they hated most deadly.

Chemnitius.
Verse. 16. And charged them that they should not make him known] Because the
time of his glorification was not as yet, but of his humiliation. 2. Because
the multitudes did not yet sufficiently know the true end and use of his
Miracles.

Verse. 18. Behold my servant] The (...)) dictio (...) ambigua est in puero and
servo. Hic autem servum denotat, cum in Ebraeo sit Nabor. Sed and Latin puer
pro servo ponitur. Drus. not. in Parallel. Sac.
Greek word signifies both a Son and a servant, but a servant here.

Show judgment to the Gentiles] That is, one should come that should restore
righteousness decayed, and He should be the Governor, not only of the
Jews, but should bring the Gentiles also under the government of God.

Verse. 19. Nor cry] Such a cry is here meant, which is a sign of a troubled
and chafed mind.

Verse. 20. A Reed is a tender thing, it will break sometimes before a man be
aware, a bruised Reed is more tender, it will be broken with a touch. A
bruised Reed is a soul broken with the sense of sin, and weak in faith.
Matthew. 11.28.

Smoking flaxe] The weeck of a candle which is newly lighted, and has little
light or heat, but rather smoakes and offends with an ill smell, i. e. A soul
which has but a little knowledge and zeal, or affection for God, and much
corruption.

Till he send forth judgment unto victory] The words of the Prophet are
somewhat otherwise, that he shall bring or lead forth judgment in truth. Yet
Matthews speech has force in it, that we may know that judgment cannot be
placed in the world without great strife or labor, for victory is not obtained
but by fighting. Some expound these words thus, Calvin.
until the sanctified frame of grace begun in their hearts, be brought to that
perfection, that it prevails over all opposite corruption.

Verse. 22. Many are blind and dumb of natural diseases: but this man was
blind in his eyes, and deprived of his speech, though there was no want in
those parts pertaining to the sight, or in the proportion of the tongue.

Verse. 23. Is this the Son of David?] Interrogatio innuit affirmationem
opinabilem, as if they should say, truly He seems to be the Son of David,
that is Christ, a periphrasis from the efficient.

Verse. 24. Beelzebub] It signifies the Lord of flies, but if it be read
Beelzebul, For Beelzebub in many copies it is (...), which sounds, Dominus
stercoreus, quod vocabulum sine dubio in contumeliam ipsius idoli and cultorum
ejus est inventum. Buxtorf. in Lexico Talmudico.
it signifies the dunghill God.

Verse. 25. Christ, 1. confuteth the cavil objected against him by a common
proverb, 2. he proves it by an induction of three particulars; one of a
kingdom, another of a City, the third of a house; the meaning is, there is
nothing more absurd, than that the Devil should willingly overthrow the power
which he has overcome, who indeavoureth by all means to have them in his
bondage.

Verse. 26. When Exorcists by the help of Satan cast out Satan, that is done by
delusion of the Devil, ex pacto, that he might thereby retain men in
superstition and idolatry, and that by his ejection out of the body, he might
have dominion over the soul: for if Satan should violently cast out Satan, he
would be divided against himself, which Christ denies.

Verse. 27. By whom do your children cast them out] This place is diversely
expounded, some Maldonate, Hilary, Jerome, Theophylact, Euthymius.
by children there understand the Apostles who were Jews borne, and had
received from Christ this gift and power to cast out Devils; others Calv. Chem.
Iunius.
rather think that by children are meant exorcising Jews before Christ's time,
who did cast out Devils among them, pretending to do this work in the name of
God, whereas in truth they were all flat sorcerers, and did it by compact made
with the Devil. Act. 19.13.16.17.

Judges] You need not to seek far for your condemnation, You have among you
sundry magicians and exorcists who pretend to exercise the gift of casting out
devils, and you think they do it by the power of God, why then do you not carry
the same opinion of me also. Mr Perkins.
the miracles which I work you apply to Beelzebub, and you praise the same in
your children; therefore you have enough at home to condemn your selves.

Verse. 28. By the Spirit of God] Luke metaphorically calls it the finger, for
Spirit. For because God works, and shows his power, by the Spirit, the name
of a finger is aptly given it; this speech was common among the Jews.

Come] This word is very forcible, and shows that Christ appeared willingly
to them as a Redeemer, but they as much as they could, drove him from amongst
them, and would give no place to him that was come, ready and prepared for
their salvation.

Verse. 29. This sentence is but a confirmation of that which went before. He
affirms that a strong and mighty Tyrant cannot be driven out of his kingdom,
until he be spoiled of his weapons; he alludes to that place, Esaias 49.24.

Verse. 30. When Christ was much injured with the blasphemies of the Pharisees,
he confutes the slander, and then lays down this rule, Proverbium Iudaicum in
utramque partem usurpatum, nam and dici solebat, Qui non est contra vos, pro
vobis est. Luc. 9.5. Sic in gnomis Salomonis, respondeas stulto, and ne
respondeas stulto, quae omnia veritatem suam habent pro materia cui aptantur.
Videtur autem proverbium istud hoc loco a minori ad majus hoc modo procedere.
Si in bello internecino quale est inter Dei servos and daemonas, nemini licet
neutrarum esse partium, sed medii pro hostibus habentur, quanto magis ergo
hostis censendus sum diaboli, qui non modo illi non prosum sed obsum quam
maxim? Obstat quicquid non adjuvat. Quintil. Grot. in loc.
He that is not with me is against me, in such blasphemies against Christ, we
must take his part actively, and must resolve to be with Christ against the
world. In Mark 9.40. and Luke 9.50. Some cast out Devils in Christ's name, and
the Disciples forbad them, here because they did act in Christ's name (though
they did not follow with them) they were not to be hindered.

V. 32. Christ said v. 31. Blasphemy should not be pardoned, in the 32. he
adds, Shall be forgiven neither in this world, nor in the world, nor in the
world to come] that is, never, as Mark expounds it. Mar. 3.19. Bucer, Calvin,
Martyr, Musculus, Zanchius, say, that those who out of malice and purpose
blaspheme and oppose the divine truth revealed in their minds, shall never
obtain pardon; the Papists say they may obtain pardon, but difficultly.
Neither in this world, nor in the world to come] as we see in the Scripture
the like positions are amplified, sometimes by a partition of persons,
sometimes of places, sometimes of things, as here of time; by a partition of
things, Genesis 31.29. of places, as Deuteronomy. 5.32. of persons, Romans 1.16. Rainold de
lib Apoc. tomo secundo praelect. 171.

A proverbiall kind of speech for never, as neither good nor evil, for nothing
at all; neither to the right hand, nor to the left, that is, on no side, Drus.
Proverb. Clas. 2. lib. 3. Proverb. 24.
with the Scholiastes Ben Syrae, qui linguae morbo laborant, sanari non possunt
neque in hoc seculo neque in futuro.

Origin thought that all sins should be pardoned a long while after the last
judgment, which error Christ refutes in those words, nor in the world to
come.]

Verse. 33. Either make the tree good, and his frite good, etc.] Christ
commands the Pharisees to be either good or evil, as if he should have said,
there is nothing more contrary to honesty than hypocrisy, and they challenge
to themselves the title of righteous in vain which are not upright; it is an
upbraiding speech.

Verse. 34. How can ye being evil speak good things] It is (says Christ) no
marvel if you vomit out evil words, seeing that your heart is full of malice.

Verse. 36. Where by idle words, he means such as bring no profit to men,
Sermo otiosus pro inutili sumitur, qui nihil aedificationis vel fructus affert.
Calvin. Verbum otiosum est quod justa necessitate and pia utilitate caret.
Greg. Quod sine utilitate loquentis vel audientis profertur. Hieron. in loc.
nor honor to God, though they do not directly dishonor God, or hurt men. The
words are a true proposition, and sound argument drawn a minore ad majus; if
account must be rendered at the day of judgment of every idle word that men
speak, then much more of blasphemous words.

Verse. 40. By three days and three nights are meant three natural days,
because the Hebrews had no other words for a natural day. It could not be said
he lay three artificial days in the earth, because he lay in the night part of
a natural day. His abode in the grave was about 38 hours. Mr. Perkins.
He was but one day and two pieces of two days in the grave (for he was buried
in the evening before the Sabbath, and rose in the morning the next day after
the Sabbath) yet this is sufficient to verify Christ's saying, Christ was
buried in the heart of the earth, not the midst, but by an Hebraisme, as of
Tyrus. Ezekiel. 27.4. Manifesta haec (...). Nam and Ebraeis, and Graecis, and
Latinis, vox diei ambigua est, and nunc naturalem nunc artificialem diem
significat. Hujusce ambiguitatis tollendae causa solent Ebraei (quorum loquendi
formam Apostoli and evangelistae retinent, Graece quamvis scribant) cum
intelligunt diem naturalem sive civilem, hoc est (...) ponere diei parts,
licet res tota die gesta non sit. Tres dies and tres noctes ponuntur hic pro
triduo, Triduum enim in sepulchro Christus fuit, (...). Imo haud aliter
intelligendu^ videtur, cum Jonas in Ceto fuisse dicitur tribus diebus ac
noctibus. Quistor pius. Non praecise tres dies and tres noctes, nullo modo, sed
figurate and synecdochice. Nam Christus sepeltebatur diei sextae vespera, quo
die crucifixus est, die septimo quievit in sepulcro, die octavo, primo
septimanae proximae resurrexit. Itaque fuit in sepulcro duobus tantum diebus
integris, ac vix quidem illis integris. At dicitur fuisse in cord terrae tres
dies and tres noctes, sicut Jonas fuerat tres dies and tres noctes, ut
commendaret istud mysterium Ionae Prophetae, quo adumbrata est Christi morr and
resurrectio, atque doceret istud etiam vere de ipso affirmari, eum triduo
fuisse in sepulchro, tres dies ac tres noctes synecdochice, quoniam dies
conficitur ex die and nocte, Christus quievit in sepulchro part dierum trium.
Rainold de lib. Apoc. praelect. 128.
for if the analogy had stood in three whole days, then Christ should have
risen the fourth day. Langus de Annis Christi lib. 2. cap. 1. says, by this
exposition Scripturae in os contradicitur, he says two nights and two days
are not three nights and days, two and three are not the same.

41. The men of Nineveh shall judge exemplarily, and are produced to convince
others, who have less profited by greater means. Beza, Piscator.

Vunoleane] because of pollution of sin. Spirit] the Devil. Gone out] that
is in part, as a Drunkard wrought on by a Sermon.
Verse. 43. Is gone out] A voluntary action, but he is cast out of the godly. He
may return and actually possess such men he was actually cast out of. It is
said metaphorically, that he walks through dry places, for his banishment is
grievous to him, and his dwelling out of men is like a filthy desert. Alludes
to the Israelites being in the wilderness, they were not content, but had
rather have been in Egypt again, there was no meat nor drink.

Seeks rest] So long as he is out of man, because that then he fretteth and
tormenteth himself, and cease not to try every way until he recover that he
has lost.

Verse. 44. My house] It is his house though he be in part cast out.

Temptations of a Hypocrite 1. they cease. 2. then the Hypocrite is a fit house
for the Devil, the gracious are not empty.
Empty] Or as the word is, idle, not possessed by grace; so void as no body
looks to it; the word is used by Pharaoh against the Israelites, you are idle;
so the devil finds men idle not looking to their souls, and then comes in.

Swept and garnished] As men expecting guests sweep the house to show how
welcome they shall be; so the idle man garnishes his house, and is ready to bid
the devil welcome: A heart emptied and swept of goodness, and garnished with
noisome lusts, is prepared for the devil.

Verse. 45. Seven other spirits] The number of seven is taken here indefinitely,
as in other places, Worse Devils in respect of the effects they work in a man,
God gives the Devil leave to take a further possession of him.
that is multitudes.

Seven Spirits In the Revelation, that is, with several operations, so the
devil comes with greater temptations and sins.

Verse. 47. His brethren] That is, his nearest kindred, see chapter 13.55.

Verse. 48. Upon this place some old Heretics denied Christ to have any
Mother. Interrogatio indignantis, as if he had said, What do thou tell me of
my Mother and my brethren, as if it were fit that I should omit my Fathers
business, to hearken to my earthly kindred. Luke 2.49. Marys importunity is
here reproved.

Verse. 49. Behold my Mother and my brethren] Spiritual kindred are stronger
than carnal.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 2. THE occasion of our Saviors Sermon, was the gathering of much people
together, and coming unto Christ out of all Cities; the kind of doctrine he
spoke was by a Parable Parabola est explicatio rerum per similitudinem quandam.
Refert quasi agricolae alicujus historiam quotidie sationis tempore consuetam.
Sed hoc differt historia a parabola, quod illa est narratio simplex rei vere
gestae: ista est narratio sive vere, sive verisimiliter gestae, ad aliquid
simile significandum: verbi causa, hic vult significare Christus, ex tanta
multitudine audito rum vix quartam partem credituram Evangelio, prout ipse
Dominus parabolam interpretatur Discipulis. v. 18. Pareus.
, that is, a comparison and similitude drawn from ordinary matters; here it is
taken for an obscure manner of propounding the truth under a continued
similitude, or allegory, from the Greek (...) assimilare, Luke 21.29. see
24.31.33.44.45.47. verses of this Chapter.

Behold a sower went forth to sow] The Scope of this Parable is twofold, First,
whereas our Savior saw a multitude of hearers, but not all coming with the
same intent, nor all hearing with the same fruit and profit: he manifestly
propounds this parable to show the diversity of hearers. Secondly, that every
man might enquire and make trial of himself, in which form or rank of
Hearers he is.

Behold] A note 1. of certainty. 2. Of intention or excitation, that is, let
him that hears consider, remember, apply. 3. Of castigation or check to our
dullness, in beholding such material things.

A Sower] That is, Christ himself, verse. 37.

Went forth to sow] That is, to preach in Spirit, person, ministry.

His seed] That is, the word of God, ver. 11. Which by Christ and his Ministers
is cast into the furrows of the heart, as seed into the furrows of the earth
by the husbandman.

The word of God in this Sermon, is compared by Christ to seed: Verse. 19.
Optime (...) semini comparatur: Nam and Latin sermo a serendo dici creditur.
Grotius. Chemnit. in Harmon.
and for diverse reasons. First, as unknown seed, of which you know not what
fruit it will bring forth, is a contemptible thing and of no price; so the word
of God is not esteemed of. 1 Cor. 1.23. Secondly, as seed has in it self a
virtue of growing, of bearing fruit, and of procreating that which is like unto
it; so the word of God has in it a spiritual and quickening force of
regenerating men. Thirdly, as the seed does not quicken being kept in the
garner, but being cast on the earth; so unles the word of God be spread abroad
into the ears and minds of men, it does not regenerate men, nor bring forth
the fruits of faith. Fourthly, as in sowing the blessing of God is required,
unless we will cast away the seed in vain; so in preaching the word, it is
God only that gives the increase. 2. Cor. 3.7. Fifthly, as in sowing the field
is to be prepared, unles we will lose our labor with the seed; so the heart
is to be prepared to hear the word of God.

Verse. 4. The high way being continually trod by the feet of men grows hard,
seed will not grow there; so men's hearts through the continual passing of the
Devil and lusts. Our Savior interprets it plainly in the 19. verse. the
reason of unfruitfulnesse is two fold, one inward, the seed was trodden under
foot, that is, they despise and undervalue it; the other outward, by malice of
the Devil, the Fowls came and devoured it up. Luke 8.12. he steals, that
is, closely and secretly takes it away.

Verse. 5. This second ground goes beyond the former, they are hearers and
doers. If you sow seed in ground that has some stones and some earth, it will
soon come up, but grows not downward; so these hear the word with joy, but
it takes no root, if persecution come his Religion is gone.

These bad hearers are compared to stones or stony grounds. 1. For their
natural hardness. 2. Coldness. 3. Heaviness. 4. Unprofitableness. This bad
ground goes beyond the former. 1. It receives the seed. 2. Incontinently. 3.
With joy. 4. Brings up the seed sown; it sprung up to sundry degrees. 1. To
external obedience and reformation in most things. 2. To an outward
profession. 3. To a kind of faith.

Much earth] Not as if there were no By sufficient earth is meant a particular
distinct knowledge of the word, and of their own part in it; by rooting,
stability, certainety, and sincerity of faith and other graces.
earth, or roots, or moisture, but as a Rock covered with a little crust of
earth above, all stones below; so it had no roots, that is, no deep roots, no
roots to feed the stalk and blade that was come; no roots which could save
it from withering in time of heat. This is implied by all the Evangelists, who
say, because it wanted roots it lasted but a while, it wanted moisture, that
is sufficient moisture.

Verse. 6. They withered away] Fell away, not all at once, but by little and
little, as a leaf loses his greenesse, and flourish, and withers by degrees.
The causes, 1. Inward. 1. Positive, hardness, it fell among stones. 2.
Privative, want of Moystnesse. Earth. 4, 5. v. Roots. 6. v.

2. Outward Persecution. 21. v. Temptation. Luke 8.13.



Moistnesse] humor, 1. Vnctionis, a sound supply of saving graces which
continually feeds and cherishes the root. 2. Compunctionis, sound sorrow
for sin, and the sound exercise of mortification.

Verse. 7. This ground goes as far as the former in hearing, Luke 8.14. in
receiving, Matthew. 13.20. and Mark. 4.14. and in growing, as Luke, it springs
beyond the other: the other grows, but this sprang up, not only to a blade, but
to an ear, though not a ripe one. These third hearers are doers and sufferers,
in the winter time the thorns will cherish the seed, but when it should bring
forth the earth, the thorns grow up and choke it.

Bring forth no fruite] That is, not to perfection, bring not fruit to the end
as the Greek is, or maturity. The causes of this failing are set down. 1. In
general to be thorns, viz. inward lusts, carnal affections, and corrupt
desires. 2. In special of three sorts, 1. Cares of the world, to distinguish
them from the cares of heaven, Luke 8.14. and 22.2.2. Riches, Luke 8.14. called
deceitfulness of riches, verse 22.3. Voluptuous living, Luke 8.14. called
lusts of other things by another Evangelist, these enter and choke the word,
Mark. 4.19.

Verse. 8. The ground is called good, not a priori, because the word finds it
so, but a posteriori, it is made so by the word. The heart is called good in
two respects. 1. as emptied of bad qualities, being contrary to the bad
disposition of the three former kinds of ground. 2. as well qualified by grace,
so it is called an honest heart, a general word, and put for the approved
disposition of the soul, containing both civil and religious honesty. The
first received not the seed, this receives and retains it; the second choakes
the seed, this cherishes it in a good heart; the third came up fair, but
withered, Sicut in terra mala tres fuere diversitates, secus viam, and petrosa,
and spinosa loca: sic in terra bona trina diversitas est, centesimi,
sexagesimi, and tricesimi fructus. Hieron.
this continues fruitful.

Our Savior speaks not by an hyperbole, or an excessive speech, but
according to the manner of the best ground in Canaan, which brought an hundred
fold increase.

Austin and Jerome say, our Savior mentions three degrees of fruitful ground,
to note a difference betwixt Virgins, Widows, and Married persons.
Theophylact applies it to Anchorites, Monks, and Laickes.

Christ mentions three degrees of fruitful hearers, 1 to note the free
disposition of Gods grace, who distributes to every one according to his good
pleasure. 2. to comfort and encourage his Ministers, who though they lose much
labor in the three bad grounds, yet the good ground makes amends, in which
none are fruitless. 3. to comfort and strengthen such as have not, nor can
attain this hundred fold, though their endeavors be true and earnest, Christ
honors them with the name of good ground, Matthew. 25.23.

Verse. 12. See Luke 19.26. That is, that uses well what he has received.
Drusius in his proverbs expounds it thus, He that has the gift of faith, to
him other things also shall be given.

Verse. 13. Audientes corporis sensu, non audiunt cordis assensu. August. de
corrupt. and great. c. 7.
He here plainly declares, why he used a parabolicall kind of teaching,
because they seeing with their bodily eyes the Miracles of Christ, and hearing
with their corporal ears his Sermons, they did not see nor hear with the
eyes and ears of their heart.

Verse. 19. And understands it not] Spiritually.

(...).
Then comes the wicked one] That is, the Devil; this phrase notes a special
wickedness. God is called by the Prophets in the old Testament, the Holy one,
because he is infinitely and altogether Holy; so the Devil, because he has
the most wicked nature, is called the wicked one. 1. the Devils fell of
themselves and made themselves wicked. 2. they persist in their wickedness. 1
John 3.8. 3. they labor to make others wicked like themselves, they are wicked
subjective and effective.

And catches away that which was sown in his heart] Catch in our language
imports a kind of violence, but the Greek word (...) is more full, Mark says
he comes and takes away the word out of his heart. 4.15.
fetches it away by violence as the Harpie her meat; the ravenous creature
the Harpie has her name from this word; Christ uses the word Matthew. 11.12.
where it is rendered, take by force, because of the vehement pursuit of their
spirit, so this shows the extreme eagerness of satan's spirit.

Verse. 21. Yet has he not root in himselfe] It must be a rooting of our own,
not in opposition to Christ, but any other person, and not so much inregard of
quantity as truth; It must have a rooting, 1. In the understanding. Ephesians. 4.14.
2. Memory. 3. The conscience. Romans 14.15. 4. In the will. Act. 11.23. 5. In the
affections. Ephesians. 3.17. 6. In faith. Col. 2.5.

For when tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, he is by and
by offended] Tribulation is taken largely for any kind of affliction, here for
such a tribulation as has something of persecution in it for the word;
tribulation is often immediate from the hand of God, persecution is ever from
the hand of man.

Because of the word] Received.

Offended] At this persecution; it implies such a distaste as puts a stop to a
man in the way he is in.

Verse. 22. This ground in the general nature of it is thorny, thorns are
lusts that thrive in the soul, so called, 1. because they are sponte
nascentia, spring up naturally in the heart as the others do in ground. 2.
tear and wound the soul as thorns the flesh. 1 Timothy 6.10. 3. in the respect
of the end, thorns are for fire, so lusts either for the fire of the Spirit of
God, or of the wrath of God.

And the deceitfulness of riches] Riches are a great portion of the things of
this world, the Greek word rendered deceitfulness, signifies the drawing one
out of his way, (...) ex a priv. (...) a path, a drawing out of the way.
it notes the deceiving which is under the most cunning disguise of that which
is good or true, the fairest color to draw us out of the way. Riches are not
deceitful actively as the heart of man, Ier. 17.5. or as lust, 4 Ephesians. 22.
but objective, because they are those things about which we are deceived, not
as they are possessed and used, but as they are 1. coveted. 2. trusted to. 3.
ill employed.

Verse. 24. The Kingdom of heaven] That is, the Gospel, because it is the
means of setting it up.

Verse. 25. His enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat] So long as the
Church wandreth in this world, Hypocrites and wicked men be mixed with the
good and sincere, therefore the godly should arm themselves with patience, see
47. v. the mixture of good and evil must be patiently borne until the end of
the world, because the true and perfect restitution of the Church shall not be
before that time.

This Text has much prevailed with many of the Ancient and modern Divines,
Mr. Bedfords examination of the Arguments of the compassionate Samaritane.
to draw them to the use of much, peradventure overmuch, clemency toward
Heretics. Where there is a seeming repugnancy in the Texts, there it is fit
the plain precepts should guide our practice, rather than dark and obscure
parables. The meaning of our Savior is not to forbid the use either of the
spiritual or civil sword. These tares in the Parable are expounded to be the
children of the wicked, that is, of that wicked one the Devil. Why therefore
should it be so expounded, as to favor Heretics rather than Hypocrites? The
intention of the Parable doubtless is to show that there is no expectation of
universal purity in the Church of God during this life; this is the intention,
and farther than so it is not doctrinall; it is evident that he who forbad to
pluck up the tares, did not forbid to hinder the sowing of them.

He that sowes the good seed is Christ our Savior, the field is the world,
Rainold. de lib. Apoc. tomo secundo. praelect. 171.
the good seed are the sons of the kingdom, the tares are the sons of that
evil one, the enemy which sows them is the devil, the reapers are the
Angels, the harvest is the end of the world.

Ver. 31. By these parables Christ encourages his Disciples, lest they being
offended with the small and base beginning of the Gospel should give back,
therefore the Kingdom is compared to a grain of mustard seed, and leaven.

Verse. 32. Which indeed is the least of all seeds] One of the least, or least
of all those which after grew so big.

Lodge Vocem (...) (quae and in Graeco Danielis 4.18. in re simili occur rit.)
Fateor non male versum nidulari: at quid opus fuit a veteri recedere qui (verbo
habitandi usus) tantundem ac meo animo elegantius expressit. Avicula est
parvula, nomen ei Cassita, habitat nidulaturque in segetibus. Gel. l. 2. c. 29.
Pricaus in loc. Graece est (...), quod quidam vertunt nidulentur: nam and
Interpres supra 8. ver. 28. (...) vertit nidos. Rectius tamen congruere videtur
habitandi vox, quia non nidificandi tantum gratia agunt in arboribus volucres*
verum etiam habitandi and versandi dum nullis opus habent nidis, dum scilicet
carent pullis. Caeterum vox (...) quod est tabernaculum deducta, loco convenit,
eo quod frondosae arboris rami sint aviculis veluti tabernaculum seu tentorium.
Lucas Brugensis Comment. in 4. Evang.

Id est ut quasi habitent in ramis ejus, Psalm. 104 13. neque enim de nidis
tantum agitur. Recipient haec verba Nabuchadonosoris somnium apud Danielem
4.9. Grot. in loc. Videsis mea Critica Graeca.


] The Greek word signifies properly, to dwell in a Tabernacle. Beza translates
it, make their nests; the vulgar dwell.

Ver. 33. This Parable is the same in effect with the former. A woman] He
instanceth in her, because it is their way and nature to do it; the word of God
rooted in the heart seasons the whole man.

Chrysostom says, the meaning is, that the Apostles should bring many nations
to the Christian faith, as leaven is wont to turn a great deal of meal into
its own nature; Leaven though small does so spread its force, that a great heap
of meal is leavened therewith.

Verse. 34. He used not these continual Parables so much for instruction sake,
as to make the hearers attentive, and more apt for another time.

Verse. 38. The field is the world] Christ meant not the wide world (but by an
usual trope) the Church scattered throughout the world, as John 3.16. 1 John
2.2. Else there had been no place for the servants wonder, that the world
should be full of wicked persons. ver. 27.

Verse. 43. Then] The adverbe of time then is very forcible, for it contains a
secret opposition to the present state, and of the last day, in hope whereof
Christ comfort all his faithful ones. Calvin.

Verse. 44. The scope of that Parable is this, If one should come into any of
our fields, and by searching find a gold mine, he would not make it known to
any, but cover it close and go his way, and sell all that he had to buy the
field, that thereby he might enrich himself: even so having found this, that
the Gospel reveals the way to life everlasting, though we must not conceal
the same from others, yet we must be like this man herein, that we could be
content to part with all that we have, that so we might make the Gospel ours.
Perkins on Rev.


All that he hath] Parts with the inward love and outward practice of sin;
Christ crucified must be our treasure; there are five things intimated in the
Parable, 1. We must find this treasure, so much is employed in the word hidden,
for we cannot have a thing that is hid before we find it. Mat. 11.25. 2. We
must highly prize, and value it, so here, and Paul Phil. 3.8. 3. Obtain and
get it, so here, and Mat. 6.20. 4. Assure it to our selves, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18,
19. 5. Use it as a treasure, have our conversation in heaven, for there Christ
our treasure is, and where our treasure is there will our hearts be.

Luke 12.33.
Verse. 46. And bought it] Ob. Esaias 55.1. Ans. Heavenly life is the free gift of
God, yet we are said to buy the same, when we do willingly bridle the desires
of the flesh that we be not thereby hindered from obtaining the same. Phil. 3.8.

By that a man has, is meant sin, and by selling it, the renouncing and
disclaming of sin. Not pawn, but sell them.
The sinner must sell all that he has, not his Goods, Lands, Children, for
these be none of his own, God has lent him these to use, our sins are our own
and nothing else: He that will have part in Christ, must part with his sins,
make a through sale, forsake them all, and for ever.

Verse. 51. All the Parables were expounded privately to the Disciples, but now
after that the Lord had so lovingly instructed them, he also admonishes them,
that they should not be wise for themselves only, but impart unto others that
which was committed to them; therefore he says, that Teachers are like to
householders, which are not only careful to provide for themselves, but lay up
also for the nourishment of others.

Verse. 52. Every Scribe] This name, though given to some, who besides the
ordinary function wrote something, 1 Chronicles. 24.6. yet was given not from
writing, but because they were skillful in the word written. See Mat. 23.34.

New and old] Are new and old meats, Piscator, Grotius. New and old fruits,
Drusius. Although some would have the Old and new Testament to be understood,
that is, the Law and Gospel. Calvin interprets it of their diverse and manifold
ways of dispensing heavenly mysteries, which they do apply to every man's
capacity.

Verse. 55. Is not this the Carpenters son] Christ himself Mark 6.3. is called
the Carpenter; and Justin Martyr says, Faber Latin and (...) Graece,
vocessu^t significationis amplae, ad omnes artifices, qui corporis labor
adhibito, e quavis duriore materia aliquid struunt, se extendentis, unde fit,
ut varient opiniones, cujus generis faber Joseph fuerit, aliis existimantibus
fuisse fabrum ferrarium, D. Hilario in hunc locum, aliis lignarium. Augustino.
Lucas Brugensis Comment. in 4. Evang. Fabri silius] Scilicet lignarij, qui
aedificia struit ^is enim (...) dicitur. De Dieu in loc.
that he made plows and yokes before he exercised the function of the ministry.

Hereupon Julian the Apostata scoffed at Christ our Savior, saying (at his
going against the Persians) to the Christians, what does the Carpenters Son
now? Cum Julianus bella^ esset contra Persas facturus, and minatus fuisset se
post bellum ecclesias graviter afflicturum, and petulanter insultaret, filium
fabri nihil illis affere posse subsidii, Dydimus vir ecclesiasticus hanc de eo
pronunciavit sententiam: Iste fabri filius arcam ei ligneam ad mortem parat.
Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 2.
And threatening, that after his return he should not be able to save them from
his fury: whereto a godly man answered by the spirit of Prophecy, He whom
Julian calls the Carpenters Son is making a wooden Coffin for him against
his death; and a little after in that battle he dyed miserably.

Verse. 57. A Prophet is not without honor, save in his own Country] It may be
this was a general Proverb, that they which are eminent in gifts, are no
where less esteemed than in their own Country; Vide Piscat.
but Calvin and Chrysostom think the Jews were especially reproved by this
saying, Christ was never less esteemed any where than in Galilee.

CHAP. XIIII.
Verse 2. THis is John the Baptist] His conscience troubled him for killing so
holy, and innocent a man.

Verse. 6. When Herod's birth day was kept] After the manner of the Kings of the
East. We have a most ancient example of this custom in Egypt, Genesis 40.20.
That ancient custom cannot be disproved in it self, of joyful solemnizing
the birthday yearly, for that day, as often as it returns, admonishes every
one of us to give thanks to God, from whom being brought hither we have passed
many years now through his mercy; then that it may call to our mind how
unprofitablely we have spent the time allowed by him, Calvin.
and that we would commend our selves for the remainder of our lives to his
protection. Maldonate inveighes against Calvin for this that he here delivers,
but he is vindicated by Paraeus.


Verse. 19. He commanded the multitude to sit down on the grass] That Christ
commanded the people to sit down by troops, he did this first by counsel,
that the miracle might be the more conspicuous to the troops so disposed.
Secondly, that the men might be the more fitly numbered, and when some looked
back on others they might be mutually witnesses to themselves of this heavenly
grace. Thirdly, Because he saw the Disciples sollicitous, he would approve of
their obedience, Calvin.
commanding them that which was in show a miracle, for it was wonderful when
there was no provision, wherefore Christ would make show of a banquet.

Hilary disputes, whether the multiplication was made in the hands of Christ
breaking, or of the Disciples distributing, or of the company taking; but it is
probable that it happened in all three, and in breaking he so multiplied the
fragments, that both the Apostles and the company saw the power of God in his
hands, Polyc. Lyser.
and after felt it in their own hands.

Verse. 20. And they took up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets full]
Every Apostle, as it seems, Grotius. Vide. Juvenalis satyram tertiam.
brought his basket after the usual manner of the Jews, as often as they went
any journey far from the towns: In these baskets they were wont to carry bread
with them, as it appears, 16.7. Mark 8.14.

Verse. 23. Compared with ver. 15. These things cannot otherwise be reconciled,
Vide Grot. in verse. 15. Gerh. in Har.
than that the evening in the former place notes the time next the Sunsetting,
in the latter place the time after the sunsetting, which extends it self to
midnight. Exodus 12.6.

V. 25. And in the 4th watch of the night] The night was in times past divided
into four quarters, or greater hours, termed 4. watches, each watch
containing three lesser hours. The first they called caput vigiliarum, Vide
Grotium in loc.
the beginning of the watches, it began at the even or Sunseting. Lam. 2.19. The
second was the middle watch, Judge. 7.19. not so termed because there were only
three watches, as Drusius would persuade, but because it lasted till midnight.
The third watch began at midnight, and held till three of the clock in the
morning, gallicinium, Cock-crowing. Luke 12.38. The last called the morning
watch, the dawning, Exodus 14.24. it began at three of the clock, and ended at
six of the morning, that is spoken of here, and all of them are mentioned,
Mark 13.35. The Romans did so divide their night, and distinguished their
several watches by several notes, and sound of Cornets or Trumpets; thence
the phrase de tertia vigilia in Caesar's Commentaries.

Verse. 27. Be of good cheere] The Greek word signifies three things. 1. Be of
good courage, forti animo estote. 2. Comfort, be of good comfort, consolamini.
3. Confidence, fiduciam habete, be of good confidence, believe.

V. 28. Bid me come unto thee on the water] Rash zeal in Peter, yet God turned
it for best, 1. Lest any say Christ's Body was not like ours, Hierome. 2. He
sank to check his blind zeal. 3. Theophylact and Hilarie think it a type of
Peter's forwardness when he denied Christ.

Verse. 30. Lord save me] We should have an eye on Christ in all troubles, Psalm.
121.1. Peter falls to prayer.

Verse. 31. Christ is firm, though he sink.

Verse. 36. Only touch the hemme of his garment] Neither weak faith nor
superstition, but as Luke 8.44. Act. 19.12. Christ has all creatures to obey
him, and he heales all diseases.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 2. WHy do thy Disciples transgress the traditions] There is a manifest
impiety in certain humane traditions, because they appoint perverse worship,
and that which directly opposes the word of God. others when they involve the
worship of God with profane fopperies, they do vitiate its purity. Others
which have more color, and are not infected with any notable vice, Calvin.
yet for this very reason are condemned, because they are feigned to be
necessary to the worship of God. So we depart from the mere obedience of God
alone, and a snare is cast upon men's consciences. Of this last kind it is here
treated. For the washing of hands which the Pharisees urged, could not of it
self be reproved of wicked superstition, otherwise Christ would not have
suffered water pots to be brought at a wedding; unless it had been a free
ceremony.

They are much deceived who have compared the sprinkling of holy water used by
the Papists with the Jewish washings.

Hoc est, Deo cui persolvenda sunt omnino vota, and cujus priores sunt parts,
jam antea consecravi id omne quo alioqui posses a me ex meis bonis in hac
egestate sublevari. Drus. Vide Cameronem and Capell. in loc. and Scultet.
observat. in Matthew. c. 41. and Seldom. de Jure naturali and Gentium. l. 7. c. 2.
Verse. 5. Whosoever shall say to his Father or Mother, It is a gift by
whatsoever thou might be profited by me] That is to say, that which thou
ask for thy supply, is given to another use: and I have nothing for thee.
Polyc. Lys.

It is an ellipticke speech, but may easily be supplied, so that the sense
should be this, if any one shall say Corban, he does well, and has well
executed the office of piety toward his Parents, and is not guilty of sin
against the fifth Commandment; It is better and more holy to give Corban, or
to bestow something toward the building of the Temple, than to relieve Parents.

Verse. 16. Made of none effect] The Greek word signifies to deprive of all
rule and authority, as much as in them lay they did so.

When the Commandments of men are appointed as parts of Gods worship, and as
necessary to salvation. Eos errare Christus pronunciat qui loco doctrinae (1 Samuel 15.23.) obtrudunt hominum mandata, vel qui inde regulam petunt colendi Dei.
Calvin.
Verse. 9. In vain do they worship mee] Christ cannot endure when divine
worship is feigned by men's wits. Christ by his quoting of Esaias does not a
little illustrate the place, the Prophet by fear understands the worship of
God, therefore Christ rightly interprets it by worship, that is, whatsoever out
of the word of God by the advice of men is brought into holy duties. They are
said to worship God in vain, either because they do not obtain the end and
fruit of divine worship, or else because the worship it self of it self is
vain and frivolous. Christ reprehends three things in the Jewish traditions,
that they obtruded outward cleanness on God, instead of the purity of the
heart. 2. that by their humane traditions, they made void the worship of God.
3. that they preferred humane traditions, before the divine precepts; Chemnit.
and were so taken with their traditions, that they neglected the divine
precepts, yea made them altogether vain, as the Papists do.

Verse. 17, 18. The things themselves did not defile a man, no nor hurt then
when the Ceremonial Law stood in force, as the doing of things ^imply
unlawful does, and as the conceit of the Pharisees was, therefore our
Saviors meaning here is to show the nature of the things themselves, without
respect to the Ceremonial Law; which the Pharisees not considering, thought
that the very eating of the things themselves had been sinful, and had
polluted the Soul: for if a man had then eaten upon necessity, the thing it
self had not defiled, but alone the breach of the Law, and the defilement had
been merely Leviticall and ceremonial, not true and spiritual.

Verse. 22. Behold a woman of Canaan] Her faith was such, that this Evangelist
reports it with an ecce, behold a woman of Canaan. She is by Mark said to be
a Grecian, and by nation a Syrophaenician. It was the common manner of the
Jews, to call all foreign nations Graecians; and therefore that Antithesis
between the Graecians and Jews, is often found in Paul. Being borne in the
coasts of Tire and Sydon, she was called a Syrophaenician, when as the Region
had the name of Syria, and Phaenicia was a part of Syria, and it is to be
supposed that the most part of them came of the people of Canaan, who being
banished out of their Country, took the next place of refuge in their
banishment.

And cried unto him] To show her great affection.

Have mercy on me O Lord, thou Son of David] These words intimate Christ's
Office, Nature, and Person; have mercy] Miserere mei, dicit, ut magis Christum
moveat, quam si diceret, filiae meae, Aut ut Chrysostomus, Theophylactus, and
Euthymius putant, quia ejus filia sine sensu jacebat, ipsa vero utriusque, and
suum, and filiae sentiebat dolorem. Maldonat. in loc.
Shows his Office, for he came to bind up the broken heart, to visit and
redeem his people; the word Lord] His divine Nature; Son of David] His humane;
both together, one Christ. My daughter] not a servant, but a daughter; and she
not only troubled, but vexed, and that not a little, but piteously, nor with a
common evil, but even with the very Devil.

Verse. 23. First, Christ does neglect her, answering not a word, then deny her.
v. 24. reproach her. v. 26.

Verse. 23. Send her away] Some say they spoke this out of commiseration, rather
from impatience.

Verse. 24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel] Jesus
Christ (says a Father) speaks not like Jesus Christ in the eyes of a mortal
man, he that was to redeem mankind, to say he was not sent.

Object. Christ was a Savior not only of the Jews, but Gentiles. Esaias 49.6.

Answ. Christ here speaks of his prophetical Office, The Jew was the elder
brother, Mat. 10.5.
in respect of which he was the Minister of Circumcision. Romans 15.8. He was
first sent to Israel, Jerome; while he was in forma servi, until he had
consummated the work of our Redemption, he was sent only to Israel, Iunius.
He that knows himself not a wandering sheep, Mat. 18.11. Luke 17.10. Perkins
on Jude.
but quite lost, even in the Lions pawe, ready to be devoured, such does Christ
take upon his neck, and like a good Shepherd bring back to his fold.

Verse. 26. The reason is taken ab absurditate, the doctrine of salvation, is
bread, and it is not meet, (...) fit, honest, decent, Maldonate. to dogges]
Greek, whelps, (...) Catellis, Neque Servator verbis illis concedit quae
petebat Cananaea, sed fidem illius tentat vehementissime, oblique canem
nominans, quod convitium apud veteres grave fuit. Sculter. Verum canes Hebraeis
and Graecis veteribus dici solere eos quos contemnimus. Sed vox (...) ei
significationi non convenit. Ita enim appelari vulgo canes qui in delitiis
erant, quales Melitenses. Tantum ergo indicatum voluit Christus discrimen quod
ad id tempus erat inter (...) and extraneos. Grotius.
Beza. Our Lord used the diminutive that he might seem to speak the more
contemptuously. Christ speaks after the manner of the Jews, who called the
Gentiles (as the Canaanitish-woman was) dogs.

V. 27. Yet the dogs eat of the crumbs, etc.] She answers by an ingenious
inversion, says a Father, with a witty retorting or turning back of our
Saviors words upon himself. I am a dog, true, but dogs etc. Reliquias
canibus dari receptum ubique. Grotius. If I be a dog, I am thy dog. Origin.
Crummes belong to dogs jure quodam. Luther. Give me the portion of dogs.
She had one property of a dog, for she held fast.

Observatione dignum est, nullius hominis fidem, nisi Gentilium, admiratum
fuisse Christum, ut hujus muheris, and illius Centurionis. Matthew. 8.10.
Maldonatus in loc.
Verse. 28. O woman great is thy faith] Exclamat tanquam victus. Brugensis. He
cries out as conquered. Exclamatio admirantis; it is an interjection of
marvelling, non possum amplius repugnare precibus tuis. I can no longer
withstand thy requests. Four things are required to justifying faith,
knowledge, assent, confidence, application. In all these four the faith of
this woman was great. 1. For knowledge, she lived amongst blind people, and
those that were ig^orant of the true God, and yet she had exact knowledge of
Christ, that he was the Lord and true God; that he was merciful and
bountiful, that he could drive away the Devil, and weaken his power. She knew
these things so exactly as if she had spent all the days of her life in the
midst of Gods people. 2. For assent, she gave assent to none but to them which
related that Jesus of Nazareth is that great Prophet of the Lord, which can
drive away all evils and adversities. 3. For confidence, she came with such
confidence to the throne of grace, that neither by silence, Polycarpus Lyserus.
nor by a harder answer given by the Disciples, nor by the reproach of a dog,
did she suffer her self to be deterred or driven away, until she had obtained
mercy. 4. For application, she firmly believed, if Christ at least would
speak the word, or consent by his beck, that that should be so efficacious,
that her daughter would forthwith be delivered out of the power of the Devil.

Verse. 32. And I will not send them away fasting] But the Apostles on the
contrary allege, 1. The inequality of proportion, we have seven loaves, but
4000. men, one loaf then must be divided into 550. particles, whence the
portion of some, will scarce arise to the bigness of a Pea, to satisfy him.
2. The incommodity of the place, here we are in the Wilderness, where nothing
grows; where you shall find more stones than loaves. 3. The continuance of
want, they have continued with thee three days, whence their hunger has
greatly increased, that peradventure a whole loaf will scarce suffice for one
man if it were given him. Polycarpus. Lyserus.
This is a plain evidence of a great weakness and unbelief, in the heart of
the Apostles, which do derogate from Christ, the honor of his divine
omnipotence, and they seem to themselves to be very wise, whilst by their
infancy they go about to inform the divine wisdom.

Verse. 36. And gave to his Disciples] He would use the Ministry of these, that
they might be convinced by their own testimony, that the Lord did that thing,
which they thought impossible to be done.

The principal scope of this, as also of the former Miracle is, that we may be
admonished, that nothing will be wanting to them, who being inflamed with a
holy desire of the kingdom of God, follow Christ, and faithfully worship him.

V. 37. And they took up of broken meat, etc.] Although that was chiefly to
recommend the Miracle, yet our Savior would have nothing lost.

Brugensis Comment. in 4. Evangelia.
Seven baskets full] In a former Miracle there remained twelve baskets of
fragments, now seven; then the number of the baskets answered to the number of
Apostles, now to the number of the loaves.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. TEmpting] That is, that they might try whether he could perform
this thing which they asked but captiously.

Quale viz. signum edidit Iosue So^em sistens; Samuel tonitrua eliciens,
Jesaias umbram regredi jubens in solario. Beza.
A signe] That is, a miracle whereby he might signify that God had sent him.

From heaven] Like that of Elias, 2 Kings 1.9. Piscator. Like that of Moses,
when God rained Mannah from Heaven. See the 6. of John.

Verse. 2. The sky is red] That redness signifies a rarity of the Clouds, and
purity of the air. Polyc. Lyser. Vide Sculter. observat. in Matthew. c. 4 5.


Verse. 3. Foul weather] Because the Clouds are thicker than those which the
Sun in the day time can consume or dispell.

Verse. 13. Cesarea Philippi] To distinguish that from another Cesarea. It was
at the foot of Libanus near Jordan called by Philips name. Calvin says he
took occasion to move this question to strenghthen his Disciples the more.

Men] Not pharisees, they would have said he had had a Devil.

That I the Son of man, am] That is, ex numero hominum, Beza. I who am clothed
with flesh, Calvin.

Verse. 14. And they said, Drusius de tribus sectis Iudaeorum, l. 2. says, this
place, and that John 9.2. do prove that the Jews held a (...), or migration of
souls from one body to another.
some say thou art John the Baptist] Chrysostom thinks they all made this
answer; Calvin, those that were better disposed; they were Herodians that
thought him John the Baptist. Aquin. Hugo Card. Matthew. 14.2. All that followed
Herod's judgment. Some Elias] they conceived that Elias would come out of
Heaven, and preach before Christ came, John 1.21. this arose from their false
interpretation of that place, Mal. 4.5. The third sort Jeremiah. 1. Because He
preached sharply and tartly. 2. As Jeremy was thought to be a Seducer of the
people, so he. 3. Because holy from his childhood. Theoph. 4. Because He was
persecuted and railed on as He. Aquinas and others.

One of the Prophets] Like one of the Prophets.

Verse. 15. But whom say ye that I am] This particle ye is put emphatically, by
which he separates them from the common people; ye, that have been so long with
me, which have continually heard my doctrine, whom do ye say that I am, Polyc.
Lyser.
who am disesteemed by others for my mean outside?

Verse. 16. And Simon Peter answered] Peter was the mouth of all the rest; Quem
os Apostolorum non male vocant Chrysostomus and Augustinus.
they are few words but full of sense; he speaks ad vitandam confusionem.

Verse. 17. But my father which is in heaven] vide Joh. 6.63. Grot.
See 1 Cor. 12.3.

Verse. 18. Thou a^^ Peter, and upon this rock, or stone] It is not called a
rock of Vide Bezam.
Peter, but he is so called Peter ^f a rock, as we all Christians from Christ.
Hilary, Cyrill, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Ambrose, understand by the rock, not
Peter's person, but the faith which he had professed in Christ; Chrysostom. Epiph.
H^^ary, Origin, Jerome, Ambrose, Beda. Super hanc petram non super hunc Petrum,
for Christ built his Church upon the fa^^h and not the man, or upon Christ.
Their Learned Expositor Lyra (in loc.) their preacher Feru^ (in loc.) and
Cardinal Hug^ expound Rock, Christ. Bish. Mortons Appeal, l. 2. cap. 17.
or Christ himself whom he confessed, called a rock of old, Deuteronomy. 32.18. Psalm.
18.3. so Austin often, it comes all to one either interpretation says
Whitaker. Some say his ministry. Peter was (...) foundation both of the Church
of the Jews and Gentiles, Acts 2. and 15 7. Vide Cameron.


The rock is Christ, not Peter; Peter's faith, not person; the Apostle elsewhere
tells us Christ is the head corner stone, and that the Church is built upon the
foundation of Prophets and Apostles, not on one Peter.

Whether it be to be referred to Christ whom Peter confessed, or to Peter's
faith or confession of Christ, or to Peter himself in respect of his Doctrine
and Apostleship (as the Ancient Fathers have all these three relations) it
comes to one end, that Peter had no other authority than the rest of the
Apostles, upon whom the Church was built no less than upon him, who also
believed and confessed as Peter did, had the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
and power to bind and loose as ample as he, Mat. 18.18. Quibus verbis deserte
Petrus distinguitur a Petra, cum persona, tum genere: quod esset absurdum si de
uno Petro utrumque membrum esset intelligendum. Debuerat sane potrus dici tu es
Petrus and super te Petro aedificabo. Chamierus. Vide Cheitomaeum de Graeco
barbaris novi Testament. in voce (...).
John 20.23. Fulke on Rhem. Test.

My Church] That is, not any visible Church on the earth, but the Church of the
Elect, all the Elect, the strength of the Church shall stand unvanquished. 1
Ioh. 5.4.

Gates of hell] Vide Sculte^ observat. in Matthew. c. 46. and Brugen. in loc.
That is, all the power and policy of Satan, so Interpreters generally explane
it, though Grotius dislikes this exposition.

Vide Bezam. Traditio clavium symbolum est potestatis atque authoritatis in
aliquem Collatae. There are some therefore to whom the Lord has committed the
power of admission and ejectio^; to thee] therefore all men have not the keys.
It is a dispute whether the power be in the Congregation radicaliter, and in
the Officers formaliter.
Verse. 19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven] This
is a metaphorical speech, for the understanding whereof we must know, that
Faith is compared to a door, Acts 14.27. because by it we have entrance into
Gods Kingdom; so accordingly the means of begetting, preserving, and
increasing of faith, is the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, and Discipline, these are
compared unto keys which Christ has committed to his Ministers, to admit such
as are to be admitted, and exclude such as are to be excluded. This is also
meant by that which follows, whatsoever thou shall bind] only another
metaphor is there used, the meaning of which is opened unto us by that of
Solomon, Pro. 5.22. Sins are as cords, and Christ has given his Ministers
power to bind with these cords such as remain in impenitency and unbelief,
but to loose from them such as repent and believe. This power they exercise, 1.
By preaching the word. 2. By administering the Sacraments. 3. By Praying. 4. By
executing Discipline upon gross offenders, and releasing them upon their
repentance. 2 Cor. 5.19. James 5.14, 15.

When one was made Doctor of Law among the Jews, they spoke to him in this
manner, D' Espagne de la manducation du corpse de Christ.
as the Rabbis show; Receive authority to pronounce bound that which shall be
bound, and to pronounce loose that which shall be loose. Christ speaking to his
Disciples here whom he would make Doctors, says, That which you shall bind on
earth, etc.

Keys is a borrowed speech, signifying power and authority by the Ministry of
the Word, either to give entrance into the kingdom of heaven, which is begun
on earth and finished in the heavens, The keys of the kingdom of heaven are
the authority of preaching the Gospel, administering the Sacrament, and
Church Censures, all which things were in as ample manner granted to the other
Apostles, As my Father sent me, so send I you, whose sins you retain they are
retained, and whose sins you remit they are remitted. If Christ had given or
promised a primacy to Peter, in saying, thou art Peter, etc. then no doubt the
contention would have ceased among the Apostles for that time forward who
should have been chief, but the Disciples long after this contended about
that. Mr. Wheatly. To thee] cum reliquis. Origin, Austen, Chrysostom. To thee
and thy fellow Laborers the other Apostles, and your Successors, Synecdoche
membri; in another place he gives the keys to all the Apostles, John 20.23.
Cyprian says, that Christ in the person of one spoke unto all, that he might
commend the unity of the Church.
to such as obediently receive the word; or to cast out from thence such as
shall obstinately refuse it. This is not Peter's key, but the Popes picklock; by
binding and loosing are signified the same things noted by the keys, and the
same power is given to the rest of the Apostles that was given to Peter. John
19.20. Cart. on Rhem. Test.

The proper use of keys is to let in and out, the ministry of the Gospel
being executed, partly by Preaching, and Sacraments, and partly by Church
censures, is called the keys, this is all likewise that is meant by binding
and loosing Dr White.

Verse. 20. Then ^harged he his Disciples that they should tell no man that he
was Jesus the Christ.] Christ therefore forbids them this, because it was not
simply necessary to Salvation to know in special that Jesus of Nazareth was
the Messiah, for then men might be saved without this special knowledge, from
a general faith in the Messiah to come. Because the Disciples minds (the death
of Christ being at hand) were troubled, they were not so fit publishers of so
great a matter. Cameron praelect. in Mat. 16.20.

The Apostles had not yet the Holy Ghost come down on them, and therefore could
not fully declare it. Ambrose. Prius discendum antequam docendum. 2. Because
Christ was not yet glorified.

Verse. 23. Get thee behind me Satan] That is, out of my sight, See Mat. 4.10.
Thou would hinder man's redemption, and Satan could do no more. They that will
have his trade shall have his name too.

Tolet in Comment super loc. observes, Abnegare plus est qua^ negare, abnegare
implicat duo. 1. veheme^tiam. 2. Co^^tus magnitudinem.
Verse. 24. If any man will come after me let him deny himself, and take up his
cross and follow me] Here are three branches: 1. Self denial. 2. Gospel
suffering. 3. Gospel service.

Deny, or forsake himself] That is, all that he has, as Luke expounds it,
14.33. all outward prerogatives touching the flesh.

To deny is either when we contradict what is affirmed and affirm the
contrary, or else when we refuse to grant ones request, and neglect or oppose
it. The first is Logical, in our words, the other moral, in our actions.

And take up his cross] Not as if he should make himself a Cross, but that
which is appointed for him. The original word (...) is emphaticall, as
Chrysostom notes, and signifies not simply negare, but pernegare, or prorsus
negare, totally, utterly to deny, not at all to spare or regard, it imports a
universal denial, rendered by Beza abdicet seipsum, which is as much as to
reject and cast off, as a man does a graceless son,

1. simply and absolutely man's sinful self, and so it is all one with Tit.
2.12. Deny ungodliness and wordly lusts. 2. A man's natural self conditionally.
3. A man's moral, virtuous, renewed self comparatively, in relation unto
righteousness. A man must willingly and obediently forsake all sin, subdue all
general concupisence, with his own proper and personal corruptions, Psalm.
18.23. absolutely without any limitation or exception cast away and forsake
always in praeparatione animae, and actually whenever Christ calls them unto
it, Quotidie tollere crucem implicat tria. 1. V^rias esse piorum afflictiones.
2. Perpetuitatem afflictionu^. 3. Pro^ptitudinem subeundi quamlibet crucem.
whatsoever is near and dear unto him if it become a snare to conscience, and
disesteeme the best of his graces in respect of the righteousness of Christ. 2.
Gospel suffering, a cross, and his cross, and to be taken up voluntarily. Take
up his cross, Luke adds daily, Luke 9.23. which has great force in it, for
Christ declares that there is no end of our warfare until we shall depart out
of this life. 3. Gospel service, and let him follow me.

There are two arguments used to set these three on, in Ver. 25, 26, 27.

Verse. 25. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it] We may understand
it, first, in reference to this present life, he runs himself into a greater
worldly danger while he thinks to avoid it. Secondly, It is always true in
respect of eternal life, they lose a better life than they save; and whosoever
will lose his life for my sake shall find it] That is, lose temporal life, as
men count it, shall find eternal.

Ver. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world] The
earth and all the things there that men can value and desire may be possessed
without possessing God.

And lose his own soule] Not in regard of being or property, but felicity.

These words set forth the transcendent excellency of the soul of man. The
soul put for the whole man, because a principal part. A man] that is, any one
of all mankind. Gaine] that is, in the worlds apprehension, not profit in Gods
account. World] that is, all that is in it.
There are two arguments used to prove this, 1. A comparatis, the comparison
consists of three pair of particulars: 1. Of Acts, gain, and loss. 2. Of
Objects, the world, and soul. 3. Of Adjuncts, the whole world, and his soul,
2. Ab impossibili, from the impossibility of recovering this soul and
redeeming it if it should be lost.

What shall a man give] That is, there is nothing he can give. Est interrogatio
negantis, quasi dicat, nihil proderit. Paraeus.
The interrogation carries with it, 1. a challenge, a triumphant denial. 2. An
appeal, to set it home on our consideration.

Put the soul and the world together, and the soul will be found far more
excellent. 1. The world was made for the soul, the end is more noble than the
means. Genesis 1.26. Psalm. 8. beg: 2. God prefers a soul before the world. Pro.
23.26. Esa. 66.1, 2, 3. The soul is the Lords, the world Satan's; God is called
the God of the Spirits of all flesh, Satan the Prince of this world. 4. The
Soul is of a Spiritual nature, the world of an earthy nature.

Omnia si perdas, animam servare memento. Verse. 28. In his kingdome] That is,
the powerful effects of the Gospel, as Mat. 10.7. and 12.28. 2 Pet. 1.16. The
manifestation of the heavenly glory which Christ began at his resurrection, and
showed it more fully by sending the Holy Ghost. See John 21.22.
Calvin. for that which some do imagine of John is a fancy. The earth where
John was buried (if we may believe Austen) bubleth like water, to testify his
breathing, and that he is not dead but sleeps. Sands his travells.


CHAP. XVII.
Verse 1. ANd after six daies] Luke 9.28. says, about eight days, there is no
contradiction. For either Matthew or Luke count that time from diverse terms,
Sex dies integros numerant Matthaeus and Marcus 9.2. qui medij fluxerunt: Lucas
autem factum esse dicens octo fere postea diebus tam diem illum quo locutus
erat Christus quam quo transformatus est, comprehendit. Calvin.
or from the same: And then Luke reckons up eight days, the first and last
being reckoned with them, Matthew only six, the middle ones being cast
between. This answer Calvin in his Harmony, and Scultetus observat in Matthew. c.
50. Vt si dicam mensis est, recte dixisse intelligar etiamsi absint dies
aliquot. Judaeos octo dies appellasse id quod ab uno sabbato est ad alterum,
apparet. Joh. 20.26. Grotius.
give.

Jesus takes Peter, James, and Iohn] Because it was not yet time of Christ's
full glory, he therefore showed not his glory to all his Apostles, Non assumsit
omnes, ne res divulgaretur priusquam id expediret (certe filium proditionis
Judam non congruebat adesse) tres autem assumsit, quod poterant sufficere ad
ferendum Testimonium, quando divulgari expediret. Brugensis. Tres testes
deligere satis habuit Dominus, quia hic numerus ad rem probandam a Lege
praescribitur. Deuteronomy. 17.6. Calvin.
but chose out of them some Antesignani, who might be sufficient and fit
witness enough to others of Christ's glory seen, viz. Those very persons who
after in the mount of Olivet were to be spectatours of his low abasement, here
first in the Mountain of Tabor were beholders of his great Majesty and glory.
There are diverse causes why he took only these. Peter, that he might reclame
him so much the more strongly from his error, into which he fell by hearing of
the passion of Christ. James, because he first of all was to shed his blood for
Christ, Acts 12.2. And lastly John, because he was to defend his divine majesty
against the blasphemies of Ebion and Cerinthus.

Christ took upon him the heavenly glory for so short a time, to declare that
he went willingly to his death, for it was as easy to exempt his body from
death, as to adorn it with heavenly glory.

Qualis futurus est tempore judicandi, talis apparuit Apostolis. Hieron
Scultet. observat. in Matthew. c. 51. Vide plura. ibid.
Verse. 2. And he was transfigured before them] Greek metamorphosed, or
transformed.

And his raiment was white as the light] Mark says, white as the snow, Mar.
9.3. these do not oppose each other, for as darkness has its blackness, so
light its whiteness, therefore it is all one whether the comparison be
borrowed from snow or light, which the words of Mark show; shining proper to
light, and white proper to snow, applied to one and the same garment; Mark
there adds, So as no Fuller on the earth can white them.

Verse. 3. Moses and Elias were verily present. These two appeared, to show that
the Law and Prophets had no other purpose, Calvin.
nor end, but Christ, and to show the consent of the Law and Prophets with him.
It is probable Moses was raised from the dead, Deuteronomy. 34.6: about what they
talked see Luke 9.31. In life eternal the Saints shall mutually know one
another, Piscat. Polyc. Lyserus. Vide Capell. Spicileg.
for these three Disciples here having but a taste of it, knew Moses and Elias.

Verse. 4. Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to
be here] Peter being astonished, spoke as a man altogether amazed. Mark 9.6.

Verse. 5. A bright cloud overshadowed them] A cloud was put before their eyes,
that they might know that they were not yet fit to behold the brightness of
the heavenly glory. Vox e nube, subaudi, facta est, quod exprimit Lucas. Nempe
ex illa nube, cujus modo facta mentio, in quam illi fuerant ingressi, id quod
notat articulus. Piscat.
A voice sounded out of the cloud; but neither was body nor face seen. Deuteronomy.
4.12. The cloud was a sign of the divine presence, as Exodus 11.34. Bright to
distinguish it from the old Law, which was given in a dark cloud.

This is my beloved Son] Some think that there is a secret opposition between
Moses, Elias and Christ, as if Christ should command his Disciples to be
content with the only Son, for that name is emphaticall, whereby he is
extolled above the Servants.

Hear ye him] Emphatically, hear him above Moses and the Prophets, as
fulfilling of both. Grotius. Believe and obey his doctrine.

Verse. 6. Fell on their face] Id est, proni adorarunt, nisi malimus prae metu
cecidisse quasi semianimes, quamobrem, etiam Dominus eos erexisse dicitur. Beza
in loc. Sic Maldonatus. Timore non veneratione ceciderunt, propterea dicitur
eos Christus tetigisse: sicut solemus, ut ad se redeant, exanimes tangere.


Verse. 8. Save Jesus onely] That glory was tied to the Law and Prophets but for
a time, that only Christ might continue glorious. Solum Iesum audita ista voce
viderunt, ut scierent, illam de hoc solo pronuntiatam esse. Piscat.


Verse. 11. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come
and restore all things] That is, John Baptist, see Matthew. 11.14. Liquidum mihi
videtur verba haec eodem spectare quo ea quae sequntur, ad Iohannem Baptistam
scilicet. Grotius. Vide Calvinum.


Verse. 15. Lunaticke] Those are called Lunaticke which either at the wane of
the Moon have the falling sickness, or are troubled with a giddiness.
Lunatici medicis dicuntur illi qui morbo comitiali sive caduco laborant. Sic
vero dicuntur, quia existimant, eos qui interlunio nascuntur, potissimum hoc
morbo divexari, vel etiam quod ad motum lunae morbus vel accedat vel recedat,
prout virtute Lunae humores cerebri vel augentur, vel minuuntur. Polyc. Lyser.
Vide Scultet. observat. in Matthew. c. 2.


Verse. 17. O faithless and perverse generation] An apostrophe to the
Disciples. He accuses their incredulity.

Verse. 20. If ye have faith as a grain of mustardseed, ye shall say unto this
mountain, Mr. Perkins on Heb. 11.30.
Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove] Signifying, that by the
power of true faith, such things as are impossible to man's reason, should be
brought to pass, if God have promised them.

This is a proverbiall speech among the Hebrews, as appears by Paul, 1 Cor.
13.2. The sense is, you would perform things most difficult, says Grotius.

Verse. 21. This kind goes not out, but by prayer and fasting] That is, this
kind of evil Spirits which is sent for the punishment of greater offenses, so
Grotius. Earnest Elton. Dr. Tailor. i.e. Intensissima precatione. Bucer. v. 24.
Vide Seldenum, de Jure naturali and Gentium. l. 6. c. 18.
and continued prayer, having humiliation joined with it; they go often
together, Act. 10.30. and 14.23. 1 Cor. 7.5. We must stir up our faith by
prayer, and our prayer by fasting.

V. 26. Jesus says unto him, then are the children free] As if he should say,
if I would stand on my privilege, as I am the Son of God, I am exempted, Per
filios intelligit Christus Filios regnorum sive terrarum id est, inde natos
sive oriundos, alioquin sermo ejus non videretur fuisse ad propositum, nam in
plurali locutus est tam pro se quam pro Petro, quem constat non fuisse Filium
talium Regum. Dr. Fulke. vide Cameronem.
as a Kings Son is not to perform that ordinary service which other men
perform; it cannot be meant, that the Jews were free, for Christ's Father and
Mother were taxed.

Verse. 27. This fish is called at Rome, Piscis Sancti Petri.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. WHO is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven] In the Church. It is called
the kingdom of Heaven, 1. Because the King which injoyes this kingdom is
heavenly. 2. Because his seat is in heaven, thence he reigns, thence he
exercises his power. 3. Because his Subjects after they are admitted into this
kingdom, are heavenly and spiritual. 4. The certain seat of the subjects of
this kingdom is in heaven. 5. Because the government is wholly heavenly and
Spiritual.

Verse. 2. And Jesus called a little child unto him] Some think, but without
probability, that this child was that famous Ignatius, who was Christ's Martyr
under Traiane. Beza.


Verse. 3. Except ye be converted and become as a little child] Two things are
required of them that would enter into this kingdom. First, To become as
little children, that is, Non videntur intellixisse regnum illud spirituale and
coeleste Christi, sed regnum terrenum and temporale Messiae, quale expectabant
and animo concipiebant tum temporis Iudaei. Cameron.
in humility, meekness, and freedom from pride and disdain; the child of a
Prince will without disdain associate himself with a poor man's child.

Secondly, we must be coverted and regenerate by the Spirit of God, John 3.3.
Mr. Perkins.

Verse. 5. And who to shall receive one such little child in my name, receives
me] The Greek word (...) which properly notes hospitality, here is taken for
all kind of benefits, as Act. 21.17. compared with Mark 9.41.

Verse. 6. That place may be understood of men of years, who if they have
contrite and humbled hearts, Psalm. 131.
are little ones believing in Christ.

It was a custom (says Jerome) amongst the ancient Hebrews, that he which
had committed any heinous crime (if he had been taken) should be tied to a
great stone, and so cast into the deep, but Grotius denies that there was such
a custom among the Jews, D^u. observat. Sac. l. 3. c. 23. and citat Hieron.
in loc.
seeing there is no mention of it in the Law, and there were only four
punishments used by them, viz. fire, stoning, sword, and strangling, therefore
this kind of speaking, came rather from the Syrians their neighbors.

A millstone were hanged about his neck] A huge millstone such as an Ass Mola
asinaria cui viz. agitandae afini adhibebantur. Beza in. 9. Marc. 42. Hilary,
Iansen. vide Grotium.
can but turn about, as the word imports, Perkins. And as the Syriacke and
Latin interpreters understand it.

And that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea] The words in the Greek are
word for word, in the middle of the Sea, where the Sea is deepest. Vide
Scultet. observat. in Matthew. c. 52.

Verse. 7. Woe to the world because of offences] This is vaedolentis, as if a
Physician should say, woe to that man from this sickness, so Christ says, woe
to the world, because the scandales in it shall be very vulgar and usual.

But woe to that man by whom the offense cometh] This is a vae indignantis, and
of one denouncing punishment, Polyc. Lyser.
the hainousnes of whose punishment by a comparison he sets before their eyes.
Among the four kinds of punishments used by the Jews, they reckon this as the
most heinous, because they were judged unworthy either to behold the Sun, or
enjoy again the benefit of the Air.

Verse. 8, 9. That is, our evil concupiscence, fornication, uncleanesse, wrath
and ambition. Matthew. 5.29, 30. Col. 3.5.

Verse. 10. Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones] By little
ones he means, young Infants which are within the Covenant, Mr. Perkins: see
Dr. Prideaux his Sermon on this verse.
or others which are like to young infants in simplicity and innocence of life,
and humility.

Both little in christianity, and little in years, Babes and Sucklings, Angels
are their rockers, Kings Sons must have their guard. Dike.

Do always behold the face of my Father, which is in heaven] That phrase
implies only, they are in a ministerial ready way, to be at the Lords
appointment for any service.

Verse. 12. Christ would show that a good teacher must labor no less to
recover what is lost, Calvin.
than to preserve what he has under his hand.

Verse. 15. If thy Brother shall trespass against thee] Do thee any wrong, or
else sin against God, and thou be privy to it (for that sin may be said to be
against a man whereto he is privy, though the wrong be not against him, because
there is an offense given unto him.) then tell him] That is, correct and
admonish him privately. Christ sets down three degrees of brotherly
correction. Perkins.
1. That he which has sinned should be admonished privately. 2. If he show any
token of stubbornness, that he be again admonished before witnesses, the 3d
is, if he prevail nothing this way, that he be delivered to the public
judgment of the Church.

Verse. 16. In the mouth of two or three witnesses] Not of one but of two or
three, therefore the person offended is a witness.

Verse. 17. Tell it unto the Church] This power and Jurisdiction was with them
which were the Chief rulers of the Synagogue, It is a foul error (as Beza in
loc. thinks) to say the whole multitude is here comprised. Christus non ibi de
doctrina sed de censuris tantum ecclesiasticis loquitur, and loci sensus hic
est, Si quisquam, qui in fratrem peccaverit, eumque injuria aliqua affecerit,
post unam and alteram privatam increpationem ad ecclesiam delatus, ejus monitis
non obtemperaverit, eiusque censurae non paruerit: is excommunicetur.
Whitakerus de ecclesia.
Mark. 5.22. and an example of this custom is extant, John 9.22. and 12.42.
and 16.2. This punishment with the Jews was like excommunication with us; the
Church] not the Pope, as Papists say, tell the Church, that is, many. Theoph.
that is, tell the Governors thereof. Chrysostom. Our Savior rises in his
speech from private admonition, to admonition before two or three, and from
them to the Church.

Heathen] Not so well translated; we in our English, call Heathens such as know
not God, as Mahumetanes; rather one of the Nations, that is, not of the Jews;
and the other word may better (say some) be translated a customer.

As an Heathen] Let one that is excommunicated by the Church, be esteemed of
thee as if he were some Heathen or Publican, that is, a stranger from the
Church, and not belonging to it. Piscator.

Verse. 18. Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, etc.] By the context it appears
that our Savior speaks of Church Censures, for having said, v. 17. if any
would not hear the Church (that is, the admonition of the Church) let him be
as an Heathen or Publican (that is, excommunicated, cast out from the society
of the faithful) to ratify the Church-censure in this case he adds verily,
etc. that is, whosoever shall be (justly) excommunicated on earth, shall be
held excommunicated also in heaven, and whosoever shall be ( justly) absolved
on earth, shall also be absolved in Heaven.

The same words that are in the 16. v. but in a diverse sense; there his purpose
was to confirm the authority of doctrine, and he speaks of the word preached,
here of public censure and discipline, the meaning is, whosoever having
committed a sin does humbly acknowledge his fault obtaines pardon.

The power of binding and loosing is that authority given by God to his Church
on earth, whereby it pardons, or retains unpardoned, the sins of men.
Perkins.


Verse. 19. Agree] Greek, sing one song, make a harmony, (...). Translatio est
a corpore ad animum, nam de voce and cantu proprie id dicitur. Beza. in loc.


Verse. 20. Where two or three are gathered together] See 1 Cor. 5.4. Piscator
Christus hic nullam mentionem facit vel concilij generalis vel non errandi, nam
duo aut tres non faciunt generale concilium. Calvinus. Et si Christus sit in
medio eorum qui in suo nomine congregantur, non sequitur illos non errare.
Whitak. de council.
Those which assemble together to handle those things which belong to the glory
of God, may comfort themselves with this promise of his gracious presence. To
be gathered together in the name of Christ, is no other thing but to meet for
a pious and just cause, to propound to our selves the will of Christ in our
meetings, to aim at nothing else but Gods glory and the good of the Church,
the same with that in the 19. chap. verse 29. for Christ and his profession.

Verse. 21. and 22. As if he should have said, Master, Septuagies septies, id
est, quadringentis nonaginta vicibus. Hieron. Septenarius numerus est
septuagies multiplicandus qui conficiat numerum 490. Polyc. Lyser.
how often would thou have us receive them into favor that offend us? Christ
says, there should be no end of forgiving, but as often as the sinner
repents. The Lord confirms this doctrine with a most fit parable, the sum
whereof is this, that they which will not be brought to forgive the offenses of
their brethren, do very ill provide for themselves, for they shall find God as
hard to be entreated toward them. The similitude consists especially in
three points, for the Master is set against the servant, a Great sum against
a small, singular Clemency to extreme cruelty. For what are we if we be
compared with God, and what sum is every one of us indebted toward him,
lastly how light are the offenses of our brethren to us, if our obligation to
God be considered?

Verse. 23. As if Christ should have said, the case between God and man, in
respect of the soul and the estate of spiritual life, is like to that between
a civil earthly Master and his servants, in respect of money and the business
of this present life.

Verse. 25. God does not always show his rigor unto us at the first, nay he
preventeth us with his free goodness, but he only teaches what would become
of us, if God should use us, as in justice he might.

Verse. 26. And I will pay thee all] Object. Therefore we our selves may pay our
own debts.

Sol. 1. It is a Parable, and that is not the maine scope. 2. Fear forced the
servant to promise more than he was able to perform.

Verse. 32. and 34. The Schoolmen observe hence, peccata remissa redire, that
sins being pardoned return. The scope of the Parable (which is the right key
to open it) is not to show, that God will remember sins pardoned for new ones
committed, but to manifest, that forgiveness of others is a necessary
qualification to be forgiven by God, and that we may not believe God will
forgive us, unless we forgive others; and this is clear by the conclusion, v.
35.

The Papists would draw Purgatory fire out of the adverb until, but it is
evident that Christ speaks here of eternal death, and not of any temporal
punishment, whereby he should satisfy the judgment of God. Calvin.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 2. AND great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there] From
which we may conjecture who were Christ's companions for the most part, the
weak, sick, deaf, blind, and the like miserable persons.

Polyc. Lyser.
Verse. 3 The Pharisees also came unto him tempting him, and saying unto him, Is
it lawful for a man to put away his Wife for every cause] The Pharisees
demand, whether it be lawful for a man to put away his Wife for every cause?
If Christ deny it, they will cry out that he does wickedly abrogate the Law: if
he affirm it, they will condemn him for favoring men's lust, but Christ knew
how to take the wise in their subtilty.

Verse. 4. Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning, made them
male and female] The question has the force of a reprehension, as if he should
say, if you have not read it, you may be ashamed of your sloathfulnesse; if you
have read it and not understood it, Piscat.
you may blush at your ignorance, being Doctors of the Law; if you have read
and understood it, then you may be ashamed of your hypocisie, thus to tempt me.

Christ does not answer directly to what was asked, but does fully satisfy the
proposed question; as if one being now asked of the Mass, should faithfully
expound the mystery of the Lords Supper, Calvin.
and should at last infer, that they are sacrilegious and deceivers, who dare
add or detract any thing from the pure institution of the Lord, he shall
openly overthrow the feigned sacrifice of the Mass.

Made them Male and female] viz. First, Adam, then Eve out of his body, which
Christ conceales as sufficiently known. The meaning is, God the maker of
mankind, made man and woman, Nonnulli ex hoc loco putant Adamum a Deo creatum
esse. hermaphroditu^, ac utrumque habuisse sexum, ut simul esset masculus and
foemina: sed apage has nugas. Cornel. a Lapide.
that every man being contented with one only wife should not desire any
others, for he rests in the number of two, Mal. 2.10. yet a man may lawfully
marry another wife when the first is dead, because the band is not only broken
by death, but the second wife is placed by God in the roomth of the former as
if she were one and the same.

Whosoever should put away his wife, should rend himself in pieces.
Verse. 5. For this cause shall the man] Meaning the husband; he is here
particularly mentioned, 1. Because at the first making of this Law the woman
was first brought to him to see how he could like her. 2. Because of the
pre-eminence that the man has over his wife, yet the woman is also tied
thereby, for the nature and rule of relation requires as much.

Cleave to his wife] The Greek word imports to be glewed unto, whereby it
signifies that straight knot which is between man and wife, Vide Bezam.
as though they were glewed together. To his wife] not wives, this is against
Polygamy. And they twaine] not more, shall be one fl^sh] God that in the
Creation made two of one, by marriage made one of two.

Verse. 11. All men cannot receive this] Many persons mistake the help prepared
of God, Genesis 2.18. or do worse, considering that some cannot abstain.

Augustine, Hier. Perkins.
Save they to whom it is given] Continence is a gift of God, whereof all men
are not capable, but those only to whom he gives it, when, and as long as it
pleases him.

It is given of God, and that not unto all men, as the gift of speech, or
reason, nor unto all godly men, as is the gift of faith, but unto certain
only, therefore Paul, 1 Cor. 7.7. calls it a proper gift of God, which some
have, and some have not. Cartwright.

This says Maldonate, almost all expound, as if the sense were, Id est, non
omnes praestare possunt, ut sint sine uxore, quia carent dono continentiae. Sic
fere omnes exponunt, quam interpretationem adduci non possum ut sequar.
Maldonat. in loc.
all cannot perform what ye say, that is, want a wife, because all have not
the gift of Chastity.

Verse. 12. Christ names three kinds of men which are chaste: First, It is said
of Origin, that though he was much given to allegorizing the Scripture, yet he
understood this place literally and guelt himself. Vide Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l.
6. c. 8.
They that are chaste by nature, borne Eunuchs; Or secondly, which are made
chaste by men, those that are violently cut, and so are forced, because they
lack those parts of a man. Thirdly, Others which have voluntarily repressed
their lusts by abstinence, temperance, made themselves chaste that they might
the better serve God. These he sets free from the necessity of marriage when
by nature they are fit for marriage, though they do abstain they tempt not
God, because he grants them liberty.

Verse. 16. What good thing shall I do] Hilary says, he did intend to be
legally just.

Verse. 17. Why call thou me good? there is none good but one, that is God]
As if he should have said, thou do evil to call me good master, except thou
do acknowledge me to come from God. Christ's purpose was to bring his Doctrine
into credit. Dum Christum (in quo nihil homine sublimius) bonum vocat, sibi
etiam utpote homini laudem bonitatis arrogat.
He applies himself to the opinion of him to whom he spoke, who called Christ
good in no other sense, than he would have done another Master or Prophet, and
in this sense Christ rebuked him for calling him good, that is legally, taking
him to be a mere man.

Verse. 18. He reckons up the Commandments of the second Table, v. 18. Non
dices] vel, non respondebis, quod verbum Ebraeum proprie significat, nam
testimonium qui dicit, plerumque respondet ad interrogata Judicis. Drus. in
Parallel. Sac.
because in those of the First Hypocrites more easily conceal their impiety.

Verse. 19. Love thy neighbour] Every man, so Christ expounds it, Luke 10.30.

This answer was 1. suitable to the question, what shall I do? 2. The Law in it
self is the way to life but for man's weakness Romans 8.3. the godly keep it in
Christ.

Those that will be saved by works must keep the Commandments, and no man
shall be saved by the Law unless he perform all those things which are
written, as Paul teaches, Gal. 3.12. from Levit. 18.5.

Verse. 20. All these things have I kept from my youth up] A dream of
righteousness, He thought the keeping of the Law had been but a trick of youth.
Calvin. Jerome says, it was a lie; so also Ambrose, Austin, Hilary. from my
youth, as common people say, I have had a good meaning ever since I could
remember.

What lack I yet] To perfection.

Verse. 21. If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou hast] That is, if
thou will show thy self to be such a one indeed as thou boastest thy self to
be. The words are 1. Personal and particular. 2. No counsel but a Commandment
of special trial. Mr. Perkins. Male hic Papistae ex personali mandato
constituunt generalem regulam, and ex singulari facto universalem definitionem,
cum hinc definiunt paupertatem spontaneam esse perfectionem Christianam.
Hemingius.
He desired to be an extraordinary man, therefore he has an extraordinary
trial. Relinquishing of all habitually in preparation of mind. Aquinas says,
perfection may ^e without actual renunciation; the want of habitual forsaking
of all was notable in the young man, as it may seem to be verified by Christ's
speech.

Treasure in heaven] That, is, excellent, bread that came down from heaven, Our
Father which art in heaven.

Heavenly things are, 1. Absolutely good, have a fullness in them, earthly
relatively. 2. They are pure and immixed things, earthly are mixed and
imperfect. 3. They are always new and fresh, these things have satiety in
them, and please only with their variety. 4. Are lasting, they sought a better
and more enduring substance.

Verse. 23. A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven] Aquinas
and Hilary say, he that loves money; Austen understands it of one that desires
to be rich; Polycarpus of one that trusts in riches; so Mark expounds it, 10.24.

Take kingdom of heaven for kingdom of grace, his riches choke the word and
hinder holy counsel; of kingdom or glory, if it hinder him from the former, it
will from that.

Hardly] A rare, not impossible thing. Mark and Luke express it with
affection, O how hardly can rich men be saved?

Verse. 24. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle] There
are three expositions of this. The first is somewhat conceited, Hugo Cardinal
says, that there was a little Gate in Jerusalem called the needles eye, it was
impossible for a Camel to enter in at that, ^ome think our Savior alludes to
this. Secondly, Theophylact interprets it of a Cable rope or Cord; Proverbium
de re quae nullo modo, aut cette difficulter admodum fieri poest. Cameli nomine
nonnulli funem nauticum intelligendum esse contendunt, sed mihi non persuadent.
De animante intellexit Ambrosius, eodem modo Origines, nec aliter Hieronymus.
Syrus quoque interpres in eadem sententia fuisse videtur, v^ae enim illa
rudentem, quod sciam, non significat. His add quod de animante intellectum sit
hyperbola eminentior: tum etiam quod Christus in mentem habuisse videri possit
proverbium apud Thalmudistas frequentatum, non est elephas, qui intret per
foramen acus, substituto Cameli nomine in locum elephantis; forte quod id genus
animantis in Syria vulgo notius esset, quum utrumque aeque (...) sit, sive
Camelum legas sine elephantem. Drus. Prove. Glass. 1. l. 3 Confer Drus. observat.
l. 1. p. 24. Et qui ex inde desumpsit Tarnov. exercit. Bibl. l. 470. vide
Cornel. a Lap in loc. and Canin. loc. N. T.

In Syriaca lingua est Gamal quae vox Camelum animal significat, inde
descendens nempe Gamela. Et ab ea vox Graeca and Latina originem trahunt, vox
Latina nullo pacto significationem funis Nautici admittit, sed animalis potius
quod in Syria notissimum fuit. Alardi Pathologia Sacra.

Graeci quidam ut and The^phylactus notat, ad funem nauticum haec traxerunt,
sed perperam ignorantia adagij inter Hebraeos and Arabas vsitati, non minus de
elephante quam Camelo. Grotius. Vide Bezam and Sculter, observat. in Mar. c.
53. See Weemes Christian Synagogue. p. 33. Our Savior alludes to an Hebrew
Proverb, It was usual with the Jews to say, when difficult matters were
promised, have thou been at Phumbaditha, where Camels go through the eyes of
needles. Barlow.

In praefatione prima libri Zohar scribitur. Nos in nomine Dei nostri commodum
indicavinus introducere elephantem in foramen acus, id est, rem maxim arduam
praestare, vastum hujus libri opus in formam minorem and breviorem contrahere.
Hoc proverbium imitatus est Christus pro elephanto ponendo Camelum. Buxtorf. in
Lexico Talmudico.


so Aristophanes Scholiast says the word signifies; so Clemens Alexandrinus
lib. 11. Strom. Arnobius, Suidas, Chrysostom, or author operis imperfecti,
Hom. 33. in Mat. Austin, Jerome, Ambrose, Hilary, Calvin; But Drusius and
Caninius deny that the Word signifies a Cable. Thirdly, these words are a
Talmud Proverb; when they would show a thing to be unpossible, they were used
to say, It was as hard as for an Elephant to go through a needles eye; our
Savior uses the word Camel because he was better known to them.

That is, such a rich man as sets his heart to get riches and honor, not
regarding the Religion of Christ. Perkins. Such a one as trusts in his riches.
Mar. 10.24.

Verse. 28. Ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel] Although for the double portion of Joseph's children the Tribes were
made thirteen, yet for the most part they are wont to be named twelve. Act.
26.7. Iam. 1.1. Grotius. By giving his Disciples thrones, wherein they should
judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, he compares them to Ambassadors, or to
chief Counselors and Presidents, which have the chief seats in the Kingly
Assembly. All the Saints shall give their voice, and approve of his righteous
judgment, Proximum mihi Regi honorem occcupabitis. Grotius.
1 Cor. 6.3. but the Apostles above the rest shall fit as it were on the bench
with him, because Christ shall give judgment according to their doctrine
preached in the world. Piscator.

Twelve Tribes] That is, the whole world, by a Synecdoche, as Rev. 7.4.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 1. FOr the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an housholder]
This Parable is nothing else but a confirmation of the sentence going before,
the first shall be last, and therefore the end of the Parable is concluded with
the repetition of the same sentence, verse. 16. Christ says, there is no cause
why they which are first in time should brag over others: For the Lord as often
as he pleases can call them whom he seemed to neglect for a time, Calvin.
and either make them equal, or prefer them before them which are first.

This Parable is not brought to show that there is an equality of blessedness,
but to reprehend the Pharisees, Ob. Ergo opera ex condigno merentur vitam
aeternam, sicut labor diurnus denarium diurnum. Sol. Scopus parabolae est,
nullam esse causam, cur obmurmurent Deo, aut invideant aliis qui tempore sunt
illis priores: quia Deus pro been placito suo potest aequare posteriores
prioribus.
who repined that other Laborers (as the Apostles who were called to work
after them) should be made equal with them, that is, have as much estimation
and approbation as they, they having borne, as they imagined, the burden and
heat of the day. Christ cleares himself from imputation of injustice, saying,
they had that which they agreed for, they proposed unto themselves worldly
honor and estimation, and they had it. And to prove that this could be no
degree of eternal blessedness, no more need be said, than that they murmured,
whereas he that has least in the glorious kingdom of heaven shall be
satisfied. A Penny was the ordinary hire for a days work.

The Penny is not eternal life, but some other reward common to the hypocrite,
Si denarius diurnus vitam aeternam adumbret, est merces laboris diurni, ex
munificentissima Dei pactione, non ex condigna aestimatione rei ad rem. Episc.
Dav. de justitia actuali.
and true hearted: for he that was sent away chidden for his envious grumbling
was sent also with his Penny.

Interpreters for the most part agree, that by the Husbandman is meant God
himself; by the Laborers, men upon earth; by the Vineyard, the Church of God.
Some of the Fathers, as Origin, Chrysostom, Jerome, Austin, Gregory, say, that
by the five hours in the Parable are noted the five ages of man.

An artificial day consists of twelve hours, John 11.9. lasts from sun rising
to sunsetting; this day was divided into four quarters, Mihi videntur primae
horae esse operarij Samuel and Hieremias and Baptista Ioannes, qui possunt cum
Psalmista dicere, exutero matris meae Deus meus es tu. Tertiae vero horae
operarij sunt, qui a pubertate servire Deo coeperunt. Sextae horae, qui matura
aetate susceperunt jugum Christi. Nonae, qui jam declinant ad senium.
Vndecimae, qui ultima senectute. Hieron.
The first began at six of the clock and held till nine, this was called the
third hour, verse. 3. The second quarter ended at twelve of the clock, the
sixth hour, verse. 5. The third at three in the afternoon, the ninth hour,
verse. 5. The fourth at six of the night the eleventh hour. verse. 6.

Verse. 6. Some are called at the eleventh hour of the day, but that is meant
either of the latter age of the world, or else in our latter days, but not at
death, for they were to go into the Vineyard and work. The last was called the
eleventh hour by our Savior, whereas among the common people it either was
called, or should have been called, by proportion with the rest, the twelfth
hour, to intimate that God seldom calls any at the twelfth hour, for that
is an hour rather to discharge servants, than admit new.

Verse. 8. Beginning from the last unto the first] He begins with the last, Id
est, nulla ordinis inter ipsos habita ratione, sed ita ut nemo praetermittatur.
Grotius.
a strange manner of proceeding, and very unequal, but this is done on purpose
says one, to show that at the day of judgment God gives the laborers in his
Vineyard Heaven and Salvation, not for any worth or merit in their works, but
according to his mere grace, and therefore they have as much as those that
labored ten times more.

Verse. 11. Murmured] The Greek word signifies, to grunt as Swine. It is used
by the Septuagint, Exodus 17.3. Number. 14.24. and elsewhere. Latin obloqui non
male verteris. Grotius.


Verse. 16. Many be called, but few chosen] Called, viz. outwardly by the word,
Amilitum delectu deductum videtur, in quo ex magno hominum numero non nisi
pauci, id est, praestantissimi quique eligantur. Schotti Adag. Sac.
Chosen, viz. to eternal life.

Verse. 19. Gentiles] That is the Romans, he understands Pilate and his
Soldiers. Psalm. 2.1. Drusius.

Verse. 20. Her sons] viz. James and John, who themselves are said to have put
up this Petition to the Lord, Mark. 10.35. therefore the mother and sons joined
together in this work. Piscat. Probabile est quia illis obstabat pudor, matrem
astute fuisse interpositam, quae audactus peteret. Ab ipsis autem profectum
esse vorum hinc colligitur, quod Christus illis non matri respondit. Calv.


Verse. 21. Grant that these two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and
the other on the left in thy kingdome] That is, when thou art made King here on
earth, not in heaven. To sit at the Kings right hand signifies the next place
to the King, 1 Kings 11.19. Psalm. 45.10. Heb. 12.3. The left hand then
consequently means the third place in the kingdom, for the greater any one was
in a kingdom so much the nearer did he sit to the King in public meetings

Verse. 22. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be
baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with] That he may correct their
ambition he propounds to them the Cross, as if he had said, have you so much
leisure from the present warfare, Calvin.
that you now appoint an order for the glory and pompes of the triumph?

The cup] That is, the measure of afflictions which God assigns to every man.
See Beza. Duplici nomine damnanda fuit eorum inscitia, primum quod ambitiose
appeterent plus quam decebat: deinde quod pro Coelesti Christi regno aereum
phantasma conceperant. Calvin. Plautus in Cassina. Eodem poculo bibere, pro
incommodis ijsdem subjacer^ dixit. Vide Sculter observat. in Mat. c. 54. and
Grot.


The faithful are instructed by baptism to deny themselves, to crucify the
old man, and also to bear the Cross. Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6. As often as baptism
is mentioned, let us remember that we are baptized on this condition, and to
this end, that we should bear the Cross upon our shoulders.

Verse. 23. Ye shall drink of my cup] By the word Cup, not strictly death, but
more largely sufferings, especially more grievous, are meant says Grotius.
Because they were his Disciples, it was necessary that they should be made like
their Master; he tells them before what should come to pass afterward, that
they might arm themselves with patience; and under the person of these two men
he speaks to his Disciples.

But to sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give] Christ
speaks according to their opinion who did dream of the worldly kingdom of
the Messiah, therefore he would raise their conceits to a heavenly Kingdom,
and as a Mediator lift them up to the Father.

Goijm. Cartwrights reply to Whirg.
Verse. 25. Gentiles] (...) Signifies naturally not the Gentiles, but simply any
nation, in which sense it is often taken in the Old and New Testament. Genesis
10.31, 23. Deuteronomy. 32.28. Psalm. 43.1. Matthew. 28.19. Act. 10.35. Luke 7.5.

Verse. 29. And as they departed from Jericho] Matthew and Mark say that the
Miracle was wrought as Christ went out of the City, Dubium an eadem sit
historia quae hic a Matthaeo, and quae a Marco 10.46. and a Luca 18.35.
narratur. Assentior Theophylacto quivnam tantum historiam a tribus Evangelistis
narrari putat. Maldonatus. Vide Grotium.
and Luke makes mention that it was done before he came into the City; Mark
and Luke speak but of one blind man, and Matthew adds two; Calvin supposes
that the blind man cried out as Christ came toward the City, but says he was
not heard because of the noise; then he gat into the way at Christ's coming out
of the City, and then at length he called him. For the second knot it may be
conjectured, when one blind man at the first sought for help of Christ another
was moved by his example, and by this occasion two received their sight; but
Mark and Luke speak of one only, either because he was more known than the
other, or because the power of Christ was as notably shown in one as in two.

It is uncertain (says Brugensis) whether the name of Ierico was imposed upon
this City, from the figure of the Moon, Iareach is the Moon in Hebrew. Reach
is odor in Hebrew.
or from the most sweet odor of Balsame, of which it is very fruitful.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 3. AND if any man say ought unto you, ye shall say, the Lord has need
of them, and straightway he will send them.] Our Savior did this as Lord, not
only of the Beast, but also of the owner. And therefore when he sent his
Disciples, at the same time he inclined the heart of the owner to be willing to
let them go, showing thereby himself to be the Lord, that has the hearts of
all men in his hands, and consequently the Governor of all things else.

Asino insidere apud Haebraeos veteres non erat paupertatis signum, nam
proceres asino vectabantur; ut Jud. 10.4. and 12.14. videre est: sed cum
Salomonis temporibus Aegypti commercio equorum copia apud Judaeos crevisset, ex
eo eviluere asini. Sed and ipsa asini. Sed and ipsa asini statura and comitatus
urbem ineuntis facile ostendunt regnum quod sibi Jesus vindicabat diversissimum
esse a regnis mundi. Grotius in loc.
Verse. 5. Tell the daughter of Sion] That is, Jerusalem built on Mount Sion,
the inhabitants of that City, a metaphore and metonymie both.

It plainly appears by the other Evangelists, that Christ rode only upon the
Colt. He names two for one, Calvin.
by a Synecdoche, or after the familiar use of the Hebrew tongue, Non utrique
insedit sed pullo vehebatur sequente illius matre. Liveleius in Hos. Caldaeus
dixit apud Zach. in asino, pulloque filio asinae, unde and notissima de Iudaeis
ac Gentibus allegoria quam Chrysostomus, Theophylactus, Cyrillus, B. Hieronymus
and alij, hic adferunt, quemadmodum non minus diligenter quaesiverunt quid sit
factum asina, cum inveheretur pullo Dominus. Alij enim modo huic modo illi
insedisse, alij insedisse huic illam baiulosse vestes, alij postremo quod
plerisque placuit, cum Johannes insedisse eum pullo dicat, asinam secutam
volunt. H^insij dissertat. de verae Criticae apud veteres ortu, progressu, etc.
vide Bezam in loc.
he rehearses one thing twice.

Verse. 8. Great multitude spread their garments in the way] viz. As to one
anointed and in deed a King; It was a custom with the Jews, when Kings were
made, to strew their garments and submit unto them.

Verse. 9. And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried,
saying, Hosanna] So says one, both those which lived before Christ, and those
which lived after him, are saved by him; see Weemes Divine ex ercitat. p. 171.
This prayer was taken out of the 118. Psalm. 25. Matthew also does advisedly
rehearse the Hebrew words, that we may know that applauses and votes were not
rashly given to Christ, but that they reverently followed that form of
praying, which the Holy Ghost had dictated to the whole Church by the mouth of
the Prophet. Calvin.

This word Hosanna consisting of a verb, and Hebrew particle, Grotius. Vide
Canin. loc. Novi Testam.
is used for the hymn it self, as (...) with the Greeks. It is used so also,
15. v. the sense is, we sing this well wishing hymme to the Messiah our King.
The custom of carrying bows the Jews received, as many others, from the
Graecians.

Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord] Out of Psalm. 118.26. The
Latins in their acclamations said, Felix sit, aut vivat.

He is said to come in the name of God, which does not intrude himself, but by
the commandment of God undertakes a kingdom. Divino mandatu ac potestate.
Grotius.

Verse. 11. The Prophet] Whom we have acknowledged hitherto as a Prophet, we
honor as a true King.

Verse. 12. Whereas people were to bring their sacrifices of Pigeons and Lambs
a great way off, they provided all these, that the strangers might buy them for
money at the Temple, and so save a great deal of trouble, but Christ saw that
under a pretense of buying and selling, they did nothing but cheat and cosen
the poor people, and did in overreaching and circumventing the poor buyers,
steal.

Verse. 13. Ye have made it a den of theeves] In that they robbed God in
converting the place to profane and common uses which he had ordained only for
sacreduse, viz. the Temple.

Verse. 16. Thou have perfected praise] The same word is used, Gal. 6.1.

Verse. 17. Bethany] Some expound it a house of sheep, others a house of a song,
others the house of obedience, and others the house of affliction.

Lodged] (...), which Matthew uses here, and Luke 21.37. of Christ lodging at
Bethanie, is properly spoken de armentis, of Herds, Formatur ab (...) quod
stabulum significat. Gerh. Harm.
afterward it was applied to men turning a side, and lodging all night with
one, as it is often used by the Septuagint. Josh. 6.11. and 8.9. Judge. 19.6.

Verse. 19. The fig tree (as naturalists observe) puts forth her fruit as soon
as her leaf; whereas Mark says the time of figs was not yet, he means the
time of ingathering figs.

The tree (say some) was like others, and as fruitful, Christ only intended
to show to his Disciples that He was God and man, Voluit in arbore symbolum
proponere qualis tandem exitus maneat hypocritis, and simul detegere quam
inanis sit ac nihili eorum ostentatio. Calvin.
man in that He was ignorant whether it had fruit or no, God in that it
withered upon his cursing of it. Others say, that though the time of
fruit-bearing was not come, yet he cursed it, because it had no sign of any
fruit.

Verse. 20. Withered away] The leaves falling off, Casaubonus Monet illud
vitandae ambiguitatis causa potius vertendum esse, ut statim exaruit, quam
quomodo. exatuit, cum (...) hic non sit quaerentis de modo, sed admirantis.
and its natural moisture being wholly consumed; the same Greek word is used
Mark. 5.29.

Verse. 22. Here might seem to be a tautologie, one would think that it had
been large enough to have said, whatsoever ye shall ask, ye shall receive:
but here is, Mr. Burrh. There is this illogicall reasoning of unbelief, that
though we agree to the promises in general, yet when we come to particulars,
we think they will not be made good to us.
all things whatsoever. We would not speak so in ordinary language. And all
things] Here is the general promise, that all things which ye ask ye shall
receive, and whatsoever may refer to particulars, every particular thing that
ye ask ye shall receive.

Verse. 25. The baptism of John] That is the whole ministry of John, both the
Doctrine He taught, and the sign of baptizing, wherewith he did confirm his
doctrine.

Which question tends to affirm that it was of God and not of man, and
therefore to the Pharisees that despise John's baptism, he says, that they
despised the counsel of God against themselves.

Verse. 32. John came unto you in the way of righteousnesse] That is, the
Doctrine of John was sound and right.

Believed him] That is, allowed, and with earnest affection embraced it.

Verse. 33. Another parable] John 19.32. Rev. 6.4. as one with the Hebrews
signifies the first. The scope of the parable is to show, 1. Gods great
benefits to them. 2. Their great unthankfulness. 3. The great punishment that
would fall upon them for their sins.

Luke says, Christ spoke to the multitude, and the speech is here directed to
the Priests and Scribes. But this is easily answered, for though Christ bent
his speech to them, yet he discovered their shame before all the people. The
sum of the Parable is this, it is no new thing if the Priests and other
Governors of the Church do endeavor wickedly to defraud God of his right, for
they have used the like theevery before, against the Prophets, and now they are
ready thus to slay the Son, but they shall not escape unpunished, for God
will arise to revenge his own right. And this is spoken for two principal
causes. 1. That he might reprove the Priests of unthankfulness and infidelity.
Calvin.
2. That he might take away the offense which might be taken at his death,
which was so near at hand.

Let it out] In Greek gave it out for their use for a time.

There was a certain house-holder, which planted a Vineyard] That is, God the
people of the Jews. Esaias 5. Esaias 5.2. a Wall.


In universum ijs omnia significantur quae aut ad tutelam aut ad ornatum
pertinent. Grotius.
Hedged it] 1. For distinction, God separates his people from all the people of
the world. 2. For safety and defense. Some make the hedge the law of Moses in
the whole latitude of it, others circumcision with all the Leviticall rites.

A wine-presse] That is, all holy duties.

Divinus cultus. Cartw.
And built a Tower] That is, the glorious Temple. Mic. 4.8. Not so much in
reference to the material structure, as the Ministry of it, the doctrine and
discipline of it. Ezekiel. 7.20.

Let it out to husbandmen] That is, commended the Vineyard to the care and
diligence primarily of the Church Governors, the Priests and Levites, and also
of the civil magistrate.

And went into a far country] Some say this is spoken ornatus gratia, to fill
up the parable; it is spoken (says Ambrose) secundum opinionem colonorum,
according to the opinion of the wicked husbandmen.

Verse. 34. He sent his servants] That is, the Prophets God raised up in the
Church of the Jews from Samuels time till the coming of John the Baptist.
Ier. 25.4.


Verse. 25. Beat one] Jeremy. See 1 Kings 22.24. Ier. 20.2. And killed
another] The Greek word signifies to murder with cruelty, as Esaias. And stoned
another] That is, killed him with stones. 2 Chronicles. 24.21. Zachary the Son of
Iehoiadab.

Verse. 38. Expressing plainly in this Parable Gods dealing with Jerusalem, and
theirs with him, and what was the immediate cause of their destruction.

Verse. 42. By the stone is not meant any particular stone rejected in the
building of Salomons material Temple (as some conceit) nor secondly the people
of Israel, who though contemned for a while, yet were afterward advanced; but
David literally rejected by Saul and the Nobles of the kingdom, and Christ
typically, who was refused by the Jews, but yet exalted and advanced by God to
rule in the throne over his Church graciously, and over his enemies terribly,
therefore compared to a Stone, because he is the foundation and support of his
Church.

The builders rejected] He grants the Priests this title of chief builders,
in respect of their calling, though they sought the ruin and destruction of
the Church.

The head of the corner] That is, He should be the chief stay of the
building, as the Cornerstone upholds the chief weight of it.

Some do very curiously discourse of the word Corner, that Christ was placed
in a Corner, that He might join together two diverse walls, viz. the Gentiles
and Jews.

And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken] That is, (says
Grotius) he that shall stumble upon Christ yet living, shall perceive his own
weakness to his loss, as an earthen vessel struck at a stone.

But on whosoever it shall fall, He seems to have reference to that place.
Dan. 11.44.
it shall grind him to powder] But he that shall persist in opposing him after
he shall be exalted into his heavenly kingdom, shall as utterly perish as an
earthen vessel on which a great stone is cast from a high place. This befell
the Jews when Titus beseeged Jerusalem, and will much more befall them at the
day of judgment.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 1. HEre is a proposition whereby he farther condemns the malice of
the Pharisees; Vestis nuptialis Christus est, qui and sponsus and cibus etiam
est in his nuptiis. Christu^ autem induimus tum fide ejus meritum
apprehendendo, ut nuditas nostra coram Dei judicio ipsius justitia tanquam
pretiosa vest tegatur, Gal. 3.26, 27. tum sanctae vitae conversatione, qua
ipsius vestigiis insistimus, cum Christus non solum nobis datus sit in donum,
sed etiam propositus in exemplum. Gerhardus.
the sum of the proposition is the same with that which was laid down
before, Chap. 20. that many are called, and few chosen, as is concluded in the
14 verse. He illustrates this proposition by a similitude or parable, the sense
of which in brief is this.

The kingdom of heaven] That is, the state of the Church. A King] that is, God
the Father, so called to declare his divine Majesty, and to set forth the
magnificence of the Feast. His Sonne] that is, Christ. The wedding Feast] the
glorious excellencies God tenders in the Gospel Ordinances. The wedding garment
put on] by faith, including in it conversion. The Bride or Spouse] the Church.
The Guests] Jews and Gentiles. First servants sent to invite] the Prophets.
The second] the Apostles. The Marriage] eternal life, or the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Under this parable is threatened the Jews destruction. Chrysostom. Calv. The
Jews have the honor to be first called.

This inviting to the Marriage feast, signifies our inviting to partake of
Christ and his benefits in the Gospel. See Esaias 25.8.9. and Prove. 9. beg.
Because in a Feast there is first plenty, secondly of dainties. The Lord
provides dainties for the souls of his people in the preaching of the Gospel,
1 the dishes the love of God and his free grace and mercy, the body and blood
of Christ with the merit of it. 2. The spirit of God in all the gifts and
graces of it is there abundantly powered out.

1. This is food for the soul, will feed the inward man. 2 pleasant food. 3
will satisfy the soul and answer all the desires of it. Esaias 55. because it
puts it into the possession of that which is its most suitable good. 4 It is
medicine for the soul. Revel. 22.5. The refusers are such as come not to Gods
Ordinances at all, or do not at all accept of Christ. The man without a
wedding garment is one that comes carelessly and unduly to these ordinances and
so does not in deed and truth partake of Christ which will breed life in a
dead soul, John 5.25. It will nourish the soul up to everlasting life. John
6.31. to the end.

2. To a Feast there is required not only good fare, but good company; a
voluptuous Roman said he did often eat good meat alone, but he never feasted
but in good company. Heb. 12. All the Saints here and the blessed Trinity eat
and drink with them.

Thirdly, Hearty welcome from the Feastmaker. Prove. 23.1. Cant. 5.1.

Fourthly, All is free cost. Esaias 55.1, 2.

Fifthly, The continuance of this Feast, all the days of their life,
especially the great standing dishes, faith in the blood of Christ and
communion with God.

Verse. 2. The Kingdom of Heaven] That is, the Heavenly, by an Hebrew phrase,
viz. Because it has a heavenly King, Christ sitting at the right hand of the
Father in heaven; heavenly law, a doctrine brought from the bosom of the
Heavenly Father; the citizens of this kingdom seek heavenly things, and their
conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.20. Col. 3^ 1. God reigns in them after a
heavenly manner; the promises given to them are heavenly.

(...) hic sunt non ipsum matrimonium, ut vertit Syrus, quod mox dicitur
prandium, alibi coena: ut and coenum nuptialem Plautus dixit, quomodo and
nuptiarum vox Terentio atque aliis usurpatur. Grotius.
Marriage] It is prepared in this life, consummate in the life to come.

Trinae vocationi opponit Christus tria eorum genera qui vocationi non
responderunt, nec in nuptiali convivio comparuerunt; Prima classis complectitur
nolentes, secunda negligentes, tertia persequentes. Gerhardus.
Verse. 3. His servants] The Prophets to call] preach or prophecy; them] the
Jews.

Verse. 4. Other servants] Evangelists, Apostles, they had a larger promise.
Dinner] Knowledge of God, and forgiveness of sins. Oxen] Strong Fathers of
the Old Testament. Fatlings] The sweet Gospel. Killed] The Greek word here is
commonly used in Sacrifices, and is by translation used for other feasts also:
for feasts and banquets were wont to begin with Sacrifices

Not come] Called by Preaching to sorrow, obedience.

The marriage] Gregory applies it to Christ's incarnation, but it is a spiritual
conjunction with Christ. Hilary, Calvin. Being invited, they are guests, being
come, they are brides.

Verse. 6. And entreated them spitefully] As Peter, and John, and Paul, several
times. And slew them] As Stephen, and both the James.

Verse. 7. Sent forth his armies] The Romans who spoiled Jerusalem, they were
the executioners of Gods wrath, therefore called his Armies.

Verse. 8. Servants] Apostles, Disciples, Ministers. Ephesians. 4.

They which were bidden were not worthy] The Jews unworthiness was the cause
of our graffing in. Romans 11. Acts 13.46.

Verse. 9. High wayes] The Gentiles called by the Apostles, faeces populi.
Cartw. See 1 Cor. 1.22, 23.

Verse. 10. And gathered all as many as they found] The Twelve Apostles were
scattered in all Countries, and gathered together all as many as they found,
the Gentiles came willingly, first, in that they withstood hindrances and
dangers; secondly, they came by troops, as in the Acts.

Verse. 11. The King] In respect 1. of his Power, Ier. 10.7. 2 his Majesty, 3.
his Dominion. King in Heaven in respect of his Glory, in earth in respect of
his Grace, in hell in respect of his Justice. Man] taken collectively for all.
Origin in loc.

Vestis haec est ambulatio digna vocatione Ephesians. 4.1. Opera quae ratam
efficient vocationem. 2 Pet. 1.10. Grotius.
A wedding garment] Righteousness imputed and inherent. Revel. 19.7, 8.

Verse. 12. First, the examination, Friend; secondly, the conviction, from his
own mouth, qui tacet consentire videtur; hence we may infer, that the wicked
shall be speechless and have nothing to say at the last day; thirdly, the
verdict, ver. 13. this punishment is hellfire.

Verse. 13. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth] Weeping is the
expression of sorrow, and sorrow cooles the heart, and cold makes the teeth to
chatter.

Verse. 14. Few are chosen] This is the application of the Parable, few of those
that are called and invited by the Ministry are chosen.

Snare him] in words or talk, the greek word is derived of snares which
hunters lay for wild beasts.
Verse. 15. Then went the Pharisees and took counsel, etc.] There was a great
question then amongst the Jews concerning Tribute, for when as the Romans had
translated to them the tribute, which God in the Law of Moses commanded to be
paid to himself, the Jews were offended, therefore the Pharisees devise this
subtilty to catch Christ by; so that he should ensnare himself which way
soever he should answer; if he should deny to pay it, he should be guilty of
sedition, but if he should grant it to be due, he shall be accounted as an
enemy to his own nation, and a betrayer of the liberty of their Country.

Verse. 16. True] That is, a faithful interpreter of God.

In truth] Without any corruption.

Verse. 17. To give Tribute] The word here used signifies a valuing and rating
of man's substance according to the proportion whereof they paid tribute in
these provinces which were subject to tribute.

(...), vt docet Aristoteles, and nomen suum and vim ipsam habet (...). Hinc
Majestatis criminibus accensetur nummos corrumpere. Nummos autem imperantium
vultu ac nomine signari Persicum creditur esse institutum unde: Daricorum
nomen. Grotius.
Verse. 20. Whose is this image and superscription] The Roman Caesar's imprinted
their image upon their gold and silver too. As to make laws, so to coin money
is a sign of the chiefest dominion. The very money having its value from
Caesar's edict, and bearing his name and image, did witness that he bore the
chiefest rule over the Jews, and that they acknowledged in their money.

Verse. 21. Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesars] The money declared
the subejection of their nation, as if he should have said, if you think it
absurd to pay tribute, be not subject to the Roman Empire, but the money
declares that Caesar reigns over you, and your own secret allowance
declares, that the liberty which you pretend is lost and taken away. It is
observable in this place, the article is twice repeated in the Greek text when
he speaks of God more than when he speaks of Caesar, Fundamentum opinionis
Sadducaicae fuit nullam substantiam esse extra Deum praeterres sensiles. Clare
id nos docet Lucas. Act. 23.8. ubi voce Spiritus intelligendus divinus ille
afflatus quo Prophetas a Deo impulsas recte credebant Pharisaei. Saedducaei qui
prophetica scripta non recipiebant (nisi forte tanquam humanae sapientiae
opera) nullam, ut videtur, admiserunt revelationem divinam, nisi per vocem,
quomodo lex erat tradita: cui soli obedientiam praestasse Sadducaeos apparet.
Grotius.
showing that our special care should be to give God his due.

Verse. 23. The Sadduces] Some derive the word from Sedek, justitia,
justitiaries, such as would justify themselves before Gods tribunal; others
from Sadoc the first author of the heresy, as the Arrians from Arrius; they
said there were no spirits, neither Angels nor humane souls separated from the
body, Luke 20.27. Acts 23.8. The Sadduces (say some) Piscator, Maldonate.
rejected the Prophets and all other Scripture, save only the five books of
Moses, therefore our Savior here confuting their error, concerning the
resurrection of the dead, proves it not out of the Prophets, but out of Exodus
3.6. But this of their rejecting all save the five books of Moses is denied by
other De eo quod dicuntur negasse Spiritus, non disputo. Sane ut multi putant,
sic sequeretur eos negasse Legem Mosaicam, quae variis in locis Angelorum
mentionem facit; praeterea certum est eos non negasse librorum propheticorum
autoritatem ut ex Talmude liquet. Menasseh Ben Jsrael de resurrectione
mortuorum. c. 6. vide Horringeri Thesaurum Philologicum. l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 5.
learned men.

Verse. 32. God is not the God of the dead but of the living] Our Savior Christ
denies not but that the godly departed are dead, See Heb. 11.16.
for so he himself calls them in the verse before, and it is of necessity
that either they be dead or translated, only he denies them to be dead in
the sense of the Sadduces, Cartw. confut. of the Rhemists.
which esteemed that there was no other life after this, but that death made a
man equal with a beast. As if should say, God is not the God of such dead, as
you surmise shall never rise again: but because they are intended to rise
again, God is their God.

Among all the arguments brought to prove the immortality of the Soul, none
seems fitter to me to move men's minds (says Grotius) than that which Clement
the Bishop of Rome was wont to urge, having received it from Peter the Apostle,
If God be just, the soul is immortal, a like speech to which Paul has 1 Cor.
15.19. for if we make any difference of things well or ill done, if we
acknowledge a divine providence and justice, which the Sadduces durst not
deny, for we see it is worse with many good men here than with the wicked, it
follows there will be another judgment, and therefore that also which may
receive a reward or punishment. This also proves the resurrection of the bodies
as Grotius further shows.

Verse. 34. Put the Sadduces to silence] The word is remarkable, it is (...),
Bishop Lake. See Beza on verse. 12.
he bridled their mouths, which is a phrase borrowed from fierce and
stomachfull horses which are impatient of the rider, yet are they held in by a
strong bit, and so subjected to the will of the rider by force, not out of
their own tractablenesse. Psalm. 32.9.

Verse. 35. Then one of them which was a Lawyer asked him a question] As many
plotted the question, so there was but one that did propose it. Vnus a caeteris
subornatus. Emi serunt unum, ut si vincat ille omnes victores habeantur, si
vincatur solus erubescat. Brugensis.
Chrysostom and others of the Fathers observe a policy therein; For the
Pharisees had reason to doubt of the success upon their former proof,
therefore they handle the matter so that but one should speak, and if he
prevailed they would all triumph, because he was of their Sect, but if he were
foiled, then they would put it off and say it was but his private conceit.
Bish. Lake.

Verse. 30. The great Commandement] Great for greatest, for the Hebrews have
not superlatives. Mark calls it primum omnium, the chiefest of the
Commandments. He asks (says Chrysostom) about the greatest Commandment,
which had not fulfilled the least.

Verse. 37. All thy heart] Not that fleshie part of the body, but the will, the
commaning elective faculty and the directive the mind or understanding, with
all thy heart, soul, mind,] that is, with thy will, with thy affection, with
thy understanding, All the heart is the same with a pure heart. 1 Timothy 1.5. as
we say in Latin, Totus in hoc sum.

Strength] Not that which thou have, but which God at first gave thee.
Supervacua illorum diligentia qui (...) nimium subtiliter hic distinguunt, cum
vocum multarum cumulatio nihil aliud quam intensius studium designet: sicut ut
and Latini dicunt, cord, animo, atque viribus, ut ab alijs est annotatum.
Itaque eodem sensu quae hic habemus, terna modo, modo singula, modo bina
reperias. Singula 1 Reg. 14.8. 1 Samuel 7.3. 2 Reg. 10.31. Psalm. 119.2. Bina
Deuteronomy. 4.29. 2 Pat. 15.12. 2 Reg. 23.3. Grotius.
Soule] 1. Concupiscible faculty whereby the soul pursues after a thing, and
minde] the irascible whereby it incounters with that which hinders it in its
pursuit.

Moses Deuteronomy. 6. and out of him Mark. 12. and Luke 10. add a fourth, which is
strength. Bernard thinks that these 3. words, heart, soul, and mind, were
intimated in Christ's question tripled to Peter, love thou me, affectuose,
prudenter, fortiter.

Perkins First] In dignity, because it commands us things concerning God. 2. In
order of nature, because the love of our neighbor flows from the love of God.
Piscat.
Verse. 38. This is the first] viz. In nature and order.

And great Commandement] viz. In excellency and dignity. Great] Because the
true understanding and use thereof is of great importance. 2. Because it is one
of the hardest to be kept.

Verse. 39. Our Savior answers ex abundanti, first tells him of the love of
God, and then adds the love to his neighbor. He says it is like to the
first, yet so as it yields to it in dignity. 1. In the efficient cause, God
that has commanded thee to love himself, commands also this love of another
as thy self. 2. In the matter, it is love that is required in both. 3. In the
quality if it be sincere and unfeigned, even as we do our selves. 4. In the
generality of it, contains all those offices that belong to our neighbor. 5.
In the end, See 1 John 4.20. Like the first, 1. in objecto, for man in his
neighbor must love nothing but God. 2. In subjecto, for this love must take up
all the powers of man, as the love of God did, though with subordination. 3. In
fructu, for it brings forth all the duties of the second Table, as the love
of God did the duties of the first. 4. In duratione, it is everlasting.
for as God is the scope of the Law in the first Table, so man is to be loved
for God, and in reference to him. 6. In time, they shall always endure. 7. In
necessity, as a man cannot be saved without this, so neither without the love
of our neighbor. 8. In difficulty, in the spiritual amplitude of it.

Verse. 40. Hang] It seems to be a metaphor (says de Dieu) from things hung
up, which stick in that thing to which they are hung, till they be taken away,
and there have their firmness and consistence, which metaphor is in Esaias.
22.24. In those two commandments, the whole Law and Prophets have a firmness
and consistence, are hanged on them and stick in them, that they cannot thence
be severed. See Grotius.

CHAP. XXIII.
OUR Savior in this Chapter describes a hypocrite by his signs. 1. They say
but do not. v. 3. He is nothing but leaves, shows, he talks but does not. 2.
He is unmercifull. v. 4. severe in prescribing to other men, but partial to
himself. 3. He is ambitious, seeks the setting up of himself, not God. v. 5.
4. He must be the teacher, rule the roast. v. 6. 5. He perverts all religion,
and has an aim at his private gain. v. 14. 6. He is most meddling where he
should not. v. 15. 7. He is partial in his obedience. v. 16. 8. Preposterous
in his obedience, lighter matters most busy him. v. 23. 9. He is still for the
outside. 25, and 27. verses. 10. He cannot brook a faithful Ministry,
especially the present Ministry. v. 30.

(...) est cathedra in qua sedentes magistri legem aut populo public aut
discipulis privatim interpretabantur: quomodo Cathedrae vox Graecis quoque and
Latinis usurpatur. Grotius. Sedet in Cathedra Mosis qui non ex seipso vel
proptio sensu sed ex Dei authoritate and verbo praecipit. Calvin.
Verse. 2. Sit in Moses chaire] That is, show out the Law of God. Their
conjecture (says Calvin) is probable, which refer it to the Pulpit which
Esdras set up when the Law was read, Nehem. 8.4. Christ exhorted the people so
far to obey the Scribes, as they continued in the simple and pure
interpretation of the Law. Moses signifies the old Testament here, and his
Chair is the Chair in which the Law was explained. Acts 15.1. 2 Cor. 3.15. to
sit in Moses chair, is not to succeed Moses (for the Scribes and Pharisees
were not his successors) but to deliver the doctrine he delivered. Cameron.

Verse. 3. They are ready enough to command, but slow and remiss in doing. v.
3. i. e. Quaecunque vera and recta dixerint, and quaecunque secundum legem
docuerint, ea facite. Whitakerus.


Verse. 4. Heavy burdens] Not ceremonies, for the Pharisees did abound in them,
but justification by works, looking for Christ a temporal King, and not a
remitter of sins.

Verse. 5. Make broad their phylacteries] Purple-studs woven on garments.
Epiphan. schrolles of parchment for the head, Hieron. Chrysostom in loc. Vide
Bezam. Piscat. and Cameronem. (...) a Graecis dicuntur, id est, conservatoria,
quod ad conservandam legis memoriam instituta essent.
or frontlets, or on garments, Phylacteria, ut Origenes, Chrysostomus,
Hieronymus and Euthymius scribunt, membranulae erant, in quibus legis praecepta
scripta erant. Maldonatus.
on which were written the Ten Commandments. The Pharisees carried them about
their head and arms, that they might perpetually set the Law of God before
their eyes, so understanding that place, Deuteronomy. 6.8. See Scult. observat. in
Matthew. c. 61.

And enlarge the borders of their garments] Number. 15.38, 39, 40. and Deuteronomy.
22.12. The Jews were commanded to hang fringes upon the four quarters of
their garments, Lucas Brugensis Comment. in 4 or Evangelia. (...) vetus editio
habet magnificant fimbrias, hoc est magnas and amplas faciunt, non magnifice
jactant aut extollunt, and interpres recentior, producunt fimbrias, est autem
(...) ora vestimenti, quae and lascinia dicitur. Notatum est Christi vestem
etiam simbrios habuisse, and Iudaeos hodie fila numero octo ex lana Contexta
quatuor angulis Certa quadam lege in panno quadranguli vincire. Drusius De
tribus Sectis Judaeotum. l. 2.
which when they saw, they might remember the Commandments of God. For since
men are apt to forget the Law, God would often put his people in mind of it,
that which way soever they turned their eyes, they might meet presently with
some pious admonition. The Scribes and Pharisees did wear these borders
thicker and longer than others, as a certain argument of piety, being desirous
to be esteemed more mindful of the Commandments of God than others, and being
content with the good esteem of men for these things.

Verse. 7. Rabbi, Rabbi] A Master or Doctor, eminently gifted with variety of
knowledge. Every Rabbi Rabbi ab Hebraeis nominatur Doctor, a Verbo Rabab quod
significat multiplicari, vel a copia scientiae, vel ab authoritate. Piscat. Hoc
est, ne optetis, desideretis, vel affectotis ita vocari, ut ex antithesi. v. 6,
7, 8. apparet. Glass.
had his Disciple. Matthew. 26.49. John 3.26. 1 John 38. The chief Rabbis sat
in reserved Chaires, these are the chief seats in the Synagogues, which the
Scribes and Pharisees so affected. Their companions sat upon benches or lower
forms, their Scholars on the ground at the feet of the Teachers. Act. 22.3.
Luke 10.39. Godwins Jewish Antiqu. Vide Grotium, and Cameron in loc. Ambition
is here condemned by Christ, says Theophylact.

Verse. 9. The scope of the place is, Christ does not forbid the name of Father
simply, but only as it is affected and sought after ambitiously as it was in
the Pharisees. We should not call any our Father on earth, as we call God our
Father, that is, to put our trust in him. Elton.
1. To condemn the ambitious seeking and boasting in the titles of Father,
Doctor. 2. To teach that no man should depend upon any other as God, to put
their trust in him, and make him the author and preserver of our life. Some
make this distinction to no purpose, that men which beget children, are Fathers
according to the flesh, but God only is the Father of Spirits; but the meaning
is, the honor of Father is given wrongfully to men, if the glory of God be
thereby darkened. Calvin. See Cameron.

Verse. 12. And whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased] A sentence often
used by Christ, and famous without doubt among the Jews, we say, pride will
have a fall.

And he that shall humble himself shall be exalted] Solomon says more than
once, See Pro. 15.33. and 18.12.
before honor humility. Aesope being asked what God did, answered, that he
abased the proud, and exalted the humble.

Verse. 15. Compass Sea and Land] It is a kind of proverb, and is like that,
omnem movere lapidem, that is, you use all means to make a Proselyte.

In the Greek it is Sea and dry Land. The earth is called dry, Genesis 7.22.
Jonah. 1.9. by an excellency, from the predominant quality in it, Scultet.
observat. in Mat. Vide Bezam.
for it is (as Philosophers teach) a most dry element.

(...), of coming or adjoining to their Church. Proselytus graece idem est quod
latin advena, vel adventitius. Corn. a Lap. Vide Grot.
The Heathen people are called Proselytes, when they were called to the Church
of the Jews, and embraced their Religion, as if he should say, Adventitij, as
the Eunuch, Act. 8.

There were two sorts of Proselytes or converted Gentiles.

1. Proselytes of the Covenant; these were such as were circumcised, and
submitted to the whole Mosaicall paedagogy: these were counted as Jews, and
conversed with as freely as those which were so borne.

2. Proselytes of the Gate; these were inferior to the former, they were not
circumcised, nor conformed themselves to the Mosaicall Rites and Ordinances.
Such a Proselite was Naaman the Syrian, and Cornelius. Mr Mede on Act. 10.4.
Vide Drus. de tribus Sectis Judaeorum. lib. 2.

The child of hell] As Judas, John 17.1. is called the Son of perdition by a
most elegant Hebraisme, one ordained to destruction.

Verse. 16. Is a debtor Ezekiel. 18.7. Genesis 90.17.
] The Arabicke turns it, has sinned, purus putus Chaldaismus, hence sins
are called debtes, and sinners debtors. Drusius. whence that kind of speaking
arose, forgive us our debts. Beza.

Verse. 18. He is guilty] (...), that is, is a debtor. Sometimes it signifies
(after the Scripture phrase) to sin; but here it seems rather to note after
the usual and proper signification to be bound to pay, Romans 13.7, 8.

Verse. 19. The Altar sanctifies the gift] That is, consecrates it unto God,
and appropriates it to his use.

Verse. 23. Ye pay tith of minte, and annise, and cummin] The Pharisees did
tithe the least things, Vide Drus. detribus sectis Judaeorum. l. 2.
they paid tithes of all the things they possessed. Luke 18.12.

Iudgement] That is, equity or upright dealing. Calv. In respect of our selves.
Iun. Mercy] That is, charity toward our brethren. Faith] That is, piety toward
God. Iunius. Tit. 2.12. Rather truth and constancy in promises. Christ here
(says Calvin) does try their holiness by their love toward their brethren,
therefore he touches not the first Table at all.

Verse. 24. Wine in hotter Countries is wont to have many gnats, so that it is
necessary for them which will drink, first to strain the wine that they may
take away the Gnats, hence the speech is taken. Maldonate.

Verse. 26. Build the tombs of the Prophets] Hypocrites honor the holy
Ministers of God after their death, whom they could not abide in their life.

Virtutem incolumen odimus,
Horace.
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi.
Verse. 32. Fill ye up then the measure of your Fathers] An ironicall speech.
Beza. Proceed ye also to imitate your Ancestors, that at length your
wickedness may come to some degree. Sunt verba permittentis cum significatione
desperatae atque incorrigibilis illorum malitiae.


Verse. 34. That is, God has spoken of you before in the Spirit of prophecy
what shall come to pass.

Verse. 35. Here is mention made specially of Abell and Zachary, because we read
that Abels blood cried to the Lord. Genesis 4.10. And Zachary when he was ready
to dye said, Let the Lord see and judge. 2 Chronicles. 24.22.

The blood of Abell shed by Cain is called bloods, but of all righteous persons
here is called but one blood, because it is the blood of one common body the
Church, and one common cause for Christ's sake. Mr. Rainolds.

Calvin. De Sclater. Inter prophetas duo fuerunt Zachariae, quorum uterque
patrem habuit nomine Barachiam. Antiquior ex ijs hic memoratur cujus pater
etiam Ioiada vocatur. 2. Paral. 24.21. in exemplari authentico est Zachariae
Ioiadae filij. Drus. observat. Sac. l. 14. c. 22.
Because their cruelty argued approbation of the like sin in their bloody
Progenitors. The pronoune you does generally comprehend the whole nation from
the beginning. Christ imputes Abels death unto the Jews, because there was a
certain kindred of ungodliness between them and Cain.

Some understand Zachary the Father of John Baptist, of whom, Luke 1.5. S^
Origin, Basil, Theophylact, Baronius and Tolet, Hoc quia de scripturis non
habet autoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur qua probatur, says Jerome.

Others say, that Zachary the last save one amongst the twelve lesser Prophets
is here understood by Christ. So Chrysostom, Tertullian, Ordinary Gloss,
Gualther, Sanctius, but this opinion besides the neareness of name has no
shelter, and therefore Jerome gives it the same censure that the former.

3. Some, as Glassius, Grotius, Calvin, Beza, understand Zachary the son of
Jehoiada, of whom there is mention made, Glass. Philol. Sac. l. 1. Tract. 2. de
Textus Graeci in N. T. puritate.

Slew between the Temple and the Altar] As if he should say, rebus vacans
divinis, and in loco divino cultui dicato. Glassius ibid. Maldonarus idem
sentit. vide Cornel a Lap. and Calv. in loc.


2 Chronicles. 24.21. that he was stoned in the Court of the Lords house, So Jerome,
whom Luther and many of the modern follow, and most rightly, for neither the
scope of Christ's words, nor the kind of Zacharies death, nor the place of
killing, nor the name of his Father, any whit oppugneth that opinion. Grotius
goes this way, See him in loc.

Verse. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee] As if Christ should have said, thou
which should have been a faithful keeper of the word of God, the Mistress of
heavenly wisdom, the light of the world, the fountain of true doctrine, the
seat of the worship of God, an example of faith and obedience, art become a
murderer of the Prophets, so that now thou have gotten a certain habit in
sucking their blood. Christ's purpose was for to meet with the offense which was
at hand, lest the faithful when they should see him slain at Jerusalem
without a cause, should be troubled at the strangeness of such a sight.

How often would I] It is rather a word of disdain than of compassion. Calvin.
Gallina) Vox graeca communis est ad avem and gallinam, and mirus quidem inest
avibus omnibus amor fovendi tuendique pullos, sed gallinae praesertim.
Brugensis.
See Deuteronomy. 32.11. Esa. 65.2. He describes not here the secret counsel of God,
but that which is learned by the word.

Christ speaks not of the will of his good pleasure, for that cannot be
resisted, but of his signified will in the Ministry of the Prophets, and of
himself as he was a Prophet and Minister of the Circumcision unto the Jews, for
so he might will their conversion and yet they will it not. Perkins.

And you would not] This may be referred to the whole Nation as well as to the
Scribes, yet rather to them by whom that gathering together was most hindered,
for Christ inveigheth against them in the whole course of his speech, and
though he spoke to Jerusalem in the singular number he alters it now.

Verse. 38. Behold your house is left unto you desolate] He fortelleth the
destruction of the Temple, and the overthrow of the whole Commonwealth; they
held the Temple as a Fort impregnable, as if they sat in Gods lap, but by
calling it their house he shows plainly that it is the house of God no more.

Verse. 39. Ye shall not see me henceforth] As if he had said, from henceforth,
viz. after you have crucified me, ye shall not see me till the end of the
world, when I shall come again, which coming, some of you, viz. that are
Elect, shall gratulate unto me and say, blessed is he] and perhaps as some
interpret it, all you who now reject me as a vile person, will then, but too
late, either by force, or in imitation of the godly, acknowledge me the blessed
that comes in the name of the Lord. Mat. 26.64. Dr. Tailor.


He does not declare (says Calvin) what they should become, but what he
himself would do; so that this should be the meaning, I have behaved my self
humbly and lovingly amongst you, and have discharged the office of a Teacher,
now the course of my calling being finished, I will depart, and you shall not
enjoy me hereafter, but the Redeemer and Minister of Salvation whom you now
despise, ye shall find and try to be a Judge. Zach. 12.10.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse 1. THe buildings of the Temple] How much that building cost Herod may be
gathered by this, Calvin. Erat templum hoc orbis miraculum. a Lap. Immensae
opulentiae templu^. Tacitus.
that he had ten thousand workmen laboring about it for the space of eight
years. The Disciples might well wonder at these stones, for they were goodly
and fair, and (as Josephus writes) fifteen Cubits long, twelve high, and
eight broad.

Verse. 1. There shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be
thrown down] An hyperbole, as if he should say, it shall be utterly overthrown.
This was fulfilled forty years after Christ's Ascension by Vespasian the
Emperor, and his Son Titus, say Eusebius and Josephus.

Et patet exemplis oppida posse mori. His Disciples] That is, four of them,
Peter, James, John, and Andrew. Mark. 13.3. Piscat. Calvin.
Verse. 3. When shall these things be] They thought the Temple should stand as
long as the world stood, therefore as soon as Christ said the Temple should be
destroyed, they presently thought with themselves of the end of the world.

Which question of the Disciples having two parts, when the Temple shall be
destroyed, and what shall be the sign of his coming and of the end of the
world, receives an answer to both: To the former, concerning the destruction
of Jerusalem, from the 4. ver. to the 23. To the latter, concerning the coming
of Christ, and the end of the world, from thence to the 42.

Verse. 6. See that ye be not troubled] A metaphore taken from an allarm which
disquieteth Soldiers. Considerate ista diligenter: sed ne ita movemini istis,
quasi extrema essent malorum quae Judaeos manent, ob contempta tot ad
poenitentiam hortamenta. Grotius.


Verse. 7. And there shall be famines and pestilences] It is elegant in the
Greek, (...); These two words (...) and (...), famine and pestilence, are wont
often to be joined together, as being by the sound of the Greek words, and by
a certain natural connection coupled amongst themselves; the old proverb is,
(...), after famine the pestilence.

By the whole world is not to be understood every small corner and unknown part
of the world, but by a Synecdoche, the greatest part of the world then known to
be inhabited, as Luke 2. Calvin. See Col. 1.6.23. Romans 1.8. and 10.18.
Verse. 14. In all the world] Some object the Antipodes and other people far
remote to whom not the least fame of Christ has yet come, this knot may be
easily untied, for Christ does neither design the several parts of the world
specially, neither does he pre^ixe a certain time, but only affirms that the
Gospel shall be propagated to the utmost ends of the earth before his last
coming.

The end come] The end of the Temple and City, not of the world, if Chrysostom
or Luke may be credited, Luke 21.20.24.

Dan. 9.27. It is abominable wings (that is Armies) bringing desolation.
Austen, Cartw. Perkins.
Verse. 15. The abomination of desolation] By the desolation which shall be
executed by abominable men, Idolaters, the Prophet means, and after him our
Savior, the destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman Armies; Luke 21.20.
therefore has it, When you shall see Jerusalem besiedged by an Army.

Verse. 19. And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck
in those daies] Because they were not free and ready to fly.

Verse. 20. But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the
Sabbath day] Jerome says, that our Savior bids them pray that their flight
might not be in the winter, Christus respexit ad opinionem qua^ tunc temporis
Judaei habebant de Sabbatho, qui existimabant nulla de causa licere iter facere
longius quam duorum millium cubitorum. Capellus. Vide a Lap. Because it could
not but grieve them that made conscience of pleasing God, to be forced to
forbear those services on that day which God required. Mr. Hieron.
nor on the Sabbath day, because in the one, extremity of cold forbids to go to
the wilderness and to lie hid in the mountains and deserts: In the other
there is either the transgression of the Law if they be willing to fly, or
eminent death if they abide, so the Ordinary gloss also.

Ne scilicet festinationem, vel religio, vel itineris asperitas and brevitas
dierum, impediat ac moretur. Calvin.

Verse. 21. For then shall be great tribulation] Rev. 20.1. Dan. 12.11. He
means the tribulation the Jews were to endure at the siege and suprisall of
Jerusalem by Titus and Vespatian. See Luke 21.20.

Verse. 22. And except those days should be shortned] God did not make the
days of those troubles shorter than he had decreed, but shorter than the
enemy had determined, or than any wise man who judges only by the rules of
humane policy could have expected.

There should no flesh be saved] That is, with a temporal Salvation from the
Roman Sword and devouring calamities which attended that terrible War.

Verse. 24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very Elect] The Fathers teach that this place is to be understood
of Antichrist and his Ministers, the Papists confess it.

It is not possible for any of Gods Elect to be so deceived by any false
teachers, as that they should fall into those errors that are fundamental,
and persist in them. See Fulke on Rhem. Test. on John 16.13.
One that is in the state of grace may for a time hold such errors in religion
as do trench very near upon the foundation: For all the Elect Apostles did
believe that Christ should be a worldly King, Mark. 10.37.41. yea, after his
Passion and Resurrection they held this error, Act. 1.6. Hilders. on Psa. 51
ver. 7. Lect. 146.
The whole Church of the Galatians held for a time that a man could not be
justified by faith in Christ only without the works of the Law, 3, 4, and 5.
Chapters.

Verse. 26. Secret Chambers] As when Papists say, he is in the Chapel, in the
Altar, in the box, believe it not.

Verse. 28. Wheresoever the Carkase is, there will the Eagles be gathered
together] That is, the Saints and Elect which now enjoy Christ. Irenaeus,
Hilary, Chrysostom, Euthymius, and Beza, Interpret it of the Angels which
shall accompany Christ to judgment; as the Eagles fly from far Countries
through the clouds to the Carcass, so the godly shall be taken up into the
clouds to meet Christ, and shall be ever with him; The Eagles fly high, so the
Saints are heavenly; The Eagles are endued with quick sight, can look upon the
Sun, so the godly on the Sun of righteousness.

Verse. 29. Immediately] That must not be measured by our, Paul so speaks of
the time of the last day, as if he with his hearers should live to it. 1 These.
4.15.
but the divine Computation, in which a thousand days are as one, Psalm. 90.4.
2 Pet. 3.8. That whole time between Christ's first and last coming is called by
the Apostle, the last coming, yea, the last hour, Act. 2.17. 1 Cor. 10.11.
Phil. 4.5. Heb. 10.25. Iam. 5.8. 1 Pet. 4.7. 1 Ioh. 2.18.

Stars shall fall from heaven] Not indeed, but in the opinion of men; The
meaning is, there shall be so great a concussion of the frame of heaven, that
the Stars themselves may be thought to fall. Calvin.

Shall be shaken] In Greek (...), which properly signifies they shall be
shaken as the Sea troubled by the waves, and shall be in danger by shaking, for
it is used of a reed shaken by the wind, Mat. 11.7. Luke 7.24. Of measure
shaken, Luke 6.38. Gerh. de exiremo judicio.
Of the foundations of houses moved, Luke 6.48. Acts 4.31. and 16.26. And
metaphorically of the instability and change of things, Heb. 12.26, 27. As also
of the trouble of the mind, Act. 2.25. 2 These. 2.2.

Verse. 30. Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man] Bellarmins mouth runs
over exceedingly when he says, De Imag. l. 2. c. 28. Communis fuit semper
opinio, crucem signum filij hominis appellari: eamque in Coelo, aut in aere,
Christo veniente, quasi ejus vexillum apparituram esse. Maldonar in loc.
Quaeres, quodnam est signum filij hominis, id est, Christi incarnati? Resp. est
Crux. a Lap. in loc. Quidam accipiunt de speciali quadam claritate ac radio
quodam igneo qui immeditate Christi adventum praecedet and in momento per
universum orbem se extendet. Gerh. loc. Com. Signum crucis inquit Lessius, unde
ecclesia Canit, hoc signum crucis erit in coelo cum Dominus ad judicandum
venerit. Quidam (inquit ille) putant ipsam erucem in qua dominus pependit,
divinitus instaurandam, and ibi apparituram, sed haec minor est inquit ille
quam ut toti orbi possit esse conspicua.
that the Ancient Fathers ad unum omnes interpret this sign to be the Cross:
For Chrysostom thinks it to be the Body of Christ it self. Theophylact
holds the true Cross shall appear whereon Christ dyed. Abulensis and
Iansenius are of another opinion, they think it shall be a Cross compacted of
glorious and lightsome air; so Lessius de perfectionibus divinis, l. 13.
thinks it shall be a great and bright figure of the Cross, a Cross made of the
air or clouds which may be seen of all. See Rhem. Testament.

It is a manner of speech borrowed from the wars, Cartw. confut. of Rhem. Test.
for our Savior by evident tokens of his glorious appearance, as by the
displaying of a Banner, will gather his Saints together from all the corners of
the earth. All marks of ignominy of Christ shall then be abolished, there is
no likelihood then of the appearance of the Cross.

As the morning Star, or a great brightness in the firmament, is a proper sign
of the Suns present rising, so this of Christ's immediate coming.

There be diverse opinions what this sign is. It is thought (by Calvin, Beza,
Bucer,) that by this sign of the Son of man there are meant. (by way of
Synecdoche) the great signs of glory and majesty which then shall compass
Christ about, and shall Omnium oculos convertere ad se quasi signo dato, which
seems to have strength from the explication which follows, He shall be seen
come in the clouds with power and great glory, That is* (says Musculus) the
foresaid events shall be certain significations, and as it were, a sign of my
coming. Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, Romans 4. that is,
Circumcision which is a sign.

Ipse filius hominis tanquam signum certissimum adventus sui ad judiciu^.
Piscat. Gerh. It is called the sign of the Son of man by an excellency, because
that Christ himself immediately upon that sign appears. Smith. Mark. 13.26.
Lu. 21.27. Hieronymus, and alij, vexillum crucis intelligunt. Mihi semper
probabilior sententia eorum visa qui nubes coeli de^otari existimant. Nam quod
Marcus and Lucas signi filij hominis nullam mentionem faciunt, sed simplicitur
dicunt: Tunc videbunt filium hominis venientem in nubibus cum potentia multa
and gloria. Mar. 13.26. Luc. 21.27. Probabiliter concludimus apud Matthaeum
apparitionem signi filij hominis in coelo, esse conspectum filij hominis
venientis in nubibus Coeli: praesertim cum verisimile sit, quod fuit proximum
signum Christi a Discipulorum oculis abeuntis in coelum, idem fore proximum
signum Christi redituri ad judicium, oculis omnium hominum primo objectum, vide
licet, nubem. Hinc toties scribitur in nubibusedens adventurus. Dan. 7.13. Mat.
26.64. Mar. 14.62. Apoc. 11.7. and 14.14. Taceo quod signum filij hominis
populo Israelitico interdiu praeuntis fuit columna nubis. Exodus 13.21. Scultet.
obser. in Mat.

Hoc vero signum, sit ne futura aliqua stella, an crux, an quale aliud, frustra
inquiritur aut definitur. Paraeus in loc.




Some take the words to be an Hebraisme, and think Christ himself (the Son of
man) is there meant, so Jerome, Estie. But it cannot be taken so, (say some)
for there is an opposition between these, so that the sign can never be the
thing signified, and the words following distinguish him from that sign. They
shall see the Son of man. Yet other Evangelists have only these words, then
shall the Son of man appear, which confirms this last exposition. Origin takes
it for the miraculous power and virtues of Christ. Chrysostom expounds it of
the wounds that be in the hands, feet, and side of Christ. Mr Perkins, Rollock
on 1 These. 4. and others, take it to be the burning up of this world at the
very instant of Christ's coming, mentioned by Peter, because it is also said,
Dan. 7.10. A fiery stream issued out when the Ancient of days sat upon his
throne. Others take it to be the sound of the last Trumpet, but it cannot be
that, because there is a distinction between them, ver. 30, 31. Smith on the
Creed, and Barlow, say, it is the infinite brightness and splendor which shall
come from Christ's glorious Person, the brightness whereof shall darken all
other lights. See Dr Hals Paraphrase, and Beza. Bifield on Colos. says, what
that sign shall be, I cannot describe: Some think that by it is meant the
Gospel, and the power of it toward the latter end of the world. Grotius
Paralells it with that Rev. 19.11. the white horse, that is, the pure preaching
of the Gospel. See Rev. 6.

All the tribes of the earth] That is, all people of the earth, a metaphor from
the common wealth of the Jews, for the Jewish people were distributed into
twelve Tribes. Synecdoche integri, for the wicked people only shall mourn.
Piscat.

Mourne] Yea, and that with deep mourning, beating their breasts as the Greek
word imports.

Verse. 31. And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet] 1
These. 4 16. This is an allusion, Vide Grot. in Mat 6.2. and in loc.

The Lord will use the Angels as Instruments.


because by a received custom among the Jews, and those Eastern Countries,
their great Assemblies were called by the sound of the Trumpet. The Angels
shall not use any material Trumpet, but by some marvelous great shrill sound
shall call all to judgment, John 5.25. It is called the voice of Christ
himself, Vox praeconis est vox Iudicis, the voice of the Crier is the voice of
the Judge.

Ver. 34. This generation shall not pass] Some by generation understand all
mankind, as if it should not be till there were a period put to man's
succession, That is, one generation shall not pass until the destruction of
Jerusalem be accomplished, which was effected about forty years after, so it
is likely that after all the signs aforesaid, before one age shall pass the day
of Judgment shall come. Cartw.
so the word is used, Esa. 41.4. But our Savior adds a determining
particular, this generation. 2. Others understand it of heaven and earth,
making it the same in effect with that which follows, and so the word is
used, Genesis 2.4. 3. Others understand it of Believers, the generation of those
that seek thy face. 4. Some understand by it this age, for (...) signifies
both, and so think Christ means all that time intervening between his first
and second coming, so that there should be no singular change in the Church of
God again before the day of Judgment. But the most plain and simple meaning
is to expound it of the destruction of Jerusalem, and by this generation is
meant the age of those men living, as Noah was just in his generation, that is,
with the men of that age.

Verse. 35. Heaven and earth may pass away, but my words shall not pass away]
These words may be taken either comparatively thus, Heaven and earth shall
sooner pass away, as Luke 16.17. Or positively, the heaven and earth shall
pass away at the end of the world, but his word shall not pass away, that is,
be destroyed, before it have its full and perfect end; for the Ceremonies and
Sacrifices in the old Law did hold till Christ came, but then they were to
cease in him, who was the body and fullness of them.

Verse. 36. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of
heaven, but my Father only] Christ knew it not 1. to reveal it, the Church
knew it not. 2. He knew it not as man. Jansen.

Ver. 28. Eating] (...), they gave themselves to eat, as bruit beasts; so the
word signifies: for otherwise it is no fault to eat. See my Greek Critica.


Verse. 40. The one shall be taken, and the other left] That is, say Jerome and
Theophylact, the first shall be elected and safe, the other reprobated and
perish. Grotius thinks it is to be referred to the distinguishing of men which
is made by the Gospel, especially in those first forty years, a visible sign
also of which was the preservation of the Christians from the evil of the
siege of Jerusalem.

Verse. 43. If the good man of the house had known in what watch the thief
would come] It has troubled some that our Savior should compare his coming
and a thieves together, but it is not comparatio personae ad personam, or
negotij ad negotium, but temporis ad tempus; not the comparing of person with
person, or business with business, but of time with time.

CHAP. XXV.
HEre are three Parables, 1. Of the Virgins wise and foolish. 2. Of the
servants faithful and sloathfull. 3. Of the Sheep and Goats at the last
judgment. Two general points are taught in all these Parables.

1. There are many hypocrites in the Church, as well as some sincere
Christians. 2. That Hypocrites shall be damned at last, as well as more open
sinners. In every one of the Parables, the Hypocrite is confident and thinks
well of himself, but the true Christian fearful.

Verse. 1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten Virgins] The
kingdom of heaven sometimes is taken for the doctrine of the grace of the
Gospel, the kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed.

2. Sometimes for the glorious State above.

3. For the state of the Church of Christ under the New Testament, where God
manifests himself, which is a heaven on earth, so here, which kingdom is
described by the King and subjects; The Head and King of this kingdom is
described by his coming, He comes 1. As a Bridegroom. 2. Apparently, not
hiddenly as in the days of his flesh. 3. Suddenly, in the darkest time, at
midnight.

The Parable of the ten Virgins is borrowed from the manner of the Country
where our Savior taught, where she that was given to marriage had her maidens,
The scope and drift of this Parable is effectually to stir us up to prepare
our selves for the coming of Christ, and to show it is not enough once to be
prepared for our duty, unless we continue to the end. Calvin.

Certe sine veteris Historiae luce, Simile de december virginibus nemo satis probe
intellexerit. Nuptiarum solemn celebrabatur noctu: quod persuadent verba
Plutarchi in Problematibus: ille ait, Romanos noctu nupsisse. Et verba Lucae
Evangelistae. c. 12. v. 35. Adhibebantur lucernae and faces. Virgins
cantaturae epithalamium domi per multas horas exspectabant lampadibus accensis.
Accidit autem, ut dum ita exspectarent, dormitarent nonnunquam. Cum jam sponsus
cum sponsa veniens limen domus tetigit, sese cum sponso in cubiculo repent
abdit. Scultet. observat in Matthew.

Virgins quae in thalamum ingressae clauserunt ostium, ita ut paucissimi and
non nisi advigilantes possint ingredi cubiculum. Vide plura. ibid.


and the Bridegroom his young men, which gave attedance on them, fetching the
Bride from her friends to his house, which was done in the night. Judge. 14.11.
Matthew. 9.15.

By the Bridegroom is signified our Savior Christ himself, so He is called
often of Paul, Romans 7.4. and Ephesians. 5. whose Spouse is the Church; under the
name of Virgins all are comprehended, who by profession and promise of faith
and baptism, have undertaken to be Virgins, that is entire and faithful unto
Christ. Virgins not tainted with the gross pollutions of the world. Ten
Virgins, five wise, and five foolish, non quod numero sint pares, not that they
are equal in number. All were Virgins in opinion; all had lamps to betoken
their profession; all waited for the Bridegroom, which shows their joint hope
and expectation; all slumbered and slept, bewraying their common corruption;
all had fellowship one with another. The wisdom of the wise Virgins
consists in this, in that before their slumber (that is, before the day of
their death, or before their change, at the latter day) they labor to provide
themselves of such graces, as shall not forsake them when they come to
judgment, the folly of the foolish, in that their light died with them, they
having not the graces of true faith, sanctification and repentance: so that
when they were to be changed or raised in the latter day, they have no saving
grace at all found in them, whereby they might with boldness appear before
the Judge of all the world.

By the lamp is imported that outward profession to men: the oil signifies
true faith and a good conscience inwardly to God. Hoc loco per lampades non
intelliguntur faces seu funalia quae apud Graecos lampadum nomine
intelliguntur, sed ejusmodi lucernae quae vasculis imposito ellichnio foventur,
in hac significatione vox (...) usurpari videtur. John 18. and 3. Act. 20.8.
Gerh. Harm. Vide Bezam. in v. 1.
Howsoever the lamps of foolish Virgins, of idle and empty professors, gave
them credit with men, so that they were not barred from the company and
conversation of the wise, yet in the sleep of death they shall go out and
shall not serve to light them to go to God. Our Savior expounds himself, ver.
13. where by prepared Lamps, he shows to be meant watchful mns, always
lifted up in attendance for the coming of our Savior Christ.

Traditio Judaeorum, Christum media nocte venturum in similitudinem Aegyptij
temporis, quando pascha celebratum est, unde reor and traditionem Apostolicam
permansisse, ut in die vigiliarum paschae ante noctis dimidium, populos
dimittere non liceat, expectantes adventum Christi. Hieron in loc.
Verse. 6. At midnight there was a cry made] This cry (says a Lapide) signifies
the Trumpet of the Arch-angell raising the dead out of their graves.

Verse. 14. to 31. This Parable of the Talents is the same in effect, with that
of the Virgins, for as there was in the other a Bridegroom and a Bride,
Virgins wise and foolish, the wise received, the others rejected; so here is a
Master and his Servants, of whom some be faithful, and some unfaithful, the
faithful plentifully rewarded, the unfaithful justly punished: yet this does
more effectually prepare us to his coming than the former, because it has more
arguments than the former. 1. In that they received their Masters goods,
whereof they were to give an account. 2. In that their just reward is more
lively declared. The Parable is, a certain householder about to go into a
strange Country gave to each of his servants a portion of his goods, answerable
to their estate and ability, to occupy till his return, and as they gained by
employing the same, so they received their reward, Christ is the Householder,
the heavens are the strange Country in regard of us, Luke 19.11, 12. whither
when Christ ascended he distributed his gifts and graces to his Church, 1 Cor.
12.7. Ephesians. 4.8. that we might use them in this life, and render a just
account of them unto him at his next coming.

Verse. 12. I know you not] That is, like you not, so to know is to approve. 1
Psalm. ult. 2. Tim. 2.19.

Verse. 15. To every man according to his several ability] Therefore say the
Papists, there is some prerequisite disposition in us. Answer, That is not to
be understood of an active, but a passive capacity, men are not like stones. 2.
Though the Lord may regard some dispositions before, yet they also were the
gift of God, and bestowed upon us freely.

Verse. 21. Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord] It is a great joy. 1. Because
our Masters. 2. He says not let it enter into thee, but enter thou into it,
showing, that the joys of heaven are so many, that they cannot be contained in
the soul of man. Such a joy as Christ provided, and which he himself injoyes.

See Ezekiel. 34.17. Dextra symbolum est faelicitatis, gloriae, regni, victoriae
and triumphi; sinistra vero infaelicitatis, opprobrij, servitutis and miseriae.
a Lapide Vide Grotium, Cartwright.
Verse. 32. And he shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divided
his sheep from the Goates] In what manner all men shall be ranked and ordered
at the resurrection, is set forth by a Parable of the Shepherd and the Sheep:
for as the Shepherd when evening comes, gathers his flock and separateth
the Sheep from the Goats, so in the evening of the world, our Savior Christ
shall gather all nations by the ministry of Angels, and then there shall be a
full separation, the godly being set on the right hand, and the wicked on the
left, which separation the Angels can most easily make in discerning between
them, as otherwise, so even by their cheerful or fearful countenances.

Verse. 33. And he shall set the sheep on the right hand, Praeter. l. 1. in v.
41. See Weemes his Christian Synagogue.
but the Goat on the left] Drusius thinks he had reference to the Jews
custom of judgment, who had two notaries, one on the right hand, to set down
the words of those which did absolve, another on the left, to write the
sentence of condemnation; some say he alludes to Deuteronomy. 27.11.

This discovers truly the spirits of those men that shall be tried, the Saints
are the Lords Sheep, the wicked are Goats. The Saints and Sheep resemble one
another in these particulars.

1. Sheep are meek, mild, innocent, and harmless creatures, patient; so the
Saints. 2. They hear the voice of the Shepherd; so do the Saints what God
says, Electos comparat ovibus, ob innocentiam, humilitatem, simplicitatem,
modestiam, obedientiam; reprobos haedis, quia hoc animal faetet, est asperum,
immundum, petulcum, lascivum, rixosum.

a Lapide. See 34. of Ezekiel. Olevian.


his counsel swayes them. 3. The Sheep follow the Shepherd, that is, follow
his Commandment, his example, counsel, a whistle will fetch in the Sheep,
Christ's call inclines them to come. 4. Sheep are sociable. 5. Sheep are the
profitablest creatures to their Master, that any one can keep, profitable
living, and when they are dead; so the Saints, they live and dye to the Lord.
The Goat on the other side is refractary, wanders up and down, and is not for
the Shepherds voice. 2. Is a noisome stinking unclean creature.

Verse. 34. Blessed] viz. In Christ, who was made a curse for us. Gal. 3.13.
inherit] or possess by lot, therefore because adopted he does not merit.

Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world] What then could they
deserve? these are the causes of salvation, that which he adds,

Verse. 35. I was a hungered, etc.] Are the signs of true faith.

Christ chooses works of the second Table, because they are most manifest to
the world, and pronounces sentence according to them, because they are more
visible than faith.

The causall conjunction for, implies the meritoriousnesse of works, says
Bellarmine. Answer. It is note of consequence and order, not of the cause, as
we say Summer is come, for flowers do spring, and it is a good tree, for it
brings forth good fruit. See Luke 7.47. 1 John 3.14. Bellarmine urges that,
go you cursed, for you have done so and so; there is a great deal of
difference between the evil and good we do; our evils are truly ours and
fully evil, but our good things are not ours and but imperfectly good.

Verse. 41. Depart from mee] There Is rejection. Ye cursed] There is
malediction. Into fire] There is the vengeance of that element. Calvin.
And everlasting fire] There is the continuance of it, therefore they dream
that say the Devil shall be delivered at last. No natural but metaphorical
fire, that is sharp punishment, for the worm which Esaias joins with it, is
metaphorical, Esaias 66.24. and the Prophet declares it to be a metaphorical
speech, 30. and 33. verses, when he compares the Spirit of God, to a pair of
bellows, wherewith the fire is kindled, and adds also brimstone.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse 2. YE know that after two days is the feast of the passover, and the
Son of man is betrayed to be crucified] Gods will was that his Son should be
offered on the day of the pasover, that the old figure might give place to the
only sacrifice of eternal redemption, and that all Israel might be witness
to it. Act. 2.23. and 4.22.

Verse. 11. The poor you have always with you] The world abounds with such,
(...) in his libris non est qui mendicando victum quaerit, ut multis alijs in
locis tum praecipue 1 Cor. 8.9. Videre est: sed qui de suo vix habet unde
vivat: egentem rectius quam pauperem verteris. Grotius.
therefore you may always do good to them, but I am to dye shortly, and you
can never after perform any such office to me.

Verse. 12. She did it for my buriall] By this Christ would declare that the
precious ointment was accepted, not for the savor of it, but only in respect
of burial, and show that his grave should yield forth a pleasant savor.

Verse. 13. Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there
shall also this that this woman has done, be told for a memorial of her] She
shall enjoy the honor of it in all the Churches for ever, so long as the
Gospel shall continue in the world, which will be as long as the world it self
continues.

By this Sentence the calling of the Gentiles is testified.

Verse. 14. Judas Iscariot] Judas signifies a Confessor, Iscariot either of the
village where he was born, or of the Tribe of Issachar; Iachar signifies wages
or hire, noting unto us Judas nature by his name.

Verse. 15. Thirty pieces of silver] Zach. 11.12.3 pound, 15 shillings, as some
Travels of the Patriarchs. p. 391.
suppose, the price of a servant.

Verse. 21. And as they did eat, he said, verily I say unto you, that one of
you shall betray me] That he might make the trayterousness of Judas the more to
be detested, he sets forth the vileness of the same by this circumstance,
that when he sat together with him at the Table, he devised treason.

Vide Daven. Animad. p. 100. and Dr. Twiss. vind. l. 1. part. 2. Sect. 4. and
Grot.
Verse. 24. It had been good for that man if he had not been borne] That is, not
been. A temporal miserable being at the worst is better than a not being, but
an eternal miserable being is worse than a not being, in a Theological
notion, what ever it be, in Metaphysickes or Philosophy.

Verse. 26. As they did eate] Word for word, they eating, which we must
interpret out of the words of St Paul, 1 Cor. 11. that says after supper, so
Luke; the Sacrament succeeded the Passover.

This is my body] A Sacramental phrase, the sign for the thing signified, as
Circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis 17. And the Lamb the Passover,
Exodus 12. Baptism the Laver of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5.

Verse. 27. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying,
drink ye all of it] Christ in this seems to have reference to the custom of
the Jews, for it is an express Law among them, Buxtorf. in Lex. Talmud.
that of four Cups all that are present at the Passover should drink, whether
they be men or women, of perfect age or children, especially of the fourth and
last Cup.

Gomarus.
Verse. 28. My blood of the New Testament] That is, a Sacrament or Sign in
remembrance of his blood powered out.

Bux. in Lex. Talmud.

New] That is, excellent, as Psa. 33.3. Rev. 3.9.

Pollio and ipse amat nova carmina.

Vide Pisc. in loc.

Laetitia immortalis quae per vinum adumbrata intelligebatur. Grot.


Verse. 29. I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until that
day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom] Christ seems to have
taken occasion of this from the custom of the Jews, in which it was forbidden,
the Cup being drank up, to taste any more wine that night. Christ therefore
says, that in this he will do nothing against their traditions, but so, that
not only he will drink no more wine that night, but all that time that he is
to continue in the world.

Expositors interpret that of drinking wine new in his Fathers kingdom two
ways. Chrysostom, and some others, understand, by the kingdom of the Father,
Christ's Resurrection; and by the new wine, that corporal eating and drinking
of Christ with his Apostles after his Resurrection. Luk 24.43. Acts 10.40, 41.
2. More probably, by the kingdom of the Father is meant the kingdom of glory
after this life, and by the wine he would drink with them, that celestial
liquor of sweet joy and eternal comfort which the Saints partake therein with
Christ.

Verse. 30. When they had sung a hymme, etc.] A hymme is a verse sung for the
praise of God. Their opinion does not seem to be vain, who think that the
Apostles at that time sung a great hymme, Drus. observat. Sac. l. 7. c. 15.
Vide Cornel. a Lap. in loc. and Dilher. Elect. l. 2. c. 20. Buxt. in Lex. Talm.
which consists of six Psalms, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, and 118. The Hebrews
certainly sing this song in the night of the Passover after the Lamb is eaten.
Paulus Burgensis thinks that the Apostles rehearsed this hymme, according to
the custom of the Jews, after the Passover, and that this place is to be
understood of that, which is very probable, for since in other things it is
manifest that Christ with his Apostles observed the rite of the Jews in eating
the Passover, it is not unlikely that he might follow them in this also.
Grotius says, learned men think that the hymmes were sung by Christ which were
wont to be sung at the Passover, as the 114, and those that follow, but he
seems to be of another opinion. Sed sicut ad veterem gratiarum actionem
Christus novam addidit suo instituto congruentem, ita and de hymno fecisse,
credibile est. Grotius.


Verse. 31. All ye shall be offended because of me] See 11.6. To be offended
here is to fall from the office of a Disciple and friend, and to think less
worthy of their Master. Grotius.

Verse. 34. Mark. 14.30. says, before the Cock shall crow twice, thou shall
deny me thrice. Graece significantius (...), id est abnegabis. a Lap.
] He being Peter's Scholar sets down things more exactly, not sparing his
Master. The Greek word signifies utterly to deny. See 16.24. and Grotius on
this place.

Verse. 36. Gethsemane] Some interpret it the valley of fat things; Caninius
says, it had that name from the plenty of butter. Luke names only the mount
of Olives. Gethsemani a torcularibus vini atque olei sic dicitur, cum enim in
vicino monte Oliveti magna copia creverint oleae, atque in vicinia illa
cultissimae fuerunt vineae, ideo in praedijs illis habebant torcularia, in
quibus uvas and oleas exprimebant. Geth. Vide Capell. Spicileg. de Dieu, and a
Lap.
Mark and Matthew do give a more special note of the place. Luke says, He
went thither as he was wont. John says, that the place was well known to him
that should betray him. Christ of purpose offered himself to death.

Sit you here] Yet he enjoynes them a Prayer in regard of the danger of entering
into temptation, as it is in Luke, which two seem inconsistent, The Greek
word (...) used here, and Mark. 14.32. signifies, not only to sit, but also to
remain and expect, as it is used Luke 2.49. Act. 18.11. The LXX. use it for
Iashab to dwell and remain. Judges 9.41. and 11.16. Alardi pathologia N.T.
for that gesture seems not convenient for prayer. Answer. The word sit is
taken Synecdochically for remaining in that place. Cartwright.

Verse. 37. Took with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee] He did that for
that purpose, that having the same men witnesses of his afflicted condition
which he had of his glory showed in the Mount, they might the less be
solicited by his miserable condition to a defection from him. Cartwright in
Harm. Gerh.

He chose three out of the number of eleven, those which he did most confide
in, and to whom he was wont to communicate his greatest secrets, to be witness
of his Agony, and the horror of his death approaching. Brugensis.

Verse. 38. My soul is exceeding sorrowfull] Every word is emphaticall, my
soul, his sorrow pierced that, Psalm. 68.1. and sorrowful round about, even to
death; (...), Tristitia undique obsessa non tristis tantum ut vertit latinus
interpres nimis molliter, sed undique tristis ut recte Beza vim expressit
compositi vocabuli. Chamierus.

He desired not to shun death as satisfactory for sin, but as it destroyed life.


that is, heavy round about, Luke 22.46. As the soul was the first agent in
transgression, so it is here the first patient in affliction.

To death] That is, this sorrow will never be finished, or intermitted, but by
death.

Verse. 39. Father if it be possible let this cup pass] Quid illa vex nisi sonus
infirmitatis nostrae? Aug. in Psalm. 110. By the word Cup is noted the
providence of God, who dissposeth to all a measure of afflictions, even as a
householder measures out a part to every Servant, and divides the portions
among the Children. He prays for freedom from the cup and hour, that is,
the sense of those grievous torments that were upon his soul, but withal he
resigned himself to his Fathers will, saying, Nevertheless, not as I will, but
as thou wilt] As if he should say, but let me suffer yet still even so much as
thou see fit for me to suffer. See Cameron.

Verse. 40. Could ye not watch with me one houre] Christ in the heaviness of his
heart sought comfort from the Prayers of his Disciples.

Verse. 41. Watch and pray] Even while we are praying had we need to be
watching, for even then Satan watches his time to tempt us. Ideo vigiliaris
praecipue meminit, quod nox esset and tempus quiescendi. Cart. in Harm.


Verse. 43. Heavy] Sorrow increasing their heaviness, Luke 22.45.

Verse. 44. And prayed the third time, saying the same words] That he repeates
again and again the same Petition, it is an amplification of the greatness and
heinousness of the punishment Christ endured for us. A threefold petition
declares the most vehement desire either of obtaining or declining something.
Compare this with 2 Cor. 12.7, 8. Cartw. Harm.

Verse. 48. Whomsoever I shall kisse] The Hebrews not only when they took their
leave, and after a long absence, as some think, but at other times in token of
love did kiss one another, as we are taught, Luke 7.44. Tertullian says, the
Christians received this Custom from the Jews. This is the kiss of love, and
the holy kiss, of which there is so often mention in Paul. Grotius. In
primitiva ecclesia preces, potissimum orationem Dominicam, osculo Christiani
claudebant. Di^h. Elect. l. 2. c. 4. Vide plura ibid.
Tertullian calls it Osculum pacis, which the oriental Churches now also use.

Verse. 50. Wherefore art thou come] That is, with what mind do thou come to
kiss me, with that which Joab did Amasa? So Grotius interprets it out of Luke
22.48.

Verse. And smote off his eare] The Greek word is (...), in Latin auricula, a
little ear, or the tip of the ear which is soft, whence the Proverb, Auricula
mollior. Grotius would have this only to be cut off, but because the LXX use it
simply for an ear, twice in the Kings, and the Syriack uses it so, it is
better hold that Malchus his whole ear was cut off, says Gerb.

Verse. 52. Put up again thy sword into his place, for all they that take the
sword shall perish with the sword] That is, they who have no calling to take
the sword, if they take it they shall dye by it; Quod Petro dictum est,
continet quidem prohibitionem utendi gladio sed non in defensionis causa, neque
enim se opus habebat defendere, jam enim dixerat Christus de discipulis Sinite
hos abire, etc. Joan. 18.8, 9. Neque Christum, nam defendi nolebat. Ver. 54.
Vlciscendi ergo animo Petrus ut erat fervidus, non defendendi ferebatur, add
quod arma sumebat in eos qui nomine publicarum potestatum adventabant. Grotius
de jure Belli ac Pacis. l. 1. c. 3.
the other which our Lord adds, those that take the sword shall perish with
it, either is a Proverb taken from the use of the common people, by which it
is signified, that blood is drawn out by blood, and therefore that the use of
arms is not without danger, or (which is the opinion of Origin, Theophylact,
and Euthymius) there is no reason why we should snatch revenge from God, which
he will sufficiently execute in his time, as Rev. 13.10. and in these words
there also seems to be a Prophecy of the punishment which the sword of the
Romans would exact from the bloody Jews. Grotius de jure Belli.

This is wont to be commonly interpreted, as if this commination belonged to
Peter. But this sentence hurts not those who defend the innocence of another
from injury, although perhaps they exceed measure in it, as Peter did here; for
Peter's fault was impatiency, not a desire of shedding blood, to which these
words properly aim. Therefore this seems to be the sense, Do not O Peter,
Provoked by a consideration of that injury which is offered me, prevent Gods
revenge. Grot in loc.

Verse. 57. And they that had laid hold on Jesus, led him away to Caiphas the
high Priest, where the Scribes and Elders were assembled] There was not at that
time in any other place, either a Temple of God, or a lawful worship, or a
face of a Church, but at Jerusalem; the high Priest was a figure of the only
Mediator between God and men, they which were present with him in Council
represented the whole Church of God, yet they all conspire together to
extinguish the only hope of Salvation, but it was prophesied of before, Psalm.
118.22. and Esa. 8.14. Calvin.

Verse. 59. False witnesse] They are called false witnesses, not which bring
forth a lie made of nothing, but which calumniate those things which are
rightly spoken, and wrest them to a crime. Calvin.

Verse. 63. But Jesus held his peace] When he was charged by false witnesses,
not only because they were unworthy to be refuted, but because that he did not
seek to be delivered, knowing that the hour was come, yet Caiphas triumphed
upon his silence, as if he had held his peace as one convicted, as they are
wont who know themselves guilty.

Whether thou be the Christ the Son of God] This was an insnaring question of
the wicked High Priest; if he had denied that he had been the Son of God, he
would then have exclaimed, why therefore do thou assume that to thy self
which thou art not? If he had affirmed it, he would have charged him with
blasphemy; if he had been silent, being adjured, he should have seemed to have
contemned God, and the authority of the High Priest.

Vox est assentientis atque vel modeste respondentis. Beza
Verse. 64. Thou have said] Mark. 14.62. interprets it, that it is as much as if
he had affirmed that he is the person of whom the question was made.

Verse. 65. Rent his cloaths] The tearing of their garments did signify that
their hearts were torn in pieces with grief.

Verse. 67. They spit in his face and buffeted him.] The face of Christ defiled
with blows, See Esa. 50.6.
and spitting, restores that image in us which by sin was corrupt and blotted
out.

Sedulius elegantly expresses.

-- Non denique passim
Vel colaphis pulsare caput, vel caedere palmis,
Aut spuere in faciem plebs execranda quievit.
And a little after: Namque per hos colaphos caput est sanabile nostrum,
Sputa haec, per Dominum nostram lavere figuram, He alluded ad alapas servorum
manumittendorum. Casaubone.

His alapis nobis libertas maxima plausit.


This was a frequent sign of contempt with the Hebrews, Number. 5.14. That which
Esaias says of himself, perhaps in a figurative kind of speech, that was
fulfild in Christ literally.

Verse. 70. But he denied before them all, saying, I know not what thou sayest]
Ambrose says, that as long as Peter stuck close to Christ's side, he did set
upon a whole squadron at once, but when he was gone from under his wing, a
silly maid did outface him. (...) est devovere, detestari, maledicere,
dirissima and pessima quaeque imprecari, praepositio (...) addita augere
significationem videtur. Significatur igitur Petrus extremis diris seipsum
devovisse, Dei maledictionem sibi ipsi imprecatus esse. Beza, Lucas Brugensis
comment. in 401 Evangelia. Corpus and animam suam exitio devovet, sibi enim
maledictionem Dei imprecatur, si Christum noverit, atque perinde hoc valet ac
si dixisset, male peream si quid mihi commune est cum salute Dei. Calvinus
comment. in Harmon. Evang.


Verse. 74. Then began be to curse] The Greek word (...) imports a cursing and
damning of himself, an imprecation of Gods wrath, and of separation from the
presence and glory of God, if he knew the man. Some say he cursed Christ, as 1
Cor. 12.3.

I know not the man] It appears (says Grotius) that it was a great amazement
which brought Peter to so incredible a lie. For there was scarce any Jew which
knew not Christ by sight, being famous for so many miracles. Neither could
Peter allege any cause why he came thither, if he had not known him.

Verse. 75. He went out and wept bitterly] Clement notes, that Peter so
repented, Cornel a Lap.
that all his life after, every night when he heard the Cock-crow, he would
fall upon his knees and weep bitterly, and beg pardon of this sin.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse 3. THen Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned,
repented himself, etc.] When he saw the proceedings and issue of this
business, Dr. Hals Paraphrase of all the hard Texts of Scripture. Vide Iansen.
concord. Evang.

Omnes tres paenitentiae parts attigit. Iansenins.


viz. that Jesus was condemned to die, whereas upon the sight and knowledge of
the continall miracles of Christ, he perhaps supposed that (notwithstanding
this wicked transacting of his) his Master would easily free himself from
their hands, he was stricken with a late remorse.

In Judas may be found the Papists whole definition of repentance, for here is
to be seen both contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction of
work, as they speak.

Thirty pieces of silver] By the Law of God slaves were esteemed at the rate of
thirty Shekells, Exodus 21.32. See Josephus. l. 4. c. 8.

Verse. 5. Hanged himselfe] Vide de Dieu, Heinsium, Grotium, and Pricaeum, in
loc.
Some say it is passive, and should be translated, he was strangled or
stifled, but whether by the halter or with some sudden desease, is not
determined, and Luke. 1.18. says nothing of it.

Verse. 9. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet] It
is hard to admit the corruption of the original text by the negligence of the
transcribers mistaking the contracted word, (...) for (...), as some would have
it; See my Treatise of Divinity, Book 1. chapter 6. Clarum est Testimonium hoc in
Ieremia nusquam extare. Quin Interpretes, quos secutus sum, ex Zacharia illud
depromunt, utrum igitur memoria fefellit, cum haec scriberet, evangelistam?
Quidam ita censent, quod neque confirmare argumentis neque refellere animo est.
Sed erit fortasse, qui culpam eom in librarios conferet. Quod mihi non
improbatur, ut quemadmodum Theodorus notat, error sit ex compendio scribendi
(...) and (...). Scire autem licet legi apud interpretem. Matthaei, Syrum
simpliciter, quod dictum est per prophetam. Drus. in Parallel. Sac. Vide Grotium
in loc. and Brugens. notat. in Biblia.
and it is harder with Origene and Jerome, to admit any apocrypha parts of the
Prophet Jeremy; and hardest of all with Augustine to grant a mnemonicke
error, a slip of memory, in the holy Evangelist.

The Syriacke names not the Prophet; it was the custom for one man to have two
names, Mr. Bailey on Zeph. 3.1.
Jeremy and Zachary, which differ not much in signification, one signifies
the commemoration, the other the exaltation of God; a learned man that saw a
Copy written 600. years ago, says there was neither Jeremy nor Zachary,
but the Prophet. Maldonate and Iansenius incline to this exposition.

Zachary has the name Jeremy, abridging all his work. Broughton.

Vide Grotium.
And they took the thirty pieces of silver] Of what value each piece was, is
uncertain, but the Jews have given a rule, that when a piece of silver is
named in the Pentateuch, it signifies a sicle; if it be named in the Prophets,
it signifies a pound; if in the other writings of the Old Testament, Dr. Tailor
of the life and death of Christ, who quotes Elias Levita in Tisbi, and Arias
Montanus in diction. Syro-Chaldaic.
it signifies a talent; this therefore being alleged out of the Prophet
Jeremy, by one of the Evangelists, it is probable, the price at which Judas
sold his Lord, was thirty pound weight of silver.

Verse. 14. He answered him to never a word] 1. Innocence needed no apology. 2.
Shows he contemned death. 3. To teach us quietness.

Verse. 16. Barrabas] Is a Syriacke word, and signifies the son of a Father,
Bar signifies a son, and Abbas a Father, as 16, 17. Bar-Iona the son of Iona,
or a dove. Piscat.

Verse. 19. His wife sent unto him, saying, have thou nothing to do with that
just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him]
See 1. Gods power to give testimony of his childrens innocence. 2. He often
keeps his testimony till the last moment. 3. A message is delivered against
many objections. 4. Christ converts his wife, while he condemns him. 5. Fear
of wrath. 6. Use of dreams. 7. Wives suffer for ill husbands. 8. It is a
dream in the day, it is unwholesome to sleep then.

Verse. 23. But they cried out the more, saying, let him be Crucem Christo
optant, quia id ignominiosissimumerat supplicium. Apuleius extreman poenam
dixit. Grotius.
crucified] Such are the clamours of the peolpe in Tertullian, Christianos ad
leonem, Christianos ad bestias, so the Jews cry out in the Act. 21.36. and
22.22. Away with him, A way with such a fellow from the earth. The like is that
in Suetonius, Tiberium in Tiberim, and in Ammianus, Arde at Valens.

Verse. 24. He took water and washed his hands] Pilate conversing with the
Jews, imitated their custom in this. Hujus confuetudinis apud Graecos vel
Romanos nullum reperio vestigium: Itaque puto Pilatum inter Iudaeos versantem
eorum instituta and consuetudinem in hac part esse imitatum. Nam quod afferunt
docti viri ex Sophoclis interpret, id huic loco non convenit. Illi enim
lavabant manus, ut scelus a se patratum quoquo modo expiarent: Pilatus ut
innocentiam suam testatam faceret. Casaubonus in notis.

Videtur mutuatus exemplum ex similibus ritibus Iudaeorum qui Deuteronomy. 21.6.
jubentur, lotione manuum declarare, se expertes caedis: quanquam est quid
natural propemodum, nec musitatum Romany, ablutione manuum, animi puritatem
innocentiam que significare. Iudaico usus est more, inquit Origenes, volens eos
de Christi innocentia, non solum verbis, sed etiam ipso facto placare. Lucas
Brugensis comment in 4 or Euangelia. Credo id fecisse Pilatum potius Hebraico
quam Romano ritu. Sanctius in Act. 18.8. Vide plura ibid.




There were three sorts of washing of hands in use among the Jews, says Godwin
in his Jewish Antiquityes.

1. Pharisaicall and superstitious, this was reproved. 2. Ordinary for outward
decency, this was allowed. 3. In taken of innocence, this was commanded the
elder of the neighbor Cities in case of murder. Deuteronomy. 21.6. Psalm. 26.6.
Officers should have clean hands; outward washing serves not, he had need to
rub hard to get of guilt with so weak a means. It was not used (say some)
among the Grecians and Romans. Pilate (says Casaubone Exercitat. 16. ad
Annal. Eccles. Baron. Vide Grotium.
against Baronius) did it not in imitation of the Jews, sed mos veterum fuit
mentem suam significare non solum verbis sed etiam factis, ut Act. 12.2.

Verse. 25. His blood be on us, and our children] That is, the punishment of his
blood, his death. Josh. 2.19.

Verse. 26. And when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified]
This shows Pilates desire to content the people, and he also feared Caesar,
John 19.13.

Vide Grotium in loc. and de Dieu in Joh. 19.2. Vestis haec erat dibapha, id
est his tincta, scilicet semel purpura, id est, murice, and iterum cocco
infecta. Cornel. a Lap.
Verse. 28. Put on him a scarlet roabe] Mark 15.20. and John. 19.2. have
purple, which yet are distinct colors, but both of them belonging to Kings,
Rev. 19.4. The Evangelists by reason of the affinity, and almost promiscuous
use of those colors, speak more commonly and grossly of them.

Verse. 29. And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his
head] They would not only mock him, with the putting of such a Crown on him,
Atrox fuit haec Christi ignominia, qua ipse quasi regi ficto corona spinea
illudunt, aeque ac ingens cruciatus, tum quia spinae erant acutissimae, tum
quia infixae capiti and cerebro in quo est omnium nervorum, musculorum,
sensuum, ac sensationum fons and origo. Cornel. a Lap.

Ver. 31. Fecerunt id hoc fine, ut dolorem Christo augerent, quia Chlamys illa
Coccinea vibicibus ex flagellatione relictis fortiter erat impacta, proinde non
sine exquisitissimo doloris sensu detrahi potuit. Gerh.


but by the same also show their cruelty, fastening the thorns into his head;
as also the purple roabe put upon him when he was all bloody with stripes did
not a little pain him. This part of our Lords passion was prefigured by the
type of the Ram. Genesis 32.13.

Verse. 32. They found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they compelled to
bear his Crosse] 1. There was a type of this, Genesis 22.6. 2. Christ bears the
curses of the law. 3. God will provide help. 4. There is a spiritual
consociation between Christ and his members. 5. A stranger not a Jew, the
Gentiles have part in Christ. 6. We are strangers to Christ till we suffer with
him.

Simon] signifies obedient, he that is obedient carries the Cross of Christ.
It was a usual custom among the Romans, whence they were called, Furciferi,
Gallowes-bearers. Malefici cum ad supplicium educuntur, quisque effert suam
crucem. Plutarch.
Theophylact.

Verse. 33. Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a scull] They brought Christ to
Golgotha, a place of the dead, because (say some) he was numbered among the
dead; rather because those who were dead before had benefit by him.

Golgotha, a Syriack word, signifies the place of a Head corrupted, from the
Hebrew Gulgoleth, a skull. Epiphanius and Origin say, Cranij locus sic dictus a
Craniis hominum de quibus sumptum esset supplicium, ibi jacentibus, non a
capite primi hominis ibi condito, ut veteribus quibusdam placuit. Schind. in
Lex. Penrag. Vide Cheitomaeum de Graeco-Barb. N.T. and Grotium in loc.
Christ suffered in the place where Adam was buried, and that this place was so
called from his skull; but this is false, for Adam (as we read in Joshuah) was
buried near Hebron. It was so called, because it was a place full of skulls of
dead men that had been executed there.

Verse. 34. They gave him wine mingled with gall] This Mark sets down to
have been myrrh, Mar. 15.23. Myrrh in Hebrew and Syriack has its name from
extreme bitterness. The Jews were accustomed to give to those who were
punished by death, a Cup of wine, with which there was mixed myrrh, or some
other drug of that kind, Mede in Apoc. 148. Vide Grot. in loc.
that they might bring them into a senseless stupidity, but Christ refused to
drink it. Hence it comes to pass, as it seems, that the Prophets in
setting forth destructions, so often use the Parable of the Cup: as which was
wont to be offered to them that were to dye, according to the Custom of the
Nation.

Verse. 35. They crucified him] With his arms open, with one hand calling the
Jews, with the other the Gentiles. Aretius. As the extension of the first hand
brought death, so the extension of the second hand brought life. Jerome.

His Garments were taken from him, that we might put him on in Baptism. Gal.
3.27. He was called King of the Jews, even by a Heathen Judge, to reprove the
infidelity of the Jews; he was counted among sinners, that we might be reckoned
among the Sons of God; his confidence to his Father is blamed, that ours might
be praised; he wrestled with the temptation of desertion, that God may never
forsake us; and that no man might doubt of his death, and that he might
sanctify our graves, he was honorably buried. Grynaeus. See Grotius.

Verse 39. And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads] All sorts
of Persons reproach him: 1. Those which passed by, that is, the promiscuous
multitude, consisting of men and women, Jews and Gentiles. 2. The chief
Priests, Gerh. in Harm. Evang.
the Scribes and Pharisees, ver. 41. 3. The Soldiers. 4. The Thieves, ver. 44.
They accuse him for a Liar, Ah thou that dectroyest the Temple] They would
convince him of falsehood in foretelling the destroying of the Temple, when
Christ spoke of his body. 2. They object the Cross, If thou be the Son of God
come down from the Crosse] As if they should say, if he were the Son of God he
would not hang on the Cross. 3. They carpe at his miracles, descend from the
Cross that we may believe, as if they should say, now were a time for thee to
exercise thy miraculous power in descending from the Cross. 4. They carpe at
his benefits bestowed on others, He saved others and cannot save himself] They
calumniously accuse him, as if his healing the sick, freeing of those which
were possessed with Devils, and raising the dead, had been but counterfeit and
mere delusions. 5. They except at his Doctrine and his profession, that he is
not the Christ the chosen of God, nor the King of Israel, but that he arrogated
all these things falsely to himself; they oppose his confidence in God, he
trusted in God, let him deliver him if he will] As if they should say, he is
forsaken of God; these are the bitings of the Serpent foretold, Genesis 3.15.

(...) Si placet ei. Beza. Si placuit sibi in eo. Syrus interples. Arabs. Si
diligit eum.
Verse. 43. If he will have him] The vulgar Latin, si vult, rather, if he take
delight in him. These words are taken from the Lxx Interpreters, Psalm. 22.9.

Verse. 44. The thieves which were also crucified with him] Matthew and Mark by
a Synecdoche attribute that to thieves which was Calv. August.
proper only to one of them, as appears by Luke 23.39. So in Hebrews 11. They
shut the mouths of Lions, and were sawed asunder, when as the one belongs to
Daniel, the other to Esaias alone. Hillary, Origin, Chrysostom, say, that they
did both first reproach him, but afterward one was converted.

Cornel. a Lap.
45. From the sixth houre] That is, from high noon. Unto the ninth houre] That
is, till three in the afternoon. Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut mu^ limachina
dissolvetur. Denis the Areopagite. See Beza on Mar. 15.
The darkness and Eclipse were not natural, for at the Jews Passover the
Moon was in the full.

Ver. 46. Eli, Eli, lammasabachthani] gnazabhtani, so it is Psa. 22.2. But
Christ used the Syriack idiome, say Caninius, and others. Our Lord spoke all in
Broughtons Epistle to the Nobility of England.
Syriack save the Revelation. Grotius says, it may be collected hence and else
where that Christ neither used the old speech of the Hebrews, nor the Syriack,
but a mixed dialect which then flourished in Iudaea.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me] Therefore truth and faith may be
without feeling. Forsaken] 1. By denying of protection. 2. By withdrawing of
solace. Non solvit unionem, sed subtraxit visionem. Leo. The union was not
dissolved, but the beams, the influence was restrained.

Christ spoke partly in the Syrian Language. There is between Christ and God,
1. An eternal union natural of the Person. My God] These are the words not of
justifying faith, whereof he stood not in need, but he had such a faith or hope
whereby he did put his confidence in God.
2. Of the Godhead and Manhood. 3. Of grace and protection; in this last sense
he means, forsaken, according to his feeling, hence he said not, my Father,
but my God. They are not words of complaining, but expressing his grief.
Athanasius de incarnatione Christi says, He spoke this in our person; Non enim
ipse adeo desertus fuit sed nos, vox corporis sui, hoc est, Ecclesiae. Aug.
Epist. 120. It shows that 1. God left him in great distress. 2. That he
withdrew from the humane nature. 3. That God powered his wrath upon him as our
surety. 4. He suffered in soul. 5. Will comfort us in distress. 6. God
forsakes the wicked. 7. Fear and hope are in his words.

Verse. 50. Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, gave up the Ghost]
He yielded up, or gave up the Ghost, therefore he could have kept it; that
shows he died Esaias 53.12. Joh. 10.18. Palam ostendit, se mori, non violenter,
quasi nequiret se ipse diutius in vita servare, sed propria voluntate: Nam qui
moribundus valuit clamorem edere ingentem, valuit and a morte se servare.
Impossible est enim ut a clamore valido statim quis moriatur, siquidem morte
lenta interficiatur: nam qui subito confodiatur gladio, nihil mirum clamare
simul and mori. Lucas Brugensis. Vide Grot.
freely, and so do the other words; to be able to cry with a loud voice was a
sign of strength, not of one dying.

Verse. 51. The veil of the Temple was rent in twaine] Thomas thinks the
outward veil which divided the Court from the Sanctuary; rather the inward,
Beza, Ribera, Tostatus in Exodus Gerh. Cornel. a Lap. Lucas Burgen. comment in 4
or Evang. Vide Grot.
which was put before the Holy of holiest; Christ opened the way to the
Holiest, Heb. 8.9. The veil rent, 1. That there might be an entrance made into
heaven by his death. 2. To show that the ceremonial Law was abrogated by his
death. 3. To show that he had cancelled the veil of our sins. 4. To show that
the veil of ignorance was taken away in the Law. 2 Cor. 3.13.

Verse. 52. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept,
arose] The whole earth was shaken, it was an universal earthquake, as the
Eclipse. a Lapide. The Earth was troubled with a palsy, See Luke 23.45.
and with its violent shaking awakened the Saints out of their dead sleep. This
earthquake was a sign of Gods wrath for man's sins. Psalm. 18.8. Joel 3.16. See
Mat. 4.5. and Dan. 9.6. Siclorum in scriptio erat Jerusalem sancta. Grotius.


Verse. 53. Went into the holy City] A periphrasis of Jerusalem, so called
chiefly in respect of Gods sanctification, and dedication of it from the
beginning unto himself, and because it was the seat of the divine worship. Esaias
48.2. Nehem. 11.1.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse 1. IN the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day
of the day of the week, etc. See Weemes his Christian Synagogue, p. 70. Sine
test egressus est e sepulchro ut locus vacuus primum indicium foret: deinde
mulieribus per Angelos nuntiari voluit se vivere: paulo post illis apparuit, ac
tandem Apostolis, idque saepius. Calvin.
] Christ rose early, to show unto us, 1. The power of his Godhead. 2. The
impotency of his enemies who could no more stay him than they could the Sun
from rising. 3. The benefit which Believers obtain by his rising again. Luke
1.78, 79.

Mary Magdalene] John names her as the Captain of the Company, and she was at
the principal charge says Grotius. She seems to be more noble than the
rest, because her name is wont to be set before others, 27. Chap. 56. and 61.
verses, here, and Mark. 15.40. and 16.1. Luke 8.2, 3. and 24.30.

Verse. 2. And behold there was a great earthquake, etc.] The Lord by many signs
shows the presence of his glory, that he might the better frame the mind of the
holy women to reverence.

Rolled back the stone] That Christ might come forth; therefore the body of
Christ went not through the grave stone, as Papists say. Perkins.

In Matthew and Mark there is mention made of one Angel only, when John
20.13. and Luke speak of two, but this show of repugnance is easily taken
away, because we know how frequent Synecdoches every where occur in
Scripture. Therefore two Angels were first seen to Mary, then to her other
Companions; but because the other who spoke especially turned their minds to
him, it was sufficient to Matthew and Mark to relate his Embassage. See
Grotius.

Verse. 3. His raiment white as snow] See Act. 1.10. The greatest whiteness is
compared to Snow, as with the Greeks and Latins, so also with the Hebrews.
Numb. 12.10. Lam. 4.7. Whiteness is a sign of purity and holiness. Dan. 7.9.
Rev. 3.4, 5, 18. and 4.4. and 6.11. and 7.9, 13.

Verse. 6. He is not here, for he is risen] In Matthew it is, Dominus non est
hic, surrexit, The Lord is not here, he is risen: In Mark it is, Dominus
surrexit, non est hic, The Lord is risen, he is not here. Matthew proves the
Cause by the Effect, Mark the Effect by the Cause.

Verse. 19. Go therefore and teach all nations] (make them disciples) baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost] As if he
had said, Promiscue utu^tur interpretes scripturae, imo etiam ipsa scriptura,
his vocabulis, in nomine, vel in nomen, vel supra nomen. In Graeco textu verba
institutionis habent, (...), hoc est, in nomen, Interpretes tamen, paucis
exceptis, reddunt nihilominus in nomine; Quemadmodum Actorum etiam 10. v. 48.
habetur, Petrum jussisse baptizare Cornelium cum alijs, in nomine Domini; est
autem baptizare in nomen, vel in nomine, vel super nomine Patris, and Filij,
and Spiritus Sancti, primo baptizare very and unius Dei authoritate, jussu and
mandato, hujusque personam in baptizando sustinere. Vt si officiarius aliquis,
vel legatus dicit, se in Domini sui nomine haec aut illa proponere, vel facere,
hoc est, ex mandato. Praeterea significat baptizatum consecrare and obligare ad
agnitionem, fidem, invocationem and cultum hujus very Dei qui est Pater Filius
and Spiritus sanctus. Zepperus. Vide Grot.
first teach before you do administer the Sacrament unto them.

These words were spoken to the Apostles only, and not to the Catholic
Church; now their teaching was infallible. 2. The Pastors of the Church in all
ages have Commission to teach likewise, but that proves not all their teaching
to be always infallible. He shows that as long as there are nations, Baptism
should be administered.

Verse. 20. I am with you always, even unto the end of the world] This was a
personal promise made only to the Apostles, and so cannot be extended to all
the Church according to their immediate sense. 2. To whomsoever it belongs,
the meaning is, that howsoever his bodily presence ceased, yet his providence
should never fail to preserve and comfort them in all their troubles, and help
them in all their actions, and by degrees so enlighten them also, that they
should not perish in their ignorance, but be led forward to more perfection.
Jansen. 3. If it privilege the whole Church from error, because it is made to
it, then consequently the particular Churches, Pastors, and Believers therein,
because it is made to them likewise, but experience shows these latter may
err. 4. the Papists say, the Pope may err, which could not be if these words
of Christ meant the Church of Rome.

The Disciples lived not till the end of the world, therefore I am with you,
and your Successors, the lawful Ministers of the Gospel, for ever.
Chrysostom bids us take notice that Christ mentions the end of the world,
that he may therein hearten his Disciples in bearing of the Cross, since it
must have an end, and preserve them from being besotted with any worldly hopes,
seeing they are transitory, and must have an end.

ANNOTATIONS UPON S. MARK.
CHAP. I.
ALthough Mark (as Jerome says) made an Epitome of the Gospel written by
Matthew, yet in the manner of handling he is unlike, and follows another
order, partly by relating Histories more largely, and partly by inserting of
new things. He was the Disciple Gerhard. Brugensis. Scripsit Evangel^um Marcus,
sed brevis sime: scripsit Lucas, sed luculentius. Vterque sui magistri vestigia
pressit, expressit morem. Lucas Paulum est imitatus, Marcus Petrum: brevis iste
and succinctus, profusior ille uberiorque. Novarinus in Evangelia.

Graece scripsit Marcus, quanquam in gratiam praecipue Romanorum, sicut and
Paulus ad Romanos epistolam Graeca scripsit lingua, quia Judaei qui Romae
agebant plerique Latini sermonis ignari longa per Asiam and Graeciam
habitatione Graecam linguam did cerant: and Romanorum vix quisquam erat non
Graece intelligens. Grotius.


of Peter. 1 Pet. 5.13.

Every Evangelist has his proper exordium, Matthew and John begin with Christ,
Matthew with his humane generation, John with the divine generation, Mark and
Luke begin with John, Luke with John's nativity, Mark with his preaching.

Verse. 2. As it is written] A testimony is an inartificiall argument, and
weak among men, because man is a liar; yet when it is Gods testimony, it is
far above all demonstrations.

In the Prophets] Grotius reads it, in Esaias the Prophet, and wonders that the
truth of that reading should be questioned, seeing besides the authority of
Copies, and Irenaeus so citing it, there is a manifest agreement of the old
Interpreters, the Syriacke, Latin, and Arabic, because the testimonies of two
Prophets follow, Malachie and Esaias. See Mr. Lightfootes Harmony. In libris
prophetarum, Plurali numero utitur vel per Synecdochen integri, vel quia
recitat dicta duo ex prophetis diversis Malachia scilicet and Iesaia. Piscat.
Non hic significatur in uno aliquo Propheta, ut saepe alias; sed in ea part
veteris instrumenti quae Nebjim vocatur, hoc est Prophetae. Nam sacra Scripta
dividunt Ebraei in Legem, Prophetas, and Hagiographa. Prophetas rursus
partiuntur in priores and posteriores. Hos deinde tribuunt in majores and
minores. In Prophetis ergo, id est, in ea part quam dixi. Adigit nos ad hanc
interpretationem rei veritas. Nam Testimonium quod sequitur, ex duobus
compositum est, and quidem ex diversis Prophetis. Siquidem prior illa pars,
ecce ego mitto nuncium meum, etc. Ex Malachia descripta est, posterior vero,
viz. vox clamantis in deserto, etc. Sumpta est ex Esaia. Drusius in Parallel.
Sac.

Per Synecdochen pars tota Scripturae ponitur pro uno libro istius partis, ut
Marc. 1.2. Ioh. 6.45. Id est in ea part Scripturae quae Prophetas continet, in
volumine Prophetico. Non enim in omnibus prophetis id erat scriptum, quod
citabatur, sed in uno tantum, prius quidem, Mal. 3.1. alterum, Iesa 54.13.
Buxtorfij Tiberias. c. 11. Vide de Dieu, Iansen. Bezam, and Brugens. notat. in
Biblia.




Verse. 3. The voice of one crying] Voice is not so much to show that God does
all, as to show the vehemence of John.

Verse. 4. Preach the baptism of repentance] That is, adjoined the word to the
water, or which was used to testify and profess repentance.

Verse. 5. There went out unto him] John did not go over the Cities and Towns,
as he preached, as Christ and his Apostles did, but men went out of Cities and
Towns to him in the wilderness. Schind. lex. Pent. Verbum (...) seu (...) ita
universe de quolibet indumento dicitur, ut etiam de armis signate apud bonos
authors dicatur, quae quis in aciem descendens induere solet. Quae notio apt
hic cadit; nam vili hoc and duro vestitu Ioannes utebatur, tanquam bellicis
armaturis, quibus in campum descenderat. Novarinus in loc.


Verse. 6. Clothed with camels haire] 3 Matthew. This they call Chamlot in the
Spanish, in Latin, vestis undulata, because it is painted in the liknesse of
waves.

Verse. 9. Was baptized of John in Jordan] Our Lord was baptized, Quod in
Iordanis fluvio baptizari Christus voluerit, majus humilitatis indicium est,
nam Iordanes eum quondam, rerum omnium conditorem agnoverat, dum ejus jussu
aquae sisterentur. Novarinus.
not that He might be cleansed by the water, but intending thereby to cleanse
and sanctify the water. Ambrose. Our Savior vouchsafed to be baptized to draw
all men to Christian baptism. Austen. Christ received baptism from John to
ratify and give authority to his baptism. Jerome. That the faithful might be
more assured, that they are engraffed into Christ, and are buried together with
him in baptism. Calvin.

Verse. 10. He saw the heavens opened] That word is used of three things rent
Matthew. 9.16. Cloven, or rent,
Luke 5.36. John 19.24. of a garment rent, Chemnit.
and of the veil of the Temple which was rent into two parts, Mark. 15.38. and
here of the Heavens.

Verse. 14. The Gospel of the kingdom of God] That is, whereby men attain both
the parts of Gods kingdom: both that of grace here in this life, and that of
glory in the world to come.

Verse. 24. Jesus of Nazareth] They cunningly call him so, to nourish the error
of the multitude, that thought he was borne there, and so not the Christ. John
7.42.

The holy one of God] Greek, that holy one, (...) Ille sanctus, sclicet per
eminentiam a Lap. Exodus 38.36. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. Beza in loc.
by an excellency, In which words he seems to allude to that name which was
written on the mitre of the High Priest, Holiness to the Lord, in which the
chiefest mystery of religion and faith is contained.

Verse. 25. And Jesus rebuked him] Matthew. 8.26. Uses this word, Daemones
compescit, licet vera dicentes, ne testes natura mendaces approbaret. Novarinus.
when Jesus commanded the winds and the Sea. Christ has absolute authority
over Devils, not only as God, but as Mediator: which is for our comfort; for
as Mediator he came to dissolve the works of the Devil.

Hold thy peace] Or be musled, as 1 Timothy 5.18.

Come out of him] Christ needs nothing to overcome the Devil, but only his
bare word, Matthew. 4.

Verse. 26. Had torn him] Luke uses a milder word, He threw him in the midst]
This shows his rage and fury. He tare him] That is, there were such grievous
convulsions in his body, as if one limme had been pulled from another.
yet they very well agree in the sense, because both would teach, that the
going out of the Devil was violent, for he so cast down the miserable man, as
if he would tear him in pieces, yet Luke says the labor was in vain: not
that that violence was altogether without hurt, or at least without any sense
of grief, but because the man being whole, was after freed from the Devil.

Verse. 27. With authority commands he even the unclean spirits, and they do
obey him] The Jewish exorcists were wont by invocation of the name of God to
drive away the Devils. But no man before this time did that pro imperio as
Christ here, see the 9. chap. verse. 25.

Verse. 32. When the sun did set] Greek, Vide Bezam. (...) Graecis recte dicitur
quicquid visibus se subtrahit. Lxx. in Joel. 2.10. Grotius
when the sun dipped, because it seems to the people to dippe in the Sea when
it sets.

Verse. 34. And suffered not the Devils to speak, because they knew him] There
may be a twofold reason why he would not suffer them, one general, because the
time of his full discovery was not yet come. 2. Another special, because he
refused those publishers and witnesses of his Divinity, who by their praising
of him would cast an aspersion upon him, he was rather to manifest that there
was a hostile enmity, which the author of eternal salvation, and life, had
with the Prince of death and his Ministers. Calvin.

CHAP. II.
Verse 4. BEd] The word signifies the worst kind of bed, whereupon men use to
lay down themselves at noonetide and such other times to refresh themselves,
we call it a couch.

Verse. 26. In the days of Abiathar the high Priest] He that is here named
Abiathar in Samuel is called Abimelech. It is not a fault of the pen men,
Drus. in Parallel. Sac. Achimeleco nomen fuisse Abiathari, and Abiathari ejus
filio vicissim nomen Achimelecho, nondum video probatum. Grotius. Vide plura.
ibid. and Bezam
one name being put for another; some say Abimelech had two names, (so
Iansenius.) and this is he which also 2 Samuel 8.17. is called Abiathar, whose
son was Ahimelech, who is called Abiathar, 1 Samuel 22.20. but this conjecture is
not certain; others affirm that Abiathar executed the Priests office together
with his father Ahimelech, it may be so, but there wants testimony to prove it,
so Drusius. Grotius says the most probable reason why Mark says, that was
done here under Abiathar the High Priest, which was done under Ahimelech, is
this, viz. Abiathars name was the more known for the bringing the Ephod to
David, and for executing the office of the High Priest long under David. He was
High Priest when this was done, viz. his fathers deputy to whom he succeeded in
the office of the High Priest, as Deputyes were wont, and was present at the
thing here related, and both approved of his Fathers and David's fact. So Luke
in designing of time added Annas to Caiphas the High Priest, as one more famous.

Verse. 27. The Sabbath was made for man and not man for the Sabbath] Only
Mark has this argument, it is taken from the foundation of the institution of
the Sabbath, for man was made before the institution of the Sabbath; therefore
man was not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for man; that is, it was
instituted for the use and profit of man; but two ways it was instituted for
man, 1. For his body, Deuteronomy. 5.14.21. 2. For the spiritual edification of his
soul, Chemnit in Harm. Evang.
Exodus 31.13. Ezekiel. 20.1. Genesis 2.2. the sense therefore is, the external
observation of it is not to be required, neither with the hurt nor destruction
of man.

CHAP. III.
Simili sensu ait August. si famentem non pavisti occidisti, quia permisisti
eum fame emori. a Lapide. Chemnit. Docet exemplo suo Christus ita irascendum
peccatis, ut simul peccantium nos misereat. Grotius.
Verse. 4. IS it lawful to do good on the Sabbath days, or to do evil] In the
necessity of my neighbor there is no middle to be held between doing good and
doing evil: not to do good when an occasion being offered thou may, and
necessity requiring thou oughtst, is the same as to do evil, and therefore
Christ only makes a division of two members; to do good or to do evil, for
the omission of doing good is referred to evil deeds, especially where there
is danger in omission. Chemnit.

Verse. 5. Being grieved for the hardness of their hearts] It is an excellent
description which only Mark has in this place, the anger of Christ was mixed
with his commiseration for the hardness of their hearts; (...), the
praeposition (...) shows, that it is to be referred to his looking about with
anger, with which his grief was mingled; Christ was sad that men exercised in
the law of God were so grossly blinded, but because malice blinded them, he
was also angry as well as sorrowful. Calvin.

Verse. 26. And the Pharisees went forth, and straight way took counsel with
the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him] By which the
preposterous religion of Hypocrites is declared; for those that were so greatly
angry that Christ healed on the Sabbath day, and with his word only, and a
miserable man: they themselves presently in the same Sabbath, are not afraid to
take bloody counsels against an innocent person, and doing well, and that with
the enemies of the people of God.

The Herodians Dr. Tailor of the Life and Death of Christ. 3d. Parr. Peculiaris
quaedam inter Iudaeos fuit secta Herodianorum, qui nihil admodum a Iudaeis
differrent, maxim quidem a Pharisaeis, quibus aliquoties in sacra
Evangelistarum historia conjunguntur: nisi quod Herodem magnum pro Christo
colerent. Dilh. Electa. l. 1. c. 14.
were a sect of people who said Herod was the Messiah, because by the decree of
the Roman Senate, when the Scepter departed from Judah, he was declared King.

Verse. 10. and 11. The Evangelists comprehend under two general heads, the
Miracles which Christ there showed, viz. healing of the weak, and casting out
the Devils. And that therefore, because in these two things consists the office
of Christ. 1. He bruiseth the Serpents head. 2. He frees men from the power
of the Devil. Mark notes that peculiar thing in this place, that when Christ
had healed many by his word and by touching them, the rest of the company took
so great confidence from thence, that they did not doubt of being healed,
although he neither spoke to them nor touched them, so they might touch Christ.
Chemnit.

Verse. 10. As many as had plagues] Mark calls diseases here plagues or
strokes, that He might show that diseases are divine punishments of sin,
and sent by God. 2. That he might signify greater and more cruel diseases.
Psalm. 89.33. Chemnit.

Verse. 13. And he goes up into a Mountaine] As he was wont, as often as he
purposed to pray to his Father more earnestly. So he gave an example to his,
that they should always begin imposition of hands with prayers, which the
Apostles followed, Act. 1.24. and 14.23.

Verse 16. Four names of the Apostles are Greek, Peter, Andrew, Philip and
Bartholomew, Cephas is a Chaldee word, the rest are Hebrew, Simon] Hearing,
obeying. Iacobus] Supplanting. Iohn] Gracious. Iudas] Confessing, celebrating.
Matthew] Given, Chemnit. Vide Canin. loc. Novi Testam.
who was therefore called Levi, quasi adhaerens Domino, as it were adhearing to
the Lord. Thaddaeus] As it were pappie, quasi mammosus, a pap in Syriacke is
called Thad. Lebbaeus] Corculum, a little heart, a cord derivatum. Drusius.

Verse. 17. He named them Boanerges, which is, the sons of thunder] This name
Boanerges] In Syriack, benai regeschi, that is sons of a noise* because they
were with a loud voice to preach the Gospel. Pasor. Tonare eos dicimus, qui
orationis and eloquentiae vi maxim pollent: igitur vim sermonis duorum fratrum
ut efferret Christus, eos tonitrui filios appellavit. Novarinus. Vide de Dieu,
a Lapide. and Cheitonaeum de Graeco-barb. N. T.
says Jerome was given them, because they were taken with Christ into the
Mountain, where he was transfigured, to hear the voice of the Father out of
the Cloud, testifying of his Son, whose voice seemed to the people to be
thunder, as appears by the 12. of John 29. Some think they were so called,
because they were more vehement and terrible in their preaching, than the rest
of the Apostles. See Rev. 4.5. Heb. 12.26. so Brugensis and others.

Christ in imposing of this name, seems to have respect to the second of
Haggai 7. says Grotius.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 9. HE that has ears to hear, let him heare] A form of speech to
stir up attention, as v. 23. Matthew. 11.15. and 13.9. and 43. Mark. 7.16. Luke
8.8. and 14.35.

Verse. 11. Unto them that are without, all these things are done in parables]
By which he not only understands those, who through their whole life are
altogether strangers from the kingdom of God, as the wild barbarous Gentiles,
Chemnit.
who were from their childhood given to idolatry, but also all those, who for
a time were the children of the kingdom, but by their own impiety deserved to
be divorced and cast out of the kingdom.

Verse. 22. There is nothing bid] viz. In our hearts though never so closely,
which shall not be manifested] viz. by the power of the word most plainly.

Verse. 24. With what measure you mete, Prout homines prima and maxim
necessaria pietatis monita grato and fideli animo accipiunt, ita se in eos
magis magisque effundit divina largitus. Grotius.
it shall be measured to you] With what measure you mete to God in duty, God
will mete to you in grace. Cant. 1.3.

Verse. 25. For he that has, to him shall be given] That is, He that hears as
he ought to hear, every time that he hears, he grows something more rich,
he gains some more saving knowledge.

Verse. 26. So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the
ground] Although this similitude tends to the same purpose that the two former,
Sator non est hic quivis praeco veritatis, sed ipse primus ejus sator Christus,
Mat. 13.37. Nam and hic qui sevit dicitur missurus in agrum messores, infra 29.
Is autem haud dubie est Christus. Matthew. 13.39, 40, 41. Grotius.
yet Christ seems purposely to direct his speech to the Ministers of the word,
lest they should more negligently follow their calling, because the fruit of
their labor does not presently appear, therefore he propounds the Husbandmen
to them to imitate, who cast their seed into the ground with a hope of mowing,
neither are anxiously disquieted, but go to bed and rise, that is after their
manner, are intent upon their daily labor, and refresh themselves with rest in
the night, till at the length the Corn grow ripe. Calvin.

Verse. 38. Master, carest thou not that we perish] The Disciples were too much
fixed on their Masters carnal presence; here they do not simply pray but
expostulate with Christ; Luke notes their confused trembling, Master, Master,
we perish.

Verse. 39. And said unto the Sea, peace, be still] The Greek is more
emphaticall, he put a bridle on the mouth of the Sea, or haltered it, that it
might rage no more; it is used, 1 Cor. 9.9. (...) of (...), fraenum. Addidum
augmentum verbo (ut alij notavere) celerem obedientiam significat atque
perfectam; quasi diceret: Statim penitusque obmutesce. Brugensis, Novarinus in
loc.


Verse. 40. How is it that ye have no faith] That they entreated him to help
them it was rather a testimony of their faith, if relying on the confidence of
his divine power, they had quietly and without so great fear hoped for that
help which they begd. Calvin.


CHAP. V.
Verse 2. IMmediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean
spirit] Mat. 8.28. speaks of two, but Mark and Luke make mention but of one,
yet they affirm not that it was one alone, and therefore are not contrary to
Matthew. They mention only one, either because this was the more famous of the
two, by the cure of whom the fame of Christ spread the farther, Jansen. Concord.
Evang.
or because he only being cured would follow Christ, and being sent by him
extolled him highly.

Verse. 5. And always night day and he was in the mountains, and in the
tombes] The Jews did not bury theirs in the Cities, lest they should be defiled
by them, but out of the City in fields, ^ansen concord. Evang.
and especially in desert parts, where almost every family had his Sepulcre cut
out in some rock.

Verse. 7. What have I to do with thee] For indeed Christ and the Devil differ
in nature, studies, and actions.

I adjure thee by God] Who by his just judgment has suffered me to be in
these men for their sin, Polyc. Lyser. Vide Bezam.
do not torment, nor expel me out of this Country. It was a great torment to
the devil to cease from tormenting the man whom ^e had possessed, says
Novarinus.

Verse. 9. And he asked him, what is thy name] He asks not as if he were
ignorant, but that from the devils answer, the multitude of the devils,
dwelling in him, might be discovered to those that were present, Jansen.
that so they might perceive the cause of that strange cruelty described, and
the greatness of the miracle, in which by Christ's power the man was afterward
free from so great a number of devils, and might know that Christ's power was
greater than that of many devils joined together.

A Legion was a term among the Romans for Soldiers, as we say a Regiment, it
was 6666. says Hesychius.

Verse. 10. He would not send them away out of the country]Because (says
Cajetane) they have several regions where they most haunt, Amare videntur
regiones illas prae aliis, in quibus more^ hominum propter longam
consuetudinem, perspectiores habene, ac ubi major est eis nocendi occasio and
spes. Brugensis.
and they that are in such a region are loath to be put out of it, but would
feign keep their place.

Verse. 11. Now there were there nigh unto the mountains a great heard of Swine
feeding] Luke says, this heard was in the mountain. Austen says, this heard
of Swine was so great, Jansen. Intelligi potest grex ille tum fuisse in part
montis inferior^. Grotius.
that some of it was near the mountain in the fields, some in the mountain,
or they were in the lower part of the mountain which began to spread into the
fields.

Verse. 15. And cloathed] Ingenuous modesty; whom formerly the furies of the
Devil had deprived of clothes, he fits now clothed, and in his right mind;
not only endued with a right mind, and carrying himself modesty, which are the
usual significations of this word, but also rightly judging of the Doctrine
and miracles of Christ, for it is evident out of Zenophon that this also is the
use of this word.

Verse. 30. And Jesus immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of
him, turned him about in the press, and said, who touched my cloathes] Christ
would have this miracle discovered; First, In relation to the woman: 1. To
prevent a temptation which might have fastened upon her afterward, if she had
not sought to Christ, and returned thanks to him for this cure. 2. To maintain
his farther grace to her, he commends her faith, bids her go in peace. 3. That
he might cure some infirmity in her. Secondly, In regard of himself: 1. To
glorify his divine knowledge, that he is able to discover so secret a thing.
2. His divine power, that by this touch only he was able to cure so deep and
difficult a disease. 3. For the confirmation of their faith that were about
him, and likewise to assure Iairus that he would recover his daughter.

Verse. 33. And fell down before him] Those that prayed fervently were wont to
fall upon their knees. Act. 7.60. This was used, not only by the Christians,
but by heathens. Dilsher. Elect. l. 2. c. 23. Genua misericordiae consignavit
antiquitas, quod ea supplices at ingant, ad haec manus tendant. Id. ib.
It was a sign of humility with both, but the Heathens intimate something more
when they fall upon their knees: They think that those who would obtain mercy
should fall upon their knees, because the knees were consecrated to mercy.

Verse. 37. He suffered no man to follow him] Either because they were unworthy
to be witnesses to the miracle he hindered them from coming in, or because he
would not have the miracle overwhelmed with the company clamouring about him.
Calvin.

Verse. 40. When he had put them all out] He took so many witnesses as sufficed
for proving the thing, to admit more might have a show of ostentation.

Verse. 42. Were astonished with a great astonishment] An ecstasie is taken for
a peremptory sequestration from thoughts and dealings with the world, for the
ravishment of the mind by contemplation of truths revealed to it. Acts 10.10.
and 22.17. Sarson on 1 Timothy 1.15. Obstupuerunt stupore magno] hoc est, rei
novitate ita perculsi fuerunt, ut prae admiratione quasi in sluporem quend^m
mentis conjecti fuerint. Polyc. Lyser.
It is taken here, and Luke 5.26. for astonishment through admiration.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 3. IS not this the Carpen^^r] or that Carpenter. The Greek word (...)
is a general word, rendered Faber; (...) faber ille.
and it is questioned by some whether should be meant by it Faber serrarius, or
Faber lignarius, a Smith, or a Carpenter. Justin. antiquissimus scriptor,
diserte testatur Christum antequam munus illud suum exerceret, fabrum fuisse
lignarium, and aratra ac juga caeteraque ejusmodi fabricasse. Beza in loc.
Hilary and Ambrose think Christ was a Smith; The common opinion is, that he
was a Carpenter; Some hold that the Greek word is so taken when it is put
absolutely and without addition, besides the Arabic version is for that, and
(...), a chief builder, comes from (...), princeps, and (...), faber. Hence
Christ in his preaching (says a Lapide) drew similitudes from the yoke, Mat.
11.29. and plow, Luke 9.62.

Verse. 7. And he called unto him the Twelve, and began to send them forth two
by two] Our Savior sent out his twelve Apostles Binos Apostolos mittit, non
solum ob concordiam and unitatem, sed ut promptiores fierent, and alter alteri
exemplo esset, ferventiorque alterius alacritate alter redderetur. Novarinus.
two by two, and so the seventy Disciples two and two before him, Luke 10.1.
both to make the message of more authority, the things being confirmed by the
testimony of two witnesses, and for the mutual comfort and aid which they
might have of each other, both in their journey and business. See Mat. 10.1.

And gave them power over unclean spirits] Christ furnished his Ambassadors
with the gift of miracles, which was to them in stead of Chemnit.
public testimony, or (as they speak commonly) in stead of letters of
credence.

Verse. 8. See Mat. 10.10. God would in this first embassage give them a
manifest document of the divine providence.

Verse. 13. And anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them]
Whence the Papists would ground their extreme unction, which they hold to be
such a Sacrament of the Church, as is here insinuated by Mark. But first, the
Evangelist says not, that the Apostles anointed those who were in the pangs
of death, upon this opinion, that in that Unction they might have the last and
firmest savegard against Sin, the Devil, and Death, but only describes the
gift of healing, the power of which the Lord said he had granted them for that
Embassage in the former Chapter. Secondly, The Evangelist does not prescribe
that such an anointing with oil ought to be made and kept in all the Church
of the New Testament always even to the end of the world, but describes the
gift of healing, which, as also other gifts of miracles, was temporal, and
ceased after the Gospel was propagated through the whole world. Chemnit. Har.
Vide Cornel. a Lap.
Thirdly, We read not that the Apostles anointed them of which they might
probably presume that they would presently dye, but they anointed those sick
lest they should then dye with that weakeness. Fourthly, We read here nothing
of the command of Christ, nor of the fact of the Apostles, that the oil of
that unction ought first by express words to be consecrated and exorcised.
Fifthly, Neither do we read, that it was either commanded by Christ, or that
the Apostles practiced it, viz. the anointing of the Organs of the Senses.
Sixthly. There is no Letter or Syllable of a certain form of words, as is
usual in Popery. Seventhly, Mark does not say, that the end and effect of
this unction was, that their sins might be blotted out, and the snares of the
Devil avoided in those that were about to dye, but that by this external
symbol, which then was usual among the oriental people, the gift of
corporal healing might be administered.

Verse. 21. When a convenient day was come] Not in respect of God, to whom it so
seemed comely to make the birth day of a wicked King lamentable by the death of
a most holy man, but in respect of Herod and Herodias, who found not a fitter
time of acting the murder long conceived and revolved within their minds.

Verse. 46. And when he had sent them away] The Greek word (...) does not
signify simply to dismiss or send away, Novarinus. Lucas Burgensis.
but with tokens of singular good will, as we take our leave of, and wish well
to our friends departing from us: So this word is used, Luke 9.61. Acts 18.21.
2 Cor. 2.13.

CHAP. VII.
Vide Cameron myr. evang. and Grot Sedulo and accurate, Causaub. Syriac,
curiose. Vulgata versio habet crebro, quam voculam etiam Erasmus retinuit; and
qui Turcis conversati sunt, illi norunt, ipsos mane preces suas non prius
recitare, quam manus cubito tenus lavarint. Hoc a Judaeis mutuati sunt. Polyc.
Lyser. Exponunt iterum atque iterum laverint, metaphora ducta a pugilibus qui
iteratis pugnis decertant, etsi possit locus ille accipi de Iudaeis, qui pugno
manum lavando fricarent. Drus. Prove. Clas. 2. lib. 4. Quidam vertunt (...)
certatim, quasi dicas, pugilatim metaphora a pugilibus sumpta, ut lavandi
summum studium ac veluti eertamen significetur. Novarinus in loc.
Verse 3. WAsh their hands oft] Or diligently, in the Original, with the fist.
Theophylact, usque ad cubitum, up to the elbow. Holding] That is, studiously
and with all their strength holding, as the Greek word signifies, (...).

Verse. 4. And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not]
The market where they often happened to converse with sinners, and feared lest
by the touch of profane men and heathens they should contract impurity. Also
washing their hands they took heed of keeping their ring on their fingers,
lest any filth should lie under it, whence all their washing would be vain. So
they thought that their cups would be profane unless they were first washed,
for it might come to pass that a dead fly might defile them; if any one rose
from the bed not besprinkled with water, they thought him profane, since it
might happen that a flea was killed in it, from which he might be defiled. But
all those things were taken out of Numb. 19.20. and Levit. 14.7. and 16.19. The
Pharisees added these traditions or cautions to this Law, by which they took
heed lest the Precepts of God should be violated on the sudden. Christ
reprehends two things in the Jewish traditions: 1. That they obtruded outward
cleanness on God, instead of the purity of the heart. 2. That they made the
worship of God out of their humane Traditions. See Grotius.

Verse. 7. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men] In vain, either because they attain not the end and
fruit of divine worship, or because the worship it self of it self was vain
and frivolous. Polyc. Lyser.

Verse. 8. Laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men]
They preferred their humane traditions before the divine precepts, and were so
taken with them, that they neglected, yea made void, the other.

Verse. 11. If a man shall say to his Father or his Mother it is Corban] As if
he should say, I have given to the treasury, therefore look for no duty from
me, this word is the Jews solemn oath. Mr. Hildersam.

The Scribes and Pharisees taught, that Parents might be freely neglected,
Down. Diat. de Antich. part prima. l. 3. c. 6.
if the children had either consecrated any thing to holy uses, or had vowed
that they would not help their Parents. See Dr. Rainolds his conference with
Heart. c. 7.

The Syriacke has Corbani, the Evangelist seems therefore to have retained
the Hebrew word, Lucas Brugensis Comment. in 4 or Evangelia. Gorban donum sive
munus, proprie quod Deo offertur. Drusius De Tribus Sectis Iudaeorum. Vide
plura ibid. Vide Dilher Eclog. Sac. Dictum. 11.
because the Jews were wont commonly to use it for the form either of a vow or
an oath.

Verse. 17. His Disciples asked him concerning the Parable] Matthew says that
Peter asked him, Mark his Disciples, that he would explain this Parable unto
them. Polyc. Lyser.
Therefore either Peter in the name of the rest asked him, and after the rest
of the Disciples also in the house asked him. Calvin.


Christ answer shows that his Disciples asked him, for not only Peter's
ignorance, but the ignorance of them all is blamed by him.

Verse. 18. Are ye so without understanding also] Which words here are very
emphatically put, in respect of the Apostles, as if he should say, what you
whom I have had so long time with me, to whom I have familiarly imparted the
light of my doctrine, which I have made partakers of all the secrets which I
have received from my Father, which I have made Doctors of the whole world, and
have long since often instructed, in what things the true purity of man
consisted, that you ought to understand my doctrine before others, yet are you
so rude and unskilful, Polyc. Lyser.
that you do not understand those things which are most plainly spoken?

Do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without enters into the man,
it cannot defile him] The words are to be understood according to the subject
matter, Id. ib.
the matter of which Christ treates in the present, is not properly meats
considered in and by themselves, but the use of them, whether they ought to be
taken with washed or unwasht hands. Besides Christ here speaks not of
Leviticall impurity, but of cleanness before God, which are most different
among themselves.

Verse. 21. From within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murthers] That is the heart corrupted with original
sin, as if the heart, that is, the whole, were in a manner nothing else but
sin.

Verse. 22. Pride and folly are against the first Commandment, blasphemies
against the second and third, by which men reproach the word or name of God, of
sins against the fifth Commandment he spoke before, and here are murders
against the sixth, adultery and fornication against the seventh, thefts and
covetousness against the eighth, guile against the ninth, evil thoughts
against the tenth. See Grotius.

An evil eye] That is, envy, as Romans 1.29. or niggardliness, or both.

Verse. 33. and 34. By sprinkling spittle on his tongue, he would note that the
faculty of speaking was derived from him alone, by putting his finger into
their ears, Saepe Christus externo aliquo signo inaspectabilem efficaciam
velut spectandam exhibebat, ita digitis in aures imissis irrigataque lingua
Testatum fecit eum esse cujus vi clausi meatus quasi perterebrarentur, and
lingua palato adhaerescens motum recuperaret. Grotius.
he taught that it was his proper gift to boar as it were the deaf ears, for
there is no need to fly to other allegories, that he removed the deaf man
aside from the multitude, he did it partly for that purpose, that he might
cause the glory of his truth to appear a far off to rude and not yet fit
witnesses, partly that He might more freely and fervently pour out his
prayers; that he looked up to heaven and sighed, it was a sign of his vehement
affection, whence we may perceive how singular his affection is toward men in
whose miseries he condoled. Calvin.

Ephphata] The Evangelist retained the Syriacke word, that he might show how
easy it was for Christ to heal this wretched man, Polyc. Lyser. Vox Syriaca:
quae Hebraicis literis scribitur Ethpatahh Piscat. Vide Canin. loc. Nov. Test.
Vox Syriaca sive Syro-Chaldaica est, deducta a radice communi Hebraeis Syris
and Chaldaeis, Patah. sine petah. Brugensis.
as he who using a familiar and ordinary word, perfectly restored him; but it
is in the Imperative Mood, be thou opened, for all things are done at the
command of this Lord.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 2. AND have nothing to eate] It is very observable, that our Savior had
a continual care, that none who followed him should want.

Mr. Clarke in loc.
Verse. 15. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod]
Erroneous corrupt doctrine is like Leaven. 1. In regard of the commonnesse. 2.
In regard of the quantity, little. 3. In regard of the quality, like, as that
to dough. 4. In regard of its spreading property. 5. In regard of the effects,
Leaven. 1. Sowreth. 2. Hears. 3. Swells.

Polyc. Lyser.
Verse. 25. He was restored] This word notes such a restoring as is not
inferior to the first integrety, for so it is used, Exodus 4.7. Genesis 29.3. and
40.21. Ier. 15.19. and 5.19. Therefore the third of the Act. 21. The last day
is called the day of restitution of all things.

And saw every man clearly] The Greek (...) componitur ex (...) eminus and
(...) quod lucem ac splendorem significat: quare vim vocis ut exprimant quidam,
duobus latinis verbis adhibitis interpretantur eminus and dilucide. Lucas
Brugensis.
word rendered clearly, is a compound word, and signifies a far of and clearly.

Verse. 31. And after three days rise againe] Matthew says the Son of man must
be raised again the third day, Mark that he must rise again after three
days. Here Interpreters much trouble themselves, wherefore Mark should say
after three days, especially because the history of the resurrection shows,
that it cannot be extended beyond the third day. It agrees with the Hebrew
Michzeb, which according to the Rabbines notes the extremity either of the
beginning, or end. Deuteronomy. 14.28. Not after three years, but it signifies in
every third year, in which a peculiar tithe was to be gathered. Polyc. Lyser.
Vide Bezam, and Grotium in loc.
There are like examples in profane Authors, in Lucian, Euripides, Homer,
from all which it is evident that Mark does not differ from the rest of the
Evangelists in sense, though he use a different phrase.

Verse. 37. What shall a man give in exchange for his soule] The meaning indeed
is, that nothing in the world can answer the worth of it.

Verse. 38. In this adulterous and sinful generation] adulterous] Not such as
are borne in adultery, they are generatio adulterina rather than adultera,
rather such as were given to adultery themselves, and Spiritual Adulterers.
James. 4.4.

Sinfull] That is, notoriously sinful, as Mary Magdalen is called a sinner.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. AND he said unto them] to Peter, James, and John.

There be some of them stand here here, which shall not taste of death, till
they have seen the kingdom of God come with power] That which some feign of
John is ridiculous, John himself will refute this fabulous opinion, John 21.2,
3. Calvin.
Besides it is folly to refer that in the singular number to John, which Christ
speaks in the plural number of some. Polyc. Lyser.

By the coming of Gods kingdom understand the manifestation of the heavenly
glory which Christ began from his resurrection. Calvin.

Very many, and those most rightly, understand these words of the following
glorious transformation, and transfiguration of Christ on the Mount: Polyc.
Lyser.
For the three Evangelists immediately annexe that as an accomplishment of what
Christ here promised.

Verse. 2. And after six dayes] Matthew and Mark number six days, Luke eight
days. Matthew and Mark reckon the six whole days which flowed between, Luke
comprehends as well that day in which Christ spoke, Calvin. Polyc. Lyser.
as that in which he was transfigured. That is, in the seventh day Christ took
to himself Peter, James, and John, being withdrawn from the company of the
Apostles, and on the eighth day being accompanied with them, he ascended into
the Mountain, prayed, and was transfigured before them.

Verse. 6. They were sore afraid] This Greek word is used of such a fear which
makes one withdraw himself from the presence of another, of whose company he
acknowledges himself unworthy, as Deuteronomy. 9.19. It is used, Heb. 12.21. of the
terrible vision which God showed upon mount Sinai.

Verse. 12. Elias verily comes first and restores all things] That is, all
things which according to the prophecy of Malachy he was to restore, Mal. 4.5,
6. By Elias in Malachy is understood John Baptist, Luke 1.17. Mat. 11.14.

Verse. 13. But I say unto you, that Elias is indeed come] The Jews believed
that Eliah was to be sent before the Messiah began his kingdom; Christ
confesses that to be true, and says, he was already come.

Verse. 18. Teareth him] The Greek word (...) signifies to tear and rent as
the dog does. This tearing (says Beza) is to be referred to the inward grief
of the bowels, because the Spirit invading him (as it happens in the Cholick)
he was troubled as much as if he had indeed perceived his bowels to be torn
asunder.

Verse. 24. I believe, help thou mine unbeliefe] There is faith and unbelife in
the soul, at one time, in one action, upon one subject. Mr. Perkins.

Verse. 31. The Son of man of man is delivered] (...), Using the present tense,
he signifies that the thing shall be shortly, for Christ did so hasten to
death, and so seriously think of it, that it might seem present to him, which
was to come. Novarinus. Epiphanius says, Christ called himself the Son of
man, that he might show that he is that Person which the Prophets foretold
should take the nature of man, and amongst them Daniel by name calls him the
Son of man.

Verse. 37. Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name] Christ
respects the childish quality, not the individuum. Polyc. Lyser.

Verse. 43. The fire that shall never be quenched] O that word never (said a
poor despairing creature on his death bed) breaks my heart.

Verse. 44. Esaias 66. ult. Mark adds thrice, Where the worm dies not, Worms
and fire use to make an end of other things.
and the fire is not quenched. By which words metaphorically the twofold
punishment in hell, one of the body, another of the soul is thought to be
noted, says Polycarpus Lyserus.

By the worm is declared the continual remorse of conscience, and the daily
meditation of the sins committed: By fire, a sensible punishment, and most
exquisite torments in the body. So Lyserus.

Rather by these two is meant the poena sensus in hell, the privation of all
good is commonly called poena damni, the punishment of loss, this is one part
of hell torments, The everlasting absence of all good from God or the
Creatures. The second part is a presence of all evil, comprehended here under
the worm that dies not, and the fire that is not quenched. The worm is the
Spirit of God by the coactive power of the Law holding a man's sins before his
eyes, filling him with self convictions, and perfect fear and despair for
ever; the furious reflection of the soul upon it self for all its neglected
opportunities, and the irrecoverable misery it is in. The fire is the wrath of
the great God, let in upon the whole soul to eternity, but especially on the
conscience, Heb. 12. ult. The fire is the essential part, the worm but the
accidental.

From Carcasses slain in battle and putrefying, worms are begotten, but the
carcasses of the wicked shall not be consumed, their worm dies not, he seems
to have respect to the fire whereby the children were consecrated to Moloch,
and to the Sepulcres and carcasses which are wont to swarm with worms;
Rivetus ex Sanctio. The valley of Hinnom.
as if he should say, the hell where the wicked are everlastingly tormented,
shall not have fire or worms which soon fail, as those without Jerusalem,
Jer. 19. but which continue and torment for ever.

Verse. 49. Every one shall be salted with fire] In the Old Testament the force
and efficacy of the Holy Ghost is compared to fire, Vide Cappelli Spicilegium.
Notu^ illud quod ex Cleanthe Varro dixit: animam suillo pecori pro sale datam
ne putisceret: Et hujus rei causa salem in sacris Hebraeorum usitatum notavit
doctissimus Abarbaniel. Mos hic ut and alij ad gentes quoque manavit. Grotius.
Esaias 6.6, 7. and 4.4. to which there seems to be an allusion, Mat. 3.11. So
here to be salted with fire, as by the force and efficacy of the Holy Ghost, he
is preserved from the corruption of this world, and by sanctity of life he is
sweet and pleasing unto God.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1. THe people resort unto him againe] That he repeates the word (...),
again, twice, we may thence collect, that he dismissed those former Companies
healed by him, and that afterward another new Company met together, Polyc.
Lyser.
and came to him.

As he was wont, be taught them againe] This is a laudable custom, for one to
use to do those things which belong to his calling according to the will of
God. Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 3. What did Moses command you] He asked, not as if he had been ignorant
of Moses his Doctrine, but that he might show himself to be in no wise a
contemner of the Law.

Verse. 14. Suffer the little children to come unto me] Not such as were like to
children, for he took them up into his arms.

For of such is the kingdom of God] He means not the kingdom of glory, but
the visible Church of God, it is constituted of such; no child by nature is a
Church member, but by virtue of the Covenant made with his Parents. Ephesians. 2.12.

Verse. 17. There came one running, and kneeled to him] Which seems to show his
zeal and humility; his compellation, good Master. His errand, or the matter of
his question, What shall I do to have eternal life?

Verse. 18. There is no man good but one, that is God] That is, simply,
absolutely, essentially, and of himself such. Christ neither denies himself to
be God, nor to be good, yet he received not the epithete of good from this man;
as if he should say, because thou think me to be a mere man, thou ought
deservedly to abstain from calling me good, since God only is to be called
good, and if there be any good found with men they receive it from God alone.

Verse. 21. Loved him] With compassion, not approbation of his avarice.
Chrysostom, Jerome. Ex usu vocis (...) apud Lxx interpretes videtur nobis
majorem lucem hoc loco ad ferri posse. Ibi enim non semper pro diligere, sed
and pro amicis blandisque verbis compellare and laudare sumitur. Vt Cant. 1.14.
2 Paral. 18.2. Psalm. 78.37. Similiter ego and hoc loco intelligo, servatorum
nostrum, audita juvenis jactantia, qui se universam legem observasse
gloriaretur, noluisse eum aperte mendacij arguere, severisque verbis objurgare,
sed adblanditus est ei, laudavit eum ac studium quod legi servandae impenderat,
amicisque eum super hac re verbis compel lavit. de Dieu in Marc. 10.^1.
The Greek word signifies friendly to speak to, and deal gently with one,
so the LXX use it, 2 Chronicles. 18.2.

Chrysostom says, that he was covetous; Jerome, that he came to tempt Christ.

Sell whatsoever thou have, and give to the poore] That commandment was not
ordinary, Mr. Perkins.
but special, belonging to the young man; it was a commandment of trial
given to him only, and the reason of it was peculiar to him, viz. to show him
his corruption, confidence in his riches, and to discover his hypocrisy.

Verse. 22. Went away grieved] Lowering, a metaphor taken from the lowering of the
heavens on a wet morning. Videtur mihi (...) ad vultum magis quam ad animum
pertinere, quasi dicas front nubila. Vide Mat. 16.3. Grotius.


Verse. 24. Children] Thereby reproving their weakness of understanding.

Verse. 29. For my sake and the Gospell] Matthew says, for my sake, Luke, for
the kingdom of God. The sense amongst all the three is the same, for it is
Christ who brought the Gospel out of his Fathers bosom, and by that restores
the kingdom of God, whence these three, Christ, the Gospel, and the kingdom
of God, cannot be separated one from another. Polyc. Lyser.

Verse. 30. He shall receive an hundred fold] eminenter, not formaliter, not a
hundred Fathers, Perridiculus erat Iulianus ille Apostata, quum hunc locum
exagitans, quaereret number centum etiam uxores habituri ossent Christiani. Beza
in loc.
but he shall have that in God which all the Creatures would be to him if they
were multiplied a hundred times; wife here is left out in the repetition; See 1
Cor. 12.28.

With persecutions] Christ does not promise persecution (which would be absurd)
but says it shall be, that in the midst even of persecutions they shall be
more happy a hundred fold than ever before, who preferred Christ before all the
commodities of this life.

Mark adds this (says Grotius) lest we should think that temporal felicity
was promised us. Solatitia promittuntur, non delitiae.

Verse. 49. Be of good comfort, rise, he calls thee] Whence it appears that
he was troubled in his mind, peradventure because yesterday and now to day some
blind persons were healed, he feared lest the patience of the Lord should fail
in him. Polyc. Lyser.

Verse. 50. He casting away his garment, rose, and came to Iesus] From whence we
may collect his great desire, and the greatness of his confidence, Polyc.
Lyser.
he did not simply rise but leapt for joy, and that he might come the nimbler
to Jesus, he also cast away his cloak, teaching us, that if at any time we be
called of Christ by his word, we should hasten to him without any delay. Polyc.
Lyser.

Verse. 52. Go thy way] He commands him to go away, not as if he could not
endure him about him; but as he gently dismissed others who received benefits
from him, Polyc. Lyser.
lest they should think themselves bound to service for the benefit received,
as Mark 5.34. and 7.29.

Followed Quoru^ salvabat animas, sanabat corpora. Bernard.
Jesus in the way] Going to Jerusalem to bear his Cross.

CHAP XI.
Verse. 13. Seeing a fig tree a far off having leaves, he came, if happily he
might find any thing thereon: Vide Grotium. Quis dubitat, quin ubi Dominus tum
fuit maturas fuisse ficus Evangelista dicat? istam autem ficum ideo damnatam,
quod dissimilis tum coeteris spem dubitantis ac esurientis, secundum oeconomiam
Domini eluderet aut frustraretur? Quem sensum sine ulla vocum vel levissima
mutatione, invenies, si legas, (...) Vbi enim erat, tempus erat ficuum, vel,
tempestivae acma^^rae erant ficus. Accentus enim spiritusque quos, ut
distinctiones omittebant veteres, plerique (quod antiqua docent exemplaria) aut
negligebant, saepius mutatos, non est cur miretur quispiam; minime autem qui
antiquos codices vel obiter inspexit. Heinsius.
and when he came to it, he found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was
not yet] The fig trees in those hot Countries bore all the year, the time of
ripening was not yet come, though Christ meant by the curse of the fig tree, to
bring in the doctrine verse. 22.23.

Verse. 24. What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive
them] Where he shows two principal things required in prayer. 1. An earnest
desire of the grace and blessings we ask. 2. Faith, whereby we believe that
God will grant us the things we ask. Perkins.

In the Greek it is (...), not that ye shall receive them, as some render it,
but in the present tense, that ye do receive them, which has a great force.
It is so certain that we shall receive what we ask in prayer, that we seem
to receive it when we ask. Novarinus.

Verse. 30. The baptism of John was it from heaven] That is, from God. Coelum
pro Deo poni notius est quam ut probari debeat. So, I have sinned against
heaven, and the Poet says, Drusius.
Id est, Deo aut Coelicolis. -- Coelo gratissimus amnis.

CHAP. XII.
In a Parable aliud dicitur aliud intelligitur.
Verse. 1. HE began to speak unto them by Parables] A Parable is a Greek word
derived (...) as Jerome notes, because it is likened to another thing, it
signifies Gerh. in Harm. Evang. In Parabolis tria sunt primo radix, scopus,
viz. in quem tendit parabola 2. Cortex, similitudo sensibilis quae adhibetur 3.
Medulla seu fructus, sensus parabolae mysticus. Glassius in Philol. Sac.
a similitude and comparison, so it is taken, Matthew. 24.32. Mark 3.23. It is
used for any thing uttered more obscurely and figuratively, Matthew. 15.15. For a
proverb, Luke 4.23. For a type of the Old Testament prefiguring something in
the New Testament. Heb. 9.9. and 11.19. But properly and strictly it is taken
for the artificial narration of a thing as it were done to signify another
thing, so it is taken here.

Our Savior used Parables and similitudes. Matthew. 13.3.24.31.33.41.45. Mark
4.33.34. Christ always observed this in Parables, (says Chemnitius) either he
himself interpreted them, or at least in the beginning or end of the Parable
he added some sentence which is as a key to open the true sense of the Parable,
that thence the genuine interpretation may be taken.

There are many reasons given why Christ speaks so often in similitudes,
either because the people of the East were accustomed of old, to propound their
doctrine under such representations, as we see in many passages of the Old
Testament, or because the divine oracles had foretold that the Messiah should
open his mouth in Parables, or because supernatural objects insinuate
themselves more easily into the Spirit and make more lively impressions there,
being conveyed by those things which are obvious to the senses.

Verse. 13. To catch him in his words] In Greek a metaphore from hunters (...)
Sicut scilicet venator captat feram. Piscat. Matthew uses another metaphore
from the hunting after birds. Vide Bezam.

Verse. 14. For thou regardest not the person of men] (...) Regarding of men's
persons is where we more favor this man than another, not for difference in
the cause but of the person.

I am the God] I am that God, ego sum Deus ille, it is an emphaticall article,
noting an excellent thing and known to the common people, as if he should say,
that God which appeared to those holy Fathers, and gave them certain promises,
making a Covenant of grace with them. Piscat.

Verse. 29. The first of all the commandments is] The first not of order in the
Decalogue but by reason of weight and dignity, because it is the special
commandment and most momentous. Capell. Spicileg.

Verse. 34. Discreetly] The word is significant, as one having a reasonable
soul, (...), quasi dicas, Habendo mentem, id est, cum mente. Piscat. Vide
Bezam.

Verse. 37. And the common people heard him gladly] Libenter, willingly. Beza
and the Vulgar. (...) Iucunde late, suaviter, cum voluptate. Haec omnia
adverbium istuc significat. Novarinus.
Because that which is done with pleasure, is done willingly

Totum victum suum. Drus^us. i. e. Totas suat facultates e quibus victitabat.
Piscat. (...) est id quo vita sustentatur, Laxius etiam (...) vocantur omnia
quae in usus nostros possidemus, ut Luc. 8.43. and 15.2.30. Sic and Hebraei
usurpant Chaiah. Been autem hoc loco arbitror a viro rarae eruditionis Aria
Montano (...) accipi tantum, quantum quoque die homini alendo sufficit; Nam
pauperrimorum hominum diurnus victus quadrante admodum parabatur. Grotius.
Verse. 44. Even all her being] When a poor man offers any thing, he seems to
offer his soul, or certainly it is as grateful to God as if he offered his
soul, that is his life. Life is put for food. (...) all her life, so Luke
8.43.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. WHat manner of stones] Interrogatio admirantis, as if he should say,
these stones ( viz. of the Temple) what and how great are they? Piscat.
how fair and how great. Luke expressly mentions their fairness, Mark their
greatness in the answer of Christ.

Verse. 11. Take no thought before hand what ye shall speak, neither do ye
premeditate] Our Savior forbids his Apostles both to take care, Vide Bezam*
and to take thought before hand when they were to appear before great
persons; both to forecast with themselves what to speak when they come before
them, Mr. Gataker.
and to forethink how that they shall speak will be taken when they have spoken
it.

Verse. 30. This generation shall not passe] The word signifies the space of an
hundred years, albeit this came to pass before fifty years.

Verse. 32. But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels which
are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.] To know here is the same with
to teach; Cameron. myr. Evang. 1. Epiph. Chry. Bern. Non sciebat practice ut
pater. 2. Greg. He knew it not in persona ecclesiae, sed sua persona. 3. O^ig.
Naz. Cyrill, Not as man humana scientia, sed divina revelatione. 4. Jerome,
Aug. Basil, Theoph. He did not know to tell them. Bellarmine urges this place
for equivocation; the Fathers drew not hence mental reservation.
what soever things he might teach, he did, but it did not agree to his office
to declare the day of his coming, as 1 Cor. 2.2. to know is taken for to
teach, as it is commonly said in French, Un ministre ne doit scavoir que sa
Bible. He knew it not as he was man, or in his state of humiliation he did not
precisely know it, although he knew it as he was God, or he knows for
himself, although he will not reveal it unto us.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 5. IT might have been sold for more than three hundred pence] Which
amounts to above nine pounds, seven shillings, and six pence of our money.
Joh. 12.5. Mr Hildersam. Trecenti denarij faciunt 30. aureos Romanos. a Lapide.


Mary Magdalene (says a Lapide) was more liberal in anointing Christ, than
Judas in betraying him.

Verse 8. She is come before hand to anoint my body to the burying] The Greek
word signifies to Non est (...), quod est quocunque modo ungere, sed (...),
quod est unguentis and odoramentis ungere. Novarinus, and Brugensis in loc.
anoint with sweet and aromaticall ointments. Kings bodies were anointed with
precious ointments, the piety of Mary Magdalene persuaded her to anoint Christ
with such, who was more worthy than all Kings.

Verse. 21. The Son of man indeed goes, as it is written of him] The Greek
word rendered goes, signifies properly se subducere, to withdraw himself,
Novarinus.
Christ used the same word, John 8.22. when he spoke of his going to heaven, as
if the Cross was as much desired by Christ as heaven it self.

Verse. 23. When he had given thankes] The Greek word is to bless, which is
here taken only to give thanks, as Luke and Paul interpret it, and Mark also,
speaking of the Cup.

Verse. 24. And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new Testament, which
is shed for many] That is, a sign and seal of it to all penitent Believers.
The word Testament signifies properly, the last will Est Testamentum,
Modestino definiente voluntatis justa sententia, de eo quod quis post morte^
suam fieri velit. Heb. 9.17.
of a man, by which he disposes of his estate. It is used here to signify the
Covenant of God made with mankind in Christ concerning the remission of their
sins, sanctifying of their hearts, and saving of their souls for his sake,
which is called a Testament, because it was made good, ratified, and confirmed
by the death of Jesus Christ; and a new Testament in opposition to the old
Covenant of works made with Adam, or to the old Covenant shadowed with
Ceremonies unto the Jews; for God made two Covenants with men, one with Adam
in his Innocence, in which he required of him perfect obedience to all his
Commandments, and promised him life everlasting as a reward of his obedience.
This is called the Covenant of works. The other was made with Adam fallen, in
Christ, wherein God undertook to give unto Adam for Christ's sake the pardon of
his sins, and life eternal notwithstanding his sins, and required of him faith
in Christ, and repentance for his sins, consisting in sorrow for them, and
careful amendment of them. This was delivered to the Fathers with diverse
Ceremonies, of the blood of Bulls and Goats, signifying Christ's Blood, and
this is called the old Covenant. It is delivered to us without shadow, and
sealed by the blood of Christ, which all those Sacrifices represented, and it
is called the new Covenant.

Verse. 33. And began to be sore amazed] That phrase signifies, not only a
beginning, but also a proceeding, Mark. 6.34. and 13.5. Luke 16.45. Acts 1.1.
and 24.2.

Sore amazed, or astonished] This (...) significat attonitum esse, pavere,
(...) vero significationem auget, ita ut (...) sit animo and corpore
perhorrescere, attonito stupore percelli, sicut in subita consternatione aut
febrium accessu fieri solet. A medicis vocatur horripilatio. Alardi Pathologia
N. T.
word denotes such an astonishment as comes from fear, when a man sees
himself fallen on a sudden into some great distress, out of which he finds no
coming out. There is an astonishment of admiration, and another of fear, this
latter is here meant.

Verse. 36. Abba, Father] This title is given to God twice elsewhere also, Romans
8.15. and Gal. 4.6.

Ita and Paulus, Romans 8.15. and Gal. 4.6. Videntur Hebraei Graeco utentes
sermon retinuisse hanc vocem, quia naturaliter pueri eo sono patres salutant.
Graeci dicunt (...). Sed and Latini ab eo sono dixerunt pappare. Duplex autem
vox posita est affectus testandi causa. Grotius. Vide Capelli Spicilegium.
Father, Father] The one word is Syriack, the other Greek, the latter is added
to explain the former. The language of the Jew and Gentile, to signify, that
God by Christ's Cross was to become the Father, as well of the Gentile, as of
the Jew.

Verse. 51. Theophylact says, it is probable that this young man was of that
house where they did eat the Passover, and there are the same words in
Euthymius. This conjecture seems most probable of all, he followed Christ
before the Traitor came with the Soldiers. It might happen that this young
man after he had been in bed might hear something of the danger of Christ whom
he honored, and so presently leapt out of bed only covered with a linen
cloth, and began to follow Christ, for it was late at night, Casaub.
Exercitat. 16.
and one of the watches was past.

Verse. 58. We heard him say, I will destroy this Temple] Christ indeed said
some such words, Joh. 2.19, 21. but he spoke this of the Temple of his body, of
which that Temple was a type, whereas they maliciously interpreted that he
spoke of the Temple in Jerusalem; and again they change the words, for Christ
said, destroy this Temple, but these witnesses affirm he said, Mr. Perkins.
I will destroy this Temple made with hands.

Verse. 65. And to cover his face] The covering of the face was a mark of a
condemned man, Vide Quistorpium in Ezekiel. 12.6.
held as unworthy to behold and enjoy the light of the Sun, or of the Princes
countenance. Esther 7.8.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 11. But the chief Priests moved the people] For they knew that Pilate
was popular, and affected the favor of the people, and that there was not a
more compendious way to kill Christ than by stirring up the people against him.
See Act. 12.3.


Verse. 19. Worshipped him] (...), Properly signifies, to fall upon the knees,
or to be cast down at another knees, and to worship and honor him, as
appears from this place, and 1 Cor. 14.25.

Verse. 22. And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being
interpreted, the place of a skull] Gulgoleth in Hebrew is a skull, it is used 2
Kings 19.35. and Judges 9.53. This word here is rather Syriack, but said to be
Hebrew, John 19.17. because Syriack was the usual tongue with the Hebrews of
that time. See Joh. 19.13.
Beza would have it read (...), but Ludovicus de Dieu thinks that change
unnecessary.

Verse. 23. And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh] The Jews (says
Fagius) gave condemned persons some grains of Frankincense in wine to cause
giddiness that they might be less sensible of their pain, therefore Christ
refused it. Matthew says, it was Vinegar mingled with gall. Gerh. See Mat.
27.34
Psalm. 69.21.

For reconciling of the difference between the Evangelists, their judgment is
most probable, that say the women of Jerusalem out of pity gave him wine
mingled with mirrhe, but the Soldiers and Jews out of very spite and cruelty,
changed it into vinegar mingled with gall. It is guessed that this was a
custom even in Salomons time, because of that sentence, Prove. 31.6.

Verse. 25. And it was the third hour, and they crucified him] Christ's
crucifying began at the third hour, that is, at nine of the clock in the
morning, and ended at the ninth hour, that is, at three in the afternoon. The
day (from Sunrising to the setting) had twelve hours, as Christ says, John
11.9. Are there not twelve hours in the day? Matthew. 27.46. Vide Piscat. in
verse. 33. One Evangelist says the third hour, the other the sixth, in ancient
copies both are the same. Tertia, non inchoans, sed finiens, ac desinens in
sextam. Sexta enim hora crucifixum esse Christum, puta in meridie, patet ex
verse. 33. a Lapide.
Their first hour was about six of the clock in the morning with us, their
sixth hour was noon, their ninth hour was three of the clock in the
afternoon. Christ's crucifying began at the third hour; but his hanging on the
Cross was not till the sixth hour. See Weemes his Christian Synagogue. p.
15.4.

Crucifying] Signifies an inchoate, not a perfect act; as if he should say, at
the third hour the Jews began to talk of crucifying Christ, crying crucify
him, crucify him, Pilate consented to them and commanded that he should be
scourged, as it were preparing him for the Cross and death, but at the end of
the third hour, Cornel. a Lap. in Ioh. 19.14.
the sixth beginning, Pilate iuridically condemned him, and presently they
crucified him; Mark therefore declares the original and beginning of the
crucifying at the third hour, but John assigned the execution and complement
of it at the sixth hour.

Verse. 34. Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani] Psalm. 22.2. In the Hebrew it is, Eli,
Eli, It is thought he repeated the whole 22. Psalm, which is an admirable
narration of the passion. These first words were spoken in a language of it
self, or else by reason of distance not understood, for they thought he had
called for Elias to take him down from the Cross. D. Tailor of the life and
death of Christ.
lammah gnazabtani. The name of God which Christ uses here Elis derived from
strength, therefore he complains, that the strong God who can free him, leaves
him in such straights, yet calls him his God, that by this relative he may
declare his confidence still in him.

Forsake mee] The Greek word (...) has a singular emphasis in it, (...) is to
leave or forsake, but this is more, to forsake a man in danger, or drowned in
the mudde.

Verse. 36. And one ran, and filled a sponge full of vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drinke] Mark attributes that here to a Soldier, which
Matthew ascribes to others, The vinegar and the sponge were in execution of
condemned persons set to stop the too violent issues of blood, and to prolong
the death; but were exhibited to him in scorn, mingled with gall to make the
mixture more horride and ungentle. Dr. Tailor of the life and death of Christ.
but there is no repugnancie, for it is probable that the scoffing began with
one, which being received greedily by others, stirred up a cry amongst all, so
the word let alone, is not a word forbidding, but of sporting. Calvin.

Verse. 40. Mary the mother of James the lesse] That is not to be understood in
respect of age or years, as if he were younger than the rest of the brethren,
but in respect of body or stature; the word in Greek is (...). For there were
two of that name, one the Son of Zebedee the other of Cleophas, and they both
Apostles, and such as conversed with Christ, the former was taller in body, the
latter shorter; therefore from the stature of their bodies He was was called
the greater, but this the lesser. Chemnit.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 2. ONE of the Sabbaths] Why do the Evanglists say, (...) one of the
Sabbaths, and not (...) the first of the Sabbaths? That is after the manner of
the Hebrew tongue, in which the first day is called one. Hag. 1.1. one day of
the month, that is, the first. Neither is it improbable that the Evangelists in
this manner of speaking, did point their finger to the history of creation, in
which the first day of the world is called jom echad, One day. Genesis 1.5. For as
that day was initiall to the world, so the day of the resurrection of our Lord
is the beginning of our glorification; as in that day light was produced, so
Christ rising, the light of righteousness and joy is risen to us. Gerh. in
Harmon. Evang. Vide Piscat. and mea Critica. Sac. Graeca.

Verse. 3. Only Mark expresses this doubting, but when the rest of the
Evangelists say that the stone was rolled away by the Angel, we may easily
collect that they stuck perplexed and doubtful in counsel, Calvin.
until a passage was made by the hand of God.

Verse. 5. A young man sitting] Mark here, and Luke 4.4. Say they were men,
Matthew and John, they were Angels that appeared; Matthew and John show what
they were indeed, the others declared what they seemed to be at the first
appearance, or in what shape they appeared. Genesis 18.2. and 19.1. and 32.24. The
Angels usually appeared unto men in the shape of men, that their Message might
be delivered more familiarly, and received more comfortably. Mr. Ball.

Affrighted] The Greek word signifies to be sore amazed and astonished with
fear, the Septuagint use it. Dan. 7.7.

Verse. 7. Tell his Disciples and Peter] Peter was specially named and severally
from the rest of the Apostles, not as Baronius thinks, because of his
superiority above the rest, but because he only denied Christ, and so had of
all other most need of comfort after his horrible fall, yet is he set behind
all the Disciples as inferior unto them, whereas they prefer the Pope to the
whole Church, and make him Lord over it.

That he goes before you into Galilee] These women followed Christ out of
Galilee, therefore the Angel foretells them that before they returned into
Galilee, Christ should go before them there, and manifest himself unto them;
this promise of Christ is Matthew. 26.32. Mark. 14.28. But wherefore does the
Angel foretell that Christ should specially go before them in Galilee, and
that they should see him there, when he was seen there neither only nor the
first? both Christ and the Angel speak of that solemn and public apparition
in which Christ revealed himself to all the Disciples together, in a Mountain
of Galilee. 1 Cor. 15.6. Gerh.

Verse. 9. First to Mary Magdalen] Therefore not to the Virgin Mary as the
Papists say. It is very observable (says Iansenius) that our Savior after his
regeneration, in consolationem paenitentium, for the comfort of true penitents,
appeared first to Mary Magdalen and Peter who had been grievous sinners.

Verse. 12. Into the Countrey] Luke says they went to the Castle of Emaus.
Mark expresses the middle of the way, Luke the term or end.

Verse. 14. Vpbraided them with their unbeliefe] Either because some of them did
not yet believe, as it also happened in the last apparition, Matthew. 28.17. and
so their should be a synecdoche in the words, by which that is attributed to
the whole society which some of it did, or because their faith was not yet free
from all doubting, but their mind was struck with the mutual waves of faith
and doubting. Gerh.

Verse. 15. Every creature] That is, to all nations, so Matthew and Luke; by the
name of creature (as 1 Col. 23.) is understood only the reasonable creature,
they only were capable and stood in need of the doctrine of the Gospel; man
is so called by an autonomasie, because he is the chief of all creatures.
Gregory gives a more subtle than solid reason of it, because man is a
microcosme, and has some thing common with all creatures, Being with stones,
life with plants, sense with beasts, reason with Angels. The Monks say St.
Francis preached to Birds, and to Fish. Beda to the very stones: Eve is called
the mother of all living, that is, of all men. Preach the Gospel to the Jews
and Gentiles, to bond and free of what state, degree or condition soever, See
Mat. 10.5. and 28. Matthew. 19.

Verse. 16. He that has believed and has been baptized shall be saved] Qui
credierit and baptizatus fuerit, etc. that is, shall have believed, and shall
have been baptized, but he that has not beleived] That is, shall not have
believed, shall be condemned.

Verse. 17. The promise was made by Christ unto his Church, to be fulfilled
immediately after his ascension. It extends only to the times of the primative
Church, and to such as then lived. Perkins

Verse. 21. Sat on the right hand of God] The Apostle most plainly shows, 1
Cor. 15.25. what Christ's sitting in the Heaven means, that which David said,
sit at my right hand, he says, it behooves him to reign. To sit therefore is
to reign and to govern the Church, in the same phrase in which we are wont to
say, that such a Pope now sits at Rome. Vide Estium ad Roman. 8.34. ad Ephesians.
1.20. and ad Heb. 1.3. and 13.

ANNOTATIONS UPON S. LVKE.
CHAP. I.
LVke collected an Evangelicall History in the fiftieth year after Mark. See
Grotius on ver. 1. Gerhard.


He was the perpetual Companion of Paul in his travells. Librum autem and hunc
and qui est de Actibus Apostolocis scriptum arbitror non multo post quam Paulus
Roma abijt in Hispaniam. Nam in id tempus desinit Actorum liber, qui si serius
scriptus esset, in ulteriora etiam tempora narrationem protenderet. Puto autem
Roma ijsse Lucam in Achaiam, atque ibi ab eo conscriptos quos habemus libros,
quod and Hieronymus prodidit, sunt qui decimo quinto post Christi ascensum
anno, sunt qui secundo and vicefimo id factum narrant. Grotius.
2 Timothy 4.11. Col. 4.17. Philem. 24. He only makes a preface before his Gospel
that he may briefly show the reason which induced him to write. He was a Syrian
by nation, being born at Antioch the Metropolis of Syria, and by his calling a
Physician.

His speech both in the Gospel and Acts is more elegant, Jerome on Esaias 6.
and savours of secular eloquence.

A Father said of Sains Lukes Gospel, which he dedicated to Theophylus (which
signifies a lover of God) Si Deum diligis ad te scriptum est: If thou be
one that love God, this Gospel is written to thee.

Verse. 1. Many] Either Matthew and Mark published before Luke, as Chemnit,
(...) non significat vanu^ conatum, sed ad verbum significat manum operi
admovere vel aliquid aggredi. Vide Grot. and Scultet. Exercitat. Evang. l. 1.
c. 1. Certe Matthaeum and Marcum a Luca fuisse reprehensos, concedi nullo modo
potest. Nam dubium, utrum Lucas ante Matthaeum and Marcum, an Matthaeus and
Marcus ante Lucam scripserint, and vox (...), non duos, sed plures designat:
quemadmodum velex Epiphanio notum est, plures in describenda Historia
Evangelica fuisse occupatos. Lucas scriptores alios nec mendacij, nec erroris,
nec incertitudinis, nec imperfectionis arguit proaemio suo, sed causas tantum
scriptionis suae exponit: Exemplum aliorum: notitiam exactae Historiae:
confirmationem fidei sacrae Historiae. Scultet. Exercit. Evang. l. 1. c. 1.
or some false Apostles and Evangelists, whereof there were many.

He calls in this proaemium the Gospel a narration, or declaration, which the
Apostles viva voce delivered concerning the Person, Life, Office, and Actions,
of Christ, which the whole Apostolical Church then received with a certain
faith and full assent. Chemnit.

Most surely beleeved] Or fully persuaded; (...) dicu^tur ea quae certo
explorata and firmis testimoniis quod ita se habebant comprobata sunt, ut
nullus sit dubitationi locus: sed animus certa fide and plena assensione merito
and tuto assentiatur. Chemnit.
the word in the original which signifies to be fully persuaded, is a
metaphor borrowed from ships which are carried with full sail, and it
signifies a most certain persuasion of the truth of things which have been
sufficiently proved to us, so Grotius.

Verse. 2. Even as they delivered them unto us, etc.] The sense is, Eye
witnesses] Plus est oculatus testis unus quam auriti december.

Calvin. Har^^ Vide Bezam and Capelli S^cileg.


that that is the true Doctrine of the Gospel, which the Apostles as
Ambassadors, being called by God, and sent to preach, delivered viva voce
through the whole world, as the rest, or in writing, as Matthew.

Verse. 3. Having had perfect understanding] The Greek word is metaphorically
deduced from them which tread in others steps lest ought should escape them,
for Luke would declare unto us a diligent study and manner of learning.

From the very first] He declares the cause why he writes after the other
Evangelists, because he enquired after the conception, birth, and education as
well of John Baptist as Christ, and began thence.

Verse. 4. That thou might know the certainty of those things] (...) is
properly such a certainty by which we are certain that we do not err.

Vide Scultet. exercit. Evang. l. 1. c. 1.
Wherein thou have been instructed] Or catechized, (...), that is, wherein thou
have been hitherto taught by a lively voice either before or after baptism,
(...) in Paul and Luke signifies to teach the rudiments of Christian Religion,
viva voce. Gal. 6.6. Whence the candidates of baptism were called Catechumeni
in the primitive Church, because before baptism the first principles of the
Christian faith were taught them by their teachers viva voce. Lucas Brugensis.

Verse. 5. Of the c^urse of Abia] That is, the week Latinus interpres (...)
modo vices, modo turmas vertit, rectius Classes dixisset more Romano, mentio
harum Glassium frequens in sacris literis. 1. Paral. 23.6. and 28.13.21. 2.
Par. 5.10. and 23.8. and 31.2.15.17. and 35.4. Scultet. Exercit. Evang. l. 1.
c. 7.
of Abia. 2 Chronicles. 23.8. For the family of Abia was not now extant among the
courses, there is no mention at all of him among the Priests that returned out
of captivity, and therefore the Evangelist says not that Zachary was of his
family, but of his course, that is, of a course that bare his name. Mr.
Lightfoot of the Temple-service.

Verse. 6. Righteous before God] That is, upright, Walking in all the
Commandments and ordinances of the Lord blamelesse] Commandments, That is,
matters of morality and perpetual necessity, Ordinances] That is, all such
outward appurtenances to the worship of God as were required.

Verse. 7. And they had no child, because that Elizabeth was barren, and they
both were now well stricken in yeares] Elizabeth was barren in the flower of
her age, Calvin.
and old age makes fruitful women barren, therefore in two obstacles there is
a double wonder of the divine power, and that the Lord by a stretched hand from
heaven might witness, that the Prophet was sent by him.

Verse. 12. And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled] Both by reason of the
new and unusual vision, and also because of the Majesty of the Angel
appearing, for he appeared in a heavenly shape. Judge. 13.21. Dan. 10.8. See v.
29.
Even good men have been afraid at the presence of good Angels, when they have
come with good tidings.

Corpus mortale tumultus non velit aetherios.

Verse. 15. He shall be great] Both by reason of gifts and authority, and
especially by reason of office.

Chemnit.
In the sight of the Lord] That is, in the Church or in the Ministry of the
Lord, because he did as it were point with his finger at the present Messiah.

Shall be filled with the Holy Ghost] The filling with the Spirit signifies
excellent, singular, and extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, or abundance of
gifts. For those which are furnished with the peculiar gifts of the Holy Ghost
beyond the common reason of the vulgar are said to be full of the Spirit.
Chemnit.
Act. 6.5. and 11.24.

Verse. 17. The disobedient] The Greek word may signify either such as will not
be persuaded to believe, or rebellious. Both does imply some stubbornness, and
therefore the Syriacke translation has it, stubborn.

Cartw. Vide Sculter. exercit. Evang. l. 1. c. 9. Chemnit.

Ita hic Angelus dicitur, quia eo ministro Deus utitur ad summam potentiam sua^
explicandam. Hujus nominis recitatione Zacharias ad Danielis librum revocatur,
quasi dicat Angelus: mirari noli, si quid nunc eximium and naturae ordinem
superans Deus efficit. Instant enim illa tempora Danieli indicata, quibus
potentiam suam Deus amplissime est exserturus. Hebraeorum magistri aiunt
severitatis ministrum esse Michaelem, Gabrielem misericordiae, ideo illum una
ala volare, hunc duabus. Similique de causa Michaelem vocant ignem, Gabrielem
vero aquam. Grotius.


Verse. 19. I am Gabriel] Gabriel signifies the strong of the mighty God, by
this he would teach Zachary, that he ought to be admonished by beholding of
him, not to measure this business by humane weakness. It makes also for the
confirmation of the certainety, that the same Angel which foretold the
supputation of the time of the Messiah, Dan. 9.21. Should declare the
accomplishment of it.

That stand in the presence of God] That is, which serve him, as the Lord lives
in whose presence I stand, that is whom I serve. Grotius thinks it is a speech
taken from the Courts in the East, and is as much as if he should say that he
is not every servant, but a Prince of the Heavenly kingdom. See Matthew. 18.10.

Vox Graeca mutum and surdum significat. Vide v. 62.
Verse. 22. Remained speechlesse] He was a Priest of Aarons seed, to signify
that the end of his Priesthood was at hand, and that the people should look
for another Priest.

Verse. 24. Hid her selfe] The word in the original signifies very secret
hiding. Hoc ideo fiebat quod de re subdubitans, noluit rem evulgari, priusquam
eam ex vitali infantis in utero motu, compertam haberet; nam circiter quinque
menses infans se ad matris sensum movere solet. Cartwrightus. in Harm. Evang.
Hiding is coming into less company than ordinary. five months] A month is
here to be taken as women in their matters use to count a month. Piscator
thinks it hard to be told why five months are mentioned. Beza alleges three
causes, either because all Jewish women used to do so; or she misdoubted
whether it would fall so yea or no; or because hiding her self so long, and
then coming abrod on the sudden, the wonder might seem the greater.
Chemnitius says because she was ashamed to have lust now in her old age,
because she might at her first coming abroad, convince that she was with child.

The Arabicke has it, and occultavit graviditatem suam, she hid her being with
child, De Dieu. comment. in loc.
lest we should think that she was not seen by any for five whole months, but
that she conceald her being with child, for in the five first months those
which are with child are not so big but it may be hid from those that behold
them if they be silent, especially if by reason of their great age, there be no
cause to suspect so much.

Verse. 25. My reproach] In that she calls it her reproach rather than her
husbands, we thence learn (says Cartwright) that either yoakfellow ought
rather to ascribe the sault of barrenness to themselves, rather than to lay it
on the other.

Verse. 28. Highly favoured] or graciously accepetd, or much graced. verse. 28.
In hac Mariae descriptione videmus nihil de sanctitate and pietate Virginis
admistum, cum tamen illud in uxore Zachariae diligentissime factum sit:
Scriptura enim praescia superstitionum, quae olim Virginis in cultu, and nimia
existimatione exstiturae essent, in ea part silentium sequuta est. Cartw. in
Harm. Evang.
The Greek word signifies freely beloved, not full of grace, both here and
Ephesians. 1. in Chrysostomes judgment.

The Monks have depraved these words, and say, that Mary is full of grace as
the neck of the Church, as Christ is the Head, and that blessed among women,
they have in their postils transformed into this blasphemous sentence, let
women be blessed in thee, as men in the Son Christ.

These holy words of the Angel are profanely, superstitiously, Fulke in his
Annotat. on the Rhem. Test.
and idolatrously abused by the ignorant Papists, as a prayer, when they are
none, mumbled in Latin, whereof they know not the sense, said unto stocks and
stones, yea to God himself.

The Lord is with thee] That form is most usual in Scripture, but it is used
two ways. 1. Optative, let the Lord be with thee. Josh. 1.17. 1 Chronicles. 22.1.
2. Indicative, Chemnit.
the Lord shall be with thee. 1 Kings 10.7. Iud. 6.12. Sumo non indicativa sed
potius apprecativa significatione. Grotius.
This latter signification does better agree to the Angels sentence. Gabriel
might so speak because she was about to conceive and bring forth Immanuell,
which is God with us.

Blessed art thou among women] Or rather blessed be thou, it is taken out of
Iud. 5.14. See Ruth. 3.10.

Verse. 29. She was troubled at his saying] As before in Zachary, v. 12. It is
taken from stirred water, and signifies perplexity of thoughts, when one cannot
tell what resolutely to think. John 11.33. and 13.21.

Verse. 31. Shall call his name Iesus] That which Esaias called Immanuell,
Grotius. Therefore Matthew says that propheci^ is fulfilled in imposing of the
Name Jesus.
the Angel called Jesus performing the office of an Interpreter, whence it
appears, that there is the same signification in both. For whether we say this
is he by whom God is favorable to us, (which Immanuell signifies,) or this is
our Savior, the sense is one.

Verse. 32. He shall be called great] 1. In respect of his Person, because He
was both God and man. 2. In respect of his Office. 3. In respect of his
kingdom. Chemnit.

The throne of David his father] Christ may be said to have the throne of David
two ways. 1. Properly, for he was borne King of the Jews, by right descent
from his Father David, as his genealogy plainly shows. Luke 3. Matthew. 2.2.
2. Typically, Esaias 9.6.7.
for David's kingdom was a figure of Christ's kingdom, and David himself a
type of Christ. Ier. 23.5, 6. Hos. 3.5.

Verse. 33. And of his kingdom there shall be no end] Obj. 1 Cor. 15.24. It is
said, Christ shall deliver up the kingdom to the Father. Dan. 4.3. Esaias 9.7.
Ans. Luke speaks of Christ's kingdom in respect of it self, the Apostle in
respect of the administration of it. In the former respect it shall never be
abolished, Christ shall always have a people to rule, but He shall not rule as
now he does by Magistrates, Ministers, the word and Sacraments.

Non dubitantis esse arbitror, sed admirantis. Virum Cogno. vit. etiam apud
Ovidium est. Grotius.
Verse. 34. How shall this bee] There is threefold how] viz. of curiosity,
incredulity, and infirmity, she doubted not of the effect, but inquired after
the quality of the effect it self.

The Holy Ghost did as it were cast a Cloud over her. Luke 24.49. Act. 1.8. To
teach us that we should not search over much into the mystery of incarnat^on.
Mr. Perkins.
Verse. 35. The manner of her conception is expressed in those two Phrases of
coming on her and overshadowing her, to show that this was an effectual
work, and yet so difficult to conceive that we cannot reach unto it.

The power of the most High] That is, the Holy Ghost.

Over shadow] A metaphore from birds cherishing their young ones, that so the
Angel may show that this child shall arise by that power by which the world it
self began. Grotius.
See Iunius on Genesis 1.2.

(...).
Verse. 41. The babe leaped in her wombe] The Greek word signifies to leap as
lambs and calves being well fed. The word is used by the LXX. for Jacob and
Esaus stirring in the womb. Genesis 25.22.

Verse. 42. Blessed art thou among women] We do acknowledge that the Virgin Mary
was blessed among women, as here, and a blessed woman, as 28. and 48. verses,
yet more blessed as Austin says in receiving the faith, i.e. Felicissima
mulieril. Martin. Grammat. Heb. l. 2. c. 5. i.e. Laudatissima foeminarum
Caninius. Vide Spanhem. Dub. Evang. part secunda. Dub. 48.49. Bellarmine and
Gregory de Valentia, end their books thus. Laus Deo, virginique Matri Mariae
Deo iterum filio. Dicunt a foro justitiae Dei appellandum esse ad forum
miserecordiae marris ejus, and multos, quos justitia Christi damnat,
miserecordia matris ejus servari.
then in conceiving the flesh of Christ. We count her holy, meek, humble, we
praise God for her, that he made her the instrument of Christ's coming into the
world, and desire to imitate those virtues and excellencies that were in her.
But the Papists commit gross Idolatry, they give her the titles of Mediatrix,
Salvatrix, Shee-Saviour, Queen of Heaven, Queen of mercy, They parallel ubera
and vulnera, making the milk of Mary to be as precious as the blood of Christ,
they call her unicam miserorum spem.

O Foelix puerpera
Nostra pians scelerae
Iure matris impera
Redemptori.
Calvin says, if she should now live and see that honor which is due only to
God, given to her, she had rather they should draw her about by the hair, spit
in her face and offer her the foulest abuse that may be.

Verse. 43. And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to
mee] They are not the words of one being ignorant or doubting, Origin, Ambrose.
Beda.
but affirming her self unworthy. Ruth. 2.10.

Verse. 44. The babe leaped in my womb for joy] In gaudio magno the Syriack,
that is for great joy. This motion was not natural Haec exultatio facta est
divinitus in infant non humanitus ab infant. Augustinus. Grace (...) id est,
exiliit in exultatione, licet enim (...) significet gesticulationem, significat
tamen gaudium quoque and exultationem, quae gestiendo and exiliendo ostenditur.
Cornel. a Lapide in locum.
but spiritual, and therefore John was sanctified in his Mothers womb, and
did really rejoice at the presence of Christ in the Virgin.

The word (...) signifies outward gesticulation or exultation, as Psalm. 65.13.
and so it is to be understood here: The Babe in my womb leaped with
extraordinary gesticulation or exultation.

Verse. 46. My soul does magnify the Lord, etc.] Compare this ode with that
which Hannah sung after Samuel was borne. 1 Samuel 2. For as Peter martyr has
observed, they are so like, that the blessed Virgin seems to have taken much
out of that song.

Verse. 47. And my sprit has rejoyced] (...) The Greek word signifies
exulting, such a joy as we use to express by outward signs in the body, as
dancing. The Syriacke has a word whence an exclamation made for joy is
deduced: Euge, Euge. Some by soul would have the understanding to be meant,
and by Spirit the will. a Lapide, by soul would have the inferior part of the
soul to be meant, which respects natural things, by the Spirit the Superior,
which respects divine and Spiritual things.

In God my Saviour] Who both delivers and keeps me, and is the author of
perpetual salvation, for the word (...) comprehends these three benefits of
grace. The Syriack renders it, In Deo vivificatore meo. (...) aut (...) dicitur
opus potentissimum, qualis erat virginalis conceptio. Grotius.


Verse. 51. He has showed strength with his arme] A great power of God is
declared by his finger, greater by his hand, greatest by his arm. See Exodus
15.16. and Psalm. 76.16. and 89.14. and 97.1. Esaias 40.10. and 62.8. Job. 40.4.

Verse. 53. He has filled the hungry with good things] By the hungry are meant
those who feel themselves void of grace, yea, as it were pined and starved for
want of it Perkins on Jude. Adverte hic Judaeos non semper in Synagoga fuisse
circumcisos. Nam Joannem domi fuisse circumcisum colligitur ex versu sequenti,
Cornel. a Lap.
.

Verse. 59. On the eighth day they came to circumcise the child] We collect
says Calvin from the words of Luke, that although they circumcised their
Infants at home, yet they were not wont to do it without the company of many
men, and that deservedly, for since it was a common Sacrament, it ought not to
be administered privately.

Verse. 66. The hand of the Lord was with him] The grace of God was many ways
conspicuous, which openly showed that he should not be an ordinary man. Calvin.
Manus id est, potentia, providentia, cura, gratia, and favor (horum enim omnium
symbolum est manus) mirabilis Dei ostendebat se in puer^ hoc, scilicet Joanne
Cornel. a Lap.


Verse. 68. Blessed be the Lord God] He is worthy of praise, or Let the Lord be
celebrated and extolled, redeemed] or as the words are, has wrought
redemption, Chemnit.
the Syriack is, fecit ei redemptionem. That is, by Christ incarnate inchoative.

Verse. 69. An horn of salvation] That is, a mighty Savior for us, 2 Samuel
22.3. Psalm. 132.2. Thou have laid help on one that is mighty, which Esaias
expounds, mighty to save, Esaias 63.1. The glory and strength of horned beasts
consists in their horns. Metaphora sumpta a cornutis animalibus quae cornibus
se defendunt, and adversarios prosternunt, Chemnit. Cornu Hebroeis robur
significat. Vide Grotium. Cornu per Catachresin in Scriptura significat robur,
potentiam, victoriam, gloriam, and consequenter regnum. Cornel. a Lap.


Verse. 70. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been since
the world began] As if they had all but one mouth and message. All the holy
Prophets prophesied of Christ, of his strength, victory, and Kingdom.

Verse. 74. That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve
him without fear] Delivered out of some dark deep hole, it signifies to bring
forth something to light, enemies] The Devils, wicked men, sin, death, and
hell.

The manner of our service must be, first without fear, either without cause
of fear, as Romans 8. 1. Or without servile fear, not constraind, but willing
and cheerful. 2. Universal, in holiness, toward God, in righteousness;
toward men. 3. Before him, (as in his sight) sincerely. 4. All the days of
their life, constantly in all estates unto the end. Col. 1.10.

Verse. 76. The Prophet of the most High] See Mat. 5.9. as if he should say,
Thou John (says a Lapide) although thou be such a little Child, only eight
days old, yet after 29. years when thou art a man, thou shall be a Prophet,
publishing and declaring Christ.

Verse. 78. The day-spring] Greek the East, Vide Piscat. and Jun. parallel. in
loc. and Cornel. a Lap.
by a metonymie of adjunct for the Sun rising. The Chaldee Zach. 3. and 6.
Chapters turns it Messiah, that is Christ. The Hebrew word there is tsemach,
which properly signifies a branch.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. ALl the world] That is, all the Provinces subject to the Roman
Empire; Ad verbum tota habitabilis, ita ut subaudias terra. (...) autem non
accipitur proprie, ut Psalm. 24.1. de toto orb terrarum, sed de toto orb
Romano: sicut Synodus secunda Constantinopolitana (...) dicitur apud
Theodoretum, hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 9. quamvis Congregati in ea essent Episcopi
ex orientali tantum Romani orbis part: and proprie loquendo, nulla unquam
fuerit Synodus oecumenica, id est, universalis, ex Orb toto coacta. Scultet.
Delit. Evang. c. 12.
the Romans arrogantly called themselves the Lords of the whole world. The
Syriack has it, universus populus possessionis, or Dominij ejus, viz. subject
to Augustus, and the Romans. a Lapide.

Joseph. Antiq. 18. c 1. (...), not taxing but enrolling.
Verse. 2. This taxing was first] Luke says this description was first, viz. in
respect of the other, which followed after ten years, or the first general tax
which happened in the whole world now in peace under Augustus and the Romans,
for the other impositions were particular in certain provinces. a Lapide.

Verse. 4. And Joseph also went up from Galilee out of the City of Nazareth,
into Judea, unto the City of David, which is called Bethlehem] That is, He went
up from Nazareth a City of Galilee, where (as the Angel relates) the Virgin
conceived Christ. Whence Christ was called by the Jews a Galilean and Nazarite.

Bethlehem] The house of bread, it received its name from the goodness and
fertility of the earth. It was situated beyond Jerusalem, and was distant from
it a journey of two hours.

Verse. 7. Her first born Son] The first born by the fault of the version (says
one Cartw. Harm.
) is referred to Mary, as if Christ were her first born, when he is so called
in respect of his Deity, because He is before all Creatures, and for that cause
truly God, as 1 Col. 15. and Heb. 1.5.

Because there was no room for them in the Inn.] An Inn is domus populi, open
to all passengers that will take it up, Juris publici, wherein every one has a
right, yea and in the most common part of the Inn, the stable, all have
interest.

Alii vertunt, stetit super illos, quasi Angelus e Coelo lapsius. a Lap. Gerh.
Harm. Vide Bezam.
Verse. 9. The Angel of the Lord came upon them] It signifies a sudden and
unhoped for coming, Luke 21.34. and 24.4. Acts 4.1. and 10.17. and 11.11. and
12.7. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. It signifies also to assist one from some higher place,
Numb. 14.14. Luke 4.39. in which sense it may be here also taken, Angelus
pastoribus (...), that is, from above, as it were from the air hanging over
their heads, stood by them.

Verse. 10. Good tidings of great joy] All Gods people throughout the whole
world should greatly rejoice in Christ.

There are Prophecies extant in the Prophets of this great joy, as Esaiah 9.3.
and 35.10. and 51.5.11.

Verse. 13. A multitude of the heavenly hoast] So an orderly multitude of Angels
is called, Angeli omnes Christum Deum ac Dominum suum, in terram nascentem
comitati sunt, sicut aulici vel comitantur Regem peregre proficientem, Heb.
1.6. Cornel. a Lap. in v. 7.
as elsewhere a legion of Devils; where many Angels appear there one as a Ruler
is set over the rest.

Verse. 14. First the Doxologie or praise, Glory be to God on high.] Secondly,
gratulation, rendering the reason thereof; because of Peace on Earth, Good will
toward men; for the conjunction (...) is not to be taken here for a
copulative, but as vau is frequently used in the Hebrew for a Conjunction
causall.

Glory when it is referred to God, often signifies the Divine presence, or
Shecinah, as in 9. v. 2. the high and glorious supereminency or majesty of God,
In Excelsis referri potest tum ad Deo, quasi dicerent, Gloria est Deo qui
habitat in Coelis altissimis, ibique gloriam suam Angelis and beatis ostendit;
tum potius ad Gloria, quasi dicerent, In Coelis altissimis Angeli dant gloriam
Deo, sicut in terra homines fruuntur pace per Christum jam natum. Cornel. a Lap.
which consists in his threefold Supremacy, of power, of wisdom, and of
Goodness, so here, and then to glorify, or give glory unto God, is nothing
else but to acknowledge this Majesty or greatness of his supereminent Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness. Mr. Mede in loc.

We translate it from the Greek, and unto men good will. Maldonate confesses
that all the Greek Copies now extant have it good will ( viz. of God) unto men,
and Bellarmine says this is the better. Bishop Mortons Appeal.
Good will] Some refer it to God, and take it for the eternal love of divine
complacency which moved him first to the work of our redemption. See Cornel. a
Lap. Others refer it unto men, and make it a limitation of that which goes
before, reading (...) for (...), not peace on Earth, to men good will, but
peace on earth to men of good will, so Austin, Cyprian, Ambrose, and most of
the ancient and learned Fathers. The Rhemists translate out of the Latin,
peace unto men of good will.

Verse. 19. Pondered them in her heart] That is, by meditating upon them in her
mind, Vide Piscat.
she had wrought them into her heart and affections.

Verse. 21. And when eight days were accomplished for the Circumcising of the
Child] After eight days were consummated that he might be circumcised: (...)
dictum, ut significaret ur impletum id tempus quod ex lege Circumcisionis erat
praestitutum, cujus temporis dies ultimus erat a natali octavus. Grotius. Vide
Brugens.
So Erasmus and the vulgar Latin read it; but if the eight days were
consummated, the infant against the precept of the Law was circumcised the
ninth day; therefore Beza's version is better, cum advenisset dies octavus ut
circumciderent puerculum, when the eighth day came, that they circumcised the
Child: so 2 Act. 1. Beza renders it cum advenisset dies Pentecostes.

Verse. 23. Every Male that opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord]
Whereupon diverse Fathers, viz. Theophylact, Ambrose and Origin, said, that
Christ was that immaculate one, Aperiens urerum sic enim mavult Laurentius homo
superstitiose verecundus, quasi vero vulva sit obscaenum vocabulum. Erasmus.
who alone (without the preceding act of man) Matris suae vulvam aperuit, as
witnesses their own Bishop Jansenius, yet the Papists condemn us for saying,
that the blessed Virgin did in bearing Christ vulvam aperire, which the
Romanists will have to be all one with virginitatem corrumpere. Bishop Mort.
Protest. Appeal. l. 5. c. 22. Sect. 1.

Verse. 24. A pair of Turtle Doves or two young Pigeons] A manifest sign of
her poverty (for all a Lapides shifts) for the Law was that they should offer a
Lamb with a little bird, but those whose poverty would not suffer them to do
it, Licet tres Reges magnam vim auri Christo obtulissent, tamen B. Virgo
paupertatis studiosa, ut ostenderet se spernere omnia terrena, ex illis pauca
duntaxat quasi libando accepit, quae brevi consumpsit. Cornel. a Lap. Vide.
plura ibid. Vide Cartwright. Harm. in Evang.
they brought two little birds, whence we may collect that the Wise men gave
not much gold, since they brought it rather to honor Christ than to exercise
their liberality, as their Custom was to come to their Kings. Grotius.

Verse. 25. Waiting for the consolation of Israel] That is, (...) vox Lucae
peculiaris, qui bis praeterea usurpat, Act. 2.25. and 8.2. Hebraeorum
imitatione quibus Religiosus dicitur Jare sed plerumque addito Dei nomine, ut
Isa. 1.16. Grotius.
when Christ would come who is consolation in the abstract, the only ground of
comfort to the Israel of God. See 40. Isaiah 1. and 51.3. and 61.1.

Verse. 29. As if he should say, I have now Lord lived long enough; Quasi
necessitate quadam teneretur in hac vita, non voluntate, says Ambrose.
Let me now depart in peace, seeing I have seen thy Christ my Savior.

Depart] The Greek word (...) is properly to loose one bound with bonds, the
LXX. use it Genesis 45.2. Numb. 20.29. for to dye. Hebraeum Patar and Graecum
(...) est absolvere crimine debito, aut vinculis. Drus. in Miscell. l. 2. c. 12.


Verse. 30. Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation] There is a great emphasis in this
pleonasme, as when we say in Latin, His ego oculis vidi, we are said to see
something in mind, and opinion; here Simeon rejoices at the corporal sight of
Christ, which yet before he had really embraced with his faith, as John 8.56.

Thy Salvation] Adumbrat Simeon nomen (...). Dilher. Simeon shadows out the
name of Savior. Christ Jesus is here meant. See Psalm. 50.23.

Verse. 32. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel]
The light of the Gentiles is preferred before the glory of the Jews. Dr. Clerk.
He puts the Gentiles before the Jews, because the second calling, the
conversion of the Jews to Christ, shall not be until the fullness of the
Gentiles come in.

He is called, Cartw. in Harm. Evang.
The glory of the people of Israel Not as if the Gentiles had not cause to
glory in Christ, for all our glorying must be in him, but the Israelites have a
peculiar glory from Christ, because he came of them, Veluti scopum, contra quem
tela suorum contradictionum dirigant inimici ipsius. Piscat. He shall be as a
common mark whereat the arrows of reproach shall be fully shot, Doctor Halls
Paraphrase. Nescio an facilior hic locus fuisset, si nemo eum exposuisset, sed
fecit multitudo and varietas interpretationum, ut difficilis videretur.
Maldonatus in loc. In signum contradictionis, vel contentionis, ut vertunt
Syrus and Arabicus. Tertullianus de carne Christi cap. 23. vertit, In signum
contradicibile. Maldonatus and Franciscus Lucas, Christus inquiunt positus in
signum, id est in scopum sagittariorum in quom Judaei and Scribae increduli,
non tantum lingua verba maledica, sed and manu tela malefica conjecerunt.
Basilius, Beda and Theophilactus intelligunt signum Crucis, ut alludat ad
Isaiae 11.10. Ita Toletus, Cornel a Lap. in loc.
Romans 9.5. and was first appointed for them. Romans 3.2.

Verse. 34. And for a sign which shall be spoken against] Of six sundry senses
I select two: Signum to mean here either scopum, or vexillum, the Archers
mark, or the Banner in War, which every Enemy strives to win, or throw down.
This later metaphor Tolet rejects, Dr Clerk.
and says, the word bears it not, perhaps because Calvin and Beza so expound
it. Maldonate, as learned a Jesuit as he, approves it. Both metaphors have the
same meaning. a Lapide and others say the Evangelist alludes to that in Esaias
8.18. I and my children are for signs, but a sign spoken against, many should
be his adversaries.

Verse. 40. And the child grew and waxed strong in Spirit] Which word is spoken
of the nourishment and augmentation of the body in children. Genesis 21.8. Iud.
13.24. The words have relation to the gifts or spiritual operations, See Mr
Reynolds in the life of Christ. p. 423.
Ephesians. 3.16. Acts 6.3. (...), wisdom, signifies, gifts in the mind or
understanding; (...), grace, gifts in the other inferior faculties of the
soul, in the gestures and actions, to all which a peculiar divine grace was
added.

Verse. 48. They were amazed] 1. Feared lest he should leave them. Thomas in
loc. 2. Lest he should fall into enemies hands. Gloss.

Thy Eather] 1. In opinion, Luke 3.23. 2. In care. 3. Husband to Mary.

An nesciebatis oportere me in ijs esse quae Patris mei sunt.
Verse. 49. That I must be about my fathers business] It is an elegant phrase,
in his esse, for to be seriously employed, as that also was used in the
Sacrifices, Hoc age, as now among Christians, sursum corda.

Verse. 52. Increased in wisdom and stature] In stature really, and also in
wisdom and favor with God, as Ambrose and Fulgentius interpreted it, limiting
themselves to his humanity, and the state of humiliation which for our sakes he
underwent. See ver. 40.

CHAP. III.
Verse 2. ANnas and Caiphas being the High-Priests] Not as if at one and the
same time there had been two chief Priests, Vide Seldenum de Successione in
Pontificatum Hebraeorum. l. 1. c. 12.

Chemnit. Sacerdotij honor dimidia exparte apud Annam Pontificis socerum
residebat.

Calvinus. Scriptura summo Pontifici suum substituit non semel vicarium, ut
recte Theodorus Beza observavit Marci primo. Summus Sacerdos dicebatur Pontifex
primus, vel magnus; Alter Pontifex secundus sive vicarius, ut 2 Reg. 25.18. Sic
2 Paraelipom, 24. Nadab and Ahihu conjunguntur, item Eleazar and Ithamar, sic
alibi alij, ut recte vir Clarisimus adnotavit Casaub. exercit. 13. ad Annal.
Eccles.


for this by the Law was not lawful, neither do we read in histories that it
was done. But when the last of the Roman Governors did violate the Laws of the
Temple, Annas, who according to the Law ought to be chief Priest in the whole
time of his life, was removed from the Office, and after diverse changes Caiphas
at length was brought into his room, or which is more probable, those two were
Priests by turns. John 18.13. and Act. 4.6.

Under the High Priesthood both of Annas the Father in Law to Caiphas, and of
Caiphas Son in Law to Annas, ruling successively; so as John preached in the
several years where they succeeded in Government to each other. Dr Hals
Paraphrase upon the hard Texts of Scripture.

Verse. 7. O generation of vipers] Christ in general seems to have respect to
that which is written, Genesis 3.15. of the seed of the Serpent, which namely are
of the Devil, Ioh. 8.44. and 1 Ioh. 3.8. for thereby is signified a nature
infected with the poison of sin by the Serpent, which by malice, wicked
education, corrupt instruction, may be made incurable and deadly poison as that
of the Viper is described to be, Act. 28.4. and Mat. 23.33. the Pharisees are
called Serpents, a generation of Vipers.

Verse. 8. Bring forth fruits worthy of repentance] Or meet for, as the very
same phrase is translated, Mat. 3.8. Evil fruits deserve repentance, and
therefore worthy here cannot imply any matter of desert.

Verse. 11. He that has two coats let him impart unto him that has none] That
is, He that has things necessary and in abundance, let him give freely, yet so
as he reserve one coat to himself.

Verse. 14. Do no violence to no man, neither accuse any falsly] The first word
signifies, toss no man too and fro: The other, get nothing by Sycophancy. Be
content with your wages (...) Graeci vocant non sola stipendia, sed omnia
militiae merita, in quibus est and annonae praebitio and alia commoda quae sub
imperio Romano erant non invidenda, si laborum militarium justa habeatur ratio.
Grotius.
] These are three commendable things in Soldiers.

Verse. 16. Shall baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with fire] That is, with the
Holy Ghost which is like fire, not only in purging away their dross and
corruptions, but mightily heating them, and stirring up strong and ardent
affections in them for God and his glory.

Verse. 23. And Jesus began himself to be about 30. years of age] Only Luke
expressly says, Chemnit. Christ was almust thirty years old, fere triginta
annorum, for he wanted above two months. See a Lapide in loc. and Mr Lightfoot
on Acts 1.9.
that in the thirtieth year of the age of Christ according to the flesh
assumed this was done: in which age the Priests of the Leviticall kind were
admitted to the public Ministry. Numb. 4.3.

Verse. 36. Which was the Son of Cainan] In the Genealogy of Christ the name
Cainan is brought, which is not in the Hebrew Edition, Genesis 11.12. 1 Chro.
1.10, 24.
but in the Edition which the Hellenists used: For learned men think that it
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, when the history of the Gospel was delivered in
Greek to come to the Gentiles (which were to compare this narration of Luke
with the Greek Edition) to pardon that, it being now a received error,
although besides the truth. For we must not think that Luke opposes the truth
of the History, but somewhat indulgeth for a time the public error which was
so deeply rooted, until there were a fitter place for the Church to order
something concerning that thing without a greater loss. Although their opinion
seems to be the sounder, which deny that the name of Cainan was inserted
either by the Septuagint, or by Luke, River. Isag. ad Script. Sac. c. 10.
and that it rather crept in elsewhere after the Gospel was written by Luke,
of which their conjecture they had good reasons, as we may see in Cornelius a
Lapide his Commentary on the 11 Chapter of Genesis. Compare this place with
Genesis 10.25. and 1 Chronicles. 1.8. there Arphaxad is said to have begotten Sala, and
so Genesis 11.12. the year of Arphaxad is designed in which he was borne from
that Sala, viz. 35. It is a wonder that Cainan is inserted between Arphaxad and
Sala, as if Sala were not the Son of Arphaxad, but the Grandchild of Cainan.
There are which would have Luke follow the Lxx. Interpreters, with which you
may read in the like manner, Genesis 10.25. and the following Chapter. Therefore
they think that the Evangelist in a matter of no great moment, and which
nothing pertaines to the faith, with a holy condescension, had rather follow
those that err, Bocharri Geograph. Sac. part priore. l. 2. cap. 13. Vide
plu^^ ib. Vide Grotium
than by an unseasonable dissent cast a scruple, or else to bring the
authentickness of their Gospel into danger with the weak or obstinate, which
he had persuaded, that these penmen of it were without error. But in this
opinion (by the authors favor) there seems to be nothing sound. Therefore I
see not how Luke and Moses can be better reconciled (says Bochartus) than by
following the opinion of Cornelius a Lapide a famous Jesuit, who thinks that
by the error of the Scribes the name Cainan crept into the sacred Text, and so
into the Edition of the Lxx. and multa suadent imo persuadent, that that is not
rashly affirmed by him, 1. Because Philo and Josephus who do follow the Greek
Edition in other things, have not remembered this Cainan. 2. Jerome in the book
of his Questions upon Genesis, in which by comparing the Greek and Hebrew
Copies he diligently notes if they any where differ, simply writes that
Arphaxad begat Sala, neither does he observe any difference between the Books.
Lastly, A most ancient Copy of the New Testament, which Beza used, had nothing
of Cainan, as he himself testifies in his Annotations.

CHAP. IV.
Verse 1. WAS led by the Spirit] (...), agebatur, Chemnit*
which word is used of a peculiar inward force and impulse of the Spirit. Romans
8.14. Gal. 5.18.

Verse. 2. Being forty days tempted of the devill] (...), that is, Multis modis
quorum praecipui hic referuntur. Grotius.
suffering temptation from the devil, from whence some collect, that Christ
suffered many other temptations from Satan in these forty days, besides the
three temptations mentioned by the Evangelists; See 13. ver. Yet Luke (says a
Lapide) seems especially in this word to have respect to those three famous
temptations of Christ, which he after rehearses.

See Matthew. 4.3. Chemnit. Cuivis horum lapidum: quod pluraliter exprimit
Matthaeus, ut alibi s^pe. Grotius.
Uers. 3. If thou be the Son of God, command this stone that it be made bread]
Satan first propounded to Christ that He would either turn all or many stones
of that place into bread. And presently according to the description of Luke,
he may be understood to have added, Or if this be too much, say to this one
stone let it be bread.

He might hold one stone in his hand, and show the other stone lying upon the
ground. Brugensis.

The opinion of many Divines is probable (says a Lapide) that the Devils sin
at first was this, when God revealed to him that the Son of God should assume
humane nature, and commanded him to submit himself to the man Christ, he
envied Christ that he being a man should be preferred before him a most
glorious Angel; and that the humane nature should be assumed into an
hypostaticall union with the second person of the Trinity, therefore he
rebelled against God and Christ; wherefore perceiving that this man was called
the Son of God by the Father and John the Baptist, he would try whether He was
the true Son of God; Cornel a Lap. in 4. Mat. 3.
that he might power out upon him his ancient envy, anger, and indignation.
Therefore it is probable (says a Lapide) that the Devil did not at first
abruptly say to him, If thou be the Son of God, command these stones to be
made bread, but that he first courteously saluted him, and by fair speeches
insinuated himself into him, saying, what my Lord do thou here alone, what
do thou muse on? I saw thee baptized in Jordane, and heard a voice from
heaven saying, this is my Son, I desire to know whether thou be truly the
Son of God by nature, or only his adopted Son by grace? I see also that by
fasting forty days thou art very hungry, therefore if thou be the Son of
God satisfy thy hunger, and turn those stones to bread; for it will be very
easy for thee to do it.

Qua Graeci proverbiali figura brevissimum tempus indicant. Been autem versum
in puncto temporis, quomodo loquuntur Cicero and Caesar. Nam momenti
significatio longius portigitur. Grotius.
Verse. 5. In a moment of time] So the vulgar interprets it (...), in puncto
temporis. Beza. Erasmus thinks the metaphore is taken from a mathematical
point. Some think it is a metaphore taken from the points of Scribes.

Verse. 6. And the Devil said unto him, all this power will I give thee and the
glory of them] Lucas Brugensis, on Matthew 4.8. Thinks the Devil by the art of
the optickes, (in which he is most skillful) did expose to Christ's view all the
kingdoms of the world.

Verse. 12. For it is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it]
Whence it is manifest (says a Lapide) that he feigned himself to be the Son
of God, God, says Hilary, and consequently to be adored.

Delivered to mee] By God, he conceales the name of God both because he hated
him, and because he would be esteemed and worshipped as God.

Verse. 13. And when the Devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from
him for a season] As if he should say, Calvin.
that rest or truce was not given to Christ until he was exactly tried with
all kinds of temptations.

Chemnit. The word (...), comprehends all these.
Verse. 15. Being glorified of all] That is, the Galileans and others, for his
doctrine and miracles, began excellently, honorably, or gloriously to think
and speak of him, to give great authority to him, and to have him in singular
honor.

Verse. 16. He went into the Synagogue on the sabbath day] In the time of his
ministry he observed this custom, that in the days of the Sabbath for the
most part he entered into Synagogues to teach. Chemnit.
John 18.20.

And stood up for to read] Our Lord stands up to read the Law, but v. 20. sits
down to preach, Mr. Thorndikes Discourse of the Right of the Church in a
christian State. chapter 4.
the one, to show reverence to the giver of the Law, the other, authority over
the congregation, which he taught as a Prophet.

Verse. 17. And there was delivered unto him the book of the Prophet Esaias]
Seeing sections out of the Law and Prophets were read every Sabbath, there was
given him a book which was more difficult to expound; and that book most
clearly prophesies of Christ.

When he had opened the booke] (...), unfolding or opening. Their Books were
not written as ours are in several leaves; but according to the custom of
those times, (...) est evolvere. (...) convolvere. Nam Hebraeorum, ut and
Latinorum, libri erant volumina, hinc evolvere librum apud Ciceronem atque
alios. Idem est revolvere Livio and Martiali, qua voce and hic usus est recte
Latinus interpres. Ejusmodi libros etiam nunc in Synagogis videre est. Grotius.

Olim libri non ligabantur sed involvebantur, sicut adhuc hodie liber* Legis
(quem Iudaei Sepher Torah appellant) Jnde and liber Esther a velvendo megillah
vocatur. Elias Thisbites. Eadem de causa librum volumen Latini a volvendo
nuncupant.

Olim libri ex futilibus foliis non constabant, ut hodie constant: sed una erat
continua and perpetua pagina quam circa virgam oblongam (ut body solemus
tabulas Geographicas) quasi circa transjectum axem volvebant, ne a pulvere aut
aliunde noceretur, inde libri ab Hebraeis megilloth, a Latinis volumina dicti
sunt. Hinc sumpta metaphora, dicitur, Esai 34.4. Et coeli volventur ut liber,
and Apocalyp. 6.14. Et coelum recessit sicut liber convolurus. Ioma seu Codex
Talmudicus a Roberto Sheringhamio Cantabrigiensi editus.


in one large scrowle of parchment, or other matter, which was rolled together
like the web upon the pin. Psalm. 40.7.

Verse. 18. He has anointed me to preach the Gospell] Enduing with grace is
called anointing for the resemblance it has with an ointment. An ointment is
a composition, Vnxit me] Vt Prophetam infra. 7.46. and 12.3. Cur unxit an
testandae reverentiae? aut unxit ad funerationem, Marc. 14.8. aut unxit ex
consuetudine illius aevi, nam vnctio post lotionem facit ad obstruenda corporis
spiramenta Drusius.
and has these ingredients, oil and sweet odours, by virtue of oil it soakes
into the bones, Psalm. 109.18. By virtue of the sweet odours mixed with it, it
works upon spirits and senses; oil represents the virtue of the power of the
Spirit, and odours the comfort of grace.

Verse. 20. And he closed the booke] The word is complicans, folding, roling it
up, and v. 17. explicans, unfolding or opening it. See Beza on that verse. And
sat down] Challenging to himself by his own right the office of a Teacher,
others of the common people did stand when they interpreted, Act. 13.16.

Were fastened on him] (...) signifies when with fixed eyes we do attentively,
and as it were immoveably stick in the beholding of any thing. Chemnit.


Verse. 22. And all bare him witnesse] That is, their mind was so convinced with
those things which were spoken by Christ, Vide Bezam. Chemnit.
that they could not doubt nor contradict the Prophecies agreeing to him.

Gracious words] An Hebrew phrase, in which the force and grace of the Holy
Ghost was conspicuous. Verba (...) sunt gratiosa vel gratia plena, vel
acceptabilia verba, afficientia cor. Chemnit.


Verse. 30. But he passing through the midst of them] That is, with much
confidence, safety and assurance, he withdrew himself. The same kind of speech
is repeated John 8.59. Where it is plainly intimated that Christ by his divine
power was made invisible to his enemies, wherefore it is credible that he
escaped here after the same manner.

Verse. 36. With authority and power] (...), potestas, authority, is a right or
moral faculty, (...), potentia, power, is an active force or natural faculty.

Verse. 38. Simons wives mother was taken with a great fever] Peter's Mother in
law, (for that he had a wife is manifestly collected from this history) was ill
of a fever, not a light or remiss one, but so vehement that she lay down with
it. Luke calls it a great fever, for she was old being the Mother of Peter's
wife, and in old people such fevers are dangerous and deadly, which can hardly
be cured by nature whose forces are weak. Christ did not only heal her by
his word, Chemnit.
as he did the noble man's son that was sick of a fever; John 4.50. But he used
peculiar gestures. He came to her where she lay down, says Mark. 2. Laying
hold on her hand, he lifted her up. 3. He stood above her, not as if he stood
upon her as it were kicking her with his feet, but that he stood so near her,
that bowing his body he did as it were lie upon her, (...).
that is the meaning of the Greek words. 4. He reproved the fever, this
declares the power of Christ, that he so healed this woman that had long
conflicted with a fever, and was so worn with it, that she kept her bed, that
without the relickes of weakness she presently recovered both her strength and
health.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1. AS the people preassed upon him to hear the word of God] Christ's
hearers did (...), they lay upon him, Videtur haec vox non quemvis concursum,
sed cum pressura significare: unde irruere non male vertit Latinus interpres.
Vide Act. 27.20. Grotius.
they preassed upon him; the word of God, in opposition to the traditions of
men which the Pharisees taught.

Verse. 5. We have toyled all the night] Which is more seasonable for taking
than the day, and have taken nothing.

Verse. 6. And when they had thus done, they enclosed a great multitude of
fishes, and their net brake] When Jesus called those Disciples, they had been
fishing all night and caught nothing; Dr Tailor the Life and death of Christ
part. 2.
but when Christ bad them let down the net, they took multitudes, to show to
us, that the success of our endeavors is not in proportion to our labors,
but the divine assistance and benediction.

And their net brake] This verse seems repugnant to that John 21.11. Suppose
they had written both of one miracle (as they do of diverse) yet there is no
contradiction, Finis miraculi fuit, ut cognita Christi Divinitate, se illi
Petrus and alij discipulos addicerent. Generaliter tamen hoc exemplo docemur,
minime timendum esse ne respondeat labori nostro benedictio Dei and optabilis
successus, quoties jussu and auspiciis Christi manus operi admovebimus. Calv.
in loc.
the one intending thereby to signify, that the greatness of the burden
exceeded natural ability of instruments which they had to bear it, the other
that the weakness thereof was supported by a supernatural and miraculous
addition of strength. The nets as touching themselves brake, but through the
power of God they held. Hookers Eccles. Pol.

Verse. 7. Began to sinke] Would have sanke unless he had been upholden by a
miracle.

Verse. 9. He was astonished, and all that were with him] Amazement besieged on
every side, Simile est apud Latinos circu^stetit horror.
and possessed them all, so the Lxx use the word (...), Psalm. 18.5. and 2 Kings
22.5.

Verse. 16. And he widrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed] Thence we may
gather what Christ did when he was not busied in teaching and working miracles,
viz. was intent on prayer, praying and giving thanks for his ministry and
office, and for the whole Church to be gathered in the New Testament. Chemnit.


The power of the Lord was present to heal them] By this Hebraisme he means,
that the Lord healed neither by medicines, nor prayer, but that he exercised
his power in healing the sick, or the virtue of the Lord, that is, the divine
power, exercised it self in and by Jesus Christ in healing the sick.

Verse. 21. Who is this which speaks blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God
alone] That is, he cannot be either the Messiah, or a Prophet sent by God,
because he speaks blasphemies.

Verse. 27. And saw a Publican] Publicans were certain Officers in the Roman
Empire which did gather up the Tribute that was to be paid, and such gifts as
were given: And because the goods of the Empire were called Publica, hence came
the name of Publicans.

Verse. 29. Levi made him a great feast] (...), A feast for all Comers. Erasmus
out of Athenaeus says the word signifies splendidum epulum. Ad verbum
acceptione^, quod passim in eo omnes accipiantur. Beza.


(...), tam ad suavitatem quam adutilitatem sive commodum valetudinis referri
potest. Etsi enim vina nova plerunque sint dulciora, unde mustum (...) dicitur,
adeoque gulosis gratiora, prudentibus tamen magis arridet vetus, quia and
defaecatius est and generosius, nec modo palatum magis afficit, linguamque
gratius vellicat, sed and stomachum benignius iuvat, omnesque spiritus magis
restaurat and reficit. de Dieu in loc.
Verse. 39. The old is better] vulg. melius, salubrius Beza, suavius Syrus,
Piscat. Eras. quia scilicet levius est. For this word properly signifies
levity, as Mat. 11.30. Luk 6.35. Romans 2.4. Ephesians. 4.32. Old wines are wont to
be of a more gentle taste, new more austere.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 12. COntinued all night in prayer to God] Either because it was
concerning a business belonging to the kingdom and glory of God, Chemnit.
or rather because it was a serious speech with God.

Verse. 13. Whom also he named Apostles] This may be interpreted two ways:
Either because afterward being installed into his Office he put that name upon
them; or because he had now honored them with that Elogie in hope of the
future dignity, Calvin.
that they might know to what end they were separated from the common Vulgar,
and to what use they were destinated.

Verse. 15. Simon called Zelotes] The Zealous, to distinguish him from Simon
Peter; Par on the Romans
he was so called because of his earnestness and zeal for the Gospel.

Verse. 18. Vexed with unclean spirits] Which Phrase he uses also, Chemnit.
Acts 5.16.

Verse. 23. Leap for joy] The word signifies, to express mirth by some outward
gesture. (...) proprie dicuntur lascivientes pecudes: translatitie ijs
tribuitur, qui prae gaudij abundantia, non possunt se continere quin varios
gestus edant, hinc and inde subsilientes. Beza, Brugensis.


Their Fathers] That is, the ancient people of the Jews, for Christ speaks
here to his Disciples and others that were Jews by nation. Perkins

Ver. 24. But woe unto them that are rich] He curses the Rich, not all, but
those which receive their consolation in this world, that is, are so contented
with their estate that they forget the life to come. Calvin.
He shows therefore that riches are so far from making one blessed, that they
are often turned into the occasion of ones destruction.

Verse. 25. Woe unto you that laugh now] It is the property of a man to laugh,
therefore he speaks of laughter, not as a natural, but as a sinful act. For
ye shall mourn and weepe] You shall have nothing but mourning hereafter.

Verse. 26. Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you] (...) is opposed
to all those things which are spoken of, persecution, hatred, accusations,
reproaches, Chemnit.
separation, ejection, and persecution.

Verse. 35. Lend, looking for nothing againe] Our own due and right must be
parted with, when it is not the parties sin, but external calamity that
hinders him, Christ shows with what affection and disposition of heart men
ought to lend, viz. having respect only to the good of the party borrowing, and
not to the restitution of the thing lent. Vide. Grotium.
thou ought then to forgive it, at least to bear it till he be able.

Verse. 38. Good measure] The good is general of just measure. Pressed down]
Levia, light things because they are porous we use to press down to make good
measure. Shaken together] Some things go together more straightly by shaking,
as corn. Vide Bezam in loc.
Running over] Agrees to liquid things. The Lords meaning is, that God will
most largely reward our beneficence. Into their bosome] That is, he will so
reward them that they shall perceive that they are rewarded.

An Hebrew phrase applied to the custom of the Nation, for the oriental
Nations (among which were the Jews) wore long garments, Piscat.
so it was convenient for them to receive in their bosom those things which
were plentifully given. Psalm. 80.12. Esaias 55.6. Jer. 32.18.

Verse. 48. He is like a man which built an house, and dug deep, and laid
the foundation on a rock. And when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently
upon that house and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a rock] The
builder is the professor of the name of Christ. Three parts of professors of
wisdom are propounded. 1. To dig deep, that is, come to a deep search and
examination of his own corrupt heart, that he may know the iniquity thereof. 2.
To make choice of a rock for a foundation, that is, Christ. Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
Acts 4.12. 1 Cor. 3.11. 3. To build thereon, Mr Perkins.
we are built on Christ by our faith in him. Ephesians. 3.17. Psalm. 125.1.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 5. FOR he loves our nation] It is no doubt but the Jews commend him for
his piety, neither could the love of the Nation every where hated, elsewhere
proceed, which he evidently witnessed that he favored the Doctrine of the Law
by the study of the Law and the worship of God, building them a Synagogue; It
is wonderful stupour in the mean while, Calvin.
that by their suffrage they acknowledge a Gentile to receive the grace of God,
which they contemptuously refused.

A Synagogue] The Synagogue was 1. For instruction, there, as in a School,
they were instructed in Gods Law. (...) proprie congregationem significat: hic
autem locum ubi congregatio fiebat. Piscat.


Mr Coleman on Ier. 8.20.
2. Petition, there was an Oratory, whether at times they went to pray.

3. Correction, there were offenders punished, as several passages in the
Gospel show.

Verse. 12. The gate of the City] For the Jews had their Sepulchers out of the
City, as we may see, Grotius. Hinc collige Iudaeos sepulchra sua habuisse non
in urbe, sed extra urbem, ideoque tum ob nitorem, tum ob sanitaetem, ne
cadavera suo foetore and putredine aerem inficerent. Cornel. a Lapide.
Mat. 27.59. and other people also, whence he is said to be carried out. And so
the cause of public health requires, which is much impaired by the evil air
of graves. The more may we wonder why Christians should have their sacred
meetings in those places in which those carcasses are, which was first brought
in for the memory of the Martyrs, but not so well continued.

Verse. 13. And when the Lord saw her, he had Compassion on her, and said unto
her, weep not] He really showed the efficacy of comfort, restoring the raised
Son to his mother. He uses two instruments, Chemnit.
as it were, in the raising up of this dead person, for he touched the Biere,
and spoke to the dead; 1. That he might show that the destruction of death, and
restitution of life, is the power and work of his person, not in the divine
nature only, but in that also which he assuming from us, enriched with the
fullness of the divinity. 2. That he might teach, that the mean, or instrument,
by which those benefits of Christ are communicated to us, Loculum taugendo
forte ostendere voluit sibi minime horrori fore mortem and sepulchrum quo nobis
vitam acquireret. Calvin.
are his word, by which he will destroy death, and restore life in us. This is
the first raising of the dead made by Christ in the New Testament.

Verse. 14. Young man, I say unto thee, arise, or be raised from the dead] Jesus
(when those that carried the young man stood still) cried to the dead man, not
in words of praying, (as Elijah and Elisha did) but in the word of commanding.
For so is the word (...), Chemnit.
used of the dead, Mat. 11.5. and 14.2. and 16.21.

Verse. 16. And there came a fear on all] The common people amongst them which
believed not in Christ could not so lightly neglect or calumniate this miracle
as the rest for the unusual greatness of it, for in nine hundred years
almost after Elisha we read of no such thing to have happened in Israel.

And they glorified God] Because they declared that this miracle was a
testimony and warning that God either sent some famous Prophet, or the Messiah
himself.

A great Prophet is risen up] All those which were sent by God were called
Prophets. They call him a great Prophet, Grotius.
because he restored the dead to life, not by prayers, nor by the spreading of
his body upon him, but by a bare command, without all example.

Verse. 22. To the poor the Gospel is preached] Some translations (as the
Geneva) have it, Vulg Lat. pauperes Evangelizantur.
The poor receive the Gospel: Which is more proper. The poor are Evangelized
or Gospellized, so is the Greek, as we say, one is Frenchified, or
Italianated, when his Garb and carriage are such as if he were a natural
Frenchman, or Italian, so their speeches or Judgments, actions and affections
are transformed into the Gospel.

Christ speaks this in a twofold reference: 1. To the freeness of his love, he
has no respect of persons. 2. In reference to the effect, the poor receive
the Gospel, have received a tincture or impression of the Gospel, are
transformed into it.

Poor) These words are absolutely true of the spiritually poor or humble: 1.
Because he was made so by the Gospel. 2. Was bred by it, therefore is
nourished by it; yet 2ly. they are intended by Christ of the outwardly poor,
because he bids them tell what they had heard and seen, they could not see the
spiritually poor. 2ly. All the rest of the things which they were to tell John
of were temporal, bodily blindness, lamenesse, death, therefore this. 3.
Christ speaks of miracles, for a gracious man to receive the Gospel is no
miracle. 4. This exposition agrees with other places, Ioh. 6.26. and 7.98.

3ly. This is not true of them universally, nor exclusively, not all the
outwardly poor, nor only they, receive the Gospel; but fourthly probably and
for the most part the poor rather than the rich embrace it, and more eminently
receive it; 1. Into their understandings to know it. 2. Into their judgments
to allow of it as true. 3. Into their wills to consent unto the goodness of
it. 4. To obey the truth of it in their lives.

Verse. 25. Are in kings courts] In Kings Palaces. Piscat. Vno verbo in regiis.
Ovid. 2. Meram. Regia solis erat sublimibus alta Columnis, veruntamen
periphrasis illa magnificentius sonat. Piscat.


Verse. 28. He that is least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he] That is,
the least Doctor in the time of the New Testament (who is in no wise to be
compared with John for the gifts of the Spirit) in which the Gospel concerning
the kingdom of heaven is preached, is more excellent than John in respect of
the kind of his doctrine. Scultet. de precatione.


Verse. 30. The Counsel of God against themselves] (...), in or against
themselves, the words will bear either: In themselves, because they knew it,
(...) Graecis ut and consilium Latinis significare potest aut id quod secum
quis constituit facere, aut quod faciendum Censet. Potest utravis significatio
hic locum habere. Grotius. Vide plura ibid.
and took it into consideration, and yet rejected it: and against themselves,
because it was their destruction.

Verse. 33. But John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine]
That is, he observed not a vulgar, but an extraordinary, peculiar and austere
kind of life, Chemnit.
he drank only water, and did eat locusts and wild honey.

Verse. 34. The Son of man is come eating and drinking] That is, Christ in his
external and common life affected nothing singular or extraordinary, but
applied himself to the vulgar and usual custom.

Verse. 35. Wisdom is justified] That is, acknowledged and declared to be just.

Verse. 37. A sinner] A notorious sinner. Whereas diverse others addressed
themselves to Christ for corporal mercies, this only comes for spiritual,
even for remission of her sins. There are three great things observable in
this history. 1. Great sins. Mr. Burgess of Justification.
2. Great repentance and humiliation. 3. Great love and grace of God through
Christ in pardoning sin.

Brought an alabaster box of oyntment] It was a Custom to anoint guests at
feasts, This was a present for a Prince, an alabaster box of Nard Pistick was
sent as a present from Cambyses to the King of Ethiopia. Dr. Tailor of the life
and death of Christ, the third part.
in token of welcome. See 26. Matthew. 7.

Verse. 44. Thou gave me no water for my feet] It was a custom amongst them
to give water to their guests coming far for their feet, as is manifest from
Genesis 18.4. and 19.2. and 43.24. and Judge. 19.21. 1 King. 25.41. These. 5.10.
They did it either that they might wash their feet which they had fullied in
the way, or because of their weariness, for cold water refreshes a wearied
person. Non solum Iudaeorum and omnium Orientalium, sed and Graecorum mos fuit,
discubituris lavare pedes, in Conviviis cumprimis splendidis. Quistor pius.
Simon seems not to have neglected this Custom, because Christ came not
far, but was only invited to feast with him, unless it can be proved that
water was wont to be given to such as were invited to a feast. Drusius in
praeterit.

Christ came from Jerusalem to Bethany, Grotius.
for he spent the days with teaching at Jerusalem, and in the evenings for the
most part came to Bethany.

Verse. 47. For she loved much] Or, and therefore she loved much; Particula non
causativa sed illativa vel rationalis. Vt Matthew. 25.34. 1 John 3.14. Perkins on
Jude.
The Papists make this for causa praecedens, and not signum subse quens, as if
her love were the cause of the forgiveness of her sins. The word ( for) does
not signify here a Cause, but a reason drawn from the sign, as it is also
used elsewhere, the sense then is, many sins are forgiven her, and hereby you
shall know it, because, or in that she loved much. The particle ( For) is used
as a note of the effect, or sign, in our common speech, as there is fire, for
I see smoke, this tree lives, for it sprouteth. Mr. Pinke would have it run
thus, therefore she has loved much, for first the whole scope of the Parable
is to show, See Downam. Of Justification. l. 6. c. 12. page 404, 405. To gather
hence merit of remission for o^r works of Charity is against the ground of
faith, by which we believe remission of sins, which is directly opposi^e to
merit. Dr Tailor.

(...) aliquando est conjunctio collectiva seu rationalis, and significat ideo
vel propterea, ut hic, and 1 Samuel 2.25. Posselius in Syntaxi Conjunctionum p.
300.


that he loves most to whom most is forgiven, and not contrarily that most is
forgiven to him that loves most. 2. The antithesis in the same verse requires
it, the words, but to whom little is forgiven he loves little, suppose this
thesis, because many sins are forgiven her she loves much.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 2. MAry called Magdalene] Her name was Mary, but she was married to a
noble personage, Vide Cornel a Lap.
a native of the Town and Castle of Magdall, from whence she had her name of
Magdalene, though her self was borne in Bethany.

Verse. 3. Which ministered unto him of their substance] These examples, say
some, show that the wife in some respect may dispose of goods without her
husbands consent to good uses, Fieri potest ut Cuza Herodis procurator domino
suo nimium similis consilio uxoris valde fuerit contrarius: sed pia mulier
obstaculum hoc zeli sui fervore and constantia superavit. Calvinus.

Quod quidam hinc argumentum petunt, licere uxoribus viros a fide alienos
deserere, non video quid certi habeat. Credibilius aut uxorem dici quae vidna
fuerit, aut maritum non alienum fuisse a pietate. Vt solet Deus rimul^s
quibusdam in aulis alioqui nimium sibi praeclusas penetrare. Nam and in Neronis
aula non defuere qui Christianismo faverent. Phil. 4.22. Grotius.


for it is like Herod's steward was of Herod's mind. But all the show of
probability that can be showed, that the wife of Chuzas ministered to Christ
without her husbands consent is, that Ioanna is there said to be the wife of
Chuza, Herod's Steward. But first the phrase does not imply that Chuza was then
living. Secondly some gather, that this Steward was the Ruler, whose son Christ
healed; who thereupon believed with all his house, Chemnit. Harm. Evang. cap.
33. John 4.53. which if it were, then it cannot be doubted, but that his wife
followed Christ with his good liking and consent. Chuza being Herod's Steward,
and so a man of great place, and public employment, might if he were then
living, depute the managing of all affairs at home to his wife, Prove. 31.11.
and so she might have at least a general consent.

Verse. 13. In time of temptation fall away] Greek, opportunity of temptation,
that is, (say some) when one is tempted by his darling sin.

Historical and Temporary faith may be lost but not saving faith.

Verse. 15. In an honest and good heart] Erasmus thinks it is an Hebraicall
doubling, for very good, as Ier. 24.3. the Prophet calls figs good good, that
is, very good. Others think it is a kind of speech used by the Greeks, Beza.
and fetched from the very secrets of Philosophy, although the common people
usually had it in their mouth; Because there are some external goods of
fortune, as they call them, others of the body, and others of the mind. The
Graecians call a man adorned with all these (...) is referred to the external
life, (...) to the true virtues of the mind.

(...) Haec vox Hellenistis frequens constantiam illam denotat quae inter
adversa durat spe meliorum. Grotius.
Bring forth fruit with patience] Or as the Greek word may bear, in expectation
or tariance, viz. for the fit season.

Verse. 23. A storm of winde] (...). It is not properly one wind, Aristot.
dicit (...) esse ventum violentum qui inferne sursum versus repent convolvitur.
but a conflict of many winds; the LXX. use it 38. Job. 1.

Verse. 25. Where is your faith] Or as the Greek Article intends, Where is
that your faith? Vbi est illa fides vestra? Tolet. Comment. in hunc loc. that
measure and degree of faith, which you have showed to be in me.

Verse. 29. It had caught him] (...) he made him run violently, as the horse
when he is spurred. Beza.

Verse. 30. Legion] A Legion in the wars contains above 6000. footmen, and
700. horsemen. Quod vocabulum recentiores Graeci mutuati sunt a Latino Legio.
Fuit autem Legio apud Romanos agmen militare, constans Hesychio autore, viris
sexies mill sexcentis sexaginta sex. Secundum Suidam sunt sexies mill
milites. Legio in summum (inquit Varro) Constiterit duodecies millibus
quingentis militibus, ut ut autem nume rarentur milites veterum Legionum apud
Romanos, Diabolus hic ipse reddit rationem nominis, quia multi sumus. Quia enim
tunc temporis Romanae legiones in Syria and Iudaea, hinc inde in praesidiis
dispositae, and omnibus nomen illud non tantum notum sed and formidabile erat,
ideo illud ipse sibi assumpsit. Chemit.


Verse. 31. That he would not command them to go out into the deep] (...)
bottomless deep, because there nocendi and perdendi potestas auferetur. See
Beza and Grotius.

We may find three notable evidences of Satan's limited power in this one
history of the man possessed in the region of the Gadarens. 1. In that he begs
leave to enter into the Swine, he that afterward boasts that all the world was
his, and all the Kingdoms thereof, has not power over a vile Swine. Secondly,
as soon as he enters into the Swine, he presently carries them headlong into
the Sea, why did he not so to the man possessed? not for any love he bare to
him more than to the Swine, but because he was limited by God. Thirdly, his
name was Legion, there was a whole Legion of Devils in him, though such an
army of them was in one poor man, yet they were not able to destroy and drown
him as the Swine.

Verse. 38. Now the man out of whom the Devils were departed, besought him that
he might be with him, but Jesus sent him away.] It is uncertain why Christ
refused to have this man his companion, unless that he expected a greater
fruit of it, if he should be witness of so excellent and singular a benefit
among the Gentiles, Calvin.
which Mark and Luke witness to be done.

Verse. 39. Show how great things God has done unto thee] That Christ commands
him to report it as the work of God, not his, he did it to this end, that he
might be accounted a true Minister and Prophet of God, and might obtain an
authority of teaching, for so it behoved the rude people to be instructed by
degrees, Calvin.
to whom his divinity was not yet known.

Verse. 43. Spent all her living] Consumpsit (...), she spent her whole life,
that is, the goods which maintained her life, so Prove. 27.27.

Verse. 52. Bewailed her] The word signifies to beat and strike, and is
transferred to the mournings and lamentations that are at burials, at which
time men use such kind of behavior. Camerarius in notis, recte observat,
verbum hoc habere significationem feriendi and caedendi, inque funeribus
lugentium tales solent esse gestus.

Apud LXX. in hac significatione verbum hoc legitur Creberrime. Vide Genesis 22.2.
and 50.10. 1 Samuel 25.1. 2 Samuel 7.12. Jer. 4.8. and 22.18. Quistorpius.




CHAP. IX.
Verse 3. TAke nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither
bread] He commands them not to be sollicitous for food, See Matthew. 10.10.
that they might give themselves wholly to preaching, and commit themselves to
the divine providence. A scrip is a little sack, in which they did put and
heap their meat; by bread all food is here signified, Novarinus.
as it is usual in Scripture.

Deny himself] Greek utterly deny himself. Abnegare seipsum est suo arbitrio,
suae voluntati, and omnibus proprijs animi motibus placitisque renuntiare,
proprios affectus negligere, suggestiones ac suasiones earum comprimere and
repellere, atque posthac non sibi ipsi sed illi deditum esse, quem in Dominum
ac magistrum delegit. Polyc. Lyser. 1. In persons, He must deny himself in his
Father, Mother, Children, Friends, all. 2. In things, He must forsake, house,
lands, goods. He must deny himself in his profit, credit, pleasure, ease, and
offer up himself to God. 2. Take up his daily cross, bear with patience the
crosses that come upon him daily, or day by day. 3. Follow Christ through thick
through thin.
Verse. 23. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his Cross daily, and follow me] The meaning is this, every one that will
become a scholar in the school of Christ, and learn obedience unto God, must
deny himself, that is, he must in the first place exalt and magnify the grace
of God, and become nothing in himself, renouncing his own reason will and
affections, and subjecting them to the wisdom and will of God in all things.
Secondly, take up his Cross, that is, he ought always to make a
forehand-reckoning, even of private Crosses and particular afflictions, and
when they come to bear them with cheerfulness, for there is that emphasis in
the word take up. This done, he must follow Christ by practicing the virtues of
meekness, patience, love and obedience, and by being conformable to his death
in crucifying the body of sin in himself. Mr. Perkins.

Ne deterreat 1. Vitae periculum. v. 24.2. Opum jactura. v. 25.3. Famae
ignominia. v. 26.
Verse. 24. For whosoever will save his life shall lose it] That is, that will
not take up his Cross to follow Christ, shall never be saved.

Apud Latinos exitus and excessus pro morte passim occurrunt. Grotius.
Verse. 31. Decease] (...). Some think he alludes to the Exodus, or going of the
Israelites out of Egypt; for as their going out of Egypt was to them the
beginning of their liberty, so also death to Christ was a way to glory, and
after his example also to us: whence also the ancient Christians loved to call
death (...), 2 Pet. 1.15. As we may see in Irenaeus, Clement, and others.

Verse. 41. Oh faithless and perverse generation] 1. Faithless, which neither
by doctrine nor miracles can be overcome or reformed, so as to believe.

2. Perverse, which by no Laws will be brought into order. This is taken out
of 32. Deuteronomy. 20. where Moses gives these Epithets to the Israelites, Polyc.
Lyser.
who for forty whole years could not be brought, neither by the Law of God,
nor by stupendous miracles, to order their lives according to the will of God.

Verse. 51. He settled himselfe] Or as it is in the original, he hardened his
face, to go to Jerusalem, (...) obfirmare animum est omnem metum and horrorem
mortis deponere, and animo suo constituere hanc mortem esse ferendam, ut ut
dura and horrenda omnium sese in ea praebeant LXX. interpretes hanc Graecam
phrasin ponunt Ier. 21.10. Ezech. 6.2. Polyc. Lyser. in loc. Vide Bezam and
Piscat in loc.
as Ezekiel. 4.3. Christ by his whole outward habit and gesture declared that it
was determined for him to go to Jerusalem. For he did not now go from one town
to another, as he was wont, to preach the Gospel, neither staid he any where,
but presently went in that way which leads directly to Jerusalem, till he was
past Samaria.

Verse. 54. And when his Disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as
Elias did] Here they show themselves to be Boanerges, that is sons of
thunder, quid mirum filios tonitrus fulgurare? Ambrose. Ragash is to make a
great tumult, as a furious multitude gathered together, that makes a noise as
the noise of a troubled sea, Psalm. 2.1. Therefore some not without reason say,
the sons of Zebedeus are called Benai regesci, Sons of Thunder. Rutherfords
Trial and Triumph of faith.

Crotius.
55. Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of] Some interpret it, you know
not what spirit becomes you, rather you know not what Spirit acts you. The name
Spirit is of large extent, in its original it signifies the wind; it is
trasferred to other things, God, good and evil Angels, and the soul of man
are so called. It is taken also for the affections of the mind, Romans 11.8.
Ezekiel. 13.3. The meaning is, you think you are acted by such a Spirit as Elias
of old; but you err, you have a zeal, but not according to knowledge, and
which is therefore a humane affection, not a divine motion, as the following
reason proves.

Verse. 62. No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit
for the kingdom of God] As though he had said, Mr. Perkins. Vide Cornel. a
Lap. and Grotium.
He that starteth from the plough is not fit for the field: no more is he that
shifteth from his calling, fit for Gods service.

CHAP X.
Verse. 1. APpointed] The Greek word (...) Signifies both to demonstrate and
create, whence we may collect, that Christ did not only rightly choose these
seventy Disciples, demonstrated them to his Apostles, because he thought them
fit for this embassage, but also by certain ceremonies ordained them to this
office, for so the Greek word signifies in this place. Polyc. Lyser.
signifies to design to a public office.

The seventy also] As there were twelve in the old Testament, from which the
twelve Tribes were propagated; and which the whole nation of the Jews
acknowledged for their Progenitors, so Christ also would have twelve Apostles
which should regenerate both the Jews and Gentiles by the word, and which the
whole Christian Nation should acknowledge for their Patriarchs; and as Jacob
descended with seventy souls into Egypt, Genesis 46. v. 27. So Christ would have
seventy Quod Latinus posuit LXXII Non aliunde est quam ex antiqua traditione.
Nam tot fuisse a Christo Creatos antiquitas credidit, etiam Graeci, qui hoc
loco legerunt (...), ut Origenes and Epiphanius. Neque vero temere, nam moris
erat Hebraeis LXX. nominare numero rotundo etiam ubi constabat esse LXXII.
Grotius.
Disciples, but who these seventy Disciples were it is no where expressed in
Scripture.

And sent them two and two before his face into every City] This sending of two
together commends brotherly conjunction, makes for consolation in adversity,
and for the greater confirmation of the truth, thereby is also signified that
this business is such to which one suffices not; but two eyes always see
more than one; Moses and Aaron were sent to Pharaoh, Paul and Barnabas by the
Church, (...) i. e. (...), as Mark speaks from the idiome of the Hebrews,
chapter 6. v. 7. as we by interposing the copulation say in english two and two.

Verse. 2. The harvest truly is great but the laborers are few] This is the
force of the speech, a great harvest requires many workmen, the doctrine of
the Gospel hitherto expounded by me in all Palaestina, has the reason of a
great harvest, therefore it requires many Ministers. And Christ says this for
the consolation of these his Ambassadors that they may hopewell.

Verse. 3. As Lambes] Here we must not scrupulously inquire, why Christ names
his Disciples here lambs, when he had called his Apostles before sheep? for
the sense is the same in both places, and the Syriacke uses the same word in
both places, by this name Agnus a Groeco (...) derivatur quod castum
significat, innatam habet simplicitatem and hero suo utilis est. Caro et lac
cibo inserviunt, vellus and lana indumento, stercus medicinae and foecundandis
agriis. Polyc. Lyser.
He admonished the Disciples of chastity, simplicity and public profit.

Among wolves] So he calls the Priests and Pharisees, partly for their rage,
against Christ and his Apostles, and partly for their power with which they
were furnished to hurt.

Verse. 4. Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes] This he says not only to
warn them that they ought to be quick in this journie that they may return
speedily to him, but also, that he might show his divine power, that he can
provide for them and all others following their lawful vocation, though they
be destitute of these things.

Salute no man by the way] He would warn them to make speed, so 2 Kings 4.29.
Festinationis signum ut supra. 9.61. Est hyperbole, quasi dicat, Ne divertatis
ad privatas salutationes and familiares prolixasque collocutiones, nam alioqui
non vult Christus Discipulos suos esse inciviles and rusticos. Cornel. a Lap.
Those salutations (says Grotius) among the people of the East, were not done
with a light gesture or word, but with many bendings of the body, kisses,
embraces.

Verse. 6. The son of peace be there] He calls him so who does not disdain the
doctrine of peace, or the Gospel, hears that attentively and receives it into
an honest heart, one worthy of peace, as 2 Samuel 12.5. says Drusius.

It shall turn to you againe] Christ would teach them that they lost nothing
by discharging their duty by reason of the others incredulity.

Verse. 7. Eating and drinking] He implies that necessary food shall not be
wanting to them, although he send them without purse and scrip.

Go not from house to house] He would not have them rashly change their Inn,
which is sign of an inconstant and mutable mind, Lautiores mensas sectando.
Quistorpius.
or is joined with a contempt of the first Host; as if he by his inhumanity or
baseness had driven away his guest.

Verse. 8. Eat such things as are set before you] That is, be content with any
mean provision.

Verse. 11. Even the very dust of your City] By which symbol the Jews did
witness that those men against whom they did shake off their dust, Erasmus in
Adag: cum pulvisculo. Eodem pertinet Evangelicum illud quo jubentur etiam
pulverem excutere Apostoli ne minimum quidem ab eis secum auferre.
were so execrable to them that they would not communicate with them in their
dust. This shaking off the dust ought also to admonish us, that we have nothing
common with wicked men, so that their dust may not cleave to us.

Verse. 13. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida] Which is thought to
be the country of five Apostles, Peter, Andrew, Philip, James and John. John
1.44.

Verse. 15. And thou Capernam] Where Christ besides many excellent Sermons
wrought so many Miracles that the Nazarites his Countrymen objected it to him.
Luke 4.23.

Verse. 16. He that hears you] viz. Teaching and prescribing what is right.

Verse. 17. Through thy name] Christ wrought Miracles by his own power, the
Disciples by Christ's; whose name they also called upon, as we may see in the
Acts and Books of the Jews; as before the Devils yielded to the name of the God
of Israel, so now to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

Omni sua gloria and potestate.
Verse. 18. I beheld Satan as lightening fall from heaven] From the degrees of
knowledge, power, and dominion he had in the hearts of men, as Capernaum
exalted to heaven, as suddenly as lightning is wont to shine from heaven; this
prediction is to be referred to the incredible swiftness of propagating the
Gospel to the destroying of false religions, and all the works of the Devil.

Verse. 19. He may have respect to Esaias 11.8. Sicut Latini id quod durabile non
est dicunt in vento and aqua scribi, ita Hebraei pari sensu dicunt scribi in
terra, id est in pulvere. Ierem. 17.13. Huic contrarium est scribi in Coelo, id
est vitae aeternae ascribi atque destinari. Grotius.
He alludes to the 91. Psalm. 13. alhough there he speaks of the protection of
divine providence here of a wonderful power.

Verse. 20. Rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven] A
metaphorical speech for to be counted sons and heirs by God, as if they had
been noted down in a catalogue. It is better to have that which is proper to
Saints, than what is communicated also to others. Calvin.

Verse. 21. Rejoyced] He witnessed his joy not only in words but also in his
gesture and countenance, so the Greek word signifies.

Verse. 26. What is written in the law? how read thou] Taking it for granted
Mr. Perkins.
that men must read the Scriptures privately. As if he Mr. Hildersam on Psalm.
51.6.
had said, In the written law of God (and there only) thou shall find what
those good works are that God will reward in heaven.

Verse. 27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind] By the heart is
understood all the affections, desires, and inclinations; by the soul, the
will, purpose, and resolution; by the mind, the reason, understanding,
discourse, and memory; and by the might or strength, all the facultyes of the
soul, and parts of the body, with all their functions, actions and operations,
both internal and external.

And thy neighbor as thy selfe] By the name of neighbor, all men, of what
condition, sex, or nation soever, are understood.

Polyc. Lyser.
As thy selfe] 1. Truly. 2. Ardently. 3. Constantly.

Verse. 28. This do, and thou shall live] Object. Life is promised to the
worker, yet Romans 4.3. It is said, Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto
him for righteousness. Ans. Both speak of the word, but not of the same part
of the word, the Law promises life to the worker, and the Gospel life to the
believer.

Verse. 30. Wounded] With his sins and the sting for them; One glosseth well on
it, Chrysostom. Ambros. and Stella. Qui locus latrocinijs infamis ut notat
Hyeronimus.
not from Jericho to Jerusalem, but the contrary; Jericho was a type of hell,
Jerusalem of heaven, a man that forsakes God and turns to the Devil is like
to be wounded.

Verse. 31. By chance] Therefore, say Dr. Tailor. Vide Bezam. and Piscat.
some, one may use the word chance. It is a parable, and being uttered in the
common received terms, cannot be stretched so far beyond the scope of it. 2.
The Greek words (...) signifies properly, it fell out, or came to pass, viz.
by the providence of God overruling the matter. 3. It fell out casually to the
Priest who expected no such event.

Verse. 34. Pouring in oil and wine] Wine serves to cleanse, and ease the pain
within, oil to mollify the flesh, and allay the pain without.

Wine and oyle] That is, the doctrine of Salvation. Ambrose, Stella, Calv.
Chemnit. Wine, the Law to eat out the corruption, and oil, the Gospel to
heal it.

Verse. 35. He took out two pence] Christ has bequeathed unto us for our souls
health both laws, the old and new, say Optatus and Ambrose.

Verse. 39. Which also sat at Jesus feet] It was the custom of old that the
Doctors for honors sake sat in a more eminent place, but the Disciples and
the common people sat at their feet. Act. 22.3. The same custom is yet to
this day observed in Temples and Schools. Polyc. Lyser.


Mary also commends to us two gifts of the mind which in the greedy hearers of
heavenly doctrine are necessary, Sessione significatur quies, attentio,
diligentia and assiduitas. Lucas Brugensis.
one is tranquillity of mind without all distraction of body and thoughts, the
other is humility and reverence toward the Teacher, the first is noted by the
word sat, and the latter by sitting at his feet. Polyc. Lyser.

Verse. 40. And Martha was cumbred about much serving] The Greek word rendered
Cumbred, (...), signifies to be drawn and wried round and round about. The
adverbe of that word, (...), is used 1 Cor. 7.35. and rendered without
distraction, not being torn, vexed and drawn asunder. Evangelista tribus
verbis utitur (...) distendi and distrahi, (...) solicisum esse, and (...)
tumultuari, quibus excessum Marthae circa curam rei familiaris notare voluit.
Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 41. Martha, Martha] A friendly compellation, as Matthew. 7.21. Martha is
named twice, it signifies bitter, as if he had said, bitter bitter. 1. Bitter
to her self, in making a drudge of her self, and neglecting the word. 2. To
her sister, in chiding and accusing her. The doubling of the name among the
Hebrews partly signifies vehemence of affection, partly greatness of good
will, as Matthew. 7.22. See. 22.31.

41.42. Verses. 4. Attributes are given to riches. 1. They are many things and
require much labor. 2. Unnecessary. 3. They will be taken from us. 4. They are
not the best. See Luke. 16.2. Porro unum est necessarium Vulg. Atqui una re
opus est. Beza.


Verse. 42. One thing is needfull] So we read it with the Vulgar, that is, the
word of God. Chrysostom. Ambrose, Calvin. Primarily, simply, and per se needful.
The original is, there is need of one thing, one dish is enough, but Grotius
Non puto de uno ferculo Christum hic agere quod tamen quibusdam valde placere
video: Satius est intelligamus Christum ex occasion ejus quod gerebatur
generalem pronuntiasse sententiam: varias esse ac multiplices hujus vitae
curas, sed unam esse rem quae si salvi esse velimus omnino nobis sit
necessaria, curam scilicet pietatis. Matthew. 16.26. Grotius.
dislikes this. That good part] By an excellency, that is, the best. Austin,
Non tu malam sed illa meliorem.

Which shall not be taken away from her] That has once received it.

Christ would not suffer Mary to be drawn away from an extraordinary exercise
of the word, though there was much business by reason of his unlooked-for
coming with his Disciples.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. WHen he ceased] The Greek word signifies to put an end to a thing,
properly to sit down and rest, as if prayer were a labor.

Verse. 2. When ye pray say our Father, etc.] Luke somewhat varies from Matthew
in laying down the form of the Lords prayer, that he might teach, that in
prayer we ought not to be so sollicitous of words as to pray in the mind and
Spirit, and to attend rather to the matter than to the words. For the sense,
there is no difference to be found between both forms, only the words are
changed, when the sense is coincident. Polyc. Lyser. Omnino credibile est in
Graecis codicibus adjecta ex Matthaeo quae Lucas omiserat, cum non exstet in
Latinis antiquis illud, qui es in coelis, item, fiat voluntas tua ut in coelo
ita in terra ( quod and Graeci codices quidam omittunt) item, sed libera nos a
malo; quae ipsa etiam non expressa vi insunt verbis coeteris. Grotius.
Matthew says (...) this day, Luke (...) daily, Matthew has (...) debts, Luke
(...) our sins, Matthew says (...), as also we forgive, Luke (...) for even
we forgive, but the sense in both is the same, and in Luke the conclusion, for
thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, is omitted.

Verse. 5. Which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight,
etc.] There are five excellent things observable out of this Parable.

1. When a people of God are in the darkest condition they ought to sue to him
for mercy and deliverance.

2. It is our duty then not only to be importunate but impudent with God. Ver.
8. Because of his importunity, in the Greek it is impudence; there should be a
holy boldness in prayer.

3. A people that are so importunate with God, he will at last show mercy to
them.

4. God will not only grant what we desire, but will give more than we desire,
he desired but three loves, he will give him as many as he needs.

5. When a friend comes to a friend he shall prevail.

Verse. 9. And I say unto you] It is a comparison not from the like but from a
greater, if an impudent beggar obtain so much from man, what will not an
humble and daily petitioner obtain from God.

Verse. 11. If a Son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he
give him a stone, etc.] This seems to have been a common Proverb. Videtur hoc
fuisse vulgatum proverbium, cui respondet Plautinum illud quod Erasmus
observat. Altera manu fert lapidem, panem ostentat altera.


Ver. 13. Being evill] Either simply in our selves, or comparatively with God.

The holy Spirit] By which is meant, First, the gifts and graces of the Holy
Ghost. Secondly, the inward sense and feeling of him in the heart, thus he who
has the Holy Ghost may pray both for increase of his gifts, and for a
comfortable sense and feeling of him.

Verse. 21. His goods are in peace] Whereby is signified, that the wicked of the
world being possessed of Satan, are at peace in themselves in regard of
temptations; not as if lusts do not differ among themselves, Mr Perkins.
but Satan will not suffer them to question their estate.

Verse. 27. Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have
sucked] The periphrasis of a mother described from her belly and paps. See
23.29.

Ovid Metamorph. l. 4. fab. 8.
-- Qui te genuere beati.
Et matter foelix et quae dedit ubera nutrix.
Verse. 30. As Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the Son of man
be to this generation] Signum non confirmationis, sed condemnationis; a sign
not of confirmation, but Condemnation.

Verse. 33. No man when he has lighted a Candle, puts it in a secret place,
etc.] Christ by the name of a Candle understands the word of God according to
that Psalm. 119.105. and 2 Pet. 1.19. Prove. 6.23. The word of God is compared to
a Candle in many respects.

1. For the Author, which is God, he by his Son (who is the light of the world)
kindled this Candle thence from the beginning, that is to say, he has revealed
his word, and by that his will to us. 2. For its nature, because as there is
nothing purer than light in all the world, Polyc. Lyser.
with which no filth can be mingled; so the words of the Lord are pure words,
Psalm. 12.4.7. 3. For its effects which are manifold, the Candle reveals those
things (the darkness being expelled) which did first lie hid, so the word of
God reveals many things, which are otherwise unknown; the Candle directs the
steps and actions of the body; the word of the Lord shines in all spiritual
actions. Light also expels the darkness of the mind, sadness, and fear; so the
word of God first enlightens the consciences of men, afterward frees from the
terrors of sin and eternal damnation.

Verse. 44. Ye are as graves which appear not] As the deep grave hides the
stinking Carcass, and keeps in the stench from offending any man's smell
within: so the deep and dissembling heart of man is a cunning digger of such
graves, nay it self as it were is a grave, wherein their rottenness and
corruption lies so closely covered, Dike.
that hardly the sharpest noses of such as converse with them shall be able to
smell them out.

Verse. 45. Then answered one of the Lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus
saying, Drus. detribus Sectis Judaeorum l. 2. c. 13.
thou reproachest us also] As if he should say, not only the Scribes and
Pharisees, but also we Lawyers, therefore the Lawyers were somewhat different
from the Scribes.

Verse. 51. From the blood of Abell unto the blood of Zacharias] The question is
who this Zachary was of whose slaughter Christ here speaks, and there are
three opinions of learned men concerning three persons: 1. We read of one
Zachary, 2 Chronicles. 24.20. which agrees with those words of Christ, Who perished
between the Altar and the Temple. For the Altar stood in the Court before the
place of the Temple, and this very Zachary desired from God the revenge of his
blood, for he said, Let the Lord see and require it. But that in Matthew seems
to oppose this opinion, that Christ says this Zachary was the son of
Barachias, but in the Chronicles he is called the son of Iehoiadah, Polyc.
Lyser.
but others say, that he was Binominis, had two names. 2. Others say, it was
that Zachary which was one of the lesser Prophets, who himself in the Book of
his Prophecy, Neque probabilis est eorum opinio qui hoc ad Zachariam referunt
qui populum ab exilio Babylonico reducem ad templum aedificandum hortatus est
cujus extant vaticinia. Tametsi enim libri inscriptio filium Barachiae fuisse
docet, occisum tamen fuisse nunquam legitur. Deinde coacta est expositio quod
medio tempore inter altaris and Templi aedificationem occisus fuerit. De altero
Zacharia Ioiadae filio sacra historia refert, quod huic loco optime quadrat,
eum in atrio Templi fuisse lapidatum. Templum hic sumitur pro atrio, huic
propinquum erat altar. Calvinus.
chap. 1. ver. 1. witnesses, that he was the Son of Barachias, but though
nothing be observed in the Scripture of his slaughter, yet some think that he
also was killed by the Jews in that holy place. 3. Origin and Basil say, it is
an ancient tradition, that Zachary the Father of John Baptist, when he took
Mary the mother of our Lord for a Virgin, after her birth, He was killed by the
Jews between the Temple and the Altar, being accused by the people.

Verse. 52. The key of knowledge] That is, the means of knowledge, whereby (as
by the key) men are to have their entrance into the kingdom of heaven.
Tertullian rightly interprets the key the interpretation of Scriptures. See
Grotius.

Verse. 53. Began to urge him vehemently] The old Latin Translation is thus,
Coeperunt Pharisaei and legis periti graviter insistere and os ejus oprimere de
multis, Haec una est vocum in quibus intimam peritiam Graeci sermoni^ Lucas
ostendit. Nam (...) plane vox est de schola sumpta. Solebant magistri scholarum
provectiores discipulos junioribus praeficere, ut illi hos interrogarent. Id
dicebatur (...). Docte igitur hoc verbo usus est Lucas, ut indicaret Pharisaeos
omni modo hoc conatos ut multa ex ore Christi elicerent. Sensum recte expressit
Syrus aucupandi vocabulo, and Arabs eo verbo quod significat facere ut quis
disserat. Grotius.
which last words the Rhemists translate to stop his mouth about many things,
whereas the Greek signifies, to provoke him to speak of many things, as
Erasmus out of Theophylact, and Beza do prove, and the words following in the
Evangelists do show, Lying in wait for him. Vide Bezam.

Verse. 54. That they might accuse him) The Greek word here comprehends
complaint to the Superiors, and the public action before the people, that
they might condemn him publicly before the people who was privately accused as
a seditious man, and a corrupter of the Law.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. Hypocrisy) That (as the Syriack declares) is an affected
Counterfeiting of another person, and Christ understands by it that affected
ostentation both of learning and holiness, by which the Pharisees did set
forth themselves among the people, and so endeavored to win authority and
belief to their false doctrine. Polyc. Lyser.
Also by the Antithesis he desires that the Disciples deliver bona fide the
Doctrine of truth received by them, and that they confirm it by a sincere, not
counterfeit holiness of life.

Verse. 2. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed, neither
hid, that shall not be known] This sentence is also elsewhere used by Christ in
the Gospel, as Mat. 10.26. and Mark. 4.22. Christ would have his Disciples and
followers abstain from all fraud and hypocrisy, as well in sayings as deeds,
since all things in their time shall be brought to light, Id. ib.
and be manifested before God, Angels and men; therefore it is most advised to
do all things sincerely and heartily according to the prescript of God, that
our works may bear the light as being done in God. John 3.21.

Verse. 4. My friends] That is, those which he knew favored him, and he saw to
be solicitous about their own safety.

Be not afraid of them that can kill the body] It is not to be understood as
though any man had any power in himself to kill it, but God gives them leave
sometimes. But if you will fear profitably, and so as you shall be the better
for it, I tell you whom you shall fear, Mr Dod.
and I repeat it again that you may the better mark it, I say fear him.

Verse. 6. Are not five sparrows sold for a farthing, etc.] A sparrow is little
esteemed of as the price shows, and the hair of our head less, whence the
Proverb, Non pili facio, to signify a thing of small moment.

Verse. 8. Whosoever shall confess me before men] To confess Christ is not
barely to acknowledge him to be the only Savior and Redeemer of mankind, God
and man in one undivided person, also our Priest and King: but also to witness
and affirm him to be the same before men, as Mat. 16.16. Nor in words only but
in deeds, that so our whole life may speak Christ.

Verse. 11, 12. Take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye
shall say. For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour, what ye ought
to say] There were among the Ancient Fathers, some (of which number is
Augustine) who interpret this promise of infallibility (if we may so speak)
made to the Apostles by Christ, of absolute illumination made simul ac semel
when the Holy Ghost at the feast of Pentecost descended upon them; yet the
opinion of Euthymius seems more probable, who expounds it of an extraordinary
and infallible suggestion to be made by the Holy Ghost, as often as occasion
required it, the very words of Christ seem rather to favor this exposition,
which also receives strength from thence, because it is manifest the Apostles
used books, from 2 Timothy 4.13. But this would not be necessary the former
opinion standing.

Dum Christus de rebus gravissimis and aeternam salutem concernentibus
disserit, importunus quidam de turba sermonem ejus interrumpit, and de fratris
sui iniquitate conqueritur, qui tergiversans communis haereditatis partitionem
vel justo diutius proroget, vel penitus recuset. Christus ob has causas hanc
petitionem rejecit, 1. Non venerat in mundum ob temporalia sed ob aeterna ac
proinde temporalibus hisce noluit se immiscere, 2. Noluit confirmare Iudaicam
opinionem neque in discipulorum suorum neque in reliquoru^ auditorum animis qui
arbitrabantur Messiae esse regnum mundanum. 3. Praecidere etiam voluit suis
adversariis occasiones calumniandi, qui attente observarent an ex dictis and
factis aliquid arripere possent, quod speciem haberet, ac si magistratus
politici Iurisdictionem sibi usurparet, quo seditionis ipsum accusare possent.
4. Praevidit futurum, si uni in vilioribus hisce gratificaretur, mox plures ex
rudioribus adventuros, qui idem essent postulaturi, unde plus negotii in
dirimendis litibus auditorum, quam in plantando regno Dei habiturus fuisset.
Polyc. Lyser.
Verse. 13. Master, speak to my brother that he divide the inheritance with me]

Verse. 14. Man, who made me a Judge, or a divider over you] As if he should
say, it is not within the compass of my calling, for I came to accomplish the
work of man's redemption, and not to divide Inheritances, hereby giving us to
understand, that every thing must be done by warrant of some calling, Ministers
must not neglect dividing the word to divide Inheritances. Vide Grotium.

Verse. 15. Take heed and beware of covetousnesse] Watch and ward, watch and
guard, eyes and weapons. The first word implying an ocular wariness, an
eye-watch; the second, an hand watch, a kind of manual, if not material
guarding of a man's self, as if he had said, to paraphrase the Text, not to mend
the Translation, watch and ward, nay, watch and guard, and defend your selves
from the sin of Covetousness. Dike. The Greek word rendered Covetousness,
signifies an immoderate desire of having.

For a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesseth] Christ plainly crosses that opinion which the heart of man had
conceived about riches, viz. that the life of man consisted in them. But
whether we consider man's life in the length and continuance of it, or in the
comfort of it, it consists not in riches, no man lives a day longer, or merrier
for his riches. See Brugensis.

Verse. 17. What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits]
Behold, abundance does not bring to the Covetous tranquillity and felicity of
mind, but rather greater solicitude and misery, he calls them his fruits, he
does not acknowledge them to be Gods, from whose blessing all things proceed;
if (...) covetous man had acknowledged this he would have known what to have
done, he would then have given thanks to God the giver.

Verse. 21. So is he that lays up treasure for himself] Gets together Lands,
and Goods, and all abundance of things that the world counts precious.

And is not rich toward God] That is, See 1 Timothy 6.18.
was not plentiful in good works according to the measure of wealth which he
had; men are rich toward God, 1. When they are reconciled to God in the merits
of Christ. 2. Cor. 8.9. 2. When they receive his grace, whereby they are
enabled to bring forth good works both in duties to God and man. Perkins.
1 Timothy 6.16.

Verse. 24. Consider the ravens] See Psalm. 141.9. R. Dav. Inquit pullos corvorum
candidos esse ac proinde non agnosci matribus, item Deum pascere illos muscis.
Drusius.
Albertus magnus in the History of the living Creatures relates, that the young
Crows are forsaken by the old out of a cruel (...). Aristotle says they are
cast out of their nests. In such a great want of things Albertus says, that
certain little worms arising out of their dung do of their own accord cast
themselves into their gaping beckes, and by this means wonderfully nourish
them; When Matthew named the foul in general, Luke did not in vain specially
instance in the Ravens; For Job and the Psalmist extol the special care of
God toward the young Ravens.

Verse. 29. Neither be ye of doubtful mind] Hang not in suspense and doubt for
the event of the work as the meteors do in the air, uncertain whether to stay
there, In Syriaco Evangelio est, nec immoretur vel suspendatur men's vestra in
illis. Videtur alludere ad gestum ejus qui prae magna solicitudine angitur
vultum ad Coelum atrollens; verti potest, ne curetis sublimia, (...), proprie,
in dubio esse and in incerto, ut quae suspensa sunt and sublimia facile huc and
illuc impelluntur, ita animus hominis qui in dubio est and incertus, huc atque
illuc fluctuat. Varab. in loc. Vide Aretium in loc.
or to fall to the ground.

Verse. 32. Fear not little flock] There are two diminutives in the original,
the word translated flock signifies a little flock; but that the exceeding
littleness of it might appear, Christ adds another word, so the words are,
fear not little little flock, (...), little in their own esteem, in the
worlds account, and in regard of wolves. Christ's twelve Apostles, seventy
Disciples, and other faithful persons which came out of Galilee and elsewhere,
were but few, compared with the Priests, Pharisees, and the rest of the Jews.

For it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom] Fear not the
loss or want of earthly things, it is your kind and loving father that does
tender your estate and has care of it, it stands with his good pleasure, and
he wills freely to give without any merit of yours. The kingdome] That is, the
heavenly kingdom prepared for you.

Verse. 33. Sell that ye have, and give alms, etc.] Our Saviors meaning is,
Vide Aretium. in loc. Mr Perkins.
in the case of extreme necessity, when there is no other way to relieve those
that are to be relieved. See Acts 2. and 4.34, 35.

Verse. 35. Let your loins be girded about, Metaphora a vigilatium habitu. As
those who look for the return of the Bridegroom, v. 36. Beata vita hic and
alibi nuptijs compa^atur, partim quia in ea nullus dolori, luctui aut lachry
mis locus est, sed solidi and perpetuig audii plena sunt omnia, partim quia
aeternus Dei filius ecclesiam suam sponsam vere in ea sibi adjungit, ut bonorum
ipsa omnium particeps and Consori fias. Polyc. Lyser.
and your lights burning] By these words he would intimate, that all whenever
they are called out of this prison of the world, should be ready and prepared
to go out of it. By the name of light we understand the word of God, and the
light of faith kindled by it.

Verse. 36. When he comes and knocketh] He knocks by his word, as Rev. 3.20.
and when by the trouble of sickness he shows death to be near, we presently
open to him, when we readily and willingly receive it.

Verse. 42. To give them their portion of meat in due season] He alludeth to the
care of Governors of Families or stewards, who do allow to every one in the
house their portion. James 2.25.

Came crescunt dona crescunt and rations donorum. Gregory. As the gifts grow so
grow the accounts too.
Verse. 48. Unto whomsoever much is given] Not whosoever has much, but to
whomsoever much is given: 1. Because we have nothing but from gift. 2. It is a
foundation of improvement, and of the duty of giving account. Things given are
abilities natural, acquired, advantages, opportunities and time to improve all
these.

Much] A comparative: First In regard of our selves, so we receive much in
regard of our desert. 2. God needs not to bestow any thing. Secondly in regard
of others.

Verse. 50. I have a baptism to be baptized with] He calls the death of his
Cross a baptism, as also Mark 10.38. partly because it was a certain
immersion into extreme calamities into which He was cast, Christ also Matthew.
20.20. understands by the word Baptism his passion, the days of the death of
Martyrs were called Natalitia Martyrum, martyrdom it self, Baptismus
sanguinis.
partly also because in the Cross he was so to be sprinkled with his own blood
as if he had been drowned and baptized in it.

Straightned] Pained, or pent up, not with such a grief as made him unwilling
to come to it, but with such as made him desire that it were once over.

There seems (says Grotius) to be a similitude employed in the word (...),
taken from a woman with Child, which is so afraid of the bringing forth, that
yet she would feign be eased of her burden.

Verse. 51. Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I tell you nay,
but rather division] You expect that your Messiah should be such a King as
should far exceed the Roman Emperor in Riches, Power, and Majesty, who may
bestow a universal peace upon you freed from the tyranny of the Romans, may
subdue all nations, and so set them in safety. But I say unto you, that not
peace, but separation shall follow, even of those that ought to be joined
together in the bond of the straightest kindred and affinity.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. THere were present at that season, some that told him of the
Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices] Cyrill and
Theophylact, with Euthymius think, that they were followers of that Judah of
Galilee, of whom Gamaliel makes mention, Acts 5.37. Polyc. Lyser. Vide Calvinum.
They relate these to be his absurd opinions, that he taught that no man is to
be called Lord, that the Jews ought not to pay tribute to the Emperor of Rome,
nor to offer sacrifice for the Romans, and for these things Pilate was angry
with them, and commanded to kill them in sacrificing, yet these things are
uncertain. This is certain (since we may gather it out of Josephus) that the
Galileans were always prone to sedition, Vult dicere seditiosos istos
peccatores fuisse maximos qui graviter and Deum, and Magistratum offenderint.
Ac proinde supplicium quod sustinuerunt, justum esse atque sufficienter ab
ipsis promeritum. Verum enim vero vos qui hujus Crudelitatis vel spectatores
fuistis, vel ad quorum aures fama ejus pervenit, non debetis inde occasionem
sumere ipsorum infelicitati insultandi neque iam in ipsorum quam in propria
peccata inquirendi. Polyc. Lyser.
for they burned with an insatiable desire of getting liberty which they lost
by the Romans, therefore it is probable that some of them conspired, and entered
into a league to vindicate their liberty, and that things might succeed the
more prosperously, they began with sacrifices, as it is usual in making
Covenants, where Pilate as a Governor in Rome coming upon them on the sudden
with his Soldiers, cruelly slew those seditious persons, and so mingled and
confounded their blood and the beasts together. See 2 Kings 23.16.

Verse. 3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish] Though not in the
same kind, yet as severely, Indicat ipsos quoque ex inopinato crudeliter and
male interituros. Polyc. Lyser.

Verse. 4. Or those eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloe fell] That the Lord
may the more move them, he adds also another example. There was near Jerusalem
a river or Fountain called Siloa making a Fishpoole, Polyc. Lyser.
as is manifest from the 9th. of John 17. By it a tower was built serving for
an aquaeduct through the City, as is manifest from Esaias. 7.3. See 8.6. This
tower fell, and slew eighteen men.

Think ye that they were sinners above all men] Beza and the Vulgar render it
debitores debtors, but the Syriack has sinners which seems more proper here.
Debitores] hoc vocabulo in praesentia utitur, ut innuat omnes homines legi
divinae debere obedientiam, and hanc si non praestent obligatos esse ad poenam.
Polyc. Lys.


Verse. 5. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish] That which Christ here
threatens to the impenitent was fulfilled after forty years; for then Titus
the emperor of the Romans on the feast of the Passover besieged the City,
and having taken it slew many impenitent Jews as they were sacrificing.

Verse. 6. A certain man had a figtree planted in his vineyard, etc. This
vineyard notes the Church of God, Esaias 2.1. Matthew. 20.1. in which there is one
vine our Lord Jesus Christ, in which all we ought to be ingrafted as branches
if we will bring forth fruit to eternal life, John 15 1

Verse. 7. Behold these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree and
find none] Some of the Fathers interpret it only of the Synagogue of the
Jews, and so the three years wherein Christ expected fruit were three times,
1. Before the Law. 2. In the Law. 3. after the Law, as Gregory. Or the three
Laws; the first natural, the second written by Moses, the third Evangelicall
by Christ, as Ambrose. Or the three governments of the Jews; the first under
the Highpriests, the second under Judges, the third under Kings; but
Theophylact, Athanasius and Basil do expound it more largely to signify the
three ages of men; Childhood, youth, and old age, or else the three years which
Christ spent in going through their whole Land, teaching and doing good, and
healing all the world possessed with the Devil, Acts 10.38. Those which
refer these things to the three years in which Christ taught seem not to
attend to what follows, of waiting one year, Grotius.
neither did God being entreated by the godly defer the punishment of the Jews
for one, Vide Maldonatum.
but forty years after the three years that Christ taught them. Wherefore it
is better to understand the three years thus, that figs which are fruitful do
not longer stay from bearing. Alludit ad naturam ficus, quae aliquando tertio
demum anno a plantatione sua fert fructus. Sed si tertio anno nondum proferat,
nunquam eos proferre solet. Cornel. a Lap.


Verse. 11. A Spirit of infirmity eighteen years] The disease had so prevailed
over her that she was crazed by habit. Hoc est, laborabat illa foemina morbo
non naturali, sed qui ex Diaboli malitia and potentia, vel per incantationem,
vel per fascinum aliquod ipsi obvenerat. Polyc. Lys.


Verse. 13. And he laid his hands upon her, and immediately she was made
straight] He could heal her by his bare word, without touching, but he does not
only vouchsafe to touch her, to show the certainty of his Charity and good
will; but also that he might signify, that his quickening flesh is that
ordinary instrument by which he makes us partakers of his saving grace.

Verse. 14. Said unto the People, etc.] He strikes at Christ as a violater of
the Sabbath through the sides of the people, because that Jesus had healed on
the Sabbath day] Not by applying of medicines, as the Latin curare, and the
Greek (...) properly signifies. See 4 Matt. 23.

Verse. 16. Ought not this woman being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has
bound to these eigteene years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day]
This argument is amplified by a threefold comparison. First He compares the
Cattle together, the Ox and the Ass, and this woman which he calls a daughter
of Abraham, being not content to oppose a reasonable Creature to a beast which
was enough, he adds a daughter of Abraham, which name was in great esteem
with them. See Matthew. 3.9. Luke 3.8. John 8.33. Act. 13.26. Secondly, he
compares the bond whereby the Cattle are tied at the stall, and the bonds of
the Devil; and Thirdly the time. The Cattle peradventure for one night or a
few days are tied to the stall, but this woman even for the length of time is
worthy all commiseration.

19. and 21. Verses. By two Parables, one taken from the garden, viz. from a
grain of mustard seed; another from domestical matters, viz. Leaven; He
teaches, that that is the nature of Evangelicall doctrine, that it grows
besides the expectation of all men, and spreads it self far.

Verse. 23. Are there few that be saved] Christ is wont to reject curious
questions without an answer, as here, and Acts 1.7. Grotius. Respondit Christus
affirmative paucos salvari, ut insinuat Lucas, and clare exprimit Matthew. c. 7.
ver. 14. Idem asserit Isaias, Cap. 10.22. and c. 24.13. Cornel. a Lap.
It belongs to us to know what they are that are saved, not how many are to be
saved, although by one we may somewhat guess at the other, for few are willing
to enter into a hard and difficult way.

Strive with all your strength to enter through. Greek. Contendite, enitimini,
conamini, adlaborate omnibus viribus. Hoc enim verbo significat opus esse
labor and conatu, quia non sine magna and ardua difficultate queat quis
angustam portam transmittere. Luc. Brugens.
Verse. 24. Strive to enter in at the straight gate] That is, therefore strive
to enter, because the gate is straight. Bradford well compared the way of
Religion to a narrow bridge, and a large and deep river, from which the least
turning away is dangerous.

Verse. 28. All the Prophets in the Kingdom of God] Therefore also Solomon.

Verse. 30. There are last which shall be first] The Gentiles which God in times
past suffered to go after their own ways. Acts 14.15.

First shall be last] The Jews politically and spiritually, for they are the
most miserable of all people.

Verse. 32. Tell that Fox] The Prophets use to set forth Kings (says Grotius)
by the names of beasts, as the Goat, Ram, Leopard, Bear; neither undeservedly,
because the greatest part of them have beastly conditions. Crotius.
So Paul describes Nero by the name of a Lion; Herod being very subtle is
fitly termed a Fox.

I cast out Devils, and do cures to day and tomorrow, and the third day I
shall be perfected] Which words signify both the nearness of his passion, and
the certainty of the thing, Polyc. Lyser.
and the propension of his mind to so great a work.

Verse. 34. Which killest the Prophets] Jeremy, Zachary.

As a hen does gather her brood under her wings] There is in all birds a
wonderful love ingrafted to cherish and protect their little ones, but
especially in the hen. This cherishes the young ones without feathers,
provides them food, by clocking calls them to her, and contends for them
against the Kite, even to blood; the Jews were so cherished and protected by
God.

And ye would not] Christ speaks not here of his hidden and absolute will,
according to which he does whatsoever he will, neither can any creature resist
him, but of his revealed will to which men ought to apply themselves.

Verse. 35. Behold your house is left unto you desolate] First the Temple, which
is elsewhere called the house of the Lord; because the Jews made it of a house
of prayer a den of thieves, He calls it no more the house of the Lord, but
their house. Desolate] Spoiled of all its grace; yet the word house may be
taken more generally for the houses of all those of Jerusalem, yea even of the
Jews in that whole Country, as it is Psalm. 69.26. Yet Christ prophesies here
of the destruction of all Judaea, which came by the Romans under Vespasian and
Titus.

CHAP. XIIII.
Verse 2. ANd behold there was a certain man before him which had the dropsie]
It is probable that the man which had the dropsy was brought thither purposely
to tempt Christ, Calvin. Hoc miraculum aliquid peculiare habet, viz. hoc, quod
non petit sanari sed tantum erat ante illum, hoc est vel adstabat, vel
assidebat, vel decumbebat, and tacebat. Polyc. Lyc. In Evangelio de multis
aegris legimus quibus Christus subvenit; sed illi ejus opem vel ipsi
implorarunt, vel alii pro ipste intercesserunt. Id. ibid.
for he could not come to the table by chance, nor without the will and
permission of the Master.

Verse. 4. And they held their peace] As also at other times those that were
asked were wont to be silent, for if they had said it had been lawful, they
had opposed their own observations, but if they had said it had not been
lawful, they feared the reprehension of Christ, therefore they were silent.

And let him goe] He did not detain him with him for ostentation sake, nor
kept him with him for his service, but let him him go to his own.

Verse. 5. Which of you shall have an ass or an Ox fallen into a pit, and will
not straightway pull him out on the Sabbath day] Christ very fitly compares the
man sick of the dropsy with one fallen into a pit, in which he had been
drowned in the waters unless he had been drawn out, so a man that has the
dropsy will be choked at length with the water between the skin, unless he
be freed from the disease.

Verse. 7. And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when he marked
how they chose out the chief roomes] As in his first entrance he cured the
dropsy tumor of the man sick, Opportune Christus sanato eorporis hydrope,
sanare etiam aggreditur duplicem animae hydropem, superbiae tumorem and
pecuniae sitim. Grotius.
so now he intends to cure the spiritual tumor and pride of the Pharisees.

Verse. 16. A certain man] God our heavenly Father, as Matthew. 22.2. Supper] The
felicity of eternal life, to which the elect are called by the ministry of
the word. Great] Whether you respect the provider of this Supper, God, Polyc.
Lyser.
or the multitude of those which were called, or the plenty of the dishes. Bad
many] The Jews, especially the chief of them.

Verse. 18. With one consent] Although they allege several reasons, (...) See
that opened in my Greek Critica.
yet they all agree in that, that they pretend their own businesses that they
may not come to the Supper.

Verse. 21. Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the City, and bring in
hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blinde] The remote
Gentiles and barbarous people dwelling even at the end of the world. Polyc.
Lyser.
But these lie in the ways and behind the hedges, because they wanted both
divine and humane Laws, by which a City may be established.

Verse. 23. The Lord said unto the servant] It may be understood of the
Christian Magistrate, Perkins.
for that is the Magistrates duty in respect of the outward profession of
religion, or Ministers by the promises and threats, to be instant with them
till they overcome them. Polyc. Lyser. 2 Timothy 4.3.


Verse. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and
wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also,
cannot be my Disciple.] That is, rather than not love Christ, if the case so
stand, that they must be hated or Christ not loved, they must be hated, much
more farm and Oxen; or so entirely to love Christ above all, as our love of
Parents in comparison thereof is an hatred.

His own life] That is, in comparison of me and my gospel.

Verse. 33. Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he hath] The
universality, 1. Of the Subject. 2. The object. 3. Peremptorinesse of the
sentence, Cannot be.

Forsake all. 1. In Judgment and inward esteem. 2. In affection. 3. In
resolution. 4. In reference to an actual practice, and must actually forsake
them when it comes to this point, Must forsake it first as a snare, if it be
a means to hinder from good, or draw to evil. 2. As a sacrifice, if God call
for it.
that either he must lose them or renounce Christ.

Verse. 34. If the salt have l^st his savour] If it be infatuated, Verbum Dei
salis propria habet. 1. Sat est calidae naturae, sic verbum Dei hominum mentes
accendit and amore Dei quasi fervere facit. 2. Sale carnes a corruptione
praeservantur, sic natura nostra per verbum Dei ab aeterna corruptione
liberatur. 3. Sale cibi condiuntur ut ex sapore suaviore nobis commendentur and
a ventriculo facilius concoguantur: Sic verbum Dei nos gratos and acceptos Deo
reddit qui alioquin coram ipso insuisi and insipidi futuri essemus. 4. In
veteri Testamento salis magnus usus fuit in sacrificiis, Marc. 9.49. Ita omnis
cultus Dei, omnia etiam dicta and facta nostra verbo Dei cona^ta esse debent,
si Deo grata esse velint. Polyc. Lyser.
or grown foolish (a word that suites well with Zach. 11.15.) if it have lost
his savor; If a Christian have either corrupted or cast away the word of life,
and the sincere doctrine of the gospel.

Verse. 35. Men cast it out] There is not a more miserable Creature than an
Apostate Christian.

He that has ears to hear.] He that has ears by which he may attend to
what is said, and understand it, Let him hear] that is, let him attend, ponder,
and practice it.

CHAP. XV.
Verse 1. SInners] That is, those which were noted for some public offense, as
fornicators.

Polyc. Lyser.
To hear him] That is, that they might receive from him wholesome instruction,
Consolation and peace in their Consciences.

Verse. 2. Murmur^d] First taking ill among themselves that fact of Christ, then
making a noise among the people, and saying to them, this man receives
sinners. The particle (...) here seems to have a singular emphasis, as if they
should say, that magnificent Doctor, to great a man, who professes a certain
singular holiness, that he would be publicly taken for the Messiah, yet this
man does not shun the company of evil men, but admits infamous sinners to
familiar conference, Polyc. Lyser.
also to his table, that he seems to embrace them as his household servants.
Christ to defend his fact the better against the Pharisees calumniation
propounds three parables, taken from diverse matters, but tending to one scope,
viz. that men should not wonder, much less murmur if he converse with sinners.

Verse. 4. What man of you having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, does
not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is
lost, until he find it] The first parable which Christ also brought, Matthew.
18.12. seems to propound to us the mystery of our redemption, how Christ the
good and faithful Shepherd sought mankind in the wilderness of this world,
and finding it put it on his shoulders, and brought it to the sheepfold of his
Church.

Lacrimae poenitentium vinum sunt Angelorum. Bern.
Verse. 7. Likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth] That
is, the holy Angels and blessed Trinity do rejoice by general consent of all
antiquity.

Ninety nine just persons, which need no repentance] That is, Pharisees, who
seem to themselves to be just, and therefore not to need repentance.

Verse. 8. What woman] Eve. 1 Timothy 2.14.

Does not light a candle.] Drusius thinks our Savior in this speech has
respect to a Proverb used by his own nation scrutari lucernis to search with
candles, that is, diligently and carefully to seek for some thing, Drus. Prove.
Class. 2. l. 3.
as Zeph. 1.12.

Light is the doctrine of the Gospel, besomes are sermons of the Law. It is in
very ancient editions of the vulgar translation, evertit domum, for everrit
domum.

Verse. 11. A certain man had two Sons] Adam had the image of God with other
excellent gifts which he might happily use within his Fathers house, he would
not obey God, but use them at his pleasure, and so lost those excellent gifts.

Verse. 12. And the younger of them, etc.] By the Prodigal Son some understand
one that was never called or turned to God, Mr. Perkins takes him for one that
was the child of God, and afterward fell away.

Derivant Gra^matici, (...), ut cum declares qui sibi nihil servat, quem Latini
effusum and profusum simili ratione vocant. Beza.
Verse. 13. With riotous living] The Greek words signify so to waste all that a
man reserves nothing to himself.

Verse. 15. To feed swine] Which was intolerable to a Jew to whom swine were an
abomination.

Verse. 16. Would feign have filled his belly with the huskes] Which is the food
rather of beasts Quasi diceret; Porcinam quidem egit viram, and tamen ne
Porcino quidem victa saturatur. Cornel a Lap.
than men, whence Horace expressed extreme frugality by these words saying,
siliquis vivit, siliquis and pane secundo.

Verse. 17. Came to himself.] Or into himself, as the Ad se redire etiam
Latinis dicitur qui ad bonam mentem redit. Grotius.
Greek, As a man that was drunk, mad, or newly raised from sleep, or out of a
swound; some Divines make allusions of all.

Have bread enough] By bread, according to the Scripture phrase, is meant all
kind of needful wholesome food, for it is opposed to husks which are
unwholesome and fitter for swine than men.

Verse. 18. I have sinned against heaven and against thee] Against the first and
second Table. In Coelum] i.e. in Deum cujus seeds in Coelis potissimum
collocatur. Coelo gratissimus amnis. Drus. Hic notant eruditi coelum pro Deo
dici, quod verum puto, non (...) sed (...), ut Coelum significet eam potestatem
quae in Coelo maxim relucet. Grotius.


Verse. 20. And he arose and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way
off, his father saw him and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and
kissed him] Amongst all the Parables of Christ this is excellent, full of
affection, and set forth in lively colors. The old Father sees a great way
off, dim eyes can see a great way when the Son is the object. His bowels roll
within him, he had compassion of him. He runs] It had been sufficient for him
to have stood being old, and a Father, and an offended Father. Love does
descend not ascend, the Son goes to the Father, he runs to the Son. Then he
cannot stay and embrace him, or take him by the hand, but he falls upon him,
and incorporates himself into him: Yet he speaks not one word, his joy was
too great to be uttered, but he puts his whole mouth unto and kisseth him, the
badge of peace, love, and reconciliation. Here is declared the great goodness
of God, who most mercifully pardons the sins of the truly penitent.

22.23. Verses. Some understand by the robe the royalty which Adam lost, Calvin
Polys. Lyser. Filius timet convitium, pater adornat convivium. Ambros.
by the ring the seal of Gods holy Spirit, by the shoes the preparation of the
Gospel of peace, by the fat Calfe Christ who was slain from the beginning.
There is nothing else intended but to set forth the riches Hoc simplex sed
certum est, Coetera ingeniosa quidem sed incerta. Maldonate in loc. Vide
Grotium.
of Gods manifold mercyes, whereby he supplies all our wants, and bestows
whatsoever is needful for us upon our true repentance.

The use of rings was ancient as appears, Genesis 38.18. Annulus in signum
recuperatae libertatis quam amiserat, porcis pascendis admotus post vitam
profligatam. Genesis 41.42. Rivetus. Apud Romanos ingenuitatis, apud orientis
populos dignitatis eximiae signum. Genesis 41.42. Aut etiam opulentiae. Iac. 2.2.
Cum autem annuli usus inter alia sit signare, non male veteres respondere
annulo putant donum Spiritus sancti qui nos obsignat, ut loquitur Paulus, 2
Cor. 1.21. Grotius.
Among the Romans it was an ensign of virtue, honor, and especially
nobility, whereby they were distinguished from the common people, and the Son
is exempted by this means from his servile estate, and finds place among the
children free. Annulus aureus ornatus est hominis liberi and locupletis.
Brugensis.

Shoes on his feete] For his feet were naked.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1. THere was a certain rich man which had a Steward, and the same was
accused unto him that he had wasted his goods, etc.] Our Saviors intention in
this Parable is to exhort all men, especially those in great place, Summa hujus
Parabolae est, humaniter and benign cum proximis nostris esse agendum, ut quum
ad Dei tribunal ventum fuerit, liberalitatis nostrae fructus ad not redeat.
Quanquam dura and long petita videatur similitudo, clausula tamen ostendit non
aliud fuisse Christi consilium.
to improve these outward things for the advancement of their own Spiritual
and everlasting good, v. 9.

Christ propounds in the Parable two person, 1. A rich man. 2. His Steward. 1.
The rich man is God, whose Stewards are all men; because he gives their good
things to them, although to one more, to another less. Those good things are
1. The goods of the world or fortune, as some call them, gold, silver, fields,
cattle, livings, dominions, Genesis 9.2. 2. Goods of the body, as health, beauty,
strength, all the senses. 3. Goods of the mind or Spiritual, wit, wisdom,
prudence, memory, eloquence, peace, the word of salvation, the promise of
grace, righteousness and life eternal; God has bestowed his gifts on us,
that we may moderately use them in his fear, serve our neighbors with them,
and improve them for the Lord; because we shall give an account of them.

How to use our goods so as to show our selves good Stewards,

1. In respect of God, we must serve him with all these goods of ours.

2. For our neighbor, if we have more than he, we should communicate freely to
him. Prove. 5.16.

Verse. 8. The Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had done wisely]
Propter solertiam non propter fallaciam. Prudenter] non quod pic and recte. Non
lau davit factum, sed prudentiam and industriam qua ut poenam essugeret, usus
fuerat. Maldonatus.
Grotius. As we may condemn a matter, yet commend the parties wit. The
children of this world are in their generation wiser] They are not in genere
wise, but in genere suo, wise to do evil, Ier. 4.2. not wiser absolutely, but
secundum quid, in their generation, that is, in the things of the world. The
children of light] That is, Christians, who by the Holy Ghost and baptism are
made the sons of God.

Verse. 9. Make to your selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousnesse] Riches
are called unrighteous, Mammon] Significat copiama^ the sauros divitiarum hujus
mundi. They are not so in themselves but in the common use, or rather abuse of
wicked men. 1. Because they are commonly unjustly gotten. 2. Made an instrument
of many evils. 3. Evil gotten goods are unjustly possessed. Mr. Perkins.
not because they are always unjustly possessed, but because they are occasions
and motives of great unrighteousness, or else rather unrighteous is put here
for false, in the Hebrew phrase, that is, they are not true riches; the words
following confirm this exposition. See Heinsius.

That when ye faile] That is, die, so the Septuagint uses this greek word, by
which it renders Moth. Ier. 42.17, 18. They may receive you] Receiving is not
mentioned here in regard of merit (as the Papists say) as though a man could
deserve it by giving alms, but either by way of hearty prayers made by the
poor, that they may be received, or else because their alms shall be unto
them a pledge and earnest of their receiving into Gods kingdom.

Verse. 12. And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who
shall give you that which is your own] Teaching that he which is unfaithful to
another, seldom is faithful in his own affairs.

Verse. 13. No man can serve two Masters] Not contrary masters, as God and
Mammon are.

Verse. 14. And they derided him] The Pharisees did not simply laugh at Christ,
but gave also external signs of scorn in their countenance, gestures, they
blew their noses at him, for that is the meaning of the original Graece (...),
id est, subsannabant quasi contracto naso, (...) enim est nasus: atque hic est
gestus fastidientis, spernentis, vafre and callide irridentis. Ignotos naso
suspendit adunco. Horat. Sermon. Satyr. 6. Tales sunt nasones, nasuti. a Lapide
.

Verse. 15. Christ does not yield to the scoffs of the Pharisees, but defends
the authority of his doctrine, and in like manner inveighes against them with a
just zeal, and pulls away the mask of hypocrisy from them.

Ye are they which justify your selves] As if he should say, you would know
what you are, I will in a few things declare it to you, whatsoever things you
do, you do them all for that end that you may get an opinion of holiness and
righteousness before men, but howsoever before men who only judge by outward
things, you may are accounted holy and righteous, Polyc. Lyser.
God knows your hearts, which he abominates, because they are full of
hypocrisy, envy, pride and scorn.

Highly esteemed] Pharisaicall and hypocritical pride, by which they boast
themselves before men that they may seem to be holy, they be inwardly
hypocrites.

The same thing is expressed Matthew. 11.13.
Verse. 16. The Law and the Prophets were until Iohn] If the Law was to have
its period in John, then the subordination of it now to the Gospel is taken
away. But the Law was not then abolisht, as the next v. shows, as if he should
say, do not mistake me, ac si post^at lex in ecclesia ^xauctorata sit.
Secondly, that manner of dispensation which was under the Old Testament was to
last till then. 1 Pet. 1.12.
The Revelation of the mind of God then was but in glorious promises of things
to come; we now enjoy the things under the Gospel.

Verse. 19. There was a certain rich man which was clothed in purple and fine
linen, Ambrose from the adding of the name says it is a History not a
Parable, many things are related in modum Parabolae, neither eyes, finger,
tongue, nor water are in hell
. and fared sumptuously every day] Whether it be a History or a Parable,
Rainoldus de lib. Apoc. tomo primo. praelect. 79. Credo ego, nec solam
historiam, nec folum Parabolam esse, sed mixtum quiddam ex utraque, qualis apud
Poetas Tragicomaedia esse dicitur, atque haec ipsa est Iustini sententia. Nam
quod dives ille, and Lazarus fuerit, quodque ille in inferno sepultus, hic ab
Angelis in sinum Abrabae portatus fuerit, historia est. Quod autem dives ille
cum Abraham locutus fuerit, eum que rogaverit, ut Lazarum ad se mitteret, qui
gutta aquae linguam suam refrigeraret, parabola est historiae adjuncta, nec
enim qui in inferno sunt sanctos rogare solent. Maldonatus in loc.
(of which there are diverse opinions) that is of no moment, because whether
Lazarus were truly a certain poor man and beggar, so handled by the rich,
whose soul was after carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom, or whether by
the name of Lazarus, Christ signified a beggar, (as Lawyers are wont to
propound their species under the name of Titius and Sempronia) the matter comes
all to one, all confessing that under that narration Christ describes the state
of the faithful and unfaithful departing out of this life.

Clothed in purple] (...) frequentative, a new suit for every day like our
Gallants, Purple a precious garment, and proper to Kings, and those which are
near them. Mark. 15.17. Fared sumptuously] Which Irenaeus some where turns
Iocundabatur, for the Greek word signifies both, laetitiam mentis and hilare
convivium, joy of the mind, (...) Eras. Brugens.
and a merry banquet; it signifies feasted and rejoiced Iansen. Harmon.
, so that not only the delights of feasting are signified, but that he feasted
with pleasure.

Every day] That thou may understand that he was wholly given to his belly,
and was not at leisure for any other things; and this he did (...), splendide,
magnifice, pompose, therefore he was wholly of their number who daily with the
Epicure sing that hymn, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas.

Verse. 20. A certain beggar named Lazarus] The Hebrew (for Lazarus) sounds
helped by the Lord, that very word also makes for a History; He was forsaken by
men, Erasmus. Quod autem Tertullianus, Prudentius atque alij eandem hunc
mendicum Eleazarum vocant, non de nihlio est, idem est Eleazari and Lazari
nomen. Grot. Quanquam quibusdam simplex videtur esse Parabola: quia tamen
Lazari nomen exprimitur, potius rem gestam narrari arbitror. Calvin.
but had God for his help.

Lazarus by changing of the dialect, is the proper name of Eleazar the servant
of Abraham. Thus Christ places Lazarus in the bosom, or at the Table of this
Patriarch, whose household servant he had been.

Laid at his gate full of sores] That if he desired to stand or sit, yet being
pained with the greatness and multitude of sores, he could not.

Verse. 21. The crumbes] Which otherwise would be trod by the feet of men, or
gathered by the dogs.

Verse. 22. By the Angels] Behold a sudden change, he that even now was not
only scorned by men but dogs, is honored with the ministry of Angels.

Abraham's bosome] The glory of heaven or heavenly Canaan is rather called the
bosom of Abraham Perkins. Vide Cameron. myroth. and Capelli. Spicil. Christus
(...) loquitur in similitudine. Quemadmodum liberi quando in absentia parentum
a familia male tractantur, a matribus, quae tenerrime ipsos amant, in sinum
excipiuntur, ibi solatia audiunt, and omnium malorum facile obliviscuntur, sic
Lazarus benign in consortium beatorum suscipitur, atque gaudijs regni
coelestis quod Abraham promissum recreatur. Polyc. Lyser. Vide Calvinum.
than of any other of the Patriarchs. 1. For the excellency of his faith. 2.
Because the promise of inheriting the land of Canaan was first of all
(personally) made to him. He alludes either unto the practice of the Eastern
Countries, where when any made a feast, the guests did sit leaning about the
Table, and the most beloved guest leaned in the bosom of the Feast-maker, as
John at the Passover in Christ's bosom, so Grotius, or else to the practice of
parents which lay a sick child in their bosoms.

Verse. 23. And sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosome] Sees
Abraham rich afar off, and Lazarus poor in his bosom, both in heaven.

Verse. 25. Son] An Ironie, being a sharp exprobration to prick the rich man,
who in his life boasted of being Abraham's son. By the scope of the Parable, the
souls of the dead are but in two places, therefore no purgatory. Thou in thy
life receivedst] (...) here, is fully to receive.

Thy good things] This is spoken also emphatically. Those good things which
thou countedst the true, yea the chiefest good things, which thou have used not
as committed to thee under a certain law and manner, but as thine own proper
goods, in which also thou have placed all thy confidence. Grotius.

Verse. 26. Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed] Gulfe] As there
uses some times to be in earthquakes. (...) Graece vulgatus interpres reddit
Chaos, quod per errorem vid^tur factu^ pro Chasma sic enim principio probabile
est adhibitum fuisse nomen Graecum a Latino Interpret. Quemadmodum in ejusmodi
hiatu in quo vrb^^ vel terrarum tractus absorbentur, non potest transtri ab uno
hiatus labro ad alterum cum os non sit compressum sed hiatus maneat, ita
significat Dominus fieri non posse ut ullo modo transeatur ab eorum statu qui
sunt tormentis adjudicati ad statum quietis and consolationis aeternae, est,
sive constitutu^ est and firmatus (...). Rainold. de lib. Apoc. praelect. 1 62.
Vide Grotium.


Great gulfe] Signifies the eternity of their state, Significat decretum Dei
firmum and immutabile, ne quisquam unquam transiret a statu damnatorum ad
statum fidelium. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. They which would pass from hence to
you cannot] The glorified souls cannot go from heaven, worst themselves though
they would, and those that would come hither cannot; there is an everlasting
decree against it. Psalm. 36.6. fixed] (...) a metaphore (says Maldonate) taken
from Forts and Castles which are fortified by a broad and deep ditch about them.

Ambrose will have this to be an History, because of the addition of a name
and other circumstances, but though the narration may be grounded on a
history, yet it has many things in it parabolicall, and we may argue from the
scope of a Parable, as Iud. 9.8.

CHAP. XVII.
IT is the general proposition of Christ, that scandals are studiously to be
avoided by the godly, lest either they be a hinderance to themselves or to
others in the way of salvation. He also adds reasons, because it cannot be but
offenses will come; they follow from the wickedness of the world. Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 3. And if he repent, etc.] If he shall give signs of displeasure, by
acknowledging the fault committed, and seeking pardon of it, forgive him,
require no farther revenge, Polyc. Lyser.
yea not so much as satisfaction for the injury offered. This place (says Mr.
Perkins) is meant of ecclesiastical censures, that those must proceed no
further after the party offending does repent.

Verse. 4. And if he trespass against thee seven times] A finite number is here
put for an infinite as it is usual in the Scriptures for its perfection;
Christ's meaning therefore is, as often as he shall offend against thee and
repent, Id ib.
forgive him.

Verse. 5. Increase our faith] Greek add unto us faith, As if they had said,
unless we have faith, (...). Add nobis fidem. Beza.
we shall never be able to abstain from revenge so often, but if thou will
increase our faith, we shall be able to conquer even this sin. Mr. Hildersam.

The more faith the more mercy, for if you believe your own ten thousands
forgiven, you will forgive others tens.

Matthew. 17.20. Nominavit montem qui forte tum ipsi vicinus erat, ut digito eum
Apostolis monstrare potuerit. Hic nominat arborem Sycaminum quae absque dubio
tum etiam ipsis obviam erat. Sic utrobique idem est sensus.
Verse. 6. If ye had faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, ye might say unto this
Sycamine tree, etc.] He shows that he does not require a great quantity of
faith, but is content with a little faith which is like a grain of
Mustard Seed, lively, sharp, fervent. Proverbiale de re minima. Drusius.

Our Savior Christ uses this and the like expression of removing a Sycamine
tree, and the Mountains, upon three several occasions.

1. Upon occasion that the Disciples could not cast out the Devil, Matthew.
17.19, 20. There he speaks of the faith of Miracles. 2. Upon an occasion of
the drying up of the fig tree, Matthew. 11.20. Both justifying faith, and the
faith of Miracles are there intended, one primarily, the other secondarily. Se
Luke 17.3. Where a saving justifying faith is intended.

Verse. 7. But which of you having a servant plowing, etc.] As if he had said,
if a servant that has been toyling all the day long in following the plow or
the like labor, at the night when he comes home weary and hungry, be commanded
by his Master a further service, he is not to refuse to do it, he is still to
do what his Master commands him. Loquitur Christus non de mercenarijs qui hodie
nobis ministrant, sed de veteribus mancipiis quibus ea erat vivendi conditio,
ut sibi nihil acquirerent, sed cum toto suo labor, studio, industria ad
sanguinem usque heris essent addicti. Calvinus.


Verse. 8. Gird thy selfe] It was the fashion in those Eastern parts, for men
to go in long garments down to their feet. And therefore when men were to go
about any work, they used to gird and take up their garments, that they might
not trouble them in their work, by hanging loose about their heels.

Verse. 10. All that ye can] To the utmost extent of natural or gracious
abilityes.

We are unprofitable servants] Christ speaks here with the Apostles now
justified and renewed.

Verse. 14. Go show your selves unto the Priests] The Papists fondly hence build
their aucicular confession. The leprous men are I confess sent by Christ to
the Priest; but not to whisper into his ears their sins, but rather that
they might offer sacrifice according to the prescript of the Law; neither were
they sent to cleanse themselves, Calvin.
as with the Papists confession makes men clean, but that they might show
themselves to the Priests, they were clean before.

Verse. 15. With a loud voice glorified God] Which is a sign of a very
cheerful and thankful mind.

Verse. 17. Were there not te^ cleansed, but where are the nine] He asks, not
because he was ignorant, Polyc. Lyser.
but that by this means he might reprove their ingratitude and make it known
to others: he means, it is certain that all the ten received the same benefit
of cleansing, and yet only one acknowledges that with a thankful mind.

Verse. 19. Thy faith has made thee whole] It is an excellent sentence which
Christ often uses in the Gospel, Matthew. 9.22. Luke 17.29. vlt. and in many
other places. Polyc. Lyser.
For Christ observed this custom when he had a doctrine in which there was
much contained which he would commend to his hearers, and deeply imprint on
their hearts, then he included it in some famous sentence, which he afterward
often repeated. Faith is the means and instrument by which Salvation is
received from God.

Verse. 20. The kingdom of God comes not with observation] That is, not with a
worldly splendor which the Pharisees looked for. with observation] with a
splendor obvious to men's eyes, and which might be observed. It is not a thing
that by any outward pompous ceremony can be observed.


Verse. 2^. The kingdom of God is within you] That is, it was brought unto them
by the ministry of John Baptist, of himself and of his Disciples; although
indeed it was without profit to many of them.

Verse. 22. The days of the Son of man] By this he understands that outward
conversation which he used in the time of his ministry familiarly with his
Apostles, by admonishing, comforting, nourishing and defending them.

Verse. 23. See here, or see there] Is the Messiah, for about those times
Josephus witnesses that there was great store of seducers, l 10. Antiq. Jud.
20. c. 4.11.12.14. and l. 2. c. 12. belli Iudaici
some of which called them out into the desert; others into the Mountain of
Olives, and professed that they would be their deliverers, amonst whom also was
that Egyptian Act. 21.38.

Verse. 24. So shall also the Son of man be in his day] He shall come to
judgment with great light, and in the majesty of the Father.

Verse. 32. Remember Lots wife] She was turned into a Pillar of Salt, ut te suo
exemplo condiret. Augustine. Remember 1. Her going out of Sodom a type of
hell, or the world, Consider her sin and her punishment, that so fearing the
one we may learn to take heed of the other.
to Zoar, heaven, or the Church. 2. How in the way she looked back. 3. Her
punishment.

Verse. 37. Wheresoever the body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered
together] Gregory and Austen by b^dy understand heaven, by Saints Eagles, lift
up your hearts thither. Origin by body understands the Church, by Eagles
Doctors, gathering, that is consent. Jerome, Theophylact. Body Christ's
sufferings, Eagles Saints. Chrysostom. Stella, Maldonate. By body others
understand last judgment, by Eagles Saints, gathering together, brought
generally to judgment.

The Saints are Eagles. 1. They molter off old feathers. 2. Renew. Psalm. 103.5.
3. Look on the Sun. 4. Are heavenly. Ioh. 39.27. Wheresoever shows Christ's
body is not every where, he says not ubique corpus, but ubicunque.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse 1. THat men ought always to pray, and not to faint] Most firm Arguments
are drawn from the scope of a Parable, Hinc Heretici, dicti Euchitae volebant
semper orare, nec unquam ma^ibus laborare* sed stulte. Scriptum est enim: si
quis non vult operari, nec manducet. 2 These. 2.10. Dico ereo (...) semper hic
idem esse quod sedulo, perseveranter, diligenter, assidue, unde explicans
subdit and non deficere. Graeci (...), id est, non defatigari. Cornel. a ^ap.

Haec parabola sumitur a dissimili sicuti plures hujusmodi in Evangelio
inveniuntur, non Iudex iniquus cum Deo, sed perseverantia viduae in instando,
cum nostra constantia in precibus conferri debet. Polyc Lyser.


although not from the parts of it. For which very cause in all the Parables of
Christ, we see the scope is signified either in the precedent or subsequent
words; as in this Parable in the precedent words, in Luke 16.9. In the
following words. Rainold de lib. Apoc. praelect. 163.

Christ propounds this Parable, to t^ach us to be constant and earnest in
Prayer, says Mr. Perkins, see v. 5. To pray always here is not to faint in
prayer, see Grotius.

Verse. 3. Avenge me of mine adversary] Or free and defend me from mine
adversary, which either has taken away mine i^heritance, or some of my goods,
or otherwise injured me. The Greek word (...) here does not properly signify,
(says Novarinus) to revenge, but to free and deliver from evil; which may be
done without any revenge.

Verse. 4.5. He bears the widow, not from fear of God, nor out of
commiseration toward her afflicted, nor because she had a just cause, which a
just Judge ought to regard. But there are other reasons. 1. Because she is
troublesome to me, as if he should say, I would be freed from the clamours of
that importunate woman. 2ly. Lest by her continual coming, (...), ad verb^m
est obtundere, at obtundere Latin^s est ad fastidium aliquid repetere.
Teretius: obtundis ametsi intelligo. Been ergo sensum expressit Syrus, molesta
sit mihi, and Arabs, vexet me. in Grot. Vide Bezam and Piscat. Syrus vertit, Ne
mihi molestiam omni tempore exhibeat. Arabicus, Ne semper ad molestandum me
veniat. See ver. 7. Bear l^ng with them] That is, the wicked.
she weary him weary mee] word for word, beat me down with her blows, and it
is a metaphore taken from Wrestlers, who beat their adversaries with their
fists or clubs, so do they that are importunate beat the Judges ears with
their crying out, even as it were with blows. Vide Brugensem. If the unwearied
prayer of a Widow, has extorted an equal sentence from an unjust Judge; what
may not the godly hope from God?

Verse. 8. I tell you that he will avenge them speedily] That is, in his own
time; speedily in regard 1. Of God. Tempore congruo and opportuno. Jansen.
2. Eternity. 3. The wicked.

Shall he find faith on earth] That is a godly man that will believe his truth.

Verse. 10. To pray] That is, (...) here, as also elsewhere in Scripture, to do
all that which belonged to the worship of God, and was finished in the Temple.

Polyc. Lyser.
Verse. 11. Prayed thus with himself Convenit Pharisaeorum nomini qui se
gregatus est. Cameron.
] Leaving the Publican a far off behind him as impure. God I thank the^ that I
am not as other men are Pro tribus rebus debet homo (Robbinus) quotidie Deum
benedicere; Benedictus q^od me non fecerit gentilem, infidelem* Benedictus quod
me non fecerit plebei^m; Benedictus quod me non fecerit multerem, ex hac
scaturigine emanavit oration ^^a Pharisaica. buxtorf. in Florilegio Hebraico. p
32.33.
] He begins with thanksgiving, he had nothing of confession for himself. He
pleades his negative righteousness, he was no extortioner, and stands on his
comparative goodness, not as this Publican.

Verse. 12. I fast twice in the weeke] Thursday, because Moses on that day went
up to Mount Sinay: Monday, because then he came down. Drusius. He has his
positive righteousness of both Tables; here he speaks of his fasting, the
duties of the first Table: and for the second Table, he paid tithes.

Verse. 13. God be merciful to me a sinner] Oravit paucis sed affectu multo.
Bucer. Here were few words, but much zeal and matter.

Ver. 16. Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not] It is not
spoken of Children in disposition, that is, such as are humble and meek (as
some would evade) but in age, Christ took them into his arms.

For of such is the kingdom of God] Christ speaks not of these very children
only, but of such, this is a standing rule; by the Kindome of God he means the
visible Church, Mat. 8.12. and 16.19. that is, these have a right and title to
the privileges of the visible Church.

Verse. 19. Why call thou me good? none is good save one, Jansen. None good
but God] Ex se and independenter, alij participative.
that is God] Christ answered to his mind, who thought Christ to be a mere
man, so Basil, Ambrose, Jerome, Chrysostom. By that answer Christ has taught
us when we are commended, to turn our own commendations upon God.

Ver. 25. It is easier for a Camel to go through a needles eye] Whether a
Camel, or a Cable Rope be understood, in the impossibility there is no
difference, Calvin would rather have it a cable rope, but Beza, Marlorate,
Aretius, Piscator, Chamier interpret it of the Camel.
but something in the proportion, for a rope is liker to a thread than a Camel,
but simply to draw a thick Rope through a needles eye is impossible. For the
Needle, some think by that is understood a certain gate in Jerusalem, which
was so narrow, that the Camels could not (except their burdens were taken
away, and they bowed their backs) pass through it.

Rich man] Not so much from possession as affection; it is impossible for them
to be saved in sensu composito, difficult in a divided sense; because they
ought to be first changed, mutation cannot be easily done but by grace and
power alone.

Ver. 34. And they understood none of these things] It is a thing certainly
worthy of admiration, that the Disciples understand none of these things, when
this is not the first, but at the least the fifth or sixth time that Christ
spoke of the same matter: Moreover, all things were so plain and evident, that
a boy of seven years might understand.

Ver. 36. And hearing the multitude pass by, he asked what it meant] Blind
men, because they want eyes, are curious in enquiring. Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 38. Thou Son of David have mercy on me] Without doubt he heard in the
Synagogue, Esaias 35.5. that when the Messiah the Son of David should come the
eyes of the blind should be opened. He heard also by common fame that this
Jesus restored sight to other blind persons. Polyc. Lyser.
Son of David] which Epithete was anciently and at that time given to the
Messiah. He confesses him to be God when he says, have mercy on me: man while
he calls him the son of David; and for his Office, he confesses him to be
Jesus the Savior.

Verse. 23. That I may receive my sight] (...), These words sound as if this
blind man had not been borne blind, but was made so by accident or some
disease, therefore he desires the receiving of his sight lost. Polyc. Lyser.


CHAP. XIX.
Verse 2. BEhold there was a man named Zacheus] His name (says Grotius) is
purely Hebrew, Nomen Hebraeum seu Syriacum Zaccai, est a munditia, innocentia,
seu justitia deductum. Lucas Brugen.
as appears Esra. 2.9. and 7.14. It is expressed for the certainty of the
history, especially since he was a famous man. Brugensis.

Which was the chief among the Publicans] A Publican is one that gathers
public payments. He exacted tribute for the Romans, and so he seemed an
oppressor of the Jews, and therefore was odious to them, and they did often
exact more than the Romans required, which they reserved for themselves. Luke
3.13.

Verse. 4. And he ran before, and climbed up into a Sycamore tree, to see him;
for he was to pass that way] Being forgetful of his own dignity and estate,
running before as a man of mean condition. He might easily divine that all
which should see this thing would scoff at him, that he a chief and rich man
should climb a tree like boys, whence he might see Christ passing by. But his
love and desire of seeing Jesus, and especially an impulse of the Holy Ghost
took away all his modesty from him. Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 5. And saw him] He saw him not only with a corporal aspect, but with
that which was every where saving; nor only saw him, but vouchsafes to speak to
him, calling him by his proper name, as familiarly known unto him, See John
1.48. for Christ calls his own sheep by name, Polyc. Lyser.
John 10.3.

To day I must abide in thy house] A wonderful thing! we read in the Gospel
that the Lord being invited by others went to them, but we never read that of
his own accord he came to their feast, as he did to this Prince of the
Publicans; so faith always obtaines more than it wished, Zacheus desired to
see Jesus, now he has him his guest. Christ requires haste, that his
readiness to bestow faith may appear to all.

Verse. 7. Murmured] The Inhabitants of the Town, and perhaps some of Christ's
companions murmr, that he goes in to a man of an evil and reproachful name,
when yet no man invited him; Calvin.
so when the world neglects the grace of God offered, it takes it ill that it
should be given to others.

A man that is a Sinner] That here, as in many other places, notes a man of a
wicked and flagitious life. Id. ibid.


Verse. 8. The half of my goods I give to the poor) From this time I
consecrate and depute them to the poor.

Verse. 9. This day is salvation come to this house] Because Zacheus should
convert his whole family, as Cornelius the Centurion, and others did, or
because the greatest part of his house were now turned to God. Polyc. Lyser.


For so much as he also is the Son of Abraham] Because he was taken into
Abraham's Covenant, Romans 4.16.

Verse. 10. To seek and to save that which was lost) The first showed his
diligence; the second his power; both his singular Philanthropie. Such as were
lost indeed, and in their own apprehension.

Nobilis (...) been natus, ingenuus and illustris. Syrus filius magni stemma
is. Lucas Brugensis.
Verse. 12. A certain nobleman] That is, our Lord Jesus Christ, and he truly
calls himself noble, for he is Coeternall and coequall with his Father in
respect of his Deity, in respect of his humane nature he was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of a pure and immaculate Virgin, Christ has in his Genealogy
above twenty Kings and Princes.

Into a far Country] That is, to heaven, it is a long while from the time of
his death to his last coming.

Verse. 13. And he called his ten servants and delivered them ten pounds] He
observes a certain number, ten, for God knows well both the number of his
Servants, and gifts. His pound] That is, the Doctrine of the Gospel concerning
the kingdom of heaven. Let him occupie] This was spoken parabolically, Polyc.
Lyser.
as a diligent Merchant spares not labor, but is intent upon all occasions,
that even with the danger of his life he might promote his gain; So let the
Servant of Christ studiously strive by a diligent preaching of the Gospel, and
faithful administration of the Sacraments, to gain many men to Christ.

Verse. 14. His Citizens] That is, the Jews. John 1.11.

Verse. 15. And it came to pass when he was returned, etc.] This shall be in
the last day, when he shall return to the judgment of the quick and dead.

Verse. 21. Neither acceptest thou the person of any] Or the face of any. The
Greek word (...) may be rendered either way. Although the Hebrews, and Syrians,
from whence that phrase proceeded, See Mat. 22.16
always say, to respect the face, yet the Latin Interpreters use the word
person, in judging to be moved with the person, face, or any outward quality,
or appearance, nothing pertaining to the merits of the cause.

Verse. 22. Thou knew that I was an austere man] Then this should not have
made thee sluggish, but have moved thee to the greater diligence.

That at my coming I might have required mine own with usury] Christ would no
more note the rigor of God than praise Usury, when he brings in the Master of
the Family so speaking, that money should be given to the bank that at least
it might grow with Usury: Only Christ signifies that there will be no excuse
for their sloth who both suppress the gifts of God, and consume their time in
idleness. Calvin.


Verse. 23. But he perceived their craftinesse] The Greek word rendered
craftiness signifies a skill in ill doing gotten by long practice and
experience. Significat (...) quandam ad male agendum solertiam, longo scillicet
usu and tractandis rebus plurimis quaesitam, a (...) and (...) composita.
Brugensis.


Into the banke] Where either by the change of monis, or by a contract of the
loan they make a gain, and thou with them might have been partaker of the
same gain.

Ver. 24. Take from him the pound, and give it to him that has ten pounds]
That so by his deed he may show that he did not so much look after money as the
gain of it.

Ver. 27. But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them,
bring hither and stay them before me] Christ gave up the Jews his enemies which
would not have him for their King to the Romans to destroy them, who wasted
their City, Polyc. Lyser.
and dispersed the whole nation into perpetual exile. But in the last day he
will condemn to eternal death all his enemies the Devils, Jews, Heathens,
false Christians.

Verse. 42. If thou had known] The more ancient Divines take the words
optatively, Beza Quam felix e^les and beata. Calvin, curares, thou would have
taken heed, would have embraced these things. Pathetica est oration, ideoque
abrupta. Duo affectus hic simul permisti, neque enim tantum miseretur Christus
urbis cladem, sed simul ingrato populo extremum scelus exprobrat, quod
repudians oblatam sibi salutem ultro horribile Dei judicium accersat. Calvinus.
Oh that thou had known, the modern otherwise, that is, if thou had
considered and taken special notice, Esaias 1.3. Thou even thou] That is,
Jerusalem, this is emphaticall. At least] That is, after thou have so often
rejected me, and slain the Prophets that came before me.

In this thy day] That is, of visitation. Verse. 44. By the word, the things
that belong] To thy safety temporal, or salvation eternal; Christ, the
Gospel, and the preaching of it.

Jerusalem in the Hebrew tongue signifies the vision of peace, these words then
may mean, that contrary to her name she saw not her peace, Jerusalem was not
Jerusalem.

Verse. 45. And he went into the Temple and began to cast out them that sold
therein, and them that bought] Christ purged the Temple but twice, first, at
his entrance into his Ministry. Secondly, at his going out, Mat. 21. Mark 11.

Verse. 48. Were very attentive to hear him] Greek, hung upon him hearing him.
(...).


This very word is used Mat. 22.40. hang or depend upon, as a vessel upon a
peg or nail on the wall: Others render it, pendebant ex ore ejus, as Bees on
flowers, to suck out the moisture which is in them.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 5. THey reasoned with themselves] (...), (Whence Syllogismus) signifies
to reason, by arguing to conclude, to infer one thing from another.

Verse. 10. At the season] The word (...) here notes a certain time of the
year, viz. of fruits, as Matthew expressly names it, chapter 21.34.

Verse. 20. And they watched him] (...) is to be curiously intent, cunningly and
treacherously to observe. As in war all the actions of the Enemy are wont to be
studiously observed, or as in hunting, the steps of the wild beasts are wont to
be observed. Gerh. Harm. Evang.
The Pharisees were intent upon all occasions and ways how they might entangle
Christ.

Verse. 37. Now that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he
calls the Lord, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob] Christ cites a place out of Moses, because he had to do with the
Sadduces, who did not much believe the Prophets, Calvin.
at least esteemed them no more than we do the Book of Ecclesiastes or the
Macchabees: Moreover, because they brought Moses, he chose rather to answer
them out of Moses than to oppose any one of the Prophets.

Spanhemius dub. Evang. part 3 tia. p. 3. and Canaeus de Republica Heb. p.
476. say, the Sadduces received the whole Scripture, and not the Pentateuch
only. The original of the other assertion came thence (says Hottinger) that
some made the Sadduces the same with the Samaritans, These. Philol. l. 1. c. 1.
Sect. 5.
which acknowledged only the five Books of Moses for Scripture.

CHAP. XX^.
Verse. 1. ANd he looked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the
Treasury] Not because the Treasury was in a high place that he had need to lift
up his eyes; Novarinus. Brugensis.
but because Christ being a pattern of modesty had cast his eyes upon the
ground. The Greek word (...) signifies studiously to behold, which notion does
best agree here. See Chap. 8.25.

Ver. 3. Has cast in more than they all] Qualitate, animi intention,
quantitate, pro facultatum ratione.

Ver. 4. Has cast in all the living that she had] That is, all the means she
had to sustain her self that day.

Ver. 11. And fearful sights, and great signs shall then be from heaven]
Josephus of the wars of the Jews l. 7. c. 12. recites diverse signs which
happened before the destruction of Jerusalem, Vide Grotium in loc.
1. That a blazing star in fashion of a sword hung over the City. 2. That at
the feast of unleavened bread a light shone round about the Altar as clear as
day. 3. That a Cow led to be sacrificed calved a Lamb. 4. That the brazen Gate
of the Temple, which twenty men could scarcely open, was seen to open at
midnight of it own accord. 5. That in the first of May there were seen in the
air Chariots and standing battles skirmishing in the clouds, and compassing
the City. 6. In the Temple was heard the sound of a wonderful terrible voice
which said, Migremus hinc, let us go hence.

Ver. 13. And it shall turn to you for a testimony] That is, you shall have
great honor by it, as you give testimony to Christ, so Christ shall give
testimony unto you.

Ver. 19. In your patience possess ye your soules] As if he should say, if you
would save your souls, Mr Perkins.
you must labor to bear all crosses that fall on you with patience.

Patience and strength to bear afflictions must be ours, not by usurpation,
nor yet by lawful use and occupation, as a thing borrowed for the present, but
by just title and possession, we must have it of our own, and be provided of it
to use when time shall serve. When one is comfortable and cheerful, we say he
enjoyes himself, so when one keeps himself quiet in crosses he possesses his
soul in patience.

Ver. 24. And they shall fall by the edge of the sword] In the Greek by the
mouth of the sword: So Judges 18.27. Acies gladij tam Hebraeis quam Graecis os
vocatur, quod acie tanquam ore gladius mordeat and occidat omnem carnem obviam.
Lucas Brugensis.
For the sword bites in that part in which it is sharper, therefore the sword
is called (...) two mouthed for two edged, Heb. 4.12.

Vt solent qui de loco superiore liberationem expectant. Hoc est quod (...)
dixit Paulus. Grotius in loc.
Ver. 28. Then look up and lift up your heads] That is, be of good courage, as
the Syriack has expressed the sense in its Paraphrase by a metonymy of the
effect, for when men are merry they lift up their heads, when sad they cast
them down, and the reason which is added confirms this exposition.

For your Redemption] That full deliverance in which death shall be triumphed
over, draws nigh.

Verse. 34. Be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkennesse] With a surfeiting
arising from drunkenness, or a drunkenness which produces a surfeiting; but
it is better in this place to take the metonymicall signification of this word
for too much cramming or pouring in of meat or drink, Gerh. Harm.
from whence a surfeit arises as an effect, so it is taken by the Septuagint in
77. Psalm. 71.

And so that day come upon you unawares] It comes unawares when peoples hearts
are hardened against the threatenings and Judgments of God, as the deluge came
on the People in the old world. Luke 17. Erasmus reddidit ut liceat vobis
effugere, sed graecum est significantius, ut digni reddamini vel efficiamini.
Geth. Harm.


Verse. 36. Worthy to escape all these things.]

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 6. IN the absence of the multitude] absque turba, without the multitude,
that is, vel clam populo, vel sine tumultu. Brugensis. Vtrumque significat, and
(...) graece and Latino turba multitudinem and tumultum. Sensus utrumque
desiderat intelligi, cum abesset populus qui tumultum excitare posset. Lucas
Brugensis.
Either secretly without the peoples knowledge who were wont to follow, or
without any tumult.

Verse. 12. And he shall show you a large upper room furnished, there make
ready] There was no need of a spacious room for the present number there to
meet and communicate, Philip Goodw. Evangelic. Communic.
but it might be to signify that the Lord would not have this Communion
consined for the future. In that it was an upper room, it set forth the
divinenesse of the Sacrament, and the duty of lifting up the hearts of the
Communicants; In that it was a prepared room, clean and ready trimmed, it was
to teach the purity of the Sacrament, and what preparedness is meet for
Communicants.

Verse. 15. With desire have I desired] An hebraisme, that is, I have
exceedingly, Dike. Summopere desideravi. Beza, Piscat. As if he should say, I
have desired it in respect of the Passover, to fulfill all righteousness, and
in regard of the Supper, to institute the same.
earnestly, and heartily desired to eat it with you.

Verse. 19. This is my body] This, this bread say we, this body of Christ say
some Papists, this third thing, Individuum vagum, say others, a substance
confusedly taken. Bishop Morton of the Mass.
The neuter gender will agree with any thing which has not life; in the Vulgar
translation it is said of Evah the wife of Adam, hoc est os ex ossibus meis,
Genesis 2.

Which is given for you] The other two Evangelists omit this particle, which
yet is in no wise superfluous: for therefore is Christ's flesh now bread to us,
Calvin.
because by it salvation was once brought to us.

Verse. 27. But I am among you as he that serveth] Viz. not as a Master, See 24
Exodus 13. 2 Kings 2.9. and 3.11.
but as a Disciple. All Prophets whom God employed upon his messages had their
Disciples to wait upon them, which is called ministering to them in the language
of the Scripture.

Verse. 29. And I appoint unto you a kingdome] This is not so in the original;
it rather has relation to the words following, as my Father has appointed
unto me a kingdom, Vide Bezam.
so I appoint unto you to eat and drink.

Verse. 30. Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel] The Apostles are said to judge
by way of assession, or approbation, say the Schoolmen.

Verse. 31. Simon, Simon] That Epizeuxis notes the singular affection and good
will of the mind, that is, my most dear Simon, as 10.41.

He puts him in mind, First of his fall to humble him. Piscat.
2. Of his rising to comfort him. 3. Of his duty to quicken him unto Christ. In
^ribratione duo sunt, unum Concussio illa atque agitatio qua omnia sursum
deorsum Vertuntur, alterum vero segregatio atque separatio, se cundum priorem
significationem hoc loco usurpatur, ut Christus nihil aliud voluerit, quam
Satanam voluisse Apostolos and Petrum dedi sibi u^ (...) conturbaret. Came. de
Eccles com. 1. (...). Graece est deposcere ad supplicium velad quaestionem,
nempe ut Satanas Iobum, and Apoc. 12. Cameron. Myroth. Evang


Satan has desired] Satan signifies an adversary; The word that is here
rendered desired is not used again in the new Testament. But in other Authors
that use it, it signifies such a desiring, as when one man does challenge
another into the field to a Duel. Or such a desiring, as when a man comes and
calls for open, and public punishment upon a man. That is (says Grotius) he
has desired you to be given to him, it being an allusion to the history of
Job. Winnow] The word signifies to shake up and down, as in a fan wheat is
used, the kernel scarce ever lies still.

Verse. 32. That thy faith fail not] Be not wholly eclipsed in the original. A
man's faith is said to fail, either when it falls short of what it has been,
or should be. Christ now not only poured out these prayers for Peter, but also
for the whole company of the Apostles, except Judas, who then cast in his mind
his betraying of Christ. This is manifest, first because Christ says Satan
has desired you, not thee, for he laid not snares for Peter alone, but for the
chief of the Apostles, although especially for him, because he made show of
greater constancy than the rest. Secondly this is manifest from the words of
Christ, John 17.9. and 20. where he openly witnesses that he prayed for his
other Apostles and Disciples, Psalm. 6.58.

Converted Peter was converted from the state of sin before, but now from a
particular fall.
] or returnest again so Ps. 58.6. strengthen thy brethren] That is, all the
faithful.

Verse. 38. Here are two swords] Vt sit parata defensio non ultio. Ambrose. That
he may be prepared for defense not revenge. It is credible (says Grotius) when
the way from Galilee to the City was infested with thieves that many went to
the City with swords, which we may collect also out of several places in
Josephus. Two of the Apostles here imitated this custom.

Verse. 41. Was withdrawn from them] Not severed and separated, but pulled and
plucked like a tree by the root from the kindly soil. Avulsus* (...) violentam
avulsionem ac distractionem significat. Alardi Pathalogia N. T.


Verse. 44. Being in an agonie] (...) signifies summam Christi luctantis
angustiam. Beza. The word agony signifies a striving or wrestling against
something, as two combatants or wrestlers do each strive against other. The
thing which our Savior strove against was the fear and grief which pressed
his soul, that he might not be so far overcome as to bewray any manner of
impatiency.

Magnus angor guttae grossae. Jansen. Non dicit simpliciter guttas sanguinis
sudasse sed quasi grumos Concreti terrore sanguinis, and propterea addidit
particulam (...) ad leniendum id quod dixerat. Steph. These. Particula (...) hic
non est similitudinis, sed veritatis, quomodo etiam alibi a Luca usurpatur. c.
3.22. c. 24.11. uti etiam Joh. 1.11. Alardi Pathologia Novi Testamenti.
His sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground) He
wept with his members. Bern. A strange watering of a garden.

Verse. 47. Drew near unto Jesus to kiss him) That sign was given to the
Soldiers of the Roman band, who otherwise had not known Christ altogether
unknown to them. But a mystery also lay hid under this kiss, for a great heap
of execrable wickedness came by that betraying kiss, Casaub. exercit. 16. ad
Annal. Eccles. 13.
Therefore the Lord says to Judas,

Verse. 48. Judas betrayest thou the Son of man with a kisse] That also the
greatness of the sin committed might appear from it.

Verse. 63. Mocked him and smote him] See Esaias 50.6. He declares how they scoft
at him, not so much with their words as hands assaulting him; among the scoffs
which consist in the deed it self, L'Emperear de Legibus Ebraeorum. c. 8.
Sect. 6.
it was not the least to pull the beard and to pluck away the hair, wherefore
the Evangelist used (...) a most fit word, which signifies to pull away the
skin it self, much more the hair.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse 2. PErverting the Nation, and forbiding to give tribute to Caesar] There
was nothing more odious than this crime with Pilate, who cared for nothing more
than to defend the quiet state of the empire. Calvin.
Therefore Pilate neglecting other things, most of all insists on that about
sedition, because if he had found that Christ had troubled any thing in the
public state, he would willingly without delay have condemned him, this is the
reason why Pilate questioned him about the Kingdom.

Verse. 5. He stirs up the people] They say not in the preterperfect tense,
he has stirred up the people, but in the present tense, he does stir up,
signifying that his whole life was seditious. The Syriack has a word which
signifies to move with a certain tumult, which word the Thargum uses, Gerhard.
Exodus 14.24. and Ier. 51.7. therefore the Priests mean this by their
accusation, that Christ moved the people in Galilee and Judaea with new and
seditious doctrines.

By the very mentioning of Galilee they desire to provoke Pilate, See Luke 13.1
Acts 5.37.
and make him an enemy to Christ, for the Galileans above others were prone to
sedition, and impatient of the Roman yoke.

Verse. 11. Mocked him] He derides Christ, Illudens ei, ut homini fatuo: haec
enim portio est Christi and Christianorum apud id genus homines. Grotius.
as if he had been a fool who had boasted great things of himself, but when
it was come to the point could perform nothing (...) is properly to handle one
like a child, to mock and scoff at him. The Syriack has a word which
signifies to scoff at, and play with. The Septuagint use this greek word of
Sampson scorned by the Philistimes, who was a type of Christ 2 Pet. 3.3. Jude
18. They are called mockers who esteem the doctrine of the last Judgment but
a fable, and sharply scoff at it; such a scoffer in this place is Herod, who
not only refuses the doctrine of Christ, but also jests and sports at it.
Gerhard.
Christ foretold this mocking of him, Matthew. 20.19. Mark 10.34. Luke 18.34.
which he would undergo for us.

Verse. 17. They delivered at the feast a malefactor] Some say in remembrance of
the delivery of Jonathan by the people; others say to cause greater joy; others
say it was a sign of their delivery from Egypt.

Verse. 18. Release unto us Barrabas] No marvel to see murderers desire a
murderer.

Verse. 21. Crucify him, crucify him] The Epizeuxis or repetition notes the
vehemency of the hatred; as if they would crucify him twice, they cry out
twice, crucify him, crucify him.

Verse. 27. And there followed him a great company of people, and of women,
which also bewailed and lamented him] Although in public all the people with
one cry condemned Christ, yet we see that some of them forgot not his doctrine
and miracles, Calvin.
so God kept to himself a small remainder in that miserable dissipation.

Verse. 31. If they do these things in a green tree, Vide Piscat. 1 Pet. 4.15.
Compare 20 Ezekiel. 47^ with 21.3.
what shall be done in the drie] This shows First-Christ and the godly
flourish. 2. The wicked are dry. It was a proverbiall speech, for the Hebrews
call good men green wood, bad men dry wood. If husbandmen spare not their
green trees which are of good use for timber but burn them, they will not
spare old stumps.

Verse. 34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they doe] Beza says,
here he is a true High Priest, he prayed for those that persecuted him, because
he foresaw their Conversion.

Verse. 38. A suterscription also was written over him in Letters of Greek, and
Latin, and Hebrew etc. Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews, John 19.19.
Pilatus scripsit tribus Linguis, quod nemo videretur ad festum venturus, qui
non unum saltem trium linguarum intelligeret. Rainold. praelect. 256. Col.
1529. Latino sermon scripta haec (...) ob majestatem imperii; Hebraeo, ob
locum in quo supplicium sumebatur; Graeco ob maximam turbam Hellenistarum quae
ad Pascha convenerat: quanquam alioqui Graeco sermoni a Macedonicis temporibus
and in Palaestina Iudaei vic inaeque gentes assueverant. Grotius in 27. Matthew.
37. These three Languages were the most known of all the rest. The Latin
because of the Roman Empire, and the Greek by reason of the studies of
Philosophy, and the Hebrew for the antiquity of it, and being the Language of
the Jews.
] or rather as the original sounds, Jesus that Nazarene, that King of the
Jews. Three languages, to show first that he is a Savior of all sorts. 2.
Prayers in a known tongue. 3. Nothing can hinder Christ's kingdom. Pilates
purpose was that it might be read and understood of all, both inhabitants and
strangers then gathered together over the whole world, but the counsel of God
herein is to be regarded by us, who would by this way consecrate these three
tongues for the propagation of his kingdom. The Scripture of the old Testament
was written in Hebrew, that of the New in Greek, both were turned into Latin,
which version was hitherto more usual and common in the Church than all the
rest, moreover the most excellent Commentaries upon the Scripture were written
in one of these tongues. Gerhard.

First here is an exact description of the substance of our faith. Secondly, he
acknowledges his name on the Cross. Thirdly, he is King able to save, no
power is lost in his abasement.

Verse. 39. And one of the malefactors, which were hanged, railed on him] Matthew.
27.44. says, the thieves. Some say it is a Synechdoche, and the Scripture
ascribes that to both the thieves which agrees but to one. Others answer it
thus, that at the first both the evil doers did mock Christ, Perkins.
and of that time speaks Matthew: but afterward one of them was miraculously
converted, then the other alone mocked him, and of that time speaks Luke; this
is the better.

Verse. 40. But the other answering, rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear
God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation] It shows First, a true Convert
cannot abide sin. Secondly, will reprove it in others, yea his companions.
Thirdly, want of the fear of God is the cause of all disorder. Fourthly,
mockers have great cause to fear. Fifthly, It is fearful not to repent when
there is a great Judgment on one.

It makes not for late penitents. First it is an example without a promise. 2.
A miracle and rare, Many therefore defer their repentance. Hic est
impiissimus optimi exempli abusus.
we may as well look for another crucifying of Christ. 3. He did not wittingly
refuse before. 4. He had no means before. 5. He expressed more than our late
penitents do at last.

Verse. 41. But this man has done nothing amisse] Or that is absurd, or out of
place, as the (...).
original word does import.

Verse. 42. Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdome] First, Christ
is King. Secondly, not of this world. Thirdly, has the keys of heaven.
Fourthly, we must fly only to Christ for salvation. Fifthly, must believe in
Christ though all be against it.

Verse. 43. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise] Christ promises more
than the other asked. (...) vox est, ut Pollux vere dicit, Persica, quanquam
and Haebraei usurpant, ut Eccles. 2.5. Nehem. 2.8. Sed Graeci usu hanc vocem
suam fecerunt. Grotius.
This to day is emphaticall, and is wont to be added to the mention of
benefits, as Ier. 1.10.

Verse. 44. There was a darkness over all the earth until the ninth houre]
This darkness was not a natural Eclipse of the Sun. Over all the Earth] viz.
in Jury, and most Countries about. Philosophers saw it in Athens. Signifies
First, Sun of righteousness did not set. 2. Shows the Jews blindness. 3.
Detestation of the fact. 4. Vileness of our sins. 5. Teaches us compassion.
For first it cannot be so total. 2. Not so long, for the interposed Moon
goes swiftly away. It was dark, first to show the sin of the people in
crucifying of Christ. 2. That darkness of ignorance should come on the people.
Bellarm. This darkness was spoken of by St. Dennis the Areopagite.

Verse. 46. Into thy hands I commend my Spirit] That is, to thy safe custody and
blessed tuition, I commend my soul, as 1 Cor. 6.20. Acts 7.59. Gal. 6.18. 2 Timothy 4.22. 1 Pet. 3.19. as a special treasure or Jewel most charily and
tenderly to be preserved and kept. (...) est commendare veluti commendatur
depositum servandum, ac reddendum tempore. Eras. and Gerh.
Mr. Ball.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Verse. 4. BEhold two men stood by them in shining garments] Matthew and Mark
say that one Angel descended. Dicuntur astitisse mulieribus ex improviso sc.
and insperato, eodem modo o verbum illud usurpatur, Luc. 20 ver. 1 Act. 4. v. 1.
It is usual with the Evangelists to put one for many, and many for one. It
may be that Matthew makes mention but of one Angel, because but one did speak
unto the women; but Luke testifies of two, and ascribes the speech to both of
them, because he that spoke not did give consent to all that was spoken.

The two described by Luke have shining garments, but that one Angel which
Mark remembered was clothed with a white robe. The two Angels in Luke appear
in a man's shape, but the Angel in Mark appears in the form of a young man.
Therefore we must determine that these women came to the sepulcher of Christ
two several times after the resurrection, and at both times saw and heard the
Angels, the Messengers of the Lords resurrection. Gerh. Harm.
Luke describes their first coming to the Sepulcher, and the appearing of the
Angels made in it; Matthew and Mark their running out to the Sepulcher and the
apparition of the Angel seen in it.

Their garments are said to be shining, either because they sent forth a
splendor and brightness, or because they were white like lightning; the
proper signification of the Greek word confirms the first interpretation; For
(...) is to shine as lightning, and also the nature of Angels, Psalm. 104.4. The
Syriack has a word which is used of lightning shining out, Matthew. 24.27. Luke
17.24. Acts 15.13.

Verse. 5. All they were afraid and bowed their faces to the earth] The
brightness of the Angels garments did smite their eyes, an unwonted species
and appearance struck their minds, Gerh.
therefore they bow their faces being turned away from the Angels toward the
earth, which also is an argument of their humility and modesty. Rev. 5.14. and
7.11. and 11.16.

Why seek ye the living among the dead] A friendly chiding, as if he should
say, since there is life in Christ whom you seek in the grave, why do you yet
seek him among the dead, that is, in the grave, which is the house of the dead.

Verse. 6. But is risen] Viz. as a Conqueror and triumpher. When he was yet in
Galilee.] The Angels warn the women of the Sermons of Christ had in Galilee,
which are described Matthew. 17.22. Mark 9.31. Luke 9.44. because both the women
were Galileans, Gerh.
and when Christ first of all manifested himself in Galilee to be Christ, he
also added this expressly, that he was to suffer, and by his suffering to
enter into his glory.

Verse. 10. It was Mary Magdalene, and Ioanna, and Mary the Mother of James, and
other women that were with them, which told these things unto the Apostles]
Therefore God chose these women, to which the resurrection of Christ should be
first manifested, First, that he might observe his ancient Custom, by which he
is wont to choose things contemned, ignoble, and base in this world, 1 Cor.
1.27, 28, 29. These women were not only contemned for the infirmity of their
sex, but also for their Country, being of Galilee, John 1.46. but God exalted
them by manifesting to them the resurrection of his Son, which is a principal
article of our faith, and afterward he sends them to the Apostles that they
might be Apostolorum Apostolae, as the Ancients speak. 2. The women more weak
by nature, were struck with most vehement grief of mind for the ignominy and
torments of Christ, which they standing under Christ's Cross saw in the day
before the passover, therefore to them first of all the most joyful
resurrection of Christ is told, as also Christ afterward appeared severally to
Peter, because as he offended more hainously than the rest of the Disciples, so
he was more grievously troubled, whence it appears, that the resurrection of
Christ will bring consolation to the troubled Consciences and contrite hearts.
3. God would by this means prevent the calumnies of the Jews, the Priests
lied, Gerhard.
and said that the Disciples stole away the body of Christ from the grave, that
therefore the impudency and absurdity of this lie might be reproved, it came
to pass by the wonderful providence of God, that the women should come to the
grave before the Apostles. Now it is no ways probable that women and those few
should steal his body out of a sepulcher kept with armed men, and shut up with
a great stone. 4. The death of all rose by Eve a woman, therefore Christ would
that his resurrection by which righteousness and life is restored to us,
should be told by women. 5. These women went with a great deal of courage
early in the morning to Christ's Sepulcher, the Apostles in the mean while
being shut up for fear, therefore Christ would have this pious study of theirs
rewarded with the most joyful tidings of the resurrection.

Verse. 11. Seemed to them as idle tales] They do not believe their words, they
hear them as a pleasant fable, they think that these foolish women dream, the
sense is, that they said, that a false vision was offered to the women, as
those that doat imagine many things to themselves.

Verse. 12. Stouping downe] John uses the same Greek word, both of himself and
of Mary Magdalene in this history. Vim vocabuli recte expresserunt Syrus and
Arabs, ille introspiciendi, hic explorandi verbo. Grotius.


Verse. 13. And behold two of them went to a village called Emmaus, etc.]
Although Mark does only briefly touch this history, and Matthew and John
mention it not, yet because it was very profitable to be known and worthy to
be remembered, Luke does not in vain prosecute it so exactly; so, many visions
which John mentions, the other three Evangelists speak not of. Calvin.

Verse. 16. But their eyes were held that they should not know him] The
Evangelist expressly witnesses this, lest any should think that the figure of
Christ's body was changed, Therefore although Christ remained like himself, he
was not acknowledged, Calvin.
because the eyes of the seers were taken, by which the suspicion of a Ghost or
false imagination is taken away.

Verse. 19. A Prophet mighty in deed and word] He excelled as well in the gift
of teaching, as in holiness of life and excellent gifts.

(...) sieve mente, sensu, intellectu, expertes intellectus.
Verse. 25. Oh fooles] So also Paul styles the Galatians 3.1. therefore 5.
Matthew. 22. such words are not forbidden, but anger, casting out such a word
imprudently is forbidden, says Grotius. Sometimes it is for the profit of the
hearers that they should be sharply dealt with. Crudelem medicum intemperans
aeger facit.

Verse. 28. And he made as though he would have gone farther] Equivocaters abuse
this place; Finxit] Vt habet vulgata editio, (...), Erasmus prae se ferebat (
quod honestius and convenientius indicat Iansenius) longius ire. Hoc gestu
externo voluisset dominus augere and propalare desiderium quo tenebantur
discipuli ut eum retinerent and ejus praesentia diutius fruerentur, ad
communicationem ampliorem: quem finem si non habuisset, tunc reipsa
desparuisset, aut ulterius processisset. Rivetus. Haec simulatio fuit non
verbis veritati contradicentibus, sed in gestibus veritari consentientibus.
Composuit sese Dominus tanquam longius, nisi in contrarium vehementes instarent
discipuli and quasi vi ipsum retinerent. Ames. de consc. l. 5. Vide Cornel. a
Lap.
he did not pretend one thing and intend another, but as he made an offer to
depart, so without question he would have gone further if the importunity of
the Disciples had not staid him. See ver. 29.

Verse. 36. Peace be unto you] This was the ordinary way and manner of
salutation, as if he should say thus much unto them, that they should find him
every way as courteous and loving toward them now being risen, as he was before
he dyed.

Verse. 44. In the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning me]
By the name of which he comprehends all the Scriptures, as it appears from
this verse compared with the 27. where Christ is said to interpret concerning
himself, In the Psalms] That is, in the Book of the Psalms, as 20.42. and
Acts 1.20. Vetus est ab Hebraeis usurpata librorum veteris Testamenti
distinctio, in Legem, Prophetas and Hagiographa, Thorah, Nebijm, Cerubim, ad
hanc respexisse Christus videtur quando scripturam, in Mosem, Prophetas and
Psalmos hic distinguit. Psalmos ut praecipuum inter Hagiographia librum, pro
illis exprimens. Quistorpius.
the things written in all the Scriptures, and that which he first called all
the Scriptures, that here he shows is to be understood of Moses, the Psalms,
and Prophets. Rainold de lib. Apoc. Praelect. 160.

Verse. 47. Beginning at Ierusalem] Peter shows that Christ's preaching began
in Galilee, Acts 10.37. Therefore not at Jerusalem. 1. This place here is meant
of the preaching of Christ's Apostles, and not of his own, as that in the Acts
is 2. This is meant of their preaching of him after his death and resurrection,
that in the Acts of his own, and in his life time. 3. This was a ministerial
publishing of Christ, that in the Acts speaks only of a voice, fame and good
report in the mouths of the common people. Dr. Tailor.

Verse. 49. The promise of my Father] Our Savior calls the gifts of the Holy
Ghost the promise of the Father, either because it was promised of the Father
by the Prophets, Esaias 44.3. Ezekiel. 36.24, 25, 26. Joel 2.18. Or else because it
was the Spirit of the Father promised by Christ, but to be obtained of the
Father, John 14.26. and 15.26. and 16.7.

Verse. 53. Continually in the Temple] Not that they spent days and nights
there, but because they frequented all the meetings, and at set and solemn
hours were present to give thanks unto God. This cheerfulness is opposed to
the fear which first held them shut up and lurking at home. Calvin.


ANNOTATIONS UPON S. JOHN.
CHAP. I.
John in the Hebrew signifies the grace of God, he wrote the last of all the
Four. Jerome. When he returned from the Isle of Patmos. Eusebius. Johannes
scripsit, ita, ut videatur scripsisse (...), i.e. relicta ab alijs, ut
resuscitationem Lazari and alia, quae prorsus non sunt apud alios, mihi non est
dubium, quin viderit-Evangelium Lucae. Melan. postil. part postrema in festo
Lucae. p. 427.

De loco and tempore scriptionis dissentiunt auctores, alijs in Pathmo scriptum
hunc librum volentibus, aliis Ephesi, and aliis quidem triginta, and quod
excurrit, aliis vero sexaginta aut amplius post Christi in Coelum evectionem
annis. Causam post alios haec scribendi praecipuam tradunt omnes, ut veneno in
ecclesiam jam tum sparso auctoritate sua, quae apud omnes Christianum nomen
profitentes non poterat non esse maxima, medicinam faceret. Grotius.

Johannes Graece Evangelicam historiam scripsit, post Matthaeum, Marcum and
Lucam, adductus duabus potissimum rationibus. Vna eaque praecipua, ut Cerinthi,
Ebionis, Caeterorumque, nascentes adversus Jesus Christi divinitatem haereses,
refutaret; Altera, ut adderet quae observarat a prioribus Evangelistis
praetermissa, facere posse ad illorum and totius Evangelicae historiae
intelligentiam. Haec fere Hieronymus, partim in catologo scriptorum
Ecclesiasticorum, partim praefatione in Commentarium Evangelij secundum
Matthaeum, consentientibus reliquis patribus. Hoc Evangelium, ordine
perfectionis obtinet primas, quia divinam Christi naturam potissimum declarat
ac docet, caeteris circa humanam magis versantibus. Sed sicut tempore, ita and
naturae doctrinaeque ordine postremum est, quo ab imperfectioribus ad
perfectiora, and a facilioribus ad difficiliora cognitu, pergitur. Lucas
Brugensis. Vide Calvin and Toleti argument. in Johan.


Therefore there is something more in every Chapter of John than any other of
the Evangelists.

John in his Epistles was an Apostle, in his Apocalypse a Prophet, in his
Gospel an Evangelist. Jerome.

In this Gospel is declared, 1. Christ's Person, chap. 1. 2. His Office, chap.
2. to the 12. 3. His Death, chap. 12. to the end.

He begins not with words but wonders, yea, thunders, says Ardens, Iunius was
converted by reading this Chapter.

He begins his history with Christ's eternal generation. Christ's Divinity is
described to the 14. verse. His humanity verse 14. Many in his time questioning
Christ's Deity, he writes this Gospel to prove the Divinity of Christ, and
because he begins with that, is therefore (say some) called John the Divine.

Verse. 1. In the beginning was the word] Not because he is the internal word
of the Father, but because he is the subject of the word, 1 John 45. Desumptum
ex Graeco Geneseos, sicut vicissim Syrus ex Hebraeo hicposuit Bereshith.
Grotius. Johannes Videtur Augustum hoc and magnificum Evangelij sui initium e
Prove. 8.22. sumpsisse. Mercerus in Prove. 8.22. (...) est cum primum rerum
universitas Coepit creari. Grotius.
1. The substantial word whereby God created all things. 2. As a word is begot
of the mind, so is he of God. 3. God spoke to us by him. See Brugensis.

Before creation, in the beginning of the world. Christ is in the beginning,
Creatures from the beginning. Here is a distinction of the Persons in the
Trinity, Christ is God, and equal with God.

Word] Or speech rather, Estey. Not Son lest we should look for a carnal
generation. Theophylact.

Was] Fuit imports a thing that once was and is not now; Erat was and is.
Chrysostom. Cyril, Theophylact. Rev. 1.4.

With God] Not a local, but personal distinction. The word was with God,
there word is taken personally; And the word was God, there it is taken
essentially.

Verse. 2. The same was in the beginning with God] A repetition of the former to
imprint it in our minds, proves he was not only from eternity, but God from
eternity.

Verse. 3. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made
that was made] This verse proves Christ to be God. Here we have the creation of
Angels with other things. Beza. Sin is nothing but a privation of good,
therefore not made by him, for an Idol is nothing. Notam universalem omnia
optime explicat Paulus ad Col. 1.16. Omnia ab angelo usque ad vermiculum inquit
Augustinus. Vbi omnem exceptionem removere volunt sacrae literae id quod
affirmarunt explicant oppositi negatione. Esa. 38.1. Jer. 42.4. Grotius.
Not of him, but of the Father by him. Heb. 1.2. This shows the distinction and
order between the Father and the Son.

Without him] Not by him alone, all works ad extra are equal in the Trinity.

Here is the being of things, verse. 3. Life, and reason, verse. 4.

Verse. 4. In him was life 1. Christus vita est nostra. 2. Efficit vitam in
creaturis pro earum condition. Duplex vita est quam Christus efficit in
creaturis, viz. naturae and gratiae, hanc posteriorem Paulus vocat vitam Dei.
] As in the fountain, Act. 17.28. not as an accident in the subject,
Exemplariter, intellectualiter. Light] Lux rationis. ver. 9. All men may see
Christ if they be not wilfully blind.

Verse. 5. And the light shined in darkness, etc.] Minds are made ignorant by
man's fall. Calvin understands by light relics of conscience left in man, and
by darkness man's corruption, and the light reformes not corruption; Others
say, that the word was little respected before Christ's coming. Ephesians. 5.8.
Romans 1.21. John 12.35. Christ is a help against darkness of sin, ignorance,
misery, death, Gods wrath. He alludes here (says Grotius) to Esaias 9.2.

Verse. 6. A man] Man's Ministry. Sent] Must have a calling from God, Romans 10.15.
John] Iehochanan Preacher of the grace of God, Luke 1.13. This shows that
Christ is author of the light in man.

Verse. 8. He was not that light] Ob. John 5.35. Ans. It speaks not of the same
light, John Baptist was not the Sun of righteousness, the Messiah, the light
that brings light into the world, but he was a light, and gave a notable
testimony to the light. See Grotius.

Was sent] Is not in the original. Mat. 5.15. John 5.35.

Verse. 9. True] Truly heavenly. See John 6.32. and 15.1. Lighteth] Luce
rationis, the soul of a man is called a Candle in Proverbs. See Cameron.

Every man] Jew and Gentile, without respect of persons, all that are
enlightened cannot say they have light from any other. commeth] Viz. borne,
Mark. 16.15. Mat. 20.19. The world was ignorant before his Incarnation, Luke
1.79. world] is taken, First, for things created. Secondly, Per synecdochen
integri, for men in the world, both are here meant.

Some understand this of the light of grace, but it will be more universally
and necessarily true of the light of Reason, Cyrill took this light for the
light of nature and natural reason, because of the universal enunciation, so
do our reformers for the most part following him. Diverse others of the Fathers
take this universal light (because Christ is said to be this light) to be
Baptism. For in the Primitive Church, as the Nativity of Christ was called the
Epiphany manifestation, so Baptism was called Illumination. And so Christ
lightens every man that comes into the world (that is, into the Christian
world) by the Sacrament of Illumination in Baptism. Dr. Done. Augustine thus
expounds it, that is, all that were enlightened in the world were enlightened by
Christ.
which is in Infants radically, though not actually.

Verse. 11. His own] Some say, all men are here meant, because he made all, the
Jews were his people in a special manner, Psalm. 85.1. Received him not]
Believed not. Calvin. That is, they obeyed not his word, they would not be
taught and directed by him. John 3.32.

Ver. 12. As many] Either Jews or Gentiles. Calvin. Bond or free. Chrysostom.
Power] Therefore the Papists say, power is in man. See ver. 13.

The word (...) never signifies possibility, but as in other places it is
translated power or authority; so here, as also 1 Cor. 8.9. and 9.12. right or
privilege, or as Iansen. Concord. Evang. c. 1. interprets, authoritatem,
dignitatem, jus.

Christ gives you the privilege of Sons three ways: 1. By way of merit, Gal.
4.4, 5. In the sufferings of Christ there was not only debitum legale, but
super legale meritum. 2. By virtue of the mystical union, he is the Son of
God, as man by virtue of the personal union, Luke 1.35. and makes us the Sons
of God by the mystical union. 3. Christ receives the Spirit and sends it into
our hearts, and so makes us the Sons of God, Gal. 4.26.
To become] Viz. made, Mat. 5.45. Sons] Gal. 4.5. Ephesians. 1.5. Romans 8.17.

His name] Gospel preached, Acts 4.12.

Verse. 13. Which were borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, Non nascimur sed renascimur Christani. Men are not born
Christians, or regenerate 16 Matthew. 17.
but of God] Faith comes not by natural generation. Bloud] Enallage numeri,
genitale semen. The flesh] Gal. 5. opposite to the Spirit. Man] The same with
flesh. Calvin. Some by flesh would have the woman to be meant. Augustine.

Not of the will of man] Not by any natural power, virtue, or strength which
is naturally inherent in them. But of God] That is, of the Spirit of God.

Verse. 14. The word was made flesh] Viz. incarnate, man by Synechdoche, Heb
2.16. Flesh signifies contemptuous man.

And dwelt among us] As in a tabernacle or tent, that is for a short time.
Habitavit] nam sic and qui in Coelo habitant (...) dicuntur. Apoc. 12.12. and
13.6. Grotius.
The Evangelist in that phrase (...) probably alludes to the feast of Sarson.
on 1 Timothy 1.15.
tabernacles, in or near the time of which celebrated, by consent of many
Authors of best note, he was conversant with us, Zach. 2.10. Heavens are his
home, here was his pilgrimage.

Beheld Spectavimus seu novum and admirandum spectaculum. (...) spectavimus,
contemplati sumus, quasi in aperto, quasi in theatro. Maldonatus in loc.
his glory] Saw it in his doctrine, miracles, life, passions, which agreed only
to the only begotten. Full] Acts 6.8. All things in the Law were fulfilled in
him. Grace] favor. Ephesians. 1.6. Truth] All Christ's were true and not
fallacious, true knowledge, Col. 2.3. See Piscat.

Verse. 15. And cried] Alia and clara voce, Esaias, 58. Vtitur Evangelista verbo
clamandi, quia de Baptista scriptum erat ecce vox clamantis, utque
significaret, Baptistam hoc testimonium public omni populo audiente, idque
sonora voce, summa cum licertate, magno zelo, and peculiari Spiritus
exultatione praedicasse hoc de Christo, quem diu expectatum jam manifestatum
gaudebat and praedicabat. Ita enim usurpatur hoc verbum clamandi, Esa. 58.1.
and de voce gratulabunda usurpatur. Luc. 1.42. Polyc. Lyser.
For he was before me] So we read it, but in Greek it is He was my first,
preferred before me, for he was my first.

Verse. 16. Of his fulnesse] The greek word (...) is sometimes taken for
abundance, Psalm. 24.1. there is not only plenitudo abundantiae, but plenitudo
redundantiae, There is a fullness of grace in Christ as Mediator, plenitudo not
only vasts but fontis.
an overflowing of fullness in Jesus Christ. Secondly, for fulfilling and
perfecting of a thing: So love is said to be the fulfilling of the Law.
Properly it is given to vessels that are brim full of liquor, and
metaphorically here applied unto Christ.

Grace for grace] Interpreters all agree in this, that the scope of the words
is to set out the abundance of grace we have from Christ; a kind of Hebraisme
(say some) and notes the cumulation of grace, grace upon grace; grace
answerable to the grace in Christ say others; or the grace in Christ which we
partake of answers the grace in all Moses rites, and Ceremonies. See 14.17.
verses. and de Dieu. in loc.

That is, as one sweetly expounds it, as a child in generation receives from
his parents member for member, or as the paper from the Press receives Letter
for Letter, the wax from the Seal print for print, Dr. Preston.
or as the glass from the Image receives face for face, so do we from Jesus
Christ receive grace for grace, that is, Dr. Reynolds.
for every grace that is in Christ, there is a grace in us in some measure and
proportion answerable and agreeable to the same in him.

Grace for grace] That is, whatsoever Grace there is in Christ, there is the
like stamp upon the heart of every Christian, like unto that expression. Matthew.
5.38. Mr. Budge in loc.


Grace] The word Grace is sometimes taken for the love and favor of God,
Ephesians. 2.5. 2. For holiness, Col. 3.16. 3. For excellency or ability, as
Ephesians. 4.7. In all these respects there is a fullness of grace in Christ.

Verse. 17. Grace] In opposition to the curse of the Moral Law, truth] in
opposition to the figures of the Ceremonial Law. Dr. Reynolds. Grace
comprehends all the perfections of the will, truth all the virtues of the
understanding, Dr. Preston. Vide Fulleri Miscell. sac. lib. 1. c. 8. and de
Dieu in loc.

Verse. 18. Seen] Known fully, In sinu esse est proximum and intimum esse;
dicitur de conjugibus inter se, Deuteronomy. 28.54.56. de amicis. Luc. 16.22. Grotius.
Vide Brugensem in loc.
as he is or now shall be revealed by Christ. Exodus 33.20. The bosom of the
Father] That is the seat of love and secrecy.

Who is entirely loved with such affection as is due only to her who is to be
laid in the bosom. Significat (...) res aloiqui latentes and obscuras plane
and dilucide declarare. Glass. Onomat. Vide Piscat. and de Dieu. in loc.

Vsus est Evangelista proprio admodum verbo, ut Chrysostomus admonuit, (...),
Explicavit, quod est res obscuras, and quasi in tenebris latentes, in lucem
proferre, and penitus explanare. Maldonatus in loc.


Deuteronomy. 13.6. Men admit those into their bosoms with whom they impart all their
secrets, the breast is the place of counsels. Calv. That is, Christ reveals
the secret and mysterious Counsels, and the tender and compassionate affections
of the Father unto the world. Dr. Reynolds. declared] exposuit, discovered a
secret, 41. Genesis 25. Matthew. 11.27. The original word signifies to conduct, and
direct, and lead a man as it were by the hand to the finding out of something
that was hid before.

No man by the natural force of his wit can know God with a saving knowledge
necessary to eternal salvation.

Verse. 20. And he confessed and denied not] See third verse. It is familiar
with the Hebrews by affirming and denying to express the same thing for the
greater confirmation. Esaias 39.4. Ier. 42.4. See 1 John 1.5.

Verse. 21. And they asked him? What then? Art thou Elias? And he says, I am
not. Art thou that Prophet? And he answered, no.] John so denied that he was
Eliah, as he denied he was the Prophet, neither absolutely, for so his answer
had been false, (for he was the Eliah which was to come by the testimony of
Christ, Matthew. 11.14. and the Prophet, witness not only Zachary, Luke 1.76.
but also Christ, Matthew. 11.9.) but in that sense in which the Pharisees asked
him. For they by Eliah in the 4th. of Mal. understood Eliah the Tishbite, viz.
that ancient Prophet, which they expected in his own person before the Messiah
came, and by the Prophet 18. Deuteronomy. 18. they understood not Christ himself, but
another famous Prophet that should come in the time of the Messiah, distinct
from him, and also from Eliah. John 7.40, 41. and 1.20, 21. and this was called
of them Episc. Down. Diatrib. de Antichristo part secunda, c. 63. Non sum] Hoc
nimirum sensu quo interrogabatur. Grotius. Vide Calvinum.
(...). This is not only our interpretation of the words of Malachy and Christ,
but of the most learned Interpreters among the Papists, viz. Paulus Burgensis
on Malachy 4. and Ferus on Matthew 11.

Verse. 29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world]
Every word is emphaticall, Perkins. There was a standing sacrifice in the
Temple, morning and evening, and that was a Lamb, therefore he is so called
here to show that he is the daily sacrifice.
he makes here an opposition between Christ and the Paschall Lamb of Moses,
which may be called the Paschall Lamb of men.

As offerings and sacrifices are called theirs who presented them, so Christ is
called Gods Lamb, because he offered him. Christ was agnus in passione, but Leo
in resurrectione. Rev. 5.5. A Lamb suffering death, but a Lion rising from
death. The original and our last translation read it, That, or the Lamb of
God Eximius ille agnus and singularis, qui per agnos Sacerdotii Levitici
adumbratus est. Piscat. Ecce agnus Dei ille. Sir. Other beasts were sacrificed
besides, but John Baptist names the Lamb, because the killing of the Paschall
Lamb, and the effusion of his blood was a most illustrious figure of the
sacrifice of the Son of God. Gerh.
, foretold by the Prophets, Esaias 53.7. and resembling a Lamb in native
innocence and godly simplicity, 1 Pet. 2.22.

Which takes away, or beareth] (...) tollens, the word is of the present
tense, signifying that it is as it were the continual act or perpetual office
of Christ to take away our sins, as long as we are in this life; it may
signify either takes away, or takes upon him. The sin] The baptist names not
sins, but sin in the singular number, not as if Christ should satisfy for
original sin only, but rather to show that universally Christ has taken
upon himself the whole burden of sin, and all the filth of the sins of the
world, all the guilt of sin, the anger and curse of God, and whatsoever
belongs to the stipend of sin, and so perfectly expiated the sins of the
world, for when Paul speaks in general and universally of sin, he names it
indefinitely, in the singular number (...) sin, Rom 6.12.

Of the world] There is a secret Antithesis in the word world, in the
Leviticall sacrifices only the sins of the people were imposed on the Levites,
but here the Lamb takes away the sins of the whole world.

Verse. 31. Knew him not] Viz. de facie, for otherwise John could not be
ignorant that the Messiah was at hand, De facie inquiunt nonuulli magni
Theologi, id malim, quam de nomine and fama, quod nonnullis placet. Heinsius.
unless he was ignorant of his own calling. Beza.

Verse. 38. Rabbi] Rab in Hebrew signifies multum, Rabbi vel Rab significat
excellentem aliquem, sive is excellat generis nobilitate, sive virtute and
rebus gestis, sive denique doctrina and rerum cognitione: Hoc autem loco, ut in
Evangeliis passim, in postremo hoc significato accipitur, and Latin redditur
per nomen magistri vel Doctoris, vox ipsa Etymo suo sonat eum qui sit instar
multorum, velunum qui propter excellentiam aequet multos. Rollocus.

Inde nostro seculo auditur Rabbinorum nomen. Cheitomaeus de Graeco-Barbaris
N.T. Est apud Hebraeos significationis excellentioris Rabbi quam apud Latinos
Magister, and apud Graecos (...). Toletus in loc. Vide plura ibid.


magnum, much, great. Hence Rabbi (which is here interpreted Master) properly
signifies one which abounds with much knowledge, wisdom and learning. This
name was given by Esaias to Christ, 9. Esaias 5. and that deservedly. Christ
challenges this appellation as proper to himself, reproving the ambition of
the Pharisees, which would be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, and admonishes his
Disciples not to seek after that name.

Verse. 39. And abode with him that day] Viz. from the Sun rising, so that only
two hours remained to the evening, Therefore they could not return that day
to John, but remained that day with Jesus in his Inn. Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 42. We have found the Messiah, which is by interpretation, the Christ]
Viz. that Messiah, who was peculiarly foretold by the Prophets, Evangelista hoc
addit ut sciretur eundem unum esse qui Judaeis Messiah, gentibus Christus
dicitur, utrisque and Iudaeis and Gentibus aeque communis, quacunque tandem
lingua efferatur. Interpres Syrus, ut hebraice scriberet, omisit pericopen hanc
interpretativam. Lucas Brugensis.
prefigured by the rest that were anointed, was then expected by all,
anointed to be King, Priest, and Prophet.

Verse. 43. Follow me] When that phrase is used of the Master and the Scholars,
it signifies to yield himself into another discipline, to follow some one as
an individual Companion, for instructions sake, so Luke 9.49. Philip was the
first whom Christ called to be his disciple.

Verse. 47. Nathanael] Is an Hebrew name, Jonathan in Hebrew.
signifying the same that Theodosius with the Greeks, and with Augustine
Adeodatus given by God.

Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile] That is, Mr. Perkins.
a man of an upright heart that serves God in Spirit and in truth, for
otherwise it is true only of Christ, he was without guile, 1 Pet. 2.20.
Respicit ad historiam Jacobi a quo Israelitae nomen habent.


No guile] That is, none reigning, none imputed.

Verse. 48. Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I
saw thee.] Christ speaks of three wonderful things which are above man. First,
although thou wast very far distant, yet I saw that Philip called thee.
Secondly, yea I saw thee before Philip found thee, when thou wast under that
fig tree. Thirdly, I saw into thy heart, Polyc. Lyser.
that thou art without guile.

Verse. 49. Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel.]
Nathanael comprehends three things in his confession concerning the Messiah,
whence it is gathered that he was learned in the Law, who rightly understood
the special sentences of the Prophets concerning the Messiah. First he calls
him Rabbi, Polyc. Lys^r.
according to the opinion of Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Secondly, he confesses him to
be the Son of God; As the Messiah is called, Ps. 2.7. and 89.7. Thirdly, he
confesses him to be the King of Israel, Ier. 23.5. and 33.14. The promise is
Zach. 8.9. and Psalm. 2.6. Therefore he speaks of the essence and office of
Christ, in which the true knowledge of him consists, and therefore the article
is added, thou art that Son of God, and that King of Israel, viz. promised and
expected.

Verse. 51. Verily verily I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see Heaven open,
and the Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.] Christ
proves himself the Son of God, because they should see the heavens opened,
and the Angels ascending and descending upon him, as was figured in Jacobs
ladder; see this Prophecy fulfilled 17. Mat. 1.2.28 Mat. 4.5. and Acts 1. Vide
Bezam and Brugensem. Quaecunque Deo tribuntur in veteri foedere eadem in novo
Christo tribuuntur. Angeli ascendentes and descendentes Deo ministrant. Genesis
^8.12. Grotius.


CHAP. II.
Verse 1. Third day] After Christ came into Galilee. Rolloc. After he went from
John. Beza has both. Tolet reckons up five several expositions, but follows
that of Origens, as most probable, which numbers the third day from the calling
of Philip, and Christ's going into Galilee, for this was the last time described
by the Evangelist. It is probable that some of Christ's kinsmen married a wife,
Scriptores ex multis circumstantiis colligunt, vel sponsum vel sponsam fuisse
ex cognatione Mariae. Polyc. Lyser.
for Christ is here added as a companion to his mother. Calv.

Verse. 3. They have no wine] Because she knew that the Messiah would work
miracles, and Jesus was declared to be the Messiah, therefore she expects some
such thing as the Prophets foretold.

Verse. 4. Woman] As if he should say, in this case thou ceasest to be a mother,
and art to be reputed as a bare woman. Non hoc reprehendit, quod de proximi
difficultatibus sollicitae intercedit pro aliis, hoc enim est mandatum
charitatis. Recte etiam facit, quod Christum ipsum interpellat. Sed hoc vult di
cere, in ijs quae ad officium meum pertinent, ut in exaudiendis precibus, in
conferendis beneficiis divinis, nihil mihi and tibi est, nullum hic tuum jus,
nulla aucteritas est, nihil in hoc officio commune mihi tecum est. Ideo
appellat non matrem sed mulierem. Polyc. Lyser. Mulierem vocat matrem suam hic
and Joh. 19.16. ut ostendat se alium esse and majorem aliquem quam Mariae
filium. Rolloc.
What have I to do with thee] A mere Hebraisme, Josh. 22.24. as if he should
say, in this business I am not to be advised by you, neither will I; He
reprehends this in her, viz. that for the prerogative of carnal kindred she
thought Christ was obliged to do this for her and her kindred, Matthew. 12.48.
Luke 11.17. See Rolloc.

Mine hour is not yet come] That is, fit and opportune time, Romans 13.11. Rev.
14.15. John 13.1. Luke 22.53. When the wine was quite spent, when all took
notice of the want, lest water should have seemed to have been mixed with wine,
when all things were almost desperate, then is Christ's hour, by this means
the miracle is made more famous, than if he had prevented the defect of wine.

Verse. 8. Draw out now and bear unto the Governor of the feast] Because this
belonged to his office who was the taster, and who could judge of the goodness
of the wine.

Verse. 10. Every man at the beginning does set forth good wine, and when men
have well drunk, Vide Martial. epig. l. 1.24.
then that which is worse] It was a custom in the beginning of their feasts to
give the best wine, and to reserve the worser unto the last, to which Custom
our Savior alludes.

Verse. 11. This beginning of Miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee] The
Evangelist twice names the place where this miracle was first showed, Polyc.
Lyser. Canah] Signifies a Reed, Reeds grew round about this Town. Interpretor
hoc fuisse primum signum, non omnium omino quae fecit Christus, nec eorum quae
eo fecit loco, sed eorum quae fecit, ut gloriam suam palam manifestaret, ut
Johannes ipse indicat, utque sese ostenderet esse Christum. Maldonat. in loc.
for the certainty of the miracle, and distinctly names it Cana of Galilee.
That is, the miracles which Jesus showed in the time of his ministry had such a
beginning, so that this which was done in Cana of Galilee was the first.
Admirable revelations were made in the birth and Baptism of Christ, but the
Evangelist speaks of those things which Christ himself being incarnate
properly did.

And manifested forth his glory] Viz. That this Jesus is the Son of God and the
Messiah.

And his Disciples believed on him] Believed that his doctrine which he was
about to deliver was true, divine, and heavenly. 2. They trusted believing that
they should have eternal life through his name.

Verse. 12. He went down to Capernaum] Which is a days journey distant from
Cana, John 4.52. It was a principal City, a famous mart Town, and as is were,
the Metropolis of Galilee, thither therefore presently he went after he had
showed this miracle, that his glory there might be manifested to many, and
might be farther spread for the celebrity of the place and frequent commerce,
and would prevent him about to go to Jerusalem, and therefore he brought
thither the Disciples that were his kinsmen with him, who might testify of
that miracle which they saw.

Verse. 16. My Fathers house] My Father, not our Father; therefore he shows that
he is the only begotten Son of God, and that the purging of the Temple belongs
to him. He calls the Temple the house of God, because God promised that he
would dwell there, and hear his people, by exercising his power. Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 19. Destroy this Temple] By the Temple he understands his body, ver. 21.
Non jube^tis est, aut adhortantis ad caedem, sed partim praedicentis partim
permittentis, sicut Judae dicit, quod facis faccito. Polyc. Lyser.
That is, his humane nature being figured by the material Temple; that is, if
ye shall destroy, as Prove. 25.4. and Ephesians. 4.26.

Ver. 20. The Jews presently, as if they had gotten the occasion of
calumniating, which they sought for, cry out, forty six years was this Temple
in building, and repeat also that calumny after three days in the history of
the Passion; forty six years happened between the first laying of the
foundation of the Temple of Zerubbabel and the consummation and dedication of
it.

Ver. 22. And they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said]
That is, they understood the Scripture, and that speech of Christ in his death
and resurrection being fulfilled.

Ver. 24. Did not commit himself unto them] He did not acknowledge them for
true Believers.

CHAP. III.
Verse 1. NIcodemus] His name signifies the victory of the people.

Ver. 2. Came to Jesus by night] Both out of shame, for he was ashamed openly
to come to Jesus who was poor, and to be his Disciple when he was a Master in
Israel, Ne collegas jam Jesu male volentes offenderet: simile quid de Josepho
Arimathensi dicitur. 19.38. Grotius.
ver. 10. This seemed unworthy of his authority and gravity; and that he might
not incur the hatred of the Pharisees. This is three times mentioned chapter 7.50.
and 19.39.

Rabbi] He acknowledges him not to be the Messiah, nor the Son of God, but a
singular Doctor, and a famous Prophet. Polyc. Lyser.

Ver. 3. Verily, verily] See 5. and 8. verses. No Evangelist but John uses
this double asseveration, and that in matters of weight nineteen times in this
Gospel. See Mat. 5.18. and Cornel a Lap.

Except a man be borne] He uses the Verb borne or beggotten to show that our
very nature which we received at our birth is vicious, and shows also in that
the cause why none by their own good qualities or works can come to the
kingdom of heaven unless they be regenerated, because their very nature is so
depraved.

Again] The Greek word again is significant, it imports (says Beza) we must go
over all that is past, and reject it as unprofitable, and begin a new. Or
above, as James 3.17. So Chrysostom. Theophylact. Cyrill take it here, by a
heavenly generation.
The Syriack interprets it here again, and so the Greek word is taken, Gal. 4.9.

Cannot see the kingdom of God] John 12.42. and 7.48. Cannot be a partaker of
life eternal, as Ver. 5. Polyc. Lyser. Rather spiritual life is here meant.
Calvin.

Ver. 4. How can a man be borne when he is old] He names an old man, because
he speaks especially of himself; as if he should say, I am an old man, and
desire to enter into the kingdom of heaven, how can it be that I which am an
old man should be born anew?

Verse. 5. Except a man be borne of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven] Those words must be understood of inward
regeneration, in this sense, Our Savior alludes to some speeches of the Old
Testament, as Ezekiel. 36.25. He shows that this cleansing of us is by the
inward working of the Holy Ghost. Perkins. Nicodemo Christus. (viro quidem
minime malo sed tamen supra modum elato vana aestimatione nobilitatis suae)
objicit considerandam necessitatem novae cujusdam generationis, scilicet
regene^ationis. Cameron. de Ecclesia.
that is, by water which is the Holy Ghost, as Mat. 3.2. for to be born from
above, and of water and the Holy Ghost, is in our Saviors Phrase all one thing.

It is spoken to Nicodemus a Pharisee, who came not to Christ as the rest of
the Pharisees with a bitter Spirit, he though a Jew, a Doctor in Israel, one
that had good thoughts of Christ, verse. 2. yet he must be born again. 2. Must
not be new dressed, but borne again, wholly new. 3. A man not a heathen, but
one that lived in the Church.

4. Cannot else see the kingdom of God] Of grace. Calvin. He can neither be a
true and living member of the Church here, nor shall have a share in glory.

5. The manner of expression, verily, verily, shows the earnestness of Christ's
Spirit in him and the importance of the matter.

It is a great question whether he means Baptism here, for then it was not
instituted though some did baptize; others think it to be like that phrase,
Baptized with the Holy Ghost and fire; but if it be meant of Baptism, it
implies only a contempt of it when there is an opportunity, and who can think
that if a Parent should wilfully contemn Baptism, his Child should be damned
for it?

Error fuit eoru^ qui hunc locum intellexere de conspicuo baptismo, ejusque eam
esse crediderunt necessitatem, ut sine eo aeternis poenis infantes subjacerent,
cum mollius de circumcisione Judaei sentiant, cujus omissae poenam non ad
infantes, sed ad infantum parents ait pertinere. At perspicaci lectori satis
apparet agi hic de hominibus adultis rationisque and emendationis capacibus.
Quod Graeci non ignoravere: apud quos mos fuit ad plenam aetatem, annum puta
vicesimum aut ultra differ baptismum. Grotius dissertat. An semper
communicandum per svmbola.

This Text makes no more for the necessity of Water, than the like John 6.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, for giving the Communion to
Infants. Dr Fulkes Annot. on Rhem. Test. on Mar. 1. Incredibile ducebat
Nicodemus, quod de regeneratione and nova vita audierat: quia regenerationis
hujus modus altior erat ejus captu. Christus ut ejusmodi scrupulum illi eximat,
in vita etiam corporali mirisicam Dei virtutem extare docet, cujus ratio
occulta est. Calvinus.


The Spirit working like water. There are these reasons of this exposition:
First, Collation of other places where the Spirit is set out by water, as John
7.38, 39. Esaias 44.34. Secondly, Collation of this with Mat. 3.11. 3. Because
the other Interpretation, understanding it of Baptism, cannot stand, men may be
saved without it, as the Thief. Dike.

Verse. 8. The wind blows where it listeth] That is, God gives grace, and
vouchsafes favor, Perkins.
to whom, when, and where it pleases him. Because he began to speak of the
Spirit he instanceth in the wind, which is wont also to be called a Spirit, as
Genesis 8.1. and elsewhere often.

Verse. 11. Verily, verily I say unto you] Speaking in the singular, he
immediately annexeth that which follows in the plural, we speak, where
passing on the sudden from ( I to We) and so to Our, he intimated, that he was
one of that plural of whom Moses spoke in the creation.

Verse. 12. If I have told you earthly things] Si per similitudines terrestres
coelestia vos docuit; Fulk in his answer to Greg. Martins preface. p. 14.
If I have taught you heavenly things by earthly similies. Our Savior Christ
himself calls the doctrine of regeneration in such plain manner as he
uttered it to Nicodemus, earthly things, in comparison of other greater
mysteries, which he could have expressed in more heavenly and spiritual sort.

Ascensus in coelum puram mysteriorum Dei notitiam and spiritualem
intelligentiae lucem significat. 1. Cor. 2.14. Calvin. Eo loco ut intuenti
Christi scopum satis liquet, ascendenti in coelum est inquirere aut admitti in
conscientia^ consilij divini. (Eodem fere sensu eadem locutio usurpatur ab
Apostolo, Romans 10.6.) Fortasse autem alluserit Christus ad factum Mosis, qui in
montem ascendebat Deum consulturus, indidemque veluti a Deo ad populum
descendebat, ut haec sit Christi sententia, nemo un quam conscius fuit consilij
Paterni, aut consilium Patris revelavit, praeter unicum filium. Cameron.
Praelect. in Psalm. 68.19.
Ver. 13. And no man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from
heaven] Therefore none but Christ ascended bodily into heaven, and so not
Enoch, Heb. 11.5. This place is not meant of corporal ascending, but of
understanding mystical and heavenly things, as Prove. 30.3, 4. No man ascends
to the full knowledge of heavenly mysteries but Christ alone who descended from
the bosom of his Father. Perkins Dike.

Ascendere in coelum dicitur, qui arcana coeli penetrat. Prove. 30.3. Grotius.

Verse. 14. Must the Son of man be lifted up] Not on the Cross, as Piscator,
but by the preaching of the Gospel, Esaias 2.2. Calvin.

Verse. 16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
etc.] This was a sic without a sicut; that sic, so, signifies the vehemence of
his love. Chrysostom. So vehemently, so admirably. Polanus. His Son, not his
Servant; his begotten Son, not adopted; nay, his only begotten Son, Non unum e
multis, possit quis habere unigenitum and odio habere, says Hugo Cardinal,
but Christ was not so. Mat. 3.17. Prove. 8.30. Possit quis habere unigenitum sed
stultum, says he again, but he was the wisdom of the Father. Col. 2.3.

Verse. 17. God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world] Ob. John
5.27. Ans. The time of his abasement at his first coming, when he came not to
judge, but to be judged, must be distinguished from his second coming in Glory
and Majesty to judge the quick and dead.

Verse. 18. He that believes not is condemned already] Five ways: First, in
Gods Counsel before all worlds. Secondly, in the word, wherein this sentence
of condemnation is read already, Mark. 16.16. Thirdly, in their own
consciences, which is a forerunner of the final judgment. Fourthly, By
Judgments begun already upon them, as hardness of heart, blindness of mind.
Fifthly, By the horrible torment of the souls of such as are in hell with the
devils and damned ones.

Ver. 21. But he that does truth] That is, practices what he knows, and
makes conscience of his ways.

Verse. 26. Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan] Viz. Jesus who came to
thee to be baptized. Perversae aemulationis vox est, metuunt enim ne mox
deseratur magister a frequentia. Calvinus.


Verse. 29. He that has the bride, is the bridegroom: but the friend of the
bridegroom, etc.] As our Savior was the Bridegroom, so his Apostles were the
mariage-guests, Calvin in loc. Alludit ad paranymphos, qui sponso erant intimi
and familiarissimi, adeo ut ad ipsum cubile and thalamum nuptialem, coeteris
exclusis admitterentur, ideo que amici sponsi vocabantur talis enim erat
Johannes Christo. Cornel a Lap.
for so by an Hebrew phrase the children of the marriage Chamber here signify.

Verse. 32. And what he has seen and heard that he testifieth] It is not only a
general phrase of things most evident (for we can certainly witness of those
things which we see and hear) but there is a greater emphasis here in this
phrase, viz. Duobus bis sensibus homines ad cognitionem deveniunt. Grotius.
That Christ has not the things which he teaches here by revelation, as the
Prophets and Apostles, neither from the Law nor Testimony, had he learned those
things as other Ministers.

Verse. 33. He that has received his testimony, has set to his seal, that God
is true] That is, gives unto God, as it were, a testimony of his truth, Mr
Perkins. Metaphora sumta a contractibus qui public impressis signis firmantur.
Sic 1 Reg. 21.8. Nehem. 9.38.10.1. Esther 8.8, 9, 10. Jer. 32.10. Dan. 6.17.
Grotius. Metaphora petita est ab ijs, quae apud Judaeos fieri consueverun^: Nam
solebant septem vicibus interrogate testes, diligenterque singula eorum
expendere verba atque testimonia. Petit. Var. Lect. l. 1. c. 10.
and thereto puts his hand and seal.

Ver. 34. Gives not the Spirit by measure] That is, he has received the
Spirit of God in a wondefull extraordinary measure. In the time of the new
Covenant God is not said to measure, but to power out his Spirit, first upon
the Head, then on the Church, Chap. 1.16. and 7.39. Acts 21.17. Tit. 3.6.

Ver. 36. He that believes not the Son] (...), He that will not be persuaded,
or is obstinate; obstinacy against persuasion is either in the understanding,
called unbelief, Mr Pemble. Vbi notanda est emphasis vocis manet. Nam in
Scripturis (...) singularem habet significationem, notat enim constantiam and
penitissimam adhaesionem rei illius quae dicitur manner, nam est quaedam ira
Dei quae transit and quodammodo (si ita loqui liceat) lambit, ut ignis qui non
destruit sed expolit potius ut est Esa. ^4. ira quaedam Dei momentanea, quam
experiuntur etiam filij Dei. At ira manens ea est quae ita perdit ut nunquam
disperdat, and cruciat ita ut nun quam perimat. Came. de eccles. Tomo. 10.
properly to be understood here, as appears by the Antithesis, and so
translated, Romans 11.30, 31. or in the will, and then it is called disobedience,
so translated, Romans 1.30. Tit. 1.16.

CHAP. IIII.
Verse. 6. NOw Jacobs well was there] A well which Jacob when he dwelt there
dug for his own use, and the use of his Family. See ver. 12. Genesis 21.30. and
26.15.


Verse. 9. For the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans] Have not common
commerce, no not so far as that one should give the other meat or drink in his
want, Notum est Samaritanos faecem populi fuisse ex alienigenis collectam. Quia
corruperant Dei cullum, multosque p^rversos and adulterinos ritus colebant,
Judaeis merito erant exosi, interea tamen non dubium est, quin Iudaei magna ex
part carnali suo odio Legis zelum praetexerent. Calv.
or help him to it, as appears in the words foregoing, they might not eat
together.

Ver. 10. The gift of God] This is interpreted two ways, some expound it of
Christ himself, his own person, so Rollock, and Dr. Hall in his Paraphrase. 2.
Others of the present occasion and opportunity he had now to know and receive
Christ, we may take it for both.

Living water] In the letter he meant spring water, for so she understood him,
and so the word is used, Genesis 22.19. yet thereby, as by a metaphor, he meant
the Spirit of God. Hildersam. Vocat aquam viventem and ratione fontis Christi
in quo est, and ratione effectus, quasi vivificantem aquam. Polyc. Lyser. Vide
Piscat.

Verse. 12. Art thou greater than our Father Jacob who gave us the well] Because
there was great use of wells in the hotter Countries, the woman commends this
grant of Jacobs of the well as a singular benefit.

Verse. 14. Of the water] By water our Savior means the Spirit of grace, as
John 7.39. Esaias 44.3. wherewith whosoever is once endued he shall never be
after destitute of the Spirit, or of grace.

Shall never thirst] That is, Never thirst] i. e. with a tormenting and deadly
thirst. Mr. Hildersam. That is, be in the condition of nature He was in before,
with a thirst of complacency, not of total indigency. 66. Esa. 1 Est duplex
sitis, alia quae tota^is indigentiae de qua Christus, Non sitiet in aeternum,
scilicet ut totaliter indigens. Est alia quae partialis qua quis de gratia
salvifica degustavit, eaque amplius satiari anhelanter expetit, sic beati qui
sitiunt. Matthew. 5. Ames. in coron. ad collat. Hag. art. 5. c. 2.
shall never be dry, or utterly destitute of grace, ver. 13. The Spirit shall
be in him an ever-springing fountain, until he has attained eternal life;
it shall continue in him, and work effectually to his salvation. The Spirit in
its operation is like to water, 44. Esaias 3. and 58.11. See 10. and 11. verses,
and 7. John 37.38. The comparison lies in four things, as Cornelius a Lapide
and others show. First, water serves to cool burning, any scortching
unnatural heat, so the Spirit of God cooles the soul when it is scortcht with
appehension of Gods wrath. Secondly, quenches the thirst, so the Spirit of God
satisfies the soul. Thirdly, water has a cleansing virtue, it purges away
filth, so the Spirit of God, Ezekiel. 36.25.12 Zach. latter end, and 13.
beginning. Fourthly, water fructifieth, 17. Ier. 5. 1 Psalm. 3. so the Spirit of
God.

Verse. 22. Ye worship ye know not what] That is, although you have a good
intention, and direct your worship to God, Non dicit, nescitis quid adoratis,
sed adoratis quod nescitis, hoc est quia verbum Dei non est lucerna vestra,
ideo incertae and vagae sunt imaginationes quas de Deo habetis, de essentia and
voluntate ejus nihil certi and firmi potestis absque verbo statuere. Polyc.
Lyser.
and pretend the examples of your Fathers, yet because your worship was
instituted without the manifest word of God you know not what you worship. See
Dr. Reynolds on 110. Psalm. p. 136.

Salvation is of the Jewes] Which is understood First of the Messiah being to
be borne of them, Romans 9. Secondly, of the Word committed to them, Romans 3.2.
Polyc. Lyser.

Verse. 23. In Spirit and truth] First in Spirit] That is, not carnally. Truth]
That is, according to the spiritual meaning of the Ceremonial Law. They had
killing of sacrifices in the Ceremonial Law, Dr. Hall.
now there should be killing of sin; they had fire, we should have zeal;
they salt, we sincerity. See Mr. Mede on this place.

In Spirit and truth] inwardly and sincerely.

Or secondly, Spirit] for the manner of his worship, truth] for the matter as
he has revealed. Inwardly, in their hearts and souls, and truly. Spirit] That
is, in the mind, Conscience, will, and affections. Perkins.

Verse. 25. That Messiah commeth] The word is the present tense, he is even
coming, Significat adventum Messiae praeforibus esse. Polyc. Lyser.
and when he comes, he will tell us all things, that is, all these things
that we speak of concerning the worship of God, he will teach us far otherwise.
Like to this is that which the Jews say at this day of Eliah, Elias veniet and
revelabit omnia, Elias will come and will reveal all things.

Verse. 29. Is not this the Christ] Not that she doubts, but from the declaring
of things hidden she infers that he is the Messiah. Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 35. Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then comes harvest?
behold I say unto you, Wilhelmi Langi de Annis Christi, l. 2. c. 4.
lift up your eyes, and look on the fields: for they are white already to
harvest] As if he should say, you reckon yet four months to the harvest (
viz. to a natural harvest) but see the fields waxing white with fruit for a
spiritual harvest.

Verse. 42. Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our
selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ] That is, we are experimentally
convinced by what we have heard and seen, that this is he.

This is indeed the Christ] The adverb indeed is opposed either to false
Christ's as Theudas was, ottypicall worldly Saviors, as in the history of
Judges, Polyc. Lyser.
it is sometimes said he sent them a Savior: but this Jesus indeed is the
Messiah, the Savior of the world. Esaias 49.6.

Verse. 44. A Prophet has no honor in his own Countrey] It seems probable to
me that the Proverb arose from thence, Calvin.
that the Prophets were so ill entertained by their own nation.

Verse. 46. A certain noble man] Not by reason of stock or family, but by
reason of office, as the Syriack has rendered it, a Minister or steward of the
King. Regius quidam, (...) i. e. ex Herodis aulicis and eorum numero qui
plurimum apud eum poterant. Beza.
Herod's Courtier, who though he was a Tetrarch, yet he was commonly called
King; it was his wife whom Luke 8.3. reckons among the followers of Christ,
viz. Chusa who was Herod's Steward, as is there said. Polyc. Lyser.

Verse. 48. Ye will not believe] Viz. The word and promises of God, or you do
not believe that I am the Messiah. Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 52. At the seventh hour the fever left him] By that consideration it
appears that the noble man did not anxiously make haste, because he believed
the word of Christ, but went on quietly in his journey, which is an excellent
description of true faith. Esaias 28.16.

CHAP. V.
IN this Chapter because the Jews objected that Christ came of himself, he
tells them six times that his Father sent him.

Verse. 1. A feast of the Jews] The acts of that Feast contain three heads,
Polyc. Lyser.
viz. a Miracle, a disputation about the Sabbath, and a famous Sermon. The
Passover is called (...), by a Propriety, a Feast, thirteen times in the New
Testament, by the Evangelists twelve times, and once Act. 18.21. and it was the
principal, because it was the first, and was instituted for the remembrance of
the greatest benefit, and also was the most lively type of Christ his
sacrifice. Mr. Pemble in loc. Vide Cornel. a Lap. and Grotium.
When a Feast is simply named without addition, it is often used of the Feast
of the Passover, Matthew. 27.15. John 4.45. and so also John 11.56. and 2.12. it
is used, John 6.4. there seems to be an explication of this place, and the
Passover a Feast of the Jews was nigh. The reason of the Antonomasie is,
because the Passover is the beginning and chief of the Feasts, there is a
certain prerogative given it above the rest, both for the memory of the
benefit past, and the signification of the future redemption. At this feast
Jesus went up to Jerusalem, as also to other Feasts often in the time of his
ministry. Chrysostom gives three reasons of it. First, that he being so
subject to the Law for us might free us from its bondage. Secondly, lest he
should seem to be an Adversary of the Law, as if he had come to have broken
it, but that he might show that he would fulfill the shadows and figures of
him. Thirdly, because to the Feasts at Jerusalem there came Proselytes and
religious persons not only from all the p^rts of Judaea, but the whole world,
Christ would take occasion, both that he might instruct many, and that his fame
concerning his doctrine and miracles might spread the more.

Verse. 2. By the place of the sheepe] Some understand market, others gate,
which is most probable, because mention is made of such a gate nigh the Temple,
(...) Probatica, Graeca vox est idem significan^ quod pecuaria vel ovina; (...)
enim est ovis. Ita dicta fuit haec piscina tum quia erat juxta portam
adjacentem templo, per quam scilicet and greges ovium introducebantur immolandi
in templo, de qua 2 Esdrae 3. v. 1. and 32. tum quia in illa oves, quotidie
mane and vespere Deo sacrificandae congregabantur and abluebantur. Ita
Theophyl. Jansen. and Hieron. Cornel. a Lap. in loc.
Neh. 3.2. where the seventy translate it so, using the same word. Howsoever,
it was a place where sheep were kept for sacrifice. That poole was to wash and
water the sheep that were brought thither.

In the Hebrew tongue] That is, in that tongue which the Hebrews not use, which
was Syriack not much differing from the Hebrew.

Bethesda] The house of bounty, Bethesda Domus beneficentiae seu benignitatis.
Vide de Dieu, Grotium, and Toletum
because in that place God freely exercised his power in curing all diseases of
the people, and because there the godly relieved the sick with their alms.
Brugensis has both these.

The greek books have Bethesda, the Latins Bethsaida, which signifies a house
of fishing, and so agrees with poole.

Having five porches] Or Galleries, (...): it signifies a spacious place to
walk in. These were made for the relief of those poor people, that they might
be dry from wind and weather, because they were to tarry a great while before
they could be healed. Non quod videretur Angelus, sed quod persu^sum esset
Judaeis talia a Deo non nisi per angelos agi. Itaque ex motu aquae praesentia
angeli intelligebatur, ut ex terrae motu. Matthew. 28.2. Grotius. Vide Bezam, and
Toletum. An Angel was sent here that they might know, that the virtue to cure
came not from the goodness of the waters, but that it was a divine work,
seeing that could not cure till the Angel came. Mr. Pemb.


Verse. 4. An Angel went down at a certain season into the poole, and troubled
the water] The Evangelist has not marked, what sign there was by which the
descent and presence of the Angel was represented, but it is necessary that
there was some such visible Symbol by which men might mark, that the water
was not troubled by any storm, or hidden cause lying in the very fish-poole,
but that the Angel was sent from heaven into the very fish-poole, and when
that visible Symbol descended into the fish-pool, then the water which
otherwise stood was not only moved in the top, but was troubled even from the
bottom. Job 41.12. The Syriack has a word which signifies Commotion with
trembling; it was found by experience, that whosoever first entered into that
troubled water (howsoever he was held) presently he returned whole. But if
after the first, one, or another, or more entered into that fish-poole, they
perceived no virtue of healing. Polyc. Lyser.

Cerro tempore] Circa Pascha, ut veteres crediderunt. Grotius. Multa
concurrebant, ne naturalis per aquam medicatio crederetur. Primum stato tempore
fiebat. Deinde sanabantur omnia morborum genera: postremo commota prius aqua,
cum alioqui ad remedia quaeratur ea quae tranquilla est. Grotius.
The Angel did not daily descend into the water and trouble it, but at a
certain season. Lyra thinks that it began when the time of the revelation of
the Messiah drew nigh, and ended after he was glorified. Some of the Shoolemen
say that it began then when Christ being baptized in Jordan sanctified the
waters; of the article of the time when it began nothing can be determined, but
it appears that it began not long before Christ's time.

Verse. 5. A certain man] In that he is only called so, it implies that he was
a man of no great name or note, but that he was a poor man, as appears in
that he had layne here so long without help.

Had infirmity thirty eight years] The woman with the bloody issue was sick
twelve years, the woman bound by Satan eighteen years, the blind man, John
9.21. till he came to man's age, yet all cured.

Verse. 6. Will thou be made whole] He does not ask this (of which there was no
doubt, for therefore was he brought thither) as if he was ignorant, neither is
it a sarcasme, but that he might declare the desperate force of the disease,
Polyc. Lyser. Calvin. See Mr. Pemble and Cornel. a Lap. in loc.
and the want of humane help, which made for the commendation of the miracle,
and so both he and those that were about him, and those that did lie together
with him, were stirred up to the consideration of the miracle; that they might
know who was the author of it.

This is also a peculiar observation, that he healed only one among such a
multitude that lay there, in Galilee he cured every kind of disease, Matthew.
4.23. and in Capernaum all that were brought to him. Matthew. 8.16. But when
Christ wrought almost innumerable miracles elsewhere, he wrought famous ones at
Jerusalem, but those very rare, Polyc. Lyser.
and that without doubt was done for this cause, lest they should rest in
outward signs, or lest they should think that the benefits of the Messiah are
limited to the healing of men's bodies, or other external commodities, but that
the external miracles might lead them to the spiritual kingdom of Christ.

In N. T. ubi de aegris fit mentio aliquoties legitur (...). Quater hoc ipso
capite, and Marc. 2. v. 4.9.11.12. cap. 6. v. 55. Act. 5.15. and cap. 9. v. 33.
Etiam Amos 3.12. est grabatum. Apud probatos autores Latinos non semel invenire
est. Senec Epist. 18. Grabatus ille verus sit and sagum and panis durus ac
sordidus. Martial. lib. 1.93. Nec focus est, nudi nec sponda grabati.
Lecticarum usus solis aegris quasi propriiusus erat. Dieter. Antiq. Bibl. part.
1.
Verse. 9. Took up his bed and walked] The Law by name forbids to carry any
burden on the Sabbath Day, Jer. 17.21. but there was a twofold reason why
Christ would show such a spectacle. First, that the miracle might be the better
known to the common people. Secondly, that occasion might be given, and a way
as it were made open for that excellent sermon which he presently made.

A Lapide gives two other reasons: 1. Because Christ was Lord of the Sabbath,
and therefore might dispense with his Law, 2. Because the work forbidden on the
Sabbath was a servile work, not a pious and divine work, as this.

Ver. 12. What man is that which said unto thee, take up thy bed and walk]
Behold the wit of malice, they say, not who is it that healed thee, but who
commanded thee to take up thy bed. Quaerunt, non quod mirentur, sed quod
calumnientur. Grotius.

Ver. 13. Jesus had conveyed himself away] This word is used only here in all
the New Testament: It signifies to escape privily, and steal out of a
multitude; Beza. Vox haec usurpatur in Graeca versione, Jud. 18.26. 2 Samuel
11.24. and 23.16. Jud. 4.18.
it is properly spoken of those which swim out of the waters.

Ver. 14. Finds him in the Temple] Without doubt praying and giving thanks
for his health recovered.

Verse. 16. Did prosecute Iesus] The word is taken from Hunters which pursue the
Beast, and suffer him not to be at rest, till he be taken.

Sought to slay him]That is, they thought of a public accusation, that
according to the Law, Number. 15.25. he might be stoned.

Verse. 17. My Father works hitherto, and I work] In which phrase is expressed
a notable work of Gods heavenly providence, viz. that after the Creation of all
things whereby God gave being unto the Creatures, and power and virtue to do
the things for which they were created, he does by his providence still
preserve that being. Mr. Perkins. See a Lapide.

Ver. 19. Likewise] In the same manner, with equal liberty, knowledge, power.

Verse. 21. Raises and quickneth] Two phrases implying one thing, as appears
in the other clause where but one is expressed. Hereby is employed 1. a Spiritual
quickening from the death of sin, and 2. a corporal quickening, the raising of
our bodies out of the graves.

The Son quickneth whom he will] With the same and equal power.

Ver. 22. For the Father judges no man] Four things are to be considered in
judgment: 1. Judiciary power. 2. Internal approbation of good, Ferus in loc.
Vide Jansen. Judges no man] That is, by himself alone, but in and by the Son.
and detestation of evil. 3. Retribution of reward; all those things agree to
all and every person of the Trinity. 4. External fitting on the Tribunal, and
publishing of the Sentence; and in this manner the Father judges no man, but
commits all judgment to the Son.

Some say these phrases judges, and judgment, are not to be taken (only)
concerning the last judgment, but concerning the supreme disposition and
government of all things in the world.

Verse. 24. Verily, verily I say unto you] Happy are we that Christ makes such
serious protestations for us to believe, unhappy are we that cannot believe
without them. Geminatio haec attentionem excitat. Significat enim rem quam
asserit, non tantum esse certissimam, sed and sum necessariam ad salutem
aeternam. Vide. c. 3.3. Cornel. a Lapide. Brentius.


Shall not come into condemnation] In all the english Books, See Drusius of
four that come not into judgment. Dr. Clerk.
even the last Translation too, it is, The believers shall not come into
condemnation, which I marvel at, that is to expound, not to translate. The
original is (...), that is, judgment, not damnation, and words are to be
turned not as they mean in Trope, but as they signify. Christ indeed meant in
trope, (...) for (...), So St Augustine, Vtique judicium pro damnatione posuit,
The Genus for the Species, the faithful shall not come into damnation. But the
proper sense is judgment, and the Rhemists read it so.

Verse. 25. When the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live] Not such a voice as shall call them out of their graves, as
in verse. 28. for he says, now is, but the meaning of the place is to show,
that those that were dead in sin should be quickened, either by Christ in his
own Person, or by his word in his Ministers. Mr Perkins.


Verse. 28. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear his voice] His meaning is, though this be a
stupendous thing, and exceed the capacity of all reason and sense, yet you
ought not therefore to esteem it incredible, vain, and false. Christ says that
that hour comes, draws nearer and nearer, he names not the day but the hour
or moment hastening. Polyc. Lyser.


All that are in the graves] That is, by a Synecdoche of one kind for all the
rest, by what manner of death soever they dyed, Quia sepeliri communiter solent
mortui, per synecdochen omnes intelligit, qui pridem extincti sunt; vox Filij
clangorem tubae significat qui Christi jussu and virtute personabit. Mat.
24.31. 1 Cor. 5.57.
and howsoever they were consumed. Hear his voice] That is, the voice of
Christ, ver. 27. As the voice of the Son is the voice of the Father, so the
voice of the Archangell is the voice of Christ which shall send him. See 1
These. 4.16. 1 Cor. 15.51. Mat. 24.51.

Verse. 31. If I bear witness of my self my witness is not true] Ob. John
8.14. Ans. Christ's Testimony is to be considered two ways, as the Testimony of
a mere man, and so he yields to the Jews, that his Testimony was unfit and
unsufficient in his own cause, because by the Law, out of the mouth of two or
three witnesses every word must stand: But secondly, consider him as a divine
person coming from heaven, and having his Father giving witness with him, thus
his Testimony is infallible, and so the latter to be understood.

Verse. 32. There is another] That is, God the Father, not John, as some say:
For Christ would here bring in an undeniable Testimony. Mat. 3.17.
He is another from Christ, 1. In regard of the Jews conceit, that Christ was
but a man. 2. In regard of his humane nature. 3. In regard of his Office, as he
was Mediator between God and man. 4. In regard of his Person, as he is God,
being a distinct person from the Father.

(...), id est ipsa lucerna, scilicet eximia and singularis. Cornel. a Lap.
Verse. 35. He was a burning and shinning light] Greek that Lamp burning and
shining; burning to himself, shining to others. John was not only a Lamp
shining in his Sermons, but a Torch burning with zeal, Nam qui non ardet, non
accendit. Bernard. Nec lucere potest nisi prius ardeat. Aquinas.

And ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his light] All liked him very
well, yea, they even danced about him, as Children about a bonfire (so much the
word bears) for a season.

Verse. 36. The same works that I do] (...) those very works which I do.

(...) scrutamini. Vide Cornel. a Lap. The same word is used. Act. 17.11.
Verse. 39. Search the Scriptures] Though in the Original and Latin
Translation, the word be ambiguous, and may be taken in the Indicative Mood and
the Imperative also; yet I rather take it in the Imperative, as most
Translations do, for a precept and duty, than in the Indicative, for a
commendation of them, noting what they did, as if he had said, ye search the
Scriptures.

Search the Scriptures] That is, shake and sift them, as the word signifies,
search narrowly till the true force and meaning of every sentence, Non legite
tantum sed attento animo expendite. Sic (...) sumitur infra 7.5^. 1 Pet. 1.11.
Grotius. The Jews themselves thought the Scriptures necessary to salvation.
Mark 12.24. Col. 3.16.
yea, of every word and syllable, nay, of every letter and jot therein be known
and understood, confer place with place, the scope of one place with another,
things going before with things coming after, yea, compare word with word,
letter with letter, and search it thoroughly. Mr. Perkins.

It is not only a metaphor taken from digging minerals, but also from hunting
dogs who labor by smelling to find out the Hare. Chrysostom. Which elegant
similitudes sweetly commend to us the accurate search of the Scriptures.
Communiter reddi soler per indagare, sive per inquirere, quorum hoc metalli
fossorum est, and eorum qui Margaritas ac lapidos presiosos e locis
abditissimis magna solertia eruunt, illud vero venatorum proprium. Waltherus in
exercit. Bibl. Vide ejus Harm. Bibl. in loc.
The Lxx use this word, Prove. 2.4. Alphonsus the King of Arragon read over all
the Bible fourteen times with Commentaries. Beza being above fourscore years
of age could say perfectly by heart any Greek Chapter in St Paul's Epistles.

One Mistress Elizabeth Wheatenhall, the Daughter of one Master Anthony
wheatenhall of Tenterden in Kent, late deceased, not yet being ten years old,
having been about three years brought up in the house of her Uncle Sir Henry
Wheatenhall, a very religious Knight at East-Peccam in Kent, and there
carefully instructed by his virtuous Lady, before she was nine years old (not
much above eight) could say all the New Testament by heart, yea, at that age
she was so perfect therein, when she had not been there above two years, that
being asked where any words were, she would presently name Book, Chapter and
Verse. See more in Mr Stoughtons Epistle to the Reader prefixed to the Treatise
of David's love to Gods Word.
One Mr Stoughton a Minister writes this upon his own knowledge and
examination of her, in about forty places at one time, wherein she never missed
Book and Chapter but once: yea, she never erred in the number of the Verse, but
always told the just Verse, within one or two at the most, under or over.

Ver. 43. I am come in my Fathers name] To come in the name of the Father, is
to be sent by him to do all things according to his prescription, to seek his
glory, for God to be present with, and efficacious by his Ministry. Polyc.
Lyser.

To come in his own name] Is not to be sent of God, to work from his own or
others will, not Gods command, to seek his own glory and profit.

CHAP. VI.
BEllarmine himself ( de Euchar. l. 1. c. 5.) tells us, that many Papists (as
Biel, Cusanus, Cajetane, Tapper, Hessels, Jansenius) deny, that our Savior in
this Chapter treates of the Sacrament. And for those which hold otherwise, they
are divided also, (as Ferus shows on this Chapter) Some of them will have
that which our Savior here speaks about the bread of life to be meant of the
Eucharist, others will not have the Eucharist to be spoken of here till verse
51. and thus holds Bellarmine, and a Lapide. But first, this Sermon was
uttered by our Savior (as Bishop Usher says) above a year before the
celebration of his last Supper, Two years says Cartw,
wherein the Sacrament of his body and blood was instituted, at which time none
of his hearers could possibly have understood him to have spoken of the
external eating of him in the Sacrament. For in verse 4. this fell out not
long before the Passover, and consequently a year at least before the the
last Passover, wherein our Savior instituted the Sacrament of his Supper, See
John 11.55. Secondly, The eating which Christ speaks of here is by faith, even
the very act of faith, ver. 29, 35, 48, 47. therefore it is spiritual eating,
not sacramental, which may be without faith. Thirdly, Creed and manducasti
August. See Iansen. Concord. p. 59. In hoc capite non minus commendat potum
quam cibum, in quo, si de Sacramentis loquutus fuisset, quod adversariorum
plerique nunc existimant, nihil expressius esse^ contra Communionem sub utraque
specie his verbis, verse 53. Rivetus in Cathol. Orthod.
If those words ver. 53. be meant of the Eucharist, then how can our
adversaries defend their Communion under one kind, seeing here the drinking of
Christ's blood is required, as without which there is no life, this is
argumentum ad hominem, a forcible reason against the Papists, and it prevails
with diverse of them to interpret this Chapter not of the Eucharist.

The eating of the flesh of Christ, and the drinking of his blood, spoken of in
this Chapter, is not the eating of the Sacrament of the Supper, but all manner
of participation with Christ in the word and Sacrament. This eating here spoken
of necessarily gives life everlasting to the eater, 27, 35, 51, 54. but the
Sacrament does not so. 2. This eating of Christ is perpetual, and that without
which no man can have life in him, Cartw. co^furof the Rhem. Ex his verbis
palam apparet, perperam de Coena exponi totum hunc locum, nam si verum esset,
quicunque ad Sacram Domini mensam se ingerunt carnis and sanguinis ejus fieri
participes, omnes vitam referrent, scimus autem multis in exitium cedere. Et
certe ineptum fuisset ac intempestivum de coena tunc disserere, quam nondum
instituerat; ideo de perpetua fidei manducatione eum tractare certum est.
Simultamen fateor, nihil hic dici quod non in coena figuretur ac vere
praestetur fidelibus, adeoque sacram coenam Christus quasi hujus concionis
sigillum esse voluit. Atque haec ratio est cur apud Iohannem nulla fiat coenae
mentio. Calv. in ver. 54. hujus Capitis.
ver. 53. But the eating of the Sacrament is not perpetual, nor that without
which a man cannot have life in him.

Verse. 9. There is a lad here] (...), a little Lad, puerulus.

Two small fishes] (...), two small fishes. Small they must needs be, as the
word in the original signifies, otherwise how could the little boy have tugged
them thither? The multiplying is thought to have been first in the hands of our
Savior (as Augustine notes with St Hierome.) then to have continued under the
hands of the Apostles (as Chrysostom) and lastly to have its complement in the
hands and mouths of the eaters, Tolet. in loc.
as St. Ambrosa concludes with St. Hilary.

Verse. 12. Gather up the fragments] That is, forget not the least benefits.
Bernard.


Verse. 13. And filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley
loaves] It is demanded whence the Jews being so poor, Cophinus Graecum est
nomen genus quoddam Cistae significans, in usu erat apud Judaeos, unde
Martialis Judaeum Cistiferum vocat. Toletus in loc. Alardi Epiphil. Philolog.
c. 8.
and in the wilderness remote from the society of men, had baskets so quickly
to keep so many fragments reserved. Some think that baskets and hay was their
household stuff, and that they never went without them.

-- Delubra locantur
Judaeis quorum Cophinus foenumque suppellox.
But they give no reasons of this their opinion. They still carried these with
them, both because in Egypt they carried their clay in their baskets, and
because they used hay or straw to make bricks, that by these monuments they
might remember their great slavery in Egypt. Tolet says, it is likely that so
great a multitude of people had many baskets with them in which they carried
things necessary for themselves.

Verse. 14. The miracle that Jesus did] Although Christ to illustrate the
miracle commands the baskets to be filled, yet also he exhorts his to
frugality. Calvin.

Verse. 27 Labor not] The greek word is work not, take no pains for, and it
signifies also the work of the soul, Graece (...), id est, opera, studio, and
labor vestro contendite, and sedulo curate ut acquiratis cibum, non corporis
qui perit, sed animae qui non perit. a Lap. Vide Bezam and Piscat.
study not, care not, take no thought for. Matthew. 6.3. It must be understood
comparatively, rather for the food that lasts to everlasting life.

The Son of man is come] That is, the Messiah, a title known to the Jews. Dan.
7. ver. 3.

Him has God the Father] That is, the heavenly Father, Sealed] That is, made
his Commission authentical, Messiae certas notas seu signa vel sigilla
addidit, ex quibus prae reliquis filiis hominum cognosci possit.
as men do their deeds by their seal. It is a metaphor taken from them who
ratify their authorie whom they send, that is, approve of them as it were by
setting to their seal.

Loquuti erant de operibus: Christus ad unum opus eos revocat, hoc est ad
fidem, quo significat, quicquid extra fidem homines moliuntur, inutile ac vanum
esse, solum vero fidem sufficere quia hoc unum a nobis Deus postulat, ut
credamus. Calvinus.
Verse. 29. This is the work of God] That which he esteems in stead of all
works, That ye believe on him whom he has sent.

The promise of never hungring and thirsting is not made good fully till we
come to heaven. Psalm. 16. v. 6. Rev. 7.17. First, this promise does not exclude
the feeling and sense of our present wants. Secondly, it is not put to exclude
those fervent desires that the faithful have after more grace. 1 Pet. 2.2. A
taste of Christ's sweetness will make us hunger and long after more.
Verse. 35. He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on
me shall never thirst] Shall a believer that partakes of Christ be so
satisfied as never to hunger more? we are subject to wants, and commanded to
hunger and thirst again. John 4.14.

First, our Lord may speak this in opposition to outward food, grace is an
everlasting spring, he shall never have a total drouth. Secondly, it may be
meant of corrupt motions to these outward objects, he shall never long more
after them with that eagerness or impatience. Thirdly, it may be spoken in
regard of the full content that the soul may take by reflecting on its
interest in Christ. Fourthly, they shall not thirst with an utter despairing
thirst accompanied with a total privation of Gods grace and love to them.

Verse. 37. All] The greek word is neuter, that is, the whole body of the
Church. giveth] That is, electeth, shall come to mee] by faith and love, I will
in no ways cast out] An emphasis in the original, two negatives, in no wise,
by no means, cast out, He that believes in me shall certainly have
everlastingly life, 47. ver.

Verse. 40. And I will raise him up at the last day] He repeats this four times
in the same words, that we may be certain about this hope.

Verse. 44. No man can come to me] There is a double cannot says a reverend
Divine, one of mere weakness, showing that he which cannot do the thing
wants power to do it. Another of malignity or willing averseness which shows
a violent bent of the will to the contrary, that he will not use the power he
has. I will not undertake the maintaining of this distinction.

Except the Father which has sent me draw Therefore there is no free will.
Perkins.
him] That is, incline and turn man's will unto his aim, and make it of an
unwilling will a willing will; the reason hereof is Romans 8.7. In the calling of
men by the word, there is a Trabere and a venire. The Father draws, and the
man comes, that notes the efficacy of Grace, and this the sweetness of
Grace. Grace works strongly, and therefore God is said to draw, and it works
sweetly too, and therefore man is said to come. Dr. Reynolds on Psalm. 110. ver.
1.

Verse. 45. In the Prophets] It is only in Esaias 54.13. but because it is
contained in that part of the bible which they called the Prophets, it is
rightly so said. Calvin.

They shall be all taught of God] Non singula generum sed genera singulorum,
Cajetane, Quod dicit omnes ad electos restringi debet, qui soli sunt genuinae
ecclesiae filii: Calvinus.
that is, men of any nation, condition, sex, all that will shall be docible,
say Chrysostom and Theophylact, all which shall be worthy, Cyrill.

All] Because none is taught but of God, as he that only teaches the children
in a City teaches all, not because all learn, but because whosoever learnes
learnes of him; rather all the sons of the Church. Austen.

Comes unto me] That is, believes in me.

Verse. 47. He that believes on me has everlasting life] Sanctification is
the beginning of glorification, therefore Saint Paul omitteth it. Romans 8.30.

Verse. 48. I am that bread of life] What ever was in the Manna formally and
really, was in Christ transcendently, there was infinitely more in him to the
soul than could be in that to the body. It was admirable in many things, yet
it was but a creature, Christ is the Creator. Secondly, it was wholly an
instrument in the hand of Christ, he fed them with that Manna, often in this
chapter. Thirdly, though it was used to preserve life by the blessing of God,
yet it self was without life; but Christ here tells them he is the manna, that
living bread. It could not preserve from death, 49. ver. but Christ does. v. 51.

Verse. 51. I am the living bread] Or quickening bread, according to other
translations. The person of Christ incarnate is meant under the metaphor of
bread, and our belief is signified by eating. Christ's flesh is living bread,
both formaliter in se, Panem se vocat similitudine aptissima, quia omnes
conditiones panis perfectissime implet. Panis famen tollit, satiat, alit, and
vitam prorogat. Polyc. Lyser. Rhem. annor. in ver. 32.
and effective in nobis, makes them that eat it live for ever. 57. ver.

My flesh] Or my body, this place, and that Heb. 10.10. is to be synechdocally
understood, under one kind comprehending all his sufferings. Bis ponit verbum
dabo, quia vere duplici ratione caro Christi datur pro mundi vita, una ratione
acquisitionis quando caro Christi in Cruce traditur in mortem pro totius mundi
vita. Altera ratione applicationis and distributionis, qua in praedicatione
Evangelii haec vita itidem omnibus in mundo offertur. Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 52. Give us his flesh to eate] Here is not meant an external eating and
drinking with the mouth and throat of the body, as the Jews then and the
Romanists more grossly since have imagined, but internal and spiritual by a
lively faith. Bishop Usher.

Verse. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of God, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you] We may ask a Papist whether the Eucharist be here spoken
of; if it be not, why do they allege this Chapter to establish their
transubstantiation? if it be, Quem locum qui de symbolica manducatione
interpretati sunt, eo devenere, ut non modo recens natis infantibus exhiberent
Eucharistica symbola, sed and nisi id fieret, aeternus poenas ipsit infantibus
crudeli scito denunciarent, cum revera ibi manducare and bibere nihil sit aliud
quam intelligere, meditari, and in usum vertere. Grotius. Dissertat. an semper
communicandum per Symbola. Hinc homines malae linguae sibi persuaserunt
Christianos filiorum suorum carnem esse, and sanguinem bibere. Dilher. Eclog.
Sac. Dic. 18.
why do they deprive the people of that life in taking the Cup from them? It
does not serve the turn to say, that the people receive the blood together
with the host by a concomitancy, for he that so receives the blood does not
drink. Pet. du Moulin.

Verse. 54. Who so eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life.] To
give us to understand that his manhood has quickening virtue in it; yet not of
it self as by it self, but as it is the manhood of the Son of God. Mr. Perkins.

Verse. 55. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed] It is as
much as if he had said, real meat and drink, yet means he not corporal but
spiritual meat and drink. v. 65. Spiritual and corporal are opposite one to
the other, not spiritual and real. That is real which is not imaginary or in
conceit only, but in deed and truth.

Verse. 56. My flesh and drinks my bloud] That is, not only Christ's body but
person, See 57.
all his merits, his passions and privileges which flow from them.

He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him]
Christ in this Chapter is often resembled to food; the Spirit of God delights in
this metaphor, not only because they of Capernaum followed him for the loaves,
but because the resemblance is suitable in five particulars. First, in regard
of the necessity of Christ for the soul as of food for the body. 1 Timothy 6.8.
Genesis 28. Food and raiment, food is more needful. Adam in Paradise, and many
Nations subsist without raiment, but none can without food. Secondly, in
respect of its complacency and delight. Thirdly, its efficacy, it continues and
strengthens life, so Christ. Fourthly, because of the union between the meat
that nourishes and the body that is to be nourished. Fifthly, there is a
unity. 1 Cor. 6.17.

Verse. 62. What and if ye shall see the son of man ascend up where he was
before] It is necessary to understand it one of these two ways, either then
you shall not be scandalized, when you shall see, etc. or contrarily, then you
shall be more scandalized. Many follow the former sense, Chrysostom,
Augustine, Cyrill, Theophylact, Beda, Rupertus. I can hardly persuade my self
(says Maldonate) that it is to be understood then you shall cease to be
scandalized, Maldonat. ad loc. Vide illum in v. 49.
or then you shall understand, believe, as all the authors which I have read
interpret it. What will you do when you shall see me ascending into heaven,
how much more will you be scandalized, how much less will you believe. I deny
not (says he) that I have none, the author of this interpretation, but I
approve of this more than the other of Augustine, the most probable of the
others otherwise, because this is more repugnant to the sense of the
Calvinists, which to me is a great argument of probability.

Verse. 63. The flesh profits nothing] That is, the fleshly eating of Christ;
for in no other sense can the flesh be said to profit nothing, See Heb. 9.12.
and 10.10. Matthew. 26.27, 28. and 51. of this chapter. Prodest quicquam] ad
vivificandum sc. Ter^ul.
for Christ's flesh was as necessary to the work of our redemption as his
Godhead. The Godhead supported but the flesh suffered.

The words that I speak unto you are Spirit and life] Because the word of God
is the pipe whereby he conveigheth into our dead hearts spirit and life.
Perkins. As Christ when he raised up dead men did only speak the word and they
were made alive, and at the day of Judgment by his very voice when the trumpet
shall blow, all that are dead shall rise again.

The flesh is his humane nature wherein by death he is become our bread; the
Spirit his divine nature which makes his flesh to live, and which gives a
quickening virtue to this bread.

Verse. 70. I have chosen you twelve] To the Apostolical function. Calvin.
Calvin.


Verse. 71. When he was one of the twelve] Yet we do not read that he was
moved, so stupid are hypocrites that they feel not their own wound.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 5. NEither did his brethren believe in him] That is, they did not know
nor believe that he was the Messiah, Hinc. colligimus quam nihili sit carnalis
propinquitas perpetuam euim infamiae notam Spiritus inurit Christi cognatis,
quod tot operum testimoniis convicti, ne tum quidem credebant. Calvinus.
and the Son of the living God, but they thought that he was only a man like to
themselves. It belongs to a witness ingenuously to utter that which he knows
to be true, not to do any thing for any man's favor or hatred which may oppose
truth. Polyc. Lyser.

Verse. 17. If any man will do his will] That is, believe it, and subject
himself to it, He shall know] Viz. by that comfort which he shall feel upon
his subjection. Perkins.


Verse. 20. Thou have a Devill] It is all one as if they had said, thou art mad;
It was an ancient saying among the Jews that men are troubled by the Devil
when they were in a fury, or when their mind and reason was taken away. Calvin.


Verse. 24. According to appearance] The original is (as the vulgar rightly)
secundum faciem, because the face only appears, the rest is hid.

Verse. 35. The dispersed among the Gentiles] By the Gentiles he here
understands the Hellenists, that is, dispersed Jews, so called because they
spoke the Greek tongue, Mr Mede on Acts 6.5. Placet doctis per (...) hic
intelligere Hellenistas, id est, qui origin and natione Judaei (in qua autem
Graeci erant) urpote inter Graecos dispersi, quales etiam intelligi videntur
Ioh. 12.20. de Dieu in loc. Vide Bezam, and Drus. Praeterita.
and used the translation of the Septuagint (which was made in Egypt) in their
Synagogues.

Verse. 37. Jesus stood] When otherwise the custom of that age carried it,
Polyc. Lyser.
that the teachers sat, even as Christ also often did, but here he stood that
he might signify that he would seriously execute the great Office of Teaching.

Cried] Both for the multitude of the company that he might be heard of all,
and that he might declare that he would speak of those things which it
belonged all to hear and know, and also that he might show an undaunted mind,
Ibid.
and that he feared no man.

If any man thirst] The metaphor of thirsting was suitable, because it was hot
weather. Esaias 55.1. Rev. 21.6. and 22.17. Sitis est sensus deficientis
humiditatis in corpore.
A thirst in Scripture in general means a vehement desire, but here more, it
is the same in the soul that thirst in the body. Three things meet in bodily
thirst: 1. A failing of moisture. 2. A sense of unnatural heat, therefore it
is said in Scripture, burnt up with thirst, dried with thirst. 3. A vehement
desire after moisture which may cool this heat, and supply this want. That is,
finds himself empty of grace, is sensible of his corruption, and of the wrath
of God, and then vehemently desires Christ.

Verse. 38. As the Scripture saith] That is, as the Scripture is wont to
express it, for otherwise there is no such place to be found. See Dr. Hals
Paraphrase. Ad scriptur^m alluditur, non quod haec eadem verba in ullo veteris
Testamenti loco reperiantur: sed quod sensus idem, non uno, sed multis apud
prophetas locis sit. Maldonat. in loc.

Ita saepe Johannes ubi non anum aliquem locum sed and multorum consensum
indicat, quare and Syrus pluraliter hic Scripturas posuit. Grotius.




There is no Scripture that says this in terminis, Alij censent id scriptum
non in uno loco, sed in multis, idque omnino non quoad verba, sed quoad rem and
sensum. Cornel a Lap. See chapter 4. ver. 14.
but all those Scriptures which speak of the pouring out of the Spirit may be
alluded to says Grotius; yet he and Rollock say Esaias 58. is especially meant,
Joel 2.28. says Brugensis.

Christ interprets what he means by the next verse. Vide Iun. Paral. l. 1.
paral. 71.
By Waters is meant the indwelling virtue of the Spirit. See Ver. 39.

By Rivers of water, the abundant and various operations and gifts of the
Spirit. Calv.

By living water, or water of life, some say is meant the reality of these,
they have real graces, and comforts; others say it is so called from the
effect, because the nature of this water is to give and preserve life; this
phrase is rather an Hebraisme, Ventrem per catachresin vocat interiora animae.
Cornel. a Lap.
amongst the Jews a spring that never fails is called living water. See John
4.10, 11, 12, 13. That is, in his inward man shall be those inward graces that
never fail.

Flow out] He shall not only have enough for himself, but wherewith to refresh
others.

Verse. 39. The Holy Ghost was not yet given] That is, in comparison; Examen
praefar. Morini. p. 180. See Calvin. The miraculous and sanctifying gifts of
the Holy Ghost were not as yet so fully given as they were afterward when
Jesus was received into glory. Dr. Halls paraphrase.
he was given before, but so sparingly, as in respect of this pouring out, Tit.
3.6. He might seem not to be given at all.

Because that Jesus was not yet glorified] He had not yet ascended into heaven.
That was the highest and perfect glory of the man Jesus when that of the
Psalmist Psalm. 109.1. was fulfilled, when the Father said to Christ
triumphantly ascending above all heavens, Sit at my right hand. Brugensis
Comment. in 4 or. Evangelia, vide plura ibid.

Ver. 48. Of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees] Yet Nicodemus was a Ruler and a
Pharisee. John 3.1.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. Jesus went unto the mount of Olives] He sought this solitariness,
partly that he might refresh with necessary rest his body wearied with the
daily labor of teaching, partly that he might be more for prayer. Polyc. Lyser.


About half a mile and a furlong from Jerusalem toward the east stood the
mount of Olives, so called from the multitude of Olives. See Travels of the
Patriarks. p. 483.

Verse. 3. And the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in
adultery, etc.] The Graecians read not this history; Quia haec historia semper
a Latinis ecclesiis recepta fuit, and in plurimis vetustis Graecorum codicibus
reperiatur, and nihil Apostolico spiritu indignu^ continet, non est cur eum in
usu^ nostrum accommodare recuse mus. Calvin. Omiserunt hanc historiam
Interpretes and Commentatores, non quod apocrypham censerent, sed quod in suis
codicibus non inve nirent. Paulus Tarnovins in loc.
Chrysostom and Theophylact wrote whole Commentaries upon this Evangelist, but
explained not this history; Jerome also witnesses that this history is not
extant in any of the Latin Books, and it is not found in the Syriack Edition
of the New testament. Polyc. Lyser.

We know that the history of the adulterous woman was in times past expunged by
many, and is not found in the Syriack Edition, or in the Paraphrase of Nonnus,
but yet we deny that it is not found in the Greek fountain; yea, Theodorus
Beza witnesses, that of seventeene of his ancient Copies only one wanted it;
none of the printed books which are extant this day leave it out. Austen
affirms that it was perversely rejected by some Heretics, because it seemed to
promise to men an impunity of sinning. But this is nothing to us to whom it
suffices that the fountains are clear. Chamierus tomo 10. l. 12. c. 7.

Vide Piscat. in loc. and Seldeni, Uxorem Ebraicam. c. 11. p. 368. ad 372.
Bezam, and Drusii praeterita, Grotium, and Waltheri Harmoniam Biblicam.
It is found in a Syriack book of special note, therefore Ludovicus de Dieu,
who wrote it out thence, mentions it in his Animadversions. Tatianus (who lived
within threescore years after John) expressly mentions it also in his harmony
of the Gospels, as Mr Seldom shows in his Vxor Ebraica.

A woman taken in adultery] In the very act, (...), that is, in the theft,
perhaps to intimate the great theft which is in adultery. Deprehensa est in
adulterio] Hoc est, deprehensa est in ipso facto cum adultaretur, (...) est
enim deprehendere in facinore ipso, and huiusmodi deprehensionem (...) appellat
Erasmus. Tam manifest ut negari non possit. Vox est Graeca forensis. Grotius.
(...) (quamvis (...) nullibi inveniatur) in ipso furro, and per Synecdochen
generis pro specie in ipso facinore. Dilher. eclog. Sac. Dictum. 6.
Id est, (...), In ipso furto. Piscat. Some say, they brought the Adulteress
and not the Adulterer, that they might try Christ's chastity; but rather because
she was easier to be taken than the man, says Maldonate.

Ver. 4. Master] They call him Master, whose Disciples yet they would not be,
and whom in the former Chap. ver. 47. they called a Seducer. But they flatter
him shamefully hoping by that the more easily to deceive him. They propound
both the greatness and certainty of the crime.

See Boys his Sermon on this Text in his Remains.
Verse. 6. But Jesus stouped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as
though he heard them not] The Syrians write not to the left hand as the
Hebrews, not to the right hand as the Greeks and Latins, but downward, as
Masius shows in his Syriack Grammar, which custom of writing it is probable
was then observed by Christ, because at that time the Jews used the Syriack
tongue. Piscat.

By this gesture Christ would show that he was offended with the accusation of
these men, Polyc. Lyser. Hoc gestu eoru^ contemptum prae se tulit. Calvin.
and that he judged them unworthy of answer, because they carried all
maliciously and fraudulently, and would be swift in punishing when they were
slow in doing rightly.

What Christ wrote, and wherefore, it is not expressed, yet the Fathers
diligently inquire after both. Aug. l. 4. de Consens. Evang. gives these
reasons why Christ wrote, First, that he might signify that those were to be
written on earth, not in heaven, Vide Toletum in loc.
as he had said to his Disciples, Luke 10.20. Secondly, That he might show that
he works miracles on earth, for miracles are certain signs which are done one
earth. Ambrose says, that he wrote that, Ier. 22.29. And in another place he
says, he wrote, Thou see the mo^e that is in thy brothers eye, but do not
see the beam which is in thine own eye. Sunt hae Patrum meditationes. Certi
tamen nihil statui potest says Dilher. Dilher Ecclog. Sac Dictum quintum.
These are the meditations of the Fathers, but nothing certain can be
determined. That he wrote with his finger significant letters, and made some
words which might reprove the sins of most fraudulent men it is probable, but
what they were it is beyond our capacity to understand, says the same Dilher.

Verse. 7. He that is without sin among you] He condemns their Hypocrisy, not
the fact simply.

(...) signifies properly, one that is impeccable and not subject to sin. But
Tolet thinks it is here rather taken for one that is now without sin.

Calvin thinks that he spoke this according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.7. by which
the witnesses were with their own hands to kill the guilty person. But there
God warned they should not condemn that person with their tongue which they
would not kill with their hands, here Christ requires perfect innocence in
witnesses, that none should undertake to punish a crime in another, unless he
be innocent and free from all fault himself. See more in Calvin.

Verse. 9. Being convicted] Or reproved, the Greek word signifies conviction by
argument.

Went out one by one] Vnus and deinde unus, One and then one; we have the same
expression, Mark 14.19.

Beginning at the eldest] Either because the younger for honors sake offered
the first place of going out to the Elder, or because the elder were conscious
to themselves of more and greater sins; and that he might give them the more
confidence of going out, he again bowed himself, Ver. 8.

Verse. 10. None but the woman] In respect of the accusers, the Disciples were
yet present, and the people which Jesus taught.

Verse. 11. Neither do I condemn thee] He came not then to the judgment of the
world, but that he might give place to repentance Christ while he was in the
form of a servant neither condemned whoredom, nor absolved it civilly. Non ad
Christum spectabat Politici magistratus officium, morte multando sontes exequi,
sed hortari potius nec pergeret adulterari: sed quo minus illa puniretur ab
aliis quorum inter fuit insontes animadvertere, nihil absuit. Dr. Twiss. vind.
l. 1. part 1. digr. 10. c. 2. Vide Bezam, and Piscat.


Sin no more] Willingly, deliberately.

Verse. 12. I am the light of the world] The light of the world visible by
Creatures, of the invisible by grace; the light of the world which I have
created by my word, redeemed by my blood; not of the Jews only, but of all men,
of all times, places, orders, and conditions, Esa. 42.6. and 49.6. Luke 2.32.

He that follows me] To follow Christ is to receive his Doctrine, to
acknowledge him for the true Messiah of the world, to worship and invocate him,
the following of Christ therefore comprehends true faith Charity and obedience,
as Christ himself explaines it, John 12.36. and 46. not only a lively knowledge
of the true God and salvation, but also as Austen will, a continuation of the
same even to eternal life.

The light of life] Which may be referred either to Christ, who is the light,
and enlightens every one coming into this world, he shall, I say, possess
this Christ the fountain of life, that is, shall be partaker of his benefits
and merits; or it may be referred to eternal life, that last end of our
afflictions, as if he should say, he that obeys me shall have eternal life,
shall once see that light inaccessible where God himself dwells, Aretius
and enjoyes it.

Verse. 32. And the truth shall make you free] Austen observed here the emphasis
of the Greek word, for they are said to be freed by the Latins, who are
brought out of danger, or from a disease; but the Greek word belongs to
liberty which is opposed to servitude; also, he is called a free man amongst
the Latins who is out of danger, but the Greek word signifies, an ingenuous
man, and one that is obnoxious to no servitude, the stomach of the Jews so
declares it, We never served any man.

Verse. 33. We were never in bondage to any man] Some of the ancient Fathers
judge this speech of the Jews to be the Character of an arrogant mind, Vide
Rollocum in loc.
and also a manifest lie, See Genesis 29.20. and 39.1. Their Fathers served in
Egypt forty years, Genesis 15.13. and Exodus 20.2. They served also the
Babylonians, Seldenus de Jure naturali and Gentium part tertia. l. 6. c. 19.
Duobus maxim modis homines servi fiebant, nascendo ex servis, aut bellico casu
incidendo in captivitatem. Vtrumque a se removent. Non sumus nati ex Cananaeis
aliisque servilibus populis, nemo nos in servitutem bello redegit. Non agitur
hic de liberate status publici sed privati. Grotius.
and even then the Romans. Mr Seldom distinguishes of a twofold servitude, one
inherent in the person or intrinsecall, another extrinsecall consisting in
outward services, and civil obedience, they deny the first only here (says
he) as the words following in Verse 34. show, Whosoever commits sin is the
servant of sin.

Verse. 34. Commits sin] That is, gives himself unto it, (...), he that
makes sin, That is, that does it as his work. Verily, verily] He was about to
speak of a great matter, and that which the Jews would hardly admit of, and
therefore he seriously confirms it. Is the servant of sin] As if he should
say, You understand my speech of a corporal servitude, of which I in no wise
speak; there is another spiritual servitude far more hurtful, viz. the
bondage of sin, from whom you and other men are in no wise free.

Verse. 36. If the Son] That is, himself who was the natural Son.

Verse. 43. Why do ye not understand my speech] That is, approve and assent to
it.

Because ye cannot hear my word] That is, understand it, ubi audire pro
intelligere est. Glassius.

Verse. 44. He was a murderer from the beginning] That is, the first murderer,
and the author of murder, opposite to God, who is the first good, and author of
all good, life to himsefe and in his creature. From the beginning] Not of the
Creation of the world, or of time, but of man. He is a liar and the father of
it] So he is of all sins, but of lies because he brought sin into the world
by way of lying at the first.

Verse. 47. Ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God] That is,
profitably, for they all heard.

Melancthon. Luther.
Verse. 49. Jesus answered, I have not a Devill] When the Jews objected two
crimes against our Savior Christ, one that he was a Samaritane, another that
he was a Devil, he neglected the crime which concerned his person, and passed
it over as being of the least sort of wrongs, and stands upon that other
especially which touched his doctrine, I have not a Devil.

Verse. 56. Saw it] A far off, Heb. 11.13. How could this be when Christ was
borne many hundred years after? Answer, Not by the eye of sense or reason, but
faith, whereby he saw Christ more lively, Perkins.
and more to his joy and consolation, so many hundred years before he was,
than many which lived in Christ's time, and saw him, and conversed with him.

The Fathers say that he saw Christ's birth at the vallie of Mamre, Gen 18. and
his passion in the Mount Moriah, Genesis 22.

Verum quidem est, nondum attigisse Dominum annum tricesimum quartum (nam post
annum tricesimum tertium cum dimidio Christus sublatus est e terris) verum hoc
illi largiuntur, eum jam prope attingere annum quinquagesimum: non potuisse
tamen fieri affirmant, ut videret Abrahamum. Quo quidem responso corporalem
hunc aspectum intelligunt, eum Dominus de spirituali and fidei aspectu loquutus
sit. Rollocus in loc.
Verse. 57. Thou art not yet fifty years old] In his prime and flower of age, a
little past thirty Rogers pratic. Car. See Dr. Hackwells apology, page 162.
Have thou seen Abraham] who died above two thousand years since.
, deemed by Jews a man toward fifty, such shows of over age (say some) had
care and pains to win souls cast upon him. But Calvin dislikes this, and
says, they grant him more age lest they should seem to deal too exactly and
precisely with him, as if they should say, certainly thou will not make thy
self so old that thou should boast of thy coming to fifty, See Maldonate
and Grotius.

CHAP. IX.
This is added to show the greatness of the miracle. See 32. verse. Quo magis
damnas vulnus eo magis lauda medicum.
Verse. 1. HE saw a man which was blind from his birth] The Syriack has it,
blind from his mothers womb. Those that become blind after they are borne may
be cured by natural means, but those that are borne blind, can only be
helped by God.

Verse. 2. Who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was borne blinde]
Speaking according to the opinion of some Philosophers that was now also
received among the Jews (as learned men think) viz. that there was a
preexistency of the souls before they were united to their bodies. Either
himself or his parents, they were persuaded, Depravata tum temporis fuerit
doctrina de peccato originali. Pharisaei infra huic caeco dicunt, tu totus in
peccato natus es, and nos doces? Ergo de reliquis qui sine externo aliquo
hujusmodi defectu nascebantur judicarunt, eos non totos in peccatis, atque sic
sine originali malo nasci; Hunc errorem Apostoli, sicut etiam reliqui Judaei ab
ipsis hauserunt. Polyc. Lyser. Vide Cornel. a Lap.
were guilty of some extraordinary sin, or else such a Judgment sure would
never have befallen him. Mr. Hildersam.

Verse. 3. Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents] An Ellipsis, viz. that
he should be born blind; blindness was not inflicted on him for his own or his
parents sins. These words are not to be taken simply, but secundum quid, and
according to the propounded question of the Apostles, viz. that they did not
sin in that manner, that for any enormous sin he was borne blind, but that
the works of God should be made manifest in him] The event of the thing
confirmed, that many works of God were manifested on this wretched blind man,
his Justice, mercy, power.

Verse. 4. I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day, etc.] He
borrowes a similitude from the common custom of life. Psalm. 104.22. He calls
that a day, Calvin.
the time limited by his Father, in which he should finish the work commanded
him.

Verse. 6. He spate on the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and anointed
the eyes of the blind man with the clay] It is certain that Christ in healing
this blind man (as sometimes elsewhere) used such a means and remedy which
might seem altogether absurd, Polyc. Lyser.
and contrary to our reason. As man was first made of clay, Calvin.
so Christ used dirt in restoring his eyes, demonstrating his power in the same
part of his body which the Father exercised in making the whole man. Vide Bezam.


Verse. 7. He went his way therefore and washed, and came seeing] A great
commendation of his obedience that he simply obeyes Christ, although many
things draw him away into the contrary part. Calvin.


Verse. 9. I am he] He is not ashamed of his ancient miserable condition, so
that he may give glory to Christ whose beneficence he had tried.

Verse. 11. And I receved sight. Est Catachresis. Nam (...) proprie eorum est
qui videndi facultatem aliquando habuerunt: sed nec male recipere quis dicitur
quod communiter tributum humanae naturae ipse abfuit. Grotius.
]

Verse. 15. He changes nothing in his answer, but constantly affirms one and
the same thing concerning the Lords fact toward him.

He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see] By that he declares the
continuation of the benefit, that it was not vanishing but solid and constant.
Polyc. Lyser.


Verse. 16. How can a man that is a sinner] The Jews were wont to call him a
sinner who exceedingly offended, being wholly alienated from God, who was
delighted with every sin, and therefore was to be excluded from the Church or
Synagogue.

Verse. 17. He is a Prophet] He thought Christ was above the vulgar by bestowing
this benefit on him, that is, the anointed of God, and promised Savior of
mankind.

Verse. 18. The Jewes] The Pharisees were so called because they dwelt in Judaea
properly so called, and pretended that themselves only were the true
confessors; they would not firmly believe it although they heard it
expressly from their neighbors.

Verse. 21. By what means he now sees we know not, etc.] Out of fear to the
Pharisees they gave not due honor to Christ Jesus the Son of God; they lie
also when they say that they are ignorant of that which was now made known to
all the neighbors.

Verse. 24. Give God the praise] This was a form of obtestation, and as it were
of adju^ation among the Jews, which they used in drawing out the confession of
truth Josh. 7.19. they meant, think that thou now stand before God and his
terrible majesty, which God is a severe punisher of lying, wherefore conceal
and dissemble nothing which that man has done in healing of thee.

That this man is a sinner] That is, a heinous sinner, with whom God has no
commerce.

Calvin. Quasi diceret, quandoquidem de Dei gloria agatur, hoc nec dissimulare
nec negare debeo aut possum, quod cum ab utero matris caecitatis malum sim
expertus nunc hujus viri beneficio oculi mei visus facultate sint instructi.
Polyc. Lyser.
Verse. 25. I know not] The meaning is, it belongs not to me to determine
whether he be a sinner or no; this he speaks to prick them the more.

Verse. 27. And you have not heard] That is, you have not believed for the
hardness of your heart.

Verse. 28. Thou art his Disciple] They count it for a reproach to be Christ's
disciple.

Verse. 31. God hears not sinners] That is, such as live and lie in their
sins, and turn not unto God by true repentance Perkins.
; such as persevere in sin, in whom it reigns. Polyc. Lyser.

See 109. Ps. 7. Prove. 28.9. 1 Esaias 15. Austen taught, etiam malos Sacerdotes
exaudiri cum orant pro gregibus suis, quamvis non exaudiantur cum orant pro
seipsis.
Ob. Therefore say the Separatists, I may not pray with an evil man.

Sol. But this speech is not universally true. He may hear him as a public
person, though not as a private. Secondly, though God hears him not for
himself, yet he hears him for the people, as Balaam blessing Israel, being
both a wicked man, and speaking against his heart, God heard him for the
people, 23. Numb. This is a proverbiall speech as we may see Psalm. 66.18. Esaias
1.15. and elsewhere, and is to be understood (says Grotius) as the words going
before and following show, of him who falsely affirms that he was sent of God,
whom God hears not so as he shall do divine works to confirm his mission.
Vide Brugensem. Pecatores] 1. e. deceptores. Rolloc.

Verse. 34. Altogether borne in sinnes] That is, a greater sinner even by nature
than any other, because he was borne blind Mr. Hildersam.
. See Brugensis and Rollock.

Cast him out] viz. Out of the Synagogue or Temple, excommunicated him, ver.
22. a man may be excommunicated by the officers of the Church, yet not by the
censure of it.

Verse. 35. When he had found him] Therefore he sought for him.

Verse. 37. Seen him] Not with corporal eyes, for Christ had departed before
the blind man had returned to Siloe from the fish-pole, but with his spiritual
sight, by which the divine power and mercy of Christ shined in the person of
the blind man.

Verse. 41. If ye were blind, ye should have no sinne] This sentence may be
expounded two ways. First, if you did acknowledge your selves blind, and
confess your sin, your sin should not remain, None in comparison, not
simply none. Austen. See 1 Cor. 1.17. that is, say Bucer, Musculus, and
Aquinas, agreeing with the gloss, your sin had not been so exceeding sinful
as now it is.
because ye would seek mercy, and should be healed. Maldonate, Chemnit.
Harmon. Evangel. Secondly, if you were blind, that is, if ye had not the
knowledge of the Scripture, whence if you would you might know the truth, ye
should not have of great sin as now ye have. Jansen. Harm.

Compare the 39. ver. where by those that do not see or are blind, are
understood those which acknowledge themselves to be spiritually blind, and
seek to be enlightened by God.

CHAP. X.
IT is a parable from economy, and husbandmens sheepfolds. Secondly, since
Christ compares the Church to a sheepfold into which God gathers all his, he
compares himself to a door since there is no entrance into the Church but by
him.

By this parable our Savior first convinces the Pharisees that they are false
teachers, for they were not taught of their heavenly householder, neither let in
by the dorekeeper at the door, but of their own accord crept into Gods
sheepfold. The order of the Pharisees neither was instituted by God, nor
brought in by the Prophets, but feigned by men, and they entered themselves into
the sheepfold of God. Therefore they had no care of the sheep, neither did they
feed them with the doctrine of Gods word, neither went before them by an honest
example of life, but fatted themselves, suffering the people of God to wander
into any errors. Secondly, Christ by this parable gives a reason also why many
of the people leaving the Pharisees followed him and his doctrine. Viz. They
were wandering sheep, and heard that Christ in the word of God propounded the
true doctrine of salvation.

Verse. 1. Enters not by the dore] Like as an honest man, climbeth up some
other way like a thief or robber. Thieves (says Jerome) lay snares, and
deceive by hidden fraud, Vel fur qui fraud alienum diripit, vel latro qui vi
oves rapit, and raptas dilaniat atque occidit. Polyc. Lyser. Fur quia venit ut
rapiat alienum; Latro quia ut occidet. Sic exponitur infra v. 10. Grotius.
robbers boldly take away others goods, thieves lay wait for goods, robbers
for life also. Tolot.

Verse. 3. To him the porter openeth] Openly, and in the sight of all he enters
in by the door. Vide Bezam. He declares five marks which are necessary to a
true Shepherd of the Church. First, he enters in at the door, that is, has a
lawful calling, non prece vel precio, much less by force is he obtruded on
the hearers. Secondly, the dorekeeper opens to him, by whom we understand the
Holy Ghost. Thirdly, being let in into the sheepfold, he is not mute toward the
sheep, but calls them, and that by name, that is, he studies to know the
dispositions and manners of all his hearers, that he may afterward know
according to the diversity of their tempers to speak to them, admonish and
handle them. Fourthly, leads them out of a dark dungeon of the world into the
light of heavenly doctrine, from the love of earthly things to the hope and
desire of heavenly. Fifthly, he goes before them with his voice, Polyc. Lyser.
and also with his example invites them that they may follow him to the lively
food of the word of God.

To which may be added this sixth out of the following explication of the
parable, that a good Shepherd seeks not his own profit from the sheep, but
the good of the sheep, and so seeks it, that he is also ready to give his life
for them.

These things are to be considered in this parable. First, the Shepherd
Christ, Ille pastor ille bonus sc. per excellentiam, hoc est, praeclarus,
optimus and praestantissimus, imo unicus and singularis ille princeps pastorum.
Cornel. a Lap. Polyc. Lyser.
in Greek it has a singular emphasis, the article (...) is twice put, (...), I
am that Shepherd, that good one promised by God, Esaias 40.10. Ezech. 34. He
proves this first from his fidelity, he defends his sheep, lays down his life
for them. Secondly, he feeds his sheep, ver. 9. The pastures of the sheep are
the doctrine of the Gospel. To go in and out in the Hebrew phrase signifies to
do prosperously in all the actions of his life, 1 Kings 18.6. to conclude,
Christ so feeds his sheep that they have life, and have it more abundantly,
they have life entering into the Church, and have it more abundantly going out
of this world to eternal life. Austen. Secondly, from his care for his sheep,
therefore he says 14. ver. he knows his sheep, the word know signifies not a
bare knowledge, but also comprehends a diligent care and custody, notes not
only the affection but the effect, as 15. ver. the Father knows the Son, that
is, acknowledges him for his natural Son, embraces him, loves him, and
intimately cares and approves of all things that belong to him. I lay down my
life] That is, being crucified he expires his soul, and is buried; also the
Son knows the Father, he acknowledges that he has all things and has
received them from him, and he is dear to him, and honors him though all the
world persecuted him. Thirdly, from his diligence, whereby he increases his
sheepfold; he speaks properly of the calling of the Gentiles, which then were
as yet strangers, In hac parabola ertam auditorum verbi requisita sub imagine
ovium repraesentantur, quarum sunt tria, 1. Vt boni and very pastoris vocem
audiant, unicus autem verus pastor est Jesus Christus, hujus solius vocem in
Evangelio traditam audire debemus. 2. Evocanti pastori obtemperent and
praeeuntem sequantur. Haec est obedientia fidei quam passim Paulus Christianis
commendat. 3. Alicnum non audiant, non sequantur, sed ab eo fugiant.
not of the sheepfold or Congregation of believers out of the Jews. This may
also be applied to the sheep wandering from the Shepherd, Christ is very
diligent in reducing these, Luke 15.4. Secondly, Christ compares his followers
to sheep, 1. They easily wander from the Shepherd and the flock, and having
once gone astray depart aside more and more. 2. They have exactly known their
shepherd. Thirdly, they love the voice of their Shepherd, and willingly hear
it, especially when they ought to be led to pastures and fountains. Fourthly,
they follow the Shepherd when he goes before them.

Verse. 4. And the sheep follow him Loquitur hic Christus secundum morem
Iudaeae, in qua regione pastores oves praecedere solebant.
] In the Scripture both is said of the Shepherds, that they go before the
flock and lead it, Psalm. 80. and that they follow it, Psalm. 78.71. 2 Samuel 7.8.
That is for love, this for custody sake. Paulus Tarnovius.

Verse. 5. A stranger] One that brings new and strange doctrine, other doctrine
than such as their Shepherd does teach; they will not follow, but flee from
him] Lest they should be seduced and misled by him.

Verse. 8. They are Theeves] Though they were dead, yet he says not they were,
but in the present tense they are Non de tempore exponi debet, sed de ordine
and scopo doctrinae, quod illi homines sunt fures and latrones qui Christo non
praeeunte, non ducente, non mittente, veniunt. Polyc. Lyser. Venire ante
Christum est non mittente eo venire ad docendum in ecclesia, prophetae itaque
huc non pertinent, cum illi oves a Deo fuerint missi. Haec expositio est
Augustini. Tarnov. in loc.
Thieves, because (...) the impenitent sin cleaves to them no less after
the committing of the sin, than if still they were in the very act of doing
of it.

Verse. 9. And shall go in and out] By going in and out the Scripture does often
signify unto us all the actions of life, as they say in French aller et venir,
for to be conversant. 1. They shall go safely withersoever they have need. 2.
They shall be fed to the full. Calv. Harm.

Beza. Diligenter munere suo fungetur; vis haec est hujus phraseos. Vide Exodus
28. v. 35. Quistorpius.
Or he shall go out and in, that is, shall live securely, for so this proverb
as it were is taken among the Hebrews, as Deuteronomy. 28.6. Psalm. 121.8. Yet here it
seems to be a peculiar allusion to the office of Shepherds, whose sheep are
daily lead out to the pastures, and thence back to the sheepefold.

Verse. 12. The Wolfe] That is, false Teachers, Matthew. 7.15. Scatters the
sheepe] That is, the Church of the New Testament.

Verse. 14. Know my sheep, and am known of mine] As the Sun casts down beams
upon us, by means whereof we again see the body of the Sun; even so the
knowledge of God whereby he knows us for his, works in our hearts a
knowledge of God in us; Vide Bezam.
whereby we know him for our God. Mr Perkins.

Verse. 16. One Shepheard] The Papists say, if by the name of Shepherd Christ
should understand himself, why should he say, there shall be one Shepherd,
and not speak it plainly, Bring] Effectually. Proverbium fuit, Grex unus,
unus pastor. Vide locum similem Ezec. 37.24. ubi typus est ejus rei, descriptio
ecclesiae ^ndique colligendae sub capite Christo. Grotius.
and I am that one Shepherd? Christ alluded to Ezekiel 33.37. and 23. chapter As if
he should say, it shall be fulfilled which was foretold by the Prophets, there
shall be one Shepherd, Besides it is usual with Christ also when he speaks
of himself to use the third person, as when he says, When the Son of man
shall come, be will scarce find faith on earth. Cameron. de ecclesia.

Verse. 27. My sheep hear my voyce] That is, the elect, and such as are
predestined of my Father. Heare] That is, believe and obey it. And I Know
them] Take care of them as my sheep. Follow mee] As their Shepherd.

Verse. 30. I and my Father are one] In consent, will, essence, power and
dominion. Polyc. Lyser.


One] Frees thee from Arrius, who denies the eternal Divinity of Christ. Are]
Frees thee from Sabellius, who denies the distinction of the persons in the
Deity.

Verse. 34. Is it not written in your law] That Christ says to the Jews, it is
written in your Law, Id est, in sacris illis literis quae vobis praescribunt
quid credere and facere debeatis, and proinde non male legis nomine
appellantur, id est Thorah, que significatur quicquid hominem dirigit. Sic
infra 15.26. 1 Cor. 14.21. Sed and in ipsa Mosis lege non quidem exstant verba,
sed sensus idem, cum judices Dij vocantur. Grotius.
and yet Cites the saying out of the Psalm, that has troubled some, because
the Old Testament is sometimes divided into the Law of Moses, the Psalms, and
Prophets, Luke 24.44. Therefore some here allege Moses, Exodus 21.6. and 22.28.
that so that saying may be cited out of the Law, but by the word Law, is
understood the Scripture of the whole Old Testament.

Verse. 35. And the Scripture cannot be broken] No man dare dispute Hoc est, non
potest reijci, negari, infringi, averti aut irrita fieri. Polyc. Lys.
against its authority.

Non potest ei contradici, as he that does any thing against a precept is said
to break it. Matthew. 5.19. and John 5.18. and 7.23. So also he that contradicts
an affirmation. Grotius.

Verse. 37, 38. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. But if I
do, though ye believe not me, believe the works, etc.] The argument of it
self is plain; No man can of himself, and by his own power, do divine
works, unless he be truly God; I do divine works by my own power, yea I do
the works of my Father, not only the like and equal, but the same with the
Father; therefore I am truly God, Polyc. Lyser.
neither deserve I to be counted a blasphemer, because I said I was one with
the Father.

That the Father is in mee] That is, that you may know that the unity of the
Father and me, is so individual, that one exists in the other.

Such a union cannot be found in all the creatures, to find two, one of which
is so in the other, that they are one and the same nature numerically. But the
nature and essence of God the Father and God the Son is so one and the same,
that all the Fathers essence is in the Son, Polyc. Lyser.
and in like manner the essence of the Son wholly in the Father, and so the
whole Father subsisteth in the Son, and the whole Son in the Father. John. 14.9.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. WAS sick] The Greek word (...) is used of one that is very sick,
Matthew. 10.8 Luke. 4.46.

The town of Mary and her sister Martha] Those Sisters were the Commanders of
that Town and Castle, Polyc. Lyser. Vide Grotium.
as John. 1.44.

Verse. 2. That Mary which anointed the Lord] There were many Mary's, therefore
for difference sake he adds those words, Which annointed] The time past which
the Evangelist uses, anointed, ought not to be referred to the time of the
thing done, of which he now speaks, but to the time in which he wrote, as if
he should say, Calvin.
this is the Mary which afterward powered out the ointment, upon which occasion
the Disciples murmured.

Verse. 3. Lord behold, he whom thou love, is sick] We may tell God what he
knows; Christ's beloved is subject to outward miseries.

Verse. 4. That the Son of God might be glorified thereby] By raising of him;
Distulit sonare ut posset resuscitare. Aug.
which he deferres for his glory and our good.

Verse. 5. Now Jesus loved Martha, and her Sister, and Lazarus] He loved those
who were used to intertaine him, as Elias, 1 Kings 17.9. Elisha, 2 Kings 4.8.
Kindnesses showed to the Saints are not lost, Matthew. 10.41.

Verse. 9. Are there not twelve hours in the day] Christ comforts them from
Gods providence, God made the day twelve hours, who can make it shorter? An
artificial day. Simplex sensus est, loquitur Christus parabolice and vult
dicere. Quemadmodum Coelestis meus pater cuilibet diei in principio creationis
duodecim attribuit horat, uni longiores alteri breviores, and quicunque in
ejusmodi die ambulat, dum Sol adhuc lucet, non offendit, quia videt quo ambulet
and ubi versetur: Sic idem Coelestis meus Pater cuivis homini suum diem vitae,
and in eo 12. horas sive breves sive longas assignavit, and dum ille dies
durat, non metuat quod quicquam adversi ipsi citra Dei voluntatem accidere
possit. Sed elapsis illis horis, and quando nox ingruit, tum non amplius mundo
fidendum, quia pericula simul ^ncidere possunt. Polyc. Lyser.
for who can shorten man's life, Matthew. 10.30. Psalm. 139.16. Job. 14.3. As when
we walk in the day we need not stumble, so in Gods ways, vocatio Dei instar
lucis divinae est. Calvin.

Verse. 11. Our friend Lazarus sleepeth] Death parts not friend-ship.

But I go that I may awake him out of sleepe] As if he should say, I will not
ascend into Judaea, that I may provoke the Jews with disputations or Sermons,
but that I may visit Lazarus our common friend and raise him from sleep.
Christ's modesty appears in this, that when he had said he slept, he
immediately added that he would raise him, when he says he is dead, he adds
no such thing.

Verse. 12. Lord if he sleep he shall do well] They meant a natural sleep,
for sleep in greater diseases is a sign of health returning.

Verse. 15. To the intent ye may beleeve] That is, that their faith may
increase and be confirmed. It was increased first, by that which they heard
Christ to relate to them what happened about Lazarus, none telling them, and by
that great Miracle of raising one dead four days; which if he had been
present, he had either driven away the disease, or raised him newly dead.
Polyc. Lyser.

Vox desperationis est. Calv.
Verse. 16. Let us also go that we may die with him] With Lazarus. Beda takes it
to be his godly desire, Polanus his infirmity, we shall be killed, as v. 8.

Verse. 18. Bethanie was nigh unto Jerusalem about fifteen furlongs off]
Stadium a Furlong contains 600. foot, The same of his death might easily come
to Jerusalem.
that is a 125. paces. Calv.

The holy Evangelists St. Luke chapter 24.13. and John here, reckon the way by
Furlongs. See the Travels of the Patriarchs. p. 1. and 2.

Verse. 21. If thou had been here] We sent thee word, a kind of reproving.

Verse. 23. Thy brother shall rise againe] He tells not when. Polanus. Needs no
prayers to raise him.

Verse. 25. I am the resurrection and the life] The cause of the resurrection of
all men as God, Ego sum resurrectio and vita, non formalis, sed causalis, quasi
diceret, ego sum qui resuscito, ego qui vitam praebeo. Cornel. a Lap.
Fundamentum realis consolationis. Polan. The wicked shall rise, yet not to
life, but because he speaks of godly Lazarus he joyneth these two.
of the Church as Mediator and head thereof, 1 Cor. 15.22. that is, I am the
author both of this life and the life to come. I quicken in this life by the
life of grace, and give eternal life in the world to come.

Verse. 26. Beleevest thou this] That I am the resurrection and life.

Verse. 27. Lord I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God which should
come into the world] A full and perfect description; she confesses his person
and office, that is, I can not doubt but those that cleave to thee shall have
life eternal.

Verse. 28. Secretly] Because of the Jews malice.

Verse. 29. She arose quickly and came unto him] Christ is accepted in trouble.

Solent lachrymae lachrymis excitari presertim apud animos misericordes.
Grotius. Vide Dilher. Eclog. Sac. Dictum 9.
Verse. 33. Groaned in the Spirit] The Greek word signifies that commotion of
mind which is in anger with a rage and horror. Tremellius well renders the
Syriacke, vehementer commotus est in Spiritu suo.

Improprie vehemens illa commotio, qua animus Christi commotus fuit, nominatur
perturbatio: quo nomine viz. excessus affectuum notatur: qui in Christo nullus
fuit; Vere quidem affectibus humanis commotus fuit animus Christi, sed sine
(...), ut si aqua limpida in puro vitro inclusa agitetur ac moveatur. Piscat in
loc.
And was troubled] (...), he troubled himself, his own judgment, spirit and
heart stirred up his affections to be troubled, His affections were wrought on
judiciously, right reason did always direct and moderate them. These passions
in Christ were not so much passions as propassions freely assumed, as Divines
from Damascene teach.

Verse. 35. Jesus wept] The Text says, he was glad, v. 15. so that he wept
only for his friends sake who were then a weeping, to show us the necessity of
mourning with those that mourn, say the Fathers on the place. He has a sense
of our infirmities, See Luke 19.41. Heb. 5.7. Christ was here thrice very much
moved and wept, First, v. 33. When he saw Mary and the Jews weeping. See Luke
19.41. and 22.44.
Secondly, here. Thirdly, in v. 38. when he saw Lazarus his Sepulcher.

Verse. 44. And he that was dead came forth, etc.] Lazarus had no favor to be
raised to dye again, he dies once more than ordinary.

Verse. 45. Believed on him] By believing here nothing else ought to be unstood
but a docilitie to embrace the Doctrine of Christ. Calvin.


Verse. 47. Then gathered the chief Priests and the Pharisees a council, and
said, what do we] Therefore not only the high Priest arrogated this power to
himself, but ex concilio totius Synedrii, with whom was jurisdiction, he
appointed an assembly, that even by that the pride of the Pope of Rome may be
reproved, Gerh. Harm.
who when he would seem to resemble the Priesthood of Aaron in other things,
yet says he only has a power of calling a Council from Peter.

Verse. 43. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and the
Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation] After forty two
years the Romans came and overthrew both place and nation, destroyed the City
of Jerusalem and the Temple, and brought the Jews into miserable captivity.

Verse. 49. And one of them named Caiaphas] His name signifies vomiting with
his mouth, Nomen Caiphae fignificat vomentem ore vel vomentem statutum a Kaah
vel Ko vomuit, and Peh os, sermo, and specialius statutum. Number. 14. v. 41. quae
etymologia non male huic Pontifici congruit, quia fastu at ambitione ebrius
crudam ac crudelem sententiam contra Christum evomuit. Isay. 8.7.
which Etymology well agrees to him who vomited out a cruel sentence against
Christ.

Verse. 50. Nor consider that it is expedient for us that one man should dye for
the people, and the whole Nation perish not] Not that he had any intent to
prophecy, but because the Lord used him as an instrument to publish his truth.
Perkins. Vide Cameronem.

CHAP XII.
Verse 3. ANd anointed the feet of Iesus] Matthew and Mark say, that Christ's
head was anointed, John, his feet; but the three agree among themselves, that
Christ was not sparingly anointed by Mary, but that a large plenty of ointment
was powered upon him. Because therefore John speaks of his feet, it is all one
as if he had said, Calvin.
that the whole Body of Christ even to the feet was anointed.

And wiped his feet with her haire] Hysteron proteron, Non erat simplex liquor
ex nardo elicitus, sed varia erat confectio ex rebus odoriferis, itaque non
mirum est odore perfusam fuisse totam domum. Calvinus.
for the first wiped his feet from dust and dirt, and then anointed them.

Verse. 6. This he said, not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a
thief, and had the bag] The rest of the Apostles not out of an ill
disposition, but inconsiderately condemn Mary, but Judas seeks an honest
pretense for his sins alleging the poor of which yet he had no care.

Verse. 7. Has she kept this] He means it was not unseasonably, but according
to the occasion. That is said to be kept which is in safe custody, and
opportunely brought forth. The anointing of the bodies was not a vain
ceremony, Vide Piscat.
but rather a spiritual symbol, because it did put the hope of resurrection
before their eyes. He was anointed as one that was to be laid in the grave,
Calvin.
Mary certainly was moved on the sudden that she should do that by the guidance
of the spirit which she had not before thought of.

Verse. 9. Might see Lazarus] That they might behold a wonderful sign of the
power of Christ in Lazarus. Tanquam laetitiae and festivitatis insigne quum
novum Regem exciperent.


Verse. 13. Took branches of palm trees, and went forth to meet him] The palm
trees among all people were always signs of victory, by which is signified
that the people acknowledged Christ a Conqueror, who by his Passion and
Resurrection should gloriously overcome death and the Devil, as also the Elect
are said to carry palms in their hands, Rev. 1.9.

Hosanna] By this voice they witnessed that they acknowledged Jesus Christ to
be that Messiah promised in times past to the Fathers, Serva vel salvum fac
obsecro. Calvin.
and from whom Redemption and Salvation was to be hoped. For the 118 Psalm
(whence that acclamation was taken) was composed of the Messiah to this end,
that all the Saints in their daily prayers might ardently desire his coming,
Singulari quodam jure venisse in nomine Domini Christus dicitur, quia per eum
non ex part (ut antea per Prophetas) sed in solidum Deus se patefecit.
and receive him with greatest reverence when he was given. He comes in the
name of God who does not rashly intrude himself, nor falsely usurpes honor,
but being rightly called has God the guide and author of his actions. See Mr
Lightfoots Temple-Service, c. 16. Sect. 2.

Verse. 15. Sitting on an Asses Colt] It is true that Christ rode upon an Ass
which was led together with his Dam, and the words of the Prophet agree, it
being a frequent repetition among the Hebrews, Calvin.
which express the same thing twice in diverse words, upon an Ass, and the
Fool of an Ass. Our Evangelist, which studies brevity, omitting the former
member, Vide Waltheri harmoniam Biblicam in Matthew. 21.5. Vectus autem est
Christus asina prius, quia Judaico populo legem imposuit prior, deinde pullo
sessoris inexperto, quia Gentilium populum posterius sibi associavit. Id ibid.
only reherseth the latter; Mat. 21.5. says, Christ sat upon an Ass, and a
Colt; the other two Evangelists, Mark 11.7. Luke 19.35. and John here, make
mention only of the Colt brought and sat on. He rode upon them both
successively and by turns say Tolet and others, which opinion they think, Zac.
9.9. and Mat. 21.5. does favor.

Est Hyperbole, quasi diceret, plurimi abeunt a nobis, creduntque in Iesum.
Cornel a Lap.
Verse. 19. The world is gone after him] That is, men of all kinds
promiscuously.

Verse. 22. Philip and told Andrew Jesus] Two together.

Verse. 23. The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified] Many
expound this of death, because by that Christ's glory was illustrated, therefore
Christ according to them says, Calvin.
that now the time of his death draws near. But I rather refer it to the
publishing of the Gospel, as if he had said, that the knowledge of him will be
shortly spread through all the coasts of the world.

Ver. 25. He that loves his life] (...) is here used of excessive and
preposterous love, he that so loves his life, that out of a desire to save it
he denies me and my Gospel; so this Greek word is used, Mat. 10.37. The
Syriack has a word here that signifies to love vehemently.

Chap. 11.33. a vehement affection is expressed by this word.
Verse. 27. My soul troubled] (...) signifies a vehement commotion and
perturbation, as Herod's mind was troubled when he heard that a new King was
borne, Mat. 2.3. And the Disciples when they thought a Spirit was present, so
that they cried out for fear, Mat. 14.26. And Zachary at the sudden sight of
the Angel, Luke 1.12. and it is a metaphor drawn from the commotion of the
water.

Quia vox haec maxima, crassissima and resonantissima erat instar tonitrui.
Forte etiam quia confuse non articulate vocem excipiebant, uti excipitur sonus
confusus tonitrui. Cornel a Lap.
Verse. 29. Said that it thundred] Because (as Jansenius well commenteth upon
the place) some were so amazed, that though they heard a sound, yet they
understood not what it was, and therefore they said that it thundered, but
others heard it more distinctly and understood it, and therefore they said that
an Angel had spoken.

Verse. 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me]
There is a double lifting up of Christ, Vide Piscat.
1 Ignominious, on the Cross, Quistorpius interprets it of this out of the 33.
verse, then men fled from him. 2. Glorious in the Gospel preached, then he
draws men to him, therefore others expound it of that lifting up. I assent to
Chrysostom who says, Calvin.
that Christ used an universal particle, because the Church was to be gathered
both of Jews and Gentiles, John 16.16.

Verse. 36. While ye have light believe in the light, that ye may be the
Children of the light] The Gospel is a light, 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Cor. 4.4.6. It
resembles it First, in its properties. It is 1. Pure, and remains incorrupt
though it shine on dunghills. 2. Very necessary. 3 Profitable and useful to
work and walk by. 4. Pleasant, brings glad tidings. Secondly, In the effects:
1. Expells darkness, so this ignorance, error, sin. 2. Makes discoveries
where it comes. 3. Quickens, the Sun brings heat as well as light.

Ver. 41. When he saw his gllory] In that vision, Esaias 6.1, 2, 3.

Ver. 49. What I should say, and what I should speake] Between saying and
speaking (says a Lapide) there is this difference, that to say is to teach and
publish a thing gravely, to speak is familiarly to utter a thing.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1. BEfore the feast of the Passeover] The other three Evangelists say,
Christ celebrated the Passover, and instituted the Eucharist in the first day
of unleavened bread in which the Jews killed the Pascall Lamb. Therefore this
here is to be understood, So the law Exodus 12. prescribes.
that he did it in the 14. day at the evening which preceded the Feast of the
Passover, which was the fifteenth day.

Verse. 3. And went to God] A Deo exivit, non eum deserens: and ad Deum vadit,
non nos derelinquens. Bernard. He came from God not leaving him: and he goes
to God, not leaving us.

Verse. 4. Laid aside his garments] Only his upper garment not his cloak,
Calvin.
for the Oriental people used long garments.

Verse. 5. Began to wash the Disciples feet] He chose to wash their feet rather
than their head, that he might have the opportunity of a more humble posture,
Dr. Tailor. of the life and death of Christ. Upon consideration of this great
example, Guericus a good man cried out, Thou have overcome O Lord, thou have
overcome my pride, this example has mastered me. Quomodo non humiliabitur
homo sub tam humili Deo? Bernard.
and a more apt signification of his Charity. This washing of their feet which
was an accustomed civility and intertainment of honored strangers at the
beginning of their meal, Christ deferred to the end of the Paschall Supper,
that it might be preparatory to the second, which he intended should be
festival to all the world. If he had washed Judas he had washed a Blackamore.
Calvin says, he did wash him and showed his patience therein.

Verse. 6. Lord, do thou wash my feet] Oration est abominantis rem absurdam and
indignam. It is the speech of one abominating it as a thing absurd and
unworthy. Calvin.


Verse. 7. Thou know not] That is, thou know not what moves me to do this,
for his eye taught him what he did.

But thou shall know hereafter] That is, in due time this shall be interpreted
to thee, and thou shall know the reason why I did this.

Verse. 8. If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me] The word wash
signifies a free pardon of sins and newness of life. Calvin. Causaub. exercit.
16. ad Annal. Bar.
Christ washes us when he blots away our sins by the expiation of his
Sacrifice that they come not into the judgment of God, also when he abolisheth
the wicked and vicious desires of the flesh by his Spirit.

Verse. 10. Needs not save to wash his feet] Our Savior here alludes to the
customable washing of the feet which the Jews used before Supper, especially
after travel. Cartw. on Rhem. T^st. Sentio cum eruditissimo Iansenio
allegoriam eam esse ex usu communi vitae depromptam, quare dictum secundum
literam de ijs intelligendum qui corpus totum balneo lavarunt; sed postea
egressie balneo dum accedunt ad lectum convivale pedes macularunt, ac secundum
anagogen omnino lotio totius corporis de baptismo accipienda, pedum vero
ablutio de affectuum purgatione and ejus quem Theologi nominant fomitem
peccati, etiam in electis post peccatum remanentem. Calvin.


Our Savior refuteth Peter from the common custom of the Jews, as Casaubone
observes, those that are washed in the bath when they go out of the bath into
their bed need no washing but of their feet.

His feet] His affections say some, rather the defilements he contracts by his
daily walking. The relics of corruption must be purged away by little and
little; an allusion to the Eastern Countries which went in Sandales and
defiled their feet; they must repent every day.

But is clean every whit] The faithful are clean, not that they are wholly
pure so that no blot sticks in them, but because in their chief part they are
clean. Calvin.

Verse. 14. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also
to wash one another feet] Now he opens the reason of his deed, viz. that he
who is the Master and Lord of all delivered an example which all godly men may
follow, lest any think much to perform an office though mean for his
Brethren.

Verse. 14. Have washed your feet] Argumentum a majori ad minus.

Verse. 18. To lift up the heel) Metaphorically signifies, under a pretense of
friendship, Calvin.
treacherously to deceive one.

Verse. 23. Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his Disciples] They did
not sit as we at the Table, Calvin. See Mr Lightfoots Temple-Service. c. 13.
but putting off their shoes, and leaning upon pillows, did lie upon beds.

W^om Jesus loved] More than others.

Verse. 27. After the sop] Austen falsely thought, that this sop was a sign of
Christ's body, Calvin.
since it was reached when they were not at supper.

That thou do, do quickly] Vox est detestantis. Calvin.

Verse. 33. Little Children] Note here the tenderness of Christ's affection and
love toward his faithful and Apostles, for he does not say Children, but
little Children, and because the Apostles were little in the faith and love of
Christ, for they received the fullness of it from the Holy Ghost in the day of
Pentecost.

Not new] Absolutely. John 2.7. The Law it self requires the duty, John 3.11.
But new in the manner; before we were to love our Neighbor as our selves, now
as Christ loved us; he would have it always fresh in our thoughts. See 1 John
3.8. Johannes, 1 Ep. 2.7. and 2.6. Praeceptum hoc vetus and ab initio datum eum
ait, initium Evangelij and Christianismi intelligit. Hieronymus Commentario ad
epistolam Johannis, Johannes Apostolus a fratribus admonitus, cur semper
inculcaret dicens: Filioli diligite alterutrum: respondit, quia praeceptum
Domini est, and si solum fiat, sufficit. Grotius.
Verse. 34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, etc.]
Those that are going away are wont to command their Inferiors. Love is new,
because 1. Renewed in the Gospel, Christ's Example, and his last Will and
Testament. 2. Excellent, so new, as Mat. 9.17. Rev. 5.9. Maldonate resolves it
to be an Hebraisme, in which language new, rare, and most excellent are
synonima's; A new name, Apoc. 2. A most honorable name; a new song Ps. 69. A
most excellent song; New wine; Mat. 26.29. The best wine, so a new Command,
that is a rare, choice, special, remarkable one, one above all others.
Maldonate varies little from Calvin. New] As it were a Law newly enacted, not
continually practiced. Calvin. So called, says Austen, from the effect,
because it renews us, because it ought always to be fresh in our mind and
memory.

As I loved you] Calls both for the manner and measure of our love, both
intensive, and extensive: 1. Intensive, as our Saviors was, 1 John 3.16. 2.
Entensive, Romans 5.8. See Mat. 5.44.

As] Is not a note of Equality here, but of similitude, as Christ loved us
freely, John 15.16. greatly, Ibid. verse 13. and constantly, John 13.1. so
should we love our Neighbor.

CHAP. XIIII.
Verse 1. LEt not your heart be troubled] For my departure. It signifies such a
trouble as is in water when the mud is stirred up, or when the waves and surges
are raised by some tempest or storm, such a trouble as is in an Army when the
Soldiers are disranked and routed, or disordered.

Ye believe in God, believe also in me] That is, as ye believe in God the
Father, so believe also in me: ye believe that God the Father is able to
provide for you, believe in me that I am able to satisfy for you.

Verse. 2. In my Fathers house] He calls Heaven, which is the kingdom of glory
and eternal blessedness, (...) maneo.
the house of his Father, to which Christ by his death and passion contended;
in it he says there are many mansions, the word signifies a place of abiding,
that he may show the perpetuity of heavenly felicity and blessedness, opposed
to the shortness of our pilgrimage in this world, Paulus Tarnovius in loc.
Vide Bezam. The word mansions in the Original, and our language, signifies a
Remaining, and denotes the perpetui^y, the everlastingnesse of that State. Dr.
Done on this Text.
Psalm. 39.13. Heb. 13.14.

Verse. 6. I am the way, the truth, Hoc est, per me venitur, ad me pervenitur,
in me permanetur. Augustinus de doctrina Christiana. Viain exemplo, veritas in
promisso, vita in praemio Bet^.

Ingrediamur hanc viam, teneamus veritatem, vitam sequamur. Ambrose.


and the life] These words have each their article in the Greek; the way
wherein, the truth whereby, the life whereunto we walk; or the only true way
leading unto life; the way without error, the truth without falshod, and the
life without death. Bernard. This word way notes the means unto a thing, and
when he says, I am the way, it is as if he should say, Look what ever means
you do use in order to heaven, all those means have their virtue, power and
efficacy from me. Truth lies between way and life, as if the way to life were
through truth. The life, I, even I am he which gives life unto all your motions
and actions for heaven, all grace is from Christ.

Verse. 10. I am in the Father] Vt in origin and principio, as in the original
and principle, and the Father in mee] Vt in charactere and imagine, as in the
character and image.

Verse. 12. He that believes on me, the works that I do shall he do also,
Calvin. Austen. Chrysostom.
and greater works then these shall he doe] It was a promise made unto the
whole Church, neither peculiar to the Apostles, nor common to every Christian.
Greater works then these he should doe] for matter, as Peter, Act. 2.
converted 3000. not for manner, because he did them not in his own name.

It is meant of the conversion of the world by the Apostles. 2. Of other
miracles, Dike. Majora non quo ad originem and dignitatem, sed majora numero
usu atque fructu.
Act. 5.15.

Verse. 16. Comforter] Or Advocate, one that pleads the cause of another,
(...) Vox Graeca frequens apud Iudaeos in versione Chaldaea and apud
Thalmudicos, non pro consolatore, sed pro eo qui causam agit alterius, and
quidem rei. Grotius.
and him a guilty person.

Verse. 18. Not leave you comfortlesse] Or as Orphans and Fatherless children.

Verse. 19. Because I live, ye shall live also] Some expound this of the life of
nature, but he speaks of a life peculiar to his Disciples, purchased by his
death, See Dr. Raynolds of the life of Christ. p. 481.
accompanied with vision, which depends on the life of Christ, therefore it is
meant of a Spiritual life; he gives it, continues it, augments it, manifests
it.

Verse. 20. At that day ye shall know that I am in the Father] They knew it
before, he speaks of a more glorious and spiritual discovery. Calvin.


You in me and I in you] We are said to be in him, because being ingraffed
into his body, we are made partakers of his righteousness and all his
goodness; he is said to be in us, because he clearly demonstrates by the
efficacy of his Spirit that he is the author and cause of life to us.

Verse. 21. He that has my commandements] To have the commandments, signifies
to be rightly instructed in them, to keep himself and frame his life
according to their rule.

Verse. 26. In my name] That is, the Father sends the Spirit through the Son,
both as Mediator and as an Intercessour. Teach and bring to your remembrance]
or warn you, we are taught about those things we knew not, and warned about
those things we have forgotten.
All things] that are necessary unto salvation for you to know and to be
persuaded of.

These words were spoken to the Apostles only, but not of them only, Esaias
54.13. And our Savior citing this place, John 16.45. delivers the promise in
general terms.

Verse. 27. Peace I leave with you] As bonum haereditarium. my peace] The peace
which I have purchased and paid dear for, or mine for kind; the same
tranquillity from righteousness imputed which I have; it is his also to give;
men wish the peace of God or Christ, he gives it.

Not as the world giveth] Plainly distinguishing his peace from the worlds,
Mundus dat pacem ut amoliatur res adversat carni, Christus non ita dat pacem,
sed pax Christi tum demum viget cum rebus secundum carnem advers^s non premimur
modo sed opprimimur; conferatur cum hoc loco C. ad Philip. and res erit
manifesta. Cameron de ecclesia.
both in the gift and manner of giving.

Verse. 28. My Father is greater than I] The Arrians objected this place to
prove Christ a secondary God. The Orthodox Fathers said this ought to be
referred to his humane nature; but Calvin dislikes this answer. Hic (inquit
ille) nec de humana Christi natura, neque de aeterna ejus divinitate sermo
habetur, sed pro infirmitati^ nostrae captu se medium inter nos and Deum
constituit. Calv.

Verse. 30. The Prince of this world] The Devil is called the Prince of the
world, not simply, but as it is corrupted; the Prince of this world says the
Text, that is, which now lies in malice and hostility against the Son of God.
See 2 Cor. 4.4.

Has nothing in mee] That is, either nihil sui no sin in me, or nihil juris
no authority over me.

CHAP. XV.
Graece est geminus articulus (...), Id est, illa vitis illa vera. Syrus: Ego
sum vitis illa veritatis. Cornel. a Lap.
Verse. 1. I Am the true vine] Greek that Vine, that true one. Christ's seems
to have begun this Sermon upon occasion of seeing some vine as he passed in the
City, for he was wont to take occasions from earthly objects, to teach them
spiritual things. Piscat.

Verse. 2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit] He speaks of a withered
branch, that has no life; Cyrill. Theophylact. Id est qui videtur esse in me,
quum tamen revera non sit, quippe alioqui ferret fractum. Piscat.
they are called the branches and members of Christ in a general or equivocall
sense; because they profess the faith of Christ, and are numbered among the
members of the Church.

Verse. 5. The same brings forth much fruit] Both the Syriacke and Greek take
special notice of this; it is added emphatically; Christ points at such a one
as abides in him, as John Baptist at Christ. Psalm. 52.7. Such a one will be
fruitful in unfruitful times. 2. Comprehensively, it comprehends all true
Christians as well as the Apostles, he changes the second person into the
third, See v. 4. 3. Exclusively, the same and only he.

Brings forth much fruit] viz. By that life and sap of grace which he
receives of me; fruits of many kinds, grows is universal. 2 Pet. 1.5. 2.
For degrees and quantity. 1 Phil. 11.

(...) Vulg. and Erasm. sine me. Beza Seorsim a me.
Without mee] Or separate from me. See Cameron. Piscat.

Ye can do nothing] It is more emphaticall in the original, two negatives,
cannot do nothing, not no great thing, but nothing at all. August. against
Pelagius. Neither facere nor perficere as some of the Latins.

Verse. 6. He is cast forth as a branch] There are two chief ejections, Ab
interiori sanctorum communione, per separationem spiritualem. 2. Ab exteriori
communione, per publicam Apostasiam. First, from the internal communion of the
Saints, by a Spiritual separation, Secondly, from an external communion, by
apostasy.

Verse. 7. Ye shall ask what ye will] Meaning with a will ruled by the word of
God and ordered according to Gods will.

Omnia inter amicos communia.
All things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you] As if
he had said, I will communicate and impart my secrets unto you, as one friend
does unto another, as far as shall be fit for you to know.

Ferus de observatione non obsequiosa sed insidiosa interpretatur. Si me in
verbis meis insidiose observarunt, and vobis pariter laqueos ponent. Gatak. de
Nov. Instrument. Styli dissertat. c. 17.
Verse. 20. If they have kept my saying, they will keep yours also.]

Verse. 22. They had not had sinne] The sin of contempt of me and my doctrine,
their sin had been nothing in comparison of that now it is, or they had had
some cloak and color for their sin, as in the next words. Vide Piscat.

But now they have no cloak for their sin] That is, no color of plea, nothing
to pretend by way of excuse. The Greek word (...) which is also used, 1 These.
2.5. signifies a fair show, pretense, or color, which we use to call a
cloak; Thereby intimating that usually man has a cloak for his sins.

Verse. 26. Which proceeds from the Father] Which very word John uses of the
two edged sword proceeding out of the mouth of Christ, Rev. 1.15.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 2. THey shall put you out of the Synagogues] Of the manifold
significations of Synagogues, their use, original and antiquity, see Tolet on
this place, and my Annotations on Matthew. 4.23. and 6.2. and on Luke 7.5.

Verse. 7. It is expedient for you, that I go away] Expedient, Reinolds on 110.
Ps. p. 136. And for v. 10. see him ib. p. 30. and for 21. v. ib. p. 50.
to seal and secure our full and final redemption unto us, and expedient, to
prepare a place for us.

Verse. 16. The comforter will not come] John 14.16. This Greek word is
attributed to Christ, 1 John 2.1.

Verse. 8. Reprove the world] Or convince. Austin takes the word pro
reprehendere, The word in the Original signifies the refuting of an opinion
that men had before drunk in and were possessed of. Vide Bezam in v. 8.
Chrysostom and Cyrill, pro convincere; the last is the better, reprove by
preaching. Act. 2.

The Greek word more properly signifies to convince than reprove, Verbum
Graecum (...) quod latin est arguo, est convincere alterum contraria
opinantem, quod Paulus optime ostendit Tit. 1.9. arguere mundum de peccato, est
mundum opinantem se a peccato immunem convincere and ostendere esse in peccato,
secundo convincere est alterum opinantem contraria ita adstringere ut non
habeat quod rationabiliter respondeat, nec quo suam tueatur opinionem, nec quo
se defendat. Toletus. in loc. Evidentibus argumentis ac probationibus docebit,
ita ut tergiversari non possit, ita ut nihil habeant quod praetexant. Sic
accipitur arguendi verbum etiam supra, 8. v. 46. and alibi. Lucas Brugensis.
to reprove is only to discover a fault; to convince is to take away all
reasons that can be alleged for it.

The Spirits convictions are never single, Satan's voice is to cry sin, sin, the
voice of the Spirit is to cry grace and the righteousness of Christ only.
Convincing is a clear and infallible demonstration which takes away all the
cavils of the soul, when one shows a thing to be impossibly otherwise than he
represents it.

There is a twofold conviction of sin. 1. Rational, when a man's reason is
non-plust, and he cannot deny the truth of it. 2. Spiritual, when a man's heart
stoopes under it, and he takes the shame to himself.

Of sinne] It discovers 1. the nature and filthiness of sin, shows the
contrariety of it to the holy will and pure nature of God 2. the danger of it,
that thou art under the undoing power of sin, as long as thou art short of
faith in Christ. John 3. ult.

Verse. 10. Of righteousnesse] That is, 1. Of the sufficiency of Christ's
righteousness. 1 John 1.7. 2. Of the possibility of it, Because if any part of
righteousness had been to be fulfilled, Christ should have been still in the
grave, and not gone to heaven, his going thither argues all is done. Of
inherent righteousness which is imperfect, Matthew. 22.26. Sanctification. so
Matthew. 12.18. because the Devils power and sins strength to them is subdued.
that his righteousness shall be effectual to all purposes for us; because he
goes to the Father, and we shall see him no more, therefore God is fully
satisfied. 1 Timothy 1.16.

Verse. 11. Of judgment] That Christ has erected a judicatory in the
conscience. Oracles are ceased, Satan in part is cast down. 2. Makes men submit
to his judgment, Matthew. 12.20. Observe the method of this conviction. 1. Of
sin, to cure the presumption which is in men, and bring us to a selfe-despaire.
2. Of righteousness, to prevent despair in the mercies of God, when our
presumption is cured. 3. Of judgment and sanctification, to prevent that
looseness we should else fall into; we are convinced of sin by the Law, of
righteousness by the promises of the Gospel, of judgment by the Evangelicall
commands.

(...), id est, ducet recta via ad veritatem quasi dux viae. Vide Cameronis
Myroth. Evang.
Verse. 13. He shall guide you into all truth] Guide] By inward motions, moving
and persuading. 2. Changing the mind and will. 3. Kindling the affections.
Guide you, As a man is led by the hand into a place, for we are not only blind
but lame too; shall lead you into the practice of them. That promise was
directly and primarily made to the Apostles. All truth] Not simply all, but all
necessary and saving truths; to be led into all truths, is to know and believe
them. Lead them into all truth] That is, reveal Gods will unto them, and
assure their hearts, that the same is true.

He shall not speak of himselfe] Hence the Arrians blasphemously inferred (as
Jerome witnesses) that the Holy Ghost was inferior to the Father and Son,
Hieron. Dial. adversus Luciferianos. Dicttum est (...) intelligendum autem
(...). Est sermo dispensatorius. Iansen.
they said the Father only was true God, our Savior a creature, and the Holy
Ghost a servant of both. Christ speaks of the Holy Ghost as some Messenger and
Ambassador whose fidelity is seen in saying nothing himself, but only in
relating that he has in charge.

Verse. 16. Shall not see mee] When he lies in the grave, Theoph. Caiet.
Rupertus. Shall see mee] In heaven Aug. not see him at his ascension, but at
judgment. Beda.

Verse. 20. Weep and lament] (...) you would be inwardly dejected, (...) and
outwardly declare it. These words are not only meant of his Disciples, but of
all believers, Perkins.
who upon consideration of the sins, and their spiritual want of Christ, do
mourn and lament.

But your sorrow shall be turned into joy] If Christ had only promised that
their sorrow should he mitigated or shortly ended, it had been a great comfort,
but this ministers abundant consolation. Dr. Tailor.


Verse. 23. Whatsoever ye shall aske] Non quaecunque whatsoever only, but
quotcunque too, how many things soever; The Greek word is pregnant, may mean
both, does mean both. Dr. Clerk.


Verse. 33. Be of good cheere] The word signifies boldness, implying that our
confidence in God causes holdnesse and courage.

CHAP. XVII.
THis Chapter is an Epitome of that intercession which Christ's makes in heaven
for his people, for though the prayer here was in the time of his humiliation;
yet the matter of it belongs to his State of glory. That is, the cause and
beginning of life eternal.


Verse. 3. This is life eternall] By eternal life understand grace by a
metonymie of the effect, quia vitam efficit. Piscat. It works life, quia radix
and origo vitae, because it is the root and original of our life. Cyrill.
Gustus vitae aeternae, the taste of eternal life. Brentius.

That they might know] That is, believe in.

v. 4. See Dr. Reynolds, the life of Christ. p. 420.
Thee the only true God] Hence the Arrians inferred that the Son was not true
God, and the Macedonians, that the Holy Ghost was not true God. The exclusive
word only here does not exclude the Son and the Holy Ghost, but Idols and
false Gods. See Romans 9.5.

Verse. 9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou
have given mee] Our Savior prayed for those only that his Father had given
him, Oravit and pro mundo, ut resipisceret and veniam acciperet peccatorum.
Luc. 23.34. Imo and mox ut credat 21. Sed haec quae nunc orat, de protectione
paterna, de spiritu, de concordia, non nisi ad credentes pertinent. Grotius.
Vide plura ibid.
and for those whom hereafter he should give unto him. v. 20. And that with
exclusion from the world, as here, and for their sakes he sanctified himself.
v. 19. Which in like manner is to be understood with exclusion of the world.
Now by sanctifying himself, is understood the offering up of himself upon the
Cross, by the unanimous consent of all the Fathers whom Marlorate had read, as
himself professes in his commentaries on that passage in John. And he had
seen very many as there he signifies, viz. Chrysostom, Cyrill, Augustine,
Leontius, Beda, Theophylact, Euthymius, Rupertus.

Verse. 10. All mine] All that I make intercession for, and am to redeem, that
are to have benefit by me, are thine] Thine elect and chosen people, and thine
are mine] All thine elect shall have benefit by me, and, I am glorified in
them] The glory and honor that I have in the world, is in and by them, and
them only.

Verse. 11. That they may be one as we are] The unity of the will is common to
all v. 20.21. Verse. 12. (...) distne^a^ura a (...), ita ut (...) referatur ad
conservationem in bono, (...) ad praeservationem a malo, (...) ad media (...)
ad finem: qui enim ab exitio praeservari debent, filios oportet in vera Dei
agnitione and fide servari. (...) ad Christi fidelitatem, (...) ad ipsius
diligentiam. Gerh. Her.


Verse. 13. These things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy
fulfilled in themselves] That is, I have made this prayer in the world, and
left a record and pattern of it in the Church, that they feeling the same
heavenly desires kindled in their own hearts, may be comforted in the workings
of that Spirit of prayer in them, which testifies to their souls the quality
of that intercession which I shall make for them in heaven. Dr. Reynolds on
110. Psalm. 4. p. 437. See him ibid on verses 5, 6. p. 491.

Verse. 19. I sanctify my selfe] In this Chapter where he refused to pray for
all, he professes that he sanctified himself for their sakes for whom he
prayed; Sanctify here is not to make holy, and purge from fi^thine^se, but to
separate himself to all that work he undertook.
now this sanctifying Dr. Twisse. That is, he offered himself a sacrifice as
the place is expounded by Cyrill and Chrysostom, or consecrated himself to be
a sacrifice. Vide Bezam. and Grotium. Christ was Priest, Altar and Sacrifice,
Sacrifice in his humane nature, Altar in the Divine, and Priest in both.
of himself was unto his death and passion by the unanimous consent of all the
Fathers, as Maldonate acknowledges; therefore Christ died not for all and
every man.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. WHere was a Garden, into which he entered and his Disciples] Peccatum
in horto primum admissum, in horto coepit expiari. Brugensis. Sin being
committed first in the garden, began to be expiated in a garden.

Verse. 2. For Jesus of times resorted thither with his Disciples] Christ was
wont always to seek solitary places to pray in. These festival days he was
always wont to continue there in the night, Luke 21.37. and 22.39. Christ by
this deed did show that he shunned not his enemies, but made choice of fit
place and time for the executing of his Fathers and his own purpose. Grotius.
He chose rather to be taken in the place of prayer than of supper, and in the
night, Impius and ingratus Judas, qui Iesum eo laco quaerit ut comprehendat,
quo, and novit eum orare, and didicit ab eo orare. Brugensis.
that the fear of his enemies might be showed who durst not take him in the day
time.

Verse. 14. It was expedient that one man should die for the people] He meant,
it was better that Christ being but one should die, than that the whole people
(whose destruction he thought unavoidable, if Christ were suffered to live)
should perish and come to nothing. It was the will of God for the honor of the
Priesthood, Dr. Field of the Church. l. 5. c. 10.
that he should utter that he meant ill, in such words as might have a good
sense, though not meant nor intended by him, wherefore he is said to have
prophesied.

Verse. 15. And so did another Disciple, that Disciple was known unto the High
Priest] Some think this was John, who perhaps might serve the High Priest with
fish, Chrysostomus, Cyrillus, Theophylactus, Brentius and alij, existimant
fuisse Apostolum Iohannem, quae sententia confirmari potest ex eo quod Johannes
hac periphrasi se ipsum solet significare Iohann. 20 v. 2.3.4. quodque tam
exact describat, qua occasion Petrus in atrium Pontificis introductus sit.
Gerhardus. Vide Piscat.
but because after three years conversation in the School of Christ,
familiarity with the High Priest Christ's sworn enemy would be no good sign,
and because John could not without imminent danger enter into the High Priests
hall, therefore Austen and the ordinary gloss say rightly, who that Disciple
was, because it is here concealed, it should not be rashly determined. Grotius
thinks it was not John, because he being a Galilean would have been questioned
by those that stood by as well as Peter, nor any of the twelve, but rather him
in whose house Christ supped, for that Matthew 26.18. Brugensis likewise thinks
it was not Jo^n, because he was familiarly known to the High Priest, nor any
public and open Disciple of Christ, but a secret one, as there were many
then. Some think (says he) that it was some honorable Citizen of Jerusalem:
what if it was he at whose house Jesus supped, Brugensis in loc.
for he was rich and magnificent, Mar. 14.15. and also a secret Disciple of
Christ, Mat. 26.18.

Verse. 31. It is not lawful for us to put any man to death] The Jews (say
some) spoke only of a certain kind of punishment, viz. as crucifying, with
which they would have Christ suffer Iansen. Concord. c. 141. Ferus in Ioh. Vide
Grotium in Matthew. 22.
for the greater ignominy. But this seems not probable that the Jews were so
solicitous of crucifying Christ rather than of punishing him any other way,
when we read that they would sometimes have thrown him down headlong, and
sometimes have stoned him. Therefore their opinion seems to be most probable
who understand these words of the Jews, not as spoken simply and absolutely,
but with the respect had of the time, viz. For the feast of the passover which
was then kept, that it was not lawful for them to put any to death, see verse.
28. So Bellarmine says many of the fathers interpret those words. Those things
which follow favor this exposition. That the saying of Jesus might be
fulfilled] Beza says, the cause why the Jews expressly required that Christ
should be crucified, was not only because this was a most bitter and shameful
death; but because this punishment was appointed by the laws of the Romans for
the authors of sedition. See Acts 6.12. and 7.58. and 24.6, 7. against this
exposition.

Verse. 38. Pilate says unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he
went out again unto the Jews, and says unto them, I find in him no fault at
all] Pilate speaks roughly to Christ, but well of him to the people; he used
four means to deliver him, First, Loquendo, by speaking for him, when all the
world was silent. Secondly, mittendo, by sending Christ to Herod. Thirdly,
jungendo, by joining Christ and Barrabas together, thinking they would rather
have chose Christ than such a vile fellow. Fourthly, flagellando, by whipping
of Christ. Two things made him condemn him. 1 The importunity of the Jews,
Crucify him, crucify him, and his willingness to content them, Mark 15.15 2
The fear of losing Caesar's favor, John 19.13.

Verse. 39. But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the
Passeover] Some say they used this custom in remembrance of Jonathans
deliverance by the people, others in remembrance of their deliverance out of
Egypt; a third, not in relation to either of those, but in solemnity of the
feast, at the Passover a malefactor was to be set free, not an innocent
condemned. Aquinas.


CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 1. ANd scourged him] It was established by the Roman Laws, that he
which was crucified should be first beaten with rods. Jerome.


Videte ejus miseriam and quam ridiculum sit in ipso crimen regni affectari.
Vide infra 14. Grotius.
Verse. 5. Behold the man] That is, if there be any mercy yet in you look on
him, set him free.

Castellionovo vocabulo (...) lapidipavium vertit. Melius famae suae
consuluere, qui Graecum vocabulum retinuerunt, quippe usu Latinum factum
Cheitomaeus. Gabbatha] Sic nominatur illud pavimentum quod esset elevatum. a
verbo Hebraeo gabah quod significat elevari. Piscat. Erat in loco sublimi, ut
solent esse tribunalia, ut judex a circumfusa multitudine videri and audiri
possit. Cornel a Lap.
Verse. 13. In a place that is called the pavement, but in the Hebrew,
Gabbatha.] Within the Court of the Temple in a house called the Paved Chamber,
because of the curious cut stones it was paved with. See Piscator.

In Hebrew] That is Syriacke, that is the speech of the Jews. Grotius Vox est
ejus linguae quae Christi tempore vernacula erat in Iudaea quae ideo Ebraica
dicitur.

Verse. 14. About the sixth houre] Then began his hanging on the Cross say some,
Mark. 15.25. says, And it was the the third hour, and they crucified him, and
so Mat. and Luke Cornel a Lap. allegeth seven interpretations for the
reconciling of these places, but approves of this best: Christ is said to be
crucified the third hour, because at that hour Pilate publicly assented to
the Jews crying crucify him, that he might avoid the tumult of the people,
whence he commanded him to be whipped, as fitting him for the Cross; (for the
guilty persons that were to die were wont first to be whipped) yet hoping by his
cruel whipping to appease the Jews, Luke 23.14. Matthew. 27.24, 25.
but when he saw them continuing in their clamor against Jesus, at the sixth
hour fitting on the tribunal, he delivered a judiciary and formal sentence
against him that he should be crucified. Luke and Matthew seem to favor this
exposition. The best copies and John's own autograph Policarpi and Ignatij
Epistolae a Reverendissimo Episcopo Vsserio editae p. 74.75. Vide plura ibid.
(which the Author of the Constantinopolitane Chronicle says, was kept in the
Church of the Ephesians to his time) have (...) hora quasi tertia, about the
third hour. Nonnus in his paraphrase on this place also so renders it.

Verse. 17. And he bearing his Crosse] Although this was the custom among the
Romans, that malefactors should carry their Cross to the place of punishment,
Lipsius l. 2. de cruce c. 3. So that without doubt the two thieves Christ's
companions bore their Crosses, yet Christ should have been spared. For since
only lusty thieves were wont to be crucified, they were able to carry such a
burden, but Christ being cruelly whipped and hardly used otherways, sunk under
the burden. Brugensis.

In Hebrew Golgotha,] the Hebrew is Gulgoleth, wherefore the word is rather
Syriack; Id est, Cranium seu Calvaria; sic dicta a rotunditate and
volubilitate, nam galgal volvere sig. Piscat. Neque enim Gabbatha Hebraicum est
aut Golgotha, sed plane Syriacum. Quid igitur? Lingua Syriaca appellatur a S.
Iohanne Evangelista Lingua Hebraica, quod ea tunc temporis Hebraei in Iudaea
Commorantes uterentur tanquam vernacula. Valeriani De Flavigny.

Receptissimum est, Linguam Syriaeam Iudaeis Hierosolymitanis, dum Christus in
terris, in usu etiam vulgo fuisse, adeoque ipsi Christo. Seldeni Uxor Ebraica.
l. 3. c. 23.


this is often in the New Testament called the Hebrew tongue, because it was
the vulgar tongue of the Jews that were Hebrews. Acts 22.2. See 13. v.

Verse. 20. Wrote a title and put it on the Crosse] Writ faults over head to
show the equity of their proceeding. Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 1.

Verse. 22. What I have written, I have written] I will not alter it; and if man
say quod scripsi scripsi, number Deus quenquam scribis and delet? August. Does God
write any in his book and blot him out again?

Verse. 25. Now there stood by the Cross of Jesus, his mother, and his mothers
sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene.] Her standing declared
her constancy and trust in God; we have the Virgin full of grace, Mary Cleophas
the married full of cares, Magdalene the penitent, all need to look on Christ
crucified.

Verse. 26. His mother and the Disciple standing by] Stantem lego, flentem non
lego, says Ambrose of Christ's mother, I read of her standing, but not of her
weeping.

Woman behold thy Son] He calls her woman and not Mother, not as unwilling to
own her for his Mother, but either as fearing that such an owning her might
have created her further trouble, or as showing that being ready to dye and
return to his Father in heaven, he was above earthly relations, and knew none
after the flesh, no not his own Mother.

Verse. 27. From that hour that Disciple took her unto his own home] Joseph
belike was now dead. Vide Piscat.


Verse. 28. Our Savior knowing that all things were now accomplished] Our
Savior was not yet dead or buried.

Some answer that all things necessary for our Redemption were accomplished,
because Christ had borne the wrath of his Father, but rather it may be
answered, that all other things which were to go before the death of our
Savior were accomplished, so that nothing remained but this tasting of Vinegar.

I thirst] Bleeding breeds thirsting, then was fulfilled that Psalm. 21.6. in
Christ.

Verse. 29. Put it upon Hysop] Matthew and Mark say upon a Reed, Mat. 27.48.
Mark 15.36.

The Hysop stalk was put into a reed or hollow Cane, Vide Piscat. and de Dieu
in loc.
or else in those countries the Hysop did arise to that bigness that the stalk
thereof might well be called a Cane or Reed, as the tree of Mustardseed with the
Jews is far greater and taller than it is with us.

Verse. 30. Finished] That is, the Prophesies of him says Augustine, and
Chrysostom says his Pilgrimage and the wrath of God: now the Jewish Law and
Sacrifice was at an end. Iansenius.

Gave up the Ghost] Emisit non amisit. Ambrose.

Crurifragium five crurifrangium ut crux ipsa servorum peculiare quasi
supplicium fuerat. Drusius. Vide Grotium and Brugensem.
Verse. 31. That their legs might be broken]

Verse. 34. Pierced his side] Their malice dyed not with his death. The Syriack
Paraphrase says, Vide Bezam, and Fulleri miscel. Sac. l. 5. c. 1. p. 14.
Junias, Piscat. Beza, Mr. Perkins. Tacto pericardio in quo est aqua and sanguis
circum. Grotius.
He pierced his Ribbe, that is, the fifth ribbe, where the pericardium lay;
forthwith came there out blood and water] It is very likely that the very
Pericardium was pierced, a filme or skin like unto a purse, wherein is
contained clear water to cool the heat of the heart. Aqua quae diluat,
sanguis que redimat. Ambrose on Luke. The blood signifying the perfect
expiation of the sins of his Church, and the water the daily washing and
purging of it from the remainders of her corruption.

Verse. 36. A bone of him shall not be broken] Christ would have none of his
bones broken or taken off from the communion of his natural body, to note the
indissoluble union which was to be betwixt him and his members. Dr. Reynolds.


Many think (says Grotius) that he has respect here to the Law concerning
the Pascall Lamb, but he rather conceives that that place Psalm 34.21. is
aimed at, where Gods special care for a godly man is described. Vide Brugensem.


CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. Comes Mary Magdalene early] With her companions, which Matthew,
Mark and Luke name; Luke 24.1.10 Cornel a Lap. Vnam praecipuam nominat pro
pluribus. Sic Marc. 5.2. and 46. si cum Matthaeo conferas. Grotius.
but here she alone is named, because she was their leader, more zealous and
diligent than them all, (therefore she is named in the first place in the other
Evangelists) and especially because he intended to relate here upon what
occasion Christ first appeared to Mary Magdalene alone. See 10. and 11. verses,
and Mark 16.9.

Aetate velocior. Grotius. 6. v. Petrus aetate prudentior, eaque diligentius
omnia explorans. Id. ibid.
Verse. 4. The other Disciple did outrunne Peter] As younger, and so more
nimble. John out-ran Peter, Love is swifter, but Zeal in Peter is bolder to
look into the Sepulcher. See verse 6.

The Greek verb is such as timber works fastened touch, and is to fasten unto,
to be joined unto, so St. Paul uses it 1 Cor. 7. not to touch, that is, not to
be fastened by marriage, as one. Broughtons. Vide Bezam, Grotium and Brugensem.
The words should be translated, I do not yet presently ascend. See Broughtons
Epistle to the nobility of Engl. p. 45.
Verse. 17. Touch me not] Go in haste to tell my Disciples, stay not to touch
me. 2 I am not ascended] viz. that it should be time enough to touch me, or 3.
she should touch him being ascended by faith, the profitablest touch.

He forbids her to touch him, that is, not to look to enjoy his corporal
presence as before, but rather to seek for his Spiritual presence by faith,
considering he was shortly to ascend to his Father. Mr. Perkins.

But go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your
Father, and to my God and your God.] I ascend] To what end, see John 14.2.
The words are as full of Comfort as the Ocean of waters. My brethren] A loving
appellation. My Father and your Father,] A blessed union in a happy
Correlation; my Father by nature, yours by grace says Austen.

Verse. 18. Mary Magdalene came and told the Disciples that she had seen the
Lord,] A Female Evangelist. En Magdalena hic a Christo fit Apostolorum Apostola
and Evangelista. Cornel a Lap. Vide Piscat. in v. 26.


Verse. 19. When the doors were shut] Some think by his power he caused the
door to give way, others that he rarefied and thinned the substance of the
door. Primo non habtur e Scriptu^e ris, Christum intrasse per janua claulas:
sed (...), anas voces Latinus interpres reddidit semel, quum fores essent
clausae, and iterum januis clausis. At Syrus utrobique cum essent fores
clausae. Sic nihil necesse est penetrationem intelligere. Chamierus. Vide
Calvinum.
Mr. Perkins has both. a Lapide says falsely that Christ pierced the doors
as he did the Virgins shut womb when he was borne, and the stone of the
Sepulcher in rising from the grave. The Scripture is evident that our Savior
was presented to the Lord according as it is written, every male that first
opens the Matrix, Luke 2.29. Clausas portas vulvae virginalis aperuit says
Ierom.

It is not said that Christ came through the doors being shut, but after the
doors were shut, which yet at his entry were opened miraculously, as to the
Apostles the prison doors, Acts 5.19. and 12.10. The same may be said of the
stone, if he arose before the Angel removed the same. Mat. 28. Fulke on the
Rhem. Test.

Verse. 21. As my Father sent me, so send I your] First, As my Father sent me
so I send you] To imply, that he sent all with equal authority, every man's
jurisdiction coming immediately alike from Christ.
as Christ was immediately called by the Father, so were the Apostles
immediately called by himself; Secondly, as Christ was sent from the Father to
preach to the whole world, so Christ sent them into the whole world, for the
whole world was their charge; Thirdly, as Christ was sent to reveal his
Fathers will, so were they sent by Christ to reveal the Fathers will, partly
in making things more fully known, which were before but darkely shadowed, and
partly in foretelling things to come, they all being Evangelicall Prophets. In
regard of this manner of sending them they were above the Angels themselves.
See Ephesians. 3.10. Perkins on Jude.

Verse. 22. He breathed on them, and said unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost]
The ceremony of breathing on them, seems to give them all a like portion and
power of the Spirit, Christ used the Ceremony of breathing upon his Apostles,
with this form of words, receive ye the Holy Ghost, as it were of set purpose
visibly to represent he proceeding of the Holy Spirit from himself, so Cyrill
and Austen. Flatus designat Spiritum Sanctum, quemadmodum and ventus (Act. 2.
v. 2.) Eo quod Spiritus Sanctusfit veluti flatus quidam Patris and Filij, nam
and hinc Spiritus vocatur. Dedit autem praeterea intelligendum, Spiritum
sanctum a se quoque procedere, and se illius esse datorem non minus quam
Patrem. Brugensis in loc.
that is, some smaller measure of gifts as a pledge for the time, but directing
them when and where to expect the plentiful pouring out of the Spirit upon
them after his departure. This outward breathing upon the Disciples was a
lively token and resemblance of their inward inspiration with the gifts and
graces of the holy Ghost, for the Holy Ghost is as it were the breath of the
Father and the Son. Our Savior does the same that God did, Genesis 2.7. to show
that the same person that gives life gives grace, and also to signify unto
his Disciples, that being to send them over all the world to preach his
Gospel, he was as it were to make a second Creation of man by renewing the
image of God in him which he had lost by the fall of Adam; also to put them in
mind that their preaching of the Gospel could not be effectual in the hearts
of the hearers before the Lord did breath into them his Spirit. Cant. 4.10.

Verse. 23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; Ambrose,
Augustine, Chrysostom and Cyrill, Make this observation, that this is not
their work properly, but the work^ of the Holy Ghost, who remitteth by them
and therein performs the work of the true God. The Minister remits sins by
assuring them out of Gods word that believe and repent, that their sins are
forgiven; a private Christian may do this, but the promise is peculiar to the
Ministers. Matthew. 16.19. and 18.18.
and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained] First, it is certain,
that properly to remit sins belongs only unto God, Mark 2.7. God
challenges this as his prerogative royal, Esaias 43.25. The Ministers have
power to remit or retain sins ministerially, in that they have power to
declare unto men remission of sins if they repent and believe, otherwise the
retention of them; and also in that they are instruments under God to bring men
unto repentance and faith whereby to obtain remission, or otherwise to leave
them the more without excuse. Compare this place with Mark 16.15, 16. and Luke
24.47. in all which places there is the same speaker Christ, the same persons
spoken unto the Apostles, and the same time of speaking after the resurrection.

Figuram clavorum] i. e. Vestigium vulneris ex clavis impressum (...) est (...)
vestigium, quod a percussione imprimitur, and post percussionem in corpore
percusso relinquitur, Vulg. versio minus commode reddit fixuram. Syrus vertit
loca clavorum, Augustinus vertit cicatricem. Gerhard.
Verse. 25. Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my
finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will
not beleeve] Plus mihi profuit dubitatio Thomae quam credulitas Mariae.
Gregorius Magnus. The doubting of Thomas has profited me more than the
credulity of Marie; Nil tam certum quam quod post dubium certum.

Ex his verbis manifestum est, Christum Dominum a resurrectione servasse non
tantum cicatrices quinque vulnerum quae in cruce acceperat, quales remanent in
plagis sanatis, sed and ipsa foramina vulnerum non repleta carne quae speciem
clavi haberet, qualia fuisse dicuntur stigmata S. Francisci, sed aperta, ita ut
caro continua non esset. Lugas Brugensis.
Verse. 27. Reach hither thy finger and behold my hands, and reach hither thy
hand, and thrust it into my side] Into the wound of my side pierced with the
Soldiers spear.

Vide Bezam. Hominum alij Christum nec oculis carnis nec fidei intuiti sunt, ut
Phocion; alij oculis carnis and fide, ut Apostoli; alij oculis carnis non fide,
ut Carphas and Pharisaei; alij non carnis sed fidei oculis, ut Abraham. Joan.
8.56. and nos omnes. Grynaeus.
Verse. 29. Blessed are they that have not seen, but heard, and yet have
believed.

Ergo quae scripta sufficient ad salutem.
Verse. 31. But these are written, that he might believe that Jesus is the
Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his name]
This was the final cause of the writers of the Gospel.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 3. AND that night they caught nothing] The night is fittest for fishing,
because in the day time the fearful fishes are affrighted with the sight of
men, and hide themselves in the deep.

Verse. 7. Girt his fishers Coat unto him] He was not altogether naked before,
but had put off his outward Garment. Nempe partim pudoris causa ut Beza
annotat, partim etiam ne indusio laxat^ ac diffluente impediretur in natando.
Piscat. Vide de Dieu in loc.


He was clad after the manner of fishers, with some close inner garment only,
and having girt it to him, did cast himself (in the vehemence of his desire to
come unto Christ) into the Sea. Dr. Hals Paraphrase.

Notant quidam tot piscium numerari genera, eoque significari ex omni hominum
genere capturam fore. Grotius.
Verse. 11. An hundred fifty and three] There are so many kinds of the chief
fishes say some, whereby is signified that some of all kind of men shall be
taken.

And for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken] So many and such
great fishes in net but weak of it self, this also increased the Miracle.

Verse. 14. This is now the third time that Jesus showed himself to his
Disciples] It may be understood of the day when our Savior appeared, Refer ad
dierum numerum. Primum apparuit diversis ipso resurrectionis die: iterum dive
octavo, nunc tertium. Grotius. Vide Brugensem.
not of the particular appearances. This was the third day wherein he showed
himself to his Disciples, but not the third appearance, or we may understand
it of his appearing to his Disciples, when they were together, not to several
persons, yet Grotius and Brugensis refer it to the appearances.

See Dike of the deceitfulness of the heart. p. 399. and Grotius.

Mr. Hildersam, It is doubled in the vulgar, pasce agnos meos, pasce agnos meos.


Verse. 15. Jesus said to Simon] Therefore to Simon alone, feed] Therefore rule
over them as a King, My sheep] Therefore the whole Church scattered over the
whole earth, so the Papists argue. When it is said to him it is said to all,
love thou me? feed my sheep. Austin. He had denied Christ thrice, therefore
he thrice provokes him to a profession of his love; so the Fathers.

The Greek verb signifies to govern as a shepherd rules his sheep, and
adds no more authority to Peter, than to any other Bishop or Elder of the
Church, of whom it is also used. Act. 20.28.

More then these] Than thy nets, than thy fish, than thy friends, that are here
about thee. Mr Hildersam.

Lambes] Peter must not feed his sheep only but his lambs also, and first
his lambs, for the increase of the whole flock depends on the towardness
of the lambs, and they being well fed, less pains need to be taken with the
sheep. Greenham.

Verse. 16. Feed my sheepe] The Papists upon these words of Christ to Peter,
Interrogatur amor and imperatur labor. Aug. Peter had a primacie of order, not
of authority say the Fathers. See Rainolds conference with Heart, Chapter the
third.
Feed my sheepe] would gather Peter's supremacy over the Church in all the
world, but then it will follow that every Christian man should have the like
Supremacy, and be a Pope, See Rev. 2.27. The words in the Original are thus,
He shall feed and rule the Nations, as a Shepherd feeds and rules his
lambs with his hook. Mr Perkins.

Feede] By doctrine, life, discipline.

Verse. 17. Thou know that I love thee] That my love is true and sincere.
Aequum erat ut triplici abnegationi triplex confessio apponeretur, ne de tanti
peccati remissione and restitutione muneris Apostolici dubitaret Petrus. Beza.
Peter being asked of the measure of his love, answered only concerning the
truth; being asked of the quantity, he answered only of the quality.

Verse. 18. Thou shall stretch forth thy hand] As captives are wont to do;
Syrus interpres vertit, alius cinget lumbos tuos. Glossa interlinearis, cinget
inquit vinculis. Chamierus tomo secundo, l. 11. c. 16. Vide Bezam.
by the same figurative speech Paul's death was signified, when Agabus taking a
girdle bound his feet and hands. And carry thee whither thou would not]
That is, in malam crucem. Grotius.

Verse. 19. This spoke he, signifying by what death he should glorify God]
viz. By a violent and cruel death; a magnificent description of martyrdom,
Grotius.
it is a glorifying of God. See John 13.31.

Follow mee] Not in respect of changing his place, as when he said to Matthew
follow me, but it is meant metaphorically of imitation and obedience, as Mat.
16. Chamier.

Verse. 22. Till I come] Some understand Christ's coming at the end of the
world, Die a natural death on his bed, not be put to death as thou shall. v.
18. See Sands his Travells. See Mat. 16.28
and that has been the ground of a vulgar, but senseless error, viz. that
John the Evangelist is yet alive. Austen (tract in John) says that the place
where he was buried bubleth like water, to testify his breathing, and that he
is not dead but sleeps; but Beda shows that he died in peace the 98. year
of his life at Ephesus.

Till I come] Not in person but in power, in the promulgation of the Gospel
and conversion of sinners.

Follow thou mee] Non corpore sed cord, not with his body but heart. Quod
Petro dicitur omnibus dicitur. sequere me. Emissenus. It may be that sharp
reprose of our Savior, quid hoc ad te, made Peter give charge against
curiosity, as against Theft or Murder. 1 Pet. 4.15.22. Dr. Sclater. Vide
Grotium.


ANNOTATIONS UPON THE ACTS of the APOSTLES.
CHAPTER. I.
LVke calls his History the Acts of the Apostles, though it be specially of
their sufferings because even their passions were actions, Dike on Philemon.
Describitur in Actis, progressus and confi^matio ecclesiae, primo in Jerusalem
ad caput 8. Secundo e^^sdem persecutio and augmentum in Iudaea and Samaria a
cap. 8. ad. 16. Tertio ejusdem inter gentes cumprimis fundatio, and progressus
a cap. 16. ad finem. Quistorpius.
they enlarged the Kingdom of Christ by their suffering.

A History of 28. years is described in the Acts says Quistorpius.

Verse. 1. Of all that Jesus began both to do and teach] Understand those Non
dixit omnia sed de omnibus, nimirum ordinem ac seriem rerum indicans potiu^
quam nihil esse praetermissum, alioqui dissentire: a Iohanne qui negat mundum
sore capacem voluminum si singula quae dominus dixit fecitve scriberentur.
Chrysostom. Eras.
things which are necessary to be known for salvation, as Chrysostom, Cyrill,
and Austine rightly expound it. The sense is, which Jesus did and taught while
he continued on earth: The Evangelists propound two things to themselves, viz.
to set forth dicta, sacta, the sayings and deeds of Christ.

Verse. 3. By many infallible proofes] By many Signs, say the Syrian and
Arabic. But the word includes Signs of undoubted truth, and accordingly has
our English well expressed it. Mr. Lightfoot in loc. Being seen of them 40
days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the things of God] see John
20.20, 21. he would converse a long time with his Disciples to assure them of
his resurrection, and that he might more fully inform them of his will.

Verse. 4. And being assembled together with them] Some render it eating with
them; (...) est communi mensa utor, ab (...) Sal, whence the Proverb multos
modios salis cum aliquo consumpsisse; to have eaten many bushells of Salt with
one, is long to have lived together with him.

Verse. 6. Will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel] Dreaming
still of a temporal Kingdom, for which Christ rebukes them. Totidem in hac
interrogatione sunt errores, quot verba. Calv.


Verse. 7. It is not for you to know the times or seasons] As if he should say,
the Father has kept times and seasons in his own power, and therefore it is
not for you to know them. Perkins.

With the Greeks (...) season is sometime used for (...) time, but not
contrarily. (...) properly is the space of time in general, as an age, year,
month, day, hour; (...) the opportunity of doing a thing.

Ver. 10. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven.] looked with fixed
eyes like lovers. (...), est fixis and immotis obtueri oculis amantium more.
Erasmus.


Verse. 12. A Sabbath days journey] One mile says Tremellius on the Syriack
Testament, about two miles say the Latins, 2000 Cubits say the Hebrews,
which are rather to be believed See Weemes his Christian Synagogue p. 75. and
Doctor Willet on Levit. 23. quest. 5. page 567.

A Sabbath days journey was 2000 Cubits which the Hebrews make a mile,
Oecumen. ad Act. 1. Iter Sabbathi, ut ait Orig. Strom. 5. erat 2000. Cubitorum,
idque potissimum, quod sanctum tabernaculu^ and arca tanto interstitio
castroru^ ordinem praecedebant, and a tanto intervallo tentoria sigebant, quo
spatio licebat his, qui castra metati erant ad sanctum tabernaculum accedere.
Drus. Ebr. quaest. 9.29. and observat. Sac.
as appears by their books. de Dien in loc.

Verse. 18. And falling headlong he burst asunder in the midst, Necessarium non
est, ut illam corporis inflationem fingamus ad quam nonnulli confugiunt, cu^
hoc non naturali aliqua causa sed divino judicio contigisse ex istimandum sit.
Sed si causam naturalem viscerum effusionis quaeramus, ea satis idonea videtur
si dicamus ubi ruptus est laqueus, gravi e superiori loco lapsu, disruptum esse
corpus, and difluxisse viscera; imo conatus ipse ad illud mortis genus, maxim
si ex humili loco dependeat, satis gravis existimatur adilia rumpenda, ut vir
magnae fidei mihi narravit, aui and ipse norat cui illud idem in codem conatu
contigisset. Sanctius.
and all his bowels gushed out] The Greek word signifies thus much, that Judas
fell down flat, and was rent in sunder in the midst with a mavelous huge
noise. The Syriack, Aethiopick, and Arabic translates it, and he fell upon his
face upon the ground, and that place Matthew. 27.5. does not oppose it says de
Dieu, because the Greek word there is not to be rendered hanged himself, but was
suffocated or strangled. Therefore Heinsius, de Dieu and Doctor Price think
that Judas died of the Squinancie.

Verse. 19. That field is called in their proper tongue Aceldama, that is to
say, the field of blood] The word is Syriacke, it was bought with a price of
blood Matthew 27.7. and sprinkled with his blood that took that price. See
Drusius and Quistorpius.

Verse. 26. And he was numbred] The original is more, (...) communibus calculis
annumeratus est, he was by common assent, or common voices reckoned with the
eleven. See Beza.

CHAPTER. II.
Verse. 1. WIth one accord] Some render (...), with one mind, or heart. This
Greek word is often used in the Acts. Animorum unio and concordia est optima
dispositio ad reciptendum Spiritum Sanctum
It is used in reference to the twelve Apostles alone Chap. 1.15. Here in
reference to the whole hundred and twenty, and Chap. 2.4.6. in reference to the
whole number of believers. It is used also 5.12.

Verse. 3. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire.] In the
original (...) there were seen, for it was not a delusion of sense, but a
true and real apparition. Tongues, because they were to convert the world to
Christ by the power of speech and persuasion. Secondly, Fiery, to consume the
dross of error in men. Thirdly, Cloven, because they could tell how to divide
the word of truth aright and apply it to persons and occasions. Ministers must
be ardentes and loquentes; fiery, ergo ardentes: tongues, ergo loquentes, says
Chrysostom on this place.

Verse. 4. As the Spirit gave them utterance] In Apothegmes or wise sentences as
the Greek signifies. Vide Bezam.


In the usual Greek (...) and (...) signify a durable mansion; But with the
Hellenists in whose Dialect the Scripture speaks, they are used indifferently
for a stay of a shorter or longer time; that is, for to sojourn, as well as to
dwell; as those two examples out of the Septuagint will manifest; Genesis 27.44. 1
Kings 17.20. Mr. Meade in loc. vide Grotium in loc.
Verse. 5. Dwelling] (...) rather sojourning, for they were not proper dwellers,
but such as came to worship at Jerusalem from these far countries at the Feasts
of the Passover, and Pentecost, and so had been continuing there some good
time.

Verse. 6. Heard them speak in his own language] that is, they spoke to every
man in his own language: not that the hearers heard that in diverse languages
which they spoke but in one, as some have conjectured, for then (as Calvin upon
the place well observes) the miracle had been in the hearers, not in the
speakers, whereas the cloven tongues rested upon the Apostles not upon the
People.

Cujus autem diei? Sanctae nempe: De qua dictum erat, and laetaberis coram
Iehova Deo tuo, ea tamen lege ut prius sacrificia offerrent, ac convenirent
sacrisque caeteris vacarent. Haec autem hora Cultui Divino destinata cum esset,
ideoque convenissent and ipsi, optime suspicionem ejus de quo accusati essent,
ratione illa niti negat, non quasi nemo vino ea hora daret operam cum suo
tempore propheta dixisset. Esa. 5. Heinsius.
Verse. 15. It is but the third hour of the day] That is nine of the clock,
tertia viz. ab orto sole. Beza.

Verse. 17. J will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh] Peter alleging that
place out of Joel. 1.28. Esaias 44.3. Zach. 12.10.
I will pour out my spirit, thus explaineth it, I will pour out of my Spirit,
that is, the saving gifts and graces of my spirit; and pour out, Verbum
Effundo ubertatem designat: quae enim effunduntur, non parce dantur, aut
stillatim, sed abundanter and copiose. Metaphora ab aquis sumitur, quibus
irrorari leviter contingit homines; and baptizari, id est, ablui large; and hoc
posterius valet effundo. Sanctius in loc.
that is, they shall have abundance of my spirit.

Verse. 24. Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death] Some
take these to be the sorrows of the second death, viz. the torments of hell,
Non quibus nexus est sed ne nocteretur. Austen Not wherein he was bound, but
that he might not be at all bound with them, quod non aliter quam de ipsa morte
potest intelligi. Dicit autem solutis, metaphora sumpta ab iis quae loris
constricta sunt. Mors enim nos quasi vinculis and loris vinctos tenet. Drus.
Prove. Class. 2. l. 4.
because the loosing of no other sorrows was necessary to the resurrection of
Christ, and it is impossible that any man should be held of the first death.
vide Bezam.

Verse. 27. My soul in hell] That is, either thou will not leave me as in the
31. v. following where the Greek Text says, his Soul was not left] the old
Latin has he was not left] or thou will not leave my body, as that Genesis
24.26. B Usher. vide Bezam and Drusium.


Verse. 36. Both Lord and Christ] That is, God the Father has given the Church
to Christ, and Christ again to the Church, and made him Head and Savior of it
by his eternal decree.

Verse. 37. Pricked] The word in the original signifies to vex, rent, and wound
punctually, even every the least part and point of the heart, if the sharpest
points of many empoysoned daggers had been all at once fastened in their
hearts, Mr. Bolton
in the cruellest manner could be devised: they had not by the thousand part so
tortured them, as did now the sting of conscience for their sins, and the sense
of that horrible guilt of crucifying the Son of God.

Verse. 39. And to all that are a far off] That is, the Gentles, Ephesians. 2.17.
compared with 12. verse.

Verse. 42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayer] These were notes of the
primitive Church next after Christ. They continued in the Apostles doctrine.]
Secondly, in fellowship] wherein the duties of love are comprehended. Thirdly,
In breaking of bread] That is, Perkins on Jude.
the administration of the Sacraments, for the celebration of the Supper is put
for both. Fourthly, In prayer] That is, invocation of God with thankesgiving.

Verse. 46. And they continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and
breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness, and
singleness of heart.] See first their constancy, they continued. Secondly,
their fervency, daily.] Thirdly, Their unity, with one accord.] Fourthly, their
audacity, in the Temple.] Fifthly, their charity, in breaking bread from house
to house.] Sixthly, their familiarity, did eat their meat.] Seventhly, their
alacrity, with gladness.] Eighthly, their sincerity, and singleness of heart.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 2. BEautifull] For the Prince only did enter in thereat, and not the
people Ezekiel. 44.3. The people entered in at the North and South Gate, See
Josephus de Bello Iud. l. 6. c. 6.
Ezekiel. 46.9.

Verse. 18. By the mouth of all his Prophets] All the Prophets had one mouth.

Verse. 19. Repent yee] To repent is to be wise after the fact, and so to grieve
for our error that we desire and endeavor to mend it.

Be converted] Return; for it is in the active in the Greek, blotted out] of
Gods Book. Metaphora sumpta a Rationariis qui dissoluta nomina inducto Calamo
expungunt, ut recte Tremel. and Iun. observarunt in loc. Quae quidem nota ad
Graecum textum optime quadrat, ad Syram vero Paraphrasin non item. Tarnov. in
exercit. Bibl.


Dilher says, it is a metaphor taken from a munificent Creditor, Dilher eclog.
Sac. dictum, Septimum.
which remitting a debt, presently blots it out of his book of Accounts, as if
he had received it, Col. 2.14. or from a scribe, which razeth out the errors
of his Pen, and the faults of his Writing with a Penknife: or, from a washer,
which rubs spots out of linen.

Times of refreshing] Tempora refrigerii times of Cooling] By a most fit
metaphor, especially to the condition of those regions which were so hot in
summer, Vt afflictiones hujus vitae comparantur igni 1 Pet. 4.12. atque aestui;
ita vicissim consolationes aeternae a fidelibus percipiendae vocantur
refrigerium. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. Vocabulo (...) optime a Luca describitur
futurum seculum. Notat enim Recreationem, quae fit and contingit per
Refrigerationem illis qui sunt aestu debilitati, ut in quibusdam qui animi
deliquium sunt passi, uhi frigidam suffundis videre est. Alardi Pathologia N.
T. Ita vox haec Septuaginta usurpatur Exodus 8.15. Psalm. 6.4 11. Hos. 12.8.
Quistorpius.
as we see by their custom of washing the feet of their guests. Rainold. de
lib. Apoc.

Verse. 21. Whom the heavens must receive] It is questionable whether the Greek
words should be resolved, Locutio est ambigua quia tum intelligere possumus
Christum Coelo capi vel contineri, quam Coelum capere, Calvinus.
that the Heavens received Christ, or that Christ received the Heavens; Locus a
multis vexatissimus.

Times of restitution] This is not meant of the last day. See Barrh. on Hos.
1.11. p. 184.185.

Filii pacti dicentur Hebraeis, ad quos pactum pertinet. Gretius.
Verse. 25. Ye are the children of the Covenant] Or, sons of the Covenant,
because they have a right to the Covenant, as it were a birth-priviledge.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 13. IGnorant men] The word used here is Idiots, which being spoken in
comparison had to a magistrate, be tokeneth a private man: but when we speak of
sciences and studies, it signifies one that is unlearned: and in account of
honor and estimation, it imports one of base degree.

Verse. 25. Who by the mouth of thy servant David have said] The Holy Ghost
ascribes here the second Psalm to David, M. Lightfoot.
which ownes not its Author in the Title: and seems by this very passage to
give us close intimation, that every Psalm which tells not in its Title who
was the Author and Penman of it, is to be ascribed to David as the Penman.

Verse. 29. Grant unto thy servants, that with boldness they may speak thy
word] i. e. Lord, they would drive us from this work whereto thou have called
us; but do thou furnish us with such a measure of courage, that we may
proceed faithfully in our calling, notwithstanding any menaces of theirs.

Verse. 31. The place was shaken where they were assembled together] It is
reckoned by the Learned writing upon this place, that God by this external
sign was pleased to declare, Heron.
how much he liked of the act of their devotion: and withal that Gods showing
himself to approve thereof was a special favor.

Verse. 32. Of one heart and of one soule] That is, there was perfect union and
unity among them.

They had all things common] That communion was in such things only as men had
then freely given for the common good. Perkins.


a comitate proculdubio and eximia in origendis conscientiis facultate quadam
sic vocatus Syra (inquit Junius) appellatione qua filius dicitur. Bar.
Consolatio Nabba. Sed vide ^e potius ab Hebraeo (Nabba) quod significat
Prophetare. Beza. vide de Dieu in loc.
Verse. 36. The son of consolation] For this he was called the Son of
Consolation: because is was a comfort to many in the Church in this time of
affliction.

Verse. 37. And laid it at the Apostles feet] To signify (as some think) that
we must rather trample upon and contemn this trash, then to have over great
admiration of it. Greenham.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 3. TO lie to the Holy Ghost] Because all secret sins are said to be
done in a special manner under the privity of the Holy Ghost, who searches
the heart: or to lie to the Holy Ghost by tempting, to see whether the Spirit
of God could discover it.

And to keep back part of the Price] Purloyning of the Price, (...),
translate by stealing or purloining, for so the word signifies: our English:
which renders it, M. Mede in loc. The true signification of (...) is surripere,
suffurari, aut clam subducta in commodum nostrum convertere: whence Beza turns
it by Intervertere, Intervertit ex pretio; and in Titus, Intervertentes. In the
same sense it is used by the Sept. Josh. 7.1. where what we read, Achan took of
the accursed thing, the Septuagint renders, (...), he purloyned the accursed
thing, that is, the thing that was consecrated to God, as all the silver and
gold was, chap. 6.19.
Keeping back of the price, does not sufficiently express the propriety
thereof in this place. In another place it does, Tit. 2.10. where it renders
(...) purloyring. The Vulgar in both places uses Fraudare, defrauding.

The Syriacke and Arabicke express it by two words, when they could not fitly
by one, and cepit aliquid de pretio and occultavit, id est clam surripuit. de
Dieu in loc.

Verse. 9. To tempt the Spirit of the Lord] (...) translated here Tempt,
sometime signifies to provoke God by some presumptuous fact to anger: as it
were to try whether he will punish or not, to dare God, as Number 14.22.23. vide
Bezam. Eos tentasse spiritum dixit, quia fraudem suam secure compoluerant, ac
si Dei spiritus non esset cordium cognitor. Tentari enim Deum scriptura dicit,
ubi vel sua illi potentia cripitur, vel detrahitur rerum omnium cognitio,
Calvinus.
To tempt is to take a trial of a thing, as the Greek word intimates, they
proved whether God could discover the falsehood of their Spirits or no.

Verse. 39. To fight against God] That is, labor in vain, Prove. 21.30. See
23.9.
It seems to be drawn from the fable of the Giants which were said to make
war with the Gods. Drus. Prove. class. 2. l. 3.


Verse. 41. Counted worthy to suffer shame for his name] viz. From the grace of
God so governing that matter. Piscat. in Philip. 1.7.


CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. THe Grecians] The Hellenists or Graecists (so it ought to be read)
not Graecians. This word is used also, chap. 9.29. and 11.20. Gregory. Vide
Drusiu and Grotium in loc. and Mede in Act. 2.5.


Verse. 3. Look you out among you] The original word signifies, survey the
whole body of the people, and choose the best you can cull out, see Exodus 18.21.

Men of honest report] Gr. witnessed unto, well testified of.

Full of the holy Ghost] There is a threefold fullness of the Holy Ghost in
Scripture, according to a threefold capacity of the receivers. 1. Plenitudo
superabundantiae, of the fountain in Christ, Ioh. 1.16. Col. 2.9. He had not
the Spirit in measure but above measure. 2. Plenitudo eminentiae, of the
stream: so the Apostles those extraordinary Officers, had a greater fullness
of the Spirit then any since. See the fifth and eighth verses. 3.
Sufficienciae, of the vessel: this fullness has every member of the body of
Christ.

Verse. 14. That this Jesus of Nazareth] They speak so contemptuously of
Christ, Calvin.
as if the memory of him were detestable.

Verse. 15. Saw his face as it had been the face of an Angell] Hoc de nativa
facie non dicitur, sed potius de praesenti vultu, Calvinus. This is not spoken
of his natural favor, Locutio reverentiam notans non sine tremore incussam.
Genesis 33.10. and in Estheris historiae. Hic puto denotari fulgorem hominis paulo
post caelesti gloria illustrandi. Pricaeus in loc. vide Sanctium.
but rather of his countenance for the present. Guilty persons faces are wont
to be pale, they are wont to stammer in speaking, and show other signs of
trembling: Luke shows that there was no such thing in Stephen, but rather a
certain majesty shined in him. See 1 Samuel 24.19. 2 Samuel 14.17.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 2. MEn, Brethren] That is, Brethren: for the word Men is added only by
an Hebrew elegancy and custom, as Genesis 13.8. For we are men brethren; our
English renders it, for we are brethren, so verse 26 of this chapter.

Verse. 6. Entreat them ill 400 yeares] So was the prophecy, Genesis 15.13. Jerome
has troubled himself and left the knot as fast as he found it: Concinnio^ meo
iudicio illorum est sententia, qui Abrahamum patronymice sumi asserunt pro
Abrahamide hoc est, pro Iacobo Abrahae nepote, Genesis 48.15. Joseph p^o duobus
filus Ephraim and Manasse express usu^patur. Gloss. Philol. Sac. vide Bezam.
and de Dieu.
so has Austin and Genebrard, reckoning from the descent of Jacob, and others
from Abraham's departure out of Haran, Genesis 12.4. but if we reckon from his 85
year, we shall find a right computation.

From that time till the birth of Isaac were 15 years, and Abraham was a 100
years old when Isaac was borne to him, Genesis 21.5. From the birth of Isaac till
the birth of his son Jacob were 60 years, Genesis 25.26. From the birth of
Jacob till his descent into Egypt were 130 years, Genesis 47.9. From Jacobs
descent unto his death were 17 years, Genesis 47.28. From his death till the
death of Joseph were 53 years, Genesis 41.46. and 45.6. and 50 26. From the death
of Joseph till the birth of Moses were 75 years, as is gathered from received
Mr. Torshell.
Chronologers: and from his birth to the departure of Israel from Egypt were 80
years, Exodus 7.7. now the peoples departure and the giving of the Law were the
same year.

Verse. 14. Threescore and fifteen soules] Moses says that Jacob came into
Egypt with seaventy souls, Genesis 46.27. Stephen here mentions seventy five.
Some say that Luke following the Hellenists so wrote; but it is wicked to
think that Luke related the thing otherwise then it was done. Vide Bezam,
Drusium and Capelli spic^leg. and de Dieu. Drusium in 10 Deuteronomy. p. 567. and
Quistorpium in loc. Probabilis valde mihi Bezae sententia videtur qui ex
conjectura Cornelii Bertrami, collegae sui in ecclesia Genevensi Lucam putat
non (...) sed (...) scripsisse. Glass. Philol. sac. l. 1. tract. 2. de textus
Graeci in N, T. puritate.
That which some urge, that the Apostles writing in Greek used the Greek
version, is not always true. Neither did Steven cite these things so. He
disputed then before the Sanhedrin without doubt in Hebrew a popular dialect,
before whom he was to follow the Hebrew text or Chaldee Paraphrast. Some say
the word (...) is corrupt; but such things must not easily be granted. Sixty
six souls, which came out of Jacobs loins, came with him into Egypt.

The Wives of Jacobs Sons which came down with him into Egypt were but nine,
and so all Joseph's kindred which was sent for by him into Egypt, besides his
father Jacob who is here excepted, was seventy five. Moses expressly
distinguishes between those who rising out of Jacobs loins did with him
properly constitute the house and family of Israel, and between his sons
wives which were brought in into Jacobs house. Wilhelmi Longi de annis Christi,
l. 2. c. 4. See Dr. Halls Paraph in loc.

Verse. 16. Carried over into Sichem] Genesis 33.19. The father of Sichem, so it
should be translated; so Mark 15.40. Mary the mother of James; either (...)
should be rendered by and joined to the word (...), and so the sense is, that
the Patriarchs were translated into Sichem by the Sichemites, Dr. Featlie.
and laid in Abraham's sepulcher which he bought for money, or (...) to be
understood, and then the meaning will be this, that some of the Patriarchs were
laid in Abraham's sepulcher, some in the field that Jacob bought.

See Genesis 52.13
Object. Genesis 33.1^. The same field was bought by Jacob.

Ans. The field was bought twice. 1. By Abraham, and then afterward recovered
by Jacob that he might maintain his Fathers possession. Perkins. vide Bezam
and de Dieu.
2. Abraham (say some) is here put for his posterity.

The question is whether Abraham or Jacob bought this field wherein they were
buried.

Calvin's answer is somewhat too peremptory, that there is an error in all our
Copies of the new Testament, and ought to be corrected: and Beza says the
like. Lyranus and Lorinus think to salve all by putting two names upon the
same man, whom they will have sometime to be called Ephron, sometimes Hamor:
but if this should be true, the Cave in the land of Sichemites and Hittites is
not therefore all one.

Verse. 26. Sirs ye are Brethren] The words in the Greek are (...), Est quidem
generalis inter homines coniunctio, ut mutuam inter se humanitatem colere
debeant, and abstinere ab injuriis omnibus: sed hoc indignius ac minus
ferendum, quum se invicem laedunt qui arctiore vinculo inter se sunt conjuncti.
Calvinus.
men ye are brethren, ye are men, and ergo, should not strive one with another,
but much more considering ye are brethren.

Verse. 38. The Angel which spoke to him in the mount Sinay] That is, Christ
the Angel of the Covenant, say Interpreters generally.

Lively Oracles] Because they were uttered by lively voice, Esley.
not that they did give life, 2 Cor. 3.7.

Verse. 42. As it is written in the Book of the Prophets] For although the
prophecy which is brought be taken out of the fifth of Amos 25. yet the book
of the Prophets is cited in general, one part of which Amos did make. Rivet.
The twelve minor Prophets were joined in one book, least by their littleness
they should be scattered or perish.

Verse. 43. Yea, ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, See de Dieu and Capellus
on the place, and Mr. Seldom de Dis Syris Syntag. 2. c. 14.

See M. Pemb. vindiciae gratiae p 107.


and the starr of your god Rempham] That which the Prophet Amos 5.26. calls
Chiun, that Steven calls Rempham: some would have this to be Hercules, whom they
think to have been a Giant, from the Hebrew Rapha a giant, others say it is
the God of the Syrians, Rimmon.

Verse. 51. Ye stiffenecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, yea do
always resist the Holy Ghost] Whence the Arminians conclude there is a power
in a man to resist the Holy Ghost. It must be understood of the Resistere
Spiritus dicuntur, qui eum in Prophetis loquentem contumaciter rejiciunt.
Calvinus. Perkins on the third Chapter of Rev. and on Jude.
ministry of the Prophets and Apostles, who spoke by the Spirit of God, and
not of the Spirit himself, and them in some things, not in all. A thing is
said to resist, quod non cedit tactui, there is a more general, and a more
immediate touch, when the Spirit comes near the soul.

Verse. 53. Who have received the Law by the disposition of Angels] Or in the
midst of the ranks Id est, in sanctorum Angeloru^ Castris montem
cirumdantibus, ut mediatoris Mosem alloquentis majestatem testarentur,
acceperunt. Rivetus. vide Calv. and Bezam. (...) pro inter, ostendit quam
magnifice data sit lex inter multas Angelorum turmas. (...) vox est militaris,
Jud. 3.33. Grotius in loc.
of Angels, who accompanied God their Sovereign Lord, when he declared the Law.

Verse. 54. Gnashed on them with their Teeth] (...) they gnashed with their
teeth, as if they had been cutting with a Saw.

Verse. 55. And saw the glory of God] A certain brightness, by which the
Majesty of God was represented. See Exodus 24.17. and 34.18.22. Ezech. 2.1.

Verse. 56. Standing on the right hand of God] To stand Stantem inquiunt viri
magni quasi in suorum opem paratum, and alii stantem emphatice, id est paratum,
ad me in confessione veritatis confirmandum, Pricaeus in loc. vide de Dieu in
loc.
up is for ones help, plead ones cause, Psalm. 35.2. Non sedentem, quomodo alibi
describitur ad ostendendam regiam dignitatem, sed stantem quasi paratum in opem
suorum is Grotius his note on the 55. verse.

Verse. 58. At a young man's Feet] Ambrose and Theodorete think that Paul was but
20 years old at his first conversion, but the Greek word here has not so much
respect unto his age and youth, as to his courage and fierceness as the word
signifies, as Budaeus shows; Euripides calls bold and insolent speech
(...). Paul is termed by another word, Act. 9.13. Besides he spent his youth
among the Jews Doctor Willet upon the Epistle to the Romans
before his conversion, Act. 26.6. and had authority committed unto him, not
incident to a very youth, Acts 26.9.

Verse. 60. Lay not this sin to their Charge] The word which he uses here,
notes such a kind of imputing or laying to ones charge, He grieveth more for
their sins then his own wounds. Austen.
as remains firm and steadfast for ever, never to be remitted. vide Bezam. Si
Stephanus non or asset, ecclesia Paulum non habuisset. Austen thought God
ordained Stevens Prayer to be a means of Paul's conversion; see beginning of
the next Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
Quem postea ritum in ordinatione P^storum observatum fuisse constat, non
tanquam signum ^acramentale salutaris gratiae, quam proprie non significat, sed
tanquam indicium per^onae designatae and electae. Rivetus. Volebat omere
Spiritum Sanctum quia vendere volebat Spiritum Sanctum.
Verse. 18. HE offered them Mony] He would buy the Holy Ghost, because he meant
to sell it.

Dictio illa Ebraeorum lingua proverbialis est. Dicunt etiam, neque pars neque
hereditas. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 3.
Verse. 21. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter] A kind of Proverb
among the Hebrews.

Verse. 23. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitternesse] That is,
the extremity of it (the Hebrews when they cannot express a thing fully, they
put two words together to show the full extent of it:) that is, in a state of
sin and impenitency, which will at last bring forth the bitterness of
punishment.

Vir Aethiops. Quomodo vir, si eunuch^^? nam eunuchi evirati; vir hoc loco non
est nomen sexus, sed est locutio, ut vir Aegyptius in Genesi, vir Judaeus Zach.
8.23. in quo sermon Pleonasmus est; satis enim erat Aegyptius, Judaeus; tal^a
sunt mulier ancilla in Salustio, vir piscator apud Herodotum. Drusius. vide
Bezam.
Verse. 27. A man of Ethiopia]

Verse. 30. Understand thou what thou readest] q. d. to what purpose read
thou if thou be not careful to understand what thou read? Mr. Hildersam.

Verse. 39. The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip] Some understand it of an
Angel of the Lord, Doctor Tailor.
as Mr. Beza notes; from Gaza to Azotus which was about thirty six miles.

CHAP. IX.
Metaphora desumpta a b^bus oratoribus qui cum stimulis recalcitrant, non
stimulos sed scipsos laedunt. Adhiberi potest in illos qui vel Deo vel
potentioribus frustra and magno suo malo reluctantur. Job. 15.25. Est
proverbialis locutio profanis etiam Scriptoribus non infrequens. Terentius
Phorm. Act. 1. sc. 2. v. 27. Nam quae inscitia est adversus stimulum calces?
Verse. 5. IT is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks] It is a proverbiall
Speech used in Heathen writers also.

Verse. 7. Hearing a voice] object. 22. Acts. 9. the Apostle says expressly
they heard not his voice which spoke unto him; Paul did not only see Christ's
person but heard a voice distinctly; the others heard a sound but not
distinctly nor saw his person. Cajetane truly expounds it, the voice which they
heard was Paul's not Christ's, see Calvin, and Doctor Reynolds on Psalm. 110. page
381.

Vox organi demonstrat nihil posse hom^nes nisi quatenus, eorum opera Deus pro
su^ arbitrio utitur. Calvinus. Vas Electionis, id est, electum vocatur Paulus,
quia instrumentum eximium fuit, per quod Christus late in omnes Gentes, and
Evangelii lucem, and sui nominis gloriam diffunderet. Sanctius.
Verse. 15. For he is a chosen vessel unto me] That is, to publish among them
the doctrine or the Gospel Rev. 2.13. He alludes to that state of
Sanctification whereto the Lord had lately called him, whereby he made him a
fit instrument for the glory of his name in the ministry of the Gospel.

Scripturis scilicet collatis demonstrans. Est^enim (...) verbum Architect^m
cum ab artificibus desumptum qui si aliquid compingant singulas parts invicem
committunt, ut inter se aliae aliis ad amussim quadrent. Bowls de Pastore
Evangelico.
Verse. 22. Proving] (...) confirming, that is, as Beza notes, Collatis
testimoniis demonstrans, demonstrating it by comparing of one Scripture with
another, according to the manner of Artificers, who being about to compact or
join, are wont to fit all the parts amongst themselves, that every one of them
may perfectly agree with each other.

Verse. 37. Whom when they had washed, Sol. ti sunt veteres Judaei, Grae^i,
Romani, corpora defunctorum aqua lavare, and lota deinceps ad sepidturam tiblis
Canentibus efferre vide Schickard de Jure regio Ebraeorum, ^ c. 6. p. 157.
Dieterici Antiquit. Bibl. vide Calvinum and Sanctium.
they laid her in an upper chamber] The washings of the dead were usual with
many Nations.

Verse. 40. Tabitha arise] Tabitha is rather a Syriack then Hebrew name, which
Luke rendered in Greek Dorcas; both signifies a Goat. Caprea. Gaude^ant olim
mulieres nominibus ab amabilibus et placi^is animalibus petitis. Buxtorsius in
Lexic. Talmud. D^rcas est Caprea: sed vitae sanctitas, nominis paru^ honesti
maculam facile delevit. Calvinus.
He uses the same words by which those that sleep are raised, that he may
show with what easiness the Divine power raises the dead.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 11. ANd saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel descending unto him as
it had been a great sheet knit at the four Corners, and let down to the earth]
The four Corners of the sheet signified the four parts of the world; Optime
linteum a quatuor angulu expansum omnium generum animalia recipit; quia nulla
Mundi pars ab Evangelii communione exclud^tur. Sanctius.
all sorts of living creatures signified all sorts of men, the sheet the Church
militant.

Verse. 13. Kill and eat] The Pope may kill or slay and eat when he will or can;
but if he be Peter's successor, he must feed the sheep not feed on them.

Verse. 15. What God has cleansed] God is said to purify things, that is, he
pronounces things to be pure; pollute thou not] that is, employ thou not as
thou do other things to common uses, but let it serve to holy uses only.
Perkins. Sensuus est, non esse nostrum probare vel damnare quicquam: sed sicuti
unius Dei judicio stamus and cadimus, ita ipsum esse rerum omnium judicem.
Calvinus in loc.


Verse. 16. The vessel was received up again into heaven] to show that in the
end of the world the whole Church militant shall be transported into heaven and
become triumphant.

Verse. 24. Near friends;] Or necessary friends; (...) vocat Familiares amicos,
sicuti apud Latinos necessarii vocantur, qui arotiore vinculo inter se
conjuncti sunt. Calv. Amicus Latin quoque dicitur necessarius, quod eo tam
egeamus quam aqua aut igni. Act. 10.24. Et amicitia eodem, sensu dicitur
necessitudo.
they seem to take away the Sun out of the world (said the heathen orator)
who take away friendship from the life of men, and we do not more need fire
and water then friendship.

Verse. 31. Thy Prayer is heard] Heard effectually, the compound word here used
signifies so, See Heb. 5.7.

Verse. 41. Chosen before of God] See after 14.23. Praeordinatis a Deo magis
sonat delectis ut fit, per suffragia. Graeca vox dicta est a porrigendis
digitis, quo gestu suffragabatur olim populus. Erasmus. vide Bezam. (...) vox
est nata quidem in Graeciae civitatibus, ubi manibus sublatis fiebant
electiones magistratuum: sed coepit paulatim produci longius ad quamvis
electionem. Grotius in loc.


CHAP. XI.
Verse. 20. PReaching the Lord Iesus] Laymen may Preach upon occasion to
Churches disordered, and to persons not yet gathered to any Church. Mr. Pemble.


Those which were dispersed upon the persecution raised about Saint Steven did
publish the Gospel, where there was no Church Acts 8.4. and here. But how
eminent soever men's abilities are, how well soever known to themselves or the
world, to undertake the instruction of the people, without public order in
public Assemblies is a thing that no Scripture, no time, no custom of the
Primitive Church will allow. Thorndikes Service of God at Religious Assemblies
cap. 11. See more there.

Verse. 24. He was a good man] This looks both ways. First upon this, he
exhorted. Secondly upon this, much people. Being a good man, his care was great
to be diligent for a common good; Heror.
and in as much as he was a good man of a gracious and holy carriage, he did
much good, the people were the more affected with his Ministry.

See Grotius, and Drusius in loc. Fulk on Rhem. Testam. Ante hoc tempus Christi
sectatores dicebantur Discipuli. Hic vero primum a Christi nomine nobilissimum
Christianorum Cognomentum nacti sunt. Sanctiu^.
Verse 26. Christians] After the manner of the Graecians which named the
Scholars from their Masters, as Pythagoreans, Platauicks, Aristotelians,
Epicureans: Before they were called Galileans, and Nazarens, as Suidas
testifies; the most honorable name of Christians is in Italy, and at Rome
(the Country and Sea of Antichrist) a name of reproach, and usually abused to
signify a fool or a dolt.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 6. THe same night Peter was sleeping between two Soldiers, bound with
two Chains, and the Keepers before the door kept the prison] All these
circumstances wonderfully illustrate Gods power. Peter was carefully kept,
might not sleep alone, and was bound in two Chains, and other keepers also set
at the doors.

Verse. 12. Where many were gathered together, praying] In the original it is,
Many thronged together to pray].

See Beza, Gameron Calvin and Cartwright.
Verse. 15 It is his Angell] Or a Messenger from him, as it is translated, Luke
7.24.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. Brought up with Herod] The Greek word (...) signifies him, who from
his infancy was educated with another; Grotius in loc.
as 2. Maccha. 9.29. So Plato, Plutark, and others use it, and so the Syriack
takes it here.

See Calvin and Cartwright on Rhem. Test.
Verse. 2. As they Ministered to the Lord] Baronius and Bellarmine translate it,
they sacrificing. But Casaubone Exercitat. 16. c. 41.

B. Morton of the Mass l. 6. c. 2 Sect. 1. See Rain^lds conference with Heart.
p. 869. Causab. ibid. vide Bezam, et Grotium. Fulk on Rhem. Test. in loc. vide.
Quistorp. in loc.


(who for Greek-learning, has scarce had his equal in this our age) says
(...) has been used ecclesiastically, for whatsoever religious ministration
(even for sole praying when there is no occasion of sacrifice) and he
instanceth in the fathers mentioning the morning and evening (...) of the
Church. Whenever it is applied to sacred ministry and used absolutely, it is
always taken for the act of sacrificing. Bellarm. l. 1. de Missa. c. 13. But
therein he much mistakes; for in the example which he adds, Luke 1.23. (...)
is not a sacrifice but a general word, and comprehends all Priestly and
Leviticall ministeries; but it fell to Zacharies lot to offer incense; not to
sacrifice. Here the Greek word used by the Evangelist signifies to minister, or
serve in any public function, either of the Church, or of the commonwealth.
So does Saint Paul call the civil magistrates by a name derived of this verb,
or from whence this verb is derived (...) Ministers, Romans 13.6. Therefore the
vulgar translation, has better translated the participle in this place
generally ministering then Erasmus does by a special kind of ministering, that
is, sacrificing.

Verse. 15. And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets] From this place
and that 15.21. It is collected that in the time of Christ, and the Apostles,
that division of the Law into 54. De Dieu. in loc.
or as some say Dru^s. in Act. 5.32.
53. Paraschas or Sections was in use. They read a Section every Sabbath
(saving that they joined two of the shortest twice together) that they might
yearly read over all the Law. To these, so many Sections selected here and
there out of the Prophets answered.

Vide Bezam. Graece majorem habet emphasin and gratiam ve^bum Compositum, quo
Dei indulgentia exprimitur, in sustinendo populo, quem pervicacem and
immorigerum esse ^ci^bat. Calvinus in loc.
Verse. 18. Suffered be their manners] He suffered the ill manners, the word is
significant.

Verse. 21. By the space of forty yeares] See 1 Samuel 13.1.

Verse. 33. As it is also written in the second Psalme] Some hold that the
division of the Scripture into Hotting. These. Philol. Sect. 5.
Chapters is neither divinely inspired, Vetus lectio, in Psalmo primo. Nam
antiquitus, qui nunc primus and secundus, unus idemque Psalmus erat. Drus.
nor very ancient if we except the ^^almes, the distinction of which into a
certain number and order is very ancient as we may see here. In the other
Books the mention of Chapters followed long after. For Sixtus Senensis Bibl.
S. l 5. Vide Geneb. Chron
denies that any book written in Hebrew or Greek before 500 years contained
the distinction of Chapters. Some ascribe this to Hugo Cardinal, others to
others.

This day have I begotten thee] Christ is said in the day of his resurrection,
Doctor Sclater Non quod tum demum coepit esse filius Dei -- and ab eo gigni,
sed quia tum Deus potentissime per resurrectionem declaravit Christum esse
silium suum. Cameron
to be begotten of his Father declarative, because then he was most evidently
shown to be the Son of God.

Verse. 34. The sure mercies of David] Greek, the holy things of David, so
mercies that they shall be sanctified.

Verse. 35. Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see corruption] Yet
presently verse. 36. He adds that therein was verified the Prophecy in Psalm
16.10. implying thereby that he descended in some sort for the time into
corruption, although in that time he did not suffer corruption. As the word
Shacath which the Prophet used in the Psalm, does signify as well the pit or
place of corruption as the corruption it self: so also the word (...) whereby
Luke expresses the same is used by the Greek interpreters of the old
Testament, to signify not the corruption it self alone, Bishop Usher. vide
Bezam in v. 34.
but the very place of it likewise, as Psalm. 7.15. and 9.16. Prove. 26.27.

Verse. 40. In the Prophets] That is, in one of the Prophets, viz. Hab. 1.5. All
the lesser Prophets were joined together into one Book, least otherwise they
should have been lost being so small. Vide Drusium. Et Quistorpium.


Verse. 42. Preached to them the next Sabbath] Gr. (...) in the space betwixt
it, and the next Sabbath.

Verse. 43. Religious proselytes] This word is used of Luke indifferently to
note an earnestness both in the true and false religion. See 50. v.
Cartwright. See him also on the 17. of Acts. 23.


Verse. 46. It was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken
to you] Because the Jews were the people that God had owned among all Nations,
they had a double privilege; before Christ's coming, they were soli the only
people to whom the Gospel was Preached; after his coming they were primi the
first invited guests.

Verse. 48. As were ordained to eternal life] The Syriack has it positi put.
See Beza Cameron and Ames his Coronis.
He was ignorant (says de Dieu) of that which the Heretics of these days
have dreamed, that by (...) are understood those which should be apt in
themselves, and should dispose themselves to eternal life.

Verse. 51. But they shook off the dust of their feet against them] It was a
military sign of old, whereby they knew that the enemy was approaching for
their destruction, when they saw the horses approaching near unto them and
raising the dust with their feet against them, then they might know their
destruction was at hand. Weemes. Vide Calvinum, and Sanctium in loc.
So the Jews might know by the Apostles shaking off the dust of their feet,
that there was no peace for them any more, but their destruction was at hand.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 9. PErceiving that he had faith to be healed] He perceived it by his
countenance, he looked so cheerfully, and greedily upon him, Mr. Fenner.
Arcano Spiritus instinctu patefacta fuit Paulo Claudi fides, sicuti ille unus
dux and magister Apostolis fuit ad edenda miracula. Calvinus in loc.
as if he drunk in every point that he said.

Verse. 23. And when they had ordained them Elders] The Greek word says one,
Second reply against Whitgift. 136. See Cartwright also on this place; and
Amesii Bella^m. Enerv. tomo. 2. p. 97.98. vide Bezam. Acts. 10.41.
signifies to ordain by voices. The Graecians used in their Elections,
Cartwright.
the ceremony of holding up their hand, to testify their liking of him that
was chosen; the Romans going from one side unto another, whereof came pedibus
ire in senten^iam? The word does not necessarily signify a choosing by
suffrage, but a choosing by and with authority and power, and is attributed to
the holy Ghost, choosing of the Apostles Vide Quistorpium. Our translation is
true ordained by Election, and answers the Greek word, which we translate.
Doctor Fulke, See More in him.
elsewhere, where no suffrage of the people can have any place, and so here it
signifies; for it is attributed to Paul and Silos, not the people; they were
present not to certify or disannull, but to yield to and accept of the choice
which they should make.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 9. PVrifying their hearts by faith] The heart is purified by the blood
of Christ which faith lays hold on. Acts 26.18. which are sanctified by faith.

Verse. 24. Ye must be circumcised] See 16. Chap. 3. Circumcision was taken away
as a sacrament, Dr. Tailor.
but it was not yet honorably buried, and therefore it remained only as a
ceremony.

Verse. 28. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us] As being assured of the
certain direction of the holy Ghost.

Vide Bezam.
Necessary things] Not as they were under the Law, but in respect of the
edification of the weak.

Verse. 29. From blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication] The
Gentiles are forbid the eating of blood and things strangled, Cum dupliciter
possit comedi sanguis, vel intra ipsum animal, cum adhuc carni admixtus est,
vel extra animal cum fusus est; primus modus sub suffocato continetur, secundus
sub voce sanguinis intelligitur. Rivetus.
because of the cohabitation of the Jews, who were to be forborne while the
Temple stood, and until that generation were dead, which sometimes saw the
ceremonies of force.

The reason of the conjunction of fornication with things indifferent, viz.
blood and things strangled: was the general account that the Gentiles made of
fornication; Perkins on Rev. 2.15. and in his Cases of Conscience. See Elton on
the seventh Commandment.
not the Councels own opinion. Because all these did equally disturb the
Church and stir up strife, between the Gentiles converted and the weak Jews.
Blood was forbidden after Christ's ascension only in regard of offense and for
a time, so long as the weak Jew remained weak, not in regard of conscience. 1.
Cor. 6.12.

The Apostles forbid fornication amongst certain things indifferent, not that
they judged it an indifferent thing, but because it so seemed to those
Gentiles. And this seems to have been the opinion of the Corinthians. Non est
flagitium mihi creed adolescentulum scortari. Mitio Terentianus. Eadem quae hic
sacra Synodus, vetuit etiam suis Impostor Mahomed, nisi quod loco scortationis
carnem porcinam nominet. de Dieu in v. 20.
Amongst the Papists, simple fornication is accounted a venial sin; and
those that are carnal among us take fornication, committed by a young man
especially, but for a trick of youth.

(...) of (...) and (...) acetum. Plus significat quam dissensionem, a (...)
irrito. provoc^, exacerbo. Significat illos usque ad commotionem hac in re
dissensisse and adeo ut divellerentur. Apostoli erant, sed tamen homines erant.
Erasmus ad v^rbum, facta est igitur exacerbatio Piscat.
Verse. 39. And the contention was so sharp between them] The word signifies
such sharpness as there is in Vinegar. It is used by Physicians, to signify
the sharpness of the feverish humor when it is acting in a fit. Their
dissension put them as it were into the fit of a fever.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 3. ANd took and circumcised him] He was not circumcised; Grotius.
because as Talmudists say, it was not lawful for the mother to circumcise her
son his Father being unwilling, for the authority of the Father prevailed.

He was not circumcised because it was necessary, or because the religion of
that sign yet continued, but that Paul might avoid the scandal; the thing was
free in respect of God, circumcision was not now a Sacrament, Calvinus.
Sepelienda synagoga cum honor.
as it was to Abraham and his posterity, but an indifferent ceremony which
might increase charity, but did not exercise piety; Paul would not circumcise
Titus.

Verse. 13. Where Prayer was wont to be made] where there was taken to be a
Proseucha a place for prayer without the City. Ede ubi consistas, in qua te
quaero Proseucha Juven. So Luke 6.12. in Proseucha Dei. Drusius thinks it is
here to be taken for a place, Mede in Acts 16.13. see more there, vide Grotium
and de Dieu in loc.
The Syriacke has, Quia ibi conspiciebatur domus orationis; the Arabic, Locus
orationis.

Verse. 14. Whose heart the Lord opened] The metaphore is taken from opening a
door or lock; and he that is the opener, is he that has the Key of David, Rev.
3.7.

Verse. 16. A spirit of divination] Or of Python the Epithete of Apollo who gave
answer to these that sought him, (...), whence he is called Apollo Pythius, Id
erat nomen draconis, quem jaculis suis confecit Apollo, unde and ipse Pythius
dictus. Deinde spiritus ille quo afflati praedicebant futura, Pytho. vocari
coeptus est, Erasmus. vide de Dieu in loc.
and Delphicus, from that famous place whose name also was Pytho. Beza.

Verse. 22. Rent off their clothes] Of the Apostles, not their own. Erasmus
says the words may be taken either way; but Calvin, and Beza dislike that.
Graecus anceps est sermo utrum magistratus lace arint Apostolorum tunicas, an
suas ipsorum, Eras. Beza and Calvinus contra. vide de Dieu and Sanctium.


Verse. 31. Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy
house] Shall one be saved by another faith? He shall not inherit eternal
life unless he believe himself, but he speaks here of being brought under
the only means of salvation, Act. 28 28 Heb. 2.3.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 11. TH^se were more noble] Gr. Better borne and bred, of a more noble
disposition. The Country town of Berea, Laudo Cl. Bezam quod (...),
comparative potius quam superlative acceperit, and de animo potius quam genere
aut prosapia, secus quam vulg. and Eras. fecerunt. de Dieu in loc.
was more zealous and religious then the rich and stately City of Thess^l^nica.

Verse. 18 Encountered him] The greek word is taken from wars, as appears,
Congressi sunt cum. eo.
Luk 12.31. so Polybius often uses it, whom Luke loves to follow, Grotius in
loc.

What will this babbler say] Seminiverbius, this sower of words say; The Greek
word signifies such a one as they that stood in the corne-markets and gathered
up the corn that fell besi^es the sacks in emptying, as Casaubone observes:
that is, (...) avicula est ejus nominis sic appellata a legendis sive
colligenlis seminibus, quasi seminilegam dicas: caeterum in proverbii usu est
de garrulo ac futili, nihilque homine, qui quam ex trivio, vel ex auditionibus
nescio quibus adeptus est scientiam, passim deblaterat. Drus. Prove. class. 2.
l. 4. (...) proprie aves quae sita depascuntu, Grotius. vide de Dieu and
Sanctium in loc.
a man of no worth. Some think it is an allusion to little birds which pick up
the seed sown, yet are troublesome with their continual chirping.

A setter forth of strange Gods] of strange or new devils or new gods (for the
Gods of the Gentiles were devils) and the word (...) is of the middle
signification, and signifies either a good Angel or a bad, B Smith.

Verse. 21. Spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear
some new thing] To which end they often met in barbers shops, Archaeol. Attic.
l. 1. c. 3.
where all the news that was going in those days was current; hence we say,
verba in tonstrinis proculcata.

Verse. 22. Too superstitious] The comparative degree, though mostly it
increase, yet it is sometimes terminus diminuens; somewhat superstitious, and
he puts a quasi to it to make it yet more mild, (...). Quasi religiosiores.
Beza. Quasi superstitiotiores, vulg. Superstition quasi supra statutum, more
then is appointed by the Law of God, Isid.
as it were somewhat superstitious; the Athenians had teretes aures smooth
ears; yea and the word it self has an Euphemismus too: for (...), is one
that fears the Gods. They worshipped indeed devils, Moses called them so, so
does the Psalmist. Dr. Clerk.

Verse. 23. And beheld your devotions] The Rhemists translate (...) here Idols,
according to the vulgar which renders it simulachra which is too narrow; Qui
simulachra vertit nimis id anguste fecit, cum quicquid religiose colitur ea
voce in cladatur, Beza. Pricaeus. Non laudo autem quod Syrus and Arabs (...)
templa verterint. Beza sacra vestra. Vulgatus and Aethiopicus non male
simulachra vestra; viderunt enim (...) proprie esse id ipsum quod colitur, quae
quidem apud Athenienses erant simulachra: malim tamen numina vestra reddere. vt
2 These. 2.4. de Dieu in loc.
our translation is fitter; the word Devotion is indifferent either to true or
false devotion, and so is the Greek. The original word signifies whatsoever
men do reverence for religions sake. The Dictionaries say, it signifies the
forms of worship or devotions, as well as the thing worshipped.

To the unknown God] Lucian says the neighbor Countries would swear by him
unknown at Athens; some think they would not have their Gods known lest
enemies by Magic should get them away, Alexand. ab Alexandro l. 6. c 4. Alij
Athenienses gravi peste oppressos, cum colendis frustra Diis patriis se
fatigassent, timerentque ne quod numen praetermissum a se esset, (...) aram
hanc struxisse volunt, Heinsius.
hence they chained their Gods, Macrobius.

Verse. 25. Life and breath] That is, the breath of life, as Genesis 2.7. see Job.
3.5. It runs smoothly in the original.

Verse. 28. And move] Which is to be understood as well of the motions of the
mind in thoughts and desires as of the body.

And have our being] This is the meaning of it, we have not only had our being
from him at the first, but our being is in him. We have our being in him as the
beams in the Sun and an accident in the subject.

Verse. 30. God winked at] (...), That is, lightly passing over: God regarded
not, as the old translation, (...) est dissimulare, quasi non videas, Grotius.
vid. Deuteronomy. 32.1.3, 4. Doctissimis viris qui cum vetere despicens verterunt,
nullo modo assentiendum putamus; optime recentior Interpres, connivendo
dissimulans, Pricaeus.
he did look over it, he did not vouchsafe to look or set his eyes upon it,
cared not what became of men that lived in those days; for that that is the
meaning of the phrase appears by the next words, Hildersam.
and by the contrary, Psalm. 34.5. Some think it notes the indulgence of God,
that is, he did not deal severely or strictly with them when they sinned,
because they had no means or so little means to keep them from sin, rather
in those times wherein there see Calvin, and de Dieu in loc.
was so much blindness in the world God let men go on in their sin. God had
no regard to the Heathens, he dealt with them as with Cain, had no regard to
their sacrifices.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 4. ANd persuaded the Iewes] Exhorted so that he persuaded, and so the
word signifies.

Verse. 10. In this City] That is, many that are to be converted and brought
unto the faith. Perkins.


Verse. 12. Gallio] So called from his milkie whiteness. Sic dictus fuit a
lacteo cand re unde and Gallos dictos esse plerique statuunt, Pasor.


Verse. 14. Lewdnesse] The greek word translated lewdness here does elegantly
set forth the disposition of a lewd man, Burrh. on Hos.
such a one as is easily drawn to any wicked way. Lewd comes from Loedan an
old Saxon word, that is, of a servile disposition.

Verse. 26. Expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly] What if I should
say, he learned of them to mend the manner of his preaching? Heron.
I am sure there is nothing against it in the text. Beza expounds it, the way
which leads to God.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 2. WE have not so much as heard, whether there be any holy Ghost] It is
meant in respect of the miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost; Vide Bezam and
Calvinum. See John 7.34.
for it cannot be supposed that these being now entered into John's Baptism
could be so grossly ignorant, as not to know that there was a third person in
the Trinity.

Verse. 3. Unto what then were ye Baptized] That is, into what doctrine were ye
initiated, and instructed? Unto John's Baptisme] into the 1 Cor. 10 2
doctrine which John sealed by Baptism. This interpretation frees this hard
Text from the false Collection of Anabaptists; who hence would gather, that
those were by Paul rebaptized, Doctor Tailor.
who were formerly Baptized by John.

It cannot be proved that any which were once Baptized by John were ever
Baptized again. But the contrary may easily be gathered: vide Bezam. Doctor
Fulke.
for seeing our Savior Christ Baptized none himself; it will follow, that the
Apostles were either not Baptized at all, or else Baptized only with John's
Baptism.

Verse. 4. John Baptized with the Baptisme] That is, taught the doctrine of
Repentance.

Verse. 5. When they heard] That is, by John's Ministry. Baptized into the name]
viz. By John, not by Paul. Textus Graecus (ut optime notavit ac declaravit
doctissimus interpres (Beza scilicet) ex Philippo Marnixio, and ante utrumque,
Lucas Lessius in eundem locum) non dicit istos Ephesios denuo fuisse
baptizatos, sed quod Paulus eos docuisset, illos qui Iohannem Baptistam
audierant, fuisse Baptizatos in nomen Jesus Christi: ut ipsis ostenderet, male
se Iohannis doctrinam intellexisse, quod dicerent, se ne quidem audivisse esse
Spiritum Stactum. Rivetus in Catholico Orthodoxo. vide Grotium. Aliqui
objiciunt Paulu^ baptizasse eos qui antea Johannu baptismo fuerant baptizati.
Paulus non eosdem iterum aqua tinxit aut aspersit, qui fuerant tincti, sed
alios; vel ille Baptismus intelligendus est de miraculosa Spiritus Dei
donatione cum manuum impositione, quae totares illic Baptismus appellatur (...)
Danaeus.


Verse. 19. Curious arts] That is Magic, as the Syriack and Arabicke rightly
render it, whence the proverb Ephesiae literae. fifty thousand pieces of
Silver] That is, Rainold. de lib. Apoc. ex Beza. vide Grotium. Syrus
substituit, multi vero incantatores magi. Late quidem patet vitium
Curiositatis; quod diligentiae per excessum opponitur: quando quis plus
cognoscere laborat, quam expedit, vel etiam quod sibi non expedit. Per hanc
tamen Curiositatem Ephesinorum, de quibus hic agitur, magiam intelligi, ipsorum
conditio persuadet. Ephesina enim civitas magicis incantationibus, Apollonio
Thanaeo illas ibi profitente, fuit dedita. Dilher. Ecloc. Sac. Dictum. 11.
6250. pound Sterling. vide de Dieu.

Verse. 24 Silver shrines for Diana] Shrines or Temples, some Casaub. aediculae
exargento vel auro factae, in quas recondebantur Dianae parva simulachra, quae
vulgo ab alijs emebantur qui Dianam Ephesinam visebant, and fortasse reserebant
istae aediculae Templi Ephesini artificium. Casaub. notae. Vide Grotium.
say little houses or Caskets to put the idol in; others think the Temple
Diana was engraven on their Coin, as Beza, Imagunculae seu nummi quidam (says
he) qui a figura Templi quam repraesentabant Templa appellabantur, The Arabicke
and Aethiopicke translations (says de Dieu) have Images of Silver.

Verse. 27. All Asia] Universality a Cloak for error; but we must not follow
a multitude to do evil. Hoc superstitiosis omnibus commune perfugium est,
multitudinis consensum obtendere. Calvinus.


Verse. 32. The Assembly] (...) hic coetum quemvis significat, cum concio Latin
non sit nisi a magistratu secundum leges convocata multitudo. Grotius


Verse. 33. And they drew Alexander out of the multitude] the same Alexander (as
it is thought) was after a persecuter of Paul, An is sit Alexander de quo alibi
meminit Paulus, incertum est: conjectura tamen mihi videtux probabilis. Quod si
credimus eum esse, discamus ab hoc sormidabili exemplo solicit ambulare, ne in
similem defectionem abripiat nos Satan. Nam qui martyrio propinquus erat,
perfidiu^ and sceleratum apostatam factum esse videmus. Calvinus in loc.
2 Timothy 4.14.

Vsurest peculiari ver^o (...) quae vox composita est ex (...) templum and
(...) purgo si ve verro, autoribus Hesychio, Etymologico and Suida. Solert
autem qui impensius dediti sunt alicui divae, aram illius varijs ornamentorum
generibus cohonestare. Erasmus. vide Grotium.
Verse. 35. A worshipper] Or the Temple Keeper.

CHAPTER. XX.
Dicitur Secu^dus quasi sectus a primo, a secando, vel a sequendo quod primum
sequatur; ponitur pro prospero and soelici, ut navigatio secunda quae conatui
and voto obsequitur, res secundae quae pro desiderio nostro sequuntur. Hinc
secundare, obsecundare.
Verse. 4. SEcundus]

Calvinus hunc locum interpretatur, ut parum subsidij ad Dominicam solennitatem
astruendam affere videatur (...) interpretantur quidam diem Sabbathorum, non
pro primo sed imo hebdomadis die: quasi Lucas nihil altud significasset per
illam phrasin, quam quod quodam die Sabbatorum, aut Septimanae convenissent,
quando Paulus praesto fuit; sed Sabbatum pro tota hebdomado ibi accipitur, and
tunc uno aut primo Sabbatorum idem valebunt, in quo sensu phrasis illa alibi
occurrit. velut marc. c. 16. v. 2. and 9. (...) pro (...), id est, una^ per
prima^ exponit evangelista: atque ita Graeci Patres, Apostolorum temporibus
maxim vicint, (...) interpretantur; reque (...) pro (...) usquam legitur in N.
T. Theophilus. Philo. Kuriaces.
Verse. 7. Upon the first day of the week] This is a better Translation then
that, Some one day of the week.] The Hebrews use often by one to signify the
first, as Genesis 1.5. and 10.25. the Greek words are an Hebraisme. That day of
meeting was proper to Christians, 1 Cor. 16.2. It is called the Lords day, Rev.
1.10.

Perkins Cases of Conscience, of which Chrysostom says, media nocte
vigilabant ut eos condemnent qui media dic dormiunt.
Continued his speech until midnight] Perkins notes two things from this. 1.
That the night mentioned here was a part of the seventh day of Paul's abode at
Troas: for if it were not so, then he had stayed at least a night longer, and
so more then seven days, because he should have stayed part of another day. 2.
That this night was part of the Sabbath which they then kept, for they kept it
in manner of a Sabbath in the exercises of piety, and viz. in preaching, yea,
he continues there till the rest was fully ended.

Verse. 21 Testifying has to the Jews, and also to the Greeks, repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ] Here is laid down the
complete duty of a Minister. 1. To preach repentance which a man must perform
to God, whom by his sins he has grievously offended. 2. To preach faith in
Christ, and free forgiveness, and perfect salvation through faith in Christ,
to all that shall truly believe in him; and after to declare unto man his
righteousness, to show that though a man in himself be evil, Perkins.
yet in Christ he is righteous and just, and by him so justified, as he is no
more a sinner in the presence of God.

Verse. 22. I go bound in the Spirit] There are three interpretations of that
speech; one is of Camerarius and Beza, who interpret it of the Holy Ghost, viz.
That Paul should say he goes by his impulse. 2. Pricaeus. in loc. He most
app^oves of the first exposition.
The other of Grotius, to perceive things future as present which
interpretation, 1 These. 3.4. favors, a like speech of the same Paul. 3. Of
Heinsius who says that Paul was sadned in Spirit for the bonds he was to
suffer; the Greek speech seems to him to signify so much.

Verse. 24. Finish my course with joy] There is 1. Cusus naturae, 2. Nequitiae,
3. Pietatis, 4. Muneris; the fourth course of every ones particular calling, is
principally here intended. To finish ones course] Is to take up all those
duties which belong to us, to perform the same with cordial integrity, and
persevere, even to the end of the goal. To finish it with joy] is so to live
and work as to meet with joy at the end of our work.

Verse. 27. All the Counsel of God] Not his secret decrees and purposes, but
his revealed will, specially his Counsel and purpose touching the way and
means of salvation by Christ, and Christ alone.

Verse. 28. This verse may be styled Saint Paul his Trumpet, not that where of
he speaks; 1 Cor. 14.8. which sends out an uncertain sound, but like the
Trumpet of Sinay, wherein there is both Clangor, and horror, Ezod. 19.16 so
vehemently it ratleth out this Episcopal, this Paschall Cantell. First
intrinsecally, Take heed to your selves,] For qui sibi nequam, cui bonus?
Secondly, extrinsecally, take heed to the flock] yea, to the whole flock] As
Ezech. 31.39. to strengthen the weak, to heal the infected, to splint the
sprained, to reduce the wandering, to seek the lost, to cherish the strong, this
is the Clangor of the Trumpet. Sed sonitus buccinae adhuc crescit in majus and
prolixius intendiiur, Exodus 19.19. And still Saint Paul raises his blast by a
threefold inforcement. 1. Expressing the burden ad pascendum. 2. The author
Spirit. 3. The quality of the flock, populum acquisitionis, 2 Pet. 1.9.
Purchased with blood, Barlow in concio^e ad ministros Scoticos.
with Gods blood, with Gods own blood, and this is the horror of the Trumpet.
Now then let him that has an ear, hear what the Spirit speaks unto the
Churches.] Or rather sounds out to Churchmen; for there is no Clergy man
(unless he has drunk the Cup of slumber to the very dregs, Esaias 51.17.) but
the voice of this Trumpet will be unto him as Samuels Message, 1 Samuel 3.8.
making his two ears to tingle, and his heart strings to tremble.

Verse. 30. Also of your own selves shall men arise] Nicolaitanes, Rev. 2.6.
speaking perverse things] Teaching those things which swerve from that which is
right; so (...) is taken Luk 23.2. and Acts 13.8.10. Grotius.
The Nicolaitanes held that marriage was a mere humane institution, and such a
one as did not bind men's consciences, that it was lawful to eat of the
sacrifices of the Gentiles, to draw away disciples after them] Therefore they
teach things pleasing to the flesh, that so they may draw them whom the
discipline of the Church offends to their party.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. AFter we were gotten from them] The Greek word signifies, that they
were as it were by force pulled away, Avulsi ab eis. Beza.
it significantly expresses their mutual affections.

Verse 3 Now when we had discovered Cyprus] A Mariners term; they use this
expression still when they would show that they see a place, Est vox nautica
which before was hid from them.

Verse. 13. For I am ready] (...) I have my self in readiness.

Verse. 20. Thousands] (...) ten thousand. Not all of the Church of Jerusalem,
Eadem locutio 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 Pet. 4.5. and Dan. 3.18. Grotius.
but come up thither from foreign parts, and far countries at this feast of
Pentecost, Chap. 20.16. according to the Law.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 3. BRought up in this City at the feet of Gamaliel] The master sat in a
higher place, the disciple did lie upon the ground at the feet of the master.
Sedebat magister in loco editiore, at discipulus dicebatur prostratus sive
jacens in solo, ad pedes magistri. de Dieu. Ad pedes dicit, ideo quod discipuli
sedebant multum infra magistros: proximi vero magistro ij quorum maximi
profectus. vide Deuteronomy. 33.5. Grotius.


Was zealous toward God Zelo accensus Dei, Sic Syrus, Arabs and Aethiopicus
quoque legerunt. Sic Chrysostomus and omnia Graeca exemplaria quae videre
contigit. Ludov. de Dieu.
] The zeal which the Israelites had, was of the Law; the knowledge which they
wanted was of the true meaning of it.

Verse. 16. Wash away thy sins.] That is, Sacramentally. The Text joyneth with
the Sacrament invocation of the name of the Lord, whereunto salvation is
promised ( Romans 10.13. Joel. 2.22. Fulke on the Rhem. Test.
) To wash away his sins. Therefore this place makes nothing for the Popish
Heresy, that the Sacraments give grace ex opere operato, of the work wrought.

Verse. 25. A man that is a Romane] They had a law, that a Citizen might not be
tortured any way, 12 Tables.
but by the decree of the people.

Verse. 28. With a great summe] (...) Because this sum was gathered head by
head. Multa summa Nove. Nec enim (...) in re nummaria sed in oratione pro summa
dici consuevit. Beza. in loc.


CHAPT. XXIII.
Verse. 3. THou whited Wall] A fit similitude to express wicked men, who for
honor or profit sake, pretend to be Godly. Intr^rsum turpes, speciosi pelle
decora. Sanctius thinks it is a proverb among the Hebrews, as whited
Sepulcher.

Scio multos esse qui existimarunt id Apostolum dixisse per ironiam, quia cum
inter Pharisaeos vixisset ipse Pharisaeus, quamvis potuit ipsi ignota esse
persona, non potuit tamen ex consessu, non judicare, quinam esset inter
sacerdotes Pontifex maximus, cum praesertim antea dixerit sedisse illum de quo
lo quebatur, ut judicaret. Sed id mihi very similius est, audivisse quidem
Paulum vocem emissam ab aliqus ex his qui ad judicandum sederant (venisse enim
sacerdotes and omne c^ncilium constat ex cap. 22. in fine) neque tamen scivisse
a quonam illorum vox profecta fuerat. A Pontifice autem profectam non putavit,
cum propter ejus autoritatem, a qua indignum erat tam praecipitem offensionis
significationem edi, tum propter simulalam saltem sactitatem a qua tam iniqua
vox non videbatur eventura. Rivet. Isag. ad Sac. Scrip. ex Sanctio.
Verse. 5. I wist not brethren that he was the high Priest] Some say he does as
much as confess his fault, by excusing it with the plea of ignorance,
alleging that place of Scripture, which might give them to understand, that he
was better seen in the Law, then that he would have so spoken, if he had known
the quality of the person to whom he spoke.

Others say his meaning was, that he did not regard or consider him as the high
Priest: others that he did not account him worthy to be the high Priest:
others, that he plainly meant he did not know him to be the high Priest, for
it was possible he might mistake. He acknowledged him not, but knew him rather
to be an usurper, which made him use that boldness. Mr. Perkins. His meaning
was (says Grotius) that he is not the High Priest, or chief of the Senate,
who purchased such a dignity; for Paul (says he) had learned this of Gamaliel,
that a Judge who shall give money for obtaining of a place of honor, is
neither indeed a Judge, nor to be honored; but, to be esteemed an ass; Calvin
says it is an ironicall speech, and that the meaning is, ego, fratres, in hoc
homine nihil agnoseo Sacerdotale. Brethren I acknowledge nothing belonging to a
High Priest in this man. See Doctor Prideaux on this Text, p. 5. to 9. And
Doctor Willet on 22. of Exodus. Quest. 52. and Rivet on 23. of Exodus 28. Jun.
Parallel. 1. Parallel. 98. Bezam. in loc.

Verse. 6. But when Paul perceived that the one part were Saduces, and the other
Pharisees] Paul wanted not humane prudence; and therefore makes use of the
differences of his enemies.

Of the hope and resurrection of the dead] The sense is, concerning the hope of
the reward, which the just shall receive in another world, which therefore of
the Hebrews is called seculum mercedis. For then shall every one receive a
reward, worthy of his deeds: The Sadducees denied that, and they denied also
the punishment of all sin and wickedness. Drusius de tribus sectis Judaeorum
l. 3. De praemio ac poena.

Verse. 8. Angel nor Spirit] Lukes true meaning is (says Calvin) that the
Angels, yea all Spirits were denied by the Sadducees; some interpret Spirit the
immortal soul of man. Others the Holy Ghost, which the 9 verse of this Chapter
confirms, says Drusius De Tribus Sectis Judaeorum l. 3.

Vox (...) (de qua quae magni viri protulerunt, confiteor non usque quaque
probari mihi) non tantum magnatibus tribuitur, sed and cujusvis ordinis
hominibus quos amici ejusmodi elogio honestare voluerint. Significat autem non
ut recentior, potentissimus, sed optimus, ut optime heic Luc. 1, 3. and infra
26.25. vertebat vetus Interpres; cujus eruditionem centenis aliquot locis ille
alter nequaquam assecutus videtur. Pricaeus in loc.
Verse. 26. Unto the most excellent.]

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 2. SEeing that by thee we enjoy great quietnesse] It is one of the
rhetorical precepts by praising the Judge, to make him benevolous to a man's
self, which Paul was not ignorant of, as appears verse. 10. and 26.2.3.

Verse. 5. A pestilent fellow] (...) a pestilence; Pestem) sicut scelus pro
scelerato dicitur pestiferum non expressa emphasi. Beza.
foolish Tertullus that mistook the antidote for the poison; the remedy for
the disease! Doctor Hall.

A ringleader (...) Principem. Id est, quasi primos ordines ducentem, seu
primipilarem. Est enim hoc vocabulum militare. Beza in loc. Sic vocantur qui in
art, qui in co^vivio, qui in judicio aut re quavis alia primarium locum
obtinent. Grotius.
] The word signifies the first man in his rank, a military word. Qui primus ad
frontem aciei constitutus est. Hesychius.

Verse. 14. Written in the Law and Prophets] That is, to hold and embrace the
same faith, which was embraced by the Saints, and Servants of God, in ancient
times; Mr. Perkins.
and which was written by Moses, and the Prophets.

Verse. 16. Alwayes] Or throughout, in all cases, by all means, or at all
times; (...).
as the word may indifferently be construed.

Verse. 25. And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to
come, Felix trembled] Felix was deditus saevitiae and libidini Tacitus, see
Josephus Antiq. lib. 20. (...) temperance, the word in the original properly
signifies Chastity.
; righteousness has reference to others, temperance to our selves, judgment
to God.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 14. DEclared] This word signifies friendly, and familiarly to rehearse
something to one; which otherwise by right, he is not bound to do, as it
appears here, and Gal. 2.2.

Verse. 19. Of their own superstition] The word does also signify religion, but
he speaks in contempt of the true Doctrine. (...) explicat Plutarchus nimium
and importunum deorum metum, unde exortae sunt superstitiosae ceremoniae. Beza.


Verse. 23. With great Pompe] The original words signify with great fantasy,
(...) cum multa ostentatione. Beza.
or vain show. The Lord accounts of the great glory, and pomp of the world
even as a fantasy, or shadow.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 7. Unto which promise] That is, thing promised, viz. Life eternal by a
metonymie of the adjunct.

Instantly] That is, with a kind of extension, or vehemence. vide Bezam.

Verse. 14. It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks] He rehearses the
History more fully, then he had reheased it before in the 9. Chapter. This
proverb used of those which attempt things that are like to prove ill to
themselves, Terentius Phormione.
came from the Graecians to the Jews. The Latins also have taken it up. --
namque inscitia est adversus stimulum calces.

Verse. 18. Darknesse] That which is called darkness in the first, is called
the power of Satan in the latter clause, the Devil having and holding a man in
ignorance has and holds him in his power.

Repent and turn to God] Which latter words expound the former, Perkins.
and plainly show what repentance is.

Verse. 24. Much learning does make thee mad] Paul was learned not only in the
Grotius.
Law, but also in traditions which did evidently teach the resurrection and
good things of another life. He knew the Hebrew, Syriacke, Greek, and Latin
tongues, and had read the Poets.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 14. EVroclydon] This word has its name so, because this wind stirs
up great waves. Vatab. Eras.


Verse. 31. Except these abide in the ship ye cannot be saved] From whence it
follows that the precise and peremptory decrees as they call them concerning
the Salvation of any, either temporal or eternal, do not render admonitions
or threatenings unprofitable, See 24. verse.
because they are as means and serve to execute the divine decrees.

Verse. 33. This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued
fasting, having taken nothing] Physicians write that a sick man may live 14.
days without meat; Perkins on 4th. of Matthew. Calvin. vide Sanctium.
it is probable they did eat very little or nothing at all, for so are the
words.

One may be found, which may endure abstinence longer; but for such a multitude
to do it, it is scarce credible Fasting is here improperly called an unusual
abstaining from food, because all that time they had not a full meal, as sad
persons loath meat.

Verse. 34. For there shall not an hair fall from the head of any of you] A
proverbiall speech, Quod non male ita accipitur, ut nulliut rei jactarum esse
pertimescendam, intelligamus. Ast unde haec locutio, in periculoso maris
ludibrio, est desumta? A more veterum desumtam hariolamur, qui coortis in
pelago procellis, ac mari naufragium minitante, vel omnino etiam inferente,
capillos tondebant. Dilheri Electu. l. 2. c. 11. H^braicum proverbium, ut 1
Reg. 1.52. quo significatur prorsus salvos and integros ipsos fore. Beza in loc.
as may be said in Latin ne hilum quidem vobis nocebitur. See Luke 21.18.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 6. WHen he should have swollen or fallen down dead] for those that are
bitten by the viper, their flesh swells as Dioscorides l. 6. c. 38. Vox (...)
tumorem an inflamationem notet, eruditi disputant; ego utrumque significari
existimo. Pricaeus.
teaches: the Greek word here, signifies both to be inflamed and swell; but
Beza prefers the latter, because of the observation of Dioscorides; Erasmus,
and the Aethiopick translation render it to be inflamed, as de Dieu observes.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the ROMANS.
CHAP. I.
OF the Epistle, and order of all Paul's Epistles, see my Treatise of Divinity,
Lib. 1. chapter 4. p. 70, 71, 72, 73.

The Epistle to the Romans, and the Gospel of John are the Perkins art of
prophesying. St. Augustine wished three things: to have seen Christ in the
flesh, Rome in its glory, and to have heard and seen Paul in the Pulpit. Paulum
quoties lego, videor mihi non verba audire, sed tonitrua. Hieron. contra
Jovenian. de Epist. Paulin. In Paulinis Epistolis, ejus quae ad Romanos scripta
est scopus, velut Atticus Mercurius ad reliquas iter indicat. Melancthon. Quae
Pauli Epistola non melle dulcior est? non lacte candidior? Ambrosius de
Epistolis Pauli. Epistolae Paulinae non temporis ordine locatae sunt ab iis qui
eas primi in unum volumen compegerunt: sed pro dignitate eorum ad quos scriptae
sunt. Ideo praecedunt quae ad Ecclesias; sequuntur quae sunt ad singulos. Et
inter eas quae sunt ad Ecclesias, prima est quae ad Romanam, ab urbis ejus
majestate. Grotius. See the preface De Launay upon the Epistle to the Romans in
French.
Keys of the New Testament. Cardinal Poole answered well to him that demanded
what course should be taken in reading the Epistle to the Romans; First (says
he) begin at the twelfth Chapter, and read to the end and practice the precepts
of repentance and mortification; and then set upon the former part of the
Epistle, where Justification and Predestination are handled.

Verse. 1. Paul] Of his name see Beza on Acts 13.9 Calvin, a Lapide on this
place. Paul is a Latin name, from Paulus, that is a little one; so the Romans
were wont to call those which were of a lesser stature. Some think he had first
this name given him, upon occasion of converting Sergius Paulus the Deputy,
Acts 13.9, 12. before he was called Saul. Chrysostom writ eight Homilies in
his praise, and usually calls him the Apostle. Hierome calls him the trumpet of
the Gospel.

A servant of Jesus Christ] In the Old Testament those which were in great
Offices were called the servants of the Lord, that is, of God; as Moses, Jos.
1.1. Joshua, Jud. 21.8. David, Psalm. 131.10. Nehemiah, Nehem. 1.6. In the New
Testament also Jesus Christ.

Called to be an Apostle] It is simply in the Greek called an Apostle; that is,
Pierre de Launay.
made and appointed an Apostle. See Matthew. 5.9.19. Romans 7.3.

Separated to the Gospel of God] He alluded perhaps to the name of the
Pharisees, Drusius in Praeter. and de tribus sectis Judaeorum. l. 2. c. 2.
(...) est cum judicio separare ac secernere, inde (...) dicuntur canones magno
judicio collecti and conscripti ac breviter pronunciati. Gerh. vide a Lap.
which was a separando. The Pharisee was separated to the study of the Law; he
being made a Christian was separated by God to the Gospel; separated from his
mothers womb, to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, Gal. 1.15.

Verse. 2. By his Prophets] The Apostle has respect to the Oracles concerning
Christ and his Kingdom, Genesis 3.15. Levit. 18.18. Esaias 9.6. and 52.7. and 61.1.
and 65.1. Jerem. 31.31.

Verse. 4. Declared] The word signifies determined; and as it were by
definitive sentence concluded to be the Son of God.

With power] that is, powerfully, an Hebraisme; or miraculously, viz. by the
resurrection of ^he dead, as is added; for this Greek word ordinarily signifies
a miracle in the New Testament.

According to the spirit of holinesse] that is, By the force of the Deity
sanctifying and quickening the flesh, he was raised from the dead, and so
declared mightily to be the Son of God. As in the former by the words,
according to the flesh, was signified the humane nature of Jesus Christ; so
likewise by these words, according to the Spirit, De Launay sur les Romans.
is here signified his Divine nature: which the Scripture sets forth by the
word Spirit, 1 Timothy 5.16. Heb. 9.14. and 1 Pet. 3.18. The Apostle here calls
this Spirit, the Spirit of holiness; that is, the holy Spirit, according to
the style of the Hebrew. See Exodus 2.16.

Verse. 5. By whom we have received grace and Ap^stleship] that is, the grace of
Apostleship, Beza. Hendiadys. de Launay.
by the figure called (...) as 2.20: It is the Apostles style to define his
Apos^leship by the name of grace, as after Chap. 12.3. and 15.1. 1 Cor. 15.10.
Galat. 2.9. Ephesians. 3.2, 8.

Verse 7. Grace to you, and peace from God the father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ] the grace of God is that whereby be undeservedly favors us; Scultet.
de precaetione. See the French writer de Launay and Estius in loc.
but peace is a prosperous and happy success of all things; this wish is also
1 Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Galat. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. 1 Thessalonians.
1.1. 2 Thessalonians. 1.2. 1 Timothy 1.2. Tit. 1.4. almost expressed in so many words every
where; so that it is a certain mark of Paul's genuine Epistles.

Verse. 8. I thank my God, through Jesus Christ] In whose Name all our prayers
and thanksgivings ought to be presented to God, Epistola Pauli ad Romanos est
jam Epistola Pauli in Romanos.
Ephesians. 5.20. Col. 3.17.

Your faith is spoken of through the whole world] Miserum est fuisse felicem,
as miserable to have been faithful. By these words is showed the extent of the
Roman Empire, according to the style and ordinary manner of speaking then. See
Luke 2.1.

Verse. 12. By the mutual faith both of you and me] that is, by the faith which
you and I have in Jesus Christ; De Launay. Tit. 1.1, 4. 2 Pet. 1.1.
which the Apostle elsewhere calls the faith of the elect, and the common faith;
and Peter styles, the like precious faith.

Verse. 14. I am a debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians] the Greeks
and the Romans call those Barbarians which spoke any Language but theirs; De
Launay, (...) vocatur, qui vitiosa and insuavi, hoc est blaesa, balbutiente and
incondita lingua loquitur, tales a Graecis censebantur omnes qui extra Graeciam
essent, uti ex Strabone patet. Gerh. in loc.
and consequently those which were unskilful in their languages and customs.
By the Greeks he means the most polite Nation, and by the Barbarians the ruder,
as the following words show.

Verse. 16. The power of God] Not the essential power of God, but his
organicall power; potentiae organon, or the great instrument of the power of
God; it is called the arm of God, Esaias 53.1. See 1 Cor. 1.17. Pareus. Or by a
metonymie, the declaration of his power. Faejus. whereby the preaching of the
Gospel is made effectual.

To every one that believeth] the Gospel is offered unto all, but it only
profits unto salvation those that believe; Pareus. Grotius.
as a medicine is only effectual to those which receive it.

Verse. 17. The righeousnesse of God] that whereby we stand just and righteous
in the sight of God. Justitia quae non in solis factis exterioribus consistit,
sed a Deo efficitur, and ut Dei opus Deo placet. Grotius.
It is so called, 1 Decretorie, 2 Revelatorie, 3 Meritorie, 4 Imputatorie, 5
Approbatorie. Walth. Harm.

Revealed] and made known to our hearts.

From faith to faith] that is, by such a faith as grows and increases, from
one degree to another. Id est, Ex fide promovente ac subinde augescente, ut sit
Hebraismus, qualis in Psalm. 84.7. Theoph. Oecumen. Peter. Estius. Beza,
Calvinus, Paraeus.


Verse. 18. The truth] that is, those true opinions which in their judgments
they had conceived of God, Not every truth in general, nor yet the truth of
the written Word, but that light which remains in the nature of man after the
fall, called the law of nature, and the law of Nations: which light they by
their injustice, impiety, prophannesse and superstition, did seek to oppress
and extinguish, and so detain as a captive in the dark dungeon of their
hearts, Dr. Tailor on Tit. That is, while they hear, learn, and can remember
much of it, yet in their courses are as vain and ungodly as ever before.
and their duty to him.

Verse. 21. Became vain in their imaginations] Greek, their practical
inferences and discourses. See Estius. He means it, of that world of pretenses
and allegations, wherewith they did make themselves believe that their Idolatry
and other sins were no sins; (...) may better be rendered discourses or
reasonings; such as they made out of their principles, they had in their
understanding.

Verse 23. And changed the glory of the uncorruptible God, into an image made
like to corruptible man; and to Birds and fourfooted beasts and creeping
things]He plainly alludeth to that phrase of the Psalmist, which says, that
the Israelites changed their glory into the similitude of a Calf that eats
Hay; when they should have conceived God to be so infinitely glorious that
nothing could set forth his glory sufficiently: they conceived so basely of
him, that they would even set up the Picture of an Ox to represent him. This is
the Idolatry of the Papists in these days, who picture God the Father like an
old man, because of Dan 7.9. God the Holy Ghost like a Dove, because he
appeared in that shape at Christ's baptism; and Christ like a Lamb, because of
that place, John 1.29. whence their agnus Dei.

Verse. 24. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleannesse] The Apostle
instanceth in two particulars of unnatural uncleanness, as self uncleanness,
verse. 24. that is, alone by themselves. So Beza and Theophylact understand it;
that is, Verse. 26. Paul has a particular relation to Messalina.
the first degree which is therefore unnatural, because thou destroyest that
which nature gave thee for propagation. Then secondly, unclean love of boys,
verse. 27. be it discovered in what dalliance it will, though not arising to an
act of Sodomy.

Verse. 25. The truth of God]that is, those true opinions, and conceits they had
of God.

Who is blessed for ever] When the Hebrews make mention of the true God, Gerh.
in loc.
they are wont to add Ha Baruc le gnolam. Benedictus sit ille in saecula. Let
him be blessed for ever.

Verse. 27. Burned] (...), that word is emphaticall, expressing those prodigious
and monstrous lusts of the Gentiles, Id. ib.
proceeding from the fire of evil concupiscence, and deserving and forewarning
hel-fire.

Verse. 28. They did not like] The word (...) sometimes signifies to try or
examine, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Sometimes to approve and allow; so here it imports a
not allowing or regarding, or making that precious account of the knowledge of
God.

Not convenient] The Greek word implies two things, Duty and decorum; that is,
they ran wilfully into the grossest sins, contrary to all even natural duty
and decorum.

Verse. 29. Being filled with all unrighteousnesse] This is the genus,
comprehending all those things which are after enumerated.

Fornication, wickednesse] In the Greek is an elegant paronomasia, (...). Our
English renders the latter word wickedness, not so fit here, (...) being the
purpose of the Holy Ghost to set down a particular vice; it may rather (...)
^ranslated according to the etymon, troublesomnesse or a desire to procure
trouble and molestation to another; therefore it is given to Satan, the
troubler of the Saints of God, he is often called (...), that troublesome one.

Covetousnesse] (...) an inordinate desire of having more wealth then the Lord
allots us.

Maliciousnesse] that is comprehended under envy next following; (...) may
better be rendered mischievousnesse.

Envy, murder] (...). As these words are alike in sound in the Greek, V. 31.
(...). Grata vocum allusio qua nimirum innuere voluit vitiorum affinitate^.
Estius.
so the vices are alike; and one often follows the other. Estius. See 1 John
3.13.

Malignity] (...), taking all things in the worser part.

Whisperers, backbiters] A backbiter speaks evil openly of another; the
whisperer, privily. Theoph. The backbiter intends to separate friendship, the
other to hurt ones fame.

Ver. 30. Haters of God] with a hellish hatred; (...). There are three things
in hatred, says Aristotle: 1. It is against generals, the whole kind; a wicked
man hates God, and whatsoever belongs to him, his Ordinances Image. 2 It will
not be cured by time; the devils hate God for himself. Conversion is called
reconciliation with God, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. 3 Nothing will satisfy it but the
destruction of the thing hated; it strikes at Gods essence, Psalm. 10.4.
The word has a passive termination and signifies properly, hated of God;
though words passive are sometimes actively taken, as 2 Pet. 1.3. And the
Apostle here intends a Catalogue of the Gentiles sins. Theophylact
interprets it both ways.

Despightfull] (...), contumeliously, or insolently injurious.

Proud, boasters] The proud man boasts of such things as he has; the
boaster, of that which he has not, Oecumen.

Verse. 32. Who knowing the judgment of God] The Greek word (...), translated
here judgment, De Launay.
signifies properly Law, Constitution, Ordinance; and in the Greek version of
the Old Testament, where it is very often used, it is ordinarily taken in this
sense. By it here is signified the just will, law, and ordinance of God.

They which commit such things are worthy of death] that is, thou considerest
that Hell and damnation is the issue and desert of sin, and yet committest it.

But have pleasure in them that do them] or consent with them; so the Vulgar,
but corruptly.

To sin is of it self wicked, and worthy of eternal punishment; but to
approve and defend his own and other men's sins, and to judge them well done;
to applaud them in mind and judgment, and to be delighted with them, is a high
degree of ungodliness.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 5. TReasurest up wrath] that is, punishments and judgments the effects
of it; alludes to Job 36.13. the Greek word signifies to lay up for to morrow.

Day of wrath] that is, of judgment. See verse. 16.

Verse. 6. Render to every man according to his deeds] The Papists Vide Cornel.
a lap. Vide Waltheri Harm. Bibl. in loc. See Down. of justification. Lib 8. c.
5. p. 612.
infer merit of works from hence; See Matthew. 16.27. Rom 2.6. 1 Cor. 3.14. 2
Cor. 5.10. Rev. 22.12.
but 1. the word (...) to render, signifies not only a just retribution, but a
gift of favor, as in that place, Matthew. 20.8. 2. The Apostle says, secundum
opera, non propter opera; which notes the quality, not the proportion of their
works; that is, good works shall be rewarded with glory, and evil with
punishment.

Verse. 7. The best reading of these words is this, To them which by
perseverance in well-doing seek glory, Apostolus faelicitatem piorum in vita
futura exp^essurus dicit, reddet iis gloriam, honorem, immortalitatem, quia una
dictione exprimere non potuit, usus est pluribus; sed tunc de futurae vitae
beatitudine loquitur. Pareus and Beza.
honor, immortality, eternal life] that is, shall render eternal life to
such: so diverse interpret it. The word here used does as well signify
perseverance and continuance, (...); the meaning is, they which persevere and
continue in good works. So Luke 21 19: Matthew. 24.13. and the Apostle to the
same purpose, Heb. 10 36. where he uses the same word. And in this sense
Jerome takes patience here.

Verse. 9. Tribulation and anguish] The first word (...) properly signifies
compression, a (...), which is used of the active pressing of the shoe; of the
passive pressing of Grapes; metaphorically of affliction; especially in the
books of the New Testament, and in Ecclesiastical writers. The latter word
(...) is properly a straightness of spirit; Gerh. in loc.
such as is wont to happen in diseases and terrors: Here it is taken
metaphorically.

Upon every soul of man] Here is a double Hebraisme: 1. Every soul of man, is
put for the soul of every man, De Launay.
as in Chap. 1.18. Against all ungodliness and un^ighteousnesse of men, put
for the ungodliness and unrighteousness of all men. 2. The word soul is put
for person, as Genesis 12.5. and 14.21. and 17.14 and 36.6. and 46.26.

Verse. 12. Perish without Law] That is, without a Law formally published, not
materially enacted; he speaks of the Gentiles, who had the Law witten in their
hearts.

Verse. 14. Do by nature the things contained in the Law] That is, by natural
strength. Perkins. C' est a dire, par un instinct naturel and sans y estre
poussez par aucune loy. De Launay sur les Romans.


Verse. 18. And approvest the things that are more excellent] So the Greek word
is taken Matthew. 6.26. and Heb. 1.4. Some render it triest the things that
differ, (...) Probas eximia Erasmus. See 1 Phil. 10.
and ex ploras quae discrepant. Beza. Pareus. Acording to the former version
some think De Launay sur les Romans.

(...) vulg. reddidit utiliora; Erasmus and Cajetanus eximia; alij excellentia
and singularia. Sed ex verbo (...) colligitur quod hoc loco proprie significet
differentia sive discrepantia. Gerh. in loc.


that the Apostle has regard to the writings of the Rabbis and Doctors of the
Jews, which disputed exactly, and curiously, not only of things lawful, and
unlawful according to the Law; but also of those things which according to it,
were better and more excellent.

Verse. 21. Thou therefore which teach another, teach not thou thy selfe]
That is, do not thou live as thou teach. Turpe est doctori cum culpa
redarguit ipsum. Pulchre Prosper. Been inquit docere and male vivere quid aliud
est quam se sua voce damnare.


Verse. 22. Thou that abhorrest idols, d^est thou commit sacrilege (...)
proprie est templa despoliare ab (...), postea in genere pro quovis sacrilegio
accipitur. Gerh. in loc.
] Sacrilege is (if not worse) yet as bad as idolatry; as if, Paul held as good
a false religion, as a spoiling religion.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 2. CHiefely] This word (...) Erasmus takes to signify the order of the
Apostles speech, as before cap. 1.8. Gr. premierement. C'est a dire
specialeme^t and principalement; car ce mot n' est pas ici mis pour denoter un
commencement ni une enumeration don't la suite soit puis apres, exprimee, ainsi
est encores pris ce mot, 2 Pet. 1.20. and 3.3. De Launay. See Beza. Non est
ordinis sed qualitatis, significans primarium, quasi dicat ut unum eximium pro
multis dicam. Pareus vide. Iun. Parallel. 1.2. Paral. 3.
But there the Apostle begins his Epistle, which he does not here; this word
first here signifies chief, that this was the chief privilege and immuity
which the Jews had, the oracles of God] so the Lxx. calls the word of God,
Psalm. 11.7. and 17.31. and 106.11.

Verse. 3. The faith of God] That is, his constancy and fidelity in keeping his
promises Psalm. 33.4. fides quia fit quod dictum est. See 23. Matthew. 2.3.

Verse. 4. Let God be true] First let him be acknowledged such a one; he is
true, not only effective; because he performed his promises which he made to
Abraham concerning the land of promise, and Christ; but essentialiter, he is
true and constant in himself. And may overcome when thou are judged] Psalm.
51.4. here the Apostle follows the LXX. and changes the testimony for
illustration, for they who are pure, overcome in judgment.

Verse. 5. J speak as a man] q.d. Every natural man is apt to think and speak
so.

Verse. 9. We have before proved] We have pleaded it at the Judges Bar; and
have convicted them.

Verse. 12. They are altogether become unprofitable] viz. to good; that is, they
are wholly alienated from good, and made incapable to do it: De Launay sur les
Romans
this is taken out of the 14. Psalm. 3. where the Hebrew word signifies, they
are become stinking, but the Apostle followed the Greek version; and a stinking
thing is also odious and unprofitable for any service.

Verse. 13. Their throat is an open sepulchre] Throats like a sepulcher, sending
out rotten, and unsavory communication, Alludit ad hominem qui tetrum
anhelitum ex corruptis spirat extis, and ad calaver quod ex sepulcro
intolerabilem spirat odorem.
or words tending to devour.

When the grave is shut up, we see nothing but green grass; but when rotten
bones appear, a filthy stink comes out. With their tongues they have used
deceit] flattering, fauning and dissembling; Plin. l. 8. c. 28.
the poison of aspes is under their lips,] First, it stings, and wonderfully
torments a man. 2. Is incurable.

Verse. 14. Cursing and bitternesse] That is, sharp and furious inprecations,
and revilings.

Verse. 15. Their feet are swift to shed bloud] In aptness to oppress, hurt
and grind all one has to deal with.

Verse. 16. Destruction and misery are in their wayes] That is, their designs
and actions tend to destruction and misery, De Launay.
and produce it to themselves and their neighbor.

Verse. 19. Now we know, that what things soever the Law says, it says to them
who are under the Law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may
become guilty before God] It is a speech taken from a malefactor arraigned,
when the Judge objecteth, what say you? this, and this treason is witnessed
against you; the poor man stands speechless and dumb, his mouth is stopped.

Verse. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be justified
in his sight] The Greek is, All flesh shall not be justified in thy sight by
the deeds of the Law] The meaning is, none shall. The word all joined with the
negative, is often according to the Hebrew Genesis 9.11. and 11.6. Exodus 10.15.
and 12.43.48. and 20.4.10.17.
phrase put for none.

Vide Bezam.
No flesh] Flesh by double figure Metonymia materiae. Synecdoche membri.
is put for man, flesh for the body it being the matter of it; and that again
as a part for the whole man.

Verse. 21. The righteousness of God] Either because he is the founder and
contriver of it; or because he bestows it and gives it unto men; or because it
is the righteousness only that will stand and hold out before God; Mr.
Goodwin.
or by way of opposition to the righteousness of the Law, which may well be
called the righteousness of men.

Verse. 23. All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God] All] That is,
all Nations, Jews and Gentiles; that the Gentiles sinned against the Law
written in their hearts, the Apostles proved in the first Chapter; that the
Jews sinned against the Law, written in the Book, he proves in the second
Chapter; so in this Chapter v. 9. Secondly all, that is, all persons young and
old, 5. Chap. 12.14. verses, have sinned] the Greek word signifies to miss
the mark, and come short.] Greek, fallen back, left behind, the word signifies
Vide, Bezam.
them which are left behind in the race, and are not able to rune to the mark;
the glory] that is, the glorious Image which God stamped on man at the
Creation, which consisted in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, and
dominion over the creatures; or the glory of heaven, which should have been the
end of their obedience.

Bellarminus ergo errat qui justificationem d^finit per insusionem justitiae.
Scriptura saepissime accumulat verba synonima ob majorem per spicuitatem atque
emphasim, sic nos dicimus dabo tibi hoc gratis, ipsum verbum dandi donum
gratuitum innuit, sic dicimus gratiam gratis datam, cum solo vocabulo gratiae
illam gratis dari significetur; gratis, id est, ex mera liberalitate, atque
haec est causa efficiens, per gratiam ipsius, id est (Interpret Bellarmino)
per justiciam ab illo nobis infusam; and haec est causa formalis. Bellarmini
glossa textum corrumpit non explicat. Per gratiam illius, nempe Dei, sunt
exponenda, per amorem, sive gratuitam ejus benevolentiam nobis exhibitam.
Contra argutatur Bellarm. favor Dei ^a is explicatur per vocem illa^ gratis.
Probabile est ipsum Spiritum loquentem in Scriptura ingeminasse haec vocabula
per gratiam and gratis ut coargueret illorum errorem and stuporem qui gratuit^m
in justificationem erant oppugnaturi. Episc. Davenant. de justitia habituali.
Verse. 24. In this and the next verse, is described the great benefit of
justification in all the causes of it. Being justified] That is, declared to be
just, or absolved before God. The whole Act of our Justification is described
in Law Terms; the sinner is the guilty person; the plaintiff, or accuser the
Devil; the witness conscience, the advocate Christ; the Judge God.

This Justification is described. 1. From the efficient cause by his Grace] by
grace here is not meant a mere outward proposing of the word of God as
Pelagians say; nor any inward work of holiness in us, as the Papists; but the
goodness and love of God without us. 2. Impulsive, either. 1. Internal
employed in the word freely, it is oppossed to merit or dignity here. 2.
External, the redemption of Jesus Christ. 3. The isntrumental cause through
faith in his blood.] 4. The final cause, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins past, freely.] First, without cause or merit, so John
15.25. Secondly, without price, 10. Matthew. 8. vide Gerh. in loc. by his grace]
that is, the free favor of God.

Verse. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
bloud] 1. God has made Christ the mercy ^eat. 2. Under the Law it was but the
type and figure of him, they that would obtain any mercy from God, must seek
it in and through him only. Secondly, now by the ministry of the Gospel, the
Lord has set forth this mercy seat openly to the v^ew of all men, all men may
have access unto it; in the Law it stood in the holy of holies within the
veil, and the High Priest only had access unto it, and but once a year. 3.
No man may come to the mercy seat; nor hope to hude mercy with God through
Christ, but only by faith in his blood, as Levit. 16.17. Mr. Hildersam on
Psalm. 51.7. vide Bezam.

A Propitiation] So we read it, but rather a Propitiatory: the same Greek word
(...) which the Septuagint used for the Jews Propitiatory. See 25. Exodus 22.

Verse. 31. We establish the Law] The Law is established by the Gospel. The
Greek word signifies to settle a thing which was falling.
1. By apprehending Christ's righteousness for the perfect obedience unto it,
and fulfilling of it by our surety. He has fufilled the precept, and satisfied
the curse. 2. By our own inchoate obedience unto it, which by means of the
Gospel being a quickening Spirit, we are enabled unto.

CHAP. IV.
THe Papists oppose the imputation of Christ's righteousness to us, and cavil
at the very word imputation, calling of it justiriam putativam and a new no
righteousness; yet Paul uses the word ten times in this Chapter, and in the
same sense that we take it, verses 3.4.5.6 8.11.22, 23, 24.

Verse. 5. That justifies the ungodly] Not in their sins, but from their sins,
through Christ; God does justify the ungodly, as Christ does save sinners in
sensu diviso, that is not while they are ungodly, no^ while they are sinners;
but when they have forsaken their wicked ways, and turned to the Lord, by true
and sound repentance. This place must not be understood simply of such one that
does nothing at all; but respectively of such a one as does not rest upon his
works, nor rely upon his righteousness; but renouncing his own works, does
cast himself upon the free grace of God. 2. Ungodly is not used in the common
sense, Mr. Bedford against Antinomianisme.
for one that has no goodness in him at all, but in a limited sense, viz. for
one that wantteh such perfection of goodness as on which he may build the
hopes of his justification; the proposition is drawn from the instance of
Abraham, a man not altogether void of works and righteousness, His faith is
counted for righteousnesse] Faith is accounted for righteousness without our
merit; for the merits of Christ which are not inherent in us; but are
communicated unto us by his Spirit; whereby we are made members of his body,
and partakers of his righteousness.

Verse. 11. A seal of the righteousness of faith] Circumcision is a sign, The
sign of circumcision] That is, circumcision which is a sign an usual
hebraisme; as we say the Sacrament of Baptism, for Baptism which is a
Sacrament.
in regard of the thing signified, a seal in regard of the Covenant made
betwixt God and man; of righteousnesse] not our own, but that of Christ both
active and passive; faith as the instrument makes the righteousness of Christ
ours, by imputation.

Verse. 15. The Law works wrath] That is, manifests it; and so when it brings
it unto light, it semes to have effected it. Glassius.


Verse 18. Against hope] Of sense and reason; believed in hope] of Gods word,
that is, he conceived firm confidence in heart, of the truth and power of God,
which is manifest by the Antithesis.

Verse. 19. And being not weak in faith, be considered nor his own body now
dead, Id non absolute debet intelligi sed comparate ad illam uxorem quam tum
habebat, vetustam and sterilem. Alioqui Scriptura non in miraculo ponit, si
aliqua^do senes ex virgu^culis mulieribus prolem suscipiant. Moses enim pene
octogenarius liberos genuit, item Obed ex Ruth Moabltide. Nec nostro tempore
desunt exempla little, quo septuagenarij and octogenarij prolem susceperunt.
Rivetus in c. 25. Genesis vide Drusium in loc. See Doctor W^llet on 18. of Genesis
11. vide Drus. quaest. Heb.
when be was about an hundred years old.]

Verse. 20. He staggered not] The Greek word in other places is translated
doubting, nothing doubting, but the same word is also translated discerning 1
Cor. 11.29.

(...) plane persuasum habens. (...) est impleri aliqua re, ut apparet. Eccles.
8.2. sic and 2 Timothy 2.4.4.17. Hinc ducta translatio ad persuasionem, quia ubi
quis non dubitat, sed rem pro certae habet, ejus cor dicitu^ tali re esse
plenum. vide 14. Romans 9. Hinc (...) and (...). Heb. 6.2.10.22. Grotius. (...)
dicitur is, qui quasi plenis velis sic fiducia sua fertur ad eam rem. qua
confidit, ut sit metaphora a navibus ducta. Vulg. reddi dit plenissime sciens,
ut referatur ad intellectum, sed rectius redditur plene persuasum habens, certa
persuasione concepta, ut Erasmus vertit; Vt ad voluntatem and cor referatur.
Ita namque etiam in alijs locis usurpatur. Romans 14. verse. 5. 1 Timothy 4. v. 5. In
vetere Testamento tantum semel occurrit pro implevit. Eccles. 8.11. Gerh. in
loc.
Verse. 21. Being fully perswaded] There may be a full assurance of faith
respectu objecti, viz. the goodness, truth, and power of God; but not respectu
subjecti, as it is in us, in regard of our corruption. It is a metaphore taken
from ships that come into harbor with full sail.

Verse. 25. Was raised again for our justification] Christ paid our debt when
he died, and cancelled the bond on the Cross. But in his resurrection he
received an acquittance, as it were a discharge was given then. 53 Esaias. 8.

CHAPTER. V.
Verse. 1. Being justified by faith] That is, Christ's righteousness made ours
by faith. In qua stamus] id est, confidimus, nec ab ea ullis vel tentationibus
vel persecutionibus nos depelli patimur; (...) non simpliciter significat
stare, verum etiam in statione persistere, in firma fiducia permanere,
metaphora ducta ab acie in qua strenui milites ne latum quidem pedem hosti
cedunt. Gerh.


Verse. 2. In hope of the glory God] That is, that we shall partake one day of
his glory.

Non data sed effusa, liberalitatem ostendens. Chrysostom. See Psalm. 45.13. Titus
3.6. Justus, reddens cuique quod suam est. Bonus qui beneficus est, ac been de
multis meritus. Estius.
Verse. 5. The love of God] That is, the sense and feeling of Gods love to us.
See 8. verse, shed abroad in our hearts] the Greek word signifies powered out, a
speech borrowed from one licour infused into another; as hot water powered into
Beer, changes not only the color, but nature of it. It notes the abundant
manifestation of Gods love toward us.

Verse. 7. For scarcely for a righteous man will one dye] That is, an innocent,
godly man.

Peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye] Would, and
peradventure, and even dare; he speaks warily.

A good man] That is, a useful serviceable man; a man whose life and labor
benefits many; or one that has showed a great deal of goodness to us.

Id est, Insignem et sum commendabilem esse ostendit. Beza.
Verse. 8. Commendeth] That is, makes known.

Death, i. all evils Temporal and Spiritual.

(...) alij reddunt eo quod, quandoquidem. Sic Erasmus, quem sequitur Calvinus,
M^rtyr. Alij in quo; sic Ambros. Chrysostom. Pareus. See Mr. Burrrh. of
Justification, p. 185.


Verse. 12. By one man] That is, Adam, sin entered into the world, and death by
sinne] Sin brought death into the world, either meritorie as it deserves
wrath; or privative as it takes away the power of the Law to confer life,
passed upon all men] as the murraine infects the whole flock; sin and the
curse seizes upon all the whole world, as well as Adam and Eve.

For that all have sinned] Or in whom as Beza. viz. That one man, as the stock
of mankind* the sense comes all to one; in Adam legally as they stood under his
Covenant; in him naturally as they bear his Image.

That is, not laid to their Charge by God, enlightening their consciences,
concerning the true object, root, nature, or fruit of Sin.
Verse. 13. Sin is not imputed where there is no Law] Sin was imputed before
the Law of Moses was given, all were not righteous before; but either it was
not imputed by God eomparative, because men sinned against a lower light, or
rather man did not impute sin to himself, till the Law came.

Verse. 14. Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that
had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression] There is a twofold
interpretation of this place: 1 Some Zanchie, a Lapide, and divert others.
understand it of Infants which never committed actual sin, as Adam did.
Others Calvin, Estius. Raigned] that denotes the power and tyranny of death.
Hoc voluit, absolutum jus exercuisse mortem; nemo enim magis absolute regnat
quam qui sine lege regnat. Ab Adamo autem usque ad Mosen lex non fuit. Heinsius.
say it is spoken of the Heathens, which had not a clear knowledge of Gods law
and will, as Adam had: But this proves not the Apostles intent; which is to
show that the guilt of the first sin was imputed to the world. The former
exposition is the better. As the second Adam conveys not only grace by
regeneration, but righteousness by imputation: so the first Adam sin not
only by propagation, but imputation.

Who is the figure of him that was to come] That is, the first Adam, of Christ
the second Adam.

Verse. 15. But not as the offense, so also is the free gift] In this verse, and
16, 17, 18 verses, Christ is called the gift of God, and the free gift of God,
five times. See Esaias 9.6. He is called the gift of God by an excellency, John 4
10.

Has abounded unto many] (...), redundavit, was plentifully powered out; a
metaphor from waters overflowing.

Verse. 18 As by the offense of one judgment came upon all] Judgment, reatus.
Beza, Pareus, Calvin; but the judgment of God supposes a guilt.

Verse. 20. Where sin aboundeth] that is, the knowledge and feeling of sin.

Grace] the free imputation of Christ's righteousness.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 4. BVried with him by baptism into death] Baptism is an instrument not
only of thy death with Christ, which is the killing of sin; but also of thy
burial with him, The plunging of them into water which were baptized, was a
sign of their death and burial with Christ.
which is a perpetual mortification or abiding under that death. He alludes to
the manner in which baptism was then administered; which was to strip them
naked whom they baptized, and plunge them in the water; after which they put on
new garments. Whence those manners of speaking used in Scripture, Galat. 3.27.
Ephesians 4.22.23. Col. 2.11. and 3.9, 10.
to put on Christ, to put off the old man, and put on the new.

Verse. 6. Might be destroyed] or, weakened; and the strength of it broken, made
fruitless and uneffectuall: for so the word signifies.

Verse. 11. Reckon ye] make account, conclude thus; so the same word is used,
Romans 3.28.

Verse. 12. Raigne] It is the observation of Chrysostom and Theodoret upon the
words, the Apostle did not say, Let not sin tyrannize; for that is sins own
work, 1 Peter 4.2.
and not ours, Romans 7.20. All the service which is done to a tyrant is out of
violence, and not out of obedience. But he says, Let it not Reign in you; for
when a King reigns, the Subjects do actively obey and embrace his command: Dr.
Reynolds.
whereas they are rather patients then agents in a tyranny.

In the lusts thereof] By lusts here are meant the flames and motions of lust,
Perkins.
springing from the fountain of original sin.

Verse 13. But yield your selves unto God] The Greek signifies properly to
present our selves unto God; or, to tender our service and duty unto him. In
which words he alludes to the manner of the Old Testament; when a man offered
any Sacrifice for himself, he brought the beast into the Temple, or the
Tabernacle, and set it before the Altar in token that he did resign it unto
God. Perkins.


Verse. 14. For ye are not under the law] As a Covenant, See Gal. 5.18. We are
under the Law as it has rationem regulae, not as it has rationem saederis.
whether we understand it of its condemning or irritating power. Ye are not
under the law irritating corruption, and compelling to duty: but under the law
subduing sin, and sweetly leading you on in all the ways of God.

Verse. 17. That form of doctrine which was delivered you] or, into which ye
were delivered; so the Greek imports. The phrase expresses the efficacy of
Divine doctrine in the hearts of Gods children; See 2 Cor. 3.18 Vide Bezam.
as if they were cast into it as into a mould, and came forth bearing the
stamp and figure of it.

(...). Hominum more loquor. Beza.
Verse. 19. I speak after the manner of men] So Beza, and we, I speak some
humane thing. Humanum quiddam dico. Erasmus.

And to iniquity unto iniquity] By the former iniquity is meant original and
habitual sin; by the latter actual sin, as the fruit of the former.

Verse 20 The servants of sinne] A servant has two properties: 1 He is subject;
the master is above him, orders him, appoints him his work. 2 He dwells in the
house with him.

Verse. 21. For the end of those things is death] That is, the reward; because
it is the end of the work. Vide Bezam.
And in this sense this word is used, 2 Cor. 11.15. Phil. 3.19. 1 Pet. 1.9.

Verse. 22. I delight in the law of God after the inward man] That is, so far as
I am regenerate, and have a new principle of grace within me.

(...) slipendia, capitur Luc. 3.14. and 1 Cor. 9.7. pro stipendio m^litum. de
Dieu. (...) say some, quasi (...) of the evening; because wages are paid in the
evening. (...) dicuntur tum pecuniae, tum annonae and Cibaria, quae militibus
dantur; 1 Cor. 9.7. Luc. 3.14. Respicit igitur Apostolus ad id quod Verse. 19.
dixerat and Verse. 13. Deinde loquitur in plurali (...), eo quod uno mortis
vocabulo innuantur multae poenae, ac varii cruciatus impiorum. Gerh. in loc.
(...) signifies a gift flowing from grace, or free favor; not rendered as due
to the merit of the receiver, but vouchsafed freely, out of the free bounty and
undeserved favor of the giver. Non erit Dei gratia ullo modo nisi gratuita
fuerit omni modo. Aug. contra Pelag.
Verse. 23. For the wages of sin is death] The word in the original
signifies properly victuals, because victuals was that which the Roman
Emperors gave their Soldiers as wages, in recompense of their service: but
thence the word extends to signify any other wages or salary whatsoever. By
death we must understand a double death both of body and soul. But he does not
say, the wages of our righteousness is eternal life, but (...), The gracious
gift of God, through Jesus Christ. We attain not eternal life by our own
merits, but by the free gift of God; for which cause also he adds, by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Behold (says Cajetan, in loc.) the merit, behold the
righteousness, whose wages is eternal life; but to us, in respect of Jesus
Christ it is a free gift. What could Calvin, or any Protestant have said more?

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 2. FOr a woman which has an husband, is bound by the law to her
husband, so long as he lives, etc.] Sin may command far in the hearts of Gods
people, but it is not a husband; there is not only authority in a husband, but
a principle of love.
The Law is the husband, say Calvin, Estius, and the most ancient Interpreters;
others, sin in the dominion: But it is not much material whether we
understand it of the Law irritating sin, or of sin as irritated by the law.

Verse. 7. I had not known sin, but by the Law] That is, effectually; (for by
nature he knew many sins) or, to my good and comfort. For I had not known
lust] meaning the motions of original concupiscence had been sin.

Verse. 8 But sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence] Sin takes occasion from a threefold power in the law:
First, The convincing, or discovering power of the Law, as it is a Glass; as
to swear, or the like, though there be no pleasure in it, because the Law
forbids it. 2 It blinds a man. 3 It minceth it, thou shall not forsake thy
father or mother, except it be Corban. 4 Takes occasion to hate the light.
Secondly, from its restraining power, as it is a bridle: 1 Lust then spreads
the more inwardly. 2 It is enraged by it, acts with the more violence; Let us
break their bonds. 3 It improves it; as the sight of an enemy stirs up a man's
courage. Thirdly, it takes occasion, by the condemning power of the Law; we can
be but damned, Let us eat and drink, etc. 2 It takes occasion thence to drive
men into despair. 3 Drives a man to self-murder, as Judas. 4. Drives a man to
blasphemy; as Spira and the damned in Hell.

For without the Law sin was dead] No more to me then a dead thing; it never
troubled me.

Verse. 9. For I was alive] In performances, Phil. 1.6. presumption, hope,
expectation, Acts 26.9.

Without the Law] not in the literal, but spiritual sense; once, in the state
of my unregeneracy.

But when the Commandment came] in the spiritualnesse of it, and I saw in some
measure its holiness, Sin revived] That is, By the life of sin the strength
of it is understood, 1 To condemn; 2 operate or work in a man obedience to it
self.
the guilt of it was discovered to his conscience; And I dyed] I began to see I
was in the State of death.

Verse. 13. That sin by the Commandment might beceme exceeding sinfull] That
is, when the Commandment was cleared to me, then I saw that I was extreme
sinful; or, felt the violent motions of my sin.

Verse. 15. For that which I do I allow not, etc.] The Apostle speaking of the
frailties and infirmities that were in himself, and the rest of the faithful,
gives us in this and the next Chapter four notes whereby a sin of infirmity
may be known from a reigning sin. The first is in this Verse, What I hate
(says he) that I do. Hilders. on Psalm. 51.7. Lect. 136.
He was convinced in his judgment that it was a sin, and therefore hated it.
The second is, Verse. 19. The evil which I would not, that I do. His will, the
purpose and resolution of his heart was against it. The third is, Verse. 24. O
wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death! He was
much troubled and grieved when he was overtaken with it. The fourth and last
is, Chap. 8. verse. 1. They that are in Christ Jesus walk not after the flesh.
It is not their custom and ordinary practice to do so.

Verse. 16. I consent unto the Law] Gr. I speak together the same thing that the
Law does. (...), est assentior, etiam Sophocli and Euripidi. Tum vero Hebraeis
dicere est cogitare.


Verse. 18. To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good I
find not] He signifies that he could begin good things, but not perfect them,
Mr. Perkins.
and go through stitch.

Verse. 19. For the good that I would do, I do not] He speaks of the inward
endeavors of his heart. Quae memoras scio vera esse, nutrix, sed furor cogit
sequi pejora. Sencea Hippol. Act. 1. Scen. 11.


But the evil which I would not that I doe] meaning, in respect of the
corruption of his nature.

Verse. 20. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwells in me] If against my general purpose I sin against God;
and be sorry for it, and displeased with my self because I cannot obey God in
that perfection I desire, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells
in me.

Verse. 22. For I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man] Yet Verse. 23.
Paul resists the Law of God. Answ. This is an opposition in the same person,
Genus hoc loquendi in Schola Platonis usitatum fuit, l. 9. de Repub. vide
Dieteric. Antiquit. Bibl.
but not in the same part; according to the Spirit he delights in the Law,
according to the flesh he rebelleth against it.

Verse. 23. Bringing me in captivity to the law of sinne] (...). It signifies
one taken with the point of a Spear or Sword; or with a bloody weapon: from
(...), cuspis, mucro, and (...), captivus; so is the word Luke 21.24. Because
(as a Law) sin does exercise power over all the faculties of the soul, See
Romans 16.17.
and members of the body.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. THere is no condemnation to them that are in Christ] Peter Martyr
here well observes the wisdom of the Apostle, who before speaking of the
humane infirmities, and of the force of sin in our members, gave instance in
himself, that no man, though never so holy, should be thought to be freed
altogether from sin in this life. But now coming to set forth the privilege
of those which are in Christ, he makes it not his own particular case, but
infers a general conclusion, that there is no As if he should say, there
is not one condemnation; there is none in Heaven, God does not condemn them;
there is none on Earth, their own heart and conscience does not condemn them;
no word, no commandment, no threatening condemns him. Mr. Fenner on Lam. 3.57.
condemnation, not only to him, but, not to any that are in Christ Jesus.
Cajetan says falsely, when he says, there is nihil damnabile: It is not said
(says Mr. Perkins) they do nothing worthy of condemnation; but thus, there is
no condemnation to them being in Christ, though they deserve it never so much.
There is a freedom both from the guilt and punishment of sin, to them which
are in Christ; i.e. which believe, are one with Christ, all his members, and so
are effectually called. Who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit]
Walking Walking, in Scripture usually signifies to hold on a course of life, as
Genesis 5.22. and 17.1.
is not now and then to make a step forward, but to keep his ordinary course in
the way of godliness. Flesh] that is, the corruption of nature. Spirit] that
is, the grace of regeneration; live according to the motion and guidance of it.

Verse. 2. For the Law By the Law of the Spirit of life, we understand the
virtue and power of holiness; not in us, but in Christ Jesus; who by his
righteousness, and merits has delivered us from the power of sin and death.
B. Down. on Justif. l. 7. c. 7. Law of death] i. The power of death, both of
body and soul; both temporal and eternal, due to that blot and stain.
of the Spirit of life in Christ Iesus] that is, the grace of holiness in the
humane nature of Christ, which upon our union with him is by the holy Ghost
conveyed unto us; meaning the power of the Spirit which is in Christ has freed
all them which are in him from sin and death. By the law of sin is meant,
the life and power it has in it self to make guilty in Gods sight, and bind
over to punishment. As if he had said, of like things and persons there is the
like consequence; my infirmities are not imputed unto me to death; no more
shall yours. The Apostle, as in the former Chapter, verse. 24. so here, speaks
in the singular, of himself; teaching us by his own example, and every true
Christian to apply the benefits of Christ to himself.

Verse. 3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh] that is, justify us; God sending his own son in the likeness of
sinful flesh] that is, in the humane nature subject to passions and
infirmities. The Manichees and Marcionites did wrest the Apostles words to
signify that Christ had no true humane flesh, but a similitude and likeness
only: But Basil well answers them, That this word, similitude, Phil. 2.7.
is not simply to be referred to flesh; but, to sinful flesh: for Christ was
like unto us in all things, sin only excepted.

And for sin condemned sin in the flesh] that is, Christ in his flesh being
made a Sacrifice for us upon the Cross, And for sinne] that he might take away
the sin of the World. Condemned sin in the flesh] that is, exacted the due
punishment of sin in his humane nature.
did bear the punishment due unto our sin; So God condemned sin in the
flesh of his Son; that is, paenas peccato debitas exegit, he did exact
punishment due unto our sin. Pareus.

Verse. 4. That the righteousness of the Law may be fulfilled in us] i.e. That
which the law requires unto justification might by Christ be fulfilled in us
who are his members, which walk not (as also he had said in the first verse)
after the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Verse. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God] (...). The word signifies
the act of a carnal mind, comprehending thoughts, desire, discourse. Pareus
well notes, that he uses not the word (...), which signifies prudence it
self, least he should seem to have condemned that natural gift and faculty;
but (...), which notes the act rather and execution of that faculty: and he
adds to it (...), of the flesh, not condemning all prudent actions, but such
as proceed from the pravity of the flesh. The wisdom of the flesh, that is,
man's best things, his best thoughts and affections, the best inclinations and
motions of the mind of a natural man, are not only enemies, but even enmity
against God. Not an enemy, as the vulgar Latin reads it. Hereby is expressed
the irreconcilable enmity between the flesh and the Spirit; for an enemy may be
reconciled, but enmity can never be reconciled.

Not subject] That is, according to an ordinate and godly subjection, as the
word signifies.

Verse. 8. So then they are in the flesh cannot please God] Pope Syricius
wickedly applied these words of Paul to wedlock; but to be in the flesh,
signifies not to be in wedlock, but in the state of nature received by carnal
generation; and not be renewed by the Spirit, as the next verse shows: The
phrase is significant, Par. in loc. See Act. 8.23.
noting a man drowned in corruption. We say of a man overcome of anger, he is in
heat; of a drunkard, he is in drink.

Verse. 9. If so be that the spirit of God dwells in you] The word is causall or
conditional. If, not that he doubts but that he is plainly confident.
Dwelling means two things. 1. The holy Ghost does abide in them, not for a
time only, but for ever; for the word notes perpetuity. Chrysostom. 2 These. 16.
Mr. Pe^kins. He is not in us, tanquam hospes but indigena persetuus, as John.
14.16.
2. That the Holy Ghost has the full disposition of the heart; as when a man
comes to dwell in a house, whereof he is Lord, he has liberty to govern it
after his own will.

None of his] His Creature, but not his Disciple.

Verse. 10. The Body is dead because of sin: but the Spirit is life, because
of righteousnesse] Body is the mortal part of a man, which is subject to
death; Spirit is the inward part of a man, viz. His soul regenerate, which
lives by faith; that is, now for the present, the Spirit lives by grace; as
the just is said to live by faith; and that also is a pledge of life
everlasting afterward.

Verse. 13. If ye through the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live] 1. Every man must be an agent in this business, and not a patient
only; if (ye) do mortify, a man must do it himself. 2. There must be a true
hatred to sin, and that is ever to death; he must strike it to the heart. 3.
There is a slaying of every sin; the deeds of the body. That is, all the evil
lusts, and affections. 4. A killing of sin by true weapons, by the Spirit.

Verse. 14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God] It is not said ruled but
led, plus est agi quam regi; when one is ruled by another, he acts himself,
Gal. 5.18. The spirit of God. 1. Always leads a man according to the rules of
the word; the Child of God has a twofold guide, the word without, and the
Spirit within, Prove. 6.22. 2 Pet. 1.10. 2. Inclines his heart readily to work
in that way, Esaias. 30.21.
and his own action is seen; when he is led by another, though he may act
himself, the others action is more seen then his.

Verse. 15. The Spirit of bondage] Not bondage to sin, but by it.

Whereby we cry Abba Paul's meaning is to signify, that the Holy Ghost causes
us to make requests, and stirs up on hearts to groan, and sigh to God. 2
Kings. 2.12. Mark. 14.36.
Father] The reason of the gemination, is not barely by way of exegesis; but to
show that not only the Jews, but the Syrians, the Greeks, and Latins, should
call God Father. 2. To show the intensenesse, and fervor of affection. There
is the gift of prayer, and the Spirit of prayer; our prayers proceed from a
Spirit of prayer, when our hearts are filled with holy longings and desires,
after the things we pray for beyond our words; the spirit of supplication sets
the regenerate part a work: here is not a calling only, but a crying, which
notes earnestness. 2. The petition Father, Father, notes vehemence of
affection. 3. It is a repetition in several languages, Syriack, and Greek,
Abba Father.

Verse. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit] We have two
witnesses joining together their testimonies to assert this truth, See John. 5.
6. Yet does the spirit work this assurance in the heart of man, not by
immediate and extraordinary inspirations, and revelations; but by ordinary
means. Hilders. on 51. Psalm. 7. Lect. 124.
that we are the Sons of God; viz. our Spirit, and the Spirit of God, that
witness of our Spirit; That is, our conscience is the first, the Spirit of God
is the second. His work is not (...), but (...), to witness together with our
Spirit; That is, to confirm and ratify what that has asserted. Mr. Bedford
against Antinomianisme. Chap. 5.

Verse. 17. And if Children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Christ] Chrysostom observes three notable passages of honor; every one rising
by degrees, above another. 1. We are not only Children but heirs. 2. Not
heirs to any mortal man, but to the immortal God. 3. Not basely associated
in this our inheritance; but are coheires annexed to Jesus Christ.

Verse. 18. I reckon] The Greek word signifies. I conclude upon an argument.

Are not worthy] The words in the original are, not worthy to the glory; or
not worthy to be compared to it. The Greek work signifies, they are not to be
put in the bal^ance (...) signifies when a man has cast his accounts, and well
weighed the matter, he concludes, resolves, and determines, as Romans 3.28.
and 6.11. Bishop Dow. vide Bezam.
with the glory of heaven; a word taken from a balance. These sufferings which
the godly sustain, are not worthy of; or not worthy to be compared, or
comparable, or equal in worth to the glory, which shall be revealed in us, or
upon us.

Verse 19. For the earnest expectation of the Creature waiteth] The expectation
of the Creature expects, Auget emphasim, quod apostolus non simpliciter
dicit, creatura expectat, sed expectatio, creaturae expectat. q.d. Creaturae
tam anxie anque avide gloriam illam expectant ut videantur esse ipsa
expectatio. Gerh. Aliqui
an Hebrew Pleonasme, to express the continual desires, and expectation of
the Creature. That is, as some restringunt verba Apostoli ad novam creaturam,
id est, fideles, expectantes beatam illam spem; non dicitur absolute nam
creatura, sed intenta expectatio creaturae; additur autem intentam illam
expectationem expectare. Quae verba non male meo judicio sic resomebat Thomas,
creatura intent expectans, filiorum Dei revelationem expectat; quibus verbis
creaturae nomen circumscribitur, ut non intelligatur de quavis creatura, sed de
ea quae est capax talis (...). Rivetus.
expound it; the godly waits for the manifestation of the sons of God; that
is, of themselves; as the Lord reigned Brimstone from the Lord; that is
himself; it being an Hebraisme to put the Antecedent sometime in place of the
relative.

Verse. 20. Vanity] Of service, was constrained by God to serve unregenerate men.

Verse. 21. The bondage of corruption] Some say of dissolution, others of
subjection; they are made serviceable to the lusts of unregenerate men.

Verse. 22. Groaneth] As one pressed with a burden desires to be eased.
Travelleth in paine] As a woman in travel to be delivered. It is a Prosopopeia
whereby a Person is feigned to the creature, as though it had will, desire,
sorrow, groaning. Mr. Fenner in loc.


Verse. 23. Which have the first fruits of the Spirit] Which are but as a
handful of Corn, in respect of the whole Corne-field.

In this life we are not saved re but spe. (...) un a sublevat. Beza. vide
Bezam.
Verse. 24. We are saved by hope] That is, We are so assured of our salvation,
as if we possessed it already.

Verse. 26. Also helps our infirmities] Helps together. The word signifies
such a kind of helping; as when a man takes a thing (as Timber or the like) at
the other end, or the other side; one man standing the one way, and the other
the other way; or one taking up one end, and the other the other end; that is
the meaning of it.

Verse. 28. We know] That is, Not only I, and you; but all the faithful people
of God, All things] their prosperity, adversit^e, yea their tentations and
sins should in the end work for their good.
have great proof of it, by daily experience: that all afflictions (for of
them specially he speaks) how many or great so ever they be) shall by Gods
blessing procure, and further our chiefest good; that is the happiness of our
souls.

The word is not (...) he knew before, but (...) praecognovit he acknowledged
before, 2 Timothy 2.19. Romans 11.2.
Verse. 29. Whom he did foreknow] By prescience here we understand not simply
the foreknowledge of God; but his fore-acknowledging, which is a knowledge with
approbation.

Verse. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he
called them, he also justified, etc.] The Apostle compares the causes of
salvation, to a chain of many Links; whereof every one is so coupled to the
other, that he which takes hold of the highest, must needs draw the rest with
him.

Verse. 31. What shall we then say to these things?] The Apostle having set
forth the great mystery of the love of God to us in Christ, Magnificentissima
conclusio totius superioris de Iustificatione gratuita disputationis. Beza.
concludes (as some conceive) like an orator. As if he had said, Here is a
subject about which much might be said; but we had need be very careful, how
and what we say about it. No man, no not the tongue of an Angel is sufficient
to deliver, and unfold these secrets: such love, such goodness are beyond
words. Mr. Caryll on 11. of Job. 2.

Who can he against us] He means not in their affection, to oppose or work our
annoyance; but to hurt us, 1 Pet. 3.13.

Verse. 32. Delivered him up for us all] That is, for us who have all things
given with him, all such as are chosen, justified, and shall never be condemned
as in the next verse.

Verse. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect] Or put in any
accusation against them; the Greek word signifies in jus vocare, to call into
the Law. It is a law-custome to clear men by Proclamation; if one have been
indicted at the Assizes, and no Bill brought in against him; there is an O yes
made; If any have any thing to say against the prisoner at Bar, he should
come forth, since he stands upon his freedom.

Verse. 34. Who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession
Qualis est ista intercessio? non oralis; sed realis, ex merasui ipsius in cruce
oblati repraesentatione. Hinc est quod dicitur comparere coram Deo pro nobis
Heb. 9.24. D. Twiss. vind. l. 1. part secunda. Sect. 23.
for us] By appearing in heaven for us; and by willing that that his merits
should be effectual unto us.

Verse. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?] By this
interrogation, the Apostle does more emphatically deny, that any thing
whatsoever, Est autem verbum (...) significanter positum; solet enim de
Iudaicis divortijs usurpari. Matthew. 19.6. Marc. 10.9 Grotius. in loc.
shall be able to separa^e us from Christ, then if in plain terms he had
said, as after he does; nothing whatsoever is able to separate.

Shall tribulation] The word signifies any thing that presses or pincheth us:
Dist^esse.] The word is translated from the straightness of the place, to the
estate of the mind, 2 Samuel 24.14. persecution] when we are pursued from one
place to another, and banished; famine and nakednesse] which follow the
banished.

Verse. 37. We are more then Conquerers] We do over overcome, Super superamus,
(...) supervincimus.
That is, triumph, or overcome before we fight; or are more then conquerers in
them, because we are Conquerers by them.

Verse. 39. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, etc.] Whereby he
means all the faithful and Elect; and by the love of God; not our love
toward God, but Gods love toward us; the Apostle speaks before of Christ's
love to his chosen; and himself expounds it of Gods love to us in Christ,
verse. 37. The ground on which the Apostle builds this assurance, is not any
special revelation; but such a foundation as is common to all the faithful,
as appears, 2 Pet. 1.1.
v. 32, 33 34 the faith of every Christian is in nature all one with Paul's,
though not in measure and degree; and as effectual to save him as Paul's was.
The Apostle proves that neither life, that is, the pleasures of life; nor
death, that is, the pains and terrors before, as well as the stroke of death
it self; nor things present, that is, evils of sense; nor things to come, that
is, evils in expectation; nor height of prosperity; nor depth of adversity; nor
any thing else can separate us from the love of God; That is, the love
wherewith he loves us in Christ.

CHAP. IX.
Vrs. 1. I Say the truth in Christ, J lie not] This duplication of contraries,
is used for the more force, and to show his sincerity.

My conscience also bearing me witness in the holy Ghost] That is, the Holy
Ghost who is privy to my conscience bearing me witness; or my conscience which
the Holy Ghost is privy to. Mede on Acts. 5.3.4, 5.


Verse. 3. My brethren my kinsmen according to the flesh] That is, the
Israelites; meanning for the advancement of Gods glory, in their calling and
salvation. Perkins. Aliqui existimant eum, quemadmodum apud Romanos Dux
exercitus saepe unum aliquem pro toto exercitu devovebat and morti destinabat,
itae Paulum cum ad Romanos scriberet, ad illum morem adlusisse, and optasse, ut
Christus ipsum pro populo Iudaico tanquam hominem sacrum, reijci and occidi
juberet. Dilher. Eclog. Sac. Dictum septimum.


Verse. 4. Who are Israelites: to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory,
and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
promises] There are 7. privileges. First, they were Israelites; that is, of
the posterity of Jacob called Israel. The second is adoption; in that they were
reputed, and called the children of God; not the inward and spiritual adoption
spoken of John 1.12. but the federall outward, Exodus 19.5. Thirdly, they had
the glory of God; that is, the mercy seat; The Ark of the Covenants a special
token of Gods glorious presence, 1 Samuel 4.22.
the pledge of Gods presence. The fourth is the Covenant, Covenants Greek;
that is, the two Tables of the Covenant, Heb. 9.4. Fifthly, the giving of the
Law, viz. of the judicial, and ceremonial Law. Sixthly, the worship of God,
the public solemnity whereof was tied to the Temple at Jerusalem. Seventhly,
to them pertained the promises made to the Patriarchs, touching the Messiah.
Perkins.

Verse 6 The word of God has taken none effect] That is, then the Covenant made
with the forefathers is void, if the Jews be rejected.

Verse. 11. Neither having done any good or evill] That is, before he considered
of their good or evil; in his decree he decreed to love Jacob, and hate Esau.
Mr. Perkins.

Verse. 12. Question est, an Paulus Histo^ice locum acceperit de duobus populis,
and externis praerogativis, an mystice de duobus ipsi^ fratribus in
particulari, and eorum descrimine ratione salutaris gratiae and ultimi finis.

Nihil aliud est quam propositu^ electivum, adeoque liberum.
Verse. 13. J have loved Jacob, and hated Esau] There is a two fold love in God.
1. Amor benevolentiae, a love of well willing; which God did bear to the
person before the world was; and it is called the love of Election, as here. 2.
Amor complacentiae, a love of complacency, to his own Image in the person; of
this Christ speaks John 14.21.23. Rutherfords Trial, and Triumph of faith.

Verse. 14. God forbid] Greek Let it not be so, 3. Romans 6. like that speech Genesis
18.25, that be far from thee. Est longissime aver santis. Absit ut hoc
dicamus. Grotius.

Non obdurat Deus impertiendo malitiam, sed non impertiendo miserecordiam. Aug.
Epist.
Verse. 18. Whom he will, he hardeneth] There is a threefold hardness of heart.
1. Natural, which is the Estate of all men. 2. Contracted by a custom of
sinning. 3. Judiciary, which God inflicteth upon men as a judgment; this is
here meant.

Verse. 22. Vessels of wrath] Some interpret it the Instruments of wrath;
rather those which fill themselves with sin; and shall be for ever filled
with wrath.

Fitted] Made up, finished.

Verse. 23. Riches of his glory] It is familiar with Paul, to call a great
plenty of a thing rich^s, Ephesians. 1. His most rich, and abundant glory. The word
glory, which is twice here repeated, 2 Romans See 11.33. Quia praecipua ejus laus
est in benefactis. Calvinus.
is put for the mercy of God by a Metonymie; so Ephesians. 1.

Verse. 29 The Lord of Sabaoth] Sabbath, not Sabbath. of hosts, not of rest; and
so James 5.4. R. David Kimchi gives two reasons, why God is so called. First,
because he is the only Lord of all creatures in heaven and earth. Secondly,
because he can easi^y scatter, and overthrow the great force that is in hoasts,
or Armies.

Verse. 31. The Law of righteousnesse] That is, the righteousness prescribed by
the Law; an Hebraisme.

Verse. 33. And whosoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed] Or confounded.
The Apostle follows the translation of the Septuagint; in the original Esaias
28.16. the words are, he that believes shall not make haste; the Septuagint
put the consequent for the Antecedent, and the effect for the cause: because he
which is rash, and makes haste, is ashamed in the end, and confounded. Peter
Martyr expounds it of the patience of the Saints which do wait for the
fulfilling of Gods promise in due time, Iund. 2 Parallel. 15.
not hasting to use unlawful means; and more particularly, the Prophet there
reproves those which would not wait upon God for deliverance, but depend upon
present helps. Shall not be confounded] Some do refer it to the day of
judgment, when the faithful shall not be confounded, or ashamed; cum venerit
in suturo; Gloss Interlin. Haymo. But it is more general, showing that the
faithful, neither in the time present, nor to come shall be ashamed; nor to be
confounded, signifies non frustrari, not to be disappointed of their hope; P.
Martyr. and more is understood then said; that is, shall be confirmed,
comforted, established. Fajus.
Jun. annotat.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 3. GOing about] or seeking, studying.

Verse. 4. For Christ is the end of the law] The end of the Law is to justify
and save those which fulfill it; Christ subjected himself thereto, Finis
perficiens non interficiens. Aug. The abrogater of the Ceremonial, and
fulfiller of the Moral Law, not for himself, but for us; therefore Christ
doing it for believers, they fulfill the Law in Christ: and so Christ by doing,
and they by believing in him that does it, do fulfill the Law. Perkins.
Notanter appellatur (...) duo significat; semel finem seu complementum alicujus
rei, Matthew. 10.22. and 24.6. Luc. 1.33. Joh. 13 1. Hoc sensu denotat
obedientiam Domini activam, qua omnem Dei Legem a capite ad calcem, ab initio
ad finem implevit. Interdum est retributio debita sive ea praemium sit, sive
poena. Matthew. 17.27. Romans 6.21, 23, and 13.7. 2 Cor. 11.15. Phil. 3.19. Et sit
subinauit obedientiam passivam, retributionem, seu poenam nobis debitam in quam
salvator se recepit. Walther. Miscellan. Theol.
perfectly fulfilled it for us; and his perfect righteousness is imputed to us.

Verse. 5. The man] Even the man himself, in and by himself. Which does these
things] Even all those things which are written in the law, according to the
uttermost extent of them. Shall live thereby] not only temporally, but
eternally.

Verse. 10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation] The tongue confesses what the heart
believes.

Verse. 13. For whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved]
That is, whosoever has this grace See Verse. 11. Prayer is sometimes taken for
the whole worship of God. B. D^wn. of Justification. l. 7. c. 4.
given unto him truly to worship God, it is an evident sign and assurance unto
him, that he shall be saved.

Verse. 18. Their sound went into all the earth] That which the Prophet David
speaks of the Sun, the Apostle here applies to the Gospel to note, Psalm.
19.4.
that the circle of the Gospel is like that of the Sun, universal to the
whole world. The Hebrew is, Reynolds.
Their line is gone out through all the earth; the LXX. which the Apostle
follows, Vide Drus. de quaesitis per Epist. epist. 77.
their sound went into all the earth. The sense is one, though the expressions
be different.

Verse. 20. But Esaias is very bold] in telling the Jews to their faces that
they were rejected.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 9. LEt their table be made a snare, etc.] By Table, Origin means the
Scriptures, which became a snare unto them, in that they perverted them to
their own hurt. Haymo and some others say, that their Table is collatia
verborum in mensa, their meeting and conference to take Christ; whereat they
did but lay snares to take themselves. Chrysostom understands by Table, Omnes
Iudaecrum delicios, their prosperity, their public State, their Temple.
Calvin, Quicquid in vita optabile est and beatum, he gives them to their ruin
and destruction. Peter Martyr says it is an elegant allegory, wherein is
signified that whatsoever is sweet and acceptable, becomes dangerous and deadly.

Let it be made] non est optantis, sed prophetantis.

Verse. 12. How much more their fulnesse] an enriching of the Gentiles.

Verse. 15. Be the reconciling of the world] This cannot be understood of men in
all ages; but, in the last age of the world, after Christ's ascension, Perkins.
wherein God offered to all the world life everlasting by Christ.

Verse. 16. For if the first fruit be holy, the lump is also holy; and if the
root be holy, so are the branches.] First fruits and root; that is, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, Because they were first consecrated to God, and first in
covenant with God. See 1 Cor. 7.14.
It is such a holiness as that Exodus 19.6. and Dan. 8.24. and 12.7. not a
personal and inherent, but a federall and external holiness; so as to be
owned by God in a visible covenant.

Verse 17. And if some of the branches be broken off] Some urge this and verse.
20 to prove that the regenerate may fall from grace. There is a twofold
planting: 1 Outward, when God gives the word unto a people, and they
publicly profess it. 2 Inward, Perkins on Jude.
when God gives true faith, whereby men are set into Christ. The Jews were
implanted by the former only, and therefore might be broken off; the other is
everlasting.

Paul uses a similitude of graffing a branch of the wild Olive into the true,
but contrary to nature; for nature advises to set sweet graffes into sour
stocks; and though it be natural for the stock to be vehiculum alimenti, to
convey the nourishment to the graffe; yet naturally virtus temperamenti, the
quality of the juice is from the graffe, not from the stock: but in our
supernatural graffing the branch of a wild Olive is made partaker not only of
the root, but fatness also of the true Olive.

And with them partakest of the root and fatness of the Olive Tree] This Olive
tree is the visible Church, Ier. 11.16. so called, 1 Propter viriditatem, for
its greenness. 2 Propter pinguedinem, for its fatness. The root of this Olive
tree was Abraham, by virtue of the Church Covenant; the Covenant began with
him; therefore he is said to be the Root, Mic. 7. ult. Fatnesse] that is all
the outward privileges, ordinances, graces, The Gentiles partake of the root
and fatness; that is, are taken among the children of God by outward
profession, and partake of the external privileges of the Covenant. Verse. 18.
Coelum astriferum uno in loco est: and tamen ejus vox and verba ubique locorum
audiuntur, id est, vis ejus intelligitur. Pari modo cum Apostoli in
illustrioribus urbibus fuerint, ibique and praedicaverint and miracula
fecerint, ut Hierosolymis, Caesareae, Joppae, Antiochiae, Ephesi, Corinthi,
Thessalonicae, inde fama verum tantarum pervenit ad omnes terras in quibus
habitabant Judaei, idque sufficit. Grotius in loc.


Verse. 22. Behold] is not the Adverbe, but the Verb to note a narrow looking
into the point, as in that of John 1.29. As if John had said, look well on him,
eye him, and mark him well. The goodnesse] the word (...) benignitatem.
Significatur ea voce facilitas ac promptitudo praestandi beneficia, Estius.
signifies the propensity of God to do good. Severity] (...) Sic (...) severe 2
Cor. 13.10. Titus 1.13. Origo vocis a medicis qui membra insecta abscindunt.
Grotius.
such a severity as notes a cutting off: which word Paul uses the more to set
forth Gods goodness to us.

Verse. 25. Until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in] There is a double
fullness of the Gentiles. 1 Before their conversion. 2 A greater fullness
after. verse. 12. He means here a full and plentiful propagation of the Gospel,
whereby many of all Nations shall be converted to God.

Verse. 26. The deliverer] It signifies delivering by a strong hand, to rescue
by force, as David delivered the Lamb out of the Lions paw. This word is used
in the sixth Petition of the Lords prayer.

Verse. 29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance] That is,
the peculiar gifts which pertain to salvation; Peace, joy; but the essential
gifts to salvation, viz. Faith and sanctification may be abated.
for common gifts may be lost, and some saving gifts in some degree and for a
time.

Verse. 32. For God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon al^.] The word all] is not to be expounded of every particular man,
as some would have it; for then Paul should contradict himself, who said
before, God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. But it must be
understood of all that are to be saved, both Jews and Gentiles, as the article
added to all imports; the meaning is, that God will save all whom he
purposes to save of his mercy, Perkins.
and not of their merit, because all are sinners.

Verse. 33. O the depth etc.] wherein Austin says is contained the solution of
that question, why some are converted rather then others.

Of the wisdom and knowledge] God by his wisdom discerns courses most
convenient; but by his knowledge he comprehends all, whether convenient or
inconvenient.

Past finding out] A metaphor from quick-sented Hounds, who are at a loss,
having neither footsteps nor sent left of the game they pursue; none can trace
the Lord, and find out the way and reason of his doings.

Verse. 35. Or, who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto
him again] as who should say, no man can challenge God as if he owed him ought.
Sanderson.


CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. BY the mercy of God] The word in the Greek translated mercies, is the
plural number, per miserationes. Though there be in God miserationes multae,
yet there is but one mercy which is his essence; Chrysostom. The ph. Aug. Vtitur
numero multitudinis amplificationis causa. Beza.
from whence issue motus m^sericordiae.

Pres^nt] The Apostle exhorts to exhibit, present, give up themselves,
herein alluding to the rite of the sacrifices which were first exhibited and
presented unto God at the Altar. Beza.
This word is used of our blessed Savior when they brought him into the
Temple, and presented him before the Lord, Luke 22 3. Dr. Willet.


Your bodies] That is, the whole man, Part for the whole.
as 13.1. by soul he means the whole person* there is an Hebraisme, the soul
for the whole man: in this there is a Grecisme, and with us it is ordinary to
use body for the whole man, as when we say, He is a very good or naughty body.
The Greeks put (...) for persons.


He alludes to the burnt offering that was wholly offered unto God. The head,
body, legs, the inwards, all washed with water after it was killed, Present
your whole selves, souls and bodies unto God, as wholly consecrated to his
service, wherein ye shall offer a far more acceptable sacrifice to him then
all the oblation: under the Law; theirs were of beasts, yours of your selves;
theirs of beasts slain, yours is a living Sacrifice; theirs was as it were a
bruit service, yours a reasonable. Dr. Halls Paraphrase in loc.
was offered on the Altar for a sweet savor unto God. This notes principally
Christ offering of himself wholly in his perfect sufferings and obedience unto
his Father; but secondarily it was also a type of our giving and consecrating
our selves altogether unto God

Reasonable service] (...), your service of the Word. That is, ordered
according to Gods Word, the rule of obedience. As the same word is rendered, 1
Pet. 2.2. Milk of the Word; not reasonable milk, (...), Mr. Pemble. Or,
Rationalis cultus talem denotat, vel de quo rationem reddere possumus, ut
exponit Origines, vel spiritualem ut Chrysostomus, qui opponitur Animae
impetui, aut victimis legalibus, quae aliqud modo erant irrationales: ut
exponit Verstius, and alii Dr. Pride. Lect. 22. de Authoritate Ecclesiae in
rebus Fidei.
reasonable; such service as is done unto him with reason and understanding;
when the understanding is regulated by the wisdom of God, and the will by the
will of God.

Verse. 2. But be ye transformed] metamorphosed. The Greek word signifies to lay
aside one form and assume another; as the Metamorphosis written by Ovid and
others; but it is to be meant in respect of the qualities, as the words
following by the renewing of your mind, show.

Prove] This probation signifies a discerning with judgment of those things
which are good, as Phil. 1.10. he that has a perfect taste discerns of the
goodness of meats.

Verse 3. Not to think of himself more highly then he ought to think, but to
think soberly] The Greek is very elegant His omnibus verbis utitur hic
Apostolus, non sine jucunda vocum allusione, quae in Latino retineri non
potuit. Estius
(...).

Verse. 6. Gifts] That is, as some rightly interpret, according to the offices
and employments wherein we are set, these are graces and favors unto which God
does call any person, Rom 1.5. Ephesians. 3.8

Sunt qui per Prophetiam intelligunt divinandi sacultatem, quae circaincunabula
E^clesiae N. Testamenti obtiuebat Sed ego in eorum sententiam concedendum
arbitror qui Prophetiae nomen accipiunt de Sc^^pturae intelligentia, and
singulari ejus explicandi facultate. Nam reliquis muneribus omnibus quae
recensentur ab Apostolo, in Ecclesia perpetuus locus est, absurdumque foret si
cum uno temporario Charismate citra manifestam causam perpetua aliquot
conjunxerit. Gersomus Bacerus disserrat. de gubernat Eccles. Vide Calvinum in
loc.
Whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith] This
place, (says Par.) is to be understood of the Prophets in the New Testament.
There were in the Primitive times three extraordinary offices in the Church,
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11. See 1 Cor. 12.28. The Apostles
were immediately called and sent of Christ for the conversion of the world, and
planting of Churches. Prophets were such who were immediately stirred up and
called by the Holy Ghost; and also endued with singular wisdom and knowledge
both of the mysteries of faith, and also of the secret judgments of God,
present and to come; also they excelled in a wonderful gift of understanding
the prophesies of the old Testament, and of opening and applying the same to
those times. They were inferior to the Apostles; and by them appointed to
govern the Churches which they had planted. Evangelists were such ac
accompanied the Apostles in their travel, and were sent by them upon occasion
to the Churches, to preach the Gospel; but not to be resident in any place for
governing of the Churches, as were the Prophets.

Verse. 8 With simplicity] that is, of mere pity and compassion; and not for
any sinister re^pect, pleasure, or praise of men. See Ephesians. 6.5.

Verse. 9. Let love be without dissimulation] Greek, without hypocrisy. See 1
Ioh. 3.18.

Abhor] as Hell, hate with horror, The Greek word is very significant (...).
The simple verb imports extreme detestation, which is aggravated by the
composition. Chrysostom.

Cleave to that which is good] Hold it, as one firmly glued to it, for so the
word signifies; Agglutinati Beza.
things glued are not easily disjoined. The same word is used of the
conjunction between man and wife, Matthew. 19.5. Ephesians. 5.21.

Verse. 10. Vtuntur hac v^ce (...) Aristoteles, Xenophon, Cicero etiam ad
Atticum. significat vehementem amandi affectum. Grotius.

Verse. 11. Fervent] Or, zealous Vult nos qui sub lege vivimus, nihil remissum,
nihil tepidum habeamus in nobis, sed cum servore Spiritus and calore fidei
cuncta peragamus. Origin.
in spirit; as if no service could be acceptable unto God, without fervency of
spirit.

Serving the Lord] Some read the words, serving the time; because there is a
great affinity between those two words in the Greek tongue, (...) time, and
(...) Lord; apply your selves to the time; not that they should be
men-pleasers, or time-servers: but to apply themselves to the time in the
occurrent and occasions thereof. But Beza says this reading cannot be received
at all, Vide Estium.
because no such phrase is found in the Scripture, to serve the time in any
such sense.

Verse. 13. Given to hospitality] The Greek word is well translated; for this
kind of phrase notes an eager affection, (...). It is not said, exercising,
but pursuing hospitality. Chrysostom.
or following of a thing; so a common drunkard is said to be given to drink,
and a covetous man to be given to money. The phrase imports that we should be
so hospitable, as not to stay till strangers seek to us, but prevent them by
our invitation.

Verse. 16. Be not wise in your own conceits] The wisdom here inhibited may be
understood, either in regard of the object; that is, be not overcurious to pry
into secrets unrevealed; or in respect of the subject, that is, be not
conceitedly lift up in mind.

Verse. 17. Provide things honest] That is, take care beforehand for things that
may purchase us credit, and make us to be well reputed amongst men.

Verse 18. Live peaceably with all men] with a double limitation: 1. If it be
possible; some are so froward that one cannot live peaceably with them. Quoniam
id non semper obtineri poterat, ut pax nobis cum omnibus constaret duas
particulas exceptionis loco attexuit. Si fieri potest and quantum in vobis.
Calvinus in loc. Pacem cum omnibus habere non solum difficule est, verum etiam,
ut sunt multorum hominum improbi mores, impossible, adeo ut nec ipse Paulus
qui haec praecipit, potuerit cum omnibus hominibus pacem habere; merito igitur
Apostolus duas addidit clausulas generalitatem hujus praecepti limitantes: Si
fieri potest, nempe salva justicia, pietate ac veritate; and, quod in vobis
est; ne videlicet a vobis at que ex vestra part praebeatur ulla dissensionis
occasio. Estius in loc.
2 If it be in you, or so much as lies in you that is, so far as it will stand
with faith and a good conscience; whether you translate it, have peace, keep
peace, observe peace, love peace, exercise peace; live peaceably, comprehends
them all, Par.

Verse. 20. Therefore if thine enemy hunger feed him] (...). The Greek word is
emphaticall, and signifies to feed indulgently, as Birds their young; or as a
man his friend carving to him of the best. See a Lapid^, and Par. in loc.

In so doing thou shall heap Coals of fire on his head] Coals do either
melt, or consume: The meaning is, that this mercy will be like a heap of hot
coals: either to melt their hearts, and to make them our friends; or if they
persist in their enmity, 1 Samuel 24.16. Significat justas poenas ab ijs
solvenlas, qui been de se merentes odio habent. Cham. tom 1. l. 15. c. 1.
Sensus est: si aliter illa tanta tua patientia ac beneficentia ad meliorem
mentem revocari non potest, gravis ei impendet poena. Grotius in loc. vide
Estium.
to add fuel to their torments in Hell.

Verse. 21. Be not overcome of evill] That is sin; be not made to sin
Vincitur a malo, id est ab action mala, qui malos imitatur. Grotius. Vincitur
a malo (ut docet Thomas 2.2. quest. 108. art. 1.) qui vult peccare in alium,
quia ille peccavit in ipsum. Estius in loc. Elegans Antimetabole, qua velut
epilogo claudit exhortationem ^uperiorem de non ulciscentis injurijs. Id. ib.
by the sin of another: when another man has done evil against me, or any
dear to me in word or deed; I must not therefore fall into sin or forsake my
duty. One is then overcome with evil, when his mind is so possessed with the
thought of the injury that he has received, that his judgment is perverted,
and his passion disturbed by it; and this may be either suddenly, and for a fit
in anger; or habitually in malice. It is a metaphore taken from war and
combating. 1. To prevent an objection, that it is no b^senesse, but rather a
bravery of Spirit, not to revenge. 2. To show that we shall be assaulted;
therefore we had need to arm and strengthen our selves against it; fight for
it.

But overcome evil with good] Evill] That is, the injuries done to us in word
or deed; good] That is, courteous, righteous, humble, kind behavior.

Overcome] Eanestly desire, and constantly labor by our humility, love, 1 Samuel
26.21.25.
kindness to make them ashamed of their unkindnesse; by our faithfulness, and
care of our duty, to make them forbear doing evil.

CHAPT. XIII.
Verse. 1. LEt every soul Si omnis anima, and vestra. Quis vos excipit ab
universitate? Si quis tentat excipere, tentat decipere. Pontifices Romani
cavillantur hic and 1 Pet. 2.13. non contineri personam praecipientis, uti
Petri and Pauli, sed refutantur a Chrysostomo, qui ait etiam Apostolos ipsos,
nedum caeteros hoc nomine (omnis anima) comprehendi.
That is, Every man, an Hebrew synecdoche; then the Clergy as well as others,
none are exempted.

Be subject] The Greek word signifies to be subordinate, where is insinuated
the order of government; Chrysostom notes that he says not, be obedient; but
be subject, which is a general word comprehending all other duties and
services.

To the higher (or supereminent) powers] When they were at worst. He calls
the civil Magistrates powers (says Pareus) because they are armed with power
against others. And he calls them powers, rather then Kings, Princes, (says
he) that he may show, that he speaks not so much of the persons, as of the
order it self.

Verse. 2. Whosoever therefore resisteth] The Greek word notes such a resisting
as when a man is contrary to the order established; (...) resists the
Ordinance of God] Here the Greek word translated to resist] signifies to stand
against, a military word.

Verse. 4. Upon him that does evill] Any evil, civil, religious; all laws
propounded without limitation must be interpreted in their latitude.

Verse. 7. Render therefore to all their dues, etc.] Chrysostom observes well,
that the Apostle says render] not give, nihil eniur gratuite dat qui hoc
fecerit, for it is our duty to yield obedience in all things to the Magistrate.

Tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custome] For the most part,
these two words (...) and (...) are confounded, Juter tributum and vectigal,
Grace (...), ita grammatici distinguunt, quod illud pro regione seu praedijs,
hoc pro mercibus expertandis importandisve pendatur. Estius. Latin tributum
dicitur a tribuendo vel contribuendo. Vectigal a vehendo, quia solvitur ex his
quae advehuntur, vel evehuntur. Cornel. a Lap. vide Sculceti exercit. Evang. l.
1. Cap. 17.
and indifferently taken for any kind of tribute, or payment made to the
Governors: Yet to speak distinctly, there are two kinds of tribute, which is
either laid upon the persons, called (...) poll-monie Matthew. 17 25. or upon
their substance, and was due for commodities brought in; and this is (...) as
the etymon of the word shows.

Verse 8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another] Love is such a
desperate debt Est autem argute dictum: Caetera debita solvuntur nec manent:
dilectionis debitum semper and solvitur and manet. Grotius in loc.
as a man can never discharge himself of.

Verse. 9 Thou shall not commit adultery thou shall not kill, thou shall not
steal, etc.] The Apostle (says Grotius) rehearses the commandments here in
that order, in which the Lxx. rehearses them in Exodus. It is observable
(says Pareus) that he rehearses the precept about coveting in one word, Elton
on the fifth Commandment. Vide Cornel. a Lap.
as thou shall not cover; this shows it is but one Commandment. The Apostle
rehearses here only five Commandments of the second Table, and omitteth that
Commandment, honor thy Father, and thy Mother, etc. Because the Apostle had
in this Chapter, treated before of the duty toward higher powers, and
superiors, under which Parents are comprehended.

And if there be any other Commandement] viz. Of the same nature, requiring
that which we owe one to another, Grotius. 25. Exodus, 1.4.5.
viz. to honor Parents, and other things which are in the Law, but out of the
Decalogue.

Briefly comprehended] For the whole Law commands nothing but the love of God,
and our neighbor.

Verse. 10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law] The love of God fulfills the Law,
1. Reductive, because we fulfill all Commandments for the love of God. 2.
Effective, he who loves the Lord, is ready to obey him. 3. Formaliter, all
our actions should be referred to his glory.

Verse. 11. For now is our salvation nearer then when we beleeved] The Apostle,
Confert incrementa cum initijs fidei, compares the increasing of faith with
the beginning; here he persuades to newness of life ab utili, from that which
is profitable; we are now come nearer the mark, then when we began to believe,
and therefore it behooves us to be the more earnest; Nunc propior salus nobis
adest, quam eo tempore quo credere coepimus: ut ad tempus reseratur quod fidem
praecessit. Calvinus.
as those which run a race, the nearer they come to the mark, the faster they
run, least any should out strip them.

Verse. 12. Cast off the works of darknesse] That word cast off] implies two
things. 1. Haste. 2. Hatred, as Esaias 30.22. and 31.7. sins are called works.
1. In reference to the wages. 2. The number of darknesse] because they begin in
inward darkness, go on to outward, and end in utter darkness.

Verse. 13. Honestly] Or decently, 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. That is, order all our
actions, and the whole course of our life mannerly. Rioting and drunkennesse]
Giving ones self to excessive eating and drinking. (...) sunt nocturnae
amationes. (...). Nam and potari solet de nocte. 1 Thessalonians. 5.7. Grotius.


Chambering] That which we translate Chambering, is properly lying in Bed, long
lying; (...) est congressus viri cum muliere. Grotius.

Wantonnesse] The beginning of concupiscence, giving ones self to dalliance,
and such behaviors; as feed, and provoke lust; vox Graeca (...) satis late
patens, and omnia comprehendens quae lascive sunt sed hic ea quae sunt contra
sexuum decoruna. Grotius.

Verse. 14. Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.] 1.
(...) to make projects for it.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse 1. TO doubtful disputations] We should forbear (in our Christian
conference) disputes about things doubtful, and fall to exhorting, admonishing
and edifying one another. Verse 4. Quode^s dictum intelligitur qui volebant non
de factis manifestis, sed de cordibus alienis judicare. Aug. de bapt. Contra.
Donat. l. 2. c. 17.


Let every man be fully perswaded] The word which the Apostle uses* V. 5.
aestimat] Jd est, contend^t, una^ d^em esse alte^o praestantiorem, alius
c^nt^ndit omnes esse pares. De Dieu. Nos existimamus verbum (...) hic esse
Hebraeorum Dun, quod non judicare tantum sed and litigare, disceptare, litem
and causam agere, eam que tueri significat, ut Psalm. 54.3. De Dieu in loc.
signifies not to abound in sense, as the vulgar translates it; but to be
assuredly persuaded in heart of that which is done. See 22. verse (...) is a
metaphorical word, and seems to be borrowed from a Ship under full sail,
that has both wind and tide with it, to carry it with a straight and speedy
course to the desired point, and nothing to hinder it; quasi plenis velis
feratur. Piscat.

Verse. 9. Might be Lord] Greek one word, that he might Lord it, or rule them as
his.

Verse. 12. So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God] This
account is, 1. Universal, every one. 2. Necessary, shall give. 3. Strict, an
account to God. 4. singular, of himself: That is, of all his thoughts, words,
deeds, passed in his whole life; and of all things which concern his person,
calling, or actions.

Verse. 17. Meat and drink] That is, has not such need of such indifferent
things as these are; but righteousness, and peace, Some interpret it of the
Kingdom of glory as Chrysostom; these differences about the lawfulness of
meats, and drinks, will not bring you to heaven; it is rather to be
understood of the Kingdom of grace, the power of godliness consists not in
these things.
and joy in the Holy Ghost] those are the essential things to be respected of
all such as are the subjects of that kingdom of grace.

Righteousnesse] Of Christ, the assurance of our justification before God.

Peace] Of conscience, which proceeds from this assurance, and joy in the Holy
Ghost] which proceeds from them both. So Mr. Perkins.

Verse. 22. Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God] By faith the
Apostle means a persuasion in things indifferent; the meaning is, if thou
be in thy self persuaded, a thing is indifferent, use they liberty to thy
self, have faith with thy self; Doctor Tailor. Faith here signifies
knowledge, and persuasion of our Christian liberty, of which before verse 5.
and 14. called knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.7.11. Par.
but boast not of it to the offense of another.

Verse. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sinne] Whatsoever a man does, whereof
he is not certainly persuaded in judgment, and conscience, out of Gods word,
Perkins. Quicquid fit reluctante and vacillante conscientia peccatum est. Faith
is here taken for a persuasion of conscience, say Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Theodorere, Theoph. Oecumen, Calvin, and others.
that the thing may be done, it is sin.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. BEeare] (...), not only to tolerate and support their infirmities sed
in se suscipere ut curent; but to take them in hand to cure them. Gloss.
interlin. Similitudo ducta ab itinerum socijs, quorum validiores qui sunt,
minus validos part sarcinarum levant. Grotius. Metaphora ab onere vel mole,
quam columnae sust^ritant, sicut Galat. 6.2. Pareus in loc.
It is a metaphore taken from the fashion of building, where the Pillars do
carry the weight, and burden of the house; or the frame of man's body, where the
bones bear up the flesh.

Verse. 2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification]
It was necessary for the Apostle, to limite his precept in this matter; for in
another place, man-pleasing is condemned, meaning the excess of it; when one
does chiefly, or ly aim at this to give men content.

Verse. 4. Whatsoever things were written] Whether precepts, promises,
threatenings, examples; aforetime] in the old Testament, and then much more in
the new.

Learning] That is, Heavenly learning.

Through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope] True hope to
come to heaven is obtained by patience.

Verse. 9. As it is written, For ^his cause I will confess to thee among the
Gentiles, and sing unto thy name] The Apostle alleges this Text as a proof
of the conversion and calling of the Gentiles; and therefore by nations here
are meant those heathen nations, which were at that time strangers from God.
This place fitly serves to prove the conversion of the Gentiles. David gave
thanks to God before the Gentiles, that is, he did it presently, upon his
victories in the place he sang praise to God; and that exercise did bring on
some proselytes. But secondly, he does it and meant that he should do it
continually in the use of those Psalms and Songs which he did make by the
Gentiles. Thirdly, this looks higher also then David, viz. to Christ who did,
and does praise God before and among the Gentiles, by the Ministry of his
Apostles.

Verse. 12. A root of Jesse] It is so called because then the family was
obscure, when Christ sprang out of it, as the root of the trees lies hid in the
earth; and Jesse is named rather then David, because the Kingdom of David was
then ceased, only the family of Jesse still remained.

Verse. 13. The God of hope] Both objective, because he is the only object of
our hope, 1 Timothy 6.17. and effective, he only is the author, and worker of it.

(...) quanquam ab honoris appetitu originem trahit, usu tamen traductum est ad
id omne quod studio magno ac contentione agimus. Ita enim usurpat Plato,
Xenophon, Plutarchus, alij, and noster Apostolus. 2. Cor. 5.9. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
Grotius.
Verse. 20. Srived] (...). It signifies an high ambition to Preach the Gospel.

Vide Bezam. Jackson on Jer. 7.16.
Verse. 30. Strive together] (...) simul contendere. The word signifies to
strive to the shedding of blood, see Luke 22.44.

Verse. 31. Them that do not believe The word signifies both unbeleevers, and
disobedient.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 3. GReet Priscilla and Aquila] Aquila and Priscilla his wife were Jews,
and of the same Trade with Paul; De Launay, sur les Romans. Pareus. Acts.
18.2.3. So Col. 4.15. Phil. 2. Bish. Dav. and Mr. Cot^o^. vide Bezam.
Tent-makers for the Soldiers. Priscilla is here named first, as she is, Act.
18.18. 2 Timothy 4.18. whence it appears, that she was a very virtuous woman; and
perhaps to be preferred before her husband for piety.

Verse. 5. Greet the Church that is in their house] Sometimes it may be the
whole Church was met together in some eminent man's family, yet withal it
includes that the Family it self was a Church of God.

Hanc vocem non accipit in significatione propria and usitata, sed latius
extendit ad eos omne^ qui non unam tantum ecclesiam instituunt, sed promulgando
ubique Evangelio impendunt operam. Calvinus in l^c. vide Estium. See John
13.16. 2 Cor. 8.23. It may be they were employed by Saint Paul, or Saint Peter
about the Gospel at Rome. Mr. Thorndikes Right of the Church in a Christian
State, Chap. 2. p. 73. See more there.
Verse. 7. Who are of note among the Apostles] The sense may be, they were well
known to the Apostles; but it is more probable, the word Apostles is to be
taken in a large signification, for such as were messengers of the Church. Mr.
Ball.

Verse. 16. Salute one another with a holy kisse] That is, with such a kiss as
becomes Saints; as it is the fashion among us for men meeting with their
friends to shake hands, so was it among the Jews, as appears by the many
places in both Testaments, for men to kiss men at meeting, and parting.
Osculum, frequens ac pervulgatum benevolentiae symbolum fuisse apud Judaeos,
passim ex Scripturis liquet. Illud in morem transi^t apud veteres ut Christiani
ante Coenae communicationem se mutuo oscularentur, ad testandam e^ signo
amicitiam. Hinc flu^it^ritus ille qui body est apud Papistas, osculandae
patinae. Calvinus in loc. Vide Estium.


In the Primitive times Christians before the receiving of the Communion kissed
each other; which fashion for some abuse was prudently laid down: instead
whereof is the superstitious kissing of the Pax in the Church of Rome.

Verse. 17. Mark them] (...). Vulg. and Beza ut observetis, Erasm.
consideretis, Syrus and Arabs. Caveatis ab iis qui, etc. sic (...) accipitur
Luc. 11.35. de Dieu in loc. Id est, attente and diligenter, quasi hosts e
specula observetis. Beza in loc.
The word signifies such a marking as a Watchman uses that stands on a
Tower, to descry enemies, he marketh diligently all comers, and gives notice
accordingly for the saving of the City, whence Episcopacy say some.

And avoid them] viz. After admonition and good means used for their
reclaiming. Titus 3 10.

Verse. 19. Wise unto that which is good, and simple (or harmless) concerning
evill] wise to procure good to your selves, innocent in bringing evil on any.

Verse. 20 Bruise] the Greek word signifies to break or crush a thing to pieces
being applied to the feet, it notes that breaking or crushing, which is by
stamping upon a thing.

Verse. 25. Establish you] Paul often attributes this Greek word to God, as 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.17. and 3.3. 1 Pet. 5.10. elsewhere he uses the same
word concerning men viz. in their degree and order, which men do by word and
example.

Kept secret] (say some) from Jews; rather thus, comparatively hidden; Dr.
Sclater.
being never so clearly made known to the sons of men. Ephesians. 3.5.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE First Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the CORINTHIANS.
CHAP. I.
Corinthus ex angusto Achaiae limite hinc Ionium, inde Aegeum prospectans mare,
ex commercils magnas adepta divitias. Grotius.

Ibi Lais de tota Gracia tributa exegit libidinis, denis drachmarum millibus
usum sui indicans, and mortua sepulchrum habuit omnium Poetarum versibus
celebre. Id. ibid. Vbi Demosthenes mulietculae, pro horario usu corporis,
deposcenti octona auri talensa, respondit, Ego tanti poenitere non emo. Cornel.
a lap.


THe City of Corinth was a famous metropolis in Achaia; notable for wisdom.
Periander one of the seven wise men is celebrated for a Corinthian; and Tulle
calls it lumen Graeciae, the light or eye of Greece.

The Corinthians were notedly infamous for lust and wantonness, hinc (...) pro
scortari.

Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum. Therefore Paul in his first
Epistle writes much against it, 1 Cor: 5.1, 9. and 10.8. and 11.6, 9. and 18.7.

Both these Epistles to the Corinthians (says a Lapide) were written before
that to the Romans.

This first Epistle to the Corinthians in weight of argument is far inferior
to the precedent Epistle to the Romans; but in variety of things it ought to be
judged equal, and in order of time before the other. Morton.

(...) proprie aptari and coadunari significat: quemadmodam membra humani
corporis optima symmetria inter se cohaerent. Calvinus.
Verse. 10. Be perfectly joined together] The Greek word signifies such a
joining as when a bone out of joint is perfectly set right again. As Gal. 5.1.
Restore set him in joint.

See Mr. Burrh. on Hos. p. 171. Vult uni Christo magisterium ita asserere in
Ecclesia, ut ab eo pendeamus omnes: ut unus inter nos dominus ac magister
nominetur, ne ullum contra hominis nomen appenatur. Calvinus.
Verse. 12. I am of Paul, and I of Apollo and I of Cephas, and I of Christ] That
is, I am Paul's Disciple, follower; and so in the rest. Chrysostom interprets
the place so that the last words should be the Apostles own crossing the
Corinthians, showing them in his own example who they must be called by.

See Act. 26.16. Potissimum ad praedicandum, nam hic aliquos nominat qiuis ipse
baptizasset. Vossius. Dicit has non fuisse praecipuas suae functionis parts:
sibi non docendi munus praecipue esse injunctum cui incumberet. Nam quum dicit
Christus Apostolis, ite, praedicate, and baptizate, baptismum adjung^t
doctrinae tanquam accessi nem duntaxat vel appendicem: ut semper doctrinae
prior locus maneat. Calvinus. vide Estium.
Verse. 17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospell] Paul does
not simply deny that he was sent to baptize, for it was enjoined to all the
Apostles, Matthew. 20.19. to preach and baptize; but comparatively; q. d. he
rather enjoined me preaching then baptizing See John 9.41.

Verse. 18. The preaching of the Crosse] That is, the Gospel; not only because
the cross followed it, but also in that it is the doctrine of Christ crucified.

Verse. 20. The Disputer] Or, Inquirer; such as will receive no more in religion
then they can see reason for. See Beza. Fullers Miscel. lib. 3. cap. 7. The
Jewish Doctors, that were still inquiring among themselves the truth of the
Scriptures at their meetings, and yet believed not. Thorndike.

Verse. 21. The foolishness of preaching] an Hebraisme, for foolish preaching;
that is, Sic vocat Evangelium concessione ironica; non quod sit, sed quod talis
habetur mundo. Paraeus.
preaching which the most men and wisest men in the world esteem contemptibly
of, 1 Cor. 1.23. for so he expounds himself, verse. 18. carnal men and those
which shall perish, account it so. 2 The preaching of such men as have no show
with them in the world, such as the Apostles were Acts 4 13. 3 Such a kind of
preaching as is plain, and without all ostentation and show of humane gifts, 1
Cor. 2.1. 4. M. Hilders^m.

Verse. 23. Christ crucified] That is, we teach that life and salvation is come
to the world by the cross and death of Christ. Pareus. He was crucified naked,
In the Primitive Church it was a contemptible thing both among the Jews and
Grecians to be a Christian; to the one the Gospel was a stumbling block, to
the other a laughingstock. Perkins.
so he must be preached.

Unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishnesse] The one
expected a glorious estate of the Messiah in the world; the other deemed it a
foolish and absurd thing to expect life out of death, glory to issue out of
such extreme contempt. The Jews call (...) the Gospel aven gilion, that is, a
revelation of vanity; and the Greeks traduce it for a doctrine of novelty, yea
for a doctrine of devils, Acts 17.18.

Verse. 26. Are called] Is not the Word preached to these as well as to the
poor? There is a twofold call: 1 External, by the word; this the rich and
mighty have more then the poor. 2 Internal; so few of them are called, the
word is not effectual upon them.

Verse. 30. Wisdome] that relates principally to the understanding; Quae nomina
ex usu linguae Hebraea designant carum rerum authors, quarum nomitat sunt.
Itaque Christus eo mediator noster est quod Doctor, Justificator,
Sanctificator, and Redemptor noster est, quorum, primum ad Propheticum,
secundum ad Sacendotale, tertium and quartum ad ejus munus regium pertinet.
Cameron. vide Pareum.
all saving knowledge by which we are converted; and all the wisdom and
prudence we have in our practical understanding, which we receive at
beginning, in progress, and perfection hereafter, we have from Christ.
Secondly, mark the phrase: It is not said, who by Gods appointment makes us
wise, but, is made unto us wisdom, in the abstract; to show, that out of Christ
we have nothing but folly, Romans 1.22. ^ To let us know, that in him we have an
all sufficiency; there is nothing in him but admirable wisdom. Col. 2.2, 3. 2
Righteousnesse] Justification, pardon of sin, imputation of his
righteousness, acceptance of our persons; we are looked upon in him as
accepted, reconciled. 3 Sanctification] Mortification, and Vivification, hatred
of sin, and love to the duties of God. 4 Redemption] which comprehends a
freedom from all misery, sin, temptation, everlasting damnation; all
comforts, and refreshings by Gods Spirit, and everlasting salvation.

Verse. 31. Glorieth] this is a lifting up of the heart on apprehension of some
good, In Domino gloriari est totius lalutis nostrae summam solius Dei
misericordiae, and Christi gratiae transcribere. Paraeus.
whether real or apparent. ^here are four acts of Spiritual glorying: 1 Self
is abased. 2 Christ and free grace magnified. 3 All fullness is seen in Christ.
4 All this is applied to himself, verse. 30.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 2. TO know] (...), that is, to teach, preach, regard, or take notice of.
To know Christ crucified is to seek comfort and salvation in the cross of
Christ by faith. The Antinomians causelessly urge this place, Docere, Cameron.
in Myroth ad Marck. 13.32. Profiteri Illyr. Beza. praedicare. Calvin.
to show that Christ and faith only are to be preached: not the law, nor
repentance. The Apostle opposes not the matter (for he himself preached other
doctrine in this Epistle) but the manner; preached Christ plainly without
humane eloquence, verse. 1. He resolved with himself to show no other learning
but this, M Hildersam on Psalm. 51.7.
to set forth to them in the best manner he could the sufficiency of Christ,
and the benefit and fruit that comes to God by them; Downam.
viz. Not only the truth of it, but the virtue and efficacy of it in himself
in the crucifying of his flesh with the lusts thereof.

Verse. 4. With intising words of man's wisdom] that is, least men should ascribe
that to humane eloquence and wisdom, Dr. Tailor on Titus.
which is proper to the simplicity of the Gospel. Paul's condemes not all
affectionate and eloquent preaching (for he was the eloquentest preacher of all
the Apostles; and therefore it was one of Austins three wishes, to hear Paul
preach in a Pulpit) but he condemns the flattering kind of affected
Rhetoric, whereby men preached themselves, tickled men's ears, and delighted
them with lascivious phrases of oratory.

But in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power] That is, a secret power and
authority of the Spirit, Tropus est quem Hendiadem vocant; spiritus and
virtutis, id est virtutis Spiritus sancti: quam videlicet Spiritus sanctus
suppeditat. Estius.
going with his Word, enlightening with his own other men's understandings, and
heating by his own other men's affections.

Verse. 9. Eye has not seen nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him] This
must not be understood of the joys of Heaven (as it is interpreted by some)
but of the Gospell-joy, See M. Ball of Faith. p. 137.
of the Wine and fatness already prepared, and now revealed to the believer,
by the Spirit.

Verse. 11. For what man knows the things of a man] That is, those things
which lie in the heart of man, but the Spirit of a man which is in him.

Verse. 12. The things that are freely given us of God] that is, our election,
vocation, justification, Ephesians. 1.18.
sanctification, and glorification.

Verse. 14. The natural man] that is, whosoever is endued with the faculties of
nature only. Hominem (...) vocat in puris naturalibus consideratum, qui
spiritu Dei vacat, and de rebus divinis ex intelligentia caruli judicat.
Pareus. Hoc non tantum ad intellectum hominis naturalis referendum est, ac si
sensus esset, non capit, intelligit, sed and ad voluntatem. Sensus enim est,
homo animalis non recipit quae sunt Spiritus, non attendit, non curat, non
^n^at Spiritualia, nec fideli cord amplestitur ea quamdiu manet naturalis;
sequitur enim stultitia siquidem illi sunt, hoc est, ut res frivolas and
stultas spernit, quam vis minime intelligere aut percipere valeat. Mayerus in
Philol. Sac.
Calvin. (...), the souly man, he that does most excolere animam.

The things of the Spirit of God] That is, which are in the Word by Gods Spirit
plainly revealed.

Discerned] (...) est vox forensis, a law term, Acts 4.9.2.19. and is wont to
be applied to the trial of doctrine, Acts 17.2. Grotius.

Verse. 15. He that is spirituall] That is, one that is regenerate by the Spirit
of God. M. Perkins. He opposes the Spiritual to the natural man. Calvin,
Paraeus. By the Spiritual (though he oppose him to the natural man) he means
not every one which has the Spirit, and is regenerate, but him which has the
Spirit in a greater measure then any other of the regenerate have; as appears
by the opposition he makes Chap. 3.1. between them which are spiritual and
them which are babes in Christ.

Judges all things] that is, is not only certain of the truth which himself
holds, M. Hilders^m on Psalm. 51. As in a School the Master judges of every
boys Theme and Exercise, but they are not able to judge of him.
but can judge and clearly discern, and reject the error that is held by
other men. But he is judged of no man) q. d. He is so certainly assured of the
truth that he holds, that the contrary judgment of other men, whatsoever
they be, cannot oversway him, or cause him to stagger. The Papists say that
this Spiritual man is the Pope of Rome; because he alone is the Supreme Judge
of the Church; judges all, and is judged of none. But when the Apostle wrote,
there was no Pope.

Verse. 16. We have the mind of Christ] that is, his sentence and judgment by
himself delivered unto us. See 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. Vide Bezam. It is uncertain
whether he speak of the faithful in general, or of Ministers only. Pareus
says he speaks of all the faithful. Calvin would have it specially to ref^r
to Paul and other faithful Ministers.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. BAbes] Such in whom grace is true, but very weak, and corruption
strong, 2 Epistle John. 1. Heb. 5.13. in far greater measure Carnal then
Spiritual; for they had not been so much as Babes, if they had been altogether
Carnal.

Verse. 3. Are ye not carnal and walk as men] Or according to men, (...)] Hoc
est juxta voluntatem seu consuetudinem hominum carnalium. conser Romans 8. v. 27.
Contrariam phrasin (...). Vorstius.
not according to God, and the rules of Christians; but according to the will
and rule of Carnal men.

Verse. 5. Who then is Paul? and who is Apollo? Se and Apollon nominat potius
quam alios, declinandae invidiae causa. Quid aliud enim habent ministri omnes,
inquit, nisi ut sua praedicatione vos ad fidem adducant? Calvinus.
but Ministers by whom ye beleeved] Paul of high calling; Apollos of excellent
gifts.

Verse. 6. I have planted Apollo watered] A metaphore from Husbandmen. Paul
planted, that is, preached; Apollo watered, that is, Baptized, says Austen;
Papa Hadrianus, cum Lovanij collegium magnifico sumitu construxisset, vestibulo
aureis literis inscripsit, Trajectum plantavit: ibi erat natus. Lovanium
rigavit: ibi literas didicerat: Caesar dedit incrementum: ab hoc erat ex
praeceptore Cardinalis Creatus. Hominis vanitatem redarguit alius subscribens,
Hic deus nihil fecit. Pareus in loc.
rather Paul began, and Apollo built upon it. Paul Preached fundamental
doctrine, as Apollo^ taught them how to improve the doctrines to spiritual
uses.

But God gave the increase] That is, all the success and fruit of their labor
is from him.

Verse. 7. Neither is he that planteth any thing neither he that waters, Any
thing] As a principal agent, but as an instrument.
but God that gives the increase] q. d. as excellent gifts as these men had,
they did nothing in this work, the wholesuccesse is of God.

Verse. 9. Laborers Eximium elogium Ministerij, quod cum per se agere possit
Deus, nos homunciones tanquam adjutores adsciscat, and tanquam organis utatur.
Calvinus.
together] In the Ministry, not conversion.

Verse. 11. For other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ] He is the only foundation personal; the Scripture is the
foundation doctrinall. See Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 21.14. vide Pareum in loc.

Verse. 12, 13. Now if any man build on this foundation, Gold, Silver, precious
Stones, Wood, Hay, Stuble; Every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day
shall declare it because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try
every man's work of what sort it is] The Pope makes this place the principal
foundation of his Purgatory (although the Apostle here treats of a probatory,
and not a purgatory fire) Saint Austen makes answer, that this sentence is
very obscure, and to be reckoned among those things which Peter says are hard
to be understood in Paul's writings, which men oug^t not to pervert unto their
own destruction; and freely confesses, that in this matter he would rather
hear more intelligent, and more learned then himself: Vide Bezam. and
Mortonum.
yet this he delivers for his opinion, that by Wood, Hay, and Stubble is
understood, that over great love which the faithful bear to the things of
this life; and by fire that temporary tribulation, Bishop Usher. The building
of precious matter upon the foundation, is manifestly to be understood, of pure
doctrine sincerely delivered. The building of combustible matter, is vain
affectation of eloquence, and other trifling matter; not taking away the
foundation, but handling it unworthily. The Apostle says the fire shall try
every man's work. So that if this fire should signify Purgatory (as Saint
Augustine says, expressly it cannot) and if every man should follow his work,
no man should escape Purgatory. Doctor Fulke Annotat. on Rhem. Test. vide
Calvinum, and Pareum in loc.
which causes grief unto them by the loss of those things upon which they
had too much placed their affections. Either sound and profitable doctrines
Bishop Down. of Justif. l. 4. Ruttherford against pretended liberty of
conscience. Chap. 27. Estius expounds it of the Lords trying of the Son^ of
Levi. Mal. 3. See Rev. 3.10.
which he compares to Gold and Silver; or unsound and unprofitable, compared
to Hay and Stubble. He makes the judgment that tries all to be fire (whether
it be the last judgment or fiery afflictions it is no great matter) but good
doctrine will bide the trial of fire, and not be consumed; and the man
rewarded for his so building; and bad doctrine will be burnt, and not abide the
Lords fire when it is tried; for it will vanish in the day of trial, and yield
the sower of such doctrine no comfort; yet he himself keeping the foundation
Christ shall be saved, but he shall be sadly afflicted for his fruitless
building.

Verse. 18. Let him become a fool that he may be wise] That is, let him be
willing to learn even of his inferiors. Mr. Perkins, id est, deponat inanem
persuasionem, non indulgeat ineptijs humanis in rebus divinis, ne moleste ferat
a mundo se haberi pro studo. Pareus.


(...) Est manu capere and firmiter tenere. Pareus.
Verse. 19. Catcheth] And keeps as beasts in a grin, so the word signifies.

Craftinesse] (...) when they have done their utmost (as the word imports) to
bring about their devilish devices.

Verse. 20. The Lord knows the thoughts] (...), not the simple thoughts, but
the most prudent discourses, and counsels of the world.

Of the wise] That is, of such as excel in natural gifts, that are the
choicest and most picked men.

Verse. 22. Paul, Apollo or Cephas] Variety of gifts. He illustrates the
universal by an enumeration; A Christian has interest to and right in all
these things 1. Entirely or wholly, Ephesians. 1.23. and 2.10. Col. 3.11. 2
Refinedly the curse is taken away, Gal. 3.13. Prove. 10.22. 3 Really. 1 Cor.
7.31. Ephesians. 1. ult. 4. Safely, 1 Prove. 33. 5. Serviceably, Romans 8.28. 6.
Satisfyingly, 22. Psalm. 26.
highest and lowest Ministers are yours. All things are yours, the whole world,
all conditions are then yours, life and death; all events are yours, present in
this, and future in another life.

Things present, things to come] the comforts of grace in this life, and the
assurance of glory hereafter.

Hoc est, omnia propter vos sunt, and ad vestram ordinantur utilitatem. Estius.
All are yours] That is, all things tend to your good, and help forward your
happiness and salvation. Doctor Gouge.

Verse. 23. Ye are Christs] 1. By gift. 2. Purchase. 3. Conquest. 4. Covenant.
5. Communion.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 3. OF man's judgement] Or day Dies hominis pro judicio hominis, sive pro
ultimo quo dies hominum definiuntur, die ponitur, cui dies Domini opponitur.
Heinsius. Vbi diem posuit pro judicio, ex Cilicum phrasi (ipse enim Cilix
fuerat) nam dies dici rei consueverit? Sed hoc non Cilicum, sed Hebraeorum
idioma esse, qui diem Domini vocant judicium ait Drus. in annotat. N.T. Glass.
Philol. Sac. Hieronynus putat hoc and alia quaedam esse ex Cilicum, ubi Graecam
primum linguam didicerat Paulus, idiomate. Illis enim diem solitum dici pro
judicio: nec mirum, cum and Latin dicamus diem dicere. Grotius in loc. Dei
organum Paulus, quem Graecarum rerum gnarum perinde ut linguae fuisse constat,
suas habet locutiones patheticas and interdum singulares. Diem humanum vocat
hominis judicium, ex interpretum consensu, metonymice, quia judicijs stati sunt
dies. Vnde and phrasis Dicere diem, pro in jus vocare, and Dies Domini, pro
judicio extreme. Sic (...), 2 Cor. 2. v. 9. verbum esse Cilicum, Hieron. notat.
and probat Dounaeus ad Chrysostom. Hom. 23. Diem metonymice pro judicio dici
interpretum consensu. Hinc Dies Domini pro judicio extremo. Dieterici
Antiquitat. Bibl.
that is, I expect another day besides man's day. q. d. Man carries all before
him now, he has all the doings now at this day, and he may judge and censure
as he pleases; it is but his day, and I pass not for man's day.

Verse. 4. I know nothing by my self, yet I am not hereby justified] That is, I
have walked so in my calling since I was an Apostle and Minister of the
Gospel, as I am not privy nor guilty to my self of any negligence therein. So
Calvin, Pareus, a Lapide and Mr. Perkins. q. d. Though I should discern no
defect in my own righteousness (as for the main bent of my heart and course of
my life I do not) yet dare I not plead it before God, nor hope to be justified
by it; for God can epsy much more in me, then I can in my self; so one
expounds it.

Verse. 5. Judge nothing before the time] He speaks of rash judging of hidden
things, as Calvin, P. Martyr, Bullinger, Marlorat, Pareus, Beza, Estius
interpret it. Until the Lord come] That is, to judgment. Estius and others.
Who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkenesse]Whether good or
bad, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts] whether just, or
unjust. And then shall every man (who is praise worthy) have praise of God]

Verse. 6. Transferred] (...) is properly to change the habit as we may see, 1 Samuel 28.8. thence it is translated to speech, which seems to say one thing,
and mean another. Hoc est, Schemate quodam sermonis in nos transtuli. Vorstius.

Verse. 7. For who makes thee to differ from another] Episcupius (a great
Arminian) says ego meipsum diserevi. I made my self to differ, viz. by the
improvement of nature.

Verse. 8. You are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us]
That is, you exalt your selves above us here, as much as a King is above his
own subjects, you are supreme. He speaks this ironically as the next words
show. Vide Grotium
And I would to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you] I would be
glad to share in those gallant Gospel notions you so much brag of; but I
fear your portion is but small in true spiritual Gospell-knowledge, except in
your own conceits, and there you abound sufficiently.

Verse. 9. God has set forth us the Apostles last] Paul calls himself and
Barnabas the last Apostles, Postremi Apostoli hic dicuntur Paulus and Barnabas,
gratium Apostoli, qui postremo in loco diu post duo^ecim illos constitutos and
ipsam Christi ascensionem, ad hoc munus designati erant. Morton. Postremos haud
dubie vocat, qui in ordinem Apostolicum post Christi resurrectionem asciti
fuerant. Calvinus.
because they were last taken into the number.

We are made a spectacle Vide Calvinu^ and Dilheri Electa Sac. l. 2. c. 25.
Sumpta metaphora ab iis qui ignominiae causa cij cumducti ad mortem denique
trabuntur, unde Hieronymus legit Theatrum facti sumus, ut Graece est (...).
Chrysostomus de theatro hujus vitae, in quo coram Deo omnia agimus, intelligit.
] God has set us upon a theater or stage upon whom all the eyes of the
spectatours gaze, spectaculo proposuit. Beza. That word which Paul uses here
is borrowed from the manner of the Romans, who brought the gladiatores on the
arena to make sport to the people.

Verse. 13. As the filth of the world, Duabus vocibus omnium hominu^
objectissimos judicat. Habemur a mundo (...) and (...): net a pancis sed ab
omnibus, nec semel sed usque adhuc: id est, perpetuo. Parous. vide ibid.
and are the off-scowring] (...) signifies the dirt scraped of men's shoes; or
from the pavement of the ground; rejectamentum, so Erasmus. He has reference
to that Lament. 3.45. (...), Mr. Burroughes on Phil. 4.13. See 21 Prove. 18.
vide Dilheri Electa Sacra. l. 2. c. 25. Calvinum and Estium in loc.
the filth gathered by sweepings up and down, and cast upon the common dung --
cart in the street. Budaeus thinks those words have reference to the custom
of the heathens; who in times of infectious diseases, or public calamity,
sacrificed certain men to their Gods, for the removing those evils which were
upon them, and upon these men they did lay all the execrations of the people;
as if they had been the causes of all their misery.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. SVch fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles] It is
not meant, that the Gentiles never were infected with this sin; but that even
such as were but only Gentiles, have out of the light of reason, Bishop Lake.
Non intelligit nihil unquam tale extitisse, vel in historiis non refe^ri, de
quo compositae sint etiam tragediae, sed esse Gent^bus detestable, non secu^ ac
foedum and horrendum monstrum. Calvinus. vide Pareum.
detested and forbidden it. The Apostles phrase is remarkable, that which was
not, so much as named among the Gentiles was done by a Christian; whereas the
rule of piety is, that those sins should not be so much as named amongst
Christians, which are done by the Gentiles.

Verse. 2. Mou^ned] (...) referres to the style of mourners, and denotes the
solemnity usual among the Jews, of putting on mourning habit, and wailing
over them that were excommunicate.

Taken away] This precept is directed to the Church, Pareus has these words,
non dicit ut tolleretur e medio, sed e medio vestri, hoc est, ecclesiae. He
commands not to kill him; but to remove him from them.
whose weapons are spiritual, speaks nothing of the Magistrates duty.

Verse. 4. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together]
The authority of excommunication pertains to the whole Church; although the
judgment and execution thereof, is to be referred to the Governors of the
Church, which exercise that authority, Vnde apparet hac potestate praeditas
esse ecclesias, ut si quid est intus vitij, disciplinae severitate corrigant
vel ejiciant. Excommunicationis ergo potestas hoc loco stabilitur. Calvinus.
as in the name of Christ, so in the name of the whole Church, whereof they are
appointed governors to avoid confusion. Fulke on the Rhem. Testam. vide
Calvinum and Pareum.

Haec excommunicatio de qua agimus non est privata sed publica actio, and
unanim^ totius ecclesiae cousensu, solemni omnium vestrum conventu testato, in
publico coetu and omnium conspectu praestanda. Morton. Satanae tradi idem est
atque ex ecclesia, extra quam regnat Satan, ejectum declarari quempiam, non
tanqua^ apud Satanam permansurum, and cum eo periturum, sed contra ut miserrimi
sui status sensu permotus, resipiscat: and ita carne abolitae quae antea ipsi
dominabatur, spiritus superior evadat, ut itae salvus fiat: quod demu^ die
Domini plene in illo and electis omnibus apparebit. Beza de Presbyterio and
excommunicatione. vide Bezam in loc. Bis reperitur haec locutis Tradi Satanae,
semel hoc loco, and rursus, 1 Timothy 1.20. Quidam volunt tradere satanae esse
idem, quod miraculo^o modo e medio hominum tollere Ministerio satanae: sicut
Petrus sustulit Ananiam and Sapphiram. At Petius non est usus Ministerio
Satanae, sed virtute Christi. Alij tradere satanae volunt idem esse, quod ex
ecclesiae societate and regno Dei excludere, quod nos vocamus excommunicare.
Pareus. vide Plura ibid. Vide Calvinum and Estium.
Verse. 5. To deliver such a one unto Satan] Beza, Calvin, Pareus, a Lapide,
Estius, and Morton interpret it of excommunication. The excommunicate person
is to have his conscience terrified by being delivered unto Satan, that is,
cast out of the Church out of which Satan rules. 2. Sorrow must be wrought in
him for his sin, for the destruction of his flesh, and fleshly corruption,
which is the ground of true repentance. Neither is it any thing else then
excommunication, which the Apostle signifies by delivering to Satan, saving
that he expresses an extraordinary effect that followed in the Apostles time,
viz. that those which were put out of the Church, became visibly subject to
Satan, inflicting plagues and diseases on their bodies, which might reduce them
to repentance; which the Apostle calls the destruction of the flesh, that the
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, as 1 Timothy 1.20. For the
Apostles had power, like that which Saint Peter exercised on Ananias, and
S^pphira, thus to punish those that opposed them, as Saint Paul often
intimates. Thorndikes discourse of the right of the Church in a Christian
State, Chap. 1.

Some say he was delivered to Satan in a miraculous way to possess, or torment
him; an Apostolical power only. Vide Grotium. But that cannot be for these
reasons. 1 The Apostle says, you deliver, the Apostles did not work miracles
by others hands. 2. The punishment is answerable to the sin which was
twofold, v. 2. 3. He makes it a general ground of a duty; they must withdraw
themselves from such a one.

Verse. 6. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe] The word of God compares
sin unto leaven both in regard of the whole congregation; in that it
spreads further and further in the body of the Church, if opposition be not
made, Levit. 19.29. and also in regard of the persons self; in that it does
more and more sour and pollute the soul, till at last it have left no part
free; if the seasonable rendering of repentance prevent it not. But yet it will
not sour the congregation; so as that all their worship and service shall be
cast off by God as an abomination, that is the false gloss of some. For when
the Gospel is compared to leaven, the holy Ghost means not that if the
Gospel enter into any place, then the services of the whole congregation are
made pleasing to God (for the services of hypocrites which are many never
please him) but that the Gospel coming into a place, and converting some one
or two will go farther, and convert more and more, till it draw the whole
place at least to outward submission. The meaning is, one sinner tolerated and
winked at does infect another, till the whole society be over grown with the
like wickedness; and not that one sinner causes the service of all those with
whom it is done to become unclean or polluted.

Verse. 7. Purge out therefore the old leaven] That is, which proceeded from the
old man, and corrupt nature; though the Church of Corinth was very corrupt many
ways; yet he bids them not take the lump away, but remove the old leaven; he
bids them not forsake the Church, but stay and reform it.

Verse. 9. Not to company with fornicatours] The Greek word (...) both here and
2 Thessalonians. 3. being compounded with two praepositions notes a most familiar
acquaintance and conversation. Commisceri est familiariter versari cum aliquo,
and ejus consuetudine implicari. Calvinus. idem fere habet Morton.
See next verse.

See 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
Verse. 11. Not to keep company] That is, in a private and familiar manner.

With such a one, no not eate] That is, make him not a special intimate
friend. Cum talibus, id est, adeo vitiosis and Christianorum nomen
usurpantibus, ne epulas quidem habere communes, quod minimum est inter
amicitiae signa. vide Gal. 2.12. Grotius.
Intelligitur vel contubernium, vel interior c^nvictus. Calvinus.

This place being understood of all voluntary commerce with a scandalous
person, whereby at least I appear to countenance him in his sin, contrary to
that precept 1 Thessalonians. 5 22 Its apparent (say The answer to Suspension suspended.
some) that voluntary commerce at the Sacrament is here forbidden, as well as
at my own Table: The r^ason say they is evident; First, because he ought to be
kept from the Lords Table as well as from my Table. Secondly, because he might
easily be kept from this, as well as that; provided that private Christians,
and Church officers would both do their duties in their places. But if I do my
honest endeavor for this purpose, and cannot keep him away from the Lords
Table, the Lord accepts my will for my deed, and the guilt shall lie upon them
who have power, but want will to suspend him. I shall find to my comfort, that
to the pure all things are pure, Titus 2.15. Nor shall the wickedness of
others one j^t hinder the efficacy of the Sacrament to me, if I be a worthy
receiver.

Verse. 12. For what have I to do to judge them that are without? Interrogatio
affirmantis, q.d. omnino vestri id est officii. Quidni igitur and mei? Pareus.
vide plura. ib.
Do not ye judge them that are within?] That is, are not you by the power you
have of judging those that are within, to take away him that has done evil?
leaving to God to judge those without. Mr. Thorndike. Therefore something makes
one man to be without the Church, and another within. Where there is
differentia divisiva, there must be differentia constitutiva.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 2. Do ye not know that the Saints shall judge the world?] They shall
not judge by pronouncing a sovereign sentence of absolution or condemnation,
which is proper to Christ the Judge; Perkins on Jude.
but by assisting him (as Justices upon the Bench) both by witnessing and
assenting unto that righteous judgment.

The Saints shall not judge the world authoritatively; they are not in
commission with Christ; but three ways: 1. As members of Christ's body; he
judges as the head. 2. By their lives; as it is said of the Queen of Sheba,
she shall condemn them. 3. By an approbation of Christ's judgment, exulting in
it, Rev. 19.1, 2.

Verse 4. Pertaining to this life] The Greek word (say some) signifies rather
pertaining to life; and so they would have it rendered also in the former verse;
(...) ad vitam pertinentia.
but Luke 21.34. (...), is rendered cares of this life; and Grotius renders the
third verse here res hujus vitae.

Set them to judge who are of l^ast esteem in the Church] It is not spoken by
way of precept, commanding them to let the simplest of their brethren judge
their causes: Thorndike.
but by way of concession, they were better so to do, then to sue before
Infidels.

Verse. 7. Because ye go to law one with another] That is, so rashly as they
did, and before Infidel Judges, to the scorn of the Gospel.

Going to Law in this Chapter is not simply forbidden, but sundry abuses
observed: 1. Going to unfit Judges whom the Apostle styles unjust and
unbelievers, Dr. Gouge.
and bringing Christians before them, verse. 6. 2 Contending about small matters
and mere trifles, verse. 2. 3 Too much forwardness to Law, verse. 5. 4 Doing
wrong themselves verse. 8.

Verse. 9. Idolaters] There were two kinds of them: worshippers of Idols, that
is, Pareus.
false gods, as all the Heathens were; Or secondly, of the true God, in an
Idol or Image, as the Jews often were; and as all the Papists are at this day.

Effeminate] Or, soft. The Greek word (...) signifies soft-spirited men, Such
who are guilty of self-pollution.
men of a kind of soft carriage, apt to all wantonness.

Mollis erat facilisque viris Paeantius heroes. Abusers of themselves with
mankind] The Greek is but one compound word, (...). Paederastae. Calvin.

Verse. 10. Revilers] which dare call him with vile terms that offends them.

Extortioners] that care not what they pill to themselves by hook or crook.

Verse. 11. And such were some of you] The Apostle adds this word some (says
Estius) to moderate his speech, least he should seem to accuse all the
Corinthians of all the forementioned vices; to show that some were guilty of
some of those vices, and others of other; although the sin of Idolatry was
common to them all. Calvin thinks this particle is superfluous, after the
usual manner of the Grecians, which often use it Ornatus gratia, (...).
and not for restriction; and that the Apostle intends only that no man is
free from these evils until he be renewed by the Spirit. The plain meaning
(says he) is, that before their regeneration, some of the Corinthians were
covetous, some adulterers, some extortioners, some effeminate, some revilers:
See Mr. Pemble of Justification. Sect. 1. cap. 1. p. 11.
but now being freed by Christ, they ceased to be such. The Apostle puts them
in mind of the sins they had repented of, not to reproach them; but 1. That
they might be more able to mortify their present corruptions, Psalm. 38. 2 That
they might be more pitiful to others, Titus 3.11. and more thankful to God.

But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified] He uses three
words, says Calvin to express one thing, the more to deter them from falling
into those sins again which they had escaped. Pareus says Hisce in verbis
describit Apostolus eximia illa beneficia quae fidelibus in Spirituali lavacro
conferuntur; primo ponit ablationem sive purgationem peccati quae se habet ut
genus atque deducitur in has duas species, Justificationem scilicet and
Sanctificationem. Iustificatio purgat and abluit a reatu peccati, idque uno
momento and perfect: sanctificatio purgat ab ipsa inhaerente contagione and
sorde peccati, sed paulatim and per gradus. Epis. Dav. de justitia habituali.
c. 23.
we are to take washed generally for all the benefits of Christ; remission of
sins and regeneration by the Spirit and Blood of Christ; the other two, for
the parts of his washing; the first of which is Justification, and the other
Sanctification.

Verse. 13. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord
for the body] The Apostle propounds six reasons why we should fly
fornication: 1. Our bodies are the Lords, and must be serviceable unto him, in
this Verse, the body for the Lord; the body is ordained for the Lords use, and
ought to be employed to his glory; and the Lord for the body, to redeem and
sanctify the body as well as the soul; and consequently to rule and command
it as well as the soul, being Lord of both. 2. We look they should be raised
to glory in the last day, verse. 14. and therefore we must in the mean time keep
them honorable. 3. They are the members of Christ, verse. 15. we may not then
make them the members of an Harlot. 4. Whereas all other sins are without the
body, this directly is against the body, verse. 18. where he also bids them flee
Fornication. 5. The body is the Temple of the holy Ghost, verse. 19. and these
sins make it the Devils stie and stews. See Mr. Caryl on Job 3.1. p. 325.
6 Our bodies are bought with a price, ver. 20. and it is sacrilege not to
glorify God in the body as well as in the soul, seeing they are both alike
his.

Verse. 16. Know ye not, that he which is joined to a Harlot is one body] Paul
notes three sorts of conjunction: 1. In the flesh only, as betwixt a man and a
whore. 2. In the Spirit only, as betwixt Christ and his members, verse. 19. 3
In the flesh and the Spirit, when two faithful are married together.

Vide Bezam.
Verse. 17. Is one Spirit] one spiritual body. Pareus. rather in respect of the
bond, Gods Spirit. Beza.

Verse. 18. Sins against his own body] not because the body is used as the
instrument; then it will hold also in stealing, backbiting, swearing; rather as
Peter Martyr more eminently against the body then other sins. Or, the body is
not only the instrument, (as in other outward sins) but the object in this
sin; a man sins against his own body, Dr. Sclater. Non negatur prorsus quin
aliis quoque vitiis dehonestetur and probro afficiatur corpus nostrum: sed hoc
tantum dicitur, non ita residere in corpore nostro foeditatem ex illis, sicuti
ex scortatione. Manus quidem mea furto inquinatur vel caede: lingua vero
maledicentia aut perjurio, corpus totum ebrietate: sed scortatio maculam in
corpore impressam relinquit, qualis non imprimitur ab aliis peccatis. Calvinus.
vide Pareum.
spoiling it of that excellent honor whereto God has advanced it.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. IT is good for a man not to touch a woman] Good is opposed to that
which is incommodious or inexpedient; so Matthew. 19.10. it is expedient. See 7,
8, 27, 38, 40 verses. Commodum. Bonum dupliciter dicitur, vel oppositum vitio
seu malo morali, vel oppositum incommodo, unde saepe bonum nobis esse dicimus
quod est commodum. Wendelinus.
Conducible to those who have the gift of continency, and no settled abode, and
in times of persecution. See verse. 35.

Obj. Genesis 2.11. It is not good for man to be alone.

Sol. Paul wrote in times of persecution, which in all this Chapter he has a
special eye unto. See Calvin.

Touch] The Greek word often signifies not to touch with the hand, but to have
any commerce with another; therefore the meaning is, Eras. Piscat. Tangit
mulierem qui cum ea congreditur aut rem habet, ut Prove. 6.30. unde virgo
intacta. Drusius.
bonum est abstinere ab uxore, hoc est non ducere uxorem: It is good to
abstain from a wife, that is, not to marry.

Verse. 2. Nevertheless to avoid Fornication, let every man (viz. which has
not the gift of continency) have his own wife.

Verse. 3. Due benevolence] It is called (...) benevolence, Rem parum verecundam
verecunde notat. Eras.
because it must be performed with good will and delight; willingly, readily,
and cheerfully: It is said also to be (...) due, because it is a debt which the
wife owes to her husband, and he to her 1 Cor. 7.4. Dr. Gouge.

Verse. 5. Give your selves to fasting and prayer] He speaks here of solemn
fasting and prayer; these also are joined together, Matthew. 17.21. Acts 13. Non
dixit oretis sed vacetis precationi, quod ea res desileret animum ab omnibus
mundanis curis vacantem. Erasm. vide Bezam. Sensus est, ut omnibus soluti
avocamentis, agatis illud unum. Calvinus.


Verse. 9. To burne] That is, to have within a continual fervency of lust in
the heart. Hic uri vocat Paulus, non titillari duntaxat, sed libidine aestuare,
cui resistere nequeas. Vide Calvinum.
Earnest desires are meant, Hos. 7.4. Romans 1.27.

Vritur infoelix Dido, etc. Virgilius 4 Aeneid. Verse. 10. Unto the married I
command; yet not I, but the Lord] The Apostle delivered as from the Lord the
doctrine against separation of those equally joined in marriage; that is, from
the plain relation of God in the Old Testament. Because there is an express
Commandment of the Lords concerning this thing. Matthew. 19.6. Beza. Comparate
dicitur, non ego ex me, sed ex Christi auctoritate. Simile, Matthew. 10.20.
Grotius.


Verse. 12. But to the rest speak I, not the Lord] Which has reference to that
before, That is, the Lord had not given any such express commandment as Paul
there delivered, but by collection and interpretation of Scripture he did
gather it, and so spoke not of himself, but by the assistance of Gods Spirit.
as 40. Non ita intelligit a seipso esse quin ex Dei Spiritu hauserit; sed
quoniam nusquam de hac extabat in lege aut Prophetis certum ac expressum
verbum, praevenit hoc modo improborum calumnias, quum sibi quod dicturus erat,
tribuit. Calvinus.
verse 10. To this doubt of remaining together, where one is a believer, the
other an Infidel, I say, not the Lord, not as though Paul did resolve any
thing against the mind of God; but he gave this resolution as an Apostle under
the New Testament, which was different from the dispensations of the Lord under
the Law.

Verse. 14. Sanctified by the Husband] But she shall never be saved but by her
own faith; he sanctifies her marriage, but not her person. Vide Calvinum and
Bezam.

Now are they holy] Notwithstanding the difference of Religion in the parents,
yet the children are legitimate say some, and not bastards; Sancti non
sanctitate quadam naturali vel inhaerente, quae iis a fideli conjuge eodem
modo, quo peccatum originale communicetur, sed sanctitate externa, ex
misericordia Dei, eos pro suis reputantis, juxta promissionem nobis nostrisque
infantihus in gratiae faedere nobiscum comprehensis factam. Rivetus. Vide Bezam
and Estium.
a civil sanctity says Theophylact. That interpretation cannot stand; for
then all the children of Heathen should be illegitimate; there is a lawful
marriage where neither parents are believers; 2. This holiness is derived from
the faith of the parent; it is meant therefore of a federall holiness; the
children are taken into the parents covenant.

Verse. 15. But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart] He does not approve
or permit such a defection; but speaks this to free the innocent from scruple
in such a case.

A brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases] That he should be bound
either to follow the deserting party, By bondage the Apostle means matrimonial
subjection. Vinculi conjugalis obligatio. Beza.
or to continue unmarried. The Apostle says the innocent party is free not
only from bed and board, but from the bond of the deserter; so Pareus. But
(says he) the Apostles limitation is to be observed in such cases, viz. such
circumstances of desertion, in such a total separation of religion as was then
among the Pagans and Christians, and of which the Apostle properly speaks.

Contrary to cohabitation is desertion; when the husband departs from the wife,
or she from him, without each others good liking or privity; not for any
commodity or necessity of business, but out of dislike, and with an obstinate
purpose of not returning again. Vide Calvinum and Bezam in loc. Obstinata
desertio quamvis in part deserente non contineat justam causam Divortii
faciendi, parti tamen desertae post omnia alia media frustra tentata justam
adfert causam divortii patiendi. Apostolus 1 Cor. 7.15. disertis verbis
pronunciat partem desertam esse liberam. Qui autem liber est non est vinculo
constrictus. Ames. de consc. l. 5. c. 38. See Dr. Gouges Domestic duties,
Treatise 2.
Such a one as does so (say many worthy Divines) breaks the bond of marriage,
and sets the innocent party at liberty.

Verse. 23. Be not ye the servants of men] That is, in regard of conscience, in
opposition to me. In respect of the inward man; but the Apostle speaks not of
bodily service to men. Servos hominum vocat non eos, qui hominibus heris
civiliter serviunt: sed qui perversis earum desideriis sese accommodant, impiis
aut inhonestis hominum praeceptis morem gerunt. Pareus.
We are not to serve men as Spiritual masters, Ephesians. 6.13. not as supreme,
but as subordinate masters, Ephesians. 6.7.

Verse. 28. Such shall have trouble in the flesh] The Apostle speaks of all
times; although it be true, Intelligit labores, euras, solicitudines de augenda
re familiari, inopiam, lites, jurgia, sterilitatem, liberorum morbus,
orbitatem, and talia sexcenta, quae fert. conjugalis vita. Notanter igitur
dicit afflictiones in carne, ne delitiae carnis tantum quaerantur in conjugio.
Pareus.
most of times of persecution; because the present necessity ( v. 26.) may as
well mean the necessity of this life, as these times of trouble. Secondly, when
are we not likely to meet with days of persecution for well doing. See M.
Whatelies Care-cloth.

Terminus nauticus.
Verse. 29. The time is short] contracted or cut off; trussed up into a narrow
scantling; a metaphor from sails, when men are almost at harbor they begin to
strike their sails and fold them up together. Some think he compares the time
of our life with the time of the Patriarchs. Vide Bezam.
Some think he means it of the end of the world, (as Peter expresses it) the
end of all things is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7. he rather speaks of the duration of
man's life.

Verse 30. And they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not] The fathers on
this place made this observation, Per Flotum and Gaudium res adversas and
prosperas designat; est enim usitatum, causas per effectus notari. Calvin.
That the joys of this world are but quasi, as if they were joys; not joys
indeed, but shadows or figures, as Esaias 29.8.

As though they possessed not] That is, in respect of moderation of the
affections, and the disposition of the heart. Perkins.
They should have fewest worldly cares, by how much the times are harder.

Verse: 31. For the fashon of this world passes away] The Apostle speaking of
the world very elegantly and emphatically calls it, An accidental
Mathematical figure without solidity or substance, a show without a substance.
The word signifies such a fashion as is in a Comedy or Stage Play, where all
things are but for a while to please the eye. Vide Pareum and Bezam. Hac voce
eleganter Apostolus expressit mundi vanitatem. Nihil est firmi, inquit, aut
solidi: est enim facies tantum, vel externa apparentia, ut loquuntur. Calvinus.
(...), rather then (...), intimating thereby that this world, to speak of it
truly, is rather a matter of fashion, then of substance. Dr. Causabones
Treatise of use and custom.

Verse. 34. Holy both in body and spirit] Of Spirit, when it is either not
tempted to uncleanness; Dr. Tailor on Titus.
or being tempted, yields not; or yielding, is recovered by repentance: of
body also, when it neither exciteth, nor being excited executes uncleanesse.
He joins the sanctity both of body and Spirit, Matthew. 5.28.
because chastity is not so much a virtue of the body, as the spirit.

Verse. 39. Only in the Lord] That is, according to Gods word and direction,
and not against it, religiose and cumtimore Domini, pio affectu and cum persona
fideli. Pareus. Id est, in nomine Domini quod est indubitate Christiano, That
is, in the name of the Lord; which is without doubt to a Christian. Tertul.
vide Bezam.


Verse. 40. And I think also that I have the spirit of God] He speaks not as
if he doubted whether he had, but to reprove those who slighted him; Vtitur
verbo diluto, emphatica (...). Beza. Pareus. Non videtur ironia carere quod
dicit, existimo. Nam cum pseudo-apostoli, Spiritum Dei inflatis buccis
identidem jactarent ad autoritatem sibi arrogandam, and interea Paulo detrahere
studerent: dicit se quoque sibi videri compotem Spiritus non minus quam ipsos.
Calvinus. Vide Estium.
as if he had not the spirit of God. He does not mean (says Grotius) a
revelation, but a sincere affection of serving God, and the godly. And I think
that I also shall be yielded to have the Spirit of God, as well as your
glorious and boasting teachers. Doctor Halls Paraphrase.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 2. ANd if any man thinke] That is, proudly conceits, that he knows any
thing; he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. Id est, si quis in hoc uno
sibi placeat, quod ingeniosus, quod eruditus sit, quod dialecticas
disputationes norit: Grotius. vide Calvinum


Verse. 4. And Idol is nothing in the world] That is, nothing subsisting in
nature; or nothing in respect of the divinity ascribed unto it, as the
following words show, and that there is none other God but one; but something
in man's imagination, Perkins.
which gives to it the honor of God; and reputeth it as God making it a God
unto himself.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 5. HAve we not power to lead about a sister a wife] Our last accurate
translation of the English Bible, has woman in the Margin; it is the manner of
that Edition to set all the Idiotismes of either language, and diverse readings
in the Margin. The Greek word signifies both; but whether of them is fit to be
received into the Text, our Text it self shows, (...).
our Translation is according to the plain words, and meaning of the Apostle.
The words in the Greek are not a woman sister, but a sister a wife; for no man
would say a sister a woman, because the word sister implies a woman: therefore
of necessity the latter word signifies a wife specially, and not a sister
generally.

Lead about.] Declares they were their wives. See Beza and Cartwright. Etsi
(...) mulierem quamvis significet, quod Hieron. ac August. urgent: tamen
frequenter in sacris pro uxore usurpatur. Matthew. 1.20. and 19. v.
3.5.8.9.11.29. Pareus.
The word (...), secum ducere quo quis eat. Ezech 45.1.2. Grotius. Est
circumducere secum quodam jure, ut suam non ut alienam. Ideo Syrus addit,
nobiscum. Pareus.
implies a power over the party led. The Popish Priests abhor marriage, as
unworthy the sanctity of their order, yet the Apostles did not dislike it.

Verse. 9. That treads out the Corne] In that Country they did tread (...)
dicuntur Boves cum grana ex aristis exterunt pedibus: Qui mos Orientis, sed and
Graeciae ut ex Theophrasto and aliis discimus. Grotius.
out their Corn with their Oxen, as we do thresh it out. Huic contrarium est
illud ethnicorum, Bos apud acervum, quod Suidas intelligit de iis qui fruges in
area terunt, sed Camo impediuntur quo minus quidquam inde gustare queant.


Does God take care for Oxen] Not chiefly and principally, Quod Dominus
humanitatem erga boves praecipit, non id facit boum gratia, sed hominum potius
respectu, propter quos etiam boves ipsi creati sunt. Calvinus.
but subordinately as his care is toward all the creatures, so Deuteronomy 25.4. 1 Timothy 5.18. Or, does not so take care for them, as if he respected them only in
making the Law.

Verse. 13. They which wait at the Altar] (...) continually set; continual
residence was required of the Priests, Cujus vocis emphasim Chrysostomus and
Theophylactus annotarunt, ut quae sonet continuam and perseverantem servitutem:
quam and Latin vocamus assiduam. Estius.
and so of Pastors.

Omnium moribus and assectibus quantum licet, me accomodo. Estius.
Verse. 23. I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save
some] He was content to undergo any thing, for the good of any man. Mr.
Perkins.

Verse. 24, 25. They which run in a race run all, but one receives the prize?
so run that ye may obtain. Vide Bezam and Grotium.
And every man that striveth for the mastery] He alludes to the Olympicke
exercises. Cursus and lucta, running and wrestling, were two of the Olympicke
games.

Verse. 26. I therefore so run, not as uncertainely, etc.] That is, I so order
my course of Christianity. Vide Bezam.


Verse. 27. But I keep under my Body] The word signifies a buffeting about the
face, and eyes, as a man would buffet his adversary on his knees; I molest and
vex the flesh the old adversary that is in me. A battering of the body, as
those are wont which try masteries with Plummets of lead, until the blewnesse
of the wound appears most grievous. And bring it unto subjection] Compelling
to subjection as we would force a slave to grind at the Mill; Vide Grotium.
as the Greek words signifies.

The Apostle uses two words which carry much Emphasis (...) I keep under, and
(...), I bring into subjection. The former word is taken from a Champion or
wrestler that striveth for the mastery; Doctor Gouge on Ezra. 8.21.
for it has reference to the 25. verse. where mention is made of men that
strive for the mastery. The latter word has reference to Masters, that
prudently keep their servants under; especially when they wax insolent or
wanton. By the body he means the old man, which is called a body of sin,
Castigo corpus meum, hoc est, adversus carnem pugno. Theophyl. in loc.
Romans 6.6.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 2. Unto Moses] That is, sub ministerio aut ductu Mosis. Calvin under the
Ministry, In Mosen] Id est, Moses Ministerium, unde Versio Syriaca recte
interpretatus est in Mosen, per manum Mosis. Rivet. 9. See Doctor Willet on 14
of Exodus 28. Question.
or guidance of Moses, vel in doctrinam and legem Mosis, sicut Act. 19. Pareus
into the doctrine and Law of Moses.

Verse. 3. Did all eat the same spiritual meat] By the wonderful power of
faith which makes a thing absent present to the believer; by that faith they
received Christ as lively, as effectually, as much to their profit and comfort,
as we do since his coming. Mr. Perkins.
Manna is called a Spiritual meat] because it represented unto them the
spiritual food of the soul Christ Jesus the true Manna, John 6.51. See Doctor
Willet on 16. of Exodus 3. c. and Be^sa.

Verse. 4. They drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them] Not that the
water of the Rock did always follow them, They drank of the natural Rock,
which is called a Spiritual Rock, because it was a Type of Christ. The Rock
followed them, that is, the water that issued out of the Rock followed them as
they journyed, and streamed after them in their removes. Dike. vide Calvinu^.
Bibebant e petra. Tradunt Hebraei and Chaldaei, Number. 21. v. 16. petram hanc per
miraculum Judaeos in deserto assidue secutam fuisse usque in Chanaan, eisque
aquam dedisse. a Lapide. Id est aquam quae e petra fluebat; spirituali ratione
significationis, quia rem spiritualem significabat; eos insequenti, quia aqua
illa e rape fluens sequuta est Jsraelitas in variis mansionibus suis. Rivetus.
(so some expounded it) for that failed, and the people were athirst in the
wilderness; but Christ signified by the Rock, was always with them, for their
preservation. Christ is said to be the Rock of his Church; and every Member in
it three ways. 1. As the fountain in it, Zach 13 1. Jer. 2.1. 2. As the
foundation of it. 3. As the refuge and shelter of it. It is not the Apostles
intent I suppose, to affirm the truth of that which the Jews still tell, and
therefore without doubt did tell before Saint Paul's time; that the waters
followed the Fathers over mountains and valleys, in their journey, to the Land
of promise; but the Fathers drank of that water which the Jews say, followed
them. Thorndikes Review. But Calvin, Rivet, and Dike say, the waters out of the
Rock never failed them, where ever they went.

Verse. 6. Now these things were our examples, to the intent that we should not
lust after evil things, as they also lusted] When a man is not content with
what God has given him, but must have some thing else verse. 7. Verse. 7. See
Doctor Prideaux his Sermon on this Text.
Idolatry is the worshipping of God in an Image, as the Israelites in the
Calfe, verse. 8. with the daughters of Moab verse. 9. tempting of God, as it were
trying what he can do. v. 10. Murmuring, whining, complaining against God,
because of the crosses they feel; or against man, to whom he supposes he may
impute his crosses; as the Israelites did against Moses and Aaron.

Verse. 11. All these things happened unto them for examples] A type is such a
form or representation of a thing, as is made by hard pressing or striking of
it, such as we see in stamps and seals, implying (say some) that the Lord by
those strokes upon his ancient people, left marks upon their bodies, or
Printed Letters which were legible to their posterity; this exposition Calvin
justly dislikes; See John 20.25 Vide Calvinum in loc.
God by them did set his judgments before our eyes; and we are taught by those
examples what a judgment hangs over Idolaters, whore-masters, and other
contemners of God.

Verse. 13. Such as is common to man] That is, a temptation arising from humane
frailty. Dike.


Verse. 15. I speak as to wise men] Because he was to bring an argument from
the mystery of the Supper, he uses this preface, Calvin.
that they may more attentively consider the weightinesse of the matter; I
speak not to novices; you know the force of the holy Supper; there we are
ingraffed into Christ's body; therefore it is profit for you to have no society
with such.

Verse. 16. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
blood of Christ?] Some think the Apostle names the Cup first, alluding to the
custom of the Hebrews, who in their solemn Banquets did begin their feasts
with poculum gratiarum; others that Paul intending to be long about the bread,
Benedicere calicem, significat in hunc usum consecrare, ut nobis sit symbolum
sanguinis Domini. Jd sit verbo promissionis, du^ juxta Christi institutionem
conveniu^t fideles ad celebrandum in hoc Sacramento Mortis ejus memoriam.
Calvinus. Vide plura ibid. Eucharistia legitimo modo sumpta instrumentum est
ejus conjunctionis, per quam in corpus unum cum filio Dei Jesus Christo,
coalescimus, and cum caeteris etiam omnibus fidelibus, qui sunt omnes ejusdem
corporis membra. In scriptis Patrum communio est unum e proporijs
appellationibus hujus sacramenti. Casaub. exercit. 16. ad Annal. Eccles. v. 17.
id est quoniam unus est panis quem frangimus and in multas parts dividimus,
and multi efficimur unum corpus, quia omnes de illo uno pane fracto and
distributo manducamus. Pareus.
does therefore premise a few words about the Cup; by blessing some understand
consecration, not the Popish charming, whereby they conceive the nature of
these elements to be transubstantiated; but the separating of them, by
declaring Christ's institution to become holy signs of inward grace. A
Communion is properly a society of men who are joined together by certain
Laws and Covenants, to partake in the calamities, and prosperity of one
another. Chrysostom observes that Communion is more then participation, that
is where a man has part only of a thing; communion requires that we should be
united to the whole. Id est Communionis illius Sacramentum seu signum ac
monumentum. Gomarus.

Verse. 17. For we being many are one bread and one body: for we all are
partakers of that one bread] Objection. Those which eat one bread, make
themselves one body with him with whom they eat; and therefore seeing we must
not be one body with unsanctified men, neither may we partake with them in the
Sacrament. Answer. All which eat one bread, are one body in public profession
and open show, not in very deed and truth always; and to be one body with that
holy society whereof unsanctified men in show and profession do make
themselves appear to be, that can be no fault; for they profess themselves
to be the body of Christ.

Ejus scilicet generis res de quibus and supra egit c. 6. v. 12. ubi idem
dictum. Grotius.
Verse. 23. All things are lawful for me] That is, all indifferent things, for
of those he speaks.

But all things are not expedient] Proximis scilicet. Call. viz. to my
neighbor; one should not seek after his own profit, as he presently adds.

Doctor Gouge.
Verse 27. Whatsoever is set before you eat] That is, whatsoever is good and
wholesome meat.

Verse. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
to the glory of God] That is, See 14. Zach. 21. habitualiter and virtualiter
non actualiter.
eat and drink, and sleep, and recreate our selves, that we may become the
fitter to do God some honor in our places.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. BE ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ] Hence it appears
(says Calvin) how unfit the Sections of the Chapters are, Haec cla^sula
spectat superiora, quo eam manifest refert Chrysostomus. Vnde and Oecumenius,
Erasmus, Cajetanus aliique nonnulli eam annectunt capiti praecedenti. Nam quia
Paulus suum Corinthiis allegaverat exemplum, dicens, Sicut and ego per omnia
omnibus placeo; Nunc generaliter ad sui imitationem eos invitat. Estius.
because this sentence is cut off from the former, to which it ought to be
joined, and added to these following, with which it has no agreement.

Verse. 2. The Ordinances, as I delivered them unto you] The vulgar Translatour
here translates it praecepta; by traditions Apostolicae traditiones pertinent
ad ordinem and politiam. Calvinus.
we understand here from the circumstances of the words following, rites and
ceremonies prescribed by the Apostle, for order and decency in the public
assembly in their Church.

Verse. 3. The head of every man is Christ] Christ is called the head of man,
because he is every way the most principal, Perkins.
and glorious man that ever was.

The head of the woman is the man] That is the man, in that he is a man, is a
person more excellent then the woman as she is a woman: Perkins.
and the head of Christ is God] Both in respect Glass. Rhet Sac. Tract. 1. c. 7.
of his humane nature, in which regard his Father is greater than him, John
14.28. and in respect of his office, as mediator.

Verse. 4. But every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered
dishonors it] It seems there were some which taught the Corinthians that
their men should pray, and prophecy with their heads covered; As for men
covering, or uncovering their head in preaching, it can be nothing to Saint
Paul's meaning, because uncovering the head in sign of reverence was a custom
unknown in his time. Thornedikes Review. 155. Apostolus loquitur non de illo
capit^ tegmine quod pileum vel galerum dicimus, and quo, facie aperta manente,
capillus and sola capitis summitas tegitur. Hoc enim indecorum non est, quin
potius ad valetudinem tuendam necessarium: neque enim possunt homines
praesertim in regionibus Aquilonaribus degentes, and qui vel valetudine vel
aetate affecti sunt cerebrum sua natura frigidissimum sine gravi incommodo
externo frigori exponere: sed de tali tegumento quo facies in qua una omnis
viritis gravitas, dignitas and majestus se ostendit, obtegitur. Morton.
and women uncovered. This abuse the Apostle corrects; if a man cover his head,
he debaseth himself, and casts himself into servitude from that eminency
whereby he is placed of God and to the glory of Christ, his head is diminished.
For he shames the head, when he does not declare that principality which God
has given him over his wife; for the covering with a veil, was a sign of
subjection. Paul's purpose is to show the Sovereignty of the man, and subjection
of the woman; the women in the oriental parts, with a veil covered the whole
head and face. Paul speaks not of such a covering of the head as French
Pastors use in prophesying, when the upper part of the head is covered, the
glory and majesty of the countenance still appearing.

Some say that in the infancy of the Church some women were extraordinarily
endued with that gift, and did indeed prophecy. 2. Others judge it to have bin
a fault in that Church, and therefore say the Apostle reproves it in the 14.
Chap. commanding women to keep silence in the Churches. 3. A woman may be said
to prophecy, when she sings Psalms, or reads the Scripture. Mr. Perkins.
Verse. 5. But every woman that prays, or prophesies with her head uncovered,
dishonors her head, for that is even all one as if she were shaven] The
Christian women appeared open, and in public uncovered, from a fantastical
imitation of the she Priests, and Prophetesses of the Gentiles when they showed
their Idols, as their Pythiae, Bacchae, or Menadae, and the like, who used when
they uttered their Oracles or celebrated the rites and sacrifices of their
gods, to put themselves into a wild and extaticall guise, having their faces
discovered, their hair dishevelled etc. The Corinthian women conceiting
themselves when they prayed or prophesied in the Church, In Tertullians time,
those that professed Virginity, took upon them to sit with their faces unveiled
in the Church, taking it for a privilege of their rank, to disclaim the
subjection of the sex, and profess freedom. This is the occasion of his Book
De velandis virginibus. Thorndike of the service of God at religious
Assemblies. Chapter 6. See more there.
to be acting the parts of the Priests, or celebrating sacrifice, were so fond
as to imitate them, and accordingly cast off their Vailes, and discovered their
faces immodestly in the congregation, and thereby dishonored their head, that
is, were unseemly accontred and dressed on their head. M. Mede on 1 Cor. 11.5.
vide Grotium.

To prophecy signifies sometimes strictly to foretell things to come, See Acts
21.9.
as both men and women did in the primitive times, Joel 2.28.

^. In a more large notion, to interpret and open Divine mysteries contained in
Scr^pture, for the instruction and edification of the hearers, 1 Cor. 14.3.

3. To praise God in hymns and Psalms, 1 Cor. 11.5. See 1 Chronicles. 25.1, 2, 3.
Mr. Mede ubi supra.


For because Prophets of old did three things: 1. Foretell things to come. 2.
Notify the will of God unto the people. 3. Uttered themselves in musical
wise, and in a Poetical strain and composure. Hence it comes to pass that to
prophecy in Scripture signifies the doing of any of these three things,
Prophetare hic accipio pro enarrare Dei mysteria in aedificationem audientium
ut infra capite 14. Calvinus.
and among the rest to praise God in Verse or Musical composure. Two places of
Scripture, 1 Chronicles. 25.1, etc. 1 Samuel 10.5. prove this.

Verse. 7. He is the image and glory of God] Holiness and righteousness is
common to them both; Mr. Perkins.
but he is so called because God has placed more outward excellency and
dignity in the person of a man, then of a woman; carrying the mark of his
sovereignty and dominion not only over other creatures, but in respect of the
woman her self, who is likewise said to be the glory of a man, because it is
his honor to have such an excellent creature subject to him.

Verse. 10. Power over her head] That is, her veil, which is a sign of her
husbands power and superiority over her. M. Hildersam. Velum appellat
potestatem, signum potestatis viri. Fuit velum speciale nubentibus, unde verbum
nubendi apud Latinos. Rivetus. Vide Grotium.


Among the Corinthians the covering of the head was not as it is with us, a
token of pre-eminence and superiority, but a sign of subjection; Mr. Perkins
on Rev.
therefore the Apostle would have the women of Corinth when they came into the
Congregation to have their heads covered, to signify their submission and
reverence unto the Ministry of the Gospel.

Because of the Angels] That is, not only the Ministers of the Church,
Perkins. Hoc quidam de ipsis pastoribus intelligunt in coetu loquentibus qui
Apoc. 2. and 3. saepius Angeli vocantur. Hag. 1.13. Mal. 2.7. Alii de Angelis
proprie dictis intelligunt quatenus eorum ratio habenda est, ne indecoro
foeminarum habitu offendantur. Vide Grotium and Bezam. Scimus Angelos Christo
quoque tanquam suo capiti praesto esse and ministrare; ergo quum eo licentiae
prorumpunt mulieres, ut sibi dominationis symbolum praeter jus and fat
usurpent, turpitudinem suam Angelis conspicuam faciunt. Calvinus. vide plura
ibid. Paraeus Calvinum sequitur.
but Gods heavenly Angels, which daily wait upon his children, and guard them
in all their ways. Pareus inclines to this latter rather. Some think the
Apostle argues from the example of the Angels, we should imitate their modesty,
who were wont to cover their faces to testify their subjection toward God. So
Vorstius.

The Apostle has respect unto the Legend reported in the Book of Enoch (which
we see was read in the Church in the Apostles time, by the second Epistle of
St. Peter, and that of St. Jude) of those Angels that are reported there to
have been seduced by the beauty of women, out of Genesis 6.2. Not as if the
Apostle did suppose that report to be true, or did intend to give credit to the
book; but that by alluding to a passage commonly known, he may very well be
thought to intimate that a like inconvenience to it, (not disputing whether
true or not for the present) might fall out in the Church. Thorndikes Review.
At first all Presbyters were Angels of the Churches, as appears by this place;
that seems the most natural meaning of his words: for Tertullian in diverse
places of his book De velandis virginibus, intimates one reason of vailing
women's faces in the Church from the scandal of their countenances. Thorndikes
service of God at religious assemblies. Chapter 4.

Cum tamen id neque repugnet naturae, and multos apud populos usitatum sit,
naturaliter ponitur pro eo, recepti passim moris est. Grotius de Jure Belli. l.
2. c. 13. But this of Grotius, and also what others say in defense of long
hair is well answered in a book entitled Diatriba Theologica de capillis
caustans disputatione Texuali Ad 1 Cor. 11.14, 15.
Verse. 14. Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a man have long
haire] The Greek word (...) is to nourish his hair long. Long hair is an
argument either of effeminatenesse or cruelty, Job 5.5 Psalm 68.22. For that
cause Paul commands them not to nourish their hair. Raynold. de lib. Apoc.

Verse. 16. If any man seem to be contentious] the Greek signifies rather, is
pleased to be, desires or has a will to be, yea boasts and prides himself in
it.

(...) amans victoriae, ut cui victoria potior est veritate. Estius.
Contentious] Greek, a lover of victory.

Verse. 17. Now in this that I declare unto you I praise you not; that you come
together not for the better, From the 17 Verse to the end of the Chapter.
but for the worse] Throughout the whole Scripture the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is not so fully handled as in this Chapter, and that upon this occasion.
The Corinthians (it seems) had much profaned and abused the Sacrament; how and
in what manner, it is not so clear, but so that the Apostle tells them in this
Verse they came together not for the better, but for the Grande nefas, quando
medicina non modo non proficit aegros, sed etiam in venenum vertitur. Pareus.
worse; and verse. 20. This is not to eat the Lords Supper. We commonly say,
that is not done which is not rightly done, says Calvin. Illegitime edere, non
est edere. Pareus. And therefore the Apostle says twice, Verse. 22. I praise
you not; a Miosis, I dispraise, I blame you. Then having blamed them for doing
amiss, he instrusts them, and uses very strong persuasions to make them
reform and do aright. He rehearses unto them Christ's institution, and
explaines it; Vide Calvinum in V. 23.
he lets them know how heinous a thing in its own nature, and how dangerous in
respect of the consequence, it is, to communicate unworthily. Consider three
thing in general: 1. The rehearsal of Christ's institution of the Sacrament,
Verse. 23, 24, 25. Then the Apostles explication of it, Verse. 26. And 3. his
application, Verse. 27, 28, 29, 30.

Verse. 18. For first of all, when you come together in the Church, etc.] Some
take Church here per coetu fidelium. See Mede in loc.
Yet Theophylact and all Greek Writers generally expound it the ministerial
place of meeting. Cameron opposes Fuller about this point. Vide Grotium.
See v. 22.

Schismatum nomine, id est, scissutarum (ut vetus interpres ad exprimendam
Graecae vocis vim convertit) notantur animorum and voluntatum distractiones,
quibus ecclesiae corpus quasi violatur. Haereses autem, id est (ut verbum verbo
reddam) electiones sunt opiniones atque sententiae non a Deo revelata sed
electae ab hominibus adversus veritatem Orthodoxae fidei and sacrum Catholicae
pietatis canonem. Raynold de lib. Apoc. praelect. 10. Vide Grotium.
Divisi^ns] Or Schisms. Schism is a difference about rites or external
discipline; heresy is a difference about doctrine and faith. Schisms many
times degenerate into Heresies.

Verse. 19. For there must be also heresies among you] There is not any need of
them, for any good in themselves, they are the diseases of the Church; but
there are sufficient causes always in blind and corrupt judgments. He says
not, it is possible, but, necessary that heresies be, as fire to try and purge
the Gold. It behooves that there be heresies in the Church, as it is necessary
there should be poison and venomous creatures in the world, because out of them
God will work medicines. See Matthew. 18.7.

That they which are approved (sincere in the faith) may be made manifest among
you] That is, known to be sincere by their constancy.

Verse. 20. The Lords Supper] so called, partly from the Author, and partly
from the free circumstance of the evening time, 1 Cor. 10.21. and 11.23. See
Grotius.

Eate] The Papists go about to establish their administration of the Lords
Supper under one kind from the Word (...), but that word is used generally for
the whole action of the Sacrament, viz. the distribution of the bread and Wine;
and the Syriack propounds it more distinctly, rendering it, Comedentes vos and
bibentes. Waltherus in officina Biblica.

Verse. 22. Despise ye the Church of God] That is the place where Gods people
come together for his service. Mr. Pierson.


Verse. 23. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
you] And as he received what he delivered, so he delivered what he received, he
kept nothing back, Acts 20.27.

That the Lord Iesus] Only he is sufficient to institute the Sacrament who can
confer the grace of it. If we either respect Christ as Lord or Jesus, if
either our duty to him, or safety by him, then let us also respect this
Sacrament.

The same night] Christ did institute the Sacrament at night, The night before
he suffered.
because immediately after the Passover, Matthew. 26.19, 20, 26. and by the Law
the Passover was to be eaten at night, Exodus 21.6, 8.

In which he was betrayed] Greek signifies delivered or given up into the hands
of his adversaries who condemned and crucified him. The Hebrew signifies
tradere ad mactandum.
The word is often used of Judas who did it treacherously, and so betrayed him,
Matthew. 27.3. Mark 14.21. Luke 22.22. John 18.2. but sometimes it is used of
God himself, Romans 8.32. sometimes indefinitely, Pareus.
Romans 4. ult. so here it may be taken.

Took bread] off the Table, setting it apart for a holy use, Exodus 12.5, 6, 21.
This signifies, that Christ by the eternal purpose and decree of God was
separated, Videtur mihi omnino accipiendi verbum de manus prebensione in verbis
illis Christi intelligi, tum quoniam propia haec significatio est (...), tum
quod certum sit dominum cum discipulis accumbentem retinuisse ordinarium and
usitatum sumendi cibi modum. Beza.
and set a part to be made a sacrifice and offering for us. Here, and in the 26,
27, 28 verses the Apostles calls it Bread after consecration, therefore the
substance of Bread does remain after the words of consecration.

Verse. 24. And when he had given thanks] He gave thanks to God for his mercy
toward mankind, and the inestimable benefit of redemption by his death, the
Sacrament whereof he was instituting. This teaches us to come with
thanksgiving to the Lords Table; hence the Sacrament is termed the Eucharist.
Calvin.

This is my body] a figure, sign, and representation of my body; Hoc (id est,
haec res, seu panis acceptus ac fractus) est corpus meum) quod pro vobis
frangitur, id est Sacramentum signum and monumentum corporis frangendi. Est pro
significat poni apparet ex ipse Dei verbo, Gal 4.25. Danaeus. Septem extant
horum verborum interpretationes. Prima eorum est, qui ajunt Christum notasse
digito corpus suum, cum diceret hoc est corpus meum, non notasse panem quem
porrigebat, tum dicendu^ erat potius Tradam hoc corpus. Secunda little qui aiunt
Christum tantum hoc voluisse significare, corpus suum esse panem, itaque ^^unt
esse universorum; sed tum dicendum fuisset, tale quid est corpus meum. Tertia,
Consubstantiatorum, qui d^cunt hoc est corpus meum, significare, hoc pane
continetur corpus meum; sed hoc est petere quod est in principio; non enim
constat an pane contineatur c^rpus. Quarta, Veterum patrum nonnullorum, corpus
Christi vi and efficacia. Quinta, little qui dicunt agnoscendum esse panem esse
corpus Christi, sed non esse quaerendum quomodo panis sit corpus Christi. Sexta
Pontificiorum, qui rotunde sine suco and fallacia aiunt aperte hoc est corpus
meum significare hoc esse essentialiter and revera corpus meum. Septima
orthodoxorum, qui aiunt hunc esse genuinum and simplicem horum verborum sensum;
Hoc, id est, quem manibus tenco panis, corpus meum est quod fractum est pro
vobis. Cameron. opusc. Miscell.
the sign put for the thing signified, because of the analogy between them.
See Genesis 7.10. Exodus 2.11. 1 Cor. 10.4. Tit. 3.5. The Fathers generally expound
it the Sacrament of his body. Cornelius a Lapide on Esaias says, if Christ had
not been incarnate, the Priests pronouncing of these words hoc est corpus meum,
would have incarnated him; and on this place he says, Sane in hora mortis, in
die illa terribili, cum sistemur tribunali Christi de fide and vita examinandi;
si me roget Christus, cur credidisti corpus meum in Eucharistia? fidenter
dicam. Domine credidi quod in dixisti, quod me docuisti, tu verba tua per
tropum non explicuisti, nec ego per tropum explicare ausus sum.

This do in remembrance of me] By virtue of these words not only power and
authority is given Ministers, but a necessity is imposed upon them to celebrate
the Sacrament. The words are not permissive, but mandatory.

Verse. 25. After the same manner Qualia fecit circa panem, talia and circa
calicem. Jansen. ad verbum post Caenavisse, Galli hunc Hellenismum eleganter
exprimunt, apres avoir soupe.
also he took the Cup] After the same manner, and to the same end he took the
cup into his hands that he had formerly taken the Bread.

When he had supped] Or, after having supped.

This Cup is the New Testament in my blood] Here are two metonymies: 1 A
metonymie of the subject, Cup for the Wine contained in the cup, and the Wine
in the Cup is not the New Testament but a Sacrament of the New Testament, made
and confirmed by the blood of Christ.

Is] That is, seals and confirms.

Verse. 26. Eat this Bread] Still bread, even after consecration; bread, though
not ordinary and common; but this bread, yet bread.

And drink this cup] Drink this as well as eat that.

Ye do show forth the Lords death] Hence the Sacrament was termed by the
Ancients a Sacrifice, viz. representative and commemorative, but not properly.

Either to each particular man at the hour of his death, or to all men, and
the whole Church at the day of judgment.
Till he come] This shows the perpetuity of the Sacrament, the Passover
remained till Christ's first coming, his death; this must remain till his
second coming, unto judgment.

Verse. 27. Vnworthily] Ignorantly, unreverently, or profanely. He that comes
unto the Sacrament and receives it in an unfit manner, Id est, aliter quam
dignum est tanta mysteria tractari. Beza. Carnaliter, profane and per
consequens inutiliter, contumeliose and aliter quam rerum tam sanctarum and
augustarum dignitas and Christi institutio sert. Morton.
without that due regard which belongs unto such an holy action.

Verse. 28. Let] Not spoken by way of permission but injunction, not here as 1
Cor. 7.6. and 36. As, Let it be enacted.
A necessity is laid upon us, necessitas praecepti, for it is a plain and
peremptory command; necessitas medii, for without it there can be no worthy
receiving.

A man] (...) both man and woman, Gal. 3.28. the woman is partaker of the same
dignity in this matter with the man; and therefore also bound unto the same
duty.

Examine] Prove* try, 2 Cor. 13.5. Some prosecute the metaphor of a Goldsmith
searching the purity of his Gold, this being a proper word to them in their
mystery, 1 Pet. 1.7. Others make it verbum forense and juridicum, as
Magistrates question offenders.

Himselfe] Had not this been added, many would have been diligent enough in
observing the rest. Curiosum hominum genus ad cognoscendam vitam alienam
desidiosum ad corrigendam suam. Aug. conf.
Psalm. 4.4 Luke 21.34. 2 Cor. 13.5. Not but that we may and ought to examine
some others as well as our selves; the Minister the people committed unto his
charge Heb. 13.17. parents their children, Ephesians. 6.4. and masters their
servants, 2 Kings 5.25. Josh. 24.15. But we must not be bishops in others
Diocesses, 1 Pet. 4.15.

And so] God looks not so much at the thing done, as the manner of doing it.
Ier. 48.10.

Let him] He may eat and drink, and that to his comfort.

Eat] Not only stay and look on, and see what another does, but let him eat;
which condemns the private Mass of the Papists, wherein the Priest alone does
eat, the people standing by and beholding what he does, but not communicating
of any part of the Sacrament at all with him. The end of the Sacrament is to be
eaten, not carried about in pomp, to be made a spectacle to be gazed at, and an
Idol to be worshipped.

Of the bread] Bread therefore yet it is, even after consecration, so the
Apostle ever terms it, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and 11.26, 27. And (which is worthy to
be noted) the Apostle does here so term it in three Verses together, even when
he reproves the Corinthians for their unreverent eating of it, and shows them
the great danger which they incur that do so.

Verse. 29. He] That is, whosoever, what person soever he be; that eats and
drinketh] That is, receives into his body the Sacramental Seals of Bread and
Wine; for of that the Apostle speaks. Vnworthily] That is in an unfit manner,
not in some measure answerable to the worth of this ordinance.

Eats and drinks damnation to himselfe] That is, by eating and drinking
unworthily incurreth damnation, judgment temporal here, as verse. 30. and
without repentance eternal hereafter.

To himselfe] Sibi ipsi vulg. non aliis, his unworthy communicating prejudiceth
not those which communicate with him. Every man shall bear his own burden.
Mark the emphasis of the phrase he eats it to himself, q.d. he can blame no
person nor thing but himself; he cannot blame the bread or wine, nor Christ,
nor the Minister that gives it him; but his own unworthie self.


1. In regard of guilt and liablenesse unto Gods wrath. 2. In regard of the
seal and obligation in the conscience, he eats and drinks that which seals
up his damnation.

Not discerning Hoc corpus domini and sacram hanc coenam non discernunt, qui a
profano and vulgari pane and coena vel convivio nihil differ putant, ne que
dignitatem, rem signatam, usum and finem sacramenti hujus satis aestimant.
Zepperus. Vide Bezam and Grotium.
the Lords body] That is, puts no difference between the bread and wine in the
Sacrament, and other common bread and wine. There are two parts of the
Sacrament; one external, the elements presented to the senses. 2. Another
spiritual presented to our graces; he has to do only with the elements.

V^rs. 30. For this cause] For coming to the Lords Table in the sin of
fornication amongst others many were sick. See 1 Cor. 6.18. and 10.8.

And many sleep] Are dead; men are liable not only to the highest spiritual
judgment, damnation, verse. 27. but the highest temporal judgment, death, for
unworthy receiving.

Verse. 34. The rest will I set in order when J come] He speaks of the outward
decorum which is in the liberty of the Church. Certum est Paulum non nisi de
externo decoro loqui quod in liberate ecclesiae positum est. Calv^n. vide
Bezam.


CHAP. XII.
Verse. 3. NO man can say that Jesus is the Lord, Verse 1. Jn certum est an
sentiat de donis spiritus ut Chrysostom. Theoph. Ambrose, an de psallendo
spiritu, de quo videtur nata fuisse question. Eras.
but by the holy Ghost] Mr. Hildersam.
As if he had said, He cannot say and profess it from the full persuasion of
his heart; till the holy Ghost have taught it him, that he is so indeed.

Verse. 4. See Doctor Hall on this Text.

Verse. 6. And there are diversities of operations] Mighty workings. Vocabulu^
Graecum non significat simpliciter operationem, sed vim quandam and efficaciam,
qua Deus agit in nobis. Erasm.


Verse. 7. To profit] The word is (...) which imports such a kind of profit as
redounds to community. Vt Ecclesia fructum inde percipiat. Calvinus.
Vtilitatem sc. ecclesiae. Piscat.


Verse 8. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom: to another the
word of knowledge] God has given to the Pastor, whose chief office is to
apply the word, Mr. Hildersam. (...) knowledge infused by divine revelation
(...) knowledge acquired by study and industry. Barlow in Concione. vide Bezam.
the word of wisdom; as to the Doctor, whose office is to interpret the
word, and to teach doctrine the word of knowledge. The word of wisdome] That
is, a more excellent revelation, and more special and immediate instinct and
assistance of the Spirit, together with more eminent authority in explaining
the mysteries of Christ.

The word of knowledge] That is, by diligence in the Scripture, they obtain
such knowledge, as that they are able to make Christ known unto others;
although they be far inferior to the former. Doctor Tailor on Titus.

Verse. 10. To another the discerning of Spirits] That is, Inspirations.
Perspicacia in dignoscendis hominibus qui se aliquid esse profitebantur.
Calvinus.


Verse. 14. And the others following. For the body is not one member, but many,
etc.] One body and many members. 1. Use. 2. Necessity. 3. Honor. 4.
Comeliness. 5. Mutual consent commend these things.

Verse. 21. Nor again the head to the feet] He does not understand (as the
Papists say) per caput and pedes Papam and Ecclesiam; but by the Head any man
adorned with excellent gifts in the Church; Non monet Petrum ne ecclesiae
insultet, sed monet eos qui eminebant donis spiritualibus inter Corinthios, ne
inferiores contemnerent; as Chrysostom. Ambrose and Aquinas expound it.
by the feet any mean Christian.

Membra ista appellantur ab Apostolo inhonesta vel indecora, non per se sed
comparate, ratione eorum quae eximia venustate sunt praedita. Fullerus.
Verse. 23. The members less honourable]

Verse. 25. That the members should have the same care one for another] The
words (in the Greek) are, Eurroughes Jrenicum.
That the Members may care the same thing one for another] and that without
dividing care, that there might be no schism in the body. The word here used
for care is (...), the same that Matthew. 6.25.28. is forbidden.

Vbi nomine Doctorum complexus est Evangelistas etiam and Pastores, quos tamen
distinxit ad Ephesios, collocans post Prophetas, ipsos Evangelistas, postea
Pastores, postremo Doctores. Zanch. in quartum praeceptum. (...) ecclesiae
gubernatores, ut omnes boni interpretes interpretantur tam novi quam veteres.
Jd. ibid. Vide Bezam.
Verse. 28. Thirdly teachers]

Verse. 31. But covet earnestly] The word in the original is (...), be zealous
after the best thing, that is, studiously affect them; so this word is used
James 42. See 14. Chap. 1. A more excellent way] Hoc est, viam excellentiorem,
vel, ut aliis placet, vtam ad excellentiam perveniendi, de qua sequente capite.
Vorstius.
(...); a way of the highest excellency beyond any expression.

CHAP. XIII.
Angelorum linguam hyperbolice posuit pro singulari aut eximia, quanquam de
linguarum diversitate potius interpretor, quam magni faciebant Corinthii,
ambitione non fructu omnia metientes. Calvinus. Vide Grotium. Apion Grammaticus
ob garrulitatem dictus est Cymbalum orbis a Tiberio Augusto, test Suetonio.
His proverbijs significat Apostolus inanem ac futilem garrulitalem. Drus. Prove.
Class. 2. l. 3.
Verse. 1. THough I speak with the tongues of men, and of Angels, etc.] Not that
Angels have tongues or use of speech; but to note what grace and excellency of
discourse must needs be thought in them, if it might be supposed that they
should speak. Angelicum quicquid in suo genere excellit. Drusius, Prove. Class.
8. l. 3. Or if we interpret it with Calvin and Estius of diversity of tongues,
the meaning is, though thou understandest not only all the tongues of men, but
also of Angels; yet there is no reason, why thou should think that God
regards thee any more then a Cymball, unless thou had charity. Sounding
Brass, and tinckling Cymball.] That is, sounding only for pleasure, but
signifying nothing.

Verse. 2. All knowledge] Not understanding it simply and absolutely of all
kinds of knowledge; but of the gift of knowledge. Id est omnium scientiam,
scilicet eorum ad quae scientiae donum extenditur. Estius. All faith] This
place is either generally understood of all faith, or particularly of the whole
faith of working miracles, but in neither sense does it show that faith may be
removed from charity. If generally, then the Apostle must be understood as
speaking by the way of supposition, and not as positively affirming, that
either he, or any other having all faith wanted charity; therefore this
supposition ( quae nihil ponit) proves nothing. If the place be to be
understood particularly of the faith of miracles, the particle all being not
universal but integrall, as if it had been said, the whole faith, including
all the degrees of it, this miraculous faith may be severed from charity. Down.
of Justificat. l. 6. c. 3. See Cartw. Annotat. on Rhom. Test. De ea fide
loquitur quam superius inter charismata recensuit, and sensus est: fi fidem
habeam adeo perfectam, ut per eam miracula faciam etiam maxima, factuque
difficillima, quale est hominum opinione, montem loco dimovere, and alio
transfer. Estius.
By all faith he means not all kinds of faith; but all measure of it in
working miracles; some had faith to do some miracles and not others; the
Apostle shows, that if he had such a miraculous faith, that he could do all
miracles, and had not love, it were nothing. This is clear in that the Apostle
reckons miraculous faith among the gifts of the Spirit in the precedent
Chapter, 1 Cor. 12.9. and by the example, or instance of moving mountains,
which our Savior notes as a master miracle amongst others. Matthew. 17.20. Luke
17.6.

Vide Bezam. (...) proprie est ad vescendum dare. Number. 11.4.18. Deuteronomy. 8.3.16.
figurate in alicujus usus impendere. Esai. 58.14.
Verse. 3. Bestow to feed the poore] There is but one word in the Greek (...)
break my goods into pieces, or morsels, and distribute them to as many poor
as they will reach. Graeca vox significat in frusta seu particulas escam
divisam porrigere ac praebere in alimoniam. Estius. See a Lapide.

Verse 4. Charity suffers long, and is kind: charity envieth not: charity
vaunteth not it selfe] Here are certain limits and effects of charity; is
kind.] Institutum apostoli est hoc capite co^mendare charitatem, quatenus
exercetus erga proximos per officia hominibus conspicua. Estius. V. 4. Vaunteth
not it selfe] Verbum Graecum putant factum a Perperis fratribus, qui cecropes
appellati sunt, homines tam insignis proterviae, ut ex eorum moribus verbum hoc
obtinuerit. Pareus. Vide Estium.
The Greek word signifies a gentleness and sweetness of manners; envieth not]
envy is, anger at another prosperity; is not puffed up] made more conceited
of it self, in regard of wealth, or any gift which God gives.

Verse. 5. Does not behave it self unseemely] Is not transported by any ill
affection to carriage not befitting ones place, calling age; seeks not her
owne] not that which is profitable for himself, but for many; is not easily
provoked] soon distempered with anger; think no evill] takes not things
amiss; nor quickly entertaines suspicions

Verse. 6. Rejoices not in iniquity] Is not glad to see another commit sin,
that he has done ill, that I may disgrace him thereby.

Verse. 7. Bears all things] As the maine beam in a house Metaphora a tignis,
quae in aedificio juncta gravissima onera perserunt. Pareus. Instar trabis quae
impositum onus sustinet, vel potius instar palmae, quae non succumbt oneri suo.
a Lapide. Non facile de quoquam desperate quin ad meliorem frugem venire possit.
Grotius.
the building; (...) signifies properly to cover, covers faults.

Believes all things] That is, in other men's sayings and actions it believes
the best. 2. Not all things simply and indefinitely, but credenda vel
credibilia. Pareus. Not errors and false-hood; but rejoices in the truth,
verse. 6. 3. Not without trial and discretion. 4. There must go a judgment of
prudence, with the judgment of Charity.

Hops all things] From his neighbor. Endures all things] Bearing and
enduring all things seem to be the same, that is all evils from evil men.

Verse. 10. Then that which is in part shall be done away] Grace, and so glory
perfects nature quoad essentiam, sed evacuat quoad imperfectiones, it takes
away all imperfections.

Verse. 12. But then face to face] Understand we shall see. This is to be
understood comparatively, in respect of how we know him now, now obscurely as
in a glass; It is not to be understood of our bodily eyes, unless of God in
Christ. Vide Bezam.
then distinctly, clearly, immediately, so as to make us happy; we shall then
apprehend him clearly; but not comprehend him.

Even as also I am known] viz. by God. As is not a note of equality, but
likeness; so that the sense may be; As God knows me after a manner,
agreeable to his infinite excellency; so shall I know God according to my
capacity; not obscurely, but perfectly as it were face to face. Some expound it
thus, by how much our Teacher shall be more excellent, sc. God, and the manner
of Teaching more excellent, sc. the clear vision and contemplation; and by how
much our condition shall be better when we put on immortality; by so much our
knowledge shall be more perfect.

Verse. 13. But the 1. In breadth; for faith and hope are within the bounds of
man's person, but love is to God himself, and from him to our friends, yea our
enemies. Beatus qui amat te, and amicos inte, and inimicos propter te. Aug.
confess. 2. In length the other end with life love continues in heaven, love is
in God. Vide Bezam and Grotium.
greatest of these is charity] The Apostles meaning is, that love is more
excellent, not simply and absolutely; but in some respect only, that is, in
regard of manner of working, extent, and use toward others, in respect of
edifying the Church (faith and hope are private goods) or in the life to come,
the Saints shall be wholly taken up with loving God.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 1. FOllow after charity] (...) persequimini. It signifies an ardent
study of charity, to pursue it as a Huntsman pursues a wild beasts.
Vehementius est verbum (...). We are zealous of such things quae probamus ac
miramur, the other is magno studio adniti ut assequaris Vide Bezam.


And desire spiritual gifts] The Greek word signifies to desire with zeal
and holy emulation, to be zealous after, or zealously addicted unto them. See
12.31.

But rather that ye may prophesie] Interpret Scripture, because it tends to the
building up of the brethren, the conversion of unbeleevers, and the glory of
God thereby.

Bezas translation is more exact then ours, Thorndikes Service of God at
religious Assemblies. Chap. 5.
be zealous of spiritual graces, but of all spiritual graces especially that
of pr^phesying; prophesying is of the number of spiritual graces, and
therefore not to be excepted in opposition to them, as if the Apostle exhorted
to study prophesying rather then spiritual graces.

Verse. 2. For he that speaks in an unknown tongue, speaks not unto men, but
unto God] Prayer in the Church in a tongue not understood of the people
crosses this whole Chapter; it profits not, v. 6. it is spoken in the air,
v. 9. that is, it is not understood, he that speaks is a Barbarian, v. 11.
The understanding is without fruit. 14. v. It edifies not, 17. v. Instructs
not, 19. It gives occasion to some to say that we which use it are out of our
wits, Not only the reformed Churches, but also the Ethiopians, and Egyptians,
Syrians, Armenians, Muscovites, Moravians, and Sclavonians, at this day,
observe the ancient form of praying in their vulgar languages. Bishop Down. of
Prayer. c. 17.
v. 23.

Verses. 7, and 8. And even things without life giving sound, whether Pipe or
Harp, except they give a distinction in the sound, how shall it be known what
is piped or barped? For if the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall
prepare himself, to Battle?] The Apostle illustrateth the impossibily of
praying duly in an unknown tongue by two similitudes; the one taken from an
Instrument of peace, v. 7. It is impossible for him to apply himself to the
dance. 2. From an Instrument of of war, verse, 8 as if he should have said,
Bishop Morton of the Mass.
it is impossible to know when to march forward, or when to retreat.

Verse. 13. Wherefore let him that speaks in an unknown tongue, pray that he
may interprete] That is, pray for the gift of interpreting, that which he was
inspired to speak in a strange language. Mr. Thorndike. Sensus est, qui donum
habet loquendi linguis, ne inutile donum circumferat, oret Deum largitorem
donorum, ut ipsi adijciat donum interpretandi: quo ea quae peregrina lingua
loquitur ad aliorum intelligentiam proferre possit. Estius.


Verse. 15. I will pray with the spirit] That is, in a strange tongue ministered
unto me by the spirit; To pray in the spirit] Is to pray in the Closer of a
man's soul, being not understood of others; and to pray with understanding, is
to pray that others may understand. So the Apostle seems to expound the
phrase, v. 19. Bishop Down. of Prayer, c. 17.
for of that kind of Prayer he speaks. With understanding also] That is, so as
others which hear may understand: for so it must be taken, else it were
impossible that he which prays in the Spirit, should not pray with
understanding; and he speaks of public prayers.

Verse. 16. That supplieth the room of the unlearned] Meaning any unlearned
man; say Amen; and therefore prayers in a strange tongue were to be banished,
because they could not with faith and feeling say Amen, that is give their
consent at the end of them. The Papists Paulus scribit ibi ad Corinthios, apud
quos tunc temporis and Hebraeos constantissimum fuit in lingua vulgari communia
celebrare. Non igitur crediderim Paulum Corinthiis imposuisse, aut illud
praecipue voluisse, quoniam public in usu erat, sed vel de privatis eorum
conventibus, vel saltem de privatis colloquis post communia offi^ia peracta
habitis, ibi agit, and eos reprehendit, qui dono linguarum praediti etiam in
linguis extraneis tum loquebantur. Franciscus a Sancta Clara. See Bellarmines
opinion in Whitakers Epistle Dedicatory to his Treatise de Scripturis, and
Whitak. de Script. Quest. 2. c. 18. and Dilh. Elect. l. 2. c. 20.
say the Apostle means the Clerk of the Church, who supplieth the place of
the Laity. But the words do signify not him who supplyeth the place or stead;
but he that fills or occupies the place of the unlearned, that is, one of
that rank; and so is expounded by the Greek Fathers.

Verse. 17. For thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified]
That is, because he understands not what thou say, he is not guided and
directed to go along with the thansgiving wherein thou go before in an
unknown language. See verse. 3. and 8.10. of this Epistle.

Verse 18. I thank my God] The pronoune is the voice of faith, applying the
promise of grace common to all believers to himself, as Romans 1.8. That is, the
God whose I am, and whom I serve, Acts 27.

Verse. 22. Wherefore tongues are for a signe] Even judgment, and punishment
sent of God to them that believe not. See Beza, a Lapide and Estius. Contumaci
populo Deus linguas exoticas in signum irae minabatur. Pareus.

Verse. 24. But if all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, etc.
Unbeleevers were admitted to be present at preaching or expounding the
Scriptures in the time of the Apostles. That they were excluded (says learned
Mr. Thorndike The service of God at Religious Assembles. Chapter 10.
) at that time as afterward when the Eucharist came to be celebrated, I have
not the like evidence, but in reason I must needs presume it.

29. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge] It was not
then the custom (as it is now) for one only to preach in the congregation;
Certum est Apostolum ibi non loqui de promiscuo piorum coetu (id enim evidenter
colligitur ex verbis praecedentis c. 11. hujus epistolae V. 29. Nanquid omnes
prophetae) sed de certo quorundan piorum ordine ex Act. 13.15. colligi potest,
quod olim in ecclesia primitiva talis docendi modus usitatus fuerit, ut post
hymnos decantatos locus aliquis Sc^ipturae praelegeretur, ac deinde unus ex
Ecclesiae doctoribus surgeret, qui locum illum praelectum exponeret ac
doctrinas ex eo deduceret. Is cum dicendi finem fecisset, alius surgebat,
pollens and ipse prophetiae sive scripturas interpretandi dono, qua ratione non
unus tantum sed duo vel tres etiam erant concionatores, qui per vices
loquebantur. Eo existimant Apostolum respicere his verbis. Gerh. loc. commun.
de ministerio Ecclesiastico. Vide Bezam.
but that two or three chosen out of every assembly should speak in order.

Let the other judge] viz. Prophets and others endued with the gift of
understanding and discretion.

Verse 30. If anything he revealed to another that sits by, let the first
hold his peace] That is, he that was expounding the Scripture should give way
to him to whom the truth of it was revealed upon the instant of time. Mr.
Thorndike. See Morton.

It was the custom for the hearers to sit, and the speakers to stand. Estius.

Verse: 31. For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may teach] viz. all
the Prophets and Teachers. See Chapter 12.19. and Calvin in loc. Some hold that
those meetings were of Christians together, and that there was a mutual
improving of their Talents in an ordinary way, which did serve much for
edification; and they that hold this are different from Anabaptists, for they
hold this as distinct from the Ministry, to which they hold a call necessary.
Others say, that this interpreting and preaching did not belong to all, but
only to the Prophets there, and also that it was extraordinary by reason of
the peculiar gifts bestowed upon men.

Verse 32. The spirits of the Prophets] That is, the doctrine which the Prophets
bring, being inspired by the Holy Ghost. Perkins.

Are subject to the Prophets] Hoc est Prophetarum censurae, Pareus. That is,
the doctrine (or interpretation of divine Scripture) propounded by one Minister
of the Church is subject to the judgment of the rest of the Doctors. Glass.
Rhet. Sac. Tract. 1. cap. 1.

Verse. 34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted
unto them to speak] A woman may sing in the Church, Mr. Cotton of singing of
Psalms.
but she is not permitted to speak there in two cases: 1 By way of preaching.
2 By way of propounding questions, v. 35.

Verse. 35. And if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at
home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the Church.] The Apostle there
forbids open and public speech in the congregation: where if in the
exercise of prophefying they had any doubts rising concerning the things
handled, they were not permitted to stand up as the men were, either to teach
or ask questions; D. Tailor on Titus.
but keep silence for the time, and consult with their husbands at home for the
resolution of their doubts.

Verse. 40. Decently and orderly] Decorum is opposed to vanity, and filthiness;
order to confusion. Order is used metaphorically; Est ordo parium dispariumque
rerum, sua cuique loca tribuens dispositio, vel est ubi aliqua congr^enter s^se
praecedunt and sequuntur. Peter Martyr.
it is used properly of soldiers to which certain stations are assigned. That
is, let there be a care had of a decorum in all your public actions,
diligently to consider what the estate, sex, age, dignity, gift, and office of
every one require. Morton.

CHAP. XV.
See Mark 16.9. and Luke 24.34.
Verse. 5. SEen of Cephas] of Peter first among men, and Mary Magdalen among
women.

Then of the twelve] For the rotundity of the number, Judas had made one long
letter of himself. Hac ratione vocati sunt Romae Centumviri, quum tamen duo
supra centum essent: nam invaluerat usus ejus appellationis. Calvinus. Videtur
omnino intelligere undecim Apostolos etsi numerum solennem retinet. Alii tamen
hanc apparitionem refe^unt ad illud tempus quo jam Matthias electus fuit in
locum Judae Vorstius. Primarii Discipuli, qui ad Apostolatum suscipiendum and
Evangelium praedicandum a eliquis segregati erant, and qui juxta numerum
tribuum Israel, quibus Evangelium praedicandem erat, duodecim erant, atque ita
appellabantur, utcunque unus vel alter vel deesset, vel abesset. Morton.


Verse. 8. As of one born out of due time] Paul having humble thoughts of
himself, uses an humble expression, Verisimile est hanc loquendi formulam
apud Ebraeos usitatam fuisse, cum de re vili, quae plane obiici soleat atque
abscond^, loquuntu^; praesirtim si spectes Number. 12.1^. Dieterici Antiquit. Bibl.

Paulus quasi Paululus, because he was least in his own eyes.


which reason he seems to give in the next words verse. 9. Even as an untimely
birth is not fit to be called a birth; or because children that are so born are
very imperfect, they are lesser and weaker then those of full growth: so says
he, I am as a poor abortive, as a child born out of due time, I am the least
of the Apostles, and I am less then the least of all Saints, Ephesians 3.8. I am
not come to the stature and growth of a timely birth. Secondly, he calls
himself an untimely birth, or one born out of due time, probably from this
reason, because of the suddenness or violence of his conversion Hoc ideo
dicit, quia non longa institutione ad Christianismum perductus fuit, quo esset
velut naturalis partio, sed vi subita, quemodo immaturi partus ejici solent.
Grotius in loc. Se comparat abortivo idque (ut opinor) subitae suae
conversionis respectu. Nam sicuti non ante ex ute^o prodeunt infantuli, quam
legitimo temporis successu illic formati and confirmati suerint: ita justum
temporis ordinem servavit Dominus in creandis, fovendis ac formandis Apostolis.
Paulus autem vix dum been concepto spiritu vitali, ex utero projectus fuerat.
Calvinus. Vide Cornel. a lap.
For every abortion or untimely birth comes from some sudden danger into which
the mother falls; some strain or violence causes abortion: Paul in this
sense was an untimely birth, his conversion was a wonderful violent
conversion. See Acts 9.

Lyra gives three fit reasons for this Metaphor; as a child is said to be
abortive which is born either out of due time, or that is violently drawn out
of the womb, or that comes not to its due quantity: so Paul compares himself
to an Abortive, both because he was called after all the other Apostles, and
after Christ's death, as out of due time; and because he was violently by
Christ's threatenings converted to the faith, and because less then another in
respect of his life past, being a persecutor of the Church.

Verse. 10. Yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me] That is, not by
any thing in me, but Gods grace enabling my will to do the good I do.

Dr. Christus primiti^e do^mumium non ob mortem, sed ob vitam immortalem, quam
omnium hominum primus post mortem est consecutus. Loquor jam sesundum Hebraeos,
quibus vivere dicitur non animus solus sed homo totus. vide Col. 1.18. and
Apoc. 1.^. Grotius.
Verse. 20. Christ is become the first fruits of them that sleep] Among the
Jews such as had Corn fields gathered some little quantity thereof before they
reaped the rest, and offered the same to God: signifying thereby that they
acknowledged him to be the Author and giver of all increase; and this offering
was also an assurance to the owner of the blessing of God upon the rest; and
this being but one handful did sanctify the crop: so Christ to the dead is as
the First Fruits of the rest of the Corn, because his resurrection is a pledge
of theirs.

Of them that sleep] That is, of all that die; for Christ entered into Heaven
both in body and soul first of all then; but Henoch never died, H^b. 11.5.
therefore he might be in Heaven in his body before Christ's humane flesh
ascended thither.

Ob. Three dead men were raised in the Old Testament, and as many in the New
Testament, before Christ himself rose: how then is he the first fruits of them
that slept?

1 Christus primus surrext in inc^rruptione. Jerome. 2 Christ was primus though
not tempore, yet intention Dei. Cornel a Lap. 3 Aquinas says Christus primus
sua vertute resurrexit. 4 Alii suscitati sunt mortui, sed item morituri;
Christus simul relurrexit and aeternam beatanique vitam recepit. Bern. Beza.
Christus non dicitur primitiae resurgentium, quia nullus ante eum resurrexit,
hoc namque falsum esset, sed quia solus virtute propria resurrexit, and omnibus
iis qui ad gloriam resurgunt resurrectionis causa est. Ita solus virtute
prop^^a ascendit in coelum, and omnibus beatudinis causa est. Rivetus.
Sol. Christ rose first in an incorruptible and spiritual body, v. 44. they in
their natural and corruptible bodies, John 11.39. He was the first of all
those, which rose from death to life to die no more, but to live for ever;
others were raised from death to life, not to live for ever, but to die again.
He was first, not in order of time, but is the worthiest of all; they were
raised by the virtue and merits of his resurrection.

Verse. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive]
In the first part all simply, in the latter all with limitation, sc. that be in
Christ, must be understood, shall be raised by him at the resurrection. There
are two roots out of which life and death spring; as all that die receive their
deaths wounds by the disobedience of Adam, so all that live receive life from
the obedience of Christ. 2. As all die who are the sons of Adam by natural
generation, so all live which are the sons of Christ through spiritual
regeneration. Non moriuntur omnes in Adamo, sed ii tantum qui in Adamo
perm^nserunt; neque vivificantur omnes in Christo sed tantum qui Christo
adhaeserunt. Came. de Eccl. tomo. 10.

Estius gives two expositions of this place; first, as all which die, die by
Adam: so all which shall be made alive, shall be made alive by Christ. Or thus,
as by Adam all die which are Adams, that is, all men: so by Christ shall all be
made alive which are Christ's, that is, all the elect.

Verse. 24. When he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even to the
Father] By Kingdom here two things are meant; Vide Bezam in hunc locum and v.
28. and Pareum in hunc locum. Dicit Deo and Patri, id est Deo, qui idem est
pater suus, (est enim in Graeco tantum unus articulus utrumque complecten^)
quia sicut Christus ut homo omnia refert in Deum, ita idem ipse ut Dei filius
omnia refert ad Patrem, qui fons est and principium in deitate. Estius.
1. The Church which Christ shall present to his Father without spot; the
Church is called a Kingdom also Matthew. 13.4. So Chrysostom interprets it. 2.
The manner of administration of it; the substance of the Kingdom is
everlasting, Heb. 1.8. The present manner of administration shall cease, Christ
shall govern no more by Magistrates, Ministers, Ordinances, supplies of the
Spirit. This is meant by delivering up the Kingdom to the Father.

When he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power] That is,
lawful powers, and ordained of God. Tum in caelo principatus Angelici, tum in
Ecclesia cessabunt ministeria and praefecture: ut solus Deus per seipsum, non
per hominum vel angelorum manus potestatem suam principatumque exerceat.
Calvinus.

Verse. 28. Then shall the Son also himself be subject to him] Can Christ be
more subject then he has been? Things are said to be when they are publicly
manifested, as Psalm. 2.7. Saints and Angels shall be subject to Christ, and he
shall there profess that all the glory which he has obtained, he has it as
his Fathers servant.

That God may be all] Wickerius and other Familists say, that the union which
the soul has with Christ is not only real and Spiritual, but transmutativa
and conversiva; and that not in respect of qualities only, but the essence,
turns us into Christ; the very essence of the body shall be turned into God,
say they; se Christum esse and Deum esse dicere non est veritus; some such
expressions there are in Plato and Photinus, that we shall be swallowed up into
God as a drop in the Sea; but the humane nature of Christ was not turned into
the essence of God; but the meaning is, He shall be all in all immediately (now
he conveighes himself to us by means) and infinitely in full degrees.

Verse. 29. Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, Maxim
receptd sententia illa est, quod hic notetur ritus veteris Ecclesiae quasi
baptizarint, bristianos ad sepulchra ut ita symbolum esset fidei and
confessionis de resurrectione mortuorum, ita Bucanus, Piscator; a quibus
diversum statuit Beza, and Pareus, qui recte scribit, si constaret de illo
ritu, optimam esse illam explicationem. Tarnovius probat ritum illum tempore
Apostoli in usu non fuisse. Sensus igitur erit (inquit ille) si non speratur
carnis resurrectio and in coelis refectio, quid facient deinceps qui
baptizantur ac in magna^ cilamitates imo mortem volentes se immergunt, dum
Christo suum profitentur nomen? Ita baptizari (...), figurate es improprie pro
mortem de omnes generis calamitates far accipitur. Matthew. 20.22. Marc. 10.38.
Luc. 12.20. vide V. 30. and 31. hujus capitis. Tarnov. in exercit. Bibl. pro
mortuis, prostatu mortuorum, hoc est ut sibi post mortem sit been. Vossius de
baptismo. vide Cameron. myroth. Evang.
if the dead rise not at all, why are then they baptized for the dead]
Baptizing some living man in the behalf of his dead friend. Cerinthus held
that Christ did not rise from the dead, and so went about to weaken the
doctrine of the resurrection, yet it was their fashion that followed his
heresy if one died unbaptized, they baptized a living man for him. Secondly,
others take it for washing away of sin, the effect of baptism. Calv. Beza.
It is in vain to be outwardly baptized, See Dr. Donnes two Sermons on this
verse.
if there be no resurrection. See Grotius. If men desire baptism when they are
as good as half dead, esteemed pro mortuis upon an opinion that at the time of
baptism there was an absolute washing away and deliverance from all sins,
men did ordinarily or very often defer their baptism till their deathbed,
that so they might have their passage out of this world in the purity which
Baptism restored them to, without contracting any more sins after Baptism.

Verse. 31. I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I
die daily] That was an obtestation, and not an oath; for it is all one as if he
had said, Thus my sorrows and afflictions which I endure for Christ would
testify (if they could speak) that as certainly as I rejoice in Christ, so
certainly I die daily. Estius makes it an oath. Vide Bezam and Alardi Pathol.

Die daily] That is, daily expose my self to the dangers of death for the
Gospel, and conversion of the Gentiles. a Lapide.

Verse. 32. I have fought with the beasts at Ephesus] See Burrh on Hos. 2.12. p.
472. and Grotius in loc. Because the men of Ephesus fought with him after the
manner of beasts, Mr. Cotton. Savage men of beastly quality. Baines. vide
Scult. orat. de conjung. Philol. cum Theol. The Epicures of Ephesus, Demetrius
and his fellows, Acts 19.9. So after Tertullian and Theophylact, Beza expounds
it. Others understand it of his being cast unto the beasts to fight with them
See 1 Timothy 4.1. Titus 1.

Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we die] This was a proverb familiar with
Epicures, as that of Sardinapalus shows, Ede, bibe, Jude, post mortem nulla
voluptas. Paul took it out of Esaias 22.13.

Verse. 33. Evil communications corrupt good manners] This is an Iambick verse
out of Menanders Comedy. Paul Acts 17 and Titus 1. brings testimonies from
Heathen writers. Some render it evil speaking, or evil communication; some,
evil conversings; we may understand the word thus, conversing with others in
their evil speakings, sayings, or writings. Verse. 36. See Augustine De
civitate Dei. l. 20 c. 20.


Verses 41, 42. There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and
another glory of the Stars: Cartwright on Matthew. 20. Calvin is of the the same
opinion, that this place proves not degrees of glory.
for one Star differs from another in glory. So also is the resurrection of
the dead, it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption.] The
circumstances of the disputation which the Apostle handles, proves that the
comparison is of the difference between the bodies as they shall be in Heaven,
from those which are now upon earth, and not of the difference of glorified
bodies one with another; for he adds, It is sown in corruption, it is raised
in incorruption.

Verse. 44. Raised a Spiritual body] Spiritual is opposed not to visible, but
to natural; Non substantiae sed qualitatum respectu. Spiritual, not in regard
of substance, but state and condition.
They shall be still visible as the body of Christ, which yet the Papists make
invisible, and say it is in the Sacrament really present, and yet not to be
seen. Spirituall] that is, subject to the spirit (it shall not then need meat
and drink) and subtle.

Verse. 45. A quickening spirit] Because by the Spirit he quickened himself and
quickens us now to live the life of grace and shall hereafter quicken our dead
bodies at the resurrection.

Verse. 47. The first man] viz. In respect of his substance. Is of the earth
earthly] In respect of his quality, etc.

The second man] The Lord, in respect of his quality. The Apostle speaks here
as if there were but two men in the word, B Usher.
millions of men came between Adam and our Savior; there are two mediators,
Adam in the covenant of nature, Christ in the new covenant; as Adam conveighs
his guilt to all his Children, so Christ his righteousness to all his, he was
caput cum faedere, as well as the first Adam.

Pareus and others take flesh and blood here for man's sinful nature; as when
men say, Flesh and blood cannot bear such a thing, they are ready to urge this
place against them. Flesh and blood is taken either for the substance of man's
nature, as Ephesians. 6.11. or 2 for the infirm qualities that accompany it, as here.
Verse. 50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God] Not the sinful
nature of man (as flesh and blood often signify in Scripture, being opposed to
Spirit) but the constitution of nature, or the estate wherein we stand as men,
flesh and blood, qua nunc condition sunt. inherit.] That is, bear that
majesty, glory, and excellency of Heaven. Neither does corruption] Nature
subject to corruption.

Verse. 51. We shall not all sleep] To sleep here is to rest in the grave, Erit
mors quia erit corruptibilis naturae interitus, non erit dormitio quia amma non
migrabit e corpore, sed erit subitus transitus a natura corruptibili in beatam
immortalitatem. Calvinus in loc. Vide illum in 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
to continue in the state of the dead, and so we shall not all sleep, not
continue in the state of the dead.

But we shall be changed] the soul and body shall be separated, and in a
moment reunited.

Verse. 56. The sting of death is sinne] That is, the destroying power; he
compares sin to a Serpent. Vide Grotium Metaphora est sive a stimulis, quibus
aguntur boves, sive potius ab aculeis vesparum and similium bestiarum, quibus
si demas aculeum, sunt illae quidem sed nocere non possunt. Vorstius.


The strength of sin is the Law] That is, 1. In regard of discovery of it, the
Law entered that sin might abound. 2. For condemnation. 3. For irritation, it
is stirred up and strengthened by this, that the Law forbids it. Nitimur in
vetitum etc.

Verse. 58. Stedfast] A metaphore taken from a foundation, on which a thing
stands firm; or a Seat, or Chair wherein one sits firm.

Vnmovable] Signifies one that will not easily move his place or opinion.

Abounding] Or excelling.

In the work of the Lord] Because of Gods institution, as the Lords Supper or
day; or because done by his strength or for him.

Labour] Unto weariness as the Greek word signifies, is not in vaine] Not
shall be, the work is the wages the Lord;] Or with the Lord.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 2. THe first day of the weeke] That is the Lords day, which institution
seems to be derived from the Commandment of God in the Law twice repeated,
(...)] Hoc est primo die septimanae, quae dies dominica dicitur, Apoc. 1. v.
10. confer Joh. 20. Act. 20. Mr. Mede on Acts 10.4.
Exodus 23.15. Deuteronomy. 16.16.

As God has prospered him] That is, according to the ability, wherewith God
has blessed him. Graeci verbi propria significatio est prosperari in vijs, id
est, actionibus suis prospere agere. Quo etiam usi sunt Lxx. Cum alibi, tum
etiam in Psalmo primo. Verse. 3. Vsus est and Paulus Roman. 1.10. Estius in loc.


Verse. 13. Stand] The meaning is, continue, be constant and persevere in the
faith; shrink not, start not aside, nor slide from it; so stand is taken. Col.
4.12.

Verse 19. The Churches of Asia salute you] Where the Apostle means, not that
they did by word of mouth send greetings unto them: but that all the Churches
did approve of them, which he says for their great comfort, Perkins on Rev.
Romans 16.16. Act. 16.2.3.

Verse. 22 If any man] That is, That lives in the light of the Gospel, love
not] That is Hate, Luke 11.23. Ephesians. 6. ult. those who make show of love to
Christ with their mouths. Jd est, odit and execratur, nempe sciens prudens,
quod est peccatum in Spiritum Sanctum. Beza. He seems to have reference to
that Jude 14 15. Mr. Hildersam. This is a dreadful curse; See a gracious
promise. Ephesians. 6.24. Quibus verbis eum qui Christum non diligit, aeternae
morti adjudicat. Nam sulmine anethematis illius quod alias Indaeis Shammathah
decebatur (ubi Shem idem ac Dominum seu Deumipsum denotat) perculiebantur illi
qui excommunicati non resipiscebant ac de quorum salute penitus desperabant
quasi dicerent, Dominus venit (h.e. C^rto veniet) ad judicandum ic. Mayerus in
Philol. Sac. vide Bezam and Grotium, and Dilheri Electa l. 2. c. 19. Illud
maranatha ad orationis vehementiam adijc^tur, gravissimam maledistionem
denotans: quae autem sit propria verbi vis and unde hoc allatum sit, statuat
qui potest Morton.


Anathema] Accursed, or execrable, Romans 9.3. Gal. 18. 1 Cor. 12.3. Maranatha)
it consists of two Syriacke words Maran Lord, and Atha he comes; pronounced
accursed to everlasting destruction; as if he had said, let him be accursed
even unto the coming of Christ to judgment.

It is as much as he is accursed until our Lord come. It was the most
fearful, and dreadful sentence of the Church which it used against those
which (having been o^ it) did utterly fall from it so as the Church might
discern that they sinned the sin against the holy Ghost. Reduplication in
Scripture signifies two things, vehemence of Spirit in him that speaks; and
the certainty of the thing spoken, Romans 8.15. Abba Father in two Languages; the
Spirit of God is a Spirit of supplication in Jew and Gentile; so here cursed in
two languages; to show that both Jews and Gentiles which love not Christ are
cursed.

Neque statim post priorem, neque multo post scripsit hanc ad Corinthios
epistolam Paulus. Tantum enim intervalli suit quo Timotheus a Paolo nissus ire
Corinthum potuit, Mandata Pauli explicare, and ut ^is parcre^ur laborare, and
ad Paulum redire. Grotius.
ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the CORINTHIANS.
VERSE. III. CHAP. I.
THe God of all comfort P^^asis apostolica, quae and in Psalmis ac prophetis
usitata vocare Deum patientiae, solatij spei, pacis, quod sit horum author,
Romans 15. and alibi. Estius.
] Of all sorts and degrees of comfort, who has all comfort at his dispose. It
intimates. 1. That no comfort can be found any where else; he has the sole
gift of it. 2. Not only some, but all comfort; no imaginable comfort is
wanting in him, nor to be found out of him. 3. All degrees of comfort are to be
found in him. See 4. verse.

Verse. 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them, etc.] Plainly noting that he is not fit to comfort others, who
has not experience of the comforts of God himself.

Verse. 12. For our rejoicing, or (...) Nullum theatru^ virtuti conscientia
majus est. Cicero in Tuscul.
boasting is this, the testimony of our conscience] Here we may see the quiet
and tranquillity of a good conscience, See 1 Timothy 1.5. The meaning is, that of
which I boast, and in which I trust before God, is the testimony of my
conscience.

Vide Bezam and Estium
Verse. 13. For we write none other things unto you, then what you read, or
acknowledge] That which you read written, is indeed written as well in our
hearts as in this paper.

Verse. 14. We are your rejoycing] Or rather boasting (...), that is the matter
and object of your boasting, Pia erat gloriatio Pauli quod sun Ministerio
Corinthios sub Christi obedientiam redegisset: Corinthiorum vero, quod a tali
Apostolo tam fideliter and probe fuissent instituti, quod non omnibus
contigerat modus hic in hominibus gloriandi nihil obstat quo minus in solo Deo
gloriemur. Calvinus.
as you are of ours; or if we follow our translation, the Corinthians shall
rejoice at the last day, that ever they saw Paul, and Paul in them.

Solo Christo sulciuntur emnes Dei promissiones. Sententia memorabilis, and
unum ex praecipuis fidei nostrae capitibus. Pendet autem ex alio principio,
quod non nisi in Christo propitius est nobis Deus Pater: promissiones vero
testimonia sunt patern^ erga nos benevolentiae: sequitur ergo per ipsum solum
eas impleri. Calvinus.
Verse. 20. All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen.)

Yea] True in the event, and real performance.

Amen] That is, Stable and firm as the Hebrew word signifies, that is, they
are both made and performed in and for him.

Verse. 22. Given us the earnest of the Spirit] But if God having once given
this earnest, should not also give the rest of the inheritance, he should
undergo the loss of his earnest, as Chrysostom most elegantly, and soundly
argues. See Ephesians. 1 13.14.

Verse. 23. I call God for a record upon my soule] Or against my soul, it is
all one. The Apostle the better to persuade men, Est juramentum persectum, sed
in re gravissima. sic Job. 16.18. in animam meam, id est, cum maximo meo malo,
si fallo. Vide Job. 22, 23. Sic ne vivam jurandi formula apud Ciceronem and
Martiale ut, ne salvus sim, apud Ciceronem, alibi. Grotius in loc.
to believe what he was about to speak, uses an oath, and that not a simple
one, but with an execration added. As if he should say (says Estius) Perdat me
Deus, nisi vera dixero, Let God destroy me, if I speak not truth. Only God in
Scripture is said to swear by his soul, as 51. Ier. and 6. Amos, since he
only swears by himself, because he has not a greater to swear by.

CHAPT. II.
Verse. 15. A Sweet savour] It is one word in the Greek (...) beneolentia. The
Apostle so calls himself and his fellow workmen causaliter, Non autem respectu
Dei solum, hac phrasi de Evangelio Christi crucifixi utitur, sid and respectu
hominum, ad quos odor ille suavis se diffundit, and credentes quidem recreat
salvatque, incredulos autem interficit and damnat, uti 14.16. declaratu^.
Glass. Rhet. Sac. Tract. 1. c. 7. (...) fragrantia, metaphora sumta a
sacrificijs. Pareus. Gregory in his Morals says, that this word is like the
Planet Venus, which unto some is Lucifer a bright morning star arising in
their hearts, whereby they are rouzed up and stirred from iniquity; but to the
other is Hesperus, an Evening star, whereby they are brought to bed, and laid
asleep in impiety.
as those which send out a sweet savor from themselves.

To them that are saved] Indeed in them chiefly; yet not only in them, but in
them also that perish.

Verse. 16. Savor of death unto death] viz. To seal up their condemnation
while we preach Christ a Judge, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

The savor of life unto life] To assure their souls of eternal life, whiles
we preach Christ a most merciful Savior to all that shall believe, 2 Thessalonians.
1.10.

And who is sufficient for these things] That is, what Minister of the Gospel
is fit to perform these things which we speak of? viz. to be the sweet odor
of Christ every where.

Verse. 7. Corrupt the word of God] That is, such as by fraud and base arts play
the hucksters to inhance the price, and amplify our own gain. See a Lapide,
and Vorstius.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 2. Ye are our Epistle written in our hearts] That is, wherein we do
inwardly and heartily rejoice. Jd est, ego Evangelium vestris inscripsi animis;
and dat totius nomen parti. Nam ipsos dixit, and ostendit se loqui de little
studio and affectu. Grotius.


Verse. 3. To be the Epistle of Christ] Here is an Epanorthosis, Alludit ad
promissionem quae habetur Jer. 31.31. and Ezech. 37.26. Calvinus. Estius.
or correction of himself, as 1 Cor. 15.10. For when he had said before, that
the Corinthians was his Epistle that he might mitigate the envy of the speech,
he says that they are the Epistle of Christ, because their faith was his work
but written with his Ministry.

Not in tables of Stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart] He alludes either
to Ier. 31.31. Or to the law written in Tables of Stone; Drus. Prove. Class. 2.
l. 3.
which Tables shadowed out the great hardness of man's heart; to which the
fleshly Tables of the heart are opposed, which by the force of the Spirit are
made more tender, that the grace of the Gospel may easily be engraven in them.

Verse. 5. Are not sufficient] (...), Have no aptness to a good thought, the
least part of a good work.

But our sufficiency] Our fitness.

Verse. 6. Able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the
Spirit] That is, Origines literam hic grammaticum and literalem sensum
Scripturae vocat and exponit: Spiritum autem allegoricum sensum quem solum
aedificare ait, and a nobli esse sequendum, literalem vero prorsus reijciendum.
Vide Bezam and Grotium. Literae nomine significat externam praedicationem, quae
cor non attingit: per Spiritum vero doctrinam vivam, quae efficaciter operetur
in animis per gratiam Spiritus. Litera ergo perinde valet ac literalis
praedicatio, hoc est mortua and inefficax, quae tantum auribus percipitur.
Spiritus autem est doctrina spiritualis, h^c est, quae non ore tantum
pronuntiatur, sed efficaciter in animas usque vivo sensu penetrat. Calvinus.
He has made us Ministers rather of the Spirit then of the Letter; or more of
the Spirit then of the Letter, because of the promise of the plentiful
effusion of the Spirit, after the ascension of Christ; so J will have mercy,
and not sacrifice. That is, rather mercy then sacrifice and Joel 2.13. that is,
rather rent your hearts then your garments.

Verse. 17. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty] Liberty is
opposed to three things. See Psalm. 51.12. Cui unica tantum est necessitas non
delinquendi. Tertull. Jer. 22.19. Per nomen libertatis, non tantum intellego a
pec^ati and carnis servitute manumissionem: sed etiam fiduciam quam concipimus
ex adoptionis nostrae testimontor, convenit cum illo Romans 8.15. Calvinus.
Libertatem dicit oppositam servituti. Hanc enim libertatem Graeca vox (...)
significat. Intendit autem apostolus, hac part explicate mysticam
significationem ablati velaminis. Vt enim velum impositum subjectionis ac
servitutis cujusdam judicium est in eo cui imponitur: quemadmodum docet
apostolus, 1 Cor. 11.10. ita velaminis ablatin significationem habet donatae
libertatis, quae donatio fit non per literam sed per Spiritum. Vt sensus sit;
Spiritus Domini, cum ipse sit Dominus, ideoque liberrimus; libertatem
communicate ijs quos inhabitat, id est, Christianis: libertatem utique
spiritualem, quia Spiritus est, a servitute legis and peccati eos liberans.
Estius.
1. Necessity; where the Spirit of God dwells in a man, he frees him from all
necessity of sinning. 2. Coaction and constraint, such a one does nothing by
force, and from a principle without, but from an inward instinct and impulse;
my soul follows hard after thee; life is a selfe-moving power. 3. To
restraint, when Gods sets a man at liberty, he in largeth his heart, Psalm.
119.32.

See Dr. Reynolds of the glory of the Gospel. From one degree of glorious
grace to another.
Verse. 18. But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory] That is, seeing by
the appearing of grace, the veil is removed, that we may see the face of God
clearly; now must we by means of this knowledge be transformed into his
Image; that Image in which we were created, must be daily renewed, and by
degrees further restored in us; that is the Apostles meaning from glory to
glory. As Adam was created in the Image of God, so must every believer be
renewed unto that blessed condition.

Vide Estium and Vorstuum in loc.
By the Spirit of the Lord] These words may also be rendered, by the Lord of the
Spirit, or by the Lord the Spirit; but our version is most plain.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 2. COmmending our selves to every man's conscience in the fight of God]
That is, he did so preach and live, that every man's conscience could not choose
but say, Mr. Fenner. (...) habuimus Romans 3.13. (...) hab^mus Psalm. 15.3. and
36.3. dolo tracta^^ verbum Dei, qui ut hominibus placeant aut partem very
tacent, aut falsa admiscent. Grotius.
certainly Paul preaches the truth and lives right; and we must live as he
speaks and does.

Verse. 3. Hid to them that perish] That is said to be hid, which although it be
conspicuous of it self; yet is not seen as the Sun, by those that are blind,
See Luke 19.42.

The God of this world Tum a superbia, quia sibi arrogat honorem Dei and vult
adorari ut Deus: tum a potentia, quia hoc obtinet in reprobis qui sunt major
pars seculi. Zanchius.
] Not in spect of dominion over things created; but 1. In respect of
corruption, for he is the God of the evil in the world. 2. In respect of
seduction. 3. In respect of opinion, or estimation, because the people of the
world make the Devil their God.

The Marcionites, and Manichees in times past abused this place, to prove that
there were two principles or Gods; one which they called good, the other evil.

Haesitamus at non prorsus haeremus. Beza. Tertullianus Graecarum vocum
paranomasiam ita Latin reddidit, indigemus, sed non perindigemus.
Verse. 8. We are perplexed but not in despaire] Staggering but not wholly
sticking. In the Greek there is a sweet allusion of the simple and compound
verbes. (...).

Verse. 13. Having the same spirit of faith] That is, he and the rest of Gods
Church and children, Spiritus fidei, id est, fides a Spiritu donata, ut
Spiritus mansuetudinis, pietatis, fortitudinis, dilectionis, sebrietatis,
proipsis huijusmodi donis Spiritus Sancti. Estius.
had the same faith proceeding from the same spirit.

Verse. 16. Day by day] Non est hoc loco dissimulandus insignis lapsus Cajetani,
viri alioquin egregie docti, qui ex annotationibus Erasmi male intellectis, pro
illa part de die in diem credit Apostolu^ scripsisse adverbiu^ nove (...); em
exponit, ac subtiliter in ea philosophatur: quum Erasmus non aliud dicat, quam
nove scriptum a Paulo (...) die and die, pro (...) in dies. Quam facile aberrat
in Scripturis interpretandis qui linguae originalis ignarus tantum ex a^^js
authoribus venatur, quid Graeca, quid Hebraea habeant? Estius in loc.

Verse. 17. For our light affliction, which lasts but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory] All that can be by
man inflicted on man, Worketh] the Greek word signifies also to prepare, as the
learned in that Tongue know, Dr. Fulke. Not by deserving, but by showing the
plain way thither. Perkins. Dr. Gouge. Hic Hebraeo more verbum ge minans
Apostolus summam quandam excellentiam indicavit. Grotius. Est ejusdem vocis
excessum significantis geminatio, qua utuntur interdum Hebraei ad significandam
vel copiam vel excellentiam quandam immensam, ut Genesis 17.2. multiplicabo te
plurimum plurimum. and Cap. 30. v. 43. Levi vir valde valde. Tantum illud hic
peculiare, quod praepositionem Paulus variat, nihil tamen diversum significans.
Estius.
is but (...), compressio, a pressure, and that of the body only; for which by
way of recompense shall be conferred glory, which here compriseth under it
whatsoever may make to the happiness of man, and that both in body and soul.
2. The kind of affliction is but some light thing, easy to be born by him
which is endued by a Divine Spirit; but the recompense is a weight ((...),
alludit ad Hebraeum and Chaldaeum nomen gloriae Chabod and Jakar; Cameron) such
a weight as infinitely over-poyseth all afflictions. 3. The continuance of
afflictions is but for a while, even for a moment, but the weight of glory is
eternal; to show that in this comparison all degrees of comparison are
exceeded; he adds hyperbole upon hyperbole (...), which emphaticall
Graecisme, because other Tongues cannot word by word express to the full, they
are forced to use words and phrases which exceed all comparison, as Mire supra
modum Erasmus, supra modum in sublimitate vulg. Lat. Excellenter excellens,
Beza. Exceedingly exceeding, or as our last Translation turns it, a far more
exceeding.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. WE know] 1. By the revelation of the Word, John 14.2. 2 By the
persuasion of faith. Haec scientia non est humani ingenii, sed ex Spiritus
sancti revelatione manat: itaque propria est fidelium. Calvinus.


That if] The Apostle speaks not this doubtingly, as if it were uncertain
whether our bodies were to be dissolved or not; but by way of concession,
having in it a strong affirmation, as if he did say, albeit it be so that the
earthly house of our Tabernacle must be dissolved, yet are we sure of a better.

Our body is called a house, 1. in respect of the comely and orderly
workmanship thereof; 2. in respect of the soul which dwells in it.

Earthly] 1. in regard of the matter it was made of earth; 2. means by which
our bodies are continued and upholden.

A Tabernacle] to show its mortality; that was made for transporting, so this,
to which building (which is firm and stable) is opposed.

Verse. 2. Desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven] The
Apostle desired that glory should come upon him without a dissolution, (...)
Emphasis hujus verbi before intelligi potest ex 1 Cor. 15.51. ubi de subita
vivorum immutatione agitur. Vorstius.
as it does on the elect that are alive when Christ comes to judgment.

Earnestly desiring, if it might be, that in this state of our bodies we might,
without the pain of dissolution be clothed upon with the life of glory and
immortality. Dr Halls Paraphrase.

Verse. 10. Appeare] Though some Interpreters render it apparere and astare, and
make it all one with Rom 14.10. yet the word (...) signifies so to appear as
to be made manifest in that day; and so in the next verse the same word is
twice rendered by our Translators.

Verse. 11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men] as if he
had said, Scire terrorem Domini, est esse participem illius cogitationis, quod
semel reddenda sit ratio coram Christi tribunali: nam qui hoc serio meditatur,
necesse est ut tangatur timore, and neglectum omnem excutiat. Calvinus. Vide
plura ibid.
I know in the last day I must come to the bar of Gods judgment, and there
be tried of all things I do, and therefore do I endeavor to keep a good
conscience in all the works of my calling. Perkins.

Verse. 13. For whether we be besides our selves it is to God] That is, when I
commend my self, Hoc per concessionem dictum est. Sana enim erat gloriatio
Pauli, vel sobria and sapientissima insania si ita vocare libel: sed quia
multis videbatur ineptus, loquitur ex eorum opinione. Calvinus.
and boast of mine own ministry against others, and in so doing seem mad to
you; yet then I respect not my self in so doing, but only God and his glory:
or whether we be sober it is for your cause] That is, use such courses as to
you seem wiser, we do it faithfully for your good. Dike.

Verse. 14. Constrains us] Either an expression from those who had a
spiritual prophecy upon them, (...) Constringit] Id est, totos possidet ac
regit, ut ejus afflatu quasi correpti agamus omnia. Alludit enim ad vatum
furorem, ut diximus Acts 18.5. Beza. Similitudo sumta a parturientibus. Vide
Luc. 12.50. Grotius.
which was very powerful, whereby they could not but speak; or from women in
Travel, Heb. 12.15. which through pain cannot but cry out. The word signifies
in a Pound or Pinfold, so that it cannot get out by any evasion; in does faith
control the heart that it cannot wind out. Signifying thereby, that whereas
Christ had so loved him as to shed his blood for him, that very love did
constrain him to refer all he could do to the honor and praise of Christ.
Perkins.

Verse. 16. Henceforth knoww no man after the flesh] That is, do not regard
carnal privileges as before, not Christ himself in such a way, but look on
him as in Heaven. Non ^stimamus quemquam e divitiis aut truditione, quae sunt
res carnales, id est, hujus saeculi. Grotius. Vide Calvinum.
See V. 17.

Though we have known Christ after the flesh] Despising him for want of outward
glory.

Verse 17. In Christ] One may be so two ways: 1. Externally, Sacramentally, and
in regard of profession only, as John 15. 2. Or really, we are in him as our
head, receiving influence, direction and power from him. Si quis in regno
Christi vel in Ecclesia locum aliquem obtinere cupit. Calvin.

New Adam, new Covenant, new Paradise, new Ministry, new Creation: new Lord,
new Law, and all new.
He is a now creature] Some read it imperatively, let him be a new creature;
but our interpretation is more probable. This new creation (...) is used both
concerning the action it self, creation: and the object or terminus, creature.
New] This word in Scripture signifies as much as another, Mark 16.17. compared
with Acts 2.4. Not that it is essentially new, but only in regard of
qualities, yet this Scripture uses this emphasis not only to exclude a total
but partial concurrence of our will.
(for so it may be rendered) is not by the bodily presence of Christ, but by
the apprehension of faith.

Verse. 19. Reconciling the world unto himselfe]

Object. Therefore he called all men effectually.

Ans. Romans 11.15. the Apostle expounds himself.

Not imputing] It is a metaphor drawn from the custom of Merchants, which keep
in a book all that is owing to them, and it is therefore translated number,
reckon, and Romans 5. five times imputed.

Trespasses] The Greek word comes from a word that signifies to fall besides;
it is translated fall, Romans 5.12. offenses, Romans 4. four times.

Perkins on Rev. vide Calvinum.
Verse. 20. Be ye reconciled to God] They were reconciled to God before, See Chapter
6.16. but he intends thereby to provoke them to get a more full assurance of
their reconciliation by the daily renewing of their repentance.

Hebraica phrasi qua peccata d^cebantur ho^iae immolandae pro hominum peccatis,
quod omnes observant qui hunc locum exposuerunt; neque enim alio sensu ullo
fieri potest ut vere Christus dicatur factus peccatum. Chamierus. Vide Bezam.
Verse. 21. Sin for us] as he was made a Sacrifice for sin; for the sin
offerings in the Old Testament were called sin. Again, he was made sin for
us by imputation, because our sins were charged upon him, but he had not
sin in his nature. 1 Pet. 3.21. See verse. 24. Bifield. See Grotius.

Who knew no sinne] That is, experimentally, he felt no sin in his own heart;
he acted no sin in his life. Dicitur Christus non novisse peccatum phrasi
Scripturae; quia peccatum nullum fecit; id est, adeo suit a peccato alienus, ac
si prorsus peccatum ignoraret. Estius.
But otherwise he knew fully what sin was; he knew what the nature and
effects of it were.

The righteousness of God] 1. Righteous by such a righteousness as God
requires. 2. He says in the abstract we are righteousness it self, Mr.
Hildersam.
that is, perfectly and fully righteous. 3. We are made so in him, not in our
selves inherently. Not the essential righteousness of Christ, that is
infinite: that were to make a creature a God; but the righteousness according
to the law, to which the Godhead of Christ (though it was wrought in the
humane nature) gave an efficacy or excellency.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. REceive not the grace of God in vain] Not that the saving graces of
faith and love, and the like, may be received and lost again, Dr. Tailor.
which is the Popish collection from this place; but the doctrine of grace and
faith is here meant. Grace is taken, for the free favor and good will of God.
2 For the grace of the Spirit, faith, love. 3 For the manifestation of Gods
grace; so the Gospel is called the grace of God, the grace of God which brings
salvation. Titus. both because it comes from Gods mere good will, and because
in that doctrine there is a manifestation of the grace of God; so the grace of
God is often received in vain. This Word of the Gospel is received, 1. By
hearing. 2 By understanding. 3. By faith. 4. By affecting. There may be a
receiving it in vain in all these respects; we may hear in vain, understand in
vain believe in vain, show some affection in vain. A thing is received in vain
three ways: 1. When it is so done that no effect at all follows. 2. When the
effect chiefly intended and designed follows not, or not proportionably to the
means and opportunities we have enjoyed. The Word of God cannot be received in
vain in the first sense, so as that no effect shall follow, Esaias 55.11. for it
either softens or hardens, saves or destroys, 2 Cor. 2.13. The Word is by most
received in vain, in respect of the proper and intended effect; many come not
up neither in proportion to what they have received.

Verse. 10. As sorrowfull] As notes not a counterfeiting of sorrow, but the
overcomming of sorrow. Quasi tristes. He brings in the sorrow of the godly with
a quasi, as it were sorrow, says Anselme; not that it is sorrow indeed, but as
sorrowful; as if it were a painted sorrow, not true sorrow indeed; but when he
speaks of joy, there is no quasi, but true joy.


As having nothing, and yet possessing all things] In Greek there is a pleasant
Paranomasia in the words having and possessing, (...), which the Latins cannot
express.

Verse. 24. Be ye not unequally yoaked with unbelievers] This Verse condemns
unequal yoaking of believers with Infidels, whether in familiar society, as
Calvin, Vide Bezam.
Estius. Or rather in marriage, as others take it: 1. For the inequality of
such yoaking. 2. For the unavoydable peril of contagion.

Verse. 15. What concord has Christ with Belial] Not Beliar, Mercerus notavit
esse quosdam qui putent Paulum allusione sacta ad locum qui habetur 1 Reg.
18.21. posuisse hic nomen Christi pro nomine Domini, and pro Baal Belial. Vide
Bezam.
As the Grecians corruptly read it. That is, with the Devil, so the Syriack,
cum Satana, one that is profitable to none, or without yoke, as the etymology
of the word signifies.

Verse. 16. I will dwell in them] The words are very significant in the
original: (...), I will indwell in them, so the words are. M. Burrhoughes.
Dwelling together notes intimate and constant communion.
The are two ins in the original, as if God could never have enough communion
with them.

And touch not the unclean thing] This exhortation is taken out of Esaias 52.12.
To touch an unclean thing is no more in figurative speech, but that which in
plainer terms the Apostle delivers thus, Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness; that is, join with no man in a bad action. The
unclean thing not to be touched is not the man with whom we join in any action,
but the action it self in which we join with them.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. HAving therefore these promises] Mentioned in the former Chapter, v.
16, 18. Paulus admonet hanc subesse conditionem universis promissionibus, ut
nobis ad provehendam Dei gloriam sint incitamenta, unde ad nos extimulandos
argumentum sumit. Calvinus.
Not only having them made, but entertaining them.

Dearly beloved] So Phil. 4.1. we have this epithet twice. He does not say of
whom, of God, Christ, the Angels and Saints.

Vehementer exundo gaudio. Beza.
Verse. 4. I am exceeding joyfull] Over-abound exceedingly with joy.

Verse. 6. Comfort those that be cast down] made low, and be so in their own
eyes.

Verse. 7. Your fervent mind] it is in the original your zeal.

Verse. 11. For behold, this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly
sort, what carfulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves,
yea what indignation, yea what fear, yea what vebement desire, yea what zeal,
yea what revenge] The Holy Ghost has set down seven fruits or signs of godly
sorrow. The whole man is set on work in repentance; the understanding part must
exercise it self in carfulness and apology, the affections are to be
exercised in indignation, fear, desire, and emulation; the body in revenge and
punishment, the fruits of repentance. Perkins.
1. Care to leave all our sins. 2. Apology, whereby a man is moved to accuse
and condemn himself for his sins past, both before God and man. 3.
Indignation, whereby a man is exceedingly angry with himself for his offenses.
4. Fear, least he should fall into his former sins again. 5. Desire, whereby
he craveth strength and assistance against sin. 6. Zeal in the performance
of all good duties, contrary to his special sins. 7 Revenge, whereby he
subdues his body, that it may not be an instrument of sin.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 9. MIght be rich] That is, that we might have the pardon of sin, and
be received into Gods favor. Perkins. vide Bezam. Spiritualibus divitiis,
doctrina scilicet pietatis, peccatorum, remissione, justitia, sanctimonia,
aliisque virtutibus. Cornel. a Lapide.


Verse. 18. The brother] Silas, says Estius; Luke the Evangelist say Jerome,
Cajetane, Grotius, Bilson.
some. Others Chrysostom, Calvin, Dr. Hall. Hunc alii Ba^nabam, alii Apollo,
alii alium fuisse putant. Sed res prorsus incerta est. Voistius. Vide Estium
and Cornel. a Lap. in loc.
say it was Barnabas, because he was by the Churches suffrage made Paul's
companion.

In the Gospell] Not the book which was not then as yet published, but the very
Office which Luke had faithfully performed in many places in Paul's turn; or the
very preaching of the Gospel, as Chapter 10.14.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 5. BOunty] Beracah or (...), Blessing in Scripture signifies a gift or
present bounty, Graeci (...) nomine usi sunt, ut Hebraicam vocem exprimerent
Beracah quae tam benedictionem quam beneficentiam significat. Calvinus.
or beneficence; the present which Jacob provided for his brother Esau when he
went to meet him, is in all the story through called his blessing. So 1 Samuel
30.26. and 5.27. and here the collection at Corinth for the poor Saints at
Jerusalem is twice called (...), their blessing, which we translate bounty Mr.
Mede on Psalm 112.9. Vide Bezam.
Increasing and multiplying is so natural unto blessing, that in the original
Tongues of the old and new Testament plenty is put for blessing. M. Bridge on
Heb. 2.17.

Verse. 6. He which sows bountifully] with blessing as it is in the original,
shall reap bountifully] with blessing.

Verse. 7. According as he purposes in his heart] That is freely, and of his
own accord determines with himself. Downame. Jd est, quisque tribuat, prout
apud se and in animo suo libere constituerit ac praedeliberaverit. Estius.


Not grudgingly] When we perform good duties heavily, and with grudging.

Or of necessity] When we do them indeed, but against our will, only because
we must do so to save our credit, 1 Pet. 5.2.

Verse. 8. God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always
having all sufficiency in all things, may abound in every good worke] He
prevents a secret objection of such as might fear poverty to themselves, if
they should give abundantly; and shows that whatsoever they shall give, shall
return to them with usury. The Apostle in the original is emphaticall, he
triplicates the word. First (...) not in one but in every necessity. Secondly,
(...), not sometimes, but at every time. Thirdly, (...) not some sufficiency,
but a sufficiency of every grace.

Verse. 10. Your seed sowne] Almesdeeds are called seed here; and 6. v. we shall
gather the crop in heaven. These words and the following, are taken out of the
55. Esaias. 10.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 3. THough we walk in the flesh] That is, though we be weak; so some;
though we do indeed live in the flesh. Doctor Halls Paraphrase. Hic ambulare
in carne significat in mundo versari: quod alibi dicit, Habitare in Corpore:
Calv. Quod Evangelij Ministerium militae comparat, aptissima est similitudo.
Militia quidem perpetua est vitae hominis Christiani: nam quicunque se Deo in
obsequium addicit, nullas unquam inducias habebit a Satana, sed assidua
inquietudine vexabitur. Verum Ministros verbi ac Pastores reliquis antesignanos
esse decet. Et certe nulli sunt quibus magis instet Satan, qui acrius
impetantur, qui plures aut graviores sustineant insultus. Calvinus.


Verse. 4. Warfare] First, Ministry, as 1 Timothy 1.18. That is, discharge the duty
of the Ministry as thou oughtst; The Hebrew Saba is sometimes rendered, (...);
warfare; sometimes Ministry (...). not carnall] See 3. v. and follows. But
mighty through God] Or to God, Divinitus valida] id est, infinita illa Dei
potentia nituntur. Beza.
by an Hebraisme exceeding mighty; mighty through God, by divine power not
humane strength. So Estius.

Verse. 18. Approved] That is fit for life eternal. (...) Similitudo a nummis
probis sumpta.


CHAP. XI.
Verse. 5. FOr J suppose, J was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles] A
modest expression, that is, he was even with the chiefest Apostles. Modestiae
causa dicit se ita existimare: quum res esset omnibus cognita and manifesta:
intelligit autem quod suum Apostolatum ornasset Deus non minoribus gratijs quam
Johannis aut Petri. Calvinus. Vide Estium.
Apostleship as an Office, was of equal honor in all the Apostles; but even
amongst them, some had more excellent gifts and greater enlargements.

Verse. 6. But though I be rude in speech] This is spoken not simply, but partly
by way of supposition, as if he had said, many may and do take me to be rude
in speech; Doctor Gouge. Imperitus sermone] scilicet graeco, polita nempe and
verbosa eloquentia Graecorum, qualis est Isocratis, Demosthenis, Luciani. a
Lapide. If I be not so eloquent in my speech as some of them. Doctor Halls
Paraphrase
yet none can imagine that I am so in knowledge, and partly by way of
comparison; in regard of the vain rhetorical flourish and show of eloquence,
which other false teachers, and many heathen orators made, 1 Cor. 2.1.4.

Verse 9. I was chargeable to no man] That is, received nothing from any, which
carnal men count a burden. The learned observe the word has his weight from
Torpedo, which signifies a cramp-fish; a fish (they say) that has such a
benumming, quality, that the cold of it will strike from the hook to the line,
from the line to the goad, Annotat hic Theophylactus and Oecumenius id quod in
Graeco est etiam sic intelligi posse, non tamen obtorpui aut elangui, (tale
quid enim proprie verbum Graecum significat) id est, non idcirco segnior ad
praedicandum sui. Verum altera lectio, nulli onerosus sui, contextui magis
quadrat. Essius. Graece (...), quod verbum dictum est a torpore and ot^o, nam
otiosi premunt and imminent alijs assidue precando quod est oneresum esse;
(...) enim est torpere. Vnde and (...) dicitur torpedo piscis. Ad verbum vertas
non obtorpui in aliquem. a Lapide.
from the goad to the arm, from the arm to the body of the fisher; and so
benum him, and take away all use, and feeling of his limbs. His meaning is,
that he was none of those idle drones; which by their laziness do even chill
and benum and dead the charity of well disposed people. See Beza and Grotius.

Vide Di^heri Electa. l. 2 c. 19. Et Estium in l^c.
Verse. 24. Of the Jews five times received J forty stripes save one] Forty
save one, so the Greek, stripes being understood; that word is put in our
translation in another Character, as Beza likewise has Plagas. 25. Deuteronomy. 3.
The Lord commanded, that the number of strokes should not exceed forty; the
Jews, that they might not transgress, gave one less.

Verse. 25. Thrice was I beaten with r^^s] By the Gentiles: for it was a custom
with the Romans, to beat the guilty with Rods; therefore Cajetane collects
hence, that the Jews were not wont to whip with Rods but with some other
Instrument, because the Apostle says, he was only thrice beaten with Rods.

14 Acts. 19.
Once was I stoned] By the Jews at Lystra in Lycaonia, and that so grievously,
that he was thought to be dead.

Verse. 27. In hunger and thirst, in fastings often] Could not get bread
sometimes when he would have eaten; and sometimes could eat and would not.

Hilder^am.
Verse. 30. I will glory of the things, which concern mine infirmities] Our
afflictions are called our infirmities; the best are apt to bewray weakness
in them.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. IT is not expedient for me doubtless to glory] That is, although for
you it behooves me to glory, Estius.
that I may defend the dignity of my Ministry against detracters; yet it is
not expedient for me, viz. Simply, and unless in the present or like case,
because it has a show of boasting.

I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord] viz. To relate them.
Revelation includes or supposes vision, When Paul comes to speak of
himself, he speaks in the person of another. 2. He concealed it for 14.
years. Vide Bezam and Grotium. Calvin.
but not contrarily.

Verse. 2. I knew a man] That is himself, his modesty. Job. 42.5. In Christ]
having union, communion with Christ. 14. years ago] so long since Paul was
converted, and after had this Revelation.

Whether in the b^dy I cannot tell; or whether out of the body I cannot tell
Whether in body, or in an ecstasy of spirit. Doctor Halls Paraphrase.
] By this he expresses the more the greatness of the revelation. For he
means that God dealt so with him, that he himself did not conceive the
manner. He says therefore, that he knows not whether in his body and soul he
was caught up into heaven, on in his soul only.

Caught up to the third heaven] He calls it the third heaven, in respect of
the heavens under it: for the place wherein we breath is the first heaven; the
starry firmament is the second heaven; and the Paradise of God the third. See
4. verse.

Vide Bezam, Such as he neither may nor can utter. Doctor Halls. Paraphrase.
Verse. 4. Which it is not lawful for a man to utter] Not lawful for a man to
think he can utter, which he had no Commission to utter. It fell not within the
laws of preaching to publish them.

Verse. 7. A Thorn in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet me] It may be
rendered the Angel Vide Bezam, Grotium and Estium. Saint Austins free
confession, se nescire qu^d sit Angelus Satanae is more ingenuous then their
interpretation, who refer it to an extreme pain in the head, that Saint Paul
should have as Theophylact says, or ad morbum Iliacum which Aquinas speaks
of, or to the Gout, or pain in the Stomach, as Nazianzene, and Basile
interpret it. Oecumenius understands the messenger to be those Heretics,
which were his Adversaries in his preaching of the Gospel; according to the
signification of the word Satan, 1 Kings 5.4. Others even amongst the Fathers
understand it particularly, and literally of that concupiscence, and those
lusts of the flesh, which even the most sanctified may have some sense of and
some attempts by. Others understand it generally of all calamities spiritual,
and temporal, incident to us in this (...); but Cajetane goes farthest, who
reads it not as we do Angelum Satanae, but Angelum Satanam, not that Angel
which comes from Satan; but that Angel which is Satan himself. He conceives
it to be a prayer against all temptation from the Devil, and his Instruments.
Doctor Done on Psalm. 6.4.5. Vide Estium in loc. Some inward suggestion of
Satan working upon his corruption, whatsoever it was. Mr. Wheatly. Sunt quidam
qui adversarum quendam insignem qui Paulo immineret indesinenter, puta
Alexandrinum ararium, intel^^gi volunt, and sententia simplicissima videtur
quae statuat Paulum caesum plagis ab Angelo quodam Satanae. Camer. praelect.
vide Mytoth. Evangel.
Satan. Some inward corruption which Paul felt in his own heart; which Satan
stirred up in him. Mr. Hildersam.

Some would have it original corruption set on by the Devil; others interpret
it to be a wound in the Spirit, the sting of conscience pressing him down to
the nethermost hell in his sense, that was taken up before to the highest
heavens. Others say he was unapt to any good, praying, or preaching: for so God
cured and prevented pride by eclipsing gifts and spirit; he repeateth it twice
in this verse, as a thing worthy to be observed, least he should be exalted
above measure. Some interpret this prick in the flesh, a bodily disease, the
headache, the Iliacke passion; others blasphemous thoughts darted in with
violence. Some say he was much reproached by the false Apostles, as a man of
mean presence; and perhaps had some imperfection in his speech; they might
charge him, that he had lived on the peoples bounty, or misled them. It is
certain it was some constant impetuous torment what ever it was.

Verse. 8. Thrice] That is often, a Lapide. So Beza and Estius, often and
earnestly. Doctor Hall.

Verse. 9. My grace is sufficient Sufficient for 1. Quantity. 2. Efficacy. Mr.
Perkins.
for thee] That is, thine infirmity shall not be removed; content thy self,
that thou art in my favor, and have received my grace; by which thou do
withstand this temptation.

My strength is made perfect in weaknesse] He means that the lower men be
brought, Doctor Gouge. Not that weakness puts strength into God; but gives him
occasion of declaring his strength.
and the more weak and unable to be established they may seem to be, the more
divine is that power manifested to be, whereby they are established.

Verse. 10. When I am weak, then am I strong] Strongest through hope in Christ,
when I am weakest through sense in my self. Doctor Hill.
Not only by an intrinsecall disposition, that we are more inclined to seek
strength; but indeed by a Spiritual capacity, Jesus Christ is more prepared to
bestow strength, when we are sensible of our own weakness.

Verse. 11. I am become a fool Alludit fortasse ad Hebraeum verbum halal
laudare, quod in hithpael significat insanire, ame^tem esse, indecore se
gerere. Vide Bezam in 11. c. v. 1.
in glorying] As if he had said, it is the guise and character of a fool,
affectedly to commend himself; but I have not affected it, ye have compelled
me.] You have forced me to this folly as it were, who so much esteem false
Apostles my contemners.

I ought to have been commended of you] That is, ye ought to have given
testimony to my integrity, and to have maintained the honor of my Ministry.

For in nothing was J behind the chiefest Apostles] Therefore Peter was not the
greatest of all. He speaks it not of gifts alone, but of power and authority,
as the Text shows. See Beza on 11. Chap. v. 8.

I am as much an Apostle as they, who are more then much Apostles, Significat
Paulum nihil velle sibi proprium sumere, sed tamen in Domino gloriari; nisi
forte magis placeat concessionem esse, in qua exprimat quid de se a malevolis
and obtrectatoribus jactetur. Calvinus.
As the Greek will bear it.

Though J be nothing] Though you through envy account me nothing; and though I
in humility would account my self nothing.

Verse. 14. For I seek not yours but you] That is in my Ministry with you, I
do not look after my own temporal profit, but your salvation. Yet Ministers
should find both us and ours us in our obedience, ours in our recompense.

Verse. 15. Spend and be spent] Not only lay out my substance, but lay down my
life for you. Doctor Halls Paraph. The former (...) notes to be at cost with
them, to take some pains; but the other word (...), notes the spending of all
Super impendor.

Gloriarum flatus ob divitias, eruditionem, eloquentiam, 1 Cor. 4.18.19.
Tumults] Seditiones quae ex schismate nasci solent. De hoc vocabulo vide Luc.
21.9.33.
Verse. 20. Swelling] That is, taking things unkindly, sitting and musing that
one should so wrong me; and even having the heart rise against him for it.

Tumults] That is, making a great stir of the wrong received, telling this
body, running to that, filling the Town with it.

Verse. 21. Bewaile] In Paul's Language (as a learned man observes) to bewail,
and correct, seems to have been all one.

Vncleanesse] All impure words, and behaviors, fornication, and wantonness,
things of the same kind.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. IN the mouth of two or three witnesses] Himself and Timothy.

19 Deuteronomy. 15. Omnis animo (says one) est aut sponsa Christi aut adultera
Diaboli.

Every soul is either the spouse of Christ; or the Devils strumpet.

Nisi adulteri estis, id est, nomine non re Christiani, 1 Cor. 9.27. 2 Timothy 3.8
Tit. 1.16. Heb. 6.8. His oppositi (...), probi qui sunt quod videntur. Romans
14.18. and 16.10. 1 Cor. 11.19. supra 10.18. 2 Timothy 3.2. Iac. 1.12. and hic mix
7. Grotius.


Verse. 5. Examine your selves, prove your selves] Doubling his phrase, as it
were his files; thereby showing that it is not a superficial, but a
substantial examination that is required in these weighty matters; some say
the first word signifies a curious search, the other an approbation on trial.

Whether ye be in the faith] That is whether the faith be in ye, so John
says, he was in the Spirit, 1 Rev. so one is said, to be in the flesh, Romans
8.8.

Except ye be reprobates] In the state of reprobates, unapproved, counterfeit;
he means not such as are opposed to the Elect, as the word reprobates is
usually taken by us in English; therefore the translation is not so proper.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the GALATIANS.
CHAP. I.
GAlatia was a most brave Province of lesser Asia near Phrygia. Vehementiorem
in hac quam in aliis Epistolis esse Paulum satis apparet. Tempus quo scripta
est haec ad Gallo- graecos Epistola, sicut designate indicare non possum, ita
videre mihi videor non long abfuisse ab eo tempore quod ad Romanos scripta est
Epistola. Grotius. Illud huic Epistolae familiare, quod (sicut etiam a B.
Hieronymo observatum est) ipsa sola, inter tredecim Paulinas non ad unius
civitatis fideles scripta est, sed ad totius provinciae. Nam Galatia, non urbis
sed regionis nomen est, in Asia minori sitae; in qua test Augustino Ecclesiae
erant innumerabiles. Et Gallo graecia alio nomine votata fuit, quod in eam
Graeciae partem Galli quondam ob finium suorum angustiam, commigrassent. Vbi
and quando scripta sit haec Epistola, non constat. Estius.
See Acts 18.

The Apostle handles the same argument here that he does in the Romans; this
is as it were an Epitome of that, and has many the same sentences, reasons,
and phrases with that.

Verse. 1. An Apostle] That is, called or designed to be an Apostle. Paul in his
salutations is wont to style himself an Apostle, that he may win authority to
his dofrom his person.

Not of men] as Princes send civil Ambassadors, or as the Jews sent false
Apostles. Munus hoc mihi neque ab hominibus suopte arbitratu impositum est,
neque etiam Dei jussu per meros homines, quomodo multi in Ecclesis ordinati
fuere per Apostolos dictante spiritu, ut Matthias ab Apostolis nominatus, sed
ab ipso Christo jam extra homines in divina potestate constituto. Christus per
evectionem suam in coelum non est homo, nempe qualis fuit, and quales nos
sumus, id est, mortales. Grotius.


Neither by man] as Timothy, Titus, Luke, who were ordained by man; or else not
by the commendation, pains or instruction of any man.

But by Jesus Christ and God the Father] That is immediately by God. Whosoever
will take to him the place of teaching, it behooves him to speak in the name of
God or Christ. But because the Galatians did more doubt of Paul's calling,
therefore he expresses more here then in his other Epistles, to assert that.
He does not barely affirm that he was called by God, but on the contrary
denies that he either received it from men, or by men. He speaks not of the
common Offices of Pastors, but of the Apostleship.

Verse. 4. From the present evil World] From bondage under the custom of it;
Bifield.
from the fellowship with the men of it, and from the plagues that belong unto
it.

Verse. 6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed] (...) is properly to be
transferred or transported from one place to another, as Plants or Trees are
wont to be transported, Hos. 5.10. the Septuagint uses this word, whence the
Apostle borrows it. He speaks here of the apostasy or seduction of the
Galatians by false Apostles. Alardi Pathologia. N.T.
He alludes (says Jerome) to the word Galal to roll; as if he should say, You
are Galatians that is, rolling and changing, falling from the Gospel of Christ
to the law of Moses.

Verse. 8. But though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel to
you] Plainly implying, Notanter dicit praetet non contra. Pseudo-Apostoli enim
negabant se contra Evangelium Christi aliquid decere quia fidem retine^ant,
fide nos justificari concedebant. Docebant vero praeter hoc aliud, Etiam legis
opera ad salutem esse necessaria. Parau^
that though the person which brings a doctrine were an Angel, yet he must be
tried. He does not say a contrary Gospel, but any other Gospel. That which is
directly besides the Gospel, is indirectly against the Gospel; if we be
justified by faith, understanding it exclusively, that is, sola fide, then we
are not justified by works.

Verse. 10. Do I seek to please men?] This interogation is a negation; I do not
seek.

Nunc] id est, ex quo apostolus factus sum. G^otius.
For if I yet please men] without respect to the pleasing of God, 1 Cor. 10.33.
q.d. It is true indeed, once I did seek to please men, but I am now otherwise
then I was.

Verse. 18. I went up to Jerusalem to see Peter] From this Greek word rendered
see (...) comes historia, (...) non est quomodocumque videre, sed quomodo
spectare aut invisere solemus res aut personas in quibus ob excellentiam multa
digna sunt cognitu. Estius.
in which things are set before our eyes, as it were.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. I Went up again to Ierusalem] Or, ascended, because Jerusalem was
placed and seated upon a mountain, Perkins. Ascendit, nempe ex Antiochia,
Syriae, loco humiliore maritimo in montana Jerosolymae. Paraeus.
and compassed with mountains, Psalm 125. Or, in respect of the dignity and
excellency of the place: as we in England are said to go up to London from all
the parts of the Land, because it is the chief City.

Verse. 5. The truth of the Gospell] That is, the truth of God revealed in the
Gospel concerning justification and salvation by the free grace of God, Veritas
Evangelii accipienda pro genuina ejus puritate: vel quod idem est, pro pura and
integra ejus doctrina, neque enim penitus Evangelium abolebant pseudo Apostoli,
sed adulterabant suis commentis. Calvinus. vide Pareum.
through the merits of Christ apprehended by faith.

Verse. 6. In conference added nothing to me] That is, he had so full a measure
of Divine revelation, that when they came to talk together of the points of
Christian Religion, they could tell him nothing which he knew not before.

God accepts no man's person] That is, for the outward appearance, as the
Greek will bear it; so he regards not the rich more then the poor.

Verse. 7. The Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed to me, as the Gospel
of circumcision was unto Peter] The words Circumcision and uncircumcision
signify the Nation of the Jews and Gentiles, Metonymia satis nota est in
vocibus Circumcisionis and Praeputii, pro Iudaeis and Gentibus: ideo praetereo.
Calvinus.
the one circumcised the other uncircumcised.

Verse. 9. James, Cephas] Cephas is Peter, so called by Christ, John 1.43. James
named before Peter, Bellarm. de Roman. Pontifice dicit hunc textum corruptum
esse. vide Grotium. Primo loco Jacobum po^^unt omna Graeca exempla^ia (Latmi
quidem Pettum praeponunt non sine falsi crimine) quia fuit eximiae authoritatis
Apostolus. Pareus.
1 Cor. 9. John 1.44. Not Peter but James was the President of the Council of
Jerusalem, because he spoke the last, and concluded all, Acts 15.13. and 21.18.

He names James in the first place (says Estius a Papist) for the honor of
our Lord, whose brother he was, and because he was Bishop of Jerusalem, where
these things were done, and also was much respected of the Jews for the opinion
they had of his sanctity.

Coram ipse improbavi ejus Consilium. Grotius. Vide Calvinum. Estium and a
Lapide.
Verse. 11. I withstood him to the face] Jerome and others would have it a
shadowsight simulate non vere; but face is not opposed to withstanding
cordially but secretly, behind his back. Paul resisted him in truth and good
earnest; this appears because in the words following he sets down a weighty and
urgent cause of his reproof.

Verse. 15. And not sinners of the Gentiles] The Gentiles were not greater
sinners by nature then the Jews; Weemes.
but the Apostle speaks here according to the opinion of the Jews, who thought
the Gentiles greater sinners then themselves. That is, not sinners of the
people of the Gentiles to whom the law was not given, they wanting the rule of
Gods law ran headlong into every sin. Estius.


Verse. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me] showing, that he had
life whereby he did live, but had not life in himself to give to others, as
Christ, That is, I live a Spiritual life, yet not I as a natural man. Perkins.
John 5.26. Austen.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. O Foolish Galathians] The Greek word (...) signifies those that are
stupide, and which understand not what they ought; Non tam Gentile vitium, quam
insperatam stoliditatem Apostolus ipsis exprobrat. Confer 1 Cor. 15.2.36.
Vorstius.
it is used also Luke 24.15. Foolish and slow of heart, the latter interprets
the former.

Who has bewitched you] That is, who has deluded your eyes, and caused you to
think you see that which you see not. He uses a word borrowed from the
practice of witches and sorcerers, who use to cast a mist (as it were) before
the eyes, that is, Perkins. (...) proprie est oculis corrumpere. Sed ab oculis
ad animum transfertur, ut and Latinum inde deductum fascinare. Grotius.
Fascinare est malesico aspectu laedere. Plinius, l. 7. c. 2. exemplis ostendit,
etiam interficiendi vim oculis fascinatoribus inesse. Pareus.
dazzle them, and make things to appear unto them which indeed they do not
see. Some say to bewitch is to hurt with the eyes. Nescio quis teneros oculus
mihi fascinat agnos. Virgil. So the Greek word seems to intimate, (...) quasi
(...), id est, (...).

Before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth] As if he had
said, Galatia was not the place where he was put to death. (...). The Greek
word signifies to paint forth a thing, Romans 15.4. a Theological painting not
Artificial, as the Papists would have it to warrant Crucifixes. Vide Bezae
annotat. and Piscat. Schol.
to whom I have preached the doctrine of the Gospel in such evidence and
plainness, as if Christ had been crucified among you, and you had seen his
blood distilling from his hands and side. So Calvin, Pareus, Estius a Papist,
and others.

Verse. 2. By the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith] By works is
meant the doctrine of justification by the works of the law; Dr. Tailor.
and by the hearing of faith is meant the doctrine of the Gospel: hearing
being put for the thing heard, and faith for the doctrine believed. In utroque
nomine videtur esse metonymia, quatenus auditus more Hebraeorum pro
praedication^, fides autem pro doctrina fidei, hoc est, Evangelio usurpatur.
Conser. Romans 10.16, 17. supra cap. 1. v. 23. Vorstius.


Verse. 6. It was imputed unto him for righteousnesse] To impute properly is a
speech borrowed from Merchants; and it signifies to reckon, Perkins.
or to keep reckoning of expenses and receipts; so Ebilem 18. impute it to me,
that is, set it on my reckoning; that is, the thing which his faith believed
was imputed to him by God.

Verse. 13. Being made a curse for us] He says not, Christ was cursed, but a
curse, which is more; it shows that the curse of all did lie upon him. Calvin.
Execratio, hoc est execrabilis (metalepsis abstracti pro concreto) nostro bono
and loco. Subeundo mortem ligni seu crucis execrabilem, Deo invisam, uti
apostolus per scripturam subjectam docet. Pareus.


Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree] The death on the Tree was accursed
above all kinds of death, as the Serpent was accursed above all beasts of the
field. Both for the first transgression, whereof the Serpent was the
instrument, the tree the occasion.

This is taken out of Deuteronomy. 27.26. the Apostle here and elsewhere alleges the
old Testament according to the Septuagint interpretation commonly then known
and received among the Grecians. Pareus. vide Estium.
Therefore though he was most skillful in the Hebrew Tongue, yet he thought it
enough to express the sense of the Law.

Verse. 16. Promises] By the promises are meant the covenant of grace made with
Abraham, so called for two reasons; 1. Because the main of the covenant
consists in promises. John 8.56. Heb. 11.13.
2 Because the covenant was revealed to the Fathers in promises, but not
performed.

And to thy seed, which is Christ] Christ personal and mystical, both; his
person primarily and principally, To Christ in aggregato, as comprehending the
head and the members in the unity of one body. Caput and corpus unus est
Christus. Aug.
his Church mystically.

Verse. 17. The promise] So called, because all the promises are for substance
one in the Lord Christ, and meet in him as lines in the center.

Verse. 19. Ti^^ the seed should come] that seed, that is, Christ, verse. 16.
therefore he being come, Pareus.
the subserviency of the Law to the Gospel should seem to cease. Some expound
this only of the Ceremonial law, as Beza and some others; when Christ came,
the Ceremonial law was taken away; but in the 12 and 13 Verses he speaks of
the Law whose sanction was, He that does them shall live in them, therefore the
moral ^aw is chiefly meant. Christ both personal and mystical is here meant;
the Law was given to the Jews to prepare them for Christ personal, and given
to the Church till all be fulfilled.

In the hand of a Mediator] That is, by the ministry of a Mediator. Typical
Moses, real Christ. Vide Pareum.


Verse. 20. But God is one] God is said to be one and the same, constant and
unchangeable like himself. Hoc est justitia and sanctitate semper sibi
constans. Pareus.


Verse. 22. All] Not (...) all men, lest some women might be exempted; not (...)
all women, Dr. Clerk. Vide Bezam. Omnia dicendo, plus expressit quam si omnes
dixisset. Neque enim solos homines, sed quaecunque habent vel afferre possunt,
complexus est. Calvinus.
lest some man might be exempted: but (...) all, that is both men and women; as
if Paul would purposely prevent all cavils.

Verse. 23. But before Faith came] That is Christ, says Paraeus, Faith being
taken metonymically for its principal object. The revelation of faith in Jesus
Christ. Fides significat revelationem plenam eorum quae tunc latebant sub
obscuritate umbrarum legis, neque enim fidem adimit patribus qui sub lege
vixerunt. Calvin.

Verse. 24. The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ] As without a
Schoolmaster first had and used for entrance in rudiments, Paedagogus non
constituitur in totam vitam: sed pueritiae tantum destinatur. quemadmodum patet
ex etymo nominis; deinde puerum formando, hoc spectat, ut rudimentis pu^rilibus
ad majora praeparetur, ut unque Legi c^nvenit: nam aetatem habuit finitam cui
prae esset: deinde promovere debuit suos discipulos aliquo usque duntaxat, ut
superatis ejus elementis, dignos virili aetate progressus facerent. Calvinus.
Vide Pareum.
children come not to the University; so without the Law we cannot be
sufficiently taught to be preferred unto Christ; he that changes from a
Country School to the University, changes his Tutor; so we are not under the
law, but under grace.

Verse. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized unto Christ, have put on
Christ] A speech borrowed from the custom used in the Primitive Church; for
those that were Adulti or come to age, Weemes.
when they were baptized came to the Church the Sunday before the Pascha, and
put upon them white clothes; therefore the day was called Dominica in albis,
Vide Bezam. In Christum baptizari est per baptismum se profiteri Christi
discipulum. Similis allusio ad ritum baptismi. Romans 6.2. Grotius.
and they were called Candidati.

Verse. 28. There is neither Jew nor Greek] He says this to take down the pride
of the Jews, and lift up the heart of the Gentiles.

There is neither bond nor free] To take away the great carnal difference
among professors. There is neither male nor female] To take away the base
difference that the Turkish Mahomet puts between the two Sexes, See 1 Cor.
12.13.
when he says the weaker has no soul to save.

Verse. 29. Heirs according to the promise] That is, we who are Gentiles must
receive the inheritance no otherwise then Abraham did, and thus become Abraham's
sons: but he was heir by promise, Dr. Tailor.
and not by nature, and so must we.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 4 THe fullness of time] 1. Fullness of grace, 1 John 10. 2. Of
fulfilling promises, 2 Cor. 1.20. 3. Of fulfilling the Law, Romans 10.4. and
Prophets, Luke 1.70. 4. End of the world after him, 1 Cor. 10.11.

Made under the Law] Not only under the ceremonial Law as he was a Jew, but
under the moral as a man; for it is under the Law under which we were, and
from which we are redeemed. See Gal. 3.13.

Verse. 5. To redeem them that were under Redemit Judaeos proprie a jugo legis
p^liticae, and a ceremoniis sub quibus patres serviebant: a maledictione legis
moralis tum illos tum nos, quoniam hoc omnes premebamur. Pareus.
the Law] 1. On the Laws part, it rigorously exacted perfect obedience, under
pain of eternal death. 2. On our part, we do what the Law injoynes out of a
slavish Spirit.

That we might receive the adoption Adoptio in filios talis est, quando quis
certis de causis, quem non genuit in filium and haeredem adoptat, qualis fuit
Manasseh and Ephraim, Genesis 48. Moses Exodus 42. Graeca vox una voce omnia
complectitur. Alardi Pathologia. N. T.
of Sonnes] The Greek word for adoption shows the nature of it, to put one in
the place of a Son.

Verse. 6 Crying Abba Father] That is, causing you to cry; Romans 8.15.
as we call it a merry day, which makes men merry. Aug. de dono perseverantiae,
c. 23.

The gemination notes siduciall, filial, and vehement affection. Pareus.
The first is an Hebrew, or Syriack word. The second a Greek, whereby is
signified the union of the Hebrews and Grecians, or Jews and Gentiles in one
Church.

Verse. 9. Weak and beggarly elements] Or to come nearer to the meaning of the
Apostle, strengthlesse and beggarly, as the Greek words signify; Cartwright.
In respect of those who rested in them, and that when they were out of date.
Hoc est, Iudaeorum more cultum and meritum religiose ponitis in observatione
dierum, mensium, temporum, annoru^. Pareus. Apostolus non improbat discrimina
temporum quae Deus ipse ordinavit, Gen 9.22. sed observationem superstitiosam
dierum, qua alij aliis sanctiores putantur, cultus and meritum eis affingitur,
quod faciunt Papistae. Pareus.
both the Mosaicall ceremonies, and Heathenish worship. See 3. v.

Strengthlesse] Because they could not justify.

Beggerly] Because they have no consolation, or salvation in them. Pareus.

Verse. 10. Ye observe days, and months, and times, and yeeres] By days are
meant Jewish Sabbaths: by months, the Feasts observed every month in the day
of the New Moon.

Times] Or seasons as the Greek word signifies, fit times for the doing of this
or that business. It was the manner of the Gentiles, to make difference of
times in respect of good or bad success; and that according to the signs of
heaven. And it is very likely, that the Galatians observed days not only in
the Jewish, but also in the Heathenish manner.

Year.] The seventh of Remission, and the 50. of the Jubilee.

Verse. 15. Ye would have plucked out your own eyes] That is, A proverbiall
Speech. Significat eos ad quid vis sibi charissimum praestandum, preciosissimum
largiendum fuisse paratissimos. Oculis enim rem nullam habemus chariorem oat
protiosiorem, Matthew. 7.29. Pareus.
departed from your dearest things to have done him good.

Verse. 19. Of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you]
The Apostle uses a comparison drawn from the forming of an infant in the
womb, Vide Bezam. The word (...) translated, I travel in birth, signifies not
only the travel of the woman at the birth of the Child; but also the
painful bearing thereof before the birth.
which is not formed all at once, but the principal parts first; the heart,
brain and liver; and then the other by degrees: for grace is not wrought all
at once, but by degrees. The pains of travel breed not greater desire to see
the man child borne into the world then Paul's love in him, till Christ were
new formed in them.

Verse. 21. Ye that desire to be under the Law] That is, Sub Lege esse hoc loco
significat subire jugun^ Legis, hac condition ut Deus tecum agat secundum
Legis pactum, teque vi^issii^ ad servandam legem adstringas, nam alioqui sub
lege sunt omnes fideles. Calvinus. Quia usitate lege naturae secundum insitam
carni virtutem generandi natus est. Estius.
the writings of Moses commonly called the Law, because the Law was the
principal part thereof.

There is a threefold being under the Law. 1. For justification as here, and
condemnation as in the fourth and fifth verses of this Chapter. 2. for
Irritation, as it stirs up sin, so Romans 6.14. 3. For compulsion, Gal.
5.18. That is, not forced to duty as a slave.

Partus sequitur ventrem
Verse. 23. Borne after the flesh] That is by a bare natural power of
generation.

By promise] That is, not so much by any natural strength of the Parents, as
by virtue of Gods promise, which bound his truth to set his omnipotency a work
above nature. Virtute supernaturali parenctibus effoetis promissa. Pareus.


Verse. 24. Which things are an allegory] That is, being the things that they
were, signify the things that they were not; Allegoria est cum ex eo quod
dicitur, aliud quiddam significatur. Estius.
a figure of some other thing mystically signified by them; that is they
represent or signify the two Covenants.

For these are the two Covenants] That is, distinct Covenants, of works and
grace; first and second Covenant; not the Covenant of grace differently
administered in the Old and New Testament. Ishmael was not under the Covenant of
grace in any sense; Isaac and Ishmael represented all men; regenerate, and
unregenerate, all which are under the Covenant of works and grace.

Mount Sinai] Which came thence, being there published and promulgated; the Law
the Covenant of works.

To bondage] That is, begets not Children of a free and ingenuous Spirit;
loving God and out of love doing him service; and merely of his grace, love,
free favor, and promise, expecting their reward; but bondslaves, which out of
a fear of punishment, or hope of reward do service, and expect the reward,
for the worthiness sake of their works.

This Covenant is Hagar] That is, signified by Hagar, so called for a double
respect. 1. For its condition, because it begets all Children to bondage. 2.
For subordination, Sarahs maid the Law is a servant to the Gospel, and
Gospell-ends.

Verse. 25. Mount Sinai in Arabia] That is, so by signification, and
representation; and answers in signification and type to Jerusalem which now
is, and is in bondage] That is, to the Law, and to the curse and rigor of it,
being debtours to the whole Law to do it; or if they do it not, to the curse
to suffer it.

Verse. 26. Ierusalem] That is, the heavenly Jerusalem the Church; the number of
true believers, which do indeed seriously embrace the doctrine of the Gospel,
which began by Christ and his Apostles to be preached at Jerusalem; not hoping
to be justified and saved by the merit of their own works, but by the free
promise of God in Christ; these are free from the curse and rigor of the Law;
and she is the mother of all true Christians of us all] That is, of my self
and all those which with me look for righteousness and salvation, alone
through the merits of Christ, and mercy of God in Christ, through faith in his
name.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. STand fast] A metaphore taken from Soldiers, which stand in their
ranks, and fight valiantly where the Captain has set them; not shrinking a
foot.

In the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free] This liberty consists in
freedom, partly from the curse of the Law, partly in its rigide exaction; and
partly from the observation of ceremonies. Vorstius.

And not be intangled] The word is metaphorical, alluding to Oxen who are tied
to the yoke; Ne implicemini. Aug. reads it ne attineamini, Ambrose nolite
cohiberi. Tertul nolite astringi. Vet. Lat. nolite contineri. Beza nolite
implicari. Implicandi verbo alludit ad boves quorum cornua loris jug^
complicantur, ut colla demittant; ita olim implicatae tenebantur patrum
conscientiae legum variarum quasi laqueis. Pareus.
their necks being pressed and kept under. So Pareus and others. Let us not
return like willing slaves, to our chains again.

Verse. 2. Behold I Paul say unto you] q. d. These things are as certain, as I
am truly called Paul. Pareus.

Behold] It is a word of one stirring up attention. I Paul who am an Apostle,
If any revive the rite, which was a type of the Messiah to come, he denies
Christ to be exhibited, therefore Christ shall profit him nothing. Vide Grotium.
and have authority to publish the Gospel say unto you, whosoever says to the
contrary; if you think circumcision of necessary use with faith in Christ in
the matter of justification, you shall have no benefit nor comfort by Christ's
death, passion, resurrection, or any thing he has done; Christum dimidium
quisquis habere vult, totum perdit. Calvinus.

Verse. 3. Every man that is circumcised, is a debtor to the whole Law] He is a
debtor in regard of duty, The parts being inseparably united.
because be that thinks himself bound to keep one part of the ceremonial Law,
does thereby bind himself to keep it all. And he that is a debtor in duty to
keep the whole Law must needs be a debtor in regard of the penalty, because he
is not able to keep any part of it.

Verse. 4 Christ is become of none effect unto you, whosoever of you are
justified by the Law] So many of the Galathians as sought to be justified by
the Law, that is, by their own obedience prescribed by the Law.

Ye are abolished from Christ] Or as it is in the original, Exinaniti estis a
Christo. Calvinus Evacuati estis a Christo. Vulg. Vide Bezam. Siquam justitiae
partem quaeritis in operibus legis, Christus nihil ad vos. Calvinus.
ye are made void and empty of Christ, that is Christ is an empty and
unprofitable Christ to you, that are of that erroneous opinion, and hold
stiffely that you are justified by the Law.

Fallen from grace The love and favor of God, Perkins. All that profess
Christ, are under the grace of God, in the judgment of Christian charity.
] viz. of God, That is the doctrine of grace say some; the favor of God, and
all the benefits flowing from it says Pareus. See 11 Romans 6.

Verse. 5. Neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision] By
circumcision, he means the outward privileges of the Jews; and by
uncircumcision, the privileges of the Gentiles, Baptism, and the Supper. All
outward prerogatives avail nothing to justification.

V. 6. But faith which works by love Fides operabunda. Bellarminus verbum
operatur manifesto Barbarismo passive interpretatur, efficitur, perficitur,
contra grammaticam vimverbi deponentis operatur, contraque omnium veteru^ and
recentiorum interpretum sententiam; (...) enim est participium mediae, non
passivae vocis, quia passivus sensus repugnares Apostoli scopo and verbis.
Pareus.
] Faith is not wrought by charity (as Bellarmine perverteth this Text) for then
it will follow that love, by which faith is wrought, must needs be before
faith; the Greek word is not of the passive, but of the middle voice, as the
Interlinear, faith which is effectual; Pagnine, working by love. Faith works
by love, not as fire makes hot by heat; which is a formal property inherent
in it. But as the soul does this, or that by the hand; which is an externe
Instrument conjoined unto it.

Verse. 7. Run well] Our Christian life is often compared to a course, because
there is need of alacrity, and striving to it. As in second Chapter 2 v. Phil.
2.16. Heb. 12.1. 2 Timothy 4.7. 1 Cor. 9.4.


Did let you] Stop you, intercept your course, turn you out of the way; (...),
proprie est tranversum aliquid struere quo iter impediatur, unde translationo
quadam significat impedire. Act. 24.4. Romans 15.22. 1 Thessalonians. 2.8. Grotius.
secretly intimating their inconstancy.

Verse. 12. Cut off videtur alludere ad circumcisionem quam urgebant, quum
dicit, Abscindantur. Calvinus.
] Seeing they glory so in the skin cut off.

Which trouble you] Or as the Greek word signifies waste and overthrow; Qui vos
quasi quasi sedibus vestris pellunt. Beza.
because these men drive Christians out of house and home, as enemies when they
come to sack or spoil a Town.

Verse. 13. But by love serve one another] That is, Romans 13.8.
let every man in his place and calling become servant to another, and so
preserve love by the duties of love.

Verse. 14. For all the Law is fulfilled in one word] This is secretly opposed
to the doctrine of the false Apostles, which urged ceremonies alone. Calvin.

Love thy neighbor as they selfe] It is a note of similitude, not equality.

Verse 16. Fulfill the lusts of the flesh] That is, accomplish them with love,
with pleasure, and with full consent of will.

Verse. 17. The flesh] That is the corruption of man's nature.

Lusts against the spirit] That is, grace in the heart.

And the spirit lusts against the flesh] First, by laboring to overmaster,
and keep down the motions thereof. Perkins.
Secondly, by stirring up good motions, and inclinations to piety.

Non esse sub lege est immunem esse a maledictione, a coactione, ab onere
ceremoniarum legis, est vere ab his liberatum esse. Pareus.
Verse. 18. Ye are not under the Law] Condemning or forcibly compelling you.

Verse. 19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest] The Apostle when he
speaks of the fruits of the flesh, Vocat opera carnis: quia haec sunt studia,
h^mores and actus hominum carnalium. Pareus.
he says of them, that they are manifest not only to God, but men, which have
the light of reason and natural conscience; but when he comes to speak of the
fruits of the spirit, he says not so of them, verse. 22. The grace of Gods
Spirit is a hidden and secret thing, 1 Pet. 3.4. and is not so easily discerned.

Verse. 20. Witchcraft] The word (...) properly signifies poisoning; but here it
is fitly translated Witchcraft, (...) In vidia: dolor ex bonis alienis; (...)
voces pari sono amat jungere Apostolus ut has ipsas. Romans 1.29. Grotius.
because all poisoning is comprehended under Murder which follows.

Verse. 21. And such like] The Apostle having reckoned up many works of the
flesh is forced to conclude and say, and such like] as being not able to think
of all the sins, which do as fire sparkle out of the furnace.

Of which I tell you before as I have also told you in time past] before]
Before you go to Hell, as I have already told you.

Verse. 22. The fruit of the spirit] He called them works of the flesh; vices
end in themselves; Where the Holy Ghost rules, there he ingendreth those good
gifts and motions of grace.
but fruits of the Spirit, virtues abound with fruit. It is so called, as
Ephesians. 5.9. 1. Because all grace comes originally from the Spirit, as the fruit
is derived from the root. 2. Because of the pleasantness. 3. Of the advantage
and profit to ones self.

Faith] By faith he means fidelity, in making good the words that have gone
out of our mouths; so Pareus, Estius, and others.

Verse. 23. Against such there is no Law] Such persons, not works. 1. They need
not rigorous Law to compel them, Spontaneae sunt virtutes.
by virtue of their graces they will do them. 2. No Law to condemn them, so
Pareus, that is the better.

Verse. 24. Have crucified] He uses this word, to show that mortification of
the flesh, is an effect of the Cross of Christ Calvin.

The flesh] That is, the corruption it self of nature.

With the affections and lusts] That is, the inward working of it in sudden
passions, and more settled desirers.

Verbum (...) significat ordinate incedere, and intra limits suos se
continere. Estius.
Verse. 25. Walke] Orderly by rule, by line and measure.

(...) sunt qui honorem venantur ex ijs rebus in quibu^ verus honor situs non
est, ut ex opibus, eruditione, eloquentia. Grotius. (...) provocare dicitur de
iis qui ad certamen aut bellicum aut Judiciale alios vocant: Jnde per
translationem dicitur deijs qui in quovis alio certamine, puta eruditionis aut
eloquentia, sperant se alijs superiores fore. Grotius.
Verse. 26. Vain glorious] Desiring to be accouted rich, eloquent, good by men.

Provoking one another] Striving to anger, and vex one another with injuries,
contumelies, and contempt.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. IF any man he overtaken with a fault] He means a frailty and
infirmity; (...) Erratum significat, sive laesionem temere and quasi errante
manu admissam. Alardus.
and to be overtaken is on the sudden, ignorantly, and without deliberation, to
be drawn to commit some offense.

Restore] The word is borrowed from Surgeons who being to deal with a broken
joint will handle the same very tenderly: Set him in joint; so it is used
Matthew. 21.16. Perkins. (...) est aptum reddere: interdum and sanare quod
corruptum est. Matthew. 4.21. Marc. 1.19. quae significatio been congruit huic
loco. Grotius.
so must they be dealt withal in reproof which sin out of humane frailty.

Lest thou also be tempted] Even with a powerful and prevailing temptation to
fall into thy brothers sin. He does not say lest thou also be overcome, but
tempted; because if God leave thee to the temptation thou will soon be overcome.

Verse. 2. Bear ye one another burdens] Both the inward burden of your
temptations and corruptions, and the outward of afflictions, Esaias 13.16.
Meaning such things in our brethren as are like burdens, even troublesome and
grievous unto us. Etiam peccata sunt onera: portat aliena peccata qui non
superbe lapsum contemnit, sed sperat de eo meliora. Grotius. The Apostle
calls slips, infirmities, and sins, by the name of burdens; taking his
metaphor from travelers, who use to ease one another by carrying one another
burden either in whole or in part. Pereus in loc.
We must not bear with their sins, but help them out of their grief by
consolation, their sin by direction.

Verse. 4. Let every man prove his own work] The Greek word (...) translated
prove, signifies also to approve, as Romans 14.2. 1 Cor. 16.3. And so the word is
used in English, when we say, such a one is to prove a will, that is to approve
it. The word here may be understood in both senses, to prove our works, and to
approve them.

To rejoyce] The Greek, to glory: which is more then to rejoice.

Verse. 5. Bear his own burden] as a Porter. Portabit (...) quod est bajulorum
proprie. Erasm.


Verse. 6. Let him that is taught] Gr catechized, (...) Hoc est, proprie; qui
viva voce instituitur. Confer. Romans 2.18. Vorstius.
or taught familiarly by word of mouth, or lively voice, as when children are
taught the first principles of Religion. Here it is taken more largely for him
that is any way taught and instructed. Make him that taught him] catechized
him, or instructed him, generally. Partaker] That is, communicate, afford, give
unto them these temporal things.

Verse 7. For whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap] It is an usual
proverb among all Nations; You have the like sentences, Job 4 8. Prove. 11.18.
and elsewhere. Vt sementem feceris ita and metes. Cicero de oratore.
To sow with the Hebrews often signifies to work, and to reap to be rewarded
or punished, Matthew 25.24, 26: 2 Cor. 9.6.

Verse. 10. As we have therefore opportunity] Take the present occasion of doing
all the good thou can. (...) signifies in a large acceptance,
seasonablenesse of circumstance, whether of time, place or any occasion: but
most properly a seasonable time. Therefore it is turned, dum tempus habemus.
Vet. lat. Beza. Pareus. Vbi tempus habemus. Calv.


Verse. 14. Cross of Christ] Some understand it of the afflictions which he did
suffer for the profession of Christ; but this sense cannot be, Greenham. Vide
Grotium. Gloriari in Christi cruce perinde valet atque Christo crucifixo, nisi
quod plus exprimit; significat enim mortem illam ignominiosam, probrique
plenam, imo etiam maledictam a Deo. Calv.
that we should rejoice in nothing but affliction; it is rather to be
understood of the Cross which Christ suffered for us then of that we suffer
for him, as 2 Cor. 2.2.

Verse. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature] That is, are neither acceptable to God, nor
available to salvation. under these two synecdochically comprehending all
outward privileges and dignities.

As many as walk] The Greek word signifies not simply to walk, but to walk by
rule, Atque ita incedent ut recta serie and ordine progrediantur, illud enim
est (...). Rainold. de lib. Apoc. vide Bezam.
in order and measure, without treading aside, but making straight steps to our
feet, Heb. 12.13.

According to this rule] This Canon; that is, the doctrine of this Epistle
Metaphora ab architectis. Pareus.

The Israel of God] Israel of old was the Church of God; therefore the Church
is now called the Israel of God.

See 2 Cor. 11.23. and 4.10.11. Vide Bezam, and Grotium. Etsi illis non
refragamur, qui asserunt, Paulum cicatrices suas intelligere, quas toties
caesus virgis, toties lapidatus, toties bestiis objectus, toties in vincula
conjectus reportavit; inficiari tamen nemo audebit, haud perperam nos sentire,
si eundem, ad ritum respoxisse Romanorum contendamus; apud quos militiae
tyrones vel in facie, vel in manibus, vel in alia quavis corporis part,
inscriptionibus quibusdam, quas proprie stigmata denotant, signabantur, ne, si,
leporina fortitudine militiam subterfugere auderent, possent latitare. Dilhet.
elect. l. 2. c. 10.
Verse. 17. For I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Iesus] The word in the
original translated marks, does properly signify Prints with a hot Iron. But
here it is used generally to signify any blemish, scar, or mark whatsoever.
Prisons, bonds, whips, buffetings, stoning, reproaches of all kind, which he
endured for the testimony of the Gospel.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the EPHESIANS. Epistola
haec semper inter eximias est habita, scripta ab Apostolo jam diu functo
Apostolicum munus, cum in vinculis esset Romae, ad Ephesos civitatem Asiae
praecipuam, e qua urbe multi viri docti and in saeculi rebus sapientes
prodierant. Grotius.

CHAP. I.
Verse. 1. TO the Saints] 1. They were all Saints by outward profession. 2.
There were many true Saints, the better part gives the denomination; Wine and
Water is called Wine.

Ephesus] This was a mother City in lesser Asia, famous for Idolatry,
Conjuring, as the Acts of the Apostles testify; so given to all riot, that it
banished Hermodorus because he was an honest sober man: yet here God had his
Church. It was near the Sea, given to merchandise, ample and rich. Bayne.

Verse. 3. Blessed be the Lord God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us, etc] Blessing is applied, Nos Deum benedicimus, quum eum
probeneficiis laudamus; ille vero nos benedicit, quum nos beneficiis afficit.
Nam Dei benedicere benefacere est. Estius. Verbum Benedicendi hic vary
accipitur, prout vel ad Deum refertur, vel ad homines, Nostra erga Deum
benedictio laudis est, dum ejus beneficentiam praedicamus; Deus autem nobis
dicitur benedicere, quum soelicem rebus nostris dat successum and nos sua
beneficentia prosequitur, ita ut been and prospere sit nobis. Calvinus.


First, to God; and signifies, 1. To consecrate to an holy use, Genesis 2.3. 2. To
enrich with favors, as here, and Acts 3.26.


Secondly, to man; who is said to bless God when he prays unto him, or
praises him for his mercy, as here, and Matthew. 14.19. and 26.26. Psalm 103.1.
and 104.1. and 115.18. Luke 1.68.

Blessed] That is, praised.

Who has blessed us] That is, enriched us with all blessing or grace.

With all Spiritual blessings] In the original it is in the singular number,
(...), in omni benedictione spirituali. Grotius.
with all spiritual blessing; all, and yet but one blessing: to note, that
Spiritual blessings are so knit together that they all make up but one
blessing.

Blessings may be said to be Spiritual three ways: 1. When they are blessings
bestowed on men's Spirits; when their souls prosper. 2. When they are wrought,
not in a natural way, but by the Spirit of God. 3. When they tend to a
Spiritual end. 2 Chronicles. 17.2, 3. Spiritual blessings are the chiefest, 1.
Because they are the blessings of Gods right hand. 2. Come from his choice
love. 3. Because they are blessings of the spirit and soul. 4. Because of
their conjunction; where God gives one Spiritual blessing, he gives all.

In heavenly places] or things; places is not in the Original. In Heavenlies.
This word is used five times in this Epistle, Verse 20. of this Chapter, In
coelestibus] non multum refert subaudias locis an bonis. Calvinus.
2, 6.3, 10. and 6.12. on which last place see Dr. Gouge.

Verse. 4. Chosen us in him] or, for him, as some would have it; not as if
Christ were the foundation of election, Dicimus nos electos esse in Christo
tanquam in capite, ut essen^us illius membra eaque sancta, etc. Zanchius.
but we are chosen in him as the foundation of our salvation.

Verse. 5. According to the good pleasure of his will] The Greek word (...)
rendered here good pleasure is a word peculiar to the Scripture, and (as Hunc
sermonem de Hebraic^ Ratson LXX. interpretes transtulerunt, rebus novis, nova
verba fingentes. Hieron. in loc.
Jerome says) was first invented by the LXX Interpreters, that they might
express the signification of the Hebrew word Ratson.

Nos gratis sibi acceptos fecit. Beza. Nos sibi gratis effecit gratos. Pareus.
Wherein he has made us accepted] Greek freely made us free.

Verse. 8. All wisdom] 1. In regard of the excellency, because it serves to all
purposes. Sapientiae fuit invenire rations sanandi generis humani: prudentiae
eas disponere. Grotius.
2. In regard of the quantity, not absolutely, but comparatively: 1. In
comparison of that measure which was given the believing Jew. 2. In regard of
those which are more imperfect.

Verse. 9. The mystery of his will] The Gospel of salvation may be called a
mystery in three regards: Bayne. Vide Bezam.
1. Absolutely, because it is a thing of it self within the will of God, which
no creature by it self is able to know. 2. In regard of the spare revelation
and small number of those to whom it was manifested. 3. Now it is divulged, in
regard of those whose eyes are not opened to see it.

Verse. 10. In the dispensation] It is a word taken from Stewards, and such as
have the keeping of things in common, and are to distribute them as they see
fit for singular persons and occasions. To dispense them is to distribute that
I have in common, as is fitting in wisdom, to persons and occasions in
particular. Dispensation of times is put by a metonymie of the adjunct, for
fullness of times wisely dispensed. This Greek word (...) shows that God
has a care of the Church, as a man of his house, and dispenses to every one
of the family his portion. Est similitudo sumpta a familia, in qua
paterfamilias aut aliquis ejus loco, ex cella deprompta dimensa dat singulis.
Grotius. The Angels received their confirmation from Christ, and are reconciled
to us by him.
Baine.

Of the fullness of times] Fullness of times indefinitely, universally notes
the consummation of all these seasons successively which God had appointed for
the gathering of his Saints

Gather together in one] There are three significations of this Greek word.
Chrysostom has two: 1. Gather together as members under one head, (both which
are in Heaven, and which are on earth) Angels and men; this interpretation
Zanchy follows. 2. To recapitulate and sum up what was spoken more fully; so
we say the heads of a Sermon; so it is used Romans 13.9. All excellencies are
summed up in Christ; all the Sacrifices were fulfilled in that one Sacrifice,
all the promises were accomplished in him. So Tertul. Erasm. Gr. (...) quod
verbum vary interpretes vertunt and exponunt. Vulgatus vertit instaurare,
Erasmus summatim instaurare, quod Bullingerus retinet. Tremelius ex
translatione Syriaca, de integro renovarentur, quasi dictum esset (...).
Calvinus recolligere, quod Bezae and piscatori placet. Hieronymus vertit
recapitulare. Grotius in loc. Vide Lamperti Alardi Pathologiam Sacram Novi
Testamenti.
3. Summatim instaurare, briefly to restore all things, and bring them to their
primitive perfection; what we lost in Adam is restored in Christ, both in
Heaven and in Earth. Angels and Saints in the Church Triumphant and Militant.

Verse. 11. Also we have obtained an inheritance] We were sorted out; the old
books read it we are chosen, In sortem adsciti sumus. Certum est alludi ad
sorts, quibus inter Israelitas fuit divisa haereditas terrae Chanaan Zanchius.
Vide Estium.
the latter we have obtained an inheritance. The word signifies, we have been
chosen as it were by lot to an inheritance.

Verse. 13. After that ye heard the word of truth] That is, the Gospel; it was
indicted by the Author of all truth, and contains so much supernatural truth
as is necessary for our salvation. 3. It excites us to the embracing, and
practicing of truth.

In whom after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of
promise] The original runs thus, In whom believing, or having believed, or
when you believed, you were seale^ This implies 4. Things. 1. A work of real
and visible distinction of the called of God from other men. 2. A work of
confirmation whereby we abide so. 3. Of transformation, and daily renewing the
soul. 4. The evidence of all this to the conscience of him that is sealed.
The nature of a seal is to make things sure, Dan 6.8. Matthew. 27.66. as a
writing is firm amongst men, when the seal is put to it; secondly men set
their seals also on things to note their propriety in the thing which is
sealed. See 2 Cor. 1.23. with that holy Spirit of promise] Gr. See Beza.

Verse. 14. Which is the earnest of our inheritance] Our English relative (who)
does more distincly answer to the Greek then (which) This word earnest Bayne.
Vox (...) vox est canamea sive Phaenissa, quae per commercia inde in Graeciam
venit, and valde huic rei convenit; est ^n^m arrhabo sive ut Latini brevius
dicunt arra pars pretii in antecessum data, quo minus de plena solutione
dubitetur. Sic dona illa spiritus celestia portio quaedam erant foelicitatis
coelestis, and aeternae, and de ea fidem faciebant. Grotius. Vox Hebraea est
origin, Genesis 38.17. Latini dicunt arram. Est tamen and Latinum arrhabo.
Accipitur pro munere, quod datur tam in contractu matrimonij, quam emptionis.
Cheiromaeus de Graeco-barbaris. N. T. 2 Cor. 1.22. and 55.
is in the original tongues more large then our English; and may signify
pledges, pawnes, hostages, as well as earnest, which is in contract of buying
and selling only exercised; and is a giving some small part of a sum, to
assure that the whole shall be tendered in due season.

Of the purchased possession] It is one word in the Greek, but two in English,
(...) Hebraeo more abstractum pro concreto: Populus ille Deo acquisitas ut
dicitur 1 Pet. 2.9. and Act. 20.20. Habet autem eam vox (...). Solemus enim
magni facere ea quae nobis magni constant. Grotius.
because we cannot otherwise express it; some refer it to the persons, so
Calvin. Others to the estate they shall attain unto, when they come to heaven.
So 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.14.

Verse. 16. Cease not to give thankes] 1. In all his solemn addresses. 2. By
frequent ejaculations. 3. In regard of the habitual disposition of the soul.
4. Would persevere in it.

Verse. 17. The God of our Lord Jesus Christ] 1. by way of opposition to all
false Gods, as he is called the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. 2. The Father
of glory] That is, glorious father. See 24. Psalm. latter end, Act. 7.2. because
he is the fountain of all visible glory, gave such abundant glory to the Sun.
Secondly, of all invisible glory. 1 Timothy 3. latter end. Thirdly, the fountain
of the Deity, Chrysostom. expounds it the Father of Christ as v. 3. Baine.
In regard of his incarnation, God the Father gave him his body. 3. As he is
mediator. 4. By way of exaltation; this is more then the God of the whole
world, God of Nations.

The Spirit of wisedome] Put for the gift of wisdom bestowed on us, so called
both because the Spirit does beget it in us; and is with it to sustain and
perfect it, as also because it self is of a spiritual nature, moving them in
whom it is to work after the directions of it.

Verse. 18. The hope of his calling] Hope is put for things hoped for, Spes pro
resperanda more Hebraeo posita est, ut and alibi interdum. Estius.
not for the grace of hope, which springs from faith; thus we say he is a man
of fair hopes, that is goodly lands which in likelihood will befall him.

His inheritance] An inheritance which comes by grace or lot, called his. 1.
Because it is of his preparing and providing. 2. Because we shall have it with
him. 3. Because he is the subject or matter of it; the heaven of heavens is
communion with God, he shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.

Verse. 19. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward who
believe according to the working of his mighty power] Observe the gradation,
Burrh. Excellency of a gracious Spirit. 182.
the Apostle speaking of the power of God put forth upon those which do
believe, expresses it in a six fold gradation. 1. It is his power, only the
power of God could do it. 2. The greatness of his power. 3. The exceeding
greatness of his power. 4. It is the working of his power. 5. The working of
his mighty power. 6. It is the same power by which he raised Christ from the
dead, and set him above all; so v. 20.

Verse. 21. Far above all principality and power, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named] Some interpreters understand this of terrene
dominion; others of the Angels.

Non dubium qum his nominibus Angelos designet: qui sic ideo nuncupantur, quod
Deus per ipsorum manum, suam potestat^m, virtutem and dominati mem exerceat.
Quemadmodum ex diversitate nominum colligimus diversos ordines; ita subtilius
de illis inquirere, and numerum finire and gradus statuere, non modo stultae
est curiositati^, sed tem ritatis etiam impiae ac periculosae. Calvinus. Nomina
sunt ordinum angelicorum Deo ministrantium in Coel^stibus Estius. Vid plura
ibid. Intelligunt quidam de imperijs terrenis. Sed locus Coloss. 1.16. and quod
hic infra est 3.10. evincit ag^ hic de eximijs Angelorum Classibus. Grotius.
Principali^y] Those in principal authority.

Power All secondary powers sent from them.

Might] That is, Angels putting forth might in some miraculous effects of mercy
and udgement.

Dominion] Such Angels whose Ministry God used in the government of kingdoms
and provinces.

Name] Every creature howsoever named. Baine.

Verse. 2^. To be head over all things] Christ is a head in regard of
intimatenesse of conjunction, by way of influence, the spring of sense and
motion, in respect of government. See 4. Chap. 15. v.

Verse. 23. The fullness of him that fills all in all] There are four things
considerable in this last clause* both dark and excellent. 1. The Church is
Christ's fullness, the fullness of him] Actively if we consider Christ not
personally, but mystically as a Head, (...) alibi activam, alibi passivam habet
significationem. Hic passiva rectius convenit, ob locum huic geminum Coloss.
2.10. and infra hic 5.18. Nec aliter sumenda vox eadem Coloss. 1.19. Grotius.
Et (...) hic dictu^ forma Attica, sono passivo, sensu activo^ quomodo hoc
verbum usia pant and Plato in Timaeo and Xenophon Graecae Historiae sexto.
Christus in omnibus, eredentibus scilicet, implet omnia, meutem luce,
voluntatem pijs affectibus, corpus ipsum obse quendi facul^ate. Id. ibid.
and having the Church for his body, but it is rather called Christ's fullness,
because it is filled by him; the fullness it has is from him, of his
procuring, bestowing, continuing, accepting; and because all is for him,
therefore his fullness. 2. Yet he fills it, that filleth] The Greek word is
of the middle voice; but here it is to be translated actively; there is a
great deal of difference between the fullness of the choycest believers, and
the fullness of Christ; there is in him plenitudo fontis, a fullness of the
Fountain; in them plenitudo vasis, a fullness of the Vessel; in him (say the
Schoolmen) there is a fullness of sufficiency, bounty, pre-eminence and
redundance. 3. The extent of this repletion, all] He fills 1. All creatures
with natural blessings, Psalm. 104.28. and 65.9. 2. All men with common
blessings, John 1.9. 3. All the Saints with special, peculiar, and
distinguishing blessings; though they have not all the same degree and measure
of them. 1. With Spiritual gifts, for the edification of themselves and
others, 1 Cor. 12.4.11. 2. With Spiritual privileges; all Saints are
justified, and every one as truly as any one; though they be not so greatly
sanctified, they have all the benefit of adoption, the youngest children as
well as the eldest, the first born; all things shall happen for the good of
all. 3. With Spiritual consolation requisite to their condition, John 16.24. 2
Cor. 1.5. Lastly, he fills not only all the Saints, but all the Saints, (...)
all things, all their capacities. 1. All the faculties of their souls, the
understanding with light, Ephesians. 1.18. and 5.8. Psalm. 36.9. The conscience with
quickness, pureness, tenderness, quietness, Act. 24.16. 1 Titus 15. 1 Cor.
1.12. 1 Pet. 3.18. The will with Spiritual intentions, purposes, 2 Cor. 5.9.
the affections of love, joy, fear, are set on him chiefly. 2 All the Members
of the body, 1 Cor. 6.20. Romans 6.13. 2 Cor. 4.10.11. 3. All the desires of the
inward man. Psalm. 25.13. and 37.4. Esaias 58.11. 4. All the endeavors of the
outward man 75. Psalm. 2.3. Esaias 22.12. Psalm. 138. ult. 4. The qualification of
this extent, in all) 1. Ordinances. 2 Occurrences and providence, Romans 8.28.
3. Ages and successions, 2 Cor. 4.13. 4. All relations, Romans 3. 23. 5.
Comforts. 6. amidst all their discomforts. 7. To all saving intents and
purposes: initiatively and gradually here, and consummatively hereafter.

CHAPT. II.
Verse. 2. THe course of this world] Ad verbum juxta seculum bujus mundi.
Vorstius.

Vide Bezam. (...) multa significat interdum vitam, and per (...) rationem
vivendi, quae Derech. Hebraeis; vixistis ut mos erat plerisque. Grotius.
The world of the world, that is, that temper and frame of that age of the world.

Verse. 3. Fulfilling the desires of the flesh] (...), The wills lust is made up
all of wills. Vorstius thinks it notes the two perverse desires, some of which
are more internal, some more external.

And were by nature the Children of wrath, We are subject to Gods wrath even as
in nature a child is to the Commandments and authority of his Father. Vide
Bezam. Per filios irae, simpliciter intellige perditos ac morte aeterna dignos.
Ira enim judicium Dei significat: ideo filij irae perinde valet atque coram Deo
damnari. Calvinus.
even as others] To be by nature the children of wrath signifies these things.
1. Wrath is our proper due, we are borne to it. 2. It belongs to us as soon as
ever we have a living soul, damnati priusquam nati Aug. 3. We are
irrecoverably the Children of wrath, Adam might have helped it. 4. It is
universally so, as we say a man is by nature mortal, because all are so. Locus
est insignis adversus Pelagianos, and quicumque peccatum originale negant.
Calvine. That which is naturally in all is original. See Estius.

The Apostle opposes the word nature (says Vorstius) to the boasting of the
Jew, as of their carnal generation from Abraham.

Verse. 5. Quickned] Greek made alive; he repeates it again in this verse
(what he had touched on in the first.) 1. In regard of the grammatical
construction to make the sensefull; the sense being imperfect; in the first
verse in the original, he quickened is wanting; and he varies the person; in
the first verse it is you; the Ephesians to whom he wrote; here ( we) includes
himself with the Jews and repeats it to show the generality of the condition,
all are dead in sin. 2. The certainty of it. 3. The corruption of our nature,
that are unwilling to take notice of it.

By grace ye are saved] And so verse 8. the Apostle brings in this sentence
twice; not only to show that the progress of a Christian is by grace, Gratia
non est gratia ullo modo nisi sit gratuita omni modo. Aug.
but the very first beginning and setting out, it is all of grace.

Verse. 7. He might shew] The original is of greater force then our
translation, that he might show forth by demonstration and evidence; that so
the world might see, admire, and applaud the bounty of his grace.

Verse. 10. For we are his workemanship] 1. He works the Saints off from their
beloved sins. 2. He works them above the dearest of creatures, and comforts.
3. Works them out of carnal self. 4. Works them in Christ.

That we should walk in them] Walking imports 1. Spontaniety in the principle,
moves from within; if a man be drawn or driven, he does not walk, Prove. 20.7.
The Hebrew word in that conjugation signifies, sets himself a going. 2.
Progress in the motion, he moves forward, gets ground of corruption, lives
more in, to and upon Christ.

Verse. 12. That at that time ye were without Christ, etc. The Covenants of
promise] because several ways revealed and at several times dispensed.
] 1. They are without Christ the ground of hope. 2. Out of the Church, the
place of hope. 3. Without the Covenant, the reason of all our hope and
believing.

Without God] Not only without the true knowledge and worship of God, and such
as did neglect both: but such as were neglected, and not regarded of God; and
suffered to walk in their own ways and sins. See 19. v. Without God. 1. In
reconciliation. 2. In Communion; grace is tendentia animae in Deum. Vide Bezam.

Verse. 14. He is our Peace] 1. That of men with God was procured by him. 2. Of
men with men. 3. Of men with themselves.

Verse. 17. And came and preached peace to you, Voces Procul and Prope, non ad
loci distantiam referuntur: sed Iudaeos Deo proqinquos sacit ratione soederis:
Gentes vero remotas, quae a regno Dei exulabant, quamdiu nullam habebant
salutis promissionem. Calvinus.
which were afar off] Christ preached peace to them that were afar off, that
is, to the Gentiles in the persons of his Apostles.

Verse. 18. An accesse] The word is (...) ^ leading by the hand, it is used
also, 3 Chapter v. 12. An introduction, or adduction; it is an allusion (says
Estius) to the custom of Princes, to whom there is no passage, unless we be
brought in by one of their favorites.

Verse. 19. The household of God] Which words imply special care and government;
as a wife and good householder, has a special care over them of his family.

Verse. 20. On the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets] That is on the
doctrine Pauci nonnulli, in quibus Chrysostomus and post eum Oecumenius, ac
Theophilactus, quibus confentive videtur Tertullianus, sic interpretantur,
quasi dictum sit, super Apostolos and Prophetas, qui sunt fundamenta. Quae
expositio etsi coactior sit quam solidior: ^amen sut eam non refellam) certum
est Apostolos and Prophetas non posse dici fundamentum n^si habita ratione
Ministerij, id est, quatenus ministri fuerunt jaciendi fundamenti; verum magis
prop^ta expositio, and quam sequuntur plerique omnes, haec est, ut voluerit
Paulus fideles superstructos super doctrina veteris and novi Testamenti, quae
sit fundamentum Apostolorum and Prophetarum, id est quod Apostoli and Prophetae
constinerunt: quod idem est ac si ipsum Christum nominassent; sic Ambrosius,
Anselmus, Glossa interlincaris and ordinaria, Lyranus, Thomas, Lombardus,
Cajetanus and Gagnaeus, Chamierus tomo secundo l. 10. c. 1. Vide Bezam.
of the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

CHAP. III.
Minimissimus. Estius See 1. Cor. 15.9.
Verse. 8 Less then the least] (...), a comparative made of a superlative.

The unsearchable riches of Christ] Riches imply two things. 1. Abundance. 2.
Abundance of such things as are of worth, riches, and riches of Christ;
unsearchable riches of Christ; in Christ are riches of Justification, Tit.
2.14. Sanctification, Phil. 4.12, 13. Consolation, 2 Cor. 12.9 Glorification, 1
Pet. 1.5.

Verse. 10. To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God] That
is, if it had not been for the Churches sake that God would reveal so
glorious a Mystery, the Angels in heaven must have been for ever ignorant of it.

Perkins on Jude.
By the Ministry of the Apostles, the Mysteries of God concerning man's
redemption have been revealed to the Angels themselves. See John 20.21.

Some say by way of information, the Angels are edified by preaching; others by
contemplating of the Church, Vide Bezam. Ecclesia ex Iudaeis pariter ac
Gentibus col lecta, quasi speculum est in quo contemplantur Angeli mirificam
Dei sapientiam, quam prius nescierant. Calvinus. Dei sapientia angelis non
innotescit per Ecclesiam docentem, sed per ea quae in Ecclesia geruntur, sive
per executionem mysteriorum in Ecclesia. Estius. Vide a Lapide.
seeing the manifold wisdom of God therein.

The Schoolmen distinguish of a threefold knowledge of Angels. 1. A natural
knowledge concreated with them. See 1 Pet. 1.12.
2. Experimental; some think this is here meant, the experience the Angels
gather out of the observation of Gods dealing with his people. 3. Cognitio
revelata.

The manif^ld wisdom of God] Multivarious wisdom, The wisdom of God is simple
and uncompounded; it is pure and unmixed with any thing but it self, yet it is
manifold in degrees, kinds and administrations. vide Hieron. in loc.

Verse. 12. In whom we have boldness and accesse] The word translated
boldness, in the Original is (...), (...) ex origin quidem loquendi
significat libertatem, sed largius perducta significatione fiduciam, ut videre
est Levit. 26, 16. Magnam autem fiduciam parit spiritus ille attestans Deum
nobis esse patrem. Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.6. Grotius. (...) veteri interpreti est
fiducia, Erasmo est audacia. Beza reddidit libertatem, quae est facultas qua
libere loquimur, quicquid volumus. Non multum refert, veteremne an Bezae
versionem sequaris. Vox utramque significationem admittit, unde Beza aliquando
libertatem reddit, ut hic, and 2 Cor. 7.4. Act. 3.29. and 4.29. Alibi fiduciam
Heb. 4.16. 1 Ioh. 2.28. Est autem libertas apud homines and Deum. Apud homines
Joh. 7.13. Act. 4.13. 2 Cor. 3.12. Ephesians. 6.19. 1 Timothy 3.13. Apud Deum Heb.
10.19. Grotius in loc.
it signifies liberty of speech, or speaking all, or boldness of face in
speaking. A believer by faith has boldness to go to God by prayer; and
access; it is (...) in the original, which signifies such an access as is by
manuduction, as Isaac took Rebecca; so Christ takes the soul espoused to him
by the hand, and leads it into his fathers presence.

Verse. 15. Of whom the whole family] That is, the Church. The Church triumphant
in Heaven, Vox (...) significat samiliam seu cognationem eorum, qui ab uno
patre, seu principe generis orti sunt. Estius. vide Vorstium.
and militant on Earth, make but one family, Gal. 6.10.

Verse. 17. Dwell in your heart] By his Spiritual presence and gracious
influence.

Being rooted and grounded in love] That is, have a strong and firm love to the
things of Jesus Christ; love is the great mover in the soul, which carries it
out in all its actions.

Verse. 18. May be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the ^^edth and
length, and height and depth] The Apostle sets out Christ's love with height and
depth, B. Andrews. Naturalists give us but three dimensions of a body,
longitude, latitude, and profundity; the love of God has altitude added, which
is a ^e^rth.
length and breadth, the four dimensions of the Cross; to put us in mind (say
the ancient Writers) that upon the extent of the Tree was the most exact love,
with all the dimensions in this kind represented, that ever was.

Verse. 19. To know the love of Christ which passes knowledge] Christ love is
great, 1. Because the love of all relations (as a Head, Lord, Father, King,
Husband,) meets in Christ's love to his Church. 2. It was the love of God and
therefore, infinite, from everlasting. 3 It has no motive: Christ loves
because he loves, Videri potest Apostolus respicere ad Gnosticos, qui hoc
superbo nomine sese nuncupaverunt a scientia quam sibi peculiariter
vendicabant. Vtitur enim vocabulo (...), unde (...). Estius. vide plura Ibid.
He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. 4. He loves without measure, it
is not provoked by unkindnesse; yet we may know more of this love of Christ
though we cannot know it all.

Filled with all the fullness of God] Desire, An Hebraisme. The Hebrews when
they would set out any excellent thing, they add the Name of God to it; Cedars
of God, wrestlings of God. God appoints not only the persons unto glory, but
that fullness of grace which shall fit them for glory, Ephesians. 4.13. Two things
conduce to our happiness in Heaven; 1. All our faculties shall be enlarged. 2.
All our graces perfected.
1. To be filled with knowledge of all the will of God, Col. 1.9. 2. To have a
more full repair of the Image of God in you, 2 Pet. 1.4 3. In regard of your
influences from God and enjoyment of him; here we enjoy him in creatures,
ordinances; in Heaven we shall enjoy him immediately.

Verse. 20. That is able to do exceeding abundantly] in the Greek it is, to do
above all super abundantly.

Verse. 21. Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus etc.] Christ is a
Mediator to us two ways: 1. As in him God the Father loved us, elected us,
redeemed us; Zanchius.
Lastly in and by him he bestows all good things upon us 2. As we by him have
access to the Father; therefore the Church was ever wont to conclude her
prayers, per Christum Dominum nostrum, by Christ our Lord. As it was the
custom in the Church to pray, so also to give thanks to God by Christ, Romans
1.8 and 7.25. Grotius.


CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. PRisoner of the Lord] Or, in the Lord, in the cause of the Lord. See
Chapter 3 v. 1. He was an Apostle thirty five or thirty six years; for the last
eight or ten he was a prisoner, and wrote several Epistles.

That ye walk worthy of the vocation] Suitable to the purity and dignity of it.
It is a holy and high calling, 1 Thessalonians. 2.2. When A^tigonus was going into the
house of a Harlot, one said, O remember that thou art a Kings son.


Called] 1. To holiness, to act it, 1 Thessalonians. 4.7. 2. To glory, to enjoy it, 1
Pet. 5.10. 3. Peace, Col. 3.15.

Verse. 3. Endeavouring] Students, Beza. Soliciti, Junius. Calvin and Vulg.
using all possible carfulness. It is therefore first a difficult matter;
secondly, of great concernment.

Verses 4, 5, 6. There is one body and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your Calling. One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God, and one
Father of all, etc.] Here are seven ones together in two or three lines, to be
an argument of unity.

This is one of the most famous Scriptures for the union of Saints that we have
in all the book of God. Since they have all one Father, and so are brethren;
since they have all one head, which is Christ, and so are fellow members of the
same body; since they are led all by one Spirit, since they hope all for one
Heaven, bear all one badge of baptism, are knit all by one bond of faith to
Christ, and one another: therefore they should be at peace among themselves.

Verse. 5. One faith] By one faith is there meant one Religion and Doctrine of
salvation, Perkins. Fides una respectu non subjectorum, graduum, sed speciel,
objecti, finis.
1 Timothy 1.19. The faith of the elect is but one; 1. In respect of the kind of
it, being a justifying fath. 2. The object of it, which is one Christ. 3. The
end salvation, Jude 3.

Verse. 6. Who is above all, and through all, and in you all] That is, the Lord
is in all his Saints by his special grace; he passes through every thing by
his common providence, his eyes run through the earth, and he is above all,
looking what secrets are in man's heart* one that stands on high and looks over
all that is below, can easily see whatsoever is done.

Captivitas hic nomen est collectinum pro hostibus captivis. Calvinus. Perkins.
Verse. 8. Lead captivity captive] By captivity is meant sin and Satan, which
did and do lead men captive into perdition. 2. Death and the grave, which held
him captive, and in bondage for the space of three days; he leads them all
captive 1. in himself, triumphing over them; 2. In his members, subduing and
weakening their power.

Gave, gifts unto men] It is he received gifts, Psalm. 67. the Apostle shows
wherefore Christ received gifts, Dr. Fulke in his preface to his defense of the
English translation against Martin.
viz. to bestow them on his Church; or else Christ gave of his own and received
none, and so the Apostle shows the excellency of the truth above the figure,
Christ above David; what those gifts are, is expressed in the eleventh verse;
not bare qualifications of men, but officers. Singular and special gifts as
tokens of his favor, such as Princes bestow upon the day of their solemn
Inauguration.

Verse. 9. What is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of
the earth] Some interpret it of Christ's incarnation, in allusion to that of the
Psalm, lower parts of the earth, Hoc est, ad subterraneum receptaculum
animarum. Bellar. Calvin. Bezae, Marlorati una eademque est sententia; viz.
Christum descendisse e Caelis in terram, id est in hanc vitae conditionem
nostram. Vel e Coelli in uterum. Vide Bezam.
meaning the womb; so they say, Christ descended to take our nature of the
Virgins womb; but seeing that the descending into the lower parts of the earth
is opposed unto his ascending into Heaven, some conceive by the lowest parts of
the earth is meant hell, as the lowest degree of Christ's abasement set against
the highest degree of his glory.

Verse. 10. Far above all Heavens] That is, all visible Heavens, Extra mundum
hunc creatum. Calvin.

Verse. 11. And some Pastors and Teachers] Pastors to instruct in
righteousness, for the maintenance of purity in manners; and Teachers to
maintain the purity of doctrine in soundness of judgment. Pastores and
Doctores idem esse nonnulli volunt, idque quod Apostolus in eo contextu ad
Ephesians. non dicit Christum dedisse alios Pastores and alios Doctores: quasi
posterius nomen sit prioris explicatio. Sed credo illos falli. Quasi vero in
hac brevi ministrorum Ecclesiasticorum descriptione admitti debeant synonima.
Voces certe diversa habent significata, nam doctor est qui tantum docet.
Pastor, qui regit, gubernatque ecclesiam, nimirum non tantum docendo, sed etiam
arguendo, consolando, sacramenta dispensando, orando, invisendo familias,
arcendo lupos, invigilando gregi, denique patrem agendo. Ergo Pastores sunt ii,
quos vocamus, ^am ministros Ecclesiae, and imprimis superintendentes seu
Episcopos. Doctores sunt qui in scholis puram tradunt doctrinam veramque
sacrarum literarum interpretationem; talis fuit Origines in schola Alexandrina
and Clemens-Alexandrinus. Zanchius in quartum praeceptum and in loc. Vide
Calvinum.
So Mr. Perkins. Jerome, Augustine, Chrysostom, Theodoret thinks the Apostle
expressed one office Bilsons perfect government: of the Church.
by two names, to show what thing belonged to the Pastoral charge. Implying
that the scope of the ministry is to bring and preserve all the members of the
Church in this unity of faith and knowledge.

Verse. 14. That we henceforth be no more tossed about with every wind of
doctrine] Their instability is expressed in two metaphors, (...) tossed to and
fro; the former is drawn from a wave of the Sea (for (...) is a wave) and so it
denotes an uncertain man which fluctuates in opinion, and is explained to the
full James 1.6. Vide Grotium. D^abus metapho^is eleganter miseram eorum
trepidationem exprimit, qui solid non recumbunt in verbum Domini. Primum
naviculis facit similes, quae medio in mari variis fluctibus jactatae, certum
cursum non tenent: nec art aut consilio reguntur, sed abripiuntur quocunque
impetus tulit. Deinde comparat eos vel stipulis, vel aliis rebus infirmis, quae
pront se ventus moverit, agitantur hec and illuc, and saepe in contrarias
parts. Calvinus.
The latter from a light cloud swimming in the air, (...), and carried about
in a circle, having no weight in it, and may well be expressed by that of Jude
12.

The slight] (...) Graeca vox est, sed Thalmudicis quoque and Rabbinis
frequens; Et quia in alcae Iudo solent simpliciores circumveniri, ideo ad
quamvis circumventionem haec vox tranferri solet. Grotius.
signifies cogging with a Die, such slights as they use at Dice.

Cunning craftinesse] (...), they watch all advantages.

Lie in weight to deceive] (...). they have all the arts of consenage. Paul
has heaps of words to express this Serpentine quality of sin by cogging
and cheating.

Verse. 15. Speaking the truth] So it is used Gal. 4.16. Others, doing or
following the truth, John 4.21. (...) Truthifying, or following the truth.
Veritatem sectantes. Vulg. Calvin.


Verse. 16. Fitly joined together] that phrase imports that the erroneous are
like a bone out of joint, it will cost many an hearty groan before they be
reduced to their right place.

Verse. 17. Walk not as other Gentiles walke] viz. Unconverted Gentiles; do not
imitate them from whom you have made so happy a departure.

In the vanity of their mind] (...) the mind is the seat of principles, of
supreme primitive and undenied truths; but says he, their minds are destitute
of all Divine and Spiritual truths.

Verse. 18. Having the understanding darkned] (...) the reasoning and discursive
faculty; the understanding is the seat of conclusions, and that is unable to
deduce from Spiritual principles (if there were any in their minds) such sound
and divine conclusions, as they are apt to beget.

Being alienated from the life of God] That is, the life which God allows of,
and which his children live by. Grace is called the life of God, or a godly
life. a vita quae secundum Deum est, and quam Dei leges praescribunt. Estius.
1. Because it is from God as the Author. 2. It is according to God as the
pattern. 3. Unto God as the end. They are not only strangers to it (for so all
men are naturally) but estranged, that is, an enemy thereunto, as the Apostle
expounds it Col. 2.21.

Verse. 22. According to the deceitful lusts] (...) according to the lusts of
deceitfulness, because lust has a deceit in it, it draws us from God.
Secundum desideria erroris. Vulg.


Verse. 23. In the Spirit of your mind] in the most pure and Spiritual part of
the soul.

Verse. 26. Be angry and sin not] Let us seek matter of anger in our selves
rather then others, be angry with our own faults. Proverbialis dicendi figura,
qua significatur iracundiam primo quoque tempore coercendam. Deuteronomy. 24.23. Beza.
Leontius Patricius was one day extremely and unreasonably angry with John the
Patriarch of Alexandria; at evening the Patriarch sent a servant to him with
this message, Sir, the Sun is set: upon which Patricius reflecting, and the
grace of God making the impression deep, he threw away his anger, and became
wholly subject to the council of the Patriarch, Tailors life and death of
Christ.


Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath] He seems there to allude to that
Law recorded by Moses, whereby it was provided that the malefactor which had
been hanged before the Sun should be taken down from the Tree before the Sun
went down; so wrath, anger, must be dismissed, and not suffered to lie down with
us.

Verse. 27. Neither give place to the Divell] Therefore the Devil does stir
up anger.

Verse. 28. Working with his hands in the thing which is good] In some lawful
and Christian calling. A good thing must be honestum and utile, an honest and
profitable good thing.

Verse. 29. No corrupt communication] The Greek word properly signifies that
which is rotten, Col. 4.6. the Apostle exhorts to the contrary, Let your
speech be always with grace, seasoned with Salt; Salt is a preservative
against rottenness.

Verse. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God] The holy Ghosts person is set
forth in the Greek with very great energy, such as our tongue is not able to
express it fully; three words have three articles, every word his several
Article by it self, (...), the Spirit, not a Spirit; and not holy, but the
holy; nor of God, but of that God.

The holy Ghost is compared to a guest, and our bodies and souls unto Innes:
and as men use their guests friendly and corteously, so should we such a guest,
not grieve him, Tertul.
Delicata res est Spiritus Dei; muchlesse resist, quench, or vex him, 1 Thessalonians.
5.19, 20. Acts 7.51. Esaias 63.10. This phrase is not to be understood properly
but tropically, because the holy Ghost is incapable of grief or passion; we
grieve the Spirit when by sin we hinder the powerful working of it.

Sealed unto the day of redemption] A metaphor (says Zanchy) from Merchants
who having bought such goods, seal them as their own, that so they may
transport them.

Glory is here called redemption; there is a twofold redemption, 1. From our
sins, 2. From our imperfections, Heb. 9.28.

Verse. 32. Be ye kind] This word (...) is used of things and persons. Being
used of things, it signifies both facility, Matthew. 11.30. and utility, Luke
5.39. Being used of persons it signifies one that is desirous to do well, and
ready to gratify. It is given to God Luke 6.35. 1 Pet. 2.3. and to men in this
place.

Tender-hearted] (...), well of bowels. The first word is opposed to anger,
this to bitterness. Quasi honorum viscer^m. Respondet Hebraeo Racham, quod
significat ex intimis visceribus misereri ut omnia viscera videantur
commoveri-dolore and commiseratione miseriae proximi. a Lapide.


CHAP. V.
Imitatores Dei Calv. and alii. Liberorum est patrem moribus reserre. Grotius.
Verse. 1. BE you therefore followers of God] (...), imitaters of God.

As dear children] (...) as beloved children, (ut filii dilecti, Beza) viz of
God.

Verse. 2. Walk in love] A Christian should be so molded into a loving temper,
as all his actions should savor of love, his counsels, punishments.

As Christ also has loved us] 1 By way of motive, Christ has loved us. 2. By
way of pattern, as he has loved us.

And has given himself for us] He does not say, has redeemed us, but given
himself for us, The way to know whether Christ has given himself for us is
this: if he have given himself to us; to us in sanctification if for us in
justification. John 3.8, 9.
and for our sins, as Gal. 4. to show how he gave himself for us, quatenus
sinners.

An offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savour] An offering and
sacrifice, to show the compleatnesse of it, wherein God was well pleased and
satisfied. The first word comprehends all Sacrifices, the latter signifies a
bloody one. They used Incense called suffi^us in burning their sacrifices. To
this the Apostle alludes here.

Verse. 3. But fornication and all uncleanesse, or covetousness, let it not be
once named amongst you as becomes Saints] Fornication, uncleanesse and
covetousness are 1. Contrary to the very disposition and Spirit of a Saint,
his new nature. 2. Pet. 1.4.2 To the dignity and privilege of a Saint; his
body is a Temple for the holy Spirit to dwell in, and all things are his, 1
Cor. 3.21. A Covetous man above other sinners is called an Idolater here verse.
5. And in the Colos. (though there be Idolatry in other sins) in a peculiar
way. 1. In regard of the object, Nisi philosophorum quidam Cynicus extitisset,
qui doceret omnem titillationem carnis and fluxum seminis ex qualicumque
attritu tactuque venientem, in tempore non vitandum, and nonnulli sapientes
saeculi in hanc turpem and erubescendam haeresim consensissent, nunquam Sanctus
Apostolus scribens ad Ephesios, ad fornicationem etiam omnem immunditiam
copulasset. Hieron. in loc.
he sets up his Gold instead of God. 2. Bestows the disposition, and affection
of his soul, which are proper to God; he loves it, rejoices in, and trusts
in it.

Not named] With allowance, with any extenuation, but with some detestation.

Verse. 4. Jesting] Scurrility, or scurrilous jesting, unworthy of a grave man.
(...) nativa sua significatione. Hic non intelligitur (...) illa, quae virtus
est and urbanitas dicitur Latin^s, de qua Aristoteles. 4. Ethic. 8.
The Greek word signifies the handsome turning, or changing of a word, and is
made a moral virtue by Aristotle; but because men are apt to exceed in
jesting, it is here taken in an evil sense.

Verse. 15. See then that ye walk circumspectly] The Apostle means in a
spiritual sense the whole course of our life; here are four things. 1. A
living man having a locomotive faculty, one alive to God. 2. Terminus a quo,
sin. 3. Terminus ad quem, to God, Christ, Heaven. 4. Medium, or the path to
walk in, the will of God.

Verse. 16. Redeeming the time, because the days are evill] Seeing what is past
cannot be recalled; then recompense the loss of it, by the well bestowing of
time to come.

Redeeme] Improve to the best advantage of glorifying God, and getting good to
our selves and others. To redeem is to purchase or buy as Tradesmen in the
Market.

The time] that is, season.

The Children of God while time, means, health, and life, and liberty is
afforded unto them, should store themselves with faith and ability against
evil days. Mr. Hooker.




The time] Greek, the opportunity or season, any opportunity for doing any
business, more peculiarly the fitness of opportunity, in regard of the
Gospel shining.

Because the days are evill] That is, full of troubles and afflictions.

Verse. 18. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excesse] Do not take in too
much of the creature; (...) rendered excess, signifies two things, excess in
expenses opposite to frugality, and excess in delights (whether it be in
meats, or drinks, or the like) opposite unto temperance; and it signifies
these vices in an extremity.

But be filled with the Spirit] q. d. drink as liberally and largely of this
as you will, here is no excess to be feared. Opponit res in aliquo similes:
illi vino implentur: vos Spiritu: illud illis gaudium parit: hoc vero quanto
justius vobis? Grotius. Superfluit Sancto quamvis subintelligatur, says
Cajetane. Be ye filled] That is labor for abundance of the Spirit that the
Spirit may abundantly dwell in you.


Spirit] viz. the holy spirit, so the vulgar, Spiritu Sancto, though (as
Erasmus notes) none of the Ancients read it so besides, yet the sense is
rightly expressed; that is, with the gifts and graces of the Spirit; one is
said to be full of that which he possesses in great measure, as full of
wealth, wit. See Romans 15.14. and Acts, 6.3.5.

Verse. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs] Our Songs must be spiritual. 1. For matter, not profane. 2. They must
proceed from Gods Spirit, as the Author of them. See v. 17. and Psalm. 37.4.
3. Must be framed with honest and gracious words beseeming the Spirit. 4. To a
spiritual end. 1. Gods glory. 2. Our own and others edification; to the Lord,
that is, before the Lord.

Verse. 21. Submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God] This is a
general to the particulars that follow. First, an exhortation. Secondly, a
direction.

Verse. 22. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands] The duties of
husband and wife are laid down first, 1. Because God made them first. 2. They
are the chiefest in the family. The Apostle begins with wives, as he does in
the Colossians, and in Peter, because she is the inferior; and it is the
Apostles order to begin always with the duties of the inferior; and this
order is observed in the fifth Commandment. 1. Because the inferior is the
lother to subject himself to his place. 2. Because it will fare worse with
inferiors, if there be strife who shall begin.

Submit] (...), The word being of the mean voice, may be translated either
passively ( be ye subject) or actively, Subditae sint. Hieron. Vet. Transl.
Eras. Subjicite vos. Beza.
submit your selves. Unto your own husbands] (...)) which words contain two
things. 1. That wives ought to have but one husband, 1 Cor. 7.2. 2. That this
subjection is to be performed to him alone, forbidding all submission to
adulterers; commanding chaste and faithful obedience unto him.

As unto the Lord] That is, to Christ Jesus: for this word is by a kind of
excellency appropriated unto him; and it is so expounded 6. Chapter 5. v.

Verse. 23. For the husband is the head of the wife] For shows this verse is a
reason of the duty; The husband is called the veil of his wife: which as it
implies subjection on her part, so protection on his, Genesis 20.16. 1 Cor. 11.10.
and a husband must have a provident care to save his wife, as Christ his
Church. This is metaphorically spoken, in allusion to a general body, that is,
the husband by reason of his place, is more eminent; he is to protect, defend,
and govern his wife. The Members are subject to the head, without reasoning.

Particula (...) significat similitudinem non aequalitatem; and compararem cum
re non autem modum cum modo; quia alio and praestantiori modo Christus est
caput Ecclesiae quam vir uxoris suae. Zanchius.
Even as Christ is the head of the Church.]

And he is the Savior of the body] He means it exclusively, of none but those
who appertain to the body, and are Members thereof. A Savior (...), Grecians
say this Greek word cannot be fully expressed in Latin, signifying as much as
a most absolute deliverer from all dangerer and evil whatsoever, Matthew. 1.21.

Verse. 24. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be
to their own husbands in every thing] Here is another reason, and another rule;
as the Church is the manner; in every thing shows the extent.

The wife should subject her self to her husband, as the Church to Christ;
such a subjection as the Church performs to Christ, ought the wife to
performer to her husband; cheerful, ready, constant subjection.

Jn every thing] Lawful and honest.

Verse 25. And gave himself for it] Greek gave himself willingly, he was a
price and satisfaction, Gave himselfe] That is, his life and blood; and purged
it with water through the word.
the end of Christ's giving up; and himself was our justification, and
sanctification.

Verse. 27. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinckle, Sicuti formae elegantia in uxore causa est amoris, ita
Christus Ecclesiam sponsom suam ornat sanctitate, ut sit hoc benevolentiae
pignus. Calvinus.
or any such thing]

Ob. 64. Esaias 6.

Sol. These places are both true, the Prophet speaks of the Church Militant;
the Apostle of the Church Triumphant.

The word present is taken from the custom of solemnizing a marriage: first
the spouse was woed, and then set before her husband, that he might take her to
wife, to be with him. Genesis 2.22. Esth. 2.13.

Verse. 29. But nourishes and cherishes it] These two words (...) and (...)
(to nourish and cherish) comprize under them, a careful providing of all
things needful for a man's body; to nourish is properly to feed; to cherish
Proprie dicitur de gallina fovente ova quum illis incubat. The metaphore is
taken from Birds which hover their wings over their young ones, or that sit
upon their Eggs. They do it tenderly.
is to keep warm; the former is done by food; the lattet by apparel. 1 Timothy
6.8.

Verse. 31. Shall be joined unto his wife] He shall be glewed to her, as two
bords are joined together with glue. Agglutinabitur] Firmissime adhaere bit, ut
quae sunt glutine compacta and conjuncta, Matthew. 19.5. Drus. in Parallel. Sac.


They two shall be one flesh] Our English cannot well express the Greek in
good sense word for word; which is thus, they two shall be into, or in one
flesh; they which were two before marriage, by the bond of marriage, are
brought into one flesh, to be even as one flesh.

Verse. 32. This is a great mystery] The Papists make marriage a Sacrament. The
vulgar Latin translation first led them into this error; Quam vocem vulgatus
interpres tum hic tum alibi vertit Sacramentum] Sed proprie arcanum vel
secretum reddere debuit, juxta propriam ac nativam ejus vocabuli
significationem, ac proinde manifesta inscitia est ex maia versione velle hic
novu^ Sacramentu^ cudere: quin ergo etiam ipsam incarnationem Christi, atque
ipsam quoque praedestinationem Dei dicant esse Sacramenta proprie dicta ^ nam
utrumque similiter Apostolus vocat (...), and in utroque loco vocem illam per
Sacramentum vertit interpres vulgatus, 1 Timothy 3. and Ephesians. 1. Add quod totum
illud de Sacramento sive mysterio in hoc loco ad Ephesios 5. non intelligit
Apostolus de matrimonio corporali sed de Ecclesia 32. v. Laurentius.
for it translateth the word mystery here a Sacrament. But 1. A translation is
no sufficient ground to prove a doctrine. 2. The word Sacrament has as large
an extent as a mystery.

Verse 33. And the wife see that she reverence her husband] As if he had said
of all things, let her most carefully labor not to fail in this point of
duty; the wife] that is, every wife; see] that is, carefully look to it and
not make shifts or excuses; fear or reverence] not as men do a Lion or Bear,
run from them, but fear to offend him; let her not dare to displease him.
Reverence him, an affection compounded of love, fear and desire, love to his
person, fear of offending him, and desire to please, content, and satisfy him.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. CHildren obey your Parents in the Lord] Inferiors duties are usually
laid down first, because 1. They are unwilling. 2. May win superiors. your]
restrained only to their own Parents.

Parents] In the plural number meaning both sexes; the former word (...)
children is in the newter gender, including male and female, son and
daughter, under obedience all duties are comprehended.

In the Lord] A phrase used also, 1 Cor. 7.39. and it may be taken. 1. As a
note of direction in obedience of God. 2. As a note of limitation, that it
extend not to any thing against the will of God.

For this is right] 1. According to Law. 2. By way of recompense.

Verse. 2. Honour] All inferiors are comprised under one kind, and all their
duty under this one term, Honor. 1. Inward estimation. 2. Outward submission.
3. Maintenance; Parents bear Gods Image, and the Mother is subject to contempt.

The first Commandment with promise] First is used in Scripture, where there
is no second, 1 Matthew. 25. The first Commandment of those which concern our
duty to men, with a special promise annexed to it.

Verse. 3. That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the earth]
It is fit and just that he which honors those from whom he has received his
life, should have his temporal life prolonged.

V. 4. Bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord] This phrase (to
translate it word for word) nourish them in discipline or instruction, implies
as much as if he had said, nourish and nurture them, or feed and instruct them.

Verse. 5. Your Masters according to the flesh] Or outward man, not the Spirit.
Secondly to be obeyed accordingly in civil and carnal things; as the dominion
of one is bounded, so the subjection of the other.

With fear and trembling] Fear signifies a reverend respect of one, it is
that which was required of wives. 5. Chap. 33. v. trembling is more proper to
servants, Jd est, cum magna solicitudine. Sic enim and alibi utitur hac phrasi;
ut 1 Cor. 2. and 2 Cor. 7. and Phil. 2. Estius.
it is a dread of punishment.

Verse. 9. Ye Masters do the same things unto them] A strange speech, Eadem
dicit non opere aut officio, sed modo and proportione. Estius.
but the meaning is, that they also in their carriage toward their servants in
doing the duties of masters, must do it as unto the Lord as 5. v. that is,
both the servants and Masters care in their mutual duties one to another, must
chiefly be this to please and approve themselves unto God. Mr. Hilderson.

Verse. 11. Against the wiles of the Devill] (...) against the stratagemes of
the Devil; (...) significat afluta hominum stratagemata, quibus adversarios
aggrediuntur, ex ea port qua minime pertimescendum erat. Methodici enim sunt
ingenioso. Alardi Pathologia N. T.
for it signifies properly an ambushment, or stratageme of war; whereby the
Enemy sets upon a man ex insidijs at unawares; denoting the specious and fair
pretenses of false teachers.

Verse. 12. Darknesse] Some expound it of unregenerate men, some of sin.

Spiritual wickednesse] Or spiritualls of wickedness, as it is in the
original, most monstrous vile, malicious wicked spirits.

In high places] The original word signifies heavenly, in heavenly things, or
places the word (...), here used is translated heavenly things, 1. Chapter 3. or
places; the Devils have their abode in the air.

Verse. 13. Evil day] That is, The time of temptation, because then Satan
tempts us to evil; Beza translates it tempore adverso. See 41. Psalm. 1.
and because it is a time of trouble or affliction.

And having done all to stand] Or having overcome all, brake the strength of
your enemies.

A four sold truth is here meant, 1. Of judgment and opinion. 2. Of heart and
affection. 3. Of words. 4. Of deeds and actions.
Verse. 14. Having your loins girt about with truth] In the Loins is strength,
Job. 40.16. In them also is the power of generation, Genesis 35.11. This metaphore
applied to the mind denotes strength, steadiness and constancy. Truth is
compared to a girdle, or a Soldiers belt, whereby they knit together, and
close unto their middle, the upper and lower pieces of their Armor; these
belts as they were strong, so they were set with studs, being fair. This
girdle has these uses, 1. It does adorn, for this was the use of the studded
belt, which Soldiers did were to hide the gaping joints of their armor, which
would have been unseemely, for sincerity adorneth the soul, 1 John. 4.7. 2. A
girdle does keep the several pieces of armor fast and close together; so the
girdle of truth contains and holds together all other graces. 3. It
strengthens a man by trussing up the loins moderately, Esaias 23.10. and 22.21.
Prove. 31.17. whence that frequent exhortation gird up thy loins, Ier. 1.17.
Job. 38.3.20. and 40.7. 2 Kings 4.29. and 2 Kings 9.1. So this grace adds
great strength to the Inner man, Job. 27.5.4. In the Eastern Countries they
used to gird up themselves close to the body, when they had any journey,
combat, or labor in hand, least their long garments should be an impediment
to them, 1 Kings 18.46. So to have their loins girt, is to be fitted and
prepared for any service, travel, or conflict, as Luke 12.35. 1 Pet. 1.13.
Act. 12.8. So Christians girded with truth, are in readiness for any
spiritual duty, and to encounter with any adversary power.

Breast Plate Alludes to Esaias 59.17. It is used also for that piece of the
armor which covers this part. The use of a Breast Plate is to keep the vital
parts from being mortally wounded,; that a man be not stricken down without
recovery; so righteousness the soul.
] The word (...) here used, signifies the part of the body wherein are
contained the vital parts, the heart, lungs, liver, which being wounded there is
no hope of life. His meaning is, that when once we are assured of our peace,
and reconciliation with God which is wrought by the Gospel; then are we
prepared to follow Christ through the most hard and stony, the most sharp and
thorny way of any trouble whatsoever.

This preparation is that furniture which the Gospel of peace prescribes unto
us, and which it works in us, viz. a heart settled and resolved to go boldly
through all troubles.

Hieron. In omnibus. Beza insuper super omnia Erasmus.
Verse 16. Above all] The original phrase (...) is diversely translated, in all,
as if he had said, in all things whatsoever you do, use the shield of faith:
to all, as if he had said, to all other graces add this; above all, as we
translate it. All these in effect imply one and the same thing; only this
latter is some what more emphaticall, and as proper as any of the rest; it is
somewhat like to that Hebrew phrase, Prove. 14.23.

The shield of faith] (...) a shield a (...) (say some) a door, or gate; it
signifies a long, broad, large shield, wherewith the whole body was covered.

Bochartus Geograph. Sac l. c. 42.
says it is a barbarous word. 1 Because no Grecian used it before Polybius,
who lived long among the Carthaginians. 2. The Graecians reckon it among the
Arms of the Barbarous.

The Apostle alludes to the custom of old; for when they dipped the heads of
their (...) in poison and shot them at their enemies, they fired their flesh;
but soldiers then had shields made of raw Neats Leather (as Polybius and
Vegetius testify) and when the fiery darts lighted upon them, they were
presently quenched; so these fiery tentations of Satan, when they hit the
shield of Faith, are presently quenched.

Verse. 17. The Sword of the Spirit] Because it is directed immediately by the
Spirit, and because this Sword pierces to the heart.

Verse. 18. Praying alwaies] not by fits and starts; be always in a praying
frame, and actually pray on occasion. (...) in every season; as any just
occasion is offered, we must pray.


With all prayer and supplication] According as our own and the Churches
various necessities shall require.

In the Spirit That is, either the soul of a man, to pray with the heart, or
else by the holy Ghost, as Jude, that is, prayer must be the work of Gods
Spirit stirring holy desires.
] fervently and not formally, and with lip-labor only; watching thereunto
against distractions and wandering thoughts, with all perseverance holding out,
and not giving over when we speed not at first.

Watching] The Greek word is a metaphor taken from hunting-dogges, that never
leave following the sent, till they have gotten the game.

Verse. 20. In Bonds] Or, word for word, in a chain, (...). At Rome (where Paul
was a prisoner) such prisoners as had liberty to go abroad, had a long chain,
Beza and Grotius in loc. Dr. Gouge. Vide Grotium in Act. 28.16.
the one end whereof was fastened to their right hand, and the other end was
tied to a Soldiers left hand, so as a prisoner could go no whether without a
Soldier, who was to be a keeper to him. Thus it is likely that St. Paul was
chained, for he mentions here but one chain, in the singular number.

Verse. 23. Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith from God the father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ] The Apostle prays that they may have faith with
both peace and love from the Father and Christ; that is, from God as an
efficient cause thereof, and from Christ as a meritorious cause.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the PHILIPPIANS.
CHAP. I.
PHilippi a principal Town in Macedonia took its name from Philip King of
Macedon the founder of it, Est haec Epistola, quanquam and ipsa Romae in
vinculis scripta, laetior alacriorque and blandior caeteris ideo quod
Philippis, quae urbs praecipua est Macedoniae and Colonia, his fuisset Paulus
Act. 16. and 20. and been successisset ibi Pauli praedicatio. Grotius.
says Estius. See Acts 16.12.

Verse. 1. The Servants of Jesus Christ Plus certe est esse servum alicujus,
quam ministrum; ministri vocantur etiam illi qui ad certum tempus, in certo
officio and pro certa mercede alicui ministrant, and serviunt, ut ministri
principum: sed servi illi proprie dicebantur, qui toti quanti quanti erant,
alicuterant obstricti corpore in perpetuum: in quos Domini jus habebant vitae
and necis, and quicquid lucrabantur totum illud reddebant dominis, tanquam
illorum, and non suum: quorum denique erat nihil agere nisi ex praescripto and
voluntate Dominorum. Hoc igitur epithecon docet speciatim ministros verbi quid
sui sit officii: Peculiari quadam ratione toti sunt obstricti Christo: ut ab
ejus ore semper sit illis pendendum: Et non quae sua sunt, sed tantum quae Jesus
Christi in suo ministerio quaerant, ut de Timotheo praedicat Apostolus c. 2.
Zanchius.
] The name servant here is a Title of honor; as in other Epistles Paul calls
himself an Apostle, so here he calls himself a servant: A servant of Christ
therefore is the same with an Apostle of Christ. a Lapide.

All the Saints] All those which were called out of the world to Christ, and
have given their names to Christ, and were sealed by baptism, and have not by
a manifest apostasy fallen from Christ and his Church, are comprehended by the
Apostle under the name of Saints.

With the Bishops and Deacons] By those the word, Sacraments and Discipline; by
these Alms were administered. Calvin hence notes, that Bishop and Pastor are
Synonima; and that the name of Bishop is common to all the Ministers of the
Word, when here are many Bishops belonging to one Church. Postea (says he)
invaluit usus, ut quem suo collegio praeficiebant in singulis Ecclesiis
Presbyteri, Episcopus vocaretur salus; id tamen ex hominum consuetudine natum
est, scripturae authoritate minime nititur. Dr. Airay speaks almost to the same
purpose. Estius seems to oppose this opinion of Calvin's. See him and a Lapide.

Verse 6. That he which has begun a good work in you] (...), that he which has
in began a good work in you; for the work is wholly inward and spiritual.

Verse 7. I have you in my heart] That is, you are most dear and precious to
me. Q Mary said Calice was in her heart, and there they should find it if they
opened her.

Verse. 8. In the bowels of Jesus Christ] This phrase has according to
Interpreters two meanings. Vide Conel. a Lap.
First, ( in the bowels of Christ) is taken causally, as if he meant to show
that those bowels of compassions were infused into him from Christ, and so he
longed after them with such kind of bowels as Christ had wrought in him. Or
else secondly, in the bowels, is put for ( instar) like the bowels, or after
the bowels, according to the analogy of the Hebrew phrase, and then the meaning
is this, Like as the bowels of Jesus Christ do yearn after you, so do mine.
Viscera pro intimo cerdis affectu and amore posuit hic Apostolus; sensus est,
se ex intimo cordis affectu illos amare and desiderare; significat qualitatem
sui amoris, eam esse spiritualem fundatam in Christo. Zanchius.
Bowels are a metaphor to signify tender and motherly affection and mercy,
Luke 1.78,

Verse. 9. Abound] The Greek word (...) signifies exundare and redundare, to
overflow; a bubling fountain keeps not the water in it self, but sending it
forth it flows out to others, that every one may partake of its water; so
charity is said to abound, or overflow, when it is so kindled in the hear both
toward God and our neighbor, especially toward the Saints, and toward all
other men, even enemies, that it abundantly communicates it self both in
friendly offices and benefits to all both absent and present. The Apostle
wished three things from God to the Philippians, increase of charity, increase
of knowledge of Divine things, and of Spiritual sense, that is, of
experimental knowledge of Christian matters.

Yet more and more] More and more notes the quantity, yet the perseverance of
it; in knowledge, that is, in knowing all truths, say some; a full and solid
knowledge, but not of all things. Calvin.

And in all judgement] That is, in particular; for judgment is taken first for
particular acts of the same, and for the working of those things upon
themselves which they do know; and secondly, for the sense and taste in their
hearts of what they know, for the word is (...).

Verse. 12. The things which happened unto me] that is, the troubles he had in
carrying on his Apostleship.

Verse. 13. So that my bonds in In Christo posuit, pro in negotio, vel in causa
Christi; significat enim illustria fuisse sua vincula ad provebendum Christi
honorem. Calvinus.
Christ are manifest in all the Palace] Paul's Iron chain was more glorious
then all the Golden chains in Nero's Palace.

Verse. 14. And many of the brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds,
etc.] Many Christians that were not so bold before, were encouraged by his
sufferings. See Estius.

Verse. 19. The supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ] We have the Spirit of God
by continual supplies, Adam received it all at once.

Verse. 20. My earnest expectation and hope] to signify the strongenesse and
surenesse of his hope, both expressing thus much, that his hope was sure, Id
est, prout expecto and spero. Vox Graeca (...) non qualemcunque expectationem
significat, sed intensam and vehementem. Romans 8.19. Estius.
that he expected the thing he hoped for, as they that earnestly looking for a
thing stretch out the head to look for it.

Whether it be by life or by death] If I live by preaching, if I die by
suffering.

Verse. 23. In a strait] The sense is, I am drawn diverse ways, this way with
the desire of Christ, that way with the love of the brethren, for whom my life
in the flesh is yet necessary. Estius, a Lapide. A metaphor taken from the
straitness of places, where we are intercepted by an enemy, or otherwise shut
up, so that we cannot find an issue.

Having a desire] This is somewhat more then simply to desire, for it notes a
vehement, earnest, and continued desire, a desire which is in action, and
working till we have our desire accomplished; whereas to desire simply may be
used for any motion.

To depart] (...) in an active signification signifies to return, Luke 12.36.
and properly agrees to Mariners steering their course thither whence they loose
Anchor; and what is our whole life but a most dangerous Navigation? Vide Dilh.
Eclog. Sac. Dictum quintum and 13. and a Lapide in loc.

And to be with Christ] These two are to be read together; Desperati ad mortem
confugiunt taedio vitae: fideles ad eam libenter properant, quia liberatio est
a servitio peccati, and transitus in regnum coelorum. Calvinus.
for death of it self should not be desired, because this desire crosses
nature; but for another end it may, viz. for conjunction with Christ. This
place may confute the error of those who dream that the souls separated from
the bodies do sleep. Vide Estium.

Which is far better] It is very significant in the original, far much
better, or much more better. Multo magis melius. Vulg. Valet multo melius.
Beza. Multo longeque melius. Erasmus. Apostolus non simpliciter dixit multo
melius, sed multo magis melius; Videlicet comparativum duplicans, ut vehementem
excessum significaret q.d. multo longeque melius, aut infinitis partibus
melius, quam permanere in carne; ut hoc illius respectu ne desiderandum quidem
sit. Estius.
(...).

Verse. 27. Let your conversation be etc.] The word used in the original
implies, that they were Citizens of a City which is above and enforces this
construction; only ye, as Citizens of an heavenly Jerusalem, carry your selves
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ; that is, so that your life be framed
after the doctrine of the Gospel, and be answerable to your profession. The
word signifies worthy of the Gospel; but this cannot be meant as if so be that
our conversation should be such as deserves all the good that there is in the
Gospel; it is as much as beseeming the Gospel, meet for the Gospel; bring
forth fruits worthy of repentance, meet for repentance, such fruit as may
manifest your repentance. This word is translated in another place convenient
and meet. Mr. Buroughs in lec.


That ye continue in one spirit] Or stand fast, for so the word signifies;
like unto good soldiers which yield no ground, but keep their standing.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. IF there be therefore any consolation in Christ if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels of mercies] This is a very
patheticall exhortation, in which he entreats the Philippians by all means to
be at mutual concord among themselves.

Any consolation in Christ] So Chrysostom, Calvin, Beza, and others; Ambrose,
exhortation; it signifies both, but the first is most received here.

Any comfort of love] That is, if you so love me, as you desire to bring any
comfort to me in my afflictions. Id est, si quod solatium ex charitate
profectum a vobis expectari potest. Estius.


Any fellowship of the Spirit] As if he had said, you profess a communion and
fellowship, I adjure you by this fellowship which you profess to perform these
duties of love.

Bowels and mercies] Bowels are any affections; mercies are affections toward
those that are in any calamity. Grotius.

Verse. 2. Fulfill ye my joy] And your own joy, and the joy, of the Angels in
Heaven, and the joy of the Bride and Bridegroom.

That you may be like minded] (...), unanimous, as the Vulgar and Beza read; of
one accord or mind, yea una anima, as Iunius translates out of the Syriack, one
soul; or as informed with one soul; that is, as one man in the matters of
Gods worship.

Verse. 3. Through strife or vain-glory] out of a desire to cross or excel
another. Those two are most hurtful to the peace of the Church.

In lowliness of mind] To both diseases he applies one remedy. That which the
Apostle here commends, the moral Philosophers reckon as one of the most
contemptible vices; but the Spirit of God here crosses them; the word plainly
signifies base-mindednesse, when a man is low, base, vile, and abject in his
own conceit.

Let each esteem other better then themselves] Non minus vere quam humiliter,
as Bernard glosseth, Vide Zanchium.
because in some gift or other, at least in the measure or use another may be
better then us.

Verse. 4. Look not every man on his own things, but evey man also on the things
of others] What will be for my profit or advantage, Nemo studeat privatis
commodis, sed omnium saluti. Estius.
and not what will be for the public and common good, and benefit of others
also.

Verse. 6. Who being in the form of God] There is not a little contestation
with Arrians and Socinians (who deny the deity and eternity of Christ) about
the true meaning of those words, who being in the form of God; Vide Grotium in
loc. Causabone. Of Christ's exinanition. Ex obscurissimis sacrae scripturae
locis hic merito locus censeatur. vix alius in disceptationibus cum
Photinianis, imo and Luth^ranis nobilior aut magis decantatus locus. (...) vel
(...) (nam eadem esse nemo dubitat) haud raro Graecis pro praeda aut spolus
quae parta victoria aut expugnata urbe victoribus cedunt. Christus homo cum in
terris ageret, non duxit sibi facie^dum, ut numine suo ad ostentationem
uteretur, sed contra exinanitionis statum praetulit. Causab. de verborum usu
Diatrib.
and a great controversy concerning the right sense of those words, thought it
not robbery; the Greek words import, He made it not a matter of triumph or
ostentation; by which interpretation the Orthodoxe sense of the former words is
much confirmed where (says Calvin) is there an equality with God without
robbery, but in the only essence of God? mihi certe (says he) ne omnes quidem
diaboli hunc locum extor queant.

Verse. 7. But made himself of no reputation] Gr. he emptied himself, se
exinanivit. Beza, ex omni seipsum ad nibil redegit, is learned Beza's
exposition. He did disrobe himself of his glory; even emptied himself as it
were of his divine dignity; to undertake a base and humble condition for our
sakes.

Verses 7. and 8. And took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a man] Here is lik^nesse,
fashion and form; by likeness man is described, by fashion or shape, a man is
pictured, and by form a man is defined to be a perfect man.

Verse. 8 He became obedient unto death, even the death Ne perderet obedientiam
perdedit vitam. Bernard. Perkins. The meaning is, that Jesus is the true God,
and all creatures should be subject to him as to the Father; name is put for
person, bowing of the knee a bodily ceremony to express inward subjection.
Estey.
of the Crosse]

Verse. 10. That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow] That is, at the
consideration of the great Majesty, whereto he is now exalted; every heart,
even of the greatest Monarch should be touched with submission, and reverence.
This is taken out of Esaias 45.23. Shall give that glory to Christ in our humane
nature, which is due to Jehovah. See John 5.20, 21, 22, 23. Every Knee] That
is, the whole man shall be subject to the authority of Christ; the heart to
believe in him; the affections to close with him.

Verse. 11. Every tongue shall confesse] That is avow him openly; every tongue
shall speak out together, as the Greek word notes.

V. 12. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling] Greek, work till
you get the work Non dicit Apostolus nude (...) in quit Chrysostomus s^d (...)
id est (ut ipse interpretatur) accurate magnoque cum studio operamini. Syrus
magis operamini opus vitae vestrae.
through. Timor and tremor, Fear and trembling thus differ, that timor sit
cordis, tremor corporis, fear is of the heart, trembling of the body, as Haymo
and the ordinary gloss; and trembling is wont to be an effect of more vehement
fear; but when they are joined together, they signify a solicitude of
working, with a fear of offending, as 1 Cor. 2 3. 2 Cor. 7.15. Ephesians. 6.5.
Austen rightly observes, that the Apostle here alludes to the words of the
Psalmist. 2. Psalm. 11.

Verse. 13 Both to will and to due] If both be his own works, Duae sunt
praecipuae parts in agendo, voluntas and potentia effectus; utramque in
solidum Deo asserit; quid amplius nobis restat in quo gloriemur? Nec dubium est
quin perinde valeat haec partitio, ac si Paulus uno verbo totum dixisset;
voluntas enim fundamentum est; effectus, absoluta aedificij superficies. Ac
multo plus expressit, quam si Deum initij and finis authorem dixisset; tunc
enim cavillarentur Sophistae, aliquid medium relinqui hominibus, nunc autem
quid omnino proprium nobis reperient? Calvinus.
the desire as well as the deed, he must needs love and like both.

Verse. 14. Without murmuring and disputings] That is grudging that he must pay
this, or do that; muttering and arguing why he should not do it: murmurings
are secret complaints one of another, like to the grunting of hogs; Zanchius.
disputings are open contentious and quarrels.

Verse. 15. That ye may be blameless and barmelesse, the Sons of God without
rebuke] That ye may be the spotless sons of God, Greek, that is, Deuteronomy. 32.5.
without all such spots as are inconsistent with your Sonnership.

Verse. 17. Yea and if I be offered] Yea and though I be offered as a drink
offering, Heb. 13.16. Vide Bezam.
upon, or for the sacrifice.

Verse. 21. For all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christs] All
not collectively, that is, all individuals, but distributively, all of all
sorts, Christians of all sorts; (...) hic positum pro multi, Sua agunt plerique
hominum. Grotius:

Quod omnes dicit, non urgenda est particula universalis, ut nullam exceptione^
admittas; erant enim alij quoque, qualis Epaphroditus, sed pauci: verum omnibus
tribuit quod passim erat vulgar. Calvinus. Omnes dixit pro eo quod Latin
dicimus, plerique omnes, id est, plurimi, valde multi. Estius.


or the generality, most Christians, as 2 Timothy 4.16.

Seek their own] 1. Honor and advancement, 2. Gain, 3. Pleasures, 4. Ease
and safety, 5. Satisfaction.

Their own] Not properly, Hag. 2.8. Hos. 12.9. but first because they have a
civil right unto them, secondly, because in the opinion of the world, they are
their own.

Not the things which are Jesus Christs] That is, the things of the Church.
First, because the Church is the Spouse of Christ. Secondly, because he has
purchased it with his blood. 3. Because of the love he bears to it. They seek
not the preservation, and propagation of Christ's Kingdom; more particularly,
First, the pure preaching of the word, and right administration of the
Sacraments. Secondly, the truths of Christ. Thirdly, the worship of Christ.
Fourthly, the government of Christ. Fifthly, the Ministers of Christ.

Verse. 24. But I trust in the Lord] The word signifies an assured confidence,
and is seldom or never used, but when the thing follows, which thus is
trusted.

Syriacus, in honor habeto. sic, Theodorerus, Ambrosius. Calvinus, Beza. In
pretio habeto; (...) enim utru^^quo significat. Zanch.
Verse. 29. Hold such in reputation] Have them in high honor and estimation;
for so the word here used in the original signifies.

Verse. 30. Not regarding his life Beza and Steph. non habita vitae ratione.
Ambrosius Graecam voc^m propius expressit in interitum tradens animam suam;
graecum verbum significat male consulero and non habere rationem alicujus, non
quod Faber putat, sport consultoque tradere. Sentit enim Paulus illum open
divina servatum fuisse: alioqui ipse se praecipi taverat in exitium vitae.
Eras. Vide Bezam.
] yriacke explaines it thus, despised his own soul; Calvin exposing his soul
to danger.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 2. BEware of Dogs] The Greek word signifies to see, so 2 Col. 8. so the
Latins use, Habet Emphasim quod ^on simpliciter ait cavete canes, sed addit
articulum, istos canes, istos malos operarios; voluit omnino digito monstrare
illos falsos Doctores qui erant Philippis.
video pro caveo. Seducers and false Teachers are called dogs. First, because
they make a great spoil among the flocks, where they are let loose, Ezech.
22.25. Acts 20.29. Secondly, they are fawning crouching creatures, they come in
a specious way; pretending much humility, and in offensivenesse, 2 Timothy 3, 4.5.
Romans 16.18. Thirdly, in respect of their indefatigable industry; the dog will
compass much ground in the prosecution of his prey; so these Sea and Land, to
make a Proselyte. The Apostle terms such Jews here dogs which revolted from
Christianity to Circumcision.

Duae sunt causae cur hos doctores ex circumcisione vocarit concisionem: una
quia sua doctrina de carnali circumcisione, ape^te se nondum esse vere
circumcisos, nempe cord, sed tantum corporis particula concisos declarabant:
altera quia dum illam carnalem circumcisionem urgebant, corpus Ecclesiae
scindebant atque perdebant. Zanch.
Beware of the circumcision] By this word beware thrice repeated, the Apostle
signifies, that he would have the Philippians diligently know and distinguish
false teachers from true; and to take heed of the one, and highly esteem the
others. Zanchie.

Concision] By an allusion to the circumcision of which they boasted, when they
did nothing else but rend the Church. Calvin.

Verse. 3. We are the circumcision] That is, truly circumcision, viz. in heart,
not those which yet continue in the external circumcision now abolisht. See
Romans 2.19.

Rejoice in Christ Jesus] That is, Place the whole confidence of Salvation in
Christ; and confess this openly, when there is need.

Verse 5. An Hebrew of the Hebrews Whereby he argues the ancientnesse of his
stock and lineage, as being continued from Abraham called the Ebrew, or from
Eber of whom the Jews were called Ebrewes; which was before the confusion of
tongues, at the building of Babell. Doctor Airay. Genesis 14.13.20, 21, 25.
] That is, excellent or famous among the Hebrews, Vide Drusn observat. l. 4.
c. 20. Of those first most laudable and ancien^ Hebrews, Abraham, Jsaac and
Jacob. a Lapide. See Zanchius.

Verses 8. and 9. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord: for whom J have suffered
the loss of all things; and do account them but dung, that J may win Christ:
And be found in him not having, etc. Dung] Or dogs meat. Vide Bezam. (...)
dicuntur quasi (...). m^cae quae canibus projiciuntur. Vide a Lapide.
That is, not barely to know these things, or to believe them by faith; but to
have the experience of the virtue of his resurrection, in raising him from the
death of sin to holiness, and newness of life; giving him a full conquest
over his corruptions, and spiritual life and strength to serve God in some
perfection.

The Apostle speaks of two kinds of righteousness, the one which is a man's
own, not having mine own righteousness, the other which is another; and that
is Gods or Christ's. The former he calls the righteousness of the Law, viz.
Whereby a man through observation of the Law, is accounted righteous, and in
this Paul would not be found: not that he would not be found fruitful in good
works, but he would not be judged by them; they being in comparison of the
Laws purity and perfection a stained Clout; the latter in which Paul would be
found, that he might find acceptance in the sight of God, is not his own, but
another. 2 Not obtained by any, even the best works but apprehended by faith;
which cannot be said to lay hold on any thing within us; but something without
us. 3. It is of God through faith, that is, such a one as God freely through
his Christ gives us, and makes ours; not by putting it into us as other
graces; but by imputing it into us, and by this means acquitting us; and
secondly of such a person that is God, as well as man.

Verse. 10. That I may know him] Two things are comprised in it. Vide Bezam. ut
perfectie cognoscam. Jerome.
1. Have the experience within himself, of the things he knew. 2. A further
degree of knowledge; both Theoreticall and Practical.

And the power of his resurrection] That is, that he might feel in himself
that power whereby Christ was raised from death to life; to raise him also from
the bondage of his sins, to a new life. Perkins.

Being made conformable] Or as Beza reads it, whiles I am made conformable.
Unto his death, that is, unto Christ being dead.

Verse. 11. Unto the resurrection of the dead] That is, by a Metonymie of the
subject for the adjunct, That is, to have been as perfect as the glorified
persons in the day of judgment.
that perfection of holiness which accompanies the Estate of the resurrection.

Verse. 13. Forgetting those things which are behind] viz. The former part of
his care in the way of godliness, as Caesar in warlike matters, proceeding
still forward. Alludit ad cursores qui nusquam deflectunt oculos, ne
celeritatem cursus sui retardent Calvinus. Vide Bezam


Nilque putans factum dum quid superesset agendum.

And reaching forth Graece (...), quod magnam habet Emphasim: significat enim
manus totumque corpus protendere ad scopum, ut eum apprehendas antequam pedibus
eum attigeris: quod faciunt stadiodromi, qui cum extremo nisu conantur, maxim
dum metae and victoriae vicinae sunt, ut antagonistam aequis pene passibus
currentem praevertant, caput totumque corpus and vires exerunt, ac praecipites
ad scopum ruunt, ad eumque summis manibus eum prebenfuri se extendunt. Jta
Chrysostom. Et Theoph. a Lapide in loc.
] Greek, bending or stretching forward, as if he threw himself forward like a
dart, v. 13. After that Christian perfection, unto which he had not yet
attained. See Doctor Airay in loc.

Verse. 14. I follow hard (or press wieh an eager pursuit (for so does the
word emphatically import) after the mark) as by levelling at the mark for) or
unto, It is the same word that signifies to persecute because the earnestness
of his Spirit in pressing toward the mark now is the same, that it was in the
persecution of those that pressed toward the mark before. Mr. Burroughes. As
good runners when they come near unto the mark, stretch out their head and
hands, and whole body to take hold of them that run with them, or of the mark
that is before them; so he in his whole race so labored unto that which was
before, as if he were still stretching out his Arms to take hold of it. Doctor
Airay.
that is, to attain unto.

The price of the high calling] That is to the heavenly glory, to which God
calls all his Elect in Christ. (...), signifies praemium certantibus propositum.

V. 16. Let us walk by the some rule] Or as some not unfitly translate it, let
us (...) dicitur ordo in acie a front ad extremum agmen por^ectus. Thucid. l.
4.
proceed by one rule, for the word properly signifies to go on in order; it is
a Military word borrowed from the marching of Soldiers unto the Battle; whose
manner it is to keep their rank, and without any outraying to march along
after the prescript rule of their General, or Leader. Incedamus quasi milities
in acie ordine and gradu nostro, Gal. 5.25. and 6.16. a Lapide.

Let us mind the same thing] The phrase of speech here used, signifies to be
of one mind, of one judgment, of one affection one toward another; so that
nothing be done through contention amongst us. See 2. Chap. 2. v. and 4. Chap.
2. v. (...) idem sapere, id est, sapiamus, as the words before in the Greek are
to walk in the same rule. The Infinitives are put for the Imperative, after
the manner of the Hebrews* a Lapide. Unless it be an Elliptick phrase, in
which some word is to be understood. See Vorstius.

The word signifies our Charter and, our municipall Laws, we live by the same
Laws, as the Saints and Angels in heaven do. Pro conversatione, Grae^e est,
(...), quae vox significat conversationem civilem, id est, civium intet se:
tanquam dicat aposto^us, civitas nostra in qua ut cives conversam^^, in coelis
est; Jtaque nos non terrena s^pimus sed coelestia. Estius. (...) significat
inquit Budaeus, regimen Politicum reipublicae vel civitatis. q.d. Nostrum
regimen, nostra respublica, nostra civitas in coelis est; nos gerimus ut
municipes coelorum. a Lapide. Corpore ambulamus in terra, cord habitamus in
caelo. Aug. Anima non est ubi animat sed ubi amat.
Verse. 20. For our conversation is in Heaven] Our City conversation, our
trading and trafficking. The Greek word comprehends two things. 1. The State
of a corporation, City, or body Politic; and the Laws whereby they that are
so embodied are regulated. 2. The ways, endeavors, and aims of such, in
relation to such a State. In the first sense the meaning is, we are free of the
City of God, naturalized; in the second sense the meaning is, we live as those
of the City of God; our actions and ways savor of heaven.

Verse 21. Who shall change our vile body] An allusion to those who changing old
and broken vessels, desire to have them wrought in the best and newest fashion.

CHAP. IV.
Epitheta quibus compellat Philippenses duo indicant, qualis and quantus suerit
Apostoli erga illos assectus. Singulari amore illos complectebatur ita ut cum
illis semper esse cuperet: ideo au, Fratr^s dilecti and exoptati: deinde
declarat qualis suerat Philippensium pietas. Jta in unive^sum illa Ecclesia
profecerat and constans suerat in doctrina Christi per Apostolum praedicata, ut
eam vocarit Apostolus gaudium and coronam suam; Gaudium, quia sua pietate
praebebant Apostolo materiam gaudendi; coronam quia erant ceu ornamentum, decus
and gloria Apostoli, quasi dicat, propter vos mihi placeo, propter vos clarus
and illustris sio, ut exponit Theodoretus. Zanchius.
Verse. 1. MY brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for] with fair compellations
he insinuates into their affections, which yet come not from flattery, but
sincere love.

Verse. 2 Of the same mind in the Lord] That is, of one mind, and one judgment
in the things of the Lord, betwixt themselves, and with the Church.

Verse. 3. True yoak-fellow] some special man that preached the Gospel purely
and sincerely there with him at Philippi. Calvin will not determine whether he
speaks to a man or a woman. See Beza.

Which labored with me] That is, when the Gospel was first preached by him at
Philippi, they labored yea and even strove, for so the word signifies, putting
themselves in hazard for the defense of the Gospel. Significatur certamen
quale est athletarum, id est, vehemens ac laboriosum. Estius.

In the Book of life] whereby he means that their life was as certainly
sealed up with God, as if their names had been written in a book to that
purpose. See Exodus 32.32. vide Grotium. Vorstius thinks it a speech taken from
the custom of Soldiers or Cities, in which the chosen Soldiers or Citizens
are by name written in a certain book.

Zanchie.
Verse. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoyce] As if he should
say, I will not cease to exhort you that always, and so in all things which
are from the Lord you rejoice but in the Lord, he doubleth the mandate to show
the necessity of the duty.

Verse. 5. Let your moderation be known unto all men] He says not, be ye
moderate, Eos ad omnia aequo animo serenda hortatur. Calvinus.
but let your moderation or lenity, as the Syriack, be known, and not simply to
men, but to all men: That is, not only the faithful, but Infidels and
Heathens; not for vainglory, but for the edifying of your neighbor* the glory
of Christ's name, and the Gospel, as Matthew. 5. Let your light so shine etc.
Observe three degrees of this moderation toward our neighbor: 1. To tolerate
faults which are not erroneous nor punished by the Laws, as anger,
covetousness, frowardness. 2. To interpret doubtful sayings, or deeds the
best way. 3. That we correct greater faults where there is not obstinacy,
either gently or severely, as the thing it self requires. The Apostle speaks
properly of the moderation which is necessary for every Christian, that he
deal not rigorously with his neighbor.

The Lord is at hand] three ways. 1. In respect of his Deity, by which he
reigns in the midst of his enemies. 2. By the efficacy of his Spirit, by which
he dwells and works in us. 3. By his coming visibly to judgment. He is ready
to help his, Psalm. 145.18. Jam. 58.
as Psam ^45.11. Calvin. Estius.

Verse. 6. Be careful for nothing] With a care of diffidence. The Apostle
comprehends all kind of prayer under these words,

But by every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your
request etc.] 1. (...), prayer, whereby we ask of God temporal or eternal
blessings. 2. (...), by which we deprecate all evils. 3. Thanksgiving for
benefits received, as though God took no notice of their prayers, that do not
withal give thanks.


Requests] This is the general, and by it is meant any prayer made unto God,
for the obtaining of that which is good, or avoiding that which is evil. The
Apostle annexeth a promise to the precedent exhortation.

Verse. 7. The peace of God] So called, 1. because it has God for its object;
2. Because God by his Spirit is the Author of it, it is peace from God.

Which passes all understanding] viz. Created, because the understanding of
man cannot sufficiently conceive it. 2. Cannot sufficiently esteem or prize it
according to the worth of it.

Shall keep] as with a Garrison; vide Bezam. Keep all in their office.

Your hearts Scriptura animam hominis quoad facultates, in duas parts solet
dividere, mentem and Cor; men's intelligentiam significat; Cor omnes affectus
aut voluntates. Calvinus.
] That is, your affections to obey.

Mindes] Greek, reasonings or imaginations. That is, (...).
understanding in a readiness to direct their whole souls. The peace of God
shall keep you so that you shall not fall from God, neither in wicked thoughts
nor desires.

Verse. 8. Whatsoever things are true] in opinion, that they may be free from
errors in word, that they may be free from leasing; in deed, that they may be
free from all hypocrisy, and dissimulation.

Whatsoever things are honest] Or, as the word rather signifies, whatsoever
things do set them out with an holy gravity; whatsoever things are grave and
comely for their persons, they may say and do.

Iust] That every man may have his right of them, and that which is due unto
them, so that we deceive and hurt none.

Pure] That in their lives they may be unspotted, and in their words and deeds
undefiled.

Whatsoever things are lovely] Or may make them lovely, and win them favor
with God and men.

Whatsoever things are of good report] That by such things they may purchase to
themselves a good report amongst men.

If there be any vertue] That is, any thing which has in it commendation of
virtue.

And if there be any praise] any thing praise worthy with good men.

Thinke] It signifies a diligent consideration; a love and desire of the mind
after such things.

Verse. 9. And the God of peace shall be with you] That is his favor and love
in Christ shall embrace you, and all that outward prosperity and success, as
his wisdom shall think meet for you.

Verse. 10. Flourished] The word is borrowed from Herbs or Trees, which seeming
in Winter to be dead and withered, Dr. Alray. Metaphora sumpta ab arboribus,
quarum vis hyeme intus contracta latet, vere florere incipit. Calvinus.
in the Spring grow green again; so their care which for a time languished now
again revived.

Verse. 11. For I have learned] I am instructed and religiously taught; or
taught as in a mystery, (...) sacris imbutus, initiatus mysteriis. Non
fermidavit Apostolus vocem Graecae superstitionis ad meliores usus tranferre;
nam and (...) vox hinc venit. Grotius in loc. vide Bezam.
or entered in this high point of Christian practice; so the word signifies. I
have not this by nature, I am taught it, and I see it is a mystery.

In whatsoever state I am] The word state is not in the original, but in what
I am; that is in whatsoever concerns or befalls me, whether I have little or
nothing at all.

Therewith to be content] Or self-sufficient, it is properly attributed only
to God. See 1 Timothy 6.6.

(...) quasi (...) se pedibus proculcandum prosternit. M. Burroughes on the
place.
Verse. 12. I know how to be abased] (...), even to be trampled under feet. Hoc
est, patienter far humilitatem. Calvinus.

Every where, and in all things] (...), in every place, in every time, in every
thing; the words will bear all this. See Estius.

Verse 13. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me] That is,
which belong to his calling. q. d. without Christ strengthening me I can do
nothing.

Verse. 18. An odor of a sweet smell] The Apostle calls the gift which the
Philippians sent him lying in prison, an odor of a sweet swell, in an Hebrew
phrase; that is, See Heb. 13.16 Alludit ad id quod apud Moysen passim de
sacrificits legitur ea Deo accepta esse in odorem suavitatis. Verse. 19. But my
God] Dixit meus 1. ut significet se vere illum agnoscere pro Deo suo. 2. ut
significet hunc unicum esse illum a quo in carcere sustentetur and omni
consolatione afficiatur. 3. ut docea^ cum ipse sit legatus hujus Dei quicquid
ad se missum suit a Philippis, illud hunc suum Deum compensaturum. Zanchius.
a most sweet or fragrant odor; for as sweet odours are a refreshing of the
senses, so our refreshing of the Saints bowels, is in a manner refreshing of
Gods own senses and spirits. A term borrowed from the perfumes which were made
upon the Altar of Incense. See a Lapide.

Verse. 20. Now unto God and our Father] The conjunction and is here exegeticall
not copulative. Our God in respect of our creation, and our Father in respect
of our regeneration; our God in respect of temporal blessings, Our Father in
respect of spiritual graces, and eternal in the Heavens.

Verse. 22. All the Saints salute you] viz. All the rest of the Saints, that
labor not in the Gospel. Omnes sancti, nempe reliqui Christiani, qui Romae
erant licet non laborarent in Evangelio. Subdit maxim etc. id est, Nerouis.
Addit hoc, quo magis illos consoletur, simulque and animet ad constantiam. Si
enim isti non metuebant Neronem, quin juberent salutari Christianos qui erant
etiam alibi quam Romae: cur non and nos forti animo simus? Zanchius.


Chiefly they that are of Caesar's houshold] Piety is rare in Princes Courts;
yet even in Neroes Court there were some Saints. That which some imagine, that
Seneca is here designed among the rest, has no color says Calvin] for he
never by any sign says he] showed himself a Christian, neither was he of
Caesar's household, but a Senator. See Estius.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the COLOSSIANS.
CHAP. I.
THis Epistle was written by St. Paul when he was prisoner at Rome. The
occasion of the writing of it was a report brought unto him concerning the
estate of the Church at Colosse, Omnes Epistolae Pauli egregiae sunt: sed
omniu^ imprimus quae Roma ex vinculis missae sunt. Harum primam temporis ordine
arbitror fuisse illam ad Philemonem; Nam tunc adhuc cum ipso erat Epaphroditus
qui and Epaphras: alteram ad Philippenses, ubi Epaphroditum remittit ad
Ephesios; and eodem prope tempore hanc ad Colossenses, cum adhue quae ad
Ephesios scripserat, in animo haererent: postrema vero omnium ea quae posterior
est ad Timotheum. Grotius.
that after they of the Church had been converted by Epaphras to the faith of
Christ, and instructed in the truth of Religion, according to the doctrine of
the Apostles, they were in danger to be seduced by false Teachers, raised up by
Satan, who sought to impose and thrust upon them the observation of
circumcision, and certain rites of the ceremonial Law, abolished by Christ,
and to entangle them with many philosophical speculations; and to bring in the
worship of Angels, and many other sorts of will worship devised by themselves.
The Apostle hearing of this eminent danger like to fall upon them, was induced
to write this Epistle unto them, as a remedy against these evils. The sum and
substance of this Epistle is, that the Colossians ought to continue constant in
the doctrine of the faith delivered unto them by Epaphras; and to avoid the
corruption of flattering novelties and deceivers. The material parts of it
besides the Proem and conclusion, are two. The first is concerning Christian
doctrine, in the two first Chapters; the second concerning Christian life and
conversation in the two Chapters following.

Verse. 9. That you might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding] The words are better translated by
Tremelius and Calvin; wisdom and prudence. To see truths and the reason of
them, this is wisdom; Ad sapientiam pertinet universalis mysteriorum
speculatio, ad prudentiam mysteriorum cognitorum ad actiones applicatio. Estius.
to be cunning in practice, that is prudence. Ephesians. 1.8. in wisdom and
prudence. The opposite to wisdom is folly, the opposite to prudence is
blockishnesse in a man's whole course.

Verse. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord] Walking is an ordinary
metaphor in the Scripture for the conversation of Christians, commonly used for
the outward conversation, here for outward and inward too; because worthy and
well pleasing is added.

Worthy] is taken in a legal and strict sense; Sicut decet Christi fideles ac
discipulos; ita ut ipsi per omnia placeatis. Estius.
so the Angels can do nothing which deserves Gods acceptance and regard. 2. In
an Evangelicall and comparative sense, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.

Of the Lord] The word God alone ordinarily signifies the Father, the word Lord
alone usually Christ; behave your selves answerably to his wisdom, authority,
holiness, example.

Unto all pleasing] Not in one thing only, but that whatever we do may be
acceptable to him; there are diverse notes of Universality, verse. 9. and twice
here, and verse. 11.

Unto all patience] notes 1. totum subjecti, the man all patient; that is
patient in tongue and in heart. 2. Totum ipsius quantitatis, a totality of the
very grace of patience, pure patience without mixture of passion. 3. A totality
in reference to condition, Lockyer.
a heart so principled, so compos sui, master of himself, that no evil can
make evil, not the greatest evil the least impression of evil. 4. A totality
in reference to time, totum temporis such a patience as dies not till the man
die.

Verse. 12. Made us meet] It is not said, that he has made us worthy, as the
Rhemists translate it; C^rtwright. See Estius.
but only fit or meet, as both the Greek signifies, and the interlineall and
Syriack have translated it; therefore merit cannot be drawn hence.

Verse. 13. Who has delivered us] The word signifies by fine force to deliver
or pluck away, even as David pulled the Lamb out of the Bears mouth. It
signifies such a deliverance as (in respect of them that are delivered) is
never deserved by them, nor desired of them; but is (as it were) a drawing and
haling, as the pulling of a beast, or rather a dead wight out of a pit: And in
respect of the deliverer it signifies such a deliverante as is wrought by his
Almighty power, by the power of his Spirit. Elton.

And has translated us] A word taken from those that plant Colonies, and cause
the people to go out of their native soil to inhabit a new Country.
Transtulit] videtur hoc verbum ab iis desumptum, qui Colonias deducunt and
populum migrare cogunt ex natali solo, ut novam aliquam regionem incolant.
Episc. Dav.


Verse. 14. In whom we have redemption] a full and perfect redemption; It is not
(...), but (...).

Through his blood] So also it is, Ephesians. 1.7. These words are wanting in six
ancient Copies, and are not read by Chrysostom or his Epitimator Theophylact,
nor by the Vulgar and Syriack.

Verse. 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God] Christ is called so because
of his equality every way, and likeness to his Father; by him God, otherwise
invisible, is manifested to us.

The firstborn of every creature] The firstborn is used two ways; 1.
Properly for him that was born before all others like to himself; so Christ is
not the firstborn, so he should be a creature. 2. Improperly, for him who is
Lord and heir of all his Fathers goods; so here the firstborn of every
creature is the Lord of all creatures.

Angelos iis ornat nominibus, quae terrenorum Magistratuum and Politicae
authoritatis propria sunt. Glassius.
Verse. 16. Whether they be Thrones or Dominions or Principalities or powers]
The first two Thrones, Dominions, respect things in invisible or things in
Heaven; the latter two Principalities, Powers, things on earth; for he seems
to illustrate each part of the distribution by the particulars inferred, as
Ephesians. 1.21. see Bayne. Others interpret all these of the good Angels.
Augustine says, what difference there is between these four words, let them
tell us that are able, so they prove what they tell us; for my part, says he,
I confess I know it not.

And for him] That is, to seve for his glory and praise. M. Perkins.

Verse. 18. He is the head of the body] The head for influence, dominion,
direction.

The first borne from the dead] He has this dignity and privilege, to rise to
eternal life, and glory, the first of all men. Lazarus and others rose before
him; but to live a mortal life, Vide Bezam. Mr. Perkins. Caput seu princeps ac
Dominus mortuorum. Dilher. Primogenitus ex mortuis dicitur non modo quia primus
resurrexit, sed qui^ restituit etiam aliis vitam. Calvinu^.
and to dye again. By virtue of his resurrection, he is the cause of the
resurrection of all his Members; as the first borne among the Jews did
communicate his good things to his brethren. See Romans 8.29. For these two
reasons, he is called the first borne among the dead. See 1 Cor. 15.20. Elton.

Hoc ad angelos bonos proprie non pertinet, sed ad animas piorum, qui tunc,
quum Paulus illa scriberet, mortui erant, and quorum animae erant tunc in
coelis per Christi sanguinem Deo reconciliatae ac receptae. Daneus.
Verse. 20. And by him] That is, by Christ, not as an Instrument as the Papists
say; but as a ministerial, and meritorious cause of reconciliation, 2 Cor.
5.19.

To reconcile all things unto himselfe] To reconcile, is to set at one, and to
make of enemies friends.

Both the things in earth] That is, the Elect living in this world; And the
things in heaven] That is, the holy and Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. The Angels
have need of a mediator for confirmation in goodness; and that they might
again be knit together with the Elect, under one and the same head Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 1.10.

Verse. 23. Grounded] The word in the original signifies, except you be so
built as a house is built upon a sure foundation; as a tree that is soundly
rooted, and setled] A metaphore from the sitting of the body, which is then
most firm.

The hope of the Gospell] viz. Those sweet promises of life, which are the very
matter of the Gospel.

And which was Preached to every creature, which is under heaven] That is, Vide
Bezam. and Estium.
so and in such sort, as every man living might have heard and known; had not
the fault been in their own carelessness.

Verse. 24. Fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh] He means not the passion of Christ, but the sufferings of the body of
Christ, that is, Vide Bezam. Perkins. See Acts 9.4.
the Church whereof Christ is the head.

For his bodies sake which is the Church] Because they confirm the faith of
the Church. Non pro illis redimendis aut expiandis sed pro illis confirmandis,
et aedificandis in doctrina Evangelica


Verse. 26. The mystery which has been hid from ages] That is, of the Gospel.

But now is made manifest to his Saints] The Gospel was revealed to all the
world, 11 Matthew. 25. and 13.44 2 Cor. 4.3.
they might have a literal knowledge of it; but the Saints only a spiritual
knowledge. The common truths which others see with a rational eye, they see
with a siduciall eye.

CHAPT. II.
Verse. 5. BEholding your order] That is, your outward beauty. Ordinis nomine
tam consensum, quam mores rite compositos, and totam disciplinam intellige.
Calvin. vide Bezam.


And the steadfastness of your faith in Christ] (...), the firmament of your
faith, so the vulgar renders it; it is as firm as the firmament it self. See
1 Pet. 5.9.

Verse. 7. Duplex metaphora est; altera a plantis been radicatis, altera a domo
been fundata. Estius. vide Bezam.
Rooted and built up in him] He alludeth to a tree well rooted in the ground;
and to an house well set upon a good foundation. Calvin and others. He
signifies that Christ is the root, in which he would have them firmly rooted;
and the foundation upon which he would have them built.

Verse. 8. Spoil you] Verbo utitur admodum proprio; a^ludit enim ad praedones,
qui dum violenter rapere gregem nequeunt, fraud abigunt pecudes. Calvinus.
Estius.
(...), That is, make a prey of you. The Speech is taken from thieves, who come
secretly to carry away a sheep out of the fold; to whom the Apostle compares
vain teachers. Doctor Tailor.

Through Philosophy] The Apostle speaks not absolutely of Philosophy, but of
vain deceiving by Philosophy as the Text implies. Non verum usum syncerae
philosophiae, sed abusum, qui est confusio philosophia cum Evangelio prohibet,
vel potius Sophisticen illam rejicit, quam falso aliqui Philosophiae titulo
venditant, cum sit (ut eo ipso loco Apostolus ait) inamis quaedam deceptio.
Pezel tract. de coena Domini.
Omnes adulterinae doctrinae quae nascuntur ex humano capite, qualemcunque
habeant rationis colorem. Calvinus. Some say vain deceit is here added
interpretatively.

Verse. 10. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all principality
and power] As though he had said, because in himself he has the wel-head of
glory and Majesty; the which becomes ours in that he is also the head of his
Church.

Verse. 11. In whom] That is Christ, of whom verse. 8, 9, 10. Yee] That is all
you Colossians and others that have truly believed in Christ.

Are circumcised with the circumcision] That is, made partakers of the
spiritual good whereof circumcision was anciently to the Jews a sign and
seal.

Made without In Graeco una composita dictio est, (...). Estius.
bands] That is, not performed by any external act of any man upon the body,
but spiritually upon the soul; by a spiritual and inward act of Gods Spirit.

In putting off the body of the sins of the flesh] That is, which inward
circumcision consists in this, There were many ceremonies in Baptism used in
the Primitive Church, viz. Putting of old clothes, drenching in water, so as to
seem to be buried in it; putting on new clothes at their coming out, to
which Paul alludes in these two verses, 11, and 12. and 3 Col. 9, 10. and Romans
6.4, 5. Thornedikes discourse of the Right of the Church in a Christian State.
Chap. 4.
that a man is enabled to cast aside, mortify and overcome those manifold
corruptions, and disorders of the soul, which come unto us by our fleshly
generation; and do show themselves in our flesh, our outward man.

By the circumcision of Christ] By merit and virtue of all those things which
Christ has done and suffered in his humane nature; among which this of his
circumcision was one.

(...).
Verse. 13. Having forgiven you all trespasses] The word imports, that he has
freely forgiven us all our sins. Romans 3.4. The word rendered trespasses
usually, is understood of actual sins, (...).
either it is a Synecdoche, and so one sort of sins is named instead of all;
or else he speaks according to the feeling of many of the godly, who even
after forgiveness are troubled with a wicked pronenesse to daily sins.
Vehementius obligat syngratha autographo, There are two ways of cancell^ng a
bond, laceratione and litura; here it is blotted out and can be read no more
then if it had never been; the obligatory power of the Law, as a Covenant is
taken away. Glassti. Rhetor. Sac. Vide Bezam.


Verse. 14. Blotting out the hand writing of Ordinances] Beza and Calvin
understand it of the ceremonial Law; it is meant not only of that, but of the
moral Law as a Covenant of works, say Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Jerome; this
is spoken (says Zanchie) to comfort the Colossians, who were never under the
ceremonial Law.

Verse. 17. Which are a shadow of things to come] Ceremonies are called
shadows, because that as the shadow carries though a dark, yet some
resemblance of the body, whose shadow it is, so Ceremonies of Christ.

Verse. 18. Beguile you, of your reward] It referres to prizes in the Olympic
games, as that in 8. v. to spoils in war. He means their salvation.

In a voluntary humility, and worshipping of See 23. v. This the Papists due,
as though it were too much boldness, to go, directly to Christ. Vide Calvinum.
Angels] The worshipping of Angels which Paul condemns arose from a pretense
of humility. For such making a show of humility, that they could not go
directly to God neither were they worthy to go by Christ, therefore they
taught that they must use the mediation of Angels; so Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Theophylact, and the Greek Scholiast in loc.

Verse. 21. Touch not] A woman, 1 Cor. 7.1. Taste not] Meat; handle not] Money,
meddle not with secular contracts. Doctor Sclater.

Some observe that the rest of the words without copulatives, notes their
eagerness, in pressing these things, and persuading men to the care of them.

Verse. 22. Which all are to perish with the using] The words signify, are to
corruption in the use.] That is they come to, no such use or end as is aimed at
in them; those were such observances (as Zanchie shows) as men devised or
used with an estimation of worshipping God in them ex se as of themselves.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1 Seek those things which are above] It implies, 1. An act of the
understanding mind, and contemplate on the things that are above. 2. Of the
will; long for, favor and affect them.

Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things which are on
earth] He repeates what he had said in the former verse, to show our dullness
of capacity in conceiving, and backwardness in practice, and the necessity and
excellency of the duty.

Verse. 3. Your life is hid with Christ in God] A happy and glorious life, hid
chiefly in respect of security, Extra periculum est vita nostra etsi non
appareat. Nam and Deus fidelis; ^ideoque non abnegabit depositum, nec sallet in
susceptu custodia: and Christi societas majorem etiamnum securitatem affert.
Calvinus.
and also in respect of obscurity, that your selves sometimes can not find it;
not only hid from the eyes of the world, but also from our own eyes, It is
called mortification to show that there is a great deal of misery and pain in
it. A Father says this is the hardest Text in all the Bible; and the hardest
duty in all Christianity, that we can go about. Mr. Fenner.
in respect of the fullness, and perfection of it.

Verse. 5. Mortifie] or put to death, He alludeth unto the ancient sacrifices,
whereof so many as consisted of things having life, were appointed to be slain
by the Priest before they were offered upon the Altar; as a type of our killing
the old man, before we can become an acceptable sacrifie unto God.

Your Members which are upon the earth] That is Some of which he names
afterward.
lusts, called Members, 1. Because the whole corruption of our evil nature, is
compared to a man's body; and called the body of death. 2. Because they are as
natural to a carnal man; and as well beloved as his Members, Mark 9.43. 3.
Because they do dwell and work in our Members, Rom, 7.23. James 4.1. Upon
earth, first because they are exercised upon things of this earth, as their
proper object, secondly because they will continue with us during our natural
life, and abode upon the earth. The sins here reckoned up are sins either
against the seventh Commandment, viz. fornication, uncleanesse, inordinate
affection; or against the tenth Commandment, evil concupiscence; or the
first, covetousness which is Idolatry;

Inordinate affection] In the original, it is but one word, (...), any violent
strong passion, that chiefly which we call being in love. Mollities verti
solet. Ab hac Pathici and Molles dicuntur: quales fuerunt Heliogabalus, and
ipsius foedissimi asseclae. Pareus.
Some think it means the burning and flaming of lust though it never come to
action; or the daily passions of lust, which arise out of such a softness, or
effeminatenesse of mind as is fired with every occasion, or temptation.

Verse. 11. But Christ is all and in all] Christ is all in a twofold relation,
Hoc est, Christus solus proram and puppim (ut aiunt) principium and finem
tenet. Calvinus.
of God and man; look what God can require for his satisfaction, or we desire
for our perfection, is so completely to be found in Christ, that it need not be
sought elsewhere.

In all] Men or things; it may be read either way; he is all things in all
persons; or all things in all things.

Verse. 12. Put on therefore as the elect of God bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering] He wishes them as they would
be sure of their election, to have a sound note of their holiness, and that
God loved them, Qua locutione serium, and quasi visceralem miserecordiae
affectum notat. Calvinus.
so to put on the bowels of mercy; let these be your robes and coverings, wear
them as you wear your garments; and let them be as tender and inward unto you,
as your own principal and most vital parts. Such a measure of pity and
compassion, as makes the inward bowels to yearn; and mercies of diverse kinds,
it is in the plural number.

Kindnesse] This virtue extends further then the former; for pity and
compassion is proper to those which are in some affliction and misery; but
kindness reaches to all whether in prosperity or adversity; it is a sweet and
loving disposition of the heart, and a courteous affection to all, showing it
se^fe in pleasing and good speech.

Humbleness of mind] A mean esteem of our selves.

Meekenesse] A quiet and calm disposition of heart, neither prone to provoke,
nor easily provoked to anger by an injury.

Long-suffering] A further degree of meekness, a continued quietness of
mind, after many wrongs offered.

Verse 14. And above all these things, put on charity which is the bond of
perfectnesse] Above all] Because love is the root of all, he does by this
phrase compare charity to the most precious garment which is put upon all
others.

The bond of perfectnesse] That is, the most perfect bond which is among men to
unite them together: Bishop Down. Of Justification, l. 5. c. 7. See Bifield.
for according to the Hebrew phrase which is usual in the writings of the
Apostle] vinculum perfectionis is vinculum perfectissimum, quo plures inter se
colligantur: for it is not (...), but (...), That is, as Cajetan speaks,
vinculum conjungeus amantes, or as Justinian, perfectissimum quoddam vinculum.

Verse. 16. Dwell in you Vult doctrina^ Evangelij illis esse familiarem.
Calvinus.
] That is, let it not come as a stranger, but let it be familiar with you,
Richly] be not content to know one part of the word, but know it throughout,
have a high esteem of the Gospel. (...) notes two things, 1: The measure and
so it is well rendered plenteously. 2. The worth of the knowledge of the word;
and so it is rendered richly.

In all By daily meditation of the Commandments, promies, and threatenings
revealed in the same.
wisdome] A Child may be able to say much by heart, and yet not have it in
wisdom. Vt jnde scilicet edocti sapiamus quod oportet. The word of God is a
rule for all the virtues before mentioned, and the study of that will fit us to
the duties of our several relations after rehearsed.

Teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs] See Ephesians. 5.19. In both which places, as the Apostle exhorteh us to
singing, so he instructs what the matter of our Song should be, Mr. Cotton of
singing of Psalms, c. 4. and on 1 Cant. Psalmus est in quo concinendo
adhibetia musicum aliquod inst^umentum praeter linguam. Hymnus proprie est
laudis canticum, sive alta voce, sive aliter canatur. Oda non lauds tantum
continet, sed paraeneses and alia argumenta. Calvinus.
viz. Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs. Those three are the Titles of the
Songs of David, as they are delivered to us by the Holy Ghost himself; some of
them are called Mizmorim Psalms; some Tehillim Hymns; some Shirim Songs,
Spiritual Songs.

Psalmes] Were sung on the voice, and Instrument both, Psalm. 108.1. Dan. 3.7.

Hymnes] Were Songs of thankesgiving, for a particular benefit received, Matthew.
26.30.

Songs] Wherein we give thanks for general blessings; as when David praises
the Lord for the works of creation, Psalm. 104 3.

Gratiam hoc in loco nonnulli exponunt animi gratitudinem, sive gratiarum
actionem; vocabulum (...) aliquoties hoc sensu accipitur, 1 Cor. 15.57. 2 Cor.
2.14. alii exponunt in dexteritate quadam gratiosa, quae and jucunditatem and
utilitatem afferat auditoribus; in hunc etiam sensum quandoque capitur
vocabulum (...) ut infra 4.6. and ad Ephesians. 4.29. Episc. Dav.
Singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord] Psalm. 103.1. That is, (say
some) with a comely and reverent gesture; a decent and sweet Tune, rather with
understanding and feeling hearts, 1 Cor. 14, 15.

Verse. 17. And whatsoever you doe] If you would have God to accept of it.

Do all in the name of the Lord Iesus] To do any thing in another name,
imports three things, 1. To do it by some Warrant or Commission from another.
2. To do it for his sake and service. 3. By the assistance of another. That
is, to be authorized, and allowed by Christ, what we speak or do, to do it
for Christ's glory, and likewise for his sake, and by his strength; do it in
this persuasion; that through Christ God is well pleased with you. Hildersam.

Verses 18.19. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in
the Lord. Husbands love your wives, etc.] The Apostle begins first with the
duties of married persons, as Ephesians. 5.22.25. and so proceeds to the duties
of Children and Parents, of Servante and Masters, as Ephesians. 5.20, 21. and
6.1.4. First, because this society is first in nature, and therefore in order.
Secondly, this is the fountain from whence the rest flow, Psalm. 120.3. and
127.3. Prove. 5.15.16. And of them he begins first with wives; constantly
observed both by Peter 1 Pet. 3.1. and Paul Ephesians. 5.22. Mr. Gataker.
First to show the inferiority of the wife in regard of the husband; for the
Apostle begins ever with the duty of the Inferiors, Ephesians. 6.20.22. and 4.1.
Secondly to show where duty is to begin, at the Inferior, and so to ascend to
the Superior.

Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands] That is, yield your selves
unto the will, direction, 1 Pet. 3.5.
and discretion of your husbands.

(...).
As it is fit] The original word is rendered three ways, 1. Vt oportet as ye
ought, and so is a reason from Gods institution. Ye must do it. 2. Vt
convenit, as it is meet. 3. Vt deeet, as it is comely; women delight in
neatness. It is meet or comely, in regard, 1. Of the Law of nature. 2. Of Gods
Institution after the fall. 3. The Husbands headship. 4. womanly infirmities.

Mr. Gataker.
In the Lord] It may be taken as a note of direction, prescribing the ground
and manor of this submission; that it be done in obedience of God, and the
command of God; in conscience of the order, and ordinance of God; so it is used
Ephesians. 6.1.2 As a note of limitation, Sic placeat uxor voluntati conjugis ut
non displiceat voluntati conditoris. Gregory.
describing the bounds and limits of this submission, reverence and obedience,
that it extend not it self to any thing against the will and word of God. So
it is used 1 Cor. 7.39.

Verse. 19. Husbands love your wives] That is, carry in your hearts a kind and
loving affection toward them, and show it forth both in word and deed. A man
loves his child, tanquam aliquid sui; his wife, tanquam se.


And be not bitter against them] A metaphor taken from such things as are
bitter in the taste; See Ephesians. 4.3.
as Gall which when it is mingled with sweet things makes them distastefull: so
if the husband shall be bitter and fierce in his authority, reproves, and
commands, things in themselves wholesome, the wife will neither brook nor digest
them. Mr. Gataker.
Among the Heathen the Gall of the Sacrifice that was slain and offered at
Weddings was thrown out of doors, to signify that married folks should be as
Doves without Gall. Olim apud eas gentes, quae falsos deos colebant, qui Junoni
nuptiali seu pronubae sacrificabant, ii fell cum reliqua non conficiebant
victima, sed exemptum abjiciebant apud altar: quo instituto legis author
obscure intuebat a conjugio semper debere bilem iramque abesse; cujus rei
testis est Plutarchus. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 4.


Verse. 20. Children] Greek (...), whereby is signified unto us a man's whole
progeny. So that sons and daughters are not only to be understood here, but
likewise grandchildren.

Your parents] Under which word both fathers and mothers are equally
comprehended; the child takes his original from both. Prove. 23.22. and 15.20.
Levit. 19.3.


Verse. 22. In all things] That is, in all lawful and bodily things, in all
outward things which are indifferent. Ephesians. 6.1.

Your masters] All masters indifferently, without difference of sex, 1 Timothy
5.14. or of condition.

Not with eye service] Not with eye-services, in the Greek, (...), Not only
when their eye is upon you.

Verse. 23. Do it] Work it; so the word properly signifies.

Heartily] The original word signifies from the very soul. Ex anime.
The obedience of servants should be a hearty obedience.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. GIve] The word properly signifies exhibit or yield.

Iust] That is, feed them, govern them, protect them, reward them.

Ye also have a Master in Heaven] That is, one which exercises the same
authority over you, and will do the same things that you do to your servants,
viz. oversee you, punish you, call you to account.

Verse. 6. Seasoned with salt] Yea, as in meats, the more subject they are to
putrefaction, the more need they have of powdering; so in the matters of
speech, Sal optimum and utilissimum est ciborum condimentum, si moderate
adhibeatur: transfertur autem ad sapientiam significandam, utpote qua nihil est
hominibus utilius in vita. Estius. vide plura ibid.
the readier we be in vulgar and ordinary matters to forget our selves, the
more need have we the more thoroughly to season them with that holy Salt.

Verse. 12. Always laboring fervently for you] Hisce verbis declarat qualis
fuerit haec praecatio Epaphrae pro Colossensibus; assidua nimirum and etiam
fervida; assiduitatem vocabulum illud (...) indicat, vehementiam vero and
fervorem ostendit verbum illud (...) quod innuit certamen and quasi luctam cum
Deo ipso. Episc. Dav.


Compleat] or filled; the Greek word is a metaphor from a ship with sails with
the help of Winds; when a man is filled with the commandment as the sail of a
ship is filled with wind.

Verse. 13. I bear him record] or witness with him; I yield him my testimony.

Verse. 14. Luke the beloved Physitian] Beloved, because of the good he brought
to the Church by the skill of Physic. Physician, to distinguish him from Luke
the Evangelist; for if it had been him, he would have given him the title.
Calvin and Elton go this way. Estius says it was Luke the Evangelist, and that
he was a Physician, and so styled here peradventure, Bifield enclines to this
opinion.
because hereby his Physic was very helpful to the faithful.

Verse. 16. And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause it to be read also
in the Church of the Laodiceans] Here is warrant for the public reading of
the word. See Act. 15.21.
See 1 Thessalonians. 5.27.

Verse. 17. Take heed] The original is, see to the ministry. So the Greek word
is used 2.8. Matthew. 8.25. and 12.38. 1 Cor. 8.9. the meaning is, Carefully look
into the Office and function, and diligently weigh and consider what it is, the
weight of it, and what belongs to that pastoral duty.

That thou have received in the Lord] That is, from the Lord, which he of his
grace and mercy has committed unto thee.

That thou fulfill it] The word is metaphorical, borrowed from a Vessel that
ought to be full of liquor, or the like matter, and is not; and it is as much
as if he he had said, that thou fill up that Vessel of thy ministry, as it
ought to be filled, and leave no empty place in it; do it not to the halves, or
in some part, but perform it in every respect, as it ought to be performed,
accomplish all the parts of that Office and Ministry.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE First Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the THESSALONIANS.
CHAP. I.
THe order of Paul's Epistles is according to the dignity of the Cities; Inter
Novi Testamenti libros Epistola ad Hebraeos quasi Paulina, and Apocalypsis
quasi Johannis, ultimum acceperunt locum, quia eorum librorum authoritas diu in
obscuro, aut controverso fuit. Haec Epistola ideo prior dicitur quod ante
alteram jam locum suum occupasset in Epistolarum Paulinarum volumine; scripta
est non multo postquam Thessalonicae Paulus fuerat, non sane Athenis, ut quidam
Epistolae fini adscripsere, sed Corinthi. Grotius.
therefore those which are directed to particular persons are put in the last
place. Chrys^stome, and some of the Ancients say that both the Epistles to the
Thessalonians are among the first which Paul wrote; which is most true (says
Grotius) of the second Epistle.

Thessalonica ((...)) was the Metropolis or mother-City of Macedonia, anciently
called Thermae, new built by Philip King of Macedon after his conquest of
Thessaly, for monument of which it was so re-edified and enlarged, and obtained
that name. In this City God was pleased by his ministry to collect a Church.
See Acts 17.1.

Verse. 3. Your work of faith] All good Offices and fruits which proceed from it
toward God, our neighbor, our selves.

And labor of love] That is, laborious love, Heb. 6.10. a labor undertaken
out of love.

Verse. 5. But also in power, and in the holy Ghost] That is, in the power of
the Holy Ghost.

Verse. 6. Having received the Word in much affliction] He does not mean that
they received the word when they were afflicted, that is, poor or otherwise
distressed, (that is, a kind of advantage to the receiving of the Word) but
afflicted in or for receiving the Word. See Chap. 2.


Verse. 8. For from you sounded forth the Word of the Lord, etc. Graece (...),
id est resonuit quasi echo, and exsonuit quasi tuba, ait Theoph. Vatablus, A
vobis ebuccinatus est sermo Domini. Syrus. A vobis manavit fama sermonis
domini, id est, praedicationis Evangelicae. a Lapide.
] An elegant metaphor which signifies, that their faith was so lively, that
with its sound as it were it stirred up other Nations. The Greek word (...) is
with the sound of a Trumpet or loud voice of a Crier to make a sound far off.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 3. FOr our exhortation was not of deceit] That is, our preaching; a
Synecdoche, because exhortation is a chief part of preaching. Exhortatio
Tremellius and Boderianus; consolatio Syrus and Arabs; (...) vox ambigua est,
ut nunc pro exhortatione, nunc pro consolatione sumitur. de Dieu in loc.
See Acts 13.15. 1 Cor. 14.3.

Verse. 5. For neither at any time used we flattering words as ye know, nor a
cloak of covetousness, As all sins have cloakes, John 15.22. so especially
covetousness.
God is witness: The Apostle professes against flattering words, and appeals
to them who had heard him concerning that; but he might carry his covetousness
so closely that they might not discern it, therefore he appeals to God for his
freedom from that sin. See Estius.

Verse. 6. When we might have been burdensome, or as the Apostles of Christ]
(...) has a twofold signification; Nec iis qui ad gravitatem Apostolicae
praestantiae aut dignitatem, cum Erasmo; nec recentioris, qui ad sumptus
Ecclesiarum id referunt, quibus gravem se fuisse neget Apostolus, assentiri
possum. Cum primo manifest neget ullam se adulationis aut avaritiae
suspicionem praebuisse, adeo ut ne rumoribus quidem ejusmodi de se occasionem
dederit: ut nec contra nimiae severitatis accusari posse, quemadmodum illi qui
ambitiose hoc agunt, ut hominum gloriam venentur; quin potius cum ita ut
Apostolus Christi agere potuerit, mitem ac mansuetum fuisse, neque aliter cum
iis quam nutrices cum alumnis, quos tenerrime fovent, egisse. Heinsius.
one to be burdensome, viz. that Paul as an Apostle could have demanded
necessaries from the Thessalonians, but he would not. This signification agrees
with that which goes before Verse. 5. nor a cloak of covetousness; and with
that which follows Verse. 9. Beza and others. 2. To be in authority, viz. Paul
as an Apostle of Christ could have showed more gravity and authority, but he
would not; this agrees with what went before, I sought not the glory of men.
Chrysostom, the Syriack, Calvin, and others follow this signification; vide
Bezam. The Hebrew Cabad signifies tam onerare quam honorare. Exodus 20.12. honor
est onus quoddam.

Verse 7. Even as a nurse cherishes her children] That is, the mother which is
a nurse tenderly handles them, but suffers them not to harm or mischief
themselves. See Esaias 49 33. Number. 4.12.

Verse. 8. Being affectionately desirous of you] Covetously or lustfully
desirous, as the original words signify, which note the most swaying
heart-passion.

Were willing to have imparted unto you our own soules] That phrase signifies
the effectual affection (say some) wherewithal he delivered the word unto
them. By an usual Metonymie, our lives; whether by pains in preaching, or
persecution; the latter is resolved by interpreters. Dr. Sclater.

Verse. 9. Our labor and travell] The first Greek word (...) is not simple
labor, but labor joined with greatest care and solicitude; (...) travel
adds something more, for it is a labor not only having solicitude, but also
weariness joined with it, for when one has wrought long and much, he is wont
being oppressed with the burden of the labor, to be wearied. The Apostle
therefore by these two words signifies, that he did not lightly, but diligently
labor among them, even to weariness, and that day and night. Zanchy. Vide
Bezam.

See Dr. Sclater.
Verse. 16. Wrath is come upon them to the utmost] (...) until the end, wrath
is come upon them finally, so as it shall never be removed; so some interpret it

Verse 18. But Satan hindered us] By casting a necessity on him of disputing
often with the Stoics and Epicures which were at Athens. Whether satan
hindered by sickness, or by imprisonment, or tempests at sea, who can resolve?
Dr. Sclater.


Verse 19. For what is our hope, our joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye
in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his comming] Paul tells the
Thessalonians that they are his hope, B Lake. Vo^ estis spes mea, gaudium meum,
and corona mea, non formalis, sed objectiva sive materialis, quia estis materia
and objectum spei, gaudii, and coronae meae. a Lapide.
that is, the thing hoped for; joy, that is, the thing wherein he shall joy;
and crown, that is, the thing for which he shall be crowned.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. WHerefore when I could no longer forbeare] As if he had said, my love
toward you was such, See 2d Chapter 8.11 Cum desiderium vestri n^n ferrem diutius,
nec tam^n aditus ad vos daretur, visum fuit adventum and praesentiam meam per
alium mihi conjunctissimum, ac velut alterum me, suppleri. Estius.
and so strong within me, that it was like a fire in my breast, I could no
longer keep it; and from thence it was that I sent Timotheus our brother to
establish and comfort you touching your faith.

Verse. 5. No longer forbear] A desire both of knowing your faith and affairs.
Jllud verbum (...) proprie significat continere se seu onus sustinere.
Significat ergo Apostolus desiderium quo tenebatur videndi and in tot
calamitatibus Thessalon^censes consolandi, cum non posset praestaere quod
cupiebat propter Satanae impedimenta, fuisse sibi onus grave. zanch.


Verse. 8. We live] That is, lead a merry life, so the Hebrews use this word,
Vivimus, hoc est recte val^mus. Calvinus.
Psalm. 22.27. and the Greeks and Latins also so use it.

Jf ye stand f^st in the Lord] A Speech borrowed from them that stand upon
their guard or watch, or in their rank, wherein they are set, Doctor Airay.
Significatio est ingentis gaudij, quod ex ijs quae Timotheus nunciaverat,
percepit. Estius.
See Romans 5.2. 1 Cor. 16.13. 1 Phil. 27. and 4.1.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 4. KNow how] There is a peculiar mystery in every branch of
Christianity; I have learned, says the Apostle how to want and abound. to
possess his vessel in sanctification and honour] That is, his body which is
the instrument of the soul, and containing it as in a vessel. The Hebrews
call all Instruments vessels. 1 Samuel 21.5. 2 Cor. 4. 1 Pet. 3.7. Sane meretrix
vulgari dicterio vas fractum appellatur. Drus. Adag. l. 4. Class. 1 Prove.
As if he had said, that is indeed true sanctification agreeable to the will of
God, and pleasing to him, that is throughout; outwardly in the body, keeping
that pure and undefiled; and inwardly in the heart, rooting from thence the
lust of concupiscence.

Verse. 5. Not in the lust of concupiscence] That is, not in the inward burning
lust stirring up to filthiness, coming from inward concupiscence.

Verse. 11. And that ye study Graecum verbum significat eniti; quomodo legit
Ambrosinus, id est, magno conatu quippiam agere, translatum a more hominum
ambitiosorum, qui summo studio and animi contentione nituntur ad honores.
Estius.
] The Greek signifies to contend as it were for honor.

To be quiet; the Greek word signifies to rest, and live in silence; and to
do your own businesse] That is, do the necessary works of your callings that
belong to you. Perkins.

He forbids two vices, which for the most part go together, idleness and
curiosity.

Verse. 12. And that ye may have lack of nothing] Or of no man, that is not need
relief and help of any man, or of any thing. Perkins.


Verse. 13. Sorrow not as those that have no hope] As if he had said, sorrow if
you will; but do not sorrow as they that have no hope. Grace destroys not
nature but rectifyeth it. Mr. Fenner on 2 Lam. 57.
That is a sorrow with nothing but sorrow; from which they have no hope of
enlargement or freedom.

Verse. 16. With a shout] The word which the Apostle uses here, Graece (...),
id est, hortamen appellant quod praec^pue apud nautas est quasi solemn, ut uno
veluti concentu remos adducant. Beza. 17. verse. Electi (inquit Cajetanus in
loc.) qui relinquimur non moriemur, sed de vita corporali transferemur in vitam
immortalem. Vide Bezam.
signifies properly the encouragement, which Mariners use one to another; when
they all together with one shout put forth their Oars, and row together. It is
called a clamor, a vociferation, a shout, and varied by our Translators, and
Expositors, according to the original of the word to be clamor hortatorius,
suasorius, and jussorius. The voice of the Archangell is added (says Calvin)
by way of exposition, showing what that shout shall be; the Archangell shall
exercise the office of a crier, to cite the living and dead to Christ's
Tribunal.

a Lapide says that these words with those following, And with the trump of
God] are a figure called Hendyadis. With the voice of the Archangell, which is
the Trump of God; so called, 1. By an Hebraisme, that is great and loud, so as
to be heard throughout the world. Secondly, because it shall go before God the
Judge. 3. Because it shall be terrible such as becomes the divine Majesty.

CHAP. V.
Est ea humani ingenij curiositas ut quae maxim latent, ea maxim scire
cupiat. Sic multi ea aetate scire cupiebant, quando venturum esset illud
judicium. (...) sunt majora temporum spatia, ut anni: (...) minora, ut menses
ac dies. Habes haec sic distincta Dan. 7.12. in Graeco and Act. 1.7. Grotius.
Verse. 1. TImes] The Greek word signifies space of time in general. Seasons]
The opportunities of doing things. See Acts 1.7. Touching the year, or month
or age; when the Son of man shall come, it is as much unrevealed, as the
season.

Verse. 3. As travail upon a woman with Childe] The Scripture uses this
similitude, Psalm. 48.6. Ier 6.24. and 49.24. and 50.43. He signifies that the
evil is 1. Certain. 2. Sudden. 3. Inevitable.

Verse. 9. But to obtain salvation] Or to the purchased possession; so the same
word is rendered 1 Ephesians. 13. and so it may be rendered 2 These. 2.14.

Verse. 12. Know agnitio potissimum consistit in obedientia, reverentia and
rerum ad vitam necessaria^u^ prompta ac liberali su^ministratione. Estius.
(...) hic est, non simpliciter cognoscere: sed agnoscere: hoc est, pro nostris
pastoribus ac patribus reverenter amplecti, honor que debito afficere.
Zanchius.
them which labor among you] That is, both in heart acknowledge them the
Ministers of Christ and in affection love them as his Ministers.

Which labor among you] That is, which painefully, and earnestly labor among
you till they be weary; Ministers must be laborers not loyterers.

Verse. 13. And to esteem them very highly in love] Have them in singular, or
abundant; or more abundant love, for their works sake.

Verse. 14. Warn them that are unruly] Which keep not their station. If we see
any man disordered in his carriage, Some think it is a metaphore borrowed from
the custom of war, wherein every Soldier has his station and is assigned to
his rank, from which when he s^arve, he becomes inordinate. Metaphora sumpta a
militibus sparsis and inconditis, quique (ut ait Cicero) non sunt in numeros
coacti. Estius.
we must not think he is an unruly fellow, and so let him go; but admonish
him, that is a duty of charity, as well as the next following.

Support the weake] hold up as a crutch does a body that is lame; or a beam a
house that is ruinated, 1. Bear with their wants, and weaknesses. 2. Put under
thy shoulder, to help to bear their necessities, Romans 12.13.3. Help his
burden of sin from off him by admonishing, reproving, exhorting and praying.
Doct. Tailor.

(...), est proprie, nitentem and conantem, sed non sufficientem, nec sat
virium habentem adjuvare. a Lapide.

Verse. 17. Pray without ceasing] Ephesians. 6.18. That is, on all occasions, every
day. The original word signifies such a performance of this duty that you do
not cease to do it at such times as God requires it at your hands; It may
fitly be expounded by that in the next verse, in all things; for the sense
would be the same if we should say, in all things pray, and continually give
thankes] that is, upon every just occasion pray and give thanks. The Euchetae
thought they might do nothing else but pray; and grounded their heresy upon
Luke 18.1. Ephesians. 6.18. and this place. Bishop Down. of prayer, c. 27.
the same word is used, 2 Timothy 1.3. 2. A man must ever be praying habitually; a
true Christian has always a disposition to pray, though not the liberty, 2 Samuel 19.13. 3. There is a vital prayer as well as an orall, semper orat qui
been semper agit. 4. We must bless and sanctify every thing to us by prayer.
5. Pray in all Estates, in prosperity and misery.

Verse. 18. In every thing] That is, in every condition, or with every duty.

For this is the will of God in Christ] The acceptable will of God in Christ.

Verse. 19. Quench not the Spirit] That is, say the Anabaptists, hearken to the
suggestions of the private Spirit. Ephesians. 4.30. Zanchius.
The word Spirit is not taken essentially for the three persons in Trinity,
Grace can never be quenched, but we may do our endeavor to quench it. Vide
Bezam.
nor hypostatically for the third person, but Metonymically for the fruits of
the Spirit. The Spirit is quenched two ways as fire, 1. By throwing on water;
all sin is as water; sins do quench the Spirits operations. 2. Fire may be
quenched and put out by withdrawing of wood and fuel; all negligent using of
the word, Sacrament, Prayer, Meditation, holy conference, and communion of
Saints, do much quench the Spirit.

Verse. 20. Despise not prophesyings] The Greek word signifies, account it not a
thing of nothing, account it not a slight matter.

This (...) implies highest reverence and esteem, 1 Cor. 14.3.
this sentence is fitly added to the former, as if the despising of prophesying
were a quenching of the spirit.

Verse 21. Prove all things] The Greek word betokens such a trial, as
Goldsmiths use touching Metal, for the discerning whereof they have a
touchstone, at which that which will not hold is rejected, and laid by as
counterfeit.

Verse. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evill] That is, do nothing wherein
sin appears, or which has a shadow of sin.

Verse. 23. And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly] One would rather
have thought, he should have been styled the God of grace, but God will not be
a God of peace with us, till we be thoroughly sanctified. He is called the God
of peace, Ambrose expounds it of Christ himself.
because he has the fountain of peace in himself, peace is in him as a
fountain. 2. As the author and communicatour of all peace unto us in all
kinds, external, internal, eternal.

The whole man is sanctified throughout, when the spirit thinks nothing, the
will affects nothing, the body effects nothing contrary to the will of God. Our
sanctification is perfect in parts, but not in measure, nor degrees; as a
Child is a perfect man in all the parts of a man, but not in quantity.

Your whole spirit soul and body] By spirit he means the understanding and
will, the reasonable and highest faculties; by soul the sensitive powers, the
affections and the appetite. By body the outward man, the Instrument of the
Soul.

Verse. 24. Who also will do it] That is, Idem ipse dabit perseverantiam; hanc
enim omnibus electis promisit, in quorum numero vos esse confido. Estius.
he will finish and perfect his gracious work begun.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to the THESSALONIANS.
CHAP. I.
Hanc Epostolam, inter Paulinas ordine temporis secundam esse, utpote proxime
scriptam post p^^o em ad Thessalonicenses, recte censent eruditi: De loco minus
inter eos convenit. Estius.
GRotius thinks this Epistle in order of writing was before the former; but
the order was inverted by those which gathered, and digested the Epistles.

Verse. 5. Counted worthy Loquitur hic aperte non de merito, sed de dignatiene
gratuita: Quis enim meritus est vocari? Pareus. The proudest linguist in Rome,
cannot give one instance from any Classical Author Divine or Profane, where
(...) signifies other then dignari. In our English to vouchsafe, to account,
esteem, or accept as worthy. Doctor Sclater.
] Some translations formerly had it make worthy. This is of Gods free
acceptance of grace, and not of the merit of our constancy; and it is so
likewise fitly translated, 11. v. But because the making worthy is referred to
God, the translators were not so careful of the term, seeing it might be
understood that God by his grace makes us worthy in his account. And the
Rhemists have falsely translated their own Latin Text, which is dignetur,
that our God would vouchsafe, or accept as worthy; and not to make worthy as
they have wilfully corrupted the Text to make it serve their heresy. Doctor
Fulke.

Verse. 8. In flaming fire] In the fire or burning of flame, that is flaming,
(...), In igne flammae, id est Flammante sive in flammato. Atque ita legit
Ambrosius. Scire autem licet apud vulgatum interpretem esse in flamma ignis.
Quomodo sane Tertullianus legit adversus Marcionem l. 5. c. 16. Ego parum
refer arbitror utro modo legatur. Nam si^e illud sive h^c dicas, sententia in
idem recidit. Ignis flammae legitur Jesa. 4, 5. and Thren. 2, 3. flamma ignis
Jesa. 29.8. Drus. Observat. Sac. l. 16. c. 13. Vide Zanchium and G^otium in loc.
by an Hebraisme, in igne flammante. See 2 Pet. 3.10.

Verse. 10. To be admired in all them that beleeve] The Saints of God know most
of Christ and his riches, yet then they shall admire him; admiration is the
overplus of expectation. Admiratio oritur ex rerum novarum and magnarum
intuitus. Zanchius.

CHAP. II.
Johannes scripsit Antichristi Mysterium, Paulus Commentarium. John in his
Revelation, Antichristum typice adumbravit Daniel c. 7. and sequentibus. Topice
postea delineavit planius Paulus, 2 Thessalonians. 2. before Johannes in Sigillis,
Tubl^ and Phialis Apocalypticis, una cum capitis 13. and 17. vivacissimis
descriptionibus. Doctor Pride. Lectione de Antichristo.
does write of Antichrist obscurely as it were in a mystery; Paul in this
Epistle speaks of him plainly, as it were by way of Commentary.

In all brotherly love, we beseech you to beware of seducers. (...) from (...)
signifying love. (...), a brother derived from (...) a womb, a wombe-brother
being properly uterinus, the fruit of one womb; this shows that he tendered
the Thessalonians as he did his Mothers womb or his own bowels, as brethren.
Verse. 1. Now we beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and by our gathering together unto him] The meaning is this, you know that
Christ will come with a company of Saints; and as you hope and desire that your
selves shall be added to that company; even so we beseech you brethren by our
gathering together, that you be not moved from the truth by any seducers.

Verse. 2. That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled] Their terror is
expressed by a double metaphor, 1. from a Sea-storm, Elegans metaphora a
fluctibus marinis sumpta, Vorstius. Shaken in mind, yea from their mind, so the
original; their mind or understanding seemed to be torn from them through the
fear of the day of judgment, as a storm forces a ship riding in the road to
cut cable. 2. From Soldiers frighted by a sudden alarm; the Greek word is
metaphora a clamore tumultuantium, Vorstius. a word taken from the noise and
cry of men in an uprore. Squire. It imports such perturbation as arises from
rumor, Mark 13. or relation of something troublesome.

Either by Spirit] That is, pretense of inspirations, revelations, immediate
and extraordinary from the Spirit of God. There were some which had revelations
from Satan, but delusions, pretended to speak to the people of God in the name
of God. See Micah 2.11. 1 John 4.1.

That the day of Christ is at hand] Nempe hoc anno, nam (...) hic dicitur de re
praesenti, 1 Cor. 3.21. Gal.
ut Romans 8.38.4.4. Heb. 9.9. Grotius.

Verse 3. Except there come a falling away first] The word here used signifies
the shrinking of Soldiers from their General to the enemy; (...) tam in
sacris literis Act. 21.21. Heb. 3.12. quam in Theologorum scriptis, defectionem
a Deo denotat, ejusque fide, vel religione, quam semel quis professus fuerat.
Quam esse sinceram Graecae vocis proprietatem, Suarez fatetur. Atque ita
seipsum postea exponit Apostolus. Clarius vero 1 Timothy 4.1. eandem Apostasiam
praedicens. Patres verba Apostoli de spirituali apostasia interpretantur. Down.
Diatrib. de Antichrist l. 3. c. 1.
now it is by proportion drawn from hence to signify an apostasy and
backsliding from the profession of Christ to the contrary part, that is to
Antichrist. The article (...) insignis quaedam and quasi Catholica apostasia.
Episc. Down. Quanquam patres aliqui hunc locum de defectione a Romano Imperio
interpretantur, ut Ambrosius, Sedulius, Primasius, Tertullianus and Hieronymus;
and Bellarminus ait hanc esse valde probabilem sententiam: tamen constat hanc
defectionem non intelligi. Nam loquitur Apostolus de illa (...) quae futura
erat per Antichristum: at Antichristus fidem and religionem oppugnaturus erat,
non politiam, Christo se non Imperatori oppositurus: Ecclesiae and religionis,
non Regnorum and Rerumpublicarum statum mutaturus. Whitakerus de Ecclesia cont.
2. q. 3.
shows that he speaks of a famous apostacy There is a twofold defection, one
civil, from the Roman Empire; so Ambrose, Jerome, Tertullian, interpret it; the
other Ecclesiastical, from the true worship of God to Idolatry, defectio a
side; so Chrysostom, Oecumen, Theophylact, and Theodoret expound it. Austen de
civitate Dei says this is the more probable, and so Paul uses the word Heb.
3. 1 Timothy 4. Some expound apostasy by a Metonymie of the adjunct, and
understand by it Antichrist himself the Apostate.

And that man of sin be revealed] Antichrist is called (...), the man of
sin, because he amongst men is the most sinful, either from his personal
sin, or corrupting others. An Hebraisme, merum scelus, Beza. The son of
perdition] A man devoted to destruction. See John 17.12.

Verse. 4. Who opposeth] Or is an adversary, or opposite, (...), another Satan,
he is a divellish adversary. The article is not always restrictive,
restraining the name to an individuum. Matthew. 1.35. Luke 4.4.

And exalts himself above all that is called God] That is, all those to whom
the name of God is communicated. Angels in Heaven, Psalm. 8.5. compared with
Heb. 2.7. and Magistrates on earth, Exodus 22.12.

Or that is worshipped] Any thing that is worshipped as God, or wherein God is
worshipped. See Acts 17 23. So in the Church of Rome are the Host, the Cross,
the Saints, and their Images and Relics. The Pope advances himself above
Angels, Kings, and Princes, who are called Gods; above the Saints, the Host,
the Cross, and whatsoever (...) is in the Church of Rome, and yet requires
them all to be worshipped.

So that he as God sits in the Temple of God] To sit, either absolutely or
transitively to set himself.

The Temple] Not of Jerusalem, that was destroyed, and never to be restored:
but the company of them which profess the name of Christ, who are called the
house and Temple of God, 1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 3.6. Ephesians. 2.20, 21. 1 Cor. 3.16,
17. 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 3.12. The Apostle speaks here of Antichrist, and says,
he sits in the Temple of God as God; those words as God, evidently show that
he speaks not of a corporal sitting in a material Temple, according to the
gross imagination of the Papists, (for so God does not sit) but of the
dominion of Antichrist in the universal Church, Sedere for cathedratica
potestate praesidere. Estius. As the use of the word is frequ^nt in Greek and
Latin authors. see Matthew. 13. Act. 18.11. Downam. Diatrib. de Antichristo. l.
1. c. 3. The chief place of the Popes dominion is called his Seeds, that is,
See or seat.
and the usurpation of supreme power over all Christians. Sitting is reigning
Psalm. 9.5. and 29.10. and 110.1. compared with 1 Cor. 15.25. Zach. 6.12. and
whereas other Kings and Princes are said to reign some months or years, the
Pope of Rome is said to sit so long: so Rev. 17.11, 15. and 18 7.

As God] Challenging to himself supreme, universal, and divine power in the
Church, The Pope of Rome rules over the Church as if he were a God upon earth.
The Canonists call him Dominum Deum nostrum Papam. See Downam of Antichrist,
chapter 5. and 6.
and equalling himself to our Lord Christ, blessed for ever. He shall rule and
reign as if he were a God.

Showing himself that he is God] The Greek word rendered showing, as Beza
observes, is answerable to the Hebrew Moreth, faciens se apparare, prae se
ferens; or as we say, taking upon him as if he were God.

Hoc est occulta quedam iniquitas, alta, profunda and numeris omnibus absoluta,
nam ea vis est ejus locutionis apud alios auctores. Causab.
Verse. 7. For the mystery of iniquity does already work] That is,
Antichristianisme; it is iniquity, but mystical, that is, palliated with the
name of piety; so the ordinary Gloss. It is a divellish opposition unto
Christ, cunningly cloaked under the profession of Christ.

He who now letteth] (...). This is expounded two ways, which come both to
one: qui obstat, so Chrysostom, and after him Oecumenius, so Beza and we; or
qui tenet imperium, Romae enim Dominus qui potuit esse Antichristus, quam, diu
R^mae dominatus est Imperator? Latin interdum tenere dicuntur, qui rerum
potiuntur. Down. ib.
sive imperat, so Austen; For the Emperor by holding the Empire at Rome, did
let or hinder the revelation of Antichrist. Down. de Antich.

Verse. 8. Shall consume with the spirit of his mouth] That is, the preaching of
the Gospel in the mouths of his Ministers. Damascene by the spirit of his
mouth here understands the Word of God, and the Chaldee so interprets Esaias
11.2. The Greek (...) signifies the same with the Latin consumere, to consume,
whether it be done by degrees or together.

Quibus verbis putamus duos gradus distingui destructionis Antichristi, nimirum
inchoatae and perfectae. Haec tum erit demum cum Dominus illustris appare^it,
nempe secundo and ad orbem universum judicandum. Illa autem hanc praecedet,
quum verbo ejus, id est spiritu oris, ita conficietur.
And shall destroy with the brightness of his comming] The Apostle means
either the light of the Gospel, or the second coming of Christ to judgment,
or some other notable manifestation of Christ's presence in ways of power and
justice, and shaking the earth.

Verse. 9. Lying wonders] Or, as the words are (...), signs and wonders of
lying; that is, most lying signs and wonders. B Down. of Antichrist. 1. In
their original they proceed from the Devil the father of lies. 2. In their
matter, lies, appearances, juglings, Rev. 13.13. 3. End, lying and seduction,
confirming lies. Rev. 13.14. Dr. Tailor. See Beza.

Verse. 10. And with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousnesse] An Hebraisme, they
call falsehood unrighteousness; they deceive by their relickes and miracles.
Rev. 13.14. (...) the out path leading to wickedness.

Because they received not the love of truth] that is, wilfully despised grace
offered, those doctrines of truth concerning God; and our duty to him, and our
salvation.

(...).
Verse. 11. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions] efficacy of
delusion.

That they should believe a lie] That lie, viz Antichrist.

Verse. 12. That they all might be damned who believed not the truth] that is,
that shall not have believed the truth, Qui non crediderint veritati. But had
pleasure in unrighteousnesse] But shall have delighted in iniquity, Sed
acquieverint in injustitia. B. Down of Antich. l. 2. c. 12.
See Mark 16.16.

Verse. 13. And belief of the truth] This has reference to salvation, that is,
he has appointed us to salvation, which is to be had by this means. Verse. 13.
Videtur Apostolus in verbis illis (...) digitum intendere ad initia ingressus
peccati in mundum per praevaricationem Adae. Piscat. quod and mihi etiam
(inquit Twissus) plurimum arridet.


Verse. 14. Whereunto he has called you by our Gospell] That is, the Gospel
discovered in my preaching.

To the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ] See 1 Thessalonians. 5.9.

Verse. 15. Therefore brethren stand fast, and hold Retinete, (...), totis
nimirum viribus. Haec enim est propria declaratio (...) quod erudite obse^vavit
Syrus interp^es Beza. 1 Cor. 11.2. See Beza and Fulke against Martin. vide
Grotium. Nihil aliud per traditiones fignificat Apostolus, nisi doctrinam
E^angelii de vera fide in Christum, and refipiscentia; quam ex sua institutione
pridem didicerant, deinde per epistolam quoque edocti suerant. Supervacanea
enim and falsa forent ista verba, sive per Epistolam, si per traditiones
intelligeret tantum ordinationes (...) quae post per manus traditae essent, seu
de dogmatibus, seu de ritibus, praeter verbum dei, in Ecclesia servandis.
Zanchius.
the traditions which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our Epistle] The
traditions which the Apostle recommendeth to the Thessalonians were no other
but such as he mentioned to the Corinthians, according to the Scripture. The
Apostle by those words has reference to those things which are written
elsewhere. The disjunctive whether does not always distinguish between
documents or precepts in respect of the substance or thing it self, but only
insinuates the diverse manners by which one and the same doctrine is delivered
by one and the same Teacher present.

The traditions] The doctrines delivered unto you; which you have been taught,
whether by word] By lively voice in the ministry of the word preached, which
you hear; Mr. Hildersam.
or by our Epistle] Or by the holy Scripture which ye read.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. MAy have a free course] That is, a speedy and uninterrupted passage;
and be glorified] That is, purely and powerfully preached. Id est, ut
Evangelica doctrina per nostram praedicatioum foeliciter ac sine impedimento
propagetur ac proficiat; utque celebris efficiatur, atque de eo homines ubique
been loquantur. Estius.


Verse. 2. Vnreasonable] Absurd, (...).

And evil men] (...), men desirous of trouble.

Verse. 3. Who shall stablish you, and keep you from evill] Stablish you in the
faith, Observanda sunt diligenter illa verba (...) and (...). habent enim
singularem emphasin; notant nempe vim and efficaciam gratiae, qua imbecillitas
illa and inconstantia nativa stabilitur and confirmatur adversus omem insultum,
quo debilitari alioqui and frangi denique sanctissimus quisque facillime
posset. Cameron praelect. in Matthew. 18.7.
lest you fall from it; and keep you from evil, viz. the devil, lest he
subvert your faith by evil men, as the instruments of his art. Estius. Or it
may be taken more generally here for any evil. a Lapide.

Verse. 5. And the Lord direct your hearts] The word signifies, by a right line
to direct one to somewhat.

Into the love of God] we cannot wait on the Lord Jesus Christ except we first
love him.

Unto the patient waiting for Christ] That is, to endure in waiting for Christ,
(...) sustinentia, patiens expectatio rei desideratae.

Verse. 6. That walks disorderly] Either without a calling, or idly and
negligently in his calling. He explicates this in the subsequent words.

And not after the tradition which he received of us] What the Tradition was is
expressed by and by after, Verse. 10. He which will not labor must not eat.
This doctrine was written before when God commands every man to labor in his
vocation.

Verse. 9. Not that we have not power] (...), right, title, See 1 Thessalonians. 2.6.
lawful authority to take maintenance from his Auditors.

But that we might make our selves an example, etc.] (...), as 1 Timothy 4.12.
when applied to denote what tends to exemplary, it signifies the liveliest
expression, and as I may term it, effigiation of that virtue or virtuous
practice which we desire to exemplify. Dr. Sclater.

Verse. 10. If any would not worke] viz. in some special and warrantable
calling.

Verse. 11. That there are some] He charge not the crime upon the whole
Church, he says not at all, or most of you, but some; loquitur quam fieri
potest parcissime. 2. He speaks indefinitely.

Which walk among you disorderly] Not laboring but being busy bodies, living
without a calling, or neglecting their calling, and going trifling up and down
here and there, twatling and talking of what pertaines not to them. The word
being military signifies one out of his rank, one that is not in file to fight
against his enemy.

Nihil agentes sed curiose sa tagentes. Steph. praefat. ad Nov. Test Nihil
operantes sed circum operantes. Estius. Vide a Lap.
Working not at all, but are busie-bodies] There is an elegant Paranomasia in
the Greek, (...), which other languages cannot express; not working, but over
working; not working at home, but overworking abroad. Idleness and curiositity
go together.

Verse. 12. And eat their own bread] That is, the bread which is procured and
deserved by his own just and honorable labor. As if he had said, He that does
nothing has right to nothing, he has no bread of his own to eat.

Verse. 13. Be not weary in wel-doing] Giving over and fainting, because he
finds not such success and encouragement from men as he should.

Verse. 14. Note the man] judicially, that all may avoid him; that is,
excommunicate him. Baines his Diocesans trial. Significat notare, nota quapiam
insignire, and in abquem animadvertere: ut censores apud Romanos notare
solebant. Dicit ergo, notate ignominia, tanquam probrum, and pestem publicam:
seu ut nos loquimur, excommunicate, excludite Ecclesia and coetu vestro.
Zanchius.
vide Bezam. Some rather render notice, or signify him: the word signifies
both. Note him with a brand of infamy, or notice him as infamous to the Church,
that all may avoid him. See Dr. Sclater in loc.

And have no company with him] Greek, be not mingled with him, in intimate
familiarity. See 1 Cor. 5.9, 11.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE First Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to TIMOTHY.
CHAP. I.
THe Epistles of the Apostles, were directed either to Churches in general as
the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, or persons in particular,
either public, as Timothy, Titus, or private as Philemon. Paul's two Epistles
to Timothy, and to Titus, are alike in their argument; for they instruct a
Minister, and show the special parts of his Office; although it be done more
fully in this first Epistle.

Timothy signifies the honor of God, or precious to God; he honored God, From
(...) honoro and (...) Deus q.d. Cultor Dei vel honorans Deum. Pasor. Sic (...)
a verbo (...) magni aestimo, ^n preti^ habeo, honoro.
and was precious to him.

Paul wrote this Epistle to Timothy, to show him how to carry himself in the
house of God.

Verse. 2. Grace, Mercy, and Peace] See 2 Timothy 1.2. These three are joined
together only in the Epistles to Timothy, and Titus, as Theophylact has
observed out of Chrysostom. Grace signifies the free good will, and favor of
God toward us. Mercy the free pardon of our sins, and restoring of the Image
of God. Peace tranquillity of conscience, and joy from the sense of Gods favor.

Verse. 3. (...). Vide Bezam. Verbum Graecum quo usus est Paulus, est
compositum: ideoque tran^ferri potest, vel secus docere, ac novo modo: vel
tradere diversam doctrinam. Paulus eos intelligit qui ambitionis causa novam
doctrinam ingerebant. Non vocatur alia doctrina tantum quae palam cum pura
Evangelij doctrina pugnat, sed quaecunque parum. Evangelium vel corrumpit novis
and adventitijs figmentis, vel profanis speculationibus obscurat. Calvinus. Si
quis aliter docet, vel si quis aliena docet. Gerh. in c. 6. v. 3.
Teach no other doctrine] The word may be extended both to matter (as some) to
teach no other thing; or to manner, (as others) to teach no other way; not to
teach nova, no nor yet nove.

Verse. 5. Charity] That is love both to God for himself, and man for God.

Intellige charitatem erga Deum simul and proximum. Vorstius.

From a pure heart] That is, a sincere heart, 1 John 3.18.

Verse. 6. From which some having swerved] or missed the mark. A metaphore
taken from bad shooters, say Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius. See Gal.
6.16. (...) a scopo aberrantes. Quae vox sumpta est a jaculatoribus; diciturque
de ijs qui carentes art jaculandi and collimandi in scopum, ab eo aberrant,
and in aerem aliove sua tela conjiciunt. Cornel. a Lapide.


Verse. 8. But we know that the Law is good] 1. In respect of the matter of it
therein contained. 2. In respect of the authority stamped upon it by God, Lex
est bona; ut pote a bono Deo profecta, and nihil praecipiens nisi quod bonum
est; Denique bona quia servata vitam praestat. Loquitur autem praecipue de lege
morali, quae continetur decalogo, ut patet ex peccatis and contrariis quae mox
enumerat. Estius.
whereby it becomes a rule unto us. 3. Instrumentally as used by Gods Spirit
for good. 4. In respect of its sanction; for it is accompanied with promises
temporal, Command fifth; and Spiritual, Command second. 5, In respect of the
Acts of it. 6. In respect of the end of it, Romans 16.7. In respect of the
Adjuncts of it. 8. In respect of the use of it. Mr. Burgess in loc.

Jf a man use it lawfully] There is an allusion in the words, the law lawfully,
(...). 1. To discover his sins, that he may be kept low in his own eyes* Vt
^estia ista justitiae propriae occidatur. 2. When by the precepts and curses of
the Law, one is brought to set a higher price on Christ. 3. When one delights
in it, Romans 7.22. The Law is good in it self, but it shall not be good to
thee, if thou use it not lawfully.

See Mr. Pemble of Justificat. Sect. 5. c. 2. p. 183.184. and a Lapide.
Verse 9. Knowing this, That the Law is not made for a righteous man] This place
seems to make for the Antinomists. There is no law to the righteous man to
condemn him, being a person justified; no law to compel him, because he is a
voluntier, and does willingly yield obedience to the law without constraint,
but a law to command guide, and direct him. Doctor Tailor.

Some interpret it thus, the law (viz. in the threatenings of it) is not made
for a righteous man. The law was not set to bring any of the punishments which
are here threatened upon the righteous and holy.

Augustinus, Thomas, Glossa ordinaria slatuunt mentione ignoran^iae peccatum
Pauli exag gerari. sic particula o^i hoc loco non causaliter sed adversative
est accipienda ut Act. 1.17. quanquam ignorans feci. Gerh. in loc. Non causam
adfert cur ipsi ignosci debuerit, sed cur Deus ipsi potius quam aliis
ignoverit. Grotius.
Verse. 13. Because I did it ignorantly in unbeliefe] The words are rather thus
to be read notwithstanding, or although J did it ignorantly, not for I did it
ignorantly, or because I did it ignorantly by way of excuse. He was not
converted because he did it ignorantly; then all those which sin ignorantly
should be converted; (...) is rendered although Luke, 23.40 the same Greek word
that is here used. The words are brought in by way of aggravation, did it
ignorantly in unbeleefe, an ignorance of p^ave disposition. Some say his
ignorance left a capacity in the subject, not in the sin; else he had
sinned, committing it so maliciously against the holy Ghost. Mr. Bridge on 106.
Psa. 8

Verse. 14. And the grace of our Lord] That is, Christ.

Was exceeding abundant] (...), was over full, redundant, more then enough.
Superabundavit, plus quam abundavit. Gerh. Supermultiplicata est, supercrevit,
exuberavit, superabundavit a Lapide.

Verse. 15. And worthy of all acceptation] The Apostle in this word (...)
acceptationem and approbationem n^tat, quo sensu Sy^us redd^d^t, Fidelis est
sermo and dignus qui recipiatur. Gerh. in loc. See C^jetane.
(says P. Fag. in Deuteronomy. 5.27.) has respect to the Jewish Cabala, that which
is authentic, certain and undoubted is called Cabala, we must not doubt of
this truth.

That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom J am chief
(...), I am the first of sinners, so it is in the Greek. Primus non tempore
sed malignitate.
] Some say Paul calls himself the chiefest of sinners, because his sins were
more general then others; his persecution against the whole Church. See
Vorstius. 2. Peccatorum salvato^um primus Aquinas. Not absolutely a greater
sinner then the Pharisees, who sinned against the holy Ghost; but the greatest
sinner of all that should be saved, for he says in the same verse, Christ came
to save sinners, of which saved sinners I am the chief. 3. Others interpret it
thus, Paul was so in his own apprehension, he esteemed himself the greatest
sinner; so Estius, a Lapide.

By these words we are admonished (says Calvin) what a great and heinous crime
infidelity is, especially where obstinacy and cruelty is joined with it.

Verse. 17. To the only wise God] God is said to be only wise, because he is
of himself, perfectly and immutably wise. See 16. Romans ult.

(...) honor est ipsius majestati^ Dei excellentia, splendour, a miratio and
virtus: (...) vero seu gloria illius tantae virtutis praedicatio, praeconium
and celebratio, quae sit o^e hominum vel Angelorum. Danaeus in loc. Vide Estium.
Be honor and glory]

Fides est ut navis: vita pura velut gubernaculum. Gubernaculo abjecto non
mirum si navis in scopulos impacta frangitur. Grotius. vulg. Barbare,
naufragaverunt. Metaphora sumpta est a me^catoribus, quorum merces naufragio
pereunt, vel potius a navigantibus in naufragio submersis. Geth. in loc.
Translatio sumpta videtur ^on a navigantibus (non enim dicit Apostolus ipsos
periisse) sed a mercatoribus quorum merces naufragio pereunt. Estius.
Verse. 19. Holding faith and a good conscience, which same having put away,
concerning faith have made shipwrack] He compares our conscience to a ship,
our Religion and faith to our treasures laid in it; as a hole in the Ship
loses the treasures by sinking the Ship: so crack the conscience, and the
treasures of Religion suffer shipwreck. Having not expelled, but repelled; or
put from them a good conscience, That is, not caring to keep a good conscience.

Concerning faith have made Shipwrack] That is, became Heretics; he means not
the gift of faith whereby we do believe, but the doctrine of faith, which we
do believe, 2 Timothy 2.18.

Verse. 20. Whom I have delivered unto Satan] By excommunication, whereby for
their Heresy and blasphemy I have cast them out of the Church. Quod Beza and
P^scat. per excommunicationem factum volunt. Sed quod pace tantorum virorum
dixerim, multum differt (...) ab excommunicatione, quanquam in finibus
aliquatenus conveniant. Nam Satanae tradere est aliquem impoenitentem
flagitiosum, qui sam excommunicatus est, aut excommunicari moreretur, in
Diaboli potestatem tradere, ut eum corporali quoque cructatu affligat, quo
melius ad poenitentiam adducatur, and a tam enormi scelere terreatur, quo
saltem anima ejus salva maneat. Fuit haec potestas quaedam peculiaris, a Domino
una cum dono miraculorum Apostolis suis concessa: ut ita opera Satanae aut alio
quodam modo possent affligere, etiam absentes cum essent, enormiter
flagitiosos, ut videre est Act. 5.10. and 13.2. Itaque non congregatio
ecclesiae sed Apostoli tradebant Satanae, etiam ab entes 1 Cor. 5.5. Haec
potestas tunc temporis ecclesiae impense suit necessaria ad coercendos
contumaces. Nondu^ enim erant Magistratus Christian^, quorum auxilio hic
ecclesia uti potuisset. Scultetus in loc. Tradidi Satanae) nempe morbis
cruciandos ut 1 Cor. 5.5. explica vimus. Grotius in loc.
Estius. Tertull. in Apol. c. 39. calls this excommunication divinam censuram,
a divine censure. Cyprian Epist. 62. gladium Spiritualem, a spiritual sword.
Jerome Epist. 13. virgam ferream an Iron rod. Chrysostom thinks that those
which were excommunicated by Paul, were also corporally vexed by Satan, 1 Cor.
5.5. but that does not plainly appear says Estius. Calvi^ compares this place
with Cor. 5.5. and expounds it of excommunication; for since Christ's kingdom
is in the Church, out of it Satan reigns.

Therefore he that is cast out of the Church, must necessarily live so long
under Satan's Tyranny, till being reconciled to the Church, he returns to
Christ. Chrysostom, Theophylact, Oecumenius, a Lapide, Vorstius, with Doctor
Hall, interpret it also of excommunication.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. FIrst of all] Not before all other ordinances.

Supplications] Under which word he comprehends confession of faith, and
craving pardon for them.

Prayers] That is, Petitions for blessings of all kinds that we stand in need
of.

Intercessions] By which he means deprecations of those evils and judgments
which we see cause to fear.

Verse. 2. For Kings and all that are in authority] Greek in dignity or
eminency. (...) Nero then ruled.

Vide Calvinum Estium, a Lapide in loc.


That charge was given by Paul, even then when Caesar was a persecutor of
Christian Religion. Heron.

Tertullian in his Apology, c. 39. speaking of those things which were done by
Christians in their assemblies says, Oramus etiam pro imperatoribus, pro
Ministris eorum and potestatibus, prostatu saeculi, pro rerum quiet.

Verse. 4. Who will have all men to be saved] 1. All kinds of men, some of all
sorts, Jews, Gentiles, rich, poor; some of all ages, sexes, conditions,
nations, callings. Genera singulorum non singula generum. De hominum generibus,
non singulis personis sermo est. Nihil enim aliud intendit, quam principes and
extrancos populos in hoc numero includere. Calvinus.
2. Such as come to the knowledge of the truth. 3. q. d. No man is saved, but
he whom God will have saved, as when a public Schoolmasters teaches
children in such a City, we are wont to say, that he teaches all the boys of
that City, not simply all, (for many are not taught) but all that are taught.

Verse. 5. And one mediator between God and men] In the Greek it is, Vnus etiam
mediator Dei and hominum. Beza. Vulg. Mediator Dei dicitur, quia Deus ipso
tanquam internuncio and sponsore utitur apud homines: Hominum autem quia pro
hominibus apud Deum intercedit, ipsosque sua morte Deo reconciliat. Vorstius.
one mediator of God and men; which may refer either to the two parties
betwixt which he deals, pleading for God to men, and for men to God; or to the
two natures, mediator of God, having the divine nature, and of men having the
humane nature upon him. Vide Estium in loc.
The Papists say Christ is our only Mediator of redemption; but the Saints
are Mediators of intercession. But the Apostle speaks so plainly of Prayer
and intercession, as that distinction will not serve; the office of
intercession pertains unto Christ, as part of his Mediation, Heb. 7.15.

Verse. 8. I will therefore that man pray everywhere] When God had not now
limited Prayer to any place, had ruined the set place for Prayer at Jerusalem.
See 4. John 21.

Lifting up holy Pa^^es constanter puras manus, non aqua lotas (sc. lustrali,
ut Baronius) sed sanctas and purgatas ab omni iniquitate interpretantur. Sic
Chrysostomus, Theodoretus, Oecumenius, Lyranus. (...) significat sanctum Heb.
7.26. Apoc. 15.4. etiam profanis scriptoribus; praestat igitur cum Luthero
sanctas manus, quam cum vulgata puras vertere. Scultetus.
hands] which are not defiled with blood and sins, Esaias 1.15.

Without wrath and doubting] Wrath against men, and doubting in respect of God;
faith and charity are required in Prayer.

Verse. 11. Let the woman learn in silence with all subjection] The Apostle here
speaks of the order, and comeliness of public Ecclesiastical Assemblies,
wherein women were not allowed to take upon them any power, or function of
teaching, for three reasons here propounded. 1. From their condition, which is
to be obedient unto man; and therefore in man's presence, they must not usurp
the authority of teachers. 2. Their function which is to serve men; for Adam
was first created, and Eve for Adam. 3. From the weakness of their sex, which
lies more open to Satan's seducement. Vide Grotium.

Verse. 13. For Adam was first formed, then Eve] Therefore Adam must be
superior; Quod signum eminentioris in viro dignitatis, 1 Cor. 11.8. Grotius.
Vide Calvinum.
by that reason (may some say) Birds and Beasts should be preferred before
both. The Apostle speaks of the same kind, and not of diverse kinds. Doctor
Tailor.

Verse. 14. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the
transgression] To be deceived, Mirum quam se hic antiqui torserint. Ephiphanius
hae^. 49. Jun. paral. l. 2. p. 47. Calvin. Beza, say, Adam was not first
deceived, as 13. verse. Chrysostom says he was not properly, nor immediately
deceived from the Serpent, but occasionally. Mercer that he was not deceived
but enticed. Jerome, and Drusius, that he was not deceived by the Serpent, but
by Eve. Theophylactus mulierem a cupiditate, virum a multere seductum ait. Non
deceptus est, nempe a serpente. Grotius. vide Estium and a Lapide.
is to err and mistake in judging. Adam did not eat out of error as Eve; for
he did not persuade himself, that he should get more knowledge by it, but
alone was drawn to follow his wife by her entreaty, as not thinking that death
could follow the eating of the fruit, when he saw that his wife (who had eaten
already) was not dead, but as healthy as before. Yet Adam sinned more then Eve,
because he received the Commandment from the Lord; he had more wisdom and
strength, and had a greater measure of knowledge. Therefore this place here
(says Paulus Fagius on third of Genesis 19.) is to be understood of the weakness
of women, not of the greatness of the sin.

Verse. 15. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in Childe-bearing] (...), by
bearing of that child viz. Jesus Christ, which words are to be understood
(says one) as those of Gal. 3.16. by the childe-bearing of one of that sex,
woman kind shall be restored into a capacity of heavenly bliss; or in, that
is thorough, or by Childbearing. Non causam cur salvabitur, sed statum in quo
salvabitur designat. Rivetus.

It is added, if they shall continue, which it is not to be understood of the
children but of the woman, that is to say the sex which being a word
collective, signifying a multitude, is joined to a verb of the plural, as
turba ruunt.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. IF a man desire the office of a Bishop] This Greek word signifies an
earnester desire then the other following, Pro desiderat in Graecu non est unum
idemque vocabulum, sed priori loco (...), appetit, unde (...) appetentia,
praesertim cibi vehementior, vocabulum etiam Latinis authoribus usurpatum
Posterius verbum est (...) cupit, defiderat; utitur autem in priori loco
vehementioris significationis vocabulo; quod eadenires nomine Episcopatus
desideretur ardentius quam nomine operis and officij. Estius.
because the same thing (say Estius, and Gerhard) by the name of Episcopacy, is
more ardently desired, then by the name of work and duty.

Verse. 2. A Bishop then must be blamelesse] viz. In respect of his life and
outward conversation. The Apostle requires sixteen conditions from a Bishop;
ten affirmative, six negative.


The husband of one wife] Because in the East particular men had sometimes more
wives; as now the Jews and Turks have, say Gerh. in loc. Scultetus. Vide Bezam.
See Titus 1.6. Polygamia hic nominatim in Episcopo damnatur quae tunc apud
Iudaeos pro lege fere obtinuerat. Gerh.
some. But he means it at one time, See Verse. 12.
as Chapter 5. v 9. though he have been married more then once. The godly ancient
fathers accounted him to be Bigamus that had two wives at once, and not him
that had been twice married.

Vigilant] That diligently attends his flock, Vulg. Sobrium, (...). Perinde
est, sive sobrium, sive vigilantem vertas. Quanquam hoc posterius ad
proprietatem verbi magis quadrat. Vorstius.
Estius and Gerhard say both significations agree. Sober] (...). The Greek word
properly signifies a man of a sound mind, that is, prudent and circumspect.
Some have rendered it prudentem, others pudicum, others temperantem; the Greek
word signifies all these, says Estius, and Gerhard after him.

Of good behaviour] Or, neat. (...). In countenance, gate, speech, and whole
habit of the body, well and decently composed.

Given to hospitality] (...). A lover of strangers; who willingly entertaines
and receives Christians, especially Ministers.

Apt to teach] (...), furnished with gifts of teaching.

Verse. 3. Not given to Wine] That is, to be a common tipler (...) vinosus, q.d.
vino assidens, scilicet ad perpotandum. Gerh. in loc. Non tantum ebrietatem hoc
verbo notant Graeci, sed quamvis intemperiem in vino ingurgitando. Calvinus.
, and one that loves to sit by the Wine, morning and evening, day by day.

No striker] Cognata vitiae sunt vinolentia and violentia. Non opor^et
Episcopum esse percussorem.

Nor greedy of filthy lucre] When one by unlawful means heaps up riches, and
is more tenacious of his Goods then fit, (...) est turpis lucri sectator. It
may be referred to the object, that one should not gain by any base thing; and
to the manner, that one should not filthily affect gain from an honest thing
Gerh. in loc. This seems redundant, for it follows after not covetous. a Lapide.

But patient] One that will depart from his own right for peace sake.

Not a brawler] (...), alienus a pugna.

Not covetous] Not a lover of silver, (...). Munster in the third Book of his
Cosmography has a terrible example of covetousness, in Hatton Archbishop of
Mentz, which calling the poor Mice, and suffering them like Mice to perish
with hunger by the just judgment of God, was invaded by Mice, which fled to
his Tower, (which is yet to be seen on the River of Rhene) and there devoured
him.

Verse. 6. Not a novice] Paul says not (...), but (...); Chrysostom. Nuper
implantatum, qui a falsa religione nuper ad veram transiit. Gerh. in loc. Vide
Bezam.
it is not meant of young in years, but in faith; one newly converted to the
Christian faith; as it were a tender and young plant in Christianity. Such a
one is apt to be proud especially if a Minister.

He fall into the judgment or condemnation of the divell] That is, into the
same condemnation with the devil.

Verse. 8. Likwise] Simil^er, Vulg. In the Greek it is not (...), but (...),
which signifies itidem, in like manner.

Must the Deacons be grave] (...). id est, Prae gravitate reverendus, to be
reverenced for his gravity. Chap. 4.12. and Titus 2. ult.

Verse. 13. For they that have used the office of a Deacon well] Some B. Barlow
in his Sermon on Act. 20.28. Id est, qui diaconatus officio been functi
fuerint, viam sibi parabunt ad gradum majorem and honoratiorem, nompe
presbyterii vel etiam Episcopatus. Estius.
would have it rendered, they which have discharged the office of a Deacon
well, See Par on 12. Romans 8. p. 257.
and find fault with the Genevah for rendering it, those which have ministered
well, purchase to themselves a good degree. Id. ib. Graedum sibi honestum
faciunt. nempe ad presbyterium. It^ enim mos erat illorum saeculorum, ut ex
optimis de Christiana plebe dia^oni fie^int, ex diaconis optimis presbyteri, ex
presbyteris optimis praesidente^. Grotius. vide Calvinum.
Some would have it rendered, prepare unto themselves a fair step since (...);
properly signifies a stair or a step, as Acts 21.35. Do justly obtain the
favor and honor to be preferred to the higher offices in the Church. Dr H^lls
Paraphrase.

Verse. 15. The Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth] In old
time the Gentiles used to write their Laws in Tables, The Apostle here speaks
of a pillar not more architectonico, understanding by it some essential piece
of the building: but more forensi, for such a post or pillar on which Tables
and Proclamations are wont to hang. Dr. Preston.
and so hang them upon pillars of stone, that the people might read them, as
Proclamations are nailed to posts in Markettownes; they had other pillars also
like the Pasquils in Rome, whereupon whosoever listed hung their Epigrams or
Libels which they would have known. The Apostle describing the Church, likens
it to one of these pillars, whose use was to show what hung thereon. This
Church Dr. Chaloner (...) Columnam Gal. 2.9. (...). generaliter sustenticulum
and quasi sedem, aut id cui res quoquo modo innititur, significat. Gerh. in loc.
here is not the Church which the Papists make to be the Judge of
controversies; neither the Church representative which is a general Council;
nor the Church virtuall, which they imagine to be the Pope: but the Church
essentall, the Congregation of all believers, the House of God, as he calls
it.

These words, the pillar and ground of truth, may have reference, not to the
Church, Chillingworth.
but to Timothy, that thou may know how to behave thy self as a pillar and
ground of truth in the Church of God, which is the House of the living God; for
having called the Church a house, it may seem somewhat heterogeneous to call it
a Pillar. 2. The Church which here Paul speaks of, Vide Cameronis my^othecium
Evangelicum, and Scultetum in loc.
was that in which Timothy conversed; and that was the particular Church, and
not the Roman. 3. If he speak of the Universal Church, this shows us what it
should be, not always what it is; as that, You are the Salt of the earth, said
Christ to his Disciples, because it was their office to be so. 4 By truth here
is meant all necessary to salvation, not all profitable truth, absolutely and
simply All.

Mysterium q^od quae ea d^sciplina traduntur cognosicada, naturae lace
comprehendi n^qu^ant; mysterium vero pietatis, quod eadem illa (quaecunque
tandem sint) agnita semel and credita excitent admirab^les affectus pretalis.
Cameron. (...) saepe vocatur Evangelium, non modo quia tamdiu latuit, verum
etiam quia humana industria nequ^t reperiri. Matthew. 16.17. Grotius.
Verse. 16. Great is the mystery of godlinesse] The Gospel is so called.
because as it is a doctrine made for the honor, dignity, and promotion of
godliness; so it is a doctrine which consists of such truths and connexions of
things that are far remote from the common thought, reasons, and
understandings of men.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. EXpressely] (...) diserte Beza aperte significat. Grotius in so many
words.

In the latter times] viz. Under Antichrist. The Scripture speaks of the
latter times, Appellatione (...) intel^igitur totum illud temporis spacium, quo
inter primum and secundum Christi adventum intercedit. Luc. 8. v. 8. 2 Timoth.
3. v. 1. 2 Pet. 3. v 3. 2 Johan. 2. v. 18. Jud. v. 18. Gerh. in loc. Novissimus
dies dicitur in Scripturis quadrupliciter. Primo, pro multo seu longo temporis
post. Genesis 49.1. Deuteronomy. 4.30. Dan. 2.28.29. Secundo, pro temporibus Novi
Testamenti; hoc est, initio adventus Christi seu Messiae, Isa. 2. v. 1. Mich.
4.1. Act. 2.16. Tertio, pro omnino novissimo ac extremo d^e mundi ac judicii
universalis. Joan. 6.54. and 11.24. and 12.49, Quarto, pro antecedente, 2 Pet.
3.4. Judae v. 8. Atque ita etiam in loco isto Pauli secundum expositionem
ipsorum Papistarum, Lyrae, Cajetani, Espensaei, Salmeronis, and aliorum.
Laurentii Grotius Papizans.
the times of Antichrists rise and discovery, when the Apostasy shall
overspread all the Christian Churches, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8, 10. and the last times, 2 Timothy 3.1. the times of Antichrists destruction, Rev. 106.

Some shall depart from the faith] That is, from the doctrine of faith, which
in general is the holy Scripture, in special the Gospel, called therefore
the word of faith, Romans 10.8. and the law of faith, Romans 3.27.

Verse. 2. Having their consciences seared with is hot Iron] (...), is to
cauterize, to sear with an hot Iron, or cut off with searing, as Surgeons
do rotten Members: Now that which is seared becomes more hard and brawny, and
so more dull, and not so sensible in feeling as otherwise; in this sense (...)
signifies those who have a hard and brawny conscience, Medes Apostasy of the
latter times. Al^i putant alludi ad Cauterium quo signabantur equi and mancipia
in front, ut ex nota inusta cognosci possent; alludit Apostolus ad
instrumentum Chirurgicum quo resecantur ustione parts male sanae a corpore
humano* Alsted paratir. vide Gerh. in loc.
which has no feeling in it: in the other sense, as (...) is to cut off by
searing, it must signify those who have no conscience left; there is not much
difference, but I follow the first, a hard and unfeeling conscience. vide
Estitum.

Verse. 3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving] It was the very purpose and
intent of else Creator of all things, when he made the food wherewith we
sustain our selves, that the use of it should be joined with giving of thanks,
Aliud est damnare nuptias and cibos, quod Marcionitae, Taliani and Manichaei
fecerunt; aliud prohibere; quod faciunt Pontificii. Down. Diatrib. de Antich.
part. 1. l 3. c. 2. See Fulke on the Rhem. Test. Nota est Antichristi prohibere
nuptias. Hieron. * Adversarii dicunt Montanum hoc in loco intelligi. At nos
dicimus illos a Montano hoc accepisse. Whitakerus de Eccles. vide Calvinum.
whereof we have example in Christ and Paul. Who forbid marriage and meats but
the Papists? They forbid marriage to some men at all times, and certain meats
to all men at some times, and that for religions sake: esteeming of marriage in
their Clergy worse then adultery, or Sodomy; and eating of flesh in Lent, or
other forbidden times, as a mortal sin. Downam of Antichrist, l 1. c. 4.

Which believe and know the truth] As if those that wanted faith and saving
knowlede did but usurp the bread they eat.

Verse. 4. And nothing to be refused] viz. Out of religious respect of
conscience to Gods word.

Verse. 5. For it is sanctified by the Word and prayer] Sanctified] that is,
made holy and lawful for us to use. By the Word] Certifying us of Gods will,
that we may use them. And prayer] Whereby we crave his particular good liking
for our use of the creatures, with praising him.

Verse. 8. Having promise of the life that now is] That is of earthly blessings,
and riches; Graece promissiones numero plurali, videtur enim apostolus
significare quod in sacris literis multae extant hujusmodi promissiones. Estius.
Eternal blessings only are promised absolutely, and temporal with
restraint, viz. if they serve for Gods glory, and the good of his children.

Verse. 10. Who is the Savior of all men, Vide Calvinum.
specially of those that believe] It is meant of Gods general providence; or,
if of his special mercies, that they are offered to all.

Verse. 12. Let no man despise thy youth] Though young, yet so carry thy self
in thy ministry, Nolo te talem exhibeas, ut possis ab aliquo merito contemni,
Hieron. Epist. ad Titum. See Titus 2.7. 1 Pet. 5.6. Fac ut morum gravitate
tantum reverentiae tibi concilies, ne quid aetas tua juvenilis, quae alioqu
contemptui obnoxia esse solet, tua authoritate minuat. Calvinus.
that they may reverence and fear thee for thy gravity therein.

In word] That from his mouth they might be instructed in the wholesome word of
truth.

And in conversation] That in his life they might see that integrity which
becomes Saints. It is all one (says Calvin) as if he had said, Dictis and
factis, adeoque tota vita.

Verse. 13. Till I come give attendance to reading, to exhortation, Exhortation]
or consolation (...) rather the first here, as Lavater Estius.
to doctrine] As if he should say, that thou may be able to exhort and teach,
study hard. Mark the order, he preposeth reading; for the Scripture is the
fountain of all wisdom, whence Pastors ought to fetch what they utter to
their flock.

Verse. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
Prophesie] Hildersam. Vide Scultetum.
As if he should say, suffer it not by idleness to decay, but stir it up,
nourish and increase it.

Verse. 15. Give thy self wholly to them] (...) be in them; which phrase implies
much intention and Industry in our studies. Sic Horatius: totus in illis.

That thy profiting may appear to all] As if he should say, strive so to teach
as it may appear thy gifts increase daily.

Verse. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy doctrine] Luke 14.7. Take
heed Attend tibi ipsi, ut recte vivas; attend etiam doctrinae, ut alios recte
instituas. Estius.
unto thy self how thou sinnest, and to thy doctrine what thou teach. See
Acts 20.28.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. REbuke not an Elden] Do not handle him roughly, and as it were
strike him, Ne rigide eum tractate, and quasi plagam ei imponite. Vorstius.
vide. Cornel. a Lap.
as the Greek word signifies.

Verse. 3. Honor widows that are widows indeed] He alludes (say Calvin,
Estius, a Lapide, Alludit ad etymon (...), quod est a (...), id est, destituo,
desolor, arbo; sic and Latin vidua a viduando dicitur. Vide V. 5. a Lapide.
) to the Greek name for a widow which comes of a Verb that signifies to be
destitute and deprived. Those widows which were destitute of humane help and
comfor, the would have sustained at the public charge of the Church, which is
termed honor because they terrified thereby the virtues of those so sustained.

Verse. 4. Any widdow] Any mother or father.

Have children] That is, those which come immediately from their own bodies.

Nephews] Grandchildren or great-grandchildren.

Show piety] To perform duty to parents is pious.

And to requite (...) vicem rependere, in praebendis sc. alimentis. Gerh.
] That is, do one good turn for another.

For it is good] That is, morally, a commendable virtue.

And acceptable before God] pleases God wonderfully.

Verse 6. But she that lives in pleasure] That makes it her element, all her
business is to take delight; (...) significationem habet pruritus. Est ergo
lasciva and procax. Iac. 5.5. Aug. quae in delitiis agit. Cyprian. Quae
delicata est. Gerh.
so James 5.

Is dead while she liveth] That is unprofitable; a life led in pleasures is a
death. The Ancients call idleness a burial of a living man.

Verse. 8. He has denied the faith] He takes not faith in a full latitude; in
that particular he shows himself to be no believer.

And is worse then an Infidell] He that is worse then an Infidel is near to
the devil; there is no worse thing then an Infidel. But the Apostles meaning
is, he commits a sin greater in some respect then they do which remain in
infidelity. He is worse then an Infidel in this point, because he by the very
light of nature knows this to be a duty. Hac part fidelis, si curam suorum non
habeat, infideli deterior est; absolute deteriorem esse non est necesse.
Estius. Gerhard.

Verse. 9. The wife of one man] A woman which has not had two husbands at once;
having so been wife of one husband, Hoc est, quae sua culpa non transierit ad
secundas aut tertias nuptias, puta per divortium, aut repudium aliquod
illegitimum. Vorstius.
as that she has not upon his repudiation married to another. Dr. Halls
Paraphrase.

Verse. 10. If she have brought up children] Nourished her children; or word for
word, (...), si filios suos pie educavit in timore Domini. Gerh.
if she have fed her children.

Verse. 12. Having damnation] That is subject to the censure of the Church, say
some. Calvin says Paul terrifieth them with the damnation of eternal death.

Because they have cast off their first faith] That is, either the faith and
promise which was made to God in their Baptism, or the faith and promise of
service and releife, Perkins. Primam fidem dici fidem Baptismi, quae scilicet
in Baptismo prima suscipitur, neque veteres neque recentiores Theologi mihi
persuadent: quando quidem in Baptismo non promittimus nos vel a primis vel a
secundis nuptiis abstenturos: and lascivia invencularum viduarum ad secuntdas
nuptias prorumpens, and in iis m^rbi interniremedium quarens, pro insamia
quidem, at non pro fidei Christianae rejectione habita fuit. Sculterus.
to be performed to the poor.

Verse. 13. And not only idle, but tatlers also, and busy bodies] The Apostle
coupleth these two together, idle and busy bodies; those which are idle in
their own duties, They are not only called (...) because not busy about what
they should, but (...), or intent on things they should not, Thomas Goodwin.
are most busy bodies in other men's.

Three things (says Calvin) are here fitly joined together by Paul; idleness,
curiosity which proceeds from that; and garrulity, which is the fruit of
curiosity. Percontatorem fugito, nam garrulus idem est. Horace.

Verse. 17. Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the word and doctrine] Some learned and late
writers conceive that this place makes for the Lay- Presbyters; others say here
are not two sorts of Elders, Dicit qui laborant; quia doctrinam sacram tradere
sicut oportet non parvi laboris. Estius. Vbi manifest duo Presbyterorum genera
statuit Apostolus, interpret Ambrosio and aliis veteribus, and ex nostris fere
omnibus. Bullingero, Martino, Calvino, Zanchius in quartum praeceptum. Saravius
against Beza, Sculteus in loc And Bishop Bilson in his perpetual government c.
10. go the other way. Here two Elders are mentioned; but the difference
whether official, or personal is very doubtful; one office may comprehend
both these duties, and the comparison may be in their personal excellencies,
one may excel in the governing part of the office, and the other in the
doctrinall part. Husseys Plea for Christian Magistracy. Vide Blondellum de jure
plebis in regimine Ecclesiastico. p. 80.81.
one to govern, the other to teach, but two duties of each Presbyter, viz to
teach and govern. The illation of the former is this, there were elders that
ruled well, and labored besides in the word of God; therefore there were
Elders that ruled, and labored not.

It is imagined that two kind of Presbyters, as well as two parts of their
Office are expressed; one of Ministers of the Church, another of the people;
one perpetual, Thorndikes Service of God at Religious Assemblies, Chap. 4.
the other ambulatory for their time; both alike interessed in the government
of the Church, the office of Preaching charged upon the one. How little of this
is set down in the words of the Apostle, were the sense of them that which is
pretended, let all the world judge. But of this, See vindication of
Presbyteriall government p. 37. etc.

Be counted worthy of double honour] By which he means maintenance, as
appears, verse. 18. It should be such maintenance, so free, so liberal, as
may testify that you honor him in your hearts; such as may keep him from
contempt. Mr. Hildersam on 51. Psalm. the honor of countenance, and
maintenance, Dike on Philem.

Peradventure the Apostle has respect to the Law of the firstborn, Deuteronomy.
21.17. in which a twofold portion is commanded to be given to him. The first
borne was the chiefer, more excellent and honorable person of all the family,
whence Elisha as the chiefest of all the Prophet Eliahs disciples desired a
double portion of the Spirit, 2 Kings 2.9. To the same purpose, the Apostle
here seems to declare that those who rule well, as the first borne, and the
most excellent, are worthy of a double portion of honor and reward. De Dieu in
loc. that is ample maintenance, and officii and doctrinae Jerome. duplex, and
reverentiae and subsidii. Aquinas, sibi and suis says another; double not in
comparison with any Lay-governours, but in regard of widows and Deacons.

Especially] Shows not diverse persons, but parts of their callings says one.

Verse. 19. Against an Elder, receive not an accusation] By an Elder understand
Ministers, civil governors, and all superiors; and if we must not receive,
muchlesse may we frame an accusation against them. Perkins.

Verse. 20. Them that sinne] That is, openly and with scandal.

Rebuke before all] The whole Assembly of the Church, Matthew. 18.17. 2 Cor. 2.6.
Id est palam and in publico conventu ecclesiae, graviter ac severe sunt
increpandi. Estius.


Verse. 21. Doing nothing by partiallity] The Apostle charge Timothy, that he
do nothing (...), that is, by titing the balance of one side. In alteram
partem inclinando. See 23. Exodus 2. Metaphora sumpta est a bilance. Gerh. Vide
Bezam. 22.24.


Verse. 22. Lay hands suddenly on no man] By a part is here manifested the whole
Act of ordination, As though he had said more largely, use all the
circumspection thou can, yet some hypocrites will creep in^o the Ministry:
some are inwardly profane, and such close sinners thou can not discern,
till afterward they manifest themselves; others are open sinners, of which
thou may judge aright; these latter thou art to hinder; the former reclaim,
or seasonably remove, and so salve up the soar again. Doctor Tailor.
because hands were imposed upon them.

Neither be partaker of other men's sinnes] This is diversely interpreted.
First, as if this were the meaning, there are many will ordain rashly, do not
thou fall into such men's sins, so as to be like them. Secondly, there are
many that will importunately desire such to be ordained, who may please their
humors; but do not thou yield to such importunity, least thou partake of
their sins. But thirdly it may have reference to the persons ordained, that
if Timothy were not diligent to examine them, both for their doctrine, and
conversation; all the wickedness these Ministers should afterward commit in
the discharge of their duty, would be accounted as his; and he should answer
for them.

Vide Calvinum and Estium. Est stomacho laborantibus assiauus aquae potus
inutilis Celsus l. 1 c. 8. praecipitque similiter stomacho laborantibus ut
vinum adhibeant. Sculretus.
Keep thy self pure] That is from sins, that thou be without blame.

Verse. 23. Drink no longer water] There are but two words in the Greek,
(...), Paul (...) does wholly forbid Timothy to drink water, but to drink it
only, for so (...) signifies.

Use a little wine] That is, but a little wine; we sold the land for so much,
that is, but for so much, Act. 5.8. drink wine, sed modice, hoc est medice to
cure thine infirmities, not to cause them, pro remedio parcis, non pro delicius
redundantius. Ambrose.

Paul prescribes Timothy to drink a little wine for his stomachs sake, and
often infirmities; yet he never prescribed him but a little preaching, nay
though a weak sickly man; yet he charges him before the Judge of quick and
dead, to preach in season, and out of season. Dike.

Verse. 24. Some men's sins are open before hand q. d. Quamvis quorundam
peccata sunt manifesta propter quae ab ecclesiastic officijs eos excludere in
proclivi est; tamen aliorum peccata sunt occulta, quae temporis progressu in
lucem proseruntur; ideo ad ordinationem non est temere and praecipitanter
accedendum. Glass. Philol. Sac. l. 1. Tract. 3. Haec tota sentenua cum versu
22. and praece^entibus connectenda videtur: quippe in quo ratio redditur illius
praecepti de cavenda communione altenuorum peccatorum. Vorstius.
] Some there are who offer themselves to ordination, whose scandals are known
before hand.

And some men they follow after] Others offenses they are not known, till after
they be ordained.

CHAPT. VI.
Verse. 3. ANd to the doctrine which is according to godlinesse] That is, the
Gospel by a Periphrasis. See the 3. Chap. 16. and Titus 1.1. because the
nature, constitution, and composure of it is such, as if he that framed it had
intended the exaltation of godliness by it in the world.

Verse. 4. But doting about questions] In Greek, sick about questions. He means
not such questions as are profitable, (...), vox haec a typhonico vento dosumta
creditur, quem veteres putarunt hominibus nentem ac^ rationem adimere, and
vento isto correptos insanire. Gerh.
but which are raised, ad ostentandum acumen, so that one question begets
another.

And strifes of words] (...), word bates.

Verse. 5. Perverse disputings of men (...), inutiles contentiones,
disputationes curiosa. Occumenius metaephoram deductam putat ab ovibus quae
applicatae aliis and attritae etiam sanas morbo assiciunt. Gerh. in loc. Vide
Estium.
] In the original, galling one another with disputes.

He makes not the gain of godliness to depend upon the condition of our
contentment, as though there were no profit in it, unless we were contented
with it; but that is the effect and an inseparable companion of godliness to
make us contented with all estates, for it always brings with it contentment.
De pietate tria praedicantur quod sit quaestus: ingens quaestus: talis denique
quaestus qui pariat ex se (...). Scultetus.
Verse. 6. But godliness with contentment is great gaine] Godliness with
selfe-sufficiency, for so it is word for word in the original. It restores us
our primitive right and interest in the creatures; a godly man in his wants may
claim the promise, and live upon God. 2. He is sure of the best supply, and in
the best way. 3. Every creature and blessing shall be sanctified to him. 4. It
produces gracious effects. 1. True contentation of mind, 37. Psalm. 2. Makes
him thankful in the want of these things as Job. 3. He looks on common
favors as fruits of special love and pawnes of a heavenly inheritance. 4. It
makes such an impression on his heart, as was in God in the bestowing of them;
as God has showed love to him, so will he to the Saints.

Verse. 7. For we brought nothing into this world] Greek, this new world.

And it is certain we can carry nothing out] He does not say as it is, Job.
1.21. we brought nothing into the world, and shall carry nothing out; but as if
men affirmed some such thing in their own hearts, that their riches should go
out of the world with them, or could profit them when they are dead; he says
it is certain we can carry nothing out.

Verse. 8. And having food and raiment, let us therefore be content] That is, if
we have food and raiment necessary for us and ours, we ought to quiet our
hearts, Perkins. He says not Cates nor delicates, but food that may feed; he
says not ornaments, or abillements, but coverings, garments, so much as may
keep thee from cold; garment quasi gardment. Minshew; toga quae defendere
frigius, Quam vis crassa queat. Horace.
and have no further care. The word signifies let us have enough, let us count
it enough.

Verse. 9. But they that will be rich] The Apostle says not those that are
rich, but these which inordinately desire to be rich, or such as refer the
labor of their callings to the gathering of wealth; where the Apostle does not
simply condeme a rich estate, but rather the desire to be rich, that is a
desire to have more then is necessary for the maintaining of a man's estate.

Fall into temptations] That which we pray daily against, are overcome by them.

And a snare] viz Of Satan, the vulgar adds the Devil, but it is not in the
Greek and Syriack. And into many foolish] Absurd and sordide.

Hurtfull] And damnable to the soul.

Which drown men] Like one that has a Millstone about his neck, and is thrown
into the bottom of the Sea. (...), proprie est in profundum demergere.

In destruction and perdition] That is, destroying perdition. He uses two
words to signify the greatness, and certainty of the destruction; or to note
a double destruction, Temporal, and Eternal. Estius and others.

Verse. 10. For the love of Money] The preposterous in ordinate love of it.

Is the root of all evils Bion avaritiam vocabat vitii metropolin, Timon
malorum elementum.
] He says not that it is the cause, principle, original, but the root, not of
a few, many or very many, but of all evils, the covetous man will be ready to
commit any sin. Quid non mortalia pectora cogis Auri sacra fames.

Pierced Verbum (...), notat proprie confossionem, cum quis in mucronem
incidit. Sensus igitur est, tranfixerunt seipsos multis doloribus. Gerh. in loc.
themselves thorough] One every side, circumcicra perforant, as if one were
stabbed all over, from head to foot.

With sorrowes] Such as women in travel are subject unto.

Verse. 11. But thou O man of God, flee these things] Not only because it was
exceedingly unbecomming him, but because even he is inclinable to it. That is,
thou who art to have office in the Church by ordinary calling, as the Prophets
and men of God of old had by extraordinary; thou who after a special manner
art to be Gods peculiar, by reason of thy function, 1 Samuel 2.27. 2 Timothy 3.17.

Fly Verbum fuge emphasin habet; q.d Sis ab hujusmodi longissime remotus.
Estius. Doctor Tailor on Titus.
these things] That is, preserve thy self from these noisome lusts, the
breeders of most filthy and detestable cogitations and practices.

And follow after righteousnesse] That is, deal justly, give every man his
own.

Godlinesse] Covetousness is Idolatry; practice thou piety which is great
gain.

Faith] This is a maine fruit of godliness; follow it and thou shall not
distruct Gods providence.

Love] To men a fruit of faith; self-love occasions covetousness.

Patience In adversity.

Meeknesse] Waiting and expecting Gods coming, to the supply of our want.

Verse. 12. Fight the good fight of faith] That is, strive by faith, patience
and Prayer, against all these lusts of infidelity, Vide Cornel. a Lapide,
Metaphora sumta non a militia, sed a certamine, quod cursu fiebat in studio, 1
Cor. 9.24. 1 Timothy 2.5. Gerh. Ex Estio.
distrust, earthly-mindednesse.

Lay hold on eternal life Veluti bravium sive praemium certaminis. Persistit
in Metaphora. Gerh. ib.
] Being called by faith, and hope, lift up thy heart and affections to a
heavenly conversation, so some, That is, so strive in this course that thou
may obtain eternal life.

Verse. 14. That thou keep this Commandment without spot] That is, so keep
this Commandment, Mr Ball.
that thou look for Christ daily; and so that if thou should live until
that time, thou remit nothing of thy study and care.

Vide Cornel. a Lapide.
Some interpret it in general of all the commandments given by the Apostle to
Timothy; some in special of the Commandments, in 11. and 12. verses, some of
the Commandment of love; Calvin Nomine mandati significat quae hactenus de
officio Timothei disseruit: quorum haec fait samma ut se fidelem Christo and
Ecclesiae Ministrum praeberet. Calvinus.
goes the second way.

Verse. 15. The only Potentate] Because he is essentially, and independently
potent, yea omnipotent.

Verse. 16. Who only has immortality] viz. Perfect and independent; the Angels
are immortal, not of their own nature, but by Gods grace.

Jn di vitiis cupiditate^ reprehendit non facultatem. Austen.
Verse. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world] This is added by way of
extenuation, the world is brittle and all things in it; those are world-lings
in heart, as well as in estate; there are other riches besides those of this
world Matthew. 6.20. and 19.21.

That they be not high minded] He bids rich men take heed of two things, first
Pride here, and secondly deceitful hope in the next words.

Nor trust in uncertain riches (...), in incertitudine divitiatum, hoc est, in
incertis divitijs. Gerh.
] Yea to uncertainty it self, so it is in the original; some render it
unevidence of riches, they evidence not Gods love.

But in the living God] This Epithete is added either to distinguish him from
false Gods, or to declare the certainty of hope which is placed in God, who
lives always, and immutably.

Verse. 18. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate] All is but beneficence, (...), Graeca vo^
proprie significat eam communicationem qua quis ea, quae habet, alijs qui non
habent impertiendo communicate. Romans 12.13. Heb. 13.16. 2. Cor. 8.9. Gal. 6.6.
Gerh. in loc.
expressed in the variety of four Epithetes.

To do good] Imports all good whatsoever belongs to a Christian life; the
other two, distribute, and communicate, that good which properly is expected
from rich men, that none else can do.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Second Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to TIMOTHY.
CHAP. I.
THere is the same Argument generally of this Epistle with the former. Exordium
posteriosis Epistolae ad Timothum recte dixeris Exordium Epistolae ad Romanos
contractum. Scultetus.


Verse. 3. Whom I serve from my forefathers] or Progenitors: so Calvin. Some say
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; Latini certe progentorum nomine, ut Graeci (...)
vocabulo, complectuntur non parents modo proximos, sed superiores quoque, qui
nominibus carentes, eisdent majores vocantur. Espencaeus. (...) aliqui majores,
nempe Abrahamum, Isaacum and Jacobum, and alios deinceps a quibus ortus est
intelligunt; ego progenitores proximos significari puto. Scultetus. Gratias ago
Deo meo, quod quoties ad eum preces fundo, toties tui sum memor, ac pro te oro.
Estius.
others his natural parents.

With pure conscience] That is, a conscience purified from the guilt of sin
by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ. 2. A conscience purified from
self ends and respects. Sincerely and without hypocrisy.

Without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers night and day] We
cannot think that Timothy was never out of his thought; but the meani^g is,
when he did call upon God from day to day, he still remembered him. 1 Thessalonians.
5.17.

Verse. 6. Stir up the gift of God which is in thee] That is, as man preserves
the fire by blowing, (...) qui sopitos suscitat ignes; Est hoc verbum Genes.
45.27. suscitatur autem spiritus ille precibus dil^genti meditatione and jugi
pia operatione. Grot. Scultetus in loc.
so by our diligence we must kindle and revive the gifts and graces of God
bestowed on us. Therefore some think it is a metaphor taken from a spark kept
in ashes, which by gentle blowing is stirred up till it take a flame; so
Calvin, Barlow, and others. But it is better (says Gerhard) to refer it to the
Type of the Priests of the old Testament, by whose daily and continual
ministry the fire coming from Heaven was maintained: so Timothy is commanded
to stir up and preserve the gifts of the Holy Ghost received, and cause them to
flame and burn in him. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. 1 Timothy 4.14. Not those gifts common to all
the faithful, faith, hope, and charity, but the particular gifts of the
Spirit, as the gift of teaching in the Schools, the gift of exhorting in the
Church, and persuading men the faith of Christ; the gift of Tongues. In calling
it a gift he signifies an extraordinary grace of that time; but in willing him
to stir it up, and not to neglect it, Thorndikes Service of God at religious
Assemblies. c. 5.
he shows that it was in him to procure it at Gods hands, by reading
teaching, and praying, and the like means.

By putting on of my hands] The ceremony of laying on of hands has been used
of parents in blessing of their children Genesis 48.14. in Sacrifice Levit. 1.4.
in healing of diseases, Acts 28.8. in conferring the excellent gift of the holy
Ghost, Ordinatio vocatur manuu^ impositio, quia fit cum ceremonia impossionis
manuum. Estius.
Acts 8.17. and in making of Ministers; to which time these words have
reference, 1 Timothy 4.14.

Verse. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling] In calling he
is said to save us, to set us after a sort in possession of salvation, when he
calls us vocatione sancta, id est sanctificante, making us holy

According to his purpose and grace] That is, not moved by our works, but by
his purpose and grace, that is fore-purpose.
Not according to our works] That is, not for the foreknowledge of man's faith
or works; mark the exclusive, when, before the world was; therefore this grace
whereby we are saved, cannot be any gift of grace infused into us, unless it
could be infused before the world was, or we were in it.

Verse. 12. Nevertheless I am not ashamed] There is confidence; I know and am
perswaded] there is faith; That he is able to keep] there is a sure preserver;
That which I have committed] there is the pledge of salvation.

Here the Apostle calls his own soul (...), because committed to God to keep to
glory; in the 14 Verse the Gospel is called (...) because committed to us, to
our keeping.
The Apostle says he committed to Gods custody a pawn or pledge, or that which
he entrusted him withal; and what that is Interpreters differ. One faith his
soul, another (which is all one) himself; his works, says a third; a fourth
adds his sufferings; a fifth his salvation. He committed to God his soul,
himself, his doings, his sufferings, to be rewarded with life and salvation.

Ea doctrina quae nihil insalubre habet admixtum qualia multa erant in doctrina
Rabunorum and Philosophorum. Grotius.
Verse. 13. Hold fast the form of sound words] Or, wholesome words, such as have
a healing property in them, as the word signifies. Principles of Religion
grounded on Gods Word are called sound, wholesome, or healthful words, both in
regard of their matter and substance, and also in regard of their effect, they
cause and preserve good, sound and spiritual health. Form] or pattern. A
metaphor, say some, from a Carpenter that works by rule. Hhora Weemes out of
Iunius. (...) quidam vortunt expressam formam, quidam imaginem and
delineationem, quidam informationem. Gerh.
foramina, a speech borrowed from Merchants who have several boxes or holes
wherein the put their several sorts of money.

In faith and love which are in Christ Iesus] That is, sound doctrine is
contained in those two heads, faith and love, both which have reference to
Christ. Neither Protestant nor Papist Mr. Ward. See Gal 5.6. Ephesians. 6.23. 1 Timothy 1.14. These two were figured by the Vrim and Thummim.
, Calvinist nor Lutherane, Conformist nor Unconformist, but faith and love in
Christ Jesus is all in all.

Dike. Translatio sumpta ab umbra aut ventulo in l^cis aest^osis. Grotius.
Verse. 16. For he often refreshed me] This is another word in Greek then is used
Philem^n 7. A metaphor taken from those who being almost overcome with heat,
find some cooling; to show how acceptable and comfortable Onesiphorus his
relief was unto him.

Verse. 17. But when he was in Rome, he sought me diligently and found me]
Therefore Paul was a prisoner at large. Found m^] That is, came where I was.
The difference between Invenire and Reperire is this; when we go on a thing,
it is invenire; when a thing comes on us we do reperire.

CHAP. II.
(...).
Verse. 2. AMong many witnesses] Per multos testes, by many witnesses; so the
Vulgar, and the French Par plusieurs tesmoius. Fr. Bib. Vide Bezam.
also, inter multos testes, so Beza and we accordingly, that is, many being
present which can testify of these things. That is, the better version.
Gerhard.

Verse. 4. Entangleth himselfe] (...), is entangled. It is a comparison
Thorndikes Right of the Church in a Christian State. Chapter 5.
which St. Paul borrows from the custom of the Roman Empire, Entangle quasi
in angulum, etc.
wherein Soldiers, as they were exempted from being Tutors to men's persons, or
Curators to their estates, so they were forbidden to be Proctours of other men's
causes, to undertake husbandry or merchandise.

Verse. 5. Strive for masteries] The Apostle has respect to the manner of the
Grecian combats, Verbum (...) ex quo athletae dicti, significat certare
quocunque certandi genere, quod corpore exercetur, velut lucta, cursu, pugnis,
disco, saltu. Estius. Gerh. in loc.
in which those that were conquerers had a crown or garland of Herbs given
them. A metaphor borrowed from Wrestlers, Justers.

Verse. 15. Rightly dividing the word of truth] Or, word for word, Similitudo
ducta a victimis quae certo ritu secari debebant. Est autem and Evangelii
annuntiatio sacrificum and quidem egregium. Grotius. Vide Bezam. Ex sectione
sacrificatarum carnium metaphoram derivasse Apostolum ad concianotores verbi
Dei, existimant nonnulli. Sed verius puto sumptam esse metaphoram a nutrieibus
cibos in particulas and ofsulas secantibus, ut commodiu^ eas glutiant parvuli
quos educant. Menochius de Republica Hebraeorum. l. 2. c. 10. In Graeco est
(...) recte in parts secantem and dividentem; m^taphora a structoribus sumpta,
quorum munus est ex ipsorum artis praescripto integras verbi gratia aves, aut
alias carnes in frusta ex cutere, and partem cuique suam apponere. Nec aliunde
quam a partibus convivalibus sumpta videtur metaphora illa, qaa usus est
Christus Dominus Luc. 10.42. and illa qua usus est David, Psalm 15.5. sumpta
metaphora a symposiarchis qui quantum vini esset hauriendum praescribebant,
atque ita calicis partem assignare videbantur. Idem ibid. l. 6. c. 3. Vide
Fulleri Miscel. Sac. l. 3. c. 16.
rightly cutting into parts the word of truth] It is a metaphor (say Gerhard,
Perkins, and others) taken from the Levites who might not cut the members of
the sacrifices without due consideration. The righteousness respects not
only, or not so much the subject or word divided, as the object or persons to
whom the division is to be made, in giving every one his portion, or food
convenient for him; as some parts of the Sacrifices were given to the Priests,
others to the people.

Verse. 16. Increase] The Greek word signifies to cut a thing before to make a
passage for other things, as in some Countries they cut a passage for their
sheep because of the ice.

Verse. 17. And their word will rot as does a canker] Estius defends this
translation. Calvin and others would have it rather translated a Gangrene. Seu
titus, Calvin and Grotius show that they are not the same disease. That it has
its name in Greek from eating. Physicians say that if it take hold of any
member in the body, unless speedy remedy be found, it fretteth the flesh,
blood, bones, never ceasing till the whole man be destroyed. Error is
exceeding infectious and hurts the soul, unless daily prevented, (as a
Gangreen or running-tetter the body) 1. speedily, 2. incurably. 3. mortally.
Vide Calvinum, Estium, Gerh. in loc.

Of whom is Nuptialis, nomen haeretici negantis carnis resurrectionem a themate
(...), pellicula seu membrana virginitatis index quae primo coitu rumpitur.
Pasor. Hymenaeus a nuptiarum Deo: Philetus nomen quasi Optatus, Desideratus
apud Latinos. Grotius.
Hymeneus and Philetus] It is not certain who this Philetus was; Monstrat
digito pestes ipsas, ut sibi ab illis omnes caveant. Calvinus.
the Apostle speaks of Hymenaeus, 1 Timothy 1.20. They are Greek names, as many
others in the Cities of Asia built by the Grecians. The one by interpretation
is a love or wedding-song: the other, amiable, or affected.

Verse. 18. Who concerning the truth have erred] Swerved, missed the mark; Qui
a veritatis scopo aberrarunt. Gerh. The Apostle uses this word thrice in these
two Epistles to Timothy, by which not every error in Religion is signified,
but an error of that kind wherein the foundation is not retained.

Saying that the resureection is past already] Denying, viz the resurrection
which is to be of men's bodies at the last day, and turning it into the
resurrection only of the soul from sin.

And overthrow the faith of some] Not the grace, but the profession of faith,
or else the doctrine of faith which these did hold; they were run into
errors and heresies. It is in the present tense in the Greek, by which the
Apostle signifies that they do not only persist in their error, but also in
a perverse study of propagating it. There is an Emphasis in the word subvert or
overthrow, because the faith of the resurrection being taken away (as the
fountain of all Christian Religion) presently the whole fabrique of Christian
Religion falls to the ground, 1 Cor. 15.13. Estius. Gerhard.


Verse. 19. Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, etc.] That is,
Singula verba pondus habent; certitudo haec nititur, Primo, fundamento.
Secundo, non quocunque sed firmo. Tertio, non hominis sed Dei. Quarto, non
vacillante sed stante idque obsignato, idque notitia Dei, non simplicis tantum
inspectionis, sed discernente suos a non suis. Dr. Pride.
the decree of Gods election stands firm and sure, so as those who are elected
by him shall never fall away. This he declares by a double similitude; he
says the election of God is like the foundation of a house which stands fast
though all the building be shaken. The Church of God is compared to a building,
election to the foundation; A foundation is first in order of the building. 2.
Highest in honor, Christ is called the foundation of foundations, Stands
su^e] Abides firm, stable, constant, without change or alteration. Our English
word sure comes from the Hebrew ^zur a Rock. Barlow. Numerus certus non solum
quoad numerum numerantem ut suggerunt Armimati, sed quoad numerum numeratum ut
orthodoxi tenent.
Esaias 28.16. 3. Is the stability of a whole building. Secondly, he says that
election has the seal of God, and therefore may not be changed. Having this
seal, the Lord knows them that be his] Or who are his, not only how many
are elected, but who they are, who be the very numericall persons. A seal is
for two ends, secrecy and safety; things which are sealed are made sure and
authentical; this seal has two parts: the first concerns God in that every
man's salvation is written in the book of life, and God knows who are his.
Secondly, a second part of the seal which concerns man, and is imprinted in
his heart and conscience, which also has two branches, the gift of invocation,
and a watchful care to make conscience of all and every sin, in these words,
And let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity] whereby
he signifies that those which can call upon God, and give him thanks for his
benefits, and withal in their lives make conscience of sin, have the seal
of Gods election imprinted in their hearts, and may assure themselves they are
the Lords. Mr. Perkins.

Verse. 21. He shall be a vessel unto honour] That is, known or declared that
he is so.

And prepared unto every good worke] The word in the original signifies when
a man is fashioned as a Vessel is fashioned and the meaning is, Dr. Preston.
that then a man is good, when his heart is fitted to good works.

Verse. 22. Flee also youthful lusts] There are lusts peculiar to that time of
life, sensuality, abuse of self, creatures, headstrongness.

Verse. 24. But be gentle unto all men, apt to teach] Where the Apostle seems
to conclude him not to be apt to teach who is not inclined to a gentle and meek
disposition. Dr. Tailor on Titus. Neque enim doctrinae locus erit nisi adsit
moderatio and a quabile quoddam temperamentum. Calvinus.


Patient] The Greek word properly signifies Tolerantem majorum, one that bears
evil. (...) lenem, placidum mansuetum humanum erga omnes; (...). proprie
significat drcendi donis instructum, idoneum ad docendum. Gerh.
(...), evil persons rather then evil things. Estius. Gerh.

Verse. 26. And that they may recover] Or awake themselves; Syriack, that they
may be mindful of themselves. (...) proprie e vino ad se redire, per
translationem usurpatur ad liberationem ab omnibus rebus aliis quae mentem
turbant, ut videre est Abac. 2.7. 1 Cor. 11.34. Grotius. The Apostle alludeth
to one that is asleep or drunk, who is to be awaked, and restored to his
senses. Barlow.


Out of the snares of the divell] Greek, snare of the devil; that is,
pleasures, which make men as it were drunk; we are freed from these by Christ,
Esaias 42.7.

Who are taken captive] (...), taken alive, as soldiers in the wars, or
beasts in a toil. The Greek word is properly a warlike word, but is more
largely used, as we may see Luke 5.10.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. IN the last days Comprehendit universum Christianae Ecclesiae
statum. Calvinus. (...) tempora molesta. Tribuuntur tempori istiusmodi epitheta
metonymice, propter ea quae in tempore contingunt maxim propter horum mores ac
studia. Estius.
] That is, all the time from Christ's first to his second coming. Perilous
times] Vulg. tempora periculosa. The Greek is properly difficult times, in
which it is hard to consult, or to carry ones self.

Verse. 2. For men shall be lovers of their own selves] Self-love is the root of
these 19 vices here mentioned. The Apostle begins with self-love, and concludes
with love of pleasures; men always abound with self-love, but it shall then
prevail more then in times past.

Truce-breakers] Or promise-breakers, (...), foe difragi, infidi.
for it needs not be confined to the leaving of those Covenants of Cessation
from Arms betwixt enemies which we call truces, but may be understood
generally of any promise or compact whatsoever.

Verse. 4. Traytors] Such as betray (...), proditores, amicitiae desertores.
those who put their confidence in them.

Heady] Such as fly before they should; (...).

High-minded] Such as are puffed up with pride, show it outwardly (...).

Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God] There is an elegant paronomasia
in the Greek, (...).

Verse. 6. For of this sort are they which creep into houses] Syriacke creep
like Ferrets, or Weesils. Vide Fulleri Miscell. Sac. l. 3. c. 14. and Bezam.

Vulg. ex his enim sunt qui penetrant domos. Graecum (...), hic idem est quod
(...), penicus seu in profundum ingredi, in penitiorem recessum se abdere.
Ambrosiaster legit, qui irrepunt in domos. Locus parralleis, habetur, Tit. 1.
v. 11. Gerh. in loc.




Verse. 8. As Iannes and Iambres Jannes and Jambres qui fuerint, docent Hebraet,
Graeci and Latini Scriptores. Apud Nathanum etiam Hebraeum autorem Lexici
juris, scribit Drusius, se invenisse: eos principes magorum Pharaonis fuisse,
ac Mosi edenti miracula restitisse. Scultetus.
withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth] The series of the speech
seemed to require that he should say, as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses so
do these also resist us. But he alters his style, and says more emphatically
they resist the truth, that he may show that their opposition is not so much
against men preaching the truth of the Gospel, as against truth it self; and
therefore against God who is the first truth: Estius and Gerh. in loc. It is
likely they were therefore two (says Calvin) because as God raised up Moses
and Aaron as two Captains for his people, so Pharaoh would have so many
Magicians to oppose them.

Verse. 12. Yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution] There is a kind of godliness, which may be free from persecution;
Causis sufficientibus positis in actu necessario ponitur effectus. They have
enemies enough.
but if one will live godly up to the rule and principles which Christ has
given, he shall be subject to persecution.

Verse. 13. But evil men and seducers (...) proprie significat incantatores ac
praestigiatores, deinde generaliter usurpatur pro impostoribus ac deceptoribus.
Estius. Gerh.
shall wax worse and worse] That is, evil men who are seducers, or among all
evil men, especially seducers.

Verse. 15. And that from a Child, thou have known the holy Scriptures] (...),
from his Childhood, yea from his infancy as the word properly signifies, Mr.
Hildersam. Mos erat and est nunc qucque Indaeorum, a prima aetate quae
literarum capax est, sacra scripta legenda dare pueris. Grotius. Vide Gerh. et
Espencaeum. in loc.
from thine infancy say the Rhemists who yet cannot endure that Children
should be put to the reading of the Scriptures. See Estius.

Here is a large praise of the knowledge of God; in the commendation we have 1.
Of whom: Timothy, a Child: 2. For what 1 Act, knowledge. 2. Subject,
Scripture, set out by the adjunct holy; effect, make wise to salvation.



Verse. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God] (...). Because he had
exhorted Timothy to the reading of the Scripture, therefore he here commends
it, 1. From the authority. 2. From the profit of it, not only the sentences,
but the several words, and the order, and the whole disposition of them is
from God, as speaking or writing by himself; Romans 15.4. Consolation is added,
but that may be comprehended here under doctrine or instruction.
this is to be divinely inspired says Estius.

Is profitable.] Showing that the word of God must never be meddled withal but
for some profit. Then particularly he shows wherein the profit consists.

For doctrine] That is, to teach men what to know, and believe.

Reproofe] Of error and false opinions.

Correction] Of ill behavior.

And instruction] In good behavior.

Verse. 17. That Verisimile est Apostolum respicere ad illud, quod in V. T.
Prophetae peculiariter vocabantur viri Dei. 1 Samuel 9. v. 5. 1 Reg. 17. v. 18.2.
Reg. 4. v. 7 Gerh. Quod si scriptura sacra doctoribus sufficit, quidni
sufficiat auditoribus? Scultetus.
the man of God] Meaning not any man, but the Minister, 1 Timothy 6.11. 1 Cor.
4.1. Yet not one particular person, but the whole calling.

May be perfect, thoroughly furnished] That is, sufficiently instructed to
execute all the parts of his office.

Bellarmine, and Andradius, make themselves merry here, and say that the word
profitable never notes sufficiency; but the same Greek word is used, 1 Timothy
4.8. for sufficient.

The Scripture is so profitable, that a Doctor of the Church may thence
confirm the true doctrine, and confute false; may instruct and mend his
manners, and be made wise to obtain salvation; therefore it is perfect. That
which contains all things necessary, contains a sufficient doctrine.
Classicus hic locus est, ex quo Scripturae perfectio contra Pontificios
demonstratur. Gerh. in loc.

But Estius says the Apostle here speaks only of the old Testament; for
Timothy could not from his Childhood know the Books of the New Testament,
since they were not then extant. To that we answer with Calvin, that for the
substance there was nothing added; for the Apostles writings are but an
explication of the Law and Prophets, together with an exhibition of the things.
And if the Old Testament alone were profitable for all these ends, then much
more now is the whole Scripture, the new being also added.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. I Charge thee therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing] As if he should say,
Hildersam.
Thou can never answer it unto God, and unto Jesus Christ at the day of
judgment, if thou do it not.

Verse. 2. Huc pertinet ista terribilis obtestatio; scilicet ut officium
praedicationis, ac coetera quae sunt hominis Dei munia, dil^genter and
constanter exequatur. Estius. Quibus verbis significat, multis stimulis opus
esse ad nos impellendos ut in recto cursu progrediamur. Calvinus.
When the Apostle foretells, that in these latter times men should have
itching ears, he prescribes to Timothy this remedy to cure it, preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long suffering and doctrine, as if he should say, teach diligently, zealously,
profitably; using not only doctrine, but application, grounding thy
exhortations, and reproves, substantially upon sound doctrine. Hildersam.

Stand much upon it, id est, (...) operi, instanter age quod agendum est.
Estius. Saint Austen expounds it in a word, opportune volentibus, importune
nole^tibus; in season, to the willing, out of season to the unwilling. The
Greek Commentators refer this to the Preacher, when it is commodious, or
incommodious for him; others to the hearer, when he is willing and unwilling.
See Estius.
Preach the word] It is not only a toleration, but a peremptory command.

Be instant] The Greek word signifies, to stand to or over a business; our
English word expresses it fully; to be instant in a business, imports two
things, earnestness, and diligence.

In season] May be understood two ways, 1. It may be taken for the ordinary
set time appointed, and set apart for this exercise, the Lords day, Mark 6.2.
Luke 4.16. Act. 13, 14. and 20.7. 2. At such times and seasons, when the word
may be most acceptable, most profitable unto the hearers.

Out of season] Not in it self or in truth, but in the opinion of men.

This duty of the Ministry, is twice pressed upon them, reprove, rebuke. See
58. Esaias. 1.

Rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering] Titus 1.13. There is a precept to
reprove sharply. Some consider the persons to whom the Apostle writ these
things, the one was Timothy who (they say) was severe and austere, Doctor
Tailor on Titus.
and therefore is exhorted to patience and meekness: the other Titus, who was
gentle and meek of nature; and therefore spurred unto sharpness and severity.
Others draw the difference from the people, over whom they were set; the
Cretians were hard and refractary, full of bad qualities the Ephesians among
whom Timothy was sent, were of some better temper, and disposition: and
therefore were to be mildly dealt withal.

Verse. 5. Do the work of an Evangelist] Hanorisica officij mentio tam ad ^um
animandum quam ad commendandam aliis ejus authoritatem valet: quorum utrunque
spectavit Paulu^. Calvinus. Hoc est, ita parts omnes Ministerii tui exequere,
ut omnes intelligant te rem seriam agere and in Evangelij Praedicatione proram
and puppim salut^ humanae positam esse. Scultetus.
That is, which is worthy of an Evangelist, therefore say some, Timothy must
needs be an Evangelist; and so no Bishop.

Some by the name of an Evangelist, signify in general a Preacher of the
Gospel; but these are rather meant says Calvin, which the Apostle used as
companions in executing, their office, Act. 21.8. Ephesians. 4.11. As if he had said,
do thou Timothy that which becomes thee in thy place and calling, faithfully
and with conscience, for I have so done in my place and calling; I have done my
duty conscionably and faithfully; and stood against all opposition to the
contrary, and now I am ready to be offered as a drink offering, Phil. 2.17.
and to depart this life; though Estius oppose this. Immolor ac libor more
sacrificii, Metaphorae ratio a sacrificiis V. T. ducta, quibus addebantur olim
libamina. Gerh. in loc. Vide plura ibid. Vide Calvinum and a Lapide.

Verse. 7. J have fought a good fight] (...), Certamen illud praeclarum certavi,
Beza. I have fought that excellent fight, a fight by wrestling; the Apostle
uses this Metaphore also, 1 Cor. 9.25. He adds this partly for his own
comfort, and partly to provoke Timothy to imitate him.

I have finished my course] As the first Metaphore was taken from a stout
Champion, so this is taken from a strong runner. He compares himself to those
which run in a race, which Metaphore he also uses and joins it with the
former, 1 Cor 9 24.26

I have kept the faith] This third Metaphore is taken from a brave Soldier, he
was faith^ull to his General, 1 Cor. 4.2.

Verse. 8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of righteousnesse] As if he had
said, I have finished my course, and done my duty in my place; Metaphora
militu^ and cursorum, quibus corona praemii loco solet proponi. Estius. Corona
ut scribit Carolus Paschalius de coro^a, signat absolutionem, con^ummationem,
perfectionem, and evinciendo capiti destinatur, quae eminentissima and
absolutissima pars est totius humanae compaginis. Corona est, ultra cujus
excellentiam mortalium vota non extenduntur. Hinc summu^ omnium praemiorum sunt
Coronae Hinc est, quod coronare quandoque est remunerare, and corona
remuneratio. Corona denique non qualecunque praemium notat* sed praemium
victoriae, hoc est, pugnando, vincendo partum. Ubi durior pugna, ibi gloriosior
est victoria, inquit Severus Sulpitius in Dial. Scultetus in loc.
and hereby I know and am assured that henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
righteousness.

Verse. 10. Having loved this present world] The word signifies, Mr. Fenner.
Vide Calvinum Bezam and Grotium.
and so other translations render it, he embraced this present world, that is,
the affections of his heart had a sympathy with it, as the Ive with the Elm,
he embraced it.

Verse. 13. The Cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus] Jerome, Chrysostom and
Theophylact say it was a kind of garment for a journey, which he used when it
was raignie weather, or the season cold; Paul therefore being in prison, and
the weather cold, Menoch. de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 7.
and he unwilling to be burdensome, being content with his poverty, he caused
that garment to be brought him which he wore in cold weather.

But especially the Parchments] Which may appear to be Note-bookes of his own
making; the Syriacke translateth it falciculum voluminum, Mr. Hildersam,
the bundle of writings folded up together; for they used then Parchment to
write in, as we do Paper now. So Gerhard and others.

Verse. 14. Alexander the Copper-smith did me much evill] This Alexander is
conceived to be the man of whom we read, Per (...) inte^liguntur schedae
pelliceae, in quibus Paulus quaedam scitu digna ad juvandam memoriam
annotaverat, unde velut de iis singulariter solicitus dicit, Maxim membranas.
Estius and Gerh. in loc.
Act. 19.32. that stood to Paul when he was in that danger at Ephesu^; there he
had like to have lost his life for appearing on his side. So Calvin. Others
doubt whether this Alexander be the same with him mentioned 1 Timothy 1.20. Vide
Estium.

Verse. 15. For he has greatly with-stood our word] Not us but our words, our
Preaching; for the one is but a personal persecution and against charity; the
other a doctrinall offense, and against piety and so more heinous.

Verse. 17. And I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion] That is, out of
the mouth of Nero say Beza a Lapide. Dr. Hall. Vide Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 2.
c. 22.
some so called for his power and cruelty, because he horribly persecuted the
Christians. Or as some (taking it for a proverbiall Proverbialiter dictum pro e
summo discrimine, and usurpatur ubi alicui ex insperato salus obtigit. Nam quem
leo ore prehenderit quasi extra spem esse liberationis legitur Psalm. 22.22.
Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 3.
speech, noting any eminent danger) I was delivered from the extremest hazard
of death; even as a man rescued out of a Lions mouth, and pulled from between
his teeth. So Calvin and Estius.

(...), does not signify properly liberatus sum, as the vulgar has rendered
it, but ereptus sum, for the Apostle does not mean that he was freed from his
bonds, since he was in bonds when he wrote this Epistle, but that he was
snatched out of the present danger which was then feared. Gerh. in loc. ex Estio.

Speeds Chron. l. 6. c. 9. ex Matthew Parker. Archbishop of Caut.
Verse. 21. Linus] This is that Linus, who was after Bishop of Rome, as Eusebius
thinks l. 3. c. 2. Claudia) an English (or rather British) woman went to
Rome, converted by Paul, married a Roman Gentleman, who for his parts was
called Pudens as here, but before called Rufus. It was thought she sent the
Gospel first into England.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to TITUS
CHAP. I.
Hujus Epistolae, quam ad Titum, suum ex genti^itate discipulum, scripsit
apostolus, idem sere argumentum est cum duabus ad Timotheum, prae^ertim cum
priore. Nam sicut Timotheum Asiae minore praesecerat, ita Titum Cretae
celeberimae and amplissimae insulae, quae nunc vulgo Candia vocatur. Erat
itaquo uterque de ijs quae ad regimen Eccliasticum pertinerent, etiam per
literas instruendus. Quod autem multo brevius ad Titum scribat, quam ad
Timotheum, ea ratio reddi potest, quia Titus ut aetate provectior, ita and
Ecclesiastic rebus gerendis erat exercitatior: Timotheus autem junior, atque
recentior; ideoque pluribus informandus. Estius.
THis Epistle is by the learned, called Epitome Paulinarum Epistolarum, an
Abridgement of all Paul's Epistles, it is fraught with such variety of precepts
fitted to all sorts, sexes, ages and conditions of men, as whatsoever he has
in all his Epistles more largely handled, he seems summarily to have reduced
the same into this one.

This Epistle contains three parts, 1. The salutation in the four first
verses. 2. The narration or proposition of the matter of it, from the 5. verse
of the first Chapter, unto the end of the eleventh of the third Chapter. 3. The
conclusion, containing some private business enjoined Titus: and the ordinary
salutation of the Apostle.

(...), ante tempora saecularia. Non ab aeterno, sed ante multa saecula.
Grotius.
Verse. 2. Promised before the world began] Or rather from the beginning of
ages, viz. in that famous promise of the blessed seed, Genesis 3.

Estius Quia promittentes constituunt dare quod promittunt; hinc apostolus
abusus est vocabulo promissionis, pro de creto seu praedestinatione: ut sit
sensus, Deum ab aeterno praeordinasse, and constituisse dare electis vitam
aeternam. Estius.
and a Lapide interpret promised by purposed; he says the same here (says a
Lapide) that he does 2 Timothy 1.9. God promised, that is decreed to promise
before the world began; and in due time has made the promise manifest in the
word preached. Doctor Tailor.

It seems somewhat harsh to interpret the word promised, by decreed to
promise: and therefore it is better M. Ball of the Covenant. Vide Mede in 14.
Apoc. v. 6.
to refer it to the promise made from the beginning of the world.

This promise was made to Christ (say some Mr. Goodwin on 6. John 37. Vide
Hieron. and Bezam. in loc.
) A promise is more then a purpose. A purpose may be in ones self, as Ephesians.
1.9. but a promise is made to another.

Verse. 5. Set in order] Supereorrigeres, so Jerome translates it, noting the
emphasis of the praeposition added; whatsoever is corrected is imperfect; and
some things were corrected by me before, yet not fully redressed; those things
therefore which are wanting to perfection, do thou proceed to correct, and set
in order.

The word properly signifies a continual and instant straighning of things
which grow crooked in the Church. Doctor Tailor.

And ordain Elders in every City Jn singulis civitatibus, sive oppidatim; haec
enim insula quondam dicta est (...), quod centum habuerit oppida.

Vrbibus inclytae centum Creta ideo dicta a Craiis Hecatompolis olim. Mantuanus.


] Jdest, per singulas civitates. (...), Acts 14.23. in every Church. Estius.

Verse. 6. Unruly children] (...), a metaphor taken from untamed headstrong
beasts, that will not be brought under the yoke. Obstruere prorsus intendit
haereticorum ora, qui nuptias damnant. Chrysostom.

The Apostle would by the society of marriage and Priesthood stop the mouths
of Heretics that condemned marriage.


The word therefore is fitly translated unruly, and is answerable to the Hebrew
phrase given to disobedient children, viz. sons of Belial, Deuteronomy. 13.13.
Hieron absque jugo, sons without yoke.

Verse. 7. For a Bishop must be blamelesse] Since the Apostle prosecuting the
same argument uses the name of Bishop and Presbyter indifferently in the same
sense (as Jerome and Calvin in loc. observe) thence some infer that there is
no difference between them. By the name Bishop he means those whom before he
called Elders; Locus hic abunde docet, nullum esse Episcopi and Presbyteri
discrimen, quia nunc secundo nomine promiscue apellat quos prius vocavit
Presbyteros. Calvinus. vide B^zam.
and throughout the New Testament it is indifferently given to all teaching
Elders, that is, Pastors and Ministers; and so is here to be taken. A title Dr.
Tailor in loc. I conceive it to be as clear as if it were written with a Sun
beam, that Presbyter and Bishop are to the Apostles one and the same thing, no
inequality or difference of Office, power or degree betwixt the one and the
other, but a mere identity in all. It is true Jerome says, Quid facit excepta
ordinatione Episcopus quod non facit Presbyter? but in the same place he proves
from Scripture that Episcopus and Presbyter are one and the same; and therefore
when he appropriates ordination to the Bishop, he speaks of the degenerated
custom of his time. Mr. Hendersons answer to the Kings papers. See the Divines
answer to the Kings Papers at Newport.
well known in the Apostles days in the Tongue then commonly used, to betoken
a painful Office, and a diligent labor; borrowed from such as are set in the
Watch-towers of Cities or Camps, to epsy, and by a loud voice, or sound of a
Trumpet, or otherwise by a Bell or Warning-piece, to discover and signify the
approaching of the enemy: for such were properly called ((...)) Bishops, or
Watchmen. It is attributed to the Pastors and Teachers of the Church; not only
the great Pastor and Archbishop of our souls, 1 Pet. 5.4. and the Apostles,
Acts 1.20. but the other Pastors and Teachers. And the word must be thus needs
generally taken in the New Testament, as appears Phil. 1.1. where the Apostle
writes to many Bishops in one City, Philippi. and Acts 20.28. speaks to many
Bishops in one City of Ephesus.

Not self-willed] One that pleases himself in his own mind and will; will
have his own way. (...) ex origin est sibi placens, (...), explicante in
magnis moralibus Aristotele. Latini veteres quidam hoc loco protervum vertunt.
Grotius.


Verse. 8. A lover of good men] Or good things. Estius would have it rather
referred to persons, because so it agrees better with the words going before.
Hospital but to good men, Quasi diceret Apostolus, amatorem hospitum sed
honorum. See Beza. These two are never to be abstracted one from another; for
good men are to be loved for their goodness; and whosoever loves goodness,
loves good men; yet of these two the context seems to favor the latter, a
lover of good men; for the Apostle would have the Minister harborous to good
men. Dr. Taylour.

Verse. 10. Especially they of the circumcision] That is, the Jews, Vide Bezam.
Jerome on the fourth of Galatians says, Paul knew secular Learning, though not
perfectly, as this place and that in the 17 of the Acts, out of Aratus, and
that 1 Cor. 15.33. out of Menander, show. vide illum. in loc.
as Romans 3 30. Col. 4.11. for Creete had many of the dispersed Jews; see Acts
2. The Apostle (says Dr. Tailor) means not so much the people of the Jewish
Nation, as the Jewish Teachers, the teachers of circumcision, such as are
mentioned Acts 15.5.

Verse. 12. One of themselves, even a Prophet of their own] Epimenides, a Greek
Poet, who was esteemed as a Prophet by the Cretians, Vocat proprium eorum
Prophetam, vel quia omnes Prophetae vates dicuntur, vel quia descripsit vitia
naturaliv gentis suae, quod perinde est ac posteriorum vitia praedicere, quia
vitia nativa parentum fere in posteros derivantur; nisi dicere velimus
Prophetam appellatum, quia scripsit librum de oraculis, and a Cretensibus
habitus tanquam Propheta test Laertio. Immo and Cicero, l. 1. de divin.
Epimenidem illorum catalogo adseribit, qui per furorem sunt vaticinati.
Menochius de Republica Hebraeorum. l. 3. c. 14.
to whom also they sacrificed after his death; therefore called so ironically
by Paul, say some. But since Poets are sometimes called by the Grecians
Prophets (as among the Latins Vates is so used) Calvin takes it here only for
a Teacher. He also hence notes, that they are superstitious which dare take
nothing out of profane Writers. Estius dislikes that he should be called a
Prophet here, because he was a Poet; as if Paul spoke after the manner of the
Heathens, which were wont to call their Peophets Vates, because they thought
them to be acted by some Deity; for elsewhere (says he) viz. Acts 17. he calls
them Poets; He is so called because he was indeed a Prophet and did divine and
answer of events to come; some of whose answers and Oracles are yet extant, and
recorded in Authors; besides that some of the Heathens confess that he was the
chief of those who by fury prophesied of things to come. Dr. Tailor.
but rather Paul calls Epimen^des a Prophet (says he) because he wrote of
Oracles, and professed a knowledge of secret matters. See a Lapide.

The Cretians are always liers] They were so given to lying, that they
occasioned a Proverb among the Heathens, Apud Graecos (...) usurpatur pro
mentiri, and Cretizas adversus Cretenses de en dicimus qui mendaciter agit
subdoleque, contra hominem subdolum and vasrum. Rainold. de lib. Apoc.
praelect. 134. Scultetus in loc. vide Erasm. Adagia.
We may lie with the Cretians, that is, lie with the liers.

Slow-bellies] A proverbiall speech of such as are greedy, and given to their
bellies. So the Syriack interprets it.

Verse. 13. This witness is true] Although Epimenides was a Cretian, that is, a
liar; because he spoke against himself, not for himself, and against his own
Nation, so that his testimony against them was more to be esteemed then
Xenophons, or Plato's speaking for them.

Wherefore rebuke them sharply] Or refute them. Non est increpa, sed argue, hoc
est refelle. Erasm. (...) cuttingly, or precisely, or to the quick. He alludes
to Chirurgions who cut away the dead flesh which festereth corruption in
wounds. So Estius, Dr Tailor, and others.

That they may be sound in the faith] Not the virtue or gift of faith whereby
we believe, but the doctrine of faith, that which we do believe; that is, the
doctrine of the Gospel; Dr. Tailor.
so it is taken Gal. 1.22. It is here opposed to Jewish fables and
commandments of men in the next Verse.

(...).
Verse. 14. Which turn away from the truth] In the word Turn away is a metaphor,
the speech being borrowed from those who turn away their bodies from the things
they dislike; Dr. Tailor.
and here translated to signify an inward loathing and dislike of the truth.

Verse. 15. Unto the pure all things are pure] That is, all things in their own
nature indifferent. Quorum est pura and men's and conscientia rebus adiaphoris
minime polluntur. Lex Mosis ponit discrimen ciborum, ut alii quidem sint puri
and liciti, alii vero impuri and illiciti. Sed hoc discrimen sustulit lex
Christi, qui omnia sine delectu piis concessit 1 Timothy 4.4. Drus. Prove. Class.
1. l. 5.
See 1 Cor. 6.4. and 10.13. Romans 14.20. all such things are free now to be used
in good conscience without scruple, by means of our Christian liberty.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 3. NOt given to much wine] So given as to be a servant, slave, or
vassal to it; Non multo vino servientes. Quasi dicat, a vino in servitutem
redactus and quasi mancipium ebrietatis.
Vulg. He has expressed it significantly; for it is a sevitude and base
condition for the senses of a man to be possessed with Wine, and not to be his
own man, but a slave to Wine.

Verse. 10. Nor purloyning] The Greek word signifies to detain any thing to
ones own self that belongs not to him, Est (...) decerpere ac furtim
detrahere, cum totam rem tollere non ausi, quod servi solent. Sicut Ananias
Act. 5.2. Espencaeus.
and to put it apart to his own use, as Ananias and Sapphira did, Acts 5.6.
where the word is likewise used. This vice in times past was so common among
servants that the Poets use the word fures for servi.

Quid Domini facient audent cum talia fures? Virgil. Eglog. 3. Verse. 12. We
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world] In these
words he concludes our whole duty: live soberly, toward our selves; righteously
toward our Neighbors, and godly toward God.

Haec tria perpetuo meditare adverbia Pauli.
Haec tria sint vitae regula sancta tuae.
Verse. 14. Who gave himself for us] His soul, body, life; it shows the
willingness of his death.

Redeem us] Redeem by a price, ransom, and procure us a complete pardon; us,
Jews and Gentiles.

Purifie] By his word and Spirit, by the application of the doctrine of Christ
and his grace. 1. The word does this by way of example, while it sets out to us
the holiness of Christ. 2. By way of argument, that we should not show our
selves so unkind to him, as sin against him.

Verse. 15. Rebuke with all authority] That is, with a derived ministerial
authority; Christ preached, as having authority in and from himself. Matthew.
7.29.

Let no man despise thee] He should not suffer any to contemn him. Paul does
not speak here to Titus as he did to Timothy, Let no man despise thy youth; 1 Timothy 4.12. Id est, talem te exhibe tum vita tum verbo, qui contemni a nemine
possis. Espencaeus.
whence it is collected that Titus was elder then Timothy. The Greek word here
rendered despise is not the same with that in Timothy.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 5. BY the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost] The
Spirit of God alludes to the practice of all civil people at the birth of a
child; they first wash it from its natural uncleanness: 16. Ezekiel. 4.6.9.
so the Spirit of God cleanses us from our spiritual pollution. Baptism is
sacramentally the laver of regeneration; not by the work wrought, but by the
grace of Gods Spirit by which we are justified, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Verse. 9. But avoid foolish questions and genealogies] Such genealogies as are
not in the word, Cajetan. Stultas quaestiones vocat quae carent rationabili
causa quaerendi, quaeque nihil adserunt aedificationis. Estius. Iudaei a parva
aetate vernacula sui sermonis vocabula penitissimis sensibus imbiberunt, and ab
exordio Adam usque ad extremum Zorobabel, omnium generationes ita memoriter
velociterque percurrunt, ut eos suum putes refer nomen. Hieron. in loc. vide
Espencaeum.
which gender questions that the Scripture does not end and determine.

Foolish questions] That is, unnecessary, idle, of no moment, of no good use to
edification, neither in faith nor love, in conscience nor manners. Dr. Tailor.
And genealogies] here is condemned all that recounting of kindred and pedigree
in all sorts of men, which proceeds from a vain mind, and tends to worldly
pomp, and vainglory. The Jewish Teachers would be much and often in extolling
of their Tribes and kindred.

Verse. 10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition
reject] Or avoid; not as Erasmus Quem Papistae Erat mus quia ulcera eorum
rodit, per convitium nominant. Vide Bezam.
too truly, but bitterly scoffs the Romish practice, Devita, id est, De vita
toll; but reject in an authoritative or judicatory way; not a mere negative
act of refraining company, but a positive act of censure is here meant.
Graviter quasi censoria correctione reprimendi sunt. Calvinus.

Verse. 11. Is subverted] (...). It is as much as if he had said, He is an house
subverted Cottons Bloody Tenet.
or turned upside down, or inside outward, Metaphora sumpta est ab aedificio,
quod non modo aliqua part collapsum est, sed funditus dirutum, ut
instaurationi non sit locus. Calvinus. Estius idem fere habet.
as a house turned off from the foundation.

As a ship Mr. Vines.
turns up her keele; this Greek word is used Deuteronomy. 32.20. a people turned
upside down; or subverted.

Has the fairest side outward; the word is a Metaphor drawn Mr. Cranford on 2 Timothy 2.17.
from foul Linen, as Favorinus, the foul side turned inward; as if he should
have said, such a man, what ever shows he makes, is a naughty man.

Being condemned of himselfe] It is but one word in Greek, (...). Experience
convinces that most Heretics think themselves in the right; Thorndikes
Discourse of the Right of the Church in a Christian State: Chapter 1. Vide Estium.
so far they are from condemning themselves, in their consciences. But they
condemn themselves, by cutting off themselves from the Church, which other
sinners are condemned to by the Church. Fornicator, adulter, ho^acida, per
sacerdotes de Ecclesia propelluntur. Haeretici autem in semet ipsos sententiam
ferunt, suo arbitrio de Ecclesia recedentes: quae recessio, propriae
conscientiae videtur esse damnatio. Hieron. in loc.


Verse. 14. And let ours also learn to maintain good works] The words are, let
them learn to be eminent in good works above others. Dr. Fulke. See
Cartwrights preface to the New Testament.
The Vulgar has it, curent bonis operibus praeesse. The Rhemists brag that
their Translation (which has it, to show forth good works) is the better. We
translate it also to excel, and the Greek signifies all three indifferently.

THese Postscrips in the end of Paul's second Epistle to Timothy, and of that to
Titus, (as learned Beza has well observed) were not found in the most ancient
Greek copies; They are not in the most ancient Parchment Manuscript Greek Copy
of the Bible, which Mr. Patrick Young has to publish.

Subscriptiones illae Apostolicae non sunt: and idcirco neque in Syro, neque in
omnibus Graecis exemplaribus leguntur, sed aliquot post saeculis ex Graecorum
scholiis videntur adjectae: ne dicam, quod haec ad Titum subscriptio Epistolae
ipsi repugnat, quando dicit, Nicopoli scr^ptam Epistolam, cum Paulus. c. 3.12.
Titum accersat Nicopolim. Scultetus. Certum est subscriptiones Epistolarum
numericas ortum traxisse a piis Christianis quibus vel Epistolae ab Apostolis
fuerunt inscriptae, vel qui earundem (...) habuerunt. Tertullianus enim libro
de praescriptionibus adversus Haereses post libri medium testatur, suo adhuc
tempore, quod in tertium a Christo nato seculum incidit, Authenticas
Apostolotum Epistolas fuisse recitatas, sonantes vocem, and repraesentantes
faciem uniuscujusque. Waltheri Centuria Miscel. Theol.


nor yet in the Vulgar Latin translation, no not to this day; these additions
were made some hundred of years after the Apostles. In Ieromes time they were
not extant, as the translation that goes in his name can testify, which has
no such Postscript. Our former and ancient English Translations, though they
have them, yet they are but in a small Character different from the Text, as no
part of it. See Mr. Cudworth on the 6 of the Galatians annexed to Mr. Perkins
on the Postscripts of the several Epistles.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of PAUL the Apostle, to PHILEMON.
IT is a very Rhetorical Plena roboris and lacertorum est tota Epistola, and
singulis ejus verbis mirifica quaedam argumentandi vis latet recondita.
Scultetus.
Epistle. Philemon to whom this Epistle is written was Paul's Disciple, a man
famous among the Colossians, whose house Theodoret witnesses was at Colosse
unto his time. Gaius was the Churches host, he the Churches friend. His
private piety (says Scultetus) is especially worthy of praise, that he had as
it were a certain Church in his house.

Philemon, which signifies a lover, is a fit name for a Master; and Onesimus,
which signifies profitable, V. 11. is a fit title for a servant.

Verse. 3. Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ] The salutation is set down by the matter of it, which he wishes to
them whereof the parts are grace, Fenner.
that is, full favor of God; peace, that is, by a Synecdoche of the special
for the general, all prosperity both of soul and body. 2. By the form, from
God the Father, and from Christ.

Verse. 7. The Bowels Hoc idioma Apostolicum est, ut semper viscera vocet,
volens plenam mentis ostendere charitatem.

Hieron. in loc. Si me habes pro amico, ac proinde rerum tuarum participe.
Grotius.


] This word is thrice used in this Epistle; that is, by an excessive Metaphore,
the inward affections of the Saints.

Are refreshed] A Metaphore drawn from the rest of the body wearied with
travel, or tired and over pressed with some burden; and sweetly applied to
the rest of the affections toyled and turmoyled with grief, and ready to sinck
under the burden of some grievous affliction.

Verse. 17. If thou count me therefore a partner] The words in the original
are, if thou have me a fellow or partaker, that is one in common with thee, as
we are wont to say if you love me do such a thing; yea it has a show of an
obtestation, q.d. Per amicitiam nostram te oro ut illum sucipias. Estius.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle to the HEBREWS.
CHAP. I. Epistola Apostoli ad Hebraeos sacrosancta est and nihil nisi Deum
spirat. Nescio equidem an post Evangelium Johannis ullus novi Testamenti liber,
in quo plus prosundae reconditaeque sit Theologiae. Cunaeus d^ Repub. Heb. l.
3. c. 7.

See Gal. 1.12. Doctor Fulkes answer to Martin.

Vide Grotium.



THe diversity of the style and inscription of this Epistle, and manner of
reasoning, makes some doubt of the writer thereof; and also some thing in the
Epistle, shows it was not written by Paul, as in the beginning of the second
Chapter. The doctrine of salvation was confirmed to us by them that heard it
after it was first spoken by the Lord himself, which seems to agree with the
profession of Luke in the beginning of his Gospel. An ancient Greek Copy
(whereof Beza speaks) leaves out the name of Paul in the Title; and also
diverse Printed Books. Hierome in Catalogo Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum, after
he has recited all the Epistles of Paul, at length he comes to this Epistle:
but the Epistle (says he) which is called unto the Hebrews, is not thought to
be his, for the difference of style and speech, but either written by Barnabas
as Tertullian says, or Luke as some think, or Clement.

But I have in my Treatise of Divinity, proved this Epistle to be canonical,
written in Greek, and probably to be Paul's also.

This Epistle is as it were the Harmony, both of the Old and New Testament; it
shows how Christ was prefigured in the one, and exhibited in the other. It is
the only key to the types of the ceremonial Law, which hold forth the
Priesthood of Christ.

The Apostle writes to the Hebrews, not to fall away from Christianity to
Judaisme, for the persecutions which the Jews their natives brought upon them,
which is the full scope of this Epistle. Thorndike of the Right of the Church
in a Christian State. c. 1.

Nullus est ex sacris libris qui de Christi sacerdotio tam luculenter disserat,
^nici quod morte sua abtulit sacrificij vim dignitatemque tam magnifice
extollat, de caeremoniarum tam usu quam abrogatione uberius tractet: qui
denique before explicet Christum esse finem legis. Calvinus.




The Apostles maine scope in this Epistle to the Hebrews, is to set forth the
nature, and exalt the excellency of Christ's Priesthood.

Verse. 1. God who at sundry times and in diverse manners, spoke in times past
unto the Fathers by the Prophets, etc.] The excellency of the Gospel above the
Law is set down in these three points, 1. God spoke unto the faithful, under
the Old Testament, by Moses and the Prophets, worthy servants, yet servan^s;
now the Son is much better then a servant, verse. 4. 2. Whereas the body of the
Old Testament was long in compiling, Bishop Smith.
much about a 1000 years from Moses to Malachie; and God spoke unto the
Fathers, by starts and fits; one while raising up one Prophet, another while
another; now sending them one parcel of Prophecy or story, then another: when
Christ came all was brought to perfection in one age: the Apostles and
Evangelists were alive some of them, when every part of the New Testament was
fully finished 3. The Old Testament was delivered by God in diverse manners, of
utterance and manifestation, but the delivering of the Gospel was in a more
simple manner, either by the tongues or pens of them that held an uniforme
kind of teaching.

(...), at sundry times] So we translate it, or by sundry parts by piece-meale,
the word will bear both, Plurifariam, id est, pluribus tempo^ibus tempo^e
Abrahami, Isaaci, Jacobi: temporibus Mosis, Josuae, Iudicum: temporibus
Davidis, Salomonis and Prophetarum: ac postremo temporibus Danielis, Aggaei,
Zachariae, Malachiae. Grotius.
and both are consonant to the circumstances of the Text. It signifies
Multiparti^e says Ribera, By many parts, now a part of his will, and then a
part further. Dickson.

(...), and in diverse manners] Or in diverse forms, or similitudes, but the
former is the better, in diverse manners of utterance and manifestation,
sometimes in dark words, sometimes plainly and familiarly, or sometimes by
lively voice, sometime by vision, or dream, or inspiration, or Vrim and
Thummim, by signs from heaven.

Tam veterem quom novum mundum per silium factum esse intelligit. Pareus.
Verse 2. By whom also he made the worlds] There is another world besides this,
see 12. Matthew. 32.11. Heb. 3. Or else it is so called for the variety of times
and ages, and sorts of the creatures, one succeeding another.

Verse. 3. The brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person]
The latter words are an exposition of the former; Mr. Mede.
Image expounding brightness; and person or substance glory.

(...), is the thing which has brightness in it, (...), is that which
receives his brightness from another. Re^ercussus divinae Majestatis, qualis
est solis in nube qui decitur (...). Grotius.
The Greek word signifies somewhat more than brightness, even such a
brightness, as has a luster cast upon it, from some other thing; a fit word
to express the everlasting generation of Christ. The similitude is borrowed
from the Sunnebeames.

The express Jmage] A comparison from the seal of a Ring, the form of which
is imprinted in the Wax.

Purged our sinnes] Some make it a Physic Metaphore, but rather be alludes to
the law of purging sin by sacrifice.

Verse. 9. Therefore God even thy God ba^h anointed thee, with the Oil of
gladness, above thy fellows] This is taken out of 45. Psalm. 7. the Chaldee
Paraphrast and many Rabbines interpret it of the Messiah, Jude per
excellentiam Redemptor n^ster d^ctus est Hebraice Meschiach. sive Messiah,
graece (...), Latin Vnctus. a Lapide. Vnctus fuit Christus supra nos omnes,
quia si^e mensura, nos autem ad certam quisque portionem, prout singulis ipse
distribuit. Deinde nostra causa Vnctus fuit, ut hauriamus omnes ex ejus
plenitudine. Quare ipse Christus: nos ab eo Christiani, quasi rivuli a sonte.
Calvinus.
who as mediator had a fullness of all graces. According to his divine nature,
he had an infinite fullness of grace in his person; according to his humane
nature, he had a fullness of habitual grace: Mary had a fullness of grace; and
Barnabas was full of the Holy Ghost. The fullness of grace in Christ, is
p^enitudo generum and graduum, a fullness of kinds and degrees; the Saints have
fundamental graces, as faith, repentance and the like; yet they may want joy,
p^ace, assurance; but Christ had a fullness of all kinds of graces. Esaias
11.2.2. They have but their measure of grace; Christ had a fullness of grace
for degrees, John 3.34. He had all graces in the most eminent degree, the
spirit of God rested upon him, Esaias 11.2. See Esaias 42.1. The oil wherewith
Christ was anointed, is called the oil of gladness, because the sweet savor
of it gladdeth the hearts of all his Members; that is all true Christians,
which are his fellows, and partners in the annoyting; he was Christ as they
Christians. That word in Psalm. 45.7. translated above may signify more then
thy fellows, prae consortibus tuis, so Tremellius; that is says Mr. Perkins]
Christ's manhood was filled with the gifts and graces of God, both in measure,
number, and degree, above all men and Angels. Or, for his fellows, pro
consortibus suis, so some read it; Christ received not the spirit for himself,
but for his people, John 1.16.

Verse. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirit, etc?] He does not so much ask,
as plainly affirm; for the Hebrews use an interrogation, when they would the
more confirm a thing.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. LEast at any time we should let them slip] That is coldly translat^d,
least we slow. Saint Paul had been a Babe (says Broughtons Epistle to the
Nobility of England. Sic Lament. 4.9. fluxerunt, id est conciderunt. Et hic ne
cadamus vertunt Syrus and Arabs, nec aliter hic sumpsit Chrysostomus and
Graecialij. Sic quae intereunt aquae effluenti comparantur, Job. 20.27. Grotius.
Broughton) if he had thought that all Jerusalems Rabbis could forget upon
what principles he disputed; Ne dilabamur ut aqua quae inutiliter effluit: quae
similitudo exprimitur, 2 Samuel 15.8. Psalm. 58.8. Grot^us. Est Metaphorae, quam
alij sumptam putant a vase perfluente, alij ab aqua effluente. Priori modo,
sensus est; ne audita nobis excidant e memoria; ne simus instar dolij pertusi,
aut rimosi, quod liquorem infusum non retinet. Hunc sensum optare videtur
antithesis quae est inter vocabu^a attendere and effluere. Estius. vide plura
ibid.
or thought that if the Rabbis had embraced the rules and principles, they
could soon forget them. Here Arabiques translate elegantly Na^kitu we fall,
the Syriaque Nabed we perish. Saint Paul's Metaphore was taken from Jeremie.
Lam. 4.9. They that are slain with the Sword, are better then they that are
slain with hunger: which flowed, as peirced by wanting the fruit of the field.
Least we leake it out, like water put into a Colander, or riven dish; some
think it to be a Metaphore from paper that does not bear Ink well, a Charta
Bibula quae scripturam been nos continet. See Pareus.

Verse. 2. If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, etc.] The meaning is
briefly this, if every transgression of the Law was severely punished, how
shall we escape, if we do but neglect the Gospel? See Estius.

Verse 3. If we neglect] Greek disregard, not care for it.

So great Salvation Intelligit doctrinam Christi quae tantae, id est, long
majoris salutis, ac foelicitatis promissiones continet, quam lex vetus
continebat. Estius.
] That is the means of it. So he calls the doctrine of the Gospel,
Metaleptically from the effect (says Pareus) because faith in the Gospel
brings to us eternal Salvation. For the Gospel is the power of God to
salvation, to every believer.

Verse. 9. Should taste death for every man] Or every thing or creature, (...)
pro omni. Quod utrum accipiendu^ sit ut neutrius generis, pro omni re seu
creatura; an ut masculini pro omni homine, non liquet. ^t neutrum acceperunt
Origenes, Ambrosius and Theodoretus; ut Masculinum Chrysostomus, ac caeteri
fere omnes. Quod and Syrus interpres sua versione expressit, addens, homine.
Estius vide plura ibid.
who all these be the context Doctor Tailor on Titus.
shows. 1 Sons that must be led unto glory, v. 10. 2. Christ's brethren, v.
11. 3. Such Children as are given of God unto Christ. v. 13. See Pareus.

Some Protestant Divines urge this Scripture to show that Christ dyed for all,
though not equally for Judas, as for Peter. Some distinguish thus, they say
Christ is sufficiens remedium, there is virtue enough in Christ, but not
sufficiens medium, because besides the work of Christ, there is required faith
to apply it, Mark 16.16.

By tasting death he means dye. see Matthew. 6.28. John 8.52. Whencesoever the
Metaphore is taken, whether from those which drink poison, or rather from the
taste of those things which are bitter and unpleasing.

Verse. 14. Destroy him that had the power of death] (...), That he might make
Satan unprofitable, idle, and fruitless, as the word is used, Luke 13.7. Romans
3.3. The Devil has the power of death in a double respect, He has not
imperium Principis, he cannot take men to death when he will, but Carnificis. a
Lapide.
1. As he has the power over sin, 2 Timothy 2. ult. 2. As an executioner, Luke
12.20. Job. 33.23.

Verse. 15. And deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life
time subject to bandage] Every unregenerate man is subject to the fear of
death. 1. Because all the comforts of this life forsake him then. 2. All his
parts and accomplishments shall be taken away. 3. His hopes dye. 4. His
conscience shall then be awake, this is the worm. 5. Must go to God to give an
account, whom he has no interest in. 6. All offers of grace shall be at an end
Vide Grotium.

Verse. 16. For verily be took not on him the nature of Angels] The word in the
original (...), He takes not hold of Angels.(...), apud Platonem and altos
est solemniter vindicare. Hic autem ex superioribus intelligendum est vindicare
sive asserere in libertatem manu injecta. Sic somitut. Luc. 23.26. Act. 23.19.
Sic infra 8.9. solent autem manu apprehendi qui e servitute aut vinculis
educuntur. Grotius. Verbum Graecum non simpliciter assumere aut accipere
significat, sed apprehendere, vindicare, manum injicere in rem aliquam;
vindicantur autem qui in libertatem asseruntur. Estius.
signifies properly to take a man with thy hand, either to lead him some
whether, or to uphold him thereby to help him. See Matthew. 14.13. Mark 8.23. and
Luke 9.47. and 14.4. Hence figuratively it is translated, to signify
succouring, or helping. For when we would help one from falling, or sinking
under some burden, or would raise him being fallen, then we put our hand to
him, and take hold of him.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. PArtakers of the heavenly calling] It is so called not so much for
that the Author, See Phil. 3.14.
means and manner are heavenly, but because the State whereto we are brought
is heavenly and glorious. Doctor Sclater.

Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession Christ Iesus] The
Greek word signifies magno studio mentem in rem intendere. Quia ad
supercaelestia n^s ducit, non ad terrenam possessionem ut lex Mosis. Grotius.
4. Ephesians. 11.
To show that Christ has the eminency of the chief offices in the Old and New
Testament, these words are used. The High Priest was the highest office in the
Old Testament, and Apostle in the New. He calls him here the Apostle (...), he
is the chief of the Apostles.

Our profession] That is of the Gospel which we profess, because he is the
Author and Doctor of the same. Perkins. Quidam sic exponunt: Quem nos
apostolum and pontificem confitemur. Alij sidei seu doctrinae, quam nos
profitemur. Quae est Graecorum interpretatio eademque germanior. Estius.


Verse. 2. Who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was
faithful in all his house] Not in giving as full and exact directions for all
particulars, concerning the worship of God, Because in the least thing that was
done about the making of Gods house, he precisely followed the direction that
God had given him, as it is expressly noted of him, Exodus
40.16.19.21.23.25.27.29.32. Hildersam on 51. Psalm.
and government of the Church of the New Testament, as Moses did in his time
for the Church of the Old Testament; for there is not such a particular and
exact form of worship or Church government drawn, as we see in the Law, but
herein stands Christ's faithfulness, that he has as fully revealed unto us the
doctrine of the Gospel, as Moses did that of the Law; and that he has
faithfully performed, and fulfilled all the types of himself, and all the
things signified by Moses ceremonies, as Moses has faithfully and distinctly
set them down. See Pareus.

Gloriatio de spe vitae and gloriae aeternae certo ob tinendae. Pareus.
Intelligitur spes illa laeta, nempe vitae aeternae sub illis legibus sub quibus
a Christo promissa est. Grotius. Vide Estium.
Verse. 6. The rejoicing of the hope] That is the doctrine of the Gospel,
whereby these are dispensed and confirmed.

Verse. 12. Take heed brethren least there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief in departing from the living God] He shows five degrees of Apostasy:
the first is, consenting unto sin, being deceived with the temptation of it.
The second is, hardness, of heart upon many practices of sin. Thirdly, Mr.
Perkins.
the heart being hardened becomes unbelieving, and calls the truth of the
Gospel into question. Fourthly, by unbelief it becomes evil, having a base
conceit of the Gospel. Fifthly, this evil heart brings a man to Apostasy, and
falling from God, which is the extinguishing of the light of the Gospel.

An evil heart is a great evil, First, from the nature of it, 1. it is an
inward evil; a seizes on the most principal part of man, the soul; 3. an
inveterate evil, we brought it with us into the world; 4. an insensible evil.
Secondly in the effects, 1. It indisposeth us to all good. 2. It is the root of
other evils, Matthew. 15.19 3. makes a man unfit to live or die.

Verse 13. Exhort one another while it is called to day] When you commit a
sin, you think if you stay a week, a fortnight, or a month, you shall come
in as well as at the first; no, says the Apostle, while it is to day come in,
do it presently, Dr. Preston.
for sin will deceive you, it will harden your heart before you be aware.

Through the deceitfulness of sinne] That is, deceitful sin, an hyppalage,
Prove. 14.8. Ephesians. 4.22. Romans 7.11. 1. It has its original from the subtle
Serpent Satan the grand Impostor. 2. It is the cause of all the deceit, guile,
and falsehood that is in this world, Psalm. 54.20, 21. Acts 13.10. 3. Sin is in
its own nature deceitful, Familiare scripturis est, ut peccatum, seu
concupiscentia dicatur homines seducere, decipere, abstrahere and allicere, ut
Romans 7. Dan. 13. Jacob. 1. Id autem dicitur per quandam Prosopopeiam, quatenus
homo tentatione aliqua, velut suasione sollicitus and inductus, peccato
consentit, quasi ab ipso peccato persuasui. Fit autem miro modo, ut dum cor
emollitur delectatione peccati, paulatim obdurescat adversus praecepta Dei.
Estius.
every error in opinion and evil in practice proceeds from deceit; the mind
is deluded in the first with a show of truth, and the will in the second with
the appearance of goodness. Rather to believe then practice; the Apostles
proper meaning is, the deceitfulness of sin in matter of believing.

Verse. 14. If we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast to the end]
(...), the first act of faith, whereby we began to subsist in Christ. Vocabulum
(...) de imperperfectione nostra nos monet: ut quotidie proficere studeamus;
vox (...) dubitationem Papisticam excludit, certitudinem salutis nobis
confirmat. Conditio adjecta studium perseverantiae in nobis excitat. Paraeus.


Verse. 17. Whose carcasses fell in the wildernesse] The Vulgar renders it
cadavera. (...) properly signifies members. The Syriack has rendered it ossa
bones. Vide Estium.
Because those unbelievers lie prostrate in the wilderness, therefore a great
multitude of their bones lie dispersed in the wilderness.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 2. BUt the word preached did not profit them] Profiting may be taken
here for the truth of grace, or for growth in grace; men cannot grow in grace
that have no grace; John 5.25.
but the word works true faith on that person which came to it without any
true grace or faith at all.

Not being mixed with faith in them that heard it] The word signifies as if we
should say, such a potion did not good, because they had not such an
ingredient. See Dickson.
An exceeding strong, drink not tempered and qualified profits not nature; so
those great promises, so much exceeding opinion and expectation of reason, not
being mixed with faith, did not profit them.

He compares the heart to a vessel, in which there must be both the word and
faith; these two must be mingled together, and then it will be a word of power,
life, and salvation. Perkins. Fides hic comparatur partibus humani corporis per
quae fit digestio, and cibus in succum vertitur. Ita Lucas medicus ex art
medica voces sumperit. Grotius.


Verse. 9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God] A Sabbatisme,
as Calvin and Beza render it. In this Chapter is mentioned a threefold rest: 1.
In Heaven, Verse. 1. 2 A rest of Canaan, Ver. 5, 8. 3 The rest of the h^ly
Sabbath. Ver, 9.
That is, the keeping of the day of rest, (though it be commonly rendered rest)
he forbeares to use the same Greek word for rest, which he used both before and
after. Estius and others take it here for a celestial rest, and bring the next
Verse to confirm their opinion. See Rev. 14.13.

Verse. 12. For the word of God is quicke] Or living; 1. Formally in its own
nature, in that it abides for ever, Id est, Ag^s perpetuo ut ea quae vivunt.
Convenit hoc verbo Dei, sed praecipue Evangelico. Psalm. 105.9. and 107.20. and
147.15, 16. and 40.8. and 55.2. 1 Pet. 1.22.23, 24.
in regard of the sense and matter contained therein, not as it is written in
Paper. 2. Efficiently, and that in these respects: 1. It gives life at the
first, it is appointed by God as the instrument to beget the new life of grace
in us, James 1.18. John 17 17. the savor of life. 2. It increases spiritual
life, 1 Pet. 2. 3. It directs and teaches us the way to eternal life, John 5.

Piercing even to the dividing ^sunder of s^ule and spirit] That is, the whole
man. It works not only upon the inferior faculties, which are less pure,
but upon the purest and most supreme part of the soul; for the word pierces
as far as the eye of the Auth^r of it, to whom all things are naked and open.

Grotius.
And of the joints and marrow] By the joints he means the minima, the least
things; and by the marrow the intima, the most secret and inward things.

A discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart] (...), a Critic
Direbantur critici nomine etiam a Latinis usurpato, homines acris judicii, qui
de libris, aut versibus, aut aliis aliorum operibus censere poterant, ac
discenere quid probum; quid reprob^m, item quid genuinum, quid vero spurium ac
supposititium. Quales in censendis Homeri versibus, Aristarchus and
Aristophanes Grammatici memorantur. Estius.
, a curious Judge, and observer.

(...) rendered thoughts, are properly the secret and inward workings of
passions and affections: (...) intents, are the secret and first workings of
men's understandings and apprehensions.

Verse. 13. Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight]
Neither is there any creature which is not manifest in the sight thereof; so
some read it, and the Greek will very well bear it, viz. of the word, and
understanding by creature such thoughts intents and notions as are framed in
the heart, which may be termed the creatures of the heart. Heron. See Dikes
deceitfulness of the heart. p. 10.
This interpretation holds good correspondence with the Greek, the scope of the
place, and the Analogy of faith.

But all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to
doe] (...) naked as when the skin is pulled off; and (...) opened, as the
intrailes of a Sacrifice cut down the back.

He uses a metaphor taken from a sheep whose skin is taken off, and he hanged
up by the neck with his back toward the wall, A speech borrowed from the
Priests under the Law, who when they killed the beast, all things that were
within the beast were laid naked before the Priest, and he saw what was sound
and what corrupted. Weemes.
and all his intrailes laid bare, and exposed to open view. He alludes to the
Anatomizing of a creature (say some) wherein men are cautious to find out
every little Vein or Muscle, though they be never so close. They are naked,
therefore God sees their outside; and opened, dissected, quartered, and cleft
asunder through the backbone, so that he sees their inside also. Opened is more
then naked; naked is that which is not clothed, or covered: opened is that
whose inwards are discovered and made conspicuous.

That is, not able to sympathize with, or pained with our infirmities.
Verse. 15. Cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities] The original
word is purely Greek, as there are many in this book; it is used also 10.34.
and no where else.

Was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sinne] That is, say
some, was never temped to sin, as Matthew. 15.38. but the Apostle here comforts
the people of God against sinful temptations, Christ was tempted to sin, but
not into sin.

Verse. 16. Let us goe] Because our Mediator is God, as in Ch 1. he is able to
reconcile God to us, and procure grace for us. 2. Man, Heb. 2.14. and our high
Priest, Verse. 14.

Come boldly] So as to speak all our mind. The word signifies to speak all, or
speak with hope and confidence.


Vs] Generally all Christians; in the Law only the High Priest might come, and
that once a year; we may now come at any time when we have need.

Unto the Throne of grace] The Cherubims or Mercy-seat was a Type of the Throne
of grace.

That we may obtain mercy] viz. From God, by our High Priest, and Intercessour.

Find grace] In the original, receive grace; not to earn, purchase or deserve
it.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 2. WHo can have compassion on the ignorant] The word signifies to
apportion his compassion, or to compassionate them as much as they need. (...)
declarat indolem quae ad commiserationem sit prona, quanta opus est. Beza. Qui
quantum satis est miserari possit. Id. ib.


Verse. 6. Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedec]
Melchizedek signifies a King of righteousness, and Salem signifies peace.
Heb. 7.2, 3. Christ was a King of righteousness and peace.

Verse. 7. Who in the days of his flesh] That is, when having our weak and
frail nature he lived with us here, for so the word flesh is to be taken;
Beza. vide Grotium.
least any should think that he put off his flesh.

When he had off^red up prayers and supplications] The first word is nomen
generis, the second signifies something more, most submissive prayers. Preces
generale nomen est, supplicationes autem supplicum preces sunt, cum qui orat
objicit se ad pedes, aut genu tangit ejus quem erat. Significatur ergo magnus
affectus, and humilitas Christi precantis. Estius.


And was heard in that he feared] And yet we see the Cup did not pass from
him, Perkins. Preston.
because he was strengthened to bear it.

First, Christ did not ask deliverance from death absolutely, Mr. Ball. Est
contracta locutio, frequens and Hebraeis and Graecis. Sensus est in hoc
exauditus fuit ut ab isto metu liberaretur. Grotius.
but adding this condition, if it be thy will O Father.

Secondly, he was not delivered from suffering, but had strength and power
given him, whereby his manhood was made able to bear the heavy burden of Gods
indignation.

Verse. 8. Yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered] That is, he
showed obedience more then, then before. Not as if Christ were to go to
school to learn; Mr. Hildersam. Alludit ad Proverbium Graecum; (...), quales
sententiae and cum simili (...) sunt ferme in linguis omnibus; sensus est,
expertus est in tantis tentationibus quam sit arduum Deo obedire. Grotius.
or as if by certain acts he were to fit himself for obedience; he did not
learn that which he knew not before, but did that which he did not before; he
then was put to the trial of his obedience.

Verse. 9. And being made perfect] His perfection was declared, and his
Mediatorship accomplished in the things that he suffered.

He became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him] This
is to be understood both of the obedience of faith, which is the principal,
John 6.29. and also of our new obedience. B. Down. of Justification. l. 7. c. 7.

Verse. 11. And hard to be uttered] To be interpreted; Greek, to be fitted in
the utterance or expression of them to your capacities.

Seeing ye are dull of bearing] Or rather slow, or slothful, according to the
Greek; that is, averse from taking pains, that you may be able to hear with
understanding. There is a twofold dullness in the people in hearing; 1. Some
are dull in the letter, so the high way ground. 2. To the Spiritual sense.

Verse. 14. But strong meat belongs to them that are of full age] To those
that are perfect; so it ought to be translated, and so it is in the original.

Even those who by reason of use] (...), by an habitual use or long custom.
Dr. Preston.
The old translation by reason of custom, Propter habitum. Beza.
and the new by reason of use; but neither is so full as the original, by
reason of habit.

Have their senses exercised to discern both good and evill] The word properly
signifies such an exercise as Wrestlers or such as contend for victory do use,
(...). Vulg. Reddidit, sensus exercitatos. Sed Graecum proprie significat
organa sensuum ut sunt oculi, aures. In nominibus (...), est elegans
paranomasia. Comprehendit autem nomine boni and mali etiam verum and falsum in
doctrina Christiana. Gerh. in loc.
which is with all their might and strength, being trained up unto it by long
exercise.

That is, he that has this true wisdom, he has such a distinguishing faculty,
that as the taste discerns of meat, or as a man that is accustomed to taste
Wine can easily discern between good and bad; so, by a certain wisdom that is
unfused into him, he is able to discern between good and evil, even as the
senses do (for that is the scope of the place) between color and color,
taste and taste; there is an ability in the perfect to discern between good and
evil.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 2. OF the doctrine of Baptismes] Among the principles of Christian
Religion that were first taught unto the Christians of those times, See my
Prolegomena to my Treatise of Divinity for the opening of these two first
verses. Vide Bezam and Grotium. Baptismi tantum mentio fit, coena Domini
omissa. Quod ideo factum existimatur, quia ut ex multorum veterum scriptis
liquet, catechumenis olim doctrina de caena hac non proponebatur. Imo neque cum
peragenda illa esset, interesse permittebantur ut illius actionem spectarent.
Zepperus de Sacramentis.
the doctrine of Baptismes is one; that is, the doctrine of the Sacraments;
figuratively putting one for both; and perhaps the plural number is used
because it has a double washing and not a single; even the outward washing of
the outward, and an inward washing of the inward man. Calvin thinks he means
the solemn rites, or set days of baptizing.

Verse. 4. For it is impossible for those which were once enlightned] That is,
say some, very difficult; as it is impossible but that scandals should come,
and so they would take it in that place, to deceive if it were possible the
elect; but the reason given why they c^nnot be restored, because of their
crucifying of Christ again, argues an impossi^ility, not indeed of it self,
but by the just judgment of God upon them. All who hold falling from grace
bring this place as a main support of the cause, and therefore understand this
of the truly godly; but the Orthodox answer, If these were godly, it was only
an hypothesis propounded, this condition puts nothing in being; it is only
propounded conditionally, and by way of admonition, which is an effectual
means of keeping them from falling. 2. They deny these to be truly godly, they
were only close hypocrites.

Enlightened] Have been baptized. So Heb. 10.32. the Syriack, Arabic, and
Aethiopick render it; and so some of the Greek Fathers expound this word,
because adulti were not baptized till they had been catechized, Quod Graece est
(...), sive illuminati, hoc Syrus vertit baptizati, and Justinus Martyr Apolog.
2. atque alii baptisma vocant (...). Itaque omnes pene veteres hinc probant
baptismum posse iterari: ut Ambrosius, Epiphanius, Hieronymus, Augustinus,
Cyrillus and alii. Rectius Anselmus, Lyranus, Hugo, alii, qui verba ista
intelligunt de blasphemia in Spiritum Sanctum, quae non remittetur in hoc
seculo neque in futuro. Vossius disputat. 17. de Baptismo. 2.
and sufficiently instructed in the faith; rather inwardly enlightened in the
mind, had a great measure of illumination in the mysteries of the Gospel; men
cannot sin against the Holy Ghost without a measure of illumination.

And have tasted of the heavenly gift] or Supercelestiall gift. It is one thing
to drink or eat, says Gregory, another to taste, Matthew. 27.34. men may taste
that which they spit out again; Jonathan did, but taste the Honey.

The heavenly gift] That is, Christ, who is called the gift of God, John 4.10.
See John 6.38, 50.

And were made partakers of the Holy Ghost] That is, the common gifts of it.
Calvin. A Hypocrite may have a disposition to sanctification, have it in fieri
not in facto esse.
Pareus. That is something they have so like sanctification, that both
themselves and others may think them truly sanctified.

Verse. 5. And have tasted the good word of God] Received it with some love and
delight; called good word, because it only reveals Christ, who procures all
good unto all believers. Vide Bezam.

And the powers of the world to come Some understand the gift of miracles in
the Gospell-time, which is the world to come, in respect of the Jewish
pedagogie; rather the wonderful works of the life to come, as glorification
and salvation. A hypocrite may apprehend some excellency of the resurrection,
conceive the manner of the day of judgment.
] Some interpret it of the world under the days of the Gospel, they may have
a taste of the Gospell-ordinances, and privileges. Most refer it to the
world to come; God lets in a glimpse of heaven, 34. Numb. 16, 17. or a flash of
hell upon the conscience.

Verse. 6. If they shall fall away] Altogether, totally, Prolapsi, id est,
prorsus lapsi. Anselme. Not at universalem ab Evangelio defectionem. Calvin.
This place must be compared with Heb. 10. and so it is to be understood of a
wilful malicious Apostasy, not from any temptation, but out of mere hatred to
the truth; so that this place makes nothing for the Novatians which denied
repentance to them that sinned after Baptism. See Grotius.

To renew them again to repentance] If ever they come to repent, they must be
reduced to that former estate, though that be not enough; that is, to have
knowledge and light of mind only, it must be in a more powerful way.

Verse. 7. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it,
and brings forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing from God] All is an allegory; the earth is man, Ier. 22.29. The rain
Gods word, Deuteronomy. 32.2 Amos 7 16. The word is usually in Scripture compared to
rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2. and that in three respects, 1. The rain for its birth is
heavenly, it comes down from heaven, and waters the earth, says the Psalmist;
so the word Heb. 12.25. 2. Free; the rain is freely dispensed, Amos 4.7. So is
the Lord in the dispensation of the word, 3. When it comes, it comes with a
Commission, Esaias 55.10. So the word.
The Herbs are graces, and the blessing is a sweet retribution and
accumulation of mercy.

Blessing from God] Either incrementum, increase of those graces they have
already received (to them that have more shall be given) or maturitatem, when
fruits cease growing in bigness, they grow in ripensse; their graces shall
increase both in regard of greatness and ripeness.

Verse. 10. To forget your work and labor of love] That is, those duties which
out of love to him we perform with labor and striving. Mr. Hildersam.


Verse. 11. To the full assurance of hope] Hope has an eye to the good of the
promise (as faith to the truth of it) the assurance of hope is, that we shall
certainly receive that good.

Verse. 13. Because he could swear by no greater, he swear by himselfe] q. d. If
there had been a greater God, he would have sworn by him.

Verse. 17. The heirs of promise] That is not only such to whom the promises
belong, but such as claim their inheritance by adoption and promise. Doctor
Tailor.


Verse. 18. To lay hold upon the hope set before us] The Greek word rendered to
lay hold, does not signify quomodocunque tenere, (...). Estius. Gerh.
sed ita tenere and complecti ut non patiaris tibi eripi, to hold any way, but
so to hold and embrace a thing, that thou suffer it not to be taken from
thee.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. FOr this Melchisedek King of Salem etc.] There is nothing spoken of
Melchisedek but in Genesis, Genesis 14.
Psalm. 110. and in the 5. Chapter of the Hebrews and this.

(...), non ratione generationis sed ratione commemorationis, quia Scriptura de
eo sic loquitur, ut nec patris nec matris ejus ullam saciat ment^onem. Gerh. in
loc. Non quod tale quod de eo exstet, qui and patrem and matrem and majores
habuit, qui and ipse postremo obiit ut coeteri, sed quod nihil de ipsis
exprimatur. Heinsius. Vide Grotium. Origene says Melchisedek was an Angel,
Jerome consutes that opinion, and says he was Sem, of whose mind are
Epiphanius, Marlorate.
Verse. 3. Without Father* without Mother, without d^scent] This is not spoken
simply, and absolutely, but by a figure; 1. Because the Scripture mentions
not who were his Parents, no more does it Iohs, or the three Childrens. 2.
Because he being a type of Christ, has eternity ascribed unto him by reason of
Christ, who as he is man has no Father; and as he is God has no Mother; and
as he is the eternal God, has no beginning of days. Roberts of Tithes.

Some think that this Melchisedek was Sem the ^ldest Son of Noah; for he was
living when Jsaac was 50 years old; and therefore almost all the days of
Abraham. He was without beginning in the new world, for he was born in the old;
and without end in the old world, because he continued in the new after the
flood.

Constans veterum Hebrae^rum opinio est Melchisedek fuisse Sem filium Noe.
Ribera.

Some Heretics said he was the Holy Ghost Vide Cunaeum de republica Hebr. l.
3. c. 3.
or an Angel.

Nettles answer to the Jewish part of Mr. Seldens History of Tithes. Vide
Alardi Epiphyll. Philolog. c. 7. Graecum proprie significat ex spoliis sive
exuviis ab host detractis, quomodo etiam Graecorum scholia interpretantur.
Gerh in loc. Vide Estium.
Verse. 4. Unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoiles]
(...) properly signifies the chief parts, or top of the heap.

Decimas accepit ab Ab^aham. Beza. Edecumavit Abrahamum. Grotius. Verbum (...),
ac simplex (...) and active usurpatur, pro eo quod est decimas dare, and
passive pro eo, quod est decimas accipere. Gerh. in loc.
Verse. 6. Received tithes of Abraham] In the Greek it is (...), which in plain
English is, he tithed Abraham; and took them of him as his due.

Barlow Bishop of Roch. on 20. of Act. 28.
Verse. 7. And without all contradiction, the less is blessed of the better]
Taking it for the benediction, which is authoritate not devotione; for the
subject may bless the Prince, and man blesses God in hearty devotion, but the
blessing of authority comes from the greater.

Verse. 22. By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better Testament] Christ was
the surety of the first Covenant to pay the debt; of the second Covenant, to
perform the duty.

A better Testament] Not in substance, but in the manner of revealing.

Verse. 24. An unchangeable Priest-hood] It signifies such a Priesthood which
cannot pass from him to any other, (...), quasi dicas in transibile, quod ad
alium transire non potest. Estius.
as the Priesthood of Aaron did Perkins.

Verse. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost] In the
original (...), to the uttermost of time, at all times, and for ever; it must
be referred to the perfection or fullness of time, To all ends and purposes
pe^fectly. Beza. Perpetually or for ever; so Tremel Grynaeus. In a ternum,
Syrus. in perpetuum, vulg. ad plenum, Erasmus. ad perfectum, Stapulensis. quod
Graeca vox proprie significat. Gerh. in loc.
and not of his saving; that is, continually and perpetually, as the latter
words of the verse show.

Seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them] Superintercede, as the
Greek may signify.

Verse. 26. For such an High Priest became us] It was a just and decent thing
that our High Priest should be such a one.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 4. FOr if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest, seeing that there
are Priests that offer gifts according to the Law] That is, as in the times of
the old Testament, if the Priest had only offered a sacrifice, and not gone
into the holy of holies with the blood thereof, sprinkling the mercy seat,
praying and interceding that it might be accepted for the sins of the people,
Mr. Bridge on 2 Heb. 17.
the Priest had not done that work of the Priest, and so he had not been a
complete Priest; so if Christ had only offered up himself here a sacrifice,
and had not gone into heaven, the holy of holies, and carried the power and
virtue of his death thither, to pray and intercede for us, he had not done the
work of the great High Priest.

Verse. 5. Was admonished of God] One word in Greek (...), (...).
signifies to answer as God does men by oracles, Heb. 11.7. and 12.25. So 2
Matthew. 12. (...), being warned of God, as it should have been expressed there.

Verse. 6. He is the mediator of a better Covenant, Ibi vetus and novum
Testamentum non accipitur pro libris veteris and novi Testamenti sed pro
foedere operum and foedere Evangelico. Et meliores promissiones dicuntur quibus
promittebatur vita aeterna sub condition fidei, quam Deus in suis
praestituturas erat, iis quibus cadem quidem promittebatur vita, sed sub ijs
conditionibus quibus homines erant impares; etsi tamen non inutiliter
proponerentur, ut suae imbecillitatis co victi ad Dei miserecordiam
confugerent, eujus promissiones in Christo venturo apprehenderunt Patres, qui
sub lege constituti ad Christi justitiam se converterunt. Rivetus. Isag. See
Cartwright on 11. Romans 4. and on 7. v. Vide Came. Myroth; Evang.
which was established upon better Promises] The promises of the new Covenant
are said to be better in four respects, 1. All the promises of the Law were
conditional, this do and thou shall live; those of the Gospel are absolute,
of grace, as well as to grace. 2. This Covenant promises higher things; here
God promises himself, his Son, his spirit, a higher righteousness, and a
higher Sonship. 3. Because of their stability, those of the old Covenant were
swallowed up in the curse; these are the sure mercies of David. 4. They are all
promised upon our interest in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. This makes the promises
sweet, because they lead us to Christ, the Fountain of them.

Verse. 7. For if that first Covenant had been faultlesse] That manner of
administration of the Covenant of Grace, may be said to be faulty two ways, 1.
As imperfect, dispensed in shadows; their dwelling in the land of Canaan was
to them a type of heaven. 2. As it did not make the person perfect, conveyed
not grace. See 10. verse.

Verse. 9. And J regarded them not] Greek, I did not care for them.

Verse. 10. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,
after those days says the Lord, I will put my law into their mind, etc] In
this verse the Apostle sets down the Covenant of grace: That expression of
writing the Law in the heart shows, 1. That the Law is not in any man's heart by
nature; there is not a principle, and rule of conformity within, Romans 7.9. 2.
The Spirit of God makes use of the Law, to put a suitable disposition into the
heart, to what the Law requires. 3. In Conversion, the Lord puts the whole Law
into the heart; Sumpta est Metaphora a membranis aut tabulis in quibus aut
super quibus aliquid scribitur. Estius.
there is a conformity to the Law in all things. 4. The Lord so puts it there
that he writes it; by which expression he signifies, that it shall for ever
ever abide there. It is an allusion (says Estius) unto the two Tables of the
Law. They were first written by the finger of God, and then put into the Arc;
so God first writes the Law in our hearts, and then puts it in our minds.

Verse. 11. And they shall not teach every man his neighbour] The teaching of
men shall not be laid aside, but they must not depend on it; He gives them
sound and saving knowledge.
the teaching of God shall make it effectual to them. See Estius.

All Gods people, little and great, weak and strong, shall know him; by
knowing is not meant a bare apprehension, and notion of his being and nature,
but a knowledge of acquaintance, a knowing him to be ones God reconciled to him
in Christ, See 2 Cor. 4.6.
so Hos. 2.20.

Verse. 12. For J will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins
and their iniquities will I remember no more] Here are two things, 1. There
conciliation of God with his people, I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, He will be merciful, or propitious, appeased, and pacified
toward them, The Scripture in propounding Gospel privileges, sometimes uses
these three words, as Exodus 34.5. sometimes two. as Jer. 31.34. sometimes but
one, as Ier. 33.8. See Ier. 31.33. and 32.38.39.40. (Where the Covenant is
originally recorded) that God himself does all.
which has respect to the ransom, and satisfaction of Christ. 2. He will
pardon them completely; here are three words, unrighteousness. sins, and
iniquities, to show that he will forgive all kinds, and degrees of their
sins, 1. The number of words implies the number of sins. (...) 2. Some of
these words are of a higher nature; God will pardon the most heinous sins;
God himself undertakes all in the Covenant of Grace, as we may see in the 10,
11. and this 12. v. He will put his Law into our mind, he will be to us a God,
he will teach us, and pardon our sins; Christ is the Mediator and surety of
this Covenant, he undertakes with God, that we shall be his people; and with
us, that God shall be our God. He had three Offices to make good this; all
employed in these three verses Verse. 12. I will be merciful, Or pacified, by
that propitiation the High Priest shall make, there is his Priestly office, v.
11. He teaches his Church outwardly by his word, inwardly by his spirit; there
is his prophetical office, v. 10. He says he will put his Laws in their
minds, there is his Kingly office; he is as King to see that we shall be
obedient to God.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 4. WHerein or in which was the golden Pot that had Manna, and Aarons Rod
that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant] He says that there were three
things laid up in the Arc, the Pot of Manna, Aarons Rod, and the Tables of the
Covenant. Vide Menoch. de Repub. Heb. l. 5. c. 2.
They conceit it well, that say the Arc is the Church, the Tables the word,
the Manna the Sacraments, and the Rod the discipline.

Ob. 1 Kings 8, 9. and 2 Chronicles. 5.10. It is said, there was nothing in the
Arc, (save the two Tables of Stone) Paul says besides these there was Aarons
Rod, and the golden Pot having Manna.

Sol. 1. Which here has relation (say Ribera, Iunius in Parallel. l. 3. Vide
Crotium in loc. See Weems his Christian Synagogue, p. 89.
some) to the remote antecedent, which Tabernacle, not Arc. Pareus says this
is a forced construction. 2. Others Estius. Gerh. a Lapide in loc. Facilia est
hu^^ locorum conciliatio: vrnam and vrgam Aaron Deui jusse at coram Testimonio
repait. Quate probabile est, in arca simul cum tabulis fuisse inclusas. Quum
autem templum extructum est, tunc ordine singula digeruntur. Calv^nus.
say that they were not included in the body of the Ark, but conveniently
placed about it; this seems most probable; for may be interpreted not only
in, but with, near, about, as Judges 18.12. Luke 9.31. and 13.33. and so it may
be rendered, with, or about which, Pareus gives this answer. God Commanded the
two Tables to be placed in the Arc, Exodus 25.21. Deuteronomy. 10.5. He commanded the
Pot of Manna to be kept before the Arc of the Testimony, and there Aaron is
said to have put it, v. 34. Also he commanded Aarons green Rod to be laid
before the Arc for a Sign to the Rebels, Numb. 17.10. And it is
unquestionable that these three were kept in or near the Ark, as long as the
Tabernacle continued. But the Temple being built by Solomon, only the Tables
are said to have been kept in the Ark; the other things being fitly disposed in
the holy place. ^he Apostle therefore having respect to the first disposition,
which was in the Tabernacle, before the Temple was built, relates nothing
strange from the History.

Verse. 7. But into the second went the High Priest alone once every year, not
without blood which be offered for himself* and the errors of the people] The
High Priest only once a year, Quanquam dicitur summus sacerdos semel
intrasse, id intelligendum quod uno tantu^ die intraverit, non quod non
aliquoties exicrit and rursus intrarit. Vide Levit. 16.14, 15. Primum caim
intrare eum oportuit batilli inferendi causa: deinde suffitus: deinde sanguinis
vitula: primum, deinde and hirciul. Itaque quater illo die eum intrasse ait
Moses Rotzi recte. Grotius.
viz. on the day of expiation, might enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum; and that
not without incense, and precious sacrifices. See Levit. 16.2.29.33. That by
this means, both the High Priest and people might be struck with a reverence
of the place, and God dwelling there, says De Republica Hebraeorum l. 3. c. 7.
Vide Cunaeum de Repub. Heb. l. 2. c. 4.
Menochius. This blood here mentioned, was a type of the blood of Christ,
wherewith the Church is to be cleansed, as the High Priest himself was a type
of Christ, says Eslius.

Verse. 10. And carnal Ordinances] Such as carnal men might easily perform,
and as were very suitable to the disposition of a carnal heart. Mr. Hildersam.

Until the time of reformation] Greek, the time of correction; that is, the
time of Christ's revealing, Tempus correctionis] alludit ad vaticinium Jeremiae
31.37. Novum enim testamentum veteri instar correctionis successit. Calvinus.
who was the body of all those shadows.

Verse. 14. Through the eternal Spirit] That is, the divine power of his
Godhead. Passus est Christus ut homo, sed ut mors illa nobis salvifica esset,
proveniebat ex efficacia Spiritus. Ideo Spiritum vocat aeternum, ut sciamus,
reconciliationem, cujus est effector, aeternam esse. Calvinus. vide Bezam.


Purge your conscience] That is, free you, 1. from the guilt and punishment of
sins; the guilt of sin lies heavy on the conscience. 2. the dominion of
sin, to serve it in the lusts thereof.

From dead works] Sins are called dead works. 1. Works, because the soul is
busy about sin, as a man about his work. So Ephesians 5.11. 1 John 3.8. 2 Dead,
Mortua opera intellige vel quae mortem generant, vel quae fructus sunt mortis.
Nam cum animae vita sit nostra cum Deo coniunctio, qui alienati sunt per
peccatum vere censentur mortui. Calvinus.
partly to make the comparison more complete; they were ceremonially dead by
touching dead carcasses, so inwardly by sin; and as a dead carcass is
loathsome and odious, so sin, Ezekiel. 36.31.2 In respect of the effects, they
bring forth death, Romans 6.21. they leave a sentence of death upon the
conscience till the virtue of Christ's blood be applied.

To serve the living God] Here is the end of their purging; we are not washed
by Christ that we should defile our selves again; but our purity must serve to
Gods glory, and nothing can come from us which will be acceptable to God,
until we be purged with the blood of Christ; and it is an elegant between dead
works and the living God.

Verse. 23. With better Sacrifices then these] Then those of the old Testament;
not in substance, but in manner of exhibiting. Potiores victimas pro victima,
quia tantum una est: sed propter antithesim plurali numero libere abusus est.
Calvinus.
Christ was then slain only in types and figures; in the new Testament there
is a real and personal offering up of Christ himself. Bulkley on the
Covenant.

Verse. 24. Now to appear in the presence of God] Verbum forense, an expression
borrowed from the custom of humane courts: Perstat in similitudine. Nam and
summus sacerdos dicitus apud Deum apparere, ubi stat apud Arcam. Sic Christus
apparet coram solio majestatis ut nostras res Deo commendet, supra 7.25.
Grotius.
for in them when the Plantiffe or Defendant is called, their Attorney
appears in their behalf, 1 John 1.2. The Leviticall Priest was wont to
appear before God in the peoples name; he was but a figure; in Christ is the
solid truth and full effect of the figure.

Verse. 27. And as it is appointed to men once to die] It is a general Law
given for men to die; if it happen to any otherwise, as to Enoch and Elias,
those are nothing, Statutum regulare est; illos autem non mori singular est.
Cajetanus in loc. Si quis objiciat his quosdam esse mortuos, at Lazarum and
similes: expedita est solutio, Apostolum hic de ordinaria hominum condition
disputare, quin etiam ab hoc ordine eximantur quos subita immutatio corruptione
exuet: quia non comprehendit nisi eos qui diu in pulvere corporum suorum
redemptionem expectant. Calvinus.
says Grotius, to so great a multitude of men dying; so ye may say for those
that shall be found alive when Christ shall come to judgment.

Once to die] The word once (say some) is not to be referred to die, as if
there were some suspicion that man could die twice; but to appoint, it was once
appointed, and that once shall stand.

And after death the judgement] Some understand this of the particular
judgment, the judgment which God passes upon the soul immediately after
death; but Estius interprets it of the general judgment.

Verse. 28. To bear the sinnes] The word (...), to bear, Vide Bezam.
although it properly signifies to lift or carry something from a lower place
to an higher, or at least from one place to another, yet in this place it
simply signifies to take away; so it is used Josh. 24.32. and 2 Samuel 21.10. and
Ezra 1.11. and Psalm. 102.24. For things lifted up are first taken away from the
place where they were before: and things taken or carried away from a man must
first be raised and lifted up.

He shall appear the second time without sin unto salvation] Christ comes
but twice corporally, once to merit salvation, Dr. Tailor.
and again to perfect it.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. FOr the Law having a shadow of good things to come] It was not so
much as an Image, Similitudinem hanc mutuatus est ab art pictoria. Calvinus.
Vide Pareum.
a shadow is not so much as an Image, but an Image is not so much as the thing
it self; it was not an Image but a shadow. Burrh. Jacobs seed. Some think that
the metaphor of the shadow is taken from painting; Painters are wont with choke
or a coal to delineate that thing which they propound to themselves to
express, which rude picture is called a shadow or adumbration, for the obscure
representation: then with their Pensill they bring on the lively colors, that
it may be a distinct and express likeness of a thing, which is properly
called an Image.

Verse. 2. Should have no more conscience of sinnes] Not that they will make no
conscience of running into sin, as many Libertines do, that is not the
meaning; but conscience will be able to lay no more sin to their charge.

Verse. 5. Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou
prepared me] That is, Dr. Tailor.
now after the coming of Christ; ( but a body) That in this body I might offer
that expiatory sacrifice of which all the other were but shadows.

A body have thou fitted me, Psalm. 40.6. it is mine ears have thou opened; but
here so for illustration: Christ's obedience began at his ear, but his whole
body was obedient when he offered himself upon the Cross. Weemes.


Verse. 7. In the Volume of thy Book it is written of me] Interpreters enquire
whither David, Psalm. 40.7. and the Apostle here, Nam ad hunc usque diem non
habent Judaei in Synagogis alium legis librum quam longa per gamena volutum de
Dieu. Vide Bezam and Grotium. Pentaeteuchus etiamnum hodie a Judaeis dicitur
semperque dictus est Sepher (...) liber, non libri. Caput accipitur pro
volumine, liber pro Pentateucho. Olim and Evangelia una serie absque
sectionibus scripta erant. Alardi Epiphyll. Phylol. c. 9. vide plura ib. Libri
nomine Legem intelligi, quae regulam sancte vivendi omnibus Dei filiis
praescribit, absurdum non est. Quanquam mihi genuina magis videtur haec
expositio, ut dicat se in eorum catalogo censeri qui se Deo praebent
obsequentes, Calvinus. Vide Cunaeum de Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 1.
had respect to Christ; or where it is so written: they agree in this, that the
Pentateuch is meant; for scarce any other books of Scripture were written in
David's time but it, unless Job. The Pentateuch then was one book, and the text
in the Bible was not so distinguished as it is now. Pareus says, in the whole
Volume of the Bible there are many Oracles extant concerning Christ, in which
his obedience toward his father is described, especially in 52 and 53 chapters
of Esaias.

Verse. 10. By the which we are sanctified] Sanctifying here is not taken
strictly for the change of our image; but rather largely for all the benefits
of Christ, reconciliation, adoption, justification, and salvation it self. So
Pareus and others.

Verse. 19. Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by
the blood of Iesus] There is nothing that can make a man die and go to God
with true boldness and expectation of a better life, but only faith in the
blood of Christ.

Into the Holiest] That is, Heaven, say some, whereof the Holy of Holies in the
Temple was a figure or type. Others think that he means a clear manifestation
of the way to glory, under the Gospel. See 1 John ult.

Verse. 20. By a new and living way which he has consecrated for us] 1. A new
way; not the old, Vide Bezam.
by the covenant of works. 2. Living, enlivens the person, God will enable us
to walk in it.

Through the veil, that is to say his flesh] An allusion to the Temple, the
veil or curtain did hide the glory of Sanctum Sanctorum, and withal
ministered an entrance into it for the High Priest.

Verse. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith] Here
we have the true disposition of the soul in worship: 1. A true heart; he does
not say, sinlesse, but a true heart, Omni trepidatione and dubitatione de
gratia deposita. Pareus.
without guile. 2. In full assurance of faith] That is, to be sure of
acceptance of my person and service when I come into the presence of God. A
settled and full persuasion to be accepted through Christ. The first absolutely
necessary, this not so absolutely.

Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience] q. d. Otherwise your
drawing near will be to no purpose; you shall but provoke the Lord in drawing
near, except you be thus sprinkled, washed and purified. Dr. Preston.
Abst^rsionem cordis a mala conscientia appellat, vel quum impetrata peccatorum
venia puri censemur coram Deo, vel dum cor ab omnibus pravis affectibus
purgatum, carnis stimulum non pungit. Ego licenter utrunque comprehendo.
Calvinus.


There is a twofold evil conscience: 1. That lives in some known sin; 2.
that accuses a man, and is unquiet.

He alludes to the old rites, in which the Israelites being to come to the
Tabernacle and worship of God, purged themselves with many washings; or to the
Sacrament of Baptism, in which there is an external washing of the body; but
men are purged from all sin inwardly by the blood and spirit of Christ.

Some say he alludes to Numb. 9.9. the sprinkling water made of the ashes of
the red Cow, wherewith the people were sprinkled.

Verse. 26. For if we sin wilfully] This translation is better then the
Genevah, (...) fieri docent philosophica, quae nec violentia, nec ignorantia,
sed spontaneo voluntatis motu fiunt. Ergo desectionem intelligit non violentia
extortam a tyrannis, aut metu factam, aut ex ignorantia admissam sed
voluntary, hoc est, deliberata voluntate and consilio malitiose commissam.
Malitiam enim docent ea quae in similitudine sequuntur. Pareus.
which has willingly. Seientes and volentes, wittingly and willingly, of set
purpose. The word answers to that of Moses, Numb. 15.30. Elata manu, with a
high hand, a resolute wilfulness. See 1 Pet. 6.2. Mr. Bedford on Ioh. 1.16.

Verse. 27. But a certain fearful looking for of judgement] There is a twofold
receiving of judgment in this life: 1. One enjoined as a duty, Cruciatum malae
conscientiae significat, quem sentiunt impii, qui sua culpa in perpetuum se
abdicatos esse norunt. Calvinus. Vide plura ibid.
1 Cor. 11 31. 2. another inflicted on him as a punishment, when conscience at
last shows him his everlasting damnation, as it did to Spira say some.

Verse. 29. Who has trodden under foot the Son of God] (...) notes by
translation extremity of contempt, Matthew. 7.6. and 5.13. contemn and despise
Christ; Extremi contemptus indicium est conculcare quempiam: Infandi autem est
sceleris, id committere in filium Dei. Estius. Proculcans tanquam inultilem. 1 Samuel 2.29. Grotius.
So Theophylact, Ambrose, and Primasius expound it: those things we despise and
make no account of, we tread under foot. Dr. Benefield on Heb. 15.24.

Wherewith he was sanctified] 1. Sacramentally, 2. putatively, 3. or at most by
way of disposition. See Heb. 6.4, 5. Dr. Sclater. Erat sanctificatio
apostatarum non interna, sed externa in professione fidei and participatione
sacramentorum consistens. Erant sanctificati, hoc est a Judeis and paganis
professione segregati, and pro veris Christianis habiti. Pareus.


Verse. 33. Ye were made a gazing-stock] Brought into the Theater, so the Greek,
(...). A Metaphor taken from them (says Ribera) who were sent into the
Theater, that is into the public sight of all the Citizens to fight with
beasts, or with one another mutually, as the gladiatores, which all beheld with
delight, and likewise observed diligently how they fought. The nowne is used 1
Cor. 4 9. and rendered spectacle; the Greek word is (...), a Theater

Verse. 36. Ye may receive the promise] That is, the thing promised.

Verse. 37. For yet a little while] The words in the Greek are a double
diminutive, (...), adhuc enim tantillum. Drus. in Parallel. Sac. Vide Bezam and
Grotium.
a little little while to it. Though long for the time in it self, yet a
little while as may be in respect of his desire, without the least delaying to
come.

He that shall come will come] For their deliverance. Perkins. The doubling of
the phrase, veniens venit; Mr. Goodwin.
coming he will come, implies vehemence of desire to come and that his mind
is always upon it; here is still a coming. The Hebrew phrase signifies an
urgencie, vehemency and intensenesse of some act, as desiring I have desired.
And as not content with these expressions of desire, he adds over and above
all these, Id. ib.
and will not tarry: With this sweet promise Mr. Wheatly comforted himself a
little before his death.
and all to signify the infinite ardency of his mind toward his elect here
below.

Verse. 38. Now the just shall live by faith] That is, shall sustain himself by
expectation of the promises.

But if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him] That is,
which for a time believe in God, Perkins.
and afterward pull back their feet, and go back from their faith.

as 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Rogers on faith.
More is meant then spoken, after an Hebrew manner of speech; as though he
should say, I abhor all those that fall away through unbelief.

The word is a Military word, taken from Soldiers who recoyle and leave their
standing in whom the Captain delights not. Nor can we in our Christian fight by
retiring and recoyling please our Captain; but the Martial law for such is in
the Text, Dr. Tailor. Verse. 39. (...) Ad animae acquisitionem, id est, ad
salutem. Metaphora a negotiatione ducta, qua quis vel acquirit amplius and
lucratur, vel perdit quod habebat. Marc. 10.39. Gerh.
they withdraw themselves to perdition.

CHAP. XI.
THis Chapter is called the little Book of Martyrs, containing the Acts and
Monuments of the Church of God in the days of old.

Verse. 1. Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen] The substance] The meaning is, (...) is that which gives a
substantial being to the things of eternal life. Burrh.
that though there are many things promised by God, which men do not presently
enjoy, but only hope for, because as yet they are not: yet faith does after a
sort give a subsistence or being unto them. Perkins.

(...) proprie quidem convictionem significat, sed quia solida demum est ea
convictio quae fit per demonstrationem, hinc est quod etiam demonstrationem
significat. Capellus in loc. vide Grotium.
The evidence] Or convincing demonstration. (...) signifies the demonstration
that convinces the soul thoroughly of the certainty and truth of such things
as by reason and natural parts are not seen. That is, by believing a man does
make a thing as it were visible, being otherwise invisible and absent. Mr.
Burrh. Perkins.

Verse. 4. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice then Cain]
1. Quia hostia copiosior, Incipit apostolus ab Abel, Adamo praetermisso, quod
de eo postquam peccaverit, nihil eximium Moses narret. Estius.
because he offered a double Sacrifice, himself and his Lamb; but Cain only
offered his Corn. 2. Quia excellentior, it was better chosen, because of the
fattest and best of the flock; Cain carelessly took that came first to his hand
of the fruit, and no more. 3. Quia ex fide, by faith he offered it. B. Andrews.

God testifying of his gifts] Genesis 4.4. it is said that God had a respect unto
him and to his offerings; meaning by some visible approbation, whether fire
from See Genesis 15.17. Levit. 9.23.24. Judge. 6.21. 1 King. 8. to 12. 1 King.
18.38, 39. 1 Chro. 21.26. Finches Old Testament or the Promise, and others.
Heaven or something else; Igne coelitus demisso ut Levit. 9.24. Vide Grotium.
for Cain discerned it, and the Apostle here does so interpret it. This visible
and outward testimony which God gave signified the inward testimony of the
Spirit testifying to our spirits that we and all we do is acceptable unto God
in Christ, Rom 8.16.

Some of the Rabbines relate (as Paulus Fagius observes in his Annotations on
the Chaldee Paraphrase) that a face of a Lion was seen in the Heavenly fire
inflaming the Sacrifices; which (if it be true) did probably shadow out the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Revel. 5.5. of whom all the Sacrifices of the Old
Testament were Types.

Verse. 5. For before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased
God] Dicente Scriptura; One says, quale hoc testimonium non liquet, the
Scripture expresses not what this testimony was.
Haymo says this testimony was the testimony of Scripture, Genesis 5.24. but the
testimony of Moses was after his translation, therefore it was the testimony of
his conscience which bare witness within that he pleased God. Mr. Fenner.

He pleased God] (...) is the word, which signifies he gave God content, or
kept Gods favor and good will.

Verse. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God] I must do all duties
out of a principle of faith; and not of reason only, or an enlightened
conscience. Three rules to know this, 1. Such a one has an eye always to the
promise, as well as to the precept; he looks to the Law as his rule, and to
the Gospel for his power. 2. He looks not unto the duty, but on Christ for
acceptance. Exodus 28.38. Rev. 83. 3. He is not discouraged for want of a
present income in duty 2 Cor. 5.7.

For he that comes to God, Bishop Down of Justification l. 6. c. 10.
must believe that he is] To come unto Christ is to believe in him, John
6.35.37.44. And if that be the meaning of the Holy Ghost in this place, then to
come unto God, is to believe in him by special faith; otherwise the Apostle
should enunciate idem per idem. And then the meaning is this, he that would
believe that God is his God; and that he will be gratiou^ unto him, must first
believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, or the
word come in this place may be expounded by seeking. He that will come unto
God, that is, he that will seek God, must believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him.

Verse. 7. Of things not seen as yet] That is, Gods mercy in his deliverance,
and the destruction of the old world.

Verse, 10. For he looked for a City which has foundations] That is, Doctor
Reynolds. (...), ad artificium and excellentiam operis, (...) ad opus ipsum
refertur. Zanchius.
a City which was built upon the immutable stability of Gods oath, and promise
of heaven, a periphrasis. Whose builder. The Greek is Artificer, God has
manifested great art in making the third heaven; he bestowed skill and wisdom
on it.

Verse. 11. Because she judged him faithful who had promised] That is, she knew
that whatsoever God had promised, he would faithfully perform.

Verse. 13. Confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth]
Strangers are a people absent from their own Country; Non agitur ibi proprie de
gloria Coelesti; intelliguntur tum promissiones de possessione terrae Canaan,
quam Patriarchae nondum occupaverant, tum and maxim promissio de adventu
Messiae. Rivetus.
Pilgrims are strangers that have not any abiding where they are; Paul has
reference to the place, Genesis 23.4. See 47. Genesis 9.

On the earth] Theophylact, and Oecumenius following Chrysostom say that not
only Canaan, or Palestina is understood, but the whole earth.

Verse. 17. Offered up Isaac] Either because he presented him unto God upon the
Altar, which was an offering of him up, Pergit trium patriarcharum commendure
fidem. Idque facit per singulos, in Abraham autem immoratur, quod ille totius
generis Hebraeorum princeps esset, ac fidei virtute coeteros antecelleret.
Estius. Vide Bezam in loc.
or rather because he had fully purposed to have perfected the offering by his
sons death, had not God himself interposed from heaven to restrain him.

Verse. 19. Accounting] Or reasoning, Ratiocinatus, Beza. (...), id est, ratione
apud se subducta, cum secum perpendisset, considerasset, ratiocinatus esset,
suaque ratione conclusisset. Estius. The argument that prevailed with him, was
that which follows.

From whence also he received him in a figure] That is say Erasmus, and others,
Jn imagine quadam resurrectionis, quia qui immolationi addictus erat and postea
liberatus videtur tanquam revixisse, haec est Calvini expositio long omnium
optima. Scalig. Vide Bezam and Grotium. Abraham non aliter filium suum recepit,
quam si illi ex morte restitutus esset in novamvitam. Calvinus. Vide Estium and
a Lapide.
in the type of the resurrection, viz. Of Christ, whose humane nature like a
Ram, was truly slain; and after raised again by the power of the Deity, and
freed from death as Isaac.

Pareus interprets it thus, non secut atque si Deus eum ex mortuis suscitasset,
as if God had raised him up from the dead. The neerenesse of death wherein
Isaac was, was a similitude of death.

Verse. 21. And worshipped leaning upon the top of his staffe] Lifting up his
body to do reverence unto God, thereby testifying his humility, faith, and
hope. Perkins on Rev. Vide Bezam Cartwrightum and Grotium.


Verse. 25. Then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season] Greek, then to have
the momentany fruition of sin; so Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Oecumenius read
it. Honors, pleasures, delights are called the pleasures of sin, not because
they are so in themselves, but because they are occasions and instruments of
sin; and are seldom had, or held without some sin or other. Doctor Tailor.


Verse. 26. For he had respect unto] The Greek word signifies, to look up in
admiration curiously; which is translated in Latin suspicere.

The recompense of the reward] That is, to the blessing promised to Abraham.

Verse. 35. Others were tortured] (...), sympanizati sunt. Their bodies were
racked out as a Drum. Verbum (...) deductum est ex nomine (...), quatenus eo
significatur non instrumentum quod pulsatur, sed quo pulsatur, viz. Eustis,
sive sustuarium, quo carnifices pulsabant corpora reorum per machinam
tractoriam distenta. Gerh.
What they suffered has exercised all our Grammarians, Philologers, Doctor
Done. Vide Bezam, Grotium, et Estium,
and Antiquaries that have enquired into the racks, and tortures of those
times; we translate it roundly, they were tortured. Saint Paul's word implies a
torture of that kind, that their bodies were extended, and racked as upon a
Drum, and then beaten with staves; what the torture intended in that word was,
we know not. The Lxx use this word 1 Samuel 29.13. See my Greek Gritica.

Dan. 3.16, 17. Doctor Gouge.
Not accepting deliverance] From death, viz. On persecutors terms, and
conditions, cum nollent recipere conditionem oblatae redemptionis. Estius. See
more there.

That they might obtain a better resurrection] It is usual in Scripture,
sometimes to put a comparative for a positive, or superlative, that is, a good,
or the best resurrection, if we take it comparatively it is meant of a better
resurrection then the persecutors offered them; Vide Estium.
they were at their enemies disposal, and as dead men; but if they would have
turned from the faith, they should have been restored to life; therefore it is
elegantly called a resurrection, We say such a one is risen from the grave. The
Heathens jeered the Christians, and told them they needed not to care for their
lives, since they should rise again; will you (said they) redicurae parcero
vitae?
because they were as dead men being in their power; yet they hoped to obtain
a better resurrection, viz. From an inflicted death, to eternal life.

See Jones. Circuierunt in melotis] (...) autem melote est ovills pellis cum
suo vellere, qualibus pellibus induos saepe videmus Romae circumjectae regionis
rusticos habitatores, ac praesertim pastores. Vide 4. Reg. 1.8. Matthew. 3.4.
Menoch de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 5.
Verse. 37. Were tempted] Beza says it is much this should come in after the
recital of most sharp Capital punishments, and which he mentions also after;
and the Syriack interpreter has it not. Beza therefore would rather have it
read were burned. But the word tempted, may well be retained; when they saw
they could do no good with violence, they made them great promises, and tried
whether they could prevail that way, as appears in the Martyrologie.

Burrh. Jac. Seed.
Verse. 38. Of whom the world was not worthy] They have that excellency, as the
world is not worthy to enjoy them, they are not worthy of their presence, that
they should so much as live amongst them; they are rather fit to be set as
Stars in heaven, and be before the Lord in his glory.

Vide Bezam.
Verse. 39. They received not the promises] viz. In their real exhibition.

Verse. 40. That they without us should not be made perfect] Not that they were
not taken to heaven, but before Christ they had not that perfect State in
heaven, which now we and they are presently possessed of. For they expected in
heaven their Redeemer, Bayne.
even as souls now expect the resurrection of the body.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. WHerefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses] The examples of godly men in the Old and New Testament are called a
cloud of witnesses by allusion: Haec conclusio est quasi epilogus proximi
capitis: ubi demonstrat quorsum recitaverit illum Sanctorum Catalogum, quorum
fides sub lege excelluit: nempe ut se quisque comparet ad eorum imitationem. Et
metaphorice copiosam multitudinem vocat nubem; densum enim raro opponitur. Si
pauci essent numero, tamen suo exemplo incitare nos deberent: sed ubi ingens
est turba, acriores stimulos addere nobis debet. Praeteria dicit, nos densitate
illa vel copia circundari, ut quocunque oculos vertamus, flatim occurrant multa
fidei exempla. Calvinus. Nubes Ebraice (...) dicuntur a densitate, igitur nubes
testium, id est, densitas, frequentia, multitudo. Drusius. Metaphora est ducta
ab avibus magna multitudine volantibus quae all^ suis praetervolantes umbram
instar nubis faciunt. Esai 60.8. Capel. Spic. Vide Bezam and Grotium.
for as the cloud did guide the Israelites through the wilderness to the Land
of Canaan: so the faithful now are to be guided to the heavenly Canaan, by the
examples of good men. Perkins.

In their life and conversation they witnessed by word and deed to Gods Church.
2. In their death many of them witnessed by their blood. 3. Hereafter they
shall witness for, or against us. Doctor Tailor.

Let us lay aside every weight] That presses down, that is, all earthly
affections, and what ever may hinder us in our spiritual course. See Beza.

And the sin which does so easily beset Respicit forte locu^ Lam. 1.14. ubi
peccata comparantur jugo loris implicantibus hominem ac saepe dejicientibus.
Grotius.
us] The similitude (says Deodate) seems to be taken from such long and large
garments, as were wont to be laid off in races, to be so much the freer. The
Greek work (...), is nomen compos^ium signifying well, that is, easily
besetting.

And let us run with Patience the race that is set before us] This race is the
course it self wherein we strive by running; for in the Greek it is (...) a
strife-race, whereby is signified all kind of strife in this manner, whether it
be by running, wrestling, Currere certamen est currendo certare. Certamen hoc
cursorum, illud est quod sibi propositum habet ac suscepit omnis Christianus,
quando renunciavit vitae veteri, and professus est novam. Estius.
hurling, or any other way, but here he speaks of running. To run the race, is
to strive by running, he means especially the false of our faith. 1 Timothy 6.12.
See 2 Timothy 4.7. Vide Grotium.

Verse. 2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith] Faith here
is taken for all grace, it is a complete work at first as Christ is the author
of it; but he is the finisher also that is, upholds and maintains it.

Verse. 4. Striving against sinne] That is, as interpreters of good note Piscat.
and alij. Est in Graeco elegans verbum (...), quod est eorum qui totis virbibus
in agone certant, ut vincant adversarium. Ribera in loc. In agone contra
certantes ut intelligamus nos esse debere peccati antagonistas, id est,
adversarios, semper intentos ad vincendum and expugnandum peccatum: quomodo
peccatum ex adverso semper vigilat in perniciem nostram. Estius. Vide Cornel. a
Lapide.
observe, either against the wickedness of the enemies of the Gospel, which
by cruel and bloody courses strive to force men from the faith, or against
sin, that is, against sinners, v. 3. Or against sin in your selves.

Verse. 5. My son despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when
thou art rebuked of him] The Greek word translated Despise Imports the
littling or thinking of them little; do not little, or slight the chastenings
of God in thy thoughts, nor do not think thy afflictions so great, that thou
must needs sink and faint under them. (...) arguo, ad verba refertur; (...)
castigo ad ferula^ parvorum. Aret.


Rebuke is chiefly referred unto words, and chasten is chiefly referred unto
the Rod, and sharpness of discipline.

Verse. 7. God deals with you as sonnes] That is, he comes to you in the
cross, not as a Judge and revenger, but as a kind and loving Father. Perkins.

Verse. 11. Afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto
them which are exercised thereby] That is, Perkins. Pro exercitatis est verbum
elegans (...), quod de ils dicitur qui nudi exercebantur ad palaestram, unde
and gymnasia dicta sunt loca in quibus athletae exercebantur. Ribera and a
Lapide in loc.
afflictions and chastisements which seize upon Gods Children, do leave after
them amendment of life, as the needle passes through the cloth, and leaves
the thread behind it.

The Greek word translated exercised, is properly spoken of them qui nudi
exercentur in palaestra, and it is translated to all kinds of more vehement
exercise. Chrysostom and Theophylact urge this Metaphore, and say correction
is called an exercise, because it makes the faithful as certain champions
more strong, and invincible in patience.

Verse. 13. Least that which is lame be turned out of the way] The Greek word
is (...), (...) est luxari vel diverti a justo acetabulo ac commissura ossium.
Gerh. Claudicationem vocat, cum homines in religione alternant, nec sincere Deo
se addicunt. Calvinus. Idem habet Pareus.
which may be taken in two senses; either for the luxation, or sprayning of
some Member, or joint necessary for walking, which being dislocated takes away
all use of walking, or else for straying from the way, which to most
Interpreters seems most probable.

Verse. 15. Looking diligently, least any man fail of the grace of God] He
means not only to make us careful for our own particular, Doctor Sclater.
but watchful over others, as the reason annexed imports: least thereby many
be defiled.

Trouble your] (...), Graecum proprie significat obturbet, interturbet. Estius.
Gerh. Profaneness lies in two things, 1. In a low esteem of spiritual
servic^s. Amo. 8.5. Prosanus quasi procul a sano loco sacro. 2. In a low
esteem of spiritual privileges.
The Greek word does properly signify to trouble; and hinder a man's rest; it
is used only here.

Or profane person as Esau] This example may serve to expound what he means
by profane. The Lord had annexed to the birthright the promise of the Land of
Canaan as a figure of heavenly felicity; wicked Esau not considering this
despised it. So God has appointed his Ordinances to be means of grace and
life to men; when they do not know and believe this, and receive it by them,
they are profane.

Non immediate reprobatio refertur ad rejectionem a gratia salutari and gloria
aeterna, sed ad repulsam quam passus est Esau, quia quod petebat ab Isaaco, non
potuit impetrare. Rivetus.
Verse. 17. He was rejected] viz. By his Father, Genesis 27.35.37.40. (...), is not
to obtain that which we will.

For he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with
Teares] viz. In his Father, not in himself, that is for all his crying he
could not move his Father to change his mind, and repent himself of his
blessing Jacob; so Beza, Estius, Mr. Perkins, and others expound it. See Genesis
27.34.38. Pareus, and a Lapide, would have the relative it referred not to
repentance, but to blessing.

Torquet interpretes quod Mosi haec verba Apostolus tribuit, quae ausquam
legimus Mosem protulisse; verum solutio non evit difficilis, si consideremus
Mosem nomine populi sic loquutum, cujus mandata quasi internuntius ad Deum
referebat. Fuit igitur haec communis totius populi querimonia. sed Mose^ in
l^citor, qui fuit veluti commene os omnium. Calvinus. Quid locutus fuerit Moses
Exodus 19. Non exprimitur. Collicere h^nc est eum his vocibus trepulationem suam
testarum fuisse: Deum consolatione eum erexisse; unde vero Apostolus accepit?
vel ex traditione: vel quod magis. videtur ex revelatione singulari: qua Moses
Historiam creationis a Deo acc^pit. Trepidatio autem Mosis, argumento fuit,
ipsum quoque peccatorem esse, licet propheta summus esset; metus enim ex
peccato est. Pareus. vide Cornel. a Lapide.
Verse. 21. I exceedingly fear and quake] Those words are not to be found in
all the Books of the Old Testament. Perkins. See Exodus 19.19.

Verses 22, 23, 24. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the
living God] The Apostle in a heap of words, The faithful are made fellows of
Angels, and of all the perfect souls departed since the beginning of the
world, and of Christ himself. Doctor Fulke.
amplifies the high dignity of every one effectually called. Not that we have
now full fruition of the glorious Deity, but first the use of Scripture is to
speak of things that shall be, in the present time, or time past, to signify
certainty of accomplishment in time prefixed. 2. We have present title thereto,
Gal. 4.1.2. 3. We are united with God in Christ, and Made one body with the
whole Church Triumphant and Militant. Doctor Sclater.

Verse. 23. The spirits of just men made perfect] They are said to be perfect in
respect of grace, though not of glory, till the body be there also. Quia carnis
infirmitatibu^ non sunt amplius obnoxii, deposita ipsa carne. Calvinus.

Verse 24. And to the blood of sprinkling,] It is so called in allusion to the
Passover, where the blood of the Paschall Lamb was sprinkled on the posts of
the door to save the house from the stroke of the revenging Angel. Quidam
volunt alludi ad sanguinem agni paschalis, quo Israelitae jubebantur aspergere
posts and superliminaria aedium, Exodus 12.7. Sed rectius dicitur respectum
haberi ad aspersionem sanguinis foederalis quae describitur. Exodus 24. v. 8.
Confer Heb. 9.18: Gerh. Sanguis Abel testimonium est divinae justitiae adversus
Gainum: sanguis Christi realissimum est testimonium divinae misericordiae erga
miseros peccatores. Sanguis Abel loquitur de terra and efflagitat vindictam.
Genesis 4.10. Matthew. 23.35. Sanguis Christi de coelo quasi loquitur
reconciliationem cum Deo, pacem and vitam. Glassius. vide Grotium.
Mr. Hildersam.

That is, that blood which is sprinkled and applied to us, pleades and cries
for mercy unto God for us.

That speaks better things then that of Abel] See Genesis 4.10. That cried for
vengeance, this for pardon of sins.

Verse. 25. See that ye refuse not him that speaketh] See that ye shift not him
off that speaks; some say it has reference to the 19 verse. (...), id est,
deprecari, v. 19. repellere, recusure, repud^are ut hoc loco. Pareus.

Verse. 26. Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also Heaven] The
civil State, and Ecclesiastical to, say some. Pareus says by Heaven and
earth he understands both the frame it self of Heaven and earth, and the
inhabitants of both, Angels and men.

Verse 27. The removing] Mutatio, Tremel. Translatio, Erasm. Ar. Mont. The Greek
word is (...). It is a common fault among translators, that they will
accommodate the words of a Text to their own apprehension of the sense and
matter thereof: They understanding that the things here said to be shaken were
the Jewish Ordinances, translated their disposition a Removal, and the truth
is they were removed, but the world signifies no such thing. As its natural
importance from its rise and composition is otherwise, so neither in Scripture
nor any profane Author does it ever signify properly a removal. Translation
or changing is the only native, genuine import of it. Removal is of the
matter; Translation of the form only, Heb. 11.5. we render it translation and
change, Heb. 7.12.

CHAP. XIII.
BIsh. Andrews calls this Chapter the Chapter of Remembrances, or the
Remembrancers chapter. Ver. 3, 7, and 16.


Verse. 2. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers] See Romans 1.13. 1 Timothy 3.2.
and 5.10. 1 Pet. 4.9. The study of this virtue was then very necessary,
Respicit Apostolus ad consuetudinem istorum temporum, quando non erant, uti
hodie apud nos and alias Gentes Europae, hospitia publica aut tabernae
mercenariae. Vide Genesis 18. and 19. and 24. Jud. 19. and alibi Job 31.32.
Respicit quoque Apostolus ad statum istius temporis quo haec scribebat, quando
propter persecutiones cogebantur fideles huc illuc fugere ac peregrinari.
Laurentius in 1 Pet. 4.9.
when there were no public Innes, and the godly were often banished, lest
they should either want entertainment, or else go to Infidels.

For thereby some have entertained Angels unawares] As Abraham and Lot, Genes.
18.13. and 19 2.

Verse. 3. Remember them which suffer adversity] The Greek word is a general
word which may be extended to all kinds of afflictions; or if it be restrained,
it commonly signifies those that are sick or suffer bodily pains.

As being your selves in the body] q d. because you are fellow members with
them in the same mystical body (as Calvin interprets it;) Or, (as Luther)
seeing your selves are yet in the body, you your selves are exposed to the like
sufferings, and therefore should Christianly remember them. Quod cuiquam,
cuivis accidere potest. Hodie mihi ^ras tibi. Pareus likes this best. See Beza.

Verse. 4. Marriage is honorable in all] Not, let marriage be honorable (as
the Papists say,) but marriage is honorable; the latter part of the sentence
being affirmative, shows that the Apostle meant to speak affirmatively in the
former also. I follow Pareus who would have it so meant, rather then Gerh. Res
eodem redit, sive assertive accipiatur honorabile est conjugium, sive
praeceptive, conjugium debet esse honorabile. Gerh. Vide Bezam. Quum dicit in
omnibus, intelligo nullum esse ordinem qui a conjungio prohibeatur. Calvinus.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, do all prove out of this
place the permission and lawfulness of marriage to all men. Vide Grotium.
who thinks both readings come to one.

In all] (...). That is, in all men And this is the true and proper translating
of the words, for amongst all is not so fit; that may be honorable amongst
all, which all are not so capable of, as the ministry. And when it is said in
all, it is meant (says Pareus) in all those who by the Laws may honestly
contract. See Jones in loc.

Verse. 5. Let your conversation be without covetousnesse] The word for
conversation in the Greek is (...), which either signifies a custom and
manner, or the means and way of getting our livelihood. Vox Graeca (...),
quamvis modum plerumque significat, non tamen modum qui rei imponitur, ne
immoderata sit, ut intellexit Cajetanus; Graece imperitus; sed modum, id est,
agendi rationem aut rei qualitatem. Caeterum constat etiam pro more, and pro
moribus, usurpari non sine elegantia, apud authors Graecos, Platonem and
alios. Nec dubium quin ea significatio, quam and alii omnes retinent, huic loco
sit optissima. Estius.
Both these senses come to one; both our manner and our means of getting our
livelihood must be free from all covetousness, or love of Silver, as the Greek
word signifies. See Luke 12.15. Ephesians. 5.3. Col. 3 5. 1 Cor. 3.10. 1 Timothy 6.10.

And be content with such things as ye have] Contensi praesentibus, so Beza; be
content with things present. (...) Graecis vocantur ea b^na, quae adsunt.
Estius.
The Hebrews had been plundered of all when the Apostle spoke this, Chapter 10.34.
Though they had nothing they must be content; so was Paul, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.

For he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee] There are five
Negatives in the Greek to assure Gods people that he will never forsake them.
Ipse viz. Dominus. Cur enim Christianis non liceat quod Pythagoreis omnes
concesserunt. Beza.


It may be rendered according to the Greek, I will not not leave thee, neither
will I not not forsake thee.

Verse. 7. Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you
the Word of God] As if he should say, The Apostle requires this duty three
times in this Chapter. See the 17 and 24 verses.
so far forth as they brought you the warrant of Gods Word for that they held
and practiced, have them in reverent remembrance. Hildersam.

Whose faith follow] q. d. Follow them not in every thing, but follow their
faith, which we know is only founded upon Gods Word.

Considering] The Greek word (...) is emphaticall, signifying an iterated and
formerly intermitted consideration: quasi diceret reconsiderantes, as it were
signifying that they had ceased from consideration of this kind. Estius and
Gerhard in loc.

Verse. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever] Yesterday,
that is, the time past before his coming in the flesh. Idem est, id est, sibi
similis, sicut dicimus rex Jupiter omnibus idem. Grotius.
Today, while in the flesh; and for ever, that is, after. The same before time,
in time, and after time.

Verse. 9. Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines] Ephesians. 4.14.
Be not carried about with every wind of doctrine, (where the same Greek word is
used) brings light to this place. Vide Pareum in loc.
The original word signifies rashly to be moved, and to wander hither and
thither; which happens to those that have nothing fixed in their mind to follow.

For it is a good thing that the heart be stablished with grace, not with
meates] A good thing; that is, better, or best; positive put for the
comparative, or superlative: food does establish the heart someway, it
refreshes it, Genesis 48.5. But the lasting comfort and establishment of the heart
is by grace. Vulg. optimum est.
That is, with grace wrought in the heart, or with the doctrine of grace, for
he opposes grace to meats, about which questions were then started; and by
meats he understands by a Synecdoche the whole body of the Ceremonial Law,
which is opposed to the Gospel, or the doctrine of grace; as if he had said,
Do not think to settle your selves by the Ceremonial Law, one part whereof
consisted in the choice and distinction of meats, which have not profited them
that have been occupied therein; they have gotten no establishment by them, but
grace will do it.

Verse. 15, 16, By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name. But to
do good and communicate, forget not, etc.] By the Sacrifice of praise he
means the Eucharist, Thorndikes Discourse of the Rights of the Church in a
Christian State. chapter 4.
as it is called usually in the ancient Liturgies and writings of the Fathers.
For to this purpose is the whole dispute of the place, that in the Sacrament
Christians communicate in the Sacrifice of Christ crucified, (which the Jews
can have no right to) instead of all the Sacrifices of the Law. And therefore
by doing good and communicating, he means the oblations of the faithful, out
of which at the beginning the poor and the rich lived in common at the
assemblies of the Church.

Verse. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves] The
Apostle uses two words to set forth the duty of the people to their Pastors,
obey and submit, Obey them preaching, submit to them punishing.
there being two sorts of things which they ought to come under, their Sermons
and their censures.

Verse. 18. They watch for your souls as they that must give an account, that
they may do it with joy, and not with griefe] The dreadfulnesse of these words
did strike a great terror into Chrysostomes heart, L. 3. de Sacord.
though he himself preached many times every day.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE Epistle of JAMES.
CHAP. I.
THese seven Epistles written by James, Peter, John and Jude, have unfit Titles
prefixed before them in that they are called sometimes Canonical, especially
in the Latin Church; That the Epistles to the Hebrews, of James, the second of
Peter, the second and third of John, and Jude, (though doubted of for a time)
are Canonical, I have proved in my Treatise of Divinity. Jerome says of
James, Peter, John and Jude, that they are breves pariter and longae; breves in
verbis, longae in sententiis. Epist. Fam. l. 2. Epist. 1. That they are both
short and long too; short in words, long in substance. Epistolae Canonicae
dicuntur quia Canones, id est, regulas ac praecepta continent instituendae
vitae Christianae. Estius. Vide Bezam.
and sometime Catholic, chiefly of the Greek Church: neither of which were
ever given them by any Apostle or Apostolic Writer. Yet though this Title
cannot be defended, it may be excused and tolerated as a Title of distinction,
to distinguish them from the other Epistles. Also they may have this Title
Canonical set before them, not because they were of greater authority then
other Writings, but to show that they ought to be esteemed of and embraced as
divine, howsoever in former times they were unjustly suspected. The second
inscription is as unfit as the former, therefore the Rhemists unjustly blame us
for leaving out the Title Catholic in our authorized English Bibles; for it
is well known that that Title is not given by the Holy Ghost, but by the
Scholiast who took it from Eusebius.

The Epistle of James is especially paraeneticall, exciting the faithful to
constancy under the cross, and to proficiency in a Christian life.

Verse. 1. Iames] There were two of this name, Matthew. 10.2, 3. He that was the
Penman of this Epistle was James the less, Mark 15.40. the Lords brother,
Gal. 1.19. a pillar in the Church, Gal. 2.9.

Verse. 2. Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations] Count it,
implying that man in his choycest deliberation ought to do so. The other words
are emphaticall. He says not be quiet alone, but be joyful; not with a little
joy, but with exceeding great joy; all joy, an Hebraisme, full Omne, id est,
totum, perfectum, plenum, summum. a Lapide. Vox (...) verbatim reddita, est
circumcadere. Brochmand. in loc. After he brings in the example of Ioh, who did
not suffer for Religion.
perfection; when ye fall into] or, fall among, so it is translated Luke 10.30.
when diverse temptations as it were incompasse and begirt us, so that no hope of
escaping seems left; into diverse temptations] not some, but diverse; that is,
any kind of affliction, whether for Religion, or not; and not small
afflictions, but trials and temptations, such afflictions as have in them a
certain fierceness to show what is in us. If ye cannot rejoice in the sense
of affliction, yet you may in the use of it, because it makes to the trial of
your faith and increase of your grace. Dr. Tailor on Titus.

Verse. 4. But let patience have her perfect work] Patience is perfect, 1. when
it puts forth perfect acts. Patientiam habere debet opus perfectum tripliciter.
Primo perfectum in se, puta in sertitudine and continuatione tolerentiae usque
ad finem crucis and vitae. Secundo perfectum in fine, ut scilicet patiat^^ pro
Christi fide, justitia, aut virtute. Tertio perfectum in comitatu innocentiaec
^t^rarumque virtutum. a Lapide.
2. when it continues in those acts. There are five acts of patience in
Scripture: 1. An universal resignation of our selves unto Gods will as to the
rule of goodness, 2 Samuel 25. 2. A silent submission; patience keeps under all
risings of the heart, Levit. 10.3. My soul keeps silence unto God, says
David. 3. An acceptance of the punishment, Levit. 26.41. looking on it as
proceeding from mercy, a fathers hand, and done in measure. 4. It makes the
soul cheerful under the burden, as in the second verse of this Chapter. 5. It
makes a man thankful, Job 1. ult. Secondly, patience must continue, if the
burden (...) implies two things not to sink in their courage, for they must
(...), nor shrink from their burden, for they must (...). B. Lake.
continue. See verse. 12. and James 5.11. There are two motives here: 1. By this
means you shall be perfect; grace perfects the man, and the perfect work of
every grace perfects the grace; acts intend habits. 2. Wanting nothing] The
Greek word signifies possessing your whole portion.

Verse. 5. If any of you lack wisdome] That is, to suffer, to carry a man's self
in affliction. If here is not of one doubting, but opposing it as a thing
certain; q.d. if any want wisdom, as you certainly all want, behold I show
you how to get it.

And upbraideth not] Hitteth none in the teeth; either with present defects, or
former failings.

Verse. 6. But let him ask in faith] That is, affiance; as the other word
wavering Dicuntus illi (...), qui mente and cord fluctuant, dubii quid
statreant, quo inclinent, ubi pedem sigant. Hanc enim esse genuinam verbi
significationem, videre est Act. 10. v. 20. and 11. v. 12. and Romans 4.20.
Brochmand. in loc.
shows; for he that wavereth is like an arm of the Sea, driven with the wind;
And tossed] He is off and on, to day he will ask, to morrow he will not.

Verse. 8. A double minded man] Not one that pretends one thing, and intends
another (though the word be sometime so taken) but when the mind is divided
between two objects, See Jam. 4.8. (...) cujus anim^^ quasi divisus est, partim
Deo confidens, partim diffideus. Vorstius. Vide Bezam.
that it knows not which to choose, but stands as one in bivio, that has two
ways before him, and knows not whither to go, this way or that way. Dr.
Preston.

Vnstable] (...), like a man that stands upon one leg, wavereth and is
unsteady, and easily overturned.

Verse. 9. Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that be is exalted] viz. In
Christ to be equal with the greatest Prince in the world; Frater] id est
Christianus; omnes enim Christiani fratres sunt. a Lapide.
yea to be above him if he be out of Christ. Dike on Philemon.

Verse. 10. But the rich in that he is made low] Even in this, that in Christ he
has made equal with himself the meanest, not in his outward pre-eminence
over them.

Verse. 12. He shall receive the Crown of life] That Crown of life, that is,
eternal life as a Crown; Piscat.
as there was a Crown to him that overcame in their exercises among the
Grecians.

The word Crown represents unto us, 1. The perpetuity of that life, for a
Crown has neither beginning nor ending; therefore it is called an
immarcessible immortal Crown. 2. Plenty, because as the Crown compasses on
every side, B. Lake.
so there is nothing wanting in this life. 3. The dignity, eternal life is a
Coronation-day.

Which the Lord has promised to them that love him] Such promises there are
Matthew. 10.22. and 19.28, 29. John 16.22. See Esaias 64.4.


Verse. 13. For God cannot be tempted] Greek, is impenetrable, no sin can
pierce him. (...).


Verse. 14. When he is drawn away of his own lust] The whole corruption of the
heart, or original sin, is called lust, (...) est extra viam rapere, a recto
tramite tractusuo abducere. Brochmand in loc.
because it principally shows it self in those lusts.

And enticed] as a fish (...) elegans metaphora est, sumpta a p^scibus, qui ex
hamo falluntur. Vorstius.
that is drawn aside into the deep water, and after caught by the bayt.

Verse. 14, 15.

By five degrees the lusts of the heart rise unto a reign and regiment in the
heart of every wicked man. Metaphora desumpta est a meretrice quae imprudentem
adolescentem abstulit a parentibus, sive a recto tramite and ad se veluti esca
allicit, deinde ex congressu ejus concipit and parit. Ludovic. de Dieu in loc.


First, Lust tempts, and that two ways. 1. By withdrawing the mind from God.
2. By enticing and entangling the mind with some delight of sin. Secondly,
lust conceives when it causes the will to consent, Perkins on Jude.
and resolve upon the wickedness thought upon. Thirdly, it brings forth,
when it forces a man to put in execution the things consented unto, and
resolved upon. Fourthly, it perfecteth the birth of sin, urging a man to add
sin unto sin, until he come unto a custom, which is ripeness and
perfection in sinning. Fifthly, it brings forth death, that is, everlasting
vengeance and destruction. In all which he alludeth unto the beginning,
proceedings, and end of man: who after he is past his full strength, decays
again and dies.

Verse. 17. Every good gift] Temporal and smaller; and every perfect gift]
Spiritual and greater blessings of grace and glory; is from above, A good
thought is gratia infusa; a good word is gratia effusa, and a good deed is
gratia diffusa, say the Schoolmen.
and comes down from the father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning] God is here compared to the Sun, and is therefore
called the Father Pater luminum, non luminis; omnis luminis elementaris,
aetherei, Spiritualis and Caelestis. Pareus. Vide Cornel. a Lap.
of lights, but yet is preferred before it, because it has sometimes clouds
cast over it, and sometimes is in eclipse; but there is no change, or shadow
of change with him. All these words are astronomicall; God is compared to the
Sun, and his light is much perfecter. The Sun has its parallaxes, in the
East it looks one way, in the South and West another way, and his turnings,
yearly departures from us, which we call Solstices. God neither rises nor
sets, nor departs, but is always near to those that call upon him.

That we should be a kind of first fruits of his ^reatures] The Saints are
called the first fruits of the creatures. 1. The first fruits are the choycest
fruits, Selecti and Deoconsecrati. See 18. Number. 12, 29, and 32 Verses.
Mich. 7.12. 2. They were dedicated to God.

Verse. 19. Quick to heare] This implies a readiness to the duty, and of the
spirit to close with the mind of God. Therefore Philosophers say we have two
ears, and but one tongue; and ears open but the tongue hedged in with teeth.
(...) non modo celerem and velocem, sed and ingenio acri praeditum significat.
Brochmand. in loc.


Slow to speake] That is, not to presume of our own gifts, thinking our selves
better able to teach others then to be taught by them.

Verse. 20. For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God] As if he
had said, in time of wrathful anger thou can do nothing that is good and
pleasing to God.

Verse. 21. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of
naughtinesse] That is, cut off as much as in you lies, Mr. Perkins.
all corruptions both of heart and life.

Filthinesse] This Greek word (...) is used only here, and properly signifies
the filthiness adhering to the body; but translated to the mind, it signifies
covetousness, as sordes in Latin; but here, any kind of sin. Estius, Cornel
a Lapide. Vide Grotium.

Superfluity of naughtinesse] Excrementum malitiae, Beza. All kind of evil
thoughts and affections more then needs; all naughtiness is supersfluous; but
he means such naughtiness as does abound, does superfluere float at top.

Engrafted word] Because it should abide in our hearts like a Syence Mr.
Perkins.
in the stock, and never be removed, but there grow and fructify unto life
eternal.

Mr. Hildersam.
Because as the syence of a good fruit that is grafted into a Crab-tree stock
will change the nature of the juice and sap of it; so the Word is able to
change our natures quite.

(...)Paralogizantes vos ipsos, id est, captiosis quibusdam ratjunculis ex
scripturae vel aliunde petitis vosmetipsos illaqueantes atque fallentes,
sophistarum more. Estius. Vide Cornel. a Lapide.
Verse. 22. Deceiving your own selves] Putting paralogismes, fallacies, and
tricks on themselves. Hearers of the word shall be blessed: we are hearers of
the Word, therefore we shall be blessed.

Verse. 23. For if any be a hearer of the Word, and not a doer, he is like unto
a man beholding his natural face in a Glasse] The Law is speculum peccati, a
man may see his spots there; speculum justitiae, it declares to a man, 1. his
primitive righteousness; 2. the perfect holiness, and perfection of Christ's
active obedience, Romans 8.2. 3. The duty he ought to perform, and the rule he
should walk by. 4. Our perfection in the life to come.

Verse. 25. Whose looketh] (...) is to look upon a thing by bending the neck and
body. See Luke 24.12. John 20.5. 1 Pet. 1.12. By this one word therefore is
commended to us, both singular humility and intent study in contemplating of
Christ propounded in the Gospel. See Cornelius a Lapide.

The perfect Law of liberty] The moral Law is called the law of liberty Quia
tum demum liber homo est, ubi legis divinae jugum suscipit, Deoque in lege
praecipienti libenter paret. Lud. de Dieu in loc.
in opposition to the Ceremonial law, and the bondage thereof.

Verse. 27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God, and the Father] This is the
way and means to declare pure Religion.

Is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction] (...)
translated here visit is an emphaticall word, for it includes both a benevolous
affection, and benefits which proceed from thence, Luke 7.16. Heb. 2.6. in
Herodian it is used of Physicians which visit the sick and take diligent care
of them.

The fatherless and widdows] That is, all that are miserable; but these are
named as being forsaken of all, and more miserable then other afflicted persons.

And to keep themselves unspotted of the world] That is, forbeares the practice
of those sins which all the world runs after. Therefore in baptism
heretofore they renounced all the pomp of the world and were clothed with a
white garment, and warned to keep it white, Rev. 14.5.
and to present it before Christ the Judge in the last day.

CHAP. II.
Varii vary haec exponunt, sed pauci remacu attingunt. a Lapide. Perkins cases
of conscience.
Verse. 1. MY brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of
glory, with respect of persons] We are not forbidden to honor rich men; but
the Apostles meaning is, to reprove those who prefer riches before piety;
when rich men are honored being ungodly, and godly men are despised and
rejected because they are poor.

Verse. 2, 3. For if there come unto your assembly a man with a Gold Ring, in
goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment. And ye
have respect to him that wears the gay clothing, etc. Vide Estium and
Brochmand. in loc. See Luke 15.22. and 23.11.
] Rich and mighty men were wont in times past (says a Lapide) to wear a Gold
Ring, both to seal their Letters, for ornament, and to cheer their hearts;
whence they wore it on the next to the little finger of the left hand, because
there goes an artery from that finger to the heart, says Gellius Lib. 10. c.
10.
With the Romans heretofore only Senators Exploratissimum est aurei annuli
usum apud antiquos, insigne fuisse Nobilitatis, ut etiam apud Romanos hujus
annuli gestatio equitum ordinem distinguebat a plebe; qua de re videri potest
Plinius l. 33. c. 1. Tiraquellus in notis ad Alexandrum ab Alexandro, lib. 2.
c. 29. Sigonius l. 2. c. 3. de jure Romanorum. Menochius de Republica
Hebraeorum. l. 6. c. 7. and in loc. (...) Non ineleganter fecit nomen
composiaum ad instar aliorum quae in Graeco erant recepta. Annulus aureus, non
minus apud veteres Hebraeos quam apud alias gentes gestamen honoratorum ac
ditiorum. Genesis 38.18, 25. and 41.42. Esai. 3.19. Grotius.
and Knights did wear Rings. White apparel as well as Gold rings (says a
Lapide) was in times past an Ensign of dignity; at Rome it was the garment of
those that did ambire magistratus, who were thence called candidati. Yet it is
not necessary (as Menochius de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 7. shows against Baronius)
to interpret it white apparel; for the Greek word (...) signifies properly
fulgentem or splendentem, gorgeous shining; there is an article in the Greek
that shining garment; we translate it gorgeous, Luke 23.11. The white color
indeed has more splendor and light then other colors. Here it is taken for
precious or excellent, and is opposed to vile.

He means in their thoughts they scorned a godly man because poor, in
comparison of a wicked man that was rich; for such are otherwise in a civil
way to be preferred.

Verse. 4. And are become Judges of evil thoughts] That is, judges ill
affected, carrying in them perverse and crooked thoughts, and judging in
respect of persons.

Verse. 5. Has not God chosen the (...) non est quivis pauper, sed qui
mendicissimus est, quod ait Cicero. Nam est a (...) timide oberro mendicans.
Brochmand. in loc:
poor of this world] God usually elects the poor; that is, the lower sort of
men; he speaks it not exclusively to the rich; but most of those that are
chosen are poor, or of an inferior rank. See 1 Cor. 1.26.

Verse. 6. D^e not rich men oppress you?] (...) is wickedly to abuse ones
power, tyrannically to oppress others; in which sense it is used in Xenophon,
and Acts 10.38.

Verse. 8. If ye fulfill the Royal Law] That is, a commanding Sovereign Law. a
Lapide gives diverse expositions. It is interpreted three ways; Lyra expounds
it the Law given by God the King of Kings; so the Syriack reads it, the Law of
God. 2. Others expound it, that which excells in its kind, so the ordinary and
interlineall Gloss. 3. Others Proverbialis, locutio, ut via^ regiam dicimus
quae diverticula non habet: quiae lex sine ulla personarum acceptione omnibus
patet, nec cuiquam adulatur. de Dieu. Vide Calvinum, and Brochmand. in loc.
say it is to be taken as the Kings way, that which is plain and without any
turning, or which is common to all.

Verse. 10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law] outwardly and in show; and
yet offend Metaphora ab iis qui inter ambulandum aut currendum ad obstaculum
aliquod offendunt, ac pedem impingunt. Piscat.
in one point] wittingly; and giving himself liberty to break any one
Commandment. Is guilty of all] That is, 1. either he breaks the chain of
duties, and so breaks all, the Law being copulative; or, 2. with the same
disposition of heart is qualified to break them all; every one sin contains
virtually all sin in it.

Verse. 12. By the Law of liberty] The law is so called because it freely
accuses without respect of persons, Mr. Ball.
Romans 3.20. and 11.30. and is not a bondage or burden to the regenerate, but
kept of them freely, willingly, and of indulgence.

Verse. 13. And mercy rejoices against judgement] The Greek word rendered
rejoices, (...), is emphaticall. Paul uses it Romans 11.18. and James here,
Vide Brochmand. in 3. Jac. 5. Radix est (...) cervix.
and 3.14. It signifies to glory against one, to insult over one, and to lift
up the neck and head as if a thing were well done.

Verse. 14. What does it profit my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and
have not works? can faith save him?] The Apostle speaks not of a true
justifying faith, but of faith professed only, or of the profession of faith.
If a man say he has faith] If a man professes himself to believe; and have
not works] That is, a conversation answerable in some measure to his
profession: can that faith of his, which is in profession only, save him, or
justify him? No by no means; This affirmative Interrogation is a most
emphaticall Negation.

Verse. 19. Thou believe that there is one God: the Devils also believe and
tremble] The Devils believe the general Articles of the faith: but the Apostle
instanceth in that, either because it is the distinction of a carnal believer
from a Pagan; Hunc articulum adfert pro exemplo, vel quod in eo maxim Judaei
differrent a Paganis vel quia in symbolo fidei nostrae primus est. Estius.
or because it is the first article of our faith. The Devils acknowledge four
articles of our faith, Matthew. 8.29. 1 They acknowledge God, 2. Christ, 3. the
day of judgment, 4. that they shall be tormented then.

Tremble] They quiver and shake, as when men's teeth chatter in their head in
extreme cold. The Greek word signifies properly the roaring of the Sea: From
thence (says Eustathius) it is translated to the hideous clashing of Armor in
the battle. The word seems to imply an extreme fear, which causes not
only trembling, Premenda est emphasis verbi (...). Nam Graeci significaturi
metum vehementissimum, eumque subitaneum, quo quis corripitur, usurpare solent
verbum (...): nam hoc sensu inventes hanc vocem apud Plutarchum and alios: quo
etiam ducit radix vocis. Nam (...) est fremitus and horror maris ac stuctuum.
Brochmand.
but also a roaring and shriking out. Mark 6.49. Acts 16.29.

Verse. 21. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works?] See V. 25. That is,
their faith was by their works justified, See Mr. Pemble of justification. And
Down of justification. l. 7. c. 8. Vide Bezam. See Mr. Hildersam on 51. Psalm.
Sect. 6. c. 1. p. 193, 195. and 215, 216.
and declared to be a true and living, not a false and dead faith; yea,
themselves were thereby justified and declared to be true believers indeed,
truly righteous before God, and not so in show and profession only.

It is not meant of the justification of his person before God, Perkins and Dr.
Tailor on Titus. Nec hoc intelligit Jacobus de causa justificationis, sed de
ejus declaratione and manifestatione, nec de causa perfectionis fidei, sed
testimonio perfectionis illius, cui tamen testimonio and manifestationi
tribuitur rei efficientia, usitata in Scriptura loquendi formula, qua res
dicuntur fieri cum manifestantur. Rivetus. Vid Dilherri electa l. 3. c 24.
but of the faith of his person before men. The true meaning is, Abraham was
justified by works; that is, he testified by his works that he was by faith
justified in the sight of God.

The Papists add unto the Text, 1. a false gloss, by works of the Law. 2. A
false distinction, saying that they justify as causes.

Verse. 22. See thou how faith wrought with his works] Faith professed, as
verse. 24. did cooperate either to or with his works; that is, either faith with
other graces did cooperate to the bringing forth of his works, or else it
cooperated with his works; not to justify him before God, but to manifest and
approve his righteousness.

And by works was faith made perfect] Not that works do perfect faith; but
faith whilst it brings forth good works does manifest how perfect it is, as 2
Cor. 12.9. See Beza.

Verse. 26. For as the body without the Spirit is dead, so faith without works
is dead also] Either the Apostle James speaks of the habit of faith, or of
the profession of it. If of the habit, R. Down. of justificat. l. 7. c. 8.
then the comparison stands thus: As the body of man without the spirit, that
is, without breath (which is the prime signification of the word (...) derived
from (...) to breath; in which sense it is called the spirit of the mouth, and
spirit of the nostrils) I say, as the body without breath is dead, so that
faith that is without works, which are as it were the breathing of a lively
faith, is judged to be dead. If by faith we understand faith professed, or the
profession of faith: as elsewhere in this Chapter, and Act. 14.22. Romans 1.8.
then we may understand the similitude thus: as the the body of man without the
spirit, that is, the soul, is dead: so is the profession of faith without a
godly life. Apoc. 3.1.


CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. MY brethren, be not many Masters] Or teachers; multi Doctores. Beza.
Let not private persons take upon them to become instructers of others. So Mr.
Perkins, rather censurers. Ego magistros intelligo, non qui publico munere
funguntu^ in Ecclesia: sed qui jus sibi censorum in alios usurpant. Tales enim
reprehensores, quasi magistri morum haberi volune. Atque haec loqintio tam
Graecis quam Latinis est usitata, Magistros vocare qui superciliose in alios
animadvertunt. Calvinu^.
Dr. Hall in his Paraphrase takes it in both senses; My brethren do not
ambitiously affect the title of the Authors, and leaders of factions, drawing
Disciples after you; neither be ye rigid and uncharitable censurers of others.
See a Lapide.

Knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation] That is, Matthew. 7.1.
Romans 2.1.
by censuring and judging of others we shall receive the greater judgment.

Verse. 2. For in many things we offend all] The Apostle puts himself into the
Yet he was worthily called James the just.
number, and speaks it of those that were sanctified, at least in his esteem,
and in the judgment of charity.

We offend all] (...) labimur, impingimus, we stumble all: A Metaphor from
Travelers walking on stony or slippery ground. The Apostle speaks not of the
singular individual acts, but of the diverse sorts of sin.

Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. And setleth on fire the whole course, or
wheel of nature] He compares the course of man's life with a wheel. Calvin.
That is, the whole man, Perinde est, sive rotam sive curriculum vertas, prout
accentum mutaveris; intelligit enim Apostolus metaphorice, totum vitae nostrae
tempus. Vorstius. (...) Calvinus, Beza, Vulg. Rotam potius quam curriculum aut
circumvolutionem dicere malui, quod Jacobus sic mihi videtur alludere ad
rapiditatem circumdotae rotae, suo motu flammam concipientis. Beza.
a man's own tongue fires himself and all others: like the Sun, (when it is
out of order and course) sets all on fire.

And is set on fire of Hell] That is, the hell of thy nature, say some; by the
Devil, says Estius, so called by a Metonymie.

Verse. 8. But the tongue can no man tame] This is wilder then the wildest beast.

Verse. 15. Divelish] Or full of Devils. The Greek word ends in (...) and
denotat plenitudinem. Because fleshly wisdom aims at Satan's end, viz. to keep
a man in an unregenerate estate. (...). Satanica apud Arabem. Haec mundi
sapientia vocatur diabolica, tum quia diabolum imitatur, tum quia a diabolo
suggeritur and aspiratur. Porro alludit Iacobus ad etymon daemonum: daemones
enim dicuntur quasi (...), id est, scientes, and his antiqui cribuebant
scientiarum and artium bumanarum inventionem; sed proprie ipsi primi anctores
and inventores sunt sapientiae mundanae quae docet se suaque attollere, alios
deprimere a Lapide.


The wisdom which is proper to Devils; or (as Piscator will have it) which is
inspired by Devils or evil spirits.

Verse. 16. Confusion] The Vulgar renders it inconstancy, (...) vi vocis est
tumultuatio, agitatio inquietudo, res quae nescit stare certo loco. Brochmand.
and so it sometimes signifies. Calvin and Erasmus pertubation; some tumult;
tumulinatio. Beza. others otherwise.

Verse. 17. Without hypocrisie] Great censurers are commonly great hypocrites.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. FRom whence come wars?] Not by the Sword, or Armies; but their tongue
and heart wars by reason of the difference of affections. Chap. 3.14. and
4.5.11. The Greek word properly signifies quarrels in which much blood is
shed; and fightings] or brawlings; is is rendered strifes, 2 Timothy 2.23. Among
you] being brethren, and scattered brethren. James 1.1. Come they no^ ben^,
even of your lusts] That is the root, the Devil may increase them. The Greek
word may be translated pleasures or delights. We must understand lusts in
general, all kind of lusts. That war in your Members] 1. Bello externo, 1
Pet. 2.11.
when the whole carnal part fights against the whole Spiritual part, Romans
7.23. Gal. 5.17.2. Bello civili and interno, when one lust wars against
another, as in carnal men.

Verse. 3. Because ye ask amisse] Neither suitably to Gods mind, nor agreeably
to his end.

Verse. 4. Ye adulerers and adulteresses] because of the running out of the
heart to any creature Adulteros appellat metaphorice; tum quia voluptatum
fecerat mentionem quarum immodicus appetitus adulteros facit; tum quia a Deo
fornicatur, atque adulteratio, quisquis amorem quem Deo debet, ad mundum
transfert. Estius.
inordinately.

Know ye not] This word has an Emphasis and pricks sharply; as if he should
say, what are you so ignorant, or do you not consider?

The friendship of the world is enmity with God] both actively and passively;
for it both makes us hate God, and it makes God hate us.

Verse. 6. But he gives more grace] That is, the Scriptures offer grace and
ability to do more then nature can; so some Weemes. Vide Bezam.
; rather (as Calvin) to overcome our lusts, and bring them into order.

God resists the proud] Sets himself in battle array against him, as the
Greek word emphatically signifies. (...) Plutarcho and aliis ex adverso stare
instructa acie. Brochand. in loc.


Verse. 7. Submit your selves wholly to God] The Greek word translated submit is
very Proprie significans inferiorem obsequenter parere ordini a superiere
constituto. Brochmand. in loc.
emphaticall; (...) according to the force of the word is, place under,
subcolleco. See Romans 13.1. Ephesians. 5.22.

Verse. 8. Draw nigh to God] We have been enemies to God, far off from him;
now we must approach to him, and seek to recover his favor.

Cleanse your hands ye sinners] (...) signifies in general any sinner, in
opposition to a righteous man; Romans 5.19. In special it signifies a wicked
man, one of a flagitious life; a sinner Qui sunt publici and perditi
pececatores, at qui peccandi artem exercent. Brochm.
(...), Luke 7.37. See Matthew. 9.10, 11. and 26.45.

Cleanse and purifie] An allusion to legal uncleanness, and the purifying of
them. Before an unclean person might draw near to God, he must be purified
from his uncleanness.

Hands and heart] The outward and inward man, being filthy and unclean, must be
purified from corruption of heart and life.

Ye double-minded] As chap. 1.8. such as have a double divided heart.

Verse. 9. Be afflicted and mourn, and weep, let your laughter be turned to
mourning, and your joy to heavinesse] A man must so seriously consider of his
wretchedness, Affligitevosmetipsos jejuniis, lugubrem habitum induite, saccum,
and cilicia, ut poenitentes Christiani solebant. Haec enim vi^ ^st istius
vocis, ut videre est Genesis 37.23. 2 Samuel 13.37. fletus solet plerumque jungi cum
jejunio. ut 1 Samuel 7.11. and 12.22. Grotius.
till he be made sad by it, and till it do even press sighs and tears from
him; and if his heart refuse to be broken at first, he must give himself to
this sadness, and put from him all matter of laughter and mirth, and make it
his only business to mourn. (...) translated here afflicted, is he which is
troubled with the burden of calamities, as the etymology of the word shows.

Heavinesse] Such a heaviness Emphasis est in voce (...) qua utitur Apostolus.
Nam proprie significat dimissionem vultus sive e marore, sive pudore, sive
utraque re ortam. Brochmand. in loc. Vide plura ibid.
as may be seen by the casting down of the countenance, as the word imports.
See Beza and Grotius.

Verse. 10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord] That is, present your
humble supplications unto God for pardon of your sinfulness, and for help
against it by his Spirit, and the blood of his Son. He humbles himself in
Gods sight, that does from his heart confess his own wickedness, and
acknowledging himself to be base and vile, and to deserve all punishment, yet
takes boldness to supplicate for pardon and help in Christ's name, and for Gods
mercy sake in him.

And he shall lift you up] That is, help you out of sin and misery.

Verse. 12. There is one Law giver] This shows, 1. That Christ is he which gives
Laws to his people. 2. That he alone gives Laws to them.

Verse. 17. To him it is sinne] That is, sin with a witness, by an
excellency; sin not to be excused by any plea or color. Peccatum gravius ac
majus alludit ad Luc. 12.47. Estius. See John 9.41.


CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. Weep and houle] Or, weep bowling; flete ejulantes. The Greek word
(...), translated houle, some say, is proper to Wolves. Plutarch and Aristotle
say it is proper to Frogs. In Homer and Demosthenes it signifies horrendum
clamare, to cry horribly, or to cry with a certain howling. The Scripture uses
this word to declare great sorrow, as we may see Micah 1.8. Ier. 4.8. Joel.
1.10, 13. This threatening seems to be taken out of Luke 6.24.

Verse. 2. Your riches are corrupted] The Greek word (...) is used by the LXX.
Interpreters Ier. 22.19. of stink exhaling from a carcass.

Verse. 4. Behold the hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields,
which is of you kept back by fraud, See Mal. 3.5.
crieth] There are four enormous crimes which in Scripture are said to cry to
Heaven: 1. Voluntary murder, Genesis 4.10. 2. The sin of Sodom, Four
crying-sinnes.
Genesis 18.20. 3. The defrauding of the laborers wages, as here. 4. The
oppression of the poor, Exodus 1.23.

Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis, and Sodomorum,
Vox oppressorum, and merces detenta laborum.
The Lord of Sabaoth] Of Hosts, not Sabbath, Vide Bezam and Grotium.
so Romans 9.29. (...) vox corrupta ex Hebraeo Zebaoth, quod exercitus significat
in plurali Vorstius.

Verse. 5. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton: ye have
nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter] The Apostle uses two very
emphaticall words, and one elegant expression, to set out the riot of those
rich men. The first is (...), which is to live delicately and luxuriously. The
Noune (...) is used Genesis 2. by the Septuagint interpreters, to note those
delights which Adam enjoyed in Paradise. See 2 Pet. 2.13.
The second word is (...), which signifies to pass one life luxuriously in
pleasures. It is used also 1 Timothy 5 6. The third expression is, Ye have
nourished your hearts, (...) proprie est instar agnorum petulanter exultare and
lascivire. Hic metaphorice ad delicatam and lascivam istorum vitam refertur.
Vorstius.
as in the day of slaughter, or Sacrifice. The Apostle points his finger (says
Piscator) to those solemn Feasts in which Eucharisticall Sacrifices were
plentifully slain, and when they fared daintily, Prove. 7.14. Esaias 2.14.
Vorstius has almost the same.

Verse. 11. Behold, we count them happy which endure] either till God come in
judgment, or for your deliverance.

The Lord is very pitifull] (...) multorum viscerum, of many bowels, of tender
compassion.

Verse. 12. But above all things my brethren swear not] Why above all things?
Idolatry and superstition are as heinous: but 1 This is a sin of that slippery
member, the tongue; 2. grown now through general use familiar, custom has
made it habitual; Dr. Sclater. Quia Judaei valde proni erant ad juramenta, nec
facile evelli ea consuetudo potuit, ideo Christianos monet serio Jacobus, ut
meminerint ejus praecepti quod Christus dedit, Matthew. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
Quae autem valde caveri volumus, ea dicere solemus cavenda ante emnia. Grotius.
the propension thereto was greater, therefore is this emphaticall caution
given. He had spoken of patience before in adversity, and now he wishes them
above all things not to swear; meaning, if they be crossed, they should above
all things take heed they do not break forth to unadvised oaths.

But let your yea be yea, and nay nay] Whatsoever we affirm in common speech,
we should truly aver with a simple affirmation: and what we deny, deny it
with a simple negation. Pareus.

Verse. 13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? let him sing
Psalmes] He does not leave it as arbitrary, he may pray or choose; he must,
there is the necessity of a precept laid upon him. As he has reason to pray
then because of his own need, so he has encouragement to pray then, because he
may have stronger hopes to speed. The Greek words are more significant, (...)
rendered afflicted, is to be greatly afflicted and vexed with evils. The word
translated merry is (...), in his right mind; noting that all true mirth must
come from the right frame of the mind.

Dike.
Let him sing Psalms] viz. of thanksgiving, as the opposition shows.

Verse 14. And let them pray over him] This phrase is emphaticall, for being
present with the sick man it moves us the more in our prayers; so Christ did
over Lazarus, and Elishah over the widows son.

Anointing him with Oil in the Name of the Lord] That anointing of the body
was a ceremony used by the Apostles and others, Ex instituto Christi Marci
6.13. nempe quia oleum apud Hebraeos Divinam gratiam significabat: ut and manum
impositio, quae and ipsa circa aegrotos adhiberi solebat. Marc. 16.18. Act.
28.8. Omnia autem ista fiebant in nomine Christi. Marc. 16.17. Act. 3.16.19.13.
Proculus Christianus S^verum Imperatorem per oleum aliquando curavit. Testis
Tertullianus apud Scapulam. Grotius.
when they put in practice the miraculous gift of healing, which gift is now
ceased. 2. That anointing had a promise that the party anointed should recover
his health; but the persons thus anointed die without recovery. Mr. Perkins.

This was an extraordinary thing communicated to those which had gifts of
miracles used by them, Vide Chemnit. Harm. See Fulke on the Rhem. Test.
as an outward symbol and sign of the Spiritual healing; and so we deny not
but it was an extraordinary temporary Sacrament; but now that miracles are
ceased, still to retain the outward sign is a vain superstitious imitation,
although St. James his Oil and the Popish Ointment do much differ.

Verse. 15. Save the sicke] That is, restore to health.

Verse. 16. Confess your faults one to another] This Commandment binds as well
the Priest to make confession to us, as any of us to the Priest, so say Cajetan
and Scotus. The confession of faults which the Apostle here speaks of, is to be
made, 1. in time of sickness. 2. In the private house. 3. One to another. The
Apostle would not be so preposterous as to require a man first to receive that
Unction which they say is not to be received before confession, Mutuo quod de
pastore ac ove non potest intelligi. Vnde S. Augustinus id refert ad eos qui se
mutuo offendorunt. Riveti Cathol. orthod.
and then after to require confession. 2 Cajetan in loc. ingenuously confesses
that St. James speaks neither of Sacramental Unction no Confession; he would
have the people mutually confess their faults one to annother, that so they
may mutually pray one for another.

The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much] There is but
one word in the Original, M. Burthoughes.
the working prayer, (...), but it is translated by two, effectual, fervent.
It signifies such a working as notes the liveliest activity that can be.

It signifies effectual, or effectually working; and so both the Verb and the
Participle, Romans 7.5. 2 Cor. 1.6.4.12 Gal. 5.6. Ephesians. 3.20. Col. 1.29. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. James 6.16. B. Down of justification, l. 4. c. 11.
which are used nine times at least in the New Testament, are or ought to be
effectual; namely in it self, or effectual to work according to the twofold
(...) or act, whereof the Philosophers and Schoolmen use to speak; to wit, the
first, and the second.

Verse. 17. Subject to like passions] or, same passions; it is but one word in
the Greek, and used only here, (...) Hoc est, similibus sive iisdem
passionibus obnoxious. Vorstius.
and Acts 14.15. in both which places Beza renders it iisdem affectionibus
obnoxious.

And he prayed earnestly] Greek, and he prayed in prayer; that is, he prayed
earnestly for the ingemination has this force. (...) and precibus precatus
est. Beza. Et oratione oravit. Vulg.


ANNOTATIONS Upon the first Epistle general of PETER.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1. THE inscription shows that this Epistle was written to the
strangers, dispersed through Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bythinia.

There are diverse opinions about these strangers, the most common and true
opinion is (says Pareus) that Peter wrote this Epistle to the converted Jews
scattered through the provinces in Asia, which is very evident (says He) from
the first History of Pentecost described in the second of the Acts, for then
the Jews came out of diverse provinces, viz. Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, to
Jerusalem to the Feast. This Epistle was by Peter written to these Jews made
Christians, and returned into their provinces, and there much afflicted for the
Gospel.

The purpose of the Apostle in this Epistle is to confirm the Christians, to
whom he writes, in the faith, and to assure them, that it was the true grace of
God they had received, and to persuade them to all possible care of sincerity
of life becoming the Gospel, and to constancy in trial. See 1 Pet. 5.12. and
2 Pet. 3.1.

Verse. 2. Grace unto you and peace be multiplied] Or fulfilled. (...)
significat multiplicari, dilatari, incrementum largistimum capere, adimpleri,
ut sic tum de multiplicatione in quantitate discretatum de augmento in
quantitate continua accipiatur. Matthew. 24.12. Act. 6.1. and 7. c. 7. v. 17. c.
9. v. 31. c. 12. v. 24. 2 Cor. 9.10. 2 Pet. 1.2. Inde quidam reddunt
multiplicetur, quidam vero impleatur. Gerh.
See Jude 2. Grace and peace are perfixed in the salutation before almost all
Paul's Epistles, but this word fulfilled is here added.

Verse. 3. Has begotten us again unto a lively hope] It is called a lively
hope, Spes viva pro spevitae capitur: quanquam videtur tacita esse antithesis
inter spem, quae in regno Dei incorruptibili defixa est, and inter spes hominum
fluxas ac evanidas. Calvinus.
1. Because it is active, it puts a man on lively endeavors, He that has
this hope purifieth himself. 2. Because it comforts and cheeres up the soul,
brings life into the Spirit. 3. Because it lives when a man dies. It is so
called in opposition to the dying hopes of ungodly men, Job. 11. vlt. We who
before were strangers and without hope, are now through the mercy of God by the
ministry of the Gospel, regenerated, and so restored to the hope of an
immortal inheritance.

Verse. 4. To an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for you] It is not corruptible, nor perishes as the
riches of the world, Zanchius.
it cannot be defiled with abuse, nor fade with antiquity; and is laid up in
Heaven. Col. 1.5.

It fades not away, there is the unchangeablenesse: it is immortal, there is
the eternity of it. Mr. Perkins.


Vndefiled] (...), This Epithete is used of Christ, Heb. 7.26. Of the marriage
bed, Heb. 13.14. And of worship acceptable to God, James 1.27.

That fades not away] (...), This is the proper name of a Flower, which is
still fresh and green. See 5.4.


Ver^um (...) proprie significat praesidijs muniri, (...) enim significat
custodiam sive praesidium militate. Vtitur Apostolus peculiari verbo (...), id
est, qui Custodim^ni non quomodocunque, sed vigilantissima cura; qualis est
militum qui in excubijs collocantur ea part qua metuitur hostilis irruptio.
Nam (...) militare praesidium. est. Estius.

The word is used metaphorically, Gal. 3.23. Kept] East, as under a strong
Garrison. Praesidio tenebamur. Shut up is there added exegittically. Cities
being kept with Garrisons against enemies are wont to be kept shut.


Verse. 5. Who are kept] Or as the original is, being a military word, safely
kept, or guarded as with a strong Garrison. So it is rendered 2 Cor. 11.32.

By the power of God through faith unto salvation] Two things are spoken of
faith, the first is affirmed, viz. that faith preserves a man to salvation
through all hindrances either of inward temptations or outward crosses which
the Devil or the world can lay in his way, the power of God preserves, but
through faith; the second is employed, therefore we must labor to keep that
faith evermore with us which must keep us, and to preserve that which must
preserve us to salvation. Mr. Perkins.

Verse. 6. Greatly rejoyce] There is a great emphasis in the word (...) for it
signifies to witness the inward joy of the heart, in the countenance, voice,
and gestures, and therefore it is more than to rejoice. Christ joins these two
together, Matthew. 5.12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, not only inwardly
rejoice, but also in outward signs, witness the inward joy of your heart,
They are joined together also, 1 Pet. 4.13. Rev. 19.7.

Perkins.
Verse. 7. Though it be tried with fire] Men are cleansed by affliction from
their corruption, as gold from the dross by the fire.

Might be found unto praise and honor and glory] Praise consists in words,
honor in external signs, glory in a good opinion, yet here they are taken
for the same thing.

Verse. 8. In whom though now ye see him not yet beleeving] As if he should
say, you believe nevertheless assuredly in him, though you did never see him.
He speaks to the Jews which were in dispersion, Hildersam.
many of which never saw Judaea.

Metaphora a victoribus in stadio, qui potiti victoria post absolutum certamen
de manu Agonothetae reportant bravium vel Coronam. Pareus.
Verse. 9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your soules]
Not only hereafter, but here while they were obeying God. Vide Estium and
Gerhardum.

In verbis compositis (...) and (...) magna est emphasis, exprimit tum ardeus
desiderium tum singular studium Prophetarum in exquirenda salute per Messiam
promissa in ipstus adventu clarissime revelanda. Gerh. in loc. Vide Laurentium.

Id est, accurate, diligenter, solicit, magna contentione and studio
perquisiverunt and perscrutati sunt. Comel a Lap. Salus pro conspicua
manifestatione accipitur, quae nobis obtigit Christi adventu. Matthew. 13.6. Calv.


Verse. 10. Of which salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you] Not that
themselves had no consolation of that grace, which by the eye of prophecy they
foresaw to light in abundance upon the Church of the New Testament, but because
in comparison it came to us and was not accomplished unto them. Perkins.

Hoc maximum Evangelij encomium est quod the saurum sapientiae continet,
Angelis adhuc clausum and occultum. Calv. (...), This word signifies prying
into a thing overvailed and hidden from sight, to look as we say wishly at it
as if we would look even through it. Vide Bezam and Gerhardum.
Verse. 12. Which things the Angels desire to look into] Stooping down to
behold. The Cherubims were made with their eyes looking down to the mercy seat
in the Holy of Holies. Exodus 25.18, 19, 20. Whereunto Peter here alludeth, when
he says, the Angels themselves desire with bowed heads to peep. They stoop
down as it were; for the same word is used, John. 20.5. of the Disciple that
came and stooped to look into that part of the Sepulcher where Jesus was laid.

The Septuagint use it, Cant. 2.9. Genesis 26.8. 1 Chronicles. 15.29. Prove. 7.6.

2 Kings. 4.29. Job. 40.2. Luke 12.3. See Ep. 6.14. Similitudo ex more vetusto
sumpta, nam quum oblongas haberent vestes, neque iter facere, neque quicquam
operis commode suscipere poterant, nisi succincti. Vnde istae loquutiones
Accingere se ad opus and res gerendas. Ergo impedimenta tolli jubet, ut soluti
ad Deum contendant. Calvinus in loc. Vide Gerhardum and Laurentium.

Lumbos succingimus ad quatuor usus, primo aditer, secundo ad opus, tertio ad
bolla, quarto ad ministerium. a Lapide. Vide plura ibid.


Verse. 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your minde] Even as the Jews and
eastern people at this day tuck up their long Garments to make them more
expedite and free to a journey or business; so Christians journeying toward
heaven, must take short their minds from earthly delights. Dr. Tailor on Titus.
Vide Bezam.

The maine strength of the body is in the loins, therefore some say the strong
purpose and resolutions of the soul are here meant

At the revelation of Jesus Christ] That is, when Christ is revealed, that is,
gloriously at the last day, or when Christ reveals himself by his word or
Spirit now in this life. Some interpret it thus, Look for the glory that shall
shortly be brought unto you, at the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ; others
thus, See Calvin. and Bifield in loc
Trust on the present grace that now is brought unto you by Jesus Christ
himself, revealing and opening the same. Both are good and agreeable to
Scripture, and each has the countenance of learned men; the latter is the
better, 1. Because it more agrees with the plainness of the words. 2. Grace
is rarely (not twice that I know) put for glory. 3. Peter having mentioned the
last end before, Estey.
v. 4, 5. It is most likely that here he should set down the way and means
thereunto. 4. If the former should be meant, then must the Apostle say that
here, which he had set down v. 7.5. The latter is fuller, a man may look for
glory and have little grace, and we are to take Scripture in the largest
meaning.

Verse. 14. Not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts] (...),
viz. as a player was framed and fashioned to the gesture and words either of
drunkenness or adultery, when he played them on the Scaffold of the Theater.
H. Steph. in These.


Verse. 19. As of a lambe] Christ is like a lamb, 1. For harmelesnesse. 2. For
patience and silence in affliction, Esaias 53.7. Ier. 11.19. 3. For meekness and
humility. 4. For sacrifice.

Without blemish and without spot] That is, free from all sin, either
actual, Significat hac similitudine in Christo nos habere quicquid veteribus
sacrificijs adumbratum fuit, quanquam praecipue alludit ad Agnum paschalem;
atque hinc discendum est quid nobis prodest Legis lectio in hac part.
Calvinus. Nomen (...), quod de Christo etiam usurpatur Heb. 9.14. quidam volunt
esse originis Graecae deductum a (...) quod est Culpare, sed rectius deducitur
ab Hebraeo Mum quod etiam Syrus hoc loco utitur, quod proprie significat vitium
aliquod corporis. Levit. 21.18. de Sacerdote. c. 2^.20. de pecore, ab eo enim
descendit (...) significans dedecus ac probrum, praesertim si a Poetis
usurpetur. Gerh.
that is without blemish, or original, that is spotless says Aquinas. By
unspotted is meant right in the outward parts, by without blemish sound within.
See Exodus 12.5. A lamb may be without blemish, (...), which yet is not
without spot, (...), that therefore the most absolute and perfect purity of
Christ prefigured in the lambs of the Old Testament that were to be
sacrificed, might be better expressed, the Apostle calls him a lamb without
blemish and without spot. See Ephesians. 5.27.

Verse. 24, 25. These Verses hold out two things in a special manner. 1. The
vanity of things Temporal. 2. The glory of things Spiritual and eternal. The
vanity of carnal excellencies is set forth under an allegory.

Verse. 24. For all flesh] Caro hominem denotat cum omnibus donis naturalibus.
Luther. By flesh is meant all mankind, and all the creatures since the fall
given for man's use, Genesis 6.13.

Grasse] This word is used three ways, 1. To note a multitude. Ioh. 5.25. 2.
Glory, a flourishing estate. Psalm. 72.16. 3. A fading of that glory. Psalm.
90.6. and Psalm. 103.15, 16.

All flesh is grasse] That is, all carnal excellencies of the outward and
inward man have a flourishing estate, but they fade.

Verse. 25. But the word of the Lord] Not that in the book but written in the
heart turned to grace as the former ver. shows.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. WHerefore laying aside all malice and all guile, and hypocrisies, and
envies, Metaphora est, vel ab oneribus quae humeris deponuntur, vel a
vestimentis quae exuere ac deponere solemus. Laurentius.
and evil speakings] There are five things we should lay aside, when we come
into Gods presence to hear his word, Malice, Guile, Hypocrisy, Envy, and
evil speaking. 2. Note the extent of it, all Malice, all Guile, and all evil
speaking. He says Hypocrisies, and Envies, and evil speakings in the plural
number, to note that we should not tolerate in our selves any kind of these
evils. Bifield.

Verse. 2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby] The new man desires, (...) in Scripturis accipitur tum pro
infant adhuc in utero materno concluso, Luc. 1.41. tunc pro infant recens
nato, Luc. 2.12. Act. 7.19. tum pro eo qui jam paulo adultior, 2 Timothy 3.15. hoc
loco in secunda significatione accipi adjecta vocula (...) ostendit. Gerh. in
loc. The word may be said to be sincere, 1. In it self, because it is without
error, sin, and there is no deceit in it at all, Pro. 8.7, 8. Psa. 19.8, 9.
and because it has no composition in it, but is the pure word of God, as it
came from God himself at first. 2. In effect it makes men sincere, it both
teaches and works in the Godly a Spirit without guile. Psalm. 19.8, 9.
Bifield.
1. The milk of the word; when a Child is newborn nothing can give him
content but milk, he desires, it as his livelihood, afterward he is more
playfull, and every small matter makes him neglect the breast; so the new
Creature esteems the Word as his appointed food, he cannot live without it. 2.
The sincere milk, unsophisticated, not compounded; the Child desires the
mothers milk as it is of it self, without sugar; so the new Creature desires
the word, for the Words sake, for its natural sweetness, and loves to hear the
downright naked truth without any mixture; another man may desire to hear a
Sermon for the neat composition, for the Learning that is showed in it, but not
for the sincerity of it. 3. Therefore he desires it that he may grow thereby in
saving goodness, Faith, Zeal, Mercy. Another man may desire the Word that he
may get more knowledge. The Greek word (...) here rendered desire signifies a
vehement desire of learning, which he compares with the earnest desire of the
babe after the mothers milk, which comparison is certainly taken out of Psalm.
131.2. that this Greek word signifies so may appear by Romans 1.11. 2 Cor. 5.2.
and 9.14. Phil. 1.8. and 2.16. where it is also used.

Verse. 5. Ye also as lively stones] The godly are called lively stones, stones,
because of their solidnesse, lively, because of their activenesse.

Verse. 6. Behold I lay in Sion a chief corner stone] Greek, ground stone, that
is, Christ who is primus in fundamento, Quod aliqui in voce anguli subtilius
philosophantur, quasi hoc ideo dictum sit, quod Christus Judaeos and Gentes,
tanquam duos parietes diversos simul conjungat, non satis firmum est, contenti
ergo simus simplici expositione, ideo sic vocari, quia aedificij pondus illo
innititur. Calvinus.
Esaias 28.16. 2. The glory of the building.

The Pope, says Bellarmine in his Preface to the Controversy de Romano
Pontifice, but Paul and Peter teach that this stone can be meant of none but
Christ. Estius here interprets it of Christ.

Verse. 7. He is precious] (...), Honor, He is an honor; the more of Christ any
one has, the more he is honored. Laurentius thinks the abstract is put for
the concrete (...) for (...) honor for honorable and precious.

Verse. 9. That ye should show forth] The Greek word (...) signifies publicly
to set forth, and so to excite others to glorify God. The LXX use it for
Saphar to rehearse, to number orderly, Psalm. 9.14. and 55.8. which word the
Syriack uses here.

Verse. 12. Shall behold] With a narrow circumspection; it is not only seeing
but with a narrow circumspection. (...) penitius and perfectius inspicientes.
Gerh.


Verse. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man] It is not humane in
regard of the Author, (...) proprie significat subordinari, ordine quodam
subjici. Gerh. Ordinatio divina secundum substantiam, humana ratione subjecti,
causae instrumentalis, finis.
it was not devised by man, but in regard of the end, because it was ordained
of God for man as the proper subject, and for his profit as the proper end of
it.

Verse. 15. That with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men] The Greek word translated well-doing is a participle of the present time,
If ever we would effectually silence wicked men, we must be continually
exercised in well-doing. Bifield. Vide Gerh. in loc.
and notes the continual custom of well-doing. Put to silence] Sometime this
Greek word is translated to still a thing that is tumultuous and raging, and so
the Sea was silenced, or made still, Mark. 9.39. Sometimes, to make
speechless, or dumb, so Mat. 22.12. Sometimes, to confute, so as they have
not a word to answer, so Mat. 22.34. Sometimes, to muzzle, or tie up the mouth,
so 1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Timothy 5.18. and so it signifies properly. The word here
rendered, Foolish men, signifies properly, men without mind, or men that have
not use of their understanding, and so are either natural fools, or mad men.

Verse. 16. As free and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousnesse]
Free in respect of our consciences, exempted from humane powers, Not a civil
but a spiritual freedom is here meant, called Christian liberty. Bifield.
and yet as servants of God bound in conscience to obey him in obeying them, so
far forth as he does command us to obey them. B. Downames Sermon of Christian
liberty.

Cloake] The Greek word (...), which is no where else found in the whole new
Testament but in this verse only, signifying properly any covering; Alludere
mihi videtur Petrus ad veterem illum morem quo pileati incedebant servi recens
manumissi. Beza.
as the covering of Badgers skins, Exodus 16.14. and 36.16. That which was
spread over the Tabernacle is in the Septuagint translation so called. And it
is very fitly translated a cloak (though it do not properly so signify) in
respect of that notion wherein the word in our English tongue is commonly and
proverbially used; to note some fair and colorable pretense, wherewith we
disguise and conceal from the conusance of others the dishonestie and
faultiness of our intentions in some things practiced by us. John 15.22. 1
These. 2.5. Sanderson in loc.

Of maliciousnesse] (...) is properly rendered by malice or maliciousness. As
these English words and the Latin word malitia whence these are borrowed; so
likewise (...) in Greek, is many times used to signify one special kind of
sin, which is directly opposite to brotherly love and charity; Id. ib.
but here it is taken more largely for all manner of evil and naughtiness
according to the adequate signification of the Greek and Latin adjectives
(...) and malus, from whence the substantive used in the text is derived.

Verse. 17. Honor all men] The Jews despised the Gentiles, Romans 14.3. And
among the very Jews the rich despised the poor, James 2.3. The Apostle here
applies a remedy to this disease; a parallel place we have, Romans 12.10. Phil.
2.3.

Love the brotherhood] Brotherhood is taken collectively for the whole multiude
of brethren, as nobility for the whole society of noble men. Vorstius. Gerh.
The Apostle uses this word in the same signification, chapter 5. v. 9. Therefore
the Syriacke has rightly rendered it, love your brethren.

Verse. 18. Good, Gentle] A Masters goodness has relation to justice, Dr Gouge.
his gentleness to equity.

But also to the froward] Even where the servant may not obey, he must be
subject. (...) vulgate reddidit discoli Graecam vocem alla voce Graeca
exprimens, quod imperitis errandi occasionem praebuit; (...) proprie significat
obliquum, curvum. Luc. 3.5. metaphorice eum qui est moribus pravis, animo
corrupto and depravato. Act. 2.40. Phil. 2.15. Gerh.


Verse. 21. Leaving us an example] The Greek word (...) Translatio a picturis
vel paedagogis sumpta. Beza. Translatio sumpta a lapidibus viarum indicibus.
Arias Montanus.
is a metaphore taken from Scriveners or Painters, and signifies properly a
copy or pattern, Vsurpatur proprie de exemplari, quod praeceptores discipulis,
pictores novirijs proponunt, ad quod in pingendis literis and imaginibus
respiciant specimen artis suae exhibituri. Gerh. in loc.
or portraiture of a thing exactly drawn out. Bifield.

Verse. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree] The
Apostle alludes to Esaias 53. See Verses 4.6.11.12. Sicuti sub lege peccator ut
reatu solveretur, victimam substituebat suo loco: ita Christus maledictionem
peccatis nostris debit^m in se suscepit, ut e^ coram Deo expiaret. Calvinus.
And he has respect also to the saying of John Baptist, John 1.29. The word
(...) himself has a great emphasis, whence the Prophet so often there
repeates it, v. 4.5.7.11.12. Bare] In allusion to the Sacrifices. See Heb.
7.27. James 2.21. and 53. Esaias 4.

Our sins] That is punishments. The original word translated Tree] Signifies
sometimes a staff, Matthew. 26.47. sometimes a pair of stocks, Vide Bezam.
Act. 16.24. sometimes a tree growing, Rev. 2.11. usually wood, 1 Cor 3.12.
here a Gallows made of wood. Bifield.


By whose stripes ye were healed] (...). The whole Testament has not the
like, That is, forgiven. Compare Mat. 13.15. with Mark 4.12. See Esaias 5. Vide
Bezam. Erasmus ita reddidit haec verba, Cujus ejusdem vibice sanati sumus.
two relatives at once in the original, as if I should say, cujus livore ejus
sanati sumus, By whose stripes of his we are healed, the term here has a
double Synecdoche, one stripe for many, and stripes for his whole passion. Dr.
Clerk.

Estius thinks that the word (...) is either added for emphasis, or (which is
more probable says He) it is an Hebraisme peculiar to the Hebrews as Psalm
73. and 104.

Peter alludes (says he) to the stripes that servants receive from their
cruel Masters, therefore he returns to the second person ye are healed.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. (...)] Elegans metaphora a servis illis sumta, qui negotiantur cum
pecunia heri sui, vide Mat. 25.14. Significatur id Christo veluti lucrum
accedere, quum multi ad fidem adducuntur, atque ita regnum Christi
amplificatur. Vorstius.

(...) accuratam inspectione^ and considerationem significat ut colligitur ex
hujus Epistolae c. 2. ver. 12. qui locus huic nostro parallelus, neque alibi in
Novo Testamento hoc verbum occurrit. Gerh. in loc.
Verse. 2. WHile they beheld your chaste conversation coupled with feare] Behold]
The original word signifies to observe and pry into a thing, to find out
the secrets of it. Bifield.

Feare] Meaning, not slavish fear of blows, but reverent fear of offending.
See Ephesians. 5.33.

Verse. 3. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the
hair, and of wearing of gold, Nehemiah Rogers. Vterque Apostolus excessum
prohibet and quod praecipuum est commendat. Rivetus. As John 6.27. Vide Cartw.
in Prove. 31.22. Some conceive that the Apostle does simply and for ever forbid
these things named, and all of like sort, and that for ever, which opinion
(says Bifield) is the opinion of almost all the Ancient and modern Writers.
Docet quo praecipue cultu and ornatu mulieres se viris commendare debeant, viz.
interiore potius quam exteriote. Estius.
or of putting on of apparell] Neither Paul. 1 Timothy 2.9. Nor Peter here, do
simply condemn ornaments, but the abuse of them, they being used by persons of
mean condition. 2. The Church was then under grievous persecution. 3. The
words are rather an admonition than a prohibition, he forbids not the using
of them, but admonishes them that they would rather adorn the inside than the
outside, and this evidently appears by the Antithesis that is used in both
places, not says Paul, but not says Peter, desire more the adorning of the
mind than the body.

Verse. 6. Even as Sara obeyed Abraham] That is, constantly, and generally. He
names her before others, Esaias 51.20. Genesis 15.12.
because she being the mother of all the Faithful is worthy to be honored and
imitated by her Sex.

Calling him Lord] Or Sir, an honorable title, not in speaking to him, or of
him, before others, Mr Burroughes in his Irenicum would have it spoken to
Abraham. There was but one good word (says he) in Sarahs speech to Abraham,
she called him Lord, the speech otherwise was a speech of unbelief, yet the
Holy Ghost speaking here of her, in reference to that speech, conceales all the
evil in it, and mentions only the reverend title she gave to her husband,
commending her for it. See Bifield.
by whom it might be told him again what she had said; but when she thought of
him in her heart, even in her inward cogitations; so Mr Wheately, and Mr Fenner
in his Order of Household Government so likewise interprets it. Calvin says
Peter means she was wont to call him so.

Verse. 7. That your prayers be not hindered] Sinful walking in any relation
hinders Prayer three ways: 1. It deads our spirits, streightens our hearts,
weakens our gifts for Prayer. 2. Hinders the effect, fruit, and success of
Prayers. 3. It hinders us from the very act, it breeds a strangeness between
our Souls and God.

Verse. 8. Pitifull] The Greek word signifies rightly bowelled, or such as have
true or right bowels; Quasi diceret, honorum viscerum. It is a word proper to
the Scripture, and taken from the custom of the Hebrews, which use bowels for
affections. One whose bowels are moved with the misery of others. There is the
same Etymology almost of the Latin word misericordia.

Verse. 18. That he might bring us to God] In reconciliation and communion.

Put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit] When he dyed according
to the humane nature, yet by the virtue of the divine nature, Rainold de lib.
Apoc. See Romans 1.4. Spiritu vivificatus, vel subjective intelligitur, nimirum
ut Christus dicatur vivificatus in sua part, hoc est, Christi ea pars
vivificata, quae spiritus dicitur: quemadmodum nos resurrecturi dicimur carne;
nempe, quia caro ea est proprie quae resurgit a mortuis: vel efficaciter
Christus vivificatus a spiritu, sive per spiritum, utrovis autem modo, evinci
dico, absurdam esse hanc de animae descensu fabulam. Chamierus.
and by force of the Spirit he was raised from death.

Verses 19, 20 These verses and the former should be thus translated (says
Broughton) Christ suffered, being made dead in the flesh, made alive by the
Spirit; In his Epistle to the Nobility of England. Ipsa vox (...) quintuplice^
habet in scriptura notionem, 1. Significat generatim receptaculum, Apoc.
18.2.2. Proprie carcerem in quo detinentur ac custodiuntur captivi, Mat.
14.10.3. Vigiliam nocturnam, sive horas vigiliae nocturnae, Mat. 14.25. and
24.43.4. Custodiam militarem, Acts 12.10.5. Infernum seu gehennam, Mat. 5.25.
atque hoc in loco. Laurentius.
in which Spirit he had gone and preached to them that now are spirits in
prison: because they disobeyed when the time was: when the patience of God once
waited in the days of Noe.

The Papists urge this place for the limbus patrum, preached there to the
Patriarcks. See Fulke on the Rhem. Test. Locus hic omnium pene interpretum
judicio difficillimus. Estius. Petrus dicit, Christum per spiritum suum a quo
fuit vivificatus, id est, per divinitatem suam Noachi tempore, nempe per os
Sacrum hujus Patriarchae per spiritum Christi loquentis, praedicasse ijs quorum
spiritus jam sunt in carcere, id est, in ferno, non autem limbo, quia fuerunt
increduli, cum Dei patientia eos expectaret in diebus Noachi. Rivetus in
Cathol. Orthod. Tract. 2. quaest. 43. Vide Calvinum, and Bezam.
2. For Christ's descent into hell, but 1. Peter speaks of Noah's time, they hold
it of all the Patriarcks. 2. He speaks not of the Fathers that were obedient,
but of those that were disobedient. 3. Here he did not deliver them.

The meaning is, He] That is, Christ. Went] That is, in the Ministry of Noah,
preached in Noah's time to those that are now in hell. Spirits] That is, the
souls departed; not men, but Spirits to keep an Analogy to the 18.

2. This place speaks not of triumphing, but of preaching; now there is no
preaching in hell to convert.

Verse. 21. But the answer of a good conscience] That is, the answer of a
believing heart, acknowledging these sacraments to be seals and pledges of the
righteousness of faith, and that inward baptism which indeed saves. Dr Tailor
on Titus.

The Apostle alludes to the custom that was in the Primitive Church, those who
were catechized were demanded of the Catechist thus, credisne, beleevest thou,
abrenunciasne, do thou not renounce the devil? And they answered abrenuncio,
Weemes. Vide Bezam, and Estium.
I do renounce him.

CHAP. IV.
Ver. 3. BAnquettings] Compotationibus, drinkings, because as Lyra notes there
be other ways and means to drunkenness besides by wine. (...) quum pot ando
certatur and ad numerum bibitur. Estius.


Verse. 4. Metaphora est sumpra ab ijs qui in ignota regione peregrinantur.
Significat enim impios ista vitae m^^atione tanquam re peregrina and nova
offendi: prove exporientia restatur. Vorstius. Phrasis etiam aliis linguis
familiaris: ut Gallis. Ils se trouvent estranges. Laurentius. See 2 These. 2.2.
Wherein they think it strange that you run not with them to the same excess
of riot] They are said (...) by the Grecians, who are troubled with admiration
at a new, unusual, or strange thing.

Verse. 6. For, for this cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are
dead] That is, unto those who are now dead, or were then dead when Peter wrote
this, who then lived when the Gospel was preached unto them, as he says in
the fifth verse, according to that we have in our Creed, the quick and the
dead, that is, those which before were dead, but then shall not be dead but
living when they shall be judged.

Verse. 7. But the end of all things is at hand] Not the end of the world, but
of the Jewish Church and State. So Luke 21.9. 1 John 2.18.

Be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayer] He does not forbid zeal and
fervency, but to have due respect to God and his will, to submit our will to
the will of God, that is, to be sober in prayer.

Verse. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God] Oracles]
That is, the sacred writings the Scriptures, (...) oration elliptica est.
Subaudienda enim sunt duo verba cognata, ut sensus sit, siquis loquitur, ut
eloquia Dei loquatur. Vorstius. (...) does relate to the manner of speaking as
well as to the matter which is to be delivered.
as Romans 3.2. So called, because God did inspire the Prophets to utter and
write them. As if he had said, with that fear and reverence, with that
preparation, with that judgment and discretion, with that zeal and affection,
as it becomes the oracles of God to be spoken with. Mr Hildersam.

Verse. 13. But rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings]
They are called the sufferings of Christ, 1. In respect of the original,
because they are for his names sake. Matthew. 5.11. 2. Because of his sharing in
them, though not affectu patientis, yet compatientis, though not with a sense
of pain as in his natural body, yet with a sense of pity. 3. In regard of
the order and issue. Luke 24.26.

Verse. 14. For the spirit of glory, and of God rests upon you] In regard of
their present glorious condition (by reason of the value and excellency of
grace) to be preferred before worldly prosperity; He seems to allude to Esaias
4.5. Mr Sarson. Vide Bezam.
and the Spirit of God] In that they are assured by divine revelation, and the
comfortable influence of Gods Spirit, that God will add a gracious event to
their sufferings.

Verse. 15. But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an
evil doer] Turn not thieves, See Ioh. 21.22.
nor so carry your selves as thieves.

(...) Tale hominum genus nullus elegantius descripserit quam Terentianus ille
senex, his verbis, Tantumne ab re tua ocij tibi, aliena, ut cures, eaque nihil
quae ad re attinent?
A busie-body in other men's matters] It is but one word in the original, and
costs us a whole sentence; as Bishops in another diocese, as priers into
other men's matters.

Verse. 18. And if the righteous scarcely be saved] (...) is used of those
things which with much labor are brought about. Act. 14.18. and 27.7.

Verse. 19. Wherefore let them suffer according to the will of God] These words
note not only righteousness, that it must be a good cause we suffer for, but
the spring whence suffering comes ex voluntate Dei, each circumstance.

A faithful Creatour] That is, God did not only make heaven and earth and so
leave them, as Masons and Carpenters leave houses when they are built, but by
his providence does most wisely govern the same. Perkins.


CHAP. V.
Verse. 5. BE clothed with humility] (...), The Greek word comes of a
primitive which signifies a knot, Of (...) Innodaram habere, estote intus
ornati. Beza. Metaphora sumpta videtur a genere vestimenti in nodum constricti,
quo servi utebantur, (...) Graeci vocabant; sensus est, humilitatem animi
indu^te, and instar vestis nodo astrictae vobis conjunctam retinete, ne uspiam
excutiatur. Estius. Vide Gerhardum.
because humility ties the graces together that none of them be lost, quasi
dicat arcte vobis astringite. Estius.

B. Smith. (...) verbum (...) est militare, ex adverso, quasi aciem instruere,
praelio obsistere. Gerh.
For God resists the proud] Or (as the original speaks more emphatically)
seteth himself in battle array against him.

Verse. 6. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he
may exalt you in due time] This verse is an inference upon that which went
before, thus, God is no way to be resisted, but to be sued unto for grace, this
is done by humility, humble your selves therefore; the Greek word is not so
rightly rendered passively by the Vulgar, be ye humble, as by others, and our
latter translation actively, Dr Prideaux.
humble your selves.

Verse. 7. Casting all your care upon him] All the care of the end is to be cast
upon God, In omni cura nostra de rebus necessarijs, and curam nostram
postulantibus, toti pendeamus a providentia Daei. Estius.
we are to be careful in the use of the means.

Verse. 8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the Devil, as a
roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may devoure] Sobriety makes a man
fit to watch; be sober in body, and watch with your minds.

His name Devil, and that which he seeks to devour, shows his malice; the
beast whereunto he is resembled Lion, shows his power and craft; Dr Gouge.
and the attribute roaring, adds terror thereunto: lastly his walking up and
down shows his sedulity.

Verse. 10. But the God of all grace] He is so called, Viz. auctor,
conservator, promotor, perfector, remunerator. a Lap.
because he is the giver of all kinds, and of all degrees of grace; wherefore,
it is added, he calls and perfects. Dr Sclater.

Settle you] As a foundation is settled to be unmovable. See Heb. 1.10. (...)
significat fundare, unde (...) fundamentum. Matthew. 7.25. Luc. 6.48. Col. 1.23.
Gerh.


ANNOTATIONS Upon the second Epistle of PETER.
CHAP. I.
IT is written to the same that the former Epistle was written to, chapter 3. v. 1.
the principal argument of it is to take heed of false Prophets and teachers.

Verse. 1. Have obtained] Obtained by lot, so the Greek, sortiti sunt, So Luke
1.9. Acts 1.17. (...) significat non solum sortiri sive sorts ducere, Ioh.
19.24 sed etiam sort aliquid accipere vel obtinere. Gerh. in loc.


Like precious faith] See Ephesians. 4.5. Not that it is equal in all, but because
all possess the same Christ with his righteousness, and the same salvation by
faith.

Through the righteousness of God, and our savior Jesus Christ] The
righteousness of Christ is called Gods righteousness here, 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans
1.17. and 3.21. and 10.3. Not because it is the righteousness of the Godhead,
but of him that is God. This is an excellent testimony to prove the deity of
our Savior; like to that of Titus 2.13. For it is not said, of God and of our
Savior, as noting two persons, B. Down. of Justification. l. 4. c. 2.
but of God and our Savior, as betokening one.

Verse. 3. Called us to glory and vertue] Through the Temple of virtue we must
pass on to glory.

Naturae nomen hic non substantiam sed qualitatem designat. Calv. Vide Bezam.
Non transformatione naturae humanae in divinam, sed participatione donorum,
quibus conformes efficimur divinae naturae. Pareus.
Verse. 4. Partakers of the divine nature] Not of the substance of the Godhead
as the Familists say, therefore they use those phrases Godded and Christed when
they are converted, but the words following show the meaning, having escaped
the corruption that is in the world through lust, they love and hate what they
did not before, the whole soul in the bent of it is carried to new objects. To
be made partaker of the divine nature, notes two things,

1. A fellowship with God in his holiness, the purity which is eminenter and
infinitely in Gods most holy nature, is formaliter, or secundum modum
creaturae, fashioned in us. Dr Reynolds.
2. A fellowship with God in his blessedness, viz. in the beatificall vision
and brightness of glory.

Totus hic Sermo B. Petri usque ad versum octavum Climaticus esi, sive
scalaris, constans septem gradibus; quibus per octo virtutes jucundissime
progreditur. Estius. See Heb. 6.11.
Verse. 5. And besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and
to virtue knowledge] That is, see that every grace act in its season and order;
he speaks not of the habits of Grace, (all graces are wrought together) but of
the Acts.

The Greek word signifies to supply and further, to minister.
Adde] The Greek word has a greater emphasis taken from dancing round, as in
dancing they took hands, so we must join hand to hand in these measures or
graces. Lead up the dance of the graces, as in the galliard every one takes his
turn, in every season bring forth every grace.

Faith] Is first mentioned, because it gives us the first hope and comfortable
access to God, it is the Mother grace.

By faith he means true religion and that gift of God, whereby we put our
trust and confidence in God; by virtue, an honest and upright life shining in
the virtues and works of the moral law. Mr Perkins in cases of conscience.
By knowledge he means a gift of God whereby a man may judge how to carry
himself uprightly, or prudence a more full understanding of heavenly
mysteries, and applying them to practice.

Verse. 6. Temperance] By it is understood a gift of God, whereby we keep
moderation of our natural appetites, especially about meat, drink and
attire; by patience, a virtue whereby we moderate our sorrow in enduring
affliction. Godlinesse] Is a virtue whereby we worship God in the duties of the
first Table.

Verse. 7. Brotherly kindesse] Is a virtue whereby we love the Church of God,
and the members thereof. Charity] Or love, that virtue whereby we are well
affected to all men, even to our enemies.

Verse. 9. And cannot see far off] The Greek word (...) Quae vox deducta est a
(...) nictare connivere, and (...) id est, oculus. Dicuntur enim (...), qui non
vident nisi quae oculis prope admoventur. Estius.
signifies, him that naturally cannot see except he holds near his eyes,
so Peter calls such as cannot see heavenly things which are far off,
poare-blind or sand-blind. Beza renders it nihil procul cernens.

Verse. 10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your calling
and election sure, for if ye do these things ye shall never fall] Which words
contain 1. An exhortation to make our election sure; The Greek word translated
give diligence, signifies two things, 1. All possible haste and speed, so the
verb and nown are used, Luke 1.39. Mark. 6.25. so the LXX. use it commonly,
Exodus 12.11. Deuteronomy. 16.3. Dan. 6.19.2. All manner of seriousness and intention
in doing: 2 Cor. 8.7. 2 Pet. 3.14.
there is a double certainty, 1. Objecti, so it is sure with God, for with him
both it and all things are unchangeable. 2. Subjecti, sure to our selves, in
our own hearts and consciences. Secondly, the means whereby to come to this
assurance, that is, by doing the things before named in the 5.6. and 7. verses,
to practice the virtues of the moral Law, there set down, to labor to grow
in grace, and use diligence. First calling, from it thou may easily ascend to
assurance of election.

For if ye do these things ye shall never fall] That is, into scandalous
sins, or fall utterly, ye shall not fall for ever, Greek.

Verse. 12. But so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, Calvin
refers this to the supplies of the Spirit of grace here. Luther refers it to
the time of a man's death, a godly man which has assurance shall go to heaven
alacri animo ac plena fiducia. Some interpreters refer it to a man's state after
death: Oecumenius to the day of judgment; Estius to the different rewards in
Heaven.
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ] The
Kingdom here mentioned is the kingdom of glory. 1. Because it is promised as
a reward to one that has made sure his calling. 2. Because it is styled an
everlasting kingdom. It is called the kingdom of Christ; because it is given
to Christ as a reward of his sufferings, and because the government of it is
committed to him, Heb. 2.5. he has entered into it, Luke 14.19. He is the Ruler
in this kingdom, Ephesians. 1.21. As conversion gives one an entrance into the
kingdom of grace, so assurance gives one an entrance into the kingdom of
glory. 1. Because it is not barely faith but light with it. 2. An earnest. 3.
Affections are hereby laid up suitable to a glorious estate, rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory.

It is an everlasting kingdom, because the union between the soul and him is
everlasting; Christ is there medium visionis and fruitionis, as here he is
medium reconciliationis and communionis.

Verse. 14. That shortly I must put off this my tabernacle] In Greek it is, that
the laying aside of this my tabernacle is quick.

Verse. 15. I will endeavor that you may be able after my decease to have these
things always in remembrance] These words (according to the Rhemists
Translation) their Jesuits Salmeron, Suarez, and Bellarmine, do judge
excellent for their purpose, to prove that Peter after his departure would
remember them: And this must needs be (say they) by praying for them. Not to
stand upon their bad Latin, and worse English Translation, the true
construction of the words is, that Peter promises (whilst he is in the way)
that is, in this life, that they should have his Books, So Caj^tane. Petrus
satagit ut etiam se mortuo recta d^ctrina mane at apud fideles, and ad posteros
transmittatur. Estius.
( viz. his Epistles) which after his departure might put them in mind of such
things.

Verse. 16. Unto the power and comming] That is, the powerful coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. So Estius, and others.

Verse. 19. We have a more sure word of Prophecie] More sure than Gods own voice
in the Mount, of which he spoke before. Erasmus explaines the Comparative by
the Positive, more sure, that is sure. Beza and Piscator by the Superlative,
most sure, or very sure.

Until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts] Not (as some most
falsely interpret it) till Christ come into your hearts, and then throw away
the Scriptures; rather, till there be a more full Gospell-light. So Estius,
Gerhard and others.

Verse. 20. No prophecy of Scripture is of any private Interpretation] Word for
word, all prophecy is not of any private Interpretation, an Hebraisme, Potest
quilibet Scripturam interpretari privata industria ut tamen non inducat
privata^ sensum, hoc est, sensum aliquem ex cerebro natum interpretantis, long
illa ableganda est a Scriptura, sive is interpres privatam personam gerat sive
publicam nullo discrimine. Chamierus. Vide Bezam, and Cameronem.

A private man may expound, but not in a private manner, by stamping new
expositions upon holy Writ, different ab ecclesiae consortio, or by not taking
the Text, and those things that naturally cohere.


for no prophecy is of any private Interpretation. So Rom 3.20. Stapleton
says, Interpretation is private, either Ratione personae, when the man is
private, or ratione medij, when it is not taken out of the Context or
circumstance, or ratione finis, when it is for a false end. Now a private
Interpretation in regard of the person, if it be public in regard of the
means, is not forbidden, for it is lawful for one man with Scripture toti
resistere mundo, says the gloss of the Canon Law; the meaning of the place
is, that the Prophets were not Interpreters, or Messengers of their own private
minds, but of the will of God, as the next verse shows.

Verse. 21. But holy men of God spoke as they were moved] Or acti and impulsi,
Esaias 48.10. Heb. 13.7. Acts 28.25. Mic. 3.8. Nehem. 9.30. That is, they did not
only utter their words by the Holy Ghosts immediate direction, but by the same
direction did commit them to writing; for speaking is used for writing, 1 Kings
4.29.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. BUT there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you] Prophets then, Teachers now; it is but a
variation of the Language of the time, yet the new Testament calls false
Teachers false Prophets, 1 John 4.1. One may be called a false Prophet, or
Teacher in a twofold respect, 1. As he teaches lies, Mr. Vines in loc.
or prophesies falsely. Ezekiel. 13.6. 2. As he teaches without a Commission.
Ier. 14.14. and 23.22, 35. The Hebrew expresses not a false Prophet in one
word, but calls him a Prophet, the Greek (which has the felicity of
composition) does.

Who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies] Greek, Heresies of destruction,
that is, destructive Heresies, Damnable is either restrictive to some Heresies,
as implying that there are some Heresies which are not damnable, or descriptive
as describing what Heresies are in suo genere, so it is taken here. Gerhard. in
loc.
an Hebraisme, as Psalm. 5.6. a man of bloods, that is a bloody man.

Greece (...), quam vocem Vulgatus aliquando vertit haeresim, ut Act. 5.17. and
17.5. and 34.14. and 1 Cor. 11.19. Aliquando sectam, ut Act. 24.5. and 26.5.
and 28.22. Gal. 5.20. and in hoc loco. Derivatur haeresis, non ut quidam
insulse nimis dixerunt, a Latino haereo, est enim vox graeca, sed (...) quod
est eligore. Laurentius.
Heresy was first taken in a good sense: it signifies Election, and was
referred both to good and bad Sects. It seems to be taken from the Schools of
Philosophers, wherein every one chose a Faction to which he fided. Heresies in
the plural to point at a multitude.

Even denying the Lord that bought them] The Socinian denies that men are
bought by Christ, as if he were pointed at in this Text. See Laurentius.

Perkins on Jude, and Elton, see verse 20.
Object. How can Reprobates be said to be redeemed or bought by Christ?

Answ. Not in Gods decree, for then they had been saved, but in their own
conceit and judgment, and also in the judgment of other men led by the rule
of Charity.

Verse. 3. With fained words] Fine set words, forms of speech.

Ad poenastartareas damnavit. Mede. Vide Gerhardum.
Verse. 4. But cast them down to hell] (...) is read but only here.

Verse. 5. But saved Noah the eighth person a preacher of righteousnesse]
Erasmus reads it, the eighth preacher of righteousness, See 1 Pet. 3.20. Noah
was the first in order of years and dignity of entrance into the Arc, yet he
is called the eighth, in that he was one of them (as the Learned observe) qui
octonarium numerum perficiebant, who made up the number of eight.
(person is not in the Greek) but Beza dislikes that reading, and gives a good
reason against it. See Gerhard.

Bringing the fioud upon the world of the ungodly] That is, the generation of
sinful men who lived in the days of Noah.

Verse. 8. Vexed his righteous soule] The word is a fine word implying two
things: 1. The search and examination of a thing. 2. The racking and vexing a
man upon the trial; so Lot observed all the evils, he weighed them. 2. He
racked his soul, and vexed himself with the consideration of them; Mr.
Hooker. Vide Bezam.
the same word is used, Mat. 14.24. in the matter of a storm.

Verse. 14. Having eyes full of Adultery] Greek, full of the Adulteress, the
Apostle alludes to Mat. 5.28. the very eyes discover the mind adulterating.
Plenos adul^erae. Inescant] Idest, quosi pisces hamo captant. Beza.


Verse. 18. They allure] As the bait does the fish, as the Greek word
signifies. See Romans 16.18.

Verse. 19. Is he brought in bondage] Greek, made a servant (...).

Verse. 20. For if after they have escaped the pollution of the world] That is,
such sins as worldly men are wont to be ordinarily defiled with, by being
entangled, That is, gross sinning.
viz. in the like occasions of sin, and such sines as Satan had in the same set
for them.

Verse. 22. According to the true proverbe] The first of a dog is a very
ancient proverb used in Solomon's time, Prove. 26.11. whence some think Peter
took it. Canis reversus ad vomitum.


The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to
her wallowing in the mire] Though the sow be outwardly washed never so clean,
Si canis hoc facit horret oculus tuus, tu quid eris oculis Dei. Aug. in Psa.
83. Dr Gouge. This similitude shows that the beginning of the Chapter is
understood of wicked men as swine washed outwardly, then they are as fair as a
sheep, but backsliders have not their natures changed. Competunt haec
proverbia in omnes quidem relapsos; sed pot^ssimum ac propriissime in illos,
qui semel ab hujus saeculi immunditiis abluti ac mundati, and sanctificati;
iisdem sese ru^sus involvunt, ut olim, qui impurissimae sectae Gnosticorum sese
adjungebant; nam pro luto sive coeno Graece est (...), a quo nomen acceperunt
Gnostici, ut Borboritae dicantur. Estius. Vide Cornel a Lap.
yet because her swinish nature is not altered, so soon as she comes at mud,
she besmeares her self again by wallowing in the mire; and a dog though
being pained at his stomach, he vomits out that which paineth him, yet so
soon as he has ease, he licketh it up again. They are two proverbes used to
the same purpose. Christ joins these two living creatures together, Matthew. 6.7.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 3. SCoffers] Such as shall make childrens play of all the terrors of
the Lord. (...) verbum simplex (...) prorie significat lud^ pueriliter (...),
veluti puer, sive puerorum more; Compositum autem (...) ut and (...) valde
familiare est Evangelistis. Laurentius.
The Greek nowne (...) is only here used, and v. 18. of the Epistle of Jude.

Verse. 9. The Lord is not slacke] That is, Tardus is dicitur qui occasionem
pi^ritia effluere sinit, in Deo nihil simile, qui temporum rationem ad salutem
nostram optime attemperat. Calvinus.

(...) Dr Hackwell.


he sits not in heaven as one of the Idoll-gods, that regarded not what acts
were kept here below, or laid not to heart men's carriages toward him.

But is long suffering] Or patient, that is, he apprehends himself wronged,
and is fully sensible of it.

Not willing that any should perish] Of his. Calvin says, he speaks here of
his will revealed in the Gospel.

But that all should come to repentance] (...), to withdraw, to go aside, and
be private, to sequester our selves to our repentance.

Verse. 10. The heavens shall pass away with a great noise] Like the hissing of
parchment riveled up with heat, for so signifies the original word.

Verse. 11. What manner of persons] Even to admiration Non simpliciter
qualitatem significat rei vel personae sed cum emphasi quadam admirationis, ut
Matthew. 8.27. Marc. 13.1. Luc. 7.39. Estius. Vide Gerhardum in loc.
(...).

In all holy conversation and godlinesse] (...) in sanctis conversationibus and
pietalibus, vulg. in holy conversations and godlinesses; Numerus pluralis
excellentiam and magnitudinem rei denotat.
when the Scripture would express a thing exactly it uses the plural number.
Cant. 1.4. thy loves, and the God of our salvations. Ps. 68.20. The God from
whom salvation comes in the most high and eminent way. Genesis 19.11. with
blindnesses, coecitatibus Montanus. That is, with the greatest blindness.

Verse. 12. Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God] The one
is a word of faith, the other of earnest desire. See 2. Tit. 13. (...) votis
accelerantes. Steph. God has appointed when the day of judgment shall be,
but we may be said to have unto it. 1. In our desires. 2. In our preparation.

Iustitiam pro justis accipio, abstractum pro concreto. Aret. Vide De Pride. in
loc.
Verse. 13. Wherein dwells righteousnesse] That is either perfect
righteousness, or men perfectly righteous. Estius.

Fulke on the Rhem. Testam. Locus hic evidens est adversus sectarios docentes
Scripturam sacram ubique facilem esse and omnibus intellectu perviam. Estius.
Loquitur de magnitudine rerum divinarum non obscuritate Scripturae. Res in
Scripturis sunt difficiles non in se, sed propter nostram coecitatem. Deinde
non loquitur de omnibus, sed tantum de quibusdam: qualia sunt oracula de
futuris temporibus, de Antichristi adventu. Pareus.
Verse. 16. In which are some things hard to be understood] There are many things
in the Scriptures hard to be understood, yet whatsoever is necessary to be
known, is plainly set forth and easily to be understood, of them that will
read diligently, mark attentively, pray heartily, and judge humbly. The
Apostle would not by this he says here, discourage or dissuade the people
from reading and studying the Scriptures; For in the first Chapter he commended
the faithful for their diligent attention unto the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, which are more obscure in the chief mysteries of Salvation, than
these of the New.

Wrest] (...), A metaphor from torments; lay them on the rack to make them
speak otherwise than they meant. See Gerhard.

Yet Paul exhorts Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. and others, to read the Scriptures, even
in the congregation. 1 These. 5.27. Col. 4.16.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the first Epistle general of JOHN.
CHAP. I.
THIS Epistle is altogether worthy of the Spirit of that Disciple, which was
loved by Christ. He is much before others in urging brotherly love. Calvin.

He exhorts the faithful, First, against Heretics, that they would
preserve the true knowledge of Christ our Mediator God and man, the faith, and
the whole doctrine which they had learned of the Apostles, and take heed of the
doctrines of Heretics. Secondly against licentious men, that they would study
to avoid sin, to keep the Law of God, and especially to perform the duties
of brotherly love. Zanchie.

Verse. 1. Which we have heard] He alludes both to the Sermons which he and the
other Apostles heard with their own ears from the mouth of Christ, Beatus
Ioannes Evangelista, cum Ephesi moraretur usque ad ul^jmam senectutem, and vix
inter Discipulorum manus ad ecclesiam deferretur: nec posset in plura verba
vocem contexere, nihil aliud per singulas solebat proferre collectas, nisi hoc,
filioli diligite alterutrum. Tandem discipuli and fratres qui aderant taedio
affecti, quod eadem semper qudirent, dixerunt: Magister qua^e semper hoc
loqueris? Qui respondit dignam Ioanne sententiam: Quia praeceptum Domini est,
and ^ solum fiat. sufficit. Hieron in c. 6. Epist. ad Galat. Oculis vidisse non
est pleonasmus sed major expressio amplificationis c^usa. Imo non contentus
simplici aspectu, addit contemplati sumus. Calv.
and also to the testimony which the Father gave twice from heaven to Christ,
the Apostles hearing, saying this is my beloved Son Zanchius which we have seen
with our eyes] He alludes both to the Miracles wrought by Christ, and to the
glory which in the holy mountain (as Peter calls it 2 Pet. 1.) Christ gave to
John, James and Peter to see, and also to Christ's resurrection and visible
ascension into the Heavens.

Which we have looked upon] This is not a tautologie, but this word signifies
something more than the former, thoroughly to behold.

And our hands have handled] He alludes to the familiar conversation which the
Apostles had with Christ for about three years, Luc. 24.
and also to that touching when after the resurrection Christ offered himself
to the Apostles that believed not in him to touch him.

Of the word of life] Christ is life, essentialiter and causaliter. He is a
living word, that is, life it self, and a quickening word, bringing life and
salvation to men.

Verse. 4. That your joy may be full] Our fellowship with God and Christ brings
full joy. 1. Because he is a full good. 2. A perpetual good, Psalm. 16. vlt. 3.
This union intitleth us always to this good.

Verse. 5. God is light, Negatio contrarij auget vim affirmationis. 1 Reg. ^o.
1. Deuteronomy. 33.6. Prove. 30.11. 1 Samuel 1.11. Job. 20.27. Id est purissima est lux.
Vide Bezam. Haec loquendi form a valde est Ioanni familiaris, ut quod
affirmavit, contraria negatione amplificet. Ergo sensus est Deum ejusmodi lucem
esse, ut nullas tenebrat admittat. Calvinus.
and in him is no darkness at all] There are many properties of light, for
which God is often in scripture compared to it, 1. nothing is purer than light,
so God is most pure. 2. All things are conspicuous to the light, so to God. 3.
Without light nothing can be seen, so without the beams of divine wisdom, no
heavenly things can be known of us. 4. There is nothing more pleasant than the
light, so nothing more happy than God. The maine property of light is to expel
darkness where it is, and inlighten the place, so God expels the darkness of
ignorance and infidelity, and inlightens men with the true knowledge of
himself. Zanchius.

Verse. 7. We have fellowship one with another] God with us and we with him.

And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin] Not has
cleansed, or will cleanse, but cleanses, viz. daily, neither does he say
simply from sin, Zanchius.
but from all sin.

Estius thinks it is not improbable that John says this to meet with those
heretics the Ebionites, who when they walked in darkness, did believe they
should be cleansed from their sins by their frequent washings, though they
acknowledged not the mystery of our redemption by Christ.

Verse. 9. If we confess our sinnes] That is, truly, seriously, and from our
heart repent before God. Vide Bezam.


He is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousnesse] As if he should say, God of his infinite mercy has
promised to all true penitents and confessors, that he will forgive and never
remember their sins any more, he must stand to his promises, or else he should
be unfaithful; and he is just, Dr Tailor.
he does not say he is merciful, but just to forgive the sins of true
believers, because they are satisfied for, and Gods justice will not let him
demand the same debt twice, of the Surety and of the debtor.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. MY little children] He shows that he delivered to us this doctrine
concerning the study of avoiding sin, Vox est blandissime monontis, quo and
Christus ad discipulos suos usus fuit, Marci 10. and Joan. 13. and Paulus ad
Galatas cap. 4. Ipse vero Johannes in hac Epistola frequentius utitur. Estius.
and observing the law of God out of a Fatherly affection.

These things I write unto you that ye sin not] He teaches that the study
of holiness and innocence, is the first study which a Christian should
perpectually labor in.

If any man sin we have an Advo^ate with the Father] Advo^ate, The Greek word
is translated Comforter, John 14.16. and 15.26. The word Advocate is a
law-terme, quicunque adest alteri in causa officij gratia, says the Civil Law.

Verse. 2. He is the propitiation Propitiatio actionem denotat, qua Deus ex
irato judice propitius redditus hominibus in gratiam eos recipit, ut in novi
foederis promissione. Heb. 8.12.
for our sinnes] That is, the propitiator by, a metalepsis. See Vorstius.

Vsitatum est Hebraeis totum mundum dicere pro certa universitate quorundam de
quibus in subjecta materia agitur. Ludov. de Dieu in loc.
But also for the sins of the whole world] That is, of all the faithful,
mundus ex mundo, for he that is faithful speaks to the faithful, says
Ludovicus de Dieu. See Calvin and Beza.

Verse. 3. And hereby we do know that we know him] That is, we believe in him,
and apply him with all his benefits unto our souls. To know that we know, is
to be assured that we know.

If we keep his Commandements] The conscionable endeavor to frame our lives
according to Gods will revealed in his word, is a most certain mark that we
are true believers, and so the true Children of God and heirs of glory. They
who have an upright desire, an unfeigned purpose, a sincere endeavor to walk
in the obedience of all Gods Commandments, are said to keep them.

Verse. 4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a
lyer] Such a one is called a liar in a double respect, A lyer] That is a
hypocrite whose love is not sincere but feigned and counterfeit.
both in that he says he has that knowledge he has not, it not being true,
and because also he denies that indeed which he affirms in word.

Mandatum vetus and novum diverso respectu, vetus ratione substantiae
praecepti, and rei traditae, novum ratione modi tradendi. Spanhem. Dub. Evang.
Verse. 7. An old Commandement] Because it had been long ago. The Gospel came
from God, and is his eternal truth.

Verse. 8. A new Commandment I write unto you] It is so called, because it was
renewed by the Lord after it had been as it were antiquated and almost
extinguished. 2. Because it was commanded to such men as were new or renewed.
3. Because it was an excellent Commandment.

Verse. 12. I write unto you little children] A child is he in whom grace is
weak, and corruption strong, not one particular virtue but the general body
of the new man, as Nicodemus, Vide Bezam.
Joseph of Arimathea, the Apostles themselves while Christ lived with them,
because ye have known him that is from the beginning] That is, with a knowledge
of acquaintance, whereby they conceived him to be their Father; such as little
children have of their Fathers and Mothers.

Senes se ut plurimum subducunt, quasi excesserint discendi aetatem: pueri,
quasi nondum maturuerint, recusant audire: mediae aetatis homines, quoniam
aliis studiis occupantur non adijciunt huc animum, ergo ne qui se eximant,
Evangelium ad singulorum usus accomodat. Defignat autem tres aetates, quae
magis recepta est hunae vitae partitio. Calvinus. Videmus quam diabolica sit
tyrannis Popae quae minaciter ab evangelij doctrina aetates omnes arcet, quas
Spiritus Dei tam studiose provocat. Calv.
Verse. 13. Fathers] Or old men are they in whom the body of corruption is weak,
and the whole inward man strong, to which perfection all the people of God must
aspire as all men do follow after old age. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and the
Apostles were such toward the end of their days, and old Simeon and Anna the
prophetess.

Senibus competit notitia: and congruum est ut antiqui cognoscant antiquum
dierum. Estius. What is more commendable in fullness of age, than fullness of
knowledge? and what is more fit to be known of ancient men than the Ancient
of days. Dr Hals Paraphrase.
He gives a reason suitable to old men, I write unto you Fathers, because ye
have known him which was from the beginning. As if he had said, wisdom and
knowledge are amongst old men, amongst the Fathers; I take it for granted, that
you are knowing men, therefore I write unto you about these depths of
knowledge. Job. 12.12.

I write unto you young men] A young man is he in whom the general body of
grace is strong, but some one or other corruption, as anger, lust, worldliness
is still strong, as Jonah, Sampson.

Because you have overcome the wicked one] The strong Christian is of the
winning side, his corruption decaies, grows less and less, he falls less
often, less grossly, with less delight, rises sooner out of sin, humbles
himself sooner and more for it, and is made more wary, careful, and fearful.

Verse. 14. I have written to ye young men, because ye are strong, and the word
of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one] Young men are
called out to bear the heat of the day, because they are in their strength,
and are chief Champions either for good or evil. Dr. Tailor on Titus.


Verse. 16. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life] Every Creature is an occasion to draw out lust,
whatever you see or hear.

Lust of the flesh] That is, to fare deliciously every day, pleasures and
delights. The lust of the eyes] The covetous and craving eye which can see
nothing but it wishes it. And the pride of life] Ambition, thirst after
Preferments, State, Credit, Popularity, Dr. Tailor on Titus. The worlds Trinity.
which three Mantuan has expressed in an elegant distich.

Ambitiosus honor, and opes, and foeda voluptas,
Haec tria pro trino Numine mundus habet.
Verse. 18. It is the last time] Greek, the last hour; (...), Novissima hora
est. Vulg. We hold Antichrist to be the whole body of Heretics in the last Age
of the world, who under the name and profession of Christ advance themselves
against Christ. Bishop Down. of Anrich. l. 2. c. 1.
it refers not to the day of judgment and end of the world, but to the
desolation of the Jewish Church and State; now that there are many Antichrists
which teach Doctrines contrary to Christ.

And as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many
Antichrists] The word Antichrist is only used in the Epistles of John, and not
elsewhere in the Scriptures. See ver. 22. and 4.3. and 2. Epist. 7. By which
places it is evident that (...) does not only signify the head of the
Antichristian body (which is not one singular man, but is continued in a
succession of many) but also sometimes any Heretic that oppugneth the Natures
or Offices of Christ: and sometimes the whole body or company of Heretics
opposed unto Christ. For John affirms that those many Heretics and Deceivers
of his time, are the Antichrist.

Verse. 19. They went out from us] viz. Ex ecclesia fidelium seu Christianorum
per haeresin egressi sunt. Estius.
By embracing Antichristian Doctrines.

But they were not of us] That is, Augustine.
even when they seemed to be among us they were not of us.

He speaks of Ebion, Cerinthus, and such like Antichristian Heretics, who
Apopostatizing from Christ and his truth departed from the Church. They were
once in the Church in regard of outward profession, but never truly of the
Church, for then they would have persevered.

Verse. 20. But ye have an unction from the holy One, and ye know all things.]
The Holy Ghost is compared to oil, his work in teaching us to anointing: Est
aute^ (...) Vnguentu^ porius quam unctio, oleum laetitiae, Heb. 1.9. Spiritus
nimirum ille qui sancta dogmata magis magisque imprimit animo. Romans 5.5, 8, 15,
16. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and 4.30. Grotius. Christus per eminentiam dicitur (...).
Sanctus ille, Acts 3.14. Apoc. 3.7. Opponit autem spiritum Christi spiritui
Antichristiano, ut qui ex adverso pugnent inter se. Grotius.
1. Because there is a refreshing in the teaching of the Holy Ghost, it makes
us glad. 2. His teaching is oily, sweet, and soft. That is, ye have received
from Christ the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and he has taught and instructed you
in all things which are necessary to the Salvation of your souls for you to
know and be instructed in. Mr. Hild. on Psalm. 51.

Verse. 22. Who is a lyer] A grand liar, or that liar (...).

But he that denies that Jesus is the Christ: He is Antichrist that denies
the Father and the Son] John here speaks neither of the body of Antichrist in
general (as elsewhere in his Epistles the word (...) is used) nor of the head
of the body in particular, who is most worthily called (...), the Antichrist,
but of some other members of the body, that is, of those Antichrists or
Heretics of the time, as Cerinthus, and others, who denied the Divinity of
Christ; and denying the Son, did consequently also deny the Father, for he is
the Father of the Son. That is, Those which worship the Father without the Son,
as the Jews and Turks. 2. Those which do not believe that they are reconciled
to the Father by the Son, as the Papists, those have not the Father neither.
Pareus.

Hildersam ubi supra.
Verse. 27. As the same anointing teaches you of all things] That is, the
Spirit of God teaches you of all things that are necessary for you to know.

And is truth and is no lye] This teaching of the Spirit is clear, certain.

And even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him] As if he should say, ye
shall abide in Christ, and in the profession of every truth of his, because ye
have been taught by his holy Spirit.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 2. But we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him] Not
alone, we know that he is ours, but we know that he will hold and keep us in
that estate till he cause us to inherit eternal glory with him our Head.

Verse. 3. And every man that has this hope in him purifieth himself, even as
he is pure] That is, he which has hope to reign with Christ in heaven, uses
the means whereby he may purify and keep himself from sin, Mr. Perkins and
others.
that he may be in some measure pure as Christ is pure.

Verse. 4. For sin] That is, every sin. Is a transgression of the Law] An
anomie, irregularity or lawlesnesse; (...) utrinque appositus articulus
declarat veram esse definitionem hanc in qua vere definitum and definitio
reciprocantur. Beza in loc.
there is but one word in the Greek, yet it has the force of two; (...)
consists of the privative particle (...), and the word (...) a Law; this is a
precious definition (says Beza) consisting but of one word, Peccatum est
dictum, factum, concupitum contra aeternam legem. August. contra Faustum. l.
22. c. 27.

Any want of conformity to the Law though in the habitual frame of a man's
Spirit, or any practice swerving from it in thought, word, and deed, is a
transgression of the Law.

Verse. 6. Whosoever abides in him sins not] This is not to be understood of
particular sins, but of a course in a known sin. See 1 John 1.8.

Verse. 8. He that commits sin] That is, he whose Trade and course is in a
way of sinning; two things show that one commits sin, 1. If he love sin, Majus
est peccatum diligere quam facere. Aug. 2. If one lie in any sin unrepented of,
Job 20.12, 13. Is of the Devill] That is, resembles him as a Child does his
Father, and is ruled by his Spirit.

Non dicit Peccavit, sed Peccat Nam in eo assidue perseverat, sicut and ipsius
filii. Beza. Rutherf. Trial and triumph of Faith. That is, sins not totally
and finally. He sins not 1. Studiously, he purposes not sin. 2. Willingly,
viz. with his whole will and full consent. 3. Not affectionately, he loves not
sin. 4. Not deadly, Or not unto death. Dr. Tailor. Vide Calvinum. He does not
sin as the wicked man does, of whom he had spoken verse. 8. with the full sway
of his soul. Hildersam on Psalm. 51. Bellarmine says, this is the hardest
place in all the Scripture urged for perseverance.
For the devil sinneth] He not only says he has sinned, but (...), he
sins, or is sinning. From the beginning] See John 8.44. Diabolus statim a
creatione mundi fuit apostata. Calvin.

That he might destroy the works of the Devill] Greek unravell, (...). The word
in Scripture is ascribed to the casting down of a house, Joh. 2.19. to the
breaking of a ship, Acts 27.41. to the loosing of any out of chains, Acts
22.30. Christ is opposed to Satan, he not only is free from sin himself, but
came to destroy sin.

Verse. 9. Whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin] That is, give himself
over to a voluntary serving of sin. The original is (...), cannot sin as a
work of iniquity, he cannot follow his sin as a workman follow his Trade.
Compare ver. 8. with John 8.34.

The reason is given, for his seed] The seed of God, the seed of grace, and
regeneration, 1 Pet. 1.23. Perkins, Hildersam. That is, either the Spirit of
God, whose virtue is a principal efficient, or the word whereby as an
Instrument we are regenerate, and begotten to God. Dr. Tailor, Episc. Dav. de
justitia actuali. Vide Piscat. and Vorstium in loc.

Remains in him, and he cannot sin] (He cannot so fall as Apostates) because
he is borne of God. Hilders. on Psalm. 51. That is, says Arminius, so long as
the seed of God remains in him, but it may depart, but the Apostle gives this
as a reason, why the Saints cannot fall away, because the Seed of God abides
in them, Quia verbum Dei, quod quasi semen est quo divina natura in nobis
gignitur, in ipso vegetum existir. Verbum evangelij semen dicitur passim. Mar.
4.14. Mat. 13.19. 1 Pet. 1.23. Hoc verbo regignimur, Jacobi 1.18. Grotius.
Seminis nomine significatur Spiritus Sanctus ab effectu, quod ejus vi and
efficacia regeneremur spiritualiter, quemadmodum ex carne and semine generamur.
Rainold. de lib. Apoc. Vide Bezam.
being regenerate it ever abides in them, and therefore they cannot fall away.

Verse. 10. Manifested] That is, evidently seen and known.

Verse. 14. Because we l^ve the brethren] Here love is no cause of the change,
but a sign and consequent thereof. Perkins.


Our love is not the cause of justification, (or our translating from death to
life) but a manifest sign and evidence whereby it is known that we are already
justified, for so he says, speaking in the time past, (...), Dr. Down. of
Justificat. l. 6. cap. 12.
that we are already passed or translated from death to life. And to the like
effect our Savior speaks, Luke 7.47. as if he had said, hereby it appears,
that many sins are forgiven her because she loved much.

Verse. 17. Who so has this worlds good] Greek, the life of this world, there
is a man's ability. And sees his brother has need] Here is his brothers
necessity. The rule of love is my brothers necessity, and my own ability.

And shuts up] In Greek, locks as with a Key.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 4. BEloved, believe not every Spirit] That is, yield no credence to
every Doctor who does gild over his Doctrine with pretense of the Spirit.
Squire. Nomen spiritus metonymice accipio, pro eo qui spiritus dono sepraeditum
esse jactat ad obeundum Prophetae munus. Calvinus. Spiritus nomine intelligit
Prophetiam sive veram sive falsam, ut 1 Cor. 12. to and mox v.6. Grotius.


But try the Spirits] That is, Perkins. Magnam hic quidem diligentiam requirit,
metaphora ducta a fabris metallicis, and trapezitis ac nummulariis, qui aurum
argentumque ut habeant defaecatum a scoria qua nunquam prorsus vacatcum e terra
effoditur, purgatumque a sordibus aeris atque alioru^ omnium metallorum quibus
permiscetur and adulteratur aliquando, quando moneta cuditur, igne aliisque
rebus illud expurgant, ita verbum hoc a Xenophon^e and Scriptoribus Ethnicis
and ab Apostolo Petro usurpatur. 1. Pet. 1.7. Rainold. de lib. Apoc. Tomo
secundo, Praelect. 214.
those Doctrines which men pretending the gifts of the Spirit did teach, 1
These. 5.18. As Goldsmiths separate Gold and dross, and examine every piece of
Gold by the Touchstone.

Whether they are of God] As they are boasted to be, many run not sent by God,
but stirred up by ambition, covetousness, or by the impulse of Satan. See
Deuteronomy. 18.22. Ezekiel. 13.2. and 26.18.

Because many false Prophets are gone out into the world) This Age as the Lord
foretold (says Grotius) is very fruitful of such Impostors. To go out into
the world (says he) is spoken both of good and evil Prophets, and signifies
to appear to the people, John 6.14. and 10.36. and 17.18. and 18.37. Ephesians.
1.15.

Verse. 8 For God is love] See verse 16. causally, not formally, say Schoolmen,
He is the fountain of love, therefore this must needs flow from him where ever
the knowledge of him comes.

Verse, 12. If we love one another God dwells in us] The meaning is, that by
this gracious love we do evidently demonstrate that God is in us.

And his love is perfected in us] That is, either actively, that love whereby
we love him, and that is perfected because it is demonstrated in the excellency
of it, (as Gods power is said to be perfected in man's weakness, because it is
manifested so) or else that passive love whereby God loves us, is abundantly
declared perfect in that he works such a gracious inclination in us.

Verse. 17. Herein is our love made perfect] The Familists (who hold that there
is a perfection of love in the regenerate in this life) much urge this place,
but by love here is not meant the love that is in us, or that we bear either
to God or man: but rather Gods love to us, Hic Charitas Dei erga nos
intelligenda est. Calvinus. Elton.
that is, true Believers, which is said to be perfect in us in regard of the
effect and use of it. Compare it with verse 16. But admit that John speaks
here of that love that is in us either toward God or men, he means then such
as is true, sound, and unfeigned, opposed to that which is hollow and
hypocritical, so perfect is taken Es^y 38.3,

Verse. 18. Perfect love casts out feare] It does not cast out the of fear
offending God, but that whereby we question the favor of God.

Verse. 20. For he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he
love God whom he has not seene] That is, He that cannot endure nor look on
that little glimpse and ray of holiness which is in his brother, in one of the
same infirmities and corruptions with himself, Mr. Reynolds.
will much less be able to abide the light of the Sun of righteousness, and
the most orient, spotless, and vast holiness which is in him.

CHA. V.
Verse. 1. EVery one that loves him that begat] That is, God the Father.

Loves him also that is begotten of him] That is, all the faithful.

Verse. 3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his
Commandments are not grievous] The Holy Ghost sets down 2. notes whereby we
may know that we love God: The meaning is, to him that loves God, his
Commandments are not grievous, but he delights in them according to the
inward man.
1. That we keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.6. John 14.15. 2. That his
Commandments are not grievous, for nihil difficile amanti, nothing is
difficult to him that loves. Genesis 29.20. a miosis, That is, pleasing,
delightsome. The Rhemists quarrel with this Translation, they translate it,
And his Commandments are not heavy. Our English word grievous Dr Fulke.
comes of the Latin word grave, which is not only weighty, but also
troublesome; it better answers the Greek and Latin than the word heavy, which
is properly that which is of great weight.

Verse. 4. And this is the victory that overcommeth the world, even our faith]
Faith overcommeth the world two ways, 1. It discerns a vacuity and
emptiness in all terrene objects. 2. Because it uniteth to Christ, making the
subject in which it is a member of him, and so a conqueror with him, John 16.
ult.

1. The world frowning, with the troubles, fears, and dangers of it; he that
believes is above the worlds frowning.

2. Fawning, faith overcomes the world that it shall do us no hurt that way,
Heb. 11.26.

Verse. 6. This is he that came by water and bloud] The Apostle alludes to the
ancient Jewish rites, Water and blood issuing from Christ's side prefigured both
these.
wherein there was a purification by water, which was to take away the filth of
sin, and an expiation by blood, which was to take away the guilt; Christ came
not only to justify, but to sanctify. See Calvin.

Verse. 7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost] Three, Dr. Tailor. Multa sunt loca, in quibus Syrus
cum Vulgato concinit: plurima tamen loca sunt alia, quae discrepant quam
maxim; quae mediocris lectio suppeditat. E. g. locus luoulentissimus, 1 John
5.7. tres sunt qui testimonium dant in Coelo, etc. In Vulgato legitur, non
autem in Syro. Fidem igitur and adsensum a nobis difficulter impetrant, qui, ad
deprimendem Syri utilitatem, and ad excusandam suam ignorantiam, Syriacam
Paraphrasin non nisi vulgatam versionem esse contendunt. Dilh. Eclog. Sac.
Dictum 11.
1. In the true and real distinction of their Persons. 2. In their inward
proprieties, as to beget, to be begotten, and to proceed. 3. In their several
Offices one to another, as to send and to be sent.

In heaven] That is, e Coelo, from heaven say some, as God the Father, and the
Holy Ghost by cloven tongues, and Christ is the faithful and true witness;
rather because their testimony is to witness the things done in heaven; there
is the work of God upon us as Election. 2. A work of God in us as Conversion,
Sanctification, 1 Phil. 6. The Father witnesses by the Spirit, Matthew. 16.17.
compared with Romans 8.17. 1 Cor. 12.3. The Son by blood, Justification, the
doctrine of free grace in the Gospel, 1 These. 15. The Holy Ghost by water,
sanctification. Rev. 2.17. Vide vorstium Dr Tailor.
He that does righteousness is righteous, hence we know that we are
translated from death to life, and these three are one] In nature and essence,
one in power and will, and one in the act of producing all such actions, as
without themselves any of them is said to perform.

Verse. 8. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, and the
water, and the bloud] Baptism, Spirit] That is, by a metonymie, the heavenly
doctrine delivered by the Spirit, water against the power of sin, blood against
the guilt of sin, the blood of Jesus Christ as sprinkled upon our consciences
within us, as Heb. 12.24.
the Lords Supper, and the Ministry.

The Spirit is mentioned in both, the end of a witness is to decide a
controversy verse. 10. The spirit is said to be a witness in heaven and earth,
in regard of the things that are witnessed, that our names are written in
heaven, and that grace is wrought in our hearts. The Lord alludes to the manner
of purging sin under the Law by blood and water, their sacrifices and washings
must be blood for satisfaction, as well as water for sanctification. There was
a double use of blood under the law for effusion and aspersion, it assures our
interest in Christ's blood.

Verse. 10. He that believes not God has made him a lier] Not by
transmutation of God, he esteems his word and promises as false.

Verse. 11. And this is the record] Or testimony, and this life is in his Son]
there is a life of righteousness, holiness and comfort laid up in Christ.

Verse. 12. And he that has the Son has life] Of justification, of
Sanctification, of glory.

Verse. 13. That ye may know, that ye have eternal life] If a man could not
know both that he were in the state of grace, By eternal life here is meant
the truth of grace, grace is called glory, 2. Cor. 3. vlt. see chapter 3. of this
Epistle. v. 14. John wrote this general Epistle to all the faithful, yea even
to such amongst them as he calls little children, 1 John 3.18. the weakest
and meanest of all the faithful.
and that he should be maintained and kept in that estate for ever, he could
not know that he had eternal life. Therefore a multitude of marks, signs, or
discoveries of a believers Spiritual estate are plainly laid down in this
Epistle more than in any other so short a piece of Scripture in the whole Bible.

Verse. 14. If we ask any thing according to his will he hears us] God
hears an enemy, but to hear with favor is here meant, and so we ordinarily
say of a Favorite, that he has the Kings ear; and if a man be obstinate to a
man's counsel, we say he would not hear though he gave the hearing. Mr
Goodwin.


Verse. 15. And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we
have the petitions that we desired of him] That is, Perkins.
if we can perceive and discern that God listeneth to our prayers, hereby we
may assure our selves that he grants our requests.

Verse. 16. If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death,
Non hic inter veniale and mortale Peccatum distinguit Apostolus sicuti postea
vulgo factum est: Prorsus enim insulsa est illa distinctio quae in Papatu
obtinuit. Calvinus.
he shall aske] That is, which undoubtedly brings death, the sin against
the Holy Ghost, for every other sin, we may pray for forgiveness of it to
others.

There is a sin unto death] By which he means not, that there is a sin
that deserves death (for so every sin does) but a sin, which whosoever falls
into, Mr Hildersam.
and commits, he must needs dye and perish everlastingly.

Verse. 18. We know that whosoever is borne of God sins not] That is, Mr
Hildersam and B. Down.
he sins not unto death, v. 16.

And that wicked one touches him not] That is, tactu qualitativo, Cajetan. So
as to leave an impression of his own devilish Spirit, Scilicet lethaliter.
Calvinus, Vorstius.
as the needle is touched by the Loadstone.

Verse. 21. Little children keep your selves from idols] He bids them take
heed not only of Idolatry as from the service, but of Idols themselves, that
is, Tertull. Vide Bezam.
the very images or shows of them. For it is unworthy that the image of the
living God should be made the image of an idol, and that being dead. At that
time in which St. John wrote, The vulgar translatour says filioli custodite
vosa simulacris, which is all one as if he should have said, ab imaginibus,
children or babes keep your selves from images, as we translate it, against
which Martin excepteth, and it sore grieveth him that this sentence is written
in the top of Church-dores, o^ in the place where the Rood loft stood, as
confronting and condemning the Crucifixes and Images that were wont to stand
there. Dr Fulke against Martin.
(...) signified an image generally, therefore it may be translated an image
generally, and seeing he speaks of the unlawful use of images, it may also
be translated an idol, as the word is now taken to signify.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the second Epistle general of JOHN.
CHAP. I.
Verse 10. IF there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine] viz. Of
Christ, bring] By an ordinary hebraisme, Dr Hall. Johannes loquitur de iis qui
asserunt doctrinam alienam a verbo Dei, and Christo nos volunt abducere. Pareus.
opposes it. Qui hanc Christi doctrinam aversatur and impugnat. Estius.

Receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed] viz. After
admonition and good means used for his reclaiming. Dr Tailor.
Titus 3.10.

Mr Perkins. Non sunt agnoscendi pro Fratribus, et vero prohibet omne
commercium extra periculum Fidei, and casum scandali, quandiu adhuc spes aliqua
est lucrifaciendi eos. Pareus.
It is to be understood of giving an outward approbation to false teachers, of
special familiarity.

Ex veris possunt nil nisi vera sequi.
Verse. 21. No lie] That is, no doctrinall lie, either about matters to be
believed, or to be done, either concerning the mysteries of faith, or the rules
of a holy life, is of the truth.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the third Epistle of JOHN.
CHAP. I.
Verse. 2. THAT thou may prosper] (...) of (...) and (...), Jon^s in loc.
Epistolae Joannis sunt tres numero quarum prima ad ecclesias integras
conscripta est: reliquae vero duae, ad ecclesiae membra: and quidem vel plura
ut secunda, vel unam ut tertia. Gomarus.
that thou may take a good way, go well, a metaphore from travelers. This
word is used, Romans 1.10. Where Paul prays that he may have a prosperous
journey to the Romans, from thence it is translated to all prosperity
whatsoever, 1 Cor. 16.2. We use to say in our common speech, how does such a
one go on, that is, how does he prosper.

Verse. 9. (...) Quasi diceret a Jove nutritus seu a Jove institutus.
Diotrephes] He had a glorious name, it signifies nourished by God, but he was
a bad man.

Verse. 10. Prating against us] (...), A metaphore taken from overseething pots
that send forth a some, or from overcharged stomachs that must needs belch.
See Prove. 15.2.

ANNOTATIONS Upon the Epistle of JVDE.
CHAP. I.
THE penman or writer of this Epistle was Jude or Judas the son of Alphaeus,
who was brother to James, and cousin to the Lord Jesus in the flesh. He was a
rare and notable Apostle to beat down the Heretics of that time.

The Argument of this Epistle agrees with those things which Peter has in his
second Epistle, especially in his second Chapter and beginning of the third.
Pareus says it is an epitome of that second Chapter of Peter, and paralels
diverse verses in his Epistle and that Chapter.

Verse. 3. Of the common salvation] In regard of the end and means of it, and
also of the subjects called unto it. Tailor on Titus.


That you should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to
the Saints] Austen says there is fides qua creditur, the habit or grace of
faith, and fides quae creditur, the doctrine of faith, the latter is chiefly
here understood. De Trinit. l. 13. c. 20


Verse. 4. Who were before of old] That is, from eternity which is elder than
time.

Prius vel ante scripti. Vide Piscat.
Ordained to this condemnation] (...), enrolled, billed, registered; or as it
were written down by the name in a book. So a book is given to God, Psalm.
139.16. Dan. 7.10.

Vincula haec sunt spiritualia, puta vis divina eos detinens, atque obligatio
and alligatio eorum per illam ad carcerem, gehennam and poenam aeternam. a
Lapide.
Verse. 6. He has reserved in everlasting chaines] 1. Of Gods justice. 2. Of his
providence. There are two sorts of chains, 1. Those which torment the Devil,
Gods wrath and his own conscience. 2. Those which restrain him, his own
Finitenesse and Gods providence.

Verse. 8. Likewise also these filthy dreamers] These surprised with dreams,
the Greek word signifies no more, (...). See 2 Pet. 2.10.14.
sopiti. Beza. Some applly it to nocturnall pollution, therefore our
translation (say they) puts in the word filthy, others say, such as did
pretend dreams and divine inspirations. Pareus approves of Epiphanius his
opinion, who interprets it of the vanity of the thoughts.

Defile the flesh] That is, are given to carnal sins. Pareus.

Despise dominion] The Greek word rendered despise, signifies to remove a thing
from its place with some scorn and indignation. Dominion] That is, more than
rulers, they despised not only Magistrates, but Magistracy it self.

Speak evil of dignities] Blaspheme Proterviam seductorum notat, qui quasvis
dignitates convitiis in cessunt; nullum agnoscentes ordinem neque
ecclesiasticum neque civilem. Quod fecerunt olim Nicolaitae, Gnostici, and
alij. Pareus.
glories, Greek.

Verse. 9. Yet Michael the Archangell, when contending with the Devil, he
disputed about the body of Moses] It was the will of God that Moses body should
be buried in a secret place unknown to any man, to prevent and avoid all
occasions of superstition and Idolatry among the Jews, Deuteronomy. 34.5, 6. The
Devil on the contrary would discover it, that so the Israelites might fall to
idolatry before it; Mr Perkins Fulke on Rhem. Test. Nicol. Lyra in Deuteronomy. 34.6.
Et Epistolam Judae. Nomen proprium est Archangeli, compositum ex tribus vocibus
Hebraeis, mi, Caph, el, quis sicut Deus. Reperitur autem Dan. 10. v. 13. and
12. v. 5. Apoc. 12. v. 7. Neque enim vera est eorum sententia, qui per
Michaelem ipsum Christum designari volunt quum in 1 These. 4. v. 6. Christus ab
Archangelo diserte distinguatur. Vorstius.
herein the Archangell resisted him, and strove with him for the performance of
the will of God, and the maintenance of his true worship.

This Michael was a created Angel not the Son of God, for the Devil could not
contend against the second person of the Trinity in his person immediately,
for then he had not clothed himself with the nature of man.

Verse. 11. Woe unto them] This woe is a short particle, but of terrible
signification, denouncing eternal punishment on whom it falls as a
thunderbolt from heaven; it is vox non precantis sed prophetantis, the voice
not of one praying but prophesying here, else the Apostle should seem to
transgress his own instruction given in the 9. v.

For they have gone in the way of Cain, and rangreedily after the error of
Balaam] Those two words (...) and (...), excellently set forth the dominion of
sin; gone in the way, an Hebrew phrase, that is, followed his course and life.

The latter word signifies to be powered out, that is, have given themselves
over for lusts sake to follow the error of Balaam. Effusi sunt. Beza. Instar
aquae diffluentis projecta est eorum intemperies. Calvinus.


Verse. 12. Trees whose fruit withereth] Or trees withered in Autumn, Dr.
Fulke. (...) arbores ema^cl^ae. Beza. arbores autumnales. Vulg. Vide Parcum.
when the fruit-harvest is, and so the Greek word imports: or trees
corrupting their own fruit.

Verse. 14. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his saints] It should
rather be rendered (says Mr Mede Mede on. Eccles. 5.1. Vide Estium, and
Vorstium. (...) est decies millenarius numerus, certus pro incerto. Stipatus
scilicet innumeris legionibus Angelorum and sanctorum. a Lapide.
) with his holy myriads, or ten thousands, viz. of Angels, (...), in sanctis
myriadibus ipsius. Christ himself witnesses that the Angels shall come with
him to judgment. Matthew. 25.31. Pareus.

Calvin says, by these words he means both the Angels and Saints, for both
shall attend his Throne when he comes to judge the world.

Verse. 16. Great swelling words (...), id est, tumida, excelsa, fastuosa, omnem
modum fidemque excedentia. Syrus stupenda. a Lapide.
] They brag and boast.

Having men's persons in admiration because of advantage] Bear great respect to
them by whom they may get any thing, and that only for gains sake.

Verse. 18. Who should walk after their own ungodly lusts] Greek, the lusts of
ungodlinesses, Quosi diceret, desideria eorum sunt desideria impietatum, id
est, rerum impiarum and implissima. a Lapide. Vide Pareum.
because in these the heart is turned away from God.

Verse. 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit] viz. ab ecclesia and coetu fidelium. a Lapide. Such who upon a
pretended holiness thought they might give over the hearing of the word they
were so good, they had immediate teaching; there is a lawful separation from
unholy persons and things, 2 Cor. 6.17. but those separated from holy duties,
as the words following show.

Verse. 20. Building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy
Ghost] As if he should say, the way to edify and build up your selves is to
pray in the Holy Ghost, Dr Preston. In Spiritu Sancto quatuor significat, Primo
orationem veram esse donum Spiritus sancti, and sine eo neminem posse orare
sicut oportet, ad obtinendam gratiam and salutem. Romans 8.26. Secundo in
oratione postulanda esse ea quae suggerit Spiritus sanctus, quaeque Spiritui
sancto grata sunt. Tertio orationem efficere hominem spiritualem. Quarto
Spiritum sanctum dirigere orationem nostram ne noxia sed salutaria petamus and
impetremus. Zach. 12.10. a Lapide.
that is, Spiritual prayer made through the power, assistance and strength of
the Holy Ghost.

Verse. 23. Hating even the garment spotted by the flesh] Abhor every thing
that may carry a savor or suspicion of uncleanness. See Calvin. Impense edit,
Dictum sumptum, ut apparetus a mulieribus sanguine menstruo pollutis, quarum
vestes etiam pollutae censebantur. Drus. Prove. Class. 2. l. 3. Vide Bezam.


He alludes (says a Lapide) first to the rite of the old law Levit. 15. in
which whosoever touched the garments of those that were polluted with the
leprosy, or other ways, were legally polluted. Secondly, to the profuse
drunkenesse and filthiness of the Gnostickes which sometimes defiled their
garments.

ANNOTATIONS UPON THE REVELATION.
CHAP. I.
Mihi tota Apocalypsis val e obscura vide tur, and talii, cujus explicatio
citra periculum vix queat tentari. Fateor me hactenus in nullius Scripti
Biblici lectione minus proficere, quam in hoc obscurissimo vaticinio. Graserus.
DOmitian cast John the Evangelist into a furnace of scalding oil, but when he
saw he came forth unhurt, he banished him into the Isle Pathmos, where he wrote
this Revelation. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 17.

Verbum ipsum (...), id est, revelationis, proprie scripturaru^ est, and a
nullo sapien^um saeculi apud Graecos usurpatum. Hieron. in cap. 1. Epist. ad
Galat. Apocalypsis idem est quod Revelatio, quo nomine utitur Paulus, 1 Cor.
14. and Galat. Ribeta
It is called according to the Greek Apocalypse, and according to the Latin
Revelation; That is, a discovery or manifestation of things which before were
hidden and secret, for the common good of the Church. The subject of it is
twofold, 1. The present estate of the Church. 2. The future state of it; the
things which are, and which shall be hereafter. Rev. 1.19. Fata impii, and fata
Ecclesiae, says Mr Mede.

John in all the Revelations made to him, joyneth thunder with the Revelation,
as chap. 4.5. and 6.1. and 10.3. because Gods Revelations made to the people
were usually with thunder, Psalm. 81.7. Exodus 19.16.

Woman in this mystical Book signifies three things:

1. Idols, 1. Because they are as entising and alluring as wanton women. 2.
Idolaters go a whoring after them as unclean persons after light women. chapter
14.4.

2. The City of Rome, the seat of Antichrist, chapter 17.3. 1. Because in her
outward pomp and glory she is opposed to the Chaste spouse of Christ, whose
glory is all within. Dr. Tailor on Rev. 12.
2 Because with her the great Kings of the earth have committed fornication,
chapter 17. verse 2. 3. Because she is the mother of fornications, called the great
whore, verse 1. of that Chapter.

3. The true Church, the wife and spouse of Jesus Christ. So Rev. 12.1.

All the Judgments in this Book are still upon Rome, either Rome Pagan, or
Rome Christian, Mr. Cotton upon the Vials.
or Rome Antichristian; the one falls under the seven Seals, the other under
the seven Trumpets, and the last under the seven Vialls.

The three first Chapters are most plain of all other parts of this Book; the
maine Contents of them are several Epistles sent by John to particular
Churches.

First, Why to these?

1. Because the Gospel did hear eminently flowrish.

Mr Manton.
2. Because John was President over them.

Secondly, Why to the 7 Churches in Asia, since more were planted in that
Country.

1. Because of the prophetical perfection of this number, with which the
Spirit of God is much delighted in this Prophecy; seven Stars, seven Spirits,
seven Candlesticks, seven Lamps, seven Seals, seven Angels.

2. Because in these seven Churches there was found enough to represent the
graces and conditions of all other Churches.

3. These Epistles are directed to the several Angels or Ministers of the
Churches, either because they were notoriously guilty of the offenses charged
upon them, or because all the dispensations of Christ were to pass through
their hands to the Church.

Ephesus was so named quasi (...) or (...), signifying remission, or slacking,
Languishing Ephesus.
that they may be put in mind of slacking or backsliding, wherewith the Spirit
upbraideth this Church, Cha. 2. ver. 4. Smyrna signifying lachrymam myrrhae,
Smyrna was an old Town famous for one of the seven that claimed Homer the Poet
to have been borne in them. These be Smyrna, Phodos, Colophon, Salamis Chios,
Argos, Athenae. Here Policarpus was Martyred. Broughtons Require of Consent.
She is called sweet smelling Smyrna, that is, Myrrh, or she that is more
delightful, than any pleasant and sweet spices, as is evident by that, that he
reproves no fault in her. Brightman.
the dropping or tears of myrrh, to put them in mind of the Cup of tears which
this Angel was to drink, v. 10. Pergamus, quasi (...), or (...), signifying
beyond, or out of the bonds of marriage, to put them in mind of the
Nicolaitanes abounding in this Church which were great abusers of marriage.
Sardis, quasi (...), signifying fleshly, because many in this Church were
fleshly given, Chap. 3. verse. 4. Philadelphia Whether it was so called from
Ptolomeus Philadelphus; so entitled for his love to his brother, or in mockage
for killing of him; he loved him at the first, but after contempt of his love
he killed him; or from Attalus Philadelphus, or were built by the first, and
argumented by the second. Broughtons require of Consent.
signifying brotherly love, to put them in mind of this virtue eminent in many
of this Church, therefore the Spirit rebukes her openly for nothing, Chapter 3.
ver. 10. Laodicea, quasi Whether it was so called from Ptolomeus Philadelphus;
so entitled for his love to his brother, or in mockage for killing of him; he
loved him at the first, but after contempt of his love he killed him; or from
Attalus Philadelphus, or were built by the first, and argumented by the second.
Broughtons require of Consent.
(...), the righteousness or customs of the people, to put them in mind of
the condition of the common sort in this Church, who were well conceited of
themselves, Chapter 3. verse. 17. Thyatira so called (...), signifying to run mad
after, and to spend ones self, because they ran a whoring after Jezebell, and
spent their estates upon her, Chap. 2. verse. 20. Dr Featelie.

Verse. 1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ] He does not say, this is the
Revelation of Jesus Christ; but after the manner of the Prophets, the vision of
Esaias, the word of the Lord which was to Hoseah, and after the manner of the
Evangelists, the book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Mat. 1. The beginning
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Mark 1. which Ellipsis is elegant.

Verse. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that bear the words of this
prophecie] Where have you a blessing so solemnly proclaimed to the reading and
hearing of any of the Books of God as to this Book? God would have us to
enquire into these things though they seem to be above us. Mr. Bur.


He changes the number, he that reads, and they that hear, because many
more may hear than read, Alstedius.
only the Learned can do this for the time] Or rather the opportunity of time,
tempus praestitutum, Beza, the time appointed, viz. by God, and therefore
opportune, is at hand.

Verse. 4. Which is, which was, and which is to come] In these words the Father
is noted. To come.] That is, to judgment. Mr Perkins.


And from the seven Spirits] That is, from the Holy Ghost, who is expressed in
the plural number, not as though there were seven Holy Ghosts, Vide Bezam.
but because of the plenty, perfection, and variety of his gracious operations
and influences. The number seven is rather taken than any other number, because
it is a number implying perfection, and because he wrote to seven Churches in
Asia, In Asia] Minori scilicet quae est pars Asiae Mojoris. Ad has septem
scripsit, quia in illis diu docueerat. Alstedius.
and St. John speaks here of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost as he saw them in a
vision, now he beheld the Holy Ghost in the form of seven lights in a vision.

Verse 5. And from Jesus Christ] He does not observe the order of nature, or of
the persons, but of better Doctrine, for the fitter progress of the history,
for the Penmen of the Scripture set them in the last place, of whom they mean
to speak most, as Mat. 1. He describes Christ at large from this ver. 5. to
ver. 9. Who is the faithful witnesse] The Proph^ticall Office of Christ is
intimated Esaias 55.4. And the first begotten of the dead] Here is Christ's second
Office, his Priesthood, the principal actions whereof stand in dying and
rising again from the dead, and making intercession for us.

And the Prince of the kings of the earth] Here is the third title given to
Christ, wherein his Kingly Office is expressed.

Verse. 9. And patience of Jesus Christ] Three things argued Christ's patience,
if we consider, 1. What he suffered, maledicta, malefacta, he drank of the
brook in the way, Psalm. 110. ult. 2. From whom, the vilest of men. 3. The
freeness and voluntarinesse of his sufferings: He suffered not out of
infirmity, quia resistere non posuit, but out of obedience, quia pati voluit.

Eusebius. l. 3. c. 21.
Was in the Isle that is called Patmos] Banished thither by Domitian, Eusebius. l.
3. chapter 18. from whence he returned in the days of Nero, and dyed at Ephesus.

Vide Bezam. Bifield. So the Lords day, as the Sacrament is called the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. and the solemn Prayer, the Lords Prayer.
Verse. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day) Not by Creation, for so all
days are his, nor by destination, for that intends a time yet to come; and
so the day of general judgment is his, 1 These. 5.2. but by consecration,
choice, and institution.

And heard behind me a great voice, as of a Trumpet] That is, full of Majesty
and power, Mos Hebraeorum erat, ut cum populus erat convocandus, ut rem magni
momenti and omnibus utilem audiret, tuba ex edito loco personarent aut huccina,
Hos. 5. and c. 8. Isay 58. Ribera.
which also God added unto it to further attention in John.

Verse. 13. Clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps
with a golden girdle] Christ is here described in his Priestly Robes, Hic
vestitus talaris est symbolum Sacerdotis, quia Sacerdotes V. T. ejusmodi
vestibus induebantur. Geth. in loc. Vide Alstedium in loc. Cinctura est
symbolum alacrita^is and promptitudinis in administrando Sacerdotio, in
defendendis piis. Gerh.
John wrote the Revelation long after his ascension.

His girding about the pappes and breasts signifies, that there is no defect
or aberration in any motion or affection in our Savior Christ, but every
thought and inclination of his heart is kept in order by the fullness of the
Spirit, Esaias 11.5. Or it may show his readiness to help his people.

Verse. 16. And be bad in his right hand seven stars] 1. In regard of his
disposition of Ministers here and there at his pleasure. 2. Of his protection
of them in their labors.

Verse. 18. And have the keys of hell and of death] The phrase seems to be
borrowed from great Commanders and Conquerours, who having won and entered any
City, presently have the keys delivered to them in token of that authority
which of right belongs to them; That is, power over hell and death, Claves
sunt symbolum potestatis. Solent victori ^radi Claves portarum urbis. Gerh.
it shows that Christ vanquished hell and death, and obtained full power over
them. Dr Tailor.

Verse. 20. The seven stars are the angels of the seven Churches] By the seven
Angels to whom the seven Epistles are in general directed, Alcazar says, the
Bishops are meant, Pererius with some other Ancients think rather the people.
Ministers are called Angels, viz. such as by whom he reveals his good
pleasure unto us. Angeli, id est, episcopi; pastores dicuntur illi stellae,
quia debent lucere, and praelucere aliis, sana^ dactrina, and sancta vita. Idem
sunt stellae in dextra Christi; quia ab illo defend untur adversum hosies.
Alstedius in loc.
St. Ambrose, Haymo, and Beda join both together, and this (says Dr Prideaux)
is the best approved of our reformed Interpreters, Fox, Fulke, Bullenger; for
though the Inscriptions be to the Angels only, that is, the Pastors of those
Churches, yet the Contents concern their flocks as near as themselves, chapter 1.
verse. 11.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. UNto the angel) Expressed in the singular number, to note the union
and combination in a body and society.

He that boldeth] That is, Christ.

The seven stars] By stars are here meant the Ministers of the Word.

In his right hand] That is, strongly keeps them, to show 1. His affection. 2.
His care and protection.

The Stars 1. are heavenly bodies which shine with a borrowed light, so
Ministers should shine as lights, but with a borrowed light. 2. Stars are in
continual motion for the good of the world, so should the Ministers be for the
good of the Church. Mr Arrowsmith.
3. They differ from one another in glory, 1 Cor. 15. There are Stars of the
first, second, and third magnitude, so Ministers differ from Apostles, and
among themselves.

Verse. 4. Because thou have left thy first love] Christ speaks not of the
grace of Charity wholly, but of that degree and measure wherewith he had been
formerly adorned; he commends him for two notable fruits of faith and love
which he did still exercise, v. 2.3. patience and constancy.

Verse. 5. And do the first workes] That is use your former diligence

And will remove thy candlestick out of his place] The Candlestick is the
Church. 1. Rev. vlt. That is, own them no more for a visible Church. It is
spoken of those that are of the carnal seed and externally graffed in only.

Verse. 10. Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into prison] That ye may
be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days.] Though the Devil be
malicious, His instruments, because like to him, as cruel, the Devil in
Trajan say some.
yet he is bounded by God Mr. Harris. It shall neither be so long a time as
the Devil and wicked men would have it, for then they must never come out, nor
so little a while as they themselves would have it, for then they would never
come in, or stay but a while, but God will rule by determining the time for
their good. Bifield.
. 1. For persons, he shall cast only some of you into prison, he would all.
2. For quality, cast them into prison, not take away their lives. 3. For the
end, Satan wills the undoing of Gods people, but God their trial only. 4. The
time that is set down, ten days and no longer, God reckons not only the
years but days of our sufferings. 5. The event or wages.

Ten dayes] That is, a long time ten in Scripture is numerus plenitudinis, thou
have changed my wages this ten times, says Jacob to Laban, and they have
provoked me ten times, that is, often; or prophetical days, that is, ten
years, so in Daniel; others take it indefinitely as Pareus, numerus certus pro
incerto.

Be thou faithful unto death, See 4.4.
and I will give thee a crown of life] The reward of life given to Saints in
heaven, when they have striven as they ought to do and gotten the victory, is
called a Crown, 2 Timothy 2.5. or a Garland, Dr Rainolds against Harr. p. 482.

Aeterna faelicitas dicitur corona, Primo, quia datur certantibus and
vincentibus. Alludit enim ad pugiles, athio^os, aliosque luctantes in slatio
vel agone, verbi gratia, Olympico. 1 Cor. 9.21. Secundo qu^a corona rotunda
significat perfectionem and complexum honorum omnium and gaudiorum, principio
and sine carentem instar circuli and coronae. Tertio, quiae pretiosissima est
instar coron^ gemmis exornatae. a Lapide.


by allusion to a custom that was among the Grecians. For such as got the
masterie in their games of wrestling, or running, or the like, were crowned
with a garland in token of victory. See 1 Cor. 9.25. 1 Pet. 5.4.

It is called the Crown of life, 1. to show that the Saints who laid down
their life for Christ, did not lose it but change it for a better. 2. Because
their glory and joy shall always live, 1 Pet. 1.4. 1 Cor. 9.25. 3. Because
life includes delights, glory, wisdom, and all good, they come from this life.

Verse. 15. So have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans]
They thought 1. That wives ought to be common. Clemens Alexandrinus. strom. l.
3. Affirmat Nicolaum cum haberet uxorem liberali forma atque zelotypiae esset
suspectus post Christi ascensionem, reprehensus ab Apostolis propter
zelotypiam. Quo crimine ut so purgaret, dicitur produocisse uxorem in medium,
atque ut doceret, se ab omni zelotypia alienum esse, permisisse, ut quicunque
vellet, eam duceret, huic autem facto consentientem adjecit vocem, abutendum
esse non ad scorcationem, imo potius concupiscentius carnis domandas esse
carne. Quod sactum atque dictum Nicolai diaconi sine judicio accipientes,
inquit Clemens Alexandrinus, atque impure, qui ejus haeresin persequuntur,
impudenter effuseque scortantur, atque docent licere cum alienis uxoribas
commisceri atque carne abuti. Rainold de lib. Apoc. tomo secundo praelect. 109.
2. That it is lawful to eat of the sacrifices of the Gentiles. 3. That
whoredom is lawful.

Verse. 17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden manna]
Manna had Alludit ad concionem illam Domini quae scripta est Ioh. 6. Item
ad^locum Davidis Psalm. 105.40. Beza. Significat vitam aeternam, non Christum ut
aliqui interpretantur, quae manna dicitur absconditum, quemadmodum Paulus dicit
vitam nostram absconditam esse cum Christo. Col. 3.3. dicitur manna propter
delitias beatitudinis.
dew under it and dew over it, Dr Rainolds on Hos. 14.5, 6, 7. uses.
as we may conjecture by comparing Exodus 16.12. with Numb. 11.9. Whereunto the
Holy Ghost seems to allude, though it may likewise refer unto the pot of
Manna which was kept in the Tabernacle. Exodus 16.32.33. Heb. 9.4. As our life
is said to be hid with Christ, now he is in heaven. Col. 3.3.

And will give him a white stone] White stones were in great use among the
Romans, and served: De hoc calculo varii sunt doctorum calculi. The Rhemists
translate it a white Counter, This translation is false, unlearned and
ridiculous. (...) calculum, the word in both tongues signifies a stone
properly, in which they used to write the names of them that were elected to
honor or absolved from crime.
1. To declare the victour or conqueror in proving masteries. 2. To acquit the
accused in courts of justice. Mos erat antiquis niveis atrisque lapillis.
His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpa.
3. To deliver suffrages in the election of Magistrates.


Upon all these senses this allegory touches. For this white stone is given in
token of victory, vincenti dabo. 2. It is an evidence of our Justification. 3.
An assurance of our election to the kingdom of heaven.

And in the stone a new name Nomen dignitate praestans. Pareus. Signum and
indicium novitatis vitae. Iunius. Absolutorium in extremo judicio juxta
promissionem Evangelii, Ioh. 5.24. Brightm.
written, which no man knows saving he that receives it] Beza, Bullenger,
Pererius and other Expositors generally concur upon filius Dei, which opinion
they illustrate by other texts, viz. Romans 8.15.16. and 1 John 3.1.

The benefit of adoption is not known but by experience.

Impostores blasphemias suas vocabant profunditates, profunda mysteria, and
abstrusam sapientiam, long perfectiorem quam quae ab Apostolis praedicaretur,
Christus concedit esse (...) profunditates, sed Satanae, a malo Daemone ex Orco
inspiratas, eoque aversandas and exterminandas procul. Pareus in loc. 1 Timothy
4.1.
Verse. 24. And which have not known the depths of Satan] That is, the dark
opinions and false doctrines of seducers: These called their opinions depths or
profundities, and the Holy Ghost adds an epithete, depths of Satan. As if he
had said, you call your opinions depths, and so they are, but they are such
depths as Satan has brought out of Hell, they are the whisperings and hissings
of that serpent, not the inspirations of God.

A full enjoying of himself Cartw. Pareus. Dr Tailors meditations from the
creation.
Verse. 28. And I will give him the morning starre] That is, Christ. See Rev.
22.16. I will communicate my self wholly unto him, and make him conformable
unto me in my glory.

1. The morning star is the most bright and shining of all the stars in
heaven, Christ in glory excels all men and Angels, as far as the morning
star all the stars of heaven. 2. Pet. 1.19.

2. It communicates all his light to the world, so Christ to believers all
light of grace and glory.

3. It dispelleth the nights darkness, so Christ the darkness of ignorance
and errors wherein we were wrapped in the night of sin.

4. It is anteambulo Solis, the suns harbinger, and forerunner of perfect
day, so Christ is a pledge of our perfect day and future glory.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 2. I Have not found thy ways perfect] The words are (...) Thy ways
filled up, thou have not filled up thy course in following me, not followed
me fully. That is, when the inwards of the man are filled up with acts of
graces and every grace with acts proper for it object.

Verse. 4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis] That is, a few faithful and
Saints, he alludes to Soldiers whose names are enrolled by the Captain when
they are admitted.

Which have not defiled their garments] That is, 2 Pet. 2.20.
have walked answerable to their holy calling by the Gospel, or profession.

And they shall walk with me in white] Be partakers Faciam gloriae meae
consortes. Pareus. Alba vestis nitore maxim conspicuae gloriae erat insigne.
v. 5. and 7.9. and 19.14. Pareus ib. Vestes albae symbolum. 1. perfectae
sanctitatis ac puritatis. 2. dignitatis regiae and sacerdotalis. 3. laetitae.
4. triumphi adversus hosts. 5. gloriae. Confer. Apoc. 4. v. 4. cap. 6. v. 11.
cap. 7. v. 13. Gerh. in loc.
with me in my glory. This was the habit in times past of Nobles, says
Drusius, whence they are called canditati.

For they are worthy] And what is it to be worthy but to merit, say some. By
Christ's merits, obedience, righteousness, in him and for his sake they were
counted worthy Abbot against Bishop. Deus in Christo eos reddidit dignos gloria
Coelesti. Luc. 20.35. Phil. 1.27. 2 These. 1.5.11. Gerh in loc.
, and whatsoever worthiness God pronounces of them for their works, it is by
the gracious acceptance thereof in him; worthy, not dignitate sua, sed
dignatione divina, they are worthy not absolutely, but compared to the other
spoken of before.

Verse. 5. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment]
After the manner Respicitur for^osse mos Judaeorum sacerdotalis. Lud. de Dieu.
Vide D'espagne de la manducation du corpse de Christ.
of the Priests among the Jews.

Verse. 7. He that has the key of David] The key of the house of David, that is
the Church, Lukh 1.32. See Esaias 22.22. 1 Timothy 3.15.


He opens and no man shuts; and shuts, and no man openeth] That is, He
works irresistably. Dr Tailor.


Verse. 12. Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God]
That is, Mayerus in Philol. Sac. Pareus. Vide Gerh.
in the Church Triumphant: pillars are both the firmament and ornament of
Temples.

And he shall go no more out] That is, he shall receive eternal and immutable
glory.

Verse. 14. The beginning of the creation of God] Taken out of Prove. 8.22. See
Mat. 8.12.

Verse. 16. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I
will spew thee out of my mouth] These words contain an allegory drawn from
the nature of warm water, as Illyricus and Bullenger, or from meats, as
Pererius, Ribera and a Lapide, which if they be hot or cold, the stomach may
retain, but if lukewarm, it casts them up again.

Verse. 18. I counsel thee to buy of mee] That is wait on me in the way I
conveigh grace. Gold] Some by this understand the word of God, That is, do as
men do in buying of commodities. 1. See thy want of it by viewing thy own
nakedness. 2. Esteem it in the just value of it. 3. Exchange all thy sins
for this righteousness.
Psalm. 12. and 119. others the graces of Gods Spirit. 1 Pet. 1.7. Prove. 8. Gold
is the most excellent of all metals and most esteemed, so are spiritual graces
among Christians.

And white raiment] Raiment, that is, the righteousness of Christ, graces in
Christ suitable to our necessities; white, because it is a natural color, Dr
Tailor. walk with me in white.
therefore beyond all artificial, a color of purity and ornament.

And that the shame of thy nakedness do not appeare] The Priests had linen
breeches to cover their nakedness; Christ must cover the shame of our
nakedness.

And anoint thy eyes with eye salve, that thou may see] The Spirit of
illumination.

Verse. 19. I rebuke and chasten] We have no one English word capable of the
whole contents of either of the words in the original, (...) primarily
signifies to evict or convince, to give evidence of any thing or against any
person, Dr Featelie.
to lay his sins open before him, so as he cannot but see them and be ashamed
of them, as Heb. 11.1. Ephesians. 5.11. Psalm. 50.21. (...) is likewise a word much
more pregnant than chasten, and may be expressed better in one word, I nurture
or I discipline, for the word implies a^^ well instruction as correction.

Thronus regis apud Orientales amplus and latus est, lecticae instar, fulcris
aliquantulum supra terram evectus ac tapetibus ornatus, adeo ut praeter sedem
Regi propriam, alii quoque quos honor afficere cupit Rex in eodem throno seeds
habere queant. Ludov. de Dieu. in loc.
Verse. 21. In his Throne] See John 17.24. Yet so as Christ the Head does always
excel.

Verse. 22. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches] The promises which belong to the whole Church, are to be applied by
every particular Saint.

Verba sensus significant cum affectu and effectu, words of sense signify with
affection and the effect, that is, let him attend unto and follow the
admonitions of the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 2. A Throne was set in heaven] That is, Gods presence in his Church in
Gospell-ordinances; Thronus, quem vidit in Coelo postitum, fuit is, de quo
supra cap. 1.4. and cujus deinceps vicies octies in hac Apocalypsi fiet mentio,
quia imperium and judicium Dei in omnia, quod hic thronus repraesentat,
perpetuo vult nobis esse in conspectu. Pateus.
in allusion to the Holy of Holies, where God was present in the Mercy-seate.
Esaias 6.1. and Ezekiel. 43.2.

Verse. 3. The three precious stones hold forth the three persons in the
Trinity. A Jasper having (as they say) a white circle round about it
representing Cotton on 16. of Rev. Vide Brightm.
the eternity of the Father; A Sardine stone of a fleshy color representing
Jesus Christ who took our flesh upon him; An Emerald being of a green color,
refreshing the eyes of those that look upon it, representing the Spirit, who
is (as the Rainebow) a token of In this place and 10. chapter 1. v. there is a
description of Christ's sitting in his throne, and mention made of the Rainebow,
that we may acknowledge that the throne of Christ is compassed with mercy, and
that he shows in his countenance when he manifests himself to his. The
Rainebow is signum gratiae and foederis, Gods covenant of grace and mercy
toward his Church, is always fresh and green.
fair weather, and a comfortable refresher wheresoever he comes. By that is
signified (says Gerhard) our reconciliation with God by Christ. Genesis 9.13.
Romans 5.20. See 10. chapter 1.

Vide v. 6. and 5.8. Typus hic proponitur and totius ecclesiae, and
sanctissimarum quae in ea quotidie funduntur precum and laudum, quae velut
thymiamata per Christum Deo offerunturus quatuor animalia praecones omnes and
ministros verbi Dei notant. Hieron. August. Beda, Nam and homines sunt, c. 5.9.
and inter thronum Dei and Seniores, quasi legati inter deum and opulum positi
sunt, and Animalia sunt, id est vegeta and agilia, quia ad Dei mandata
exequenda expeditos esse oportet: Alena oculis sunt ut hinc notetur eximia illa
qua praeditos esse oportet perspicacia and populenta rerum divinarum
intelligentia, quatuor sunt ut quatuor orbis plagas obire and verbo Dei
illustrare possint. Crankanth. defens. eccles. Anglic. Vide Brightm. and Gerh.
Verse. 4. And round about the Throne were four and twenty seats, and upon the
seats I saw four and twenty Elders sitting] He alludes both to the twelve
Patriarchs and twelve Apostles, which put together make up these four and
twenty, by whom the whole Church under both Testaments is represented. Mr.
Arrowsmith.

Verse. 5. And out of the Throne proceeded lightenings and thunderings and
voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the Throne] Here is a
double benefit of the ordinances. 1. Dona protectionis against all the Churches
enemies, thunderings, Amos 1.2.2. Dona sanctificationis, all qualifying and
sanctifying gifts, for their variety said to be seven Spirits.

Verse. 6. A sea of glass like unto Christall] That is, says Deuteronomy, the world
transitory and brittle as glass, tumultuous and troublesome as the Sea.
Quistorpius interprets it of Baptism.

Mr Harris. See Brightman. All the ordinances of God ^ere so clear, as that
you might see Christ's face in them as in a mirror of glass. 2 Cor. 3.18. Mr
Cotton on the 16. of Rev.
Gods ordinances in this book are set forth by name of a Sea of glass, 1. For
largeness. 2. For steadfastnesse. 3. Clearenesse, as giving us a clear sight
of God, in which respect they are also here compared to crystal.

Four beasts full of eyes before and behind] Beasts is a barbarous
translation, four wights, living Creatures, (...), men full of knowledge, of
Lions courage, Sic oculata etiam erant Ezechielis animalia Oculio vigilantia
and perspicacia Doctorum significatur. Oportet enim ceu Argos quosdam omni ex
part esse oculatissimos in ovibus pascendis, and curandis fidei suae
Commissis, in Scripturis sacris scrutandis, in lupis a grege arcendis. Pareus.
of Oxes patience to sacrifice, of man's quiet and humanity, and Eagles high
flight; Martyrs; Polycarpus was a Lion for courage, an Ox for patience, a man
indeed for wit, an Eagle for high flight, proclaming the Gospel. Broughtons
Require of Consent.

By four several forms of beasts is meant (says Pareus) the collection of
the Church of Christ in the four quarters of the World, and diverse Nations,
People and Tongues.

The Beasts represent the people, he alludes to the incamping of the People of
Israel the wilderness round about the Tabernacle. Numb. 1.52. and thence to
the end of the second Chap. Mr Mede.
The twelve Tribes which encamped round about the Tabernacle had some Beasts in
their Scutchions. The 24. Elders in the fourth verse represent the Ministers
which were cast by David into the 24. Orders.

Verse. 8. And the four Beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they
were full of eyes within] These Beasts are described full of eyes, having also
six wings about, and those full of eyes within. So many eyes do set forth the
multitude of sharpe-sighted men, and full of knowledge of the mysteries of God;
such as are in the Beasts, that is, the Church which the beasts do represent.
The wings, signify agility, and alacrity, Mr Mede.
to put in execution the Commandments of God. The wings full of eyes zeal
joined with knowledge and faith.

Holy, holy, holy] Some original Copies have it 9. times over (...) Gerhard
says, it is better thrice (...) hoc fuit Seraphinorum. Iesa, c. 6.3. Ter
sanctitatem Deo acclamant: sive S. Trinitatom in Deo innuentia, sive infinitam
(...) iterationem significantia. Est enim Deus ter sanctus, sanctissimus,
sanctitas, and puritas ipsa, beatos angelos and homines sanctificans. Pareus
only as Esaias 6.3.

Verse. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour] For what, for
his power as follows, and power, that is, says Piscator, potentiae laudem,
the praise of power, which is as much as to say, he deserves to be glorified
and honored by the acknowledgement of his eternal power, for as much as he
created all things out of nothing.

CHAP V.
Verse. 1. ANd I saw in the right hand of him that sat one the throne a Book]
That is, say some the Bible, others the Revelation; August. Hieron. Ambros.
Orig. Hilar. Eusebius. Beda, Hugo, exrecentioribut Primasius, Marlora^us;
intelligunt V and N Testamentum Gerh. Liber hic est ipsa Apocalypsis. Pareus.
In the right hand] Because all the secrets revealed in it come from the decree
of God, and are ordered by his providence. Deuteronomy.
Gods Counsels are resembled to a Book, for their certainty and stability; the
Revelation hereby understood (say Pareus, a Lapide, and Dent) is a Book of Gods
eternal Decree concerning the Church and his enemies.

Written within and on the back side] Because much was written. Ezekiel. 2.10.

He speaks (say Beza, Pareus, Brightman, a Lapide) according to the ancient
manner of wrighting in long Parchments, which were afterward rolled together
about some round piece of wood, whence Books were called Volumes or Scroles,
and Christ is said to have unfolded and enwrapped the Book, Luke 4.17. The
outside did commonly abide clean and unwritten, unless the inside were not
able to contain the whole writing; for then they filled the outward part with
Letters, which kind of writings were called backeside writings.

Scriptus and in tergo needum finitus Orestes. Juven. Satyr. 1. Sealed with
seven Seales] to note the great secrecy, and several degrees of discovery of
Gods Counsels.

Verse. 2. And I saw a strong Angell] That is, Gabriel (says Gerhard) which
name signifies the power of God. Crying with a loud voice] Like a Crier. Who
is worthy] That is, fit. To open the booke] By which is understood a
manifestation of the Decrees of God.

Verse. 5. And one of the Elders] Without doubt (says Gerhard) one of those who
rose with Christ, and ascended into heaven, Mat. 27.52. It seems to be the
Patriarch James (says he) because from his Prophecy the name of Lion is given
to Christ. Genesis 49.9

Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the root of David, has prevailed to
open the Book, and to loose the seven Seals thereof] John 1.18. Christ is
able to make known these hidden secrets, Christus Leoni comparutur 1. Propter
roboris excellentiam, 2. Propter heroicum animum. 3. Propter principatum, Leo
rex animalium. 4. Propter vigilantiam. Gerh.
therefore he is called the Counselor, Esaias 9.5. of the Tribe of Judah,
because he was borne of this Kingly Tribe, Heb. 7.14. this Tribe had the figure
of a Lion in its Ensign. Genesis 49.9.

Verse. 6. In the midst of the Throne, and of the Beasts] That is, the middle
between God and the Church triumphant, by which it is signified that the Lamb
is the Mediator between God and men.

And in the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb as it had been slaine] Not Christ
as God, but as a Lamb slain; Agnum repraesentare Christum non est dubium,
modo vocabatur Leo ob dignitatem and potentiam, Leo enim rex animalium robore
superant omnia; nunc agnus ob innocentiam and victimam. Jes. 53.7. Nec aliud
duo agni quotidie mactati sub lege significabant, nisi Christi victimam jugiter
efficacem. Joh. 1.29.36. 1. Pet. 1.19. Pareus.
the discovery of the secrets of God in his Word are the fruit of Christ slain
and ascended. Stands, because 1. Prepared to perfect the work of Redemption.
2. To help. 3. To judge. 4. To intercede.

Having seven horns, and seven eyes] The Lamb wanted neither power, Lament.
2.3: nor wisdom, Zach. 3.9. and 4.10. to open the seven Seals.

Which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth] This is
taken out of Zach. 4.10. that is, the manifold graces of the Spirit which he
gives unto his Church.

Verse. 8. The four beasts] That is, all the Ministers of the Word.

And four and twenty Elders] That is, the whole Church.

Fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them Harpes, and golden vials
full of Odours, which are the Prayers of Saints] It is an allusion to the
manner under the Law, wherein they had pots or vials for Incense, See Zac.
14.20. Cytharae sunt symbolum, 1. Laudis divina. 2. Gratiarum actionis. 3.
Laetitiae. Psalm. 33.2. and 149.3. Psalm. 150.3. Gerh.
Music of Harpes and violls, that is, all kind of heavenly melody and
harmony, such as the sweetest music may not be compared unto. Dr. Tailor.

Christians hearts are well figured out by golden vialls vessels narrow
beneath and wide upwards.
These golden Vialls are their sincere hearts, these odours, glorious
apprehensions, and fervent affections. As gold excells in purity, so Prayers
proceeding from a pure heart are precious to God.

Dr. Crakanthorpe against Spallatto. Rev. 8.4. Mr. Hildersam.
Their daily prayers and hymns of praises are noted by the Harp and Incense.

The prayers of the Godly are called odours,

1. In respect of themselves, because they yield a sweet savor and unspeakable
comfort unto their own hearts, John 16.24. but chiefly in respect of the Lord,
to him they are the sweetest odours, even such as themselves feel small
delight in.

Verse. 9. And they sung a new song] A song which should never wax old, which
should be of perpetual use in the Church of God, Canticum novu^ dicitur pro
eximium. Apoc. 14.3. Pareus.
whiles she receives perpetual blessings from God in Christ, Psalm. 33.3. and
10.

And have redeemed us to God] That is, to Gods favor, grace and glory.

Verse. 11. Round about the throne] An expression according to the manner of the
encamping of the People of God in the wilderness, See Dan. 7.10. Quia angeli
astant coram throne Dei parati ad exequendum ejus mandata. Psalm. 130.20. Dan.
7.10. Heb. 1.4.
Numb. 2. all about the Tabernacle, which had for their Ensigns four Beasts.

CHAP. VI.
IN this Chapter the seals are against Pagane Rome, in the eighth Chapter the
Trumpets are against Christian Rome, in the 16. Chapter the vialls are poured
on Rome Antichristian.

Verse. 2. And I saw, and behold a white horse] This figureth the Virgin
primitive Church upholding the purity of doctrine, and discipline of faith and
works, Vide Pareum.
as appointed by the Apostles.

And he that sat on him had a bow] Christ riding on his white horse has a bow,
See 19.11. See Psalm. 45.6. Dr Sibbes. Ministers are called whit^ horses, 1.
Horses in that God uses them in his battles against sin, Satan, the world
and wicked ones, and white for the purity of their doctrine and integrity of
their lives.
and goes forth conquering in the Ministry, that he may overcome either to
conversion, or confusion, Rev. 19.11. The conquerers entered into Rome carried
on a white horse, The doubling of the word (says Pareus) designs his present
and future victory.

And a Crown was given to him] viz. Regal or rather triumphall.

Verse. 4. There went out another horse that was red] This deciphers the Church
now red with martyrdom, under the ten great persecutions raised up by
Domitian, Trajane, Nero, Antonine, Decius, Dioclesian, Maxentius, Licinius, and
other cruel tyrants, even until the times of Constantine the great.

Verse. 5. Lo a black horse] This notes the estate of the Church now black and
in an afflicted condition by Heretics which had mingled the truth of pure
white doctrine with black darkness of heresies and errors.

To this horse is attributed a balance to design exceeding great scarcity,
when according to the curse of the Law, Levit. 26.26. men shall eat their
bread by weight; By the balance is meant the Scripture faith Pareus, which
Heretics pretend. See Lam. 4.8.
rather says Pareus, a scarcity of the word, Amos 8.11. Mr Mede would have
the matter of this seal to be, not famine or dearth of victual, but the
administration and severity of Justice through the Roman Empire. The color of
the horse agrees (says he) to the severity of justice, and the weights
Justice is painted with a pair of balances.
are a symbol of justice.

Verse. 7. Come and see] That is, come that thou may see.

Verse. 8. And behold a pale horse] Austen and Beda, apply it to the martyring
of Saints, Bullenger and Forbes to plagues of death.

Pale] The Greek word properly signifies, Green as the gross; sometimes it
is that dead color of herbs that wax dry, whence it is sometimes put for
palenesse, Equus hic dicitur (...), quod significat viridem colorem, eum qui ad
pallorem tendit cujusmodi hoc autumnali tempore arborum and vitium folia
conspicimus quae deficiente succo nunc defluunt. Pareus.
which is the hew of any withering and fading thing, so Constance the Father of
Constantine the Great was called Chlorus, because of his palenesse, as Zonarus
says in the life of Dioclesian.

And hell followed with him] Hell the page of death attends him where ever he
goes among the wicked sort, therefore they are often coupled in this book,
Death and Hell. Some understand by it the grave, when they are dead, they go
to be buried; Vide Cornel a Lapide.
so some interpret that article in the Creed, he descended into hell, That is,
abode in the state of the dead; but he speaks here (say some) of the wicked,
and judgments to them, therefore it is meant of Hell.

Brightman would rather have the Grave to be here meant, seeing many Saints
(says he) dyed among the rest, of whom it were wicked to think that they
were devoured of the Hell of the damned.

And with death] i.e. The Plague. The LXX use this word, Exodus 9.3.2. Sam.
24.13. It is called mortality by ecclesiastical writers, Vide Bezam, and Mede.
which now has passed into many mother Tongues.

Soules] i.e. The persons which were martyred. under the Altar] Bcause their
martyrdom was a certain sacrifice. 2 Timothy 4.6. Phil. 2.11.
Verse. 9. I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the word
of God, and for the testimony which they held] That is under Christ's protection
and custody. Haymo, Aquinas, Beza, Pareus. Under the shadow of his wings, the
phrase alluding to the Tabernacle which gave the offerings grace and acceptance

Lying under the Altar] That is, (says Mr Mede) upon the ground, at the foot
of the Altar, like Sacrifices newly slain.

Verse. 10. And they cried with a loud voyce] This is not to be understood of
the desire of blessed souls, or of any proper act of theirs, since it will not
agree to their felicity; River.
but in the same manner that Abells blood is said to cry, because their death
being always fresh in Gods fight, requires revenge from the divine justice,
the Saints in the mean time remaining secure.

That which the prophetical vision represents is to be understood suitably
to Christianity, and to the kingdom of God attained by it. Since therefore
revenge is contrary to the principles of Christianity, Thorndikes right of the
Church in a Christian state. chapter 5.
we cannot imagine, that blessed souls desire it, but the cry which they make,
must be understood to be the provocation of God to vengeance, which their
sufferings produce: So much more pertinently attributed to blessed souls, in
as much as, being acquainted with Gods counsels, they approve and rejoice in
his Justice, and the advancement of his Church by the means of it.

Verse. 11. And white robes were given unto every one of them] A clothing of
Princes in their great solemnities of coronation and triumphs, White was ever
the color of joy, 2 Samuel 6.14. Stola Albae principium gloriae caelestis
defiguant. Pareus.
says Eusebius; they were wont so to dignifie servants at their manumissions
with white apparel, in token of their new liberty and preferment. In the
Primitive Church one of the B. Lake. The whole Easter week Christians wore
wh^te apparel, they were baptized then, and wore white after. The week some
while after Easter was called Dominica in albis and Whitsontide from white, See
Mede.
Ceremonies of baptism was this, that the baptized person had a clean white
garment put upon him, with these words, Take this white garment, and keep it
unspotted until thou be presented before the Tribunal of Christ; the Churches
meaning was, he should continue in that innocence which he received in
baptism.

Fulgentes animas vestis quoque candida signat. Esaias 13.10. Mede.
Verse. 12. And the Sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon became
as bloud] This is a circumlocution of the eclipse of these lights, wherein the
Sun is wont to appear black, but the Moon reddish.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 3. TIll we have sealed the servants of our God in their forebads]
Amoris and singularis curae symbolum sigillum Glossius. See Ezekiel. 9.4.
Sealing was a sign of special care.

Verse. 4. An hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the
children of Israel] The people of Israel was no Church long before; Quaerunt
Papista ubi erat ecclesia ante Lutherum and quinam fuerint? Audiant Johannem,
cum antichristus videbitur omnia pessundedisse, erunt tamen 144000. signatorum.
Pareus.
the Gentile Church is called Israel, because they were graffed in instead of
the Jews that were broken off.

Cartwright in his Annotations on Rhem. Testament.
That a greater number of the Gentiles shall be saved than of the Jews, is truly
gathered out of this place. But that the elect of the Jews are in a certain
number, because their number is set down, and the other of the Gentiles is
not, is more than the Scripture does warrant; in the enumeration of the Tribes
there is no respect had of order, to show that there is no regard had by God of
carnal privileges in the matter of salvation.

This ought to be taken for an indefinite number, as well as the 7000. which
had not bowed the knee to Baal. The holy Ghost is not contented to have named
the total ^um of them that were sealed in Israel, Despagne his new
observations upon the Creed. p. 172.
but also divides it into twelve times twelve thousand, distributed by equal
portions among the twelve Tribes, every one of which is mentioned the one after
the other, with the expression of its particular number: this shows that the
number of the Elect, and multitude of Believers, are measured by certain
proportions which are known to him who is the Author.

Verse. 5. Judah is first reckoned of all Leahs children, because our Lord
sprang out of Judah, Genesis 49.10. Heb. 7.14. and Nephthali of all those of
Rachels side, because Christ dwelt at Capernaum belonging to that tribe, that
Christ's prerogative (says Mr Mede) might still excel.

Verse. 7. He omits Dan Dan praetermittitur, non quod Antichristus ex illa tribu
naciturus esset, quod Scriptores Pontificii contendunt sine ullo fundamento;
sed quia tribus illa a cultu Dei ad idola jam olim defecerat, and se cum
gentibus permiscuerat, Iud. 1.13. Vide Amos 8.14. Spanhem. Dub. Evang. parre
prima. Dub. 4 Down of Antich. l. 2. c. 12. Mede and Pareus in loc. Ephraim is
not spoken of neither as being with Dan a Ringleader of the Israelitish
Apostasy ( Jud. 17. c and 18.) but that the number of 12. notwithstanding may
be filled, Levi is set for Dan, and the name of Joseph tacitly supplies
Ephraims.
, and reckons up the tribe of Levi, not because Antichrist was to come of the
Tribe of Dan, (as the Papists say) for which opinion those places, Genesis 49.17.
and Ier. 8.16. are quoted, rather (as Spanhemius, Mede, Downame and Pareu^ say)
because that was the first tribe which fell from the true worship of God to
idolatry, and mingled themselves with the Gentiles: and for the same cause (as
some think) the genealogy of that Tribe is omitted in the 1 Chronicles. 7.

Verse. 9. Clothed with white Robes] In sign of their innocence and purity.

And palms in their hands] In token of victory over the world, the flesh,
Palmae erant antiquitus signae victoriae. The Palm here mentioned is the Date
tree, and not that which we call palm. Cartw. on Rhem. Test.
and the Devil. For palms in ancient time were ensigns and badges of
victory. Therefore palms were engraven in Solomon's and Ezekiels Temple, as
declaring victory to those that entered in, if they would contend stoutly for
God and overcome.

Verse. 14. These are they which came out of great tribulation] There is a
double article in the Greek, out of that tribulation, that great one. Matthew.
24.21.

Have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the lambe] Pareus
acutely notes that it is not here said, that the Saints do wash, Mir^ haec
(...) est sangui^^^ Christi non rubefacientis vel inquinantis, sed dealbantis
ac mundantis. Gerh.
but have or had washed their garments, for there is no washing in heaven (...).

Many take whiteness for an emblem of cleanness or of glory, but blood
defiles instead of cleansing, and takes away whiteness in stead of giving
it. Some Interpreters say well, that this passage alludeth to the habit of the
Priests of the Law, who entered not into the Temple but in white robes, but it
was not permitted the Priests to approach to the Altar, or to exercise any
office in the Tabernacle, Despagne his new observations upon the Creed. 166.167.
till they were first sprinkled with blood, both they and their garments, Exodus
29.21. Levit. 8.30. As therefore the ancient Priests were consecrated by blood,
and made capable to wear the Priestly habit in the house of God; so in the
virtue of the blood of Christ, we are reinvested of the quality of Priests,
represented by the white garment.

Verse. 15. Therefore are they before the throne of God] Causall particles
sometimes signify any argument or reason whatsoever. Alludit ad thronum Dei in
templo, hoc enim mox nominabit, in eo enim Deus sedebat in sancto sanctorum
super propitiatorium and Cherubim. a Lapide.
The rendering of any reason is called (...) a rendering of the cause, though
perhaps it is from the effect.

And serve him day and night in his Temple] He alludes to the daily and nightly
ministeries of the Levites, otherwise there is no night in Heaven. Day and
Night, that is, Beza. Serviunt ei sine intermissione in Coelo, cujus typus fuit
templum Hierosolymita^um. Heb. 9.24. Gerh
always, or the whole day; He mentions the night, because the Priests did
watch the whole night by turns in the Temple, and did by course lay the parts
of the continual sacrifice, viz. the evening Lamb, on the Altar, for this was
burned all the night. See Levit. 6.9. a Lapide.

Metaph. a matre filioli lachrymas ab stergente. Esai. 66.13. Ribera. Gerh. a
Lapide. Alsted.
Verse. 17. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes] A metaphore from
tender Mothers which deal so with their little ones. See 21.4.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 1. THere was silence in heaven about the space of half an houre] That
is, peace Silentium est felicitas, seu respiratio ecclesiae a perturbationibus.
Alstedius.
in the Church by Constantine.

Half an houre] i.e. A little time.

Verse. 3. And another Angel came and stood at the alter] That is, Christ the
Angel of the Covenant, Vide Bezam. Heb. 13.15. and 7.24.25.
Mal. 3.5. so Augustine, Primasius. He offers our prayers. The Altar is
himself, who sanctifies our prayers, as the Altar does the gift.

Having a golden censer] i.e. His holy body.

Sicut thymiama ex veriis aromatum generibus conficiebatur, ita Thymiama hoc
quod Deo Christus obtulit, ex variis Sanctorum omnium orationibus velut variis
aromatibus constatum erat; quae diversis modis, diversis linguis, diversis
votis, a diversis imo omnibus Sanctis Deo fundebantur. Crakanth. Defens.
eccles. Anglic. c. 56.
And there was given unto him much incense] See 4. verse, that is, Christ's
intercession perfuming the prayers of the Saints, of which incense of old was a
type; is it spoken of Christ after his ascension. See Heb. 9.24. 1 Pet. 2.5.

Upon the golden Altar which was before the Throne] Under the law there was a
brazen altar for the burnt offering, and a golden altar for incense; the
incense came to God out of the Angels hand, our prayers must be offered up to
God by Christ our High Priest. Hereby is signified (says Gerhard) that Christ
as the only Priest of the New Testament, does execute his Priestly Office in
heaven. Heb. 7.22.

See Romans 10.9, 10.2. Tim. 2.19.
Verse. 4. Which have not the seal of God in their foreheads] Profession of the
Christian faith is the outward mark of a Christian.

Verse. 7. The first Angel sounded] The Gospel was preached by the Apostles.

Dr Tailor on 12. of Rev.
And there followed hail, and fire mingled with bloud] That is, persecutions
and perils, contradiction, exile and slaughter, by the stubbornness of the
Jews against them.

And they were cast upon the Earth] The lowest part of Christians, being cold
in Christianity, Mr Cotton.
they were hot in Emulation and contention.

Dr Tailor on 12. of Rev. 4.
And the third part of the trees was burnt up] That is, the Apostles and
excellent teachers of the Church, compared to fruitful and flourishing trees,
for their greenness shadow and fruits, a great part of them were afflicted,
slain, put to deadly torments, but not all, the dragon could scorch but a
third part.

And as it were a great Mountaine] That is, the Roman Tyrants, so called for
their height, Id ib.
power, and swelling pride.

Burning with fire] That is, of fury and fierceness against Christian Religion.

Was cast into the Sea] That is, many people of the world subject to the Roman
power and Empire.

And the third part of the Sea became bloud] That is, many thousand Christians
were oppressed and consumed with the fire of the burning mountain, but only a
third part.

Verse. 9. And the third part of the creatures dyed] That is, faithful
Christians slaughtered and murdered. Id ib.


And the third part of ships were destroyed] That is, the Churches whose
Pastors are her Pilots, and these planted by the Apostles themselves, oppressed
and subdued.

Verse. 10. There fell a great star from heaven] That is, the Roman Bishop,
for by stars are meant Teachers, fell from purity of doctrine.

Burning like a Lampe] He seems to describe a blazing Star or comet,
amongst which Lampadias is one. Mr Mede.

Verse. 11. And the name of the star is called wormewood] All interpreters
grant this Star was some eminent person in authority, called wormwood, The
Heresy of Arrius say some.
because princeps amaritudinum, a prince of bitterness.

The third part of the waters became worm wood] Many were infected with the
heresy of Arrius, Nestorius and Eutyches.

Verse. 12. The third part of the Sun was smitten, and the third part of the
Moon, and the third of the Starres] The Sun the Scriptures, the Moon the
doctrine borrowed thence, the Stars the Ministers.

The day] That is, the joy and comfort of the Church in enjoying her happy Sun.

So that the third part of them was darkened: and the day shone not for a third
part of it, and the night likewise] A grievous night of darkness, either of
Idolatry and superstition, as some, or of persecution, as others, darkened and
obscured the chief ornaments of the purer Church of Christ.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. AND I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth] i.e. The Pope,
Under this Star both Mahomet and also the Pope of Rome is to be comprised.
Brightm. Whitakerus de eccles. controvers. secundae, quaest. tertia, c. 3. Vide
Pateum. and Deuteronomy.
not one man, but that person and that seat, that is, the whole series of all
Antichristian Popes, they casting away heavenly doctrine, embraced earthly and
Heretical doctrines.

And to him was given the key Hoc est facultas expromendi and docendi
Diabolicas opiniones. Erit ergo regnante Antichristo generalis quaedam
eclipsis. Whitak. ubi supra. Vide Pareum.
of the bottomless pit.]

Verse. 2. And there arose a smoke out of the pit as the smoke of a great
furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened] As it were a certain cloud
and night of errors; the sun and air are said to be darkened by this smoke,
because this cloud of errors and superstitions was largely spread over al
things. By the sun Aquinas understands the Doctors to whom it belongs to
inlighten others, by the Air the Church spread far and largely, which
borrowes its light elsewhere from the Doctors. Dionysius Carthusianus
understands by the Sun the prelates, by the air the people.

Verse. 3. And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth] Those orders
and number of religious people, Whitaker-Deut.
viz. Friars and Monks which have been the followers and Patrones of errors.

And unto them was given power, as the Scorpions of the earth have power]
Scorpions are of the nature of Serpents; God usually expresses all deceivers
of his people by serpents, because the Devil deceived our first Parents by a
Serpent. Brightman.
The Scorpion is one of the insecta, divided in the body, which has five arms
forke toothed. Of all creeping things that are poysonfull, the sting thereof is
most cruel and grievous, as Pliny speaks. It is of a very angry nature, and
there is a verb in the Greek tongue taken from a Scorpion, signifying to
exasperate and to provoke like a Scorpion.

Verse. 7. And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto
battle, and on their heads were as it were Crowns like gold, and their faces
were as the faces of men] Mr Mede says, the Saracens and Turks invading the
Roman Empire are called locusts for their multitude. See Judge. 7.12.

Others say, that the Teachers of Popery are here resembled to Locusts, their
faces were like men, their Doctrine in show has no terror in it. They have
Crowns of gold upon their heads, they prevail much, and have great reverence
and authority where they come. Mr Hildersam. Vide. Pareum. Brightman would have
both the Saracenes and the Monks and Friars here meant.
2. They have the hair of women, verse. 8. their Doctrine has many enticements
to allure men to the liking of it, and to provoke unto spiritual fornication.

And their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons] A symbol 1. Of cruelty, Joel.
1.6. 2. Of insatiable covetousness. Those which they cannot allure with their
fair speeches, they terrify with threatenings, and the faggot.

Mr Hildersam. The sting in the tail, the propagation of the Mahometane
heresy, say some, the smoke of which in the beginning of the Chapter rose out
of the bottomless pit; they first conquered the nations, then infected them.
Verse. 10. There were stings in their tailes] Their Doctrine in the end will
intollerably torment the Conscience of them that receive it.

Verse. 11. And they had a King over them] The Pope over the Friars and Monks,
who glories in the title of the Head of the Church. But none ever acknowledged
Arrius, Luther, or Calvin for their King, though the Rhemists so interpret it.
This Star, and this Angel of the bottomless pit, is a destroyer, as the Pope
draws infinite number of souls to hell with him. Si Papa multa millia hominum
mittat in infernum, nemo ei dicet Quid facis?

Whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue has his
name Apollyon] In both Languages the Destroyer, because a destroyer both unto
the Jews and Gentiles. Both passively and actively, both destroyed and
destroying, as Danaeus observes, because he destroys many others, and at
length is destroyed himself. 17.11. 1. Spiritually, 2 These. 2. 2. Corporally,
Rev. 18.8. (...) significat perdere and funditus evellere.
The Hebrew word signifies destruction, a metonymie of the effect for the
Destroyer. The Devil or the Pope, which you will says Deuteronomy. Pareus,
Brightman, and Forbes interpret it of the Devil.

Verse. 18. By these three was the third part of men killed] In allusion to the
Romans (say some) who conquered the third part of the world.

CHAP. X.
John having before prophesied of many mischiefs to befall the Church by
Antichrist and the Turks, both conspiring against it, in this Chapter he
brings Christ in a vision for the comfort of the Church, thus described.

Verse. 1. And I saw another mighty Angell] Protector of his Church, the Angel
of the Covenant, our great Mediator. Come down from 1. Per carni^
assumptionem. Ioh. 6.28. Sic Psalm. 72.6. Esa. 64.1. 2 Perverbi praedicationem.
3. Per auxilii exhibitionem. Ex. 3. v. 8. Esa. 41. v. 4. 4. Per poenarum
inflictionem. Genesis 11. v. 5. c. 19. v. 24. Cum primis hic ad tertium membrum
respectus habetur. Gerh.
heaven] To make himself better known, and nearer to his Church. Clothed with
a cloud] Not only in our humane nature, clouding and vailing his Deity, but
still obscured by the world. And a rainebow was upon his head] a sign of
reconciliation, an assurance that he will remember his Covenant, Genesis 9.15. See
chapter 4. v. 3. And his face was as it were the Sun] Shining as in his
Transfiguration to his Church. And his feet as pillars] For strength. Of fire]
To consume the enemies as chafe and stubble.

Verse. 2. And he had in his right hand a little (...) deducitur diminutivum
primum (...), secundum (...), tertium (...): proinde ac a Latino liber
diminuitur libellus, indeque libellulus, and libellunculus, hoc ergo tertio
diminutivo significatur hunc librum satis minutum fuisse and exiguum. Porro hic
libellus est ille de quo cap. 5. v. 1. a Lapide.
book open] That is, the Bible says Deuteronomy, the Revelation. Gerha^d.

Christ opens it to the world, and holds it open, though Antichrist would shut
up the truth, and did a long time.

And he set his right hand upon the Sea, and his left foot on the Earth] To
note the subjection of the Sea, and Earth, and all Creatures to him. Ponere
pedem alicubi est possessionem and dominium sibi vendicare. Gerh.

The word here rendered roaring does properly signify the ^owing of Oxen and
such beasts; Lions roaring is called by three other names in Greek. Brightman.
Pareus.
Verse. 3. And cried with a loud voice, as when a Lion roareth] That is,
manifests his wrath against the Tyrants, and Antichrist. Some say, (...) is
proper to Oxen (...) To Lions, but that difference is not perpetual, says
Gerhard.

Verse. 5. And the Angell] That is, Christ the Angel of the Covenant.

Lifted up his hand to heaven] According to the ancient solemn manner of those
that swear. Therefore to lift up the hand is often put for to swear. Genesis
14.22. Numb. 14.30. Ezekiel. 20.5.

Verse. 6. He swears that time or delay shall be no longer] Some think he
speaks of time absolutely, no more time at all; rather time no more to the
Roman Monarchy, No more to that effect, but that the ancient prophecies should
be quite fulfilled. Thorndikes Review p. 172.
to Antichrist and the Devil.

Verse. 7. The mystery of God should be finished] That is, (say some) Gods
secret in saving the Gentiles, Ephesians. 3.6. and Jews, Romans 11.25. viz. In the
seventh Trumpet (says Dr Tailor) an end shall be of the tyranny of Antichrist,
and the Church shall obtain happy days.

Verse. 9. Take it and eat it up] That is, Read it over earnestly, know it
exactly; so Tully called Cato, Helluonem librorum, Ezekiel. 2.9. See Ezekiel. 3.1.
because he did greedily read them and could not be satisfied with reading.

Verse. 10. And I ate it] That is, Perkins.
by study and meditation digested and settled it in his heart.

Verse. 11. Thou must prophecy again before many Peoples, and Nations, and
Tongues, and Kings] That is, before the time of fulfilling of all things, Mr
Bur. on Hos.
this Book of the Revelation shall be made as clear as if John were come to
Prophecy again before men.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood,
saying, Rise and measure the Temple of God] The reed here is the Word of God
which is the most perfect rule of faith, and Ecclesiastical Discipline. The
measuring of the Temple signifies the measuring of the Church, Pareus. This
sets forth the Primitive state of the Christian Church exactly conformable
to the rule of Gods Word. Mr Mede.
as it appears by comparing this Prophecy with that Ezekiel. 40.41. to which he
alludes.

Verse. 2. For it is given unto the Gentiles] That is, men of Gentile-like
profaneness, and iniquity, who had the keeping of the Church-Courts.

And the holy City shall they tread under foot] Tread down, or tread it under
foot. The original word may be rendered somewhat more mildly, Cottons bloody
Tenet Walshed. (...) Calcabunt, id est, conculcabunt, proterent affligendo
scilicet and contemptui habendo. Alii malunt frequentabunt quia (...) saepe
idem est quod (...). Alsted. Vide Down Diatrib. de Antichristo part. 2da p.
608, 609, 638, etc.
it may express their walking upon it.

Verse. 3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses] They are called
witnesses, because they bear witness to truth and holiness, against all the
errors and unholinesse of Antichrist; so is Christ several times called the
faithful witness by way of eminence, chapter 1. v. 5. and 3.14. because he bears
witness to all truth, against all errors and impieties whatsoever. Two they
are, partly for their paucity, Duos testes indefinite successionem aliquorum
assertorum doctrinae Evangelii adversus Antichristum intelligamus. Definite
tamen dicuntur duo, tum quia pauci erant, respectu locustarum qui orbem
Christianum replebunt: tum quia duo ad firmandum testimonium in quovis judicio
sufficient. Pareus.
and in allusion unto the Prophecy, Zach. 4.11. from whence the expression is
taken. Some interpret these two of two men, and of the time of Antichrist, but
who those two men were there is a threefold difference amongst them: Dr Pride
orat. de duobus testibus. Vide Pareum. By two witnesses is meant a few
faithful Ministers which God will raise up here and there amidst the power of
darkness in greatest strength of the Antichristian reign, the Apostle used
the number of two, because the Law of God requires so many witnesses for
necessary trial of a matter in controversy. 2. He evidently alludeth unto
Zach. 11.14. Cartw. on Rhem Test.


1. Victorinus, interprets it of Jeremy and Elisha.

2. Hilary, Catharinus, Gagnaeus with Jansenius, and Maldonate on Mat. 17.
would have Moses and Eliah here meant.

3. Ribera, Zuarez, Vegas, Pererius Bellarmine, Barradius, Malvenda, interpret
it of Enoch and Eliah. Secondly, others would not have it restrained to
Antichrists times of which some interpret it of Christ, and John the Baptist,
some of Saint Francis, and Dominick. Thirdly, Others interpret it of all the
Defenders of the truth, as Pannonius, or the faithful in all Ages, as Arius
Montanus, and Zegerus.

By the two witnesses, whether we understand the Scriptures in the two
Testaments (as Austen) which are overcome in Popery, and their own traditions
made equal, or rather set above them, or else the zealous and sincere
professors of the Word of God, who both by their Doctrine and Conversation give
witness unto the truth of it, it comes all to one, for Antichrist is an enemy
both to Scripture and Scripture men. Dr. Tailor. See him on 12. of Rev. p. 216.
There are two more famous opinions of the Orthodox concerning this matter, the
first holds that the witnesses are the Old and New Testament, according to that
John 5.39.2. That this notes the Preachers of the Word, for those are more
fitly said to oppose themselves against the Beast, to be killed, not to be
buried, to revive in their successors, to ascend by themselves to heaven. But
those two opinions do fitly agree in one, since the testimony of these and the
Testament is but one. Dr Pride. de duobus testibus.

And they shall prophesie] That is, instruct the people in the good way.

A thousand, two hundred, and threescore dayes] In their several times and
ages successively.

Clothed in sackcloth] They mourn and sigh to see Antichristianisme so
spread. 2. King. 6.30. Amos 8.10. Sackcloth is opposed to the splendor and
luxury of Antichrist and his Followers.

Verse. 4. These are the two olive trees] 1. The olive tree keeps its
greenesse, withers not in winter. 2. Is fertile.

And the two Candlesticks] Hold out the light of it to others. See Zach. 11.14.
and Exodus 25.31.

Verse. 5. Fire proceeds out of their mouth] 1. By their prayers. 2. By their
prophesying. See Gerhard.

Verse. 6. These have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy, and have power over waters to turn them to bloud] This is
spoken in allusion to Elias and Moses; whereof the one by his prayer shut the
heavens, the other by his rod turned the waters into blood. The faithful
Ministers of the Gospel should not work such outward miracles as they did,
^ent.
but they should be furnished with spiritual power, which is far greater.

Mede. Cocceius in 2 Timothy 2.23. Qui exponit duos Testes Dei (verbum vet. and
Novi Testamenti) dicit hoc nihil aliud esse, quam ver bum Dei in magno illo
regno gentium ostentui quidem esse public, sed abnegata and non percepta
illius vi ratque vitute pro cadavere ipsis esse; neque enim vivum and efficax
esse in istit spiritualiter mortuis.
Verse. 7. And when they have finished their testimony] Cum finituri sint, when
they shall be about to finish their testimony, for so (...) is to be translated.

Whether you understand it physice, killing them as men, or Metaphorice killing
them as witnesses.
And kill them] Not a real, but a mystical killing; the Resurrection, ver.
11. is mystical, for of no resurrection, properly so called, do we read before
the 20.5. of this Prophecy, therefore the killing is a throwing them from
place out of Office, some civil death. Mr Mede.

Verse. 8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the streets of the great City]
That is, Rome so called, not so much for the quantity, as because she had been
Queen of all other, as 17.18. Mede.

Which spiritually is called Sodom, and Aegypt] Rome is here for her pride and
filthiness called Sodom, and for her Idolatry and cruelty Egypt, and also in
this Book Babylon, because of its sorcery and witchcraft, as if the wickedness
of them all were concentred in her.

Where our Lord also was crucified] In respect of the place our Lord Jesus was
crucified at Jerusalem, Deuteronomy:
but if we respect the power and authority that put him to death, he was
crucified at Rome: For Christ was put to death by a Roman Judge, by Roman
Laws, by Roman Authority, by a kind of death proper only to the Romans, and in
a place which then was within the Roman Empire.

Even in Rome it self Christ has been crucified in his members, and he was
not crucified within Jerusalem, Down. of Ant. l. 1. c: 2:
Heb. 13.12.

Verse. 13. And the same hour was there a great Earthquake] A mystical (not a
natural) Earthquake, when there are great stirrs and commotions in Kingdoms
and States, and by these the forms of government changed. Such earthquakes
are those mentioned at the 8. chapter v. 5. and 16.18. and all along in this book.

Verse. 15. The kingdoms of this world] That is, the principal State, power
and persons governing in all the parts of the world, the maine ruling power of
States. World here is taken in opposition to some particular climate or Region,
so it notes the whole universe. Some refer this to heaven, but it must have
accomplishment on earth.

Are become] That is, manifested to be the kingdoms of our Lord] Lord properly
notes God the Father in the primitive acception of it, Mr Hues. Domininostri
and Christi] Kai exegericum est, pro Domini nostri, qui est Christus, sicut
passim Apostolus, Deus and Pater, pro Deus, qui est Pater. Pareus.
so here. and of his Christ] Christ the name of God manifested in the flesh,
signifies Anointed; That is, set apart to be the peculiar King, Priest, and
Prophet of his people; here recorded emphatically, as Luke 2.29.

And he shall reign for ever and ever] Greek, unto ages of ages, according to
the Hebrew, unto generation and generation.

Verse. 16. And the four and twenty Elders] That is, the Church, See 19.4.
Which sat before God on their seates] Their sitting on seats notes two things,
1. Their rest. 2. Their quiet and peaceable estate. Bish. Cowper.

Verse. 19. The arke] That is, the secret mysteries of God He persists in the
allegory of the old Temple, in whose secret place was the Arc of the Covenant
of God, seen by none but the High Priest once a year.

CHAP. XII.
THis twelfth Chapter sets forth clearly the State of the Church, Fata imperii
and fata Ecclesiae.
as the sixth did that of the Empire.

It has six principal parts. 1. A lively description of the true Church, v.
1, 2. 2. A description of the Devil her chief and furious assailant, v. 3, 4,
5. 3. The fierce battle between these two parties, v. 7. 4. The victory of
the Church and the Dragons overthrow, v. 8, 9. Dr Tailor.
5. The triumph of the godly for that victory, v. 10, 11, 12. 6. The fury of
Satan renewing the assault, v. 13. to the end of the Chapter.


Verse. 1. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven] By wonder or sign is
meant a new vision; or an unusual type of a strange battle, and marvellously
to be wondered at.

By Heaven commonly in this Book is meant the true militant Church, and the
members of it here upon earth, v. 4.

Stars of heaven] Are Ministers of the Church, v. 12. rejoice ye heavens,
that is, believers and members of the true Church on earth, so v. 3. and 7. Dr
Tailor.


A woman] The woman is the Church, resembled to a woman partly for her
weakness, but chiefly because the Scripture sets it forth by the Spouse of
Christ, Woman in this book signifies three things 1. Idols, because they are
as enticing and alluring as wanton women. 2. Idolaters go a whoring after
them, as unclean persons after light women. 14.4.2. The City of Rome, the seat
of Antichrist. 17.3. 1. Because in her outward pomp and glory she is opposed
to the chaste spouse of Christ, whose glory is all with in. 2. Because with her
the great Kings of the earth have committed fornication. 17.2.3. 3. The true
Church, and so is the word taken here. Dr Tailor.
Cant. 4.10.

Clothed with the Sun] That is, Christ, Psalm. 84.11. Mal. 4.3. He resembles it
in its properties and effects, Frst, properties, 1. In unity, there is but one
Sun in the world, and but one sun of righteousness in the Church, Ioh. 1.14. 1 Timothy 2.5. 2. Light, Rev. 1.16. 3. Purity. 4. Power and sufficiency. Secondly,
Effects. 1. Illuminates. 2. Directs. 3. Refreshes. The righteousness of
Christ is imputed to the Church. See Cant. 6 10.

She is clothed with it. clothes serve for 1. Covering. 2. Shelter. 3.
Ornament; so Christ's righteousness. and the Moon under her feet] The Moon
signifies either Temporary and Transitory things, as Dr. Tailor and others, it
being both the cause and emblem of change; or the ceremonial rights, because
the Jews festivals were ordered by the motions of the Moon, as Mr. Burrh. on
Esaias. 66.10. from Mr Mede. And upon her head a crown of twelve starres] That
is, The shining doctrine of the twelve Apostles.

Under feete] For subjection, and contempt.

Verse. 2. And she being with child, cryed] Cryed] Two ways, in her prayers to
God. and her apologies to men, Mr. Arrowsmith.

The Church has 1. Its original from heaven 2. Its tendence is to heaven.
Heb. 11.14.16. 3. The Churches conversation is in heaven. Phil. 3.20. 4. It is
dependent upon heaven. James 1.17. Mr Arrowsmith.
Ver. 3. And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold a great red
Dragon, etc.] Here we have a description of the Churches adversary, under the
name and type of a Dragon.

By the Dragon is meant, 1. The Devil, for so it is expounded v. 9. to be that
old Serpent called the Devil and Satan.

A forma in qua apparuit, and ab estutia atque officio, est enim
omniumastutissimus, and omnium imptarum astutiarum auctor. Zanchius. Dr T^ilor.
(...)
The Devil is called metaphorically a Serpent or Dragon.

1. In allusion to that story, Genesis 3. Because under this form and
representation he deceived mankind.

2. For his poison and malice whereof he is full.

3. For his exceeding strength and power to hurt and destroy.

4. For his slighnesse, subtlety and craft, Genesis 3.1. See 9. v. of this
Chapter. This his nature is couched in his name, draco (...), acute cernere, to
see piercingly, for he is subtle, acute and quick sighted to discern a far
off his prey, and advantage against us. The Greek word here used, translated
red, is emphaticall, noting him to be a fiery Dragon, fiery red, set on fire
and all enflamed with an hellish flame of wrath and cruelty against the Church
of God.

2. By the Dragon is also meant the instruments of Satan's fury, Ier. 51.34.
Ezekiel. 29.3. Psalm. 74.13.

3. Some more special instruments, the Heathen persecuting Emperors of Rome.

Dr Tailor.
Having seven heads] The head is the seat of prudence and policy: the number
of seven heads notes the manifold subtilties of the Devil and his instruments.
Others by seven heads understand the seven hills of Rome where the Dragon
lived: or the seven kinds of governments in the Roman Monarchy. 13. chapter 2.


And ten hornes] The Dragons power and strength is here called ten horns.
Horn in Scripture is commonly taken metaphorically, Id ib. The Dragon employed
the seven heads and ten horns, that is, the policy and strength of the Roman
state especially to suppress the true religion, and overthrow the Church.
and signifies strength, might, power, kingdom, glory. The number ten is here
taken indefinitely for all those Kings, Princes and Captains under them who
banded themselves against the woman, which by the perfect number of ten, are
noted to be exceeding many. See 13.1.

And seven Crowns upon his heads] By which is meant the supremacy of the
Roman Empire, subduing under it the Princes, Provinces, Nations, by
innumerable victories, but especially prevailing against the Church, and
primitive Christians, as so many Conquerors.

Verse. 4. And his tail drew the third part of the Stars of heaven] By
Stars are meant the Ministers of the Gospel, Pro trahebat. Graece est (...),
quod significat caudae ictibus devol vere, indeque mittere in terram, ut casu
elidantur and occidantur. a Lapide.
because 1. They are set in their several stations (as the stars in their
orbs) by God. 2. Because they give light to the Church by doctrine and holy
example. Matthew. 5.14. 3. They are eminent and in high place.

Of heaven] Mystical; they were removed from their holy doctrine and heavenly
hope.

His taile] That is, the power and policy of the Devil.

And the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered] The
Text has reference both to the Serpents standing before Eve the woman, that
is, the Mother of the world and Church, to seduce her; and to Pharaoh called
the Dragon of Egypt, watching the destruction of the male children of the
Church, so soon as the Mothers should be delivered of them. This standing
before the woman implies, 1. His readiness and nearness. 2. His instance and
diligence.

Verse. 5. And she brought forth a man child] Some understand it of Christ. See
Psalm. 2.9. and Rev. 2.27. and 19.15. Dr Tailor In loc.
gives good reasons against this exposition. Others of Luther, many of
Brightman.
Constantine the great a godly Christian Emperor. Dr. Tailor understands by it
not one singular person, but some potent Princes or special deliverers, whom
God stirred up to succor and relieve the Church against those Tyrannical
Romish Emperors and persecutors; Dr Tailor. ib.
By whom the Dragon was defeated and disappointed, whose aim was to devour all
the seed of the woman, for these were

1. Sons of the Church.

2. A man child, stout, strong, valiant.

3. Ruled over the Nations with a rod of Iron, viz. an unresistible power, and
overruling the nations and Princes that were enemies to the Church.

4. Was taken into the throne of God] That is, advanced into chief government
for the refreshing and defense of the Church, and curbing the rage of those
imperial Dragons.

Verse. 6. And the woman fled into the wildernesse] This verse is here inserted
by the Spirit of God, by anticipation, it was done after, though it be here
mentioned, Woman signifies here a multitude, the Church mili^ant.
it properly belongs to the 13. and 14. Idem ubi supra.
verses. It seems to be an allusion unto Isreal's flying into the wilderness
from Pharaoh that red and bloody Dragon pursuing them even to destruction. The
wilderness is nothing else but an afflicted and solitary condition of the
woman, excluded from her former glory, forced now to hide her face from the
world, and to live in poverty and exile, and in a private and solitary
condition.

Where there is a place prepared of God that they should feed her] Alluding to
the feeding of the Church of the Jews in the wilderness. The word ( They)
stands in relation to some persons spoken of before, viz. 11. chapter 2. The two
witnesses shall feed her, for the time of both fitly agrees.

A thousand two hundred and threescore dayes] By these days are meant so many
years, Ezekiel. 4.5, 6.
for all things almost in the Revelation are expressed according to the manner
of ancient Types. It is the same with times, time, and half a time. 14. v. and
42. months. 11.2.

Verse. 7. And there was a battle in Heaven] That is, in the Church militant.
Some special and notable part of that War which in the spring of the
Evangelicall Church Satan raised to the overthrow of the salvation of it.

Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and
his angells] This Michael is Christ, it is so expounded, v. 10. 2. This place
is an allusion to Dan. 10.13. and 21.3. 3. The composition of the word of three
Hebrew particles, Mi-ca-el, Dr Tailor ubi supra.
who is like or equal to the Lord, that is only Christ, Phil. 2.6. 4. We read
no where in Scripture of this name but Christ himself must be understood, Jude
9. Which place alludes to Zach. 3.2.

His angels are not only those which are Angels by nature and office, See
Josh. 5.5.14. and Rev. 9.11.
but also such persons and instruments as stand with them in the defense of
Christian Religion, and in war with the Dragon both in ecclesiastical and
political states, godly Princes and Rulers, and also godly Pastors, holy
Martyrs, zealous professors, all to whom sometimes the name of Angel is
ascribed in Scripture.

1. Because they are all sent from him, on his errand. 2. They are called his
Angels by special propriety. 3. Their whole service is due to him their Lord.
The Dragon, the General, is the chief of Devils and head of wicked Angels,
B^elzebub; his Angels are wicked spirits, and wicked men, they sight by open
force and secret fraud.

Verse. 8. But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in
heaven] By heaven here the Church of God is meant, in which the Dragon sat and
exercised his Tyranny. The phrase not to have his place is taken out of Dan.
2.35. The Dragons had no more place in the Church to domineer and tyrannize
against the Saints, as they had done, but they are now conquered and expelled
out of heaven. A general overthrow is not here properly meant, but a special
victory of some special Dragons that rose up to waste the Church, because this
is a prophecy after St John's time.

Verse. 9. And the great Dragon was cast out, that old serpent called the Devil
and Satan, Dr Tailor. Draco iste vocatur magnus, 1. Ob potentiam in impios,
Ephesians. 2.2.2. Ob regni amplitudinem, ad quod pertinent omnes impii. Gerh.
which deceives the whole world] The Devil is a Serpent,

1. Because he hid and covered himself in the serpent, in his first stratageme
against our first Parents, Genesis 3.1.

2. Because of his serpentive disposition in his poison and malice against
Christ and all Christians, and in his winding by his sly flattery and
subtilty, and in his accursed condition.

2. An old Serpent.

1. Because he is as old as the World, and at the beginning deprived our first
Parents of their happiness.

2. His malice is inveterate, as ancient as the world.

3. Is grown wonderful cunning by experience.

(...).
The Devill] So called for his crimination, accusation and calumination. He is
that egregious caluminiator, whose incessant delight and practice is in
accusing and calumniating.

1. God to man of envy, injustice. Genesis 3.3.

2. Man to God, Ioh. 1.

Satan] So called for his hostility; he is an adversary,

1. To God. 2. Good men. 3. Good actions.

He seduceth or deceives the whole world] To seduce is to draw a man aside
from the right way into some by-way; a metaphore taken from travelers; the
Devil draws men from the true worship of God, to Idolatry and false worship
of Idols and heathen Gods.

He incessantly labors in this as the (...).
participle of the present tense notes, even a perpetual action of drawing
men from the way of truth, to error and false Religion.

The persons that are seduced are the whole world, alluding to his general
seduction of all men in our first Parents, and also the general corrupting of
true Religion in the days of Noah. Dr Tailor.
But by the whole world or earth are meant the reprobates or earthly minded
men, who mind earthly things with contempt of heavenly.

He was cast out] By the members of Christ.

1. By casting out and resisting Paganism, Idolatry, Blasphemy, Impiety, and
all Injustice.

2. By the preaching and promulgation of the Gospel, which is like lightning,
quick, piercing, Luke 10.18.
and irresistible.

3. By open profession and maintenance of the faith and truth of the Gospel.

Into the earth] 1. To manifest and clear the certainty of his overthrow, and
the Churches victory; as Goliath was seen to be overthrown, when David threw
him down to the ground.

2. More specially, to show, who they be whom the Devil now tyrannizeth over,
among reprobates, carnally, and earthly minded men.

And his angels were cast out with him] That is, the power of al wicked persons
(by whom the Devil puts forth his power against the Church) was so broken
as they could never prevail against the salvation of any member of the Church,
Dr Tailor.
nor against the happy proceedings of the Christian Religion in the infancy of
the Church.

Verse. 10. And I heard a loud voyce] The cherefull noise of innumerable
Citizens of the Church militant, provoking themselves to sound forth the
Majesty and praise of God, for his great mercy to his Church, and his great
judgments against the Dragon and his Angels.

In heaven] That is, the Church militant.

Now is come salvation] That is, safety and external security of Gods people
by their deliverance from cruel tyrants, Ex. 14.13. Strength] That is, the
mighty arm of God which bears up all things, Psalm. 118.16.
and subdues all contrary things to his will and power.

And the kingdom of our God] The kingdom of grace which the Dragon specially
opposes.

And the power of his Christ] His Christ, 1. For distinction, other Kings were
anointed and set up by men. Psalm. 2.
2. For eminence. 3. For near relation.

For the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our
God day and night] This (...) signifies not any kind of accuser, Weemes.
but such an accuser who accuses before a King, here before the Lord.

Night and day] Incessantly. See Zach. 3.3.

Verse. 11. And they loved not their lives unto the death] That is, they
slighted, contemned, yea, despised their lives, and rather exposed them to
hazard and loss, than to be removed from their holy profession.

Thus are they said not to love their lives, that love Christ and his truth
more. Hoc est, sponte and imperterrito animo sese propter sanguinem agni morti
and martyrio subjecerunt: seu ut Beza vertit, animae suae prodigi fuerunt usque
ad mortem. Animam hoc est vitam diligere dicitur qui nihil habet hoc vita
Charius. Contra non diligere animam suam, qui non dubitat illam perticulis and
morti ipsi objicere; si gloria Christi and necessitas ita flagitat. Glass.
Grammat. Sac. l. 3. Tract. 3. Vide Bezam.


Verse. 14. A time, times, and half a time] A finite number for an indefinite;
So Dr. Tailor, Mede, and Brightman say; by time is meant a year, by times two
years, Per tempus tempora and dimidium temporis intelliguntur anni tres cum
dimidio. Gerh. Dan. 7.2. and 12.7.
by half a time, half a year, a year, two years and a half.

Verse. 15. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water as a floud] Multitudes
of people which he stirs up to persecute the Church. That is, the Arrian
Heresy, see Pro. 28.15. Triplex flumen denoratur. 1. Tentationis, quae fit per
blanditias, ampla promissa bonorum temporallum and voluntatum hujus saeculi. 2.
Persecutionis. Psalm. 65.8. Psalm. 124.4, 5.3. Haeresium. Gerh.


Verse. 17. With the remnant of her seed] This phrase is a metaphor taken from
Tradesmen, who having cut out a whole piece of cloth, Romans 9.29.
leave some small remnant or remainder; even so the true professors of the
Gospel are but a small remainder of the whole piece and people of the world.
Beside, it is but the remnant of her seed: As a little seed-corne is reserved
out of a great heap for store, Dr. Tailor.
which is nothing to the whole Crop; so is the small number of true Believers,
reserved by grace, to the whole field and crop of the world.

CHAP. XIII.
IF we compare this description of the Beast in this Chapter with that in the
17. we shall easily perceive that by both Beasts the Roman State is
represented, but yet not of the same time. This designs old Rome, or the
Roman State, Down Diat. de Antich. part 14. l. 1. c. 5.
as it was especially under the heathen Emperors, although Antichrist be not
excluded from that description. For the perfect Beast is propounded having
seven heads, the last of which is Antichrist. The 17th. Chapter describes Rome
as it was after.

The first Beast represents the persecuting Emperors, and is described in
the beginning of the Chapter. The second Antichrist, and begins at ver. 11. and
so forward to the end of the Chapter.

Verse. 1. And I saw a Beast arise up out of the Sea, having seven heads, and
ten horns, and upon his heads ten Crownes] Rise up] Signifies to get
strength, Dan 4.8. and 8.8. Quod Johannem hanc bestiam vidit e mari ascendere,
eo significatur Romanum imperium ex multis populis confluentibus extitisse,
Apoc. 17.15. and ad fastigium illud pervenisse. Gerhard.
Out of the Sea.] That is, of many and diverse peoples which it had vanquished.
Crowns for dignity, horns for power, and heads for subtilty. The seven Heads
are seven Hills, and ten Horns are ten Governments. Mr Dod.

The horns of the Beast are crowned and not his heads, because the Roman
Empire has always more prevailed by power than by policy, but the Dragon has
his heads crowned and not his horns, Deuteronomy.
therefore he has always done more by policy and subtlety than by power and
strength.

Verse. 2. And the Dragon gave him his power] viz. That Dragon mentioned 12.3.
the Devil that old Serpent, 12.9. whom Moses also set forth by the Serpent,
Genesis 3.1. The Dragon has something of the Serpent, but flying is added to it,
that is, swiftness of moving. See 2 These. 2.9.


Verse. 8. Whose names are not written in the Book of the life of the Lamb,
slain from the foundation of the world] Some think this is not spoken of
Election, since Christ as Mediator was elected, but of those which the Father
gave to Christ in the Covenant before the world. He speaks (say they) of the
eternal transactions between the Father and the Son. Si quis been contulerit
locum hujus libri. 17.8. inveniet trajectionem hic esse vocum, and ipsum librum
dici (...), ab origin mundi, conscriptum scilicet, similitudine sumta a been
moratis civitatibus, ubi ab initio conditae urbis extant perpetua monumenta
quae civium nomina continent. Merito autem hic liber ab eo nomen accepit qui ab
aeterno erat destinatus ut omnium Sanctorum, inter quos eminent martyrs, caput
esset. Vide Heb. 11.40. Grotius.


Others refer this from the beginning of the world to the book of life (as
Apoc. 17.8.) rather than to the Lamb slain, Causaub. of the Incarnation of
Christ.
not as though there were any absurdity or incongruity in the speech (as
Ribera) being so justifiable by the parrallell places of Scripture.

Weemes, and other learned men say from the beginning (not from eternity) in
reference to that promise, Genesis 3.15. the death of Christ being then published,
Mr Ball on the Covenant. Nempe sacramentaliter sub sacrificiis and Agno
Poschali. Wollebius. Vide Pareum. Per Agni librum intelligit constantissimam
Domini de suis salvandis Sententiam, illustratam (...), perlibri Allegoriam ut
ex praxi nostra in iis memoria tenendis, quae nolumus excidere; concludemus,
Agnum illorum, quos in librum suum retulit, nunquam futurum esse oblitum. Dr.
Pride. in orat. 4ta.
that is, slain as well then as now, not only in the Counsel and Decree of
God whereby he is borne and slain in all times and places, nor only in regard
of the eternal power, efficacy, and merit of his death; but also in respect of
the heart of the Believer, whose faith makes that which is locally absent after
a sort truly and really present. Mr Perkins.

In regard of Gods acceptance of it, for Belleevers, in the types and shaddows
of it, whereof the Ceremonial Law was full. Dr Tailor.

Verse. 9. If any man have an ear let him heare] A solemn preface before some
great matter, and diligently to be observed, Mat. 11.15. and 13.9.43. Mark.
4.9.27. and 7.16. and 8.18. Luke 8.8. and 14.35. See before Chapter 11.7.11.29. that
is, let him hear with his ear, let the ear do its work and not be idle.

Verse. 10. He that leads into captivity, shall go into captivity] Rome which
had led captive the Christians, is become a Captive to the Goths and Vandales.
For lead and go there is an elegant para nomasia in the Greek.

He that kills with the Sword must be killed with the Sword] Domitian which
had slain so many Christians with the Sword, he also was slain by the sword,
and 17 of his own Servants. So Grotius.

Here is the patience and faith of the Saints] That is, by this the patience
and faith of the Christians is confirmed, because they knew that God would
revenge their injuries.

Ver. 11. This Beast can be no other but the Pope of Rome who rises out of the
earth, that is, out of most base beginnings, and steppeth or rises above the
earth, and all earthly power; Servus servorum Dei, loquitur ut Draco, idem, ut
Diabolus, Apoc. 12.9. hoc enim, sese effert super omnem qui dicitur Deus; quasi
ipse totius mundi princeps esset. Episc. Down.
he has horns like the Lamb, that is, professes the meekness and innocence
of Christ (which the Turk never did) but speaks like the Dragon, which is to
be understood, partly of his blasphemous speeches which he does utter, partly
of the Doctrines of Devils which he does teach, partly of those hellish Curses
which he thundereth against the true professors of the faith, partly of those
great promises, which like the Prince of the world, he makes to those that do
adore him. Down. of Ant. l. 1. c. 4.

The Pope of Rome with his Clergy, for the Pope by himself and alone though he
may be termed a false Prophet, yet he makes not up the Beast, except his
Clergy be joined with him, Mede.
since the Beast does signify a company of men composed of a certain order of
members.

Verse. 12. Whose deadly wound was healed] All the Papists almost say, that
Antichrist is understood by that Head which was wounded, who shall feign
himself dead, Down. Diat. de Antichrist. l. 1. c. 5.
and shall rise again by the devils help, And that they say is the common
and received opinion of the Fathers.

Verse. 13. He makes fire come down from heaven on the earth] The Pope (say
the Papists) does not cause fire to come down from heaven, therefore he is not
Antichrist. Receive the mark of the beast] That is, such as receive some
indelible character of the Beast, as their Secular Regular priests, and all
that receive religious orders from the Church of Rome, so 16.2.9. Cotton on
Rev. 16. Such is the absurd perverseness of the Papists, that in other parts of
Scripture which are simple and plain they do hunt after mystical and
allegorical senses: but in this Book of the Revelation which is most mystical
and allegorical, without all reason they insist in the literal sense; as in
this Chapter they understand the mark of a real visible mark, and the image
of a material Image animated and made to speak, and the fire of material
fire brought down from heaven. Down. of Ant.
This cannot be taken literally, because the whole Chapter is mystical; it is
an allusion unto 1 King. 18.24. that is, Antichrist shall make his false
Religion appear to men to be the truth, as effectually, as if (like Elias) he
should cause fire to come from heaven, for a confirmation of his Doctrine.
Squire on 2d. of These.

Mr. Mede says, Excommunication is meant, which is (says he) not unaptly
resembled to fire from heaven, or lightening. For what is it in the name of God
to deliver any one over to that eternal fire, other than to call for fire from
heaven, especially since that punishment of the wicked proceeding from God, is
often in this Book set forth by the Lake of fire and brimstone, or Asphaltites,
where Sodom and Gomorrah were burned with fire rained down from heaven.

If that fire which Antichrist shall cause to descend from heaven be literally
understood, it agrees to the Pope, Down. of Ant. l. 1. c. 7. see more there.
because in diverse Popisth miracles there has been (as they say) fire brought
down from heaven. But it is rather to be understood mystically, and
allegorically, as well as other Prophecies of the Revelation. Descending of
fire from heaven in Scripture signifies three things. 1. Gods approving of the
Religion and Sacrifices of his Servants. Levit. 9.24. 1 Chro 21.26. 1 Chronicles.
7.1. John says in the sight of men. Not that they have done so indeed, but
only that they have made men believe so.
2. His sending down of the graces of the Spirit upon his children, Act. 2.3.
3. His vengeance executed from heaven upon his enemies. Antichrist does by such
signs and wonders confirm that Doctrine and Religion which he professes, as
though God answered him by fire from heaven, 1 Kings 18.38.

Verse. 16, 17, 18. Some hold that the mark, the name of the Beast, Down. Diat.
de Ant part. 1. l. 6. c. 4. Every resolved papist has the mark of the Beast,
his name, and number of his name.
and the number of his name, is one and the same thing, and that the latter of
all these is the exposition of the former. The mark of Antichrist is nothing
else but the name of the former Beast containing the number of 666. therefore
Rev. 14.9.11. and 20.4. He reckons not these three as distinct, but mentions
the mark alone.

Verse. 16. To receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads]
Gerhard says, the mark in the right hand is an oath by which the Clergy is
bound to the Pope, In the forehead] That is by outward profession, and in the
right hand] that is, by operation, as the ordinary gloss expounds it.
Subjection to the Pope, and acknowledgment of the Sea of Rome. See Down. of
Ant. l. 1. c. (...) the Popes Vassals are named after him, even as Children
bear the name of their Fathers, and must be called of the Pope, or Papa,
Papists. The number of his name, that is, to live in subjection to the Sea of
Rome and to profess themselves to be Romans.
and the mark in the foreheads notes the subjection of the Lay people to the
Pope. Mede interprets mark his name, therefore it is said, the mark or name
of the Beast, and in the Chapter following, the mark of his name. For he
alludeth to the old custom, by which servants were wont to be marked with the
names of their Masters, Soldiers the names of their commanders, the first
especially in the forehead, the other in their hands. Therefore the followers
of the Lamb also 14.1. that they may be contrary to the followers of the
Beast, are written in their forehead with the names of the Lamb, and his
Father; with the same meaning of the Type in both, to show who is the Lord, and
for whom each Company fights: Those professing themselves servants of the
Beast, and his Image, these of (...) and his Father.

Verse. 17. And that no man might buy or sell] That is, live among them, or
enjoy the benefits of humane Society.

Romana ececlsia unde Antichristus sit proditurus. de Dieu. Accommodatissimum
sane nomen, siquidem in Italia dominatur, in qua olim Latinorum erat regnum.
Latina Biblia fontibus praefert. Latin ministri ejus cultum sacrum
administrant. Latin bullas suas scribunt. Wollebius. Vide Pareum.
Verse. 18. His number is six hundred threescore and sixe] (...) Lateinos, the
Letters of which exactly express the number of 666. l is 30. a 1 t 300. ^ 5. i
10. n 50. ^ 70. ^ 200. all joined together make up the aforesaid sum.

Irenaeus (whose Master Polycarpus had been Saint John's Disciple) an ancient
Father of the Church, mentions this word, as the name of the Beast, and
affirms, that it was a common received opinion in his time, Saxonice Marin
Louther; Graece David Chytraeus. Hebraice Johannes Calvinus. uti and Beza
Antitheos reddere hunc numerum 666 annotarunt Lindanus and Bellarminus. a Lap.
that the Beast should be so called. The name of the Beast is not the name of
Antichrist properly, Down. Diat. de Aut. part. 1. l. 6. c. 4.
but of the Roman or Latin State, the last Head of which is Antichrist, which
yet has not been observed by some learned men who have diligently considered
this place. It is said to be the number of the name because the letters (of
which the name consists) comprehend that number, for the Hebrews and Greeks use
their letters for notes of numbers according to the order of the Alphabet.

It is called the number of a man, either because men do number, or because it
is obvious and usual as occurring more than once in Scripture, or because the
name of the Beast containing this number is also the name of a man. Ezra 2.13.
1 Kings 10.14. Episc. Down. ubi supra.
It may be questioned, whether the number of the name be to be computed
according to the Hebrew or Greek letters; if the name of the Beast be to be
written in Greek letters, which is very probable, because the Revelation was
written in Greek, then the name shall be (...), as was before expressed. Roman,
or Latin.


CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 1. HAving his Fathers name written in their heads] Ad constantiam
confessionis, for the constancy of their confession. See 9.4.


Verse. 2. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as
the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers, harping with
their harpes] The voice of the Lord is compared to many waters for its
irresistible force and admirable noise, making men wonder; Forbes.
to thunder for its terror and power shaking all things, to a gentle sound of
harpes for the work of peace and joy in the conscience.

Per hoc significatur celerrimus evangelii cursus. Gerh.
Verse. 6. And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of heaven] That is, another
besides one of those fingers. For he made mention of no Angel before this,
except we shall say, those Musicians were a Quire of Angels. Mede.

The everlasting Gospell] Not in respect of the future, but of the time past,
viz. that which was promised from the beginning of the world. Mede. Not that it
was eternally preached, Romans 16.25. but 1. Because it proceeds from the
eternal Counsel of God. 2. It contains the words of eternal life. 3. It
remains for all eternity. Dr Tailor on Time.
As the hills, paths, and desolations are said to be everlasting, or ancient,
Esaias 58.12. and 61.4. Jer. 6.16. and 18.16. Deuteronomy. 33.15. Genesis 49.26. Esaias
54.47. So the Gospel that is from the beginning.

It is called Eternal (says Brightman) as if the Holy Ghost would of purpose
meet with the offense of those times, when the truth that was restored should
commonly be condemned for novelty.

Verse. 8. And there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is
fallen] After the Preaching of the everlasting Gospel, presently follow the
fall of Babylon, that is, Rome. It is already accomplished in part: It is
fallen, (...) purity of Doctrine. 2. In the estimation which once it had. 3. In
authority, but th^^ Prophecy notes the certainty of her fall by an outward
overthrow. Dr. Tailor.


This commination is taken out of Esaias 21.9. and Jer. 51.8. in which words the
Prophets threaten the ruin of Babylon of the Chaldees, which had grievously
oppressed the people of God with a 70 years Captivity. This cannot be that
Babylon. 1. Because that neither was, nor is, nor shall be the Seat of
Antichrist, as this Babylon shall by the consent of all Interpreters, says
Pareus. Pareus. Toti quae praefidet orbi. Vide Down. Diat. de Ant. l. 1. c. 7.
2. This Babylon is that great City which in the time of John ruled over the
Kings of the earth, Rev. 17.18. but then that Monarchy was with the Romans, not
the Babylonians. Ribera ingeniously confesses, that this Babylon is Rome, and
the topographie of this great City agrees to none more evidently than Rome, it
is said to be seated on seven Mountains, 17.9.
which agrees to no City more than to Rome, set by Romulus heretofore on seven
hills.

Besides, this Babylon is called the great City, and that emphatically with a
double Article (...), urbs illo magna, that great City. It is manifest that
Rome was commonly called the City (...), and the great City, Vrbem quam dicunt
Romam. Rev. 17.18. Distinctionem quandam commenti sunt inter Paganem Romam and
P^panam. Illam enim Babylonem esse facile concedunt, hanc autem negant. Down.
de Ant. It must be Rome Christian as it appears from a double departure, 1 Of
Babylon from the Church, Rev. 17.1. Apostasy is peculiar to Christians.
Babylon is called a Whore. 2. Of the Church from Babylon, Rev. 18.3. the Temple
of God is the seat of Antichrist, says Paul.
and no City but that in Saint John's time ruled over the Kings of the Earth;
all the shift the Jesuits have is, that Babylon was Rome Ethnicall under the
Emperors, not Rome Christian under the Popes. But this is a poor shift, for
Antichrist was not then come while Rome was Ethnicall. 2. It was Papal Rome
that made all Nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and
with whom all the Kings of the Earth committed fornication, and the people of
God are commanded to go out of Rome Papal.

Ver. 8. Because she had made all Nations drink of the wine of the wrath of
her fornication] With the wine of the poison of her fornication, That is,
besotted them with amorous potions being poisoned Wine. For (...) here has not
the force of anger or wrath, but as it is used by the Seventy. Poison, That is,
See Dan. 32.33. Job. 20.16. Deuteronomy. 32.24. Job. 6.4. (...) respondet Hebraeo
Chemah, Quod significat quandoque venenum, Psa. 58.5. Sed potest ufitata
significatio vocis (...) retineri. Dicitur vinum irae, quia Deus ex justa
indignatiene tales seductiones and excaecationes permittit, ut concemptus
Evangelii puniutur, 2 These. 2.10. Gerh. in loc.
they would have it equivalent to the Hebrew word Chemah, which one while
signifies anger, another while poison.

Verse. 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
powered out without mixture] That notes summam poenae severitatem, a punishment
next to hell, there is utter darkness, Philosophers say here non dantur purae
tenebrae.

Verse. 13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord] Beza renders it who dye
for the Lord, or for his sake; They die in the Lord which either suffer death
for Christ, In the Lord.] That is, says Mede for the Lord, as Ephesians. 4.1.
rather in the faith of Christ being incorporated into him, as Romans 8.1. and 16
7. In Domino moriuntur, quicunque per fidem uniti and conjuncti Christo, in
unum quasi corpus cum e^ coalescunt. Rainold de lib. Apoc. praelect. 80.
Moriuntur in Domino, id est, propter confessionem nominis ipsius, in vera fide
in Christum, in vera Dei invocatione, Romans 16.12. 1 Cor. 7.39. Gerh.
or end their life in firm faith in him, that suffer Martyrdom, or dye any
way in the state of grace. Ribera a great Jesuit, though he confess, that the
common current of Expositors runs with the latter sense, yet is more earnest
for the former, that Martyrs be meant specially, that ( In) is put for (
Propter) as often in the old Testament, and sometimes in the New; he strives the
more for that sense, because the other puts out Purgatory fire, for if all
Believers dye in Christ and are blessed, and that henceforth, then none are to
be purged. Martyrs potissimum intelligi concedimus solos vero intelligi
negamus, says Gerhard in loc.

From henceforth] That is, (say some) that constantly hold out in these times
of persecution, presently (say others) from the very time of their death. So Dr
Rainolds and Gerhard.

That they may rest from their labours] That is, 1. Of a toilesome particular
calling, Jer. 16.29. 2. Under afflictions from God, and persecutions from men.
3. Under sin their spiritual warfare. 4. Under temptation. 5. Desertion.

Opera eorum, i.e. Merces operum, quae ex gratia datur. Gerh. Rainold. ubi
supra.
And their works do follow them] Go with them, the words well weighed sound
so, works are put metonymically for the wages and reward of their works, as 2
Cor. 5.10.

That every one may receive the things in his body] That is, the rewards of
those things he has done, agreeably to that which he has done, whether good
or evil.

Their works here are their eternal rewards, and that in four things. 1. In
a consummation of grace. 2. In a perfect communion with the Lord Christ. 3. In
a perfect fruition of God. 4. In the glorious employment that the soul shall
have in heaven.

CHAP. XV.
IN this and the next Chapter is prophesied and declared the last ruin of the
enemies of the Church, this Chapter is the preparation to it, and the next the
execution of it.

Verse. 2. And I saw as it were a Sea of glass mingled with fire] Some say this
is a lively emblem of this Pareus Ribera, a Lapide. Dum splendet stangitur.
See Rev. 4.6.
world, whose glory is but glass, bright, yet brittle: and it is mingled with
fire, which signifies the consumption of the world; which as glass is melted
with fire. 2 Pet. 3.12.

Rather (says Brightman) Gospell-ordinances, and the fire signifies
contention, Luke 22.45.

Having the harpes of God] That is, divine, most excellent and sweet, after the
manner of the Hebrews, who say all those things are of God, which are chief
and most excellent in their kind, as Genesis 23.6. Psalm. 36.7. Or because God
sends the joy of his Spirit into their hearts, Brightman.
wherewith they may be able to give God his due praises for this his notable
kindness and goodness unto them.

Verse. 3. And they sing the song of Moses the Servant of God and the song of
the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, etc.] Which expressions
are taken out of Exodus 15. and Psalm. 111.2, 3. and 7. verses.

Verse. 6. Clothed in pure and white linen, and having their breasts girded
with golden girdles] The Angels are described to be clothed with pure and
white linen, and to have their breasts girded with golden girdles, that is,
all of them were clothed with the righteousness of Christ, (which is pure
linen) both justifying and sanctifying them, the one imputed, Cotton.
the other inherent, and all of them were sincere professors of the truth of
Christ, Zonae aureae denotant praeclara Spiritus sancti Charismata, quibus sunt
instructi. Gerh. in loc.
their breasts girded with the golden girdles of truth.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. ANd I heard a great voice out of the temple] Great] That is, vehement
and terrible, such a one as he heard, chapter 1. v. 10. and 6.1. and 11.12. Without
doubt of the Lamb or of God sitting in the throne as the chief disposer of
these punishments. Pareus.

There is a two fold voice mentioned in this book. 1. From the throne, chapter 19.
v. 5. that is, Brightman.
from God immediately. 2. From the Temple, as here, that is obtained by the
prayers of the Saints.

Bullinger and others think these vialls import only temporal and bodily
plagues, Brightman and some others will have them only Spiritual, but they
are mixed. Cowper.
Go your ways and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth] The
vials are vessels of large content, but of narrow mouths, they pour out
slowly, but drench deeply, and distill effectually the wrath of God, they are
vessels of full and just measure, as all these judgments are dispensed in
weight and measure.

Of the wrath of God] That argues, that upon what subject soever these vials
fell, the wrath Cotton. As Antichrist rose by seven trumpets in the 8. Chapter;
so he shall fall by seven vialls, they shall be poured on the whore of Babylon,
Papists and we agree in this, but differ in the other, who shall be the whore,
we say the Church of Rome, and some of them also. Destruction comes upon all
those that join with Rome, the earth, the common people, The S^^i ditionem
Romanam, Rivers, those that carry abroad her trumperies, the Sun, the highest
authority that holds on Rome.
of God fell together with them upon the same, therefore that is a dangerous
interpretation, v. 8. to expound the Sun to be the Scriptures.

Upon the earth] That is, the common sort of Catholics.

Verse. 2. Them which worshipped his image] They which worshipped the Image of
the Beast are such as are devoted to the Canons of Popish Churches, and receive
them as articles of their faith, these are all afflicted with a noisome and
grievous sore, by the pouring out of this first vial. For those who did power
it out were such as did convince them of the damnable estate of a Catholic,
this was the common practice of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ in Q. M. Edw. the
sixths, and H. the eights time, who discovered unto them, that all their
Religion was but the worship of God after the devices of men, even
will worship, such as they were led unto by the man of sin; upon this
discovery there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon their Catholic Priests,
it is an allusion to Exodus 9.11.

Verse. 3. And the second Angel poured out his vial upon the sea, Upon the
confluxe of all sorts at Trent. Brightman. Pareus. Those deadly decrees are
written wi^h the blood of Heretics. Cotton.
and it became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the
sea] This verse describes the pouring out of the vial of the second Angel. He
poures it on the sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man. The allusion is
to a like plague upon Egypt, Exodus, 7.20.21. The Sea of the Antichristian world
is here meant, a distinct world from that heavenly State wherein other reformed
Churches stand. The confluence of all their ordinances as they do administer
the worship of God. The Sea is become blood] That is, this Religion of theirs
is convinced and discovered to be such as holds forth a dead Christ, and dead
ordinances to any spiritual life. And every thing living in that Sea dyed,
that is, every soul that had no other life, but what was bred and fed in that
Religon; and had no other Christian life but what he sucked and derived from
that Religion, they all perished everlastingly. Chemnitius, Iunius, Chamier,
Whitaker, Raynolds, Perkins and Ames.
The Angel who powered out this vial was those worthy servants of Christ which
have written either against the Trent-councell or Bellarmine, that have
convinced their doctrine and worship to be all polluted, and to be such, that
if a man know, and practice, and believe no better, he cannot be saved.

4, 5, 6, 7. Verses. These Rivers and fountains of water are generally
conceived to be the Priests and Ministers of the Popish Church, who carry
popish Religion up and down the Nations, as Fountains and Rivers do the Sea
up and down the earth. It became blood as the Sea before, and carried but
corrupt water which they received from the Sea. 2 Pet. 2.17. Bloud] Not only
in regard* that their waters themselves are blood, the doctrine and worship
which they do hold forth to the people are corrupt as their Sea is (like the
plague in Egypt, when their Waters and Rivers were turned to blood) but
chiefly in regard of the punishment which they inflict on them, for so doing,
which is a bloody death. To give a man blood to drink is to kill him, See 5.6,
verses. Cotton. Vide Pareum.
as Tomyris of old said to King Cyrus. Thou have been a blood-thirsty man,
drink thou blood which thou have thirsted. This Angel made the Priests to
undergo a bloody death, to drink blood, and also made all that received and
entertained them to drink blood too* and this was effectually accomplished by Q.
Elizabeth (says Mr Cotton) when in the 27. year of her reign, by the consent
of the Parliament she made it a law, that if any Priest or Jesuit which had
received orders from the Sea of Rome, or any authority from the Sea, should
come into the Realm, and go about or practice to seduce any of the Queens
loyal subjects from their allegiance to the obedience of the Sea of Rome; or
practice to draw them to that Religion, he should be judged of high Treason,
and suffer as in case of a Traitor.

Verse. 5. And I heard the Angel of the waters] This Angel of the waters was
he or she that poured out this vial on these waters. Q. Eliz. with the consent
of her Parliament, says Mr Cotton.
He attributes not only righteousness to God in this, but immutabilitie and
constancy, which art, and wast, and shall be alway] Levit. 24.19.20, 21. Genesis
9.4, 5, 6.

The word translated Altar signifies properly an Altar for beasts that are
slain, though sometimes it be put for the Altar of Incense. as 8.3. Which is
also a sign of Christ's death in like manner.
Verse. 7. And I heard another out of the Altar say] That is, another Angel, a
Minister and Messenger of Gods justice. This phrase out of the Altar, in this
book does usually hold forth some under persecution, either going in or new
come out of persecution, so it is expressed, Rev. 6.9. The Altar is Christ, and
Christ suffering; and those under the Altar are they that suffered with Christ
for the word of God, speaking of the primitive Christians in their first
persecution. Here he says not, they were under martyrdom, but they were come
out from under the Altar, that holds forth (says Mr Cotton) those Christians
in the Low Countries, who of a long time had been under persecution by Duke D'
Alva, and other Spanish Princes. Duke D' Alva boasted of it, that he had put
36000. Hugonets and Protestants to death, for the testimony of Jesus, but they
were rescued by the faithfulness of God, giving and blessing the courage of
Queen Elizabeth, and now they are got from under the Altar.

Verse. 8. And the fourth Angel poured out his vial upon the Sun] That is, the
house of Austria say some; the highest authority that holds on Rome, say others.

Verse. 9. And they repented not to give him glory] See v. 11. Babylon must
needs be destroyed, because she shall never repent.

Verse. 10. And the fifth Angel poured out his vial upon the fear of the
beast] The seat of the Beast is generally taken for the City of Rome, That is
his kingdom, as the following words explain, and the familiar phraseologie of
scripture does evince. David's throne is put for his kingdom, and Satan's for
his chapter 2. and 13. Forbes.
and it is confirmed from the like speech, Rev. 13.2. and therefore they gather
from hence the ruin of Rome; rather the Popes singular sole authority, and
monarchiall frame of Church Government, whereby he sits chief, and only
Judge in ecclesiastical causes, in his own jurisdiction.

And his kingdom was full of darknesse] A Kingdom is a government wherein one
does reign.

It is an allusion (say some) to the stratagem by which Cyrus made himself
Master of Babylon, having cut the river and turned Euphrates into many little
Channels.
Verse. 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings of the
east might be prepared] The Christian Kings shall so far fall off from Rome,
as that they shall dry up all her revenewes, when they shall see and abhor
the vanity of their Images and Temples, and monasteries, and the
unprofitablenesse of their expenses, when they shall see the wickedness of
their bloody inquisitions, the unnaturallnesse of all those murders of Gods
blessed servants, and their witcheries and sorceries; the horrible fornications
and whoredoms of their Stews, then is the fountain of the Turkish
maintenance cut off also, and a ready way made indeed for the Kings of the
earth, that is the Jews, Exodus 19.6. Dan. 7.27.

Out of their mouths, that is their commands 3. That is, Cardinals Bishops
and Jesuits. Jesuits are frogs, 1. Unclean. 2. Make a noise in the dark.
3. They arise out of putrefaction and live of it. 4. Are animalia amphibia, one
while in the earth, another while in the water; so they seem laymen and
Priests. 5. As Pharoahs frogs, they go into the Kings bedchamber. These
frogs by the common consent of Catholic expositors are the rabble of Popsh
Friars Priests and Jesuits. Mr Perkins. Animal impudens, obstreperum, loquax,
coaxatione and garrulitate intolerabile. Vide Fenneri Theol. p. 229.
Verse. 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of
the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet] False Prophets which
pretended to speak by the Spirit of God, 1 John 4.1. They are spirits for
nimblenesse and activity, for impetuousnesse and strength, for close and
cleanly conveiance; And Spirits of Devils, v. 14. That is, of a devilish
nature, The Greek word shows their knowledge and learning, they are learned
spirits, and yet Devils for their deceit and mischief. The Dragon is Satan
acting Rome, the beast There were four beasts in Ezekiell which persecuted the
Church of the Jews, here is mention made, but of the Beast, because this has
as much cruelty as all the other. B. Usher.
Rome Antichristian, the false Prophet the Pope.

Verse. 14. Working miracles] 2 These. 2.9.

Which go forth unto the Kings of the earth] That is, the earthly Religion.

The whole world] That is, both Popish and pagane Princes.

To gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty] That is not
the last judgment (as some have thought) there will be no warning then, That
is, to get a great battle against Christ and those Christian Princes that have
been studious in the reformation of religion.
but every day of great execution is called a great day of God Almighty. See
19. chapter 17.

Verse. 15. Behold I come as a Thiefe] Not in injustice or robbery, but
suddenly, secretly and unexpectedly, yea and also violently and terribly as a
Thief. See 3.3. Matthew. 24.43. Luke 12.39. 1 These. 5.2.

Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments] That is, He enjoyes his
own blessedness, and increases and establishes it. Some understand the
keeping of his garments of the imputed righteousness of Christ, so it is to
hold fast fiduciam remission is; Brightm.
Others Cotton.
interpret it of inherent righteousness, Rev. 19.8. Others of the glory of our
profession, garments being given to cover our nakedness, Rev. 3.4. That walk
unspotted.

Least he walk naked and they see his shame] He shall by this means prevent
the discovery of his own shame and nakedness.

Ver. 16. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew
tongue, Armageddon] That is, they went forth to persuade them, and did prevail
mightily with them. Vide Gerh. in loc. Because there at the universal
slaughters of the beast the troops or bands shall be destroyed. For Arma
signifies destruction, Gedon or Geddon a troop, Army. Mede.
Armageddon signifies the hill of Megiddon, for Mageddon and Megiddon are but
different writings holding forth the same thing. Not that this battle shall be
fought there, but it is so called because of the near resemblance of the
battle fought in this field, unto those battles which were fought in Megiddon
in old time. For it is usual in the Prophets of the New Testament to allude
unto things spoken of in the old. Here is an allusion to three notable battles
fought in Megiddon, Judge. 5.19. 2 Kings 23.29. 1 Samuel 31.28. It is spoken of in
the Hebrew tongue, because this shall befall the Hebrew people. The sum is,
that these Spirits went forth to gather those Popish and Heathen Princes
together, into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Cotton.
Armageddon, where the battle shall have the like success that it had of old,
unto the destruction of Gods three enemies, the utter ruin of Antichrist, as
of Saul, the settling of the kingdom of Christ upon David, unto the conversion
of the Jews, who shall upon this occasion mourn bitterly over him, whom they
have pierced. It is a mourning of compunction, whereby they (seeing in this
battle that Christ is indeed the true Messiah) shall mourn that they have
been so long estranged from him.

Ve. 17. The aire] That is, the kingdom of Satan, Ephesians. 2.2. See Brightman.
Rather thus, the Lord will send forth such a bright and clear knowledge of his
Christ and Church, and Saints, and holy things, which will prevail so far as
to dispell all the mists of darkness in all the world.

It is done] The mystery of iniquity is abolished, and the mystery of God is
fulfilled.

Verse. 18. And there were voices, and thunders and lightnings] The Lord will so
terribly affright and amaze the Sons of men with the power of his holy word and
will, as that it shall suddenly break forth all the world over.

And there was a great earthquake] This imports agitations and changes, not
terror only, it will shake out popery, and when by it the Popish air is
smitten, the Lord also will shake all the world by it, and the time does hasten.

Verse. 19. And the great City] That is, Rome. See 17.18. and 18.20.

Was divided into three parts] It will be divided into three factions, some
will stick fast unto Popery; and others of the people of God that before durst
not openly profess Religion, will now renounce Popery; the third part may be a
neutrall between both the other.

And the Cities of the Nations fell] The Cities of the nations were they who
did subject themselves to the popish government. See 11.


To give unto thee the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath] Cup is
a part or portion, Psalm. 11.6. and 16.5. By a metaphore taken from Masters of
feasts, Brightman.
who were wont to measure out to every one as much as he should drink. Gods
judgments are inflicted upon men in a just measure, and wine because they are
pleasing to God, as men's sins to them.

Verse. 20. And every Island fled away, and the mountains were not found] He
speaks of the Mountains and Islands of the Antichristian state. The
Mountains are the places where they went a whoring after their Gods in old
time, Ier. 3.6. Islands places consecrated by Popish devotions, as Churchyards
and the like.

Verse. 21. And there fell upon men a great haile] It is an allusion to the
hail storm in Egypt, whereof the effect was, that they sinned and hardened
their hearts ye more. See 28. Esaias 17.
This kind of haile-storme is such a plague of God upon men, as shall destroy
all their lying refuges, and discover all the counterfeit Religions in the
world.

CHAP XVII.
THe ninth and eighteenth verses are the key for the opening of this Prophecy,
concerning the beast and the whore.

Down. Diat. de Antich. l. 1. c: 5.
The Whore in this Chapter is Rome, the Beast the Roman State, the last head of
the Roman State Antichrist.

The name of the Beast is taken in this Chapter two ways, either for the whole
body of the Beast, as v. 3. where the woman is said to sit on the Beast, in
which sense the Beast is the same with many waters, Id. ib.
v. 1. viz. people, nations, languages, subject to the Roman Empire, or for
the head which is Antichrist. See. 11, 12, 13, 17. verses.

Verse. 3. And I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast] First it is to
be observed that St John here and 13.1. according to the example of the Prophet
Daniel, Dan. 7.3. does by the term of a beast import some earthly kingdom,
state Regnum aut Imperium Romanum.
and government, therefore named a beast to signify the same to be led wholly
with beastly and carnal affection to these things that concern the flesh and
savor of the flesh.

Abbot against Bishop.
2. By a woman, a harlot, he notes a City, which is the place and palace of
such a state given to fornications, both spiritual by idolatry, and corporal
by wantonness, which sits and has advancement by the pre-eminence of that
kingdom, state and government; thus the Angel plainly distinguishes the
woman and the beast, v. 7. Though sometimes they are used indifferently for the
same, v. 1. Compared with 15. and 18. but there was no City that reigned over
the Kings of the Earth, and over those many nations and people, but only the
City of Rome; therefore she is here meant, v. 9. further confirms it. The City
of Rome is famous for seven hills. Septimontium nominatur ab his septem
montibus in quibus vrbs sita est. Vrbs Septi. collis is its common Epithere.
Varro de lingua Latina l. 5.

I heard one in Cambridge, wittily argue thus from the letters of Papa, P.
Poculum. A. Aureum. P. Plenum. A. Abominationum, to which the respondent no
less wittily replied. Profecto Domine hoc est literatissimum argumentum.
Ver. 4. Having a golden cup in her hand full of abominations] Pareus says by
this golden cup the golden titles of the Pope are meant, in which he has
hitherto drunk the wine of his fornication to the world, as Papa, Pater
Patrum, Pater sanctissimus, Sanctitas, Christi vicarius, Petri successor, etc.

Full of abominations, and filthiness of her fornication] Gold without, but
poison within. He understands the wicked blasphemous Doctrines, and filthy
sins, with which the Whore of Rome has made drunk the Christian world.

Vt summus olim Pontifex. Exodus 28.36. in frontali inscriptum gestabat titulum
hunc Sanctitas Jehovae: Ita Romanus Pontifex in sua tiara, hoc ipsum nomen,
mysterium. Down. Diat. de Ant. l. 1. c. 7. Vide Quistorpium. Alsted.
Verse. 5. And upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery] One says, he saw a
mystery engraven in the Popes Myter or Crown. It is called mystery, because
Rome was raised in a mystery, that is, she got up to her height insensibly and
cunningly.

Babylon the great] Not long after the time of the foundation of the Church of
Rome did Saint John write this Book of the Revelation, wherein he reveals
that the City of Rome is Babylon, according to the general consent of their
own Jesuits and Divines.

B. Mortons appeal. chapter 4. Sect. 15. Babylon mystical here is the fear, or
chief City of Antichrist, resembling the Assyrian Babylon in pride, idolatry,
filthiness, and especially, in most cruel persecution of the Church of God
Down. concerning Antichrist chapter 2. see more there.
Babylon Apocalyptica est Romana. Bellarmine, l. 3. de Pont. c. 12. and lib. 2.
c. 2. Ribera and Vega in Apoc. 14. And not only Rome as it was Ethnicall in the
days of the heathenish Emperors, but Rome Papal; see Rhemists on Apoc. 17.5.
because say Ribera, and Viega, the Spirit warns all that were in her to
depart, 18.4. but there were then no faithful in the heathenish Rome, and they
are commanded to come out of her for fear of being consumed with fire.

Rome is termed Babylon in many resemblances, and one egg is not liker
another. Dr. Tailor.
1. Babell was the great City that must rule over all Nations, Genesis 10.10. and
Rome is the great City that must rule over all Cities and Churches. 2. At
Babell was the first confusion of Tongues, Genesis 11.7. In and from Rome is the
first confusion of Tongues, and of errors, one not understanding another in
the Word or Sacraments, or other their Services. 3. At Babell was horrible
superstition and wickedness in Priests and People, and thence it spread all
abroad. Rome is a sink of superstition and filthiness, and all Nations have
drunk of her Cup. 4. Babell held the Church in slavery seventy years; so the
Church of Christ has been oppressed a long time under the tyranny of the
Romish Church. 5. Babell robbed and spoiled the Church of her Treasures, and
the Temple of God, and horribly polluted it. Rome has robbed the Church of the
Word, Sacraments, the Offices of Christ, and most comfortable doctrine, the
chief dowry and revenew that Christ her head gave her. 6. Babell most
miserably entreated the Church, Psalm. 137.1. so all is full of cruelty in the
Roman Church.

Verse. 5. The mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth] Because she
infecteth all Nations that adhere unto her with her Idolatries and
superstitions. See ver. 2. Hoc est, inventrix, confirmatrix, propagatrix and
propugnatrix quarumvis idolomaniarum, doctrinarum damnabilium. Glass. Rher. Sac.


Verse. 6. And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with
the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus] Papists say that blood was not shed in Rome
but in Jerusalem where the Lord was crucified. Rev. 11.8.

That place in the 11. chapter is not meant of Jerusalem, as Hierome says, but
may well be understood of Rome; Christ was crucified there, either because the
authority whereby he was crucified was from the Roman Empire, or else because
Christ in his members was and is there daily crucified, though locally in his
own person he was crucified at Jerusalem. Perkins.


Verse. 8. The beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of
the bottomless pit] For the dark and deep schoole-learning, Symonds Pisgah
Evangelica.
or profoundnesse of Satan which it teaches, leaving the plain and easy
Doctrine of the Scriptures.

Verse. 9. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth] The
mountains are sufficiently known out of Poets and Histories. Neither could any
more famous mark be brought to describe Rome, says Grotius.

Septem urbs alta jugis, toti quae praesidet orbi. The City mounted on seven
hills, overruling the whole world] The names of these hills are commonly known,
and usually named in Roman Authors, viz. Palatinus, Capitolinus, Quirinalis,
Caelius, Esquilinus, Viminalis, Aventinus.

Verse. 10. And there are seven Kings] Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius,
Vespatian, Titus. So Grotius. Others interpret it of seven several Regiments,
Down. Diat. de Ant. l. 1. c. 4. and alii.
or Heads of Government, to which the State of Rome was successively subject,
that is to Kings, (which also were seven) Consuls, Decemvirs, Tribunes,
Dictators, Emperors, and Popes; of these five ceased before John's time, the
sixth which was of Emperors was now, the seventh which was of Popes, was not
yet.

Verse. 11. The eighth head, which is also one of the seven, Down. of Ant. l. 1.
c. 3.
is the Empire renewed by the Pope, and is said to be the Beast, which was and
is not though it be, whereon the Whore of Babylon sits.

Verse. 12. With the beast] or after the beast, as others read it, that is,
Antichrist.

Verse. 13. And shall give their power and strength unto the beast] (...). Their
natural power the power of arms, and their civil power, the power of
authority.

Verse. 14. And the Lamb shall overcome them] Not by destruction but
conversion, he will make use of them after to overthrow Antichrist.

Verse. 15. The waters which thou saw, where the whore sits, are peoples,
and multitudes, and nations] That very universality which the Romans are wont
so much to brag of.

Verse. 16. The ten Kings or Kingdoms of Europe, some reckon up to be these,
England, I am persuaded that Popery shall never be established again in this
Kingdom, because the everlasting Gospel shall spread still more and more
through all the Kingdoms of Europe, as appears 14.6. otherwise how shall
Rome fall? How shall the Jews ever be converted? Deuteronomy.
Scotland, Germany, France, Spain, Denmark, Sweveland, Poland, Russia,
Hungary, that took part with Rome, and shall pull her down. They are compared
to horns, because they were the strength and defense of the Roman Empire and
Papacy.

Verse. 17. And give their kingdom unto the Beast] That is, all the strength
and warlike force, and the authority and Laws.

Verse. 8. That great City, which reigns over the Kings of the Earth] Rome was
only that famous City, called therefore Vrbs by an excellency, and here with
great Emphasis, that great City. Rome papal, that monarchy was then the only
monarchy in the world.

Mart. l. 12. Epig. 8. Down. of Ant l. 1. c. 2.
Terrarum Dea Gentiumque Roma
Cui par est nihil, and nihil secundum.
By this title of great City thoughout the Apocalypse is meant Babylon or Rome,
as appeareeth by conference of these places, Apoc. 14.8. and 16.19. and
18.10.16.18.19.21. but especially by this place here.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. ANother angell] One of the heavenly host and all other instruments
acted by him.

Verse. 2. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen] That is, Rome, and new Rome.
See 14.8. and 17.5. As the Eastern, and Chaldeon Babylon did a long time
oppress the Church of the Jews, so this Western and Italian Babylon has kept
under most miserable oppression and thraldom the Church of the Christians. Dr.
Tailor.
See 18. ver. of this chapter Babylon called for its sorcery; the great] 1. From
the greatness of their glory. 2. From the extent of their power and dominion.

Is fallen, is fallen] The Lord speaks of it in praeterito, is fallen, after
the manner of the Hebrews who put praeteritum pro futuro when they would show
the certainty of a thing. Ezekiel. 7.4.5. and cum reduplicatione, is fallen, is
fallen. Such repetition used in Scripture for a double end, to set forth, 1.
The perfection of a thing done, Esaias 26.3. Psalm. 137.7. it notes an utter
destruction. 2. The affection of the speaker. Psalm. 22.1. 2 Samuel 18.33. Three
things are intended by this speech, the certainty of the destruction of
Babylon, and its utter destruction, and the joy and triumph of Gods people at
it.

Verse. 3. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication) Therefore shall Babylon fall, because she has corrupted Religion.
And the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her] She has
corrupted them, and they are her last refuge, 16.14. Magistracy is a stamp of
Gods image, therefore he is provoked to have it corrupted.

Verse. 4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues] Some interpret it of local departing,
Aliquot electi delitescunt adhuc. Bright.
as Lot went out of Sodom, and the Text favors that interpretation.

Come out in affection, in action, and in habitation, both by spiritual and
bodily departure: Little Mice (they say) presaging the ruin of a house do fly
out before hand. Dr Tailor.


Verse. 5. For her sins have reached unto heaven] The words in the original
are, her sins have followed, Brightman. Beza vertir. accumulata pervenerunt.
that is, her sins following one upon, and after another, knit together in a
continued order, have by this means grown to such a heap, that they came up
even unto heaven at length.

Verse. 6. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double
according to her works] God does not command here that Babylon should be twice
punished for the same sin, that were not according to the rules of divine
justice. Double here has reference to Babylons dealings with the Church; She
did greatly afflict Sion, and now God would have Babylon to have double
affliction to that; Babylon did unjustly in oppressing Sion, Ier. 51.45.
Sion should do righteously in destroying Babylon.

Verse. 8. She shall be utterly burnt with fire] See 17.16. Harlots by the Law
of God were to be burnt with fire, Genesis 38.24. but Babylon, 17.1, 2, 5. is a
Harlot. 2. By the law of retaliation, she must be consumed with fire, for she
has adjudged many of Gods Saints to the fire.

For strong is the Lord God who judges her] Babylon must needs fall when God
himself opposes her.

Verse. 10. Alas, alas, that great City, Babylon] 1. Great in splendour and
beauty, as set upon seven hills, for which she is famous in all the world. 2.
Great in power and authority, the metrapolitane of all the earth then. Dr
Tailor. Toties hoc ingeminatun, ut gloriationem Romanistarum de magnitudine
urbis and ecclesiae Romanae pudefaciat Prophe^ie. Pareus.


They have little cause to boast of their Temporal felicity and greatness.

Verse. 11, 12. The Merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over her for no
man buyeth her merchandise any more. The merchandise of gold and silver and
precious stones, etc.] This cannot be understood literally, there shall be
merchandising after Romes destruction, but that kind of merchandising. Rome
trades, 1. In the things of God, his doctrine, worship. 2. In the sins of men.
3. The souls of men. v. 13 Sets to sale the truths and ordinances of God, sins,
and souls of men. It is well called nobile emporium rerum Spiritualium.

Verse. 14. And the fruits that thy soul lusted after, Vide Bezam. Intelligit
delicias secundarum mensarum, confectiones delicatas, quibus Romanus clerus
etiam his terve in die se farciens, tamen jeiunat. Pareus.
are departed from thee] The Greek word signifies autumn fruit, their second
services, suckets, sweet meats and delicate confections.

Verse. 21. And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast
it into the Sea, saying, Lapis magnus sua mole ruit, magno cum impetu; majori,
si projiciatur; long maximo, si projiciatur ab aliquo robusto and lacertoso.
Alstedius.
Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown downe] The Angel
expresses it by this sign. 1. To show the difficulty of putting down
Babylon. 2. The violence of it. 3. The irrecoverablenesse of it.

Verse. 22. And the voice of harpers and musicians, and of pipers and
trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee] See Ier. 25.10. The Jews
were wont to have music at their feasts, Isay 5.11.24. especially at
marriages. See Luke 15.25. and v. 23. of this Chapter.

Verse. 23. For thy Merchants were the great men of the earth] (...), Princes of
the earth, for their great riches. See 33. Deuteronomy. 19.

Verse. 24. And in her] That is, Babylon, now Rome.

Was found the blood of Prophets] Namely of the New Testament, they were killed
at Jerusalem. Ribera. They were not all killed within the precincts of the City
of Rome, but all which for Religions sake were put to death, by her authority
or instigation were delivered to death. Romes cruelty will cause her ruin.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 1. IN heaven] Not the Church, but the innumerable company of glorified
ones in heaven say some; others interpret it of the Church, and say praise is
given to God in the Church in the Hebrew tongue, because the Jews the Hebrew
people, Mr Bulklie on the Covenant.
shall acknowledge the Lord Jesus with us.

Verse. 2. For he has judged the great whore] That is, Rome, called whore as
before, because of her Apostatizing from the truths of God and her former
covenant; the great whore, because of her universal poisoning of the earth.

Verse. 4. And the four and twenty Elders] That is, the Church; and the four
beasts] That is, the Ministers.

Verse. 8. For the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints] Righteousnesses
Greek. This (say some) signifies a double righteousness given unto us, 1. The
righteousness of justification, whereby we are justified before God. 2. The
righteousness of sanctification, by which we evidence our justification to
men: Others Downames Sum of Divinity. Vide Bezam and Pareum.
say it is an hebraisme rather, by the plural righteousnesses noting the most
absolute righteousness which we have in Christ; so the Hebrew word is used,
Esaias 45.24.

Verse. 9. Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the
Lambe] By this marriage-supper is meant the great general wedding feast in
heaven after the resurrection, Soliti fuerunt veteres, quod etiam nunc
faclitatur, sponsum honorifice deducere, illique cum celebrarentur nuptiae
adesse and comitari, ut illa sociorum, amicorum, propinquorumque frequentia
nuptiis dignitatem, hilaritatem conciliaret. Hos novi mariti comites sponsi
filios appellat Christus Matthew. 9.15. Hi socii nominatim eligebantur, and
vocabantur fere ab ipsis sponsis, ut sibi adessent, and conviviis etiam,
aliisque hilaritatis significationibus, quae exhibebantur, interessent. Iudic.
14.11. Matthew. 22.14. Menochius de Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 21.
where the King of glory and the Angels are, where the Lambs wife, v. 7, 8.
and all shall meet, at which are all the creatures in their greatest glory.

See thou do it not] The prohibition is much more emphaticall in the original,
see not (...), Vide ne scilicet adores. Ellipsis gravitatem facti denotat.
Alsted.
there is an ellipsis of the word do or worship, says Alsted.

I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus]
This is the first reason against the worshipping of Angels, We are equal in
office, Therefore thou owe not to me religious but sociall worship. The
other reason follows, worship God, because to him alone religious worship is
due as belonging to the first Table of the Decalogue.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. AND I saw an Angel come down from heaven] See the 12. chapter 9. v. Our
Lord Jesus Christ. Quadrant in Christumaptissime sacri contextus omnes
circumstantiae. Reverendissimus Episc. Vsserius de Christianarum ecclesiarum
successione and statu. l. 1.
Primasius, Austen and others. The Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3^ John 3.13.
He descends from heaven by his incarnation. Pareus. He has the key of the
bottomless pit, that is, the power of hell and death, which Christ ascribes to
himself, 18.18. and binds Satan which is proper to Christ. Pareus.

And a great chain in his hand] By which he bound the Devil; the modern
Expositors interpret it the inevitable and binding power of the divine majesty,
a long and strong chain to bind a most cruel enemy, 12.13.

Verse. 2. And bound him a thousand yeares] That is, he should not stir up the
lusts of men, Alii ante passionem Domini tempus ligationis Satanae inchoandum
non existimant freti Ioh. 12.31.32. Quod quidem tum ad passionem Dominicam
referri poterit, tum ad Evangelii quae illam subsecuta est, per orbem terrarum
promulgationem, quo tanquam firmissimo vinculo ligatus est Satanas: atque ex
tyrannide illa qua Gentes antea oppresserat, plane deturbatus. Episc. Vsser.
ibid. Ligatus dicitur Satanas and in custodias inclusus, non ut omnino non
seduceret, sed ^ne in omnes simul gentes, uti erat solitus, perversas atque
impias religiones induceret; neve ita potenter ut antea, tantoque cum successu
in mundo grassaretur. Id. ubi supra. Vide Pareum.
to make war against the Saints of God. See 8, 9. verses. What he was hindered
from when he was bound he attempted to do when loose.

Id est, firmiter muniit, ne ullatenus pateret exitus. Nam mos erat Hebraeis
and vicinis gentibus quando firmiter munitum and obseratum volebant ostium, ut
ei sigillum apponerent. Sic Dan. 6.17. Matthew. 27.62. Mede in Clav. Apoc.
And shut him up and set a seal upon him] That is, upon the door of the
bottomless pit, lest he should break out before his time.

A thousand yeares] Not a definite time as is meant in the beginning of the
chapter, but an indefinite time, that is, for ever, as Psalm. 84.10. a thousand
years is a type of eternity.
Verse. 6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, and
shall reign with him a thousand yeares] There are two common interpretations.
Some understand the first resurrection from the death of sin, and a reigning in
heaven a thousand years, they interpret eternity and a further degree of glory
for such as are called forth to suffer. Secondly, others understand it
literally, that then shall be a corporal resurrection of all the Martyrs to
live with Christ a 1000. years. First, it cannot be a reigning with Christ in
heaven, because it is something peculiar to those that are beheaded, a
resurrection which follows that, they rise from sin before they dye, besides
the 9. and 10. verses show it cannot be meant of heaven. Secondly, it cannot
be understood of the corporal resurrection, the dead in Christ rise first,
yet so that all the rest shall be raised in the same moment. Resurrection is
used commonly in Scripture to express a high degree of advancement after a low
ebb of misery, Ezekiel. 37. Esaias 26.19. Those that were beheaded shall live.

Priests of God] That is, sanctified to offer spiritual service.

Verse. 7. Satan shall be loosed out of his prison] Because the very acting of
the power which he has, is at the dispose of God. Id est, recipies priorem
potestatem. Glos^a interlinearis.


Uers. 8. Gog and Magog] There is scarce a darker passage than this about Gog
and Magog, for we read them joined together only twice, once in the Old
Testament, Ezekiel. 38. and 39. chapter and in this place. All the Schoolmen almost
follow the Gloss and Prosper, who hold that by Gog, an hidden and secret enemy
of the Church is meant, Dr Pride. in Orat. tertia.
by Magog an open enemy, therefore they have no cause to find fault with our
writers who apply those things to Antichrist in and Antichrist out of the
Church. Some expound it the Papists and Mahometans.
Pareus interprets Gog and Magog to be those four Angels bound at the great
River Euphrates. chapter 9.14.

Gog signifies Asia minor, having that name from Gyges the King thereof. Magog
is Hierapolis the chief seat of Idolatry in Syria, built by the Scythians, and
from them has that name. So that by the land of Magog we are to understand
Syria, and by Gog, Asia minor. And for as much as the Princes and people of
Syria and Asia minor, Plin. l. 5. c. 23.
were the most grievous enemies of the Jews, by whom they sustained the
chiefest calamities after their return before the coming of Christ: therefore
by an usual speech in the Jewish language, the mortal enemies of the Church,
are called Gog and Magog. And in this sense John the Divine uses these names,
Gog and Magog, Down. of Antich. l. 2. c. 16.
to signify the enemies of the Church, meaning not the same enemies whereof
Ezechiel speaks, but the like enemies of the Church, which should afflict the
true Christians, as Gog and Magog afflicted the Jews.

Verse. 10. And shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever] Ever has no
end, Pareus.
but here is a plurality for ever and ever.

Verse. 11. And I saw a great white throne] A great throne] Because set for the
great, that is, the universal judgment of the whole world; white] Shining
with celestial light and majesty.

The white color in Scripture is used to represent purity and glory, Elton.
here it signifies that the Judge shall give most just and incorrupt
judgment, and free from all spot of partiality.

Verse. 12. And the books were opened] There are two books, 1. Of Gods
omniscience, in which all our speeches, deeds, thoughts, are registered. Psalm.
139.15. Mal. 3.16. Alludes to Dan. 7.10.


2. Of every man's conscience. Luke 16.9. Romans 2.15.

And the dead were judged] The Apostle here speaks prophetically, and puts
the past time for the future, they were judged, that is, they shall be judged.
Mr Fennet.


Verse. 14. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire] That is, the
dominion of death found no where but in hell.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. AND I saw a new heaven and a new earth] The interpretation of this
(says Brightman) may be taken out of Heb. 12.26. Heaven in this part of the
Revelation is put for the more pure Church, and the earth for the degenerating
Citizens thereof.

Verse. 2. New Jerusalem coming down from God] St John's new Jerusalem, and
Ezechiels City Quae omnia (de Novo Templo etc. a capite 40. usque ad finem
libri) statum, formam, conditionem and fortunam ecclesiae Dei in N.T.
designarunt, and gratiae regnum (a quo transitus fit ad regnum gloriae, ab
Ezechiele quoque non minus quam a Johanne in Apacalypsi) eleganter
expresserunt. Haffentefferus in Templum Ezech. sive in 9. postrema Prophetae
capita.
and Temple, from 40. Chapter to the end (say some) are contemporary, and
signify one and the same thing.

Ob. John says he looked for a temple and saw none. Sol. He means in
comparison of the former manifestation they had of God, and those dark ways
he had showed himself in, it should be as glorious as heaven it self, long
uberior manifestatio. Bright. No Temple in opposition to the Jewish Temple, but
a Gospell-Temple. Mr. Bridge.

Verse. 3. Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with
them] A Tabernacle is moveable, therefore (say some) this is not spoken of
heaven. 2. Yet this glorious Church of Jews and Gentiles shall have ordinances.

Verse. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes] The meaning is,
he takes from them all sorrow and crying, and pain, as the Spirit explicates
himself. Dr Sclater.

The phrase is taken out of Esaias 25.8. and it is an allusion to the natural
affection of Mothers, which are wont to please little children crying, and to
wipe away their tears. Pareus. a Lapide.

And there shall be no more death] Neither the first nor second.

He does not mean those which are ever fearful of their own estates, lest
they have not faith, or be hypocrites, that shall be damned, though these
fears being excessive and ill grounded are faults.
Verse. 8. But the fearefull] Here is a catalogue of the damend crew, and the
fearful are in the forefront, that is, those which are so afraid of bodily
dangers and miseries, that they count it their best course to save themselves
from such evil, by neglecting their duty.

And unbeleeving] Which give not credit to the word of God.

Perkins.
Verse. 18. and 19. The State of this heavenly City is shadowed by precious
stones, and gold, to signify as well the durablenesse as the excellency
thereof.

Verse. 22. For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it] This
cannot be understood of heaven. See 24. and 26. verses.

See 22. c. 3.4. and Ezekiel. 48. vlt.
Verse. 24. And the Kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into it]
To the Church, not when in heaven. Mr. Burrh on Hos.

Verse. 26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into it]
There shall be a more glorious presence of Christ (whether personal or what
it will, See Mr. Burrh. on Phil. 4.11. 3d Sermon. p. 52
we determine not) among his people than ever yet was since the beginning of
the world.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 2. AND yielded her fruit every moneth] Were the trees so created at
first, that if sin had never entered in (which has brought into the world
thorns, briars, sweat of face, Brightman.
and difficulty of living) they would have flourished always laden with their
fruits? This allusion here seems to intimate some such matter, and perhaps
Christ would never have cursed the Fig Tree that was void of fruit, when the
time of Figs was not come, unless it ought to have borne figs at all times by
the first nature thereof. Mark 11.13.

Verse. 4. And they shall see his face] Not that men shall have a beatificall
vision of God here, but such a glorious discovery of the will of God, that it
shall be a beatificall vision in comparison of what was before seen.

Verse. 8. I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angell] See Rev. 19.10.
Johannes semel admonitus iterum id non contendisset, nisi ex quadam tantum
urbanitate prohibitum se credidisset. Lorinas in c. 10. Act. Apost. v. 25.
Ejusdem opinionis est Viegas in. c. 19. Apoc. v. 10. and 22. v. 8. Verum verba
Angeli pro urbana repulsa accipi nequeunt, sed pro necessaria prohibitione sunt
intelligenda, inprimis si mandatum Adora Deum, and verba concisa Videne
feceris, consideremus. Rivetus in Catholico orthodoxo.


Verse. 12. To give every man according as his work shall be] Mark, he says
not to the work, or for the work, but to the worker, according to his works.
Perkins.

Verse. 15. And whosoever loves and makes a lye] Some apply it to hypocrisy,
others to hankering after the old way of Idolatry.

Verse. 16. The bright and Morning Starre] That is, Christ, it is not unusual
to call any eminent person by this name. See Esaias 14.12.

Verse. 17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, come] That is (say some) the
Spirit in the Bride.

FINIS.
A Review of the whole work, consisting of emendations and Additions.
MATTHEW. Chap. 2. verse 1, 2.
THE Papists affirm three things of the wise men. 1. That they were Kings.
Whitaker against Rainolds Trium Regum incipit pudere Papistas, si qui sunt
paulo Cordatiores. Canus relinquit in medio, fuerintne vere reges an non
fuerint: negans eos qui asserunt niti historiae quam nullam probatam habuerint,
sed probabilibus tantum Coniecturis nonnullis. Chamier tomo secundo. l. 16. c.
1.
2. That they were three. 3. That their names were Gaspar, Melchior, and
Baltasar. But there is no ground in the Scripture for any of these opinions.

Matthew. 3.11. Whose shoes I am not worthy to beare] Or unloose, as Mark 1.7.
The Baptist says, he is not worthy to loose or take away our Saviors shoes,
that is, to be his Disciple, for by Maimonie in the Title of learning the Law.
chapter 5. we learn, that the Disciples of the Jews Doctors, were to do that
service for their Masters. Mr. Thorndikes discourse of the right of the Church
in a Christian State. chapter 2.

Matthew. 4.3. Since thou see thy self to be forsaken of God, etc. Perkins
there in the Margent should be set higher to the former note, and Calvin to
that, though those words are no good sense, for how should he that is forsaken
of God, be able to do such a Miracle. Rather thus, if thou have such near
relation to God, now that thou standst in need of bread and have none at hand,
command, etc.

Matthew. 5.18. Iota] The Syriack has Iod, and so it is likely (says In loc. p.
12. in the margent of my Annotations, there is Ioth pro Iod.
Menochius) Christ said, as speaking to the Hebrews, amongst which Iod is the
least of the letters: but the Greek interpreter put for it some thing like that
it might be understood of the Graecians

Matthew. 6.2. Do not sound a trumpet before thee] Because those fasts were
solemnized in the street with sound of trumpet. Quod in hypocritas dictum, qui
plus spectatoris gloriola, quam ipsius benefacti conscientia, delectabantur.
Elegantissime vero Salvator respexit ad morem triumphatorum, Tragaedorum ac
Comaedorum. In triumphatorum enim and histrionum ingressu, tubis canebatur ut
omnes oculis and auribus attenderent. Nam and hoc loco, quasi Tragaediam aut
Comaediam aliquam Pharisaeorum, Christus inducit: and, observante Schotto,
fabularum actores seu histriones qui personati, and cum larva prodibant, a
Graecis dicti sunt (...). Dilh. elect. l. 1. c. 2.
Thorndikes discourse of the right of the Church in a christian State. chapter 4.

Matthew. 8.12. Gnashing] In Greek it is (...) a shaking or chattering of the
teeth, such as is in those which are taken with the fit of an ague. Menoch. in
loc.


Matthew. 9.15. Can the children of the Bride-chamber mourne] By which he
understands the Apostles, and alludes to the custom of their weddings; Filij
Sponsi] Grace est (...) non autem (...) Est autem Grace (...) Conclave, seu
thalamus nuptialis. Itaque significatur hac phrasi amici ac socij qui
familiarius adhibentur, and qui ad ipsum thalamum sponsos deducunt. Hi autem
socij nominatim eligebantur and vocabantur fere ab ipsis sponsis ut sibi
adessent, and Conviviis etiam alijsque hilaritatis significationibus quae
exhibebantur, interessent. Vide Iudic. 14.11. Matthew. 22.14. Apoc. 19.19.
Menochius de Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 21.
many were wont on the wedding day to attend on the bridegroom, and bring him
home, that the frequency of friends and companions might add to the dignity
and cherefullnesse of the Marriage.

Matthew. 10.2. Instead of the Etymologies of some of the Names of the twelve
Apostles there, take these as more genuine and proper from Caninius his loci
Novi Testamenti. Philip Warlike who is delighted with horses. Bartholomew the
son of Thalmai. Thomas a twinne (...) in Greek, as the Evangelist interpets it:
James a supplanter, Matthew the gift of God, in Greek Theodorus, that of
Bartholomew there being a Greek name, Mark 3.16. (though some hold so) is not
proper.

Cunaeus de Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 7.
Matthew. 11.14. This is Elias which was for to come] Christ the best interpreter
of Scripture, expounds here what is meant by Eliah, Mal. 4.5. viz. John
Baptist, who is called there Eliah, for the great similitude that was between
them. They had the same girdle and raiment. Eliah offended Iesabel with his
liberty of reproving; and John Baptist Herodias, both dwelt in the desert, both
were inspired by God.

Respondens Jesus, id est, subiungens, vel fari or sus. Verbum enim Hebraicum
hanah, non solum significat respondere interroganti, sed etiam usurpatur cum
quis nulla praemissa interrogatione sermonem Exorditur. Menochius in loc.
Verse. 25. At that time Jesus answered and said] Here and in other places of the
Gospel it is said, that Jesus answered, where notwithstanding it appears not
by any circumstance of Scripture, that any had spoke unto him: I take this
term not for a bare Hebraisme, but indeed for a proposal relative to another.
Now many which opened not their mouth in the presence of Jesus Christ; ceased
not to speak in the presence of their heart, but their thoughts being known
to him, he answered the subject of their thoughts, D' Espaigne of Popular
errors,. 4. c. 3.

Verse. 28. Those words in my Annotations, p. 31. therefore not said take away
but rest from the four first should be left out.

Chap. 12. v. 43, 44. The Holy Ghost would teach these particulars. 1. Where
ever Christ comes by the Gospel to a people, he finds the Devil dwelling in
them. 2. His intention is to cast him out. 3. He is cast out in many. 4. He
being thus cast out, the house is swept from many common corruptions, and
adorned with many common graces. 5. The Devil will after try, whether they
have indeed received Christ by faith. 6. Else the common gifts will rather
encourage him. 7. When he returns again, he returns with seven worse Spirits,
there will be more hope of a profane person, then one which has such common
works.

Chap. 14. v. 6. But when Herod's birthday was kept] The ancients were wont
with feasting to celebrate their birthday, which custom the Hebrews
followed. Jerome on this place inveighes sharply against it: Genesis 40.20.
Nullum alium invenimus observasse diem natalis sui, nisi Herodem and
Pharaonem: ut quorum erat par impietas, esset and una solennitas.

There is a key of royalty or Supreme authority committed to Christ only. 2. A
key of subordinate power, or charity, given to men.
Chap. 16. v. 19. Those words upon that place in the book, this is not Peter's
key, but the Popes pick lock, should be out.

An expression manifestly borrowed from Esaias 22.23. Whence our Lord, Apoc. 3.7.
is said to have the key of David, that is, of the house of David, whereby the
Apostles under our Lord are made Stewards of the Church, as Eliakim of the
Court, to admit and exclude whom he pleased. Mr Thorndike.

Chap. 18.7. Let him be unto thee as a heathen and a Publicane] Not as if the
Heathens could be excommunicate the Synagogue, Eum vitabis ut vitantur ethnici
and publicani. Alludit enim ad morem Judaeorum, qui a Consuetudine ethnicorum.
and publicanorum, quos pro publicis peccatoribus habebant, abstinebant.
Menochius in loc.
who never were of it, or as if the Jews then durst excommunicate Publicans
and Gentiles, it was proper for our Lord to signify, how he would have
Christians to use the excommunicate, there being no reason why he can be
thought by these words to regulate the conversation of the Jews, in that
estate, so long as the Law stood, but to give his Church rules to last till the
worlds end. Thorndikes discourse of the right of a Church in a Christian State.
Chap. 1.

Ve. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them By the rules of the Synagogue, under ten that are of years there
is no congregation. Before that number of such as are come to years be
present, they go not to prayers. But our Lord intending to free his Church of
all rules that might abridge the privileges of it, Thornedikes Service of God
at Religious assemblies. c 6.
knowing that occasions might fall out to diminish the number of his people
that desired to assemble, assures them of his presence in the midst of them,
where the least number agree in the things which they desire at his hands.

Chap. 21.19. Let no fruit grow on thee hence forward for ever] Let that which
is thy fault be thy punishment, thou bear no fruit at all; whereas the
nature of thy kind is ever to have one fruit, one under another, always some
though not in a full maturity, since therefore thou bear no fruit at all,
never may thou more bear any fruit. Dr Hals Paraphrase.

The reason (say some) why Christ cursed the figtree though the time of bearing
fruit was not come, seems this, that it made a glorious show with leaves, and
promised much, yet performed nothing; and so it seems well to set forth the
cursed condition of an hypocrite. I rather approve of this Interpretation then
that first given in my Annotations, there being some just exceptions against it.

Chap. 23. v. 4. That Exposition in my Annotations, Not Ceremonies, etc. may
not seem so proper perhaps, because the Pharisees also thought to be justified
by their works, and looked for Christ a temporal King. Beza says, it is not to
be understood of the corruptions of the word which men altogether ought to
avoid, Vide Calvinum
but of that external exaction of the Law in which they are for the most part
rigorous who are most indulgent to themselves.

Matthew. 25.1. Then shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten Virgins,
etc.] Ten Virgins, that is, many; See Genesis 31.41. Videntur hae virgins quae
faces praeferebant sponsae sociae fuisse, quemadmodum etiam viris socii quidam
nuptiarum eo tempore dari consueverant. Lampadum vero ac facularum nocturnarum
opportuna in nuptiis mentio, non solum quia ad dispellendas tenebras noctemque
vincendam erant necessariae, sed etiam quia boni ominis fuisse videntur ac
foecunditatem novae nuptae portendisse. Nemo enim nescit satis frequenti
Scripturarum phrasi lucernae nomine filios significari, Psalm. 131.17. 3 Reg.
11.30. 4 Reg. 18.19. Porro quod attinet ad vespertinum aut nocturnum tempus,
video etiam apud Romanos eundem morem viguisse, ut sole deficiente, atque
stellis jam micantibus sponsae deducerentur.

Menoch. de Repub. Heb. l. 3. c. 21. Nuptiale convivium and sponsorum deductio
intendentibus se tenebris fieri solita, que scilicet tempore illo aevo passim
caenabant Id. ibid.


Virgins] Having respect to the custom of that time, Virgins carrying Torches
brought home the Bridegroom.

Verse. 4. The foolish Virgins had only oil in their Lamps, an outward
profession, but not in their Vessels, grace in their hearts.

Verse. 9. Go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves] This is not
a direction, but an exprobration.

Verse. 34. Then shall the King say unto them on the right hand, Come ye blessed
of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world] Christ perhaps will not use that form of words, but his Sentence will
be according to the tenor of them.

1. We have a loving invitation, or calling of them to himself. Come] They were
now at Christ's right hand, come nearer to me; they loved his appearing, and
longd for it; Come Lord Jesus, thy Kingdom come; he calls them as a Husband his
wife, come into my Chamber, my bosom.

2. The title he gives them, ye blessed of my Father, That is, In relation to
what they were in the world, this was their condition then, though themselves
sometimes, and others perceived it not; blessed of my Father, not of the world;
they began not to be blessed now, but appeared to be so.

3. The assignation of the reward, receive the Kingdom prepared for you,
Kingdom is the height of all worldly felicity, therefore glory is so called.

Verse. 37. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee
an hungered and fed thee? or thirsty and gave thee drink, etc.] They shall not
then make any such question; it is a Parable, and 1. God would have us know
that what ever good or bad is done to the Saints, Christ counts as done to him.
2. The Saints at the last day will not look on any thing that they have done as
worthy of Christ's taking notice of it.

Mat. 27.46. Those words in my Annotations Christ spoke partly in the Syrian
Language should be left out.

MARK Chap. 1. Verse. 2.
THose words in my Annotations, because the Testimonies of two Prophets follow,
Malachy and Esaias, should be left out.

Mar. 3.6. And straightway took counsel with the Herodians against him] The
Herodians were Sectaries or Heretics of the Jews which believed Herod the
(...) to be the Messiah, I^ should be in very Annotati^^^ also (...) Menochius
de Republica Hebrae^rum l. 3. ^. 6. vide illium in Mat. 22.16.
or the Christ promised by the Prophets, because they saw the Scepter in him to
have departed from Judah, according to the Oracle, Genesis 49.10. Herod greedily
^^ard these flatterers, and favored them, therefore he killed the Infants in
(...), that he might kill Christ, that none might be taken for the Messiah to
himself.

Mark. 5.5. And always night and day he was in the memories, and in the
Torches] The Jews had their Sepulchers not in their Cities, but in the fields
out of their Cities, like to Chambers which might receive many men. Menoc. in
Mat. 9.28.
See Esaias 65.4.

Both their public and private Sepulchers were ordinarily out of the City,
Josh. 24.30. we read that it was granted to their Kings, or some of their
chief men, and such as had deserved well of the Commonwealth to have their
Sepulchers within their Cities, 1 Kings 2.10. and 11.43. This custom they had
to bury the dead out of their Cities, Menoch. de Repub. Heb. l. 8. c. 4.
left the air corrupted with the stench of their Carcasses should hurt the
living, and that their ghastly looks might be removed far from them. By the
touching also of the Tombs and Carcasses legal uncleanness was contracted, and
therefore the Jews thought fit to remove the occasion of this by having their
Sepulchers out of the City.

Mark. 5.11. A great heard of Swine feeding] It is enquired whose Swine these
were; Menochius says it is most probable they were the Gentiles, for Jos^p^us
l. 7. (...) says Gadara, De Repub. Heb. l. 7. c. 7. Greae multorum porcorum,
quos vel Judaei contra praescriptum legis, vel incolae regionis illius Graecae
religionis, alebant. Menoch. in Mar. 8.30.
is an Ethnicke City in Religion. It is not likely (says he) that the
Magistrates of the Jews would suffer those of their own Nation to nourish
herds of Swine, since these Creatures were condemned by their Law, and held to
be unclean, Levit. 11.7. and it was not lawful to eat them. Neither does
that favor the contrary opinion (says he) which is spoken of the prodigal
Son, Luke 15.15. that he fed swine, for that is a parabolicall, not historical
Narration, and if it were historical it would not make for it, for the
Prodigal went into a far Country, that is, out of the limits of Judaea, where
no law forbad them to have Swine, and there kept Swine.

Chap. 9.49. For every one shall be salted with salt] viz. With the salt of
tribulation, Menoch de Repub. Heb. l. 2. c. 9. The vindication of the
Presbyteriall Government and Ministry. Estote acres in agendo, ita tamen ut pax
non violetur. Menochius.
by which the Elect are proved, and with the salt of wisdom, with which they
direct their actions and affections according to the rule of Gods Law.

Verse. 50. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another] By salt
is meant (as Chemnitius, and others observe) sincere doctrine and Discipline,
whereby the people of God are seasoned, and kept from the putrefaction of sin
and error; this salt is so to be sprinkled, as that if it be possible, it may
have peace joined with it.

LUKE Chap. 1. ver. 1.
Fully persuaded of, so it should be in my Annotations; so Esrey has it. But
though we say in Latin hoc mihi persuasum est, yet in English, not the thing,
but the person is said to be persuaded. See Romans 14.14.

Chap. 2.4. Whence should be left out in my Annotations, and the words
following run thus, Christ was called by the Jews a Galilean and Nazarite
because he lived there. Mat. 2. ult.

Chap. 2.8. Shepherds abiding in the field, watching over their flock by
night] That which Soldiers were wont to do in War by reason of Enemies, that
Shepherds were wont to do by reason of wild beasts or thieves, Menechius de
Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 13. and in loc. See my Annotations on Mat. 14.25.
watch in their turns. The night was divided according to their military
Discipline into four watches, that the Soldiers which could not watch all the
night, might watch the fourth part of it, that is three hours, and that some
still might be ready to relieve those who were oppressed with labor or sleep.
This space of three hours is called a watch, hence the Scripture often speaks
of the first, second, third, or fourth watch.

Chapter 3. v. 1. Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee] The word Tetrarch is a Greek
Word (...) He is properly so called who possesses the fourth part of a Kingdom
or other dominion, Menoch. de repub. Hebr. l. 1. c. 1. and in Matthew. 14.1. Vide
Plinium, l. 5. c. 18.
as Herod possessed the fourth part of the jewish kingdom, although it is
sometimes simply taken, and Tetrarcha is the same with Toparcha, He that is
Lord of some place or part of a Country; whether it be the fourth part, or a
greater or lesser.

Chap. 7. v. 22. To the poor the Gospel is preached] Some think that version
is proper (though I have something the other way in my Annotations) because
here is showed Gods goodness in sending his Gospel the glad-tydings of
salvation even to the poor, Heb. 4.2. the words (...) are rightly rendered to
us is the Gospel preached.

Chap. 10. v. 31. And by chance there came down a certain priest that way]
Some say Si fortunam di amus providentiam Dei, quatenus ejus rationobis incerta
est; veritatem rei tenentes; nomen quoque retinere possumus Atque hanc loquendi
libertatem scriptura nobis indulger. Epis. Down. in Rami Dialect. l. 1. c. 5.
Vide plura ibid.
one may use the word fortune and chance and urge this place, and that Eccles.
9.11. for it, but Dr Tailor is against it, whom I should therefore in my book
have set at the end of my note on this place, and not in the margent Austen in
his retractations repented that he had so often used that wicked and execrable
word fortune. Cum extremis duobus significandis adhibeantur fatum and fortuna:
sicut rem detestantur toto animo Catholici; sic a vocabulis libenter abstinent.
Chamier us. I dare not say (says Mr Wheatly) it is a sin for one to say by
good chance such a thing fell out, but unless when we name Chance, our
intention be to denote Gods secret providence, and we do see and observe his
hand in that thing which we say chanced, then I doubt not but that we are
guilty of finise.

Chap. 12. v. 35. Let your loins be girded about] viz. Menoch. de ^epub. Heb.
l. 6. c. 4. and in loc.
That you may readily serve your Master, returning home, see v. 37. Christ did
so, John 13* 4 Servants waited at Tables girt; that they might be more fit for
service, left their long garments which they used should hinder their service.

Chap. 23. v. 40. In stead of those words in my Annotations, it makes not for
late penitents, read thus, this example is too much abused by those that put
off their repentance, though true repentance be never too late. There is one
example least any should despair, and but one, left any should presume.

Chap. 17. v. 10. When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded
you, say, we are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty
to doe] This does not assert a possibility of complete fulfilling the law (as
some Popish expositors abuse the text) but Christ speaks it by way of
concession Unprofitable, not in that sense that he is spoken of Matthew. 25.30.
these here do not hide their talents, but two ways, 1. Because if they had
done all this they could not have obliged God, nor merited, because they should
have done but their duty, we cannot make him a debtor by performing our duty.
2. You have not profited so much as you might have done.

JOHN Chap. 1. Verse 1.
MY Annotations on that should run thus, not only because he is the internal
word, and after those words the word was with God, there God is taken
personally.

Chap. 3. v. 29. Those words in my Annotations there, for so by an Hebrew
phrase, etc. should be left out.

Chap. 4. v. 46. A certain noble man] A certain Kingly man, Regius quidam.
Calv. Beza. Vir Regius. Arabs. either of a Kingly stock, (...) Vox Gr^ca (...)
non regem aut regulum significat, sed regium, quod scilicet, vel in Regis
Herodis aut alterius aula versaretur. Itaque Syrus habet servus regius,
Vulgatus noster in textu Geaeco videtur legisse (...), quod regulum significat,
Menochius de Repub. Heb. l. 1. c. 8. and in loc.
or one of Herod's courtiers and officers.

ACTS. Chap. 2. Verse 3.
AND there appeared, unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon
each of them] The Holy Ghost sat upon the Apostles in the form of a tongue,
because he made the Apostles here preachers of the Gospel; the tongue is the
instrument of preaching, Cornel a Lap.
by tongues therefore they received the gifts of tongues.

By fiery tongues the efficacy of the Apostles preaching is signified.

Verse. 44. And all that believed were together, and had all things common] Of
the meaning of the first words were together, see Beza, Mr Lightfoote in loc.
Calvin interprets it not of dwelling together in one place, but of being of one
heart.

See my Annotations on 4.32.
For the latter words, the Papists say this community is a kind of perfection,
and thence lay a foundation for their Monasteries and Nunneries, the Libertines
also in Germany and others abuse this place.

Nimium sunt impudentes qui Platonis delirium sequuti, Meum and Tuum tolli
evangelica doctrina ex hominum societate volunt. Beza in loc. Est hoc singular
exemplum charitatis, atque ideo refertur a Luca, ut sciamus nostra abundantia
sublevandam esse fratrum inopiam. Verum sana expositione indiget hic locus,
propter fanaticos, qui bonorum (...) fingunt, qua omnis politia evertatur:
quemadmodum hoc seculo tumultuati sunt Anabaptistae, quia nullam putabant esse
ecclesiam, nisi in communem acervum congesta essent singulorum bona, ut inde
promiscue omnes sumenent. Calvinus. Vide plura ibid.
1. The property of things was distinct, though they had all things common in
the use; they sold their lands, therefore they had a right to alienate them;
they themselves gave to the necessities of the poor.

2. There was no obligatory precept to bind professors to this. 5. Acts v. 4.

3. There was no ordinance of the Apostles whereby men were bound to this
community, many precepts rather contradict it. See 1 Cor. 16.2. 1 Timothy 5.8.

4. If men had not a propriety in their goods, then stealing would be no sin
under the Gospel. Ephesians. 7.28.

Chap. 3. v. 21. Whom the heaven must receive] It is doubtful (says Cajetane)
whether he means that Christ shall receive Heaven as a King his Kingdom, or
heaven shall receive Christ, as a place receives the thing placed, both senses
are true and agree to this place, but the latter is the more genume; the
Syriacke renders the words thus, quem oportet Caelo Capi.

Chap. 4. v. 13. Ignorant men] Idiots, so the Greek, and so Calvin. Beza, and
the Vulgar render it.

Mayor in Acta Idiota dicitur qui proprio tantum, natura lique idiomate seu
lingua, and scientia contentus nescit studia literarum, (...) en^m Grace
proprium significat. Menochius in loc.
The Apostles are so called, 1. In respect of their state and kind of life, they
were private men, not set in any public office. 2. By reason of their
doctrine, illiterate men. 3. By reason of their dignity and esteem, plebeians
and of no account. 4. By reason of their popular dialect; but that they were
not idiots in knowledge, Peter and John show v. 19. and 27.28.

Chap. 6.15. Saw his face as it had been the face of an Angell] The face of an
Angel signifies some excellent and heavenly thing in his countenance, viz. an
Angelical shape and majesty. Cornel a Lap. Facies angeli significat eximium
quid, augustum, coeleste in vultu, quali specie, and majestate Angeli apparere
solent. Menochius in loc.
God bestowed a new and wonderful splendor on Steven, and as it were the
beams of a glorious body, such as he gave to Moses Exodus 34.1.

Chap. 7.14. The wives of Jacobs Sons which came down with him into Egypt
were but nine etc. those words I have in my Annotations out of Langus, but he
had eleven brethren, and they all had wives for ought appears in Scripture.

Verse. 16. Ibid. Those words the Father of Sichem, etc. to James are misplaced,
they should follow the last words of that 16. v. Emor the father of Sichem, and
therefore be set in the margent against the question and answer.

Chap. 9. v. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee
and Samaria] Rest in the exercises of the worship of God, had none to vex
oppose, or hinder them therein; a double effect follows this, and were
edified. Every particular Church and member of the Church did grow and brought
forth more fruit. The metaphor of a building agrees well, because the Church is
the Temple and house of God. 1 Timothy 3. 15. And all the faithful also are
Temples, 1 Cor. 3.16.2. Were multiplied, in number many came into the Church.

Chap. 20. v. 10. And embracing him] Embrace him on every side. Complexus] Vox
Graeca (...) id est, circumplexus notat arctissimum circumquaque Pauli
complexum, ut viscera sua compassionis, charitatis, and misericordiae in eum
effundere velle videtetur. Cornel. a Lap.


Chap. 23. v. 26. Unto the most excellent] Or most mighty, it was the title by
which the President was usually called. Menochius in loc.

Chap. 24. v. 16. I exercise my selfe] (...) id est, me exerceo, laboro,
fatigo, q. d. totus sum in hac re.

Chap. 27. v. 34. For there shall not a hair fall from the head of any of you]
This is a proverbiall form of speaking, noting by an hyperbole, Walth. Cent.
Miscell. Theol. 57.
that they should not be hurt in the least thing, nor lose the basest things,
such as are hairs of the head; so far should they be from losing their
lives. The proverb is taken not only from the first of Sam. 14.45. 2 Samuel
14.3.11. 1 Kings 1.52. but also from the 21. Chapter of Luke. v. 18.

ROMANS. Chap. 2. Verse. 15.
THeir thoughts the mean while accusing or excusing one another] He means by
turns, Cogitationibus sese mutuo accusantibus, aut etiam excusantibus. Beza
inter se invicem cogitationum accusantium aut etiam defendentium. Vulg. In
Graeco est (...), quae vox significat non qualescunque cogitationes, sed quae
fiunt ratiocinando and disceptando, dum adhibito judicio rationis animus
examinat aliquid, and de eo pronunciat sive verum sive falsum; bonum an malum.
Menochius in loc.
conscience excuses them, when their actions are conformable to the Law, and
accuses them, when not.

Chap. 3.30. It is one God which shall justify the circumcision by faith] That
is, the circumcised Jew, the abstract put for the concrete, so chapter 11. v. 3.
the election, that is, the elect. The Hebrews See Ps. 12.12. Cant. 1.4. Esaias
3.4. Ier. 5.21.
when they would express a thing to the height, put the abstract for the
concrete, the quality it self for the person.

Chap. 8. v. 13. Do mortify the deeds of the body] That is sins, because,
the body is the instrument of them for the most part.

Ye shall live] He speaks to believers, it is meant of a life of comfort and
abundant fruitfulness, live to purpose and do much service to God.

Verse. 15. The Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father] Abba Hebraice
Ab, Chald. vero and Syriace Abba, and terminatione Latina and Graeca, Abbas,
idem est quod Pater. Menochius in Gal. 4.6.
is a Syriacke word, and Father Greek, to show, that Jews and Gentiles agree
in calling God Father. Abba was then used by Children, and Father is added, as
if he had said, Father, Father, both words are used, because when we would
please, we repeat the same words, as Matthew. 7.22. or words of the same
signification, as Jehovah Adonai in the beginning of one of the Psalms.

1 CORINTHIANS. Chap. 4. Verse. 3.
But with me it is a very small thing] The smallest (...) pro minimo est. Beza.
Vulg.

Chap. 6. v. 9. Nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind] The
first are properly those, which are called Catamites, qui turpia patiuntur,
Scorta scilicet mascula. Menochius in loc. Vide Grotium.
those men which suffer filthiness to be acted upon them. The latter are
those, qui eadem turpia peragunt, which act that filthiness on others.

Chap. 11. v. 4. Every man praying or prophesying having his head covered,
dishonors his head] The Apostle would have Christians to be far from the
rites of Gentiles, their custom was to pray with their heads covered. Menoch.
de Repub. Heb. l. 6. c. 7.


2 CORINTHIANS. Chap. 4. Verse. 4.
THe God of this world] That, is the Devil, he is not the Creator, upholder or
possessor of the world, but the God thereof. 1. By unjust usurpation. 2. By
busy operation, acting in every man of the world. 3. By a voluntary
subjection, men yield themselves to him to be his slaves. 4. Because of that
great universal dominion he has over the world. He no sooner tempts, but we
are ready to close with him.

Chap. 5. v. 5. Who also has given us the earnest of his spirit] Also this is
cumulative and additionall to what went before, given, that notes the freeness
of the gift, he speaks of it as already given. The earnest of the spirit, that
is (says Menochius) the Spirit which is a pledge and earnest of future glory,
not only so, but because it is the spirits office to give assurance to the
soul.

This gift of God, or work of the spirit is called an earnest in three
respects. 1. An earnest is for confirmation of a promise or agreement, so here
of Gods faithfulness. 2. An earnest is somewhat of the same kind of that which
is to be paid afterward, and therein differs from a paune or pledge, which may
be of another kind, so this gift is somewhat of that which we shall receive
fully in heaven. 3. An earnest is but little of that which is to be paid.

Deuteronomy. 25.5. Menochius de Republica Hebraeorum. l. 8. c. 2.
Chap. 11. v. 24. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one] The
Jews gave 39. stripes only either to signify their clemency in punishing
less then the Law permitted, or to show themselves religious and studious of
observing the Law, warily taking heed that they exposed not themselves to
danger, by violating it, if they fulfilled the number of forty.

EPHESIANS. Chap. 6. Verse. 17.
Galeam salutaris, vel ut alij vertunt. Salvatoris, id est Salvatorem ipsum
assumite progalea. Menochius in loc. and de Repub. Heb. l. 2. c. 5. Vide Bezam.
THe helmet of salvation] In Greek it is (...) the helmet of a Savior, that
is, take our Savior for a helmet, viz. that being armed with his faith,
doctrine, and instructions of life, you may not fear the fiery darts of the
most wicked one.

PHILIPPIANS. Chap. 2. Verse. 17.
Menochius in loc. 2 Timothy 4.6. Ego enim jom delibor (...), id est, pro
libamento offeror, and immolor, sanguinem meum quasi libamem Deo profundo,
consecro, and sacrifico per martyrium. Menochius in loc.
AND if I be offered up] The Greek is (...), which signifies to be poured out
as a drinke-offering, viz. his blood, for there were two parts of the
sacrifices, viz. the sacrifice which was slain, and the drinke-offering as
wine or oil, which was poured upon it. The Apostle alludes to this rite of the
sacrifices.

2 THESSALONIANS. Chap. 2. Verse. 8.
WHom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of his coming] There is a difference between those two
words, consume, and destroy, (...) and (...) and they are here in a special
manner, distinguished. Illud est tractim imminuere, hoc funditus tollere. Fire
consumes Wood, and the candle by feeding on it by little and little, water
being powered on fire destroys it. Cocceus de Antichristo.

1 TIMOTHY. Chap. 3. Verse. 6.
HE fall into the condemnation of the Devill] Not that whereby the Devil
condemns, but whereby he is condemned, as the destruction of the ungodly.

2 TIMOTHY. Chap. 1. Verse. 7.
THe Spirit of love and of a sound mind] Because it fills the soul with a sense
of Gods love, and so heales the conscience.

TITUS. Chap. 1. Verse. 6.
THe husband of one wife] The Apostle does not command that a Bishop should
necessarily have a wife, but that he have not two wives. Neither is here
forbidden (as Justellus Ad Codicem Canonum ecclesiae Vniversae p. 193.
has rightly observed) Digamia aut polygamia successiva, as the popish Estius,
Cornel a Lap. Menochius.
Interpreters say, sed simultanea.

HEBREWS. Chap. 2. Verse. 7.
THou made him a little lower then the Angels] In Greek it is (...) which
may be referred to the thing, as if he should say, paululum quid, a little
deal, and to the time, so it shall be the same with paulisper, a little while.
If it be referred to the time, Menochius in loc. Vide Estium. Sanctus Thomas
utramque expositionem admittit; ita quod paulominus referatur, and ad
brevitatem durationis cum Chrysostomo, and ad quantitatem ret cum reliquis; and
haec expositio Communior est. Ludovicus Tena.
he says, that Christ for a short space of time was less then the Angels,
viz. so long as he had his mortal body. But if it be referred to the thing,
that is the dignity, the meaning is, in this thing only he was less then the
Angels, that he could suffer and dye.

Chap. 3.11. So I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my rest. Quasi
dicat, si ingredientur in terram promissam, in qua seeds quietas illis
pollicitus sum, non Existimer verax. Menochius in loc.
] The decrees of God respect men's everlasting estate, his oath, his dealing and
treating with men, that is, his Spirit shall no more strive with men.

Chap. 7. v. 26. Holy, harmless, undefiled; Haec tria ita videntur distingui,
ut sanctus respiciat Deum, Innocens proximum, impollutus seipsum. Menochius in
loc.
separate from sinners] Here are four emphaticall words. 1. Holy, either
generally comprizeth all goodness, or set apart of God. 2. Harmless, This
has relation to his outward carriage, Christ never did wrong to God or man,
was free from actual sin. 3. Undefiled, this goes to the inward parts, he
was free from corruption of nature, holy in his conception. 4. Separate from
sinners. Id est ab eorum vita and moribus longissime distants, and nihil cum
illis habens commune. Menochius.
All sorts of men are guilty of Adams sin, but Christ was not, though he came
from Adam, yet he came not by Adam.

Chap. 9. v. 14. Purge your Conscience from dead works to serve the living
God] Sinful works are called dead works, not only because they merit death,
Dixit viventi, quoniam dixerat, ab operibus mortuis, quasi docens Deo vivo non
placere opera mortua. Menochius in loc.
but because they come from a dead nature, to serve the living God, that is, we
must serve God with liveliness, the Attributes of God are suited to the
matters in hand.

Chap. 11 v. 6. For he that comes to God] Greek (...). Accedens ad Deum.
Vulg. Heb. 10.37. (...), id est, veniens, est Christi periphrasis, sic
appellatur. Matthew. 11.3. and Apocal. 1.4. Menochius in loc.
He that is coming, that has put himself on the way. See John 6.37.

JAMES Chap. 2. Verse. 3.
Sic fere accidit, ut homo Cultu elegantiore nitidus, and auro gemmisque
Collucens ad se rapiat oculos Circumstantium, and defixos teneat. Menochius.
Iudicatur affectus hominum admirantium and aestimantium splendorem externum.
Quod enim admiramur and magnifacimus, id intent adspicimus, and cum reverentia
atque veneratione respicimu^ Brochmand in loc.
AAnd if ye have respect to him] The Greek word (...) properly signifies
(says Menochius) Cum affectu quodam benign aspicere. To behold favorably with
affection.

1 PET. Chap. 5. verse 8.
BEcause your adversary the Devill] (...) is he, qui in causa and lite nobis
adversatur, so Menochius, and others. He that opposes us in a suit, such a one
is Satan, who strives with us about the salvation of our souls.

Walks about] (...) circumambulat, scilicet assidue, and continuo. The Devil
is that great Peripateticke. Job 1.7.

Chap. 5. v. 10. The God of all grace make you perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle you.] The Apostle heaps up many words to show, that God preserves all
graces, if it be weak, he protects it, he stablisheth it against opposition,
gives new supplies of the spirit, and so excites and strengthens it, and keeps
from wavering, settles us.

2 PET. Chap. 1. verse 21.
AS they were moved by the Holy Ghost] (...), carried in the arms of the Holy
Ghost.

Chap. 2. v. 7. Vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked] The Greek
runs thus, oppressed under the conversation of the ungodly in wantonness.
(...).

Verse 14. An heart exercised with covetous practises] Greek, exercised in
covetousness, (...).
not only with the practices, but principles.

Chap. 3. v. 12. The Elements shall melt] Like metal in a furnace, so the
Greek word signifies.

1 JOHN. Chap. 2. verse 20.
But ye have a unction from the holy one, and ye know all things] By this
unction He means the gifts and graces of the Spirit, the holy one, that is
Christ. It is an allusion to the precious ointment in the Old Law, that was
powered first on the head of the High Priest and so ran down.

Chap. 3. v. 20. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart,
and knows all things.] That is our conscience, David's heart smote him,
condemn notes a decisive and final judgment concerning our State. God is
greater two ways. 1 in point of judgeing, God is the Supreme, the heart the
Deputy-Judge. 2 In witnessing, he knows all things, therefore our own hearts,
Heb. 3.8. We are blind, Gods witness is more impartial and severe.

Accedendi, and ab ^llo postulata impetrandi. Menochius. Omnes tres personae
SS. Trinitatis in Caelo, and de Caelo, tum Angelis, tum maxim hominibus
testimonum perhibent Christo, quod solus ipse sit verus Messiae Deique filius.
Menochius.
Verse 21. Beloved, if our hearts condemn us not] That is, reproach us not for
the evil of our States, then have we confidence toward God] That is, we may
have a holy liberty and confidence to approach into Gods presence.

Chap. 5. verse. 7. For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one] Three witnesses to the
Godhead of Christ, the Father by audible voice in Christ's Baptism and
transfiguration. Mat. 3.17. and 17.5. Christ bears witness of himself by his
Doctrine and Miracles, Romans 1.3. The Spirit by descending on Christ Mat. 3.11.
and on the Apostles, Act. 2.3. So Menochius. In heaven, that is, they gave
witness in a glorious manner, John 5.31. and these three are one, in essence,
as the other three in testimony.

Verse 8. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and the
water, and the blood, and these three agree in one] Water and blood, holiness
and satisfaction. He alludes to the ablution and oblation of the Old Law, and
to the water and blood that came out of Christ's side, John 19.34.35. And these
three agree in one; that is, to prove that we believe in Christ, and that he in
whom we believe is the son of God.

REVELATION. Chap. 1. verse. 1.
THe Revelation of Jesus Christ] That is, received Menochius. Joannes de Vado.
by Jesus Christ. When God in old time revealed his will to his Church two
ways, viz. by vision or Dreams, Numb. 12.6. Job 7.14. the former manner, viz.
vision is noted by the common name of Revelation. For all the things that
follow in this book were revealed to John waking by visions, but not sleeping
by dreams.

There are two parts of this book of the Revelation; first, Jd. ibid.
a description of the present state of the Church, as it was then in the three
first chapters. 2. a prophecy of the future State of the Church even to the
end of the world, from the fourth chapter to the end of that book.

Which must shortly come to passe] That is, which shall soon begin to be
done, Menochius.
although they shall not soon end.

By his Angel unto his servant John] Therefore the whole Trinity revealed this
revelation to Christ according to his manhood, Christ to the Angel, the Angel
to John, Menochius. Est haec prophetia a Deo data, a Christo Mediatore accepta,
Angeli ministerio Joanni delata, a Joanne nobis annuntiata. Jonnes de Vado.
John to the Church.

Verse 13. And in the midst of the seven Candlesticks] That is, of the Church,
See v. 20.
it signifies that Christ is always present in the midst of the whole
Catholic and every particular Church as he promised, Mat. 18.20. and 28.20.
Joannes de Vado.


Clothed with a garment down to the foote] As were the Priests under the Law,
Exodus 28.4. therefore he signifies, that Christ is our Priest.

And girt about the paps with a golden girdle] As the Priests were girt. Exodus
28.4. The meaning is, that Christ our High Priest stands ready, Id ib.
and is prepared to undergo what remains of the Priestly Office for us, that
is to intercede with God for us, and to offer the incense of our prayers
continually to the Father. See Revel. 15.6. and Dan. 10.5.

Verse 20. The seven stars are the Angels of the seven Churches] That is, the
Pastors or Bishops of the Churches, for Prophets in the Old Testament were
called Angels, Esaias 44.21. Hag. 1.13. and Priests also, Mal. 2.7. Esaias 42.19.
and in the New Testament, John is called an Angel, Mat. 11.10. and the Apostles
of Christ, Luke 9.52.

Chap. 2. v. 9. I know thy poverty] That is, in the world, outward poverty,
because tribulation is joined with it, or if we interpret it of spiritual
poverty, that is, Ad quam redactus es exspoliatione bonorum tuorum propter
Christum. Heb. 11.34. Menochius.
thou have not high thoughts of thy self in spiritual things.

But thou art rich] in grace and holiness.

Chap. 4. v. 7. And the first beast was like a Lion, etc.] These are the
qualities of the Angels. The first is likened to a Lion, for his courage and
power; the second to a Calfe, for his servile ministry and unwearied labor;
the third to a man, for his prudence; the fourth to an Eagle, for his
swiftness in executing his Office. One of these living creatures was not like
to a Lion, another to a man, the third to a Calfe, the last to an Eagle;
Joannes de Vado.
but every one of these four living creatures was endued with those four
qualities, and that must be understood of each which is spoken of them all,
viz. each of them had great power, diligence, wisdom and speed in executing
the commandments of God Almighty.

Chap. 5. v. 6. A Lambe] Christ John 1.29. who for his courage a little before
was called a Lion; here for his sacrificing, meekness and innocence, is
called a lamb.

And seven eyes] These words may be expounded three ways; first, of the Holy
Ghost, as the words following seem to intimate: secondly, of the infinite
providence of God, as Zach. 3.9. and 4.10. Lastly, of the Angels ministering to
Christ, as Zach. 1.10, 11. Psalm. 77.7. Heb. 1.6. This last interpretation Mr.
Foord likes best.

Chap. 9. v. 11. The Angel of the bottomless pit] The Devil, because he is
condemned thither, reserved there, and seeks to draw men thither.

Verse 14. Loose the four Angels] That is, the Saracens, Turks, and Tartars,
for although these be three, yet they make four Kingdoms. Joannes de Vado.

Chap. 10. v. 2. A little Book] A little little book (...) libellulum, it is a
diminutive of a diminutive. Intelligit quatuor precipuos angelos malos, qui
quasi praesunt quatuor orbis partibus, ligati autem sunt, and divina potentia
Coerciti, ne tantum noceant quantum vellent, and possent. Menochius.


Chap. 11. v. 1. Measure the Temple of God and the Altar] The Temple signifies
the Holy Catholic Church, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21.22. 1 Timothy 3.5.
Heb. 3.6. The Altar signifies the pure worship of God. 1 Cor. 9.13. and 10, 11.
Heb. 7.13.

Atrij nomine intelliguntur hypocritae, qui sanctitatem simulant quum sint
impurissimi can^s. Joannes de Vado.
Verse 2. But the court which is without the Temple, etc.] It is an allusion
(say some) to the manner of the worship of God among the Jews, an atrium
Iudaeorum, and Gentium, where the Church of God promiscuously received all,
then trodden down.

Alludit hic Scriptura ad id, quod in Vet. Testamento scriptum est. Deuteronomy.
6.6.8. in manu, ut inter agendum respicias, in front, ut profitearis. Cocceus
de Antichristo.
Chap. 13. v. 16. To receive a mark in their right hand or in their foreheads]
Those that profess, approve and defend the Popish Religion, and the decrees of
the Pope, they have received the mark of the Beast in their forehead, those
which live according to the Antichristian decrees, and do what the Pope of
Rome shall command; have received the mark of the Beast in their hand.

To receive the mark of the Beast, is Legem vel mente sequi, vel lingua
profiteri. Cocceus.

Alludit tantum ad prophetiam Ezechielis cap. 38. and 39. Quemadmodum enim
ecclesia gravissime affligebatur per Gogum and Magogum post reditum e Babylone,
and ante primum Christi adventum: ita diabolus Pontificios omnes in Europa and
Turcas in Asia, quasi alteros Gogos and Magogos excitavit ab anno 1300. vel.
1320. contra ecclesiam, ut eam funditus perderet, si fieri posset, antequam
Christus secundo veniat ad judicium Judaeorum. Joannes de Vado.
Chap. 20. v. 8. Gog and Magog] Jerome interprets Gog tectum and Magog de tecto,
some Expositors therefore mistaking his meaning, interpret this place of the
Pope and Turk, because the one is an open enemy, the other a secret one to
Christ.

September 14th 1649. Imprimatur, JOSEPH CARYL.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE Of the chief Heads contained in these ANNOTATIONS.
A
ABba Father 92, 217, 271 In the days of Abiathar the high Priest cleared 79,
80 Abraham's bosom, why the glory of Heaven so called 127 Acts an History of 28
years 185 what therein set forth ib. Doubts solved Acts 7. viz. Entreat them
ill 400 years 190 Threescore and fifteen souls 190 Carried over into Sichem
190
Acts 19.2, 3, 4, 5. cleared against the Anabaptists 199 Accuser, why the
Devil so called 598 Outward Adorning, how condemned 558 Satan an Adversary to
whom 598 Affliction cleanses from corruption 554 The Churches Affliction called
Christ's affliction 303 And after three days rise again, cleared 86 Agree with
thine Adversary etc. expounded 13 Amen 17 Anathema Maranatha 255 Angariation 14
Angels how they ministered to Christ 9 Matthew, Mark, and Luke, reconciled
concerning the appearing to the women at the Sepulcher 138 Because of the
Angels 1 Cor. 11.10. explained 243 Angels not to be worshipped, and why 612
Angels need a mediator 303 Annas and Caiphas being high Priests 102 Why Christ
Answered not 74 Jesus Answered and said 618 Antichrist, who 569 Apostles
Signification of their names 26.81 Apostles Sent two and two, why 26, 83, 113
Apostles their mission twofold 27 Christians complete Armor 290 No man has
Ascended into Heaven 144 Assurance gives an entrance into the Kingdom of glory
563 Assurance of our calling and election twofold 562 Means to attain this
Assurance 562 Now is the Ax laid to the root of the Tree 7
B
BAbes in Christ, who 233 To Baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire, what 7,
8 Baptism, what it is a sign of 213 Christ's passion called Baptism, why 120
Christ why Baptized 79 Baptized for the dead what 253 Baskets, whence the Jews
had them in the Wilderness 147 The reason of their constant carrying these ib.
Beam in thy brothers eye, what 19 Fought with Beasts 254 This day I have
Begotten thee 195 Behold, ^he several exceptions thereof 33 True Believer, who
568 Bethany, what it signifies 55 Why at Bethesda Christ cured only one 146
and why he is bid to take up his bed and walk 147 Bethlehem, what it signifies
4.100 Two Bethlehems 100 And thou Bethlehem etc. art not the least, the words
plainly explained, and Micah with Matthew then reconciled 5 To Bind what 44 how
this power is exercised ib. Bound in spirit, what 200 We were never in bondage
150 Birthday, solemnization thereof lawful 39 Blessing applied to God what it
signifies 277 Blessing applied to man what it signifies 277 Blessings said to
be spiritual, why ib. Spiritual Blessings the chiefest ib. If ye were blind
you should have no sin 152 Blind men, doubts concerning them Mat. 20. resolved
54 James and John, why named Boanerges 81 This is my Body 135, 245 Book a
Catalogue or reckoning up 2 The Books were opened and the dead judged, what
books 613 Where is he that is Born King of the Jews 4, 5 The Bosom of the
Father, what 142 How Reprobates can be said to be bought by Christ 564 In the
Bowels of Jesus Christ I have you in my heart 292 Our daily Bread, what 16 why
called ours ib. Christ the Bread of life 148 Bread after consecration 246
C
CAjetans error 258 A twofold call 231 Came together Mat. 1.18. what it
signifies 3 It is easier for a Camel etc. 51, 52, 131 The Word compared to a
Candle 116 Lead Captivity captive 284 Arguments against the immoderate cares of
this world 17, 18 Everlasting Chains 576 Charity believes all things 249 The
greatest of these is Charity ib. Children, who 568 Children of wrath what it
signifies 281 Children must obey their parents, how, why 289 Christ anointed,
the word comprehends his Kingly, Priestly, and Prophetical Offices 2 He is the
anointed ib. The firstborn 4 And I of Christ, opened 230 To confess Christ,
what 128 We are Christ's, how 234 Three Cities of Christ 23 The Church called
the Kingdom of Heaven, why 47 Two things required of those who would enter into
this Kingdom ib. True Church compared to a woman, why 596 Tell it unto the
Church 48 Circumcision and uncircumcision, what 268, 273 Circumcised debtors to
the Law ib. Why Paul circumcised Timothy 197 Inward circumcision in what it
consists 304 To heap coals of fire on ones head, what 225 The Epistle to the
Colossians, when written 301 The occasion of the writing, with the sum and
substance thereof ib. Commandment. the sixth interpreted 12 Three degrees
(besides actual murder) of the breach thereof ib. The punishment due to each
degree ib. Commandment 7. interpreted 13 First and great Commandment, which,
why so called 60, 90 The second, thou shall love thy Neighbor, etc. how like
unto it 60 Why the fifth Commandment Romans 13.9. omitted 226 Communion, what
241 He that believes not is condemned already 145 Continence a gift of God 50
Corban, what 85 Corinth, where seated, notable for wisdom, infamous for lust
230 The Epistle to the Corinthians written before that to the Romans ib. A
covetous man termed an Idolater, why 287 Take up his Cross 44, 45 The
preaching of the Cross, why so called 230 To glory in the Cross of Christ,
what 275 A Crown of life what, why so called 581 A Cubit, what 18 Cup signifies
afflictions 53, 54. why 75 This Cup is the New testament in my blood 245
D
WHy the Tribe of Dan Rev. 7. omitted 589 Darkness over all the earth at
Christ's death 138 Not natural ib. What it denoted ib. Day divided into four
quarters 53 Daily bread, what 16 why called ours ib. Ill translated
supersubstantiall ib. The Dead shall hear his voice 147 Pains of Death Act.
2.24. signify not the torments of Hell 187 Not lawful for us to put any man
to Death 166 We cannot satisfy for our own debts 49 Who will render to every
man according to his deeds Romans 2.6. infers not merit of works 208 Deity of
Christ proved 561 Self- denial, what 44, 45 112 Depths of Satan, what 582
Destroy this Temple 144 Devil called a Dragon, why 596 The Devil bounded by
God 581 Why Christ suffered not the Devils to speak 79 Diligence implies both
speed and seriousness 562 The Disciple known to the High Priest, who 165 No
prerequisite disposition in us 68 Dogs, who 19, 296 why Seducers so called ib.
Dove, its nature 27 Saw the Spirit descending like a Dove 8 Shaking off the
dust, what meant thereby 27, 114 195 Reciprocal duties of Wives and Husbands
288, 306 of Children and Parents 289, 707 of Servants and Masters ib. The
Spirit of God to dwell in us, what 217
E
THere will the Eagles be gathered together 128 To eat Christ's flesh, and drink
his blood, what 148 The Elect may fall into fundamental errors, but not
persist in them 65 Emanuel, God with us 4 Ephesus 277 Equivocation, not
grounded on Luke 24.28. the place opened 140 (...), what it signifies 1 The
Evil one, who, and why the devil so called 14, 36 Resist not Evil, but etc.
opened 14 Excommunication termed a delivery unto Satan, why 236 To whom it
pertains 235 Eye, Matthew. 6.22. etc. taken for the understanding 17 A single
eye, what ib.
F
FAith, what it signifies 226 Faith preserves a man to salvation 554 One not
saved by another faith 197 Faith overcomes the world 572 Faith as a grain of
Mustard Seed, what 128 Faith obtaines more then it wishes 132 It works by
love 273 The Faith of the Elect but one 284 If I had all faith, expounded 248
The excellency of faith 23 Four things requisite to justifying faith 42 All
great in the woman of Canaan ib. God faithful and just in forgiving sins 567
Whose Fan is in his hand 8 Farthing how much 13.28 To pay the utmost Farthing
13 Christ fasted 40 days and 40 nights, why 8 My Father is greater then I 162
Call no man father 61 Father, mother, wife, must be hated, how 123 The Father
judges no man 147 Fellowship with God and Christ brings full joy, why 567
Filled with the Holy ghost 96 A threefold fullness of the Holy Ghost 189
Fullness in Christ 142 The fullness of him that fills all in all 280 To
finish ones course with joy, what 200 Tried with fire, what 554 Makes fire
come down from Heaven 601 First born, who 4, 100, 302 Christ the First born,
and why so called 4 Christ the First born of the dead 302 The First fruits of
those that slept 252 To be in the Flesh, what 217 Flesh and Spirit what 274 The
Spirit lusts against the Flesh ib. Flesh and blood, what 254 Pray that your
flight be not in the Winter, or on the Sabbath day, why 64 To follow Christ,
what 150 Christ compared to food, why 148 Foolishness of preaching 231 For
implies not meritoriousnesse of works 110 God only forgiveth sins 169 How
Ministers remit or retain them ib. Fornication to be eschewed for six reasons
238 Fornication forbidden amongst things indifferent Acts 15.29 why 196 How
Christ was forsaken, and what it shows 76 Who so forsakes not all cannot be my
disciple 123 Four beasts with wings full of eyes 585 Four and twenty Elders 584
Fruits of the Spirit 274 A Furlong how much 156
G
GAbriel, what it signifies 96 Why the Angel says, I am Gabriel ib Galatia,
where 267. Of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices
120 To gather together in one 278 Where two or three are gathered together
etc. 49 It makes not a general council ib. Nor that they cannot err ib.
Several doubts in Christ's Genealogy according to Matthew cleared, as 1. The
son of David, the son Abraham; the words explained; why Christ so called,
and why David promised before Abraham. 2 2. All women in Christ's Genealogy
except the blessed Virgin, have a mark of infamy upon them, and why ib. 3.
Those words Joram begat Ozias explained, and why Ahaziah, Joaz, and Amaziah are
pretermitted 2, 3 4. The 11 and 12 Verses concerning Jechonias cleared 3 5.
Why the Genealogy of Christ is drawn to Joseph, and not rather to Mary ib. 6.
From David until the carrying away into Babylon are 14 Generations ib.
According to Luke Concerning Cainan 13 Generation of vipers 102 This Generation
shall not pass 66 The Father of Glory, why 279 Gnashing of teeth 22 God only
good 88, 131 The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, why 279 Gog and Magog 613, 628
Golgotha, what it signifies 75 The word translated Gospel what it signifies 1
The Gospel of the Kingdom, why 10, 79 Grace for grace 142 Grace and truth ib.
Induing with Grace called anointing, why 105 Grecians Matthew 15.22. who 41
Grass, a threefold acception thereof 55 He shall be called Great 97 Greeks and
Barbarians 206 In whom is no guile 143
H
HAllowed what 15 Hand of the Lord, what 99 Hardness of heart threefold 220
Hates not Father, Mother, etc. cannot be my disciple 123 Father, mother, wife,
must be hated, how ib. Three things in hatred 207 Christ the head of every man
242 God the Head of Christ ib. Covering the head a sign of subjection 243 Seven
heads what 609 The eighth head, which is also one of the seven, what 609 ^ad
hearers compared to stony ground, why 35 Two things necessary in Godly hearers
115 With all the heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind 58, 114 An
Heathen, what 49 Which art in Heaven, what it signifies 15 Heavenly things 51
Heavy laden, what 30 Herelie, what. There must be Heresies 244 Herodians, who
80 Herod's 3. and their acts 4 Why Elizabeth after conception hid herself 97
Higher powers 225 I wis^ not that he was the High Priest, expounded 202 Holy
things, what 19 The God of hope, why 228 Lively hope, why so called 553 An horn
of salvation 99 Horns of the beast crowned, why 590 The white, red, black, pale
Horse, what 58 How threefold 98 The first, sixth, ninth, eleventh hours 53
Hungry, who 99 Never to hunger and thirst, what 145, 147 An hypocrite described
60 Hypocrites are as graves 117
I
IDle words what 33 An Idol is nothing 241 Then was fulfilled that which was
spoken by Jeremiah the Prophet, cleared 73 Jesus a Savior, why so called 2, 3
Jesuits compared to Frogs 606 I knew him not, John 1.31. cleared 142 In whom I
am well pleased 8 Christ would not meddle with dividing the Inheritance, why
118. marg. John, what it signifies, why called the Baptist, and when enterd on
his calling 6 John by Domitian banished to Pathmos, where he wrote the
Revelation 578 why he wrote to the Churches of Asia ib. why only to those
seven ib. why to the Angels of those Churches ib. when he wrote his Gospel, and
wherefore 141 Joseph being a just man was minded to put her away privately,
expounded 3 One jot or tittle, what 12 Joys of Heaven, great and many 68
Judging, what 19 Judging, twofold ib. Judge not that ye be not judged ib. The
Father judges no man 147 The Saints shall judge the world, how 237 Judgment
day how hastened unto 565 That day and hour not known of the Son 91 How we are
justified 210 Julians scoff 11
K
THe Kingdom of Heaven is at hand 6 The Gospel of the Kingdom 10, 79 Children
of the Kingdom 22 Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, what 44 not given to all ib.
yet to all the Apostles ib. By Kingdom of heaven, is meant the Church 12 and
why 47 Kingdom of heaven taken diversely 67 The Disciples dreamt of a temporal
Kingdom 185 No end of Christ's Kingdom, Objection, Answered 97 Seven Kings who
609 Ten Kings or Kingdoms, which 610 why compared to horns ib. Knowledge in
Angels threefold 282 Christ Knows not the Day or Hour of Judgment how 91
L
CHrist the Lamb of God 142 takes away the sins of the world ib. Christ like a
Lamb 555 Law what 20.154 Christ came not to abrogate the Law 11, 12 Christ the
end of the Law 221 We are not under the Law 213 Sin takes occasion from a
threefold power in the Law 214 Love fulfills the Law 226 Under the Law
threefold 272 Law of the Spirit, of sin, of Death, what 216 What going to Law
forbidden 237 Leaven of the Pharisees, what 86 Corrupt Doctrine, why compared to
leaven ib. Sin compared to Leaven, why 236 A Legion how many 82.111 Where the
spirit is, there is Liberty 258 The Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free
270 In him was Life 142 Life of God, what 285 Grace why so called ib. Christ to
be Lifted up what 158 A twofold Lifting up ib. The Light shined in darkness
142 God compared to Light 567 The Gospel compared to Light, why 158 Christ
compared to a Lion, why. Marg. 586 Little ones, who 48 Little flock, how 119
Locusts 6.591 Gird the Loins of your mind, what 554 A fourfold girding of the
Loins ib. The Lord's day, how 580 Love no cause, but sign of justification 571
Christ's Love great, why 282 God's Love unto the world 144 A twofold Love in
God 220 Love one another, as I have loved you 160 why styled a new Commandment
ib. Luke a companion of Paul 95 when he wrote his Gospel ib. savors of secular
eloquence ib. Lunaticks, who 10.47 Lying wonders 316
M
A Malefactor delivered at the Feast, why 137 Mammon, what 126 Man's day, what
234 Mark, Saint Peter's Disciple 78 To receive the mark of the Beast 601.628.
Marks of the Lord Jesus, what 276 Christ appeared first to Mary Magdalen, why
94 Matthew the first of the Evangelists 1 his Method ib. Matthew, and Luke
agree, and in what 1 they differ, and in what ib. Christ our Mediator, how 283
Michael a Created Angel, proved 576 contended with the Devil about the Body of
Moses ib. As new Born Babes desire the sincere Milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby 556 Ministers duty 200 Let your Moderation be known to all men 299
three degrees thereof toward our neighbor ibid. Morning Star, why Christ so
called 582 To Morrow, what 18 Mortify your earthly members, what 35 Mote, what
19 To sit in Moses chair, what 60.61 And he opened his Mouth and taught them,
explaned 10, 11 Multiplication of the Loaves and Fishes* where made 39.147 The
Mystery of Gods will, why the Gospel so called 278
N
PArtakers of the divine Nature, what 562 That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the Prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene, cleared 6 Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self 114 Nicodemus comes to Christ by night 144
Nicolaitans, their errors 581 Number of the Beasts name 602
O
ALL Oaths not forbidden 13 Old men, 1 John 2.13. who 568 The Church compared
to an Olive Tree, why 222 Humane Ordinances, why so called 556 must be
submitted unto, and why ibid. The Holy Ghost compared to Oil, his work in
teaching us; to anointing, why 569
P
GIrt about the Paps with a Golden girdle, what 627 A Parable what 32.82 Why
Christ speaks so often in Parables 82 Parable of the Sower expounded 33 of the
Marriage 57 of the Prodigal 124 of the Rich man, and his Steward 125 of Dives,
and Lazarus 127 of the Pharise, and the Publican 128 of the Virgins 67 Why
Christ offered on the Day of the Passover 69 To possess our ^ouls in
Patience, what 134 Christ's Patience 580 Unto all Patience 302 To pay the
utmost farthing, what 13 Peace of God, why so called 299 it passes all
understanding ibid. The God of Peace 313 Christ our Peace 281 Pearl, what 19
The Gospel compared to a Pearl, and why 20 Three Persons of the Trinity set
forth, Rev. 1 579 Which is, which was, which is to come, notes the Father. And
from the Spirits, The Holy Ghost. And from Jesus Christ, Who is a faithful
witness, intimates his Prophetical Office. The first begotten of the Dead,
his Priesthood; Prince of the Kings of the earth, his Kingly Office ibid.
Peter, to whom he wrote his Epistle, viz. To Strangers dispersed 553 who these
were ibid. The scope of Peter in his first Epistle 553 In his second 561 1 Pet.
3.19, 20. expounded 559 It proves not Limbus Patrum, nor Christ's Descent into
Hell ibid. Peter Mat. 10. First placed why 26 what Primacy he had ib. Peter not
the Rock 43 Tell my Disciples and Peter, etc. Why Peter specially named 94
Philippi where seated, and why so named 291 Phylacteries, what 61 Poor in
spirit, who 11 The woman ought to have Power on her head 243 Prayer taken for
the whole worship of God 221 Two things requisite in Prayer 89 Prayers called
odours, why 586 Three parts of Prayer 299 The Lords Prayer expounded 15
Concerning the conclusion of the Lords Prayer 16 To Pray always, what Marg.
128. Pray without ceasing 312 Praying in the Holy ghost, denotes four things,
Marg. 577 To Pray with the spirit, and understanding, what 250 Public Prayer
should be in a known tongue ibid. J Pray not for the world 164 The Preaching of
the Cross, why 230 Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel
ib. Foolishness of Preaching 232 To the Poor the Gospel is Preached, cleared
208 to what Poor 209 Why the cleansed Leper must show himself to the Priest 21
Private interpretation of Scripture how forbidden 563 Prophecy what 224.243
Women Prophesying with their heads uncovered 242 To Prophecy in Christ's name,
what 20 Prophets, what 20 False Prophets, who 564 A Prophets reward, what 28 To
receive in the name of a Prophet, what ib. A Prophet, yea more than a Prophet
how verified of John 29 Proselytes, who 62 two sorts thereof ib Psalms, Hymns,
spiritual Songs 306 Publicans, who 106.131 Pure in heart, who 11 Purgatory
rejected 128 Not proved by 1 Cor. 3.11. 233
Q
QUench not the spirit 312
R
RAbbi what it signifies 61.163 Racha, what 12 In Rama was a voice heard, etc.
explaned 5 Ravens, Gods feeding them 119 Reasonable service, what 223 To Redeem
those under the Law, why 271 Redemption twofold 286 Render to all their dues
225 Repentance, what it is 203 Reprove the world of sin, of Righteousness, of
Judgment 163 All sorts of persons Reviled Christ 75 Revelation what it
signifies 578 Two parts of the Revelation 627 Thunder joined to all the
Revelations, why 578 All Judgments in the Revelations on Rome Pagan Christian
ib. Reward implies not merit of works preceding; heaven said to be a Reward how
11 Rich toward God 119 Rich man who 51, 52. Riches how deceitful 37 Riches
how called unrighteous 126 Attributes given to Riches 115 Right eye, Right
hand, what 13 why mentioned ib. pull it out, cut it off ib. Righteousness of
God what 206 Why so called 210 Righteousness twofold, of the Law of Christ
197 Upon this Rock, etc. expounded 43 Christ the Rock of the Church 243 Rome
Papal Babylon 593. why 609 Christ said to be crucified at Rome, how 609
S
THe Sabbath made for man two ways 80 A Sabbath days Journey, how much 185
One of the Sabbaths, what 93.200 Why God called the Lord of Sabbath 220
Sacrament not treated of Joh. 6. and why 147.148. We may receive the Sacrament
with unsanctfied persons 141 Sacraments confer not Grace ex opere operato 212
Sacrifice, what 24 Sadducees, why so called 59. their opinions ib. Whether they
rejected all Scripture save the Books of Moses ib. Saints compared to Eagles,
why 128 Sts. in Life eternal, shall mutually know each other 46 Salted with
fire, what 88 The Disciples called the Salt of the earth, why 11 Gods word
compared to Salt, Marg. 123 The Angels Salutation expounded, and cleared from
Popish depravation 97 Sanctified throughout, when 313 We cannot satisfy for
our own debts 49 To Save from sin what it is 3, 4 There should no flesh be
saved, what 64 Our Savior stands to read, sits down to Preach 104 God Saves
all whom he purposes to save, of his mercy 222 Schism, what 244 Scriptures
hard to be understood, wherein, and to whom 566 Scripture divided into Law,
Prophets, Psalms 140 Sea of Glass, what 584, 604 Sealed with the spirit, what
it denotes 279 Search the Scriptures, examples thereof 147 To See God, what 11
His seed remains in him 570, 571 To Seek our own, what 296 To Seek the things
that are Christ's ib. To be seen of men 15 Sell all thou have expounded 51
Sermon on the Mount. 10. the Key of the Whole Bible ib. Gods Commandments
improved therein 11, 12 This Sermon set down, Mat. 5, 6, 7. and Luke 6.20.10.
Why Christ went into a Mountain to Preach 10 Serpent and its nature 27 The
Devil called the old Serpent, why 598 Our Service to God, after what manner 99
Seven stars. 580. why Minist. we called Stars 580, 58 Why said to be held in
Christ's right hand 580 Seven Signs of godly sorrow 262 Seven Churches what
their names signify 579 Seven Spirits ib. Christ the true Shepherd 153 marks
of a true Shepherd ib. his followers compared to Sheep ib. Feed my Sheep, no
ground for Peter's supremacy 171 Sheep and their nature 27 Saints resemble
sheep 69 Whose Shoes J am not worthy to bear 7 Sicut in Scripture taken three
several ways 16 Sign of the Son of man, what 65.66 Signs before the
destruction of Jerusalem 134 A Sign which should be spoken against, what 102
Sin brought death, how 212 Sin not imputed where no Law ib. Sin to reign in us,
what 213 Sin takes occasion from a threefold power in the Law 214 How a Sin of
infirmity may be known 215 He that is born of God sins not 570 Sin unto
Death, what 553 How each Person in the Trinity forgives Sins 24 God hears not
Sinners, how 152 To Sit signifies to reign 94.316 To Sit in the Temple of God,
what 316 Son of Abraham, who 132 Christ called the Son of man, why 22.87 Sons
of God we are through Christ 141 Then shall the Son himself also be subject 253
Spirits of the Prophets, what 251 Fruits of the Spirit 274 The Spirit lusts
against the Flesh 274 Soul and Spirit how they differ 99 Believe not every
Spirit, but try the spirits 571 The Spirit compared to water 145 What Star
appeared to the wise men 5 Christ the chief Corner Stone 556 The godly lively
Stones ib. God is able of these Stones, etc. 7 Sun, Moon, and Stars darkened 591
Sun, what 595 Christ resembles the Sun ib. Woman clothed with the Sun, what
595 Our sufferings called Christ's sufferings, in what respects 560
Superscription of the Cross, why in three Languages 137 To support the weak,
what 312 Swear not at all expounded 13 They that take the Sword, shall perish
with the sword 72 Synagouge what it signifies 9.15 The use thereof 208
T
LEt their Table, be made a snare, what 221 When Christ was driven forth to be
Tempted 8 Where he was Tempted ib. What weapons be used when he was Tempted ib.
Satan called the Tempter, why 9 The Tempter appeared in some visible shape ib.
What it is to tempt God 9 Ten days, what 581 Testament what it signifies 91
why called new Testament ib. Thessalonica where seated, by whom built and upon
what occasion 309 The third hour 93 Mark and John reconciled 93.167 Thirty
pieces of silver, how much 70* 74 A Thorn in the flesh, the messenger of satan,
what 264 Thorns are Lusts 37 why so called ib. Christ has the Throne of
David, how 97 Three hundred pence, how much 91 Christ three days, and three
nights in the grave 34 Appeared cloven tongues like as fire, why 186 Traditions
unlawful, and why 40.41 Christ's Transfiguration 46 why manifested not to all
ib. Why to Peter, James, and John ib. Moses, and Elias appeared, and why ib. As
Travail upon a woman with Child, what it denotes 313 Treasure in heaven, what
17 The Trinity set forth by three precious stones 584 Twelve tribes, what 52
Christ chose twelve Apostles, and why 25
U
TO receive the grace of God in Vain, what 261 The veil of the Temple rent; 76
which veil, why 76 Verily verily 144 Vipers their properties 7 Of the Virgins,
wise and foolish 67 Extreme Unction not proved from Mark 7.13.84 Unity of
Saints urged 283 Until, and first born, no ground for Helvidius error 4 Until
in Scripture, taken for never 4 Unworthily to eat and drink, what 246 The Dead
shall hear his voice 147 All in the Graves shall hear his voice 147
W
WAtches of the night, how many, their continuance, names 40 Of Pilats washing
his hands 74 Three sorts of washing of hands amongst the Jews 74 Waters what
610 The spirit compared to Water 145 Except a man be born of water and spirit
144 Narrow way, what 20 I am the way, the truth, and the life 161 Wite stone,
why given 582 White garments what they signify 583 Wine mingled with Mirrh,
why given to the condemned 75.92 Matthew, and Mark reconciled ib. Wisdom and
Prudence, what 301 Three parts of the Professors of Wisdom 107 Without Christ,
without God 281 Wisemen, what they were, their number, gifts, names 4 617 Two
witnesses 593.594 Three bear witness in heaven, three on earth 572 Wives must
submit to their Husbands 288 Wolves and their Nature 27 Woman in the Revelation
signifies Idols 2. The City of Rome, 3. The True Church, why 578.595 Woman
great is thy faith 42 Woman behold thy Son 167 Of the Woman taken in Adultery
149 Woman what have I to do with thee 143 Women have first notice of Christ's
Resurrection, why 139 But by every Word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God. The meaning 9 The Word of God compared to a Candle 116 to Salt, Marg. 123
The Word said to be sincere, how, Marg. 556 The Word of God compared to seed,
and why 33 Work of God upon us, Work of God in us 57^ Cast off the works of
darkness 226 Their works follow them 64 The Saints Gods Workmanship, why 281
In all the world the Gospel shall be preached, how to be understood 64 The God
of this World, why Satan so called 258 Where the Worm dies not, and the fire
is not qu^nched. 87 God only to be Worshipped 9 God to be Worshipped in Spirit,
and Truth 145 Worthy taken in a double sense 31 For they are Worthy, cleared
583 What Christ Wrote on the ground, and wherefore 150
Y
YEa yea, Nay nay 14 Young Men, who. 1 John 2.14. 568
Z
Unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias Mat. 23.35. What Zachary is
there meant 62, 63, 117.
Finis Tabulae.
A CATALOGUE OF THE Greek words or phrases, which are opened in these
ANNOTATIONS.
(...) 11 (...) 554 (...) 88 (...) 585 (...) 565 (...) 14 (...) 90 (...) 136
(...) 114 (...) 241 (...) 24 (...) 564 (...) 142 (...) 293 (...) 14 (...) 215
(...) 280 (...) 285 (...) 11 (...) 241 (...) 291 (...) 560 (...) 553 (...) 570
(...) 553 (...) 162 (...) 555 (...) 134 (...) 193 (...) 113 (...) ib. (...) 278
(...) 316 (...) 232 (...) 150 (...) 105 (...) 246 (...) 315 (...) 233 (...) 188
(...) 140.269 (...) 312 (...) 560 (...) 225 (...) 315 (...) 569 (...) 45*71
(...) 37 (...) 316 (...) 100 (...) 578 (...) 134 (...) 128 (...) 302 (...) 101
(...) 258 (...) 295 (...) 279 (...) 237 (...) 136 (...) 313 (...) 117 (...) 224
(...) 222 (...) 226 (...) 24 (...) (...) 555 (...) 207 (...) ib. (...) 96 (...)
124 (...) 187 (...) 105.185 (...) 317 (...) 55 (...) 17 (...) 205 (...) 304
B
(...) 582 (...) 253 (...) 258 (...) 310 (...) 269 (...) 227.275 (...) 15 (...)
32 (...) 592 (...) 237 (...) 23 (...) 19 (...) 365 (...) 209 (...) 297 (...)
556
(...)
(...) 58
(...)
(...) 197 (...) 265 (...) 203 (...) 198 (...) 367 (...) 576 (...) 136 (...) 9
(...) 48 (...) 598 (...) 8 (...) 27.234 (...) 285 (...) 203 (...) 191 (...) 191
(...) 209 (...) 195 (...) 208 (...) 134 (...) 263 (...) 207 (...) 104 (...) 242
(...) 565 (...) 106 (...) 234 (...) 105 (...) 609 (...) 79
E
(...) 209 (...) 108 (...) 93 (...) 560 (...) 274 (...) 13 (...) 203 (...) 201
(...) 153 (...) 54 (...) 231.312 (...) 574 (...) 266 (...) 128 (...) 554 (...)
92 (...) 128 (...) 207 (...) 576 (...) 199 (...) 94 (...) 362 (...) 288 (...)
282 (...) 163.583 (...) 149 (...) 565 (...) 292 (...) 78 (...), imp. tert.
pers. (...). f^eq. 127 (...) 274 (...) 315 (...) 261 (...) 576 (...) 556 (...)
135 (...) 133 (...) 554 (...) 242 (...) 112 (...) 26.105.142.317.609. (...) 149
(...) 297 (...) 259 (...) 285 (...) 557 (...) 106 (...) 556 (...) 105 (...) 100
(...) 16 (...) 95 (...) 558 (...) 147 (...) 147 (...) 318 (...) 147 (...) 569
(...) 319 (...) 1 (...) 132 (...) 197 (...) 278 (...) 101 (...) 14 (...) 261
(...) 575 (...) 239 (...) 286 (...) 187 (...) 127 (...) 257 (...) 96 (...) 261
Z
(...) 148 (...) 585
H
(...) 90 (...) 18 (...) 258
(...)
(...) 283 (...) 15.142 (...) 76 (...) 281 (...) 561 (...) 207 (...) 212 (...)
256 (...) 164 (...) 290 (...) 169 (...) 290
I
(...) 209 (...) 257 (...) 211 (...) 268 (...): Aor. 2 infin. (...). 212 (...)
12
K
(...) 235 (...) 60 (...) 71 (...) 133.185.275. (...) 312 (...) 291 (...) 89
(...) 207.557 (...) 207 (...) 41 (...) 60 (...) 33 (...) 275 (...) 230 (...) 38
(...) 264 (...) 295 (...) 316 (...) 599 (...) 96 (...) 271 (...) 186 (...) 256
(...) 274 (...) 12 (...) 558 (...) 164 (...) 284 (...) 226 (...) 244 (...) 30
(...) 310 (...) 317 (...) 24 (...) 202 (...) 227 (...) 260 (...) 41 (...) 226
(...)
(...) 561 (...) 1^1 (...) 560 (...) 89 (...) 127 (...) 194 (...) 64 (...) 218
(...) 223 (...) 203 (...) 147
M
(...) 235 (...) 61 (...) 289 (...) 18, 115, 248 (...) 571 (...) 234 (...) 2^7
(...) 119 (...) 195 (...) 195 (...) 255 (...) 119 (...) 286 (...) 560 (...) 160
(...) 310 (...) 300 (...) 592 (...) 126 (...) 577 (...) 201 (...) 91 (...) 562
(...) 558
N
(...) 299 (...) 189 (...) 285
(...)
(...) 559
O
(...) 164 (...) 278 (...) 100 (...) 90, 111 (...) 186 (...) 374 (...) 186
(...) 239 (...) 62 (...) 307 (...) 135 (...) 147 (...) 102, 214
(...)
(...) 147 (...) 583 (...) 32 (...) 300 (...) 307 (...) 133, 134 (...) 138
(...) 87 (...) 161 (...) 5 (...) 554 (...) 275, 304 (...) 133 (...) 196 (...)
(...) 593 (...) 282 (...) 103 (...) 189 (...) 235 (...) 582 (...) 95 (...) 241
(...) 106 (...) 279 (...) 115 (...) 293 (...) 285 (...) 30 (...) 204 (...) 598
(...) 207 (...) 553 (...) 227 (...) 212 (...) 142, 280 (...) 306 (...) 286
(...) 603 (...) 298 (...) 15 (...) 202 (...) 294 (...) 14, 16, 36 (...) 207
(...) ib. (...) 576 (...) 599 (...) (...) 559 (...) 146 (...) 218 (...) 274
(...) 281, 282 (...) 244 (...) 182 (...) 92 (...) 374 (...) 140 (...) 90 (...)
132 (...) 163 (...) 226 (...) 209 (...) 69 (...) 11 (...)
P
(...) 87 (...) 565
(...)
(...) 65 (...) 193 (...) 316 (...) 142 (...) ib. (...) 557 (...) 229 (...) 297
(...) 17 (...) 197 (...) 565 (...) 25 (...) 311 (...) 208 (...) 303 (...) 317
(...) 112 (...) 146 (...) 276, 298 (...) 263 (...) 666 (...) 28 (...) 88 (...)
303 (...) 80 (...) 192 (...) 217 (...) 215 (...) 49 (...) 9, 108 (...) 236
(...) 218 (...) 305 (...) 120 (...) 186 (...) 115 (...) 555 (...) 194 (...) 596
(...) 240 (...) 99, 288
T
(...) 300 (...) 156 (...) 564 (...) 307 (...) 594 (...) 310 (...) 170.318
(...) 115
(...)
(...) 208 (...) 22 (...) 259 (...) 198 (...) 219 (...) 577 (...) ib. (...) 288
(...) 128, 242
(...)
(...) 244 (...) 259 (...) 302 (...) 274 (...) 207 (...) 258 (...) 244 (...)
224 (...) ib (...) 59 (...) 575 (...) 207 (...) 226 (...) 61 (...) 317
X
(...) 5 (...) 219 (...) 301 (...) 102 (...) 214 (...) 193 (...) 106 (...) 222
(...) 569 (...) 185 (...) 312 (...) 565 (...) 162
(...)
(...) 569 (...) 582 (...) 232 (...) 29 (...) 225, 248
(...)
(...) 271 (...) 612 (...) 136 (...) 72
ERRATA.
REader, I shall entreat thee to excuse the misplacing of Marginall quotations
sometimes, the false figuring of the page, and false pointing, and also to
amend literal faults, where a Letter is wanting, or mistaken. The chiefest
faults I have observed are thus to be corrected.

Epist. Lat. p. 1. l. 17. propugnacula. ib. l. 18. decus. p. 2. l. 6. bonarum.
l. 22. refrigebat. p. 3. l. 14. Annorum. p. 4. m. vide Wake Regem etc. Epist.
Ang. m. I had, in the book. p. 1. l. 12. Mr. Mede on 1 Cor. 9.14. See more
there. p. 2. l. 51. pretermitted. p. 3. l. 17. by Matthew. p. 6. m. Coeperit,
p. 7. l. 27. Nation. ib. m. Pareus and the Scriptures should be lower against
v. 11. p. 8. m. scissuram. p. 10. l. 33. patriae. p. 11. l. 6. set texts. p.
12. l. 4. righteousness p. 13. l. 47. (...). p. 15. l. 28. Josh. l. 39. being
warned of God m. Cartw. Hist. ex 4. or Evang. ib. (...) videri. p. 17. l. 37.
God in Christ. p. 28. l. 2. put out (...) or. p. 36. l. 20. put out the earth.
p. 41. l. 3. without the word of God, ib. device. p. 43. l. 28. put out a
there. p. 51. m. the breaking of the law, ib. l. 37. in preparation of mind is
required. p. 59. l. 5. as if he should say. p. 60. l. 21. that it be sincere.
p. 65. l. 21. a 1000. years as one day. p. 68. l. 15. minds. p. 70. l. 10.
Sachar. l. 48. poem sung. p. 72. l. 8. held. p. 88. in servatorem. p. 89. l.
15. Solatia l. ult. id est, Deo aut Ceelicolis, should follow part of the
verse. p. 91. m. Novarinus. p. 93. l. 24. El is. p. 94. l. 34. there ib. l. 45.
crediderit. p. 96. l. 29. feret. p. 100. m. proficiscentem. p. 105. m. Cur
unxit to the end of the note should be put out. p. 107. l. 46. eos. p. 126. l.
34. contracted their noses. p. 131, l. 40. v. 41. p. 133. l. 47.
Ecclesiasticus. p. 134. l. 6. Chap. 21. p. 140. m. longius iturus. p. 143. l.
4.9. Esaias. 6. ib. last line save two, and likewise prevent him. p. 144. l. 14.
being fulfilled in his death and resurrection. p. 149. l. 6. more free for
Prayer. p. 158. l. 12. Andrew and Philip told. ibid. Naba. p. 191. m. Judge.
3.33. p. 193. m. sensus. p. 201. l. 7. Pastoral m. Deuteronomy. 33.3. p. 205. l. 5.
Of the Title, Epistle. p. 230. m. opponatur. p. 238. m. ablutionem. l. 39. so
great. p. 242. l. 3. sit. p. 243. l. 8. Grotium. p. 246. l. 2.3. p. 249. l. 2.
from his neighbor should be in another character. p. 258. l. 3. respect. p.
260. l. 10. signifies such a hemming as of a beast etc. p. 263. in vita. p.
264. l. 38. or. p. 267. l. 18. doctrine. p. 275. m. M. Perkins in loc. p. 282.
m. Grotius in loc. p. 296. m. ingeniosi. p. 311. m. 3. Lam. 57. p. 348. m.
Agens. p. 357. l. 28. Heb. 10.29. ib. l. 47. he. p. 366. l. 9. fierinesse. p.
569. m. put Estius after sunt, and put out him in the Text. p. 578. l. 10.
imperii. p. 579. l. 18. (...). p. 583, l. p^nult. as well. p. 599. m. Joannes.

FINIS.

