^REATISE OF THE VIRTUES and USES OF SEVERAL PANACEA'S OR MOST Infallible
Remedies IN PHYSIC.

By James Massard one of the most ancientest Doctors of the College of
Grenoble.

Nov. 20th. 1685. This may be Printed, Rob. Midgley.

London, Printed for the Author dwelling at present at Oliver Martinet a
Tailor, at the Kings Arms in New-Street near Covent Garden, 1685.

THE PREFACE.
I Have formerly published a Discourse touching Panacea's, or the chief
Remedies in Physic: Those that would know the Virtues of 'em must read that
Treatise; the matter is important, and therein clearly explicated.

And Mr. Blegny's Journal of Physic for the Month of August 1681, Page 378.
gives a full and advantageous account of the aforesaid Book.

Also in his Journals of Physic for the following months, he gives a
description of the two Treatises which I published one concerning the Venerial
Distemper, and the other of Fevers.

And all these Remedies are of such virtue that the sick are soon enabled by
'em to walk abroad about their affairs.

CHAP. I. The Virtue of the Panaceas or Universal Remedies.
THE Panacea's are the greatest and most infallible remedies in Physic; they
cause no loathings, are necessary not only to sick people, but to those that
are in perfect health for prevention of distempers, and they never do hurt:
they heal most Diseases which seem incurable, and make other Remedies
efficacious.

CHAP. II. The virtues and use of potable Gold.
THIS drink is of liquid Gold, of the color of fine Gold, it is of a fine
scent, agreeable taste, and rejoices the heart as soon as it is taken.

This potable Gold is so perfectly dissolved, that it cannot be any more
reduced into a body, and therefore easily mixes with the Spirits, penetrates
all digestions, and so communicates with speed it is rare Virtues.

The potable Gold is a rare Divine Panacea, helping all natures in every
distemper, preserving health, keeping off the infirmity of old age, cures
Fevers, and inflammations, eases pains, calms nature regulates all her motions,
and brings to her assistance new and prevailing forces, Dissipating the very
cause of distempers, and driving 'em out by insensible transpirations, removing
the indispositions of the parts, and happily restoring health and vigor.

Fifteen or twenty drops of this liquor of Gold is enough, taken in a Spoon
with a little good Wine, or Cordial water at any time, even at Meals, twice or
thrice in a day; a man needs no direction or precaution in the matter, for this
Remedy heals without any sensible evacuation.

CHAP. III. The Virtues of the great Panacea.
WANT of Transpiration being the general cause of all distempers, so the
Remedies which in opening the Pores render the body transpirable, are universal
Remedies for their Cure.

The great Panacea is of an agreeable color, having neither taste nor smell,
no nauseous belches in the Stomach: It makes no sensible evacuation in healthy
persons, it puts the body into a gentle breathing, animating the Spirits, and
thereby preserving health and increases strength.

This Panacea heals the sick, by opening all the passages of the body, in
dissolving the causes of the distemper, destroying it by making way for those
evacutions, which nature requires, and at the same reducing 'em to order: In
fine, by taking away the impure viscuosities and filth, which lies in the very
substance of the parts, which are the roots whence diseases Spring.

So likewise, does it infallibly cure all sorts of Fevers, and Inflammations,
as Plurisies, Small Pox, Appoplexies, Headaches, pains in the Breast, all
Consumptions, all sounding Fits, Vomitings, Cholics, Gravel, Women's pains in
Labor, Vapors, Suppressions of Monthly Effluviums, loss of Blood,
Costiveness, Griping in the Guts, paleness in the Countenance, cures
Rheumatisms, and is of rare virtue against the Gout.

Moreover, this Remedy heals all sorts of Wounds which are not absolute mortal,
in speedily stopping the Course of Blood, and dissolving and emptying by
insensible transpiration, and by Urine, or by Stools, the Blood which is
extravased, and diffused, in what part soever of the body it be, and likewise
hindering inflammations and Fevers, which often follow upon Wounds. In short, by
consolidating immediately by a balsamic virtue all bruises inward or outward.

Concerning the using of this Panacea.

You* may take the weight of one or two drams in Powder at one time, or else
made into Sugar Plums to the number of ten, at each time.

In violent Distempers, they are to be taken commonly twice a day, to wit, in
the morning, after dinner, or at night. In long illness, it suffices to take
'em once a day.

This Powder is to be mixed in a Spoon with a little good Wine, or else take it
in Sugar Plums, drink a Glass of good Wine after this remedy, and an hour after
some good Broth, afterward you may eat as at other times, if your illness be
not very great.

But to keep the body open, boil in Broth made of Veal, or the like, without,
Salt, or in water with a little Sugar, an ounce or an ounce and an half of good
Tamarins with pot herbs, during a quarter of an hour, after which strain it
without squeezing. This Broth is a little sharp, and very agreeable to the
taste. Or else, take a Glyster which is made of four or five ounces of the best
Cassia, taken out of the stick, with as much Honey, boil them in a sufficient
quantity of ordinary decoction, for a quarter of an hour: Afterward strain
this before you take it, it refreshes, it purges sufficiently, and leaves the
body open.

As to the manner of Diet, there is no need of much scrupulosity, it is
sufficient if one avoids, all kinds of excess. As this Panacea frees nature,
regulates her motions, and turns all food into good nourishment: so one may
without the least hurt in using this remedy follow ones own inclinations in
eating and drinking what we please, for as much as nature being assisted with
proper remedies, has no irregular desires.

CHAP. IV. Virtues, and use of Flowers of Silver.
THE Flowers of Silver are pleasant to behold, and agreeable to take. This
Panacea of Silver is diaphoretic, and febrefuge, it cleans the Organs of the
body, opens her passages, purifies and renews the blood sweetens the humors,
appeases the inflammations, and rectify all digestions. And therefore this
Panacea extinguishes Fevers, as well intermitting as Hectic, and continual
ones, and cures most inveterate distempers, without any sensible evacuation.

A dose of this remedy consists of thirty or forty Grains, it may be taken at
any time but at Meals.

CHAP. V. The Virtues of the aperitive Panacea.
THE obstruction of the Entrails being the usual cause of long illnesses, so
the aperitive Panacea's are universal Remedies, for the cure of inveterate
maladies.

And indeed experience shows us, that opening Pills cure the pains and
giddiness in the head, a weak digestion, and weakness of the stomach, shortness
of breath, and hypocondraic indispositions, and all other melancholy
distempers, the Sympathetic Epilepsie which is the commonest, the Scurvy,
Jaundice, pale colors of Maidens, the Dropsy, the suppression of the monthly
Courses, the Whites, fits of the Mother, the Copilations, Costiveness, and
obstructions of the Bowels.

Of the use of the aperitive Panacea.

Take in the morning seven or eight little Pills, or aperitive Confections, in
a Wafer, or in the yolk of an Egg, or in a preserved Cherry without the stone,
drink immediately after this Remedy a little good Wine, and an hour after drink
some Broth. These pills loose the body over night, and keeps it always open.

You must take for the cure of these abovementioned distempers for fifteen
days together, or three weeks every other morning, sometimes seven or eight of
these aperitive pills, sometimes the weight of a dram and an half of the great
Panacea abovementioned, drinking immediately after these Remedies a little
good Wine, and suping an hour after some Broth, or two Dishes of Coffee before
breakfast.

Whilst you are in this Course of Physic, you should eat good wholesome Meats,
and such as are of easy digestion, without interrupting your ordinary
employments: To prevent a relapse, take for some Months all the fifteen days
two or three doses of these Remedies.

CHAP. VII. Of the Virtues of the precipitate of Paracelsus.
THE precipitate Mercury of Paracelsus, purifies and renovates so efficaciously
the whole body, that it heals all sorts of Ulcers and Scabs, and amongst others
the venerial one, which is nothing else but a pestilential Scab, brought from
the Indies. Experience shows that those who are afflicted with the most
inveterate venerial distempers, are perfectly cured with this Remedy.

Concerning the use of the precipitate of Paracelsus, for the cure of the
Venerial distempers:

Take every morning during a month, ten or twelve Grains of this Precipitate
made into a Pill, mix with it some kind of Conserve; drink immediately after a
glass of good Wine, and within an hour some Broth made of Veal, in which must
be boiled an ounce and an half of good Tamarins, to keep the body open.

Although this Remedy requires no farther direction than that of eating wholesome
Meats, such as are in common use, and does not oblige a man to leave off any
business, yet does it procure so sound a constitution of body, that it is
experienced, a man finds himself more healthful now than he was before his
illness.

CHAP. VII. Virtues and use of the refreshing Panacea.
A Good color being one of the Signs of health, every body desires such
refreshments, yet few persons know which are the true ones. Cold things often
heats us, and there are corrosives which do much refresh us. This appears in
the using of water, which causes a burning Fever in those who drink of it, when
they are hot, because it then congeals the blood, and hinders transpiration. On
the contrary Spirit of Sulphur, which is extremely corrosive and vitriolic,
mightily refreshes being taken in broth, or an opening drink, because it
sweetens the acrimonial juice of the body. It makes an agreeable Salt to the
taste, which being without the corrosion of the Spirit of Sulphur, much
refreshes all the Bowels being taken in Broth.

One may use of this Salt, during the time or after the use of other Remedies,
to procure by this means a greater refreshment.

During the use of these Panacea's, you may purge your self once or twice, with
the following remedy; Take two drams of good Rhubarb cut small, half an ounce
of Tamarins, half a dram of Corriander, an ounce and an half of the finest
Mannaha Make all of it boil some time in Pullet. broth, or in two Glasses of
decoction of Liquorish, and let it stand soaking all night on the hot ashes.
The next morning strain it and then take it.

CHAP. VIII. For hollow Teeth.
HOllow Teeth do much pain some people, who knowing no Remedy, are at last
constrained to pull them out, tho they may be made well by putting in a little
grain in the hollow Tooth, which perfectly cleaning it, renders it thereby like
the rest.

CHAP. IX. A Plaster for the healing of Wounds, Ulcers and Swellings.
THIS Plaster is good for the curing all external hurts: it consolidates
wounds, and draws out all venomous humors which may hinder the reunion of the
parts, and corrupt them, it also extinguishes the malignity of Ulcers, and
effectually solves all swellings.

CHAP. XI. An Ointment for the inflammation of the Eyes.
THE inflammations of the Eyes are sometimes of that nature, as instead of being
bettered by ordinary Remedies are made worse. This Ointment for the Eyes,
lessens immediately their pain, their inflammation, fieryness, and cures them in
a short time.

FINIS.

