A LETTER FROM Maj. General Massey TO AN HONORABLE PERSON IN LONDON.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Bateman, 1659.

A LETTER from Major General Massey to an Honorable Person in London.
Noble Sir!
I Will dispense a while with my tedious Privacy and Retirement, which the
Violence and Injustice of a Juncto and their Myrmidon Oliver enforced me to,
and breath a little free English Air in the Contents of this Paper: Withal to
give you to understand, that I do yet, by Gods goodness, survive the implacable
malice of mine Enemies, and have a life devoted, and to sacrifice to my
Countries Happiness and Honor. And this not out of Ostentation, or any
Presumption of my Interest, (for I could wish there was no such factious
English word) which is no more than the bounden Duty of every good Subject, in
promoting by all lawful means and endeavors, the Peace and Prosperity of the
Kingdom: but that these difficult times do require a Review and Copy of the
former and past Transactions of the State; wherein no man will deny I have had
in both Fortunes my extraordinary share.

Sir, I need not make this Defense to you for this trouble (for you have been
wened to greater) the Universal Cry of the Nation is yet resounding in your
ears, and you have still but the Rudiments, the Introduction to their future
Importunities; the People being so wary and weary of all Counsels tending to
the prolongation of their Distractions, that they will make unjust Judges by
their reiterated and urged Demands willing to comply. And while I think on that
general Desire of the three Kingdoms, I cannot restrain my self, but bring
what I can to its conducement, and shall therefore liberally decypher to you my
thoughts, and discover my self in this Pourtraicture of my mind.

Toward the expiration of my Command and Government of the City of Gloucester,
(a place famed for its Fidelity to the Parliament) I found their animosity
against the Kings Party so slaked, before the War was near extinct, that I
could not but examine my self; in which scrutiny I saw the raked sparks of
Loyalty necessarily flying upward, and surmounting the clouds of malecontent
and envious exhalation. Afterward in my Public Trust (as being a Member of
this now-sitting Parliament) I perceived such a relenting, such compassionate
considerations, of that hitherto unaccountable expense of blood, such moderate
and equal ways to a Settlement, that it was most plainly apparent, as Vox
Populi is Vox Dei, that without the establishment of our ancient Government,
there could be neither Peace nor Order. And now since to this time, we have
seen such a deluge of confusion, one oppression ushering in another, one Power
crushing and crushed by the other, all of us made Brethren by Calamity, as by
another first Nature: What else can be added to our misery, but that we are
resolved and content to be miserable?

And this being the true state of our case, being alarmed on all sides from
abroad, awakened from our brainsick Dreams at home, having nothing to fear
within us, no danger if we be honest from without, why do we boggle at our
Peace; What Is the remora to our Safety? a few inconsiderable Anabaptists must
have the Reputation here which they had not at Munster, to be able to obstruct
our happiness. Certainly never any Soldier dreaded them, for they will make as
Schismatical Armies as Congregations, and be as many divisions as Conventicles.
Why then do we not proceed directly to a Settlement? I take that for no
politic Maxim, The farthest way about the nearest way home, for what Lynceus
eyes can spy any danger obviating such a course? What need have we of the
Fabian Cunctation? What potent Enemy is at door, except you reckon my Lord
Lambert? Believe me, all delays are dangerous, and our wounds rankle, and what
folly is it when we may be cured gratis, afterward to pay the Chyrurgeon his
own Demands?

We are lost in a Wood, let us make all speed to get out; we are non-plust and
baffled at our own Argument, 'twill be no disingenuous fallacy [Petitio
Principii] and beg the Question; which an honest Subject, though a bad Scholar,
may English [Petition the Prince.]

I have made this Essay, no way doubting but that it is the only Consult of
the Parliament, and their sole Business of Concernment: To which purpose I am
not so remote, but if the leaft shadow of disturbance should appear, I am
ready at all points to do my Devoir. Sir, I kiss your Hands, and remain,

Your most faithful Servant, WILLIAM MASSEY.
Febr. 25.
FINIS.

