Several LAWS and ORDERS Made at the GENERAL COURT Holden at Boston the twenty
seventh of May 1674. And Printed by their Order,
Judgments frustrated by Persons.
WHERE AS in the Lovying of Executions, there have fallen our many Difficultyes
whereby the Judgments obtained, Judgments frustrated by persons. Tendering
goods, Lands, and not their own, how to be made good.
have been made frustrate; For the prevention whereof;

The Court do h Order and Declare; Where any Execution shall be Levied on any
Houses, Lands and Goods, and delivered to the Parties for whom the Judgment
was granted, and the said Execution returned according to Law; if it shall
appear the Person whose Lands, Goods or Houses were levied by Execution, have
affirmed, or delivered, or tendered the said Goods, Lands or Houses as his own,
which in reality were not his own proper Estate, and in the some condition of
Estate as he did tender them either to the Officer or Parties for whom the
Execution is levied, such person so endeavoring by such Action to delude the
Law and defraud the Creditor, shall be liable to pay double damages to the
party grieved, and Pay such fine as the County Court shall see cause to impose.

And of any party that has obtained an Execution, shall adventure to levy the
same upon Lands, Houses or Goods, commonly accunted the Houses Lands or Goods
of the person against whom the Judgment was granted, and the Execution be
returned according to Law, if it afterward appear, the said Houses Lends or
Goods were not the Houses, County Co etc. to renew Executions in Case etc.
Lands or Goods of the said Parties against whom the Judgment was given, the
party that was so mistaken making the same to appear to the Court that granted
the Judgment, the said Court shall Order a new Execution for the satisfying of
the Judgment notwithstanding the former Execution returned.

Whereas it is of great moment in the Administration of Justice, that all
matters of Records, should be says fully Entered and kept, and a^ occasion is,
given forth;

Clerk of Courts and Recorders to be Sworn.
It is Ordered and Enacted by the Authority of this Court: That from henceforth
the several Clerks or Recorders of the public Courts of Justice, and the
Recorders of the several Counties in this Jurisdiction shall be Sworn by the
Courts to which they belong, unto the faithful discharge of their Office in all
respects, and that the form of the Oath be as follows:

Their O^th.
Whereas you A. B. are appointed Clerk of the County Court of C. You do Swear by
the Everliving God, that you will faithfully and uprightly demean your self in
the said Office: you shall truly and fairly Enter and Record all Acts and
Judgments of the said Court, and whatever you shall receive Order and
direction from the said Court to do, you shall safely and faithfully keep and
preserve the said Records, and deliver Executions, Decrees or Orders to Persons
concerned as in duty you ought, and true Copies of such Records give forth when
regularly called so to do, and in all things you shall be faithful and true to
the Court: So help you God, etc.

THe Law having Provided for Holding of County Courts, where Magistratesare
wanting, by such persons of worth (styled Associates) as the Freemen of such
Counties should Nominate, being allowed and appointed by the General Court; And
there having been too great a neglect of certifying the General Court, the
Names of the persons so nominated, for their confirmation and appointing such
Persons the Associates for that County.

This Court does hereby remit former neglects herein; And do Declare, That
notwithstanding such Omissions, all former Acts of County Courts shall be
accounted good and valid: And for time to come, do further Declare and Order,
That in all Counties where Associates are to be appointed, Associates of Courts
how to be chosen and when to be Sworn etc.
the Freemen shall make their Nomination of such Associates at the same time
yearly when they give in their Nominations for Magistrates, which Votes for
Nomination of Associates shall be carried also by the same Commissioners of the
several Towns, sealed up to their Shire meeting, there to be opened, and those
four persons that shall have the most Votes shall be certified under the hands
of three of the said Commissioners, the Shire Commissioner being one, to the
Court of Election yearly: For the confirmation and Approbation of the said
Associates, which being obtained, the Secretary shall certify the Clerk of the
County Court thereof, who shall give notice to such Associates to appear at
their next County Court there to take their respective Oaths.

THis Court accounting it their Duty by all due means to prevent appearance of
sir and wickedness in any kind:

Do order; That henceforth it shall not be lawful for any single Woman or Wise
in the absence of her Husband, to entertain or lodge any In-mate or Sojourner
with the dislike of the Select men of the Town, or Magistrate, or
Commissioners, who may have cognizance thereof, on penalth of five pounds per
week on conviction thereof before any Court or Magistrate, or be corporally
punished, not exceeding ten stripes; And all Constables are to take cognizance
hereof for information in such cases.

FINIS.

