portrait of Henry Massingberd

I think it meet as long as I am in this tabernacle to stir you up by putting
you in remembrance: Seeing I know that the time is at hand that I must lay down
this my tabernacle. I will endeavor therefore that ye also may be able to have
remembrance of these things after my departure

Pet. 2.1.13.14.15. The lord will perfect yt which concerns me

Psalm. 138.8 THE COUNSEL AND ADMONITION OF HENRY MASSINGBERD, Esquire TO HIS
CHILDREN.

PSALM. 111. 10. PROVE. 9.10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a
good understanding have all they that do thereafter.

PROVE. 4.7. Wisdom is a special thing, therefore get wisdom, and above all
thy gettings get understanding.

TIT. 1.15. To the pure all things are pure, but to the corrupt all things are
corrupted.

There may be both good and evil produced from all earthly things, for that
Every pot has two handles. Char. of Wisd.

LONDON, Printed by A.M. Anno Domini 1656.

I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers.

Psalm. 26: 4. man with skull and hourglass

We ought to ask, and knock, and seek, and pray,
His constant guidance in his perfect way.
How vile a shape does bear this bone,
When th'perewigg of flesh is gone
Learn from this dried bone and parched skull
The body's foul, blessed souls are beauty full.
THE Counsel and Admonition OF Henry Massingberd, Esquire TO HIS Children.
SCRIPTURES.
ROMANS 15.14. I Trust you will admonish one another in the fear of God.

1 These. 5.12, 13. Love them that admonish you, and be at peace among your
selves.

2 These. 3.15. Count him not an enemy that offends, but admonish him.

Jer. 42.19. Know certainly that I have admonished you this day.

Exodus 18.19. Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God
shall be with thee.

Job 21.16. The counsel of the wicked is far from me.

Psalm. 1.1, 2. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the
scornful; but his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he
meditate day and night.

Psalm. 16.7. I will bless the Lord who has given me counsel. And 73.24. Thou
shall guide me with thy counsel, and then receive me to glory.

Prove. 8.9. They are all plain to him that understands, and right to them
that find knowledge.

Psalm. 31.15. My times are in thy hands O God.

Job 10.20. Are not my days few.

Job 14.1. Man is of few days.

Eccles. 1.4. One generation goes and another comes.

Genesis 27.^. I know not the day of my death.

Eccl. 3.2. There is a time to be born and a time to die.

Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your parents.

Phil. 4.17. I desire fruit, that may a bound to your account.

Joh. 14.3. That where I am ye may be also.

2 Samuel 122.3. I shall go to him he shall not return to me.

Ephesians. 4.5, 6. One Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, who
is above all, and through all and in you all.

Math. 6.10. Thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.

Job 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait until my change
come.

Joh. 9.4. I must work the work of him that sent me to day, the night comes
when no man can work.

Amos 4.12. Prepare to meet thy God O Israel.

Eccl. 11.3. Where the tree falls, there it lies.

Matthew. 25.3. They that were foolish took their lamps and no oil with them.

Heb. 3.7, 8. Wherefore as the holy Ghost says, to day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts.

Mark 13.37. What I say unto you I say unto all, Watch.

Prove. 4.1. Hear ye children the instruction of a father, and attend to know
understanding.

Isa. 38.19. The father to the children shall make known thy truth.

Prove. 22.6. Train up a child in the way that he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it.

Genesis 18.19. For I know him that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice. Psalm. 133.

Prove. 1.7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, but fools
despise wisdom and instruction. And ver. 8. My son hear thou the instruction
of thy father, and despise not the law of thy mother.

Joh. 15.17. These things I command you, that you love one another. And 13.34.
A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another.

1 John 4.24. He that loves God, loves his brother also.

1 Pet. 1.22. See that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently.

Acts 7.27. Ye are brethren, why do ye wrong one another.

Job 1.21. The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the
Lord.

1 Timothy 6.17. Trust not in uncertain riches.

Eccl. 5.13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely
riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.

Matthew. 6.20. Lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven.

Rev. 8.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.

1 John 2.15. Love not the world, nor the things of this world.

Phil. 3.15. As many as be perfect be thus minded.

James 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to
visit the fatherles and the widow with some relief in their afflictions, and to
keep himself unspotted from this world.

Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures.

Matthew. 22.19. You err, not knowing the Scriptures.

Psalm. 127.5. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build
it.

Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is the
rewarder of them that diligently seck him.

Eccl 2.26. For God gives to men that is good in his sight, wisdom,
knowledge, joy.

Psalm. 30.1. I will extol thee O Lord, for thou have lifted me up. And 68.4.
Sing unto God, sing praises to his Name, extol him that rides upon the
heavens.

Psalm. 39 5. Man at his best estate is altogether vanity.

1 Samuel 2.7. The Lord brings low and lifts up.

Psalm. 18.2. The Lord is my rock and my fortress, my deliverer, my God, my
strength in whom I will trust. Ver. 30. As for God his way is perfect the word
of the Lord is tried, he is a buckler to all those that trust in him.

Luke 2.14. Glory to God on high, on earth peace.

Joh. 14.23. But the hour is coming and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the father in spirit and truth.

Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, and saves
those that be of a contrite spirit. And 51.17. A broken and a contrite heart O
God thou will not despise.

Mal. 3.3. Offer to God the sacrifice of righteousness.

Psalm 116.17. I will offer unto God the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will
call upon the Name of the Lord.

Job 4.7. Who ever perished being innocent? And 22.30. He shall deliver the
Island of the innocent, and it is delivered by the pureness of thy hand,

Romans 12.1. That you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and
acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service.

1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost that is
in you.

a Genesis ^.27. God created man in his own Image.

b Heb. 13.15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is the fruit of our lips.

Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve.

Romans 10.12. The same God over all is rich unto all that call upon him.

Psalm. 50.3, 10. I will have no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goat out of
thy fold; for every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a
thousand hills.

Psalm. 109.22. For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.

Psalm. 22.22. I will declare thy Name unto my brethren, and in the midst of the
Congregation will I praise thee. Ver. 25. My praises shall be of thee in the
great Congregation, I will pay my vows before them that fear thee.

Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will O God, yea thy Law is in my heart.

Matthew. 6.10. Thy will be done (O God) in earth as it is in Heaven.

Heb. 10.7. I come to do thy will O God.

Prove. 5.21. For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he
pondereth all his goings. And 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good.

Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

Psalm. 139.20. Thy enemies (O God) take thy Name in vain. And 145.2. Every day
will I praise thee, and I will bless thy Name for ever and ever, And 99.3. Let
them praise thy great and terrible Name, for it is holy. Levit. 22.2. Speak to
Aaron and to his sons, that they profane not my holy Name, for I am the Lord.
And Psalm. 111.9. Holy and reverent is his Name. And Ezekiel. 39.25. I will be
jealoas for my holy Name.

Eccl. 8.2. I know it shall be well with them that fear God, that fear before
him.

Jer. 10.23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in
man that walks to direct his steps.

Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare, but he that puts his trust
in the Lord shall be safe. And 30.5. God is a shield to them that put their
trust in him.

Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good to them that love
God. Matthew. 10.19, 30. Are not two Sprrrowes sold for a farthing, and one of
them shall not fall to the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of
your head are all numbered.

2 Cor. 1.3. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies and the God of all comfort.

Psalm. 23.4. Thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

Isa. 66.13. As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye
shall be comforted.

Isa. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask for the
old paths where is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest
for your souls.

Romans 8.10. And if Christ be in you the body is dead because of sin, but the
spirit is life because of righteousness.

Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I was afflicted that I might learn thy
statutes. And 126.5. Them that sow in tears shall reap in joy. Jer. 22.13. I
will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice
for their sorrow.

Lam. 3.25. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.

1 King. 3.9. Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart, that I may
discern betwixt good and bad. Psalm. 119.34. Give me understanding and I shall
keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with my whole heart. And v. 73. Give me
understanding that I may learn thy Commandments. Dan. 12.10. None of the
wicked shall understand, but the wise shall understand.

Gal. 5.17. For these two are contrary one to another.

Job 9.20. If I justify my self my own mouth will condemn me; if I say I am
perfect it shall also prove me perverse.

Psalm. 37.27. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he
delights in his way. And 50. 23. Who so offers praise glorifieth God, and
to him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God.

Psalm. 119.67, 71. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I learned
thy word. It Is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes.

Psalm. 68.3. Let the righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God, let them
exceedingly rejoice. And Prove. 29.6. In the transgression of an evil man there
is a snare, but the righteous does sing and rejoice. Psalm. 38.13. For I will
declare my iniquity and be sorry for my sin.

2 Cor. 7.9, 10. Now I rejoice, not that you were made sorry* but that you
sorrowed to repentance, for ye were made sorry after a godly manner. For godly
sorrow works repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of, but worldly
sorrow works death.

Jer. 10.24. O Lord correct me but with judgment, not in thy anger, lest thou
bring me to nothing. Psalm. 119.33. Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes and
I shall keep it to the end. And 143. 8. Cause me to know the way wherein I
should walk, for I lift up my soul to thee.

Deuteronomy. 8.5. Thou shall also consider in thy heart, that as a man chastises his
son, so the Lord thy God chastises thee. Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the man
whom thou chastenest O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law. Heb. 12.6. For
whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives.

Matthew. 22.29. You err not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God.

Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have eternal
life, and they are they which testify of me.

2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.

1 Cor. 2.10. But God has revealed them unto us by his holy Spirit; for the
Spirit searches all things, yea the deep things of God.

Romans 10.6. Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven, that is, to
bring Christ down from above? who shall descend into the deep, that is, to
bring Christ up from the dead? but the Word is nigh thee, the word of faith
which we preach.

Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false prophets.

Ephesians. 4.14. That we be no more children, tossed to and fro by the sleight of
men, to every wind of Doctrine whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

Mich. 6.8. He has showed thee O man what is good, and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God.

Romans 11.33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of
God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.

Psalm. 4.5. Offer the sacrifice of righteousness, and put your trust in the
Lord. And 104. 33. I will sing unto the Lord so long as I live, I will sing
praise unto my God while I have any being.

Matthew. 6.20. Lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth
nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal, for
where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Prove. 13.13. Who so despises the Word shall be destroyed, but he that fears
the Commandment shall be rewarded.

1 Pet. 3.16. Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you as
of evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation
in Christ.

Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee,
because be trusts in thee.

2 Chronicles. 25.2. And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but
not with a perfect heart.

Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

1 Timothy 1.5. Now the end of the Commandment is charity out of a pure heart and
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

Psalm. 107.43. Who so is wise and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take heed to thy self and keep thy soul diligently, and teach them
thy sons and thy sons sonns.

Matthew. 5.19. Whosoever shall do and teach them, shall be great in the kingdom
of heaven.

Prove. 28.9. He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
prayers shall be an abomination to the Lord.

Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

1 Timothy 4.13. Give attendance to reading.

Psalm. 1.2. In his Law does he meditate day and night. Read the whole Psalm.

Psalm. 55.17. Evening, morning and noon will I pray.

Luke 6.38. Give and it shall be given to you again.

Eccl. 1.4. One generation passes, and another generation comes.

1 These. 5.10. Who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep we should live
together with him.

1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of
this world? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? Ver. 27. God
has chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the wise: and the
weak things of this world, to confound the things which are mighty.

Phil. 4.17. I desire fruit that may abound to your account.

Psalm. 103.15. As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field so
he flourishes.

Heb. 11.16. But now they desire a better country, that is a heavenly:
wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for
them a City.

Psalm. 90.1^. So teach us to number our days (O Lord) that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom.

TEN ADMONITIONS Upon the Ten several Ages of a Man's Life: It being divided
into ten Sevens, in which is easily to be observed ten apparent changes in our
Apprehensions and Desires.
PSALM. 90.10. The age of a man is threescore years and ten, if strength
continue till fourscore years, yet is that strength but labor and sorrow, it
suddenly fails, and we are gone.


ALSO General Admonitions for the whole Life of Man.
ECCLES. 12.12. By these my son be admonished.

ECCLES. 4.13. Better is a poor and a wise child, then an old and foolish
King, who will no more be admonished.


HIS EPISTLE.
Children,
MY desire is to speak very plainly to you, in a low and common style, that so
the meanest capacity, may receive and understand my meaning. You are they that
are very near me in my generation, and for vicissitudes, and perhaps multitudes
of times (although, to speak properly, not much time, for our days be few and
evil) you are to pass and sojourn with me in my pilgrimage: and as my journey
draws toward an end, nearer the grave, the undoubted portion of mortality, so
your journeys likewise become shorter, and who knows the hour of his
dissolution, for our times are in thy hands O God. My account is great for you,
and my care is great of you (especially for the good of your eternity,) and my
commands are therefore great unto you, that with your best abilities you assist
me in it, and heartily endeavor to further my good account of you in the day
of trial: let our great and diligent care be, so to spend our time, that we
may live together (in the true and perfect service of our good God) for our
eternity: Let us take here comfort in those our friends who are gone, or shall
go out of this world, before us, [praemissi non anussi,] who lived and died in
the same faith and belief with us, and whose lives (as we may judge) have
answered their profession, that we (in the eternal mercy of the eternal
Father in Christ Jesus) shall upon our dissolution, meet them again, Rev c. 2.
(we being as they were, constant in all good duties to the end) and never part
one from the other, nor from the perfect service of our Creator for ever: This
may be (in some part) our hope and joy; but our great rejoicing must always
be, willingly and joyfully to submit to the will of God, and to his pleasure
for ever. This is not to be the work of a day, but of all the days of all our
lives; for a day soon passes away, and mortality is always at hand; therefore
beware of unpreparednesse, for if the tree fall ill, so it lies; upon this
moment (as it were) depends eternity; if then thou have not oil in thy lamp
the door of mercy is for ever shut; and who knows what a day may bring forth:
therefore seriously consider, fill your holy lamps with the burning oil of
piety and watch. And know, in case any of you become a Parent, that you owe
unto your Children, not only material subsistence for their bodies, but much
more to contribute spiritual things unto their better part their souls: and be
sure you principle them aright in the beginning of their days, so soon as they
can do or apprehend any thing, let it be good; and from the true principle of
loving and obeying our good God, even for his own sake, which will conduct us
to the right loving of our neighbor. I humbly bless our good God, that has
endued all of you with capacities and natural endowments, in some measure
capable of the best instructions: and withal I humbly crave his powerful
spirit upon your wills to improve them, and I trust your best compliances shall
not be wanting. Be sure you embrace and hold fast true love one toward
another; and although you had several Mothers, yet let your love and unity be
one, in faith and truth; and the One eternal God will undoubtedly give you the
incomprehensible blessing both of temporal and eternal peace: and will
strongly fortify you against any dejection at the deprivement of any temporal
blessings, whilst you truly consider the uncertainty of them, the difficulty
in well using of them, and the danger if abused: and that nothing is worthy our
serious thoughts, but what accompanies us to our eternal habitation, and goes
with us to that admirable, perfect and happy estate we shall most certainly
arrive unto, if we wean our selves from these worldly impediments that here
deface and clogge our souls, and only endeavor and esteem that good which
tends to the good of our eternity. The inward endowments of the mind are by
far more excellent than the outward adornments of the body; therefore let the
bottom and foundation of all thy endeavors be laid in pure and undefiled
religion, truly grounded upon the sacred Scriptures rightly understood [Sint
cast a deliciae meae scripturae tuae, nec faller in eis, O Deus meus, nec
fallam ex eis. August. Confess.] For except the Lord build the house the
workmen labor but in vain. We must all acknowledge and believe a most sacred
heavenly Deity; for whosoever come to almighty God aright, fitting for his
merciful and saving acceptance, must first know and believe that he is, and
that he is the rewarder of them that serve him True religion consists in the
knowledge of God and of our selves, (for it is a relative action between both,)
the office thereof is, to extol God to the utmost of our power, and to beat
down man as utterly lost, and then to furnish him with means to rise again; to
make him feel his misery and his weakness, to the end he may put his whole
confidence in God alone. Religion should knit and unite us to the author and
principal cause of our good, and reunite us to our first cause and root,
where, if we continue firm, we are thereby preserved in our perfection: and
contray, if we separate* we instantly faint and languish: True Religion does
make us give all honor to almighty God, and receive all benefit to our selves.
Glory be to God on high, and peace with men on earth. Almighty God must be
served with our hearts and spirits; it is the service answerable to his nature,
he is a spirit, then worship him in purity of spirit, this he requires and it
pleases him; the Father desires such worshippers: the most acceptable
sacrifice unto his sacred Majesty, is a pure, free and humble heart, this he
will not despise: A pure heart is a sacrifice to God, an innocent soul, an
innocent life. A holy man is a true sacrifice to God, his body is his Temple,
his soul is his a Image, his affections are his b offerings, his solemn
sacrifice is to imitate, serve and implore him. God is rich, and therefore
gives unto us poor, and therefore ask. Although all true worship be from the
inward spirit, yet nevertheless we must not contemn or disdain outward and
public service, which must be an assistant to the inward truth, by observing
ceremonies, orders and customs, with moderation, without vanity, ambition,
hypocrisy or covetousnes, as they may and do tend to the advancement of true
devotion in us; always remembering, that God will be served in spirit, and what
is performed by us otherwise, is rather for our selves then for God; for humane
respects and formal observances, then divine verity, which rather belongs to
manners and customs then the thing it self. Our vows and prayers to almighty
God should be always with this submission; Thy will be done O Lord, and not
mine: [ Tua voluntas Domine mea sit, and mea voluntas tuam semper sequatur, and
optime ci concordet, says a pious and ancient Father.] Take great heed of
asking any thing against the determination of his revealed will: his will is
that we ought to fit our selves to receive. We must think, speak and deal with
almighty God, as if all the world did behold us, and live and converse with the
world, as if God did behold us. We must take great care, not (upon any slight
occasion, or cursorily) to use the most sacred Name of God, but with
premeditation, obediently and reverently to speak and use it; his Name is holy,
and all honor is for ever due unto it. The divine providence being well
learned by us, does administer sufficient upholding comfort in all the chances
and changes of this life: We are most thankfully to acknowledge and submit to
this providence, which disposes all things to the best, to them that truly and
obediently acknowledge it, without which a Sparrow falls not, and with whom our
hairs are numbered: this is the staff of life, the blessed stay of comfort, on
which we safely rest in all the passages of our pilgrimage: this inward spirit
works quite contrary to the outward man, it makes us truly say, Thy will be
done (O God) and not mine; and not only say so, but heartily and thankfully
rejoice that so it is, knowing that it is best and only good for us: this
clears thy soul of grief and trouble, and fills thy heart with joy and gladness;
knowing that is done which is only good for thee, and that thy will is not
done; for had it been against divine providence, it would have produced thy
utter ruin and destruction, therefore for ever bless that most gracious
providence that has avoided it. Be diligent to find out the good of
necessity, it is a sweet herb, but grows not in every garden: it is an
especial branch of true wisdom, and teaches to take every thing by the right
end; the righteous and the wicked, the wise and the foolish, the true contented
and discontented, do all the same things, but not after the same manner, not
with the same apprehension, understanding and judgment, neither intending or
conducing to the same end and purpose, and therefore the operation in them is
not the same, but quite contrary. Nothing in this world is perfect, therefore
there is both good and evil, a right and a wrong use of them, the first
tending to true joy and comfort, the latter to sorrow and discontent.
Correction (upon search) discovers sin, and moves to repentance and
prevention. Not to rejoice (after serious thoughts) at the chastisements of
Gods providence, is a very evil sign of a wicked heart: we must be truly
sorrowful for sin which is the only cause of correction, not for the
correction; for the cause of the disease, not for the cure. Before I was
corrected I went astray, but now have I learned thy word. O blessed and sweet
correction, that leads and holds us in the way to eternal happiness: if
correction bring thee not comfort, with resolution (by the gracious assistance
of almighty God) and joy in amendment, search narrowly thy ways, for it is
greatly to be feared, they lead thee to eternal death. Correction is the sweet
beams of Gods love to soften us, that so we may receive the marks of his saving
mercy: take great heed thou be not as the Spider upon the Flower, that
gathers poison, nor as clay to the Sun, which is hardened by it: but be
thou as wax softened and fitted for impression; and as the Be, that gathers
honey from the Flower. I advise you to labor much in the Scriptures,
especially be very perfect in the new Testament, they are the medicine of life,
and in them rightly understood, is salve for every sore, and sound counsel in
all occasions. Labor to be a good text-man, for Scripture interprets it self,
although in some places there seems literal contradiction, yet the holy Spirit
tries all, and finds all, holy, right and good, tending to the all and only
good, our temporal and eternal peace, which cannot be taken from us. Psalm.
34.10. The Lions shall want and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord
shall not want any thing that is good; that is to say, they shall have all
good, spiritual and temporal, including in this word good, all such temporal
things as may be necessary to salvation (for whatsoever is contrary thereto, is
neither good nor profitable, but bad and pernicious) and therefore God does not
give temporal felicity to all his servants, but only to such of them as he
knows (with the help of his grace) will use it well to his honor and glory,
and to such it is a furtherance of salvation; whereas to wicked men, though it
be also Gods gift, yet it is not properly counted Gods gift to them, but evil
and punishment; not a blessing but a curse, not felicity but misery, by reason
that it makes them more insolent, proud and licentious, and by consequence
increases their damnation: this is the plain meaning of the Psalmist, and
accordingly will one Scripture interpret another. Again Psalm. 37.4. Delight thy
self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desire of thine heart. What is
that think you? plenty, credit, vain honor, ease, full tables, riches, etc.
No, no, but that in the want or fulness of these things you shall rest in
God, and therein have your full desire, that your will being united to the will
of God; you shall desire nothing but what is suitable to his will and pleasure,
and wholly rejoice in your will, that the will of God is done, which is only
good, and the best for you. Search not too curiously into Gods Majesty and
mysteries, lest thou be oppressed with the glory of them. Take great heed of
infecting thy judgment with false doctrine, be always most humble in the sight
of God, and offer unto him the chastity of an inward mind. Never cease from
good works during life, but lay up the treasure of all thy love in heaven, and
be assured that for thy well doing, thou shall have thy reward of true joy and
peace in mind and conscience in this life, as a heavenly gift (when earth
perhaps denies thee any) and perfect peace for thy eternity: and further know,
that who does a work never so good and laudable in it self, if he do it to
gain the applause of the world, more then out of duty and obedience to almighty
God, he shall have his reward, that is perhaps the vainglory he looked for, a
worldly reward, but not my reward, that is, the most blessed and glorious
reward of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, a heavenly reward, which he has
laid up eternally for his blessed Saints and servants in heaven. My wishes to
you are, that you will every one of you seriously observe my drift herein; and
that you will not only read and practice it, in the best construction for your
souls good, but that you will teach others so to do, especially your Children,
if God shall give you any; and to this join hearing, reading, prayer,
meditation, blessed alms and charity, and all other Christian duties, in true
love to almighty God for his own sake, to your neighbors for his Commandments
sake, and both for obedience sake unto his sacred Majesty. Consider, that as
one generation goes, so another comes, and it shall be only well to the
righteous; be righteous then and our good God will surely bless you, and in
the best time of his providence will bring us all together to eternal peace in
Christ Jesus. Children I do not command you to study, read or love this book
above others (by far more learned Authors) because of any oratory, wit or
learning there is showed in it; but because in its right construction (I trust)
it is pious, true and honest; and comes from a near related heart, that truly
desires and hopes (in the sweet and saving mercy of our good God) to live with
you all in the eternal and perfect welfare of your souls and bodies, when our
short, dangerous and various conditioned pilgrimages in this world are ended;
and that truly endeavors and desires the perfect welfare of your souls and
bodies, and the true conversion of both into the sincere love of our Creator,
more then all the world besides: therefore seriously consider this, and the
Lord give you perfect wisdom from heaven in all things. Amen.

Your Father H. M.

As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby.

Pet: i. 2.2. man on deathbed with skull and hourglass

Though infant vanities do us accuse
Yet humble innocence our God does choose
Death watches time time parts with every sand
Death and our time are partners hand in hand
And as the sands do change their glass
So I in change my life must pass
Advice or Admonition OF A FATHER.
There are three Ages principally distinguished in a Man's Life:

The first is Infancy, Childhood, Youth,
The second is Manhood, The third is Old age.
The first to be spent in learning from others, and therein our duty is, to be
diligent and love our Teachers;

For, Youth well spent a true foundation is
Of an immortal monument of bliss.
The second to be spent in more laborious learning both from our selves and
others, especially to know thy self, for man's heart is deceitful: do thou
present thy strength unto the Lord;

For, Thou can not find a better friend more fit,
To have thy strength, then he that gave thee it.
The third to be spent both in teaching others and thy self; for length of
days increases wisdom; and he that truly seeks, in time may find:

For, When deaths pale face appears, and wrinkled brow,
Thou know thy a^count is near, not when nor how.
Infancy and Childhood, Youth, strength and hoary age, if death prevent not
make our pilgrimage,

Jer. 4.31. FOr I have heard a voice as of a woman in travel, and the anguish
as of her that brings forth her first child.

Jer. 49.25. Anguish and sorrow have taken her as a woman in travel.

Deuteronomy. 12.30. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared.

Eccl. 9.12. So are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falls
suddenly upon them.

Matthew. 7.13. Wide is the gate, and broad the way that leads to destruction,
and many there be that go in thereat. Ver. 14. Strait is the gate, and narrow
is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it.

Romans 13.13. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying.
Ver. 14. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Romans 6.22. But now being made free from sin and become the servants of God,
ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. And 8.18. For
I reckon that the moment any afflictions of this life, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us.

1 Cor. 9.24. So run that you may obtain.

Zach. 4.10. For who has despised the day of small things?

Psalm. 89.47. Remember O Lord how short my time is.

Col. 4.5. Walk in wisdom redeeming the time.

Matthew. 26.41. Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.

2 Chronicles. 29.11. My son be not now negligent.

Matthew. 7.23. Depart from me ye that work iniquity.

Prove. 22.8. He that sows iniquity shall reap vanity.

Psalm. 90.12. So teach us to number our days that we may apply our hearts to
wisdom. And 103.15. As for man his days are as grass, as a flower of the
field so he flourishes. And 144. ver. 4. Man is like to vanity, his days are
as a shadow that soon passes away.

Heb. 3.7. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Ver. 13.
Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfullnesse of sin.

Exodus 22.29. Thou shall not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits.

Psalm. 119.60. I made haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

Job 11.23, 14. If thou prepare thy heart, and stretch out thy hands toward
him; if inquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness
dwell in thy tabernacles.

Psalm. 119.137, 140. Righteous art thou O Lord, and upright are thy judgments:
thy Word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it.

Psalm. 64.9, 10. And all men shall fear, and shall declare the works of God:
for they shall wisely consider of his doings. The righteous shall be glad in
the Lord and shall trust in him: and all the upright in heart shall glory.

Jam. 4.14. Whereas you know not what shall be to morrow, for what is your
life, it is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes
away.

Psalm. 89.48. What man is he that lives and shall not see death, shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave.

Prove. 14.32. The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but the righteous
has hope in his death.

INfancy the first Age, is like passing through the red Sea, in this is
required patience, this is our first footing into the wilderness, to which we
pass through the bloody sea of our distressed mother; afflicting her with
sorrow, that first tells us of a land of rest. And why should nature thus
behave her self, to seem ungrateful to her dearest nurce, and Viper-like, to
kill and tear her damme? it may be this, because there is a dangerous
wilderness to pass through, before we come to this Land of Promise, and many
by-ways and broad paths in it leading all to destruction, and only one strait
way and narrow path there is that leads to Canaan, and hard it is, and few
there are that find it: and being once set down in this wandering desert, if we
miss this strait way, and go a deadly path, woe is to us that ever we
undertook it, better had it been for us if we had not been born. But as the
loss is most sad, so is the right ordering of our way, and following this
strait path, most joyful in the end: for what are afflictions, if through them
we enter into the Kingdom of God, of which the momentany afflictions of this
life are not worthy; and unless we undertake this journey, unless we run,
we cannot obtain, we cannot have the prize, the bliss. This is the day of
small things, the beginning of days unto us, the beginning of our precious
time, so swift a steed, that if he once pass we cannot bring him back;
therefore let us improve the time because the days are evil, be very vigilant
that it pass not in vain. Some times there are, which are taken from us; some
are stolen from us; and others slip away from us; but the shamefullest loss
of time that may be, is when it proceeds from our own negligence. We see a
great part of time flitteth from all men, very much from idle persons, and the
whole from those that love iniquity; therefore ought we to put a great price
upon time, to esteem of a day, and to know that we dye daily; for herein are
we deceived, because we suppose death to be far from us, when the truth is,
death holds all our years in his possession, therefore embrace and lay hold on
every hour. So shall thou be blessed in suspense for to morrow, if thou fasten
thy hands on to day; whilst life is deferred it fleeteth, therefore make good
use of time while thou have it, for infinite are the ways that end it to thee.
It is a very evil thing, to delay the performing of good duties in this life,
which is very short, if thou would fortify and provide against the pursuit
of a powerful enemy, then more especially against the power of death, it is
more worthy to consummate life, before death, then to delay the living of a
blessed life, and death take us unprepared, the greatest loss is the loss of
time, and the greatest grief, when it is truly considered. A good life
consists not in the space, but use of time, whence it comes to pass, that
he who has lived longest has often lived little, or nothing. As the heathen
Philosopher wisely observed of one, who neglected the improvement of his time,
Quod octoginta Annorum fuit, septem tamen Annos tantum vixit; accounting only
that life, which was spent with prudence and circumspection. Consider when thou
lie down, it may be thou shall not rise, when thou sleep, thou may not
awake, and when thou wakest thou may sleep no more: Ut somnus mori is, sic
lectus imago sepulchri. When thou go forth thou may not return, and when
thou returnest, thou may go forth no more, there is not three fingers only
betwixt the Mariner and death, but in all places, and at all times, death and
life are not far asunder; every where death shows not himself so nigh, as
nigh he is: but live thou the life of the righteous, and thou shall surely die
the death of the righteous, which is the sure gain of eternal life in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

woman with skull and hourglass Train up a child in the way he should go: and
when he is old, he will not depart from it.

Pro: 22.6 As days increase so must increase our will
To do what is good and to avoid what is -- ill
Death is most certain but the instant when
Is most uncertain to all mortal men.
So soon as one sand dropps, the next does follow
Life's here to day, and death takes place to morrow.


Psalm. 22.26. The meek shall eat and be satisfied. And 25.9. The meek will he
guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.

1 Samuel 2.3. Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let no arrogance come out of
thy mouth, for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.

Prove. 3.13. Happy is he that finds wisdom, and that gets understanding.
And Ver. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace.

Psalm. 50.14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high.

Deuteronomy. 6.2. That thou might fear the Lord thy God, to keep all his statutes
and his Commandemonts which I command thee, thou and thy son, and thy sons
son all the days of thy life, and that thy days may be prolonged.

Psalm. 34.11. Come ye children hearken to me, I will teach you the fear of the
Lord.

Psalm. 111.10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good
understanding have all they that do thereafter, and obey his Commandments.

Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy
Commandments.

Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures diligently. Psalm. 119.24. Thy testimonies are
my delight, and my counselors. And 37.4. Delight thy self also in the Lord,
and he shall give thee the desire of thy heart.

Romans 12.10. Be kindly affectioned one toward another with brotherly love.

Eccl. 1.4. One generation passes and another comes. And 12.1. Remember now
thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the
years draw nigh, when thou shall say I have no pleasure in them.

Jude v. 7. As Sodom and Gomorrah are set for our examples, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire.

1 These. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.

Eccl. 9.3. There is an evil among all things that are done under the Sun,
that there is one event to all; yea also the hearts of the sons of men are
full of evil and madness while they live, and after that they go down to the
dead.

Ephesians. 6.11, 13. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil, that ye may stand in the evil day.

Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find
me.

Psalm. 63.1. O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee.

Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth.

Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature the children of wrath.

Jude v. 20. But what they know naturally as bruit beasts, in those things they
corrupt themselves.

2 Pet. 3.1, 2. In both which I stir up your willing minds by way of
remembrance, that ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by
the holy Prophets, and of the Commandments of us the Apostles of the Lord our
Savior.

Romans 2.21. Thou therefore that teach another, teach not thou thy self?
thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal?

Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false prophets (or teachers) which come to you in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.

THe second Age is termed Childhood, a right wandering in the wilderness, in
which meekness is required. The first we discovered and commenced our time,
now it is requisite to speak something of Action, which is the life of a man in
his time, of this I would (by the help of God) admonish in order, according to
the several steps and degrees of capacity. Such action as concerns this second
Age, is the beginning truly to relish and entertain wholesome doctrine and
admonition, such as tend to our temporal, but especially to our eternal
welfare: Now that we are entered into this wholesome Land, and possed the danger
of a seven-years journey, in the troublesome pilgrimage of this mortality, it
is good that we apply our minds, how we may become serviceable to our
merciful Creator, and employ our appointed time in his Vineyard, like
faithful servitors, that when he comes or calls, we may be ready to pass our
account with joy and comfort, and not with grief. In this Age we are to proceed
in those little footsteps of learning, which probably (if not much neglected)
has been laid out to us in the former Age. Foundations ought to be of the most
lasting materials, because if they fail, the whole building is in danger, and
they are most hard and unusual to be removed; therefore let thy first learning
be the best, and that is thy duty to thy Maker, which comprehends the
general performance of all duty: Learn divine precepts, especially the old and
new Testament, that may make thee wise to salvation, and that will by Gods
mercy bring on a delight in prayer, in reading and hearing the Word of the
Almighty. Instruct a child while he is young, and he will remember it
afterward: Never teach a child that which is evil, which he must either
leave, or be untaught; ingraft brotherly love one in another, ever rejoicing in
one another welfare, but especially in the good of your eternity. Now thou
must begin to take some notice of passages, and accidents, that do, may, or
have befallen thee, or some near thee; especially of the death and mortality of
thy friend or acquaintance; for often to think of death, is a great means to be
well prepared for it: and taking notice of passages and casualty in others,
fits us for changes and alterations that must befall our selves. About this
time it is, that corrupted youth begins to make excuse for faults, but do thou
fly the faults and it is sufficient. Strive to know good from evil, then
follow the good, and be sure to avoid all appearances of evil: he hardly
recovers health, that knows not he is sick: if we begin not our cure betime,
when shall we cast off those many plagues and sicknesses that begirt us. A
Christian must be an expert Spiritual Soldier, and therefore must learn
betime to put on his whole armor of salvation: we must begin to reform and
correct our minds, before they be confirmed in wickedness and corruption:
corrupted nature proffers no man a good mind before an evil, therefore is the
mind to be enforced, so shall the medicine prove sweet while it cures. Of
other remedies there are certain pleasures after health: Divinity is both
wholesome and pleasing; it is very necessary that Tutors and teachers of
Children, and all that company with them be religiously disposed, gentle and
peaceable; example, in this age especially, prevails much beyond precept; that
which is tender lays hold on that which is near unto it, grows with it, and
is fashioned to it: Nurces and Masters are often imitated by Children, and more
often in their vices then virtues, by how much in humane things the bad exceeds
the good; therefore timely and diligent heed must be prepared against them,
that so the Cokatrice and subtle Serpent may be killed betime, broken in the
egg, before it show a deceitful countenance; lest the dissembling Wolf,
having gotten a Sheeps clothing, deceive the innocent Lambs, and bring them
unawares into his slaughterhouse of destruction.

-- Nunc adhibe pure
Pectore verba puer, nunc te melioribus offer:
Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem
Testa diu --
Horat. Now Child in the white paper of thy breast
Write Virtue: now such Precepts from the best
A Pot well seasoned holds the primitive taste
A long time after --
2 Chronicles. 34.3. For while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of
David his father.

Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way, by taking heed
thereto according to thy word.

Prove. 1.4. To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and
discretion.

Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, aad he shall direct thy paths.

Psalm. 5.3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning O Lord, in the morning will
I direct my prayer unto thee and will look up.

Isa. 45.13. I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his
ways.

Jer. 10.23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in
man that walks to direct his steps.

Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the fountain of life, in thy light shall we see
light.

Rev. 7.17. For the Lamb that is in the midst of the throne shall feed them,
and lead them unto living fountains of water, and God shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes.

Phil. 4.8. If there be any virtue think of these things.

2. Pet. 1.3. According to his Divine power, he has given to us all things
that pertain to this life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that
has called us to glory and virtue. Ver. 5. Add to faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge. Ver. 6. To knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience godliness. and to godliness brotherly kindness.

Luke 10.42. Mary has chosen the good part which shall not be taken from her.

Luke 10.42. Mary has chosen the good part which shall not be taken from her.

Joh. 6.27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that meat which
endures unto everlasting life.

Prove. 11.28. He that trusts in his riches shall fall.

Matthew. 23.6. The Scribes and Pharisees love the uppermost rooms and chief
seats. Ver. 7. And greetings in the marketplace, and to be called of men
Rabbi. Ver. 12. Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

Matthew. 25.48. But if the evil servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delays
his coming, Ver. 49. And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat
and drink with the drunken, the Lord of that servant shall cut him in sunder.

Romans 7.23. But I see another Law in my members, warring against the Law of my
mind.

Neh. 9.37. They have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle at their
pleasures, and we are in great distrasse.

Prove. 12.21. There shall no evil happen to the just, but the wicked shall be
killed with mischief.

Eccl. 12.13. Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty
of man.

Ephesians. 5.19. Quench not the spirit.

Psalm. 119.16. I made haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and
open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him and he with me.

Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. But because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched
out my hand and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and
would none of my reproof, I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when
your fear comes.

Prove. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom, and with
all thy gettings get understanding.

Eccl. 7.8. The patient in spirit, is better then the proud in spirit.

2 Cor. 11.2. For I am jealous over you with a a godly jealousy, for I have
espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste vergin to Christ.

Psalm. 51.12. O Lord uphold me with thy free spirit. And 143.10. Teach me to
do thy will, for thou art my God: Thy spirit is good, lead me into the land of
uprightness.

Prove. 16.32. He that rules his spirit is better then he that takes the City.
And 20.27. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the
inward prrts of the blly.

Psalm. 22.20. The meek shall eat and be satisfied. And 25.9. The meek will he
guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.

Phil. 2.8. And being found in fashion of a man, he humbled himself and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.

Jer. 9.3. But they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth, for they
proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, says the Lord.

Psalm. 60.12. Through God we will do valiantly, for he it is that shall tread
down our enemies.

1 These. 5.6. Let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober.
And ver. 8. Let us that be of the day be sober, putting on the breast plate of
faith and love, and for a helmet the hope of salvation.

Col. 4.6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye
may know how you ought to answer every man.

Eccl. 10.10. Wisdom is profitable to direct. And 9.16. Wisdom is better then
strength. And v. 18. Wisdom is better then weapons of war, but one sinner
destroys much good.

INfancy and Childhood being passed like the red Sea and the wilderness; the
next and third Age is called Youth (like passing over Jordan) and therein is
temperance to be carefully planted: This is a dangerous and a difficult
passage, and our guide herein must be supernatural: it is not humane light
that can direct us in this way, it must be a coal taken from the Altar, and a
Candle enlightened at the holy Lamp, that must protect us in this voyage; here
we must take and endear unto us the living fountain of life, to curb the
threatening floods of death: here Virtues show your strength, or vice will soon
prevail and conquer; here you must wage a war with Epicures and other vain
professors, that in vain glorious pastimes talk of Virtues, and make them
handmaids to their vicious pleasures, whereas no true pleasure is without them;
for that is not Virtue, which waits on delight, the chiefest place is hers,
and she it is that must lead, command and be obeyed. Take great heed of being
bond-slave to delight, for all is vain where Virtue has no place; Virtue only
gives perpetual and assured joy, although there be some obstacles, which are
as foggy mists which never surmount the Sun; to obtain this no labor is too
great, nor any pains too high a price to make us thus affected; true worth is
to be well composed unto Virtue; all that is honorably performed, one only
Virtue does it, although it be by advice and counsel, for there is an
inseparable society of all Virtues; when any endures affliction constantly,
young man with skull and hourglass Where with shall a young man cleanse his
way! by taking heed, thereto according to thy word.

Psalm: 119.9. When strength and health like to the loaded glass
Are fall at height remember they must pass
Since like this head thy head must be
Hate pride and love humilitye.
Noe pas-time needs times steed is passing fleet
Time present, and time past each moment greet.
stantly perhaps he imployes all his Virtues, although but one discovers it
self at hand, which is his Patience. Virtue is that which properly belongs to a
wise man, and cannot be taken from him, bloody Tyrants have no power over this;
those goods are true and only worthy our serious endeavors to obtain, which
cannot be taken from us; as for riches, honor, precious-stones, gold, silver,
epicures feasts and such like, they are but earthly burdens, which a sincere
mind, and such as is not forgetful of his nature cannot love, because nature
spiritualized is always light, and will mount as high as heaven as soon as it
sees the gate open; in the mean while (as far as these bonds of the body, and
mass of the flesh which environeth the same will permit) upon the wings of a
sudden and swift thought, it visits and vieweth celestial things, and
examineth both time past and that which is to come; whereas this frail body,
the fetters and gives of the soul, is tossed hither and thither, punishments,
thefts, and sicknesses are exercised upon it; but a virtuous mind is sacred
and eternal, and wicked hands cannot lay hold to hurt it. Endeavor to obtain,
and keep thy self very close to all kind of Virtue which the holy Spirit shall
upon any occasion dart into thy mind, and take great heed thou quench not the
holy Spirit in thee, by sleighting, neglecting, refusing or delaying to make
good use of the good motions thereof; for (doubtless less) all men have (at
one time or other) offers and opportunities of grace, which if he make no good
use of, his damnation is surely just. I will in this place only name and
particularize some choice Virtues which I admonish you diligently to labor
for, and I will but name them, as it were, because I purpose God willing to
discourse more fully of them hereafter. The first is Wisdom, which teaches all
duty to thy Maker, thy self, and thy neighbor; this is a principal thing,
therefore get wisdom, and above all thy gettings get understanding; then get
Patience which conquereth the world, and fits thee to receive all the sweet
corrections of thy Maker with joy and comfort; remember the patience of Job,
and the sweet and pleasant fruits thereof. Then get Chastity, whereby thy body
and mind will be a fit Tabernacle for the holy Ghost to dwell in, and in the
power of the holy Spirit subdue natural corruption to the blessed Law and
rules of true piety and religion. Next Meekness: Moses was the meekest man
upon the earth (says the Text Numb. 12.3. Matthew. 5.5. Blessed are the meek,
for they shall inherit the earth,) and see his favor with almighty God. Then
Humility: O remember how our blessed Savior humbled himself for our salvation,
therefore there is no true Christian without true humility. Next get Fortitude
and true valor, but be sure thy cause be religious, right and good. Then
Sobriety and watchfullnesse, especially over thy self, and therein show thy
true fortitude and valor, in conquering and controuling thy natural passions,
subjecting them to the upright rules of reason and religion; here is great use
and need of temperance, lest heady and self-conceited youth, think and presume
to run before he can go; Temperance gives a sweet relish and seasoning to all
the virtues: and it is perpetually required in controversies and contestations,
trouble and divisions, this virtue bridles pleasant things that deceive the
senses, and by serious consideration takes the good of things obdurate. As true
Fortitude is a spur in adversity, so Temperance is a bridle in prosperity; with
these two we may subdue our passions, and carry our selves wisely in all
accidents, which is a high point of wisdom. This is the bridle of the soul,
and hereby we wean it from the sweet milk of the pleasures of this world, and
makes it fit for better nourishment, which heaven direct us in for the good
mercy thereof, Amen.

Numb. 21.3. And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel and delivered up the
Canaanites, and they utterly destroyed them and their Cities.

Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil.
And Chap. 9. ver. 3. Also the hearts of the sons of men are full of evil,
and madness is in their hearts while they live.

Prove. 8.12. I wisdom dwell with prudence.

2 Chronicles. 2.12. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, that made heaven and earth,
who has given to David the King a wise son, endued with prudence and
understanding.

Prove. 23.12. Apply thy heart to instruction, and thy ears to the words of
knowledge. And 4.24. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the
issues of life.

2 Cor. 8.12. For if there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to what
a man has, and not according to that he has not.

Prove. 23.19. Hear thou my son, and be wise and guide thy heart in the way.

Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me
into glory.

Isa. 2.5. O house of Jacob come ye let us walk in the house of the Lord. Isa.
1.18. Come now let us reason together, says the Lord.

Prove. 19.11. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory
to pass over a transgression. And 27.4. Wrath is cruel, anger is outrageous.

Eccl. 7.9. Anger rests in the bosom of fools.

Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to anger is better then the mighty, and he that
rules his spirit, then he that takes a City. And 29.1. He that being often
reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy.

Psalm. 34.12. What man is he that desires life, and loves many days that he
may see good. Ver. 13. Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak
no guile. Ver. 14. Depart from evil and do good, seek peace and ensue it.

Eccl. 7.12. The excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom gives life to them
that have it.

Prove. 12.28. In the way of righteousness there is life, and in the pathway
thereof there is no death.

Josh. 1.8. This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night.

Psalm. 119.15. I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy
Laws. And 143.5. I meditate on all thy works, and remember the days of old.
And 55.14. We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in
company.

Matthew. 7.5. Pull out the beam out of thy own eye, then shall thou see clearly
to pull out the moat out of thy brothers eye.

Prove. 11.28. He that trusts in riches shall fall, but the righteous shall
flourish as a branch.

1 Timothy 6.7. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high
mended, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us
richly all things to enjoy.

Psalm. 7.15. He made a pit and dug it, and is fallen into the pit which he
made.

Prove. 26.27. Who so diggeth a pit shall fall therein.

Psalm. 9.15. The heathen are sink down in the pit that they made, in the net
which they hid, is their own foot taken. And 10.2. Let them be taken in the
devices, which they have imagined.

Prove. 11.6. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them, but
transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness.

Eccl. 3.1. There is a time to every purpose under heaven.

1 Cor. 7.20. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called.

Ezra 7.10. For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the Law of the Lord and to
do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments.

Psalm. 119.115. Depart from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the Commandment
of my God. And 9^. O how I love thy Law, it is my meditation all the day. And
99. I have more understanding then all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my
meditation.

Eccl. 10.1. Through idleness the house droppeth through.

THe next Age is vulgarly called Manhood, and that may be somewhat like
destroying of the wicked after our dangerous passage into Canaan, for the heart
of man is desperately wicked from his youth: Now search for wisdom, now is the
corrupted earth fit for fruit; here is required prudence and true humility: if
we sleep in pride and self-opinion, the destroyer sowes his tares: the heart of
man is like a fruitful ground, that must be labored, weeded and sown with
good seed, else briars and thorns will soon spring up and cover it. To a right
ordering of our selves in this condition, what great occasion have we of right
ruled reason, and true celestial wisdom, which makes so wise to salvation,
that it raises a man far above all terrestrial and diabolical attempts, so
that they cannot hurt or violate it. The mind is the most excellent part of a
man, prudence and humility is an especial guide to it; by the mind are
actions tried, as we there relish, so are our attempts, how needful then is
the guide of perfect reason; it is the hand that guides the mind, to promote
and allow those things only which are honest, good and profitable, and abhor
and avoid the contrary: it is the light of the Lord unto us, whereby we may
discern good and evil, it is that which names us men, and only maks us differ
from the beasts. Our good is said to be consummate, if we have fulfilled that
to which we were born, which is true reason, sufficient not only to foresee,
but to execute an action. Take great heed to avoid all the enemies to this sure
guide, among the rest avoid anger; for what is more foolish, then that reason
man with skull and hourglass Fly youthful lusts but follow after righteousness,
faith charity, peace with the pure in heart

Tim: 2.2.22. Take heed unto thy stepps lest Satan's rage
Do snare thee running in thy pilgrimage
To rotten bones I must be sent
Unless resurrection does prevent
The constant motion of this running glass
Puts me in mind how lif's swift steed does pass
should seek assistance from wrath; a stable thing from an uncertain, a
faithful from a perfidious, a whole from a sick: in those actions themselves
wherein the help of anger seems to be most requisite, reason it self is more
strong; the very designs of reason and wrath are different, for reason will
have that judged which is right, but wrath will have that seem right which she
judges, and although the truth be laid before hereyes, she loves and
maintains error, she will not be reproved, and in evil enterprises, she
esteems it more honest to be obstinate, then to repent her self; cursed wrath
that will be angry with truth her self if it oppose her will. Is it wisdom
only that makes us differ from beasts, and is it our best guide to the well
ordering of our lives? then let us inquire into the properties of this wisdom,
that so we may adorn our selves therewith: Some will have it that a wise man
can receive no wrong (as to himself) for by his patience, and right
understanding of the end of all conditions, the evil rests upon the author and
actor of it: Also wise men only know to whom to give, and how to bestow the
benefits, and are very much content with their serious thoughts and
meditations, and do not permit external things to add or detract much from
them. The company and advice of wise men is very profitable, for that they are
not subject to motion of anger, neither can they be moved with disorder, or
entangle themselves with miseries, and in condemning others faults, they
always begin with their own: as for outward riches, they use them as servants,
but fools use them as commanders. Some have conceived, that evil in it self is
only evil to him that offers it, that which offends ought to have more
force then that which is offended, but vice has not more force then virtue,
whereupon it follows, that wise men cannot be offended; they are patient and
apply all things to the best remedy, brideling their passions, and judging all
evil otherways then the passionate, and converting all to good: Wisdom seeks
no revenge, for that properly belongs to God; Vengeance is mine, and I will
repay, says the Lord; from whose forbearance and long-suffering we may learn
patience: wherefore to avoid strife, is a remedy against much trouble, and it
is a true point of wisdom, to be prepared against all appearances of evil
with constancy: to that end betake thy self to some honest employment, for thou
shall find it most necessary and beneficial unto thee, to spend thy time in
some honest calling, which must by no means hinder thy constant devotion and
meditation. All callings may be abused, and a man may be wicked and violate his
soul, or he may be upright, in any of them: but of all, I only advise from a
soul hers life, wherein me thinks the soul is made subject to the body, which
is the ready way of ruin to them both; for that a man does bind himself to
kill his neighbor at every order and command of another, without examination
or knowledge of the cause or matter; wherefore (as for other irreligious
exorbitancies almost wholly overspreading that profession) I esteem it a
calling most subject to temptations, and therefore spiritually dangerous, if
not with most serious care performed, Luke 3.14. Wherein I do not condemn or
wholly disallow in any case the taking up of Arms, but I counsel and advise
that it be not undertaken without most pious care and circumspection, which may
(by the mercy of the God of hosts) obtain his blessed guidance and direction
and preservation from those manifold dangerous allurements and temptations
incident to that employment, which strongly press to the distraction of the
soul, with which the body must participate. Time is a root that certainly
brings forth many branches, many casualties and changes it does produce to all
mortality, and nothing befits a man better to entertain such passages, then
such a calling and employment, as when evil presents it self to us, we may
have ready at hand honest and just actions, to assist pious and holy
meditations, from which we (by the gracious mercy of God) shall receive much
comfort, and never be ashamed; whereas idleness and want of good and honest
action is a root for any evil.

Psalm. 103.26. All of them shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed.

Hos. 4.7. And they sinned against me, therefore will I change their glory into
shame.

Isa. 65.21. They shall build houses and inhabit them, and they shall plant
vineyards and cat the fruit thereof. And 66. v. 2. For all those things has my
hand made, and all those things have been, says the Lord; but to this man will
I look, even to him that is pure and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles
at my word.

2 Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh.

Gal. 5.16. Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. Ver. 19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are those,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, etc.

Prove. 19.14. Houses and riches are inheritances of the fathers, but a prudent
wife is from the Lord. Ver. 2. The contentions of a wife is a continual
dropping.

1 Cor. 7.8. I say therefore to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them
if they abide as I. Ver. 9. But if they cannot contain, let them marry, for it
is better to marry then to burn.

Matthew. 19.12. And there be Eunuchs which make themselves Eunuchs for the
kingdom of heavens sake.

Psalm. 106.39. Thus they were defiled with their own works.

Prove. 11.14. Where no counsel is the people fall, but in the multitude of
counselors there is safety And 15.22. Without counsel purposes are
disappointed, but in the multitude of counselors they are established.

Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor stands in the way of sinners nor sits in the seat of the scornful.
And 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me into
glory.

Jer. 40.7. Is counsel perished from the prudent, is their wisdom vanished?

Psalm. 106.13. They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his counsel.
Ver. 14. But lusted excredingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in the
desert. Ver. 15. And he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their
souls.

Prove. 8.11. Wisdom is better then rubies, and all the things that may be
desired are not to be compared to her. And v. 14. Counsel is mine and sound
wisdom, I am understanding and have strength. Ver. 19. My fruit is better
then Gold, yea then fine Gold, and my revenue then choice Silver. Ver. 20. I
lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment.

Prove. 7.1. etc. My Son keep my commandments, and hide my words with thee,
keep my commmandements, and live, and my law as the apple of thy eye: bind
them upon thy fingers, write them upon the tables of thy heart, say unto
wisdom, thou art my Sister, and call understanding thy Kinswoman: that they
may keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger which flattereth with
her words. Ver. ^. I descried among the youth a young man void of
understanding. Ver. 10. And behold there met him a woman, with the attire of an
Harlot, and subtle of heart, she is loud and stubborn, her feet abide not in
her house, for she caught him and kissed him, and with an impudent face said
unto him, I have peace offering with me, this day have I paid my vows,
therefore come I forth to meet thee dilligently, to seek thy face and have
found it. Ver. 18. Come let us take our fill of love. Ver. 21. With much fair
speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forced
him. Ver. 22. He goes after her straight way as an Ox goes to the slaughter,
or as a fool to the correction of the stocks. Ver. 23. Till a dart strike
through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is
for his life.

Prove. 6.23. The commandment is a lamp, and the law is light, and reproves
of instruction are the way of life. Ver. 24. To keep thee from the evil
woman, from the flattery of the tongue of the strange woman. Ver. 25. Lust not
after her beauty in thy heart, neither let her take thee with her eyelids.
Ver. 27. Can a man take fire in his bosom and his clothes not be burnt?

Gal. 5.6. This I say, walk in the spirit and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of
the flesh.

Jam. 1.4. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts and
entised. Ver. 15. When lust is conceived it brings forth sin, and sin
when it is finished brings forth death,

1 John 2.16, 17. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father but of the world, and
the world passes away and the lusts thereof, but he that does the will of God
abides for ever.

THe next Age still goes on in Manhood (although in it, if we observe) we
shall find of necessity many extraordinary changes and alterations; therefore
now we are entered into this promised Land of our pilgrimage, and have in some
measure destroyed the wicked, it is convenient in this place to seek out a
fitting habitation, that so we may plant a Vineyard and drink the wine thereof
with thankfulness: here is the blessed gift of Chastity much required; about
this time, and before this too often and too soon, fond youth is apt to think, it
is not good to be alone, there is much promised relicity in a married life, but
how narrow is the way that leads to this most difficult happiness, how many
thousand ways are there that lead to misery in it! If thou meanest to take
upon thee a married life, seek earnestly by prayer and true reason for heavenly
guidance in it, that which can be but once done, how great need is there that
it be well done: we are very apt to desire change, and not to be content with a
providentiall disposement; as also to think our own and present condition to be
very ill, or the worst that may be: (prayer, humility, true devotion, the
uncertainty of life, the certainty of death, the mercy and justice of God, with
fervent and constant meditation and practice herein, may by the mercy of God
make an Eunuch for the kingdom of Heavens sake,) but if it be that it is better
for thee to marry then to burn, take along with thee these advisements from a
Father, which if thou well observe (by Gods assistance therein) thou may do
well: I cannot make them absolute, for that there is nothing so bad, but some
man with skull and hourglass I will praise thee for I am wonderfully made,
marvelous are thy works O Lord.

Psalm: 139.14. All reason tell's me as the Creatures do
We have a maker and redeemer too
Though conquering time does make me rott
Yet shall I live when time is not
Man is but changed for man, and till his death
Like changeing sand, still changes for beneath
good may be extracted from it, not any thing so good but secundary causes may
produce evil by it, yet some things are so near the producing a necessity to
evil, that I wish thee take heed how thou touchest pitch least thou be
defiled: study what thou art and know what thou may be, before thou have
passed these ten Ages, then suite the uncorrupted desires and appetites of thy
soul in a woman before she be thy wise, least after it be too late: know well,
her nature, inclination, education, parentage, private devotion, and ordinary
employment, that after knowledge do not trouble thee: My first advice to thee
is, not to marry except thy best friends counsel and wish thee to it, before
twenty years of age in a woman, and twenty five in a man, about which time (by
Gods grace) thou may have a little knowledge of good and evil. Secondly, let
not money, beauty, or friends, be the greatest inducement to thy choice, for
these things all fade, and so thy due affection may also fail, but choose such
a one as may cheerfully walk with thee, in Christ to Christ, and in that walk
thou may find a true and lasting refreshment. Thirdly, be very circumspect
how thou marriest one that before was married, it may do well, but I can give
no encouragement to it, for it seems as good for thee to make thy partner, as
for another to make thy house, whereby we commonly avoid great loss, but
always great hazard. Fourthly, it is good to choose equality in parentage, and
proportion, in some reasonable measure; and if greater then thy proportion in
these, be offered, search narrowly least there be a Serpent in the grass, least
these adorn the Owner, and not the Owner these. Fifthly, endeavor thy living
in some wholesome air, where (by the blessing of God) thou may probably have
health in thy family. Sixthly, let thy partner be of a strong and healthy habit
of body, for that a sickly constitution endangereth the loss both of estate
and affection. Seventhly, having made thy choice, and providence having therein
determined and finished his appointment, do thou as the admired Be, that takes
honey out of sower herbs, and let nothing be so bitter to thee, that thou
should not convert it to some good use, moving thee to true Christian
contentment, and do thou joyfully delight thy self in all the providence of
God toward thee, especially when thou see his pleasure so fully determined
and concluded, hate all desire to change, increase, and nourish all good
honest, and contented inclinations, and besure to subdue, hate, and and avoid
all appearances of evil; murmuring or dislike of thy choice, and know that we
are all here, but in our journey, the way of our pilgrymage, which so it lead
to Heaven, happy is that passage: for the seas are rough through which we must
sail to eternal Peace, or not attain it. Now a word or two concerning
chastity or continency, because it is very difficult; and must have a careful
and painful guard, for it is no easy matter wholly to resist nature, which
herein is strong and ardent, but the more obstinate the enemy, the more
commendable the conquest. To be truly chaste out of due obedience to the
commands of God, is alike Virtue laudable in men as women: Now because this is
a violent passion and deceitful, we must arm our selves against it, and be
wary to discover its baits, and the more it flattereth us, the more to distrust
it, it would willingly embrace us to strangle us, pamper us with honey to glut
us with gall. Unchaste incontinency has many great inconveniences and dangers;
it consumes the body, and (as some say) effeminates the soul, weakens the
spirit, and that many by giving way thereto, have lost both lives, fortunes and
spirits; and it does appear true, that there is more pleasure in vanquishing
pleasure, then in possessing it; the best of earthly things often breeds
repentance, but the worst always. There are many kinds and degrees of
chastity, continency and incontinency, of which the conjugall continency is a
chief and principal, it must be kept and retained within the chaste breast of
that party whom almighty God has disposed of in marriage for our companion,
and whosoever does otherwise, violates his or her own body, by the Law of God
which commands chastity therein, by the Law of nature, which forbids that to be
common which is proper to one, and imposes upon faith and constancy by the Law
of nations, and by the Law of Justice, equity and right, which if we violate
and offend, the justice of heaven must justly punish us. Heb. 13.4.
Whoremongers and adulterers, God will judge.

Isa. 65.21. And they shall build houses and inhabit them, and they shall plant
vineyards and eat the fruit of them.

Luke 6.44. Every tree is known by his fruit, for of thorns men do not gather
figgs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes.

1 Chronicles. 28.7. I will establish his Kingdom for ever, if he be constant to
do my Commandments and my judgments.

1 Samuel 2.3. The Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.

Matthew. 5.44, 45. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that dispightfully use
you and persecute you, that ye may be the children of your Father which is in
Heaven; for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
sends rain on the just and on the unjust.

Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary of well doing.

Rev. 1.10. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the Crown of
life.

2 Pet. 1.5. Giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to your virtue
knowledge. Ver. 6. To knowledge temporance, to temporance patience, to patience
godliness. Ver. 7. To godliness brotherly kindness, to brotherly kindness
charity. Ver. 8. For if these be in you and abound they will make you that you
shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Ver. 9. But he that lacks these things is blind.

1 John ^.15. Love not the world, nor the things of the world, if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

Prove. 14.14. The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, and a
good man shall be satufied from himself.

Psalm. 34. from the 10th to the end. The young Lions do lack and suffer
hunger, but they that fear the Lord shall not want any thing that is good. Come
my children hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. What man is
he that desirech life and loves many days that he may see good? Keep thy
tongue from evil and thy lips that they speak no gu^l. Depart from evil
and do good, seek peace and ensue it. The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous, and his ears are open to their cry. The face of the Lord is against
them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth. The
righteous cry, and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their
troubles. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saves
such as be of a contrite spirit. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but
the Lord delivers him out of them all. He keeps all his bones, not one of
them is broken. Evil shall slay the wicked, and they that hate the righteous
shall be desolate. The Lord redeemeth the souls of his servants, and none of
them that trust in him shall be desolate.

Prove. 14.15, 16. The simple believes every word, but the prudent man looks
well to his goings. A wise man fears and departs from evil, but the fool
rages and is confident.

Eccl. 12.13. Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty
of man. Ver. 14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

NOw we have by the mercy of God obtained a fruitful plantation in this
promised Land, let us plant in it good and wholesome fruit, for men do not
gather grapes of thorns nor figgs of thistles. Here we may proceed in the sixth
Age of our Life, and third ascent of our Manhood, under the notion of constant
Action, and hereby our duty is, by all means to endeavor the good of all: the
heavens lead us to this by shining upon all without hopes of gain or requital:
showing thereby the duty of a good man to his neighbor; to be constantly
conversant in some good employment of the body, mind or both, is a very lively
branch of true virtue, which keeps a man unvanquished, and is not subject to
pleasures, and has its reward in it self: Virtue does alone bring forth solid
joy, and only enables a man to bear all the changes and chances of this life
with comfort; and do you rightly consider all the branches that proceed from
this root, and you will find that they are firmly united with linkes
unseparable; as all the branches of a tree have but one root to nourish them,
so all the Virtues have but one principal foundation, which is the doing all
things out of true obedience to the service and commands of almighty God,
therefore is true Virtue most highly to be aspired unto. Wisdom is a true
branch of it, which makes a man rightly to understand, the nature, use and
property of all things, and counts nothing evil but vice, which it is
always sufficiently fortified against, and cannot enter there man with skull
and hourglass Teach me o lord the way of thy statutes and I shall keep it
unto the end

Psalm: 119.33 Take heed of wasting time for when it is spent.
There Is noe redemption from the great Judgment.
Vain wretched pride behold within thy sight.
Is death or days falce pleasure or delight.
My daily dying friends that take their flight.
At highest noone, bid me remember night.
where virtue and honesty dwells: if injury be the sufferance of some evil,
and a wise man cannot suffer evil, then there is no evil that appertains to a
wise man: every injury is a diminution of him to whom it is offered, and no man
may receive injury without some detriment, either in good-Name, body or goods;
but a wise man can loose nothing, he has all his goods enclosed with the
enjoyment of true virtue; as for other things, he uses them as borrowed, and
what man is so much moved at the loss of what is not his own, but if injury
can attempt nothing which is proper to a wise man, because the whole is
conserved by his virtue, it must follow that a wise man cannot be injured,
because he sets not his heart upon earthly things, as if they were his own,
knowing that the possession of all those things that abound externally is
slippery and un-assured: plant then plentifully in the vineyard of Virtue, and
be thou a flourishing branch of this blessed root, so thou shall relieve others
with thy pleasant fruits, without diminishing of thy own store and plenty:
prosperity shall not puff thee up, nor adversity deject thee: true goods are
never subject to moth, rust and canker, neither can thieves break through and
steal them; heavenly riches shall have a heavenly reward, and earthly changes
cannot approach their dwelling. Wisdom will advise thee to be very careful
how thou do engage thy self either by word or action, especially amongst a
crowd, with a multitu^e; in a war, a civil war; against a Prince, a
present power; rather fly such a flame, if any convenience will permit avoid
the fire, while fury is fierce let it pass thee, for violent things are
seldom permanent. I cannot show you a certain way to avoid the dangers that
time and chance may bring upon you, or upon your country in your generations
for outward things, true virtue and inward treasure must secure you: it must be
wisdom, that heavenly gift, obtained by true and hearty prayer, and humble
obedience, that must guide your feet in the way of peace, that peace which the
world, the flesh, the devil cannot deprive us of, which the God of Heaven
grant us all for his mercies sake, Amen.

man with skull and hourglass Into thy hands I commit my spirit thou have
redeemed it or lord God of truth

Psalm: 31.5. If we a blessed Creatoure and a savior have
Our duty is to work, and faith to crave
Unto my mother earth I am now gone
Until the morning resurrection
As quickly as the Sand falls to his place,
So sudden is the change, of humane race


Genesis 2.8. And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden, and there he put
the man whom he had formed. Ver. 15. And the Lord God took the man and put him
into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.

Prove. 20.18. Every purpose is established by counsel, and with good advice
make war. And 24.6. For by wise counsel thou shall make thy war, and in
multitude of Counselors there is safety.

Deuteronomy. 4.39. Know therefore this day and consider it in thy heart, that the
Lord he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath there is none else.
And 32.29. O that that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter ends.

Prove. 22.3. A prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides himself, but the
simple pass on and are punished.

Acts 2.25. I foresaw the Lord always before my face.

Job 37.14. Hearken unto this, and consider the wondrous works of God.

Psalm. 8.3, 4. When I considered the heavens, the works of thy hands, the Moon
and Stars which thou have ordained. What is man that thou art mindful of
him, and the son of man that thou visitest him.

Hag. 1.7. Thus says the Lord, Consider your ways. And 2.15. And now I pray
you consider from this day upward from before a stone was laid upon a stone in
the Temple of the Lord.

2 Timothy 2.7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry but sin not, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath.

Psalm. 37.8. Cease from anger and for sake wrath: fret not thy self in any wise
to do evil.

Prove. 19.11. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory
to pass over a transgression.

Eccl. 7.9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the
bosom of fools.

Col. 3.8. Put off all these, anger, wrath, malice. Ver. 10. Put on the new man
which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him.

1 Chronicles. 28.7. I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant to
do my Commandments.

Col. 3.2. Set your affections on things above, and not on things below.

Ephesians. 6.10. Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. Ver. 11. Put
on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of
the devil. Ver. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places

Psalm. 119.67. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy
word. Ver. 71. It is good for me that I was afflicted that I might learn thy
statutes.

Job 5.17. Happy is the man whom God corrects, therefore despise not thou the
chastening of the Almighty.

Prove. 3.12. For whom the Lord loves he corrects, even as a father the son
in whom he delights.

Lam. 3.39, 40, 41. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto
the Lord. Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens.

Psalm. 141.3. Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, keep the door of my lips.

Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin, but he that
refraineth his lips is wise.

Eccl. 5.3. A fools voice is known by the multitude of words.

Prove. 6.16. These six things does the Lord hate. Ver. 17. A proud look, a
lying tongue, etc.

Psalm. 31.6. I have hated them that regard lying vanities. Ver. 18. Let the
lying lips be put to silence.

Prove. 13.5. A righteous man hates lying.

1 Timothy 4.7. Refuse profane and oldwives fables, and exercise thy self rather
unto godliness.

Psalm. 26.4. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with
dissemblers.

Psalm. 119.113. I hate vain thoughts, but thy Law do I love.

Ephesians. 5.4. Neither filthiness nor foolish talking nor jesting, which are not
convenient, but rather giving of thanks.

Matthew. 1^.16. Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves, be ye
therefore wise as serpents but innocent as doves.

Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that
which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the
hearers.

1 Co. 9.18. What is my reward then? verily that when I preach the Gospel, I
may make the Gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the
Gospel.

Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to anger is better then the mighty, and he that
rules his spirit then he that takes a City.

Isa. 3.25. Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in war.

Prove. 30.8. Remove far from me vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor
riches, feed me with food convenient for me, least I be full and deny thee, and
say, who is the Lord, or least I be poor and steal, and take the name of my
God in vain.

2 Cor. 10.3. For though we walk in the flesh we do not war after the flesh.
Ver. 4. for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God
to the pulling down of strong holds. Ver. 5. Casting down imaginations and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

Eccl. 10.10. Wisdom is profitable to direct. And 7.19. Wisdom strengthens
the wise, more then ten mighty men that are in the City.

Psalm. 138.3. In that day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst
me with strength in my soul.

Psalm. 119.33. Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it
unto the end. Ver. 34. Give me understanding and I shall keep thy Law, yea I
shall observe it with my whole heart. Ver. 38. Stablish thy word unto thy
servant, who is devoted unto thy fear.

Now thou have (by Gods gracious assistance) obtained a good plantation, and
planted it, there must be a time of weeding, nourishing and preserving it, that
so we may know the best way to improve our Talent in our heavenly Masters
service: In this time (which is the seventh Age of a man) is required
fortitude, gravity and sobriety, a stayednesse, and serious consideration of
all our undertakings, a wise take-heed and foresight into the event of a
business. Past and present things every man declares, but solid wisdom only,
shows the event of things to come; which although it sometimes fail (because
the eternal God has so decreed, that man should not know what should be after
him) yet to us it is the Candle of the Lord, and being rightly used, it is a
glimmering of the heavenly light, and excels folly and unadvisednesse, as
light excels darkness. To what purpose does he plant that does not well
preserve, but suffers savage Bores to root and spoil: and who so vain as he
that builds a house, and does not well repair and keep the same? The very
microcosme of our body, teaches us to have a fore sight into our affairs and
dealings; for we have two Ears to receive direction by, and two Eyes to look
before us, whereas of other members we have but one where the use is more
single. I advise thee to determine of nothing in a passion, if anger be at all
allowed it must be without sin; Be angry but sin not: and then surely it
must be very short, the Sun must not go down upon it. Anger is a high degree
of madness, and therefore unfits a man wholly to act any business in it: it
is only good when with thy self for the committing of sin, from which there
is some hopes of thy repentance, with care for the future to avoid it. Anger
unfits a man either to defend himself or offend his enemy, it does disarm us as
it were, and lay us open to all attempts against us, therefore have a special
care to govern thy passions, and keep thy self in a constant settled way in thy
affections, that so no chance or accident may attempt thee unprovided, or
unfortified with strong reason and wisdom to oppose and resist it: passion
sets a false gloss upon a business, and makes him seem guilty, whom
moderation and perfect reason would clearly excuse. Murmur not, neither be
angry at any affliction in this life, but bless almighty God that it is no
sharper unto thee, considering the great deserts of thy infinite
transgressions: remember (if thou make right use of it) that it is a sign and
mark of the love of God to thee, and be thou truly penitent, humble and
thankful for it; for why should a sinful man complain of a man for the
punishment of his sins, but rather in all humble obedience, love and
thankfulness, lift up thy heart with thy hands unto God in the heavens. That
thou may avoid the occasion of much anger and passion, set a watch over thy
lips, and a strict restraint to thy tongue; use not many words, for that can
hardly be without sin; especially take heed of cursing, swearing,
blaspheming, lying, etc. and love not to relate fabulous and vain jests, for
they are commonly as near a lie as complements to hypocrisy and dissimulation,
which is a gilded untruth to make it pass the better. Two things (its said)
never wax old in a man, which (without a careful watch) draw the whole body
into sin, that is the heart and the tongue, the heart always imagining new
things, and the tongue is swift to utter them: especially whilst thou art young
keep much silence, for that will prevent much repentance: imprison thy tongue
or it will imprison thee; set a restraint unto it, for it may be an evil enemy
to thee. Some say a liar is only good to reveal secrets unto, for that no man
that knows him will believe his relation. Some say, he which knows not how to
dissemble knows not how to live, but dissembling then must be taken only for
not speaking all the truth at all times, which in some sense may be esteemed
dissembling, but I conceive a man may so dissemble without blame if he wisely
order his discourse: whatsoever thou say or do, perform it from a pure
and right principle, in true performance of filial obedience so highly due
unto our God, and not out of any respect to man, other then in promoting in thy
neighbor all good, and preventing in him any appearance of evil, that by thy
evil example thou be not accessory to thy neighbors sin. Now to speak a
little of fortitude, which is a rare virtue, and produces much worthy praise
and commendation, if rightly used, but may be abused (as other good virtues) to
much loss and damage: its said of Prudence and Justice, that they govern a
man in company, but Fortitude and Temperance govern a man in private and alone:
All accidents in this life may be comprehended under prosperity and adversity,
the former guides in adversity, the latter in prosperity, and these two
virtues may wholly be comprised and understood by this word Constancy, which is
a right and equal stayednesse of mind in all accidents and outward things,
whereby he is not puffed up in prosperity, nor dejected in adversity: Now
Fortitude or Virtue, in the general and vulgar understanding of the words, is
exercised wholly in opposition and in subduing all things under it, contemning
all terrible things, and (if abused) brings fair liberty into bondage.
Military valor is commonly much different from true fortitude: we find this
valor in the ordinary sense common in beasts, but true Fortitude is only to be
found in Wisdom; many attain Valor by use, institution, example or custom,
though they be of base and slavish minds, without any tincture of virtue or
true fortitude, which is far from an inconsiderate temerity or brutish
stupidity, for virtue cannot be without knowledge, and true fortitude is a
stayed mind grounded upon the duty, honesty and justice of the enterprise,
which never cease until it overcome, for that it is a quality of the mind
not of the body, not of the limbs, but of true courage in the heart and will,
whereby it is truly sound; for not the conflict but the cause shows valor,
in which much wisdom and discretion must be showed in the execution, and all
lawful means used to avoid an approaching danger: true fortitude is both a
director and a protector, therefore most necessary to be obtained although it
cost both pay and pains.

Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit
Mania --
Psalm. 1.1, 2, 7. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the
ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the
scornful, but his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and therein does meditate
day and night. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that
brings forth her fruit in season.

Jer. 17.7. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the
Lord is. Ver. 8. He shall be as a tree planted by the waters, that spreads
out her roots by the rivers.

Psalm. 7.10. My defense is of God which saves the upright in heart. And 59.9.
God is my defense. And 16. I will sing of thy power, yea I will sing aloud of
thy mercies in the morning, for thou have been my defense and refuge in the day
of my trouble.

Rev. 3.2. Be watchful and strengthen the things which remain that are ready
to die, for I have not found thy works perfect before God.

Mark 13.33. Take ye heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is.

Psalm. 51.12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy
free spirit. And 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God; thy
spirit is good, lead me into the land of uprightness.

Neh. 9.20. Thou gave also thy good spirit to instruct them.

1 These. 5.19. Quench not the spirit.

1 John 4.1, 2, 3. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they
are of God, because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby
know ye the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh is of God: and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God. Hereby know we that we dwell in him
and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. Chap. 5. ver. 6. This is
he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by water only, but by
water and blood, and it is the spirit that bears witness, because the spirit
is truth.

Prove. 16.17. The highway of the upright is to depart from evil; he that
keeps his way preserves his soul.

1 Pet. 2.11. I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts which war against the soul.

Ezekiel. 18.27. When the wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he
has committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his
soul alive. And 33. v. 5. He that takes warning shall deliver his soul.

2 Cor. 8.12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19, 20. This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye
henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanities of their mind,
having their understanding darkened through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart. Who being past feeling, have given
themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness:
but ye have not so learned Christ. Ver. 24. Put on the new man, which after God
is created in righteousness and true holiness.

Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Heb. 10.9, 10. Then said he, Lo I come to do thy will O God. By the which
will we are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all.

Psalm. 119.37. Turn away my eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken thou me in
thy Law. And 101.3. I will set no wicked thing before my eyes. And 78.1. Give
ear O my people to my Law, incline your ears to the words of my mouth. And
39.1. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I offend not with my tongue. I
will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked are before me.

Prove. 10.20, 31. The tongue of the just is as choice silver. The mouth of the
just brings forth wisdom, but the froward tongue shall be cut out.

Prove. 16.20. He that handles a matter wisely shall find good: and who so
trusts in the Lord happy is he.

Prove. 25.11. A word fitly spoken, is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.

Prove. 8.13. The fear of the Lord is to hate evil, pride and ^rrogancy, and
the evil way, and the froward mouth do I hate. And 11.2. When pride comes
then comes shame, but with the lowly is wisdom. And 13.10. Only by pride
comes contention, but with the well advised is wisdom. And 14.3. In the mouth
of the foolish is a rod of pride, but the lips of the wise shall preserve
them. And 16.18. Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a
fall. And 29.23. A man's pride shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold the
humble in spirit.

Jam. 4.6. God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble.

1 Pet. 5.5, 6. Be clothed in humility for God resists the proud and gives
grace to the humble. Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God,
that he may exalt you in due time.

Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls.

1 Cor. 12.25. That there should be no schism in the body, but that the
members should have the same care one of another.

Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of
thy increase.

Exodus 20.17. Honor thy father and thy mother, etc.

Joh. 5.4. I receive not honor from men. And V. 44. How can ye believe which
receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God
only. And Chap. 8. ver. 54. Jesus answered, if I honor my self my honor is
nothing, it is my Father that honors me, of whom ye say, that he is your God.

Romans 2.7, 10. To them which by patient continuance in well doing seek for
glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life. Ver. 10. But glory, honor,
peace, to every one that works good, to the Jew first, and also to the
Gentile.

Psalm. 119.36. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.

Isa. 57.17. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him,

Luke 12.15. Take heed and beware of covetousness, for a man's life consists
not in the abundance of things that he possesses.

Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with
such things as you have.

Prove. 8.9. He that is slothful in his work, is brother to him that is a great
waster.

Luke 15, 13, 14, 15, 16. The prodigal or younger son gathered all together,
and took his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with
riotous living, and when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that
land, and he began to be in want; and he went and joined himself to a Citizen
of that Country, and he sent him into his field to feed swine, and he would
feign have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did eat, and no man
gave unto him.

SEeing by the mercy of God we have obtained a happy plantation, planted and
nourished it, so that the tender imps do promise much content and profit; it
is now time to fence and defend it; thereby preserving it from devouring and
ravenous beasts, with other dangers, which if it lie open to the wilderness of
this worlds attempts and assaults, it will thereby be subject to receive
detriment and damage; here is great need of careful watchfullnesse, least
while we neglect or sleep, the enemy enter, sow tares and destroy: this falls
out here in our discourse to be particularly treated on in this eighth Age of
our life, with this remembrance, that what is duty in any part of our
pilgrimage, is requisite to be carefully looked unto, and performed all our
lives, so far, and so long, as our bodies and minds are capeable of
performing such duty and service to our Maker, the benefit of which redoundeth
wholly to our selves, if truly, with such duty and relation performed. Under
the protection of this secure watch, we may pass all our days in safety;
therefore it is most necessary to make diligent search, what this watch is, and
over what it is to be: by this watch may be understood the sacred and holy
Spirit of God, moving us to do right and holy duties, and our care and
watching ought to be, at all times to take heed of quenching or neglecting the
blessed motions of this sacred Spirit in us, which is done, by neglecting,
sleighting, forgetting, opposing, or any want of executing the good motions man
with skull and hourglass We must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ.

Cor: 2: 5: 10: What manner of persons then ought we to be,
In holiness, and pyetye.
My dried bones do not despise,
For I expect a call to rise.
Life's gone on the one side, on the other it run's fast,
Life's time that is present, death is time that is past.
thereof, which surely tends to the salvation of our souls; therefore although
our souls be properly us; yet while we are in the body, our bodies (as may be
said) had need watch over them, or more properly over themselves, for that the
sin of the body destroys the soul. Now because this watch may be rightly
ordered, let us consider some of those particulars it is to be set over; and
first let us begin this watch over our wills, because the greatest part of
those impieties, heresies and errors in our faith and religion, is sprung from
our wicked and corrupt wills, from a violent and voluptuous passion, which
afterward draws unto it the understanding it self; this is a main wheel in
all our actions, and if it be evil, then it is the chief enemy that commands
against us, whose Officers and assistants in this warfare against us, we may
mention afterward in some particulars: But first to the Will; Imagination,
opinion and will, is the guide or foot of the vulgar, as reason is of the wise
and prudent; and men are tormented by the opinion they have of things, and not
by the things themselves: Will is a great part of the reasonable soul, of very
great concernment, and it principally behooves us to study how to order it, and
set a watch upon it, for that thereupon depends almost our whole estate of
happiness; this is truly ours, at our command; Understanding, memory,
imagination, and the like, may be taken from us, changed and annoyed with many
accidents, and yet the will remain at our dispose: he that has parted with,
and given away his will, is no more his own man; by this we are made good or
evil, and that will is only excellent where goodness and virtue lodges: not
he that knows good things, but he that wills, and in a right understanding
desires them, is good and virtuous. The will is happy that loves God, and to
will evil things is wicked. In the next place, set a watch over thy eyes, thy
ears, thy tongue, these are three most dangerous and desperate enemies, if left
at liberty, but if well kept to strict command and order, the most serviceable
soldiers in all the muster; the abused and common eye, is moved with the
present object, but a wise foresight considers the matter. The ear is a
principal agent to the understanding, and by the well ordering of it, saving
faith is obtained; speech is the messenger of the heart, and interpreter of the
soul, and is chiefly ordained to edify and instruct to salvation, it does
discover our mental secrets, and men judge very much by it: One said well,
Speak that I may see thee, that is, know thy heart; like golden Apples in
pictures of silver, so are words spoken in due season: But because our duty is
in all our ways to have a constant watch over our selves, we will endeavor to
mention some few more of those particulars we are to watch over: First, Over
all vain, idle and ambitious desires and thoughts, they are by nature
innumerable in us: Ambition is a folly and a vanity, like catching of smoke
instead of light, the shadow instead of the body; it is to fasten contentment
upon the opinion of the vulgar, voluntarily to renounce ones own liberty, to
follow the passions of others; to displease ones self for the pleasure of the
beholders; to let our own affections depend on the eyes of others; and so far
to love virtue as may like the vulgar: to do good, not for love of good but
reputation, this is either to be filled with nothing but wind, or else to be
empty: Ambition has no limits, it is a gulf without brink or bottom, fire that
increases by it is own nourishment: it is it is own punishment and excecutioner,
and is only just in that. True humility is a chief Emblem of honor; the
higher the Sun is, the lesser shadow it makes: the greater the virtue is,
the less glory it seeks. Commonly honor is truly compared to a shadow,
which follows those that fly it, and flies those that follow it: Let us
receive our charge modestly, and exercise it sincerely, knowing that almighty
God has placed us to stand centinell, that others may rest in safety under our
care. Parchment-honour, or by descent only without desert, is shameful and
ignoble: it is greater honor not to have the mark having deserved it, than to
have it: it is more honorable to be asked why thy statue is not set up in the
marketplace, than why it is: it is not the honor commonly given of Princes to
their subjects (who give it most often to them that deserve it least, and can
give that shadow neither but upon that little ground, and that little ground,
and those few hearts they command; whereby it becomes a shame and reproach to
those that have it) that almighty God seems actually to guide, or very
favorably to allow; but true wisdom is true honor, and thereby we honor
aright our neighbor and our God, and therefore to attain this wisdom, ought
to be our care and study. Let thy watch likewise take heed of covetousness and
prodigality: to love or affect riches with too much care to get or keep them is
covetousness, for they are not worthy our earnest care and attention: the
desire of goods, and our pleasure in them is only opinion, what we necessarily
use not, are a burden. Covetousnes is a wrong estimation and use of riches, it
is a passion that respects riches as the principal good of a man, and
fears poverty as the greatest evil; nature has placed it under us, and we
esteem it above our selves; it is ordained to supply necessity, and we covet it
without occasion: Prodigality is the contrary passion, and it is likewise very
vicious, for in despising or misusing the gift, we do the same to the giver:
to spend prodigally is to refuse the means to do well, to fling away the
staff, and then complain because we fall: he that has the least Talent, has
least burden, least account; yet take heed for the least must be accounted
for, and therefore not misused, nor rejected.

Psalm. 107.36, 37. And there he makes the hungry to dwell, that they may
prepare a City for habitation, and sow the fields, and plant vineyards which
may yield fruit of increase.

Ezekiel. 28.26. And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses and
plant vineyards, yea they shall dwell with confidence, when I have executed
judgments upon all them that despise them round about them, and they shall know
that I am the Lord their God.

Isa. 11.2, 3, 4. And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of
wisdom and understanding; the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, and shall make him of quick
understanding in the fear of the Lord. And he shall not judge after the sight of
the eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of the ears, but with
righteousness shall he judge the po^r, and reprove with equity for the meek of
the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

Genesis 18.19. For I know him that he will command his children, and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment.

Prove. 21.3. To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord, than
sacrifice. Ver. 1^. It is joy to the just to do judgment, but destruction
shall be to the workers of iniquity.

Jer. 31.30. Every one shall die for his own iniquity, every man that eats
the sower grapes, his teeth shall be set on edge.

Isa. 51.1. Thus says the Lord, Keep ye judgment and do justice. And 59.4.
None calls for justice nor any pleads for truth: they trust in vanity and
speak lies, they conceive mischief and bring forth iniquity. Ver. 8. The way of
peace they know not, and the^e is no judgment in their goings, they have made
them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall not know peace. Ver. 9.
Therefore is judgment far from us, neither does justice overtake us: We wait
for light but behold obscurity, for brightness but we walk in darkness. Ver.
14. And judgment is turned away backward, and justice stands afar off: for
truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter.

1 Chronicles. 16.10. Let the heart of them that seek the Lord rejoice.

Deuteronomy. 26.11. And thou shall rejoice in every good thing, which the Lord thy
God has given unto thee.

Matthew. 12.36. Every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account
thereof in the day of judgment.

Heb. 3.7, 13, 15. Wherefore as the holy Ghost says, to day if ye will hear
his voice. Exhort one another daily while it is called to day, least any of you
be hardened through the deceitfullness of sin.

Joh. 9.4. I must work the work of him that sent me while it is called to day,
the night comes when no man can work.

Jam. 4.14. Whereas you know not what will be tomorrow: for that is your life,
it is even a vapor, it appears for a little time and then vanishes away.

Psalm. 1.2. His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and therein does he meditate
day and night. And 119.24. Thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors.

Josh. 1.8. This book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according
to all that is written therein, for then shall thou make thy way prosperous,
and then thou shall have good success.

Psalm. 109.4. I give my self unto prayer.

Prove. 15.8. The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but the
prayer of the upright is his delight.

Matthew. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven.

Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things happy are ye if ye do them.

Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupisence and
covetousness which is idolatry, Ver. 6. For the which things sake the wrath of
God comes upon the children of disobedience.

Prove. 2.6, 7. For the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge
and understanding. He lays up sound wisdom for the righteous, he is a
buckler to them that walk uprightly. And 3.21. My son, let them not depart
from thy house, keep sound wisdom and discretion. And 8.14. Counsel is mine
and sound wisdom: I am understanding, and I have strength.

Hag. 1.5. Thus says the Lord God, Consider your ways.

Ezra 10.16. And they sat down to examine the matter.

Joh. 7.14. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment

2 Cor. 10.7. Do you look on things according to outward appearance.

Prove. 29.20. See thou a man that is hasty of words, there is more hope of a
fool then of him.

Acts 19.36. Ye ought to do nothing rashly.

Prove. 22.20, 21. Have not I written unto thee excellent things in council and
knowledge, that I might make thee know the certainty of the words of truth,
that thou might answer the words of truth to them that send unto thee.

THus (by the mercy of God) we have settled our Plantation in a good and
fruitful soil, in a very pleasant place, and by his good hand in mercy guiding
and protecting us, we may, many years receive the comfortable fruit thereof. We
must in this ninth Age of our life, with sound judgment and justice settle and
order our affairs, so that every one may with equity and right receive his
portion in due season: to this end it is not too late (according to this
method) to discourse of justice and sound judgment, what it is: and first of
Justice in general. Justice is to give to every man that which appertains to
him, to a man's self first, and afterward to others; so that it comprehends all
the duty and offices of every particular party: Does as thou would (or
rather as thou ought) to be done to, carries a man very far, but not
through, or to the utmost of this duty: before we can well know how to command
others, we must know how to command our selves, how to defend our selves from
our selves: reason must command; the appetite, desire and will, must all be
obedient to it: this is the first original, inward, proper and most beautiful
justice that may be. Equity and right reason is true justice, which handles
and rules the Law as need requires: the Laws and justice must be handled
justly, both in rewards and punishments: Justice cannot be executed by the lump
or in gross, but must be drawn out into particular dispensations, according to
the occasion. The two parts and hands of Justice, are punishment and reward,
but as it is usually ministered, it is commonly lame, at least in one of them.
Charity begins at home, so must justice; by it we may examine our selves, how,
and to what end we live and spend our days; surely it must not be to pass our
short and precious time carelessly, by chance and by adventure, as the most do,
who live not seriously and attentively (as indeed our duty is) but vainly,
heedlesly from day to day, and as it falls out: they taste not, possess not,
enjoy not their lives, but use them only to make use of other things; by this
means they abuse themselves, and many good things through their misuse: they
do all things (as I may say) in good earnest: but to live: they are serious in
the least, and in the main and principal they are negligent. We may and ought
to live seriously, attentively and cheerfully, for that our life is a business
of great weight and importance, and we must give an exact account thereof: take
heed of deferring and putting off this justice to thy self, resembling such as
defer buying till the market be over: how foolish is it to begin to live when
we must cease to live: he that means to do a great work in a short time, had
need to follow it very close, least his time cease before his work be finished,
and he faulty, because he took o more time, or lost so much, when indeed we
need nothing more: Life is short, and the art of well living is long; betimes
then learn how to live to God, and to thy self, how to be least alone when no
body is with thee: And then be watchful of vain delusions and temptations: our
great enemy the devil has deceitful baits both for loneliness and for
company: Contemplation, meditation, prayer and practice, is the happy life, let
thy body be subject to thy spirit, and let thy spirit be wholly subdued by the
Spirit of the Lord, so shall thy body be a fit instrument for virtue, and a
holy Temple for thy God. Do thou justice to thy self in getting and ordering
riches, love a competency, entertain them well got into thy house, not into thy
heart, and strive to use them as a just steward to thy masters use, that their
departure may be as honest as their entrance; if they part without thy leave,
let them carry nothing but themselves from thee, no part of thy content or
comfort, let not that be settled on them: the right use of the creature, is to
walk worthy of thy Creator: Thus much of justice. Now a word or two of sound
Judgment what it is; and it is the strict and wary trial and consideration of
every thing to the utmost; it is the examining of a matter, to find out the
bottom of it, what it may produce, and where the way lies unto its period: it
is the free and ready acceptance of the truth, where and whenever it appears
and shows it self: it is the weighing the reasons and counter-reasons on all
parts, the weight and merit in them, thereby to work out the truth: And it is
contrary to that slight and careless way of judging and passing by things
upon the first sight and appearance, as if we were able to see what was in the
house before we entered in, or what lay under the stone, before we removed it:
this is that grievous folly which men truly call rashness and self
conceitednesse; and all wise men count it shallow, empty, and want of sound
judgment; for justice and right it self, being unadvisedly performed, and by
chance, without sound judgment and consideration of the matter, may (as to the
Judge) be false, or at least undeserving praise and commendation; therefore
endeavor, not only to do good, but to do it knowingly, willingly and
wittingly, and from a pure and right principle, which shows sincere and
upright wisdom, and is worthy the righteous title of justice and sound
judgment.

2 Chronicles. 1.10. Give me now (O Lord) wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out
and come in before this people. Ver. 12. Wisdom and knowledge is granted to
thee.

Job. 28.28. Behold the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil
is understanding.

Psalm. 37.30. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue
talks of judgment. And 51. v. 6. Thou desire truth in the inward parts,
and in the hidden part thou shall make me know wisdom. And 19. v. 12. Teach us
to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.

Jer. 4.22. They are wise to do evil.

Psalm. 50.23. To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the
salvation of God.

Eccl. 10.10. Wisdom is profitable to direct.

Prove. 3.5, 6. Trust to the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thy own
understanding; in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.
Verly. Be not wise in thy own eyes, fear the Lord and depart from evil.

1 Cor. 1.20. Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world. And 2.5.
That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
God. And 3.19. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, for it
is written, he takes the wise in his own craftiness.

1 Cor. 2.6. Howbeit we speak wisdom amongst them that be perfect, yet not
the wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world that come to naught.
Ver. 7. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom
which God or dained before the world, unto our glory.

Ephesians. 1.17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory, may give
unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him.

1 Cor. 12.8. For to one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom, to another
the word of knowledge by the same spirit.

Exodus 31.3. And I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom and in
understanding.

Prove. 10.23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief, but a man of
understanding has wisdom.

Luke 16.8. And the Lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done
wisely, for the children of this world are in their generation wiser then the
children of light.

Psalm. 101.2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, I will walk within
thy house with a perfect heart.

Prove. 13.14. The Law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the
snares of death.

Genesis 17.1. I am the almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect.

Deuteronomy. 18.13. Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God.

Job. 1.8. Have thou considered my servant Job, a perfect and an upright man,
one that fears God and escheweth evil.

Prove. 11.5. The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way, but the
wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.

Jer. 10.3. The customs of the wicked are vain.

Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me.

Psalm. 143.8. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee
do I trust: Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk for I lift up my
soul unto thee.

Job 23.15. When I considered I was afraid.

Psalm. 50.22. Now consider this ye that forget God, least I tear you in pieces
and there be none to deliver.

Eccl. 5.1. Keep thy foot when thou go into the house of God, and be more
ready to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools, for they consider not that
they do evil.

Psalm. 51.2, 3. Wash me thoroughly from my iniquities, and cleanse me from my
sin; for I acknowledge my iniquity, and my sin is ever before me. Ver. 5.
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me.

Jer. 3.13. Only acknowledge thy iniquity that thou have transgressed against
the Lord thy God. And Chap. 14. Ver. 20. We acknowledge O Lord our iniquities,
and the iniquities of our Fathers, for we have sinned against thee.

1 Cor. 2.11. For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a
man which is in him.

1 Samuel 7.3. And Samuel spoke to all the house of Israel saying; If you do
return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange god
Ashteroth from among you, and prepare your hearts to the Lord, and serve him
only.

1 Cor. 28.7. I will establish his Kingdom, if he be constant to do my
Commandments and my judgments as at this day.

Prove. 4.5. Get wisdom, get understanding, forget not, neither decline from the
words of my mouth. Ver. 6. Forsake her not and she will preserve thee, love her
and she will keep thee. Ver. 26. Ponder the paths of thy feet, and let all thy
ways be established.

Eccl. 5.13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely
riches kept by the owners thereof to their hurt. And Chap. 8. Ver. 9. There is
a time wherein one man rules over another to his own hurt.

1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.

1 John 2.16. For all that is in the world, the the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father but of the world. Ver.
17. And the world passes away, and the lusts thereof, but he that does the
will of God, abides for ever.

Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe, but
Israel does not know, my people does not consider.

Job 16.3. Shall vain words have an end.

Josh. 1.8. This book of the Law, shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according
to all that is written therein, for then thou shall make thy way prosperous,
and then thou shall have good success.

Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, Stand in the ways and see, and ask for the
old paths, where is the good way and walk therein, and you shall find rest
for your souls.

Lam. 3.40. Let us search and try our ways and turn again unto the Lord.

2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith, prove your own
selves; know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except
you be reprobates.

Mich. 7.19. He will turn again, he will have mercy upon us, he will subdue our
iniquities, and cast all our sins into the depth of the sea.

2 Cor. 10.4, 5. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and
every high thing thot exalts it self against the knowledge of God.

Matthew. 7.7. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and
it shall be opened unto you. And 18. Ver. 14. Whosoever therefore shall humble
himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.

James 4.10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you
up.

Job 22.9. When men are cast down, then thou shall say there is lifting up, and
he shall save the humble person.

Deuteronomy. 30.15, 19, 20. See I have set before thee this day life and good, death
and evil, I call Heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have
set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life,
that both thou and thy seed may live, that thou may love the Lord thy God,
and that thou may obey his voice, and that thou may cleave unto him, for he
is thy life.

Matthew. 17.27. Notwithstanding least we should offend them, go thou to the sea
and cast in a hook, and take up the fish that first comes up, and when thou
have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of money, that take and give
unto them for me and thee.

Phil. 1.27. Only let your conversation be is becomes the Gospel of Jesus
Christ.

Amos 4.12. Prepare to meet thy God O Israel.

Psalm. 40.1. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me and heard
my cry.

Psalm. 106.13. They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his counsel.

Isa. 25.9. Lo this is our God we have waited for him, we will be glad and
rejoice in his salvation.

Sam. 2.15.26. Behold here I am, let him do unto me what seems good unto him.

Psalm. 89.30. If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments.
Ver. 31. If they break my Statutes and keep not my commandments. Ver. 32.
Then will I visit their transgressions with a rod, and their iniquities with
stripes.

Psalm. 74.19. O deliver not the soul of thy Turkle Dove unto the multitude of
the wicked.

Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.

Numb. 11.4. And the mixed multitude fell a lusting.

Prove. 24.1. My son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change. Ver. 22. For their calamity shall rise suddenly,
and who knows the ruin of them both.

Genesis 2.18. It is not good for man to be alone.

Matt. 4.4. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the Devil.

Joh. 6.14. And Jesus departed into a Mountain himself alone. And c. 8. v.
16. I am not alone but I and the Father that sent me. And c. 16. v. 32. Ye
shall leave me alone, and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.

Phil. 4.11. I have learned in what estate soever I am in, therewith to be
content.

Eccl. 6.9. Better is the sight of the eyes, then the wandering of the desire.

1 Timothy 6.9. But they that will be rich fall into temptation, and a snare and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition.

Eccl. 7.3. Sorrow is better then laughter, for by the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better.

1 Timothy 1.8. The Law is good if a man use it lawfully.

Prove. 15.2. The tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright, but the mouth of
the foolish pours out foolishness.

Psalm. 50.23. To him that orders his coversation aright, will I show the
salvation of God.

Psalm. 15.5. He that does these things shall never be moved. And 16.8. I have
set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand I shall not be
moved.

Psalm. 101.2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way. And 119.98. Thou
through thy Commandments have made me wiser then my enemies.

Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin, but he that
refraineth his lips is wise. And 26.12. See thou a man wise in his own
conceit, there is more hope of a fool then of him. And 10.14. Wise men lay up
knowledge, but the mouth of the foolish is near destruction.

Psalm. 11:^5. A good man shows favor and lends; he will guide his affairs
with discretion.

Prove. 23.9. Here thou my son and be wise and guide thy heart in the way. And
11.3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the perverseness of
transgressors shall destroy them.

Deuteronomy. 12.7. And you shall eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice
in all that ye put your hand unto, yea and your household wherein the Lord your
God has blessed you.

Psalm. 12.2. They speak vanity every one with his neighbor, with flattering
lips and with a double heart do they speak.

Prove. 26.28. A lying tongue hates those that are afflicted by it, and a
flattering mouth works ruin.

Prove. 27.24. He that hates dissembleth with his lips, and lays up deceit
with him.

Psalm. 26.4. I have not sat with vaint persons, neither will I go in with
dissemblers.

1 Cor. 10.24. Let no man seek his own, but every man another wealth. And Ver.
33. Not seeking my own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved.

Psalm. 5.9. For there is no faithfullness in their mouths, their inward part
in very wickedness, their throat is an open sepulcher, they flatter with their
tongues.

Matthew. 23.14. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for you devour
widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers, therefore ye shall
receive the greater damnation.

Prove. 25.1^. As an ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a
wise reprover upon an obedient ear. And 6. Ver. 23. Reproofs of instruction are
the way to life. And Chap. ^. Ver. 5. A man of understanding shall attain unto
wise counsel. And Chap. 12. Ver. 5. The thoughts of the righteous are right,
but the counsels of the wicked are deceit.

Prove. 22.26. Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are
sureties for debts. And Chap. 11. Ver. 15. He that hates suretiship is sure.

Ephesians. 5.15. See that you walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise. Ver. 18.
And be not drunk with wine wherein is excess, but be filled with the spirit.

Prove. 3.23. Then thou shall walk in the way safely, and thy foot shall not
stumble. Ver. 24. When thou lie down thou shall not be afraid, yea thou shall
lie down and thy sleep shall be sweet.

Matthew. 10.17. Beware of men.

Col. 2.8. Beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit.

2 Pet. 3.17. Seeing that ye know these things before, beware least ye also
being led away with he error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness.

Matthew. 5.25. Agree with thy adversary quickly while thou art in the way with
him, least at any time the adversary deliver thee to the Judge, the Judge deliver
thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.

Prove. 24.17. Rejoice not when thy enemy falls, and let not thy heart be glad
when he stumbleth.

Gal. 6.10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of faith.

Nah. 1.2. God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth, the Lord revengeth and is
furious, the Lord will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth
wrath for his enemies.

Amos 4.12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee O Israel, and because I will
do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel.

Eccl. 7.1. The day of death is better then the day of birth And Chapter 8. Ver. 8.
Wickedness shall not deliver those that are given to it.

Psalm. 50.6. For God is Judge himself.

Eccl. 11.9. But know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment.

Heb. 9.27. It is appointed to all men once to die, and after this the judgment.

Luke 16.22. And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died and was buried. And Ver.
23. And in hell he lift up his eyes being in torment.

Prove. 12.23. In the way of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof
there is no death.

Joh. 8.50, 51. I seek not my own glory, there is one that seeks and judges;
verily, verily I say-unto you, if a man keep my sayings he shall never see
death.

Psalm. 26.11. But as for me I will walk in my integrity. And 86. Ver. 11. Teach
me thy way O Lord, I will walk in thy truth, unite my heart to fear thy Name.

Isa. 12.2. Behold God is my salvation, I will trust and not be afraid, for the
Lord Jehovah is my strength and my song, he also is become my salvation.

Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but who so
confesses them shall have mercy.

Phil. 1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. Ver. 22. But if I
live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor, yet which I shall choose I
wot not, for I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to
be with Christ which is far better.

Romans 6.7. He that is dead is freed from sin.

Rev. 4.14. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.

Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed
trusting in the Lord.

Psalm. 48.14. For this God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide
even unto death.

Psalm. 89.48. What man is he that lives and shall not see death, shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?

Psalm. 90.8. I delight to do thy will O God, yea thy Law is within my heart.

Matthew. 6.10. Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven.

Deuteronomy. 4.9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, least
thou forget the things which thy eyes have seen, and least they depart from thy
heart all the days of thy life, but teach them thy sons and thy sons
sons.

Luke 21.34. And take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness and cares of this life, and so that
day come upon you unawares.

Eccl. 9.12. For man also knows not his time, as the fishes that are taken in
an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons
of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.

Mark. 13.35, 36, 37. Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the master of
the house comes, at even, or at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the
morning: least coming suddenly he find you sleeping; and what I say unto you,
I say unto all, watch.

Jer. 50.38. They are mad upon their Idols.

Prove. 30.2. Surely I am more brutish then any man, I have not the
understanding of a man.

2 Chr. 30.10. So the posts passed from City to City, through the Country of
Ephraim and Manasses, even unto Zebulon, but they laughed them to scorn and
mocked them.

Matthew. 25.46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal.

Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is known by the judgments which he executes, the wicked
is snared in the works of his hands.

Prove. 1.30, 31. They would none of my counsel, they despised all my reproof,
therefore shall they cat the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their
own devices.

Prove. 11.3. The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the
perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them.

Ezekiel. 18.25. Ye say the way of the Lord is not equal: hear now O house of
Israel, are not my ways equal, are not your ways unequal?

Hos. 4.9. Who is wise and he shall understand these things, prudent and he
shall know them, for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk
in them, but the transgressors shall fall therein.

Psalm. 45.^0. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation and said, it
is a people that do err in their hearts, and they have not known my ways.

Prove. 16.10. Every one that is proud in heart, is an abomination to the Lord.

Prove. 11.4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers
from death.

1 Cor. 11.31. And they that use this world as not abusing it, for the fashion
of this world passes away.

1 Chronicles. 29.15. Our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is no
abiding.

Job 14.2. He comes forth as a flower and is cut down, he flees as a shadow
and continues not.

Prove. 10.7. The memorial of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked
shall rot. And 11. Ver. 5. The wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.

Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell.

Psalm. 50.21. These things have thou done and I kept silence, thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set
them in order before thy eyes. And Ver. 22. Now consider this you that forget
God, least I tear you to pieces and there be none to deliver you. To God alone
be glory for ever. Amen.

Prove. 2.6. For the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding.

James 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom let him ask of God, that gives to all
men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

1 King. 3.9. Give thy servant an understanding heart (O God) to judge thy
people, that I may discern betwixt good and bad, for who is able to judge this
thy so great a people! Ver. 10. And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon
had asked this thing. ver. 11. And God said unto him, because thou have asked
this thing, and have not asked for thy self long life, neither have asked
riches for thy self, nor have asked the life of thy enemies, but have asked for
thy self understanding to discern judgment, Ver. 12. Behold I have done
according to thy word: loe' I have given thee a wise and an understanding
heart, so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall
any arise like unto thee. Ver. 13. And I have also given thee that which thou
askedst not, both riches and honor, so that there shall not be any among the
Kings like unto thee all thy days. Ecclus. 7.36. Whatsoever thou take in
hand, remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss.

THus have we (by the good mercy of divine providence) settled our plantation:
Now that we may know how to go in and out before the people under our charge,
it is necessary in this tenth Age to handle that, (in this place for our
conclusion) which must be likewise both our beginning and proceeding, and it is
true wisdom; the only Staff and sacred guide of a well-governed Pilgrimage,
let us therefore consider what wisdom is, it is the excellency of any property
or quality, showing it to exceed ordinary and common things; and it is used
(perhaps improperly) as an extraordinary expression both of good and evil,
wise to do evil, as well as he that orders his stepps aright is wise:
wisdom is chiefly shown in two things, either in giving good counsel, or in
using it aright when it is given: the practical part of wisdom is chiefly,
and almost wholly profitable. Wisdom is discoursed of three several ways, by
three several sorts of men; first the ignorant and obstinate vulgar, call
coveteousnesse, pleasure, and pride by the name of wisdom, and count them most
wise that can most glutt themselves therewith; but almighty God has made the
wisdom of this world foolishness. Secondly, The Philosopher who highly
esteems of wisdom, and accounts him only complete that is adorned with it,
yet does he principally and chiefly treat, and discourse of humane and
speculative old man with skull and hourglass What I say unto you, I say unto
all,

Watch Mark. 13.37. If God at all forsake us wretched we
Become a prey, to our grande enemy.
Rest with our mother earth, and watch the call
To right hand loves, and joys perpetual.
Adein foul ears, taste, smell, invention sight,
You have me deluded, now I see clear light.
lative wisdom, such as chiefly concerns the well ordering of the outward
man in all the affairs and passages of this life. Thirdly, The Divine who
says, That it is the knowledge and right understanding of heavenly things, from
which proceeds a right ordering and rule of humane actions, which is partly
obtained by industry, pains and labor (which comes near the Philosophers
character) and partly by the divine inspiration of the holy Spirit coming from
above, whence it is said, the Spirit of God is the spirit of wisdom, and that
wisdom cannot enter into a wicked heart, Eccl. 3.7. Sapiens est animae suae
sapiens, He which is wise, is wise for his own soul. Some conceive wisdom to
be a discreet and advised carriage in affairs and conversation, having little
respect to the inward motion of the mind, which indeed so understood, is no
other then a beautiful cunning, a sweet and modest subtilty. Aristotle
teaches, That the end of every action to be truly and principally good, is the
first and chief st circumstance requisite in prudence; and therefore he
affirms, That whosoever applies his wit and judgment to work an evil end,
although he have never so good success therein, yet he cannot be called truly
wise and prudent, but crafty and subtle. Secondly, That not only the end, but
means to attain thereto must be correspondent. And thirdly, That of good things
to choose the summum bonum, the best: now it is evident, that he who seareth
almighty God and keeps his precepts, performs all those three things, not
only in every particular action, but in the whole course of his life, judging
every thing according to the true worth thereof, prefers the soul before the
body, eternal things before temporal, the goods of the body before those of
fortune, and the goods of the mind before them both; and directs the whole
course of his life to the service and glory of God, whom both Divines and
Philosophers teach to be the beginning and end of all creatures. Both
Philosophers and Divines hold, that humane wisdom is a kind of Law or reason,
a beautiful composition of the whole man, both inward and outward, of his
words and actions: it is the excellency and perfection of a man as he is a man,
whereby his spirit is preserved pure and free, considering and judging of all
things without bond or affection, observing Laws and customs where we are, and
attending peaceably whatsoever may happen, even death it self. The right use
and study of Philosophy is perfect Divinity, it is the true science of a man,
and instructs him to live and to die well; it teaches perfect wisdom, and
judicious advised honesty: by it we may correct and inform our natural
infirmities, avoid the erroneous opinions and customs of our ancestors, and the
senseless opinions of the vulgar, for the true science and study of a man, is
man himself; and it is as necessary for a man to learn to know himself, as it
is natural to him to think or be near himself. This sentence Know thy self, is
a heavenly salutation and advertisement to all men: a right consideration of
errors, and sins committed, sooner reforms, then arguments or reasons
against it: if we see our selves that we have an error, it will make us
distrust our judgments, and much preventeth arrogance and presumption: a
watchful eye over our selves, is the best looking-glass to see our selves;
and because we do not descend directly into our selves, by a diligent eye and
observation, we fall not only once but again into the same error and offense;
for he that knows not his own infirmities, takes no care to avoid them: To be
an excellent man, is to confess thy self to be a man, and to watch, guide and
govern thy self by true wisdom: Do not believe others more of thy self, then
thou thy self know of thy self. One valiant act makes not a valiant man, nor
one just act a just man, but thou must look into thy inward parts to know thy
self, and then consider thy carriage, not of a day, but of every day, and that
by a constant study both of thy thoughts, words and deeds: with sound judgment
try thy thoughts, and in wisdom examine thy soul, so shall thou rejoice before
thy Creator, and obtain much comfort from the works of thy hands: by the
strength of wisdom thou may subdue thy passions, and conquer thy great
enemy, which is thy self. Let wisdom then subdue in thee the inordinate
passion of love and desire of carnal, earthly and uncertain vanities, such is
ambition and pride, which is the love of greatness and honor, this is the
rotten staff that seems to help, but if we need it fails and wounds us. Such
also is covetousness, too earnest seeking after riches, such as will be rich.
And such is voluptuous and carnal love, these are three trapps that the most
are taken with, they assault the body, the mind, the goods, and are chief
commanders under our great enemies, the world, the flesh, the devil: all that
is in the world (says the Apostle) is the lust of the eyes, the concupiscence
of the flesh, and the pride of life: And such also is thy vain and corrupt
desires, which (without a strict and wise restraint) multiply and grow
infinite; Natural desires of beasts are uncorrupted and satisfied (as in
themselves) natural desires have their bounds, but those which grow from a
false opinion are without end, for in that which is false there is no limit: he
that travelleth in the right way comes to the end of his journey, but he that
is out of his way knows not whether he goes: and therefore it is, that no man
can live a happy and contented life, that lives and subdueth not corrupted
desites, which makes things painful and troublesome, that in themselves would
not be so. Its a great excellency in Physicians to know the disease, and a
great degree of wisdom, for us to know our inordinate affections and passions;
but we must diligently search them out, and use our utmost endeavors to expel
and subdue them, such is hope, despair, choler, hatred, envy, jealousy,
revenge, cruelty, sadness or heaviness of heart (especially for outward
things) compassion, fear, etc. but the imbecility and weakness of man is not
able to perform this, especially upon himself, for we are by far more able to
give good counsel, then to take and use it aright our selves: Therefore to
obtain this true wisdom to be our guide, we must in all humble obedience ask,
knock and seek for it aright; ask by prayer, knock by repentance, and seek by
good works and true Christian love and joy, that so we may be securely and
truly guided to avoid all the weaknesses, imbecillities and infirmities, that
otherwise will seize upon us in this life, to our eternal ruin and misery.
Seeing then that our passions and natural affections are our enemies, and that
pure wisdom only is our proper friend and perfect guide, let us a little more
closely express and unmask them both. Wisdom is a regular managing of the
soul with measure and* proportion, and it is an equal, pleasant and sweet
harmony of our judgments, wills and manners, and a constant health of the
mind, and is not found in the hands of those that live at their ease: whereas
the passions are the contrary, for they are the furious reboundings, accessions
and recessions of folly, violent rash and unconsiderate sallies and motions:
the offers and effect of wisdom are as infinite as the passions, because the
Physician must have a salve for every sore, which chiefly must be compounded of
these ingredients, true property, inward government of our desires, a sweet
carriage in all accidents of prosperity and adversity, a necessary observation
of Laws, Customs, and Ceremonies, an inoffensive conversation with others, and
prudence in all affairs, which produces this effect and fruit, to be always
ready for death, and to be maintained in true tranquillity of spirit, which is
the Crown of wisdom and of sovereign good; he then is truly wise, who
maintains himself truly free, and noble, who fashioneth and fitteth himself
to the upright service of Almighty God, living and carrying himself before his
most sacred Majesty, with all and in all affairs, upright, constant, cheerful,
content, and assured, attending with one and the same foot at things that may
happen, and lastly death it self. The rules of wisdom are universal, and on
following them does our happiness (both for our time and our eternity) depend:
therefore I will only name some few and leave the rest to your diligent and
careful search. First beware how thou joynest thy self, or attemptest any
thing with the multitude, for by those floods of errors which flow from them,
thou will (in all likelihood) be drowned and overthrown, for they are variable
and unconstant, allow and disallow the same thing at the same instant: they
love not war from any truth, nor peace, for quietness, but only in desire of
change: they run all contrary one against the other, and no time pleases
them but what is to come; they praise things past, desire things to come, and
despise things present: they are usually in their public mutinies, wholly
envious and malicious, without judgment, reason, or discretion. Secondly,
beware of solitariness, for they are mistaken who think it a sanctuary against
all vices, and temptations, it is true, against the vices of the world, stirs
and disturbances that proceed from without, it is good, but it has his inward
and spiritual assaults, and difficulties: he went into the desert to be
tempted of the Devil: to imprudent and unadvised men solitariness is
dangerous, when we are alone we may entertain worse company then our selves,
therefore we must pray to be defended from our selves. Then beware of too much
desiring and rejoicing in prosperity, and of too much dejection and sorrow for
and in adversity: these are two dangerous passages in our times, and we had
need here to stand close upon our guarde, to order our affairs in perfect
wisdom and understandnig: the vulgar and common sort believe there is no
fight or contradiction with prosperity, that there is no evil at all in it, or
can proceed from it, wherein they are highly transported with joy, and in
affliction they are as much cast down and dejected, in both which their great
folly, and want of true wisdom, is plainly shown; for it is the right use
that makes either of them, or any outward thing good, or evil, to us: as too
much plenty beats down the Corn, so too much outward felicity does us hurt
and prejudice: Virtue flourishes by adversity, and prosperity blinds the
truth: but a wise man fitteth himself for all fortunes, he governs the good,
and subdues the evil: presumes not in prosperity, nor despaires in adversity:
fears neither, is not moved with the clamours of the one, nor with the glory
of the other. Also beware of company, least thou order not thy self wisely and
circumspectly in all perticulars therein, for as thy behavior is there, such
is thy respect, and honor. I advise thee then in the first place to keep
modestly silent, thereby thou command both thy own and others judgments
while they express and reveal themselves. Secondly, be not peremptory nor
obstinate in thy own opinion, for it is indiscretion to condemn all that
pleases not thy palate. Thirdly, husband well thy knowledge, and rather get
new stock then spend the old: let a right understanding guide thee both in
reading and hearing or speaking, for it is least to know the History, the
Judgment is all. Let thy conntenance and show be open and agreeable to all,
thy mind and thoughts covered and hid from all. (Here consider three things:
Concealment, in most cases commendable; Dissimulation, in some cases allowable;
and Simulation in all cases abominable.) Keep thy tongue sober and discreet,
and keep thy self strictly to thy self, for innocence and a good conscience
keeps from repentance, and gives constant rejoicing in all conditions. Beware
of flatterers, this is the art of dissimulation and hypocrisy, and these men
study to excel in it; these show not the teeth until they bite, they
undermine ind arkness, and then on a sudden blow up and destroy; these are
wolves in sheeps clothing, friends in outward show, but thou may a little
distinguish them from a friend by these and the like marks: First, Flattery
respects for the most part its own particular benefit, but true friendship
seeks not the good of it self. Secondly, A flatterer is a looking glass that
receives all forms in his judgment, framing himself wholly to the mind of him
he flattereth. Thirdly, In outward show of friendship he has no moderation,
but is is altogether without inward affection. Fourthly, He applaudeth and
commends all in him, he flattereth, and stoopes sometimes himself like a
wrestler, the better to overthrow his companion; whereas a true friend
respects not so much how to please as how to profit, like a good Physician
that would by any means cure. Fifthly, If the flatterer does usurp the liberty
of a friend to reprehend, it is performed after such a sort and manner, as
being well observed, may easily be distinguished from a friends reproof.
Sixthly, A friend always counsels and advises to that which is reason,
honesty and duty; but the flatterer to that which belongs or tends to
passion or pleasure, and that which is a malady in the mind of the flatterer.
Beware of suretiship, for that bereaves many both of inward comfort and outward
estate, and is almost ever a certain forerunner of sorrow. Beware of all
excess either in diet, sleep, labor, recreation, apparel, etc. in all things
there is a golden mean, which true wisdom will show you, in which (by the good
favor of almighty God) you may safely walk, and attain thereby temporal and
eternal peace. Beware also in choosing your friends and acquaintances, and do
you tie the knot of friendship no harder, but that if it chance to loose, thou
may fairly part; it is very safe to be intimate with very few, and those to
know first very well. Beware of suits, the first loss is commonly the least:
Oppress not the poor, nor conclude of any thing rashly: hate revenge, and
delight not in the fall of thy enemy, for that thou thy self art likewise
mortal: There is a duty due from man in the use of all the creatures, with
reference of filial obedience due to our Creator, which concerns every one to
study and perform; for that almighty God is the revenger of the wronged and
oppressed. Not to particularize any further directions, wherein sacred wisdom
is alone to guide, which only is the gift of almighty God: I will (by the
assistance of almighty God) conclude these present Admonitions, with advising
thee to a constant preparedness for death, least our Lord call at a moment
when we think not of him, and there be no time given for a possibility of
repentance. The day of death is the master-day, and judge of all our days, the
trial and touchstone of all the actions of life, then do we make our great
essay, and gather the whole fruit of all our labors: Now the uncorrupted soul
that loved truth, is filled therewith, and the wicked soul that loved evil, is
converted into it: the first acted the part of Heaven, and now receives his
purity: the latter acted the part of hell, and now receives his corruption. The
whole study of wisdom is to learn to die well; and he has not spent his life
ill, that has learned it: to die is the work and learning of all our life, and
the chiefest thing and duty of life: He shoots not well that looks not on the
mark: and he cannot live well, that has not a watchful eye on death: the
science of dying is the science of liberty: the way to fear nothing is to live
well, contentedly and peaceably: without this knowledge, there is no more
pleasure in life, then in the fruition of that thing which we always fear to
lose, principally and chiefly then let us be sure that our sins die before
us, this is the ending life before death, and the way to die rejoicing,
willingly, contentedly, voluntarily. A good and a well settled soul, does attend
death sweetly and patiently, as a thing natural, inevitable, reasonable;
contemns it as a thing indifferent and of no great importance: desires and
seeks after it as the only haven of rest from all the torments of this life,
yea and a very great gain: to fear death and love life (excess in either) is
vanity; for that life is the preparation for death, and death is the liberty
from the slaveries of life, which were it held from us we should blame nature,
and follow it as much as now we fly it. It is the passage to our friends that
are gone before us, and those we leave behind shall shortly follow: It is the
undoubted will and appointment of our good Creator, which we ought always to
obey and perform with great rejoicing, knowing that it is best for us: This is
not to be thought the work of a day, or of our latter days, but of all our
days: The way to die well is to die daily, and to have hourly meditations and
preparations befitting our dissolutions. He that often thinks of death, can
hardly die ill, but from a negligent and unprovided death, good Lord deliver
us, Amen. These words, or to this effect, do the holy Scriptures plainly show,
that they will say after death, who in their life time neglected or contemned
these and the like holy and religious duties before mentioned, and omitted a
constant care and watch over their thoughts words and deeds, nay over the very
inclination of their spirits, thereby forsaking a wise and due preparation, and
contemning the only good and eternal bliss of their change and immortality:
We mad men (or without sense or understanding) esteemed the life of these (that
is of the just) to be madness, and their end without honor: and behold how
they are now reckoned among the children of God, and their Lot is among the
Saints, therefore we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of his
justice has not shined unto us, neither has the Sun of understanding risen
unto us; we have wearied our selves in the way of iniquity and perdition, and
have walked in difficult ways, and have not known the way of the Lord: What
has our pride profited us, or what the ostentation of our riches benefited us,
all which is now passed away as a shadow, like a po^^ or ship, or bird that
fl^eth, of whose passage there remains no sign: so we were born, and presently
ceased to be, and have left behind us no sign of virtue, but are consumed and
spent in our own malignity and wickedness, without hope or possibility of
redemption. Thou that restest thy self, and put thy trust in worldly and
humane wisdom, without keeping a constant eye upon the providence of God, with
a joyful submission to his Laws and commands: while thou have time consider,
and the good Lord give thee saving wisdom and understanding.

There is much wisdom and counsel in the Apocripha and in the Proverbs, and
sayings of wise and devout men. Seek and thou shall find. You ask and receive
not because you ask amiss.

Children this is only my gift of Advice to you, hinting some part of duty,
which by the blessing of almighty God you may in practice make out better; with
this I humbly pray the Lord give you understand ng in all things: for it is not
in my power, I cannot give you wisdom, it is only by the true performance of
duty to be obtained, as the gift of God.

A general Discourse of Religion.
It Is too much (God knows) the manner of Christians, to owe their Title merely
to the Font, Education or Country; their primitive principles much satisfying
their proceeding devotions; whereas Grace and reason best confirms
Christianity; by which we are taught not to hate, but pity those of carnal and
corrupted belief, heartily endeavoring their better reformation and
instruction. Christianity being largely spread, and divided, and many
professors fallen from the native beauty, and true belief thereof; wherefore we
must be very wary to preserve and practice it in the primitive integrity, which
our Savior and his Apostles taught, the holy Fathers and Martyrs have
confirmed; and take heed we imitate not the ancient Pagans, contemning a pure
truth for a poor profession: I do not herein dissuade from a just and pious
reformation, well knowing, it is better to avoid then detain a corrupted
principle, in which (the humble and sincere heart) the Almighty guides and
will deliver from those evils and corruptions, which (I fear) in some sort
possess both reformations and reformers, either from too much self-inclination
or advantage: therefore I take it not unfitly warned from violence or war,
only for Religion or belief: for whatsoever one has framed or believed,
another may likewise frame and believe: therefore heresies will arise, so we
read, but not that they will be quite abolished: there are schisms and
divisions in all Religions, but a wary combatant may lie unvulnerable under the
true buckler of faith: where reason cannot, faith must lead the way, which is
not only above, but sometimes against it also: how necessary then is the
contemplation of the attributes of the Almighty, his wisdom, eternity, mercy,
etc. which never admits us to be alone or solitary; which is a sweet companion,
a constant rest, repose and comfort. Reason and wisdom are copartners, and
jewels to be earnestly sought for, whereby we learn to read the book of the
Creatures, Natura nihil git frustra.
and therein to behold the infinite bounty of our Creator.

Cast out the glorious likeness of thy reason,
To find the truth both in and out of season;
To find the sacred webb that Nature wove,
Circle from center to the seat of Jove:
Search all those simple Hierogliphs that read
Those secret paths wherein her steps do tread.
That was our Makers Character to lead us,
To truest comfort, had not sin deceived us,
And blotted out that blessed guiding art,
That now the most we know is scarce an
Yet mercy has allowed us to search,
That pains and reason some small part may reach.
Search while thou will, and let thy reason go,
To ransom truth even from the Abyss below,
Rally the scatterd causes, and that line
Which nature twists, be able to untwine:
It is thy Makers will, for unto none
But unto reason, can he here be known:
The Devils know him, but those damned meteors
Build not his glory, but confound his creatures:
Teach my endeavors Lord thy works to read,
That learning them, in thee I may proceed;
Give then my reason that instructive slight,
Whose weary wings may on thy hands still light,
Teach me to soar aloft, yet ever so,
When near the Sun, to stoop again below:
Thus shall my humble feathers safely hover,
And though near earth, more than the Heavens discover.
And then at last, when home-ward I shall drive
Richly with the spoils of nature to my hive,
Then will I sit, like that industrious fly,
Buzzing the praises which shall never die;
Till death abrupts them, and succeeding glory,
Bids me go on in a more lasting story.
Natural actions are much beyond our reason, and Man is an epitome and
compendium of all the terrestrial creatures: There are two books that discover
our Maker to us, viz. holy Writ and Nature; those which never heard of one,
have discovered him in the other: the Almighty very much walks in the path of
reason, when otherwise, it is a miracle; for nature is (as it were) the Art of
God. The absolute and incomprehensible providence of the Almighty, is the
disposing of all things, that appoints our heirs, and does the works fasly
ascribed to Fortune.

Blessed are those praying conquests of the objecting doubts in Divinity: the
devil will never end those disputes while we are in his Principality: but while
we build up our reason, he endeavors to pull down our faith: There are
several sorts of heinous blasphemies, but an Atheist plays at all, and at
once denies there is a God. I believe there is many an accepted faith, which
cannot endure fire and faggot, and know not but Countries and particular
persons too may have their tutelar and protecting Angels: nor that the Saints
departed may not know the passages of their friends on earth, for that it is
said, at the conversion of a sinner the Angels of Heaven rejoice; for being
that man is not only in the bulk and lump of the creatures, but lives the life
of plants, animals and spirits, it is a mighty privilege and favor from our
Creator, and may be a hierogliphyck of supernatural knowledge. The mystery of
the Creation is very great, but more particularly of man: at the bare word the
creatures were made of nothing, but man was first made of earth, and afterward
the Image of his Maker by more sacred institution: therefore he must not doat
of life, nor fear to die; for to be too sensible of life, and hopeless of
death becomes no man, much less a Christian: for although death soon lays our
honor in the dust, and changes us from commanding men, into submission to the
beasts, yet we (that is our souls) are immortal, and (if not our own faults)
not subject to so vile allotment. I cannot find life worth the wish, unless
thereby we may serve our Maker, and therein profit or promore our blessed
eternity: but if our sins grow numerous with our hours, and so outgrow our
despised repentance, where is then that profit of our many years? therefore it
is, that there is a secret end, and bottom of our days, his wisdom has
determined them: his waking providence does fulfill them, wherein the spirits,
our selves, and all the creatures of the Almighty, in a secret and undisputed
way, perform his pleasure: Another hand twines the thread of life, than that of
nature,

Lucan.
Victurosque Dei celant ni vivere durent,
Faelix essemori --
We'are all deluded, vainly searching ways
To make us happy by the length of days:
For cunningly to make's protract this breath,
From us is hid the happiness of death.
To avoid death, in a miserable life, is Christian fortitude: it is a very
great blessing, that although the weakest hand may take away our life, yet the
strongest cannot deprive us of death: for seeing this corrupted life cannot be
without sin, happy is death that puts an end to it: the devil therein was
deceived; for that his envy in bringing us into sin, has (by the Almighty
mercy) likewise brought upon us natural death, whereby we are freed and
secured both from him and it. Now our certain and eternal habitations, are
those incomprehensible scituations, Heaven and Hell, which none define or tell
what and where they are, a negative is the best we have; bye has not seen, nor
ear heard nor can man's heart conceive: but Heaven, may be, the satisfaction to
the soul, wherein it desires neither addition nor alteration: and the
unsatisfied knowing appetite after vanity, may be said a hell: therefore let us
fear the Almighty, but not be afraid of shine; let rather his mercies make us
ashamed of our sins, then his judgments afraid thereof. I think few are
scared into Heaven, they go the fairest way that would serve the Almighty
without a Hell: those mercenaries that crouch unto him for fear of Hell, though
they term themselves the servants, are indeed, but the slaves of the Almighty.
The several afflictions of the Saints are improved, and do prove the secret
favors of the Almighty: it is a singular piece of wisdom, to distinguish the
justice of the Almighty from his mercy, and not miscall those his mighty
attributes, who is merciful to all, and better to the worst then the best
deserve, the most perfect actions on earth having no title or claim to Heaven,
for while we keep guard against one vice, we commonly lie open to the attempts
of another. Acts 10.35.
I like not that opinion, which tieth salvation to the pale of any Church,
least we err as much in our own, as in another judgment: We are commanded not
to judge any but our selves; and saving humility casts us lowest, and will make
us acknowledge our unworthiness, so much, as to bring up the rear in Heaven.
Charity is a heavenly and absolute virtue; the true effect whereof, gives
Alms more out of obedience to the Almighty, than out of commiseration on our
brother; for his sake that enjoynes it, rather than for his that asks it. He
that relieveth out of bowels of compassion only, does it only for his own sake,
and perhaps because it may be his own case, which is a sinister and politic
charity: this duty extends into all the ways of doing good, both to soul and
body, and by well instructing others upon an opportunity of charity, we perform
a double duty: to be reservedly a niggard in this part of goodness, is the
most sordid piece of covetousness, and in some sort more contemptible than
pecuniary avarice. No man can justly judge another, because no man can justly
know another, nor truly himself: Adams faith could not convince himself of
murder, until Cain actually showed it upon his brother. A contemplative and
solitary life, avoideth many common and public temptations, yet has the
devil such advantage, through our corruption, that if we do not withal
valor and watchfullnesse, resist both our selves and these allurements even in
our most retired thoughts, we shall thereby become the most abject piece of
mortality. Divine dreams are most happy entertainments of rest, thereby the
sleeping of the body may be the waking of the soul. Therefore thus

My slumbring brain foretells the night,
Me safely guard, thou God of might;
Let not my sins, that raging swell,
My blessed tutelar expel;
But let thy works that once were good,
Have from thy grace their daily food:
Let not my sins black as the night,
Eclipse the luster of thy light;
Thou art my everlasting years,
Where thou art, naught but day appears:
Thou to whom both day and night,
Make an individual light,
Guard we from that secret power
That would thee and thine devour:
Let no dreams my head infest,
But such as will me wake more blessed,
While I do rest, my soul advance,
My sleep let be a holy trance;
That waking I may rise from rest
With sacred thoughts and knowledge blessed,
And with as active vigor run
Therein as does the nimble Sun:
Death seems a sleep, O make me tell
How sleep and death do parallel.
And joy as much to lay my head
In grave, as in perfumed bed:
But Lord, both sleeping and awake
My soul into thy arms re-take;
And though it be, since thence it came,
Polluted with my bodies shame,
Yet do not Lord thy own decline,
Thou art our God, and we are thine:
And thus assured, behold I lie
Securely, or to wake, or die
Here, I a Pilgrim, can but call,
At every stage, must rest or fall.
O come that hour, when thou shall please
Which is my everlasting ease;
And then convert beyond all measure,
My soul, into thy perfect pleasure.
Amen.
Reason.
DOst' reason why when youth and strength is past
In foul transgression against thy Makers Laws,
That fainting age when life is near at last
Should obtain pardon, is there any cause.
Though true repentance never be too late,
It Is rarely true that is of so short a date:
And if not true, then woe unto thy sin,
It Is no repentance then of least accept,
Great need of penitence so soon as sin.
So soon as wearied womb her charge has left,
Then we that would true comfort have in death,
Had need prevent betime, repent with breath
The ten Ages.
MY little Infant patient be and still;
In Childhood meekness must command thy will,
Youth be thou temperate, and let manhood be
Acted in prudence and humility:
Manhood is made for labor, and as health
Is gained by constant action, so in health,
True fortitude, in manhood claims a part,
And watchfullnesse, is ground for every art,
True justice, and sound judgment, merit praise,
That we in wisdom may conclude our days.
The Metaphor.
WHo enters first a new Plantation,
Must wander, yet oppose temptation,
And passing Jordan must suppress the flood
Of wickedness, and must protect the good:
Next chastely he, must labor a Plantation,
Planting good fruit fit for a habitation;
Then be must nourish and preserve the same,
Least wild devouring beasts destroy the frame:
Then make good Laws, which right to all do give,
Whose execution makes for to live.
Humility.
IN marriage and in single life it is best,
under thy fortune, or estate to live;
So thou command'st it, not it thee; and rest
is never sound, where men and women give
Themselves to thoughts of vain ambition,
and would themselves, and children, raise up high,
They are deluded by the vain tradition,
that it is good; for it is bad; and nigh
To sad destruction: thus we see, full often,
that pinnacles, and lofty topps are torn:
And fond conceits of soaring high aloft,
are always ruined, vexed, and forlorn
With those that waver; tossed with every wind;
who on true providence unsettled be:
Whose miseries are formed of every kind:
but peace is handmaid to humility.
Blessed is the man whom God does teach,
his precepts secretly:
To whom his sacred arm does reach
beyond false sophistry.
To whom dark silence learned has
from the eternal grace,
The perfect walk in sacred path,
which sin does not deface.
To whom true mercy does confute
the vanities of men,
Who do contend in much dispute,
how God to serve and when.
This precious pearl who has obtained,
and this selected stone,
The perfect way has clearly gained
To serve the holy one.
Why Sin is forbidden and Righteousness commanded.
THe true reason why almighty God is offended with sin, is not because
thereby we wound his sacred person, but because thereby we destroy our selves,
by unfitting us, and making our selves uncapeable of his mercy prepared for the
works of his own hands, whereby only is our salvation. So his commands of
obebience to his sacred Laws, is not out of any gain or benefit to himself, but
from his willingness and desire of our eternal life, and that therein his
saving mercy may be sufficient for our salvation: so then, the whole benefit of
avoiding evil and doing good, is principally and chiefly to our selves. Psalm.
50.9, 10, 11, 12. I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor hee-Goat out of
thy foldes, for all the beasts of the forest are mine, and so are the cattle
upon a thousand hills: I know all the fowls upon the mountains, and the wild
beasts of the field are in my sight. If I be hungry I will not tell it thee,
for the whole world is mine, and all that is therein.

The chief drift and end of all divine instruction is, to admonish and lead us
to upright holiness in life and conversation, which is the certain path of
eternal peace.

THrice blessed is he whose Name is writ above,
That does good, though gaining infamy,
Requiteth evil turns with hearty love,
And wreaks not what befalls him outwardly:
Whose worth is in himself and only bliss,
In his pure conscience that does naught amiss;
That planteth treasure in his spotless soul,
And virtuous life his treasure does esteem;
That does his passions master and control,
And yet true Lordly manliness does deem,
That from this world himself has clearly quit,
Counts naught his own but what dwells in his spirit,
So when his spirit from this vain world does flit,
It takes all with it whatsoever was dear
Unto it self, passing in quiet flit,
As kindly ripened corn dropps from the ear,
And heeding naught what idle folk do say,
He takes his own and stilly goes away.
D. MORE.

The Life and Death of E.M.
AS by the fruit the Tree is plainly known,
So by thy Virtues are thy Parents shown,
Persons of quality, knowledge, and estate,
Thereby more fit, true duty to relate,
To God, their Country, and to each degree,
That Adams offspring are by pedigree.
Thy Infancy, thy Childhood, and thy years
Well nigh till Twenty one, was without fears
Of marriage-troubles, whence thou took thy flight,
To Governors and Parents great delight;
With whose consent, whose charge, and pious care,
Into like pious family, you were
Planted by marriage, where did grow like he
That bore like fruit that well appeared in thee.
Thy firstborn Child from accident unknown,
Abortive was, or was an Embryon:
Nine more thou had into the Church baptized,
Five thee survive, Four be immortalized:
One more is gone the path of mortal race,
The rest rejoice in hope to see thy face:
Thy Ninth and last born child our gracious God
Di^ friendly free thee of, but oh his rod,
Some ten days after; (for my sins I fear)
Took thee to joy, left me to labor here;
Labor I will, but only in his strength
Is all my joy, all my eternal wealth:
About some Thirty three was all thy age,
Thy worldly trouble and thy pilgrimage:
Thy five days sickness needs I must relate,
As rarest pattern fit to imitate;
What thanks for grace in thy childbearing pain,
What humble yielding unto death again;
What free submission to thy Fathers will,
Either to die, or wait his pleasure still.
What sorrow for to hear of shedding blood,
What fear least war should do more hurt than good:
So that thy faith, thy promise-bearing-pain,
Confirms our hope, our hope to meet again.
Another thus.
IN Infancy thou were of humble spirit,
In Youth thy love to piety did merit;
In Woman's years, thy neighbors truly speak
Thee sober, modest, studious and meek.
Loving true peace, and all that loved good,
In Charity relieving poor with food;
Zealous in duty to thy gracious God,
Feeding with joy upon his sacred word;
This as thy years increast did daily grow,
To high perfection both in deed and show:
See that when death first had his license given
From thy Creator by decree of Heaven,
He stood at distance, only showed his dart,
To see if fear would make thee shrink the smart,
But finding still the Roses white and red,
Adorn thy face, as they were customed,
The second day he nearer does advance,
Adds sorer sickness, as his furtherance,
And finding still thy firm undaunted faith,
The third day shows his much enraged wrath,
The fourth day, seeing that no worldly dear,
Could change thy Christian courage into fear,
The fifth and last to the utmost of his power,
Without his sting, produced the fatal hour.
To the Soul.
IMpale thy self (my soul) and circle in
thy wandering thoughts from worldly vain deceits
Which makes errors; covers her sin,
And perywiggs with fraud her base retreats,
Darkens the knowledge, and bemists the eyes,
Guilding the pit-falls of her vanities.
And let thy towering fence ascend more high,
Then does the panting air, or feathered wing,
So that the Prince thereof may not come nigh,
To scale the batlings, or disturb within,
But let thy sacred soul most freely breath
It self in Heavens joys, though thou beneath.
And keep out from thy peaceful Paradise,
All proud and haughty thoughts, which make thee seem
Better then others, in thy darkened eyes,
When least of others thou thy self should deem,
And take unto thee, infant humble bliss:
For of such virtue, the true Kingdom is.
Keep out from hence all covetous avarice,
For that is a partner with the proud disdain:
That eggs thee on to cast off all advice,
And makes thee throw off godliness, for gain,
And take unto thee goods most justly got,
Using this world as if thou used it not.
Take heed of setting up an Idol here,
For that is soon done before thou be aware.
Take heed of prizeing any thing so dear
As thy own maker: fear and have a care,
Serve thy own Maker: thy own God alone,
Serve, fear and love him, for he is only One,
Three Persons yet one God, our Maker is,
So holy Scriptures teach us to believe,
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost it is;
True faith the confirmation does us give:
No other true belief of Heavens ways,
Can man make out unto his Makers praise.
Take to thy self, and truly put in use,
Those ten most blessed Precepts, Moses gave
From our Creator, which men much abuse
By false construction, thinking for to save
Thereby their trespasses, but alas it is vain
To think the soul can live, where sin does reign.
Misguided conscience, often guides us wrong;
Yet we no better guide then conscience have,
If it be guided right, by true and long
Practice of piety, prayer, and counsel grave,
For our good Maker, the true humble heart
Truly converts, and teaches him the Art.
Blessed and for ever praised be God alone,
Which gives us comfort, notwithstanding sin,
And has a store of mercies of his own,
A fountain for the soul to wash it in,
That in the merits of his only Son,
Our souls appear freed from corruption.
Then cast off from thee every sinful thought,
And all appearances that evil be,
What er'e it is, though never so deerly bought,
If it but move to sin, cast it from thee,
And let thy pious prayers, and humble soul,
Thy earthly passions, and thy sin control.
Keep out by thy impaled and circled guard,
Hopes in rebellion, or by feats of arms:
Let civil war, for no hopes or reward,
Move thee to trample on thy neighbors harms;
But p^ty all distrested, and well know
The sword's abused; seldom reforms, below.
And keep from thee all idle wandering ways,
That have no end in motion, tend to naught,
When men seek nothing; so they spend their days,
In vain conceits, moov'd by a wandering thought,
And being empty of all good within,
The Devil ready is, to fill with sin.
Civil War.
FLy Civil wars; what is good, they often undo,
Peace is my Alpha and Omega too,
Y' trust none hurts me, for why, none I hate,
I wish all peace, least all repent too late:
Neuters are fittest men, the unbyass't life
Makes a fit judge, to end debate and strife,
Demeanours in several Accidents and Occasions.
Life,
WIth Life remember Death, and soon commence,
to love thy Maker and his providence.
Health, Peace, War.
In Health take Physic, Peace provide for War,
fly all excess and fly the Civil jarre.
Sickness.
In Sickness sorrow not, but know it is best,
in thy Creatours providence to rest.
Sorrow.
When Sorrows do possess thy troubled soul,
take heed thy will do not thy God control.
Joy.
Take heed of too much joy, and laughing much,
true serious thoughts do leave a better touch.
Affliction.
In all Afflictions while thy time does run,
with true content say, Lord, thy will be done.
Single life.
There Is great temptation waits a Single life,
more outward ease often brings more inward strife.
Marriage.
Weddings like winter Sun at noon-shine bright,
but often clouds appear, and sudden night.
Discourse.
In thy Discourse take heed of speaking more
then thou thy self know to be true before.
Dispute.
Opinionated men in their Dispute,
rather themselves then others do confute.
Travel.
Use words to get their speech; but mark thou well
their Laws and Customs, and what does excel.
Study.
In closet Study where no eye does see,
remember God, and thy eternity.
Foreign Country.
If thou from home to Foreign parts be called,
take heed thou be not in their vice enthralled.
Distress at sea.
When raging seas oppress thy trembling bark,
Saints have their haven, Doves their Noah's Ark.
Wretchedness.
Thrice wretched he that humane Laws
must force to do the right he knows.
Sin.
Thy soul from sins infectinn save,
least sins do cry, and crying have.
Affectedness.
Affectednesse in carriage needs must gain,
esteem of shallow, idleness, and vain.
Soberness.
A sober carriage if apparel suit
speak grounds of wisdom, gain a good repute.
Creature.
Take heed the Creatures have not cause to cry
at thy misusing them, and cruelty.
Earth.
Possess so much of Earth, from more refrain
then thou can order to eternal gain.
Rest.
What helps not hinders, what does not assist,
is enemy to thy eternal rest.
The mind.
To write or speak, more to affect the mind
then guide the soul, is folly unrefin'd.
Teaching.
If mind and soul, be from a sacred word,
both joy'd and taught, such teaching is from God.
Good and Evil.
Ill's only ill, and good is only good,
their consequences must be understood.
Gettings.
Is ought worth sinful getting, when we see
our seeming comforts scarce last seventy?
Vain joy.
Be not too jocund when the Sun does shine,
for suddenly it is noon, and must decline.
Comfort.
In all transactions underneath the Sun,
hence is true comfort, that God's will done.
Good life.
While we walk worthy of our Makers praise,
our peace is sound, in good, or evil days.
Upright Walking.
Who laden much with earth can walk upright,
with lesser load may surely walk more straight.
The Way.
Thrice happy want, and grief, and low degree,
you are the living way appointed me.
History.
By History learn how to act thy part,
and wisely know thy predecessors Art.
Nothing new
What has been is, and what is may be done,
Wisdom says, Nothing's new under the Sun.
Practice.
To read the story, and thereof to speak
without the practick part, shows judgment weak.
Nature.
Thy own corrupted nature's sure to blame,
then what suits most therewith is most the same.
Reason.
Our cursed sins does reason so deface,
that ancient custom much usurpes her place.
Custom.
When without pains we leave accustomed sin,
Then Leper change thy spots, and More thy skin.
Friends unkind.
If Friends prove foes, and since it must be so,
be linkt no faster then thou may let go.
Friends death.
Death, thou have parted us, but we shall meet,
beyond thy power, each others bliss to greet.
Employments.
Though worldly business us divide a far,
yet in Gods service we united are.
Affronts.
Give no offense, pass by affronts, for why
it is wisdoms counsel, wise men pass them by.
Anger.
Anger, is open to the greatest harm,
it arms thy foes, and does thy self disarm.
Law.
Do right to all without Law, or offense,
thy common Law, let be good conscience.
Suites.
Sue not at Law, until thou'st thoroughly tri'de
(to get but near thy right) all ways beside.
Judgment.
If thou be called thy judgment for to give,
remember God, that judges right, does live.
Family.
He that a wife, or family controuls,
ought last to feed their bodies, first their souls.
Exact living.
From truest principles of filial love,
are all the motions of the holy Dove.
Devotion.
In daily duties, and devotion due,
be constant, fervent, and thy words but few.
Sabbath.
Make not the Sabbath shortest of the seven,
but strictly keep it, morning, noon, and even.
Public Fasts or Feasts.
In public duties, public fasts or feasts.
for public presidents; keep them at least.
Private Fasts.
When thou (as is most fit) set'st days apart
to humble thee, do it with all thy heart.
Change.
In all the change that to this life is due,
change only Adam old, for Adam new.
Sacraments.
The blessed Sacraments ought for to move
thy soul, to tears of thanks, in truest love.
Attending the Word.
By sacred preaching the true heavenly Word
is offered us, felt, heard, and understood.
Duty.
To all the creatures several rights, it is fit
to give their due, as we will answer it.
Love to God.
Convert thy soul, and see thou do not move
for hope or fear, but serve in truest love.
Meditation.
Our duty to our God i will not relate,
Heavens joys, hells torments, see thou meditate.
Prayer.
In prayer, prostrate thy most humble spirit,
in true obedience, that is thy Saviors merit.
Sudden.
The sudden act, and what is rashly done,
has penitence for his companion.
Tumults.
Avoid all tumults, for their usual spring
is pride, and envy, and a height in sin.
Company.
Take heed of company, keep watchful eyes,
there is fewest friends, the most are enemies.
Fear.
Fear not too much what may the body harm,
but love our God, and trust his mighty arm.
Evil days.
For evil days, when worldly friends afford
nor peace, nor comfort, have it in the Lord.
Good days.
Those days are good, and only good begins
when we abound in love, subdue our sins.
Belief.
Belief is that, for which we ought to pray,
for sacred guidance in a holy way.
Reading the Scriptures.
In reading Scriptures, least understanding err,
craveth' holy Ghost for thy interpreter.
Authors.
In humane authors so much multiplied,
the truth of all by holy Writ is tried.
God.
With filial fear we must our souls prepare,
before we speak his Name, for whom we are.
Souls.
In studying of souls, know it is not given
to self, to know it self, within a prison.
Bodies.
Thy body's mortal; life's but like a breath,
then walk prepared for a joyful death.
Family.
Consider those allotted to thy charge,
thy bond's more great, their liberty more large.
Friends.
If thou have found a friend beyond a brother,
bless God therefore; thou wilt hardly find another.
Enemies.
Of all thy foes, take heed of smiling jest,
the hypocrite of all is deadliest.
Occasions.
In business, and occasions, that depend
upon this life, consider well the end.
Reward.
The innocent and humble mind regard,
with due respect consider, and reward.
Punishment.
The child, the simple, and the haughty mind,
are fit for punishments of several kind.
Writing.
Speak well, but better write, writings from far,
Arts.
The perfect use of Arts, are helps to call
back, our pure nature, lost in Adhm's fall.
Recreations
Use recreations to refresh the mind,
and better it for use of every kind.
Callings.
Callings are called of God, that we therein
may with us, others, to his Kingdom bring.
Removings.
In all removals amongst humane race,
you are still as near to thy eternal place.
Slander.
If envy smite thee with his lying tongue,
works, before words, confute both old and young.
Troubles.
In all the troubles that our works do merit,
our comfort is, the Father, Son and Spirit.
Advice.
In all my counsel, the just sum is this,
crave wisdom of our God, the gift is his.
The Resolve.
BUt center me and fix my soul aright,
in true obedience to my Makers will;
Let me converted be as is most right,
in perfect service as true beauty will:
Then let his pleasure cast me to those snares
of worldly torments, mind and body both,
What ever work it be in peace or wars,
it is his employment, trial of my troth;
It is my safest way, the only path
of his blessed pleasure only, leading right
To my eternal bliss: therein his wrath
due for my sins, is covered from my sight:
This rock of comfort rightly built upon,
is not impeach't by any battering storm,
It Is still the same in its salvation,
though with the world it is desolate, forlorn:
This lightens darkness, perfumes the dungeons foul.
feels not the tortures of the Tyrants rage,
It Is food in pinings; cherishes the soul,
in strangest torments where they tyranage:
What Is scorching heat, what is icy freezing cold,
what is wilderness, or banishing from home,
What Is boilings, scaldings, torments manifold,
what is all we comprehend by martyrdom;
If I but know, that I am not my own,
But my Creatours: and it is most right
That he dispose for ever: reason's shown
I must submit to his most perfect sight,
That sees what is only good unto my soul,
to fit it for eternal Paradise:
And only orders what without control,
does only fit my soul for sacred bliss:
Which if once known, welcome the swiftest speed,
that brings me tidings of the blessed decree,
That these sharp scourges are no more then is need,
and after death my ever bliss is free.
Then cast me from most towering rocks,
amongst fair Neptune's poudred locks,
And let my next remove be set,
within the Ocean's Cabinet:
Or place me on the Lybean plain,
which raging winds to wrath constrain,
Or let my habitation be
in depth of black obscurity,
Or if the thirsty wretch for blood,
must torture me, to meit's good;
More wrong for good we here endure,
the more is our salvation sure;
Well suffering wrong is surely blessed,
with promise of eternal rest:
This promise fails not; know you this,
Yea and Amen, this promise is.
If I could knowingly but see,
how all things work the best for me,
And if I were to perfect love,
converted then I should not move,
Though Neptune's foaming wave did burn,
though mountains over mountains turn;
Though humble valleys should deride
the lofty hills in seeming pride;
Though man unto his neigh^our be
as raging wolves in tyranny,
Though foaming floods usurp the place,
of Ceres with her wonted grace;
Though Neptune, Juno, Vulcan's flames,
part Tellus from her Comely Dames;
Though flaming Meteors join their force,
with warlike furious language hoarse;
Though lies, and homebred foes take place,
and have the power of my disgrace;
Though civil wars and foreign might,
take from my life all earths delight;
Though plagues and famine, sins desert,
my comforts to distress subvert;
Though my Creators love correct,
and for my sins my soul deject;
Yet while my God is all and chief,
I have my peace, I have relief.
A Discourse,
Showing Honor dangerous. Earthly things empty. Order of Estate and Family
Education of Children. The golden mean. What tends to eternal happiness,
only good. A competency the best. Great Estates have great troubles. Our
Savior refused earthly Treasure. Disposal of Estate in life, or Death*
Respect the Righteous. Duty in using the Creatures. They exceed in sense, we in
reason Some liberty from necessity.

Titles of Honor unprofitable.
Court Honor is rarely Virtues character.
TItles of Honor usually proceed from vain glory, and do much advantage the
design of flatterers, thereby they breathe their fond deceit, knowing this
wind rests only in the fame of others, and of it self is only profitable to
them that have it not: many evil effects proceed from it, as pride,
covetousness, etc. but one of the best effects therefrom (that I know) is, the
reproving a fool by his folly; thereby showing him how little I am profited, or
he prejudiced by my superiority of going before him; but rather that I have
inconvenience and danger thereby. This gilded Apple most deceives their vain
and shallow judgments, who love to spend their precious time in visits and
excess: but with the wise, in their constant, necessary, and solid
employments, it is little or nothing worth.

Earthly things empty.
I advise you, not to be too solicitous for the outward profits or pleasures of
this life, for if thou do obtain them, thou shall find them in use beyond
expectation empty.

Order.
Live soberly (under, and within the compass of your Estate) in your Family
(if the Almighty give you any,) and keep them in constant duty, once a day at
least in public prayer together; and in private advise them all to use it,
twice every day at least.

Education.
Bring up your Children (if God shall give you any) in learning and education,
suitable to the several Portions you are able to give them: and so order them,
that they may have no idle time, and as little as may be, for vain employments.

Avoid idleness and vanity.
Be sure neither to live thy self, nor bring up your Children above your
present Estate; for that almost enforces to pride, and then covetousness must
maintain: for observe, one vice is always borne up by another: and so also is
Virtue: although they may seem to intermix, they very seldom or never do.

A mean necessary.
Love the golden mean in all earthly things: use this present world as if thou
used it not; and so endeavor to order and teach thy family, that your great
joy may be, from your hopeful assurance to live together in eternal
happiness: for the fashion of this world vanishes away, and there is nothing
good, or worth desiring, That only good, which tends to eternal happiness
but what tends to the good of our eternity (or at least not to the hurt
thereof) and nothing can be evil that tends to our eternal peace. Selah.

A competency the best.
A competency of earthly things is the request of Agur's prayer: What a
competency is, under the true notion of neither poverty nor riches, is to be
resolved: I conceive that whatsoever does or may preserve and satisfy nature,
is a competency, What it is.
and in that sense is almost every man's present estate, wherewith he ought
according to right and justice to be content. But if I be asked what in my
opinion a sussicient competency is in England, for a Person of quality to live
handsomely upon, What in England.
I conceive 500lb or 1000lb per Annum to be sufficient (from well ordering of
it) to have many opportunities to give almighty God much honor, and thereby to
do much good to men: and I am sure a great account must be made of so great a
Talent.

Great Estates cause great sorrow.
What is there from such vast Estates, as vain and unsatisfied desires wish
for, but great care both in getting and keeping of them: They have more
servants, more diet, more vainglory, and more trouble and sorrow therewith;
but what is there more (usually) for the almighty giver? surely very little,
and often nothing, save cause of anger for the bad ordering or misusing of it;
which (if not in time repented of) causes and will produce a certain and
eternal destruction.

Our Saviors portion.
Then love the Golden mean, the competent easy load and Talent, which being
wisely ordered with honest care and industry, may give thee more true and
lasting comfort, then any excess in earthly things. Consider the portion and
Talent of our blessed Savior, and his Apostles in this world, and their happy
content therewith. True peace and comfort is from the treasure in Heaven, not
in earth.

Disposement of Estate in life or death. Respect the righteous.
In disposing of thy Estate either in life or death, it is good to consider
that order in which almighty God has placed the world unto thee; and let
nothing (save the household of faith) break that order: which order is; first
thy Wife, as next thy self, or rather equal with thee: then thy Children in
their birthrights: then Kindred: then thy Servants according to their merit:
if they have spent their youth and strength in thy faithful service: then
Neighbors of thy sober faith: and lastly, all men that desire to live soberly,
righteously and honestly in this present world.

Use the Creature modestly, soberly.
Put them not to any unusual painful death, without great necessity.
Take heed thou do not tyrannize or oppress the Creature in the Liberty of use;
I mean the sensitive, who (indeed) are fellows with us, and exceed us more in
sense, then (is clearly made out) we do them in reason. Our Creator is one,
our bodies and our senses are alike; we say they sin not, thus far they
equal or exceed us: only our reason makes the difference, though some
dispute, because some sensitives prepare against a storm, which only is the
true effect of sense: however I advise you to use them very soberly, with great
care and moderation, especially in killing them, in taking away their lives to
preserve thine own: take heed in destroying their bodies, thou ruin not thy
own soul: do not put them to any unusual painful death to please thy palate,
or gain more health and strength thereby, to consume it on thy lusts: but if
there be any necessity in such using, to gain strength or health, out of thy
true desire better and longer to work in thy masters vineyard as a just
servant, Liberty in necessity.
thou may (out of such a true intent) in any sort use them; yet take heed of
the innocent and helpless cries of the meanest Creature: and pitying them, let
it move thee to true repentance, Thy sin (perhaps) the cause of their
punishment.
for that thy ill deserving sin may cause their undeserving punishment:
therefore bless our good God in the use of the Creature, but abuse it not.

Comfort from Scripture both in Life and in Death.
I. Comfort.
To have true joy in long Life, from our hearty desires of serving our God, in
all our appointed pilgrimage.

HAB. 2.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

FOrasmuch then as the Children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also
himself likewise took part with them: that he might destroy through death, him
that had the power of death, that is the devil: and that he might deliver all
them which for fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage: for
he in no sort took the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham; wherefore in
all things it became him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be
merciful and a faithful High priest in things concerning God, that he might
make reconciliation for the sins of the people: for in that he suffered and
was tempted, he is able to succor those that are tempted.

1 Cor. Chap. 15. 1 These. Chap. 4. You shall find admirable comfort by death
and in death, from the certainty of the resurrection, and of our change:
therefore read them diligently.

Prove. 14.32. The wicked shall be cast away in his malice, but the righteous
has hope in his death.

Eccl. 7.3. A good Name is better then a good ointment, and the day of death
then the day that one is born.

Psalm. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

Isa. 57.1. The righteous perish and no man considers it in heart, and
merciful men are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come.

Psalm. 63.3, 4. For thy loving kindness is better then life, therefore my lips
shall praise thee.

Psalm. 104.33. I will sing unto the Lord all my life, I will praise my God
while I live.

II. Comfort.
Secondly, Take comfort for that all our conditions both inward and outward
(sin excepted) are from the appointment of God, and his will is therein door.

Numb. 20.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron in
the mount of Hor, near the coast of the Land of Edom saying: Aaron shall be
gathered to his people; for he shall not enter into the Land which I have given
unto the Children of Israel, because ye disobeyed my Commandments at the
waters of Meribah. Take Aaron and Eleazar his son and bring them up into the
Mount Hor. And cause Aaron to put off his garments, and put them upon Eleazar
his son: for Aaron shall be gathered to his fathers, and shall die there. And
Moses did as the Lord had commanded; and they went up into the Mount Hor in the
sight of all the Congregation. And Moses put off Aarons clothes, and put them
upon Eleazar his son: so Aaron died there in the top of the Mount. Chap.
33.38.

Deuteronomy. 32.48, 49, 50. And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying; Go up into this
mountain of Abrim, unto the mount Nebo which is in the Land of Moab, that is
over against Jerico. And behold the Land of Canaan which I give unto the
Children of Israel for a possession, and die in the mount which thou go up
into, and thou shall be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother died in
mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people. Job 23.14. For he will perform
that which he had decreed of me, and many such things are with him.

Prove. 16.9, 33. The heart of man purposes his way, but the Lord does direct
his steps. The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is
from the Lord. The will and the deed of holiness is from the Lord, therefore
we must truly pray for the sacred guidance of the holy Spirit. Paul plants, and
Apollo waters, but it is God that gives the increase, Selah. Therefore O my
God, for thy Son my Saviors sake, and as thou delightest to show mercy to
the saving of a poor sinner that would truly serve thee, from his deserved
death: teach me thy precepts, and lead me in the way of thy Commandments. Turn
me unto thee (O Lord) and so I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God,
and I am thy servant, though most unworthy of thy service; I am thy unworthy
prodigal son, Lord make me return unto thee my blessed and merciful Father,
in true and saving repentance. Amen.

Jer. 15.2, 3. Thus says the Lord, Such as are appointed to death unto death;
and such as are for the sword to the sword, and such as are for the famine to
the famine; and such as are for the captivity to the captivity: And I will
appoint over them four kinds says the Lord: The Sword to slay, the Dogs to
tear in pieces, and the Fowls of the Heaven, and the Beasts of the Earth, to
devour and to destroy.

2 Samuel 17.14. For the Lord had determined (or appointed) to destroy the good
counsel of A hithophell, that he might bring evil upon Absolon.

2 Chronicles. 33, 8. Neither will I make the foot of Israel to remove any more out
of the Land which I have appointed for your fathers, so that they take heed and
do all that I have appointed them.

Job 7.3. Painful nights have been appointed me. And 14.5. Are not his days
determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his
bounds which he cannot pass. Ver. 14. All the days of my appointed time will
I wait until my change come. O preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

Micha 6.9. Hear the rodd, and who has appointed it.

Job 7.1. Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth, and are not his
days as the days of an hireling?

Dan. 8.19. And he said, Behold I will show thee what shall be in the last
wrath; for in the end of the time appointed, it shall come.

Dan. 10.1. But the time appointed was long, etc. (wherefore wait thou the
pleasure and appointment of God patiently, and rejoice in all conditions to
wait his will.) And Chap. 11. Ver. 27. And both those Kings hearts shall be to
do mischief, and they shall talk of deceit at one table, but it shall not
avail, for yet the end shall be at the time appointed, at the time appointed
he shall return, for there is a time appointed, Ver. 29, 35.

Acts 17.26. And has made of one blood all man-kindeto dwell on all the face
of the earth, and has assigned the times which were ordained before, and the
bounds of their habitation. Job 16.22. For the years accounted come, and I
shall go the way whence I shall not return.

2 Samuel 7.12. And when thy days be fullfilled thou shall sleep with thy
fathers. Deuteronomy 31.14. Then the Lord said to Moses, Behold thy days are come,
that thou must die.

III. Comfort.
Take comfort from this, that the will of God is the best for us, and that we
our selves know not what is the best for us; and therefore we may well rejoice
that his will is done and not ours, save only when it suites with his in
Christ, which is surely best for us. Numb. 27.16. God is the Lord of the
spirits of all flesh.

Deuteronomy. 8.3. Therefore he humbled thee, and made thee hungry, and fed thee with
Man, which thou knew not, neither did thy fathers know it, that he might
teach thee, that man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord, does man live.

Eccl. 7.2. Who knows what is good for a man in this life, in the number of the
days of the life of his vanity, seeing he makes them as a shadow?

Jer. 42.6. Whether it be good or evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord God
to whom we send thee, that it may be well with us when we obey the voice of the
Lord our God.

Psalm. 39.5. Surely every man in his best estate is altogether vanity:
therefore let us say with joy, as Matthew. 6.10. Thy will be done (O God) in
earth, as it is in Heaven. And with our blessed Savior, Mat. 26.42. O my
Father, if this cup may not pass from me, but that I must drink it, thy will
be done. Let us with David, Psalm. 143.10. desire our God to teach us his will;
and then with him, Psalm. 40.8. let us delight to do it; for our God is good,
and his mercy endures for ever. Selah.

IV. Comfort.
Take comfort in Sickness, because the will of God is there n done which is
for the best for us; and let it be the joy of our souls in all conditions, that
his will is done in Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.

Psalm. 115.3. Our God is in Heaven, he does whatsoever he will.

Job 30.4. None knows the secrets of God: Who has ascended up into Heaven,
and descended? who has gathered the wind in his fist? who has bound the
waters in a garment? who has established all the ends of the world, what is
his Name, or what is his sons Name if thou can tell.

Phil. 4.1^. Let us be careful ( with St Paul) to learn in whatsoever state or
condition we are, to be therewith content, both to be full and to be hungry; to
abound and to want; for we may do all things through the help of God our
Savior.

Matthew. 4.34. Let us truly say with our blessed Savior, My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, and finish his work. Say with the Apostle, Acts
21.14. The will of the Lord be done: And as Ephesians. 4.7. Be not unwise, but
understand what the will of the Lord is, and sing with melody in your hearts to
the Lord. And say with Job, Job 5.17. Blessed is the man whom God corrects,
therefore refuse not thou the chastening of the Almighty.

Prove 3.1^. For the Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as the father does
the child in whom he delights. Only thus pray in true love to thy God and
Savior, and with an humble and a contrite heart: Jer. 10.24. O Lord correct me
but with judgment, not in thine anger, least thou bring me to nothing. Then
examine thy soul, and be sure God will by his Spirit reveal to thee, and will
conclude of thee as he did to his people whom he had corrected: Jer. 30.11. I
am with thee to save thee, though I utterly destroy all the nations where I
have scattered thee, yet will I not utterly destroy thee, but I will correct
thee by judgment, and not utterly cut thee off. And Jer. 46.28. Fear thou not
O Jacob my servant, says the Lord; for I am with thee, and I will utterly
destroy all the nations whether I have driven thee; but I will not destroy
thee, but correct thee by judgment, and not utterly cut thee off. Therefore
bless our good God in and for all the conditions of thy pilgrimage: and say
with David, Psalm. 143. Hear my prayer O Lord, give ear to my supplication: in
thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness: and enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
For the enemy (viz. sin and Satan.) has persecuted my soul, he has smitten
my life down to the ground: He has made me to dwell in darkness as those that
have been long dead, therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me, and my heart
within me is desolate. I remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy
works: I muse on the works of thy hands. I stretch out my hands unto thee, my
soul thirsts after thee, as a thirsty land, Selah. Hear me speedily (O Lord)
my spirit fails, hide not thy face from me, least I be like to them that go
down into the pit. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for
in thee do I trust; cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift
up my soul unto thee. Deliver me O Lord from my enemies (viz. from my sins.)
I fly unto thee to hide me, teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: thy
Spirit is good, lead me into the land of uprightness. Quicken me O Lord for
thy Names sake; for thy righteousness sake bring my soul out of trouble. And
of thy mercy cut off my enemies (viz, my sins,) and destroy all them that
afflict my soul, for I am thy servant. I will rejoice to work in thy vineyard O
my creator, and in the strength of thy mercies will attend thy call to rest,
as thy most obedient servant. Amen.

V. Comfort.
Take comfort in a constant thirsting to be dissolved and to be with Christ, as
his servants are who be already dissolved, if almighty God in Christ Jesus were
so pleased.

Read Gerrards Meditations, Though death, as to us, is bitter, yet in from page
268, unto page 302. our trust on almighty God in Christ it is sweet. For, who
keep^th his word shall never see death, Joh. 8.51. The misery of a Christian
dies, but not the Christian man; we lose not our friends at their death, but
they go before us to the place of our enjoyment of them in Christ Jesus for
ever (as we may well believe.)

Luke 2.29. Simeon says, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace.
And Phil. 1.23. The Apostle desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ,
which is best of all.

Rev. 7.9. The elect have robes in token of innocence, and palms in their hands
in token of victory: therein are all tears wiped away from our eyes. Ver. 17.
And therein is no mourning, nor grief, nor any cry heard, but rest from labor.
Chap. 21. v. 4. and 14.15.

Our blessed Savior shows the great benefit of being dissolved; when his
Disciples were sad at it, he said, Joh. 14.28. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice
rather. Phil. 1.21. Death is gain: The Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to his Son: therefore rejoice in thy true belief to
go to that judgment. For Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that who so believes in him, should not perish but have
everlasting life. Matthew. 18.14. Neither is it the will of our Father, that one
of the little ones should perish. Ver. 11. Our Savior came to save that which
was lost. He takes away the sins of the world. He died for the sins of the
world. He has a gracious call for us; as, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. He makes intercession for us, and has
blotted out the handwriting which was against us. Joh. 5.24. He that hears
his word, and believes on him that sent him, has life everlasting, and shall
not come into condemnation. O my Savior I believe, yet help thou my unbelief,
and increase thou my faith. Ephesians. 5.29, 30. That I may truly and as I ought,
believe my self to be, and be, a member of thy body, of thy flesh, and of thy
bones. O my Savior, in the power of thy might, and as thou diedst to save
sinners, make me holy, is thou the Lord my God art holy. The days of my
pilgrimage are few and evil. My conversation is in Heaven, and I desire to see
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living: When shall I appear before
thy face O God. As the Heart pants after the fountain of water, so does my
heart after thee O God. At thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. I
shall be abundantly satisfied with the plentifullnesse of thy house, and thou
shall give me to drink of the brook of thy pleasures, for with thee is the
fountain of life, and in thy light shall we see light. Thou O Lord art the
portion of my inheritance, and my exceeding great reward. Thou shall (of thy
free love to sinners showed in Jesus Christ) cover me with the garment of
salvation, and cloathe me with the white robe of righteousness, where there is
no hunger nor thirst, nor scorching Sun. Of the fruit of the vine shall I
drink in thy Kingdom: for thy words are spirit and life, therefore shall death
be swallowed up in victory, and thou O Savior shall (for thy free merit in the
blessed mercy of our eternal Father) wipe away all tears from my eyes for
ever, for thou art my all-sufficient Lord God. While we live we cannot hope to
cease from sin; but when we die we hope to sin no more: which consideration
does administer great comfort in the remembrance and appearance of death, to
those that are truly weary of sinning against their God.

VI. The first Comfort in the pangs and passages of Death.
First, Because the will of God is therein done in Jesus Christ, which is
certainly the best for us. It is appointed to all men once to die, and after
that comes the judgment. Heb. 9.27.

2 Cor. 4.14. Knowing that he which has raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise
us up also by Jesus, therefore we faint not; but though our outward man perish,
yet the inward man is renewed daily. Ver. 17. For our light afflictions which
are but for a moment, causes unto us a far more excellent and an eternal
weight of glory; while we look not on the things that are seen, but on the
things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the
things which are not seen, are eternal.

Read Gerrards Meditations p. 109. praying for a blessed departure out of this
life, and a blessed resurrection unto life ever lasting. And Read the fifth
Chapter of the 2d Cor. in which is admirable comfort in the passages of death:
that we may be present with the Lord.

Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the man that endures temptations, for when he is tried
he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him. Then present thy sold a true devotary unto our most gracious Father
in Jesus Christ, and say with David, Psalm. 31.5. Into thy hands I commend my
spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth, Ps. 71.23. My lips will
rejoice when I sing unto thee, and my soul which thou have delivered. And
rejoice with Paul, Gal. 3.13. saying, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the Law, when he was made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every
one that hangs on a tree. Then gathering thy spirit, freeing thy soul of
worldly thougths, say (in faith and true repentance, in full assurance that our
good God is all-sufficient, and that his mercy endures for ever, and that in
Jesus thy Savior he has elected and adopted thee his son) Come Lord Jesus,
my most dear Savior, come quickly, Amen.

VII. A second Comfort in the passages of Death.
Take comfort in this, That his mercy endures for ever: therefore rejoice
always, and in all things give thanks, for that is the love of God to thee in
Christ Jesus.

Isa. 43.25. Thus says the Lord, I even I am he that puts away thy
iniquities for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

Isa. 53.4. Fear not for thou shall not be ashamed, neither shall thou be
confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame, yea thou shall forget the shame
of thy youth. Ver. 7. For a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great
compassion will I gather thee Ver 8. For a moment, in my anger I hid my face
from thee, for a little season, but with everlasting mercy have I had
compassion on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer. Ver. 9. For this is unto me as
the waters of Noah: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more
go over the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be angry with thee, nor
rebuke thee. Ver. ^0. For the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall
down, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant of my
peace fall away, says the Lord that has compassion on thee. Ver. 13. And all
thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and much peace shall be to thy
children. Ver. 17. But all the weapons that are made against thee shall not
prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall
condemn: this is the heritage of the Lords servants, and their righteousness
is of me says the Lord.

Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.

Sing praises unto the Lord ye his Saints, and give thanks before the
remembrance of his holiness: for he endures but a while in his anger, but in
his favor is life; weeping may abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning.

1 Chronicles. 16.34. Praise the Lrod for he is good, for his mercy endures for
ever. Ver. 41. And they were appointed to praise the Lord, because his mercy
endures for ever.

2 Chronicles. 5.13. And they praised the Lord saying, for he is good, because his
mercy lasts for ever.

Chap. 7. ver. 3. And they bowing themselves worshipped saying, for he is good,
because his mercy lasts for ever. Ver. 6. And the Priests waited to praise
the Lord, because his mercy lasts for ever.

Chap. 10. ver. 21. And they went before the men of Arms saying, Praise ye the
Lord, for his mercy lasts for ever.

Ezra 3.11. Thus they sang when they gave praise unto the Lord, For he is good,
for his mercy endures for ever.

Psalm. 118.4. Let them that fear the Lord say, that his mercy endures for ever.

Psalm. 106.1. Praise the Lord because he is good, for his mercy endures for
ever. Read Psalm. 136.

Psalm. 117.12. For his loving kindness is great toward us, and the truth of
the Lord endures for ever.

Psalm. 138.8. Praise ye the Lord, the Lord will perform his work toward me.

Psalm. 28.21. O Lord thy mercy endures for ever, forsake not thou the works of
thy hands; forsake me not O Lord, be not thou far from me my God.

Psalm. 71.9. Cast me not off in the time of age; forsake me not when my
strength fails. Amen.

VIII. A third Comfort in Death.
Thou may rejoice, because blessed are they which die in the Lord, even so
says the Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow
them, Rev. 14.13.

Say thou with Paul, Phil. 1.21. Christ is to me both in life and death,
advantage. Ver. 22. And whether to live in the flesh, were more profitable for
me, and what to choose, I know not. Ver. 23. For I am greatly in doubt on both
sides, desiring to be loosed, and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Eccl. 4.12. So I turned and considered all the oppressions that are wrought
under the Sun, and behold the tears of the oppressed, and none comfort
them: and lo the strength is of the hand of them that oppress them, and none
comfort them, wherefore I praised the dead, which now are dead, above the
living which are yet alive.

Numb 23.10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
unto his: the death of the righteous is greatly to be desired. Psalm. ^8.14. God
is our God for ever an ever, he shall be our guide unto death. Psalm. 116.15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints.

Prove. 14.32. The wicked shall be cast away for his malice, but the righteous
has hope in his death. Love the Lord thy God, and therein thou shall have
comfort and great joy in all conditions whatsoever; for love is stronger then
death, and our God will destroy death for ever.

Isa. 25.8. Hear with great joy the word of the Lord to them that love him.

Hoseah 13.14. I will redeem them from the power of the grave, I will deliver
them from death. O death I will be thy death, O grave I will be thy
destruction: repentance is hid from my eyes.

Romans 5.10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death
of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life.

Chap. 8. ver. 2. For the Law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus,
has freed me from the Law of sin and of death.

Psalm. 42.1, 2. As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so pants my
soul after thee O God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: when
shall I come and appear before the presence of God.

IX. A fourth Comfort in Death.
Our Savior Jesus died in pain far greater then ours, and also a most
ignominious and shameful death, and all for our sins: it were happy for us
that we could imitate in some measure his sufferings for us, because his purity
in the least degree, or part we cannot: He suffered most freely for us,
contrary to the cry and call of our rebellions even at that time against him,
when he could have got as much honor in our condemnation, and have been
rescued from those sufferings, by more then twelve legions of Angels: He has
willingly suffered, to parchace eternal life for us (as we ought truly to
believe:) Therefore this being his appointed Cross for us, let us take it up,
carry it, and follow him, therewith rejoicing, that we through his mercy are
accepted of him, as worthy to obtain and do his service: much more may we
rejoice, that we in his goodness should have promise to reign with him for
ever, Amen. Besides our blessed Saviors incarnation, in coming from his Throne
of eternal Godhead to take upon him the form of a servant; his being laid in
the manger, not having whereon to rest his head; his many weepings and
sorrowings for the sins of the world: Read (with true sorrow and repentance)
that thy sins should cause him such a death, or indeed the least sorrow.

Matthew. 27.27. Then the soldiers of the Governors took Jesus into the
Common Hall, and gathered about him the whole band. Ver. 28. And they stripped
him, and put upon him a scarlet robe. Ver. 29. And platted a Crown of thorns
and put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and bowed the knees
before him, and mocked him saying, God save the King of the Jews. Ver. 30. And
spit upon him, and took a reed and smote him on the head. Ver. 31. Thus when
they had mocked him, they took the robe from him, and put his own raiment on
him, and led him away to crucify him. Ver. 33. And when they were come unto
the place called Golgotha, (that is to say) the place of dead men's sculls. Ver.
34. They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall, and when he had tasted
thereof he would not drink. Ver. 35. And when they had crucified him, they
parted his garments, and did cast lots: that it might be fullfilled which was
spoken by the Prophet, Psalm. 22.18. They divided my garments amongst them, and
upon my vesture did cast lots. Ver. 36. And they sat and watched him there.
Ver. 37. They set up also over his head his cause written, This is Jesus the
King of the Jews. Ver. 38. And there were two thieves crucified with him, one
on the right hand, and the other on the left. Ver. 39. And they that passed by
reviled him, wagging their heads and, Ver. 40. Saying, Thou that destroyest the
Temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy self; if thou be the Son of
God come down from the cross. Ver. 41. Likewise also the High-Prists mocking
him, with the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Elders, said, Ver. 42. He saved
others, but he cannot save himself: if he be the King of Israel, let him now
come down from the cross, and we will believe him. Ver. 43. He trusted in God,
let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of
God. Ver. 44. That same also the thieves, that were crucified with him, cast in
his teeth. Ver. 45. Now from the sixth hour, was there darkness over all the
land, until the ninth hour. Ver. 46. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with
a loud voice, saying, Ely, Ely, lamasabachthani, that is, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Ver. 47. And some of them that stood there, when they
heard it said, This man calls Elias. Ver. 48. And straight way one of them
ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and
gave him to drink. Ver. 49. Others said, Let be, let us see if Elias will come
and save him. Ver. 50. Then Jesus cried with a loud voice again, and yielded up
the ghost.

Now then let us be glad and rejoice to go to him (our Savior, our joy, our
peace,) what way soever he is pleased to call us, through the most bitter
torments of mind or body, by weaknesses, sicknesses and imperfections; and let
us be most assured, that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities. nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come; nor height,
nor depth, nor any creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

2 Timothy 2.3. Let us therefore suffer afflictions as good soldiers of Jesus
Christ. For it is a true saying, If we be dead with him, we shall also live
with him; if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him; if we deny him,
he also will deny us. Yea

2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecutions. Here have we no continuing City, but we seek one to come:
Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls
to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator: knowing, that the same
afflictions are accomplished in our brethren which are in the world. As many as
our Savior loves, he rebukes and chasteneth. Be zealous therefore in the
truth, and amend, and rejoice always, that the will of God in Christ Jesus thy
Savior is therein done, which is the best for thee. Amen.

X. A fifth Comfort in Death.
Rejoice, Because it is our going from sorrow to joy.

Isa. 17.1. The righteous perishes and no man considers it in heart, and
merciful men are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come.

2 King. 22.19, 20. But because thy heart did melt, and thou have humbled thy
self before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place, and
against the inhabitants of the same, to wit, that it should be destroyed and
accursed, and have rent thy clothes and wept before me; I have also heard it,
says the Lord: behold therefore, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou
shall be put into thy grave in peace, and thy eyes shall not see all the evil
which I will bring upon this place; this was the great love of God to King
Josiah. See 2 Chronicles. 34.28.

Luke 16.22. Lazarus (by a blessed dissolution) is eased of all his pains,
sores, diseases, fears and troubles, is called for out of the prison of the
body, and presently (by the happy messenger of death) is made fit* and carried
by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: where all the elect are in joys
incomprehensible, freed from sin and sorrow forever. Amen.

XI. A sixth Comfort in Death.
Rejoice, Because it is our being gathered to our nearest alliance, our kindred
and our parents.

2 King. 22.19, 20. Josiah was gathered to his fathers in great abundant mercy
(as I mentioned before.)

See the most sweet and gracious call of the eternal mercy to Moses, Deuteronomy,
32.48, 49, and 50. (which I lately mentioned:) And the Lord spoke to Moses the
self same day saying: Go up into the mountain of Abarim, unto the mount Nebo,
which is in the land of Moab over against Jericho, and behold the land of
Canaan which I give to the children of Israel for a possession, and die in the
mount which thou go up unto, and thou shall be gathered unto thy people, as
Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered to his people.

Genesis 25.8. The Abraham yielded up the spirit, and died in a good age, an old
man and of great years, and was gathered to his people.

Numb. 20.26. Almighty God commanded Moses to take Aaron and Eleazer his son,
and to bring them up into the mount Hor, and to cause Aaron to put off his
garments, and to put them upon Eleazer his son (saying) Aaron shall be
gathered to his fathers and shall die there.

Numb. 30.1, 2. Almighty God does bid Moses avenge the children of Israel of
the Mideanites; and in token of acceptance and reward, faith, afterward thou
shall be gathered to thy people.

Genesis 15.17. And Ishmaell yielded up the spirit and died, and was gathered to
his people. Chap. 35. ver. 29. And Isaak gave up the ghost, and died, and was
gathered to his people. And Chap. 49. ver. 26. Jacob says, I am ready to be
gathered to my people, bury me with my fathers. Observe: There is no sign or
show of sorrow in him; for he might well rejoice to exchange earth for Heaven.
And Ver. 33. Then Jacob made an end of giving charge to his sons, and plucked
up his feet into the bed, and gave up the ghost, and was gathered to his
people. It is an infinite and an incomprehensible mercy of God, that his love
in Jesus is to call us in his good time from our disserving (rather then
serving) of him here, (and that with thousands of fears, cares and griefs) to
be gathered to his servants our fathers, and nearest friends, in peace.

XII. A seventh Comfort in Death.
Rejoice, Because it is our entrance into the true communion of Saints. By the
Gospel we are joined to the Angels and Patriarchs, even in this life; much
more shall we be united to the true heavenly serving our eternal mercy with
them, when we shall cease from sin.

Heb. 13.22, 23. Ye are come to the mount Sion, and to the City of the living
God, the celestial Jerusalem; and to the company of innumerable Angels; and to
the Congregation of the firstborn which are written in Heaven. And to God the
Judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men. Ver. 24. And to Jesus
the mediator of the new Testament.

Col. 1.9. The Apostle says, For this cause we pray for you, and do desire
that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding. Ver. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord, unto
all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the
knowledge of God. Ver. 11. Stengthened with all might according to his glorious
power, unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfllunesse. Ver. 12. Giving
thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light. Ver. 13. Who has delivered us from the
power of darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son.
Ver. 14. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins. Ver. 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every
creature. Ver. 16. For by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and
that are in earth; visible, and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: all things were created by him and for
him. Ver. 17. For he is before all things, and by him all things consist. Ver.
18. And he is the head of the body, the Church: who is the beginning, the
firstborn from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.
Ver. 19. For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell. Ver.
20. And (having made peace through the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile
all things unto himself, by him I say, whether they be things in earth, or
things in Heaven. Ver. 21. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies
in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled, in the body of his
flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable, and unreprovable in
his sight.

1 These. 3.12, 13. The Lord increase you, and make you abound in love one
toward another, and toward all men, to make your hearts stable and
unblameable in holiness before God even our Father, at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ with all his Saints.

Jude ver. 14. Behold the Lord comes with thousands of his Saints.

Rev. 7.9. I beheld (says the Apostle) and behold a great multitude which no
man could number, of all Nations, and kindreds, and people and tongues, stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with long white robes, and
palms in their hands. Ver. 14. (And an Elder said unto me,) These are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their long robes and have
made their long robes white in the blood of the Lamb. Ver. 15. Therefore are
they in the presence of the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his
Temple, and he that sits on the throne will dwell amongst them. Ver. 16.
They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, neither any heat. Ver. 17. For the Lamb which is in the midst
of the Throne shall govern them, and shall lead them unto the lively fountains
of waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

XIII. An eighth Comfort in Death.
Rejoice, Because it is our ceasing from sin; and the entrance into our
eternal rest and peace.

Heb. 4.9, 10. There remains therefore a rest for the people of God: For he
that is entered into his rest, has also ceased from his own works, as God did
from his. Chap. 6. ver. 20. Let us study therefore to enter into that rest
(least any fall through disobedience.) Into which peace the forerunner is for
us entered, even Jesus that is made a High Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedec.

Job 3.13. For so should I now have lain and been quiet, I should have slept
then and been at rest. Ver. 14. With the Kings and Counselors of the earth,
which have builded themselves desolate places. Ver. 17. The wicked have there
ceased from their tyranny, and there they that labored valiantly are at rest.
Ver. 18. The prisoners rest together, and hear not the voice of the oppressors.
Ver. 19. There are small and great, and the servant is free from his Master.

XIV. A ninth Comfort in Death.
Rejoice, Because it is our going to do the will of God (our most loving and
merciful Father in Jesus Christ,) without sinning against his most blessed and
sacred Majesty.

In dying we do the will of God. Heb 9.27. For it is appointed to all men once
to die, and after that comes the judgment.

Romans 6.7. For he that is dead is freed from sin.

Joh. 14.28. When our Savior had acquainted his Disciples of his departure
from them by his passion, they were sorrowful. For which our Savior seemed to
reprove them, and said, If ye loved me ye would rather rejoice, because I said,
I go unto the Father, for my Father is greater then I.

XV. A tenth Comfort in Death.
It is the love of our good God unto us, to take us away from the evil to
come; therefore rejoice at this his gracious call of infinite mercy, to that
heavenly mansion which our blessed Savior has prepared for us in his Fathers
house.

Joh. 14.2. In my Fathers house are many mansions or dwelling places, if it
were not so I would have told you; I go to prepare a place for you.

1 King. 11.11, 12. The Lord said to Solomon, I will surely rend the Kingdom
from thee, and will give it to thy servant: Notwithstanding in thy days I will
not do it, because of David thy Father: but I will rent it out of the hand of
thy son.

2 Timothy 3.1. This know, in the last days shall come perilous times. Ver. 2.
For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy. Vor. 3. Without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of
them which are good. Ver. 4. Traitorous, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more then lovers of God; having a show of godliness, but denying the
power thereof: turn away therefore from such.

Nah. 1.7. Say thou with the Prophet Nahum; The Lord is good, and a strong hold
in the day of trouble, and he knows them that trust in him. In thee O Lord
do I trust, let me never be ashamed O my God. Amen.

XVI. An eleventh Comfort in Death.
Rejoice, Because it is the going to the place where our Savior is, according
to the call and being of his servants.

Joh. 14.3. And though I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may ye be also.

Phil. 1.21. For Christ is to me both in life and death advantage. Ver. 22. And
whether to live in the flesh were profitable for me, or what to choose I know
not. Ver. 23. For I am greatly in a straight on both sides, desiring to be
loosed and to be with Christ, which is best of all.

Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints together unto me, those that make a Covenant with
me with sacrifice.

Isa. 40.10, 11. Behold the Lord God will come with power, and his arm shall
rule for him; behold his reward is with him, and his works before him: he shall
feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and
carry them in his bosom, and shall guide them with young.

Matthew. 3.12. He will gather the wheat into his garner.

Eccl. 12.7. And dust returns to the earth as it was, and the spirit returns to
God that gave it.

XVII. A twelfth Comfort in Death.
Rejoice in the Diseases, pains, pangs and troubles in thy mind or body:
because the way to Heaven is through many afflictions: and it is the way our
blessed Savior went before us: let us rejoice then to follow him in it.

Luke 6.46. Our blessed Savior says, Why call ye me Master, and do not the
things that I speak?

Psalm. 34.19. Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers
him out of them all.

Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of God in Christ? Shall
tribulation or anguish, or persecution, or famine or nakedness, or peril, or
sword?

2 Timothy 3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecutions.

Isa. 48.10. I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction (says the Lord)
And 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Be sober and watch, for your adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in
the faith, knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren
which are in the world. Remember the love of our Savior Jesus, in his taking
upon him our sins, our flesh, etc. See his love to us, his suffering for us
from his cradle to his grave: Read the Scriptures: See some notes thereof in
the title (true love to God) in this book.

Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have
caused me to trust: it is my comfort in my trouble, for thy promise has
quickened me. Ver. 92. Except thy Law had been my delight, I should have
perished in my affliction. I will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou
quicknest me. I am thine save me, for I have sought thy precepts. Behold my
affliction and deliver me, for I have not forgotten thy Law. Plead my cause and
deliver me, quicken me according to thy word.

XVIII. A thirteenth Comfort in Death.
Rejoice, because it is our going to enjoy such as were our nearest friends in
this life, in unexpressible heavenly enjoyments, according to our heavenly
Fathers will in Jesus, without any fear of losing them, or those joys for
ever. It is our being gathered to our Fathers (and then surely to all our
friends) which are the servants of our Savior Christ.

The joys of Heaven are such, as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it
enter into the heart of man to conceive; for that the flesh cannot discern, nor
punctually understand the spirit: Who knows a man, ( viz. the soul,) save the
spirit, etc. The change in death, is our being gathered to the place where our
Savior is, that we may see his glory: then certainly no joy or comfort can
possibly be wanting, neither can there be any fear of losing them any more; he
is the sure foundation of eternal comfort, and a building set thereon cannot
fail.

Hear what St John says, Joh. 8.51. Verily, verily I say unto you, if a man
keep my word he shall never see death. God is most gracious, his mercy endures
for ever; he is only good, he accepts the will for the deed, if we truly will
to obey and love his word, although we do it not.

Romans 7.20. It is not us, but sin that does offend. And certainly the author
and actor of sin in us, our old enemy, that old and lying Serpent the devil,
shall (in the justice of God to him, and the loving mercies of God to us in
Christ) bear the burden of our sins which deserve and shall have upon him
eternal death.

A fourteenth Comfort in Death.
Rejoice, For that after a short time, those friends left behind us in this
world, shall be in Jesus gathered to us, to our eternal communion, and praise
of our everlasting, most dear and loving Father, with them, without offending,
or danger to offend his most blessed and sacred Majesty for ever.

Job 14.1. Man that is born of a woman, is of short continuance and full of
sorrow.

James ^.14. For what is your life, it is even a vapor that appears for a
little time, and afterward vanishes away.

Job 10.20. Are not our days few? Chap. 14. ver. 5. Are not his days
determined? the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his
bounds which he cannot pass.

Psalm. 103.15. The days of a man are as grass, as a flower of the field, so
flourishes he. Man is like to vanity; his days are like a shadow which
vanishes.

Romans 6.^. For he that is dead is freed from sin. Ver. 11. Like* wise also
think ye that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to God in Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Rev. 15.2, 3, 4. And I saw (as it were) a glassie sea mingled with fire, and
them that had got victory of the beast, and of his Image, and of his mark, and
of the number of his name, stand at the glassie sea, having the harps of God:
and they sang the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb,
saying, Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God almighty: just and true are
thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and glorify
thy Name? for thou only art holy, and all Nations shall come and worship before
thee: for thy judgments are made manifest.

Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

A fifteenth Comfort in Death.
We may well rejoice at Gods gracious messenger of Death, because it is the
wiping of all tears from our eyes, and the final end of all our troubles and
sorrows; the world, the flesh, the devil, shall no more oppress, distract and
hurt us, with their distractions, delusions, and deceits.

Eccl. 4.1. So I turned and considered all the oppressions that are wrought
under the Sun, and behold the tears of the oppressed, and none comfort
them. Ver. 2. Wherefore I praise the dead which now are dead, above the living
which are yet alive.

Hos. 13.14. Hear what comfort our loving God gives us; I will redeem them from
the power of the grave, I will deliver them from death. O death I will be thy
destruction: repentance is bid from mine eyes.

A sixteenth Comfort in Death.
Rejoice, Because it is the imitating of our Saviors passion, as far as we
are able, that we may see his glory.

Matthew. 10.38. He that takes not his cross and follows after me, is not
worthy of me. And Chap. 16. ver. 24. If any man will follow me, let him forsake
himself, and take up his cross and follow me. And somewhat more Luk 9.23. If
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily
and follow me. And Chap. 14. ver. 27. Whosoever bears not his cross, and
comes after me, cannot be my Disciple.

2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he
also will deny us.

Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they which thou have given me be with me where
I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me, for thou lovedst
me before the foundation of the world.

Matthew. 10.24. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his
Lord: it is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master, and the servant as his
Lord. If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them
of his household?

A seventeenth Comfort in Death.
It is our freedom from sin, death and hell, and all our enemies.

The day of death ( says Solomon) is better then the day of birth: therefore
is that day, a day of rejoicing to us. St Paul desires to be dissolved and to
be with Christ, and says, it is the best of all.

Romans 6.7. He that is dead is freed from sin.

Ver. 11. Likewise think ye also that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to
God in Jesus Christ our Lord.

An eighteenth Comfort in Death.
It is our taking possession of the fulness of rest in the communion of
Saints, in the love of the eternal God, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and
therein peace for ever, therefore rejoice. Lazarus is said to be presently
carried into Abraham's bosom, where (most sure) he had immediate possession in
a high degree of eternal peace.

Gerrards Meditat. p. 25. Death is the beginning of a holy life.

Isa. 57.1, 2. The righteous perishes and no man considers it in heart; and
merciful men are taken away, and no man understands, that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come. Peace shall come, they shall rest in their
beds, every one that walks before him.

Matthew. 11.28, 29. Hear our gracious Savior, Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. Take my yoke on you, and learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

2 These. 1.7. And to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall show himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels. And if then, surely also
from our several changes till then.

Heb. 4.3, 9. For we which have believed do enter into rest. There remains
therefore a rest for the people of God; for he that is entered into his rest,
has also ceased from his own works, as God did from his: let us study to enter
into that rest.

Job 3.12, 13. Why did the knees prevent, me, and why did I such the breasts?
for so should I now have lain and been quiet, I should have slept then, and
have been at rest.

A nineteenth Comfort in Death.
Jesus Christ is in Death and Life to us gain, and causes death to be to us
advantage, the end of unexpressible evils, the beginning of unexpressible and
eternal joy.

Phil. 1.21. For Christ is to me both in life and death advantage. All the
miseries of Lazarus end in his death, and his eternal joys begin in Abraham's
bosom. Our Savior Jesus entered by the gate of death into his glory, and
thereby has prepared joys: 2 Cor. 2.9. such as eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man to conceive, for them that love
him.

Isa. 35.10. Therefore the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion
with praise, and everlasting joys shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain
joy and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

A twentieth Comfort in Death.
Doubt not of the all-sufficient love of God to thee in his Son Jesus: He
that gave thee a body when thou had none, can give thee a heavenly body, so
soon as thou art at liberty from this of earth, and will most certainly dispose
of thee in Jesus, as of his servants, which is the best for thee: His power and
his will is sufficient to give thee joys beyond thy thoughts. Have thou true
faith, and true belief, that God is, and that he is the rewarder of them that
seek him. Give him thy whole soul and spirit, and humbly crave the assistance
of the eternal God, that he will (for his Son Christ Jesus his sake) fully
and freely enable thee to give to the Sacred Trinity in Unity, three Persons
but one Almighty God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, all honor glory and
praise, as his most obedient servant for ever. And say with true faith and
love, O gracious Father, Thy will be done in earth as it is in Heaven. And in
thy most free and gracious love to a poor sinner in Jesus Christ thy only Son
my Savior, do thou compel my unworthy and corrupted will, to do unto thy
most Sacred Majesty, true and perfect service. Do thou (O blessed Father) for
thy free goodness sake, convert me wholly into that service, for thou art my
only Lord God, and I am thy servant; so come Lord Jesus, come quickly and
receive my spirit. Amen, Amen.

Matthew. 19.26. With God all things are possible.

Genesis 17.1. I am God all-sufficient, walk before me, and be thou perfect.

Chap. 15. ver 1. Fear not, I am thy buckler, and thy exceeding great reward.

Psalm. 50.7. Hear O my people, and I will speak; hear O Israel and I will
testify unto thee; for I am God, even thy God.

Against Presumption and Despair, at all times, but especially upon the
Deathbed.
Satan that old and lying Serpents suggestion to Presumption.
COme! now thou may eat, drink, sleep and be merry, because thou have lived
according to Gods commands, and now art going to thy masters rest, whom thou
have truly and punctually served; far above the service of thousands, that
doubt not at all of their salvation, the due reward of their godliness of
living. For thy Original sin which thy Father Adam committed, thou did it
not, therefore in justice God cannot charge thee with it; and he will not visit
the sins of the Fathers upon the children. As for thy actual sins of
ignorance, that cannot in justice be laid to thy charge which thou knew not
to be a sin, nor the time of its commission: Thou have lived so carefully to
please thy God, that few have been so strict in walking in his Laws: thou may
profess to have kept all his Commandments from thy youth: thou have had no
other God, nor worshipped any graven Image, and have not delighted to take his
Name in vain: Thou have constantly kept the Sabbath, have honored thy Parents,
have not murdered, nor adulterized, nor stolen, nor borne false witness, nor
covered, but have been contented with thy portion; therefore so long as life is
in thee, eat, drink and be meery, for certainly the Angels are charged to keep
thy soul and body to eternal life, as thy fellow servants of God, for ever.

The Souls Answer.
Avoid thou old and lying Spirit, truth cannot proceed out of thy mouth without
defilement! am not I from Adams loins, and can I then be clean? Did not his
sin, that thy envy brought him into, corrupt his whole body? and am not I, as
part of it proceeding from it? Could I do all that I am commanded of my God,
were I not still an unprofitable servant? Does not my least sin, in thought,
word or deed (besides my original corruption) deserve punishment infinite, as
my God (whom thereby I rebel against) is infinite? Can a clean thing proceed
out of an unclean? Instead of keeping, have I not broken all the commands of my
God, times without number, and in degrees infinite? As thou wast a liar to Adam
the first man upon earth, so thou art for ever; and as it was then said, The
seed of the woman shall break thy head; so shall it be for ever to my
salvation, in the free love and mercy, death and passion, merit and redemption
of Jesus Christ my Lord.

Satan his motives to Despair.
I was deceived indeed, and turning over another leaf in my black book, there I
find a quite contrary character of thy life: I see thou have imitated and
added to all Adams rebellions; he disobeyed and broke one Commandment once,
and therefore had that terrible sentence pronounced against him by Gods own
mouth, to be cast from Paradise, he and his posterity for ever. But thou have
broken all Gods Commandments, times without number, and in degrees beyond
expression infinite? Thy life has been nothing else but a constant breaking of
them; unless thou look for salvation from these breaches (which is a way
impossible) thou have no hope: therefore satisfy thy self with what thou can
not help, and cease to ask, or seek, or knock any more at Gods gate of mercy,
for it is fast shut against thee, and sinners cannot enter in at it: now thou
and I must burn together in hell for ever, from which there is no redemption
for us. I have recorded against thee, in places infinite, that thou have made
thee many Idol gods, in hearty seeking of vain earthly things, and thou have
loved and worshipped them as Images of thy desired lusts. The Name-of God thou
have repeated invain, and no one Sabbath have thou truly kept. Thou have not
reverenced nor honored thy Father and Mother, but in thy thoughts at least
have them despised, and murdered them, or others. Thou also have adulteriz'd
in heart, and in thy faculties stolen thy neighbors goods: Thou have coveted
and borne false witness too against thy neighbor. Almighty God gave his
Angels charge to keep his servants from wrongs and hurts, but thou have not
served him, therefore thou belongest only to me whom thou have punctually
served.

The Souls Answer.
O my Enemy, thou say thou were mistaken, and so indeed thou were, and art,
and ever wilt be, in seeking to snatch the servants of my God out of his hand:
for although my God suffer thee a while to walk the earth, his pleasure is in a
good time appointed, to cast thy chains upon thee in a place prepared, from
which thou may not move for ever. I most humbly confess, and have (so I
trust) confessed, all my sins, and more in number then what I can comprehend,
infinite; such I acknowledge are my wounds, my sore disease proceeding from thy
hate and envious gulf. Yet know I have a medicine, I have a salve sufficient, a
Jordan stream to make me clean, if not more clean then if I had not sinned: and
this my cleansing, is more my certain life then was my standing clean, if then
I had not sinned, so that thy envy now is my advantage: thou know it well,
but love not to remember that my precious Antidote, whereby I am secured from
thy Aspish poison, so closely carried under thy lying tongue: it is that free
redeeming love and blood of that most valiant Sampson, whose Name is Jesus
Christ, that quickly snapt in sunder thy treble corded lie of vain deceit, he
is my Captain that never lost, nor will lose any of his soldiers: without his
word I move not, at his command I Will gladly meet thee with million of Juries of
my sins before the judgment seat of God: and when thou have proved me guilty
as I do confess, thou will soon appear the Serpent and principal author of
my great offense, and I an accessory by thy deluding lies, persuading, and to
thy uttermost power, compelling me to do the evil that I would not do, and
hindering me from doing good; therefore know, that my Savior Christ, my Captain
and my God, will plead his death, and then I live, and thou shall bear the due
deservings of my sins for ever, in eternal flames, for they are thine:
therefore Satan (in humble reverence to my Savior) avoid, get thee behind me,
my good God has provided a place in Heaven with his servants for me, that I
may be even where he is, and as his servant, see his glory; and this
notwithstanding all my sins and ill deserts (only of his free love and
mercy) whereby he has with his bloody sufferings redeemed my soul from hell
(my just desert) because he is good and his mercy endures for ever: so come
Lord Jesus, come quickly, even as thy will may be done with the Father and the
holy Spirit, three persons, but one eternal God for ever, Amen.

True Love.
1. TO love our good God, though there were neither Hell of his justice, nor
Heaven of his mercy.

2. True love will choose rather to serve our good God in Hell for ever, if it
could more fully and better do him perfect service in those flames; then to be
for ever in the highest joys of Heaven, these not to serve him, as fully and
as truly.

3. To desire the eternal and whole conversion of thy soul and body for ever,
into the everlasting service of thy good Creator in true love, and to find
therein thy true peace, is true love. Love truly converted into the will of God
is Heaven, and those that are so converted, may be said to be in Heaven upon
earth, for neither love nor Heaven can here be perfect; but although they be
still in their earthly tabernacles, they have heavenly peace both of mind and
conscience, which cannot be quite taken from them (although here must be no
perfection) whereby the whole will of almighty God (without which, either by
appointment or permission nothing comes to pass) is the true joy and content
of their minds, wills and souls.

The love of our good Father, is shown to us in his Son Jesus, who (as it
were) took satisfaction for our sins in his sufferings, that his justice
being satisfied in the sufferings, death and passion of our Savior Jesus, we
might have only the mercy of our good Father to appear before, which in his
eternal love to us, is sufficient for our Salvation, when the justice of our
good God could no other ways be satisfied but by our damnation. The great and
unexpressible love prevailed with the sacred Deity for us, when our Savior
Jesus could have been rescued from his sufferings for us, with more then twelve
legions of Angels; and when he could have had as great honor (if not greater)
in our condemnation, then in our salvation. Let our souls, and bodies then with
all their faculties, be converted into the true love of our Savior Jesus for
ever;

For His 1. Coming down from his Fathers right hand, from his being God with
his Father for ever. 2. Poverty, that thou might be rich. 3. Not having
whereon to lay his head. 4. Wanderings, and fastings, and prayers for thee. 5.
Being betrayed. 6. Being apprehended as a malefactor. 7. Being fasly accused.
8. Scarlet robe of derision. 9. Crown of Thorns. 10. Being condemned. 11.
Nayling to the Cross. 12. Cruel thirst. 13. Sweating blood. 14. Side stricken
with a spear. 15. Bleeding water and blood at that wound. 16. Sufferings from
his cradle to his grave. 17. Bitter passion, causing him to cry, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me: 18. Lying in the grave. 19. Resurrection. 20.
Now sitting at the right hand of his Father (and in him our Father) in Heaven,
there asking the forgiveness of all our sins, of his Father, who never
denies him any thing.

Wherefore let us stand at the foot of the Cross of this our Savior weeping,
for sorrow that our sins caused his sufferings, but for joy that through his
infinite love showed therein, we are freed from sin, death and hell, and have
a place prepared in the power of his might, where we shall see and partake of
his blessed glory, as his elected servants for ever. Amen.

Thou need not to fear death, for thy Savior has destroyed the sting of
death, that is the Devil: Read Heb. 2.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, verses; there is
comfort enough in any condition: the words are these; Forasmuch then as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood; he also himself likewise took part
of the same, that through death he might destroy him which had the power of
death, that is the Devil: And deliver them who through fear of death, were all
their life time subject to bondage. For verily he took not on him the nature of
Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham: wherefore in all things it
became him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and
a faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people. For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted,
he is able to succor them that are tempted. See an admirable expression of the
infinite love of God, which may preserve us from despair, and may give us true
joy from our humble desires to serve him, though we cannot desire, much more
perfectly serve him as we ought. Isa. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people
will your God say, speak comfortably to Jerusalem, and say unto her, that her
warfare is accomplished, that her iniquities are pardoned. From hence is sweet
and solid comfort in all conditions.

An humble Prayer.
O Lord remember thy mercies, draw me unto the Son of thy love, Psalm. 139.23,
24.
and lead me in the way of thy precepts. Try me (O God) and know my heart,
prove me, and know my thoughts; and consider if there be any way of wickedness
in me; and lead me in the way for ever. 5.8.
Lead me O Lord in thy righteousness, because of my enemies, 27.11.
make thy way plain before my face. Teach me thy way O Lord, and lead me in a
right path, because of my enemies (by enemies understand inward and outward, of
the soul and of the body, but especially those inward enemies which are the
ruin and destruction of both.) 31.3.
For thou art my rock and my fortress, therefore for thy Name sake, 43.3.
direct and guide me. Send thy light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them
bring me unto thy holy mountains, and unto thy tabernacles. 143.10.
Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God; let thy good Spirit lead me
unto the land of righteousness. Draw me O God and I will run after thee.
Cant. 1.4. Psalm. 28.3. Job 7.16.
Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity. I shall
not live always, O spare me then, for my days are but vanity. I rejoice O
Lord my God in thy love, because thou art merciful and wilt spare me, as a man
spares his son that serves him, for thy mercy endures for ever, Selah.

Thou art my good Father (O my Creator) thou will not punish me, nor impute to
me my Original sins, which descended upon me from the wicked rebellion of my
first parents, even as my body is from them: but the soul that sins and does
not look toward thee, nor desire thy gracious gift of true repentance, it
shall die: Yet art thou (O my good Father) wholly and only good, and thy mercy
endures for ever, Selah.

Thou will not punish the presumptuous sins and vanities of my youth; for
thou art good and thy mercy endures for ever, Selah.

Thou delightest not in the death of a sinner (O God) but would that all
should be converted from their evil ways, and live. Thou art my
All-sufficient God of mercy, whose will is all things both in Heaven and earth:
I trust in Jesus thy only Son my Savior, that thou will turn me from all my
evil ways, and give me true repentance from the bottom of my heart, so I
shall be turned unto thee in true love, for thou art the Lord my God, and thy
mercy endures for ever, Selah.

Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, Psalm. 19.14.
be now and ever acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my redeemer.
Incline not my heart to evil, that I should commit wicked works with men that
work iniquity. Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my
lips, so shall my mouth speak thy praises for ever, Amen. O my sweet eternity,
and my eternal Savior; in thy love to poor sinners in Jesus, and for his
sake, I only beg of thee (trusting that in him thou will not deny me,
notwithstanding all my sins) for thou art good, and thy mercy endures for
ever.) And first my most humble petition unto thy most sacred Majesty is, that
thou would of free and perfect mercy, pardon all my breach of Covenants with
thee or men, as thy mercy endures for ever. Secondly, To pardon accordingly, my
vowing and not paying, for thou art good, as thy mercy endures for ever.
Thirdly, to pardon of thy like goodness all my hypocrisy toward thee and
man, as thou art good, and as thy mercy endures for ever. Fourthly, To pardon
all my blasphemies against thy Majesty, any manner of way; as thou my God art
only good, and as thy mercy endures for ever. Fifthly, To pardon all my Lies,
wherewith I have given thee cause of Anger against me, as thou art good, and as
thy mercy endures for ever. Sixthly, To pardon all my relations, speaking
absolutely, yet beyond my certain knowledge, at that time when I spoke them, as
thou my good Lord art only and perfectly good, and thy mercy endures for ever.
Seventhly, To pardon all my Oaths, and taking of thy Name in vain, as thou art
good, and thy mercy endures for ever. Eighthly, To pardon all my vain and idle
speakings, as thou art good, and as thy mercy endures for ever. O my merciful
and loving Father, I humbly pray thee for thy Son my Saviors sake, and in
his Name, be graciously pleased to pardon and forgive all the sins of all my
senses: I humbly acknowledge I have been dull to listen to thy commands, but
most ready and open to receive vanity, to the corrupting, (and as much as in me
lies) the destruction of my body and soul. For give I humbly beg also the sins
of my seeing, smelling, tasting, goings, and of all the members and faculties
of my body and soul, for they have all rebelled against thy gracious mercy, to
their due deservings of eternal death. O Lord who knows the error of his
heart, and of his ways, cleanse my soul, O Lord, from my secret sins: and
deliver me, I humbly beseech thee, from my presumptuous sins, least they get
the dominion over me, O cleanse thou me, and so I shall be cleansed. I doubt
not but thou will (in thy infinite love to the works of thy own hands, (and in
thy free pardoning of sin for Jesus Christ his sake) give me eternal life
with thy servants, and wilt not impute the guilt of sin unto me, for thou art
the Lord my God, whose mercy endures for ever, above all thy works, Selah. In
thee therefore I will rejoice.

A Confession and humble suit for Pardon in Jesus Christ.
O My merciful Lord God, I humbly pray thee for Christ thy Son my only Lord
and Saviors sake, to pardon and put clear out of thy remembrance, that
original sin, and damnation, due to me from the loins, and rebellions of my
first parents: O forgive thou the sins of my father, and let the sins of my
mother be done away: I doubt not (oh my Father of mercy) but thou have of thy
own free goodness already done it; for I know thou art only perfectly good,
and thy mercy endures for ever, Selah.

O Father, I know thou will not visit the original sin of my fathers upon
me, Exek. 18.20
for that thou have said; The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father,
neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son; but the righteousness
of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be
upon himself. O Lord I know, as a father has compassion on his children, so
thou have compassion on them that fear thee.

O my God, I acknowledge that I was born in iniquity, and in sin has my
mother conceived me: Psalm. 51.5. Exodus 34.6, 7.
but thou art the Lord my God, strong, and merciful, and gracious, slow to
anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands;
forgiving iniquities, Dan. 9.9.
transgressions and sins. Compassion and forgiveness is in the Lord our God,
albeit we have rebelled against him.

O my Father, Eccl. 11.10.
Remember not the sins of my childhood, for childhood and youth are vanity.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought
as a child: but mercy is with thee that thou may be feared. Psalm. 24.48.
Look thou upon my affliction, and my travel, and forgive all my sins. It is
the joy of my soul O God, 86.5.
that thou art good and merciful, and of great kindness unto all them that
call upon thee.

O my good Lord, I beseech thee for thy goodness sake, remember not the sins
and vanities of my youth; for only thy free mercy in Jesus my Savior, is
sufficient to release me from the torments of their deservings. Thou, my good
God (in thy saving compassion, and sparing us miserable men, from our
deservings,) say. Genesis 8.21.
The imagination of man's heart is evil even from his youth, but thy mercy
endures for ever. O make me not to possess the iniquities of my youth. Psalm.
25.7.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my rebellions; but according to thy
loving kindness remember thou me, even for thy goodness sake O Lord, for thou
art my hope (O Lord) even my trust from my youth. O God thou have, taught me
from my youth even until now, therefore will I tell of thy wondrous works. I
desire most humbly to live (if it were thy blessed will) from this moment,
eternally in thy perfect service.

O my God, I must acknowledge and confess, that my heart, my will, my ways,
my words and actions, have been evil from my youth: the leprosy of my sin
is only cureable by the blood of my Savior, that infinite pledge of thy
blessed mercy; therefore (O my good God) give me a lively faith to apply it to
all my wounds, as thou my God art only good, and from thee only is the will and
the deed of true faith and repentance. Amen

O my Father, Remember not the sins of my man hood and riper years; I
acknowledge (O my God) when I call to mind my breach of promises and Covenants
both with thee my God and man, which I have solemnly made and taken, I have
promised to thy sacred Majesty my unworthy service (though but the least part
of my duty) upon condition to receive mercy from thee, which in particular
thou have been graciously pleased (as I may judge) to give me, but I (alas) have
wholly left undone my promise with thee, so that surely I admire thy patience,
that thou have not (ere this) cast me into hell amongst thy enemies. Thou have
of thy free mercy given me time of repentance, I trust thou will in thy great
goodness, give me true repentance it self, even such as thou will not despise:
O give it me for thy mercies sake.

O my Creator, as thou love sinners in Jesus, and have mercy for the works
of thy own hands, give me true and saving grace, lead and draw me to thee in
true repentance: Lord, thy long-suffering and patience to me, does give me some
hope of thy electing me to mercy: O give me the full assurance of it, by a
true and a lively faith: Open thou (I most humbly pray for Christ Jesus his
sake) my dark and closed eyes, so that I may see the wondrous things of thy
Law: bless me O my Father, in not imputing sin unto me: for man lives not
by bread only, but by every word of thy mouth.

O God, What is man that thou art mindful of him, Psalm. 8.4.144.3.89.5.
or the Son of man that thou visitest him? Lord, what is man that thou
regardest him, or the Son of man that thou think upon him? Behold thou
have made my days as a hand-breadth, and my age as nothing in respect of thee,
surely every man in his best estate is altogether vanity. When thou (O God)
with rebukes do chastise man for sin, as a moth his beauty does consume,
surely every man is vanity. Doubtless man walks in a vain shadow, he
disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall
gather them. And now Lord what wait I for, my hope is even in thee, deliver
thou me from all my transgressions. Who can withstand thy chastenings, surely
every man living is vanity. Selah.

O my God, I humbly beseech thee, for my Savior Jesus Christ his sake, and in
thy love through him to poor, wretched and miserable sinners, forgive all my
Oaths and my hypocrisy toward thee or man: all my blasphemies, lies, false
and doubtful speeches, my vanities and offendings of thee by thought, word and
deed. O let thy sweet, free and saving mercy forgive all my secret sins; and
from my presumptuous sins good Lord deliver me, least they get the dominion
over me. I humbly beseech thee, seeing sin must reign in this my earthly
tabernacle, give me grace and strength, I humbly crave of thy most sacred
Majesty, that I may submit unto it unwillingly, as to the subjection of a
cruel Tyrant, not willingly with joy and comfort, as to a lawful Prince. Give
me grace and strength (I most humbly pray) with Ephraim to bemoane my self in
secret, and truly desire to be released from the cruel oppression of this
Tyrant; to be dissolved and be with thee my only joy and peace, that I may
serve thee as thy faithful servants, and never offend against thee any more.
Amen.

I beseech thee O my Savior and my God (for the whole remainder of my life
that yet I have to live under the Sun) remember not thou against me my former
iniquities, but make haste and let thy tender mercies prevent me, that I offend
not against thee; nay I doubt not in Jesus, but thou my merciful God wilt of
thy free goodness prevent me. Psalm. 27.11.86.11.
Teach me thy way O Lord, and lead me in a right path, because of my enemies.
Teach me thy way O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth: knit my heart unto thee
that I may fear thy Name. Turn away mine eyes from vanity, and quicken me in
thy way. 119.37.
Stay my steps in thy paths, that my feet do not slide. Show me thy ways O
Lord, and teach me thy paths, for all thy paths O Lord are mercy and truth,
unto such as keep thy Covenants and thy testimonies. O my God, I plainly see my
evil and my sin, the bitterness of my ways are before me: I must judge and
condemn my self for the least sin, guilty of infinite punishment, even as
thou the Lord my God (whom I offend and rebel against thereby) art infinite.
But O what then is the due desert (from thy severe justice) for those
innumerable heaps of wickedness and transgressions, which momentarily
increase upon me, through my corruption, wherewith I have provoked thee to
anger, and which continually call for judgment for my eternal destruction, as
my due deserts: Although I see no way of pardon without great fears and doubts,
yet I will delight my self in the mercies of thee my God, and commit my ways
unto thee my Redeemer, for I know thou will bring it to pass: I humbly beseech
thee (O my Father, my hope, my joy, the only rest and peace of my eternity,)
guide me and lead me in the perfect way of thy blessed service, as thy true and
faithful servant, from this moment for ever: O leave me not (nay I doubt not
in Jesus) but thou will ever guide and not leave me; until I be in the house
of thy love, in the place of thy rest (which thou O my Father in thy infinite
love have prepared for thy servants,) until the door be shut that I cannot
return unto my own vanities again: even so come O my Father in Jesus, Come
quickly. Amen.

A Prayer.
O thou that hear prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come; look upon our
Savior and our mercy, and let not our unworthy prayers offend thee.
O Almighty and our all-sufficient Lord God, whose will is all things both in
Heaven and earth, who art only good, and whose mercy endures for ever; to thee
the grave is open, and from thee there is no covering for destruction; thou
stetchest out the North over the empty place, and hangest the earth upon
nothing; thou bindest thy waters in the clouds, and the clouds are not broken
under them; thou hold back the face of thy Throne, and spreadest the clouds
upon it: Thou have set bounds to the waters, until the day and night come to
an end. The pillars of Heaven tremble and quake at thy reproof, the sea is calm
by thy power, and by thy understanding thou smitest the pride thereof: Thy
spirit has garnished the Heavens, and thy hand has formed the crooked
serpent: Lo these are part of thy ways (O mighty God,) but how little a
portion have we of thee, and who can understand thy fearful power. Thou art
the God of the spirits of all flesh, great art thou O Lord and most worthy to
be praised, thy greatness is incomprehensible: Thou good Lord be merciful to
all us that desire (or would at least both desire and fully prepare our whole
hearts,) to seek and perfectly to serve thee the God of our Fathers, although
we be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary. O Lord we
beseech thee let thy loving kindness and thy mercy (to poor miserable sinners
in Jesus) direct our hearts, as the hearts of thy elected servants, to pray
unto thy sacred Majesty, in spirit and truth: and we humbly beseech thee, let
thy ears hearken to our prayers, and the prayers of all thy servants who desire
to fear thy Name: Two things we most humbly beg of thee O our mercy, deny us
not them before we die: Remove far from us vanity and lies; Give us neither
poverty nor riches, feed us with food convenient for us, least we be full and
deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or least we be poor and steal, and take
the Name of our God in vain; so we will praise thee O Lord in the power of thy
might; saying, Thou wast angry with us because of our mighty sins provoking
thee, but thy wrath is turned away and thou comfortest us: Thou art our
preserver, and our refuge, we will trust and will not fear, for thou Lord God
art our strength and long, and our salvation. O our good and blessed Lord and
King, in the power of thy mercy we will extol thee, and will bless thy Name
for ever and ever: Praise ye the Lord O our souls, we will praise the Lord
during our lives: as long as we have any being we will sing unto our God: O our
God, blessed is the man unto whom thou imputest not iniquity. O teach us thy
statutes. Teach us to pray unto thee in a time when thou may be found. Thou
art our secret place, thou preservest us from trouble, thou compassest us about
with joyful deliverance, because thy mercy endures for ever. O instruct us
and teach us the way that we should go, and guide us with thine eye, least we
be like the horse and mule, which have no understanding.

O our loving God, give us grace to trust in thee, that thy mercy may compass
us, and that we may rejoice in thy salvation, and give thee praise with all the
faculties both of our souls and bodies, continually. O cause us to trust truly
in thee, for so we shall not perish. Give us grace and strength O Lord, by the
power of thy saving spirit in Jesu, truly to humble our selves for the
afflictions and sins of our enemies; so, in thy mercy, shall our prayers
return into our own bosoms: but do thou save and comfort them O Lord, for thy
goodness: and let it be thy will, O God, that our tongue utter thy
righteousness, and thy praise every day. We desire to do thy will O our God,
yea thy Law is within our hearts; deal with thy servants according to thy
mercies, and teach us thy statutes; we are thy servants, grant us therefore
understanding, that we may know thy testimonies: we love thy Commandments
above gold, yea above fine gold, therefore we esteem all thy precepts most
just, and hate all false ways. Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does
my soul keep them. The entrance into thy word shows light, and gives
understanding to the simple. Look upon us (O Lord) and be merciful unto us, as
thou usest to do unto them that love thy Name. Direct our steps in thy Word,
and let none iniquity have dominion over us: show the light of thy countenance
upon thy servants, and teach us thy statutes. Righteous art thou (O Lord) and
just in thy judgments. Trouble and anguish are come upon us, yet are thy
Commandments our delight: The righteousness of thy testimonies is
everlasting, O grant us understanding, and we shall live. Hear our voice O
Lord, according to thy loving kindness, O quicken us according to thy
judgments. Great are thy tender mercies O Lord, quicken us according to thy
free mercy, and thy goodness. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham
be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet thou O Lord, art our Father and
our Redeemer, thy Name is for ever.

O give us thy saving spirit of life in Jesus from Heaven, for we can receive
nothing except it be given us from Heaven: O Lord, why have thou made us to
err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear, return for thy
servants sake; and for our Savior Jesus Christ his sake, do thou write our
Names in the book of life with thy servants. Let our complaints come before
thee, O Lord, and give us understanding according to thy word: Let our
supplications come before thee, O Lord, and deliver us according to thy
promise: Our lips shall speak thy praise O God, when thou have taught us thy
statutes: Our tongues shall treat of thy word, for all thy Commandments are
righteous. Let thy hand help us, for we have chosen thy precepts: We have
longed for thy salvation O Lord, and thy Law is our delight: Let our souls live
and they shall praise thee, and thy judgments shall help us: We have gone
astray like lost sheep, seek thy servants, for we do not forget thy
Commandments. Our sins, O Lord, our sins, they have taken hold of us, that
we cannot look up; they are more in number then the hairs of our heads,
therefore our hearts have failed us: Let it please thee O Lord to deliver us,
make haste O God to help us; Our souls thirst for God, even for the living God,
when shall we come and appear before the presence of God. O God, thou art our
guide for ever, have mercy upon us according to thy loving kindness, according
to the multitude of thy mercies do away our offenses: Wash us thoroughly from
our iniquities, and cleanse us from our sins, for we know our iniquities, and
our sins are ever before us. Against thee, against thee only have we sinned,
and done evil in thy sight; that thou may be just when thou speak, and
pure when thou judge: behold we were born in iniquity, and in sin have our
mothers conceived us. Thou O Lord love truth in the heart, therefore give us
wisdom in our inward affections. Purge us with hysop and we shall be clean,
wash us and we shall be whiter then snow: make us to hear of joy and gladness,
that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice: Hide thy face O Lord from
our sins, and put away all our iniquities: Create in us clean hearts O Lord,
and renew right spirits within us: O cast us not away from thy presence, and
take not thy holy spirit from us. Open thou our lips O Lord, and our mouths
shall show forth thy praise. Deliver us from blood, O God of our salvation, and
from the secret trapps of our deadly enemy. Have mercy upon us, O God, have
mercy upon us, for our soul trusts in thee, and in the shadow of thy wings
will we trust, till the afflictions of our sinning against thee be overpast. We
will call upon the most high God, even to the God that performs his promise
toward us. We will dwell in thy Tabernacles for ever, and our trust shall be
under the coverings of thy wings. O God thou art our salvation and our glory,
the rock of our strength, in thee only is our rest: We beseech thee put thy
Law into our hearts, and write it in our minds, and remember our sins and
our iniquities no more. O our good God, we trust we have received the knowledge
of thy truth, deliver us from sinning against thee. O Lord God of hosts, hear
our prayers, hearken O God of Jacob, thou art our shield, look upon the face of
thine anointed: for a day in thy Courts is better then a thousand otherwhere: I
had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
tabernacles of wickedness. Thou art our Sun and our shield, and wilt give
grace and glory; and no good thing will thou withold from them that walk
uprightly. O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man to whom thou give grace to
trust in thee, and to whom thou imputest not his sin, so deal with us thy
unworthy servants O our eternal mercy: Nay we doubt not, but in Jesus Christ
thou will give us eternal life, for in him there is sufficient, that thou
should forgive, and not impute our sins unto us, Selah. In whom we trust
thou have elected us to mercy as thy faithful servants. Amen.

O most powerful Jehovah, O Eternity,

I am hungered, and cannot be satisfied;
I am thirsty, and cannot be quenched;
I am weary, and can have no rest;
I mourn, and cannot be comforted;
I am poor, and have no help;
I sin, and cannot satisfy;
I am thy servant, and cannot serve thee;
I am thy labourer, and cannot work;
I am most vile and unworthy, yet look thou upon me
O God in Jesus, and for the love of him only give me thy holy Spirit, conduct
and lead me in this my sinful pilgrimage to thee my God, my only joy, and
eternal repose even to the place of my Fathers, who are dead in thee my God,
who rest from their labors, and their desired work (in thy gracious and loving
acceptance of them in Christ Jesus) follow them: O give me thy love to poor
sinners, for that, and that only is sufficient for me. It is all joy to me to
work in the vineyard of my Master, and to see the Evening of his loving call to
rest draw on. I greatly rejoice in the love and service of my Savior Jesus. I
rejoice to die, because I know my Savior lives. I rejoice to leave my
Children, because I know the mercies of my God preserves his servants to the
joys of Eternity, and to temporal peace also, as it shall be best for their
eternal happiness. I rejoice to leave the world, because I find it not a fit
instrument to serve my Savior, and that I have cause to fear disserving him
there with.

Pious Sentences.
GOD gives the cold according to the Cloth.
God knows who is a good Pilgrim.
God Almighty, and a Father, have no requital.
God works in a little time.
God kept: nothing lost.
God reigns where he pleases.
Gods servants, have a good Master.
Job Chapter 14.
V. 1.
MAn that is Eves posterity
has short continuance,
Yet armies of his miseries
continually advance.
2
He shoots forth as does a fleure
that is presently cut down,
He vanishes, and in one hour
the grave becomes his Crown.
3
And yet thou openest thine yes,
upon so vain a shade,
And causest him to enterprise
in judgment against thy aid.
4
O Lord who can bring a clean thing
Or who dare look on thee O King
if thou please not to smile?
5
Thou have determined his days,
his months are known to thee,
Thou have appointed out his ways,
how, where his end shall be.
6
O turn away thy angry rod,
O stay thy chastizing,
Until my day desired
when I shall cease to sin.
7
For there is hope that though a
be cut and hewed down,
May have it is shading branchand be tree
as formerly 'twas known.
8
Although the root of it wax old,
within its tomb or grave,
And though the slook of it be dead
within its ancient cave.
9
Yet by the sent of water it
may budde and bloome again,
And bring forth boughs, and become fit
as plants for to remain.
10
But man is sick and dies and goes foes
to his long biding place,
Man perishes from friends from
where is honor, where is disgrace?
11
As the great waters part from sea
and are not to be found,
And as the floods dry up, and they
become, as parched ground.
12
So man does sleep and does not rise,
he shall not wake again,
He shall not from his sleep arise
while Heaven does remain.
13
O that thou would hide me in
the grave and secret chamber
Until thy wrath were past for sin,
and then would me remember.
14
If a man die shall he here live,
oh! all my wandering doom
That thou have pointed, I will wait
until my changing come.
15
Thou shall call me, and then I shall
unto thee answer make,
Thou love thine own handy-worke
for thine own mercy sake.
16
But now thou numbrest all my steps
and do not stay my sin,
As if I could pay all my debts
in which I lived in.
17
My sins and my iniquities
thou have fast sealed up,
As in a bag, whereof is filled
my sinful flowing cup.
18
And surely as the hills decay
that from their place are found,
And as the rocks do mould away
that change their ancient ground.
19
And as the waters break the stones
when thou do overflew,
Even so thou do destroy the hope,
that man has here below.
20
Thou do prevail against his soul
so that he goes as clay,
He changes q^ite his countenance
when thou casts him away.
21
Ah! he knows not whether his sons
shall honorable be?
Nor does he understand if they
shall sit in low degree.
22
But while his flesh is upon him
he shall have sorrows store,
And while his soul is bound in sin
he shall have more and more.
My GOD.
O Guide me to thy dwelling place,
O lead my feet to thee!
O draw me hard for l'me of the race
of poor mortality!
O punish not thy servants sin,
though mad and wondrous vain!
Remember in discharge of them
thy only Son was flame.
O give me for to know (my God)
though IN have not chosen thee!
Yet thou have chosen me in him
thy servant for to be:
O make me thirst to come to thee,
to that sweet place of rest!
Where are thy servants which of old
thou freely lovedst best!
Amen O Savior Jesus.
Righteous Hope.
I Am born and hope to die a Christian; and I much rejoice to perform the
sacred Law of Christ my Savior to the utmost of my power, knowledge and
understanding: Of all reformed and professed churches, I acknowledge my self to
be of the reformed Church of England, which I take to be most consonant and
agreeable to my Saviors institution, yet dare I not affirm my belief or Church
to be perfect and infallible: neither will I condemn a contrary, humble,
serious, and solemn belief to be wholly wicked and abominable; but most humbly
conceive, that the best profession, religion, devotion and belief, to be the
most humble and careful fearing of almighty God, and working of
righteousness, which whosoever obediently endeavors, shall be accepted in
the mercy of the Almighty: for although none of our works, in a strict sense,
can be called the works of righteousness, yet in some sort they may be reputed
righteous, though mixed with much sin and imperfection: as water muddy and
mixed with earth is understood and reputed water.

Ephesians. 6. I dare not say my own belief is best,
Nor dare condemn as reprobate the rest:
All righteous ways unto one gate do lead,
Salvation free thus holy Wri^ does read,
Who fears God and works truth shall have
A free acceptance from his gracious love.
Ephesians. 6, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, verses. O Lord my God, in the power of
thy love,
i will put on thy whole Armor of defense,
That in thy strength I may stand firm above
the fierce assaults of Hells concupiscence;
For this I know I do not enterprise
against an enemy made of flesh and blood,
But against Powers, Principalities,
and worldly Governors, Princes of worldly good;
in darkness, spiritual wickedness
in the high places, filled with all excess.
For that cause I will take a Cap a pee,
the whole approved Armor of my God,
That thence I may resist in the evil day,
and having finished, stand against hells rod;
Lord I will stand with my loins girt about,
with Verity in true obedience;
And I will have upon me paramount,
that righteous Breast Plate, faithful penitence;
and I will shoe my feet with preparation,
of Gospels peace, assurance of Salvation.
And above all i will take the Shield of Faith,
which is sufficient for to quench the ire,
And to extinguish all those fiery darts,
whereby the wicked me to slay desire.
and I will take the Helmet of Salvation,
the Sword o'th Spirit, Gods word from the Creation.
And I will always with all manner prayers,
and supplications, in truth, in the spirit.
And I will watch against all false gainsayers,
with perseverance till I life inherit,
from thee O Father who without degrees,
for every Child have a fit Legacy,
and all of us from thy most gracious care,
though single folk, inheritours we are.
A Military Christian.
MY only Lord of hoasts, Lord General,
Unto my Captain his all-conquering Son,
Has given all power, by whom I have a call,
To be his Soldier by Commission.
I have his promise that no Arms i will want,
But surely conquer if but valiant;
Then though I be most naked, poor and weak,
I Will from his magazine thoroughly be complete.
Thou holy Spirit distributer of graces,
Fit me a Soldier for the highest places.
Give me my Helmet, my Saviors first descent,
Give me my Beaver fixed in Virgins womb,
Give me my Pendents which to John joy sent,
Give me my Gorget Salutation;
Give me that blessed birth my back and breast,
Give me my guard of reigns, that manger rest.
Give me my Tasses, those sweet swaddling clothes,
Give me my Curaces, my Bethleem peace,
Give me my Knees, and Ankle arms, and those,
Give me my Spurros of speed in Egypts ease;
Give me my Gauntlet called a Nazaret,
Give me that Jordane Sword and I Am complete:
Yet being self-convicted, vile and vain,
I (a blind beggar,) humbly beg again,
Mount me on Faiths true courage stately steed,
And give a tr^^le to my struggling ways,
Give me the reigns of Graces at my need,
Give me a Saddle mounting me on baies:
Give me my Breast Plate and my Crooper strong,
And girt me to thy Saints in Union:
And give me Pistols, that with fire and sword,
I may be ready to advance thy Word.
Thou being armed, and being thus employed,
Whilst any Judas dare himself discover,
Against my Captain, I Will be overjoyed,
Him to extinguish, root and branch together.
My peace shall be my war, for to destroy,
The enemies of my God my King, my joy:
Who before long shall all together meet,
In chainer appointed underneath his feet:
And then we will march, under our Captains aid,
In glorious triumph, Colors all displaide.
The vanity of Temporal things in respect of Eternal.
Desire to live no longer in this thy pilgrimage, then thou can do Almighty
God, true, faithful and filial service, and let his testimonies be thy
delight and counselors. Ps. 119.24.
We must through many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of God.

Let the wicked forsake his ways, Acts 14.22.
and the unrighteous his own imaginations; and return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive: Isa.
55.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are my ways your ways says
the Lord: For as the Heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher
then your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. Surely as the rain comes
down, and the snow from Heaven, and returns not thither empty, but waters
the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the
sower, and bread to him that eats; so shall my Word be that goes out of my
mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I
will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it: therefore ye shall
go forth with joy, and be led forth with peace. Amen.

Temporal things are most vain, saving as they tend to the good of our
Eternity.
O My soul, what is thy body, thy earthly house, thy prison, and what is that
slimie life that brittle fading shade that fashioneth thee a man? Are not thy
days as a spanne, and the end certain, the Goal set and every minute
shortens thy appointed race? Is not the will of the Eternal all things both in
Heaven and earth, and can his predestined order change? Serve the Lord thy
God in his ways and paths that he has set thee for thy pilgrimage. To what
purpose is thy springing youth so strictly fettered with thy lettered chains?
and what does knowledge profit if grief be loss? To what purpose are those
endless toils, which sea and land makes way for to obtain the earth? To what
purpose does the greedy wretch with broken sleep to fill his empty grave? And
to what purpose are the hidden mines and deepest pits, sought for the secret
Pearls? And to what purpose is thy lawless sword, that subdivides the earth
unto thy babes? And to what purpose are all elements called to circulize thy
triple angler heart, yet vacuums are found? And to what purpose do thou build
thy house upon such sandy mountains as the Earth, those mouldring Tombs they
hide but frothy minds, the souls contentments of the sacred Saints? Seek for
thy self a better resting place, and be thou married to a meeter mate. Long
thou and thirst for that eternal joy, where friend with friend does meet and
never part, and where one minute of enjoyments more, then thousands years are
here in strongest bands: and where thy God almighty soon will frame, thy angled
heart to sit his endless round? where all things are swift ministers to act,
the sweet commands of thy Redeemers love, where in the presence of thy sacred
rock, thou safe shall rest, preserved and freed from fear: where all things are
the only will and mind of thy Redeemer, and shall give thee peace; Within thy
Masters vineyard work with joy, yet thirst to hear thy Masters call to rest.
Amen.

Consider seriously the wise and pious Sayings of the Ancients: in them is
shown a way to Peace.
I will only mention some as they come to memory.


and dolor inferni, sunt meditanda tibi.

si Christum nescis, nihil est si caetera discis.

quam been qualis erit post mortem praemeditari.
Sage disans.
Alors q' nous pensons estre plus miserables,
c'est lors q' Dieu nous est plus favorable.







Qui scait pollir vne rude nature.

































































































Selah.
Wise and pious Sayings of the Ancients, wherein is shown the way to Peace.















































































































Selah.

Pour mortification d'l'chair.
Psalm. 88. Aug. lib. 13. de Civit. Dei. c. 3. Genesis 2. Psalm. 48.
qui vivet and non videbit mortem?









Sap. 3. Joh. 8. Luk 10.


etc. C'est adire, enter les mains and puissance des diables les quels le
despoiiillerent du vestement de justice originelle, de la rob de grace,
d'innocence and de la charity, and par le plays de peche demi mort: Or Jesus
Christ est nostre bone and vray Samaritain.

1 Cor. 15.
ita in Christo omnes vivificabuntur.

Heb. 9.27.


Quotidie morimur, quotidie aliqua pars nostra vita demitur, and dum crescimus
vita nostra decrescit.

Psalm. 41.
ita desiderat anima mea ad te Deus. Sitivit anima mea ad Deum fontem vivum,
quando veniam and apparebo ante faciem Dei mei, le Apostre St Paul dit, mon
desir est de desloger de ceste chair, and de estre avec Jesus Christ, qui m'est
beacoup meilleur.



Heb. 9. Psalm. 115.111.


In memoria eaterna erit justus.

Psalm. 33.
Vultus Domini super facientes mala.

Luke 16. Psalm. 69.28. Tim. 4.
and cum juslis non scribantur.

etc.

Eccl. 7. Isa. 28.
and in aternum non peccabis.

l'Prophete leur respond': Delibitur faedus vestrum cum morte, and pactum
vestrum cum inferno non stabit.

Ephesians. 6.
and par le peche, la mort a pris seigneurie sur l's homme.

Pallida mors aquo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas Regumque turres.

Bernard. Virgil.
nec veretur divitias.



Isa. 40.
and omnis gloria ejus, quasi flos agri.

Aug. lib. de Natura and gratia.
fortem a debili, pulchrum a deformi, memorare utique naturae non extellaris.

Bernard.
qui ante pauca tempora nobiscum cr^nt, certe nihil ex eis remansit nisi
cineres and vermes. En tout humilytie m^d^tos donc sonu^ ent la mort, mes amiss:
car, quise humiliat, exaltab^tur.

Job 14. Apoc. 14.
nudatus, atque, consumptus, ubi quaeso est?

21.
opera enim illorum sequuntur illos. Non esurient neque sitient.

Luke 16.
Act 8.

Heb. 13 Job 14.
sed futuram inquirimus.



Job. 1.2. Act. 24. Aug.






1 Pet. 2.
tanquam peregrinos abstinere vos a carnalibus desideriis quae militant
adversus animam.

Romans 8.


Matthew. 24. Arist. lib. 6. c. 5.
qua hora Dominus vester venturus sit.



Romans 8.
prudentia autem spiritus, vita and pax.

Heb. 9.
post haec autem judicium.

1 These. 5. Apoc. 3.


nescies qua hora veniam adte.

Eccl. 9.
mais comme les poisons sont prins avec l'haim on hamecon, and les oyseauz aux
lais et fillets, ains sont prins l'hommes en tempts maunas qui leur est incogna.

Eccl. 5.
neque differas de die in diem (laraison) subito enim veniet ira ejus, and in
tempore iracundiae, disperdei te.



St Jerome.
Quotidie morimur, quotidie commutamur, and tamen aeternos nos esse credimus.

Genesis 3.
and in pulverem and cinerem reverteris.

1 Cor. 15.19
miserabiliores essemus omnibus hominibus.

Mat. 13. 1 Cor. 15. Joh. 3.






1 Those. 4.


Eccl. 6.
die nativitatis: laudavi mag is mortuos quam viventes: Mors est munus
necessarium naturae tam corruptae, quae non non est fugienda, sed potius
amplectenda.

Joh. 5.
et non in judicium veniet, sed transiet a morte in vitam.

2 Cor. 11. Jam. 1.
tunc potens sum.



Luke 6
sicut and pater vester celestis misericors est. Estote imitatores Dei sicut
filij carissimi.

Aug.
morum quoquod similitudinem habere debet, nam Christiani nomen ille frustra
sortitur, qui Christum minime imitatur. Judicium sine miserecordia ei fiat, qui
non fecerit mis^ricordiam.

Mat. 9 Prove. 14. Mat. 5. Mat. 25.






etc. Quod uni ex meis minimis fecistis, mihi fecistis. A subitanea and
improvisa morte, libera nos Domine.

Aug.
and vix been moritur, qui male vixerit.

Phil.
sed and ut pro ipso patiamini.

Phil. 1. 1 Cor. 2.
and esse cum Christo.

praeparavit Deus diligentibus se.

Aug.
rien de tout, il n' y a que Dieu seul.

Ps 6.
satiabor cum aparuerit gloriatua.

Aug.
ut summum bonum intelligeret, intelligendo amaret, amando possideret,
possidendo fueretur.

Luke 15.
quam super nonaginta novem justos, qui non ind^gent panitentia.

1 Timothy 4.


Luk 7.


Ephesians. 2.
and advena: sed est is cives sanctorum and domestici Dei.

Luk 2.


Mark. 4.
and nihil opertum quod non revelatur.



Mat. 24. Cyprian. Luke 12.
qualem te invenerit cum vorat.



Eccl. 8. Joh. 14. Psalm. 110.
para justitiam tibi, ante languorem ad hibe medicinam.





Hier.
diem judicij considero toto corpore contre misco: sive enime comedarn, sive
bibam sive quid aliud faciam, semper videtur illa tuba terribilis insonare
auribus meis surgite mortui, venite ad juditium.

Psalm. 104.
quia non justificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis vivens.



1 Pet. 4. 1 John 4. Aug. Heb. 11.
sed probate spiritus si ex Deo sint.







Serva comissum, expecta promissum, cave probibitum.



For the mortification of the flesh.












etc. that is to say, into the hands and power of devils, which spoiled him of
his garment of original justice, of the robe of grace, of innocence, and of
charity, and by the wounds of sin, left him half dead: but Jesus Christ our
good and true Samaritane.

Adam all are dead, even so in Christ shall all live.



We die daily, and continually our life in some part diminishes, and while we
increase, our lives decrease.

Paul says, My desire is to be dissolved from this flesh, and to be with Jesus
Christ which is much better.





The just shall be had in eternal remembrance.





Paul, I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, therefore there is reserved for me a Crown of justice, the which my God
the just Judge shall give me in that day: and our good God of his infinite pity
shall say to thee, Thou have called to me out of the deep, and I have heard
thee, etc.



an agreement. The Prophet answers them, Your Covenant with death shall be
dissolved, and your agreement with hell shall not stand.



Pale death beats alike upon poor men's cottages, and the towers of Princes.













etc.





















Get wisdom therefore for it is more precious than gold.







thief, and thou know not what hour I will come unto thee.















































the mercies prepared of God for them that love him.















































The sweetest Comfort.
AS a dear Mother comfort
her Son whom she has borne,
So will I help and comfort thee,
at evening and at morn.
Isa. 63.13. Nay though a Mother should forget
compassion to have,
Yet is my mercy toward thee,
even when thou can not crave.
Isa. ^9.15.
Colos. 3.4. When Christ which is our life shall appear, then shall we also
appear with him in glory. Ver. ^. Mortyfie therefore your members which are on
the earth, fornication, uncleanness, the inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence, and covetousness, which is colatry Ver. 6. For the which things
sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience

Ephesians. ^.3. But fornication and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not
be once named amongst you. Ver 4. As it becomes Saints, neither filthynesse,
neither foolish talking, neither jesting, which are things not comely, but
rather giving of thanks.

Mark 7.21. For from within, even out of the heart of man proceed evil
thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders. Ver. 22. Thefts, covetousness,
wickedness, deceit, uncleanness (or wantonness) a wicked eye, backbiting,
pride, foolishness. Chap. 4. ver 1^. The lusts of the world and the flesh
enter into the heart, and choke the Word, and it is unfruitful.

Therefore in true zeal and faith pray: O Lord my God, for Christ Jesus his
sake Matthew. 6.13. Lead me not into temptation, but deliver me from evil:
Endure thou with patience, and in the strength and mercy of thy Savior resist
thy temptations, wherewith the world, the flesh, and the Devil join in desire
to destroy thee. Jam. 1.12. For blessed is the man that endures temptations.
Ver. 13. For when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him: Let no man say when he is tempted,
that he his tempted of God, for God cannot be tempted with evil: neither
tempts he any man.

1 Cor. 10.13. Know that there has no temptation taken you, but such as
appertains to man: and God is faithful which will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you be able, but will even give the issue with the
temptation, that you may be able to bear it. Selah.

1 Pet. 2.11. I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims: abstain from fleshly
lusts, which fight against the soul.

2 Timothy ^.2^. Flee also from the lusts of youth, and follow after
righteousness, faith, love, and peace, with all them that call on the Lord
with pure hearts. Amen.

The Sun that is set may rise again,
and freshly gild his glorious train:
But man is sick, and dies, and where
are all his pleasures prized so dear?
Yet a ter some few times are past,
he shall receive a raising blast.
Eccl. 7.2.
Who can tell man what is good at need,
in his vain life and days,
Or who shall after him succeed,
his works and all his ways?
I see, Eccl. 4.8.
most vain of vanities
which to relate breed's fear:
One spares no toils, no pains, nor lies
for wealth, yet has no Heir.
Mat. 25.26. etc.
O humbly beg of God most high
that he would give thee grace,
To use thy Talent in the way
of his just Stewards race.
Job. 7, 7.
Remember well thy brickle life
thy bubble shade-like spanne,
Have, fit thee for eternity
against these few sands be run.
Prove. 13.7, 8, 9.
Two things I humbly beg my God,
do not thou me deny,
Before thou strike me with thy rod,
before I fall and die.
Put far from me all vanities
and all dissembling lies,
Feed me with food convenient
thy laws to exercise.
Least I be full and thee deny,
and say who is the Lord,
Least I be poor and steal and take
thy Name in vain, O God.
Amen, as is thy good will in Jesus.
Of worldly rest.
It Is good to want, fly fulness here
least here thou have thy fill
Of worldly wish, that without care
thou do, or good, or ill
For good so done is wickedness,
if from a maxim right
It be not with true humbleness
to God, as in his sight:
Take heed therefore of worldly things,
whatever does appear,
To make thee say (for they have wings)
it is good for to be here:
Least so thou say, Know it is good
to fly the vain excess,
For outward joys at highest flood,
are full of emptiness:
Then fill thy soul with wisdom pure,
and thou shall plainly see,
That Is only good that does assure
good of eternity.
The Devil has a secret snare in all our thoughts, words, and actions, a
tare, at least, among the Corn: Therefore watch, and care to prevent him at
your peril.

On the L M.W. dying in Childbed, the Infant living.
My dearest Child the daily growing love
Of thy dear Father, will not have thee stay,
To beat impetuous waves like wandering dove,
From worldly tumults I will take away
My sweetest lilly: yet least no Phaenix be,
I Will leave a root, a little branch of thee.
That hence may grow such fruit as thou did bear,
Such hopes of piety, such virtuous flowers,
Such innocence, such humble ways to share,
Such piety adorned thy days and hours:
Such full preparedness for heavenly joys,
That wrong it were to put thee off with toys.
Therefore my dearest welcome to thy hour,
Let all my Angels show there glad rejoice,
Let thine allied who are and are to come:
Then thanks and praise send forth in joyful voice,
For well you know my dearest only Son,
No longer suffr'd, then his work was done.
So all my Children if I take them thence
Where sin does reign, where sorrows multiply,
If of my love I make them soon commence
Their lasting bliss, their joy eternally.
This they must know to be their only good,
Thus would I have my actions understood.
Another on the same L.M.W.
CAn dearest love more to the life appear?
Then when the Child beset with mortal dread:
When outward means will not preserve from fear,
Sorrow and sin will not be vanquished.
To take the most assured change of death,
Which unto Saints is perfect life and breath.
For in this life we nothing perfect have,
But sin and sorrow which bespot the soul:
And since our great Creator will her save
From sin, which in us does his Image foul.
His will be done, and his dispose be blessed,
Most due it is, that we therein should rest.
Knowing assured here is no abide,
Nor solid dwelling here to habit in:
As Saints have gone before, the Gate is wide,
We shall succeed her, if not barred by sin.
Then shall we meet and perfect bliss partake.
With Saints and Angels for our Makers sake.
Now show my soul thy joye is here begun,
In humble love say Lord, thy will be done.
For the same L.M.W. in her sickness
Our only good, great Governor of chance,
Maker of times, and days great Ancient,
Whose will is only good, whose providence
No mortal can by force or fraud prevent.
Save this thy Servant by thy blessed reprieve,
And from the jaws of death her soul relieve.
Let her most savingly behold thy power,
And let thy love possess her soul so full,
Let her long life, from this thy gracious hour,
With beams of duty, shine most beautiful.
That so her soul like repened Corn may be,
Most perfect for her blessed Eternity.
The least Mite, tending to Eternity, is for Riches and True Worth unestimable.
THe greatest gain, tending to temporality, is only as we may serve eternity
with it, considerable.

O sweetest Rose and Lilly of my Soul, my joy, my rest, my everlasting peace,
my sweet Redeemer from my Captive Chains: that (of thy mere love) would not
suffer my rebellions against thee, to have their deserts upon me; but by thy
blood have purchased my peace, and fittest me for to know, and do thy will; and
then rewardest me, as if it were my act, and service to thee of my proper
strength. Therefore O my Redeemer; thou art the Lord my God, and I am thy
servant for ever. Amen.

My soul, If thou look for and expect salvation, by the most gracious merit,
death and passion, of our Savior Jesus (then which indeed there is no sweeter
peace) search, hear and read his Word, his will, then wholly bend, and frame
thy soul, and body, to do thereafter. Amen.

Meditate seriously and devoutly of three Things past, three Things present,
three Things to come.

The three Things past are, Good omitted. Evil committed. Time pretermitted.

The three Things present are, The flesh provoking. The world enticing. The
Devil ensnaring.

The three Things to come, Death miserable. Judgment terrible. Hell
intolerable.

Against these foes, these threefold three: Thy Sheild's, the threefold Unity.

A Consult with the Soul.
TO mine own, Ego, to my self my soul,
I now would steer my wandering bark's advance,
Since long debate and labor does control,
The Impetuous tide and storms of ignorance:
And false conceit in apprehension,
Which soon overflow, thy mounted hill,
And force thee headlong with thy false invention,
Before the furious waves of empty will.
So hard it is to find out verity,
Whilst thou imprisoned art within thy clay;
Sin is so frauded by hypocrisy,
That little of thy vastness, see we may:
But wary reason is the only eye,
That shadows out, some symptoms of thy might,
And seperates from black obscurity,
Some rays from thee, or are thee, or thy right.
Thy motives (O my soul) do work more plain,
And more efficatiously, then those that be
Of body only; whereby I obtain
Small sense of pleasure, if thy watchful eye
Be elsewhere fixed: whence it is visible;
First that thou art, and then that I am thee,
Thy sense my soul, does make me sensible,
The languages on earth, acknowledge thee.
For if I say my body, I mean thence,
By my, my soul; body; souls mansion,
This is most true by old experience,
All tongues are herein, at one Union.
And still more clear thou shewst my self (my soul)
That thou, the sole command, and power have
Over my senses; else pain, and icie cold,
Would on my body more impression take,
When thou seemst absent; or in raptures high,
Freely enjoyst thy uncorrupted self,
Art fully filled with sight of Deity:
As of thy filthy Embryon bereft,
Much like as those, that have their prison left.
It Is now high time I should my self retire
From turbulent, and slippery fields of war,
Of eager, strise, of disputation-jarre,
And make account, where none but we two are
Freed from those tumults, that possess the earth,
Where what makes one to laugh, makes others mourn,
What here makes plenty, there it makes dearth;
What raises one, another down does turn:
We Will but expect, that only verity,
Which by thee shines on my gloomy eye,
Which sacred is to all eternity,
Wherein all I can wish, I do epsy:
I have discovered plain, that thou my soul
Wilt me survive, and wilt survive me too,
As thou will outlive my mortality,
And all the changes, that to me are due,
Which only are to thee, as accident,
When I thy prison am decaid, and rent,
Merely because in me thou habitest,
Thou'st change thy time, for thy immortal rest:
When accidents, and motions of my sin,
Cannot approach thy uncorrupted will,
Nor move at all, or force thee to begin
To yield; but constant thou, the same art still.
Here Is naught of time, change here is outed quite,
One even being now begirts thee round,
No troubled thought of end, attempts thy quiet,
Nor does succession, of uncertain ground;
Thus have I seen, in height of fixed thought,
And serious muse of contemplating mind,
That thou my soul, art far more truly wrought,
And purely made, and of more sacred kind:
Then I thy earthly house, and moultering tomb,
Which only am, whilst thou in me do bide,
And quickly haste unto my Mothers womb,
If thou forsake me, or me cast aside
A little space; yet truly I profess,
Whilst me thou keep, great thy danger is,
Least thou ensnared with my vain excess,
Be quite debarred of thy eternal bliss;
But if thou rule, and order me aright,
And force me subject to our Makers will,
So that my crooked ways, convert to straight,
And doing good, I do avoid the ill,
Then are we happy; for I do believe
That though we part, till resurrection call,
Sorrow to one, shall so the other grieve,
That both shall fare alike, for eternal;
Thy pains may then begin, when I in dust
Shall silent lie; till we united be:
And then most sure (ah terrible) I must
Share in thy pains, for our eternity,
If I delude thee: but if thou me guide,
And so command, that we but will to good,
But seek, and ask, and knock; the door is wide
And open set, by our blessed Saviors blood;
Then shall our joys alike eternal be,
Of which until our meeting thou'st be filled,
And so we blessed in high felicity,
Shall to our maker true obedience yield.
But now to muse a while it may be good,
And to compare thy present state, (my soul)
(As now it is immers't in flesh and blood,
Where sins presume, and ill does good control)
With that which shall betide thee, so soon when
Thou melted art, from thy corruption,
And art refined from company of men,
And with blessed Saints joined in communion;
What if our life here were a thousand years,
Longer then ere our aged Fathers knew,
And all that time, we, freed from cares, and fears,
And uncontrolled, commanded all with view;
With twinkled eye, or least beseeming show,
That all the creatures humbly did prostrate,
Their best obedience holding it their due,
What ere us pleased, to act or to relate;
And if that nature, did with them conspire,
To give us constant, and most vigorous health
And flowing springs, beyond their hearts desire;
Of relishing the height of earthly wealth,
Though Prelates, Princes, greatest amongst men
Who set the worlds belief, and actions
Be framed in heart to serve us, and let then
Our minds be freed from all distractions:
And let our vast imaginations,
Be filled with pleasures and with plenty store,
So that our hearts can wish no alteration,
Nor can conceive, how to have any more:
Thus when our thoughts are fully at a stand,
And can no higher raise our happy state;
Do but remember, that this great command
Each moment Shortens, till't be terminate,
And till it may be said, the time is past,
The thousand years are ended long ago,
He long commanded all, but yet at last
Death loosed his hold; and quickly took him froe
His fond delights; his foolish vanities,
Things only good, to him that gives well,
Their sweet refreshments to their Makers praise,
And in true use of them, the vain excel.
Alas poor soul, what comfort will it give?
When ghastly death, sore sickness or distress,
Call's for account, and says thou must not live,
But must forth with prepare in readiness,
A reckoning just; how thou have ordered,
And used thy Talent, for thy Masters gain,
If thou thy fellows have not murdered,
Or his poor creatures for thy lusts have slain:
If by false Oaths, or foul hypocrisy,
Thou have deceived, or hurt, or gained, or spoiled,
Thy honest neighbor as thy enemy,
And thus thy Countries peace, by war imbroil'd:
If thou be guilty of a double tongue,
And such a lying lip as Heaven hates,
How can thou hope to live, the Saints among,
Want of true Oil will fasten Heavens gates
Most firm against thee; when the fatal thread
Of life is cut, and when thy soul would rest
In Heavens joys, as in a pleasant bed,
There'l be no room for those, that held it best
To have their portion, and their fill below,
And said unto their souls, take here thy ease,
And valued not their Makers will to know,
Nor did regard our sacred God to please.
But let us proceed (my soul) for to compare
Great things with small, or rather all with naught,
That which we shall be, with that which we are,
Which if but rudely known, it is well we sought:
We are poor earthy worms, as plants we grow,
And as the beasts, our bodies do decay,
Nay they exceed us, they nor set nor sow,
Nor piercing sorrows takes their rest away,
Their senses far more quick, their bodies strong,
Their souls not subject to the due of sin,
For they die as their bodies, so along,
We think it is life, not soul, which does keep in
The vegetative life that is in Plants,
And sensitive that other Creatures have,
But Man is Lord of all, or else he vaunts
himself too high, too much above the grave
Of all the rest, that sojourn here below,
Their times appointed, and the same as his,
Only with reason, God did us endowe,
And from the Beasts our difference is this:
If we, by crooked and uneven ways
Of sinful walkings and rebellions,
Do not destroy our selves; we spend our days
In true subduing our plantations,
And well command, as God did first appoint,
And use our fellow creatures, to refresh
Our wearied minds, and bodies to anoint
With oil of joy, and food of thankfullness:
But yet a little further to proceed
To find on earth, what thing is only good,
Suppose what can be possible, we would need;
Though reason will not so be understood:
Suppose that the least shadow of delight,
Wherein we have ten thousand years to come,
Were full as much and of as great a weight
As twice ten thousand years, when time is gone,
Eternity gives thousands, thousands, years,
Against each moment of the longest time,
And having worn it out, it well appears
No whit diminisht, still it is a crime
To say it is shorter: for that cannot be
When time's worn out, and years thus multiplied,
It Is all one still, it is still eternity,
Its still as wide a gulf, it is never satisfied:
Then see how vainly are our lives spun out,
If time do end upon us unsuspected,
And if it may be said, that without doubt,
What is most needful, is the most neglected:
Yet in my reason I can scarce believe,
But well spent days, should greater honor have,
Then smallest infants, whom none do relieve,
But use their Mothers bowels for their grave:
And so for all degrees of knowledge sound
That men attain to; can it be for naught,
That some sit high, and others plough the ground,
I cannot herein six, my wandering thought,
But must presume, that the eternal bliss,
Which we soon shall enjoy (in our belief)
When we part hence; to one far greater is
Then to another; yet, nor care, nor grief
Can seize of any, who admitted are
To be ingulpht in the eternal joy;
Hence great is comfort, yet I think to spare
My wandering thoughts, least thereby I annoy
My truest peace: which is my full belief
And settled grant of mercy from above,
That the eternal light does show his truth
To all men's souls, if with obedient love
Their eyes but see it, with a watchful care;
And right improve it, in each action,
Which to the soul, a height of mischiefs are,
Changing our peace into distraction,
But specious shows, deludings of pretense,
(Speak what they will,) destructive are and vain
If they delude the mind, deceive the sense,
Or do but move from the eternal gain:
The high employment of the soul, is love
To her Creator; much beyond all sense
(Of Wisdom, Arts and Knowledge; far above
Both study, wit, and long experience)
Has circled to it self the light divine
(As we may judge) beyond all limitation,
And in its freedom gloriously does shine
Beyond the reach of her imagination,
While it is imprisoned, in the clayie bonds
Of earthly mansion, with defiled hue,
It dully moves, as wanting feet, or hands,
For its pure freedom, which to it is due
Of its Creatours gift; so soon as when
It separated is from earthy clay,
And is endu'd, beyond the gift of men,
And beggs of none, but of its God; who may
And will relieve its wants, with purest aid:
This being hope, and full assurance
Hold fast to care, and caring be afraid
Least smiling sin, get thy inheritance:
And catching thee in snares of wickedness,
Thirsty for earthy bubbles, in a rage
Choosing no mean, but loving all excess
With Esau, sell (for mess of poor pottage)
Thy glorious birthright, to thy Fathers joy
And heavenly Kingdom, ever permanent
And so in sin, and grief, and sad annoy
With everlasting woe, thou must lament.
Here, stay a little; let us count a while
With nature uncorrupted, and with reason,
Reason condemns her, for a Mistress vile,
And charges her, with little less then treason,
If she afford to men, long life and days,
And fitting organs, for the soul to act
And gain a height of knowledge, to the praise
Of their Creator, by the glorious fact
Of constant warfare, and does thereby gain
The blessed way, to living streams of life,
It seems but labor lost, and all in vain
That she has hazarded by eager strife,
To gain no more, amidst the many years,
Which she has run in danger of the goal,
Then she might fully had, sans cares and fears,
If she from mothers womb without control
Had been prevented, by the tender knees,
And breasts had not afforded Childrens food,
And secret helps, which only nature sees
Had been by her denied, that understood
How vain it was, for me to venture on
So long a voyage, from security
When I was safe, and settled well upon
As good a stool, as ripe maturity
Could give unto me; yea and better far
For that the hazard of so long a time
Is infinite, if they no better are
That have in holy strife, opposed the crime,
That watches every moment to destroy
Them in their passage, if when best is done
They have no more; then without this annoy
They Would not been born, nor had not seen the Sun;
Or that had naught to do with time, or age;
What reason is it, such should have like perfection,
With those who well do spend their pilgrimage,
Hating all sin, by Heavens good direction:
It must not so be thought, that ought in vain,
Is done by nature: reason is the eye
That tells us it, and shows unto us plain
Nature does naught, but has a reason why:
For if but die and live, but end and enter
Into the bliss of high eternity
In perfect measure, full as those that venture
The longest life; No! wherefore should it be
To wish a moment of employment here,
As earthly Pilgrims, only hazarding
What sure before we had; as't does appear
Most void of gain, though in well ordering:
This reason forced me to, but still I must,
My quiet in my souls belief permit,
What it does truly dictate, is most just
And perfect rule of the most sacred spirit;
If through devout and wary walking here
We have (of our Creatours grace) obtained
This holy Spirit, from our blessed Savior dear,
As his last Legacy to us remained:
But O how blessed a thing it is to see
That our immortal souls possessed are
(Upon our entrance on Eternity)
Of perfect joys, and more without compare,
Then we are capable to comprehend.
While we are wrapped in this mansion,
What then shall be our height, when we ascend
And perfect are, at resurrection?
This we refer to the Creatours will,
And joy that it, and only it, is done,
And pray that we (converted from all ill)
May in perfection ever serve his Throne.
Thrice happy moments which engrosse the soul,
Which circle it from all the worlds assaults,
Which do ingraspe it, and which does control
The foul attempts, proceeding from the vaunts
Of fierce temptations; ravishing all sense,
And singling out the soul unto it self,
While it in bliss, his Ever, does commence
And of all vanities is clear bereft:
Blessed are those soul-contents, and raptures high
Which thus our sacred spirits do possess,
And blessed is the soul eternally,
That so does leave all sin and wickedness:
And thence is entertained amongst the Saints,
A listed servant to his sacred love,
Where (though degrees) yet none complains of wants,
But all are filled with the holy dove:
And thereby fitted in perfection,
To serve the high, and uncontrouled good,
And this from perfect mercies free election,
Which by his Spirit's only understood.
But now (me thinks) I see a vanity,
Above what tongue can speak, or heart conceive,
Desires great, beyond humanity,
Beyond the blessed rules, our God did give:
The longing, thirsty wishings, of those men
Are for terrestrial shadows, seeming goods,
Which false deluding pleasures, are but when
The body's strong, the soul's beneath the floods
Of vain deceits, which no enjoyment have
Out of this body; yet does hazard much
Loss of eternal good, if they enslave
Themselves, into the company of such
To their last home; to their eternity
I cannot judge, but they most certainly,
Pass hence, into eternal misery:
Then (O my soul) make it thy chiefest care,
Since most of multitudes are thus deluded,
It does not fall to thy unhappy share,
With most of men, from peace to be excluded;
For truly (I conceive) the knowing will
And thirsty wish, of earthly things and vain,
Is perfect hell: as freedom from all ill,
And full content; is perfect Heavens gain.
What multitudes of wretched men, I find,
Some fiercely thirsting after flesh and blood,
Others lie gaping for the empty wind
Of worldly honor, and ambitious food;
Others do covet earth of every kind:
So that I see, and sigh to see, man's face
Thus desperately turned to his woe.
And must beware, least this unhappy race
Of wicked mortals, lead me wrong to go;
Well I must try, and well must weigh my soul
I must examine all my secret self,
My words, my ways, my works, I must control
Least they, me of my hoped bliss bereave;
Which best is done by contemplation
In private place, from troubles of this life,
And where thou finds (by self-examination)
Wants in thy self, fly on with eager strife
To true repentance, against all enemies,
That shall oppose thy good intent herein,
And hate the voice, of all deceitful lies
Which would excuse, or seem to hide thy sin:
Go quick about this work, for sin does grow
'Till true repentance kill it at the root,
It Is hard to get, yet penitents do know
It is obtained by prayer and earnest suite:
And must be had; else, the whole fault is ours,
It is our crooked ways that holds us out,
Our want of truth does keep from us the showers
Which would with garlands, deck us round about:
Take heed least death, this needful balm prevent,
This happy salve, that cures the soul of sin
'Least point of time, if the messenger be sent
As the tree falls, so Ever, does begin.
True reason makes up for us our accounts,
And shows how empty fond allurements are,
And how the least, that we may hope, surmounts
The most we can expect from earth, by far:
In this passage; to make thy soul secure,
Let thy chief entertainments be thy pains,
And count it greatest joy, and highest pleasure
And that there is naught sufficient, for the gains
Of well preventing such a hazard great
Count nothing long, count nothing misery,
To gain (by winters cold, by summers heat,)
A happy (Ever) and Eternity:
Then doubt not but thy care shall be respected,
Thy pains shall bring a hundred sold increase,
Thy debts are paid, thou need's not be dejected,
Thy Saviors pains, has purchased thy ease:
Now, thou may truly will, to be dissolved,
To be with Christ thy Savior most dear,
Of all thy doubts thou here shall be resolved,
This ends disputes, this puts an end to fear:
Then love long life, and love those many days
That like ripe fruit makes thee securely fall
Into that passage, which (to thy Makers praise)
Being duly entered, secures thee from thrall
And thee delivers for eternity
To incorruptible felicity.
And though our call, does nature often prevent,
Yet when she is let alone, she fairly deals,
And though she (fixed to warmed life) be sent
To fit our death; yet see, how often she steals
To us her warnings; as with dimmed sight
And theumy eyes, instead of bright and clear,
To make us see our death, for want of light;
And let us know, there is no long being here:
Again she warnes; by some decay in Teeth,
Or by a hair, that turns to Lilly white,
Or by some shaking Palsy, which all sees,
Or feeble knees, or pains by day or night,
Or hands benumbed, or hearing almost lost,
Or smelling gone, which should refresh the brain,
Or relishing in taste, whose choicest gust
Is to prepare, her guests to entertain:
Of all her warnings, the true meaning is,
To let us know she will shortly lead us home
And leave us in our woe, or in our bliss,
As we to her, have good, or evil done
As earthly pilgrims, while she did sojourne
And form her self, according to our will,
With us in houses underneath the Sun
Obediently performing, good, or ill:
Then cheer my soul and do not fear to live
Nor will to die: but take unto thy guard
Securest diligence, which does always give,
Assurance of hope, and due reward,
In power of the merit of our Jesus,
And love of God, showed in his only Son,
By which dear love, he never fails to ease us
When earthly joys, and earthly friends, are gone:
Then are we freed, to all Eternity,
From sin, and death, and hell, and surely then
Into true love, we shall converted be,
Unto our God, which Heaven is, Amen.
The Offering.
I Will offer to my only Good, an humble and a contrite heart: and my joyful
submission unto his dispose, and pleasure, for ever.

I will offer unto his most blessed Majesty, his own most gracious love to the
works of his own hands.

I will also offer the blessed conception, birth, life, passion and merit, of
his sacred Son my Savior Jesus, in whom I believe (O my Eternal Good) help
my unbelief: and for thy mercy sake, give and rightly perfect in me true and
saving knowledge and assurance in the infinite mercy of thee my only Good,
showed by thy gracious reconcilement unto me, in and through Jesus Christ.

I will most humbly offer a most willing heart, humbly begging of my Eternal
Good, the blessed guidance of his sacred Spirit, to conform and lead my weak
and timorous belief aright, and to satisfy, settle, and confirm it in his
truth.

I will also offer unto his gracious goodness, my most humble and joyful
submissive obedience, unto the direction and commands of his most gracious
Spirit, which I humbly crave, may be so powerful and strong in me: that the
influence and advantage which the world, flesh and devil, have against me by
reason of my sin and corruption, may not in the least sort be able to move or
draw me from yielding and giving all willing and joyful submission and
obedience thereto: but that I may perfectly (as I am wholly the creature of my
Creator) be converted into his perfect will and service, and therein rest in
perfect joy and peace for ever: and this for his only mercy and goodness
sake, Amen.

Therefore thus:

Feign would I have a Royal Sacrifice
Worth the presentment to my sacred Good:
Feign would I find the Pearl of precious price
That by my Savior so was understood,
I trust it was, with which I Will here commence;
An humble soul, framed of obedience:
For sure all earthly things are much too vain,
Too much corrupted by the fall of man,
Too much rebellion does this earth sustain,
Too much oppression underneath the Sun,
Too little worth they are: my Good did make
And give me these; what need he then retake?
So is the will and deed to work aright
His only gift, but in another sense,
For outward gifts are unto all alike,
But holy will and deed, arise from hence
From God's free love on souls, by sacred Spirit
As newborn babes, prepared to inherit.
Wherefore my Sacrifice is only this,
An humble heart, a broken contrite soul,
Cause me to know, it is my only bliss
My only happiness, without control,
To do thy will make me fit instrument
I Am thine and not my own, I Am full content.
Belief.
I do believe that Almighty God is, and that he is the rewarder of all them
that diligently seek him.

I do believe he has incomprehensible mercy and justice toward all the works
of his own hands.

I do believe that they shall come from all quarters of the world, and sit down
at his Eternal Table, and receive of his infinite bounty.

I do believe that Almighty God is perfect goodness, and mercy, and justice it
self: and whoever fears him and works righteousness, shall be accepted of
him.

I do believe he is the Creator and disposer of all things, and this after a
manner wholly incomprehensible to mortality.

I do believe his own being and proceeding is only from himself, and is to
mortality likewise, incomprehensible.

I do also believe the Apostles Creed concerning the sacred Trinity, the
Confession of Athanasius, and the Confirmation thereof by the Reformed Church
of England, whereof the providence of my good Creator has made me a member;
but in these I must espcially say, Good Lord help my unbelief, and guide and
hold me (by thy good and unresistible power) in thy blessed service for ever,
Amen.

I do believe, that with almighty God all things are possible, and that his
gracious mercy is above all his works. And therefore Jesus Christ may be, and I
believe (but Lord help and direct aright my unbelief) that he is his only
begotten Son, and yet conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin
Mary, that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried,
and descended into hell, and the third day rose again from the dead, and
ascended into Heaven; and si^teth there, on the right hand of God the Father
almighty, from whence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.

I do believe there is a selected number of Saints in this world, which may be
comprehended by the holy Catholic Church; and that they shall have an eternal
communion and fellowship together after this life, and that they shall have all
their sins freely forgiven them; and also shall rise together in eternal
life at the general resurrection: of which number I believe and trust my self
with ot ers more to be: for which free and incomprehensible grace, I desire
with all Saints to give everlasting praise and thanks, and to do everlasting,
most perfect service unto my good Creator forever, Amen.

I do also believe in the Holy Ghost, and that this sacred Spirit is
proceeding from the sacred Deity of the Father and the Son, which being sent
to command and take possession of our souls for the use (as it were) of the
sacred God head, we are thereby made fit workers, and laborers for the blessed
vineyard of our Creator, ready to every good and perfect work, with unspeakable
joy and gladness.

I do also believe the immortality of the soul (as certainly as the mortality
of the body,) and that as soon as it parts with the body by death, it does
participate in a great measure of misery or mercy, of joy or sorrow, according
to what it has done in the body, whether the deeds were good or evil.

I believe there shall be a restoration of bodies at the resurrection, and
degrees of perfect joy to all those that in their earthly tabernacles truly
desired to be righteous: and perfect misery to wilful, negligent and
contemptuous sinners, in which both soul and body shall be for ever partakers.

I do believe afflictions and corrections to be so necessary for us in this
life, that I scarce think any can be saved without them: and also that much
affliction in this life, is (or at least, if well used, may be) a great means,
sign and token of salvation: for that afflictions are the cords and scourges of
the Almighty, to draw and drive us on in the way of salvation, they are his
sweet and blessed surveyors, to purge our souls from our bodies pollutions, and
make us of a fit alloy for his heavenly Treasure: they which wound the flesh
and sad the countenance, make the heart the better: And from the very being
engaged under an affliction for life, may be reaped sweet and joyful comfort
both in life and death.

Therefore thus:

Some see the root, yet on it take a fall:
Like those that see the door, yet push the wall,
And having fallen upon the rock they saw,
Receive more good, then though they would escaped the blow.
The Farewell.
ADieu fond world of vain delight,
the messenger of Love,
To me has showed an inward sight
of joys that be above.
And me has summoned to appear
before the mercy-seate,
Of him whose justice is most clear,
most eminent, most great;
Whose love is fully showed to me
in pardoning my sin,
And passing by the vanity
that I have lived in:
Whose love has also conquered
both death and hell for me,
And from my soul has vanquished
fear of death's tyranny.
Who of free grace has given me
a willing wish to right,
And does accept this willingness
as perfect in his sight:
Farewell all you that truly love
the God of my Creation,
Do not ye mourn as those that have
no hope of their salvation:
We know the generations
that before us have been,
Have had their alterations
which we in part have seen:
We also trust that joys increase
after this life to those
That truly willed from sin to cease
and evil did oppose:
Then moderate your tears among
true joys, and smilings sweet,
In full assurance that ere long
we shall together meet.
Comfort your selves with words as these
and of a certain know,
That by this change true peace and ease
God's mercy does bestow
On those that keep his testament,
his Laws and Statutes just,
From principles of true intent
in him that put their trust.
Sigh for your selves, sigh not for me,
death unto me is best,
My serious thoughts convinced be
that therein is my rest;
From fancies that oppress the mind,
from lusts of flesh and blood;
From sins assaults of every kind,
most hard to be withstood;
From warr's effects, from tyranny,
from sword-like tongues that smite,
From torments, sickness, maladies,
and sorrows infinite.
From doing ill, I would not do,
from not doing the good,
Which surely I should will to do
if that I understood;
The judgment that to both is due
by Heavens fixed decree,
And that I could at all times show
what good and evil be;
From Satan's rage and cruelty
taking advantage great,
Finding my imbecility,
and opposition weak:
This happy way does safely guide
to neignbours and allies,
Who while with me they did reside
did joy my heart and eyes;
I do believe I now shall know
how God in every Land,
His saving mercy does bestow
on the works of his hand:
And I believe to be resolved
of doubts that here below
Distract the wisdom of the world
where least we do not know,
Is more then all we can attain
though art and age unite,
Such mysteries for to explain
passes man's judgment quite:
What reason is it that I should will
a moment to my days,
Except I could (avoiding ill)
spend it in perfect praise
Of my Creator; wherefore I
do clearly find it best
To cast my soul eternally
upon my Saviors rest,
And also from a perfect thought
to pray thy Kingdom come,
And as our Savior further taught
pray, Lord, thy will be done.
And as for you that longer live
and sojourn here below,
Embrace true peace, avoid all crime,
so Heaven will bestow,
Such passages of providence
upon your hearts most pure,
As shall (even in this life) commence
joys, that shall aye endure.
A CATECHISM.
QUESTION. WHat is the duty of a man to know and believe in this life?

A. That almighty God is, and that he is the rewarder of all them that
diligently seek him.

Q Who is the Creator and Maker of all things?

A. This Almighty God.

Q. What is Almighty God?

A. He is the only and perfect Good, and the wise disposer of all things for
the best for them that love him.

Q. What comfort may we learn from that?

A. To be well content in all the accidents and conditions of our lives,
knowing that they are from his providence and appointment, and therein for the
best for us.

Q. How do we know that there is a Creator?

A. Because no creature can create it self, and every man's soul speaks it to
him.

Q. What is good in man?

A. To fear almighty God, and work righteousness.

Q. What is our duty toward almighty God?

A. To love, honor and obey him, and heartily to seek after his will, to do it.

Q. What is our duty to all men?

A. To endeavor their good both in soul and body; and to do right unto them.

Q. What is righteousness?

A. The doing right unto the creature, out of a principle of obedience to the
Creator.

Q. What is our duty to the Creator?

A. Humbly, to extol, laud, praise and serve him, with a perfect heart.

Q. What is the duty of man to the creatures that be subjected to him?

A. Thankfully to use them, without the least abuse.

Q. How shall we look at the good of a man?

A. At the good both of soul and body.

Q. What is chiefly good to a man?

A. That which is good to the soul.

Q. What is chiefly evil to a man?

A. That which is evil to the soul.

Q. How shall we know good from evil?

A. Good is suitable to the Word of almighty God, and agrees to certain
footsteps or shadows remaining of uncorrupted nature in us; and it is
contrary and displeasing to our corrupted natures and desires.

Q. How is evil known?

A. By being contrary to the Word of almighty God, by being much unnatural,
and by the suiting and pleasing our natural and corrupted affections.

Q. What is the principal gift of God to a man in this life?

A. True Wisdom.

Q. What is true wisdom?

A. To be wise to the soul.

Q. What is perfect folly?

A. Foolishness and neglect toward the soul.

Q. What are corrections?

A. They are the chastisements of almighty God, and contrary to corrupted
nature.

Q. What use are we to make of them?

A. To move us to a willing submission to the will and dispose of our Creator.

Q. Should they move us to contemn life, and desire death?

A. No: but rather to rejoice in the longest and hardest work of his sacred
pleasure.

Q. Ought we most to rejoice when we enjoy the fulness of this world?

A. No: but rather to fear it to be the portion of the ungodly.

Q. What understand you by almighty God?

A. I understand a Spirit, not to be seen by the outward eye of the body.

Q. How is he to be seen and known?

A. By the eye of the soul.

Q. What is the eye of the soul?

A. Faith and reason.

Q. How shall Faith and reason be guided?

A. By the Law of Nature, and by the holy Scriptures.

Q. What does the Law of Nature show us?

A. That there is one almighty God for ever to be worshipped and obeyed by us,
who has created and made us, and has power ever our souls and bodies for ever.

Q. What further teaches it?

A. That mortality belongs to the body, and immortality to the soul.

Q. What further?

A. That there is good and evil; and that the good will be rewarded, and the
evil-doer will be punished by the Creator especially after this life is ended.

Q. What are the holy Scriptures?

A. They are sacred instructions and Laws sent unto us by almighty God.

Q What is the scope and intent thereof?

A. To admonish, teach and instruct us, to holiness and righteousness in life
and conversation.

Q. What do they further teach?

A. True Faith, and saving belief.

Q. What is Faith?

A. Faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.

Q. What is belief?

A. It is a pure persuasion grounded on the word of almighty God.

Q. What is the true belief concerning the sacred Trinity?

A. That of the Apostles, called the Apostles Creed.

Q. Rehearse that Belief?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, etc.

Q. What does this Faith and true belief show us?

A. That there are three Persons, but one Eternal God.

Q. How are these three persons named and divided?

A. Into the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

Q What is the Father?

A. We believe that the Father is the incomprehensible begetter of the Son,
thereby fitting him to receive an earthly body like to ours (sin only
excepted) that so he might therein and thereby satisfy the justice of his
Father, due for sin by us committed in our earthly bodies; which could no
otherwise have been satisfied for, but in the just destruction and damnation
both of our bodies and souls; for that the sin of the body (in its due
desert) slays the soul.

Q. What is the Son?

A. We believe that he is the only Mediator, betwixt the Fathers justice, and
man's sins, and that he intercedeth and makes peace, by his merits with the
Father for us, and that besides him we have no Mediator.

Q. What is the Holy Ghost?

A. We believe that he is the sacred Spirit of mercy, proceeding from the
Father and the Son, whereby our hearts are guided unto all the true
performances of saving duty.

Q. Are there not then three Gods?

A. No: three Persons, but only one God.

Q. Is the power and operation of all the three Persons upon the creature, one
and the same?

A. We believe their power to be equal, as one God; but severally
isntrumental to man's salvation, as three Persons, which seems plain by the
holy Scriptures.

Q. Do the Scriptures then show this sacred Trinity in Unity, three Persons but
one eternal God, their power and proceedings toward the creature; and the
duty of the creature to this Creator?

A. Yes verily; and there is no other means to know it more truly.

Q. Is it not then most necessary to be perfect in the Scriptures, and to
meditate on them continually.

A. Yes surely, for thereby we are made wise to salvation.

Q. What is the Good of this life?

A. A free and joyful submission to the good providence of almighty God, and a
diligent walking in his Laws.

Q. What is the evil of this life?

A. An unsatiable desire of such things as will not satisfy the soul.

Q. What is the soul?

A. It is the unexpressible, invisible, immortal, spiritual man.

Q. What will content the soul?

A. Things only like it self, pure, spiritual, and eternal.

Q. What is time?

A. It is the passage of our life, and pilgrimage in this world.

Q. What is our chief work in our time?

A. To fit our selves (by the assistance of the holy Spirit) for a happy
eternity.

Q. What is Eternity?

A. It is chiefly to us after this life; it is entered into by us at our death,
and is without end.

Q What are earthly things?

A. The things visible in this world, given us to use, with praise and thanks
to the giver.

Q. What are heavenly things?

A. All that we can conceive by happiness: but they are only negatively
demonstrated to us: Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can man's heart
conceive, these unexpressible mercies of our Almighty Creator.

Q. What is our duty in this life?

A. It is joyfully and willingly to bear the burden and heat of the day, in the
service of our Creator during his pleasure, until he call us to our rest.

Q. What is it to be dissolved, and to be with Christ?

A. It is to be separated by death from this earthly tabernacle, and to be
received into the communion of the blessed souls, who are dissolved from their
earthly bodies, and are with him.

Q. How ought we to use the present enjoyments of this life?

A. As if we used them not, and to keep our selves unspotted of them.

Q. How are we to provide for the life to come?

A. By an humble diligent and watchful walking in the ways and Commandments
of almighty God.

Q. What are the chief and sum of the Commandments of the Almighty?

A. Those which he gave to Moses, written in Tables of stone.

Q. How many of them are there?

A. Ten.

Q. Which are they? Rehearse them.

A. The same which almighty God spoke, etc.

Q. What is Religion?

A. It is to extol the Almighty above the highest, and to cast down man below
the lowest.

Q. What is pure Religion?

A. Pure Religion and undefiled before almighty God and the Father is this, to
visit the fatherless and the widow in their necessities, and to keep our
selves unspotted of this world.

Q. Are we able of our selves to live unspotted?

A. No: we must humbly crave the almighty power and strength of the holy Spirit.

Q. What then are the best works of a man in this life?

A. Works of Charity.

Q. What is Charity?

A. To help them that need, out of a true principle of obedience and love to
almighty God.

Q. Does Charity extend to all men?

A. Yea: but especially to the household of faith?

Q. What shall be the justifying sentence of the Saints at the resurrection?

A. Charity: See Matthew. 25. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: thirsty,
and ye gave me drink: a stranger and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me:
sick, and ye visited me: in prison, and ye came unto me.

Q. What shall be the condemning sentence of the wicked?

A. Their want of Charity: I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat: thirsty, and
ye gave me no drink: a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed
me not: sick and in prison, and ye visited me not.

Q. How is the love of the Saints each to other in this life?

A. As is their hope to live together in their eternity.

Q. What is their comfort for eternity?

A. That they shall be converted into the perfect will and service of their
Creator for ever.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. It is the pouring out the soul to almighty God, requesting things lawful,
with full submission to his holy will and pleasure.

Q. What is the best form of Prayer?

A. That which our Savior himself has taught us.

Q. What is that? Rehearse it.

A. Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, etc.

Q. Is no other form of Prayer lawful to be used?

A. Yes surely; as also Prayers on the sudden, and upon all occasions, so as
they be sincere and hearty.

Q. Are Prayers to be said only at the Church?

A. No surely: we may pray in any place or condition; nay, we must pray
continually: which we do, while we heartily desire, and therein do our duty.

Q. What is truly a Church?

A. It is the communion of Saints on earth, professing and practicing the
service of the Almighty.

Q. Which is the most pure and perfect Church on earth?

A. We believe the Christian Church, professed under the Reformation of England.

Q. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in the Church?

A. Two: Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. What is Baptism?

A. It is our first admittance into the Church: the Water signifying our
washing from sin in the blood of Christ.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. A Thankful remembrance of his satisfying sufferings for our sins.

Q. How ought we to receive it?

A. Humbly, thankfully, preparedly.

Q. How often is it necessary to be received by us?

A. Four times ordinarily in the year, besides upon extraordinary occasions.

Q. What if we think, that we cannot prepare our selves, so as that we may
receive it faithfully, and thankfully, and as we ought.

A. We must by the help of godly Ministers, and other pious persons, instruct
our selves: and also by hearing, reading, fasting, prayer and meditation; and
by all other helpful ways, prepare and fit our selves for the worthy
receiving of this token of our Saviors love, and that at our peril.

Q. May it not then be wholly omitted?

A. No: we ought hereby so to remember our blessed Savior in our time, as we
would be remembered by him in our eternity.

Q. But is there such a necessity in receiving of it, as if we do it not, we
do neglect and omit a most necessary duty to salvation, whatsoever the
occasion or reason be?

A. No: Our blessed God never binds his servants to impossibilities: if
lawful occasions call and take us from necessary opportunity of receiving it
(so it be without all neglect or contempt on our part, (it must then be only
in our hearts and wills thankfully acknowledged by us: which (in his good
mercy) will be accepted of us for the deed.

Q. How ought we to carry our selves toward our Children?

A. With due admonition, instruction, and employments.

Q. How to Servants?

A. With constant labor and instruction.

Q. How to the estate?

A. Not prodigally, thereby making our selves incapable of doing good with it:
nor too much sparingly, to hoard it up from the good end it was created.

Q. May we give all to Children and Kindred, without any respect to others?

A. No by no means; for we are only stewards to it, and must give an account
of it to almighty God who lends it us: whose will it is, that we take for our
selves and families such an under proportion thereof, that we may be sure to
have sufficient relief and charity for the poor distressed Saints whenever we
meet with them: that our estates may (in some sort at least) be helpful to
their necessities: but the laying all upon the present and future provision for
our selves and Children, thereby wholly neglecting Charity, is most abominable.

Q. What is life?

A. It is that which preserves and prepares the body to be a fit and apt
organ for the operations of the soul, and chiefly said to abide in the blood.

Q. What is death?

A. It is the conclusion and end of all our days, the masterpiece of all our
work, as we are prepared to entertain it, so we are prepared to receive and
enter into eternity.

Q. Is there any change of that condition in which death sends us to our
eternity?

A. No: but as the tree falls, so it lies.

Q. What then is the one thing necessary for the whole course of a man's life?

A. To watch. So says our Savior to all men, Watch.

A Discourse betwixt Adam and Eve
Eve. My dearest heart fain would I know,
How all our children, down below,
Observe, and keep, our Laws,
For often me thinks, I hear a cry
As if our childrens cruelty
Each tore, like Lions jaws.

Adam. Yes (truest Love) I do believe
Those precepts we to them did give
(When we were once anseen,)
They soon cast off that natures love
Which we so strict to them did give,
As if it had not been.

Eve. Dear Sir, what should this noise afford,
Does Cain, or his wretched sword,
Command all humane race?
Does he and all his cursed line,
Poor Abels off spring undermine,
And so the worst take place?

Adam. Yes truly (dear) I do perceive
Our peaceful precepts we them gave,
They wholly leave undone,
And that which we knew to be worst,
Which killed just Abel (O accursed)
Is chief under the Sun.
Thou know, we said, thou shall not kill,
Nor to thy neighbor do no ill,
In body, goods, or name,
Yet does the glittering tyrant sword,
Destroy all peace, and in a word,
Turns honor into shame.
For whereas peace was Abel's crown,
And warlike Cain was cast down,
With sentence just, ejected,
Now he that most of all, does ill,
He who the most, does slay and kill,
Is most of all respected.
The true obedience to our God,
Our duty to obey his word,
Which in our hearts does sound,
They do divide into such parts,
By Sophistry, and cunning arts
That truth is hardly found.
The government of natures, say,
That youth the aged should obey,
And do them reverence,
But now fond youth condemns the wise
And fools, do wisdoms Laws despise
By force and negligence:
The strongest hand, does call it right,
To cut down all, with force and might,
Their rage, and will subdueth,
And if they call the evil good,
The truth must so be understood,
Or else their rage renews.

Eve. What (Husband) then it seems the world,
Is topsie turvey, tossed and hurld,
And worst, has best subdued.

Adam. Yes (Wife) it is decaid, and old,
Truth and devotion's very cold,
And soon will be renewed.

Eve. Renewed, or made new (my Dear)
How shall I understand thee here,
Shall thee and IN gain meet,
Shall we in ancient Paradise
And in our blessed innocence,
Each other kindly greet?
Shall all the sins of us, and ours,
Which truth and justice, thus devours
Be pardoned, and forgiven?

Adam. In part: but how, to tell none can
It Is not the act of mortal man,
But the free gift of Heaven.

A Prayer.
O Eternal, ever-living, and all-sufficient Lord God: who art the God of the
spirits of all flesh, to whom the grave is open, from whom there is no covering
for destruction: I am thy poor, wretched and unworthy servant, and by reason of
my sin, less then the least of all thy mercies, unworthy so much as to think
upon thee, or to take thy blessed Name within my corrupted lips, much more
unworthy am I, to have liberty to call upon thy sacred Majesty, and to ask
those things that I stand in need of, with this gracious assurance, that thou will give me those things that are best for me, though I ask them not of thee,
and though I ask them so unworthily, that thou may justly refuse to give me
them, because I ask them of thee so unworthily (so that I may with humble
boldness pray; Lord give me what is only best for me, though I ask it not:
and give me not what is evil for me, though I ask it:) but thou art from
everlasting to everlasting, holy, and just, and good, and thy mercies are above
all thy works; wherefore I come unto thee, not in my own merits, but in the
merits of thy only Son, my only Savior Jesus Christ the righteous, (in
whom I believe, Lord help my unbelief,) humbly desiring thy sacred Majesty for
his sake, and for thy own goodness sake toward the works of thine own hands,
to pardon and pass by all my sins, actual and original, to blot them out
of thy book of remembrance, and to set them so behind thy back, that thou
may never call me to account for them, either in this world to my shame, or
in the world to come to my utter condemnation: Give me grace and strength to
return unto thee (O my God) as the prodigal son to his father, acknowledging
my self unworthy to be called thy son or servant; and give me (I humbly pray)
wisdom, which is about thy throne (for all wisdom is from thy gracious gift)
that so I may rightly understand earthly things from heavenly things, time from
eternity: and graciously give me the will and deed, to lay up my treasure in
Heaven, and not on earth: And I most humbly crave of thy sacred goodness, the
unresistible power of thy holy Spirit, that thereby I may be built up and made
perfect to every good work, to the true and perfect serving of thee my good
God, and to the working righteousness, as thy elected Saints (by the powerful
and unresistible guidance of the holy Spirit) do, and ought to do, both for
and in their time, and their eternity. And (O my good God) because many are the
controversies and disputes concerning thee, thy word, thy truth, amongst poor
mortality; to the great destruction, fear and trouble, of thy poor, willing,
and desiring servants; Let thy sacred Spirit (O my God) speak the truth of thy
will (and of my duty) to my conscience, and then give me grace and strength, to
follow my conscience, in the sacred way of thy holy Spirit, that so I may keep
a good conscience toward thee my God, and toward men. And I humbly pray, that
thy gracious Spirit may also reveal unto my soul, what righteousness, and
what unrighteousness is, what is truth, and what is error; what is the perfect
duty of thy servant, in all the passage of his pilgrimage under the Sun, and
what is not the duty of thy servant to do; that so I may not only perform
unto thy sacred Majesty, my present duty, in thy blessed service, but that I
may do it knowingly, willingly and wittingly: and that I may not only avoid
all the appearances of evil, but that I may do it also, knowingly, willingly
and wittingly, as becomes the most faithful and perfect servant of my Creator.
O give unto thy servant a discerning spirit; enable him perfectly (O my God) to
know good from evil, and then give him grace and strength to do the good and
avoid the evil, as becomes thy most blessed servants. And give unto me thy
servant (O my good God) a true principle of due obedient love (in all my
devotions and undertakings whatsoever) toward thee my good God. And for thy
mercies sake, teach me thy statutes, and hide not thy precepts from me; lead me
in the way that I should go, and hold me in the living path of thy most
joyful servants. Search my heart (O God) and try my ways, for there are ways
of iniquity in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. Let me have, here in
this life (O my good God) that, and that only, which may most perfect, and fit
me in soul and body, for thy eternal and most sacred service. Let the daily
presidents of mortality (O my good God) move me to true repentance; give me to
know (O my eternal Creator,) that I am no better then my parents, but as they
are returned with their bodies to the grave, and their souls to thee the God
that gave them, so it must be with me: Give me to know, O Eternity* that here
is no abiding place, here is no continuing dwelling; give me grace and strength
(our good God) to seek and find one to come, eternal in the Heavens. Give thy
servant (O my gracious God) true love to thee my God for thy own sake, to my
neighbor for thy Commandment sake, and all for obedience sake unto thy
blessed Majesty. Give me to see (O thou my only Good) the blessed marks of thy
sweet corrections, both upon my body and soul, in this life: those glorious
impressions, by which thou sealest to thy self, thy beloved children, in whom
thy soul delights. O my most gracious God, although I be most unworthy to be
(by thy good grace) accounted such a child; such delight, so beloved: yet for,
thy own goodness sake, let thy blessed seal of thy fatherly impression be
upon me, even what thou will; for I assuredly know, thou will (with my most
needful saving Cross) give thy servant most needful and saving strength to
bear it. Give thou (O God) and frame thy servant, thankfully to see, his yearly
gain for his hourly service; his eternal joy, for his temporal grief; the
infinite rest from his finite sufferings: How fit is it (O my Father) that I
should as well suffer, as reign with my Savior; and to know that the present
afflictions of this life, are unworthy of the joys that (in thy most free and
gracious mercy) shall be revealed and given unto me. O my good Father give unto
me (thy most evil deserving child,) all those sweet and blessed scourges,
crosses and afflictions, even whatsoever is necessary and needful, to frame my
impersect soul and body, fit for thy eternal and most perfect service. And
truly (O my Father) although I were to have of thy justice my self-condemning
sentence to all eternity, so soon as this life is ended; yet my serious
thoughts, would not make choice to spend my time in sinful vain delights; but
would rather choose thy fatherly chastisement and corrections temporal;
although they also were to be (as I deserve) eternal: for thy corrections (as
all that proceeds immediately from thee (my God) are sweet: they sad the
countenance, thereby making the heart better: I submit wholly to thy will (O my
eternal Good,) To be thy servant, is my Heaven, for thou art the Lord my God,
and I am thine. Thou art the will and the deed, O my God, guide me for thy
Names sake to do thee service; and in thy goodness accept of my desire, thy
own most gracious gift: suffer not sin (O my Father) to reign in my
corrupted mortal body: let not my soul offend my God, however my body may
offend him: let not my will offend my God, however my actions may offend thee,
but let the desires of my soul, and the inclinations of my spirit, be so
commanded by thy sacred power, that they may truly will, and do thee true and
perfect service now and for ever: and do thou (for thy own mercies sake to the
works of thy own hands, and for the merits of Jesus Christ thy only Son my
Savior,) convert my most imperfect will, into most perfect actions, in thy
most perfect and everlasting service: And when these days of my sinful
pilgrimage are ended, when I return to thee my God (my hope, my joy,) from this
my earthly tabernacle, do thou (O my blessed Creator) re-create my soul and
body, that so thy blessed will, may be my eternal perfect joy and comfort; and
that to be thy servant, wheresoever and howsoever, may be the blessed Heaven of
my soul and body for ever. O my Good Eternity, I do not only humbly crave
these mercies, and what is necessary to salvation (which is the perfect
admittance into thy sacred service) for my self, and such as are near to me in
this life; but also that it be thy blessed will, even for all that thou have
appointed to immortality, in thy gracious converting of sinners from the
wickedness of their ways, that so if it be thy blessed will (to whom all
things are possible,) we might be all, as one flock under thee the great and
gracious shepherd of our souls: that so the number of thy elect being
accomplished, the blessed resurrection may appear before thee; and we become
fit inhabitants for that new Heaven and new earth which thou have appointed,
and sin and sorrow may cease from us thy unworthy servants. And further my
humble suit is, that thou would give us to see all thy gracious
dispensations toward us in this life, to know that nothing falls upon us by
chance and fortune, but by thy especial providence and appointment: Give us to
know we are not our own, but thine, and that it is most right thou should
dispose of thy own for ever: make us to rejoice only in thy dispose, for that
thou art most good and gracious, and know better what is best for us than we
can know or ask. Now (O my good Creator) take us into thy almighty protection
and direction for ever, thou have been wonderful in mercy and goodness to
every one of us: thou have delivered infinite of us from infinite evils which
we see others visited with, which we may justly judge deserve better at thy
hands then we have done: we humbly beseech thee let this thy mercy lead us to
repentance, and make us to love thee as thou have loved us, that has not
spared thy Son to death for us, that so thy justice being satisfied in his
sufferings for our sins, which could no otherwise have been satisfied but in
our damnation, thy mercy may be sufficient for our salvation: and although I
have provoked thy justice by my daily sins to my just condemnation, yet do I
cast my soul and body (even for its eternity) upon thy mercy, and do disclaim
all other judgment then thy gracious pleasure, in which I will in thy gracious
strength, with peace rejoice, and therein rest for ever. Wherefore to thee O
gracious Father, to thee O sacred Son, to thee O eternal Spirit, three
persons but one everlasting God, be ascribed as is most due, all honor, glory
and praise, by thy whole creation, now and for ever, Amen.

The Blessing.
O Blessed Child, whose parts his age outrun
Whose virtues style him man before his stature,
Each eye beholds him as 'the rising Sun,
Each heart applauds him as a Pearl in nature,
Yea very strangers bless his hopeful breeding,
And breathe out prayers to his happy speeding.
But when fresh springing budds prove canker-fretted
With taint of vice, or rust of happy sloth,
Their dearest friends, that see their hopes defeated
To speak them fair, or deigne a look are loath.
But view such noisome weeds, with nausious scorn,
Yea, parents wish ill-thriving plants unborn.
The fear of God does only guide aright,
The perfect way to sacred wisdom's treasure,
Then let this fear direct with powerful might
Thy twisted thread, spun out by natures leisure,
So with thy days thy saving health will grow
To perfect joy, in sins just overthrow.
Let Heavens power down their sweetest influence,
let them enrich you with the earth's best treasures:
Let them withal instill Truths Quintessence,
heavens joys do far surmount all earthly pleasures.
Let the celestial powers you guard and guide,
and countermine when wicked powers conspire:
Let spotless blood which ran from harmless side,
quench unto you the ever burning fire.
And let the winged Posts void of delays,
from glorious Throne whom great Jehovah sends,
Translate your souls when death shall end your days,
to that celestial bliss which never ends.
FINIS.
An Index or Table, directing to several Points and Discourses in this Book.
THe Authors Epistle. Parents and Children travel together toward the grave.
Parents must give an account for their Children. Children must herein assist
their Parents. We should live together here, as we would live together
hereafter. Hence take comfort in the dissolution of godly friends, that we
shall go to them and shall never part. page 2. Our constant work. Beware of
unpreparednesse. Parents must chiefly take care of their Childrens soul, and
principle them in good. Love of, and in the truth, most necessary. p. 3. The
endowments of the mind excel the adornments of the body. A heavenly Deity to
be acknowledged. Wherein true Religion consists. p. 4. The benefit of true
Religion. How Almighty God must be served. A pure and true Sacrifice. p. 5.
Outward Ceremonies not to be contemned, nor abused. Submission is our duty in
prayer. A ask nothing contrary to the revealed will of Almighty God. p. 6. Use
not the Name of God without serious premeditation. His Name is holy. All honor
is due unto it. p. 7. The good of necessity, and of correction. p. 8.
Corrections work to good or hurt. Labor to be a good Text-man. p. 9. In what
sense Gods servants want nothing that is good; but have their hearts desire. p.
10. Search not over curiously into the mysteries of the Almighty. Take heed of
infecting thy judgment with false doctrine. Be not weary of well-doing.
Vainglory has at best but a worldly reward. p. 11. It shall only be well
with the righteous. p. 12. The first Age. The three chief destinguished Ages of
man's life. Infancy like the Red sea. p. 13. Let not time pass in vain. p. 14.
Death holds all our years in possession; therefore fasten on to day. Loss of
time considered a great grief. He that has lived long has often lived little.
Life, is only time spent with prudence and circumspection. p. 15. Death is
always very nigh at hand. p. 16. The second Age. What the action of this Age
is. Of what materials foundations ought to be. p. 17. Learn not what must be
unlearned. Observing others changes, fits us for our own. Fly offenses.
Corrupted nature, first offers corruption. p. 18. How Tutors and Fathers of
Children ought to be disposed. p. 19. The third Age. Temperance necessary.
Passing Jorden dangerous. The chiefest place is virtue. The society of virtues
inseparable. p. 20. Virtues cannot be taken from us. Earthly vanities may.
Quench not the spirit. p. 21. A recital of certain Virtues. p. 22. The fourth
Age. Wisdom and right reason necessary. Prudence and humility are especial
guides to the mine. Anger, an enemy to reason. The designs of reason and anger
different. Wisdom distinguishes us from the beasts. The properties of
Wisdom. The company and advice of wise men profitable. 24, 25. From Almighty
Gods forbearance, learn patience. An honest Calling very necessary: It must not
hinder devotion. A Soldiers life and calling very dangerous. p. 26. The fifth
Age. Marriage dangerous. Means that may make an Eunuch. p. 28. Some directions
in marriage. p. 29. Chastity in both Sexes like laudable. The inconveniences of
incontinency. p. 30. 31. The sixth Age. Endeavor the common good. Virtue to be
desired. p. 32. Wise men set not their hearts on earthly things. Prosperity
pusseth not them up, nor adversity casts them down. Engage not in a crowd, nor
in Civil war. p. 33, 34. The seventh Age. Fortitude, gravity and
consideration, is required. Wisdom is the Candle of the Lord. A wise foresight
necessary. p. 35. Anger, a high degree of madness. Anger only good against
thy own oversights. Complements commonly gilded untruths. The heart and tongue
are said never to wax old. Lies are abominable. p. 36, 37. Fortitude or valeur.
What difference betwixt military valor and true fortitude. p. 38, 39. The
eighth Age. A careful watch over our selves at all times most necessary. p.
40. Over what this watch is chiefly needful. Will, the guide of the vulgar:
Reason, of the prudent. Ambition, full of vanity, and is only just in its own
punishment. Humility the true emblem of Honor. p. 41, 42, 43, 43, 44, 45. The
ninth Age. Sound judgment and justice, what. Justice not to be executed by the
lump. p. 46. Punishment and reward, the hands of justice. It must begin at home
as well as Charity. Live not by chance. We may live both seriously and
cheerfully. Defer not justice to thy self: not buying, till the market be past.
The happy life: What the right use of the creature. Sound judgment, what.
Rashness and self-conceitednesse, what. p. 47, 48, 49. The tenth Age. True
wisdom what. The practical part chiefly profits. Wisdom three ways
discovered. Wisdom does peaceably attend all things, even death. As necessary
for a man to study and know himself, as it is natural to him to think and be
near himself. Know thy self, is a heavenly salutation: Want hereof causes much
sin. One just act makes not a just man. p. 50, 51, 52, 53. Wisdom subdueth
passion. Three traps that the most are taken with. No limit in what is false.
No happiness without subduing corrupted desires. p. 54. The multitude
unconstant: They praise things past: desire things to come: and despise things
present. Several things to beware of. p. 55, 50, 57. Wisdom governs good, and
subdues evil. How to carry our selves in company. Three considerations. Beware
of flatterers. Marks to know them from friends. p. 58, 59. Beware of
suretyship: Of all excess. Beware of choosing friends: Of Suits: and of
revenge. p. 60. A constant preparedness for death, most necessary. p. 61. The
too late repentance of the wicked after death. p. 63. A general Discourse of
Religion. p. 66. Reason. The ten Ages. The Metaphor. p. 71. Humility. p. 72.
Why Sin is forbidden, and Righteousness commanded. p. 73. The Life and Death
of E.M. p. 74, 75. A Speech to the Soul. p. 75, 76. Civil War. p. 77.
Demeanor. Upon several Accidents and Occasions. p. 78. The Resolve. p. 82. A
Discourse; showing Honor dangerous. Earthly things empty. Order of Estate and
Family. Education of Children. The Golden mean. What tends to Eternal
happiness only good. A competency the best. Great Estates have great
troubles. Our Savior refused earthly treasures. Disposal of Estate in life or
death. Respect the righteous. Duty in using the Creatures. They exceed in
Sense, we in Reason. Some liberty from necessity. p. 84. Several comforts from
Scripture both in life and death. p. 87. Against Presumption and Despair at all
times, but especially upon the deathbed. Satan's suggestions: and the Souls
answer. p. 107. True Love. p. 110. A Prayer. p. 112. A Confession and suit for
pardon in Jesus. p. 114. A Prayer. p. 117. Pious Sentences. JOB Chap. 24. in
Meeter. p. 121. My God. Righteous Hope. p. 122. Wise Sayings of the Ancients.
p. 126. For the mortification of the flesh. p. 133. The sweetest Comfort. p.
140. Of worldly rest. On L.M.W. dying in Childe-bed. p. 142. For L.M.W. in
sickness. p. 143. The least that tends to Eternal good unestimable. p. 144. A
Consult with the Soul. p. 145. The Offering. p. 155. The Belief. p. 156. The
Farewell. p. 158. A Catechism. p. 160. A Discourse betwixt Adam and Eve. p.
167. A Prayer. p. 168. The Blessing. p. 172.
There are diverse words mistaken, misplaced, mispelled, added and omitted; some
of which I here mention, the Readers care must reform the rest.
PAge 38. line 29. for virtue read valor. p. 56. l. 13. for propriety r.
piety. and l. 36. for at r. all. p. 67. l. 13. for sleiget r. slight. p. 71.
l. 17. for health r. wealth. p. 73. l. 22. for wreakes r. reckes. and l. 28.
for yet r. that. p. 74. l. 13. for be r. tree. p. 75. l. 11. for see r. so. and
l. 27. for makes r. masketh. p. 82. l. 4. for beauty will r. cen^ynill. p. 84.
l. 10. for their r. the. p. 109. l. 29. for if then I had not sinned r. if that
I had not fallen. p. 121. l. 37. for tomb or r. toom'ye. p. 124. l. 18. for
curaces r. cutaces. p. 130. l. 8. for gapde r. guard r. guard. and l. 22. for.
soy r. foy. p. 138. l. 26 for enime r. enim. p. 142. l. 32 for share r. steare.
p. 143. l. 1. for hour r. home. l. 4. for then r. their. l. 31. for show r.
chere. p. 145. l. 40. for jarre r. ire. p. 146. l. 12, and l. 13. should change
places. p. 150. l. 14. for both r. what. p. 158. l. 9. for root r. rock. p.
168. l. 41. for destruction r. distraction.

FINIS.

